A Treatise of DIVINITY CONSISTING OF THREE BOOKS.

The First of which Handling the Scripture or Word of God, treats of its
Divine Authority, the Canonical Books, the Authentical Edition, and several
Versions; the End, Properties, and Interpretation of Scripture.

The Second handling God, shows that there is a God, and what he is, in his
Essence and several Attributes, and likewise the distinction of Persons in the
Divine Essence.

The third handles the three principal Works of God, Decree, Creation, and
Providence.

By EDWARD LEIGH Esquire. Master of Arts, and one of the Members of the House of
Commons.

2 Timothy 3. 16. All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable
for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness.
John 7. 3. And this is life eternal, that they know thee the only true God,
and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent. Psalm 111. 2. The works of the Lord are
great, sought out of all them that have pleasure therein. LONDON, Printed by E.
Griffin for William Lee, and are to be sold at his shop at the Turkes-head in
Fleetstreet, near Ram-alley. 1646.

June 9. 1646.
I Have perused this excellent and learned Treatise of Divinity with much
pleasure, profit, and satisfaction; and finding it to be very sound, judicious,
and profitable, I do allow it to be printed and published.

John Downhant.

TO The Right Honorable THE LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
Right Honorable,
I Intended the Dedication of this Treatise to the Parliament before I had the
happiness to be a Member of so Honorable a Society. Who are so fit to
Patronize a work concerning God, his word and works, as the Parliament of
England, and such a Parliaments, who have heard more of God and his will, and
seen more of his ways in less then a luster of years, then many precedent
Parliaments have in several Ages* Arduous and important matters concerning
Church Quia de advisamento and ^ssensu consilij nostri pro quibusdam or dui^s
and urgentibus negotijs, nos, Statum and d^fensionem Regni nostri Angliae and
Ecclesiae concernentibus, ^uoddam Parliamentum nostrum apud Civitatem
Westmonasterium tertio die Novemb^is proximo teneri ordinavimus.
or State have been the daily Theme of your serious debates. Queen Elizabeth
once in her progress visiting the County of Suffolk, all the Justices of
Peace in that County met her Majesty, having every one his Minister next to his
body, which the Queen took special notice of, and thereupon uttered this
Speech, that She had often demanded of her privy Council, why her County of
Suffolk was better governed than any other County, and could never understand
the reason thereof, but now She her self perceived the reason; it must needs
be so (said She) where the word and the sword go together.

You did Honorable worthies) near the beginning of the Parliament, cause a
Synod of Reverend and Able Divines to be called to advise you in
Church-affaires. God has sent unto you (as Jeremie speaks) all his servants
the Prophets, Jer. 7. 25. and 35. 15.
choice men out of every County, (as you your selves were elected out of many)
to be serviceable to you in the great work of Reformation. You have had the
benefit of their faithful advise, of their fervent Prayers, and diligent
labors. When did any Parliament enter into so solemn a League and Covenant to
reform themselves and Kingdom? when were there so many days of Humiliation
kept so generally in England? when was there such a constant daily Lecture
Those Gentlemen of the House, and others that live near Westminster may hear
500 Sermons yearly at least, one every Morning, and four every Sabbath.
of worthy men in Westminster-Abbie before? In the Parliament held 5. E. 3. so
many excellent laws were made, as it was called bonum Parliamentum I hope as
you are now in Prayers and Print styled the Repairers of the breach, and
restorers of paths to dwell in, so future Ages will honor you with the title
of Optimum Parliamentum. When in the Council of Constance, talk was Ministered
touching the reformation of the Spiritualty, and some said quod oporteat
incipere a Minoritis, the reformation must begin at the Friars, no said the
Emperor Sigismond, Fox in his Book of Martyrs.
Non a minoritis sed a Majoritis incipienda est reformatio, meaning the
reformation ought first to begin with the Pope and Cardinals and Bishops, and
so descend after to the inferiors. Some Emperors were called Great for their
goodness; religion makes a Nation or person honorable Romans 9. 4. compared
with 3. 2. That was a worthy Speech of a Germane divine writing to
Oecolampadius, Veniat verbum domini, and submittemus, etiamsi nobis essent
sexcenta colla: As Queen Elizabeth passed in Triumphall State through the
Streets of London after her Coronation, when the Bible was presented unto her
at the little-Conduit in Cheape-side, Speeds Chronicle Chap. 24. p. 858.
she received the same, with both her hands, and kissing it laid it to her
breast, saying, that the same had ever been her chiefest delight, and should
be the rule by which She meant to frame her Government. You have likewise
covenanted to reform the Church according to the word of God, the best Rule
both for a Personal and Ecclesiastical Reformation. There is a double
general subject of reformation. 1. Corrupt persons, 2. Corrupt things. You
have cast out a scandalous Ministry; labor to settle (I beseech you) in all
the three kingdoms Pious and able Preachers. Christ (the great Reformer of his
Church Mal. 3. 2 Matthew. 3. 12.) specially purges the Sons of Levi Mal. 3. 1.
because he has appointed them the office of purging others. secondly the
ordinances of God must be both Pure and Perfect in a complete Reformation. You
have cast out a great deal of rubbish; O that the House of God might be built.
It was a blemish upon some of those reformations mentioned in Scripture, that
the high places were not taken away, and that their reformation needed a
further reformation. God did much honor King Edward a Child, and Queen
Elizabeth a woman in making them the beginners of a blessed reformation. O that
the Lord would be pleased by you to perfect what they begun, that Christ's
government, worship, and discipline might be set up in the three Kingdoms. In
the times of our troubles, peace and truth have been joined together in our
Prayers and Capitulations; O let them never be separated, I will reveal unto
them the abundance of peace and truth Jer. 33. 6. and the same Prophet Jer. 9.
3.
complains, that there were none valiant for truth in the earth. Buy the truth
and sell it not says Solomon, contend earnestly for the faith which was once
delivered to the Saints. Jude. 3. v.
Amicus Socrates, Amicus Plato, sed magis amica veritas. You have covenanted to
extirpate heresies and whatsoever is contrary to sound doctrine. In your first
Declaration, there is this memorable passage, It is far from our purpose or
desire, to let loose the golden reins of Discipline and government in the
Church, to leave private persons or particular congregations, to take up what
form of divine service they please; for we hold it requisite that there should
be through-out the whole Realm a conformity to that order which the Laws
enjoyne according to the word of God. God has done great things for you and by
you, and therefore he expects great things from you. It was a noble resolution
in our Josiah, Edward the 6th, when he was pressed by Bishop Ridly and others
to tolerate his Sister Mass in her own Chapel, he would not (though
importuned) yield thereto, saying, He should dishonor God in it; but being
much pressed by them he burst into tears, and they thence concluded, that he
had more divinity in his little finger then they in all their bodies; O that
you would study to premote Gods glory, and be zealous for his truth, since you
have had such experience of his mercy, and likewise could not but perceive the
evil of those dangerous errors, which were too much indulged by some of those
whom you have cast out.

I shall now speak of the threefold Subject I handle in my Book. 1. The
Scripture, 2. God, 3. The Works of God. It is reported of Charles the Great,
that he set his Crown on the Bible, Ego ipse odi meos libros, and sape ^pi^e^s
interire, quod ^etuo ne morentur lectores, and abducanta l^ctioneipsius
scripturae, quae sola omnis sapientiae fon^ est. Lutherus in ^9 c. Genes.
and Luther was so zealous to have the Scriptures read, that he professed, if
he thought the reading of his Books would hinder the reading of the Scripture
he would burn them all before he dyed. Alphonsus King of Spain and Naples,
read the Bible with Lira's gloss foureteen times over. The Emperor Theodosius
the second, wrote the New Testament out with his own hand; many speak much of
new light, but the Prophet Esaias Esaias 8. 20.
says To the Law, and to the Testimony: if they speak not according to this
word, it is because there is no light in them. Take heed of too much of that
new light, which the world is now gazing upon; Jer. 6. 16. and 18. 15.
so much new light is breaking forth, that the old zeal is almost extinct by
it, says a Minister Master Buckley of the Gospel Covenant on Zach. 9. 11, p.
14. and 104.
of New- England. The Familists say they are above Ordinances; when the body
has no need of nourishment, then (and not before) will the soul have no need
of Ordinances; we about Westminster have been better instructed out of the 20.
of Exodus 24. Some talk of Revelations and the Testimony of the Spirit. But
now the Scripture is completed, I must not expect any immediate Testimony of
the Spirit. Luther says, if any Spirit should come and speak any thing to him
that he brought not Scripture for, he would spit in his face. The Scripture is
the best Cynosure to follow, it was David's Counselor, The Schoolmen a^fi^me
that t^ree things cannot be ^efined.
it is a perfect rule of a Perfect Reformation.

Secondly, all Christian States and Persons should labor for an experimental
practical knowledge of God and Christ, 1 God ob summam formositatem.
Phil. 3. 8. 10. the vision of God in Heaven shall make us perfectly Happy. 2.
Materia prima ab summam informitatem.
Quid Deus sit ipse tantum novit, 3. Sin obsummam deformitatem.
what God is, God himself does only perfectly know. But he has revealed
himself to us in his word and works. That place in 34 of Exodus, 6. 7. verses
is as full a description of Gods Attributes, as any in all the Scripture, The
Lord, the Lord God, merciful, and gracious, long-suffering and abundant in
goodness and truth; keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity,
transgression and sin, and that will by no means clear the guilty, visiting
the iniquity of the Fathers upon the children, and upon the childrens Children,
unto the third and fourth generation. If God were more known, he would be more
loved, Psalm. 9 9.
honou^ed, feared, trusted. The Heathens extolled the knowledge of a man's self,
but Christians must chiefly study to know God.

This is a Noble Subject for a Christian Parliament and a Christian Kingdom to
exercise themselves in; O that you would all labor to know Gods excellencies,
and to propagate the knowledge of him to the many dark Corners of the Land.

Thirdly, the works of God are to be diligently observed by a Christian State.
One observes that there is a five fold Declaration of the works of God. Mr
Carill on Psalm. 1 18. 17.
An Arthnieticall Declaration Psalm. 40. 5. Secondly, a Logical Declaration of
the works of God, when we show the several kinds of them; as the works of
Creation, the work of Redemption, the work of Providence; and distribute
those into works of mercy, or works of Justice. Thirdly, an Historical
Declaration, when we declare the persons acting, the places, the times the
Counsels, the mannaging of the several actions, the events and successes.
Fourthly, a Rhetorical Declaration. Fifthly, a Declaration purely
Theological, or a practical Declaration of the works of God. 104. Psalm. 24.


We should be lifted up by Gods manifold works to the Consideration of his
unlimited greatness that is the first cause and author of them all; we can
turn our eyes no way, but exceeding great multitudes of works wrought by God
do offer themselves to our view.

If we look upward, downward, on the right hand, on the left, into our selves
and other things; our minds shall be encountered with diversity of rare Works
of Almighty God. These works are all made with much wisdom Psalm. 136. 5. and
the serious considering of Gods works is a great part of the sanctifying of
his name. Never had any Parliament more reason to magnify Gods goodness for
his singular mercies. Oh that as many of your deliverances were got with
supplication, so they might be worn with thankfulness; and as you have been
a Parliament of many Prayers, so may you be a Parliament of many praises, which
is the earnest desire of

Your Honors Devoted Servant, EDW. LEIGH.

To the Christian Reader.
REader, The number of books is without number, the Presses are daily
oppressed with them. Yet (though the world abound with unprofitable, may
pernicious I may say of some writers in these days as Tully of the
Philosophers, that there is nothing so absurd which is not m^intained by some
of them.
Pamphlets) there are many excellent subjects which are either not handled, or
not sufficiently. There is a great variety in men's fancies as well as in their
faces; and books Libri quasi liberi.
(the fruit of men's brains) are as various as men themselves. Some books are to
be tasted only, Sir Francis Bacon in his Essays.
some chewed, and some swallowed. That saying of Stanchar the Heretic
Rainoldus de lib. Apoc. tomo primo praelect. 4th.
does exceedingly please the Papists, Plus apud se valere unum Lombardum, quam
centum Lutheros, ducentos Melancthones, trecentos Bullingeros, quadringentos
Martyrs, quingentos Calvinos. That one Petrus Lombardus propter eminentem
int^r Pontificios authoritarem magister sententiarum nuncupatus est. Rainoldus
de lib. Apoc. Petrus Lombardus, quem omnes The^l^gorum schola singulari quadam
venerationis excellentia magistium sententiarum appellant, and in cujus
Theologiae compendium innumerabilia disputationum volumina eruditissimi
clariss^marum tot^ Christiano orb Academiarum Theologi celebrarunt. Sixtus
Senensis Bibl. Sanct. lib. 4*
Lumbard was more esteemed by him, then 100 Luthers, 200 Melancthons, 300
Bullingers, 400 Martyrs, 500 Calvin's. Focanus contrarily, says thus of the
Schoolmen, that one Austin among the Ancients, and one Calvin (in his
Institutions of Christian Religion) among the modern Divines, will afford thee
more solid Divinity, then all the School-Doctors of the Popish Church, with all
their vain disputations, jejune distinctions, quodlibeticall questions, and
foolish speculations, with which (says he) Thomas, Scotus, Lombard,
Bonaventure, Molina, Vasquez, Suarez, a Soto, Bellarmine, and other Doctors of
the Roman Church are full, even ad nauseam. But the Bible is indeed the Book
of Books, it signifies in the Greek Tongue, A Book in general; and was
sometimes taken so largely, So Scripture signifies writing in general, but by
an excellency the Word of God.
yet by an Antinomasie or excellency it is now taken for the Book of the Holy
Scripture, and is all one with Gods Book. We told you before how much the
Papists magnified Peter Lumbard the father of the Schoolmen, calling him the
Master of the sentences, and preferring him before hundreds of ours. The next
Schoolman after him Alexander of Ales is called Doctor Irrefragabilis Thomas
Aquinas after him, Doctor Angelicus. John Scot the last, Doctor Subtilis. Yet a
learned Doctor De Prideaux Hinc Sementiariorum, Quaestionistarum,
Quodlibetistatum ingens turba, qui pro solida Theologia spinosas and rixosas
disputationes in Christianorum scholas invexerunt.
of our own says of the Schoolmen, Scholastici vel hoc nomine non tanti sunt
a nobis faciendi, quia in Justificationis articulo vix quicquam tradiderunt
solidi. The Papists themselves note twenty Articles, in which their great
Master Lombard erred; so that that is ascribed to them, hic magister non
tenetur. But now Paul (the great Doctor of the Gentiles) of whom Chrysostom
writes several Homilies, is indeed an Angelical, Subtle, Irrefragable
Doctor. Austin desired three things: Revetendissimus Episcopus Vsserius De
Christianarum Ecclesiarum successione and statu. c. 9.
to have seen Christ in the flesh, Rome in its glory, and to have heard Paul
preach. What he speaks is true as Gospel, and we can not apply to him what
the Papists do frequently to Peter Lumbard, hic magister non tenetur. We may
exercise our judgment Solis Canonicis debetur fides, coeteris amnibus
Judicium. Lutherus.
upon the writings of men (there being few that write much and contradict not
themselves) but we must believe the Divinely inspired Writings. Lambert in his
perambulation of Kent. Se* Speed in William the Conqueror. p. 42.
There is a Book in the Law called Liber Judiciarius, or Doomesday-Booke,
because (as Matthew Paris says) it spared no man, but judged all men
indifferently as the Lord in that great day will do. The Bible is the true
Liber judiciarius, or Doomesday Book. John 12, 48.
The word that I have spoken, the same shall judge him in the last day. I shall
now in a few words discover the usefulness of this threefold Treatise. Having
been in these times of spoil unhappily plundered of my Books and Manuscripts,
(which I esteemed as a precious treasure) recovering this twice with some
others, I did resolve (for preventing any future damages in that kind) to
transcribe it fair for the Press, which was the work of a whole year. I
know first the subject is very necessary for all Christians to search into, and
I have perused all the best writers I could find, that I might handle it fully
commonplace wise, according to the excellency of the Theme. I have made use
also of some Manuscrips of three M. Pemble my learned Tutor, Master Wheattly my
Reverend Pastor, M. Ball my worthy friend.
worthy men, now with God, (whose memory I shall ever honor) for the
completing of the work. I have gleaned a few observations from some of the
worthy Lecturers in Westminster, from M. Ley of Budworth in his Lectures in the
City, and from diverse others of the Assembly, in their printed Sermons. This
work I conceive may be beneficial for these purposes: Chiefly for settling and
establishing of Christians in some maine principles of Divinity, viz. that
there is a God, against the Atheists of these times; that the Scripture is the
Word of God, against the Anti-Scripturists; that Christ is God, against all
Arrians, Socinians, and other Heretics ejusdem farinae, vel potius furfuris;
that the so* (...) of man is immortal, against such who in these dai^^ deny
the same. 2. For enabling a Christian to all d^^ties, prayer, meditation, holy
conference, catechizing his family. For example, suppose a Christian desire to
instruct his family in the principles of Religion, and would make use of M.
Bals Catechism for that purpose (for I know not a better yet extant) he may by
the help of this work open the heads of Religion, from the beginning of that
Book to the Fall of man. I would there were the like out on the whole body of
Divinity. But lest I trangresse the bounds of an Epistle, I commend the work
to Gods blessing, and desire thy benign interpretation of my labors, still
resting

Thy faithful friend and hearty wel-wisher, EDWARD LEIGH

PROLEGOMENA.
HEBR. 6. 1. THe Apostle chides the Hebrews in the former Chapter for their
ignorance and uncapablenesse of Divine mysteries from v. 11. to the end. He
tells them they were dull of hearing, and that their ignorance was affected;
they might for their time and means have been teachers, and yet now they must
be taught; and (which is strange) the very principles of the word of God. Here
in the beginning of this Chapter he earnestly exhorts them to increase both in
knowledge and obedience.

Leaving) The Apostle alludes to men running a race, they leave one place and
go on forward; we must leave the principles of Religion, that is, not stick
there, but pass on to a greater perfection. The Apostle has reference to the
Schools of the Jews where he was trained up; there were two sorts of
Scholars, 1. Punies or petties, 2. Proficients, Perfectists. Six principles
are named, as so many heads and common places of the ancient Catechism; not
but that there were many other ne^^^^ary principles; yet they might be reduced
to (...):

^ Two maine duties, that is, 1. the doctrine of repentance from dead works,
that every man is dead in sin by nature, and therefore had need to repent. 2
The doctrine of faith in God.

2 Two means. 1 The doctrine of Baptismes, by which in the plural number he
means both the Sacraments; and also the inward Baptism of Christ, and that
outward baptism of John, that is to say, of the Minister, though some
Apostolus baptismorum meminit, qui^ ad statos inter veteres baptismi dies
alludit, Paschae nimirum and Pentecostes, ubi plures simul baptisari
consueverant, vel quia de plurium baptismo simpliciter loquitur. Spanhemius.
refer it to the set times of Baptism. 2 The imposition or laying on of hands,
that is by a trope or borrowed speech, the ministry of the Church upon the
which hands were laid, not the Sacrament of Confirmation, as a Lapide expounds
it.

3 Two benefits. Resurrection of the dead, that the same numericall body shall
rise again; and eternal judgment, so called metonymically, because in that
judgment sentence shall be given concerning their eternal state either in
weal or woe.

Not laying again the foundation) Three things are required in a foundation. 1
That it be the first thing in the building. 2 That it bear up all the other
parts of the building 3 That it be firm and immovable. Simply and absolutely
in respect of all times, persons, and things, Christ Dr Field of the Church, l.
5. c. 22. Esaias 28. 16. 1 Cor. 3. 11.
only is the foundation upon which the spiritual building of the Church is
raised. The first principles of heavenly doctrine are named here a foundation,
because they are the first things which are known, before which nothing can be
known, and because upon the knowledge of these things all other parts of
heavenly knowledge do depend. The Apostles are also the foundation of the
Church, Quod est ab ipsis positum and praedicatum. Jun. ad Bellarm. cont. 3. l
3 c. 23. The Prophets^ and Apostles are not fundamenta fundantia, but fundata,
such foundations as themselves had a foundation, even the Lord Christ; the
ground of a Christians faith is Thus says the Lord, thus it is written.
Ephesians. 2. 20. Rev. 21. 14. in three respects. 1 Because they were the first
which founded Churches, and converted unbelievers to the faith. 2 Because their
doctrine which they received immediately from God by most undoubted revelation
without mixture of error or danger of being deceived, is the rule of faith to
all after-commers. 3 Because they were Heads, Guides, and Pastors of the whole
universal Church.

The Proposition or Observation which arises from these words thus opened, may
be this.

The Principles and Foundations of Christian Religion must be well laid. The
Observation.
Or thus, Catechizing and instructing of the people in the principles of
Religion is a necessary duty to be used.

The Apostle illustrates this by a comparison, first from Schools; secondly,
from building, the foundation must be first laid.

The excellent definition of catechizing which the Apostle here gives, Sermo
qui ^udes in Christo inchoat.
yields us two good proofs of its necessity.

1 It is the doctrine of the beginning of Christ, Fundamenti vocabulum est
metaphoricum, ab aedificantibus sumtum, atque denotat illud totius structurae
firmamentam in im^ posi um, qu^ sustentatur aedificium quoque subd^cto corruit
protinus, and in frusta dilabitur.
by some rendered not unfitly for the sense which gives beginning in Christ.

2 It is a foundation which bears up all the building, (without this,
preaching is to no purpose) which though it makes the least show, yet it is of
greatest use; it establishes men, and keeps them firm from wavering.

3 This course is most agreeable, 1. To Art; all Arts proceed from principles.
Physicians have their principles, Lawyers their maxims, Philosophers their
chief sentences. Davenant. adhort. ad pac^m. Eccles. c. 2.
2 To nature, which first forms the vital parts, then the more remote. 3. It
is suitable to reason. Principles are, 1. easiest in themselves. 2. Facilitate
other matters. 3. Are the most necessary doctrines of all the rest, they bear
up all the rest. 4. Are of continual and constant use; Prin^ipia sunt minima
quantitate, maxima virtute.

4. Gods order and practice has been still to lay principles; things might
easily pass from one to another at first, they lived so long. Cains and Abels
sacrificing is an evidence of catechizing before the flood; there was no word
written then, therefore it is like their fathers taught them. It was practiced
by Abraham, Genesis 18. 19. the fruit of which observe in his son, Gen 24. 63.
and servant, Genesis 12. 26. God himself writes a Catechism for the Jews,
describing a short compendium of religion in the two authentic tables of the
Law. 1 Samuel 1. 25.
Hannah delivered Samuel to Eli his instructor so soon as he was weaned.
Jehoida taught the young King Jehoash; David and Bathsheba practiced it, 2 Chronicles. 28. 8, 9. Psalm 34. 11. Prove. 4. 4. and 31. 1. and Solomon himself
seem to give that precept out of the experience of his own most excellent
education. Prove 2^ 6. See Prove. 6. 22. Prove. 31. 26. which is meant chiefly of
instructing her family.
Teach a child the trade of his way, and when he is old he shall not depart
from it; though himself scarce did so; and Eccles. 12. 23. he draws all which
he had said in his whole book to two heads, Fear God, and keep his
Commandments. Catechizing was also practiced by Christ and his Apostles, Luke
2. 46. Acts 22. 3. Heb. 6. 1, 2, 3. Christ at twelve years old submitted
himself to be catechized, Luke 1. 4. and allowed of Hosanna sung by children.
He begins with regeneration to Nicodemus, and he drew the whole Law into two
heads, Matthew. 3 8. and 4. 17. Mark 1. 15.
Matthew. 22. 37. John and Christ preached Faith and Repentance, and the Apostles
Acts 2. 5. 10. and 13. chapter and in their Epistles.
after them. Theophilus was catechized Luke 1. 4. Apollos, Acts 18. 23.
Timothy, 1 Timothy 3 15. 2 Timothy 2. 2. The Apostle Paul commends to Timothies
custody a pattern of wholesome doctrine, which he calls (...), a word ^orrowed
from the making of an impression by a stamp or seal. John 21. 15. Acts 20. 20.
a form of doctrine, Romans 6. 17. and the analogy of faith, Romans 12. 6. This
duty principally belongs to Ministers, their Office is set down under the name
of catechizing, Let him which is catechized make him that catechiseth partaker,
Gal. 6. 6. Ministers must plant and beget as well as increase and build up,
feed the Lambs as well as the Sheep; they are compared to Nurses, wise
Stewards, skillful builders; it must be performed by householders also, Psalm
78. 5. 1 Timothy 1. 5. The practice of this duty is represented in the whole
Book, of the Proverbs.
Ephesians. 6. 4. God charge parents to perform this duty, Deuteronomy. 6. 6, 7.
Rehearse them continually, whet them upon thy children, often go over the same
thing as a knife does the whetstone. They are bound to bring up their children
in the nurture and information of the Lord; children were to be taught the
meaning of the Passover, Exodus 12. 16. Masters of Families also must instruct
their servants which are ungrounded as children. Christ instructed his
Apostles, he taught them how to pray, he being the Master of the family, and
they his family, as appears, because he did eat the Passover together with
them; and the Law appoints that every family should celebrate that feast
together. The reason why God specifieth not this point in the masters duty, is,
because if it be performed by the father, it shall be needless, seeing it is
done to the masters hand; but if the father neglect it, surely the master which
succeeds in the fathers room, and has his authority, must see it done. For as
a father in Israel was bound to see his own son circumcised, Genesis 17. 12, 13.
so he was bound to see his servant circumcised; and if to circumcise him, sure
he must as well make him as his child to know what circumcision meaned. Omnis
Christi actio Christiani instructio.
And what Christ did as a master of a family, that must every master of family
do, seeing we must be followers of Christ every one in his place; therefore
every one must instruct his ignorant servants in the truths of Religion.

The Jews did use catechizing; Cyprian says Optatus exercised it at Carthage,
and Origin at Alexandria, Clemens Alexandrinus had his paedagogus, Lactantius
and Calvin their Institutions, Athanasius his Synopsis, Austin his Euchiridion,
his books de doctrina Christiana, and de catechizandis rudibus.

Catechizing is institutio viva voce, a kind of familiar conference. Prove. 26.
6.
The Hebrew verb Chanach signifies to instruct or train up even from
childhood; and to initiate or dedicate, from which word holy Henoch Chanoc.
Genesis 5. 18.
had his name, importing nurture in the fear of God. (...) vox Graeca est,
quam Latina Ecclesia prosua coepit usurpare. Martinius. Eusebius says, one was
set apart on purpose for this office in the Primitive Church, called the Catech
st. Hinc Catechumini dicebantur qui Catechismum discebant, Catechistae qui
Catechismum doc^bant. Dietericus.
The Greek word (...) signifies to sound or resound as by an echo, and is
applied even by Heathen writers unto that kind of teaching which is by word of
mouth, sounding in the ear of him that is taught, and especially unto the
teaching of the first rudiments of any science whatsoever, It signifies any
kind of vocal instruction, Acts 21. 21, 24. viz. that whereby the principles
of Christian doctrine are made known unto the hearers, as Luke 1. 4. instructed
or catechized, Gal 6. 6. taught, or catechized. See Acts 18. 25. Romans 2. 18. 1
Cor. 14. 19.

Catechizing is a plain and easy instructing of the ignorant in the grounds
of Religion, Catechizing what it is. Catechesis est elementaris institutio
Christianae religionis viva docentis voce trad^ta, and a discentibus repetita.
Altingius.
or concerning the fundamental principles, familiarly by questions and
answers, and a spiritual applying the same for practice.

What ever the catechizing in the Primitive Church was in private, for the
public it seems not to have been Dialogue-wise M. Pemble.
by question and answer, but in a continued speech, with much plainness and
familiarnesse.

Catechizing differs from preaching; preaching is the dilating of one member of
Religion into a just Treatise; M. Greenham.
catechizing is a contracting of the whole into a sum; preaching is to all
sorts, catechizing to the young and rude.

Catechizing is, It is to be performed either by the Minister in public, or
the Governors in private, or some able body in their place.
1. plain; that none might excuse themselves; that the most illiterate might
not say at the day of judgment, O Lord, thy ways were too hard for us. 2 That
the manner of the teaching might be suitable to the hearers. 3 That no
Governors might pretend the difficulty of it. 2 Instructing, which implies
that original ignorance and blindness we were borne with. 3 It is such an
instructing which is by way of distilling things in a familiar manner; our
Savior did not give the people whole Loaves, but distributed them by pieces. 4
Such an instructing as acquaints them with the meaning of things, Verba
Scripturae non sunt verba legenda, sed vivenda, said Lu^^er.
and spiritually applies the same for practice. It is not enough to say the
Creed and Lords prayer, but to understand the sense and apply it to practice. 5
An instruction by way of question and answer, which is thereby made more plain
and familiar.

The exercise of catechizing has been proved to be most ancient, and very
necessary and useful; and therefore it should be always continued in the
Church, 1 Because there will always be found Babes which stand in need of
Milk, not being able to bear strong meat. 2 Because as no building can stand
without a foundation, and none can be expert in an Art except he learn the
principles thereof: so none can have sound knowledge in Divinity, except he be
trained up in the grounds thereof.

The best way to perform this exercise, is,

1 By short questions and answers, the Minister demanding the question, the
people answering.

2 It must be done purely, ^ Cor. 2. 4.

3 Plainly, 2 Cor. 3. 2. Heb. 5. 11.

4 Soundly, Titus 2. 7.

5 Orderly.

6 Cheerfully and lovingly, 2 Timothy 2. 24. praising the forward, encouraging the
willing, patiently bearing with all, admonishing such as are unruly. Amesius
his Christianae eatechesios Sciagraphia is useful this way, and Nowels
catechism in Latin; in English there are Bishop Vshers, Mr Baines, Master
Cartwrights, Mr Balls Catechismes, and Mr Crookes Guide.

Here is a fault that both teachers and hearers must share between them;
Consectaries of reproof.
Ministers do not teach principles sufficiently, happy is that man which can
say with Paul, I have kept back nothing that was profitable. 2 Those are to
blame which will not be taught, children and servants which are stubborn and
unwilling to be catechized; some say they are too old to learn; but are they
too old to repent and be saved? some say they are past principles, they are not
now to be grounded; but we may say with the Apostle, Whereas they ought to be
teachers, they had need themselves to be taught. Such people rebel against
their Minister or Master, whose duty it is to teach them, and God who commands
it.

Let men be exhorted to practice this duty, 2 Of Exhortation.
Ministers, Masters, Parents; Schoolmasters teach the A. B. C. and the Grammar,
suffer little children to come unto me.

Consider, 1. thou broughtst thy children into the world blind and deformed. 2
Thou can not else have comfort in thy children or servants; many are crossed in
their family for want of this, and many at the gallows will cry out, if they
had lived where they had been instructed, they had never died a dogs death.
Greenham says, thy children shall follow thee up and down in Hell, and cry
against thee for not teaching them. He that will not provide for his family
(says Paul) is worse then an Infidel; and he that will not teach them is
worse then a beast. The old Nightingale Ar^stot. de historia animalium, l. 6.
c. 6.
teaches the young to sing, and the old Eagle her young ones to fly. Children
ill brought up were devoured by Bears, to teach parents Caussins Holy Court
eighth reason of his first book^.
, that since they have done less then Bears, who shape their whelps by much
licking and smoothing them (though Dr. Brown L 3. c. 6. of his Enquiries.
deny this,) they therefore by bears were bereft of them. Prove. 22 6.
It is good therefore to season our children Non minus placet Deo Hosanas
pue^orum, quam Halleluiah virorum. The Holy Ghost has composed some Psalms in
Acrosticall verses according to the order of the Hebrew Alphabet (as 25, 34.
37, 119.) that parents might teach their children the first elements of
Religion as well as learning.
with wholesome truths betime; a vessel will long keep the savor of that with
which it is at first seasoned, and the devil will begin betime to sow his
seed. Mr. Bolton upon his death-bead spoke unto his children thus, I do
believe, says he, there is never a one of you will dare to meet me at the
Tribunal of Christ in an unregenerate condition.

It will be a great comfort to thee and benefit to them when they are
instructed in the points of religion; if thy children die, yet thou may have
great hope of them, when thou have acquainted them with the principal grounds
of religion. The Papists in the preface to the catechism of the Council of
Trent, confess that all the ground we have got of them is by catechizing, and
let us look that we loose not our ground again for want of it. Julian
himself could not devise a readier means to banish Eusebius Eccles. hist. l.
10. c. 32.
Christian Religion, then by pulling down the Schools and places of educating
children. Egesippus says, that by virtue of catechizing there was never a
Kingdom but received alteration in their heathenish religion within forty
years after Christ's passion.

All ignorant persons though they be grown in years must be willing to be
instructed and catechized. See M. Pembles Sermon of ignorance. Luke 1. 5.
See Esaias 27. 11. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 8. Theophilus a Noble man and of ripe years was
catechized, as the Greek word shows; Jerem. 10. 25.
ignorance brings men to the very pit and gulf of destruction, Hos. 4. l.
and v. 14. 1. Pet. 3. 15. Christians should be ready to give an answer to every
man which does ask them a reason Heb. 5 13. One being examined, affirmed
blindly that none had died or should die for him. Another, that the Sun
shining in the firmament was the Son of God that died for him.
of the hope which is in them; the foundation is that which is first and surest
laid, and has an influence into all the building. The Scriptures are
fundamentum quo, the fundamental writings which declare the salvation of
Chistians, John 5. 39. Christ fundamentum quod, the fundamental means and
cause which has purchased and does give it, John 4. 42. The The Papists make
the Pope their personal foundation.
person we must build on is Christ, 1 Cor. 3. 11. He is called the foundation
of foundations, Esaias 28. The doctrinall foundation is the written Word of God,
which is not only the object and matter of our faith, but the rule and reason
of it. Hold Christ as your Rock, build on him, the Scripture as your rule and
the reason of your believing; this is general, there are some particulars.

1 Some things are simply necessary; See D^. Field of the Church, l. 3. c. 4,
and M. Rous his Catholic Charity, Chapters 10, and 11.
It were a notable work for one to determine this, how much knowledge were
required of all, 2. not absolutely necessary. Some make the foundation too
narrow, some again too wide; some say that if a man mean well and go on
according to the light he has, Some dislike the beginning of the Ath^nasian
Creed, Whosoever will be saved, etc. Fundamentalem articulum habendum sentio,
qui ex voluntate De^ revelantis ad salutem and aeternam beatitudinem
consequendam est adeo scitu and creditu necessarius ut ex illius ignoratione,
ac multo magis opp^gnatione, aet^rnae vitae amittendoe man^festum periculum
incurratur. Davenant. de pace Ecclesiastica. About fundamental points there
may sometimes arise such disputes as are no way fundamental. For instance,
that God is one in Essence, and three in Persons, distinguished one from
another; that the Son is begotten of the Father, that the ho^y Ghost is the
Spirit of both Father and Son; that these three persons are coeternall and
coequall, all these are reckoned in the number of Fundamentals: but those
School-nieities touching the manner of the Sons generation and the procession
of the holy Ghost, are not likewise fundamental and of equal necessity with
the former. ^, Davenants opinion of the Fundamental points of Religion.
though he know not Christ, he shall be saved: others say, that all are bound
to know distinctly the Articles of the Creed.

Fundamental truths are all such points of doctrine which are so plainly
delivered in Scripture, Certa semper sunt in pa^cis, says Tertullian. Certain
and undoubted truths are not many, and they are such as may be delivered in a
few words.
that whosoever does not know or follow them shall be damned, but he that does
know and follow these (though erring in other things) shall be saved.

These points (said a reverend Divine now with God) are twelve; three
concerning God, three concerning man, three concerning the Redeemer, three
concerning the means of attaining good by this Redeemer.

Concerning God.

1 There is one God which is an Infinite, Perfect, and Spiritual essence.

2 This one God is distinguished into three persons or manners of subsistence
after an incomprehensible way, which we believe but cannot perfectly
understand. The Father begetting, the Son begotten, and the holy Ghost
proceeding.

3 This one God, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, is the maker, preserver,
and governor of all things, by his wisdom, power, justice, providence.

Concerning man.

1 That he was made by God of a visible body, and an immortal and spiritual
soul, both so perfect and good in their kinds^, that he was perfectly able to
have attained eternal life for himself, which was provided as a reward of his
obedience.

2 That being thus made he yielded to the temptations of the Devil and did
voluntarily sin against God in eating of the Tree forbidden, and so became a
child of wrath and heir of cursing, an enemy to God, and slave to the devil,
utterly unable to escape eternal death, which was provided as a recompense of
his disobedience.

3 That he does propagate this his sinfulness and misery to all his posterity.

Concerning Christ.

1 That he is perfect God, and perfect man, the second Person in the Trinity,
who took the nature of man from the Virgin Mary, and united it to himself in
one personal subsistence, by an incomprehensible union.

2 That in man's nature he did die and suffer in his life and death, sufficient
to satisfy Gods justice, which man had offended, and to deserve for mankind
remission of sins, and life everlasting; and that in the same nature he rose
again from the dead, and shall also raise up all men to receive judgment from
him at the last day, according to their deeds.

3 That he is the only sufficient and perfect Redeemer, and no other merit
must be added unto this, either in whole or part.

Lastly, concerning the means of applying the Redeemer, they are three.

1 That all men shall not be saved by Christ, but only those that are brought
to such a sight and feeling of their own sinfulness and misery, that with
sorrow of heart they do bewail their sins, and renouncing all merits of
their own, or any creature, cast themselves upon the mercy of God, and the
only merits of Jesus Christ, which to do is to repent and believe, and in
this hope live holily all the remainder of their life.

2 That no man is able thus to see his sins by his own power, renounce
himself, and rest upon Christ, but God must work it in whom he pleases by
the cooperation of his Spirit regenerating and renewing them.

3 That for the working of this faith and repentance and direction of them in a
holy life, he has left in writing by the Prophets and Apostles infallibly
guided to all truth by his Spirit, all things necessary to be done or believed
to salvation, and has continued these writings to his people in all ages.

Observe those places Acts 15. 11. 1 Timothy 1. 15. Let a man hold this, that
there was nothing but death in the world till Christ came, and that he is come
to save horrible sinners, John 17. 3. Secondly, there is a practical place, As
there are in points of faith, fundamental Articles, so there are in points of
practice fundamental duties. M. Raynolds on 14 of Hos. 2, 3.
Titus 3. 8. Let us 1. See our selves dead without Christ, and wholly trust in
him. 2. Let us be exemplary in our lives and conversations. There are other
Fundamentals which are only comparatively necessary, that is expected from one
man which is not expected from another; and more from those that live in the
Church. Have these six principles of the Apostle not only in your heads, but
hearts. 1. That a man is dead in himself. 2. That his remedy lies out of
himself. 3. Know the doctrine of the Sacraments. 4. The Word of God. 5. Have
some apprehension of the life to come. 1. That there is a passage from death to
life. 2. That there is a fixed and irrevokable estate after this life. Hold the
doctrine of faith so, that Christ may live in you, and you be delivered up into
that form of doctrine, lay hold on life eternal.

Secondly, there are some particular principles. There is a natural light and
supernatural. The light of nature teaches some principles: That, you must do
as you would be done by, that no man hates his own flesh, that one must
provide for his family, that there is a God, and one God, that he is to be
honored and reverenced above all.

2. Supernatural, Let all our actions be done, 1. in love, 2. in humility, 3.
in faith, 4. in God; this the Gospel teaches.

Show your selves Christians in power, Corrolaries.
go beyond the Heathen in practicing the good rules of nature. 1. Be careful
to make a wise choice of principles; one false principle admitted, will let in
many errors; and erroneous principles will lead men into erroneous practices.

2. Labor to act your principles, if you captivate the light, God will put it
out.

3. Be sure you work according to your principles; we pity another in an
error when he follows his principles.

Here is an apology for those teachers which tread in Paul's steps, are careful
to lay the foundation well. It was the observation of our most judicious King
JAMES, That the cause why so many fell to Popery, and other errors, was their
ungroundednesse in points of Catechism.

How many wanton opinions are broached in these days? I wish I might not
justly call them Fundamental Haeresis est pertinax defensis e^rorl^ in fide,
opinionem aliquam pugnantem cum fundamento ejus ponentis. Voet. There are
damnable heresies, 2 Pet. 2, 1. and errors that are capital, not holding the
head, Col* 2. ^^.
errors. Some deny the Scriptures, some the Divinity of Christ, some the
immortality of the soul.

Errors are either Vide Altingii loc. commun. part 2. 262. Non omnis error
est haeresis sed illa tantum quae est contra fundamentum aut in fundamento
fidei, and pertinaciter defenditur. Voetius. ^erem. 9. 5.
contra against the foundation, which subvert the Foundation, as that of the
Papists who deny the al-sufficiency of Christ's once suffering.

2. Circa about the foundation, which pervert the Foundation, as the Lutherans
opinion of the ubiquity of Christ's body.

3. Citra merely without, these divert the foundation, as in the controversies
of Church Government, whether it be Sociall or Solitary; this strikes not at
the Foundation. Laurentius says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 3. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15.
speaks not of Heretical Teachers, and those which err in fundamentals, but
of those which err in lighter matters, because he says of both, that they
build upon one and the same Foundation, Christ.

We should contend for a known Fundamental necessary truth, Jude 3. the common
faith; not every opinion entertained on probable grounds.

It is a great question in Divinity

An Magistratui Christiano liceat capitales poenas de haereticis sumere.

Whether Heretics are to be punished by the Christian Magistrate with death?

The Papists say, Bellarm. Tomo 2. l. 3. c. 21. Thomas Aquinas p^rt. 2. quaest.
^^decima, Articulo tertic.
Haeretici qua Haeretici comburendi, That Heretics for Heresy sake, though
they do not trouble the State, ought to be put to death.

Luther does not approve of the capital punishment of Heretics, especially
for the pernicious sequel of it among the Papists against the Protestants. He
thinks it better that they be banished. The present Lutherans hold the same
almost concerning that question. Vide Gerhardi loc-commun de magistratu.
Meisner does distinguish between haereticus simplex, and haereticus seditiosus
ac blasphemus, these last he says may be punished with capital punishments.

The Socinians (being themselves the worst of Heretics) would have no outward
forcible restraining of any error, though never so gross and pernicious.

For the Protestants, hear what Zanchy says, Omnes fere ex nostratibus hujus
sunt senten^iae, quod ha^retici sint gladi puniendi. Zanchius tom^ secund^
Miscellin Cap. de Magistratu.
Beza has written a peculiar Tract de Haereticis a ma^istratu puniendis.
Calvin also has written aureum librum (as Beza calls it) of this very argument.
A^^tius has written the H^story of Valmitius Gentilis put to death at Berne.


We do deservedly condemn the cruelty of Turks and Papists, which go about
by force alone to establish their superstitions. The Church of Rome and the
Pope will judge what Heresy is, There was a Statute against Lollards in
England, and Hugonots in France.
and who is an Heretic, and they appropriate to themselves the name of
Catholics, and all such as dissent from them must presently be pronounced
heretics.

Because Heresy is not easily defined (as Austin says* Haeretitus ego^^^tion,
and tu mihi.
and because faith should be persuaded not compelled See the Statute 10. ot Q
Eliz. c. t.
We conceive that all fair means should be first used to convince men of their
errors and discover the danger of them; and that be termed Heresy which
indeed is so; Therefore we will premise some things concerning the nature and
danger of Heresy, before we speak partcularly of the punishment of heretics.

Chillingworth thus defines Heresy: Proprie Heretici vocantur qui ea
pertinaciter: rejiciunt, quae in Satris, Scripturu docentur. Dav. de judice
controver.
It is (says he) an obstinate defense of any error against any necessary*
Article of the Christian faith. Two things must concur (say some) to
constitute an Heretic. 1. Error in fide, 1 Timothy 1. 19. 2 Pertinacia, Titus 3.
10. Errare possum, Haereticus esse nolo. Haeresis est error pugnans cum
fundamento religionis Christianae, isque pertinax. Al^ingius Tomo secundo
Problem Theol. par^e 2. Prob. 14.


Dr Field Lib. 3. of the Church, c. 3. See Dr Prideaux his sermon on ^ Co^. 11.
19.
thus describes the nature of Heresy. Heresy is not every error, but error
in matter of Faith; nor every error in matter of Faith; (for neither Jews nor
Pagans are said to be Heretics, though they err most damnably in those things
which every one that will be saved must believe; and with all the malice, fury
and rage that can be imagined, impugn the Christian faith and verity) but it
is the error of such as by some kind of profession have been Christians; so
that only such as by profession being Christians, depart from the truth of
Christian Religion, are named Heretics.

Secondly, for the danger of Heresy. Heresy is a fruit of the flesh, Errors
are practical or doctrinall only, fundamental or circa-fundamentall, or
neither of the two.
Gal. 5. 20 An Heretic after the first and second admonition reject, Titus 3.
10. Heresy or false doctrine is in Scripture compared to Arrius in Alexandria
una scintilla suit. Sed quoniam non statim oppressus est, totum orbem ejus
flamma populata est. Aquinas.
Leaven, and to a Gangrene, for the speading and infectious nature of it. The
Heresy of Arrius See M. Clerks Sermons on Matthew. 8. 13. and M. Cranfords
Haereseomachia on 2 Timothy 2. 17.
was more dangerous to the Church then the Sword of all the persecuting
Emperors. We need not to ask whether he join obstinacy to his error (says
Vbi supra.
Dr Field) which erreth in those things which every one is bound particularly
to believe, because such things do essentially and directly concern the
matter of of our salvation, and he is without any further enquiry to be
pronounced an Heretic, and the very error it self is damnable; as if a man
(says he) shall deny Christ to be the Son of God, coessentiall, coequall,
and coeternall with his Father; or that we have remission of sins by the
effusion of his blood.

They therefore who first hold pestilent Heresies; and secondly, Cum agitaretur
de ista quaestione (An morte mulctandi and cogendi haeretici) in Synodo quadam
Londini, and perrogarentur singuloru^ sententiae, surrexit quidam senex
Theologus, atque hoc planum esse asserit ex ipso Apostolo. Haereticum hominem
post unam aut alteram admonitionem devita. De vita inquit, ergo manifestum est
haereticos istos homines post unam aut alteram admonitionem e vita tollendos,
Eras. Annotat. in Tit. 3.
who when before they professed the Christian Religion, and held the truth,
have yet made a defection from the same, to such Heresies; and thirdly, who
labor to infect others; and fourthly, being convicted do yet obstinately
persevere in them, and in the manner before mentioned; such are and ought (say
some worthy Protestants) to be punished by the Christian Magistrate with death.

They reason thus from the Office of the Magistrate. Every Magistrate may and
ought to punish offenders; and the more pernicious the offenders are, the more
heinous ought the punishment to be.

That the Magistrate is both custos ac vindex utriusque tabulae, these two
Scriptures do plainly evince, For he is the Minister of God to thee for good:
but if thou do what is evil, be afraid, for he bears not the sword in vain.
for he is the Minister of God, a revenger, to execute wrath upon him that does
evil Romans 13. 4. and 1 Timothy 2. 2. For Kings and all that are in Authority, that
we may lead a quiet and peaceable life, in all godliness and honesty. and are
urged by Calvin, Beza, and diverse others, to this very purpose. For if (says
Beza) the Magistrate have not power over Heretics, one of these two things
must necessarily follow, either that Heretics do not do ill; or, that what
Paul speaks in general must be restrained to a certain kind of evil deeds,
Romans 13. 4.
viz. to corporal sins.

From the 1 Timothy 2. 2. both Melancthon and Beza collect, that the Magistrate is
constituted by God, not only a preserver of the second Table, but also and
especially of pure Religion and the external Discipline of it, and so a
punisher also of the offenses Magistrates in the Scripture (in the Hebrew) are
called Masters of restraint. Qui non vetat peecare cum potest jubet. Seneca.
against it.

For the inforceing of this Argument from these two Scriptures, these reasons
may be added:

1 The sins against the first Table (Caeter is paribus) are greater then
those against the second Table, and the Magistrate is more to respect the glory
of God then the peace of the Commonwealth.

Heresies and corruptions in judgment are held by a Reverend Divine Mr.
Hildersham on Psalm ^1.
to be worse then corruptions in manners; his reason is taken out of Levit. 13.
44. one that was leprous in his head was utterly unclean.

2. Errors and Heresies are called in Scripture Evil deeds, 2. Epist John 10,
11. and Heretics Evil d^ers, Phil. 3. 2.

Divines generally hold, As all blasphemous Heretics, Levit. 24. 16. so
seducing H^reticks are to be put to death.
that such who err blasphemously are to be put to death, such as Arrius and
Servetus in France.

One says the Devil will think he has made a good bargain, if he can get
an universal liberty for removal of the Prelacy. The whole 13 Chapter of
Deutr^nomy is spent about the seducing of false Prophets.


That which Jerome wrote to Augustine, Quod signum majoris gloriae est, omnes
Haeretici te detestantur, may be applied to those of our times, who have been
Champions for the truth, such evil doers will malign them; Are not Moses
moral Laws of perpetual equity, and therefore to be observed in all ages? Is
blasphemy more tolerable in the new Testamen^? Mr. Cotton on 16 of Rev. third
Vial. We are not obliged (says Beza) to the Judicial Laws, as they were
given by Moses to one people, yet so far we are bound to observe them, as they
comprehend that general equity which ought to prevail every where.
but if they manage well so good a cause, it will bear them out.

THE ERRATA.
REader as men have their errors, so books have their errata. Though my public
occasions might be an apology for me, yet I never bestowed more pains in
correcting any book then this; and after my correcting of the several sheets,
many faults have still passed* especially in the third Book.

The litterall faults (where a letter is mistaken) the false interpunctions,
nor the joining together in the margent things of a different nature, nor the
mistaking of the figures in the first and third Book, nor the misplacing of
Scriptures, I shall not mention. Others that do wrong the sense are chiefly
these.

In the Text, Lib. 1. page 33. line 25. after 17. leave out Acts, p. 59. l. 30.
vixit, p. 63. l. 21. Glasseus, p. 70. l. 6. never doubted of their being, p.
115. l. 2. sanctissimam, p. 117. l. 30. Gretzerus. 182, 183. wants the figure
4, 5.

Lib. 2. p. 21. l. ult. does know, live and will, p. 30. l. 10. conceiving. p.
59. l. 20. 1 Themselves. 2 Stocks and stones, p. 96. l. 5. suis should be
quis, p. 129. l. 5. same should be son.

Lib. 3. p. 10. l. 25, 26. not pro singulis generum, but pro generibus
singulorum, p. 79. l. 20. (...), p* 80. l. 16. Deuteronomy. 32. 11. should be l. 11.
after them, p. 85. l. 9. (...) Maleac, p. 119. l. 22. because is wanting,* p.
121. however, should be Homer, p. 124. l. 18. souls.

In the Margent.
Lib. 1. p. 27. m. end, Tomo 1^. p. 29. m. eos. 33. m. after ubi, put in
Pontificis, and make Pontificis after Pontificii, 35. m. See M. Torshels, 49
end 4, Sepher Ketubim. 55 audiendam 56 exponen^ 60 futura 63 later end enim. p.
101. m. put out exercit. l. 1. ib. m. end, m. 183. perpetua 164. m. put out in
absterrere.

Lib. 2. p. 10. m. salis, 12 raise up, 14 verbum, Psalm. 76. 8 8 82. ult.
Z^p^erus.

Lib. 3. 51, m. Judaea, 73. m. non tam ad magnitudinem, 79 m. (...) 103. m. use
the fourth should be fourthly, 120. m. Evangelici contra Pontificios.

In the Prolegomena it should be Valentinus Gentilis peccare.

THE FIRST BOOK. Of the Scriptures.
CHAP. I.
Of Divinity in general.
IN The Preface or introduction to divinity, six things are to be considered.
1. That there is Divinity. 2. What Divinity is. 3. How it is to be taught. 4.
How it may be learnt. 5. Its opposites. 6. The excellency of Divine knowledge.

1. That there is Divinity, 1. That there is Divinity.
that is, a revelation of Gods will made to men, is proved by these arguments.

1. From the natural light of conscience, Romans 1. 18^19, 20. and 2* 14, 15.
in which (we being unwilling) many footsteps of Heavenly knowledge and the
divine will are imprinted.

2. From the supernatural light of grace; for we know that all Divine truths
are fully revealed in Scripture.

3. From the nature of God himself, who being the chiefest good, and therefore
most Omne bonum est sui diffusivu^, ergo maxim bonum est maxim^ sui
diffusivum. Vt se habet simile ad sim^le, ita se habet magis ad magis. Locus
topicus.
diffusive of himself, must needs communicate the knowledge of himself to
reasonable creatures for their salvation, Psalm. 119. 68.

4. From the end of creation; for God has therefore made reasonable creatures,
that he might be acknowledged and celebrated by them both in this life, and
that which is to come.

5. From common experience; for it was alwai^s acknowledged among all Nations,
that there was some revelation of Gods will, which as their Divinity, was
esteemed holy and venerable, whence arose their Oracles and Sacri^^ces.

2. What Divinity is. 2. What Divinity is.


The ambiguity of the Word is to be distinguished.

Theology or Divinity is twofold, Theology, if thou look after the etymology
of the word, is a speech of God: and he is commonly called a Theologer or
Divine who knows or professes the knowledge of Divine things. Peter du
Moulin.
either first, Archetypall, or Divinity in God, of God himsel^e, by which God
by one individual and immutable act knows himself in himself, and all other
things out of himself, by himself. Or second, Ectypall, and communicated,
expressed in us by divine revelation after the pattern and Idea which is i^
God, and this is called Theologia de Deo, Divinity concerning God, which is,
after to be defined. It is a question with the Schoolmen, whether D^vinity be
Theoreticall or Practical, Vtraque sententia suos habet autores. But it seems
(says Wendeline) rather to be practical, 1. Because the Scripture, which is
the fountain of true Divinity, exhorts rather to practice then speculation. 1 Timothy 1. 5. 1 Cor. 8. 3. and 13. 2. JAmes 1. 22, 25. Rev. 22. 24. hence John so
often exhorts to love in his first Epistle. 2. Because the end of Divinity, to
which we are directed by practical precepts, is the glorifying of God, and the
eternal salvation of our souls and bodies, or blessed life, which are
principally practical. Wen^line means (I conceive) that the blessed life in
Heaven is spent practically, which yet seems to be otherwise. Peter du Moulin
in his Oration in the praise of Divinity, thus determines the matter: That part
of Theology which treats of God and his Nature, of his Simplicity, Eternity,
Infiniteness, is altogether contemplative, for these things fall not within
compass of action; that part of it which handles of our manners, and the well
ordering of our lives, is merely practique; for it is wholly referred unto
action. Theology is more contemplative then practique, se^ing contemplation is
the scope of action, for by good works we aspire unto the beatificall vision of
God.

Theology amongst the Heathens did anciently signify the doctrine touching the
false worship of their Gods; L^^tanius de ira Dei.
but since it is applied as the word imports, to signify the doctrine
revealing the true and perfect way which leads unto blessedness. 2. What
Divinity is.
It may briefly be defined, the knowledge of the truth which is according to
godliness, Titus 1. 1.
teaching how we ought to know and obey God, 1 Timothy 6. 3.
that we may attain life everlasting and glorify Gods Name: Col. 1. 5.
or thus, Divinity is a doctrine revealed by God in his word, 2 Timothy 2. 18.
which teaches man how to know and worship God, Theologia est doctrina de deo
ac rebus divinis.
so that he may live well here and happily hereafter.

Divinity is the true wisdom of divine things, divinely revealed to us to live
well and blessedly, Divinity is the knowledge of God.
or for our eternal salvation. It is disputed whether Theology be Sapience or
Science. The genus of it is sapience, Theologia est scientia v^l sapienti^
rerum divinarum divinitus r^velata ad Dei gloriam and rationalium Creaturarum
salutem. Walaeus in loc Commun.
or wisdom, which agrees first with Scripture, 1 Cor. 2. 6, 7. Col. 1. 19.
and 2. 3. Prove. 2. 3. Secondly, with reason; for 1. Wisdom is conversant about
the highest things and most remote from senses, so Divinity is conversant about
the sublimest mysteries of all. 2. Wisdom has a most certain knowledge,
founded on most certain principles; there can be no knowledge more certain
then that of faith, which is proper to Divinity.

The difference lurketh in the subject; wisdom or prudence is either moral or
religious; De genere Theologiae est quaestio: quod idem ab omnibus non
assignatur.
all wisdom, whether moral and ethicall, political, or oeconomicall, is
excluded in the definition; and this wisdom is restrained to divine things, or
all those offices of piety in which we are obliged by God to our neighbor.

The third thing in the definition is the manner of knowing, Nam illis arridet
scientia, aliis sapientia, aliis prudentia. Litem hanc dirimere nostri non est
instituti: etsi vere scientem, vere (...), vere prudentem cum judicamus, qu^
verus and sincerus est Theologus. Wendeli^^s Christ. Theol. ^. 1. c. 1.
which in divinity is singular and different from all other arts viz. by Divine
revelation.

The fourth and last thing in the definition is the end of Divinity, which is,
1. chiefest, the glory of God, 2. next, a good and blessed life, or eternal
salvation, begun in this life by the communion of grace and holiness, but
perfected in the life to come by the fruition of glory. This end has diverse
names in Scripture, it is called the knowledge of God, John 17. 3. partaking of
the Divine nature* 2 Pet. 1. 4. Likeness to God, 1 John 3. 2. Eternal
salvation, the vision and fruition of God, as the chiefest good.

The next end of Divinity in respect of man is eternal life or salvation, of
which there are two degrees, 1. more imperfect and begun in this life, which is
called consolation, the chiefest joy and peace of conscience arising, 1. from a
confidence of the pardon of sins and the punishments due to sins. 2. From
the beginning of our sanctification and conformity with God, with a hope and
taste of future perfection in both. 2. More perfect and consummate after this
life, arising from a full fruition of God, when the soul and body shall be
perfectly united with God.

3. How Divinity is to be taught. 3. How Divinity is to be taught.


In the general it is to be handled methodically. There is a great necessity
of method in Divinity, that being useful both to enlighten the understanding
with the clearness of truth, and to confirm the memory, that it may more
faithfully retain things; therefore in Divinity there will be a special need
of art and orderly disposal of precepts, because the mind is nowhere more
ob^use in conceiving, nor the memory more weak in retaining. There is a
different way of handling Divinity, according to the several kinds of it.
Divinity is threefold.

1. Succinct and brief, when Divine truth is summarily explained and confirmed
by reasons, and this Divinity is called Catecheticall, Systematicall.

2. Prolix and large, when Theological matters are handled particularly and
fully by definitions, divisions, arguments and answers; this is called handling
of Common places, Scholasticall and controversall Divinity.

3. Textuall; 1 Discenda est Theolegia imprimis tex^u alu 2. Systematica seu
d^gmatica, 3 elen^tica and problematica Ve^tiu^, Biblioth Theol. l. 1. c. 6.
which consists in a diligent meditation of the holy Scriptures, the right
understanding of which is the end of other instructions. This again is
twofold, either more Succinct and applied to the understanding of the learned,
as commentaries of Divinity, or more diffuse and popular, applied to the
capacity and affections of the vulgar, as Preaching, which is called
Patheticall Divinity, and is especially useful to correct the manners of men
and stir up their affections.

4. How Divinity is to be learned. How Divinity is to be learned.


There is need of a fowrefold mind to the study of it.

1. Of a godly and heavenly mind, Job 28. 1. 2.
most ardent Prayers in our learning being frequently powered out to God, Mat.
7. 7.
the fountain of light and wisdom, John 20. 21.
that dispelling the darkness of ignorance and error he would deigne to
illuminate our minds with the clear knowledge of himself; we can not acquire
Divine wisdom (as we do the knowledge of other arts) by our own labor and
industry; it is a praise to learn humane arts of our selves, here we must be
taught of God.

2. Of a sober mind that we may not be too curious in searching out the
profound mys^eries of Religion, as about the Hoc scrutari temeritas, credere
pietas, nosse vita, Beru. Deuteronomy. 29. 29. Romans 12. 3. and 6, 7. 2 Timothy 2. 23 Mat.
11. 25.
Trinity, predestination* we must be wise to sobriety, and not busy our selves
about perplexed and unprofitable questions, being content to know such things
which are revealed to us for our salvation.

3. Of a s^udious and diligent mind; other arts are not wont to be gotten
without labor; this being the Queen of arts* requires therefore much pains
both for its 2 Prove. 2. and 8. 4, 5. and 8. 17. 33.
difficulty and excellency.

4 Of an honest and good mind, Luke 8 40. We must learn, 1. with a denial of
our wit and carnal reason, not measuring the unsearchable wisdom of God by
our shallow capacities; 2 with denial of our wicked affections, 1 Pet. 1. 2,
3. 3 with a firm purpose of obedience Joh. 7. 17. Psalm. 50. 23. Prove. 28. 28.

5. The things contrary to Diviniy, 5. The opposites of Divinity.
are

1. Heathenisme, being altogether ignorant of and refusing the true and saving
knowledge of God.

2. Epicur^isme, scoffing at Divinity.

3. Heresy, depraving and corrupting Divinity.

6. The excellency of Divine knowledge or the study of Divinity appears in
these particulars: 6 The Excellency of divinity.


1. In the subject matter of it, which is Divine, either in its own nature, as
God and Christ, Paul calls it the excellency of the knowledge of Christ, Phil 3.
8. Ps. 40. 8. Christ is the principal subject of the whole Bible, being the
end of the Law, and the substance of the Gospel, M. Perkins. Quicquid est in
suo genere singular et eximium, id Divinum.
Ps. 70, 7. 1 John 5. 46. or in relation to him, as the Scripture, Sacraments.
It is called the wisdom of God Prove. 2. 10. and 3. 13. 1 Cor. 2. 6, 7. and
that wisdom which is from above. Jam. 3. 17. If to know the nature of an
Herb, or the Sun and Stars be excellent, how much more to know the nature of
God? Aristotle held it a great matter to know but a little concerning the first
mover and Intelligences. Paul desired to know nothing but Christ and him
crucified, 1 Cor. 2. 2. Agreeable to which is the French prove^^ Ministre ne
doit scavoir que sa* Bible, a Minister must know nothing but his Bible.
That is, he professed no other knowledge.

Si Christum discis, satis est si caetera nescis;
Si Christum nescis, nihil est si caetera discis.
The Metaphysics handle not things properly, divinely revealed, but that which
the Philosophers by the light of nature judged to be Divine.

2. In the end; the principal and maine end of Divinity is the glory of God,
that is, the celebration or setting forth of Gods infinite excellency; the
secondary end is man's blessedness, John 17. 3.

3. In the certainty of it; Gods Word is said to be sure, and like Gold seven
times refined, Ps. 12. ^*
there is no dross of falsehood in it. The Academicks thought every thing so
uncertain that they doubted of all things.

4. In the cause of it; these truths are such as cannot be known, but by Gods
revealing them to us; all Scripture was given by Divine inspiration; flesh and
blood has not revealed this to thee; Mahomet would have had others believe,
that he learned the Doctrine of his Alcaron from the holy ghost, because he
caused a pigeon to come to his Ear.
a humane light is enough to know other things.

5. In the holiness of it, Psalm. 19. 5. by them thy servant is forewarned, 1 Timothy 3. 15. the Word of God is able to make us wise to salvation and to furnish
to every good work. Christ makes this a cause of the error and wickedness in
man's life, that they do not read and understand the Scriptures.

6. In the delight and sweetness of it. Job 23. chap. 12 verse, preferred the
Word of God before his food; David before thousands of Gold and Silver, Origin
says of the Devils, there is no greater torment to them, then to see men
addicted to the Scriptures. ^um. ^om. 27. in hoc eorum omnis sta^^^a est, in*
hoc uruntur incendio.
before the honey and the honey comb, Psalm. 19. 10. and 119. 103. and when he
cease to compare, he begins to admire; wonderful are thy Testimonies.
Archimedes took great delight in the Mathematics, Austin refused to take
delight in Tullies Hortensius, because the name of Jesus Christ was not there.
Nomen Jesu non erat ibi.

7. In that the Devil and Heretics oppose it; the Papists would not have the
Bible translated, nor Divine service performed in the vulgar Tongue.

TWo things are to be considered in Divinity:

1. The rule of it, the Scripture or word of God.

2. The matter or parts of it concerning God and man.

Principium essendi in Divinity is God the first essence; principium
cognoscendi the Scripture, by which we know God and all things concerning him.
I shall handle both these principles, but begin with the Scripture, as many
Systematicall Writers do.

Of the Scripture.
It is necessary that the true Religion have a rule, Of the Scripture.
whereby it may be squared, else there could be no certainty in it, but there
would be as many Religions as men. It appears by the light of nature, the
Heathen had known rules for their Rites, Ceremonies and services; the Turks
have their Alcoran, the Jews their Talmud, the Papists their Decrees, neither
can any thing be a duty which has not a rule.

God revealed himself diverse ways to the Fathers, Heb. 1. The manner of
revealing Gods will is threefold, according to our three instruments of
conceiving, viz. Understanding, Fantasy, and senses; to the understanding God
revealed his will by ingraving it in the heart with his own finger, Jer. 31.
33. by Divine inspiration, 2 Pet. 1. 21. 2 Chronicles. 15. 1. Heb. 8. 11. John 14.
26. and by intell^ctuall visions, Number. 12. 6. to the fantasy God revealed his
will by imaginary visions to Prophets awake, and by dreams to Prophets
asleep, Genesis 40. 8. and 41. 8, 9. Acts 16. 10 and 10. 3. Number. 14. 4. to the
senses God revealed his will, and that either by vision to the eye, or lively
voice to the Ear Genesis 3 9. and 4. 6. and 15. 4, 5. Exodus 20. 1, 2. and 3. 1,
2, 3 and 33. 17. And Lastly, by writing* This Revelation was, sometimes
immediate by God himself after an unspeakable manner, or by means, viz.
Angels, Vrim and Thummim Prophets, Christ himself and his Apostles.

The Scripture is called the word of God, Ephesians. 6^ Pet. 1. 15. The counsel of
God, Acts 2^* 27. The Oracles of God R^m. 3. 2. The Law of G^d. Psalm. 1. 2. The
mind of God, Prove. 1. 23.
The written word forthematter contained in it is called the word It is called
word, because by it Gods will is manifested and made known, even as a man makes
known his mind and will by his words* It is also said to be the word of God, in
regard 1. of the Author, which is God himself 2 Timothy 3. 16. 2. Of the matter,
which is Gods will, Ephesians. ^ 93. Of the end wh^^ is Gods glory, Ephesians. 3. 10. 4. Of
the efficacy, which is Gods Power, Romans 1. 6.
of God, Rom 9. 6. for the manner of Record the ( So it is called the Bible, or
Book by an excellency, it is the only Book As
Scripture, John 10. 35. 2 Timothy 3. 16. 1 Pet. 2. 6. or Scriptures, Matthew 22.
29. John 5. 39. Romans 15. 4. 2. Pet. 3. 16. By an Antonomasie or an excellency
of phrase, August. de civit. dei. l. 15. c. 23.
) as the most worthy writings that ever saw the light; Sometimes with an
Epithet, the holy Scriptures, Romans 1. 2. 2 Timothy 3. 15. the S^riptures of the
Prophets, Romans 16. 26

Some think that Enoch the seventh from Al^m wrote. but Jude 6. 14. speak^th
only of his prophesying which might rather be by word of mouth then writing,
because our Savior citing Scripture ever gives the first place to Moses, and
undertaking by the Scriptures to prove himself to be the Messiah, that he
ought to suffer, began at Moses, Luke 24. 27. No doubt if there had been any
more ancient then Moses, our Savior would have alleged it, because all the
Scripture that was before him, was to give testimony of him.

Of the authority of the Scripture.
The Author of the Scriptures was God The principal Author of all Scriptures
is God the Father in his Son by the holy Ghost, Hos. 8. 12. 2 Pet. 1.
himself, they came from him in a special and peculiar manner, commonly
called inspiration, God the Author of the S^riptures. Inspiration wh^t it is.
The Father has revealed, the Son confirmed, and the holy Ghost sealed them
up in the hearts of the faithful.
which is an act of Gods Spirit immediately imprinting or infusing those
notions into their brains, and those phrases and words by which the notions
were uttered, 2 Timothy 4. 16. All Scripture is given by Divine inspiration, or by
inspiration of God, Prophecy came not of old time by the will of men, but holy
men of God spoke as they were moved, or carried by the Holy Ghost, 2 Pet. 1.
21. They did not write these things of their own heads, but the Spirit of God
did move and work them to it, and in it, 2 Samuel 23. 2. The Spirit of the Lord
spoke by me, that is, did immediately guide me, and tell me what matter to
utter, and in what words. Stephen says, they resisted the Holy Ghost when they
did disobey the Scriptures. Acts 7. 50. 1 Cor. 11. 23.
The Holy Ghost by the mouth of David, and the mouth of Esaias spoke Acts 1. 16.
and 28. 25.

The Inscriptions of many Prophetical books and Epistles Apostolical run
thus, Exodus 4. 12.
The word of the Lord which ^ame to Hosea, Deuteronomy. 18. 18.
Amos, 2 Cor. 13. 3.
Joel, Paul, Peter, JAmes a servant of God, John 1. 56.
and an Apostle of Christ. The proeme that is set before diverse prophecies is
this, Heb. 1. 1.
Thus says the Lord; and the Prophets inculcate that speech, Ezech. 12. 25, 28.
the mouth of the Lord has spoken it; Romans 1. 2.
because they would take off the thoughts of the people from their own persons,
Esaias 58. 14^
and lift them up to consideration of God the chief author. Evangelium dicitur
sermo Christi 3 Col. 16. utroque respectu, and Authoris and materiae
Davonan^ius.


It is all one to say the Scripture says, Romans 4. 3. and 10. 11. and 11. 2.
Gal. 4. 30. 1 Timothy 5. 10. and God says, Rainoldus in Apologia Th^sium de sacr^
Script. and Eccles.
Rom 9. 25. Heb. 4. 3. and 8. 5. and 13. 5. and the word Scripture is put for
God speaking in the Scripture, the Scripture says to Pharaoh, Romans 9. 7. and
the Scripture has shut up all men under sin, Galat. 3. 22. for which in
another place God has shut up, Romans 11. 32.

All other disciplines were from God, and every truth (whosoever speaks it) is
from the holy Ghost; but the Scripture in a singular manner is attributed to
the Holy Ghost; he immediately dictated it to the holy men of God.

The efficient principal cause then of the Scripture was God; the ten
Commandments (of which most of the rest is an exposition) were written after a
secret and unutterable manner by God himself, therefore they are called the
writings of God, Tria concurrunt ut hoc dogma recipiam, Scripturam esse verbum
Dei. Esse quosdam libros ^anonicos and divinos, atque ^os ipsissimos esse quos
in manibus habemus. Primum est Ecclesiae traditio, quae id affirmat, and ipsos
libros mihi in manum tradit; secundum est ipsoruus librorum divina materia,
tertium est interna Spiritus efficacia. Episc. Dav. de Judic^ Controvers. c. 6.
Exodus 32. 16. Secondly, all the rest which was written (though men were the
instruments) was done by his appoinment and assistance. Exo. 17. 14. Esaias 8. 1.
Jer. 30. 2. The Scripture is often attributed to the holy Ghost as the Author,
and no mention is made of the Penmen, Heb. 10, 15. The Prophets and Apostles
were the Penmen of the Scripture, whose calling, sending, and inspiration was
certainly divine; for whatsoever they taught the Church of God, or left in
writing, they learned not before in the Schools, 1 Cor. 2. 13.

The Divine authority of the word may be defined, What the Divine authority of
the Scripture is.
a certain dignity and excellency of the Scripture above all other sayings or
writings whatsoever; whereby it is perfectly Formale objectum fidei generaliter
and absolute con^iderawum est divina revelatio in tota sua amplitudine accep^a,
seu divina author^tas cujuslibet doctrina a Deo revelatae, sive ea scripta sit,
sive non scripta. At formale objectum fidei illius qua creduntur ea quae in
Scriptura credenda proponuntur, est ipsius Scripturae divina and ca^^nica
authoritas. Baronius ad versus Turnebullum.
true in word and sense; it deserves credit in all sayings, narrations of
things past, present, and to come, threatenings and promises, and as superior
does bind to obedience, if it either forbid or command any thing. 1 Timothy 1.
15. 2 Pet. 1. 19. John 5. 39. Heb. 6. 18. Romans 1. 5. 2 Cor. 10. 5, 6. and 13.
3. and 12. 12. Gal. 1. 1, 12, 13. though the things in man's judgment seem
unlike or incredible, or the Commandments hard and foolish to the carnal
mind.

Heretics have labored to prove their corrupt and damnable opinions out of
the Scripture, and have received some books, if not all as Divine. The Turks
at this day so esteem the five books of Moses, as they will kiss such patches
of Paper as they find having any part thereof written in the same. Aristaeus
an Heathen, when he had determined to have disputed against Scripture,
confesses that he was forbidden by God in a dream. Plato is termed Moses
Atticus, Moses speaking Greek.

The holy Scripture in it self is Divine and Authentical, though no man in
the world should so acknowledge it, as the Sun in it self were light, though
all the men in the world were blind, and could not or would not see it; but in
respect of us it is Divine and Authentical, The description of the Scripture.
when it is acknowledged and esteemed so to be.

The Scripture is the word of God, written by holy men as they were inspired 2 Timothy 3. 6. Romans 15. 5. Scriptura est verbum Dei ejusdem voluntat^ ^ Prophet^^,
Evangelistis and Apostolis in literas redactum, doctrinam de essentia and
voluntate Dei perfect ac perspicue exp^nens, ut ex eo homines erudiantur ad
vitam aeterna^. Ger^. descript. Sac. loc. 1. Scriptura est e^pressio quaedam
sapientiae Dei afflata e Sanct^ Spiritu p^i^ hominibus, de inde monumentis
literisque consignata. Pet. Mart. loc. commun. l. 6* Scriptura est instrumentum
divinum qu^ doctrina salut^is a Deo per Prophetas and Evangelistas tanquam Dei
actuarios in libris Canonicis veteris and novi Testamenti est tradita. Synop.
pur. Theol. Scriptura est Instrumentum sacrum, quo doctrina divina ^c salutaris
a Deo per Prophetas, Apostolos and Evangelist^^ fideliter, perspicu^ ac pl^^e
in (...) Testamenti est tradita. Wal^us l^c. (...).
by the holy Ghost, Romans 1. 28.
divinely containing all Divine truth necessary to salvation, 2 Pet. 3. 15* 16.
for the edification and instruction of Gods Church thereunto, 2 Pet. 1. 20, 21.
and for the glory of God.

That the Scriptures were from God, may appear by reasons contained in or
cleaving to the Scripture.

1. From the excellency of their matter, which is Heavenly, the divine and
supernatural matter contained in it. It tells us of such things as do far
exceed the reach of man's reason, and which it was impossible for any man to
counterfeit and feign, and which being told are so correspondent to reason,
that no man can see just cause to call them into question; as the doctrine of
creation of all things in six days; the doctrine of the fall of our first
parents; the story of the delivering Israel out of Egypt, of the delivering of
the Law and ten Commandments; the doctrine of the incarnation of Christ Jesus,
of the resurrection of the dead, of the last judgment, of the life to come,
and of the immortality of the soul; for though this last was taught also by
Philosophers, yet it is so doubtfully and unperfectly handled by them in
comparison of the delivering thereof in Scripture, that it is apparent, it was
another Spirit* which guided the teachers of it here, then they were guided
withal. What Angel could ever have found out such an admirable temper and
mixture of mercy and justice together, as the Gospel reveals in the
reconciliation of God with man? God in giving and establishing his law uses no
other preface but I am the Lord, Exodus 20. nor conclusion but I the Lord have
spoken it; upon his absolute authority without other reasons to persuade,
commanding what is to be done, though it be contrary to our natures; forbidding
what is to be left undone, though pleasing to us; he promises things
incomprehensible, requiring faith; he relates and teaches things strange,
above likelihood, above man's capacity; and yet will have them to be believed,
to be understood. There is nothing in the Law against reason or common equity.
A Jesuit reports in his History, that when his fellows came first to preach in
the East Indies, the Gentiles and Indies there hearing the ten Commandments
did much commend the equity of them. See Sir Walter Raleighs History.

2. It teaches the nature and excellency of God, and the works of God, more
clearly and distinctly than any other writings, nay, then any without God could
have contrived, viz. That there are three persons and one God; that God is
infinite, omniscient, omnipotent, most holy; that he created all things, that
he does by a particular providence rule all things; that he observes all men's
actions, and will call them to account, and give every man according to his
works; that he alone is to be worshipped, and that he must be obeyed in his
word above all creatures.

3. It requires the most exact and perfect goodness that can be, Triplex
ratio est, qua nobis in^^tescat sacro^um librorum autoritas.
such as no man could ever have conceited in his brain, and yet such as being
taught and revealed, the conformity of it to right reason will enforce any well
considering man to acknowledge it to be most true and needful; for example,
that a man must love God above all, Prima Ecclesiae testimonium, eos libros
approbantis, recipientis and commendantis. Secunda interna Spiritus Sancti
perswas^, eam ipsam autoritatem cordibus ^stris insculpe^tis, (...)
persuademit, Tertia ipsorum librorum, ut ita dicam, genius: Summum gradum
^btinet testimonium Spiritus, infimum vero Testimonium Ecclesiae, Chamierus de
Canone. l. 1. 6. 1.
and his neighbor as himself; that he must keep his thoughts and cogitations
free from all the least taint of sin, that he must lay up his treasures in
Heaven, not care for this life, and the things thereof, but all his study and
labor must be to provide well for himself against the future life; that he
must not at all trust in himself, nor in any man, but only in God; and that
he must do all he does in Gods strength; that he can deserve nothing at Gods
hand, but must look for all of free favor through the merits and intercession
of another.

4. The end of the Scripture is Divine, John 7. 18. and 5. 41. and 8. 50, 54.
All other writings teach a man to place felicity at best in himself and in his
own virtue. These lift up to God, and bid him pl^ce his felicity in him.
Philosophers set their own names to the books which they wrote against
v^ineglory, and therein soug^t it themselves. There are lumina orationis in the
Sermons of the Prophets which surpass the eloquence of all the Heathen.
viz, the glory of God, shining in every syllable thereof, and the salvation of
man, not temporal, but eternal. These writings lead a man wholly out of
himself, and out of the whole world, and from and above all the creatures to
the Creator alone, to give him the glory of all victories: therefore they are
from him, and not from any creature; for he that is the Author of any writing
will surely have most respect of himself in that writing. The Scriptures
manifest Gods glory alone, Jerem. 9. 23, 24. 1 Cor. 1. 31. ascribe
infiniteness of being and all perfections to him, Nehem. 9. 6. The doctrines,
precepts, prohibitions, and narrations tend to the setting forth of his glory,
and bring solid and eternal comfort and salvation to their souls which follow
their direction. They make us wise unto salvation, 2 Timothy 3. 15, 23. show the
path of life Psalm 16. 11. Guide our feet into the way of peace, Luke 1. 79.
Christ, John 7. 18. proves that he came from God, because he sought not his own
glory, but the glory of him that sent him.

5. Another reason is from the difference of these writings from all other
whatsoever, in regard of their phrase and manner of writing. All other writings
use persuasive and flourishing speeches, these command, and condemn all other
Gods, all other religions, all other writings, and command these only to be
had in request and esteem, and acknowledged as the will of God, without adding
or diminishing, requiring every conscience to be subject to them, and to
prepare himself to obedience, without any further objecting or gainsaying, and
to seek no further then to them for Augustine was so delighted with the
Oratory of Ambrose that he contemned the Scripture as neither learned nor
eloquent enough, yet afterward when he saw his own shallowness, he admired the
profundity of Gods holy Oracles, and held the style of them very venerable.
direction. Both the simplicity and Majesty of style show it to be from God;
the wonderful plainness and yet glorious Majesty; the simplicity because it
is plain, in no wise deceitful; and because it describes great matters in
words familiar and obvious to the capacity of the Reader: the Majesty, since it
teaches so perspicuously the chiefest mysteries of faith and divine revelation
which are above humane capacity. Whether we read David, Esaias, or others whose
Licet tam verba quam res amanuensibus suis Spiritus S. dictavit, attemperavit
tamen and se cujusque Ama^^^is stylo, and cuj^s que saeculi dialecto, unde
alius est Jesaiae, al^us Amosi stilus, Alia Mosis, alia Jobi, alia Davidis,
alia Ezraei, Haggaei, Danielis, etc. Dial^ctus. Amama Anti-Barb. Bibl. l. 3.
style is more sweet, pleasant and rhetorical; or Amos, Zachary, and Jeremy,
whose style is more rude, everywhere^ the Majesty of the Spirit is apparent.
There is an authority and Majesty in them above all other writings of other
authors; the Scriptures command all both King and people, Jerem. 13. 18. 1 Samuel
12. ult. and bind the heart to its good abearing. Jerome could say, as often as I
read Paul, it se^mes to me that they are not words but thunders, which I hear.
Junius reading the first Chapter of John was stricken with amazement by a kind
of Divine and stupendous authority, and so he was converted from Atheism, as
himself says in his life. Johannes Isaac Hoc ego ingenue profiteor, caput
illud 53. Esa. ad fidem Christianam m^ adduxisse. Johan. Isaac contra Lindan.
Austin heard a supernatural voice, saying, Toll lege, toll lege. He first
fell upon that place, Romans 13. 12, 13.
a Jew was converted by reading the 53. of Esaias. Our Savior spoke as one
having authority, not as the Scribes; So this book speaks not as men; it
simply affirms all things without proof; other authors use many arguments to
confirm the truth of what they say. Therefore Raimundus de Scriptura
simpliciter absque probatione omnia dicit and affirmat; in aliis libris
probantur omnia quae ibi dicuntur per rations and argumentationes. Biblia
affirmant Deum creasse coelum and terram: affirma^ mundum habuisse principium
and nihil probat, hoc significat illum qui l^quitur in Bibliis and dicit i^ta
verba, esse tantae autoritatis, quod ei debet credi simplici verbo sine aliqua
probatione, Rai^^^d, de ^abund in Theol. naturali.
Sabunda hence proves, that he who speaks in the Bible is of that authority,
that his bare word ought to be believed without any proof, whereas Galene
Atheistically urged it the other Moses multum dicit, sed nihil probat.
way. The Socinians reject all things in Religion which they cannot comprehend
by reason. The Philosophers called the Christians by way of scorn credentes.
Julian derided the Christian belief, because it had no other proof then thus
says the Lord.

6. Another argument is taken from the experience of the truth of the
predictions and prophesies thereof. For seeing it is generally confessed, that
only the Divine essence can certainly foresee things contingent which are to
come many ages after, and which depend upon no necessary cause in nature;
therefore in what writings we meet with such things foretold and do find them
fully and plainly acomplisht, these writings we must confess to have their
birth from Heaven and from God. Now in the Scripture we have diverse such
predictions. The two principal and clearest which are most obvious and
evident, are, 1. the conversion of the Gentiles to the God of Israel by means
of Christ. For that was foretold exceeding often, and plainly, in him shall the
Gentiles trust, and he shall be a light to the Gentiles. Jacob lying on his
deathbed said, the obedience of the Gentiles shall be to him; and David, all
the ends of the earth shall see the salvation of God; and Esaias, in him shall
the Gentiles trust; and Malachy, my name shall be great to the ends of the
earth. See Esaias 49. 6. and 60. 3, 5. Scarce one of the Prophets but have spoken
of the conversion of the Gentiles. Now we see the Gentiles turned from their
Idols a great number of them, and embracing the God of the Jews, and the
Scriptures of the Jews by means of Christ, Veritas vati^iniorum.
whom they see and acknowledge to be the Messiah foretold to the Jews. Again,
it was foretold that Christ should be a stone of offense to the Jews, that
they should reject him, Idoneum testimonium divinitatis, veritas divinationis.
Tertullianus.
and so be rejected by God from being a people; do we not see that to be
performed? The accomplishment of these two maine prophesies so long before
delivered to the world by the Penmen of holy writ, shows manifestly, that
they were moved by the holy Ghost.

That promise Genesis 3. 15. was made 3948 years before it was fulfilled, Cyrus
was prophesied of 100 years before he was borne.
as S^aliger computes it. It was foretold of Christ, that they should cast lots
about his Garments, and that his bones should not be broken. Look upon this in
the inferior causes, the soldiers that brake the other men's bones, and it
seems to be a very hap and chance; Esaias 44. 28. Josias 300 before his birth. 1
Kings 13. 2.
yet there was a special ordering of this in Gods providence.

The predictions of Satan were doubtful and The Oracles of the Gentiles needed
Delio natatore, the swimmer Apollo to expound them. The predictions of the
Prophets differ much from the divellish prophesies of the Heathen.
ambiguous, but these are distinct and plain; Satan's predictions are of things
which might be gathered by conjecture, for the most part false, though Satan
cover his lying by likelihoods; but these are above the reach of Angels, most
true and certain; their end was confirmation in sin and Idolatry.

7. The Commandments are 1. most righteous and equal; 2. impartial, they
bind all men, and all in men, the affections, thoughts and consciences, and
that perpetually. Secondly, the Threatenings are general, 1 in respect of
persons. 2. In respect of things, Deuteronomy. 28. 59, 60. 3. The Promises are
comprehensive, Levit. 26. and strange Exodus 34. 24. of eternal life, Mark 10.
29, 30.

8. Another reason may be taken from antiquity Primum quodqus ^^^issimum
Tertul. The Jewish Nation was the most ancient of all, therefore the Scripture
which was delivered to them. Cameron de verbo Dei.
of the Scripture; many wonder at the Pyramids of Egypt, being the most ancient
structure in the world. The Bible contains a continued History from age to
age, for the space of 4000 years before Christ, even from the beginning. No
writer of any humane story can be proved to be more ancient then Ezra and
Nehemiah, who wrote about the year of the world 3500. Amongst the Grecians
(some say) Homer is the most ancient author that is extant, who lived long
after Troy was taken, for that was the subject of his Poem. Now those times
were not near so ancient as those in which the Scripture was written. Homer
was after Moses Between Orpheus his writings, which was the Heathens ancientest
Poet, and Moses, are at least 500 years B. Andrews. Moses antiquissimus and
fidelissimus Historicus. E^penius.
600 and odd years, says Peter du Moulin. That which the Egyptians brag of
their antiquity is fabulous; by their account they were 6000 years before the
creation, unless they account a month for a year, and then it makes nothing
against this argument.

History is an useful and delightful kind of instruction. Among Histories
none are comparable to the Histories of sacred Scripture: and that in their
antiquity, rarity, variety, brevity, perspieuity, harmony, and verity. Dr Gouge
on Exodus 13. 13. that song of Moses Exodus 15. was the first song that ever was
in the world. M. Buroughs on Hosea. Heb. 4. 12.
Orpheus, Musaeus, and Linus, the most ancient of the Poets were 500 years
after this time.

9. The power and efficacy of the Scripture upon the souls See the powerful
wo^king of it in Pharaoh Foelix, those in Acts 2. 37.
of men shows it to be of God; and the wonderful alteration that it makes in
a man for God, when he does entertain and believe it in his heart, it makes
him more then a man in power to oppose, resist, and fight against his own
corruptions; it brings him into a wonderful familiarity and acquaintance with
God. It puts such a life and strength into him, and that for Gods sake and his
truth he can suffer all the hardest things in the world without almost
complaining, yea with exceeding and wonderful rejoicing. The holy Ghost by
means of this word works powerfully, Non movent, non persuadent sacrae
literae, sed cogunt, agitant, vim inferunt. Legis rudia verba and agrestia, sed
viva, sed animata, stammea, aculeata, ad imum spiritum penetrantia hominem
totum, potestate Mirabili transformantia. Picu^ mirandula (...) Hermolaum
Barbarum.
so changing and reforming a man, that he ^^ndes himself transformed and
renewed thereby. 1. It overmasters the soul. 2. It separates the heart from
lusts, and the world 3. Alters and changes the customs of men. 4. It keeps
the heart up under the guilt of sins against all the power of the devil.

It quickneth the dull Psalm. 119. 93, 107. comfort the feeble, Romans 15. 4.
gives light to the simple, Psalm. 119. 7. convinces the obstina^e, 1 Cor. 12.
3. and 14. 24. reproves errors, rebukes vices, 2 Timothy 3. 16. is a discerner of
the thoughts, 1 Cor. 14. 24, 25. and aweth the conscience, JAmes 4. 12.

10. If there be a God, he ought to be worshipped; and he cannot be worshipped,
unless he manifest himself to us, which he has done in the Vid^ Kidem^^cium
de Scripto Dei verbo, l. 2. c. 16.
Scripture.

11. The candor and sincerity of the Penmen or Amanuenses They did as it were
transcribere animas, publish their own faults. D. Preston. They dispraise all
mankind, abase man and make him the v^lest of all creatures except the devils 1 Timothy 1. 13. Revel. 22. 8.
, respecting Gods glory only, and not their own; and in setting down not
only the sins of others, but their own slips and infirmities, does testify
that they were guided by the holy Ghost. Moses shows his disobedience, Number.
11. 11. Jonah his murmuring, Jon. 1. 4. Jeremy his fretting, Jer. 20. 14. David
shames himself in his preface to the 51 Psalm. Saint Mark wrote the Gospel
out of Peter's mouth, and yet the denial of Peter is more expressly laid down by
the Evangelist St. Mark then any other; and Paul sets down with his own Pen
his own faults in a sharper manner then any other. Matthew Matthew. 9. 9. The
Writers of the Scriptures wrote them when the world bare greatest hatred
against them, and yet never any durst writ^ a book against Moses in his time,
or against the Gospel in these days.
the Evangelist tells us of Matthew the Publican. The Penmen of holy Scripture
were holy men; called, sent, inspired by the Spirit, which had denied the world
with the lusts and affections thereof, and were wholly consumed with zeal for
the glory of God, and salvation of men. 2 Pet. 3. 15. 2 Timothy 3. 16. Matthew. 16.
17. Gal. 2. 11, 12. Ephesians. 2. 3, 5. They learned not of men what they wrote;
Moses, David, Amos, were heardsmen; Jeremy was almost a child; Peter, JAmes,
and John, were in their ships; other Apostles were unlearned before their
calling Acts 4. 13. Acts 4. 13.
Moses learned of the Egyptians, and Daniel of the Chaldeans humane Arts and
Sciences, Dan. 2.
but they could not learn of them the knowledge of the true God, they
themselves being ignorant and gross Idolaters. Exodus 5. 2.
Neither could they err in that which they delivered, Levit. 18. 3.
for by them the Spirit of Christ, Ezekiel. 8.
and Christ himself did speak, 1 Pet. 1. 11. 2 Pet. 1. 21. Acts 28. 25. 2
Cor. 13 3. In their own judgment the most holy did err, as 1 San 16. 1 and
Nathan, 2 Samuel 6. which error is truly related in the Scripture, but when they
spoke according to the guidance of the Spirit which did ever assist them in the
penning of the Scripture, they could Solis Canonicis debetur fides Cateris
onmibus judicium. Lutherus.
not err. I have learned (says Austin to Jerome) to give this honor only to
the Canonical books, firmly to believe that no author of them erred in
writing; from all others he expected proof from Scripture, or reason.

12. The wonderful consent, singular harmony and agreement Incredibilis
quaedam and plane divina conspiratio, atque concordi^ tot virorum, qui diversis
locis, temporibus, linguis, occasionibus sacra volumina conscripserunt, ut non
tam ipsi Scriptores diversi, quam unius scriptoris diversi calami fuisse
videantur. Bellar. Tom^. 10. de verb^ dei l. 1. c. 2.
of the Scriptures shows that they came not from men but from God, John 5. 46.
each part sweetly agrees with it self, and with another, and with the whole,
Acts 26. 22. and 11. 17. Luke 24 27. John 5. 46. Matthew. 4. 4. what was foretold
in the old is fulfilled in the new Testament. If there seem any contrariety
either in numbering of years, circumstance of time and place, or point of
doctrine, the fault is in our apprehension and ignorance, not in the thing it
self, and by a right interpretation may easily be cleared. See Dr. Willet on
Genesis 24. 38.

These considerations strengthen this argument.

1. The length of time in which this writing continued, from Moses until John,
to whom was showed the last authentical revelation, which prevents all
conceits of forgery, since they were not written in one nor yet in many ages.

2. The multitude of books that were written, and of writers that were employed
in the service. This is one of 36^ places, or as others reckon 370 which are
cited out of the old Testament, in the new, Dr. Pride. on Acts 23. 5.


3. That difference of place in Ezechiel prophetane in Babylone concordat (...)
Jeremia prophetante in Judaea. See Hals passion sermon.
which they were written, which hinders the writers conferring together.

Two other arguments may evince this truth, that the Scriptures were from God.

1. Miracles both of

1. Confirmation, Numb. 11. 9. and 20. 10.
which the Lord showed by Moses, Exodus 19. 16. and 24. 18. and 34. 29. the
Prophets, 1 Kings 7. 24. Christ himself and the Apostles for the confirmation
of their doctrine, Mark ^6. 20.
such as the devil was not able to resemble in show. John 3. 2. and 2. 23. and
10. 37.
The raising of the dead, the standing still or going back of the Sun, Acts
5. 12.
the dividing of the Sea, and the Rivers; the making of the barren fruitful.
John 5. 36.
My works testify of me, says Christ, and believe the works which I do, if
you will not believe me.

2. Preservation of the books of the Scripture (...) the fury of many wicked
Tyrants which sought to suppress and extinguish them, Many of the Bibles were
taken from Christians and burnt in those cruel persecutions under Dioclesian
and Maximinianus his Colleague.
but could not. As God caused it to be written for the good of his people, so
by divine providence he has preserved the same whole and entire. Here we have
three arguments in one, 1. The hatred Veritas odium parit.
of the Devil and his wicked instruments against the Scripture more then any
other book. Antiochus burnt it and made a Law that whosoever had this book
should die the death; yet secondly, it was preserved maugre his fury and the
rage of Dioclesian, Julian, Deuteronomy. 31. 24.
and other evil Tyrants. Jerem. 36. 27, 28. and ult.
Thirdly, the miserable end of Julian, Antiochus Epiphanes, Herod, Nero,
Domitian, and Dioclesian, and other persecutors of this doctrine. The books of
Solomon, which he wrote of natural philosophy and other knowledge, Tertullian
said, that Gospel must needs be good which Nero persecuted.
the profitablest books that ever were, the Canon excepted, are perished,
Cartwright in his preface to the confutation of the Rhem. Annot. on the new
Testament.
but those alone which pertain to godliness have been safely kept to
posterity; which is the rather to be observed, since many more in the world
affect the knowledge of natural things then godliness: A precious Gospel,
that was purchased by the blood of Christ, and sealed with the blood of Martyrs.
and yet though careful of keeping them they have not been able to preserve
them from perpetual forgetfulness; whereas on the other side these holy
writings hated of the most part and carelessly regarded Many delivered the Bible
to the Emperor to be burned whence the name of Proditores and Traditores
Bibliorum.
of a number, have notwithstanding as full a remembrance as they had the first
day the Lord gave them unto the Church. The Roman Empire for 300 years set it
self to persecute and extirpate this new doctrine; and in all these troubles
the Church grew and increased mighily Acts 12. 1. Herod killed JAmes with the
sword, Sanguis martyrum semen Ecclesiae.
yet v. 24. the word grew and multiplied. Facundi sunt martyrum cineres.


The miracles wrought in the confirmation of Scripture differ much from the
wonders wrought by the false Prophets, People by seeing the sufferings of the
Martyrs came more to look into and understand that profession then formerly,
which made them patiently endure such torments.
Antichrist, and Satan himself Matthew. 24. 24. 2 These. 2. 11. Apoc. 13. 13, 14.
they are neither in number nor greatness comparable to these. 1. They differ
in substance, Divine miracles are above and against the force of nature, as
dividing of the red Sea, the standing still of the Sun; the others seem
wonderful They are miranda non miracula.
to those which are ignorant of the cause of them, but are not true miracles,
simply above the ordinary course of nature, but effected by the art and power
of Satan or his instruments by natural causes though unknown to men, and many
times they are but vain delusions. 2. They differ in the end, those true
miracles were wrought by the finger of God, for the promoting of his glory, and
man's salvations. these to seal up falsehood and destroy men confirmed in
idolatry and heathenisme, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 9. Those were not done in a corner or
secretly, A marvel or wonder is nature mightily improved; a miracle is nature
totally crossed if not contradicted.
but openly in the presence of great multitudes, There were six hundred
thousand witnesses of the Seas rising up in walls. Deuteronomy. 4. 3. See Matthew. 27
45.
nay in the sight of the whole world; by the evidence of which an unknown
doctrine before contrary to the nature and affections of men was believed.
Bainham said in the midst of the fire, Ye Papists, behold ye look for
miracles, and here now ye may see a miracle: for in this fire I feel no more
pain, then if I were in a bed of down, but it is to me as sweet as a bed of
Roses. The miracles See D. Willet on Exodus 7. 9. what a miracle is, and how
true and false miracles differ: and D. Prideaux on Psalm. 9. 16. the distinction
between miracles, signs, prodigies, and Portenta out of Aquinas.
done by our Savior Christ and his Apostles, receved testimony of their most
venomous and bitterest enemies they had.

2. The Testimony 1. Of the Church and Saints of God in all ages. 2. Of those
which were out of the Church. 1. Of the Church Both ancient and Judaicall, and
the present Christian Church.
2. Of the members of the Church.
1. The Church of the Jews professed the doctrine and received the books of
the old Testament, To which testimony these things give weight.
and testified of them that they were Divine; which invincible constancy
remains still in the Jews of these days, 1. To them were committed the
Oracles of God, Romans 3. 1.
who (though they be bitter enemies to the Christian Religion) do stiffely
maintain and preserve the Canon of the old Testament pure, and incorrupt, even
in those places which do evidently confirm the truth of Christian Religion. 2.
They have constantly professed the truth in great misery, whereas by the only
deniing thereof they might have been partakers both of liberty and rule.


2. The Christian Church has also most faithfully preserved the old Canon
received from the Jews, 3. Notwithstanding the higk Priests and others
persecuted the Prophets, while they lived, they yet received their writings as
Prophetical and Divine.
and now delivered by the Apostles as a depositum and holy pledge of the Divine
Vide Cr^ii observat. in novum Testamentum, cap. 15.
will.

2. Of the members of the Church, the constant testimony which so many worthy
Martyrs by their blood have given to the truth, Rev. 6. 9.

Four thines are to be considered in this argument.

1. The number which suffered for the same is numberless, In the two Dominions
of France and the 17 Provinces, within the space of little more then fi^e^
years under Charles the ninth of France, and Philip the second of Spain, two
hundred thousand suffered as Martyrs.
many millions; that none can imagine it to arise from pride, weakness, or
discontent. More Christians were slain (as has been observed) under the ten
bloody persecutions, then Pas^hall Lambs were offered up under the State of the
old Testament. See Foxes martyrologie, Meteranus de rebus Belgicis, and Fullers
profane state, of the Duke of Alvap. 440.


2. The quality and condition of them which suffered; noble and base, learned
and A martyranswered Bishop Bonn^r, My Lord I can not dispute, but I can die
for the truth. John Jones said, when he had a cap wherein were many painted
devils with the title Haeresi^cha, Shall I grudge to wear this paper cap for
Christ, who were a Crown of Thorns for me?
unlearned, rich, poor, old, young, men, women, children, those which were
tender and dainty; all these could not suffer out of vainglory, that
stubbornly they might defend the opinion which they had taken up.

3. The torments used were usual, unusual, speedy, slow, some hewed in
pieces, burnt with slow fire, cast in to Lions, given to be devoured by the
teeth of wild beasts, some beheaded, some drowned, some stoned with stones.

4. All this they endured constantly, Videtis punctiones, sed non unctiones You
see their sufferings, but not their rejoycings. Omnis Christ anus mortis
contemptor. Photinus.
patiently, with great joy, even a cheerful heart, and merry countenance,
singing Psalms in the midst of the fire, so that the madness of the enemy was
overcome by the patience In the primitive times they were wont to call
martyrdom by the name of Corona martyrii, the Crown of martyedome; and Stephen
the Protomaryr had his name in Greek from a Crown. Erant (...) ^^rquentibus
fortiores. Cyprian.
of them which did suffer. Luther reports of the Martyr St. Agatha, as she went
to prisons and tortures, she said, she went to banquets and nuptials. That
martyr Hawks lift up his hands above his head and clapped them together, when he
was in the fire, as if he had been in a triumph. So that their testimony was
not only humane, God enabling them so stoutly to die for the truth, Phil. 1.
29.

Maytyrs of other sects differ from the martyrs of the true Church. 1. They
were fewer. 2. They suffered not with joy of conscience, which the godly
martyrs did. 3. They were punished for their Non poena sed caus^ facit martyrem.
errors discovered; the martyrs were burned for having any part of the Bible,
and the Bible sometime with them; where the Inquisition reigns it is death to
have any part of the Bible in the vulgar tongue.

The Gentiles also which were out of the pale of the Church, did give testimony
to sundry stories and examples in the Bible. Suetonius and Tacitus speaks of
the miracles of Christ, Pliny Lib. 2. c. 25. Meminerunt Mosis and Didetus
Siculus and Strabo, and Plinius, Ta^itus qu^que, and pos^ eos Dio^ysius
Longinus de for^^is sublimitare. Jamnia aatem and mambris qui in Aegypto Mosi
restiterunt praeter Talmun^ieos Plinim and Apulrius, Gr^e. de veris. relig.
Christ.
of the miracles of Moses, and of the wise men's Star; Macrobius of the
slaughtering of the Infants, Josepbus of the death of Herod, the Poets of the
flood, Plutarke of the Dove which Noah sent out. Josephus (a Jew) says in his
time there was a monument of the pillar of Salt into which Lots wife was
turned. Of Sodomes destruction speaks Strabo, Diodorus Siculus, Galene in his
book of simples. Pliny, Solinus, Polyst. hist. Tacitus lib. ult. Mela,
acknowledging that the remainders of Gods wrath are still to be seen there, as
the dead lake, the fruit fair to the eye, but falling to cinders and smoke
in the hand.

The Oracles of the Sybillae were in greatest account among the Heathen; and
held as true of all men; Credit me vobis folium recitare Sybillae. Bish.
Andrews in his large exposition on the 10 Commandments.
and if those be they which we Vide Spanhem. Dub. port secunda Dub. 34. S^ct
6, 7.
have, there is nothing which can more plainly set forth the birth of Christ,
his life and death. Exerci^. 1. ad A^nal Bar. Esaias 8. 20. Psalm 19. The Authors
often testify that they speak not of themselves, or by any humane instinct,
but from Gods command and the Spirit inspiring.
Causabon makes it apparent that those prophesies of Sybil were counterfeited
pieces, and at first entertained by such as delighted in seeing the Christian
Religion strengthened with foreign proofs.

Heretics also prove the Scripture to be divine, for they quote that; and
therefore Luther calls the Bible Librum Hereticorum. Experience teaches, that
all heresies either began or increased from the misunderstanding of Scripture.

Thirdly, the Scripture it self does give testimony to it self, that it is
divine; it is called a light, Psalm. 119. 105. because it discovers it self;
the testimony, and the testimony of the Lord: because it bears witness to it
self. The Prophets give testimony of Moses, Mal. 4. 4. the new Testament of
the Old, 2 Pet. 1. 19, 20. Peter gives testimony of Paul's Epistles, 2 Pet. 3.
15. and Paul witnesses that all Scripture was given of God, Christ commends
Moses, the Prophets, and Psalms, by which names are meant all the books
belonging to the Canon of the Hebrews.
2 Timothy 3. 16. which must be meant of all Scripture even of the new Testament,
that being the last Epistle which Paul wrote, as appears, Chap. 4. v. 16.

Fourthly, none of all these arguments can undoubtedly persuade the heart
certitudine fidei, that the holy Scripture, or any doctrine contained in it is
the word of God, till we be taught it of God, till the holy The holy Ghost
inwardly witnesses in the hearts of the faithful that the Scriptures are the
Word of God, 1 John 2. 20, 27. 1 Cor. 2. 10, 11, 12. and 12. 3. John 16. 23.
and 14. 26. Esaias 51. 16. Esaias 59. 21. Romans 8. 10.
Spirit of God have inwardly certified and assured us of it. This is called the
Sealing of the Spirit of God, Ephesians. 1. 13. by this the Scripture is imprinted
in our hearts as the sign of the Seal in the Wax. Other arguments may
convince, but this is absolutely necessary; this is alsufficient to persuade
certainly, Matthew. 11. 25. The Holy Ghost is the author of light, by which we
understand the Scripture, and the perswader of the heart, by which we believe
the things therein to be truly divine, 1 John 5. 6. It is the Spirit that
bears witness, because the Spirit, (i. metonymically the doctrine delivered
by the Spirit) is truth. So to prove that there is a God, reasons may be
brought from nature and the testimony of the Church, but no man can believe it
savingly, but by the Holy Ghost.

It is hard to carry the matter even between the Socinians reason, and the
Famalists spirit. Socinians will have nothing but reason, no infused habits, and
so they destroy the testimony of the spirit; the Familists will have nothing but
Spirit they rest wholly in an immediate private spirit, 1 John 3. 8.
There are three that bear witness in earth, blood) that is, justification by
the blood of Christ, and water) i. Sanctification by his grace, and the Spirit
(say some) witnesses in these, 1 John 2. 20.
But ye have an unction from the holy one, and ye know all things. That is, ye
have received from Christ the Holy Ghost the Comforter, and he has taught and
instructed you in all things which are necessary to the salvation of your
souls, for you to know and be instructed in, see V. 27. The testimony is made
up by arguing, whosoever believes, and is sanctified shall be saved. So the
antiquity, efficacy, and Majesty of the Scripture, the fidelity of the Penmen,
and its wonderful preservation, prove it to be the word of God. The Spirit of
God witnesses, that this word which has these remarkable advantages above all
other writings, is the word of God. The Spirit does neither witness concerning
my salvation, nor that the Scripture is the word of God immediately but
ultimately. Because I am a believer, and my faith is sound, it assures me that
I am in the state of salvation, and so he makes use of the excellencies in the
word to irradiate my understanding. We are commanded to try the Spirits; true
joy is first heard out of the word before it be fealt, Psalm. 51. 8. Spiritual
joy is an affection proper to spiritual life, Fides Christiana non acquiritur
sed in sunditur.
that life is by faith, and faith comes by hearing, Job 33. 22. See John 16.
14.

Some question whether every part and parcel of the Scripture be divinely
inspired as those places, Leviculum est quod objiciunt qui contra sentiunt, Si
omnis Scriptura Divinitus sit inspirata, sequiuurum inde etiam Gra^corum and
Gemilium Scripturas esse divinitus inspiratas^nam ut buon resp^^det Theop^y
lactus, oportebat eos novi^^e quod Paulus ante dixerat sacras literas nosti.
Rive^. Isag. ad Script. Sac.
, Touch him, and he will curse thee to thy face; curse God and die, and that
Psalm. 14. 1. Some answer thus Aliud sane Prophetas hoc vel illud scripsisse,
aliud vero scrips^^e ut Prophetas. Sp^n^emi^s.
, these places are historically inspired, not dogmatically.

Another question is, whether preaching be not divinely inspired, as well as
the word written.

The Preaching of the Prophets and Apostles was divinely inspired; but the
preaching of our Ministers, no further then it agrees with the word.

Some say the Scriptures are but a device of man's brain, to give assistance to
Magistrates in civil government.

Nothing is more repugnant to prudence and policy. What policy was it in the
Old Testament to appoint circumcision? to cut a poor child as soon as he came
into the world. Two and twenty thousand Oxen were spent at the dedication of
one Altar; to sacrifice so many Oxen and Sheep, such useful creatures? Christ
chose silly illiterate men to propagate the Nothing crosses humane wisdom more
then the Scripture.
Gospel.

This serves for information of our judgment, and assures us of diverse truths.

1. That the Scriptures are for themselves worthy to be believed, Authoritas
sine (...) Scripturae.
they have authority in and of themselves (not borrowed from any persons in the
world) by which they bind the consciences of all men to receive them with
faith and obedience, Illud authenticum dicitur, quod sibi sufficit, quod se
commendat, sustines, probat, and ex se fidem ac authoritatem habet, Whitakerus.
for their Authors sake alone and the divine truth which shines in them, though
they should not be commended unto men by any authority of any creature. Such as
is the authority of the Author of any writing; such is the authority of the
writing it self; for all the strength of the testimony depends upon the
excellency of the person which gives the testimony; now God is the author of
these writings, Thus says the Lord; therefore such authority as he has, such
must they have, a supreme, highest authority, which borrows from none, and is
subject to none. So this acknowledgement of their original teaches that we
must not believe them for the authority sake of any man or men, for Gods word
can borrow no authority from men, John 5. 34. I receive not testimony from man,
says Christ; that is, need no man's testimony. As the first goodness is to be
loved for it self, so is the first truth to be believed for it self, says
Aquinas. And as Christ by himself could demonstrate that he was the Messiah,
so the Word by it self can prove, Every principle is known by it self. The
Scripture is the primum credendum, the first thing to be believed; we must
believe it for it self, and all other things for their conformity with it.
that it is the Word of God.

We affirm that the Scriptures are known to be of God by themselves; the
Papists maintain that we cannot be certain of the Scriptures divinity by any
other argument, then the testimony of the Church, Eccius reckons this among
heretical assertions. major est Scripturae* quam Ecclesiae authoritas.
which (say they) does infallibly propound unto us, what is to be believed,
what is not to be believed; and Hermanus says, that the Scripture is no more
worth then Aesops Fables, without the testimony of the Church. As in other
Sciences there are always some principles per se nota and indemonstrabilia,
whence other things are proved, so in Divinity all conclusions in point of
belief and practice are proved by the Scripture. The Scriptures prove
themselves by their own natural light, Nisi Deus hominibus placuerit non erit
Deus said Tertul. in Apol. if God please not man, he shall not be God: as truly
and certainly as God is God, so truly is the Scripture the Scripture.
manifesting their divine original whence they are, and their right meaning,
how they must be understood. They are like light (primum visibile) which makes
all other things manifest, and it self too by it own proper qualities.

1. The Church rather depends on the Scripture which is an object not principle
of Divinity; the Church ought to be subject to Christ, Ephesians. 5. 24. the
Scripture is the word of Christ, Col. 3. 16.

2. All the words of the Scripture are words of truth, Dan. 10. 21. some words
of the Church are words of error, Esaias. 1. 21, 24. and 3. 8, 9. and 5. 13. But
the authority of him that speaks always truth is greater then of him who
sometimes lies: Spiritus sanctu^ Spiritus veritatis, loquitur semper in
Scriptura; in Ecclesia vero quandoque spiritu^ (...) These. 3. l. 11.
ergo, the authority of the Scripture is greater then that of the Church.
Goodness it self cannot deceive, wisdom it self cannot be deceived; God is
both, Titus 1. 2. The voice of the Scripture is the voice See Chamiers sixth
book de Canone; diverse Chap^r^^* and M. Pembles (...) Vindic^agra^i^. p. 207,
to 22^.
of God, 2 Timothy 3. 16. but the voice of the Church is the voice of men, Acts
14. 14. and 15. 17. and 17. 30.

3. Faith and a firm consolation in temptations ought to rely on a sure, that
is; a divine foundation, for every humane testimony is uncertain.

4. In vain shall we dispute against the wicked concerning Religion and divine
truth, if we shall say it comes from God, because we affirm so.

5. This is proved by Scriptures, John 5. 34, 35. Christ in his humiliation did
not receive the testimony of John, much less will he receive the testimony of
others now he is glorified, John 5, 34, 35, 36. 1 Cor. 2. 4, 5. 1 John 5. 9.

6. The authority proving is greater, more certain, and more known, then the
conclusion proved by the ^ame. Autoritde probans is greater then probata. The
Papists to prove the authority of the Church fly to the Scriptures Superst^us
mihi ^eb^r videtur oprum qu^^ade^ solicit illud quoad nos in^uisiver (...)
quia ^e cogitari quidem* protest (...) little librerum autorilos, nisi quoad
(...) Cham.
. For I demand whence do we understand that the Church erres not in delivering
the Canon of the Scripture, they answer it is governed by the Holy Ghost, and
therefore cannot err in its decrees. But how appears it, that it is so
governed always? they answer, God has promised it, and then they allege
those Matthew. 28. 20 and 18. 20. John 15. 26. and 16. 13.
places to prove it.

Ob. The Church is ancienter then the Scripture, because it was before Moses;
ergo, it has greater authority.

Sol. 1. The Prophets, and John Baptist were ancienter then Christ, yet not of
greater authority.

2. Consider the word, 1. quoad formale Scriptura est velipsa scriptio, and
literarum per lineas certas; victura: vel ipse doctrina per (...) Scripturas
significata, and in iis literis conienta: Scriptione fatemur Ecclesiam esse
antiquiorem, sed negamus esse antiquiorem ea doctrina, quae significatur
eascriptione. Chamier, Tom. 19. l. 1. c. 22.
externum, as written Fuit Scriptura ante M^^sen materialiter non formaliter.
and clothed with words, so the Church was before the Scripture, 2. quoad
formale internum; the matter and sense or meaning: so the Scripture was more
ancient than the Church, because the Church is gathered and governed by it, 1
Pet. 1. 23. John 17. 20. JAmes 1. 18. Semen semper sobole illa cujus est semen,
antiquius esse necesse est. In the thing it self, the being and substance of
the word was before the Church, although in this circumstance and manner of
being it was after.

Ob. 2. Non erederem Evangelio, Quibus le^^is verbis adeo exultan^, quasi
reperissent id quod pueri in fabase reperisse ^lamitant: tamsue confidenter, ae
si ad plenum vict^riac fructum sola ^riump^i gloria deesset. Chamierus.
nisi me commoveret Ecclesiae Catholicae authoritas, says Augustine.

Sol. These words (says Whitaker) are so well known to the Papists that one
can hardly exchange three words with them, but they will produce them. It is
true indeed, that we may at the first be much moved to receive and hearken to
the Scriptures, because the Church gives testimony of them, as the woman of
Samaria by her speeches of Christ was a means of moving the Samaritans to
believe, but when the men of Samaria had heard Christ himself speak, they
believed in him more for his own words then the woman's, John 4. 39, 41. In
which sense those words of Austin (so frequently quoted by the Papists) are to
be interpreted. Austin spoke this of himself being a Manichee So Musculus,
Calvin, Peter Martyr, and Whitaker expound those words; observe the composition
of the word is signifies to more with other things.
; when he was a Manichee he was first moved by the authority of the Church to
believe the Gospel. His meaning is, that he had never believed the Gospel, if
the authority of the Church had not been an introduction unto him, not that his
faith rested upon it as a final stay, but that it caused him so far to
respect the word of the Gospel to listen unto it, and with a kind of acquisite
and humane faith to believe it, that he was thereby fitted G^rson says, be
takes the Church for the Primitive Church, and that Assembly which saw and
heard Christ.
to a better illumination, by force whereof he might more certainly believe it
to be of God. But that the testimony of one Father. in one place, in a matter
of such consequence, should be of that force, it is strange.

We deny not the ministry of the Church as an external means to move us to
embrace the word of God, but we deny the authority of the Church to be the
principal Ecclesia non habet magisterium supra scripturas sed ministerium
circa Scripturas.
means. When we call the Scriptures Canonical, we call them not so passively,
because they are received into the Canon by men, and accepted of; but actively,
because they prescribe a Canon and rule to us.

The office of the Church in respect of the Scripture stands in four things.

1. To distinguish Canonical Scripture from that which is not Canonical;
There are two causes why the Apocripha are cast out of the canon, 1. External,
the authority of the Church decreeing, and the quality of the Authors. 2.
Internal, the style, the fabulous and wicked things. Chamier.
although the determination of the Church be not the only or chiefest cause
why the Apocrypha are rejected.

2. To be a faithful keeper of those books which are inspired by God, like a
notary which keeps public writings.

3. To publish, declare and teach the truth, as a crier with a loud voice ought
to pronounce the Kings edicts, but to pretermit, add, or alter nothing, Matthew.
28. 19, 20. Acts 8. 35. 1 Timothy 3. 15. This Church here is not that Church which
the Papists make to be the Judge of controversies, neither the Church
representative, which is a general Council; nor the Church virtuall, which
they imagine to be the Ecclesiae, idest, Romano pontifici vel soli, vel cum
Conoilio magisterium tribuunt summum, adeo ut solennis sit apud eas formula,
indicet magister fidei. Amesius.
Pope; but the Church Essential D. Chalonero credo Ecclesiam Catholicam.
Ecclesia dicitur Fundamentum met aphorice and imptoprie, fundamentum
secundarium.
: the congregation of all faithful believers, the House of God, as he calls
it. The Apostle here speaks of a pillar, not more Architectonico, understanding
by it some essential piece of the building, but more forensi, such a post or
Rivet and D. Preston. De sensu horum verborum vide Ca^^ronis myro^^ecium, and
Colla^ionem Rainoldi cum ^art^, c. 8. p. 557.
pillar on which Tables and Proclamations use to hang. In old time the Gentiles
used to write their Laws in Tables, and so hang them upon pillars of stone,
that the people might read them, as Proclamations are nailed to posts in market
Towns. The Apostle describing the Church, likeneth it to one of these pillars,
whose use was to show what hung thereon. It is pillar, not because it holds up,
An allusion (says Bedell) to the bases and pillars that held up the veil or
curtains in the Tabernacle.
but holds forth the truth.

4. To interpret the Scripture by the Scripture. Since many things in Scripture
are doubtful, and hard to be understood without an Interpreter, Acts 8. 31. it
does belong to the Church to expound the same, to interpret and give the sense,
Nehem. 8. 8, 9. Luke 24. 27. provided that this exposition be by the Scriptures.

Some of the Papists say that the Church may condere artioulos fidei and facere
canonicum quo ad nos, That distinction of authoritative in^ se but not quoad
nos is absut'd, because the authority the Scripture has is for and because of
us.
and though they talk of Councels and Fathers, yet all is as the Pope
concludes.

The testimony and tradition of the Church, especially the Primitive Church, is
necessary to know that the Gospel of Matthew is divine Scripture by an
historical and acquired faith, to know this by a divine Dr. White of the
Church. The Spirit witnesses, the Scripture to witnesses, and the Church
sub-witnesseth.
and infured faith, (besides the authority of the Church) the matter, character
and contents of every book, and comparing of it with other Scriptures do
serve as an inward cause to produce the said infused faith.

Ob. We are sent to the Church to determine all controversies 1 Cor. 11. 16.

Sol. Controversies are either dogmaticall, concerning faith; or rituall,
concerning true order; the proposition is about these, not the first.

Secondly, from this fundamental truth, that the Scripture is immediately from
God, (the basis indeed of all religion, 1 Cor. 15.) the wickedness of the
Church of Rome is farther to be condemned, which will not suffer the Scriptures
to be read in their Churches but in an unknown Vt olim Caligula, occlusis
omnibus horreis, publicam populo inediam and famem, ita illi obturatis omnibus
fontibus verbi Dei, sitim populo miserabilem induxerant. Illi homiminibus
famem, ut ait Amos Propheta, sitimque attulerunt: non famem panis non sitim
aquae^ sed audiendi verbi Dei. Iuellus in Apologia Eccles. Ang.
tongue, nor in private by the common people without special leave and
certain cautions from their superiors. Of old they would not suffer them to
be read at all, of late they are forced to give licenses to some, and they
teach them, that they should not make the Scripture judge of the doctrine and
practice of the Church, but the doctrine and practice of the Church must be the
interpreter and judge of the meaning of the Scripture; that is, they must take
the Scripture to mean none otherwise (whatsoever it seem to say) then what is
agreeable to that which the Pope does teach and practice. There cannot be a
surer sign of a bad cause, then that it fears to be tried by the writings
which it self cannot deny to be written by God, for correction, for reproof,
for instruction, in righteousness. Some Papists are more modest herein, as
Bellarmine, l. 2. de verbo Dei. c. 15. Catholica Ecclesia statuit, ne passim
omnibus concedatur Scripturae lectio; some more rigid, as Huntly and Hosiua.

The Papists Scripturae obscuriores sum, quam ut possint a Laicis intelligi
Bellarm. and Rh^mist. prefat. in nov. Test and annotat. in Acts 8. 31. and in 1
Cor. 14.
object the obscursity of Scriptures, as an argument to hinder laymen from
reading them, and account it a matter of profanation to allow men, women, and
children, and all promiscuously the use of the vulgar translation, and think
they will rather be hurt then benefited by them, taking occasion of erring from
them. Hosius urges that give not holy things to dogs. cast not Pearls before
Swine, to prove the people must be barred from reading of the Scriptures. It is
Pope Innocents gloss, a beast might not touch the mount, a layman might not
meddle with Scripture. Lindan says, nihil noxae inferretur in Ecclesiam salv^
traditionis fundamento, Populus non solum non caperet fructum ex Scripturis,
sed etiam caperet detrimentum, acciperet n. facilissim^ occasionem errandi.
Bellarm, de verbo Dei, l. 2. c. 15.
, if there were no Bible; and another, Scriptura citius faciet Haereticum
Lutherarum, quam Catholicum. Because we will have all proved by Scripture, and
make that the complete rule for what we believe or do in all Theological
matters, they call us Scripturarios, Scripturemen, and atram entarios
Theologos; and so to carry or read a Bible is matter of Si populus ^udis
audiret, lingua sua vulgari legi ex Canticis canticorum: Osculetur me oslulo
oris sui. Et: Laeva ejus sub capite meo, and dextera illius amplexabitur me. Et
illud oseae: vade and sac tibi ^ilios fornicationum. Necum adulterium Davidis,
incestum Thamar, mendacia Judit^, and quemadmodum Joseph fratres suos
inebriavit. Sara, Lea and Rachel doderunt ancill^s viris suis in concubinas,
and multa alia eorum, quae in Scripturis magna cum laud commemorantur, vel
provocaretur ad hujusmodi* imitanda vel contemneret sanctos Patriarc^^s ut olim
Manic^aei, vel putarent mendacia esse in Scripturis. Bellarm. de verbo Dei, l.
2. c. 15. Audivi ab homine fide digno, cum in Anglia ^^ Ministro Calvinista in
templo legeretur lingua vulgari capitulum 25 Ecclesiastic^: ubi multa dicuntur
de malitia mulierum; surrexisse foeminam quandam, atque dixisse. Istud ne est
verbum Dei? immo potius verbum Diaboli est. Bellarm. ibid. Hujus historiae
fides omnis penes sit ^onum illum virum^^ quo Bellarminus eam accepit
Whitakerus.
scoff; we may style them in Tertullians phrase Scripturarum Lucifugae and
Traditionaries.

Saint Gregory (who is blessed in their Church) exhorts a layman to the
serious study of the Scriptures, that thereby he might learn the will of God,
alleging that the Scripture is the Epistle of God unto his creature. Quid est
autem Scriptura sacra, nisi Epistola omnipotentis Dei ad Creaturam? Greg. lib.
4. epist. 40. ad Theodorum medicum. Proving further, that obscurity of
Scripture is so frothy an argument for persuading any devout Christian not to
read them, that it should rather incite them to greater diligence therein; and
therefore he elegantly compares the Scripture to a River, wherein (says he)
there are as well shallow fords for Lambs to wade in, as depths and gulphs
wherein the Elephant may swim.

Chrysostom held it a thing necessary for all men daily to read the
Scriptures, Audite quaeso saeculares, comparate vobis Biblia animae pharmaca.

Saint Jerome did exhort diverse women thereto, and commended them for
exercising themselves therein, he writes to Laeta and Gaudentia, and shows
them how they should bring up their daughters. Scripturas sacras tenebat
memoriter. Hieron. de Paula in Epitaphio. The Apostle would not have commended
this in Timothy, 2 Timothy 3. 15. that from his childhood he knew the holy
Scriptures, nor noted it to the praise of his grandmother and mother, that
they had trained him up so, if he had not known that the holy Scriptures are so
plain that even a child may be able to understand them. What may we judge of
the other easier books, when the holy Ghost would have the Revelation, the
obscurest book of all the Scripture to be read Revel. 1. 3. The people took
occasion of erring and blaspheming from the humiliation of Christ, many abuse
preaching and the Sacraments.

2. By this reason the Latin Bibles should not be suffered to be read
publicly, because many understanding Latin from the reading of them may take
occasion of erring. There is a greater reason to be had of Gods elect which are
edified by reading of the Scripture, then of those who wrest them; Peter by
this reason stirred up the faithful to read the Scriptures with greater
devotion, 2 Pet. 3, 14, 15, 16, 17.

3. This is common both to the Ecclesiastical persons and Laity, to take
occasion of erring, and blaspheming from the Scripture. If we peruse the
Histories of times past, we shall find that learned and Ecclesiastical men,
did oftener fall into heresies and blasphenies from misunderstanding and
wresting the Scriptures, then any of the common sort of people, who were often
also by the learned drawn into heresy. The Papists are not afraid the people
should be corrupted by reading their legends, and lying fables, by their
Images, which do naturally teach Idolatry.

Ob. The Papists further object, that the Hebrews did not permit young men to
read part of Genesis, Canticles, Ezekiel.

Sol. First, we must know the reading of those Scriptures non ablat am
hominibus, sed dilatam fuisse, was not taken away from them, Davenantius
determinat. 39.
but delayed only.

Secondly, this tradition concerning the age of men did drive away as well the
Ecclesiasticke as the lay persons.

Notwithstanding all this that has been objected by the Papists, we hold that
the Scriptures ought to be translated into the vulgar and mother tongues of
each nation, and that all V^rstius in his answer to Bellarmine joins these two
together, the promiscuous reading of the Scripture, and the turning of it in
linguas vernacul^^.
men ought to read them and meditate diligently in them, and that for these
reasons.

1. From the Commandment and will of God revealed in Scripture; he has
commanded all that live in the Church to study Daven. determ. quaest. 39. and
in c. 3. epist. ad Coloss v. 16. Ingra^as esse Ecclesiae Romanae editiones
vernaculas inde apparet, quod in illis lo^is ubi maxim obtinen^ maximi
placita, u^ in Hispania, non procurant Pontificis homines tales editiones, and
ab aliis procuratas ferro and flammis prosequuntur. Amesius Bellarm. e^erv. c.
3. See Col. 4. 16. and 1 Thessalonians. 5. 27. 2 John 13. 14.
the Scriptures, and read them, Deuteronomy. 11. 18, 19. John 5. 3. He speaks not to
the Scribes and Pharisees, but to the people in general, they must try all
things.

2. From Gods intention, which commanded it to be written for that end that it
might be obvious to all, John 20. 31. Romans 15. 4.

3. Those are commended which did read the Scripture, as the Eunuch, 8 Acts 22.
the Bereans, Acts 17. Acts 11. and dispraised which neglected it, as the
Israelites Hos. 8. 12. they are pronounced blessed who diligently meditate in
the Scriptures, Psalm. 1. 2. How unlike to Peter, 2 Pet. 1. 19. are those which
pretend to be his Successors.

4. From the fact of the Apostles, who as they publicly preached the
mysteries of salvation to the people; so also in their Epistles they commended
the whole doctrine of salvation to be read by them. The Epistles of the
Romans, Corinthians, Galathians, Ephesians were written to the people,
therefore to be read by them. One Epistle of John was written to Gaius a
layman, another to the elect Lady. Timothy from the Cradle was versed in the
Scripture.

5. From the profit and necessity of this study; men are illightned and
converted by reading of the Scriptures Psalm. 19. 8, 9 they are directed by them
as most faithful counselors in in all their ways, Scripturae scriptae sunt
ut inde petamus illuminationem mentis quo ad credenda, directionem vitae quoad
agenda.
Psalm. 1. 19. 24. they are armed Quod omnes tangit, ab omnibus tractari debet.
by them against the fiery darts of Satan, Ephesians. 6. 16. One seeing a youth
read the Scriptures, said, it was never well since such were permitted to
turn over the Bible; but he answered him in the Psalmists words, Psalm. 119. 9.

6. From the unanimous consent of all the Fathers, Chrysostom and Jerome
especially, who exhort the people to the private reading of the Scriptures, and
testify that the Scriptures were publicly read in their Ecclesiastical
Assemblies, not in an unknown tongue, but in a tongue understood by the people
Whitaker. contr. 1. quae. 2. c. 14. makes mention of very ancient English
translations, and Turretin^ of old French translations. vide Estium ad 2 Timothy
3. 15.
. It was decreed by the Council of Nice, that no Christian should be without a
Bible in his house. And the Jews at this day suffer no house amongst them to
be without the Bible. Christ and his Apostles teaching and disputing before the
people, appeal to the Law and the Prophets, without the name of the Author,
Book, or Chapter, because they knew the Bible text to be familiar to the
Israelites. In an unknown tougue they cannot profit the people, ergo they
ought to be translated into a tongue known to the people The word of God was
written by the Prophets and Apostles linguis ve^naculis, viz. to the Hebrews in
Hebrew, to the Greeks in Greek.
, 1 Cor. 14. Vide Casetanum in 1 Cor: 14
the Apostle in diverse verses treats of this subject, V. 6, 7, 19. He says,
all things ought to be done in the Church for the edifying of the people, that
no man should speak in an unknown tongue, without an interpreter; and says,
that he had rather speak five words and be understood, then 10000 words in an
unknown tongue. Those arguments before urged for the peoples reading of the
Scripture, prove this also; for they cannot read them in every Nation unless
they be translated into a Tongue they understand. Christ and his Apostles
taught the people the Scripture in their mother Vernaculum test Vall^^leg. l.
1. c. 5. dicitur, quod est domi nost^^e vel in^^^ra patria natum, ut lingua
vernacula, quae vulgo dicitur lingu^ mater^a. dictum a verna qui est s^rvus ex
ancilla, domi nostrae natus. Ebraeis ergo lingua Ebraea fuit vernacula, Graecis
Graeca, Latinis Latina. Hoc (...), vel Gr^^a part vel Latina Lingua sunt
vernaculae. Rivetu^ Isag. ad (...), Script:
Tongue. In the next age after the Apostles (says Gratius l. 3. de veritate
Relig. Christ.) the new Testament was translated into diverse vulgar Tongues,
the Syriacke, Arabicke, Aethiopicke, and Latin; which version^ are yet extant,
and differ not mainly from the Greek.

In the elder and purer times, the Scriptures were translated into innumerable,
yea into all Tongues usual amongst men. See Gregory's preface to the notes on
passages of Scripture. The plain and usual words, the phrase and manner of
speech most frequented, the comparisons and similitudes in Scripture most
familiar, taken out of the shops and fields, from husbandry and houswifery,
from the flock Prove. 8. 9. By a man of understanding he means every one that
is godly, as by the fool the wicked. 3. Consectary.
and the herd, show that the Scriptures were written for the capacity and
understanding of the unlearned, John 5. 39. a special place; if it be
indicative, it shows the custom Vtinam omnes saceremus illud quod Scriptum
est, scrutamini Scripturas. Origenes.
of the Jews; if imperative, it shows what they ought to do.

Many amongst us are to be blamed for not having the Scripture in their houses,
and for not reading it constantly in the same as they ought to do, or else
they read it as other books, not with such respect to it as the greatness of
its Author deserves; I mean with a desire and purpose to believe and obey
all that they find there, which must needs be the duty of those that confess
these writings come from God. We should receive it with reverence, believe it
with confidence, exercise our selves in it with diligence and delight, practice
it with obedience.

Reading the Scripture is a rehearsing out of the book such things as are
there written barely without any interpretation. The Churches of Africa had
this custom, as Augustine shows, first they read a lesson out of the
Prophets, then out of the Epistles and Gospel, with a Psalm between. Acts 17.
11.
It is to be done publicly See M. T^gbels woman's glory, Chapter 11. about women's
reading of the Scripture.
, as it was in the Synagogues of the Jews who had the reading of the Law and
Prophets amongst them, the Prophets were read in their ears every day, says
Paul, and after the lecture of the Law and the Prophets, in another place. We
honor God more by a public then a private reading of it. 2. Privately the
godly Jews of Berea did search the Scriptures, and the King is commanded to
read in the Law.

Some good Divines hold that the Scriptures barely read (though preaching be
not joined with it) may be the instrument of regeneration, since the doctrine
of the Gospel is called the ministration of the Spirit, Psalm. 19. the law of
the Lord converteth the soul, it is so when not preached; but the word of God
is made effectual by the Spirit, more often, more ordinarily to beget a new
life in the preaching (that is, the interpreting and applying of it) then in
the bare reading, 1 Timothy 4. 13. Matthew. 28. 29. Christ's custom was (as we may
collect out of Luke 4. where one instance is recorded to make us conceive his
ordinary practice) when he had read, to interpret the Scripture, and often to
apply it.

Let us all learn constantly to exercise our selves in the writings of God,
Christus Scripturas scrutari jubet, vel potius Judaeu hoc testimonii perhibet,
quod illas scrutentur. John 5. 39. Zeppe^us.
which if we strive to do in a right manner, we shall attain true knowledge
of the way to Heaven, and also grace and help to walk in that way. If the Lord
should deny to any man the public helps of preaching and conference, yet if
that man should constantly read the word, praying to God to teach him and
guide him by it, and strive to follow it in his life, he should find out the
truth, and attain saving grace, the word would illighten and convert; but if
God afford public preaching and interpretation, we must use that too as a
principal ordinance.

Let us all read Scripturam sacram^ legendo Cara vocant and Micra, quod in ea
legenda, cognoscenda, operae non parum ac temporis ponendum sit. Ideo
praecipiunt, ut homo annos aetatis suae dividat in tres^pares, quarum tertiam
lectionioni tribuat sacrarum literarum. D^usius. Ebraic. quaest. ^4.
the Scripture.

1. With hearty prayers to God to direct us, and open the sense of it to us,
Psalm. 119. 18. JAmes 1. 5, 17. and with a resolution to put in practice that
which we learn, Jam. 1. 25. Matthew. 7. 24. and we shall find the word read
Gods power to our edification and salvation. Only a Spiritual understanding
can discern an excellency in the Scripture. Nunquam Pauli mentem intelliges,
nisi prius Pauli spiritum imbiberis.

2. Diligently, attend unto reading, 1 Timothy 4. 13, 15. John 5. 39. Search the
Scriptures, whether the Greek word be a metaphor from hunting dogs, or from
diggers in mines, both import diligence. It was a solemn speech used in holy
actions, hoc age. The passions of the Martyrs may be read when their
anniversarie days are celebrated. Whence the name of Legends. Chamier.

3. Orderly, that we may be better acquained with the whole body of the
Scriptures. We should read on in Chronicles and Ezra, M. Pemble of the Persian
Monarchy.
and other places wherein are nothing but names and Genealogies, to show our
obedience to God in reading over all his sacred word, and we shall after reap
profit by that we understand not for the present; though it will be convenient
to begin with the new Testament as more plain, before we read the old.

4. With faith, V^rbum Scriptum est objectum fidei adaequatum, primum
fundamentum. a quo capit initium, and ultimum illud in quod resolvitur. Amesius
de Circul^ Pontificio. Prima veritas est fidei objectum formale quo; and Deus
ipse sive absolute, sive in Christo, est ejusdem objectum formale quod. Id ib.
Heb. 4. 2. The word of God consists of four parts: 1. History, 2.
Commandments, 3. Promises, 4. Threats. All truths taught in the History of the
Scripture ought to be believed. As that the world was made of nothing, only by
the word of God, Heb. 11. 3. and that the bodies of men howsoever they died,
shall rise again at the last day, Job 19. 26. 2 All precepts, Genes. 22. 6.
Abraham went doing that commandment though strange. 3 All promises, as that
God could give Abraham when he was 100 years old, a seed and posterity which
should be as innumerable as the Stars in the Firmament, Genes. 15. 5. and that
by Sarah an old and barren woman, Genesis 17. 16. Abraham and Sarah believed it,
Romans 4. 20, 21. Heb. 11. 11. 4. Threatenings, as that Genesis 6. 13. 17. though
unlikely, Noab believed it, 2 Pet. 2. 5. because God had said it, Heb. 11. 7.
and that Jonah 3. 4. the people of Nineveh believed, v. 5. In narrando
gravitas, in imperando authoritas, in promittendo liberalitas, in minando
severitas. Spanhemius or at. de officio Theologi.

5. Constantly. Cyprian was so much delighted with the reading of Tertullian,
that he read something in him every day, and called him his Master, Divinas
Scripturas sapius lege, i^o nunquam de manibus tuis sacra lectio dep^natur
Hieron. ad Nepotian. de vita Cleric^rum.
Da Magistrum. Let Gods command, the examples of the godly, and our own
benefit quicken us to a frequent reading of the holy Scriptures. Mr Bifield
has a Calendar, showing what number of Chapters are to be read every day, that
so the whole Bible may be read over in the year. The number of Chapters while
you are reading the old Testament, is for the most part three a day, and when
you come to the new Testament it is but two Bifields directions for private
reading the Scriptures, See Practice of piety, p. 314.
; sometimes where the matter is Historical or Typical, or the Chapters short,
he has set down a greater number. The Martyrs would sit up all night in
reading and hearing.

After we have read and understood the Scripture, we must 1. give thanks to God
for the right understanding of it, and pray him to imprint the true knowledge
of it in our hearts, that it may not fall out. 2. We must meditate in the word
of God now understood, and so fix it in our minds. One defines meditation thus:
It is an action Psalm. 1. ^. What meditation is. See M. Fenner on 1 Hag. 5. A
young Disciple asking an old Rabbi, whether he might not have time to learn
the Greek Tongue, he said, if he would do it neither by night nor by day, he
might, because by night and day he was to study the Law. 1 Psalm 2.
of the soul calling things to mind or remembrance, and discoursing of them,
that they might be the better understood, retained, affected, and possessed. It
is as it were every man's preaching to himself, and is a setting ones self
seriously to consider in his mind, and apply to his own soul some necessary
truth of Gods word, till the mind be informed, and the heart affected, as the
nature thereof requires, and is the wholesomest and usefullest of all exercises
of piety. This is to ingrast the word into ones soul, to give the seed much
earth; this is to bind it to the Tables of our heart, and to hide it in the
furrows of our souls; this is to digest it, and make it our own. 3. We
Meditatio est actus religionis seu exercitium spirituale, que Doum and res
divinas intenta, experimentali, and affectu^sa cognitione recordamur, nobisque
applicamus. Voetius.
must apply to our own use whatsoever things we read and understand, the
precepts and examples of the Law to instruct our life, the promises and
comforts of the Gospel to confirm our faith.

It serves for thankfulness, 4 Consectary.
1. that now we have the Scripture, the world was a long time without it; it
was the more wicked because they had no canon of Scripture. We are not like to
err by tradition, as former ages have done. 2. That we have so great a part of
Scripture, Some gave five marks for a book. Fox.
and in our vulgar tongue; the Martyrs would have given a load of Hay for a few
Chapters of St JAmes or Paul in English. 3. That we have so great helps for the
opening of the Scripture; so many excellent Expositors; compare Mollerus on the
Psalms, with Austin. As the latter thoughts are usually the more advised, Quo
junioros (...) perspicaciores. Salmeron.
so the latter Interpreters are generally the quicker sighted.

All those are to be reproved which contemn or unreverently handle the
Scriptures. 5 Consectary.


1. Atheists, Speculative and practical Atheists.
who impiously oppose the word of God, and all profane wretches who live
loosely and wickedly, It argued a profane spirit in Politian, who said, that
there was more in one of Pind^rs Odes then all David's Psalms.
their doom is written in this book. Julian the Apostate said of Apollinarius
his Book, wherein he defended the Divine truth against the Gentiles, Vidi,
legi, contempsi; I have seen them, I have read them, I have contemned them. To
whom Basil replied, Vidisti, legisti non intellexisti, si intellexisses; non
contempsisses. Thou have seen and read them, but not understood them; if thou
had understood them, thou would not have contemned them.

2. Papists, who 1. Set up Images and Pictures instead of the Scripture; the
Scriptures (they say) may teach men errors, but may not Pictures?

2. Equal the Apocrypha, and unwritten verities, or rather vanities, with the
sacred Scriptures.

3. Charge the Scriptures with insufficiency, lis, qui maxima sibi
Christianorum, Catholicorum nomen venditant, nihil tam solenne est, tamque
vulgatum, quam Scripturas calumnia^i Chamierus.
and obscurity, allow it not to be a perfect rule.

4. Make it of no force to bind our consciences unless the Pope ratify it.

5. Give the Pope power to dispense with things therein forbidden, yea and with
oaths and vows, which no Scripture dispenses withal.

6. Teach that the vulgar Latin is to be received as Authenticke.

7. Wrest and turn it which way Quam vere di xerit olim Polydorus Virgilius,
Dectores quo^dam Pontificias sacras literas, quo volunt, retorquere, inst^t
sutorum, quisordides pelles suis dentibus entendunt.
they please, Esaias 28. 16. Cardinal Bellarmine in praefat. l. de Summo
Pontifice and Baronius, say, that by precious and corner stone in this place,
the Pope of Rome, although less principally, is meant, who is a stumbling
stone to Heretics, and a rock of offense, but to Catholics a tried, precious
corner stone; yet Peter 1. 2. 6. and 8. expounds those words not of himself,
but of Christ. Bellarmine from Matthew. 21. Feed my Lambs and Sheep, would
infer the Popes universal dominion; Baronius from the Acts Pasco o^es meas,
hoc est, regio more impera.
, kill and eat, Psalm. 8. 6. under his feet, that is, say they, of the Pope of
Rome; Sheep) i. Christians; Oxen) that is, Jews and Heretics; Beasts of the
field, i. Pagans; Fowls of the air, i. Angels. Fishes of the Sea, i. souls
in Purgatory.

They have Tapers in their Churches in the day time, because Christ says, I am
the light of the world: or because they had such at midnight, Acts 20. 8. where
Paul preached.

This is the great fault of the School Divines, Thomas ex Aristotele,
Patribus, Concil^is, and barbara Bibliorum versione magnum illud Systema
compilavit, cui titulu^ Summae fecit, Liber sententiarum and Summa Thom^,
tanquam duo Testamenta, in pulpita introducti sunt. Amam^.
that they handle Paul and Aristotle, Suae curiositati litantes potius, quam
pietati; so that he is counted most learned amongst them who dares to seek,
and presumes to define most things out of the Scripture. What distinctions,
orders, degrees and offices do they make of Angels? what curious questions do
they raise? what use would there have been of sexes, if Adam had not sinned,
whether Christ should have been incarnate if there had been no sin, and
infinite such like.

The School men perverting the Cum Mose pugnant, cum Prophetis, cum Apostolis,
cum Christo ipso, ac Deo Patre and Spiritu sancto, qui sacras literas and
oracula divina contemnunt. Bellarm. de verbo Dei. l. 1. c. 2.
Scriptures have profaned Divinity with Philosophy, or rather Sophistry, and
yet are called School Divines, Dr. Clerk.
when they are neither Scholars in in truth nor Divines.

Behold two Swords Luke 22. 83. therefore the Pope has two Swords; one
Spiritual, another Temporal, 1 Cor. 2. 14. ergo, The Pope judges of all
things, and is judged of none.

The Papils style the Scripture Regulam Lesbiam, nasum cereum, Evangelium
nigrum, Theologiam atramentariam. A Lesbian rule, a nose of wax, the black
Gospel, inky Divinity.

Bishop Bonners Chaplain called the Bible his little pretty Gods book, Dr.
Rainolds against Heart.
Giford and Raynolds said it contained somethings profane and Apocryphal.

The Rebels in Ireland took the Bibles, threw them into the channels, Dr. Jones
his Remo strance. See Sir John Temple of the Irish Rebellion, p. 108.
and cast them into the fire, and called it Hell fire, and wished they could
serve all the rest so.

But I may say of the Gospel as the French Lady of the Cross, Never dog barkt
at the Cross, but he ran mad.

Contrarationem nemo sabrius, contra Ecclesiam nemo pacificus, contra
Scripturas nemo Christianus.

Thirdiy, The Brownists vainly and idly Non debet Scriptura quacunque occasion
detorqueri a genuino sensu. Imo quodammodo soelius est, citando detorquere:
quta indicium est, nos tum Scripturis abuti ad arbitrium: and tanquam regulaus
Lesbiam pro nostro commodo huc illuc detorquer^. Hoc vero cum semper verum est,
tum maxim in disputatione: quantum enim illud crimen est, ut qui aliorum
mendacia refutare profitetur, ipse se ita gerat, ut falsarius appellari possit?
Chamierus de Canone, lib. 8. c. 6.
quote the Scripture, filling their margents with many Texts of Scripture, but
nothing to the purpose, and misapply it; they allege those Texts of Esaias 52.
51. and Rev. 18. 4. to draw men from all the assemblies of Gods people, whither
any wicked men do resort.

Fourthly, The Antinomians, or Antinomists, who cry down the Law of God, and
call those that preach the law, Legal Preachers, and stand for Evangelicall
grace; the Law is part of Canonical Scripture, and has something peculiar in
it, being written with the finger of God, and delivered with Thunder and
Lightning. See Mr Gatakers Treatise on 23 Numb. 21. and Mr Burgess his
Lectures on 1 Timothy 1. 8, 9.

Fifthly, Stage Players, who jest with Scriptures; Witches, and others, which
use charms, writing a piece of St John's Gospel to cure a disease, or the
like, are to be condemned for abusing the Scripture. Per v^^es sacras (puta
Evang. Johannis, orationem Dominicam frequenter cum Ave Maria recitatam,
Symbolum Apostolicum, etc.) morbos curare magicum est. Voetius.

Sixthly, Printers, who print the Bible in bad Paper, a blind print, and
corruptly, are likewise to be blamed.

Seventhly, Judaei Evangelium dici volunt, quasi (...) Aven Gilion, id est,
mendacium, seu iniquitatem voluminis Gualtperius.
the Heathens and Jews. Tacitus calls the doctrine of the Gospel,
Superstitionem quandam exitiabilem.

The modern Jews call Evangelium aven gilion, a volume of lies, word for
word, the iniquity of the Volume; The blasphemous Jews mean (I suppose) the
volume of iniquity. Elias Levita in Thishi mentions this Etymology or rather
Pseudologie of the word; but P. Fagius abhorred to translate it. 1 Cor. 1. 22.


Scripture arguments are the chiefest to convince an unbeliever. 6 Consectary.
Christ by diverse arguments John 5. labors to convince the Jews that he was
the Messiah promised. 1. John bare witness of him, verse. 33. 2 His works bare
witness of him, verse. 36. 3 The Father did bear witness of him, verse. 37. 4
He produces the testimony of the Scriptures, v. 39. They are they which
testify of me. Will you not believe John, my miracles, my word from Heaven,
then believe the written word. If we believe not the testimony of Scripture, It
is a gradation.
nothing will convince us, Luke 16. 31.
though one rise from the dead; nor Christ himself, if he were here in the
flesh, and should preach unto us, John 5. ult.

The Lord in executing of his judgments commonly observes proportion and
retaliation. Antichrist is the greatest opposite to Gods Law and Word, he is
called therefore (...) 2 Thessalonians. 2. 8. the lawless one; He is without Law,
above Law, against Law; he abuses Scripture, takes upon him to judge, and
interpret Scripture, therefore it shall be his ruin, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 8. God shall
destroy him with the Spirit of his mouth, idest, verbo suo. Beza. God has
consecrated the word to this purpose; the end of it is not only to save, but
destroy, being the savor of death to some; and it is a fit instrument for such
a work. Antichrists strength is in men's consciences; only this will pierce
thither, Heb. 4. 12. God uses the word for the destruction of Antichrist,
these ways: 1. It discovers him, his doctrine, his errors. 2. It hardens him.
3. It condemns him, and passes sentence against him.

CHAP. III.
2. The Books of Scripture:
FRom the Divine flows the Canonical authority of the Scripture. The books
of Scripture are called Canonical books (say some) from the word (...), Tum
antiqui theologi, Basilius, Chrysostomus, Augustinus; tum recentiores,
celeberrimi nominis inter adversarios, Thomas Aquinas, Ferus, Andradius,
aliique Scripturam Canonis nomine designant, aut designatam asserunt, tanquam
intellectus and voluntatis regulam ad cuncta, seu credenda, seu agenda,
perfectissimam. Rain^ldus, 1 Thessalonians.
which word is used 2 Cor. 10. 13. Phil. 3. 16. Gal. 6. 16. (...), mark the
double emphasis, this notable Canon, because they were put into the Canon by
the Universal Church and acknowledged to be divinely inspired by it, and also
are made a perfect Canon or rule of all doctrine concerning religion,
credendorum and agendorum, of faith and manners, of all things which are to be
believed or done toward salvation. But Cameron thinks it is not termed
Canonical, because it is a rule, for that book (says he) is called
Canonical, which is put into the Catalogue (which the ancients called a Canon)
of those writings which are esteemed Divine. Becanus says, Scripturae dicuntur
Canonicae, quia quid nos credere, and quemadmodum vivere operteat,
praescribunt, ut huc fidem omnem, vitamque nostram reseramus, quemadmodum
lapicida aut architectus ad amuss^m and perpeudiculum opus suum exigit.
Whitakerus de Script. Controver. primae quaestione prima. Cap. 2. Libri sacrae
Scripturae Canonici dicuntur: qui^ fidei morum que regulam continent.
Woitakerus and Scharpius de sacra Scriptura.
they are called Canonical, both because they contain a rule which we ought
to follow in faith and manners, and because they are put into the Catalogue of
Divine books.

The conditions of a Canon are these:

1. It must contain truth, or be an express form and image of truth, which is
in the divine mind.

2. It must be commanded, sanctified and confirmed by Divine authority, that it
may be a Canon to us in the Church.

These books were sanctified, either commonly all of both Testaments by the
testimony of the Spirit and Church, and Canon it self, or the books of the old
Testament were specially and singularly confirmed by word, signs and event, as
the Pentateuch, but the Prophetical books and Hagiographa before their
carrying into Babylon by extraordinary sign, the cloud and veil in the
Temple, 1 Kings 8. 10. Levit. 16. 2. and Gods answer by Ephod, Urim, and
Thummim, Exodus 28. 30. after their carrying away into Babylon by singular
testimonies of events. The books of the new Testament are confirmed by the
Son of God revealed in flesh, by his sayings and deeds, Heb. 1. 2. and by the
powerful ministry of the Apostles, by signs, virtues and miracles, Mark 16.
20.

There is a threefold Canon in the Church, Proprii Canonis dicti univoce due
conditiones sunt inseparabiles quod veritatem divinam contineat divinitus
materia and forma, and quod authoritate divins publica Ecclesia datus and
sanctificatus, ut sit Canon sive regula ipsiu, atque hic vere divinus Canon.
Jun. animadvers. in Bellarm.
Divine, Ecclesiastical, and False.

The Divine Canon is that which properly and by itself is called the word of
God, immediately inspired of God into the Prophets and Apostles.

This according to the diverse times of the Church is distinguished into the old
and new Testament, 2 Cor. 3. 6, 14. this is a common division of the sacred
Bible among Christians, as in the version of Tremelius and Junius, Testamenti
veteris and novi Biblia sacra; and the Geneva gives that title to their Bible,
La Bible, qui est toute la Saint Escriture du viel and novean Testament.
Austin thinks they are better called, Vetus and novum Instrumentum. Heinsius
and Grotius, vetus and novum Foedus. vide Grotii Annotat. in libros Evangelii.
A Covenant is an agreement between two; a Testament is the declaration of the
will of one.

It is called in regard of the form, convention and agreement between God and
man, a Covenant; in regard of the manner of confirming it a Testament. For 1.
in a Testament or last will the Testators mind is declared, so is the will of
God in his word, therefore it is called a Testimony often, Psalm. 19. and 119. l
2. Here is a Testator, Christ; a Legacy, eternal life; Heirs, the elect; a
writing, the Scripture; Seals, the Sacraments. 3. Because it is ratified by
the death of Christ, Heb. 9. 16, 17.

The Books of the old Testament are the holy Scriptures given by God to the
Church of the Jews, Est matter Ecclesia, and ubera ejus duo Testamenta
divinaru^ Scripturarum. Aug. tract. 3. in Epist. Joh.
showing them what to believe, and how God would be worshipped: The new
Testament contains the books which treat of salvation already exhibited,
and Christ already come in the flesh.

All the books of the old Testament were written originally Vt veterum
librorum fides, de Hebraeis us. luminibus examinanda est, ita novorum veritas
Greci sermonis norn^am desiderat. Augustinus.
in Hebrew, because they were committed unto the Hebrews, Romans 3. 2. except what
Daniel From the fourth verse of the second Chapter of Daniel to the end of the
seventh Chapter; and from the eighth verse of the fourth Chapter of Esaras unto
the end of the seventh, the Chaldee Dialect is used.
and Ezra wrote in the Chaldee. The Jewish Church receiving them from God, kept
them and delivered them to posterity. Many grave Authors hold, that the Hebrew
was the first Tongue, and mother of all the rest; and it may probably be
collected from the names of our first parents. It was called Hebrew (says
Erpenius) not from Heber of the posterity of Sem, as Josephus, Jerome, and
others think, when it is manifest that he rather spoke Chaldee then Hebrew,
because Abraham the Patriarch which drew his original from him was a Chaldean;
but it was so called, says Erpenius Erpenius o^ at, de ling. Ebr. dignitate.
Some say the Hebrews were so called from Abraham's passing over Euphrat^s. id.
ib.
, (as all the Rabbines, Origin and others testify) from the Hebrews, which
people arose from Canaan. It is honored with the title of the holy Tongue
(says the same Erpenius) because the most holy God spoke it to his Prophets,
delivered his holy will written in it to the Church; and because it is very
probable from the opinion of great men, that holy men shall use it with God
hereafter in Heaven, Omnes libri Canonici v^teris Testamenti Ebraic^ scripti
fuerunt. Dantele and Ezra sunt quedam parts Chaldaicae, nempe quae ab iis ex
publicis Annalibus and fastis regni desumptae fuerant, in quorum monarchia tum
vive bant, ut obsenvavit doctissimus Iu^ius.
vide Buxtorfium de Linguae Hebraeae origin, Antiquitate and Sanctitate. There
are many Hebraismes also in the new Testament, many words and phrases rather
used according to the manner of the Hebrews then the Greeks; by which it is
mauifest that the same Spirit was the Author of the old and new Testament. The
knowledge of the Hebrew much conduces to the learning of those famous
Oriental Tongues, the Chaldee, Syriacke, Arabicke, and Aethiopicke, by reason
of the great affinity which they have with their mother.

The books of the old Testament may be divided several ways; in respect of
the style, some were written in prose, some in verse: in respect of time, some
were written before their being taken captives into Babylon, as Samuel, Esaias,
H^sea, and many others; some in the Captivity As Ezechiel; Daniel. Jerome has
followed this division of the Hebrews.
, and some after, as Haggai, Zachary, Malachy. The Hebrews divide the Bible
(ex instituto Esdrae) into three special parts: 1. The Law, the five Books of
Moses. 2. The Prophets. 1. The former, Joshua, Judges, two books of Samuel.
and two of the Kings. 2. The latter. 1. Greater, three. 2. Lesser, twelve.

3. The Hagiographa, for want of a more special name, by which title all the
rest are understood, and they are eleven Both the Chronicles, the Psalms,
Proverbs, Job, Ruth, Daniel, Ecclesiastes, Canticles, Lamentations, Hester,
Ezra, and Nehemiah, counted for one book.
. Our Savior himself mentions this most ancient distinction, Luke 24. 44.
calling all the rest of the books (besides the Law and Prophets,) Psalms. All
the Scriptures of the old Testament (in other places) are comprised in the Law
and Prophets Matthew. 5. 17. and 7. 12. and 11. 13. and 20. 40. Acts 13. 15. and
24. 14. and 26. 22. and 28. 23. Romans 3. 21. or Moses and the Prophets, Luke 24.
27. and 16. 29. or in the Scriptures of the Prophets, Romans 16. 26. or the
Prophets alone, Luke 1. 70. and 24. 25, 27. Romans 1. 2. Heb. 1. 1. the name
Prophet being taken as it is given to every holy writer.

The Jews, and the Ancient reckon 22 Joseph. contra Appion l. 1. Eusebius. l. 3.
c. 10. Some of the Jews reckon 24. See Sextus Senensis his Biblieth l. 1.
sect. 2. Some 27.
Books in the old Testament, according to the number of the Letters of the
Alphabet, for memory sake, Ruth being joined with the Book of Judges, and the
Lamentations, being annexed to Jeremy their Author. Hebraeis sunt initiales and
medianae literae 22, finales quinque. Quamobrem V. T. modo in 22. modo in 27.
libros partiuntur.

All the books of both Testaments are 66. 39 of the old, and 27 of the new
Testament. Some would have Hugo Cardinal to be the first Author of that
division of the Bible into Chapters, Waliherus in efficina Biblioa p 237.
which we now follow. No man put the verses in the Latin Bibles before Robert
Stephen; As the Massorites reckoned all the words and letters, so some
Christians all the verses of the Bible.
and for the new Testament, he performed that first, being Henric: Steph. Lect.
in Cancordant. Graec. N. T. Grotius de Iure Belli. l. 1. c. 2. Rive^us, Isag.
ad Script. sac. c. 29.
helped by no Book, Greek or Latin. Vide Croii observat. in novum Testam. c.
7.

This arithmeticall distinction of Chapters which we have in our Bibles was not
from the first authors. Of which that is an evident token, that in all the
quotations which are read in the new Testament out of the old; there is not
found any mention of the Chapter, which would not have been altogether omitted,
if all the Bibles had then been distinguished by Chapters, as ours, We are not
too superstitiously to adhere to our late division. See Heinsius prolegom. ad
exercit. Dr. Rainolds his Letter for the study of Divinity.
distinguishing of the Bible into Chapters and Verses, much helps the reader,
but it sometimes obscures the sense. Dr Raynolds gives this counsel to young
Students in the study of Divinity, that they first take their greatest travel
with the help of some learned interpreter in understanding St John's Gospel,
and the Epistle to the Romans, the sum of the new Testament, Esaias the Prophet
and the Psalms of David, the sum of the old, and in the rest they shall do
well also, if in harder places they use the judgment of some godly writer, as
Calvin and Peter Martyr who have written best on the most part of the old
Testament.

The Books of the old Testament are: 1. Legal. 2. Historical. 3. Poetical.
4. Prophetical.

1. Legal (which the Hebrews call from the chief part Torah Deuteronomy. 31. 9. and
33. 4. the Grecians from the number Pentateuch) the five Books of Moses:
Pentatenchum (...) quinque volumin^bus dicitur: (...) ^nim Graecis quinque
(...) volumen vocatur, Ifid. l. 6.
Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, Deuteronomy; all written by Moses, (as it
is commonly agreed) except the last Chapter in the end of Deuteronomy,
concerning his death, written by Joshua. In which five Books are described the
things done in the Church from the beginning of the world to the death of
Moses. In Judaica Ecclesia, ^tsi summa fuerit omnium librorum veteris
Testamenti, dignitas and autoritas, maxima tamen su^t quinque librorum Mosis.
Rivetus.
The Sadduces (as some say) received no other Scripture but these five Books
of Moses; therefore Christ, Matthew. 23. 32. proves the resurrection of the dead,
which they denied, out of the second Book of Moses; but Scultetus says, that
they rejected not the Prophets, l. 1. exercit. evang. c. 22.

Anciently it was not the custom of holy writers to add Titles to what they
had written, but either left their works altogether without Titles, or the
first words were Titles, the Titles now in use, as Genesis, Exodus, were
prefixed according to the arbitrament of men; and the like is to be thought of
those before the historical books of the new Testament, as Matthew, Mark
Luke, John.

With the Hebrews the Titles of books are taken sometimes from the subject
matter or argument, Spanhem Dub. Evangel. part tertia Dab. 1.
as in the books of Judges, Ruth, Kings, Proverbs, and others of that kind;
sometimes from the Authors or amanuenses rather, as in the books of Joshua and
the Prophets; sometimes from the initiall words with which the books begin,
which Jerome follows. The Books of Moses are denominated from the initiall
words.

(...) 1. in principie. i. e. Nomina h^rum quinque librorum ab Hebraeis
sumuntur de primis verbis librorum, Graeci and Latini denominant hos libros a
materia dequa agitur in principl^ librl. Bellarminus.
Genesis. (...) 2. Haec nomina. h. e. Exodus. (...) 3. and vocavit. h. e.
Leviticus. (...) 4. in deserto. i. e. Numeri. (...) 5. verba. sive
Deuteronomium.
These are subdivided again into See my Epistle to my Hebrew Critica sacra,
and Thorndike of Religious Assemblies, Chap. 6. p. 175, 176.
54 Sections, that the reading of them may be finished in so many Sabbaths,
which is signified Acts 15. 12.

Junius, Ainsworth, and Amama, with Calvin, Cornelius a Lapide, and Piscator
have done well on the Pentateuch.

1. Genesis) in Hebrew Bereshith, the first word of the book, by the Septuagint
it is called (...), which appellation the Latin Church retained, because it
sets forth the first generation of things, Chapter 2. v. 4. and of Adam, or
mankind, Genesis 5. 1. It consists of 50 Chapters, 2308 says Sixtus Senensis.
and contains a History of 2368 years from the creation of the world, to the
death of Joseph.

The best Expositors of this book are Mercer, River, Pareus, Caelvin, Peter
Martyr on 40 Chapters, Willet, Ainsworth.

Origin upon the Canticles, and Jerome Hieron. in prologo in Ezech. and Epist.
jam. l. 1. Epist. 32. Eustocbio. Mercer. praefat, in Genesis and Cantic. Vossius
in Thesibus de creatione. Vide Estium ad Ezech. 40. v. 46.
upon Ezekiel say, that the Hebrews forbad those that had not attained to the
age of the Priesthood, and judgment, viz. 30 years, to read in three books,
for their profundity and difficulty; that is, the beginning of the world, which
is contained in the three first Chapters of Genesis, the beginning and end of
Ezekiel, since that treats of the Cherubins, and the Divine Majesty, this of
the structure of the third Temple, and the Song of Songs, in which those things
which ought to be understood of the Divine Author, are easily through
youthful affection elsewhere drawn and wrested.

This book of Genesis is not only profitable, but very necessary for
doctrine; as Moses is the Prince, and as it were, Parent of Divines: so Genesis
is the foundation and excellent compendium of all Divinity, propounding
evidently the chief parts of it.

2 Exodus) The second book of Moses is called in Hebrew Shemoth, in Greek
(...), which word the Latins have retained. It consists of 40 Chapters, and
contains a History (say Junius and Tremelius) of 142 years, 146 says
Senensis.
viz. from the death of Joseph even to the building of the Tabernacle.

The best Expositors of it are Rivet, Willet, Calvin, Ainsworth.

3 Leviticus) in Hebrew Vaiicra, Barbara Turcarum gens h^die Mosis doctrinam
(...) comprehensam, non aliter quam divinam veneratur, adeo ut etiam chartarum
lacinias, quibus aliquid ejus forie inscriptum sit, deosculetur. Pareus
praefat. de libris Mosis. Evangelistae and Apostoli in nove Testamento, centies
quinquagies and amplius in narrationibus and cencionibus suis Mosaic^ Cononis
authoritatem adducunt, ut suum cum Mose and Prophetis consensum comprobent. Id
ib.
in Greek and Latin Leviticus, from the matter which it handles, because it
treats especially of the Leviticall Priesthood, and the Leviticall or
Ceremonial Laws in it. It consists of 27 Chapters, and contains a History of
one Month, viz. of the first, in the second year after their going out of
Egypt.

The best Expositors of it are Calvin, Ainswarth, and Willet.

4 Numbers) in Hebrew Vaie dabber, in Greek (...), in Latin Numeri, in
English Numbers, because it begins with declaring the number of the people, and
because many numberings are reckoned up in this book. It contains a History
of 38 years, and consists of 36 Chapters.

The best Expositors of it are Calvin, Attersoll, Ainsworth.

5 Deuteronomy) in Hebrew Haddebarim, from the first words, in Greek (...),
which the Latin retains, because it contains a second repetition of many
necessary points of the Law. It consists of 34 Chapters, and contains a
history of the two last months of the year. Some say concerning the 34 Chapter
10. that part of it was written by Ezra contemporary with Malachy.

The best Expositors of it are Calvin, Ainsworth, Wolphius Cornelius a Lapide.

2 Historical. The Hebrews divide the books into 4 Classes. The first is
called Thorah that is, the law, containing the five Books of Moses. The second
Nebii^n R^shonim, the Books of the former P^^phets, as Joshua, Judges, Samuel,
Kings. The third Nebiius Acharouim, later Prophets, Esaias, Jeremy, Ezekiel. And
the lesser being 12. but one book. A Sepher Ketubim the Hagiographall books.


1. Before the Captivity, Joshua, Judges, Ruth, Samuel, Kings. 2 After the
Captivity, both the Chronicles Ezra, Nehemiah.
The sixth Book in the old Testament is called Joshua, because it contains a
History of things done by Joshua the servant of Moses, which he by the will of
God put in writing, it being all written by him, except some of the last
Chapter, where mention is made of his death, and thought to be written by
Samuel. It consists of 24 Chapters and contains a History of 18 years, viz.
from the death of Moses even to the death of Joshua.

The best Expositors of it are Masius and Serarius for Papists, Drusius and
Lavater of Protestants.

The seventh book is called Shophetim, It was written, as it is likely, by
diverse Prophets, Matthew. 2 ult. Vide Bezam Bucer. and Calvin. in loc.
Judges, because it contains things done under the government of the 12
Judges. There is nothing certain of the author of this Book, though some
would have Samuel: but he rather collected and compiled into one Volume what
was written by many. It describes the state of the government of Israel from
the death of Joshua even to the Priesthood of Petrus Martyr in praefat. com. in
lib. Judic. scribit, alios putare unumquenque judicem suorum temporum res
gestas conscripsisse, quae postea Samuel (eorum monimenta cum difiecta essent)
in unum quoddam corpus seu volumen cocgerit.
Eli. It consists of 21 ^^hapters, and contains a History of 299 years, say
some; of 300 at least, says Spanhemius.

The best Expositors of it are Peter Martyr, Drusius, Lavater, Serrarius.

The eighth is Ruth, the author of which book is unknown; many think it was
written by Samuel, who added this as a part or conclusion of the book of
Judges. It consists of four Chapters, and is an History concerning the
marriage and posterity of Ruth.

The best Expositors of it are Deusius, Wolphius, Lavater, Topsell.

The ninth in order are the two books of Samuel, The Authors of these Books of
Samuel, are thought to be Samuel, Nathan, and Gad 1 Samuel of the first Book
to the 25 Chapter, where his death is reheased, Nathan and Gad continued it. 1*
Chron. 29. 29.
which contain in them an History of 120 y^eres. The first beginning an
History of 80 years, of 40 under Eli, 1 Samuel 4. 18. and of 40 under Samuel and
Saul, Acts. 13. 21. and consists of 31 Chapters. The second Book is a History
of 40 years, even from the death of Saul to the end of David's Kingdom, and
consists of 24 Chapters. These two Books in the Original have two several
Titles: They are called the first and second of Kings by the Greeks and
Latins. They contain a large History of things done by Kings, the History of
Samuel being praeposed. The ordinary gloss says, he wrote a good part of the
first Book. Scriptor h^rum librorum quatuor Hebraeorum eruditissimis creditur
esse Jeremias. Sermonis forma non discrepat, Eum credibile est usum
commentariis illis Nathanis and Gadis Prophetarum, quorum mentio 1 Paral. 29.
29. Grotius.
The one is the first and second of Kings. the other the first and second of
Samuel. The former Title it has received as it stands in relation to the two
next Books, and in opposition to that of Judges; for as in that Story the
Regiment of Judges was described in one Book, so in this Story, of which these
two are but one part, the Regiment of Kings is described: this is the reason of
the first Title. The other likewise of the first and second of Samuel is given
unto it, 1. Because there is very frequent mention made of Samuel therein, he
being a principal subject of the first part thereof. 2. Because it continues
the narration so far, till the infallible truth of Samuels principal
Prophecy (which seemed to remain in great doubtfulnesse, at least when he
ended his days) was fully accomplished in establishing the Kingdom upon the
person and family of David the son of Jesse.

The best Expositors of both the Samuels, are Peter Martyr, Drusius; Willet
also has expounded them, but not so well as he has other Books of Scripture.

The tenth is the two Books of the Kings, in Hebrew Melachim, Because they
reckon the first and second of Samuel also among those of the Kings. Esdras and
Jeremiah are thought to be the authors of the Kings.
is Greek and Latin the third and fourth of the Kings, from the subject
matter of them, because they relate the Acts of the Kings of Israel and Judah.
This History was written by diverse Prophets; but who digested it into one
Volume is uncertain; many ascribe it unto Esdras. The first Book consists of
22 Chapters, and contains a History of 118 years. The second Book consists
of 25 Chapters, and contains a History of 320 years.

The best Expositors of both the Kings are Peter Martyr, and Gaspar Sanctius.

The eleventh Book is the two Books of Chronicles, which is called Dibrei
Hajamim, Munster rendered it, the books of Annals, Libri praeteritorum
appellantur ab Hieronymo* Ab E^dra scriptos hos duos libros constans semper
fuit apud Hebrae^s fama: qui bos libros vocant verba dierum: id est, excerpta
ex regum diurnis. Grotius.
verba dierum, because in them the deeds of the Kings of Israel are
particularly described. The Greeks and Latins divide it into two; with the
Greeks it is called liber (...) q. d. praetermissorum, because he summarily
explaines somethings either omitted, or not fully described in the Pentateuch,
the books of Joshua, Judges, Samuel, and the Kings. Of the Latins liber
Chronicorum, q. d. Chronologicum; which appellation Luther retains in the
Dutch version of the Bible. There is nothing certain of the author of these
Books, though Esdras be thought to be the author. The first Book consists of
29 Chapters, and contains a History of 2985 years, viz. from the creation of
the world even to the Kingdom of Solomon. The second consists of 32 Chapters,
and describes a History from the beginning of the Kingdom of Solomon, even to
the return out of the captivity of Babylon.

The best Expositor on both the Chronicles is Lavater.

Twelfthly, Ezra signifies an helper, Nehemiah a comforter.
the two Books of Ezra, they are counted for one Volume with the Hebrews; the
Greeks and Latins devide them into two Books, and assign the first to Ezra,
the second to Nehemiah.

Ezra was so called from the Author, which was a Scribe, most skild in the law
of God, as appears in the 7 Chap. 1, 6, and 11, verses.

The best Expositors of it are Junius and Wolphius. Nehemiah) It is called by
the Latins the second Book of Ezra, Nehemiah in English is a Comfort sent
from God, to comfort his people in those troublesome times.
because the History begun by Ezra is continued in it; but usually Nehemiah
because it was written by him, and also because it contains the re-edifying of
the City of Jerusalem, caused by Nehemiah. It consists of 13 Chapters, and
contains a Hi^tory of 55 years, viz. from the 20 year of Artaxerxes to the
Kingdom of the last Darius.

The best Expositors of it are Wolphius and Pilkinton.

The next Book is Esther, called in Hebrew the Volume of Esther. Nomen huic
libro est a potiore persona. Martinius.
Many of the Jews think this Book was written by Mordechai, which those
words in the 9 Chap. v. 20. and 23. seem to favor. LXX huic historiae somnium
quoddam Mardochaei praemittunt quod non est in Hebraeo. Grotius. Drusius
Animad. l. 2. c. 34.
Isidore says, Esdras is thought to have written Esther, but some say it was
composed after by another; Moses Camius says it was written by the men of the
great Synagogue. Philo Judaeus says, Joachim a Priest of the Hebrews, son
of the hight Priest, was the composer of it, and that he did it at the entreaty
of Mordecai the Jew. It consists of ten Chapters, and contains a History of
10, or (as others will) of 20 Martinius.
years, concerning the preservation of the Church of the Jews in Persia by
Hester.

Drusius, Serrarius and Merlin have done well on this Book.

3. Poetical.

Job, Psalms, Grotius reckons the Lamentations among the Poetical books.
Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, Canticles; to which some add the Lamentations. Those
parts of Scripture which set forth strongest affections, are composed in verse:
as those holy flames of Spiritual love between Christ and his Spouse in the
Canticles of Solomon. The triumphant joy of Deborah, after deliverance from
Sisera's Army: Mr. Caryll on Job 3. v. 2. p. 334.
of Moses and Miriam after the destruction of Pharaoh: the afflicting sorrows
of Hezekiah in his sickness; and the Lamentations of Jeremy for the captivity
of the Jews: The Book of Psalms is as it were a throng of all affections,
Love, joy, sorrow, fear, hope, anger, zeal, every passion acting a part, and
wound up in the highest st^^ines by the Spirit of God, breathing Poetical
eloquence i^to the heavenly Prophet. So the Book of I b, whose subject is
sorrow, has a composure answerable to the matter. Pa^lion has most scope in
Verse, and is freest when tied up in numbers.

Job) There is great varieiy of judgment about the Author and Penman of this
Book; Singula in eo verba plena sunt sensibus. H^eron.
some say it was one of the Prophets, but they know not who; some ascribe it to
Solomon, some to Elihu, Quis libri scriptor fuit incertum est, nec nisi
levissim^ conjecturis nititur, quiequid. de ea dici potest B^za vid Grotium.
many to Moses; Hugo Cardinal, Suidas, and Pineda conceive that Job himself
was the author of this book, and it is thus proved, because when any Book is
inscribed by the name of any person, and there appears no urgent reason,
wherefor it could not be written by him, such a person is to be thought the
author, and not the matter of the Book, as is manifest in the Book of Joshua
and those of the greater and lesser Prophets* Waltherus in Offiecina Biblica
and Ludov. de Tena Isag. ad totam Sac. Script. The Ap^stle, 1 Cor. 3. 19.
proves it to be of divine authority.
The Arabicall speeches with which it abounds, note that it was written by some
man living near Arabia, as Job did Neither does it hinder, that Job Chapter 1. v.
1^. A^te legem datomsto u^sse sa^^s inde videtur constare, quod vir ^b
justitiam atque pietatem incomparabil (...), victimas, fi iorum nomine, toties
obtulerit. Seldenus de jure naturali. Vide plura ibid. opud Clarissim^m,
Selderum de jure naturali and Gentium l. 2. c. 7 Est li^er iste Jobi omnium
Sacrorum librerum (...), ut qui n^n m^do Theologum, verum ettam Hebraeae,
Chaldai^aeque linguae, Poetices, Dialectices, Rhetorices, Astr^omiae, Physices,
denique been peritum interpretem requirat, Beza in epist, ad exposit. Merc.
speaks of himself in the third person, for Canonical writers are wont to
do this out of modesty, Number. 12. 3. John 21. 24.

It is conceived to be the first piece of Scripture that was written, if Moses
wrote it, it is probable that he wrote it before the deliverance of the people
of Israel out of Egypt, while he was in Midian. The maine and principal
subject of this book is contained in 34 Psalm 19. Many are the afflictions of
the righteous, but the Lord delivers him out of all. We may divide the Book
into three parts, and so it sets forth:

1. Jobs happy condition, both in regard of externals, and internals, in the
first five verses.

2. Jobs fall, his calamity, from that to the seventh verse of the 42 Chapter.

3. Jobs restitution, or restoring, from thence to the end.

Beza, Mercer, and Pineda, have well expounded it.

The Psalms are called in the Hebrew Sepher Tehillim, Liber Psalmorum
complectitur quicquid utile est in omnibus Scripturis: haec sacra poesis est
elegantissima Legis Prophetarumque Epitome sola brevitate and numero a reliquis
discrepans, cum commune promtuarium earum omnium est, quae nobis necessaria
sunt. Tremel and lun.
a book of divine praises, in Greek (...), so called from a Mu^call
instrument, which name the Latins have retained. It contains sacred Songs to
be fitted for every condition both of the Church and members. It is called in
the new Testament, the Book of Psalms, Luke 20. 42. and 24 44. Acts 1. 20. No
books in the old Testament are oftener cited in the new, then Esaias and the
Psalms; that 60 times, this 64.

They are in all 150, in Greek 151. Austin and Chrysostom ascribe them all to
David as the Author, so do Theophylact, Ludo vicus de Tena. Some think that
after the Captivity Esdras collected these Psalms, dispersed here and there,
into one Volume. There are ten Authors whose names are put in the Titles of the
Psalms, viz. David, Solomon, Moses, Asaph, Etham, Eman, Jeduthun, and the
three sons of Corah. Odae istae Davidis dicuntur, quod is multas veteres
collegerit, multas ipse Psallendi sciens, Opus omni laud majus, and universae
sapientiae divinae atque, humanae exiguum quidem, sed eo etiam nobilius, atque
admirabilius compendium: ea sermonis elegantia, numerorum and harmoniae
suavitate, sententiarum erudition^ and gravitate, ut nihil majus dici possit.
E^penius or at deling. Ebr. dignitate.
addiderit, aut per homines idoneos addi fecerit. Grotius.

The Hebrews divide the Psames into five Books or parts. The first Book has
the first 41 Psalms; the second 31, from 42 to 73; the third 17, from 73 to
90; the fourth 17, from 90 even to 107; the fifth 43, from the 107 to 150.

Vide Genebr. in Psalm. 1. v. a. 1. Tituli sunt Psalmoeum claves, the Titles are
Keys as it were of the Psalms, says Jerome.

The best Expositors on the Psalms are Musculus, Mollerus, Muis, Calvin.

The Scripture is the choicest book; the Psalms the choycest piece of
Scripture, and the 119 Psalm the choicest part of the Psalms. Among 176
verses in that Psalm there are scarce four or five at most wherein there is
not some commendation of the word.

Proverbs) The book of Proverbs is compared to a great heap of Gold rings,
rich and orient severally, and every one shining with a distinst Mr. Bolton on
Prove. 18 14. Sententiae, verba, sive dicta graviter and paueis concinnata, quae
in omnium anim^ haerere, and inore versari debent, denique speculum esse totius
vitae and administrationis nostrae. Junius. What special pretogatives this
Book has above the rest of Canonical Books, see M Cawdrey on Prove. 29. 8.
sense by it self: but other contexts of holy Writ, to Gold chains, so
interwoven and linked together; that they must be illightned and receive
mutual illustration one from another.

It consists of 31 Chapters; it was written by Saomon; says Austin, 17 Chapter of
his 20 book de oivitate Dei; and Josephus in the 8th Book and 2d Chapter of
his Jewish Antiquities; and it is proved, 1 Kings 432. though there indeed it
is said only, he spoke them, yet it is likely also he wrote them. Prove. 1. 1.
they are called the Proverbs of Solomon. It is a Treatise of Christian manners,
touching piety toward God, and justice toward our neighbors.

The best Expositors on it, are Mercer, Cartwright, Dod, Lavater. Graece
dieitur hic liber (...) nimirum Hebraeum (...) proprie comparationem
significat, and quia ex comparationibus curtatis plerumque fiebaut Proverbia,
inde coepit sumi in significatione (...). Grotius.

Ecclesiastes) in Hebrew Quod in eum librum collectae sunt omnes lcientiae: vet
quod sapientia Sal^nonis hic homines congreget ad ipsam audendiam. M^rtinius.
The Proverb were Salomons Ethics. Ecclesiastes his Physics. Canticles his
Met^physicks. Proverb^a Scripta sunt potissimum pro atate juvenil^,
Ecclesiastes pro virili, Conticum pro sen^li.
Coheleth, the feminine has respect either to wisdom or to the soul, the
nobler part.

The Author of this book was Solomon, who either at his Table, or in his
familiar conference propounded these doctrines to his Courtiers, as may be
collected out of 1 Kings 10. 8. Many of the Hebrews say, that this Book was
written by Solomon to testify his repentance of his ill led life.

It consists of twelve Chapters. The sum and scope of the whole Book is
explained in the last Chapter, viz that all things in the world are vain;
therefore that nothing is more profitable and necessary then to fear God and
keep his Commandments. The principal parts of it are two: The first
concerning the vanity of humane matters and studies in the world, the latter of
the stability and profit of godliness and the fear of God.

The best Expositors on it are Mercer, Cartwright, Mr Pemble, Granger.

Canticles are called in Hebrew Shirha Shirim, by the Latins Cantica Id est,
summum and praestantiss^mum vide Genesis 9. 25. Est autem haec generalis totius
libri inscriptio, libri argumentum scriptorem que expenens. Argumenium est
epithalamium excel n^issimum sive connubiale Canticum, quo Schel^^o decant^vit
sacram illam augustissimam, and bea^issimam desponsationem conjunctionemque,
Christi cum Ecclesia. Junius.
Cantieorum, The Song of Songs, that is, a most excellent Song, the Hebrews
having no Superlatives. Solomon was the Author of it, 1 Kings 4. 32. Many of
the Ancients refer it to the spiritual marriage between Christ and the Church,
or every faithful soul. It consists of eight Chapters, and perpetual
Dialogues.

The Jews had this Book in such reverence and account, that before thirty
years of age none would study it.

The best Expositors are Mercer, Brightman, Ainsworth, Dr Gouge.

This Book which treats of that Spiritual and Heavenly fellowship the
sanctified soul has with Christ, cannot be thoroughly understood in the true
life of it, but by those that are Sanctified.

4. Prophetical.

The Greater Prophets 4. Lesser Prophets 12. Esaias, Jeremy, Ezechiel, Daniel.
Hosea, Joel, Amos, Obadiah, Jonah, Micah, Nahum Habbakuk, Zephany Haggai,
Zachary Malachy.


Grotius orders them thus: Hosea, Joel, Amos, Obadiah Jona, Esaias, Micha, Nahum,
Habbacuc, Zephany, Daniel, Jeremy, Ezechiel, Haggai, Zachary, Malachy.

They are called Prophetical Books, because they were written by Prophets, by
Gods Commandment; Prophets were distinguished by the Temples, some were
Prophetae priores, those of the first Temple; other Posteriores, of the latter
Temple.

Esaias) Is placed first, not because he is more Ancient then all the rest; for
some say that Jonah Learned men conclude from 2 King. 13. 15. that Jonah
prophesied first of all the 16, Prophets. Doctor Hill in a Sermon on the Lord
of Hoasts.
and Amos were before him in time, others that Hosea was before him, for Isays
beginning was in the days of Vzziah. Now Hosea was in the days of Jerobeam,
and Jeroboam was before Vzziah. This Master Burrouhs says is one reason, why
though he intends to go over the whole prophetical Books, yet he rather
pitcheth upon Hosea first, because indeed he was the first Prophet, but Isay
Jeshagneia, quasi dicas, Salua Domini vel dei, quod prae caeteris plenus fit
vivificarum consolationum. Non tam Prophe^a dicendus fit, quam Evangelista.
Hieron. praesat in Isaiam. Quicquid de physicis, Ethicis, Logicis, and quioquid
de sanctarum scripturarum mysteriis potest humana lingua, and martalium Sensus
accipere, complexus est summaprae caeteris Prophetis venustate sermonis, and
urbanae dicti^nis elegantia. Hieronymus.
was rather set first for the Dignity of the Prophetical Oracles which he
explaines, and because his prophecy is longer then all the rest. He is
eloquent in his speech, being a Noble man therefore the translation can hardly
express his elegancie. He brings so many and such evident Testimonies of the
coming, incarnation, miracles, preaching, life, passion, death and resurrection
of Christ, that he seems rather to write a History of things past, then to
prophecy of things to come, and one calls him the fifth Evangelist. Hence
(says Senensis) our Lord Jesus Christ made choice of this among all the
Prophets, first of all to read publicly, and expound in the Synagogue of his
own Country; and in the new Testament, he is oftener cited, then all the rest of
the Prophets. He began to Prophecy in the year 3160 seven hundred years
before Christ was borne, Vzziah the King of Judah yet reigning, and came to the
last times of Hezekiah, Isay 1. 1. and 39. 3. therefore he was almost
contemporary with Hosea, Ames, and Micha, and finished the course of his life
under four Kings of Judath, viz. Vzziah, Jathan, Achaz, and Hezehiab; The
Hebrews say he was of the Blood Royal, and that he was sawed to death with a
wooden Saw by Manasseth, an Idolatrous King, after he taught 60 years. His
Prophecy consists of 66 Chapters.

The best Expositors of it are Calvin, Scultetus, Forerius, M^llerus.

Jeremie,) Lodov. de Tena. Jirmijah celsitudo, vel excel sus Domini, quo^
m^gnalia dei animo magno atque forti docuerit. Or Ramah lah, the reject of the
Lord, so he was in regard of his condition.
This Book was always esteemed as Canonical, and written by Jeremie. He
prophesied under Josiah, Jehoahaz, Joachim, and Zedekiah. His prophecy
consists of 52. Chapters.

He prophesied partly in the Land of Judea, and partly in the Land of Egypt. In
the Land of Judea he prophesied 41. years, and afterward 4. years in Egypt.
See Jackson on Jer. 7. 16. p. 4. 5.

The best expositors of it are Bullinger, Polanus. Lamentations; It is called
in Hebrew Echa, 1. quomodo, because it begins with this word; the Septuagint
translate it (...) idest, lamentationes vel fletus for the Subject or matter of
it. It contains sad and mourning complaints of the State of the Commonwealth
of Israel, into which it fell after the death of Josiah; it consists of five
Chapters. Jer. 14. ^ 7. and 31. 17.
Jeremie is thought to be Author of it.

The best expositors of it are P. Martyr, Vdall.

Ezechiel) Jechezkel fortitudo sive robur Dei-Stylus ejus nec satis disertus;
nec admodum rust^^^ est, sed ex utr^que temperatus Senensis.
signifies the strength of God, or one strengthened hy God. He prophesied at
the same time with Jeremy. Ezechiel in the City of Babylon; Jeremy at
Jerusalem. It consists of 48. Chapters.

The best expositors of it are Junius, Polanus, and Villalpandas

This Prophecy is full of Majesty, obscurity, and difficulty. Calvin spent his
last breath on this Prophet.

Daniel) Dei judicium, adcujus exactam cognitionem necessaria est multiplex
Chaldaeorum, Graecorum, and Latinorum historia. Hieronymus, Broughton on 1 Dan.
4 Danielem Hebraei Prophetis non adscribunt, non magis quam Davidem, non quod
non multa eximia praedixerint, sed quia vitae genus propheticum non
sectabantur, sed alter rex e^rat. alter satrapa. In Graeco codice pracedunt
Prophet^ minores, sequuntur majores, and in his Dan^el. Grotius.
He wrote his prophecy after the Captivity, Chap. 1. 21. and 10. 1. while the
visions are general, and not dangerous to the Jews, Daniel writes in the
Syriacke tongue general over the East, from Chap. 1. v. 4. to the 8. Chapter.

But when the oppressors are named, Medes and the Jews plainly described to be
the people, whom God defends, then in the 8. Chapter, and all after he
writes in Hebrew, and has a Commandment to keep close to the plain
exposition in Chapter 12. 4. Some reckon Daniel among the Prophets, but the
Jews place it among the Hagiographa. It consists of 12. Chapters, the six
first of which contain matters Historical, the six last Prophetical.

The best Expositors of it are Polanus, Junius, Willet, Broughton, Huit.

The Latins give the first place to the greater Prophets, the Greeks to the
lesser, because there are many among them, very Ancient. Gratius.

The 12. lesser Prophets are so called, because their writings are briefer then
the four first greater; the Hebrews have them all in one Book; the later
Prophets spoke more plainly, precisely, and distinctly, touching the coming of
the Messiah, then the former. Daneus, Gualter, Ribera, Tarnovius, and Drusius
have done best on all the small Prophets; Mercer, and Livelie have done well on
the five first of them. The Hebrews thus place them. Hosea, Amos, Micha, Joel,
Obadiah, Jonah, Nahum, Habakkuk, Zephanie, Haggai, Zecharie, Malachi.

Hosea) In the order of the 12. Prophets all give the chief place to Hosea, he
Hebrews make Joel the next to it, Amos the third Ob^di. the 4th Jonah the 5th
Michab the 6th Nahum the 7th Hab. the 8th Zeph. the 9th Hag. the 10th Zach. the
11th Mal. the 12th But the Septuag. Interpreters make Amos the next to Hoseah,
Michah, the third, Joel the fourth, Obadiah the fifth, Jonah the sixth, the
seventh Nahum, the eighth Habacuc, the ninth Zephany, the tenth, Hag. the
eleventh, Zach. the 12. Malachi, Drus. observe. S^c. 1. 5. c. 24.
Is the first among them, whose Prophecy although it consist of more Chapters
then Daniel, yet the other is more prolixe. Hosheang notes Salvator Savior,
he is therefore so called, because he published Salvation to the house of
Judah, and spoke of the Savior of the world, and was a Type of Christ our
Savior; He Prophesied before the Babylonish Captivity; in the time of King
Jeroboam, under four Kings of Judah, Vzziah, Iothan, Achaz, and Hezekiah, and
was contemporary (as some say) with Jonah* 2 King. 14. 26. Isay Is. 1. 1. Amos
1. 1. and Micha. 1. 1. all which prophesied destruction to the Kingdom of
Israel: It consists of 14 Chapters. The best Expositors of it are Zanchius,
Tremelius, Pareus, Rivet, and Livelie. Diu vixi Osee, and Prophetam egit, ^ut
volunt Hebraei, per annos 90 ita multos habuit Prophetas (...), ut Isaiam
Ioelem, Amosum, Abdiam, Iouam, Michaeam, ut notat Hieronymus. Joel, he
prophesied in the time of Hezeohia. it consists of three Chapters, which
contain partly exhortation to repentance; and partly comfort to the penitent.
Daneus, Pareus, Gnamosonus, because he is a vehement Prophet which denounces a
hard burden, that it, most grievous punishment to the people for their impiety.
Drusius, and Livelie are the best Expositors of it.

Amos) Of a Shepherd he was made a Prophet, 1 Chap. 1. v. and 7. 14. He was
contemporary to Isay, and Hosea. He prophesied to the Kingdom of Israel or the
ten Tribes, 1. 1. and 3. 1. and 4. 1. and 5. 1. He utters a few things
concerning the Kingdom of Judah, 2. 4. and 6. 1. It consists of nine Chapters,
Daneus, Pareus, Livelie, and Drusius are the best Interpreters of it; Doctor
Benfield has done well on two Chapters.

Obadiah Gnabadeiah servus dei, a Minister of God. Jeremie 49 Chapter and Ezekiel
25. took many things out of this prophecy.
) He was almost contemporary to Jeremy. It is but one Chapter. Doctor Rainolds
has well expounded this prophecy. The destruction of the Enemies of the
Church is handled in the 16. first verses, the Salvation thereof by the
Ministry of Pastors in the five last.

Jonah Columba, quomodo dictus videtur a mansuetudine and facilitate morum.
Jonas ordine quintus numeratur inter duodecim prophetas qui minores vocantur;
tempore veo illis omnibus prior and antiquior fuit. ld 2. Regum. 14. 25.
liquet, ex eo quod de pace and salute Israelitarum sub Jeroboamo fueuram
vaticin^tus est, antequam calamitosam eorum captivitatem denunciasset Oseas and
Amos, cum Esaia. Itaque temporis ratione eum primo loco collocari oportuit.
Livelius in Annorat. in Jon.
He prophesied in the time of Jeroboam, 2 King. 14. 25. Jerome proves by the
authority of the Hebrews that he was contemporary with Hosea and Amos. It
consists of four Chapters. Abbots, and King have both commented well in
English on this prophecy.

Micah) Humiliatus sic dictus Propheta ab insigni and miranda humilitate. He
prophesied in the times of Iotham, Achaz, and Hezechiah Kings of Judah, as
appears by the inscription, Chapter 1. v. 1. and was almost contemporary with
Isay, with whom he agrees in many things. He exceeds all the Prophets in this
one thing, that he determines the place of Christ's Birth 5. Chap. 2. v.

It consists of 7. Chapters. Daneus and Chythrae^s have done well on it.

Nahum Nomen Hebraeum Nacum significat and paenitentiae Doctorem and
consolatorem, quo utroque mu^ere is desu^stus est, illo erga Ninevitas hoc ^rga
ludaeos. walther^s in officira a Biblica.
) It is probable that he lived before the Babylonish captivity, and was
contemporary to Micha, but 90 years after Jonah. It consists of three
Chapters, which contain both a prediction of the destruction of the Assyrians,
Chapter 1. and also an Explication of the causes of it Chap. 2. and 3.

Daneus is the best Expositor of this Book: The Hebrews think that both Nahum,
and Hibacuc wrote in the times of Manasseth. Both the order in which these
books were Anciently placed, and the things themselves which are contained in
their writings do intimate as much. Grotius.

Habacue, Luctator.

It is probable that he lived about Jeremies time, or a little before. It
consists of three Chapters. Grineus and Daneus, have done well on him.

Zephanie Tsphaneiah, Secretarius vel Speculator Domini.
) He prophesied in the times of Josiah King of Judah, and was contemporary to
Jeremy. He prophesies especially of the overthrow of the Kingdom of Judah. It
consists of three Chapters. Daneus has done well on this prophecy.

Haggai He excites and earnestly exhor^s the people to the restoring of the
Temple.
) Chag signifies a Feast in Hebrew, his name signifies Festivus and laetus,
aut festum celebrans vel diligens, quod templi Hierosolymitani aedificationem
post Captivitatem maxim urserit.

He began to prophecy after the Babylonish captivity in the second year of
Darius, King of Persia, Esd. 5. 1. Hag. 1. 1. Grineus and Daneus have done well
on this.

Zachary Zechareiah memoria Domini, fortassis quia pe^ipsum Deus sui memoriam
populo suo refricare volaerit, and testarise ipsum quoque meminisse ejusdem,
aut quia and ipse Domino charus extitit, and quasi in recen^i memoria.
) He prophesied after the Babylonish captivity, and followed Haggai within two
months; he handles the same subject; it consists of 14. Chapters. His Book
is more large, and obscure then any of the 12. Prophets; Daneus has done well
on the whole and Master Pemble. on 9. Chapters.

Malachie) Nuncius seu Angelus meus Mal. 4. 4. 5. He was the last Prophet of
the old Testament. See Grotius of him. Tertull. calls him the limit and
land-marke of both Testaments, limes inter vetus and novum Testamentum. It
consists of four Chapters, Daneus, and Polanus, and Stock have commented well
on this Book.

So much concerning the several Books of the old Testament

CHAP. IV.
THe new Canon is that which the Christian Church has had written in Greek,
from the time of Christ and his Apostles, and it summarily contains the word
published by Christ, and his righteous acts.

The History of which is in the four Books of the Evangelists, the examples
in the Acts of the Apostles, the exposition in the 21. Epistles, and lastly the
prophecy in the Revelation.

All the Books of the new Testament, were written in Greek Lingua Graeca tunc
temporis in orb tertarum maxim erat communis, quam tamen ob Ebraismorum
mixturam eruditi Hellenisticam, quod ea Judaei Hellenistae uterentur vocare
amant Amama Antibarb. Bib. l. 1 C. 1. Qui dubitat slylum novi Testamenti esse
Hellenisticum, is Scepticum mihi videtur agere in Philologia sacra, ^.e.
dubitare de ea re quae notissima omnibus, qui stylum Lxx. Interpretum and
Evangelistarum ac Apostolorum vel per transennam aspexerunt, ac cum stylo pure
Graeco co^ulerunt Mayerus.
vide Salmasium de Hellenistica.
for diverse reasons.

First, because that tongue in the time of Chist and his Apostles was the most
excellent of all, among the Languages of the Gentiles.

Secondly, because it was then most Common, as Latin is now. Tullie shows
orat Walterus in officina Biblica. Graeca leguntur in ominibus fere gentibus,
Latina suis finibus exiguis save continentur.
pro Archia poeta, how far the Greek Tongue spread.

Thirdly, because in this tongue all the Philosophy, and Sciences of the
Gentiles were written. The Greek tongue by the writing of Philosophers,
Orators, Historians and Poets, was fraught with the best learning, which
Heathenisme afforded.

It came to pass by the singular providence of God, that this Testament was
written in one tongue only; for what Nation else would have yielded to
another, that the Scriptures in their tongue were authentic, and so the seeds
of debate might have been sown amonst them. All almost agree in this, Rivet
Isagog. ad Scrip. Sac. C. 8.
that all the Books of the new Testament were written in the Greek tongue; it
is only doubted concerning three of them, the Gospel of Matthew, Mark, and
the Epistle to the Hebrews, many affirm that the Gospel of Matthew, was
written by Matthew in Hebrew or rather in Syriacke, the Language used by
Hebrews in the time of Christ and his Apostles; that the Epi^^le to the
Hebrews was written in Hebrew, and Mark in Latin.

It is certain, that the Primitive Church from the first times, used the
Gospel of Matthew written in Greek Memorabilis est de lingua, qua evangelium
Matthaei ab ipso conscriptum est, controversia. quidam enim Hebraeam, alii
Gr^cam esse contendunt. Ac prior quidem sementia, si plurium auctorum c^nsensum
specten^, r^mas obtinet, sin vero rei veritatem, ^osterior ampl^ctenda, u^
examen de, monstrabi^. Gomarus de Evangelio Matthaei. Casetanus initio suorum
commentariorum (...) Evangelium Matibaei non fuisse scriptum Hebraice argumento
non impto ab interpretatione vocu^ Hebraicarum, ut capite primo Emanuel, quod
est si interpreteris, nobiscum Deus Matthew. C. 27. 46. non poterat. N. Hebraica
iditio ^ic interpretari.
and counted it authentical. If any one say that the Latin Edition of Mark,
in the vulgar is not a version, but the first Copy, he may easily be refuted
from the uniforme style in it with other Latin Gospels, and it will appear to
any Reader, that the Gospel of Mark, which the Roman Church uses, is later
then the Greek, and that the Latin was made from it. For the Epistle to the
Hebrews, though many among the Ancient, thought it was written in Hebrew, yet
all agree that the Greek Edition was in use thence from the first times of the
Church. Glassias says Matthew wrote his Gospel first in Greek, for his style
agrees with Mark. Writers acknowledge that there is an Ancient Hebrew Copy of
Matthew, but upon good ground deny that it is the original truth, for besides
that by; received Tradition, it is held otherwise, Matthew. 1. 23. and other such
like places do evince it; for why should he writing in Hebrew, interpret
Hebrew words, to them which understand that Language? Hieron. in quatuor
Evangelia, and Salmasius, hold that Matthew was written in Hebrew, Evangelium
Matthaei Hebraice ab auctore scriptum esse, nemo non veterum tradidit. Hebraeum
illud Syriacum esse, quod in usu tunc temporis in Judaea fuit, Hieronymus
docet, qui Evangelium Matthaei scriptum fuisse testatur Chaldaic^ Syroque
Sermon. Salmas. de Hellenistica. Erasmus, Cajetane, Calvin, Junius, Whitaker,
Gomarus, Causabone, Gerhard, deny that Matthew was written in Hebrew. Chamier
de Canone l. 12. c. 1. says we have the new Testament in Greek; for although
some contend that the Gospel of Matthew and the Epistle to the Hebrews was
written in Hebrew; yet (says he) it is very uncertain, and so propius falso.
I think (says Rivet In Exodus 24. v. 8.
) that the Epistle to the Hebrews was written in Greek, a tongue then most
common, and which was used by many Hebrews, which were called Hellenists.

That Mark Sixtus Senensis says Expr^sly that Mark wrote in Greek Bibl.
Sanct. l. 1.
should be written in Latin originally is improbable; many of the reasons
alleged to prove that Matthew was not written in Hebrew are of force here
also; the Jews at that time of the writing of the new Testament did speak
Syriacke Lingua Syriaca Servatori nostro, and Apostolis vernacula suit. de
dieuv^de Whitakeri controversiam primam de Scriptur^s quaestionis secundae
Capite quinto. Cum legimus in Actibus Apostolorum P^ulum allocu^um esse Judaeos
cap. ^1. 40. lingua Hebraea, intelligendum est de Hebraica lingua, quae tunc
inusu erat apud Judaeos, id est Syriaca. Nam and Dominus noster ea usus est, ut
apparet ex omibus locis Evangeliorum, in quibus aliquid prolocutus est lingua
vernacula, Salmasi^^ de Hellenistica ad quartam quaestionem.
and not Hebrew, which language is mixed consisting of Hebrew, and Chaldee;
therefore (says Whitaker) it is more probable that Matthew, and he which wrote
the Epistle to the Hebrews wrote in Greek, because the Greek tongue was not
unknown to the Jews, which were Hellenists Act. 6. 1. and other Apostles
wrote in Greek which wrote peculiarly to the Jews, as JAmes and Peter.
Matthaeum Hebraice scripsisse convenit inter antiquos. Citat Irenaeum,
Origenem, Athanasium, Epiphanium, Chrysostomum, Hieronymum, Vossius de genere
Christi dissertat. Scripsit Haebraea lingua quiae praecipue Judoeorum, quos
viva voce hactenus docuisset, haberet rationem. Id. ibid. vide Grotium in
libros Evangel. It was needful that the Gospel should be written by many.
First, for the certainty. Secondly, for the perfection of it.

Amongst all the Evangelists, there is a General agreement, and a special
difference; they all agree in the maine scope and Subject, Christ; they differ
in the special argument and order. All describe the life of Christ, some more
largely, some more briefly, some more loftily, some more plainly, yet because
all were inspired by the same Spirit, they all have equal authority. The
difference of Evangelists in some smaller matters proves their consent in the
greater to be the voice of truth; for had they conspired all together to have
deceived the world, they would in all things have more fully agreed.

The doctrine of the Covenant of grace is more plainly expounded; the will of
God, and way to salvation more plentifully set down in the new Testament, then
ever it was in the days of Moses or the Prophets; and in these books of the
new Testament all things are so established as to continue to the end, so that
we must not look for any new revelation.

All these Books we receive as Canonical, because they are divine for matter
and form, divinely inspired by God, sanctified and given to the Church for
their direction, written by the Apostles or Apostolical men, sweetly
consenting with other parts of holy Scripture, and with themselves; received
always by the greatest part of the Church of God. They were written after the
death of Christ, by the direction of the holy Ghost; the Apostles by lively
voice first preached, because it was needful that the doctrine of the Gospel
should by their preaching, as also by signs and wonders be confirmed against
the contradictions and cavils of the Jews and Gentiles, and allowed by the
assent of believers generally before it was committed to writing, that we might
be assured of the certainty of those things which were written.

These books are acknowledged Canonical both by us and the Papists; so that
touching this matter there is no controversy between us and them.

The Epistles Sunt sane in eo, quo nunc utimur, volumine libri aliquor non ab
initio pariter recepti, ut Petri altera, ea quae Jacobi est, and Judae, duae
sub nomine Johannis presbyteri, Apocalypsts and ad Hebraeos epistola: sed ita
tam^n ut a multis Ecclesiis s^^tagniti. Grotius, lib. 3. de verit. Relig.
Christ. p. 143. vide plura ibid. The Book of Esther and Canticles were doubted
of by some* Vide Bellarminum de verbo Dei. l. 1. c. 17, 18, 19.
doubted of by some for a while, were first, the Epistle to the Hebrews, the
Epistle of JAmes, the second Epistle of Peter, the second and third Epistles of
John, the Epistle of Jude, and the Revelation; of which I shall treat more
when I come to handle the books of the new Testament particularly.

The story of the woman taken in adultery has met with very much opposition.
John 8.
See Gregory's preface to his notes upon some passages of Scripture. Crojus
defends Vide Calvinum in loc. and Chamieri tomum primum, l. 12. c. 7.
the truth of it, Observat. in nov. Testam. c. 17. Vide Seldeni uxorem
Ebraicam, c. 11.

The inscriptions and titles prefixed before the Epistles are no part of holy
Scripture written by the Apostles, but added to the Epistles by some others.

The Subscriptions and Postscrips also of diverse books are false, Saepe
falsissimae sunt Epistolarum Paul^arum subscriptiones. Capellus.
counterfeit, and erroneous; not written by the Apostles, but added afterward
by the Scribes which copied out the Epistles.

The subscriptions Vide Scultetum and Bezam.
of the latter Epistle to Timothy, and also to Titus are supposititious; they
are neither found in the Syriacke nor in all Greek copies, Timothy is expressly
by the Apostle called an Evangelist, 2 Timothy 4. 5. therefore Titus having the
same charge in ^rete as he had in Ephesus, they were both Evangelists. Cartw.
on the Title of the Epistle to the Romans. See him also on the Title of the
first Epistle to Timothy.
nor yet in the vulgar Latin translation; these additions were made some 100
years after the Apostles.

The Canonical Books of the new Testament are either Historical, Doctrinall,
or Prophetical.

1. Historical, We call them Historical in which is contained an Historical
natration of things done: for although in them there be many things pertaining
to doctrine, yet the chiefest thread and scope of the speech contains a
narration of an History done, hence they are called Historical.
containing matters of fact, the history of

1. Christ exhibited in the four Evangelists or Gospels, as they are styled by
God himself, Mark 1. 1. Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John, so called because
they contain a message of joy and gladness. They all treat of one subject,
Christ Jesus incarnate; most true Historians, Luke 1. 2. John 21. 24.

2. His Apostles, in the Acts written by Luke, thirty years after Christ's
ascension, so termed of the principal subject of the History, though the acts
of others not Apostles, are there recorded.

Dogmaticall or Doctrinall, such as were written by the Apostles for the
instruction of the Church of God in faith and manners, commonly called
Epistles, and that by warrant of the Scriptures, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 27. 2 Pet. 3. 1.
16. because they were sent to them who had already received and professed the
Gospel of God. These are 21. written.

1. By Paul 1. To whole Churches, To the Romans, Corinthians, Galathians,
Ephesians, Philippians, Colossians, Thessalonians.

1. Gentiles, 2. Jews. To the Hebrews.
2. To particular persons, 1. Timothy. 2. Titus. 3. Philemon.

2. JAmes, one. 3. Peter, two. 4. John, three. 5. Jude, one.
3. Prophetical, wherein under certain resemblances, the state of the Church
of Christ till the end of the wolrd, from the time of John the Evangelist, is
most truly and wonderfully described, and receives its name Apoealyps of the
Argument.

Beza, Ex Lutheran^ satis commendari nequit Harmonia a Chemnitio ad stuporem
usque dexterrime caepta, a Lysero fideliter continuata, and a Gerhardo
dexteritate and fideluate pari consummata; ex Po^ificiis, Jansenius; ex
Calvinianis Calvinus, Waltheri officina Biblic.
Piscator, Calvin, Erasmus, have do^e well on all the new Testament. Of the
Papists Jansenius has done well on the harmony; of the Lutherans, Chemnitus
and Gerhard; of the Protestants, Calvin. Maldonate and de Dieu, Cameron
Scultetus and Grotius have done well likewise on the Evangelists.

Matthew and John were Apostle of the twelve; Mark and Luke Evangelists.
Apostles is a name of office or dignity. It notes one sent from another with
command; in special certain famous Ambassadors of Christ. The Evangelists
accompanied the Apostles in preaching the Gospel.

Matthew) There was never any in the Church which doubted of its authority.
Some say he wrote in Hebrew, but that is uncertain, (as has been already
declared.) He interprets the Hebrew name Emanuel, Chap. 1. 23. and those words
Chap. 27. v. 46. therefore it is likely he wrote not in Hebrew; for why should
one that writes in Hebrew interpret Hebrew words to such as understand Hebrew?
and how came this authentical Copy and Prototype to be lost? for it is not now
extant. How ever, the Greek edition is Authentical, because it came forth
when the Apostles were living, and was approved by them, which the Ancients
confirm. Of the time when Matthew wrote, Authors agree not; Eusebius In
Chronica: vide Seldenum de jure naturali, l. 7. c. 12. Lib. 2: c. 24.
says, that he wrote in the third year of Cajus Caesar; others say he wrote
after Claudius. He wrote his Gospel in the fifteenth year after Christ's
ascension, says Nicephorus; the 21, says Lib. 3. c. 1.
Irenaeus; in the eighth year, says Theophylact.

It Tertullian calls Matthew, fidelissimum Evangelii commentatorem. De serie
annorum, quibus scripti sunt libri novi Testamenti, satis est curiosum, animose
contendere. Tamen video apud veteres non esse unam candemque sententiaus.
Chamierus.
consists of 28 Chapters, in which the person of Christ, and his three Offices
of Prophet, Priest and King, are described.

The best Expositors on it are Hilary, Musculus, Paraeus, Calvin.

Mark) He was the Disciple of Peter, and wrote his Gospel from him, in the
fourth year of Claudius Caesar, say some. He wrote not in Latin (as
Bellarmine says) but in Greek. Concerning the Archetypall Language in which
the Gospels of Mark and Luke were written, see Mr Seldom in Eutichii. orig.

It consists of 16 Chapters, in which Christ's threefold Office is also
explained.

The best Expositors on it are Calvin, Beza, Piscator, Maldonate, Jansenius.

Luke) He was for Country, of Antioch; for profession, a Physician; there is
mention made of him, Col. 4. 14. 2 Timothy 4. 11. Philem. 24. He was companion to
Paul the Apostle in his travels, and in prison. He only makes a Preface before
his Gospel, that he may briefly show the cause which induced him to write.

The best Expositors on it are Calvin, Beza, Piscator, Maldonate, Jansenius.

John) In Hebrew signifies the grace of God; Vide Sixti Senensis Bibliothecam
sanctam. Waltherns in ^ffic in a Biblica.
he soareth higher then the other Evangelists to our Saviors Divinity; and
therefore (as Nazianzen among the Fathers) he is called the Divine, by an
Excellency, because he has so graphically and gravely described the divinity
of the Son, and has written also of things most divine and Theological.
John in his Epistles was an Apostle, in his Apocalypse a Prophet, in his
Gospel an Evangelist.
He has the Eagle for his Ensign assigned him by the Ancients. He was called
Presbyter, by reason of his age, being the longest liver of all the Apostles.
He wrote the last of all when he returned from the Isle Patmos; therefore there
is something more in every Chapter of John then any other of the Evangelists.
He alone describes the admirable Sermon which our Savior made at his last
Supper, In his Gospel he writes more expressly then the rest, of the Deity of
Christ, and in the Revelation of the coming of Antichrist.
and his Prayer.

It consists of 21 Chapters, in which the person of Christ, consisting of the
Divine and humane nature, is described.

In his Gospel is described: first, Christ's person; in the first Chapter. 2.
His Office; in the second Chapter, to the twelfth. 3. His death, from the
twelfth to the end.

The best Expositors on him are Calvin, Beza, Piscator, Rollock, Tarnovius,
Musculus.

Acts Acta Apostostolorum sunt Chronica quaedam primae Ecclesiae in novo
Testamento. Sic dicuntur, quia res primis Ecclesi^ Christianae temporibus
maxim ab Apostolis gestas deseribunt. Martinius in memoriali Biblico.
) Luke in the proem of it makes mention of the Gospel written by him, that he
might profess himself to be the Author of both. It consists of 28 Chapters.
Luke calls his History, the Acts of the Apostles, though it be specially of
their sufferings; because even their passions were actions, they enlarged the
Kingdom of Christ by their sufferings.

The best Expositors on it are Brentius, de Deiu, Calvin.

The 13 Epistles of Paul: one to the Romans, two to the Corinthians, one to the
Galathians, one to the Ephesians, one to the Philippians, one to the
Colossians, two to the Thessalonians, two to Timothy, one to Titus, and one to
Philemon, the Primitive Church unanimously received into the Canon, and never
doubted being of their Apostolical. They have their name Epistles, a fornia
Epistolari qua conscriptae sunt.

A Lapide, Estius, Grotius and Vorstius, have done well on all the Epistles, In
St. Paul's Epistles this order is kept: those Epistles are set first, which were
written to whole Churches, and then those which were written to particular
persons. In both these sorts the comp^ler of them seems manifestly to have
had respect of setting the Epistles in order, according to their length.
Imprimis Estius ex Pontificiis, says V^etius.

The Epistles are for the most part written in this order: they have

1. An Inscription: wherein is the name of the writer, and of them to whom he
writes, and his wish.

2. The matters of the Epistle, which are sometimes merely religious,
concerning certain Articles of faith, or piety of life, or about the use of
things indifferent; or else familiar things, witnessing their mutual good will.

3. The conclusion: in which are exhortations, salutations, wishes, or other
familiar matters.

There are 21 Epistles; 14 written by Paul, and seven more written by Peter,
John, JAmes, and Jude.

Concerning the time and place in which the several Epistles were written, it
is not easy to determine. I will premise something about the order of the
Epistles, before I speak of them particularly.

Some of Paul's Epistles were written before his imprisonment; some in his
bonds, both former and latter. Before his imprisonment, Cartw.
the first of all that was written, were both the Epistles to Thessalonians;
Ordo Epistolarum Paulinarum respectu scriptio (...) alius est, q^am respectu
position^s in Bibliis: Waltherus in officina Biblic^.
they were written from Corinth the 8th or 9th year of Claudius.

Titus was written by Paul in those two years that he stayed at Ephesus.

Galatians) At the end of the two years that Paul was at Ephesus, the Epistle
to the Galathians seems to be written, 1 Cor. 16. 2. by which words the
Apostle seems to intimate, Lud^vicus Capellus historia Apostolica illustrata.
that this Epistle to the Galathians was written before that to the Corinthians.

Corinthians) Paul living two years at Ephesus, in the 11th and 12th year of
Claudius, the Corinthians wrote to him, 1 Cor 7. 1, and that by Stephanus, and
Fortunatus, which they sent to him (Chapter 16, 17.) by whom Paul seems to have
written back the first Epistle to the Corinthians, Chap. 16. v. 15, and 18.
for in that he exceedingly commends them of Corinth. It was not written from
Philippi, (as the Greek superscription has it) but from Ephesus, as the
Arabicke interpreter has it; as is manifest, Chap. 16. v. 8.

The second Epi^^ile to the Corinthians, and the first of Tim^thy strive for
priority, and sub judice lis est. Both of them were written a little after Paul
departed from Ephesus, and while he traveled to Macedonia, but it is not
manifest which was the first.

First Epistle to Timothy) Some think that this Epistle was written by Paul in
his bonds, Capellus ibid.
but not rightly; for he makes no mention of his bonds in it. It is probable
that it was written from Athens, as it is in the Arabicke subscription, when he
came from Macedonia to Greece; and so it was written after the first Epistle to
the Corinthians.

Romans) The Epistle to the Romans was written at Corinth, when Paul having
spent three months in Greece, Acts 20, 2.
sailed to Jerusalem, that there he might gather the collections of the
Churches of Achaia, Asia, and Macedonia. This is manifest from Romans 15. 2, 4.

These are the Epistles which seem to be written by Paul out of imprisonment;
Capellus ubi. supra.
the other were written in his bonds. Paul's bonds were twofold; former, and
latter. One only, viz. the latter to Timothy seems to be written in the latter
bonds of Paul, a little before his Martyrdom; the others were written in his
former bonds.

Epistle to the Philippians.) This seems to be the first of them all, which
Paul wrote in his bonds. When Paul was captive at Rome, the Philippians being
careful for him, sent Epaphroditus thither, who visited Paul in his bonds, and
ministered to him necessary helps for the preserving of his life, as appears
by the 2d chapter and 25 verse of that Epistle, and the 4th chapter, 10. and
18. verses. Paul sent him back again to the Philippians, and commends him to
them, Chap. 11. 28. That the Epistle was written in his bonds, is manifest from
the first Chap. v. 7, 13, 14. and from Rome, not Jerusalem, Chap. 4. verse. 22.

The Epistles to the Colossians, Ephesians, Philippians, and Philemon, were at
the same time written from Rome, and sent by the same, viz. Tychicus and
Onesimus. First, that the Epistle to the Colossians was written by Paul in his
bonds, it is manifest from Chap. 4. v. 3, and 18. but it was sent by Tychicus
and Onesimus, Chap. 4. v. 7, 8, 9.

That to Philemon was written at the same time with that to the Colossians,
Capelli historia Apostolica illustrata.
since he salutes Philemon in their name in whose he saluted the Colossians,
viz. in the name of Epaphras, Aristarchus, Mark, Luke, Demas, as is manifest
by comparihg the fourth Chapter of the Epistle to the Colossians, v. 10, 12,
14. with the 22 and 24. of the Epistle to Philemon. For this and other reasons
Capellus supposes they were both written at the same time.

That the Epistle to the Ephesians was written also at the same time, it may be
thus confirmed: 1. Because it was written by Paul in his bonds, viz. from Rome,
as is manifest Chap. 3. verse. 1. and 4. 1. 2. It was sent by Tychicus, Chap. 6.
21, 22. by which also that to the Colossians was sent. That these three
Epistles were written also by Paul in his former not latter bonds, it is hence
manifest, because Phil. 1. 25. and 26. and 2. 24. also in the 22 verse of
Philemon, Paul shows that he had a most certain hope, that he should be
freed shortly.

The Epistle to the Hebrews was written by Paul from Rome, toward the end of
his former bonds. He expressly mentions his bonds, Chap. 10. 34. and shows
that he hopes shortly to be set free, Chap. 13. v. 19.

The latter Epistle to Timothy was the last of all Paul's Epistles, written by
him in his latter bonds, of which he writes Chap. 1. 8. and 2. 9. and from
Rome, Chap. 1. v. 17. a little before his martyrdom, which he seems to
intimate Chap. 4. v. 6, 7, 8.

Thus having by the ^helpe of Capellus something cleared the order of Paul's
Epistles for the time of their writing, I shall speak of them now according to
the method wherein they are commonly disposed in our Bibles.

Romans) That Epistle is the first, not in time of writing, but in dignity,
because of the majesty of the things it handles, Justification and
Predestination. It is rightly called Clavis Theologiae, or the epitome of
Christian religion. It consists of 16 Chapters.

The best Expositors of it are Dr Selater on the first three chapters, and
Pareus with Peter Martyr and P^r on the whole Voetius says, Willetus est
instar omnium.

First to the Corinthians.) The City of Corinth was a famous Metropolis in
Achaia, notable for wisdom; one of the seven wise men is celebrated for a
Corinthian. Tully calls it Lumen Graeciae.
How much authority the Epistle to the Romans has in establishing
controversies of faith. So much the first to the Corinths has in establishing
Ecclesiastical Discipline; therefore Antiquity has placed it next the other.
It consists likewise of 16 Chapters.

The best Expositors of it are Pareus, Peter Martyr, Morton, Dr Sclater.

The second to the Corinthians It was famous also for riches and merchandise;
and for pride, luxury, lust: whence the Proverb, Non cuivis homini conting it
^dire Corinthum. L^is there asking a great sum of money of Demosthenes for a
nights lodging with her, he answered, (...) tanti ^oenitere.
) consists of 13 Chapters.

The best Expositors of it are Museulus and Dr S^later.

Galathians) St Jerome takes the argument of the Epistle to the Galathians, to
be the same with the argument of the Epistle to the Romans; wherein the Apostle
proves, that by the works of the Law, whether ceremonial or moral, no flesh
can be justified before God; using the same words in both, Romans 3. 20, 28. and
Galat. 2. 16. It consists of six Chapters.

The best Expositors of it are Mr Perkins and Par^^s.

Ephesians) Ephesus was a Mother-city in the lesser Asia, famous for idolatry,
and the Temple of Diana, as the Acts 1^. and 20. 16, 17.
Acts of the Apostles testify, so given to all riot that it banished Hermodore
because he was an honest sober man; yet here God (...) 5. Ephesians. 1^.
had his Church. It consists of six Chapters.

The best Expositor of it is Zanchi^^, Mr Baines has done well on the first
Chapter, and Dr Gouge on some part of it.

Philippians) The Apostle had planted a Church at Philippi, which was the
Metropolis of M^cedonia, Acts 16. 12. In this Epistle he commends their godly
study. It consists of four Chapters.

Zanchy, and Dr Airie have done well on this book.

Coloss^ans) Colosse was the chief City of Phrygia in lesser Asia; the Apostle
directs this Epistle to the inhabitants of that City. It consists of four
Chapters.

Bishop Davenant, Bifield, and Elton, have done best on this Book.

Thessalonians 2.) These were written to those which dwelt at Thessalonica; See
Phil. 4. 16.
it is a chief city in Macedonia, whither; how the Apostle came, we may see,
Acts 17. The first Epistle consists of five Chapters, the second of three.

Zanchius and Dr S^later have done well on both these Epistles; Jackson and
Bradshaw also on the second.

Timothy 2. A (...) honoro and (...) Deus, q. d. cultor Dei vel honorans Deum.
Sic (...) verbo (...) magni aestimo, in pretio habeo, honor^. Pasor.
) signifies the honor of God, or precious to God. He honored God, and was
precious to him. The first Epistle consists of six Chapters.

Barlow has done well on three of them, and Scultetus on the whole.

The second to Timothy) this consists of four Chapters.

Scultetus has done well on it, and Espensaeus on both those Epistles.

Titus) Titus, to whom this Epistle was written, was a faithful Minister, and
beloved friend of the Apostle, 2 Cor. 2. 13. and 7. 6. and 8. 23. Paul sent his
Epistle to him out of Macedonia, which is of the same Subject with the first to
Timothy. It consists of three Chapters.

Scultetus, Espencaeus and Dr Tailor have done best on this book.

Philemon Plena roboris and lacertorum est tota epistola, and singulis ejus
verbis ^irifiea qu^dam argumentandi vis latet recondita. Scultetus.
) he was the minister of the Church at Colosse V. 17. it is but one Chapter.

Scultetus and Dike have well interpreted it.

Hebrews) The Epistle to the Hebrews was rejected by some Heretics, as
Marcion and Arius; it is now received as Canonical, because it was inspired of
God, does in all things fully agree with all other parts of Prophetical and
Apostolical writings, and was received of the greatest part of the ancient
Church, though upon weak and slender grounds the Latin church for a time did
not receive the same.

Hierom in Catalogo scriptorum Ecclesiasticorum, after he has recited all the
Epistles of Paul, at length he comes to this Epistle; Duplex dubitatio de hac
Epistola suit, un^ de auctere, altera de authoritate ejus. Bellarm. l. 1. de
verbo Deit c. 17.
but the Epistle to the Hebrews (says he) is not thought to be his, for the
difference of the style and speech, but either written by Barnabas, as
Tertullian holds, or Luke the Evangelist, or Clement. Some ascribe it to
Tertullian, says Sixtus Senensis.

The diversity of the style and inscription of this epistle, and manner of
reasoning makes some doubt of the writer thereof; and also something in the
epistle shows that it was written not by Paul, Vide Drusium al titulum ad
Hebraeos.
as in the beginning of the second chapter, verse. 3. The doctrine of salvation
is confirmed to us by them which heard it, De fide est, Epistolam ad Hobraeos
esse Scripturam Canonicam. Cornel. a Lap.
which seems to agree with the profession of Luke in the beginning of his
Gospel; whereas St Paul denies Gal. 1. 12. that he received it of man. An
ancient Greek copy (whereof (...) speaks) leaves out the name of Paul in the
Title, Dr. Fulke against Martin. Multo facilius dicere, quis isti^s Epistolae
non sit author, quam quis sit author. Cameron, tomo tertio praelect, in Epist.
ad Heb. ubi multis rationibus probare conatur Paulum non suisse illius autorem.
and also diverse printed Books. Augustine speaks often of this epistle, as if
it were of doubtful authority, as you may see in his Euchirid. lib. 1. c. 8.
and l. 10. de civitate Dei, cap. 5. Beza, Hemingius, Aretius, leave it in
medio. Calvin and Marlorat deny that it was Paul's.

The reasons (says Cartwright in his confutation of the Rhemists) moving us to
esteem it none of Paul's, are first, that his name is not prefixed, as in all
the epistles undoubtedly known to be his. Another reason is, that this writer
confesses that he received the doctrine of the Gospel, not of Christ
himself, but of those which heard it of Christ, Heb. 2. 3. whereas Paul
received his doctrine immediately from Christ, and heard it himself of Christ,
and not of them that heard it from him.

To the first objection by Fulke it is easily answered, the diversity of style
does not prove that Paul was not the author of this epistle; for as men have
written diverse things in diverse styles in respect of matter and persons to whom
they wrote; as Tully his offices, orations, and epistles; so the Spirit of God
could and might inspire one and the same man to pen in a different manner. 2.
The other argument also against it being Paul's, because his name is not
prefixed, has but little force in it. 1. If it be not Paul's because his name
is not prefixed, then it is nones because no man's name is prefixed; so Jerome,
and from him Beza and Bellarmine both thus answer. 2. The Author of this
epistle did con^eale his name, that thereby he might not offend the weak Jews
to whom he wrote, with whom he knew his name was hateful. 3. Beza says, he
found Paul's name (...) suum invisum Hebraeit esse, (...) ad fidem jam
conversis, (...) quod ipse prae (...) legem ^^terem esse (...) cujus legis illi
(...) Dei. c. 17. Vide Bezam in (...) illum, Epistol^ (...) Apostoli ad Hebre^.
added to this epistle in all ancient Greek copies, one excepted. Other books
have no name prefixed, as the first epistle of John has not his name prefixed,
and yet certainly believed to be his.

For the last Objection, Beza answers that he reckons himself among the
hearers of the Apostles, to avoid the envy of Apostleship, see 1 Pet. 4. 3.

All the Grecians, and many of the more famous of the Ancient Latins, as
Austin, Ambrose, Gregory, and many modern writers of note, as Beza,
Bellarmine, Gerhard, Cap^llus, Martinius, Walter, Cornelius a Lapide hold it
was written by Paul, and for diverse reasons. 1. The Author of this Epistle
commends a certain famous Disciple Timothy, Chap. 13. v. 23. but none had such
a one but Paul. 2. He remembers his bonds, Chap. 10. v. 34. which is a usual
thing with Paul, Phil. 1. 7. Col. 4. 18. 2 Timothy 2. 9. Philem. v. 9. and 10. 3.
He has many of the same axomes with Paul; compare Heb. 1. ^. and 3. with Col.
1. 14, 15, 16, 17. Heb. 5. 12, and 13. with 1 Cor. 3. 1, and 2. and diverse
other places. Paul says, by that sign his Epistles may be known and
distinguished from others, viz. that subscription, the grace of our Lord, 2
These. 3. 18. which clause is found in the end of this Epistle, (...). sunt in
h^c epistola quae alibi apud Paulum to^idem pene verbis scribuntur. Beza.
Chap. 13. 4. Paul's zeal for the salvation of the Hebrews, Romans 9. 3. makes it
propable that he would write unto them. Some think it may be gathered from
that place, 2 Pet. 3. 15. Beza having alleged four reasons urged by some why
this Epistle (...) not be written by Paul* says, Other books have no name
praefixed, and yet they are certainly believed to be Canonical, as Job,
Judges, Ruth, Chronicles.
Opponitur his omnibus que scribuntur, 2 Pet. 3. 15. quae certe videntur hanc
Epistolam velut intento digito m^nstrare.

Beza concludes the matter very modestly: let the judgments of men, says he,
be free; so we all agree in that, that this Epistle was truly dictated by the
holy Ghost, and preserved as a most precious treasure in the Church. Vide
W^ltberi officinam Biblicam, and Whitakeri controvers. 1. quest. jam de Script.
cap. 16.

Some think (as I have touched it before) that this Epistle was originally
written in Epistola Pauli ad Hebraeos Hebraico, id est, s^rmone tunc in Syria
usitato scripta suit, and ab alio versa, quem quidam Clementem fuisse volunt,
alii al^um. Salm^sius de Helenistica.
Hebrew, but the style and phrase of this Epistle do Graecam redolere
eloquentiam, non Hebrae^m. 2. If it was written in Hebrew, the Hebraismes would
appear in the Greek version, which yet are rarer here then in other Epistles.
3. The Scriptures of the old Testament are cited in it, not according to the
Hebrew fountains, but according to the version of the Seventy. 4. The Apostle
Chapter 7. Waltherus in officina Biblica and Bellarminus ubi supra.
interprets the Hebrew name Melchisedech, King of righteousness; and Salem,
peace; which he would not have done if he had written in Hebrew. Junius Jun.
Parallel. l. 3. c. 9. p. 466. Vile Waltheri officinam Biblicam.
in his paralels* holds it to be Paul's, and written in Greek.

Ribera and Ludovieus a Te^a, two Papists, have written on this Epistle. Pareus
and Dixon have done best on the whole Book, and Mr Dearing on six Chapters.
V^etius much commends G^marus. There is a good English Expositor on this
Epistle lately put forth, called, the Expiation of a Sinner.

Those seven Epistles written by JAmes, Peter, John and Jude, have unfit Titles
prefixed before them, in that they are called sometime Canonical, specially of
the Latin Church; and sometime Catholic Epistolae a^^orum Apostolorum
Catholic^ dicumtur, quia generatim ad omnes fideles and in omnes quasi mundi
parts missae sunt, and ista inscriptione ^ (...) Rivetus in Catholic^
Orthodo^^.
, chiefly of the Greek Church: neither of which were given them by any
Apostle, or Apostolic writer. Yet though this title Catholic cannot be
defended, it may be excused and tolerated as a Title of distinction, to
distinguish them from the other Epistles. Also they may have this Title
Canonical set before them, (as some books of the old Testament were termed
Hagiographa by the Jews) not because they were of greater authority then other
holy writings, but to show that they ought to be esteemed of, and embraced as
Divine, howsoever in former times they were unjustly suspected. Vide Bezam.

The second inscription of Catholic is as unsit as the former; therefore the
Rhemists unjustly blame us for leaving out that Title in our English Bibles;
for it is well known that that Title is not given by the Holy Ghost, but by
the Scholiast who took it from Eusebius, General is a mere English term, and
of no doubtful signi^ication; Catholic is both Greek, and (by their saying)
of double, and therefore doubtful signification.

The Syriack interpter has this inscription of these Epistles, (as Tremellius
shows) Tres Epistolae trium Apostolorum, ante quorum oculos Dominus noster se
transformavit, id est, Jacobi, Petri, and Johannis. For the Syrians do not
esteem the second of Peter, nor the second and third of John nor the Epistle of
Jude Canonical.

The Apostles JAmes, Peter, Hieron. Epist. Fam.
John and Jude have published seven Epistles as mystical as succinct; both
short and long; short in words, long in sense and meaning.

JAmes) For the difference which seems to be between Jam. 2. 21 22. and Romans
4. 2. and 3. 28. most likely this book was doubted of in ancient times, as
Eusebius and Jerome witness. But yet then also publicly allowed in many
Churches, and ever since received in all, M. Pemble on Justification, Sect 6.
c. 1.
out of which for the same cause Luther and other of his followers since him,
would again reject it. Erasmus assents to Luther, and Mus^ulus agrees with
them both in his Comment upon the fourth of the Romans; both they of the
Romish, and we of the Reformed Church This may be see^ in the harmony of
confessions.
with one consent admit this Epistle for Canonical. Vide Polani Syntagma.

I light upon an old Dutch Testament of Luthers Translation (says W^itaker
against Raynolds) with his preface, wherein he writes that JAmes his Epistle
is not so worthy as are the Epistles of St Peter and Paul, but in respect of
them a strawen Epistle; his censure I mislike, and himself (I think)
afterward, seeing these words in a latter edition are left out.

It is nowhere found in Luthers works, that he called the Epistle of JAmes,
inanem and stramineam. Edmund Campian was convicted of falsehood about that in
England, where when he had objected that, he could find no such thing at any
time in the Books he Riveti Jesuit a vapulans, c. 9.
produced. Some in the preface of the German edition say that Luther wrote,
that it cannot contend in dignity with the Epistles of Paul and Peter, but is
strawie, if it be compared with them. Which judgment of Luther we approve not
of, and it is hence manifest that it was disliked by him, because these words
are found in no other edition from the year 1526. Luthers disciples now hold
that it is Canonical and Apostolical; Waltherus in Officina Biblica.
and they answer the arguments of those that are opposite thereto, as we may
see in the exposition of that Article concerning the Scripture, by that most
learned and diligent man John Gerard. Sect. 281. Waltherus also in o^ficina
Biblica holds it Canonical.
Gravitatem ac zelum Apostolicum per omnia prae se fert. says Walther.

We may reply against the Papists, who often object this opinion of Luthers,
that Cajetan their Cardinal Rainoldus de lib. Apoc. tomo primo praelect.
quarta.
denies the Epistle to the Hebrews to be Canonical; yea (which is far worse)
he affirms that the Author thereof has erred, not only in words, but in
the sense and meaning of the Scriptures. Vide etivm praelectionem tertiam.
Nay, Cajetan (says Whitaker) rejected JAmes, second of Peter, and second and
third of John, and Jude.

It consists of five Chapters. Pareus and Laurentius have done best on it.

First of Peter) This Epistle is called in the Title Catholicall, because it is
not written to any one person, as that of Paul to Timothy, Titus, and Philemon;
nor to any one particular Church, as those of Paul to the Romans, Corint^s: but
to the converted of the Jews dispersed here and there, as appears by the
inscription. It consists of five Chapters.

Gerhard, Laurentius, Gomarus, and Dr Ames have expounded both these Epistles.
Bifield has interpreted part of the first Epistle.

Second of Peter) Some in the Primitive Church doubted of its As Eusebius and
Jerome witness.
authority, and the Syriack has it not; but the Church generally allowed it,
and many reasons may persuade that it is Apostolical, and was written by
Peter. 1. Because the Author of It expressly calls himself Simon Peter, the
Apostle of Jesus Christ. Chapter 1. v. 1^, 13.
He wrote it in his old age to confirm them in the doctrine which before he
had taught them. 2. Its inscription is to the same Jews (that the former) viz.
dispersed by the Roman Empire, and converted to Christ, whose Apostle Peter
was. 3. It shows an Apostolical spirit. 4. Its style and composition is
agreeable to the former Epistle. 5. The Author of this Epistle witnesses,
that he was a Spectator of the transfiguration in the mount; Chap. 1. v. 16.
now Peter together with JAmes and John were present with Christ. 6. He makes
mention of the Former Epistle, Chap. 3. v. 1. 7. He calls Paul his dear
brother, Chap. 3. v. 15. It consists of three Chapters.

First of John consists of five Chapters.

Second and third of John.) They were also in times past doubted of by some,
Eusebius l. 2, 24. and 3. 21.
as Erasmus, Cajetan: but there are good reasons to prove them Canonical. 1.
Their Author calls himself an Elder; so does Peter, 1 Pet. 5. 1. by which name
an Ecclesiastical office is often signified, Zanchy has done well on the
first Epistle, Calvin on all three.
but here age rather; now it is manifest that John came to a greater age then
the rest of the Apostles. 2. The salutation is plainly Apostolical, Grace
mercy and peace. 3. In sentences and words they agree with the first Epistle.
4. The Fathers allege them for John's, and reckon them among the Canonical
books. Irenaeus, Tertullian, Athanasius.


Each of these Epistles is but a Chapter.

Jude) This Epistle also in times past was questioned by some; Vide Eusebius. l.
2. c. 23. l. 3. c. 22. Erasm. in Anno^.
but that it is Apostolical, first the inscription shows; the Author expressly
calls him a servant of Christ, and brother of JAmes. 2. The matter, it agrees
both for words and sentences with the second of Peter; of which it contains as
it were a brief sum and recapitulation. It is reckoned among the Canonical
books, and cited by Athanasius, Tertullian, Cyprian, Origin, Jerome, under
Judes name. John neither in his Epistles nor Revelation calls himself an
Apostle.
That the writer of the Epistle does not call himself an Apostle is of no
moment to infringe the authority thereof, for the judgment of the writer is
free in that case; that Title was specially used by Paul and Peter; JAmes and
John quit the same Title, yea Paul in his Epstles to the Philippians,
Thessalonians and Philemon, does not call himself an Apostle, and yet those
Epistles were never doubted of. It is but one Chapter. Willet and Mr Perkins
have done well upon it.

Revelation Vocatur iste liber Apocalypsis seu Revelationis, quia in eo
continentur ea quae Deus revelavit Joanni and Joannes Ecclesiae. Ludov. de Tena.
) It is called according to the Greek Apocalypse, and according to the Latin
Revelation; that is a discovery or manifestation of things which before were
hidden and secret, for the common good of the Church.

Eusebius l. 3. c. 17. says Domitian cast John the Evangelist into a furnace
of scalding Oil, but when he saw he came forth unhurt, he banished him into
the Isle Pathmos, where he writ this Revelation.

This book describes the state of the Church from the time of John the last
of the Apostles, Sextus Senensis idem fere habet Bibliothecae Sanctae l. 7.
Apocalypsis Johannis tot habet sacramenta quot verba.
until Christ's coming again; and especially the proceedings, pride, and fall
of Babylon, the great whore with all the Kingdoms of Antichrist. The holy
Ghost therefore foreseeing what labor Satan and his instruments would take to
weaken and impair the credit and authority of this above all other Books
(wherein he prevailed so far, Hieron. 2. epist. Fam. lib. 2. epist. 1.
as some true Churches called the truth and authority of it into question) has
backed it with a number of confirmations more then are in any other Book of
Scripture.

First, Nomen (...) test ^ Hieronymo soli Scripturae est proprium and apud
Ethuicos non usitatum, sonat revelationem earum rerum, quae prius, non quidem
Deo, nobis autem occultae and minus manifestae fuerunt.
the Author of it, is set in the forefront or face of it, the Revelation of
Jesus Christ, Chap. 1. verse. 1. who professes himself to be the first and the
last, verse. 11. so in the several Epistles to the Churchs in several styles
he challenges them to be his. Thus says he 1. that holds the seven stars
in his right hand. 2. He which is first and last, which was dead, and is alive.
3. Which has the sharp two edged Sword. 4. Which has eyes like a flame of
fire, and his feet like brass. 5. Which has the seven Spirits of God, and
the seven stars. 6. He who is holy and true, who has the key of David. 7. He
who is Amen, the faithful and true witness, the beginning of the creatures of
God.

Secondly, Peculiare est Johanni prae reliquis librorum N. T. Scriptoribus
Filium Dei vocare (...). conser. Joh. 1. 1. and 14. jam vero eandem
appellationem tribuit Filio Dei in hoc libro Apoc. 19. v. 13. Gerhardus
Waltherus.
the instrument or penman, his servant John the Evangelist, the Apostle, the
Divine, who for the farther and more full authority of it, repeateth his name
at least, thrice, saying, I John, Chap. 1. 9. and 21. 1, 2. and 22. 8. whereas
in the Gospel he never makes mention of his name; there he writes the history
of Christ, here he writes of himself, and the Revelations declared to him.

Thirdly, in the last Chapter are five testimonies heaped together, v. 5, 6, 7,
8. 1. Of the Angels. 2. Of God himself, the Lord of the holy Prophets. 3. Of
Jesus Christ, behold I come shortly. 4. Of John, I John heard and saw all these
things. 5. The protestation of Jesus Christ, verse. 18.

Fourthly, the matter of the Book does convince the authority thereof, seeing
everywhere the Divinity of a Prophetical spirit does appear; the words and
sentences of other Prophets are there set down; Vide Bezae Prolegomena in
Apocalypsin.
part of the Prophesies there delivered are in the sight of the world
accomplished, by which the truth and authority of the whole is undoubtedly
proved; there are extant many excellent testimonies of Christ and his Divinity,
and our redemption by Christ.

Fifthly, The most ancient Fathers, Greek and Latin ascribe this Book to
John the Apostle. Theophylact, Origin, Chys^stome, Tertullian, Hilary, Austin,
Ambrose, Irenaeus.

To deny then the truth of this book is contra solemn obloqui, to gainsay the
shining of the Sun it self.

The Chyliasts abuse many testimonies out of this Book, Non illud receptum est
quod ex verbis Apocal. c. 20. colligerunt Chiliastae. qui ab Ecclesi^ expl^si
sunt ut Haeretici, Sanctos nempe in terris cum Christo regnaturos anni^mille,
R^inold. de lib. Apoc. tomo 2.
but those places have been cleared long ago by the learned, as bearing
another sense. See Dr Raynolds conf. with Heart, Chap. 8. p. 406.

Calvin being demanded his opinion, what he thought of the Revelation, answered
ingenuously, Mr. Seldom of tithes, c. 1. and Bodin. Meth Hist. See Brought^n on
Apoc. p. 244. Apocalypsin Johannis Commentationibus in^actam se relinquere
sate^^^ Lutherus, quod dubi^ sit interpretationis and arcani sensus; in qua
e^si periculum sui multi hactenus feceri^s, nihil corti tamen in ^edium.
protulisse. Zepherus.
he knew not at all what so obscure a writer meant. Se penitus ignorare quid
velit tam obscurus scriptor.

Cajetan at the end of his Exposition of Jude confesses that he understands
not the literal sense of the Revelation, and therefore exponat (says he) cui
Deus concesserit.

It consists of 22 Chapters; Mr Perkins on the first three Chapters.
the best Expositors on it are Ribera, Brightman, Pareus, Cartwright, Dent,
Forbes, Mode, Simonds.

1. The Scriptures written by Moses and the Prophe^s sufficiently prove that
Christ is the Messiah that was to come; Consectaries from the Books of
Scripture.
the old Testament may convince the Jews (which deny the new Testament) of
this truth, John 5. 39. They, that is, those parts of Scripture written by
Moses and the Prophets; See Luke 1. 69, 70. Acts ^. 1^. and 10. 43.
there were no other Scriptures then written. The 53 Chapter of Esaias is a large
history of his sufferings. We have also another Book (or Testament) more
clearly witnessing of Christ; the Gospel is the unsearchable riches of Christ,
Ephesians. 3. 8.

So much may suffice to have spoken concerning the Divine Canon; the
Ecclesiastical and false Canon follow.

CHAP. V.
SOme Heretics utterly abolisht the Divine Canon, as the Swingfeldians and
Libertines who contemned all Scriptures; Totum vetus Testamentum rejiciebant
Manichaei, tanquam a Deo malo profectum. Du^s n. i^^i Deos (...) fingebant,
quoru^ un^s bonus, ma^^s alter esset. Whitakerus de Scripturis.
the Manichees, and Marcionites refused all the Books of the old Testament (as
the Jews do those of the new) as if they had proceeded from the Devil.

Some diminish this Canon, as the Sadduces who (as Whitaker and others hold)
rejected all the other Prophets but Moses; some enlarge it as the Papists, who
hold that diverse other Books called by us Aprcrypha (i. hidden) do belong to
the old Testament, and are of the same authority with the other before named;
and they add also their traditions and unwritten word, equalling it with the
Scripture; both these are accursed, Rev. 22. 18.

But against the first we thus argue: whatsoever Scripture, 1. is divinely
inspired, 2. Christ commands to search, 3. To which Christ and his Apostles
appeal and confirm their doctrine by it, that is Canonical and of equal
authority with the new Testament. But the holy Scripture of the old Testament
is divinely inspired, Stephen Acts 7. 42. cites a Book of the 12 lesser
Prophets, and so confirms the authority of them all, being in one volume. Luke
16. 19. Vide Whitakeri controver. 1. quaest. 3. cap. 3. page 210.
2 Timothy 3. 16. where he speaks even of the Books of the old Testament, as is
gathered both from the universal all writing, viz. holy, in the 15 verse; and
from the circumstance of time, because in the time of Timothies infancy little
or nothing of the new Testament was published. 2. Christ speaks not to the
Scribes and Pharisees, but to the people in general, to search it John 5. 39.
this famous elogium being added, that it gives testimony of him, and that we
may find eternal life in it. 3. Christ and his Apostles appeal to it, and
confirm their doctrine by it, Luke 24. 27. Romans 3. 21. Acts 10. 43. and 17.
11. and 20 43* and 26. 20. the new Testament gives testimony of the old, and
Peter, 2 Pet. 1. 19. of Paul's Epistles.

The Ecclesiastical Canon (which is also called the second Canon) follows,
to which these Books belong, Tobit, Judith, first and second of the Machabees,
Wisdom, Ecclesiasticus, Baruch, Additions to The history of Susanna Dan. 13.
and Bell, cap. 14. and the song of the three Children Dan. 3.
Daniel and Hester; for these neither contain truth perfectly in themselves;
nor are sanctified by God in the Church, that they may be a Canon of faith; and
although abusively from custom they were called Canonical, yet properly in
the Church they are distinguished from the Canonical by the name of
Apocryphal.

The false Canon is that which after the authority of the Apocrypha increased,
was constituted by humane opinion; for the Papists as well as we reject for
Apocryphal the third and fourth Book of Esdras, Of the Apocrypha or obscure
writings now extant in Greek.
the prayer of Manasses, the third and fourth of Machabees, as Thomas Aquinas,
Sixtus Senensis, Bellarmine, and so the Council of Trent confess, when they
omit these and reckon up the whole Canon.

The state therefore of the controversy betwixt us and the Papists is, The
Apocrypha Books are either purer, as Syrach, Wisdom, Baruch, the first book
of Machabees, and the prayer of Manasses: or more impure, as the rest, Toby;
Judith, the second of Machabees, the supplement of Hester and Daniel.
whether those seven whole books with the Appendices, be Sacred, Divine,
Canonical. We do not deny but many of these, especially Wisdom and
Ecclesiasticus are very good and profitable, and to be preferred before all
humane Tractates; but that they are properly and by an excellency Canonical,
and of infallible truth, out of which firm arguments may be drawn, that we
deny.

Those Books which the Jews of old and the reformed Churches now reckon for
truly Canonical in the old Testament, are received all even by our
adversaries for Canonical without any exception; 2. for the Canonical Books
of the new Testament there is no controversy between us, and so far we agree;
but in the old Testament whole Books are reckoned by them for Canonical which
we hold Apocryphal.

The reason why these Books at first were added to holy writ, S^e Mr.
Lightfoot on Luke 1. 17. p. 5. and 6. Acts ^. 1. and 9. 29. and 11. 20.
Solebant pueri praeparari and excoli (ad audiendas sacras Scripturas) libris
Sapientiae and Ecclesiastici, quemadmodum qui purpurum volunt^ prius lanam
inficiunt, ut inquit Cicero. Rainold. de lib. Apoc. tomo 1. praelect. 1^.
was this, the Jews in their later times, before and at the coming of Christ
were of two sorts; some properly and for distinction sake named Hebrews,
inhabiting Jerusalem and the holy Land; others were Hellenists, that is, the
Jews of the dispersion mingled with the Graecians. These had written sundry
books in Greek which they made use of, together with other parts of the old
Testament, which they had in Greek of the translation of the 70 when they now
understood not the Hebrew; but the Hebrews received only the 22 Books before
mentioned. Hence it came that the Jews delivered a double Canon of Scripture
to the Christian Church, the one pure, unquestioned and Divine, which is the
Hebrew Canon; the other in Greek adulterate, corrupted by the addition of
certain books written in those times when God raised up no more Prophets
among his people. Drus. praeterit. l. 5. Annotat. ad Act. Apost. c. 6. Jun.
Animad. in Bell. cont. 1. l. 1. c. 4. and l. 2. c. 15. sect. 21. Tertul. in
Apol. c. 19.

They are called Apocryphal (i. secret and hidden) not because the names of
the writers are unknown (by that reason Judges and Ruth should be Apocryphal)
but because they were not wont to be read Chamierus de Canone l. 4. c. 2*
Musculus, Waltherus.
openly in the Church of God as the Canonical books, but secretly and in
private by private persons, or because their authority was obscure and
doubtful with the Ancient.

These books our Church rejects, as not written by Divine inspiration for
these reasons.

All the Canonical books of the old Testament were written by the Prophets;
Because they were the Scriptures of the Prophets, Romans 16. 26. a Prophetical
speech. 2 Pet. 1. 19, 20. Luke 1. 70. and 16. 39. and 24. 27, 44, 45.
but none of these books were written by any of the Prophets, for

1. The last of the Prophets of the Jews was Malachy, Mal. 4. 4, 5. between
whom and John Baptist came no Prophet. Mark begins with the same words almost
with which Malachy ended; a good argument to prove that the new Testament is
next to the old. But these Books These books in question were never admitted
into the Canon of the Jews, they are not comprehended under Moses and the
Prophets, as Josephus (contra Ap. l. 1.) Hierome in prol^go Gal. Origin* (in
Psalm. 1.) Eplphanius (^^ pond. and men's) testify, as Sixtus Senensis and
Bellarm. confess.
were written by such who lived most of them after Malachy.

2. All the Prophets wrote in Hebrew, the language which the Jews understood;
but the Fathers affirm and Papists acknowledge that most of these books were
written in Greek; ergo, being not written by the Prophets they are not
Canonical. 2. All the books of the old Testament were committed to the Jews
and safely kept by them, Romans 3. 2. our Savior Christ which reproved the Jews
Eusebius. ^ist. l. 3. c. 10. Aug. Epist. 3. and 59.
for corrupting the sense of the Scripture, did yet never reprove them for
rejecting those books which were divinely inspired, which sacrilege he would
not have concealed; yea our Savior sends us unto the Scriptures, as they
received them, John. 5. 39. E^ras after the captivity is reported to have
gathered all the Books of holy Scripture, Eusebius. Eccles. hist. l. 5. c 8.
and safely to lay them up. If the Jews should have rejected or not received
any books being Canonical, Whitak. de Script. controv. 1. q. 1. c. 5, 6.
they had grievously erred, which the Papists themselves will not affirm. Yea
there should have been some Canonical Books which no Church received; for
besides the Church of the Jews at that time there was none in the world. The
Canonical Books of the old Testament were divided into Moses, Luke 24, 44.
the Prophets and Psalms; with which agrees the old distribution of the
Hebrews, into the Law, Prophets, and Hagiographa.

3, There are two ways to know a book to be Canonical; one by the testimony
of some Prophet or Apostle: the other by the certain testimony of them which
did live when the book was published, Aug. contr. Faustum. l. 33. c. 6.
who did witness that the book was written by some Prophet or Apostle. But
these books are known to be Canonical neither of these ways; they were
rejected by the Jews, Bellarm. de verb Dei, l. 1. c. 10. Josephus, Jerome,
Origin.
who lived in the times when they were written; our Savior Christ nor his
Apostles never commend these Books unto us as endited by the Spirit. They are
cited by Christ and his Apostles for the confirmation of their doctrine. All
the Canonical Books in general, John 5. 39. and 10. 35. Romans 16. 26. Luke
16. 29, 31. and Chapter 24. v. 25, 27, 44. The most of all in special, Genesis
Matthew. 19. 4, 5, 6. Exodus Matthew. 5. 21, 27, 33, 38. Leviticus Gal. 3. 12.
Numbers John 3. 14. Deuteronomy Acts 3. 22. Josh^a Heb. 11. 30, 31. Judges Heb.
11. 32. Ruth Matthew. 1. 3. First of Samuel Matthew. 12. 3. Second of Samuel Heb.
1. 5. First of Kings Matthew. 12. 42. Second of Kings Luke 4. 27. First of
Chronicles Matthew. 1. 3, 7, 10 13. Second of Chronicles Acts 7. 48. Ezra Matthew.
1. 12, 13. Job 1 Corinthians. 3. 19. Psalms Acts 4. 25. Proverbs Heb. 12. 5, 6, 7.
Esaias Matthew. 1. 23. Jeremy Heb. 10. 16, 17. Ezechiel Matthew. 25. 35. Daniel
Matthew. 24. 25. All the lesser Prophets Acts 7. 42. and 15. 15, 16. Hosea Matthew.
12. 7. Jo^l Acts 2. 12. Amos Acts 15. 16. Jonah Matthew. 12. 40, 41. Micha Matthew.
10. 35. Na^um Romans 10. 15. Habacuc Romans 1. 17. Haggai Heb. 12. 26. Zachary
Matthew. 21 5. Malachy Luke 1. 16, 17. These books were not cited by Christ and
his Apostles for confirmation of their doctrine.

Ob. If they be not Canonical, therefore because they are not cited; then
Na^um and Zephany are not Canonical. Aratus, Menander, and Epimenides,
profane Poets are Canonical* because they are cited Acts 17. 28. 1 Cor. 15.
33. Titus 1. 12.

Sol. They are not therefore not Canonical only because they are not cited,
but especially because they have not the characters of Divine Scripture. 2
Nahu^ and Zephany are implicitly quoted, when the books of the Prophets are
mentioned Acts 7. 41. and 15. 15, 16. The Poets are not cited as Canonical,
Du^ genera causarum sunt ob quas libri Apocryphi sunt a Canone rejecti; unum
externum, alterum internum. Externae caus^ sunt, autoritas Ecclesie
deceruentis, tum ipsorum autorum qualitas; quippe qui ej^smodi non fuerint ut
fidem mererentur. Interna sunt, quae ab ipsorum librorum examine diligenti
desumuntur, primum slylus, deinde res ipsae, nempe vel fabulosae vel impiae.
Chamierus de Canone, l. 7.
but the Apostle applied himself to his hearers, who did much esteem their
authority. Some have well coucluded from Acts 10. 43. that the Apocrypha are
not to be received as Canonical Scripture because they testify not of Christ.

4 Those books which contain manifest untruths coutrary to the Word of God,
and the books of holy Scripture, were not inspired of God; for as God is true,
so is his word John 17. 17: sweetly agreeeng with it self, and every part with
other; these books commend false things as true, and approve things evil as
right. Judith chap: 9: v: 2: commends killing the Sichemites against Genesis 49.
6, 7. 2 Mac. 14. 42. Razis is commended for killing himself, the fact is not
only related but commended also in these words, nobly, manfully; and this
commendation does plainly show that the Author thereof was not inspired He
craves pardon of his Reader, which is nor ^^tting for the holy Ghost.
of God, when the Donatists out of this book urged that it was lawful for
them to kill themselves as Razis did. Augustine August controvers. 2. Epist.
Gaudentii. c. 23.
then was forced to acknowledge, that the authority of this book was
uncertain and questionable, and proves it by the judgment of the Jewish
Church, Christ, and the Christians. Manifest fables are told in some of them
for true histories, as that of Chap. 6. 9. That the heart and liver of a Fish,
broiled upon Coals, does drive away the Devil from man or woman, that he shall
trouble them no more, contrary to Matthew. 17. 21. See Eusebius l. 4. hist. c.
26. and l. 6. c. 25.
Toby, Judith, Bell, and the Dragon.

If any desire a particular con^utation of the several Books of the
Apocrypha, I commend to his reading that learned Treatise of Dr Raynolds de
libris Apocryphis, who has so exactly handled this subject, that to write of
it after him were to write Iliads after Homer, or to draw a line after Apelles.

5. The most ancient Fathers, and Councels which lived the best and first 500
years after Cartw. in his preface to the Confutation of the Remish Testament.
Christ, rejected the same books which we do. Jerome on Matthew. 23. says
concerning a testimony cited out of the Apocrypha, Hoc quoniam ex Scriptura
nihil habet authoritatis, eadem facilitate rejicitur, qua profertur. Because
this has no authority out of Scripture, it may as easily be rejected as it is
offered.

All that the Papists object for these Books in the general, is, that the
third Council at Carthage, the Florentine council and that of Trent do
approve the said Books to be Canonical, as also Augustine and Innocentius.

To which it may be answered, Est 2 ex Canon. fidei, morum ^ the Jews rejected
the Apocrypha a Canone fidei, the Church admits it into Canonem morum. They are
given us to be read, Non eum credendi necessitate, sed cum judicandi liberate.
Austin.
1. That the Council of Carthage was but a Provincial Council, and therefore
it cannot bind the whole world. Moreover in that Council there are diverse
things which the Papists will not endure; as in the 26 Canon, there is a decree
that no Bishop shall be called chief or universal Bishop, no not the Bishop
of Rome; how should the Papists bind us with the authority of that Council
with which they will not bind themselves? 2. The Latin Jerome and Augustine.
Fathers judged these books fit to be read for example of life and instruction
of manners; but not for confirmation of faith, or establishing any doctrine. 3.
These Books are not Proto Canonical, truly and properly Canonical, inspired
by God, containing the immediate and unchangeable truth of God, sanctified by
him, and given to the Church to be a perfect rule of sound doctrine and good
life; but Deutero-canonicall or rather Ecclesiastical, as they are styled. In
this sense Augustine and Innocentius are to be taken, when they reckon these
Books among the Canonical. 4. No Council has authority to define what
Books are Canonical, what not, seeing Books truly Divine receive authority
from God himself, and are to be esteemed of undoubted truth, although all the
world should bark against them.

These two Councels Florentinum and Tridentinum concilium, ne mihi objeceris,
quibus ego nec teneri ^ec urgeri volo: an^^quiora, sanior^, sanctiora desidero.
Whitak* contra Staplet. Florentinum confilium habitum est ante (...) 150. and
Tridentinum aetate nostra, cujus habendi ea^ratio ac confilium suit, ut omnes
Ecclesiae Papisticae errores (...). Erant haec duo non legitima Christianorum
concilia, sed Tyrannica Antichristi conventicula ad oppugnandam Evangelii
veritatem instituta. Whitakerm controvers. 1: q. 1. c. 4. de Scripturis.
are of too late standing to oppose against the other ancient Councels, which
reject these Books. The co^ncell of Trent was gathered and kept against all
Civil and Ecclesiastical right; neither was there any form of justice
observed in it. 1. It was not kept in a lawful place; for whereas it was
intended against the Protestants, and the Germans were the parties accused, it
ought to have been kept in Germany, according to the request exhibited by the
body of the States of Germany assembled at Noremberg; this equity was not
observed, Re^^ extra provinciam produ^^ndus ^^n est; ibi n. causa agenda ubi
cri^^^ admissum est.
the parties accused being called into Italy. 2. In that Council matters were
concluded, and the sentence passed, the adversary not being heard speak, nor
so much as present; for the Protestants might not be admitted to hearing,
neither could they obtain to propound their opinion in the Council, muchlesse
to avouch it by lawful reasoning. Sleidan fol. 29. and yet were condemned, See
the Review of the Council of Trent. l. 1. c. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
against divine and humane law; for they both forbid the condemning of any
before he have lawful liberty granted him to plead for himself. 3. In that
Council the accuser and Judge were the same: for the Pope did accuse the
Protestants of heresy, he did convocate the Coucell, Rex Christi^is^^tus
negabas ^e habere hunc consessum (viz. conc. Trident.) pro ^ecumenica and
legitim^ congregata Synodo, sed magis pro conventu privato. Thuanus Tom. 1.
Hist. l. 2. page ^0^.
he by his Delegates was President and Moderator in it, and so together was
Accuser, Judge and Witness; whereas the reformation of the Pope was the thing
in question.

Lastly, all Councels ought to be free; but in this, Protestants might not
propound their cause, nor defend it Sleidan l. 23.
, neither might any thing be proposed, but according to the mind of the
Legates, This Council was not General, diverse Kings and Nations protested
against it, viz. The King of England, and the French King, and would not send
their Bishops and Ambassadors to it. B. Carlet^^.
or otherwise then they approved; no man had any voice in the Council but such
as were sworn to the Pope. nothing was there determined which was not first
concluded of at Rome by the Pope in the College of Cardinals, and sent from
Rome to Trent; whereupon this Proverb arose, Spiritum Sanctum Roma p^r peram
mitti Tridentum. The Holy Ghost came to Trent packt up in a Cloke-bag. We hope
therefore since the Apocrypha are justly rejected out of the Canon, that
hereafter they will neither have the honor to be bound with our Bibles, nor
read in our Churches.

The Apocrypha was never received by the Church of the Israelites, before
Christ his coming; nor of the Apostolic Ful^e in preface to his answer to
(...) in defense of the English Translation.
and Primitive Church, for more then 300 years after, as both Eusebius out of
Origin, and the Council of Laodicea Can. 59. confirmed afterward by the sixth
general council of Constantinople shows for the Greek Church, In Prologo
Galeato l. 6. c. 18.
and St Jerome for the Latin.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Authentical edition of the Scripture.
NOw we must enquire which is the Authentical edition of holy Scriptures, it
being necessary that this heavenly truth committed to writing, should be
delivered in some form of words, and in some language which may be understood.
Lawyers, from whom the use of the word Authentic Authenticu^ est quod ex se
fidem sacit, sua authoritate nititur, ab iis de quorum authoritate constat
comprobatur. To be authentical is to have authority of it self.
seems borrowed, do call those instruments and writings authentic which
have a certain and just authority in themselves.

A book or writing is authentic either by divine or humane institution;
those are by Divine appointment and institution authentical which have from
God sufficient and absolute authority to command and approve themselves worthy
credit and faith, in as much as God himself does approve thtm; by humane
institution such writings are held authentical which by the opinion and
sentence of learned men in their several professions may be esteemed worthy
credit and belief for themselves, and for the truth in them.

There is a great diversity of editions of holy Scripture; all cannot be simply
and perpetually authentical, in of, and for themselves, without reference unto
another, no more then many draughts of the same Lease or Deed, or copy of one
pardon can be. Some amongst many are authentic, whence the others are
transcribed; yea it cannot be that there should be many; but although there may
be many counterpanes of the deed, yet there is but one or two principal Deeds:
so, amongst this great variety of editions one or more ought to be as
principal and authentical.

Thrre is a question betwixt the Church of Rome and the reformed Churches about
the authentic edition of Scripture; they say, that the edition of the Bible
in Hebrew and Greek i^ not authentical, but rather the vulgar Latin. We
hold, that the vulgar Latin is very corrupt and false; that the Hebrew
Hebraels Graecisque textibus concedatur utilitas maxima, laus maxima, exemptio
de malignis corruptelis absolutissima: id vehementer approbo. Morinus in epist.
ad Dia^riben.
for the old Testament, and the Greek for the new is the sincere and
authentical writing of God; therefore that all things are to be determined by
them; and that the other versions are so far to be approved of, as they agree
with these fountains.

The Tridentine Council thus Latina vetus vulgata editio in publicis
lectionibus, disputationibus, praedicationibus and expositionibus pro
authentica habeatur, and nemo illam rejicere quovis protextu audeat, aut
praesumat. Council. Trident. Sess. 4. decreto 2do. Predigiosum certe decretum
and cujus cordatiores Pontificios and tunc cum illud cud^retur pud^erit, and
etiamnum dispudet. Amama Antibarb. Bibl.
decrees, that in all sermons, readings, disputations, controversies, the
vulgar Latin Translation should be taken for authentic before the Hebrew or
Greek, and that no man should presume upon any occasion to reject it, or to
appeal from it. When the Council of Trent says the vulgar Latin is
authentical, it compares it with other Latin Translations, not with the
Hebrew. Muis.

Andradius (the chiefest of the Divines at the Council of Trent) thinks that
the Council of Trent did not mean either to condemn the Hebrew truth (as he
calls it) or to acquit the Latin Translation from all error, when they
called it Authentical; but only that the Latin has no such error by which
any pestilent opinion in faith and manners may be gathered. This says Rainolds
against Heart. chapter 6. p. 202. and Chamier tomo 1. l. 12. c. 2.

The Rhemists in their preface to the new Testament, translated by them,
prolixly extol this Latin edition, and contend that it is not only far
better than all the Latin versions, but then the Greek it sele, which is the
Prototype.

Before we come to defend our own or disprove that opinion of the Papists, it
is necessary first rightly and fully to state the question, and to premise some
things concerning the several versions and Translations of the Scripture.

We deny not that part of Daniel and Ezra which was written in the Chaldee
dialect to be authentical, because we know the Lord was pleased that in that
language as well as the Hebrew some of his Divine truth should be originally
written.

1. For the more credit of the stories, the Lord brings forth foreign
Nations and their Chronicles for witnesses, least any of them should doubt of
the truth thereof. Junius.
2. The Lord would have some part of those stories come to the knowledge of the
Heathen, and it was requisite that the Chaldeans should know the sins and
impieties of that Nation, Nec obstat, quaedam in Jeremia, Daniele, and Esra,
idiomate Chaldaico consignata esse, ea n. lingua ab Hebraea inflexione saltem
differt and ab eadem tanquam matre, nascitur, ac demum post captivitatem
Babylonicam Judaeis (...) esse fa^il^a^is. Waliberus in officina Biblica.
and the judgments that should befall to testify unto all the truth of God;
therefore in general the alteration of the terrene States and Kingdoms is
shadowed forth and published in the Chaldee tongue, that the Gentiles might
take knowledge thereof; but the particular Histories of the coming of the
Messiah, of his Office and Kingdom, and of the calamities and afflictions
which should befall the people of God are set forth in the Hebrew tongue, as
more especially concerning them. Likewise it pleased God for the better credit
of the story, that the History of those things which were said and done in
Chaldea should be written in the same Language wherein they were first spoken;
and therefore the Epistles and rescrips of the Kings are delivered in the
Chaldee speech, as taken out of their public Acts and Jun. in Dan. 7. and
prolog. in Dan.
Records; and that the History in Daniel set forth in the Chaldee speech
gaining him respect with the Chaldeans, might stir up the Jews to receive
Daniel as a Prophet of God whom the Heathens admired. If there be any footsteps
of the Chaldee and Arabique in Job as some learned say; we do not exclude them
from authentic authority; for we say the whole old Testament for the most
part in Hebrew, and few parcels in Chaldee, are the authentic edition of the
old Testament.

The Greek copies of the new Testament are also from God immediately, the very
dialect wherein those Prototypes were, which the Pens of the Evangelists and
Apostles did write. For the Gospel of Matthew and the Epistle to the Hebrews
being written in Hebrew, and Mark in Latin, we have refuted that opinion
already; the Greek edition of those three Books, as well as of all the other
of the new Testament is authentical.

The versions of the Scripture are either the Chaldee and Greek of the old
Testament, the Syriacke and Arabicke of the new, the Latin, Italian, French,
and English of both Testaments.

All the versions Singulae ver^^nes habent fu^^ lauds, suas labes. Amama
Antibarb. Bibl. l. 2. c. 1. Multo purior (inquit ipse Hieronymus) manat fontis
unda, quam ftuit rivuli aqua.
of the sacred Scripture have so far divine authority as they agree with the
original tongue; and to say that any Translation is pure and incorrupt, and
that the very fountains are muddy, is both a foolish and impions blasphemy.
The tongue and dialect is but an accident, and as it were an argument of the
Divine truth, which remains one and the same in all Idiomes; therefore the
faith of the unlearned depends on God, not on men; although the Translations,
by benefit of which they are brought to believe, be perfected by the labor of
men. Gods providence and care of the Church is such that he would never let it
be long destitute of a fit Translation The accurate inspection of the Hebrew
Bible teaches which Translation has most exactly expressed the meaning of the
holy Ghost.
, which being published by learned men, and approved of by the Church, how ever
it failed in some things, yet following the truth constantly in the more
principal and necessary things, might be sufficient to all for wholesome
instruction.

The versions differ often much among themselves; Arias Montanus differs much
from Pagnin a learned Translator, and Vatablus from both; from all these
Luther, and from him again the Vulgar. Osiander, LXX vary.

The Chaldee Edition of the old Testament is not a Translation done word for
word, but a Paraphrase, and so called; the Chaldee Paraphrase, by the Jews
Targum Chaldaite significat Interpretationem, item Paraphrasin, quando non tam
verba quam sensus ex alia lingua redditu^. significatio hujus vocis est
generalis, ad omnes lingua^ se extendens, sed tamen usus jam ob^inuit, ut per
Targum (...) intelligatur solum Chald^ica Bibliorum v. Testamenti translatio.
Helvicus de Chald. Paraph. Namine Targum non significatur semper Chaldaeus
Paraphrastes, verum eo vocabula Interpretem in genere notant. Rainoldus de
libris Apocryphis tomo 1. c. 82. Vide Schickardi Bechinath, etc.
Targum, though some conceive that there is some kind of distinction (to speak
accurately) between the Chaldee Paraphrase and Targum. Targum being a general
word, signifying an Interpretation or Paraphrase, though it usually now by an
excellency denotes the Chaldee Paraphrase. There were three authors of it (as
it is reported,) according to the threefold difference of the Hebrew books.

Rabbi Achilam or Aquila, who is vulgarly called Onkelos upon the five books
of Moses; Rabbi Jonathan the son of Vziel upon the former and later Prophets;
Rabbi Joseph coecus (or as some will a certain Anonymus) upon some of the
Hagiographa. Those Paraphrases of Onkelos and Jonathan are the ancienter and
certioris fidei; that upon the Hagiographa is far later and less certain, it
being doubtful both who was the author, and in what age it was made. The
common opinion concerning Onkelos and Jonathan is, that one wrote a little
before Christ, the other a little after him. Capellus lib. 1. de punctorum
Hebraieorum antiquitote cap. 1. Helvicus de Chaldaicis Paraphrasibus ^. 2.

These Paraphrases among the Jews (says Helvicus) sunt autoritatis plane
aequalis ipsi Scripturae Hebraicae, neque (...) habent illis contradicere.
Quorunt Paraphrasin nemo doctus non suspicit, says Capellus of Onkelos and
Jonathan.

The use of them is very great, Ea lis adhuc sub judice haret, Ebr^^ne an
Chalda^ sit reliquarum mater^ and certe Chaldai pro sua non le^ibus militant
argumentis, Erpenius.
1 to illustrate the Hebrew Text by circumstances or a more full explication of
it. 2. To confirm the integrity of the Hebrew text, Genesis 3. 15. 3. In
controversies against the Jews, In controversiis Judaicis praecipuum robur
obtinent, says Helvicus Genesis 49. 10. The Chaldee Paraphrasts both of them most
excellently expound the place, which themselves understood not: being like
therein to Virgils Bees, which make Honey for others, and not themselves.
First, Onkelos interprets it in this manner: A Magistrate exercising
authority of the house of Juda shall not depart, nor a Scribe of his posterity
for ever, till Christ come, to whom the Kingdom pertains, and him shall the
people obey. The Livelie in his Chronology of the Persian Monarchy. Chald^ica
lingua in vet. Test. perinde ut and Syra in nov^, purior long est, quam ea
quibus paraphra^es Chaldai^e conscripta sunt. Wall. (...).
other called the Interpreter of Jerusalem, thus: Kings of the house of Juda
shall not fail, neither skillful Law-teachers of his posterity, unto the time
wherein the King Christ shall come: unto whom the Kingdom pertains, and all
the Kingdoms of the Earth shall be subdued unto him. The Rabbis generally
however they interpret Siloh confess it notes the Messiah. Joh. Isaac. l. 2.
contra Lindanum.
If Christ came when authority was gone, and authority went away at Jerusalems
fall, needs must one coming of Christ be referred to the overthrow of that
City. The Talmundici and latter Rabbines, Rabbi Sal. Jarchi, Rabbi Dav. Kimchi
expound it of the Messiah, as Buxtorf shows.

There are many profitable explications in that Paraphase on the Pentateuch,
but it is too late to be of authentic authority; Rainoldus de lib. Apoc.
and the other Chaldee Paraphrases (that excepted) are besprinkled with Jewish
Fables and Thalmundique toys. The third Paraphrase has not expounded all the
Hagiographall Books. For there was never seen any Targum upon Chronicles, nor
Daniel nor Ezra; peradventure because much of the Chronicles was expounded in
the Books of the Kings, Helvicus.
and a great part of Daniel and Ezra were written in Chaldee, that there was no
need of a new Paraphase.

Onkelos his Paraphrase seldom merits that name, being indeed commonly nothing
but a rigid version.

Cudworths discourse concerning the notion of the Lords Supper. Chap 3.

The third Targum of the Pentateuch is named Jerosolymitanum, either from the
City whence it came, or from the Tongue in which it was written. Schickardi
Bechinath Happeros Schim.

The Greek Translation of the old Testament.
There is a most ancient rare parchment Extat in Bibliotheca Serenissimi and
Potentissimi Regis nagnae Britanniae, alia ab ea quam habemus translatio Graeca
and T. propedi^m edenda utisper amus. Voet. Biblioth. Theol. lib. 2.
MS. copy of the Bible in Greek in our Kings Library at St JAmes, sent to His
Majesty that now is by Cyrillus then Patriarch of Alexandria. The Postscripts
of the second Epistle to Timothy, and that to Titus in that Manuscript agree in
the maine with the Syriacke Testament.

The second to Timothy written from Laodicea; to Titus, written from Nicopolis.

There be diverse Gr^cae multae si erunt vers^nes Scripturarum a varijs
authoribus editae. Illa autem est omnium sine controversia long nobilissima ac
celeberrima, cujus septuaginta duo interpretes in Aegypto, Ptolomaei
Philadelphi piae voluntati morem gerentes, authors extit^runt. Whitakerus. de
Scripturis.
Greek translations of the old Testament; that of all the rest is the most
famous and Ancient, of which the Seventy-two Interpreters in Egypt (obeying
King Ptolemeus Philadelphus his Commandment) were the Authors. It was made not
a whole 100 years after the death of the Author of Nehemiah, and 300 years
also before Christ. They are said to be 72 Elders chosen out of every Tribe;
they are commonly called seventy, although they were 72, as Bellarmine shows
where he speaks of their edition, as the Centumviri which were 105. Ptolomeus
Philadelphus the most learned of all the Ptolomies, had made a Library at
Alexandria which he stored with many thousands of Books, and understanding that
the Divine Books of the Prophets full of all good Doctrine, were kept amongst
the Jews, written in their tongue, by the motion of Demetrius Phalerius the
best Grammarian of that age, whom Ptolomy had appointed the Library Keeper, he
requested of Eleazar the High Priest of the Jews those Books, See Dr. Brown.
Enquiries l. 6. c. 1.
and Interpreters then 72 Elders of all the Tribes of Israel were sent unto
them. All the Latin translations of the Bible (except that of Jerome) were
made from it. Rainoldus de lib. Apoc.
The Evangelists Non sequitur Apostoli usisunt ea editione: ergo est authentica
five divina. Nam Paulus usus est etiam prophanorum libr^rum testimonij^, qui
tamen proptere a non sunt divini. Caete^um quia scrips^run^ Graece Apostoli,
facile usi sunt ea editione quae tumsola Graecis erat cognita. Chamier.
followed the version of the Seventy in many things, which was in the hands of
many, and of great authority amongst the Hellenists, when they might do it
without much swerving from the sense of the Prophets, both to show their
Liberty; and that in things indifferent and of little consequence, they would
not give occasion of cavil to the wicked, nor of scandal to the weak.

The 70 Interpreters do manifestly swerve from the Hebrew truth in reckoning
of years; versio 70. In multis discrepat a font Heb^ae^ praesert^m in
Psalmia. Ger^ardus 2 Pet. 2* 5.
for Genesis 5. they say that Methuselah was more then 167 years old, when he
begat Lamech; so that of necessity, they make him live 14 years after the
flood, which is false, for then were 9 souls saved contrary to Genesis 7.

The Syriacke translation of the New Testament Amorem verso^^la malumus
gnera^e, quam (...) officina Biblica. Syriaca lingua quasi p^oles quaedam est
Hebra^cae and Chaldaicae lingua. Hebraei siquidem, qui usque ad captivitatem
Babylonicam Hebraice solum, id est, lingua sua loqui consueverant, cum abducti
essent in Babyl^nem, c^^perunt oblivisci ling^am, propriam, and addif^ere
alienam, id est, Chaldaicam, quia tamen non perfect eam pronunciare poterant,
and semper aliquid ex Hebraica retmebant, factum est, ut lingua quaedam tertia
nasceretur, Syriaca, dicta a regime. Bellarminas. M^dum in scribendo a dextra
versus smistram in^r^tsum omnes Populi orientales sequuntur exceptis.
comes next to be considered, it is Ancient, yet it is not certain who was the
Author thereof, nor in what time it was made; though Chamier thinks a little
after Christ's time, the great elegancy and purity of speech, does show that it
is Ancient. It is probable that it was made about the beginning of the
Christian Church, because the second of Peter, with the second and third of
John, Jude, the Revelation, are left out, which though they were written by
inspiration, yet they were questioned by Ecclesiastical writers, because they
were omitted by the Syriacke translator.

It is very profitable for the understanding of the Greek Testament. It w^ll
interprets those Greek words, Matthew. 6. 10. (...) per panem indigentiae
nostrae, and that word (...) 1 Cor. 16. 22. The Syriack has 2 words Maran
Atha, which signify our Lord comes. The Papists endeavor to establish their
administration of the Lords Supper under one kind from the word (...) 1 Cor.
11. 20. but that word is generally used* for the whole action of the Sacrament,
viz. the distribution of the Bread and Wine. The Syriacke so renders it
Comendentes vos and bibentes. Andreas Masius in his Syriacke Grammar says that
the Syrians do not write sinistr^rsum toward the left hand, as the Hebrews,
nor dextrorsum toward the right hand, as the Greeks and Latins, but deorsum
downward; which manner of writing (it is probable) was then observed by Christ,
John 8. Aethiopibus qui a sinistra dextram versus scribunt Waltherw.
6. because at that time, the Jews used the Syriacke tongue.

The New Testament in Syriacke is in Latin of Trostius his Edition, the
Revelation was de Dieu's Edition, the later Epistle of Peter, and two Epistles
of John, and that of Jude, are Pococks Edition. Piscator. Schol. in loc. and
Waltherus in officina Biblica n^vi Testamenti Syram editionem magni faciunt
omnes decti. Chamierus.


The Arabique translation.

It is uncertain by whom it was made or when; sure it is, they had the
Scriptures in their own tongue; and it were to be wished that that tongue were
more common, and better understood; that Religion might be spread amongst the
Saracens, The Arabicke Testament was set out by Erpenius.
which for the most part speak that language.

In the year 1592. the New Testament in Arabicke, was first divulged at Rome.

The Arabicke tongue (says Walter) is thought to be a branch of the Chaldee
and Syriacke proceeding from both, Erpenius says the Arabicke is Ancienter
then the Syria^ke. Waltherus in
but that it exceeds them in 6. letters, there being 28. in the Arabicke
tongue. It was in use Anciently with the Ishmalites and Hagarenes, who drew
their original from Abraham, and afterward would rather be called Saracens
from Sara. It is now used through all Asia and Africa; Mahumed who descended
from the Ishmaelitish Nation, wrote his wicked and blasphemous Al^oran in this
tongue.

Erpenius officina Biblica. Orat 1. de Ling. Arab. dignitate.
(who was excellently skilled in this tongue) says it is more necessary and
excellent then either the Syriacke, Aethiopicke, Persian, or Turkish language;
he extols it for its antiquity, largeness, elegancie and profit.

The Arabians (says he) have many more accurate for Geographie then Ptol^mie;
Avice^ma, and other famous Physicians have written in this tongue. He says 32
thousand of Arabicke Books were to be had in one Library in Ma^^itania.

Joseph Scaliger, Erpenl^^
Raphelengius, Isaac Casa^bone, Emmanuell Tremellius, orat. prima and secunda
de Ling. Arab. dignitate. Mr. Cudworth calls Mr. Seldom the Glory of our Nation
for oriental Learning.
and Franciscus Junius, all learned men of special note much esteemed this
tongue, and promoted the study of it, as their writings show. Mercer who was
most versed in the Hebrew and Chaldee tongues, in his old age a little before
he died, thought to have traveled into the cast, only out of a desire learn
the Arabicke tongue.

The Latin translations were so many that Augustine Qui ex Hebraea lingua
Scripturas in Graecam verterum, numerari possunt. Latini autem nullo modo
August. de doctrina Christiana l. 2. c. 11.
says, they could not be numbered.

That new version of Tremellius and Junius both, is best for the old Test and
that of Erasmus and Be^a for the New Testament. See in Chamiers first tome l.
12. c. 1. his censure of all 3.

There is a great use also of the Interlineary version put forth by Arias
Montanus, for the finding out the sense, and genuine signification of all the
Hebrew and Greek words.

Amongst many and diverse Latin translations, there was one more common then
the rest of the Old and New Te^^ament, usually called the vulgar, because it
was of vulgar use, and received by many. Who was the Author of this Edition, it
is not manifest. Some say it was more Ancient, then that of Jerome; Jerome
wrote pure Maldon. ad Luc. 16. 1. and Eslius ad 1 Cor. 5. 6. and ad Ephel. 1.
10.
Latin, being skillful in the Latin tongue, but the vulgar trans^ation is
barbarous in many places. Therefore Pagnine, Hieronymus Latinitaris auctor est
non contemnendus, qui in omnibus scriptis sui^ sermon utitur grammatices pu^o.
Quam barbara contra sit versio vulg. res ipsa loquitur. ut mirum sit Jesuitas
elegantiae Latinae alias studiosissimos vulgatam illam translationem vel hoc
nomine non improbasse. Waltherus in officina Biblica. Of the Authentical
Edition of the Scripture.
Maldonate, Es^ius, Sixtus Senensis, Burgensis, Valla, Lindon deny it to be
Jeromes: that was translated from the Hebrew by the Greek, and not by Jerome,
but by some uncertain and unknown Author says Whitaker.

Bootius in the Index of his Sacred Animadversions, ascribes it to Jerome.

Vide Whitakerum de Scripturis Quoest. secund. controversiae.
Cap. Sexto. and Waltheri officinam Biblicam.
The Geneva translation for the French, and our last translation for the
English, and Deodate for the Italian are the best, which is now set out in
English, Diodatus noster in eximia Bibliorum Italicorum versione, says
Spanbemius.

The question betwixt us and the Papists, now comes to be considered, which of
these Editions is authentical, that is, which of it self has credit and
authority, being sufficient of it self to prove and commend it self, without
the help of any other Edition, because it is the first exemplar or Copy of
divine truth delivered from God by the Prophets and Apostles. This in respect
of the old Testament is the Hebrew and in some Chapters of Daniel and Esra the
Chaldee, and in respect of the New Testament is the Greek, all other Editions
are but of humane authority.

This proposition true in it self, is yet diverse ways opposed by the Papists,
whose opinions may be set down in three propositions.

1. That the Hebrew and Greek Text are corrupt, and therefore not Bellarm. l.
2. de verbo Dei c. 2. and Rhemists Preface before the new Testament.
Authentical, for the fountain is to be preferred before the streams if it
come unto our hands uncorruptly. The Book of Moses Fatear equidem and a me
dissentiet opinor, nemo, Apostolorum and Prophetarum (...) regulam esse and
amussim ad quam versiones omnes exigendae sint. Morinus exercit. Bibl. la.
exercit. l. 1. exercit. 1. c. 1.
which by Gods Commandment was preserved in the Arc, and that very Gospel
written by Matthew, those autographs (says Morinus) are certainly the rule of
all versions.

The second proposition is, that the 70. Translaters, were not so much
Translaters as Prophets, who wrote by divine inspiration, so that their
translation had been authentic, if it had come to our hands purely and had
not perished.

The third is, that the vulgar Translation is of authentic authority, and
ought so to be received, neither may any man presume to reject it upon any
pretense; they say it hangs between the Hebrew and Greek as Christ did
between the two Thieves.

To these 3. Propositions we oppose 3. which are most true, and shall prevail.

1. The Hebrew of the old Testament Scriptura Hebraea in v. ^. and Graeca in N.
T. ab Hierony morecte vocantur fontes veritatli.
and the Greek of the new is the authentic Edition, and the pure fountain of
divine truth.

2. The 70. were not Prophets, but Translators.

3. The vulgar translation neither is authentical nor perfect, neither ought
it in any case so to be esteemed.

Reasons Proving that the Hebrew of the old Testament, and the Greek of the
New, are authentical and pure.

To prove our first Proposition, these arguments may be brought.

The Hebrew of the old, and Greek In Ecclesia Christiana nulla unquam fuit
Editio authemica, excepta Hebraica veteris, and Graeca Novi Testamenti. Nam id
opinor in ecclesia catholica dicendum est authenticum, quod apud omnes
authoritatem in habet. Chamierus.
of the New Testament, are the very Scriptures, which came immediately from
God; the very particular, and individual writings, both for Character and
style of Speech, yea, the dialect as well as the matter of them is immediately
by inspiration from from above, and written by holy men, as they were moved by
the holy spirit; what Edition therefore is worthy to be compared to this.

When we speak of the original and authenticke Text of the Holy Scripture,
that is not to be so understood as if we meant it of the Autographs written by
the hand of Moses, or the other Prophets or Apostles, but only of the
original * or the primogeniall Text in that tongue, out of which diverse
versions Rivetus in Catholico orthodoxo^ Scripturae dupliciter intel ligitur;
vel enim significat ipsam literarum picturam and sic accipitur Exodus 32. 16.
vel res ipsas, qua significantur per eas voces ut Matthew. 22. 25. Aeque Biblia
Sacra nuncupantur codices illi qui passim circumf^untur Latin, Gallice,
Chaldaice, Syriace; ac qui Hebraice and Graece, etsi long alij sint literarum
ductus and syllabarum compositiones. Chamierus de Canone l. 9.
were derived according to the variety of tongues.

2. For a long time before the Birth of Chirst, the Hebrew was not only the
alone authentic Copy, but the only Edition which was extant in the world. In
the days of Moses, the Kings of Israel and the Prophets before the Captivity,
what Edition of Scripture had the Church but the Hebrew? what did the Jews
read in their Synagognes, and in their solemn meetings, but only this Hebrew
Edition?

After the time of Christ, for the space of 600 years, the Hebrew Edition of
the old Testament, and the Greek of the new, were held Authentic, and no
other.

3. If any thing be erroneous, doubtful, less emphaticall, or improper, or if
in the Articles of religion any doubt or difficulty arise, which cannot be
decided out of translations; we must necessarily then have recourse to the
Hebrew of the old, and the Greek of the new Testament, as Augustine de
doctrina Christiana l. 2. C. 11. Si translatio ab originali dissentit, ei
linguae potius credendum est unde in aliam per interpretationem facta est
translatio. Augustinus l. 15. de Civitate Dei c. 3.
witnesses, and Jerome in lib. Contra Helvidium.

Beliarmine grants that sometimes we must have recourse to the Hebrew and Greek
fountains, 1. When in the Latin Edition there be any errors of the Scribe.
2. When there are diverse readings. 3. When there is any thing doubtful in the
words of sentence. 4. To understand the force and Energy of the word, because
all things are more emphaticall in the original.

4. If the authority of the authentical Copies in Hebrew, Chaldee, and Greek
fall, then there is no pure Scripture in the Church of God, there is no high
court of appeal where controversies ^^eronymus and coaevus ei Augustmus diffi.
ulteribus in versionibus ob^r^is, jubent nos recurrere ad ipsos fontes. Er^en
us.
(ri^ing upon the diversity of translations, or otherwise) may be ended. The
exhortation of having recourse unto the Law and to the Prophets, and of our
Savior Christ asking how it is written, and how read thou, is now either of
none effect, or not sufficient.

The Papists differ among themselves in this controversy Bellarm. lib. 2. de
verbo Dei cap. 7. Morinus exercit, Bibl. l. 1. exercit 1. c. 2. 3. 4.
about the corruption of the originals, some of them say that the Hebrew of the
old, and the Greek of the New Testament is not generally corrupted, and yet is
not so very pure a fountain, that whatsoever differs from it, is necessarily to
be corrected by it.

Others As Canus l. 2. c. 13. de locis Theologi^ is Lind^nus l. 1. c. 11. de
optimo genere interpret.
say that the Jews in hatred of the Christian faith depraved and much
corrupted the Hebrew Text of the Old Tes^ament. Which opinion as absurd is
rejected by Bellarmine, and is easily refuted.

I shall first lay down some reasons against the grosser opinion, and also that
of Bellarmines, before I come to answer the particular objections of the
Papists.

1. Jerome and Origin thus argue, if the Jews corrupted the Hebrew Text of the
Old Testament, then they did this before the coming of Christ or after it, not
before his coming, for there was no cause why the Jews should do it, and our
Savior Christ would never have suffered so gross a crime to have passed
without due reproof, when he was not silent for lesser faults. On the contrary
our Savior sends us to the Scripture to learn the doctrine of salvation,
Luke 16. 29. and proves his doctrine out of Moses and the Prophets. Not after
Christ's coming, then the Testimonies cited (...) Christ, and his Apostles would
have been expunged by them, and the special prophesies concerning Christ, But
they are all extant. The Jews have and yet still do keep the holy Text
Noriffimum est, nulla in resuisse Judeeos tam curiosos, pios and religiese
observantes, quam ut Biblia sua casta, pura, inviolataque co^servarent. Nam
illud mandatum Dei, quod Deuteronomy. c 4. v. 2. legitur, non solum de quinque Moysis
l^bris dictum esse imerpretantur, sed in universum de omnibus l^bris and verbis
quae per Spiritum Sanctum Prophetae ludaeis Communica^unt, intelligunt. Insuper
multis ab ipsis Judaeis san^itum est legibus, cum, qui aliquid in Biblii^
mutit, pecsatum committere inexpiabrle. Quin and hoc ad jecerunti siquis velex
ignoran^ ia, and impietat^ unum vocabulum mutet, ne totus propter^^t mundus
pereat, and in (...) vertatur periculum esse. Ha^ autem sententiae sue causas
adduxerunt, quod credant Deum Opt. Max. propter solam Scripturam sacram (quam
ipsi opinionem var^is sodis probant) hunc mundum creasse. Johannes Isaacus
contra Lindanum l. 2. p. 66. 67. 18.
of Scripture most religiously and carefully, which may appear, since (as
Johannes Isaac contra Lind in. l. 2. a Learned Jew writes) that there are
above 200 arguments against the Jews opinion, more evident and express in the
Hebrew Text of the old Testament, then there be in the Latin translation. From
the days of our Savior Christ until this time, the Jews keep the Scripture
with so great reverence (says the same Isaac) ut jejunium indicunt si illa in
terram ceciderit, they publish a Fast if it fall upon the ground. This
Testimony of Isaac Levita is the more to be esteemed, Tu illos accede, and urge
disputatione; ducenta tibi argumenta ex Biblijs contra illos supp^tunt, quae in
textu Hebraeo clariora and dil^id^ora, quam ulla c^nversione inveniuntur. Id.
ib. p. 77
because he was Lindans own Master and professor of the Hebrew tongue in the
university of Coolen, and has written 3. Books in the defense of the Hebrew
truth against the cavils of his Scholar. Arias M^ntanus for his rare skill of
tongues and arts, was put in trust by King Philip to set forth the Bible in
Hebrew, Greek, and Latin, wherein he has reproved that Treatise of Lindan,
and disclosed his folly. Muis (who has written a Commentary on the Psalms) a
great Hebrician and learned Papist has written against Morinus about this
Subject. The most learned Papists, Senensis, Bannes, Lorinus, Pagnine,
Brixianus, Valla, Andradius, and Bellarmine, hold, R Ben. Maimon says, if in
the copying of the Hebrew Bible, one letter we written twice, or if one letter
but touched another that Copy was not admitted into their Synagognes, but only
allowable to be read in Schools and private families.
that the Jews did not maliciously corrupt the hebrew text.

Josephus l. 1. contra Appian (who lived after our Savior) says, that the
Jews did keep the holy Scripture with so great fidelity, that they would
rather dye then change or alter any thing in it. Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. l. 3.
cap. 10. teaches the same thing. The Stupendous diligence of the Massorites,
in numbering of the words and Letters, with the variations of pointing and
writing, l^^st any place or suspicion should be given of falsifying it, seems
to be a good plea also against the Jews wilful depraving of Scripture: Paulo
post Hieronymum confecta est massora, quam utilissimum thesaurum Arias appella^
Chamierus.

If Origin, or Jerome (the two chiefest Hebricians among the Fathers) had had
the least suspicion of this, they would never have bestowed so much time in the
learning of this tongue, nor have taken such indefatigable pains, in
translating the Bibles out of Hebrew. Yet Morinus would seem to give answer to
this, viz. that we might convince the Jews out of their own Books. Jerome does
in a thousand places call it the Hebrew truth, and fontem limpidissimum, and
preferres it before the translation of the Septuagint, and all other versions
whatsoever. He calls the Hebrew in the old and Greek in the New Testament,
fontes veritatis. Farther if the Jews would have corrupted the Scripture they
could Non potuerum Judaei Scripturas corrumpere. Augustinus ex exemplarium
Bibliorum multitudine id probat l. 15. de Civitate Dei cap. 13. Absit
(inquiens) ut prudent aliquis Judaeos cujustibet perversitatis atque malitiae
tantum potuisse credat in codicibus tam multis, and tam long lateque
dispersis. Potis^ima ratio a singulari providentia divina deducitur* Glassius
l. 1. Tract. 1. de textus Heb. in v. T. puritate. Sect. secunda,
not, for the Books were dispersed throughout the whole world; how could the
Jews then being so far dispersed themselves, confer together, and corrupt
them all with one consent? The Books were not only in the hands of the Jews,
but of Christians also and in their Custody; and they would never have suffered
the Books of the old Testament, which are the foundation of faith and life to
be corrupted. Add, if the Jews would have corrupted the Scripture, they would
have corrupted those places which make most against them, concerning Christ's
person, and office; as that prophecy, 9. of Dan. of the Messiahs coming before
the destruction of Jerusalem, that Hag. 2. 9. which sets out the glory of
the second Temple, to be greater then the glory of the first, in regard of the
presence of the Lord in it: that Genesis 49. 10. who is such a stranger in the
Jewish controversies as to be Ignorant how stoutly and pertinaciously many of
the Jews deny, that by Shilo there is understood the Messiah? but the
threefold Paraphrase there has expressly added the word Messiah, and stops
the mouths of the Jews, who must not deny their authority, so that they fear
nothing more then to Amoma Antibarb. Bibl. l. 1.
contest with those Christians, who read and understand the Chaldee
Paraphrases, and interpretations of the Rabbines. See Master Mede on that Text.

Psalm 2. 12. where the vulgar Latin has apprehendite disciplinam (quae
lectio nihil magnificum de Christo praedicat) the Hebrews read osculamini
filium, which is more forcible Ipse Bellarminus fatetur, ex Textu Hebrae^
Judaeos fortius constringi and vexari saepius pesse, quam ex versione Latina.
to prove the mystery of Christ's Kingdom, and celebrate his ample dominion
over all.

That place 53. of Esaias contains both the prophecy, and whole passion of
Christ in it self. Yet what is wanting there in the Hebrew Text? is there a
letter taken away or altered, to violate the sense of the mysteries? Isaac
Levita l. 2. contra Lind. p. 82.
says that this Chapter converted him, that he read it over more then a
thousand times, and compared it with many translations, and that more of the
mystery of Christ is contained in it, than in any translation whatsoever.

He adds further, that disputing with five Rabbines at Frankford, he urged
this Chapter against them, and thereby brought them into those straights, and
so stopped their mouths, that they could not reply to his arguments. We have
the second Psalm, the 21. the 110. and all others entire and complete, in
which there are most manifest Quid illustrius de Christi Messiae nostri diei
potest exhibitione, quam istud Esa. 7. 14. Esa. 9. 6. Quid de passione ejus
acerba and resurrectione gloriosa splendidius dici potest, quam quod in Esa.
53. cap. dicitur, i^emque in Psalm. 22. Nec tamen corruptelam vel hi^, vel
permul^is aliss Scripturaelocis ullam fuisse a Judaeis illatam deprehendere
possi^mus. Glassius Philol. Sac.
prophesies concerning Christ.

There are many besides the Papists, who have stood for the incorrupt truth of
the fountains and have defended the Jews faithfulness in preserving the
Hebrew Copies, as Whitaker, Lubbertas, Junius, Ames, Rivet and others. But none
has performed more for the vindicating of particular places, which are either
suspected, or openly charged of corruption by certain Papists, then Solomon
Glassius a most learned man, who in his Philologia sacra has vindicated 72
places of the Old Testament, and 20. of the New.

All know that that place in the 7th of Esaias a virgin shall conceive was
constantly objected to the Jews from the beginning, and yet they have left it
untouched. Chamier de Canone. l. 12. c. 4, Objections of the Papist against the
purity of the Hebrew Text in the old Testament.

Bellarmine L. ^. de verbo Dei c. 2.
only produces 5. places of Scripture, in which he indevours to prove not
that the Hebrew text is corrupted by the labor or malice Alijs occurrendum
videtur, qui zelo quidem bono, sed nescio an secundum scientiam, omnino
contendunt, Judaeos in odium Christianae fidei fludiose depravasse and
corrupisse multa loca Scripturarum. Bellarm. de verbo Dei l. 2. c. 2.
of the Jews, (that opinion he evidently and solidly refutes) yet that it is
not altogether pure and perfect, but has its errors brought in from the
negligence of the Scribes, and Ignorance of the Rabbines.

Cotton says the originals are miserably corrupted; and that there is a
multitude almost incredible of depravations, and falsifications made by the
Rabbines and Massorites.

But Bellarmine who was more learned than he, and from whom he has stolen a
great part of his Book against the Genevah translations, does sufficiently
confute him.

Ob. Ps. 22. 16. There is no Christian, but he reads (...) Caru they have
pierced my hands and my feet, yet it is in the Hebrew (...) Caari as a Lion.

Sol. This is the only argument Nullum habet Lindanus argumentum, quod vel
faciem qu^^dam veritatis habeat prater hoc. Vt veritatem sateamur, hoc
vocabulum ab annis december non parum nos torsit, maximamque suspicionem praebuit,
ut omnino corruptum esse crederemus. Johannes Isaacus contra Lind. l. 2. p.
102. Ego profecto ausim praestare praeter locum Psalmi 22. in to^is Hebraeis
Codicibus inveniri nihil, quod optimam, Cohaerentem, P^am and Christianae fidei
prorsus congruentem non habeat sententiam. Muis de Hebraicae editionis
authoritate ad veritate. Voici l' unique lieu, en tout l' Hebrien, qui semble
au^ir appearance de raison, pour fair penfer a une malicieuse entrepri^se de
Juifs. Benedict. Turretin response a la Preface de Coton.
which Lindon has of any show, to prove that the Jews have corrupted the
H^brew Text says Rainolds against Heart; Whitaker says hoc unum posse ab illis
probabile in fontibus Hebraicis corruptelae jundicium inveniri. The same say
John Isaac against Lindan, Muis against Morinus, Turretinus against Coton.

But it is easy (says Whitaker) to vindicate this place from their calumny.
For first learned men witness, that Caru is read in many Hebrew Books. John
Isaac, a Popish Jew in his second Book against Lindan witnesses, that he saw
such a Book. Hoc idem ego Johannes Isaac ipsa veritate and bona conscientia
testari possum, quod hujusmodi Psalterium apud avum meum viderim, ubi in textu
scriptum erat. (...) and in margin (...) Et ita omnia olim exemplaria
habuisse, haud dubite. Hinc itaque manifestum esse puto, cur septuaginta etalij
transtulerint, foderunt. Siquidem illi non Keri sed Ketif sunt secuti. The
Massorites say it was written Caru in many exact Copies. It is not therefore a
corruption, but a diverse reading in certain Copies by the mistake of the
Scribes, as Bellarmine himself confesses. Apparet (says he) imprudenter
quosdam, dum se Hebraeos oppugnare credunt, ecclesiam ipsam oppugnare. Si enim
illae correctiones Scribarum sunt Hebraici textus corruptiones, sequitur
aperte, vulgatam quoque editionem esse corruptissimam: quam tanten nobis
Ecclesia pro versione authentica tradidit. Bellarm. l. 2. de verbo Dei c.
secundo.

Genebrard the Kings professor of Hebrew in Paris on the place concludes that
the Jews did not corrupt this word. Vide sil in loc.

The Chaldee Paraphrast has joined both readings together q. d. they have
dug or pierced my hands and my Feet as a Lion is wont to dig with his Teeth.
Varia lectio est in Biblijs Hebraeis in locis 848. Broughton de translat.

Morinus, a learned Papist has writ n 9. exercitations on the Bible, and
labors to prove from Beza, Amama, de Dieu and other Protestant writers, that
there are many faults in the Hebrew and Greek Copies which we now have. Muis a
Papist also has answered him.

Ob. Psalm. 19. 4. Vide Rivetum in Comment. and Glassium in Philol. Sac. The
Caldee paraphrase agrees with the Hebrew. Profesto haec res, ut ingenue fatear,
me quoque aliquando torsit. Amussis, quae funiculo constat, non omnino voce
caret, siquidem architecti and alij artifices, quando aliquid signare aut
metiri volunt, dum amussem vel funiculum extendunt, and deinde m tiunt, sonum
quendam edere Consueverunt. Isaacus Levita l. 3. contra Lindanum. Illa Coelorum
linea, vel ut. Tremellias transtulit, delineatio, id est illa Machina,
structuraque orbium Coelestium, quodammodo ad amussi^ expolita, insinitam
artificis Potentiam, sapientiamque praedicat Whitakerus
The Hebrew Books have, in omnem terram exivit linea eorum, their line is gone
forth through all the earth, but the Septuagint turn it (...). Hierome, sonus
eorum, their sound, and Saint Paul approved of this version, Romans 10. 18.

Sol. Whitaker in his answer to this objection, follows Genebrard in his
Scholia upon the place, and Genebrard follows Beza on the 10. of the Romans 18.

The Hebrew word (say they) truly signifies a line, but the Septuagint
Interpreters respected the sense, and the Apostle followed them. The scope of
the Psalm is, that Gods people may see what documents are given unto them of
God, whereby they may be brought, and led to the true, certain, and saving
knowledge of God, to the 7. verse; it shows how they were taught by the works
of God, thence to the end; they were instructed by his word; the Apostle
alleges this Psalm to prove that the Jews might come to know God by his
word, and thereby might have faith in Christ Jesus; the sense therefore is not
only the delineation and constitution of things created, but also the word of
God, and the doctrine of the Gospel, long since propounded to the Jews, and
so propounded as they could not but hear, because it was published openly to
all the whole world by the mystery of the holy Apostles out of the predictions
of the Prophets. Paul interprets the comparison propounded by the Prophet and
teaches, that as certainly as the lines of heaven run forth into all the
earth, so certainly in these last times, the doctrine of the Gospel came forth
into all the earth by the Apostles preaching, and therefore the Apostle did not
rashly change the word of the Prophet, because the Hebrew Text in the Prophet
was corrupt, but purposely in stead of delineation the Apostle put in sonus,
having respect to the present accomplishment of the promise, whereby God had
foretold, that all the Gentiles should be converted to the communion of the
Gospel; and to this end he did foreshew that he would give unto them preachers.

Coton urges 2 other places, to show that the Hebrew Text is corrupted, 2
Matthew 23. and 27. of Matthew.

Ob. 2 Matthew. 23. He shall be called a Or he shall be called a flower or
branch. Weemes. Esaiae undecimo, est in Hebraeo vox Ne^zer quae alludit ad
Nazaraeum, imo est ab eadem radice; proinde poterit, si quis velit, eo referri;
ant certe non erit versio sed allusio. Itaque melior eorum videtur sententia
qui indicatum potius censent decimum tertium capu^ Judicum, ubi praedicitur
Samson futurus Nazaraeus: fuisse. enim Illum typum Christi nemo dubitat.
Chamienus tomo 1o de Canone. l. 13. c. 8. Ex Esaia 11. 1. and Zach. 6. 12.
Commodissime videtur posse exponi Casaub. in exercitat.
Nazarene is no where found, though the Evangelist say that it is written,
therefore it follows (says he) that the Hebrew original which we have is
imperfect.

Sol. Saint Jerome says that this place was objected to him ab^ve a hundred
times, and that he has as often answered it, viz that if the Hebrew be
imperfect having no such passage; then is also that of the Septuagint and the
vulgar; so that the objection is not against the Hebrew, but against the
Scripture in what language soever it be. M^ldonat, after he had well weighed
diverse opinions, holds that of Jeromes for the most sure, which is to draw
Nazarene from Netzer a branch, Esaias 11. 1. Junius in his paralels; Piscator,
Dr. Tailor, Master Dod go the same way. Chrysostom and Theophylact, because
they cannot undo this knot, cut it, thus, saying that many of the Books of the
Prophets are lost. Bucer thinks that place Judge. 15. 5. is here noted, Samson
being a Redeemer as he was a figure of Christ, and the Book of the Judges was
composed by diverse Prophets. Calvin* Marlorat, Beza Scultetus, and Master
Perkins seem to incline to this opinion.

Our last large Annotations mention both these Interpretations, but adhere
rather to the former.

Ob. The second place urged by Cotton, to prove the corruption of the Hebrew is
27. of Matthew v. Omnes Interpretes locum illum a Matthew. citatum ad ea quae
Scripsit Zacharias re^ulerunt, nec aliqui eorum de omisso aliquo Jeremiae
prophetice libro cogitarum. Nisi quod unus est inter Jesuitus qui locum
exist^mat ex duobus constatum, nempe ex Jeremiae cap. 32. and Zachar c. 11. and
hoc. esse usitatum in Scriptura exemplis probat, ut cum verba and testimonia
duorum sunt, aut altero omisso alterius tantum nomen exprimatur, aut totum
testimonium, quasi unius tantum esset, significetur. Haec Jesuita Sanctius (in
Zach. Cap. 11.) Hieronymo haec maxim placuit solutio, quam Baronius
amplectitur, ut and Jansenius, Maldonatus, and Suarez, Matthaeum suo more
tantum posuisse quod dictum est per Prophetam, ab aliquo autem in margin
scriptum fuisse Jeremiam, quod postea scriptorum incogitantia intertextu^
irrepserit. Ad hoc facit, quod in Syra versione nomen prophetae omittitur.
Rivetus in Catholico Orthodoxo. Citantur sub nomine Jeremiae, velquia Zacharias
ea a Jeremia, cujus discipulus fuerat, acceperat, vel quia idem binominis fuit,
praesertim, (...) utriusque nominis fit eadem significatio. Id. ibid.
9. The Evangelist cites Jeremie for that which is to be found only in
Zachary.

Sol. Junius in his paralels and Doctor Tailor on the temptation bring 6.
answers to reconcile these places.

1. Some say it joins together both, one place in Jeremy, Chap. 18. 1. 2, 3.
and that of Zachary; but there is little or no agreement between them.
Secondly Some say, that it is not in Jeremies writings which are Canonical,
but in some Aprocryphall writings of Jeremy which the Jews had, and which
Chrysostom confesses he saw, wherein these words were; but it is not likely,
that the holy Evangelist would leave a Canonical Text, and cite an
Apocryphal, or give such credit to it, or seek to build our faith upon it; and
by our rule, that Book should be Canonical, which is cited by Christ or his
Apostles. 3. Some say that Matthew forgot, and for Zachary put down Jeremies;
so Augustine, and Erasmus; but with more forgetfulness, for holy men wrote as
they were moved by Gods Spirit. 4. Some think it the error of heedlesse
writers, who might easily so err; but all the oldest Copies, and the most
Ancient Fathers have the name of Jeremy. 5. Some say that Zachariah being
Instructed and trained up with Jeremy did deliver it by tradition from Jeremy,
and so Jeremy spoke it by Zachariah, which might be true, because it is said in
the Text, as was spoken by Jeremy, not written. But sixthly, the most
compendious and likely way of reconciling is this; that Zachary and Jeremy was
the same man having 2 names, which was very usual among the Jews, as Solomon
was called Jedidiah, Iehoiacim Jeconias and Coniah; Simon; Peter, Cephas, and
Bariona; Matthew, Levi. So far Junius, and Doctor Tailor. See Mr. Robert
Baily on Zach. 3. 1. 2. p. 11. and last large Annotat.

The best of the Popish writers cannot deny, Jeremie and Zachary differ not
much in signification, one signifies the commemotation of God, the other the
exaltation of God.
but that the name Jeremy the Prophet is put for Zachary, either through the
negligence of the Scribes, or else it was inserted into the Text out of the
Margent, the Evangelist saying no more, but that it might be fulfilled, which
was spoken by the Prophet, as both Ians^nius and Maldmate in loc. do confess.

1 Chamier distinguishes of a twofold depravation, one of Interpretation,
herein we excuse not, nor defend the Jews. Second of the letter, herein they
are to be patronized against the Papists, Hic nodus vetustissimos quosque
interpretes torsit. Beza ln literarum compendu^s facile potuit (...) in (...)
mutari. Id ibid. Aliqui dicuut esse errorem calami et librarioram indili^eniet
oscitan^erque exemplaria sibi proposita aut legentium aut exscribentium, ut si
quis hic (...) l gerit, id, est (...) pro (...) quam sememiam Syrus and Arabs
videntur confirmare. Sed vetustas ipsa and consensus omnium exemplarint, quae
jam olim versata sunt in Patrum Orthodoxorum manibus, videtur nobis merito hoc
defensionis genus extorquere; quod etiam agnovit memoria sua Hieronymus. lun.
in Parallel. Vide Sixti Senensis lib. Saxtum annotat. 131.
who through their sides, strike at the very Scriptures, and labor to overthrow
their authority.

The Hebrew Edition then (notwithstanding these and such like frivolous
objections) is sincere and incorrupt, and if any errors crept in through
negligence or Ignorance of the Pennien, which Copyed out the Books, yet
Bellarimine himself grants they ar^ of no great moment; in matters
pertaining to says and manners, (says he) there is nothing wanting in the
integrity of the Scriptures. Haud negare ausim, and temporum injuria and
descriptorum iucuria errata quadam and sphalmata in textum hebraum irrepsisse.
Am^ma Antibarb. bibl. What reasons can the Jesuits allege, why the Hebrew and
the Greek, which kept their integrity 400 years together after Christ, amidst
as bitter Enemies as ever they had, as troublesome and tempestuous times as
ever were since, should after in time of less danger, and greater quiet, loose
not their beauty only, but their Chastity also. And we marvel that the
Jesuits are not afraid to suffer this blot to fall upon their Popish
government; which boasts and says it is the pillar of truth, and yet has
had no better care to preserve the truth.

Objections of the Papists against the purity of the Greek Text in the New
Testament.

Ob. They instance in Romans 12. 11. to be corrupt, the Greek has serving the
time (...) for serving the Lord (...).

Sol. Many of the ancient Greek The Greek Scholiast, Oecumenius, so read
Chrysostom. and Theophylact, and Basil. See Par in locum Franciscus Lucas
restatur se sex Graeco^ codites vidisse in quibus esset (...). and Beza asserit
ita legi in probatissimis quibusque^ Arias Montanus, non tantum in textu posuit
(...), sed etiam in Apparatu nullam adnoravit lectionis varictatem, quo satis
ostendit se nullos legisse codices Graecos, in quibus esset (...) alias non
omissurus opinor, qui long leviora collegit. Chamierus.
Copies and Scholiasts have also (...) as Salmerond the Jesuit confesses,
serving the Lord, and it appears in the Syriacke translation: and who sees
not, that it might rather be an oversight of the writer taking one word for
another, rather then a fault in the Text; and the cause of the mistake (says
Beza) was the short writing of the word (...), which was taken by some for
(...) whereas they should have taken it for (...). If we should admit the other
reading, we must not understand the Apostle as if he commanded us to be
temporizaers, or to apply our selves to the corrupt customs and manners of the
times; but to keep time in all our actions, and do them in the fittest season,
as Col. 4. 5. Ephesians. 5. 16.

Ob. Erasmus the best translator of all the later (by the judgment of Beza)
says, that the Greek sometimes has superstuities corruptly added to the Text
of holy Scripture, as Matthew. 6. The doxologie, for thine is the Kingdom, the
power and the glory for ever and ever. He calls these words trifles, rashly
added to the Lords Prayer, and reprehends Valla for blaming the old vulgar
Latin, because it has them not. Tertullian, Cyprian, Ambrose, Jerome, and
Augustine do expound the Lords Prayer, and yet make no mention of these words.
Beza confesses it to be magnificam illam quidem and sanctificam, a most high
and holy form of expression, sed irrepsisse in contextum, and quae in
vetustissimis aliquot codicibus Graecis desit, See Mr. Gregory his Observations
upon some passages of Scripture Chapter 38.
it is not to be found in that vetustissimus codex by Beza to the university
Library of Cambridge; that Copy perhaps was corrupted by the Heretics.

It is not presently trifles, whatsoever Erasmus or any other man shall reject
out of the Greek Copy under that name, and yet they do Erasmus wrong, to say
that he called that part of the Lords Prayer trifles absolutely; for he styles
it so conditionally, if it be not part of the Ancient Text.

2. If Erasmus had understood that that passage had been taken out of the Book
of Chronicles written by the pen of the holy Ghost, Cartw. in his answer, to
the Rhemists preface.
he would no doubt have taken heed how he had called this conclusion of the
Lords Prayer trifles, for it appears manifestly, that this sentence was
borrowed from David, 1 Chronicles. 29. 11. with some Abridgement of the Prophets
words.

3. That cannot be superstuous without the which we should not have had a
perfect form of Prayer; Coronis precationis Dominicae Qua tuum est regnum, etc.
Etsi in multis Graecis codicibus and apud Syrum quoque interpretem reperitur,
tamen, Beza referente, in vetustissi^^is aliquibus Graecis codicibus deest, and
a nemine expenitur, praetera vulgato and a Chrysostomo. Deest quoque in
versione Arabica, nec in ullis Latinorum exemplaribus visitur: ut non immerito
Erasmus conjectet, ex solemni consuetudine a Graecis adjectam and postea in
Textum ipsum fuisse translatam. Scultetus in locum.
for since Prayer stands as well in praising of God and thanksgiving, as in
petitions and requests to be made unto him; it is evident that if this
conclusion had been wanting, there had wanted a form of that Prayer which
stands in praise and thanksgiving.

4. If to give a substantial reason of that which goes before be superfluous,
then this conclusion may be so.

5. For confirmation of this reading, we may allege besides the consent of
the Greek Copies, the Syrian interpretation which is very Ancient. Chrysostom,
Theophylact, and Euthymius expound it. The Lords Prayer in Luke is perfect in
respect of the Petitions, yet nothing hinders but that in Matthew might be
added the confirmation and conclusion; Matthew has many other things in his
Gospel, which Luke has not.

Salmeron reproves Cajetan for calling this Multil^quium, since there is a
notable confession of 4 properties of God, his Kingdom, Power, Glory, and
Eternity.

I should now show, that neither the translation of the Seventy, nor of the
vulgar Latin are authentical; but there are two questions of great moment,
first to be discussed.

The first is, whether any Books of the Scripture be lost.

The second, whether the Scripture of the Old Testament was punctata from the
beginning.

To the first question, that we may give a right answer; we must distinguish of
the Books of Scripture, some were Historical, Ethicall, or Physical,
Spanhe^^ Dub. Evang. part Tertia. Dub. 130. Codices sacros in excidio
Hierosylimitano prorsus intercidisse commentum est, non veritas, Id. part
secunda. Dub. 89. That was too confidently spoken by Whitaker, (though
otherwise a worthy writer) Canonica quaedam perijsse, credo esse. enminem qui
dubitet. Psalm. 111. 8. Cartw. in his answer to the Preface of the Rhem Test.
Nego canonem, id est, numerum librorum sacrorum, ex quo confectus est, unquam
fuisse majorem, quam sit body. Chamier^^.
others Dogmaticall. The former might perish and fall away but not the latter.
Therefore that common objection of diverse Books mentioned in the Old Testament,
whereof we find none so entitled in the Canon thereof, is easily answered.
Either they were Civil and commonwealth Stories, whether the Reader is
referred if it like him to read the stories more at large, which the Prophets
touched shortly; or else they are contained in the Books of the Kings, which
are manifestly proved to be written by diverse Prophets in their several ages,
wherein they prophesied. Salomons Books which he wrote of general Philosophy
fell away, but all the other Books of the Scripture do still remain. First,
they are all of God, all whose works remain for ever, therefore the holy
Scriptures being not only his handiwork, but as it were the chief and
Master-work of all other, must have a continual endurance.

Secondly, they all are written generally for our instruction, and more
particularly for admonition and warning, for comfort and consolation, unless
we will say that God may be deceived in his purpose and end wherefore he
ordained them; it must needs be, that it must continue whatsoever has been
written in that respect.

Thirdly, if the Lord have kept unto us the whole Book of Leviticus, and (in
it) the ceremonies (which are abolished, and whereof there is now no practice)
because they have a necessary and profitable use in the Church of God; Vide
Alting. problem. Theol. partem prim. and 6. prob. Drufium de quaesitis per
Epistolam Epist. 101. Sec B. Vsher^ Body of Divinity p. 17.
how much more is it to be esteemed, that his providence has watched over
other Books of the Scripture, which more properly belong unto our times?

Fourthly, let us hear the Scripture it self, witnessing of it own authority
and durablenesse to all ages; Deuteronomy. 2^. 29.
Moses thus writes of it; The secret and hidden things remain to the Lord our
God, but the things that are revealed to us and our Children for ever. Psalm.
119. 152.
David also professes, that he knew long before, that the Lord had founded his
testimonies for ever-more. Matthew. 24. 35.
But our Savior Christ's testimony is of all other most evident: Mat. 13. 32.
That heaven and earth shall pass, Matthew. 5. 18.
but that his word cannot pass: And yet more vehemently, Luke 16. 17.
that not one jot, or small letter, prick Cui ignorata non scrupulosa tantum
sed and superstitiosa prorsus Judaeorum anxietas non in libris tantum sed in
apicib^^ librorum sacrorum numerandis, conferendis, custodiendis? and tantum
abest ut volumen sacrum integrum interversum voluerint, ut contra profit antur
totum mundum ^uiturum in Tohu va Bohu antiquum, si vel una vox in Scriptura
mutetur. Spanhem. Dub. Evang. part secunda Dub. 89.
or stop of his Law can pass until all be fulfilled. Rom 15. 4. therefore
none of those which were written for that end, are lost.

Origin in praefat. in Cant. Canticorum, Augustine l. 18. de civitate Dei. c.
38. thought it could not neither stand with the Divine providence, nor with the
honor of the Church, that any Canonical Books, and given for such to the
Church, should be lost. Of this opinion are many worthy modern Divines.
Junius, Chamierus, Tomo. 1. L. 9. c. 5. Polanus, Wendelinus, Waltherus,
Spanhemius, Cartwright, Gerardus in exegesi loci primi de Scriptura sacra. c.
6. Joh. Camero Tomo. 3. in Praelectionibus de verbo Dei. Cap. 15. Rivetus in
Isagoge ad S. Script. c. 6. and in Summa Controversiarum Tom. 1. Tract. 1.
Quaest. 1. Altingi us. But Chrysostom. and Whitaker, also Bellarmine l. 4. de
verbo Dei. c. 4. Gr^ther and Becanus hold that some Canonical Books are lost.
I rather subscribe to the judgment of the former Reverend Divines who held the
contrary.

The second question is, whether the Scripture of the old Testament was
punctata Spanhemius Dub. Evangel. part Tertia. D^b. 129.
from the beginning; or whether the Hebrew Text had Vowels, or points from the
beginning as now it has. Controversiam de punctorum antiquitate vel novitate
inter viros eruditos disceptatam non attingo. Sententia utraque suos habet
assertores, and magni quidem nominis.

Cevalerius, Buxtorfius punctorum patronus fortissimus Capellus.
Buxtorsius, Marinus, Junius, and other very godly and learned men have
defended the antiquity of the pricks, which to the Hebrews are in stead of
Vowels, and say that the Bibles were punctata in our Savior Christ's time and
that he approved of the same Matthew. 5. Piscat. in. locum. Puncta ista Hebraica
a Massorethia sunt excogitata, and textui sacro addita cicra Christi annum 500.
aut saltem post 400. Capellus de punctorum Heb. Antiq. l. 2. Amama dissertat.
de Jehov^. Vide Riveti Isagog. c. 8.
18. others hold that the invention of the pricks and the Mass^reth is to be
ascribed to the Tiberian Massorites, who flourished about 500 years after
Christ's birth; this opinion diverse learned men have defended with most weighty
reasons, as Martinius in Technologia, Luther, Mercer, Scaliger, and Drusius,
Calvin upon the 11. of Zachary, Zuinglius in his Preface on Esaias. Raynolds in
his censure of the Apocryphal Books. But above all Capellus in his Book
entitled Arcanum punctationis revelatum, has so strongly confirmed that
opinion, and has so solidly confuted the reasons which are commonly brought to
the contrary, that he has drawn some learned Divines to his opinion, which
before did stiffely adhere to the contrary opinion, and left others very
doubtful: He has well answered that place, Matthew. 5. 18. l. 2. c. 14.

But (as Amana says) if any will not be moved from the other opinion, Altum in
omnium antiquorum Patrum Graecorum and Latinorum scriptis, de punctis
silentium, ut ne minimus quidem apex de illa ^piculis in ij^ exflet. Capel. lue
l. 1. c. 9.
that the puncta were invented by the Prophets (which many godly Divines do
out of a good zeal stand for) suum Cuique liberum sit judicium.

Vide Fulleri Miscell Sac. l. 4. c. 4. Mercerum ad Genesis 16. 13. and Drusium ad
difficuliora loca Genes. Buxtor fij dissertationem de Ebraeorum literis. Our
Savior says, Matthew. 5. 18. that not one jot or prick of the Law shall perish,
whereby it should appear that the Law and the Prophets (for of both he
speaks immediately Bishop Ushers Body of Divinity p. 13.
before) had vowels and pricks: whereunto also belong all those places of
Scripture, which testify of the clearness, and certainty of the Scripture,
which could not at all be now, if it lacked Vowels. Yet this is not B. Vshers
judgment, as himself told me. Non est improbabile argumentum ex Matthew. 5. v.
18. Christus eo loco procul dubio respicit non ad puncta vocalia and Accentus,
qui tum nulli fuerunt; sed (uti recte observat Hieronymus) ad figuram
literarum, and ad cornicula illa, quibus literarum Capita in hodierna scriptura
(qua in scribendo Legis volumine utuntur Judaei) armantur; hoc que duntaxat
vult, se non venisse (quod de eo falsissimo Calumniabantur Judaei) ad
evacuandam and abolendam Legem, ut contra potius venerit ad eam perf^ctissime
implendam. Capelli Diatribe de literis Ebr.
Luc. 16. 17. ubi per (...) puncta and accentus commode intelligi posse docti
opinantur: inter quos Broughthonius in Daniel p. 45. and Polanus Syntagm. lib.
1. cap. 37. quamvis argumento illi nolimus insistere. Voetius Tomo primo.
disputat. de authoritate Scripturae.

Sine punctis legere (says Drusius) paucis hodie Concessum. Serarius de
Rabbinis says, Elias Hutter a Lutherane writes thus, e mill Praedicantibus ne
unum quidem esse, qui etiam punctatissina possit Hebraea legere, nedum absque
punctis.

CHAP. VII.
NOw I proceed to show that neither the translation of the Seventy, nor the
vulgar Latin are anthenticall.

1. The Greek translation of the Old Testament, which is commonly ascribed to
the Seventy Interpreters, is not Divinely In editione Graeca Librorum Mosis,
Psalmorum, and Prophetarum, nihil ferme est quod peregrinum non sonet, and quod
Hebraicam non oleat loquendi rationem. Croij. observe. Augustius hanc versionem
ait esse factam divina dispensatione, ea^que apud Ecclesias peritiores maximi
fieri, cum tanta Spiritus Sancti praesentia interpretes adjuti esse dicantur in
interpretando, ut omnium es unum fuerit.
inspired.

The chief Pillars of the Primitive Church ran into this error, whence
sprung many other errors. The Greek Fathers, who were generally unskilful
both in Hebrew and Latin (some few excepted) were the less to be blamed here,
since they made use of no other Editions, therefore they more confidently
affirmed their own to be Authentical. Augustine, Tertullian, and many of the
Latin Fathers (whom diverse Divines follow) ascribed too much to the Seventy
Interpreters. Yet there was a controversy between Augustine and Jerome
concerning their authority, as is evident by both their Epistles. Bellarmine
Lib. 2. de verbo Dei cap. 6.
is large in commending this version, saying, that it is most certain, that
those Interpreters did very well translate the Scripture, and had the Holy
Ghost peculiarly assisting them, least they should err in any thing, so that
they may seem rather to be Prophets then Interpreters. Gretzer bestows a
Prophetique spirit upon them, because they did so agree and absolved their
task in so short a space of time, viz. in 72. Valido (...) ^cho opus est, ut
concoqui p^ssi^ nar^atio de Lxx. cellulis, de consensu illo miro, and de exigno
temporis intervallo, quo totum opus confectum fertur. Span^. em Da^. Eva^g^
part 1^. Dub. 22.
days,

They are said to have been put a part in 72. celles, and to have all agreed in
their translation, and the ruins thereof were (as is reported) showed a long
time after at Alexandria. But Hierome and many of the * Papists held this to be
a Fable of the 72 celles, since neither Aristaeus, who was a chief man about
King Ptolomie, that set the 70 Interpreters on work, nor Jos^phus (who was most
desirous of the honor of his Nation) makes any mention thereof. And as
touching the Interpreters themselves, Jerome says, Aliud est vatem agere,
aliud Interpretem. It is one thing to be a Prophet, another to be an
Interpreter. And as for the translation, he says, Germana illa and antiqua
translatio corrupta and violata est.

That Ancient and true translation Mas^^^ praefat. ingraec. edit. Jos^ae and
Bella^m. l. 2. de verbo Dei. c. 6. Distinguimus nos inter vers^nem Lxx.
primaevam purio^emque and inter posteriorem corruptam. Haec auctoritatis est
^erexiguae, Illa autem meruit quidem quondam auctoritat^m aliquam^ Waltherus in
officina Biblica.
of the Septuagint, is corrupted and violated, which (as Hierome says) was
agreeable to the Hebrew, but so is not the Greek Copy now extant, which is full
of corruptions, and seems to be a mixed and confused translation of many.

If the Seventy, as well as the Hebrew had been authentical, the Lord would
have been careful to have kept it pure and incorrupt unto our days, as well
as he has done the Hebrew. There is indeed a Greek Edition extant, which goes
under the name of the 70. but W^itaker De Script-Controversiae primae quaest.
Secunda c. tertio. Aut haec Graeca versio, quae ad nostra tempora pervenit, non
illa est quam septuaginta Judaici s^niotes ed^de-r^nt, aut est tam i^fi^^^e
faedeque depravata, ut authoritatis perexiguae nun^ sit. Nam ne ipse Hieronymus
puram habuit translationem Grac^m septuaginta interpretum. Illam enim, quam
ha-buit, corru^tam vitiosamque esse, saepe in comment ^^iss conqueritur.
Whi^akerus ibid. Vide Bezam in 17. Matthew. v. 9.
says that the true Seventy is lost, and that this which we now have is mixed
and miserably corrupted. Danda 70 Interpretibus venia, ut hominibus; juxta
Jacobi sententiam multa peceamus omnes. Hieron ad Pam^ch. The Apostles and
Evangelists writing in Greek, often followed the version of the Septuagint then
common amongst the Graecians; and cited it sometimes where there is a most
manifest difference from the Hebrew Text but yet they did not always use that
translation, which they would have done, if they had esteemed it Divine and
Authentical.

Spanhemius Dub Evangel. part 1a. Dub. 23. and Amama Antibarb. Bibl. l. 2.
both think that conjecture of Heinsius (in his holy Aristarchus) very
probable, viz. that the fable of the number, and consent of the Interpreters
took its original from the 24. of Ex^dus. Hence (says Henisius there) without
doubt the History concerning Ptolomie, hence those famous celles which Jerome
scoffs at, Hence that invention, that none of all that number differed in their
Interpreations.

Therefore since that version when pure was but a humane not Divine work, and
proceeded from Interpreters not Prophets, it couldbe neither Authentical nor
fide digna, any farther then it agreed Graeci ab Hebr^^^^ saepe recedunt.
Mercerus ad Job. 15. 32. Vide Drusium in Genesis 6. and Fulleri miscell. Sac. l.
2. c. 6. p. 201: Mendas in Chronologici^ numerl^ habes compl^^s. See Dr. Willet
on 47. of Genesis and Chamiers fi st tome de Canone l. 13. c. 8. 9. 10. Libri
Mosis omnium sunt optime translati: and Psalmi omnium deter^ime. Chamierus ib.
c ^. Psalmo primo (...) pestilentes pro irrisoribus and (...) non resurgent
impij in judicio: periculosa amphibolia, ne forte videantur a resurrectione
excludi impij; debuit autem verti, non consisten^ in judicio, (...) quia
condemu^^^^tur. Chamierus ibid.
with the Hebrew Text.

The Ancients themselves Commenting upon Scripture, used not the Septuagint
Edition as authenticke, from which it would not have been then lawful to
depart; but rather often correct it, as Origin and Jerome from the Hebrew
fountains: which every one knows that is versed in their works.

They are most bold in changing numbers without any reason, as Genesis 5. to Seth,
Enos, Cainaan, Malaleel, they give each a 100 years beyond the Hebrew truth.
In the 46 Chapter of Genesis for Seventy souls they say 75.

The Seventie read Prove. 8. 23 in the beginning God created me, for, in the
beginning God possessed me, whether because they mistook the Hebrew word Chava
for Cava, upon their likeness in the Hebrew Characters, or their translation
was at the first (...) possedit, possessed, and the Copies slipping in one
letter, made it (...) creavit, created, as Bellarmine after Zanchie thinks.

2. The vulgar Edition is not authentical.

We are now come to show, that the vulgar Latin Edition De vulgata latina
translatione, vide Collationem Rain^l^i cum Harto c. 2. p. 23. and cap. 6 l.
201 202, and cap 8* p. 447. and Drusium in number. ^. c. 8. etc. 96. Rivetus in
Catholico Orthodoxo Wend^lin. in Christiana theologia. Gerh. lo prim. de
Script. Sac. with lea^ned Papists hold that it was not Jeromes tra^sl^tion.
Hebraici libri constanter legunt Hu, Genesis 3. Septuaginta habent (...),
Chaldaica paraphrasis hanc lectionem confirmat, Denique quidam codices vulgatae
editionis retinent ipse, quidam ipsum. Postremo pondus ipsum sententiae
postulat, ut hoc de semine mulieri^, non de muliere intelligam. Whitakerus. De
Latina Editione long animosissima Catholic^ est and Papistis controversia.
Chamierus tomo 1^. l. 14. c. 1.
is not authentical, a thing of it self manifest, but yet to be proved by some
arguments, because our Adversaries stand upon it. Our arguments are these.

1. It was not Divinely inspired in respect of matter, form, speech, as the
Hebrew of the Old Testament, and the Greek of the new were, but was translated
by humane endeavor, and therefore it is against both religion and reason to
say it is authentical; a work of men cannot in perfection be equal with a
work of God; for as Jerome says aliud est esse vatem, aliud est esse
Interpretem.

It is the office of an Interpreter, to translate the authentical Scripture,
not to make his translation authentical; for both Jerome and every other
Interpreter might err, so did not the Prophets and Apostles; the Council of
Trent first decreed that this translation should be authentical, before it
many learned Papists themselves did disallow that translation, as Paulus
Brugensis, Valla, Engubinus, Isidorus Clarius, Jobannes Isaacus, Cajetan,
Erasmus, Jacobus Faber, Ludovicus Vives, and diverse others.

2. The vulgar translation does often change the sentence of the Holy Ghost; yea,
it does dangerously and heretically deprave the sense of holy Scripture, and
translate senselesly many times, therefore it is not to be held authentical.
Genesis 3. 15. ipsa for ipse viz. Christ, or ipsum viz. semen, which place it
seems was corrupted Idolatrously to extol the praises of the Virgin Mary,
and to prove her patronage and protection. This reading drew Bernard into this
opinion, Maria abstulit opprobrium matris Evae, and patri pro matre satisfecit
quod promittitur, Genesis 3. 15. ipsa conteret; and cui servanda est victoria nisi
Mariae? Bern. See Bedels answer to Wadesworths Letters Chapter 6.

Hoc conteret, Tremel, and alij, that is that same seed, rather he, viz. that
one person. Hieron. Ipse c^nteret caput tuunt, so the Septuagint and our
translation. Genesis 4. 13. Major est iniquitas mea quam ut veniam merear. a
corrupt translation serving to countenance the error touching merit de
congruo. In the Hebrew there is nothing which has the least signification of
merit; it should be translated ut feram vel sustineam, vel remissionem
consequar. Translatio ista potest tolerari, sumatur mereri pro consequi ut
saepissime olim apud veteres. Chamierus. Exodus 34. 29. v. The vulgar has
videbant faciem Mosis cornutam, Ex voce Hebraea potest emendari prava vulgi
consuetudo, qui duobus Cornibus ping^nt Mosen; rident igitur nos and execantur
Judaei quotles mosen in templis cornuta facie depictum a piciunt, quasi nos eum
diabolum quendam, ut ipsi stulie interpretantur, esse putemus, Sixtus Senensis
Bibli^th Sanct. l. 5. annotat. 116.
for radiantem which the Hebrew word signifies; the Seventie translate it (the
Apostle Paul approving of it, 2 Cor. 3. 7. 10.) was glorified. This
interpretation of the vulgar is reprehended by Valla, Vatablus, Arius Montanus,
Steuchus, Cajetan, Ferus, Oleaster, Thomas Aquinas and Bellarmine himself de
ecclesia triumphante l. 2. c. 4. which is also confirmed by the Text it self,
for the Scripture witnesses, that the people could not behold the face of
Moses for the brightness thereof, Exodus 34. 30. and therefore his whole face,
not the highest part of his forehead, or his head was covered with a veil 33.
v. of that Chapter, 2 Cor. 3. 3.

Job. 5. 1. The vulgar Latin has, voca ergo si est qui ti^i respondeat et ad
aliquem sanctorum convertere, hence the Papists would prove invocation of
Saints, whereas it should be translated voca quaeso, seu voca jam an sit qui
respondeat, and ad queme Sanctis respicies? q.d. ad neminem. The vulgar makes
it a simple speech without any interrogation; the meaning of Eliphaz is, q.d.
Go to I pray thee, call or bid any one appear or come, that by his consent
approves of thy opinion, try whether any one is of thy mind, which
acknowledgest not that great calamities are inflicted by God for great sins,
to which of the Saints that ever have lived or yet do live in the earth, will thou turn? by whose testimony thou shall be helped in this thy complaint
against God?

Psalm. 2. 12. The vulgar has Apprehendite disciplinam, (...) Graec.
apprehend discipline or instruction, whereas in the Hebrew it is Osculamini
filium, Invictum in hoc loco prout in Hebraeo extat, contra Judaeos pro Deitate
Christi argumentum suum esse agnoscunt Pontisicij. Amama Antiba^b. Bibl. l. 3.
Pro^uldubio ex di^o illo erga Christum Dei filium (...) profecta est illa
Ebraei textus detorsis potius quam interpre^at^^ringi enim vid^as Judaeos, cum
audiunt, Messiam Dei esse filium. Maye^^ in Philologia Sacra Jilustre est
vaticinium de Christo saedissim^ obcuratum a Graeco and Lati^ interpret a
quibus neutra vox est ex pressa. Cham^r. de Canone. l. 13. c. 9.
kiss the son. Thus an evident place against the Jews for the second person
in Trinity is obscured and overthrown, by the corrupt Latin Text. To say the
sense is the same, is in vain; for an Interpreter ought not to change the
words, and then say he has kept the sense; neither is the sense of the words
the same; who will say to kiss the Son is the same with lay hold of
discipline? We must needs embrace the doctrine of Christ, if we acknowledge him
to be our Messiah, but hence it does not follow that these 2 are the same, for
then all things which agree, should be one and the same, which will not stand.
The Chaldee Paraphrast favoring that reading, does it to defend the error of
the denying the diety of the eternal Son of God.

Saepe Codices Hebraei magis Judaeos vexant quam Graeci, aut Latini. Certe in 2
Psalm. Latini and Graeci habent: Apprehendite disciplinam, ne irascatur Dominus.
ex quo nihil aperte contra Judae^s deduci potest: at in Hebraeo est (...)
Osculamini Filium ne irascatur, id est, reverentiam exhibete filio Dei ne ipse
irascatur etc. qui locus est invictissimus contra Judaeos. Bellarminus de verbo
Dei. l. 2. c. 2.

Psalmi videntur data opera versi in contumeliam Latini Sermonis. Chamierus.

The vulgar Latin of the New Testament is no less corrupted then of the old.

Matthew. 6. 11. Supersubstanti^lem, 1. ad subst^ntiae nostrae Conservationem
necessarium. Em^n Sa.
The English Papists at Rhemes (who translated the New Testament into English,
not out of the Greek Text, but out of the vulgar Latin) read, give us to day
our super-substantiall bread, the Latin has it panem super-substantialem for
Quotidianum, daily bread. The Rhemists note upon the same is, by this bread so
called here according to the Latin and Greek-word, we ask not only all
necessary sustenance for the body; but much more all spiritual food. viz. the
blessed Sacrament it self, which is Christ the true bread that came down from
heaven, and the bread of life to us that eat his Body. Our Savior Christ
which condemned vain repetition, and by a form of prayer provided against the
same, is made here of the Jesuits to offend against his own rule: for that
which is contained in the second Petition, they teach to be asked in the
fourth. Secondly, they lodge in one Petition things of diverse kinds, and far
removed in nature, spiritual and corporeal, heavenly and earthly; yea, the
creature and the creator. Thirdly, hence it should follow, that he taught them
expressly to ask that which he had neither instituted, nor instructed them
of, and whereof his Disciples were utterly Ignorant. Solomon, Omnes veteres
laetini Scriptores panem quotidianum leger^^t, it^que iuc^ute quidam nostro
tempore i^ vulgata Editione pro qu^tidi^o supersubstanti^lem posuerunt* quod
Corporis Cib^ quem a nobl^ peti probavimus, minime convenit. Maldonatus and
Ja^^enius id^m sere (...) harm. cap. 41.
from whom our Savior seems to have taken this Petition, confirms that
exposition of things tending to uphold this present life, Prove. 30. 8. Lechem
Chukki the bread which is ordained for me. The Jesuits will never be able to
justify the old interpreter, which translateth one word the same both in
syllables and signification, in one place Supersubstantiall, and in another,
viz. in Luke Quotidianum or Daily against which interpretation of his, he has
all antiquity before that translation, and some of the Papists themselves
retained the words of Daily Bread.

Bellarmine. l. 1. de bonis operibus c. 6. preferres Quotidianum, and defends
it against the other. Tostatus applies it to temporal things.

The Syriacke says Panis indigentiae, vel sufficientiae nostrae.

Luke 1. 18. Their own Dictiona^ies and Doctors expound the Greek word (...)
gratified or undeservedly, accepted, or whom Gods singular favor had made
acceptable.
Plena gratia for gratis dilecta as Chrysostom renders it, Hail Mary full of
grace, for freely beloved. The word signifies not any grace or virtue inherent
in one, but such a grace or favor as one freely vouchsafes and shows to
another; the word retained by the Syriacke in this place is Taibutha, and
signifies happiness, blessedness, goodness, bountifulness. Tremelius
turns it gratia which may and ought to be Englished favor, as the Greek word
signifies, and is expounded by the Angel, and the Virgin Mary themselves, the
Angel adding in the same verse, the Lord is with (...), meaning by his
special favor, and in v. 30. saying, she had found favor with God. The
Virgin in her thankful song magnifying the mercy of God toward her, that he
had so graciously looked on her in so mean estate, as to make her the Mother
of her own Savior, after so mavelous a manner.

They foolishly salute her, who is removed from them by infinite space, and
whom their Hail cannot profit, being in Heaven, as the salutation of the
Angel did and might do, whilst she was here in the vale of misery. Their
Alchymie also is ridiculous, to make that a Prayer unto her, which was a Prayer
for her, to make it daily, that served in that kind, for one only time: to
make it without calling which the Angel durst not do, unless he had been
sent.

Ephesians. 5. Non habet ex hoc loco prudens l^ctor^^^ Paulo, conjugium esse
Sacramentum, non enim dicit Sacramentum sed mysterium hoc magnum est*
32. Vulg. Sacramentum hoc magnum est, and the Rhemists, This is a great
Sacrament for great mystery. Sacraments are mysteries, but all mysteries are
not properly Sacraments. How can it be a Church Sacrament, which has neither
element, nor word of promise? Secondly, Sacraments are the peculiar and proper
possession of the Church of Christ, how can that be a Sacrament which is (and
lawfully may be used) out of the Church amongst the Turks and Jews, to whom
the benefit of Matrimony cannot be denied? The old Interpreter, Coless 1. 27.
translateth the same word a mystery or secret.

Chemnitius reckons this place among those which the Papists abuse, not among
the corrupted: for Erasmus dicit^ ^n sit sacramentum o^im dubitatum erat a
scholasticis, Certe ex hoc loco non possit effic^; nam particula adver ^a^iva
ego autem satis indicat hoc mysterium ad Christum and ecclesiam pertinere, non
ab maritum and uxorem. Mark 6. 8. Vide Salmerovem and Rib^ram in loc.
Sacrament is the same with the Ancient Latin Divines that (...) is with the
Greeks. Chamier.

Heb. 11. 21 The vulgar has, and Jacob adoravit fastigium virgae, the Rhemists
adored the top of his rod. whereas the words are, he worshipped upon the top of
his stasse, and not as they have falsely turned it; so also does the Syrian
Paraphrast read ^t. The word (...) used elsewhere in the New Testament for a
walking staff, agrees fitly unto Jacob, who being both old and sick, had need
to stay himself thereupon, whilst he praised God. Joseph was no King, and
therefore had no Scepter to fall down before. In the Hebrew, Genesis 47. for top
we read head, which by a Metaphor, signifies the top, because the head is the
end and highest part of man, and consequently of any thing else. And for staff
we now read in the Hebrew, bed; which fell out, because the word mittah, there
extant, pricked with other Vowels signifies a staff for in the Hebrew matteh
is a staff, and mitteh a bed. The Septuagint whom the Apostle follows, read
it matteh and so translated it staff, otherwise th^n w^ now read it in the
Hebrew Text. If we follow the Hebrew Text, as it is now extant, the sense will
be, That Jacob, because he could not raise his body out of his bed, therefore
he bowed his head forward upon his beds head, and so worshipped God.

Bez^ speaking of the diverse Latin translations of the New Testament only,
P^aefat, in nov. T^st.
he says of the v^lgar Latin, that he follows it for the most part, and
prefers it before all the rest, Maxim^ ex part, amplector and claeeris
omnibus antepono. He speaks of the new Testament only, Doctor Fulke against
Martin.
and of that Latin translation of the new Testament, in comparison of all
other Latin translations which were before him, as Erasmus, Castalion, and
such like.

These plac^s may serve to show that the vulgar Latin is corrupt, Vide
Whitaker^ Con^^versi^m primam quaest. s^cundam c^p. 10 11. and 12. de
Scripturis.
no Book being entire or free fron error. Isidore Clarius Brixianus (praef^^t.
in Biblia) a great learned man of their own affirms, that it has 8000
places, in which the sense of the Holy Ghost is changed. Since the Council of
Trent 2 Popes have set forth this vulgar Edition diversely; Sixtinus Amama
ce^suram vulgatae versionis in P^ntateucho caepit, t^lam pertexturus nisi morte
fuisset praeventus. Waltherus in officina Billica.
which of these shall be received as authentical? How often do the Papists
leave the vulgar in all their controversies when it is for their advantage so
to do? it is a matter ordinary with them, and needless to be proved.

There is no Edition Ancienter then the Hebrew, if the Latin have been used a
1000 years in the Church, the Hebrew has been used almost 3000 years; the
Chaldee, Arbicke, Syriacke, and Greek Editions also have been used above a
1000 years, and so should be authentic by the Papists argument.

Having spoken of the authority of the Scriptures, the Canonical Books, and
the Authentical Editions; I now go on to treat of the end of the Scripture,
its adjuncts or properties fitted to that end, and the Interpretation of
Scripture.

The end of the Scripture comes next to be considered, of this I have spoken
somewhat before, but shall now enlarge my self.

The end of the Scripture is considered, 1. In respect of God God in Christ, or
God and Christ is the object of Christian religion; without knowledge of Christ
we can-not know God savingly, John 11. 27. In jury only is God known.
2. In respect of us.

In respect of God, the end of the Scripture is a glorifying of him; by it we
may learn to know, love and fear him, and so be blessed. The glory of God is
the chief end of all things, Prove. 16. 4.

In respect of us, The end of the Scripture is,

1. Intermediate, temporal edification, which is fitly referred to 5 2 Timothy 3.
16. Rom* 15* 4. The word of God is profitable 5 ways. 1. For confirmation of
true Doctrine, or teaching men the truth.
principal uses, the two first respect the mind, the other three the heart,
will and affection.

It is profitable for Doctrine, it serves to direct to all saving truth;
nothing is to be received as a truth necessary to salvation, but what is proved
out of Scripture. Where that has not a tongue to speak, I must not have an
ear to hear. Hoc quia de scrip^uris non habet autoritatem, eadem facilitate
contemuitur, qua probatur Hieron.

2. Reproof or Confutation, 2. Reproof of error.
to refute all errors and heterodoxe opinions in Divinity. Rectum est index
sui and ob^iqui.
By this sword of the Spirit, Christ vanquished Satan, Matthew. 4. 4. 7. 10. by
the Scripture he opposed the Jews, John. 5. 45. 46. 47. and 10. 34. by this he
refuted the Scribes and Pharisees, Quibus principijs veritas astruitur, iisdem
principijs falsic^s destruitur.
Matthew. 9. 13. and 12. 1. Luke 10. 25. 26. 27. Matthew. 19. 34. and 21. 12. 13.
the Sadducees, Matthew. 22 29. By this Austin refuted the Pelagians, Irenaeus,
the Valentinians; Tertullian the M^rcionites, Athanasius the Arrians.

In comitijs Vindelicorum, Tertullian c^ls the Scripture Macbaera contra
haereses.
cum episcopus Albertus aliquando legeret Biblia (referente Luthero in Sermon.
Convival.) and interrogasset quidam e consiliarijs, quid libri hic ^sset,
nescio equidem (respondet) qualis sit liber, sed omnia quae in eo lego, nostrae
religioni plane sunt contraria.

3. Correction of iniquity, 3. Correction of ill behaviouur.
setting straight that which is amiss in manners and life.

4. Instruction to righteousness. 4. Instruction in a good behavior.
Instruunt Patriarchae etiam errantes. Basil says, the Psalms are a common
Store house and Treasury of good Instruction. The Title of the 32* and some
other Psalms is Maschil, that is, a Psalm of instruction.

5. Comfort in all troubles, 5. Consolation in troubles. Ro^. 15. 4. 119. Psalm.
^9. Vide Z^pper^ A^tem hab^n^i and (...) conciones. l. 1. c. 3. p. 34, 35.
Psalm. 19. 8 and 119. 50. and 92. the Greek* word for Gospel signifies
glad-tidings. The Promises are the Christians best Cordials; as Gods Promises
are the rule of what we must pray for in faith, so they are the ground of what
we must expect in comfort.

2. Ultimate and chiefest, our Salvation and life Eternal, John 5. 39. and 20.
31. 2 Timothy 3. 15. It will show us the right way of escaping hell and attaining
Heaven. It will show us what to believe and practice, for our present and
eternal happiness.

This was Gods aim in causing the Scripture to be written, and we shall find
it fully availeable and effectual for the ends for which it was ordained by
God.

CHAP. VIII.
THe properties of the Scripture fitted to that end.

The properties which the Scripture must have for the former end are these.

It is.

1. Of Divine Authority. 2. True and Certain. 3. The rule of faith and
manners. 4. Necessary. 5. Pure and Holy. 6. Sufficient and Perfect. 7.
Perspicuous and Plain.
1. It is of Divine Authority Divina autoritas Scripturae est Infallibilis
veritas in verbu and sensibus, ob quam omnes sidem e^ and obedientiam deb^nt.
Altingius. Exodus 32. 16. 2 Timothy 3. 16. 2 Pet. 1. 21. Heb. 11. 12 John 14. 26.
and so greater then all exception.

It is Divine.

1. In its efficient cause and Original, which is God the Father dictating, in
his Son declaring and publishing, by his holy Spirit confirming and sealing
it in the hearts of the faithful. He wrote the Decalogue immediately with his
own finger, and Commanded the whole Systeme, and all the parts of Scripture, to
be written by his servants the Prophets and Apostles, as the public Actuaries
and Penmen thereof; therefore the authority of the Scripture is as great as
that of the holy Ghost, Divina auctoritas suam trabis originem una ex part, ex
immediato Spiritus S. afflatu, and ex alter^, ex sublimitate rerum qu^^
exponi^. Waltherus in officina Biblica.
who did dictate both the matter and words: those speeches are frequent, the
Lord said, and the mouth of the Lord has spoken.

2. In the subject matter, which is truth according to godliness, Heb. 4. 12.
certain, powerful, of venerable antiquity, joined with a sensible
demonstration of the Spirit and Divine presence, and with many other things
atte^^ing its divine authority.

Whence it follows, that the authority of the Holy Scriptures is.

1. Infallible, Matthew. 5. 18. Scriptura est (...) Fide digna, and pr^pterse
credenda, quia (...) est, Divinitus inspira^a. Hic illud Pythagoricum val^ta
(...) We must take heed of believing Scripture to be the word of God, because
there is the greatest reason for it, but for its divine authority. Matthew. 24.
35.
which expresses the mind and will of God, to whom truth is essential and
necessary.

2. Supreme and Independent into which at last all faith is resolved, from
which it is not lawful to appeal.

By which singular authority the Scripture is distinguished, both from all
profane and Sacred writings, and Paul honors it with this Elogie, a faithful
saying and worthy of all acceptance, 1 Timothy 1. 15. a more sure word, 2 Pet. 1.
19. the Comparative for the Superlative, in which there is no doubting and
uncertainty, but all things firm.

As God is I^hovah of himself, so is his word autoritative of it self, and is
true and to be obeyed, whether thou think it Scripture or no. There is no
higher authority for thee to appeal to, it is above opinions of men,
conscience, and therefore it must determine all controversies.

2. It is true The material parts of Scripture are true. Historical
narrations, all the Histories there related, are undoubtedly true, that of the
Creation, fall, of Christ. 2. Threa^enings, the eternal torments in hell are
sure as if thou w^st already in them 3. Promises the Scripture calls them the
sure mercies of David. 4. Predictions and Prophesies, in Daniel, Revelation, as
the downfall of Antich^i^t* they speak therefore of things to come in the
present tense, O note thereby the certainty of the accomplish^^nt. E^ay 9. 6.
Apoc. 18. 2
and certain, verity is affirmed of the Scriptures primarily, internally, and
by reason of it self, which is called the truth of the object; which is an
ab^olute and most perfect agreement of all things delivered in the Scripture,
with the first truth or divine will, of which the Scripture is a symbol and
lively Image, so that all things are delivered in it as the Holy Ghost has
dictated, whence those honorable titles are given to it, the Scripture is
called a sure word: 2 Pet. 1. 19. Psalm. 19. 7. the Scripture of truth, Dan. 10.
ult. words of truth, Eccles. 12. 10. Yea, truth it self, John 17. 17. having
the God of truth for the Author, Christ Jesus the truth for the witness, the
Spirit of truth for the Composer of it, and it works truth in the hearts of
those which hear it, 2 Pet. 2. 2. The Apostle preferres the Scripture, before
the Revelation made by Ang^ls, Gal. 1. 8. Christ commends the certainty of it
above all other sorts of Revelation, 1 Pet. 1. 19. above information from the
dead, Luke 16. 31.

The word of God is not only true but eminently true, truth it self, prima
veritas, and pura Ego in hajusmodi quo* umli^et hominam scriptis libersum, qu^a
solis Canonicis scripturis debeo sine ulla recusati^ne consensum. August de
natura and gratia. c. 6. The essential form of the word is truth in forming
the whole and every part, all Divine truth is there set down.
veritas.

The Scripture has a twofold truth.

1. Of assertion, it contains no error.

2. Of promise, there is no unfaithfulness in it.

The first truth referres to the matter which is signified, properly called
truth or verity.

The second referres to the intention of the Speaker, which is properly called
veracite or fidelity, the latter is employed, Psalm. 19. thy Testimonies are
sure, and so the sure mercies of David, the former is employed, in that the word
is purer then Gold 7 times refined.

There are two signs of truth in the Scripture.

1. The particularity of it* it names particulars in genealogies, dolosus
versatur in generalibus.

2. Impartiality toward friends and their adversaries; the most holy men have
their faults described, they give due commendation to their adversaries.

The truth of Scripture is. 1. More then any humane truth of sense or reason.
2. Above all natural reason, as the doctrine of the Trinity, the incarnation
of Christ, justification by faith in Christ. 3. A truth which evidenceth it
self. 4. The standard of all truth, nothing is true in doctrine or worship which
is not agreeable to this.

3. The Scripture is the rule of faith and manners. It is termed Canonical
generally by the Fathers of the word Canon, Scrip^^ra Sancta appellatur
Canonica, and totum ^jus corpus Canon. Rationem nominis aut omnes, aut fere
omnes esse testantur, quia sit regula f^dei. Chami^rus. The Scripture is
therefore called Cano^^call, because it prescribes a ^ule of our faith and
life, Phil. 3 16. Gal. 6. 16. Tertullianus a^pellat Scripturam regulam
veritatis. Augustinus de d^ctrina Christiana l. 2. c. 8. ait in Scripturis
inveniri omnia quae continent fidem moresque vivendi.
which signifies a rule, because it contains a worthy rule of religion, faith
and godliness^, according whereunto the building of the house of God must be
sitted.

These properties (says Suarez) are required in a rule. 1. That it be known
and easy, the Scripture is a light. 2. That it be first in its kind, and so
the measure of all the rest. 3. It must be inflexible. 4. Universal.

1. It is a perfect rule of faith and obedience and able to instruct us
sufficiently in all points of faith or doctrinals, which we are bound to
believe, and all good duties or practicals, which we are bound to practice.
Whatsoever is needful to believe or to do to please God, and save our souls
is to be found here; whatsoever is not here found, is not needful to believe
and practice for felicity.

Christ proves the resurrection of the dead, being an article of our faith
against the Sadduces, Matthew. 22. 32. and the use of the Sabbath, being a rule
of life against the Pharisees, by an inference made from the Scripture, Matthew.
12. 7.

The Heads of the Creed and Decalogue, are plainly laid down in Scripture,
therefore there we have a perfect rule of faith and manners.

It is a rule. Advers. Hell. Vid. cap. 9. Sacra Scriptura regula credendi
certiffima tu^issimaque est. Bellarm. de verbo Dei l. 1. c. 2.
1. For faith. Jerome in his controversy with Helvidius says, Credimus quia
legimus, non credimus quia non legimus. We believe because we read, we do not
believe because we do not read. Christ often says, have ye not read, is it
not written, what is written in the Law? Luke 10. 26. faith and the word of God
must run parallel. This we first believe, when we do Hoc primum Credimus, cum
credimus, quodnihil ultra credere debemus See Mr. Anthony Burges on Mark 1. 2.
3
beleve (says Tertullian) that we ought to believe nothing beyond Scripture.
When we say all matters of doctrine and faith are contained in the Scripture,
we understand as the Ancient Fathers did, not that all things are literally and
verbally, contained in the Scripture, but that all are either expressed
therein, or by necessary consequence may be drawn from thence. All
controversies about religion are to be decided by the Scripture, Deuteronomy. 12. 32.
and 4. 2. Josh. 1. 7. Franciscus de S^lis a Popish Bishop says, the Gospel
was honored so much, that it was brought into the Council, and set in the
midst of them, and to determine matters of faith, as if Christ had been there.
Deuteronomy. 5. 29. Esaias 8. 20.


2. It is a perfect rule for our lives and practice Verba Scripturae non sunt
legenda sed vivenda. Doctrinae sanitas servatur confirmando verum, resellend^
falsum, vitae sanctinionia sugendo malum, faciendo bonum. Satis habet Scriptura
quo veritatem doceat, errorem redarguat, iniquitatem corriga^, instituat ad
justiria^. Nec haec uti^^ter praestat solum^odo quoe sophistarum cavillatio,
sed etiam sufficienter nempe ut perfectus sit homo etc. Rainoldus.
Psalm. 19. 11. and Psalm. 119. 9. In the Scriptures there are delivered remedies
against all vices, and means are there laid down for the attaining of all
virtues. We must follow the Scriptures exactly, and not swerve to the right
hand or left; a metaphore taken from a way or rule, says Chamier; when Linacer
a learned English man heard the beginning of the 5. of Matthew read, Blessed
are the poor in spirit etc. he broke forth into these words, either these
sayings are not Christ's, or we are not Christians.

It is a perfect not a partial and insufficient rule as the Papi^^s make it;
as God is a perfect God, so his word is a perfect word if it be but a partial
rule then it does not perfectly direct, and he that should perfectly do the
will of God revealed in Scripture, should not yet be perfect. Secondly, if the
Scripture be a partial rule, then men are bound to be wise above that which is
written, that is, above the Law and Gospel* Regula fidei debet esse adaequata
fidei, aut regula non erit. Whitakerus.

1. All addition and detraction are forbidden to be made by any man to the
word, Deuteronomy. 4. 2. and 12. 32. Deuteronomy. 5. 32. Gal. 1. 8.

2. The Scripture is said to be perfect, to beget heavenly and saving wisdom,
Psalm. 19. 8. 2 Timothy 3 15, 16, 17.

3. Men in the matter of faith Deuteronomy. 17. 18. Esaias 8. 20. Luke 16. 29. Acts 24.
14.
and Religion are sent to the Scripture only.

2. The Scripture is an Infallible rule, Luke 1. 4. of which thou have had a
full assent. Regularecte definitur mensura infallibilis quae nullam vel
additionem vel detractionem patitur.

3. It is a ^ust rule.

Lastly, It is an universal and perpetual rule both in regard of time and
person; Christians shall be judged by that hereafter John 12. 48.
ever since the Scripture has been, it has been the only rule, in the old
Testament, to the Law and the Testimony* in the new they confirmed all things
by the old, it directs in every case. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 8.
2 To all persons, this is able to make a Minister, yea, a Council, a Church
wise to salvation; to reform a young man whose lusts are unbridled, 119. 9. to
order a King, 17 Deuteronomy. Judaei do^em ex hoc loco (...) reg^m sua manu sibi legem
describere, etiamsi al^is cum priva^us esset, descripsisset. Chamierus.
29. 30.

Ob. Faith was before the Scripture, Reg^^^ fidei est quasi causa exemplari^
fidei, quam vi^el^cet fides in omnibus sequi, and cui se conformare debet.
therefore the Scripture is not the rule of faith.

Sol. The word of God is twofold. 1. Revealed, that preceded faith. 2. Written,
that did not.

Though it be a rule, yet first, it does not exclude other Ministerial helps,
as Prayer, Preaching, the knowledge of the tongues and the Ministry of the
Church, these are means to use the rule and subordinate to it, Formale
objectum fidei est causa objectiva fidei, s^u est principium propter quod
formaliter and princip^liter credimus B^ron. contra Turnebu^. Nos discamus ex
verbo non tantum sapere, sed etiam loqui. B^z^ Epist. 7. David, Psalm. 119, 133.
des^es, that all h^s counsels, thoughts, manners, actions, might be directed
according to Gods word.
we need no more rules. Therefore it is a vain and absurd question of the
Papists, let a man be locked up in a Study with a Bible, what good will he get
by it if he cannot read?

2. There must be reason and judgment to make use of it and apply it; judge
what I say says Paul, 1 Cor. 10. 15.

The Scripture should rule our hearts thoughts and inward cogitations, our
words and actions; we should pray, hear, receive the Sacrament according to
the directions of it, buy, sell, cloth our selves and carry our selves toward
all as that bids us, 2 Samuel 22. 23. the people of God wrote after this Copy,
followed this rule. Psalm. 119. 5. 59. 111. because they desired in all which
they did to please God, (now God is pleased when his own will is done) and to
glorify him in their lives, and therefore they framed themselves according to
his statutes. We cannot better express an high esteem of God and his
excellencies then by following him in all things Every one esteems that person
most excellent to whom he gives up himself most to be ruled and ordered.

4. The Scripture is necessary.

In respect of the substance thereof it was always necessary; in respect of
the manner of revealing it is necessary since the time that it pleased God
after that manner to deliver his word, The Scriptures contain. 1 A neecss^ry
doctrine, viz. of the Law, and Gospel, Matthew. 22. 37 John 13. 16. without
which we cannot be save^, Romans 7. 7. it is, 2. Necessary in respect of the
efficient cause Jude 3. 3. Of the Form, Matthew. 22. 19. 4. The end 20. John 31.
and shall be to the worlds end* It is not then absolutely and simply
necessary, that the word of God should be delivered to us in writing, but only
conditionally and upon supposition. God for a long time, for the space of 2400
years, unto the time of Moses did instruct his Church with an immediate living
voice, and had he pleased still to go on in that way, there had been no
necessity of Scripture now more then in that age, there was a continual
presence of God with them, but now there is a perpetual absence in that way;
and the word of God was written.

1. For the brevity of man's life. See the 5. and the 11. Chapter of Genesis The
Patriarks were long lived before, and after the Flood to the times of Moses;
they lived some centuries of years; therefore afterward the purity of the word
could not fitly be preserved without writing. By writing we have the comfort of
the holy word of God, which from writing receives his denomination, in being
called Scripture: which is nothing else but writing Writing does a larger good
to a greater number and for a longer time then speaking 102 Psalm. 19. vox
audita perit, litera scripta manet. To show how much a more faithful keeper
record is then report, those few miracles of our Savior which were written,
are preserved and believed; those infinitely more that were not written, are
all lost and vanished out of the memory of men.
.

2. That the Church might have a certain and true rule and Canon, whereby it
might judge of all questions, doubts and controversies of Religion, Luke 1. 4.
Every man's opinion else would have been a Bible, and every man's lust a Law.

3. That the faith of men in Christ which was to come, might the better be
confirmed, when they should see that written before their eyes which was done
by the Mess^as, and see all things that were foretold of him verified in the
event.

4. That the purity of Gods worship might be preserved from corruption and the
truth propagated among all Nations.

5. To take off excuses from men, that they did not know Romans 10. 18. civil
Laws are written and published that offenders may be excusable.

The Penmen had a command from God. 1. A public and outward command, as
Jeremie 30. 2. and 36. 2 Moses. Exodus 17. 14. and 34. 17. and John was
commanded 12 times in the Revelation to write. Rev. 1. 11. and 2. 1. 8. 12. 18.
and 3. Chapter 1. 7. and 14. and 14. 13. and 19. v. 9. and 21. 5. 2 an inward
command by private inspiration and instinct, 2 Pet. 1. 21.

5. The Scripture is Pure and Holy, It commands all good, and forbids, reproves
and condemns all sin and Among the Turks Polylygamy is lawful, Theft was
permitted among the Spartans.
filthiness; it restraines not only from evil words and actions, but
thoughts, glances. Those are frequent adjuncts of the word of God, holy, pure,
and clean, Psalm. 12. 6. and 18. 31. and 119. 40 Prove. 30. 5. It is pure in its
narrations, it speaks purely of things evil and unclean.

It is termed holy Literae sacrae di^untur (...) scripturae, ut non solum ^
saecularibus and profan^^ literis, sed etiam ^ quibuscunque, quae de sacris
rebus agunt discernantur.
Romans 1. 2. and 2 Timothy 3. 15. 1. From its efficient principal cause, God who
is the holy of holies, holiness it self, Esaias 6. 3. Dan. 9. 24. he is the
author and inditer of it Luke 1. 67. 2 In regard of the isntrumental cause,
the Penmen of it were holy men 2 Pet. 1. 21. Prophets and Apostles. 3. From
its matter, the holy will of God, A^t. 20. 27. the Scripture contains holy and
Divine mysteries, holy precepts of life, holy promises, Psalm 105. 42. holy
Histories. 4. From its end or effect, the holy Ghost by the reading and
meditation of the Scripture sanctifies us, John 17. 17. it sanctifies
likewise all the creatures to our use, so as we may use them with a good
conscience, 1 Timothy 4. 5.

From the purity Mahomet said his doctrine come from God, but the bla^phemy and
villainy therein contained, shows it came from Satan, whereas the purity and
perfection of the doctrine contained in the Scripture shows that it is from
above. Mahomet puts in some ingredients of the flesh, gives them liberty to
revenge themselves, and to have as many wives as they would.
of it, the Scripture is compared to a glass, Jam. 1. 23. to fire, Jer. 23.
29. to light, Psalm. 119. 105. The reason of it is, because God himself is
pure, most pure, Psalm. 92. ult. Hab 1. 13.

It is pure. 1. Formally in it self, there is no mixture of falsehood or error,
no corruption or unsoundnesse at all in it Prove. 8. 6. 7. 8. 2. Virtually so as
to make others pure, John 15. 3. and 17. 17. Act. 20. 32. It begets grace, Jam.
1. 18. 1 Pet. 1. 23. and preserves and increases it, Act. 20. 32. Eph^s. 4.
11. 12.

The assertory part is pure; what it affirms to be is; and what it d^nyes to
be is not. Psalm 19. 7. and 93. 5. Jam. 1. 18. 2 What it promises shall be
performed, and what it threateneth shall be executed, Numb. 23. 19. 1 Samuel 2.
30. Zach. 1. 6. 3. What it commands is good, and what it forbids is evil,
Deuteronomy. 4. 8. Psalm. 119. 108. and 19. 8. 9. Romans 7. 12.

In other Books some truth is taught, some good commended, some kind or part
of happiness promised: But in the Inspired Oracles of God, all truth is
taught, all goodness commanded, Doctor (...) Preface to New-mans Concordance.
all happiness promised; nay, we may invert the words with Hugo de sancto
victore, and say. Quicquid ibi docetur es^ veritas, quicquid praecipitur
bonitas, quicquid promittitur felicitas. All that is there taught is truth, all
that is there commanded is goodness, all that is there promised is happiness.

It is a wonderful thing, that all the particulars, which the Canticles
contain, being taken from marriage, The General view of the Holy Scriptures.
are handled so sincerely that no blemish or spot can be found therein.

Therefore the Scriptures should be preached, read and heard with holy Sancta
sancte.
affections, and should be reverently mentioned.

The ^ewes in their Synagogues will not touch the Bible with unwashed hands,
they kiss it as often as they open and shut it, they sit not on that seat
where it is laid, and i^ it fall on the ground, Mr. Gregory in his Preface to
observations upon some pass^ges of Scriptu^e.
they fast for a whole day. The Turk writ^s upon the outside of his Alcoran.
Let no man touch this Book, but he that is pure. I would none might meddle with
ours (Alcor^^ signifies but the Scripture, you need not be afraid of the word)
but such as indeed are what other men do but think themselv^s.

6. The Scripture is Perfect. Luke 16. 29. John 5. 39. Psalm. 19. and 119.
Augustinus affirmat, omniaquae continent fidem and mores, in illis inveniri,
quae aperte posita sum in Scriptura Chrysostomus Manifesta itidem in divin^^
Scripturis esse perhibet, quaecunque necessaria. Tertullianus adorat Scripturae
p^enitudinem, Et vae denunciat He^mogeni ^i quid ijs quae scripta sunt vel de
tra^at, vel adijciat. Rainoldus 1^ Thesi Deuteronomy. 4. ^. and 12. 32.


The perfection of the Scripture is considered 2 ways.

1. In respect of the matter or the Books, in which the holy doctrine was
written, all which (as many as were useful to our salvation) have been kept
inviolable in the Church, so that out of them one most perfect and absolute
Canon of faith and life was made, and this may be called the Integrity of the
Scripture.

2. In respect of the form, viz. of the sense or meaning of these Canonical
Books, or of Divine truth comprehended in them, which Books contain most fully
and perfectly the whole truth necessary and sufficient for the salvation of the
elect, and therefore the Scriptures are to be esteemed, a sole adequate, total
and perfect measure and rule both of faith and manners, and this is the
sufficiency of the Scriptures, which is attributed to it in a twofold respect.

1. Absolutely in it self, De Scripturae plenitudine and perfectione quid
sentiat Maldona^us, vide ad Joan 7. 4.
and that in a threefold consideration. 1. Of the Principle; for every
principle, whether of a thing or of knowledge, ought to be the perfect, since
demonstration and true conclusions are not deduced from that which it
imperfect, therefore it is necessary that the holy Scripture being the first
only immediate principle of all true doctrine should be most perfect. De
Scripturae integritate vide Estium ad Galat. 3. 10. See Bp* Vshers Body of
Divinity, p. 18. 19, 20, 21. 2 Timothy 3. 16. 17 John 15. 15. Acts 20. 27. Been
habet, ut iis quae sunt Scripta, contentus sis Hilary ^


2. Of the Subject, for it has all Essential parts, matter and form, and
integrall, Law and Gospel, and is wholly perfect, both

1. Absolutely, because for the substance, it eitheir expressly or
Analogically contains the doctrine, concerning Faith and Manners, which is
communicable and profitable for us to know, which may be proved also by
induction, that all necessary opinions of Faith or precepts of life are to be
found in the holy Scripture.

2. Relatively, In every age there was revealed that which was sufficient to
salvation, and yet now no more then is sufficient; the Word it self is not
now, but the revelation only is more perfect.
because as it has a perfection of the whole, so of the parts in the whole;
that perfection is called essential, this quantitative. For all the Books are
Sufficient with an essential perfection, although integrally they have not a
sufficiency of the whole, but only their own, yet so that at distinct times
every part sufficed for their times; but all the parts in the whole are but
sufficient for us.

3. In its effect and operation it makes men perfect, 2 Timothy 3. 16. 17. Romans 15.
4. John 2. ult and 5. 39.

2. As opposed to unwritten Traditions, all which it excludes by its
sufficiency; The old Testament was sufficient for the Jews, but both the new
and old make but one complete body for the Church now. Singuli libri sunt
sufficientes suffi^cientia par^^um ad quam ordinatae sunt; (...) vero Scriptura
est sufficiens essentiali sufficientia per Libros singu los fusa. Jun. Animad*
in Bellarm. Controv. Primae, capite quar^^.
but we do not understand by Traditions generally a Doctrine delivered in Word
and Writing; but specially a Doctrine not written by Prophets or Apostles,
whether Dogmaticall, Historical* or Ceremonial; for a perfect reason of the
primary opinions belonging to Faith and Manners is delivered in Scripture; and
those things which are out of, beside, or against the Scripture, do not bind
the Conscience. 2. Historical, the Sayings and Deeds of Christ and the
Apostles, are perfectly contained in the Scriptures, as many as su^fice us for
our salvation, John 20. 30, 31. Those things which are delivered out of
Scripture are to be esteemed man's writings, 3. Ceremonial or secondary
opinions concerning Ecclesiastical Rites and Customs are for Essentialls,
Substantials, and Fundam^ntals, generally contained in the Word of God; The
accidentals, accessaries, and circumstantials are free and mutable. If
Traditions agree with the Scripture they are confirmed by it if they oppose it
they are disproved by it.

The perfection of the Scriptures is not,

First, Infinite and unlimited that is an incommunicable property of God; every
thing which is from another as the efficiente ause, is thereby limited both for
the nature and qualities thereof.

Secondly, The Scriptures are a perfect Rule for matters of Faith, but not a
perfect Register for matters of fact. M. Geres. Whitakerus de Script. c. Sexto.
quaest. Sex^ae. Stapletons, and S^rrari^^ are more wary then some other
Papists; we are abused (say they) when we are said to hold that the Scripture
is not perfect, for (say they) a thing is said to be imperfect, not when it
wants any perfection, but when it wants a perfection due, as a man is not
imperfect, if he have not an Angels perfection, because this is not due unto
him; they say it is not a perfection due to the Scriptures, to teach us very
thing necessary to salvation.
we do not understand such a perfection as contains all and singular such
things as at any time have been by Divine inspiration revealed to holy men,
and by them delivered to the Church of what sort soever they were; for all the
Sermons of the Prophets, of Christ and his Apostles, are not set down in so
many words as they used in the speaking of them; for of twelve Apostles seven
wrote nothing, which yet preached and did many things; neither are all the
deeds of Christ and his Apostles written, for that is contradicted, John 20.
30. 31 and 21. 25. but we mean only a Relative perfection which for some
certain ends sake agrees to the Scripture as to an instrument, according to
which it perfectly comprehends all things which have been, are or shall be
necessary for the salvation of the Church.

Thirdly, the several Books of Scripture are indeed perfect, for their own
particular ends, purposes, and uses, for which they were intended of the Lord;
but yet not any one Book is sufficient to the common end; the whole Scripture
is complete in all the parts thereof, one speaking of that which another does
wholly pass over in silence, one clearly delivering what was intricate in
another. Paul speaks much of Justification, and Predestination, in the Epistle
to the Romans nothing of the Eucharist, or Resurrection.

Fourthly, since God did reveal his will in writing, those writings which by
Divine hand and providence were extant in the Church, were so sufficient for
the Church in that Age, that it needed not Tradition, neither was it lawful
for any humane wight to add thereto, or take therefrom; but when God did
reveal more unto it, the former only was not then sufficient without the
latter.

Fifthly, the holy Scripture does sufficiently contain and deliver all
Doctrines which are necessary for us to eternal salvation, both in respect of
Faith and good works, Perinde sunt ea quae ex Scripturis colliguntu^ atque ea
quae scribuntur. Nazianzen.
and most of these it delivers to us expressly and in so many words, and the
rest by good and necessary consequence. The Baptism of Infants, and the
consubstantiality of the Father and of the Son, are not in those words
expressed in Scripture, yet is the truth of both clearly taught in Scripture,
and by evident proof may thence be deduced; that Article of Christ's descent
into Hell, totidem verbis is not in the Scripture, yet it may be deduced
thence, Acts 2. We shall now lay down some propositions or Theoremes about
the sufficiency of Scripture.

1. In every Age of the Church, Catholici in perfectione Scripturae, Papistae
^n imperfectione, totius causae, id est, omnium controversiarum de Religi^ne
proram and puppim constitu^nt C^ani^rus ^^m. Prim^ de canone lib. Octavo. c.
primo.
the Lord has revealed so much supernatural truth as was for that age
necessary unto salvation, his ways he made known to Moses, Psalm. 103. 7. and
his statutes to Israel, Deuteronomy. 4. 6. Psalm. 147. 20. Heb. 1. 1. Therefore that is
an erroneous opinion, that before the Law written men were saved by the Law of
nature, and in the time of the Law by the Law of Moses, and since in the time
of the Gospel by the Word of grace.

2. The substance of all things necessary to salvation, ever since the fall of
Adam has been, and is one and the same, as the true Religion has been one
and unchangeable.

1. The knowledge of God and Christ is the sum of all things nec^ssary to
salvation, John 17. 3. Col. 2. 2. but this knowledge was ever necessary. Jer 9.
23. Acts 4. 12. the Fathers indeed saw Christ more obscurely and
aenigmatically, we more clearly, distinctly and perspicuously, but yet they
knew him and believed in him unto salvation as well as we, John 8. 56. 1 Cor.
10. ^, 2, 3.


2. The Covenant of grace which God made with man is an everlasting Covenant,
therein the Lord has revealed himself to be one and unchangeable; as in
nature so in will, Heb. 13. 8. Rom* 3. 29. showing that as God is one in
nature, truth and constancy, and that as well toward the Gentiles as toward the
Jews, so he would justify both the circumcision and uncircumcision, the Jew
and the Gentile by one way of Religion; that is to say, through faith and
belief in his Son Jesus Christ.

3. Christ and his Apostles professed and taught no new Religion, but the same
which the Scriptures of the old Testament did before instruct, Mat^hew 5. 17
John 5. 39. Acts 10 43, Luke 24. 25, 26, 27, 44. 45. Acts 18 28. and 17. 7. and
26. 22. and 28. 23. Romans 6. 26. Therefore the believing Jews and the converted
Gentiles are s^iled the children of faithful Abraham being justified by Faith
as Abraham was. Math. 8. 11. Lu 19. 9. Gal. 3. 7. 8. 29. Romans 4 15, 16.
Whence we may conclude that before, under and after the Law since the fall of
Adam, there was never but one true Catholic Religion, or way to Heaven and
happiness.



Moses, it pleased God to stir up holy men whom he Divinely inspired, and
sufficiently furnished to make the Truth known unto the Church; thus after
Moses during the time of the Law, the Lord raised up Prophets, who opened the
perfect way of life unto the Church of the old Testament more clearly, then it
was before manifested in the Books of Moses, the time and Age of the Church
requiring the same. The Church of the Jews in the several Ages thereof was
sufficiently taught, and instructed in all things necessary to salvation by the
writings of M^ses and the Prophets, which appears.

1. In that our Savior being asked of one what he should do that he might
inherit eternal life, Some Papists say the Scriptures are not imperfect,
because they send us to the Church which is the perfect Rule, and therefore
they are perfect implicit though not explicit: but so I might say every
rustic were a perfect Rule of Faith, because he can show me the Pope, who is
the infallible judge. If the Scripture send to the Church to learn that which
is not in the Scripture, by this sending she confesses her imperfection. See
Moulins buckler of faith p. 45.
answered, what is written in the Law and Prophets, how Read thou? Luke 10.
25, 26. and out of the Scripture he declared himself to be the Savior of the
World, foretold and promised, Matthew 21. 44. and 26. 31. Luke 4 21. and 24,
25, 26, 27, 44 John 3. 14.

2. The answer of Abraham to the Rich man, sending his friends to Moses and the
Prophets, shows that they sufficed to instruct the faithful Jews in all
things necessary to salvation, Luke 16. 29, 30. by them they might learn how
to obtain Life and escape Death, when he says, Let them hear them, he
means them only, as that place is meant, Mat. 17. 5.

3. The Jews themselves acknowledged the sufficiency of those writings, to
lead them unto life and happiness, John 5. 39.

5. The Prophets did expound the Law of God and speak more plainly, precisely
and distinctly touching the coming of the Messiah, then Moses did; but the
last full and clear Will of God touching the salvation of man was not
manifested by them; that was together, and at once to be published and taught
by the Messiah, who also at his coming did establish that order in the Church
of God, which was to continue therein for ever.

For 1. Christ was ordained of the Father to be the great Doctor of his
Church, a Prophet more excellent then the rest that were before him, both in
respect of his Person, Office Manner of receiving his Doctrine, and the
excellency of the Doctrine which he delivered.

2. This was well known not only among the Jews, John 1. 18. and 3. 12. Esaias
61. 1. 2. Heb. 1. 1 and 2. 3. Act. 1. 3. Matthew. 11. 25. 27.
but also among the Samaritanes, in so much that the woman of Samaria could
say, I know when the Messiah is come, he will tell us all things. John 4. 25.

3. The time wherein God spoke unto us by his Son, is called the last days
or the last time. Heb. 1. 2. 1 Pet. 1. 20. to note that we are not hereafter to
expect or look for any fuller or more clear Revelation of Divine mysteries
then that which was then delivered.

4. Christ is called a mediator of the New Testament or the new Covenant, Heb.
9. 15. because all things are established by him as they ought to continue for
ever; for that which is old decays and is ready to vanish, but that which is
new abides, Heb. 8. 13.

5. It pleased the Lord in great wisdom to reveal the Covenant of grace to
the Church that she might not despair; but obscurely at the first that she
might earnestly long for the coming of that Messiah, who was to make known what
he had heard and seen of the Father, which dispensation was needful, that the
grace of God might not be contemned, as happily it would have been, if God had
fully revealed and made known his bounty unto man, before he had seen his
misery, and the necessity thereof. Our Savior Christ for substance of doctri^e
necessary to salvation, taught nothing which was not before in some sort
contained in the writings of Moses and the Prophets, Matthew. 22. 32. John 5. 46.
Luke 24. 44. 45.
out of whom he confirmed his doctrine; but that which was in them more
obscurely, Enigmatically and briefly, he explained more excellently, fully and
clearly; the Apostles proved their doctrine out of the Books of Moses and the
Prophets, Act. 17. 11. and 26. 22. Luke 24. 27. Romans 1. 2. Act. 28. 23.

6. All things necessary in that manner as we have spoken, were taught and
inspired to the Apostles by our Savior Christ, and there were no new
inspirations after their times; nor are we to expect further hereafter, which
we prove

1. By places of Scripture, John 14. 26. he that teaches all things, omitteth
nothing; Christ said all things to his Apostles as appears, John 15. 15. and
17. 8. John 16. 13.

2. By reasons drawn from thence, 1. The plentiful pouring forth of the
spirit was deferred till the glorifying of Christ; he being glorified, it was
no longer to be delayed; Christ being exalted on the right hand of God,
obtained the Spirit promised, and that was not according to measure, and poured
the same in such abundance, as it could be poured forth and received by men, so
that was fulfilled which was foretold by Joel 2. 28. Act. 2. 33. John 3. 34.
35. Act. 2. 16 17. 2. The Scripture and the prophesies of the old Testament do
teach and declare that all Divine truth should fully and at once be manifested
by the Messiah who is the only Prophet, High Priest and King of his Church;
there is no other Revelation promised, none other needful besides that which
was made by him. Esaias 11. 9. Act 3. 23. 24. Joel. 2. 23. Vide Mercerum in loc.
therefore the last inspiration was made to the Apostles and none other to be
expected. The doctrine of the Law and the Prophets did suffice to salvation;
yet it did send the Fathers to expect somewhat more perfect. 1 Pet. 1. 10 but
to the preaching of the Gospel nothing is to be added, we are not sent to
wait for any clearer vision.

3. So long as any truth needful to be known, was unrevealed or not plainly
taught, the Lord did stir up some Prophet or other, to teach the same unto
the Church; therefore the Lord surcea^ng to speak since the publishing of the
Gospel of Jesus Christ, and the delivery of the same in writing, is unto us a
manifest token, that the whole will of God is now brought to light, and that no
new Revelation is to be expected.

Our 7th Proposition is, Christ and his Apostles were able to propound and
teach by lively voice, that doctrine which pertaines to perfection, John 1. 18.
and 11. 11. 32. John 8. 26. and the Apostles perfectly taught all things which
are or shall be necessary for the Church, Act. 20. 27. Gal. 1. 7. 8. 9. The
doctrine of repentance, and remission of sins in the name of Christ, does
summarily contain all things necessarily to salvation, Act. 5. 31. and 11. 11.
but this doctrine the Apostles preached, Act. 13. 38. 39. Luke 24. 47.

The word of God is not only Milk for Babes, but strong Meat for men of ripe
years, 1 Cor. 3. 1. 2. Heb. 5. 14. and 6. 1. 2. therefore it contains not
only matter of preparation but of perfection.

Or 8th Proposition is, The sum and substance of that heavenly doctrine which
was taught by the Prophets and Apostles, was by them committed to writing; the
Holy Ghost giving them a commandment, and guiding their hands therein, that
they could not err, so that the word preached and written by them is one in
substance, both in respect of matter, which is the will and word of God, and
inward form, viz. the divine truth immediately inspired, though different in
the external form and manner of delivery.

Our 9th Proposition is, that nothing is necessary to be known of Christians
over and above that which is found in the old Testament, which is not clearly
and evidently contained in the Books of the Apostles and Evangelists.

Our last Proposition is, that all things which have been, are, or shall be
necessary to the salvation of the Church to the end of the world, are perfectly
contained in the writings of the Prophets and Apostles, long since divinely
inspired, written and published, and now received by the Church of God, so that
now no new Revelation or Tradition beside Additio ad Scripturam fit
tripliciter. 1. In quo additum est contrarium and est erroris. 20. In quo
additum est diversum and est praesumptionis. 30. In quo additum est consonum
and est fidelis instructionis.
those inspired, published and comprehended in the Scripture are necessary for
the salvation of the Church.

There are 3 opinions, 1. Of the Papists who altogether deny it. 2. Of the
Socinians which would have all things expressly contained in Scripture, and if
it be not totidem verbis they reject it. 3. Of the Orthodoxe, who say it
contains all things expressly or by consequence.

The express testimonies of Scripture, forbidding even Angels to add That
doctrine of religion, to which God would have nothing added, and from which he
would have nothing taken away, must needs be perfect. Illud perfectum in ^uo
genere cui nihil in eo genere aut addi, aut diminui potest. Psalm. 19. 8. the
Heb^ew word signifies that perfection cui nihil deest.
any thing to those things which are commanded by the Lord, do prove the
perfection of the Scripture, Deuteronomy. 4. 5. 12. and 12. 32. and 30. 10. and 5. 12,
13, 14. and 28. 58. Josh. 1. 7, 8. Prove. 30. 5. wherefore the Apostle commands
that no man presume above that which is written, 1. Cor. 4. 6. 2 Timothy 3. 15,
16. Diverse reasons may be drawn from this famous place to prove the perfection
of the Scripture.

1. The Apostle teaches, 2 King. 5. 8. 1 Timothy 6. 11.
that the Scriptures are able to make a man wise to salvation: therefore there
needs no further counsel nor direction thereunto, Salus nostra Christus est,
salutis via fides, viae ^ux, Scriptu^a Raynold^s. (...) It is taken collective
not distributive. Si (...) non totam sed omnem significaret, eo fort^us futurum
argumentum nostrum: n^m si p^rtes singulae sufficerem, tum multo magis omnes
Chamierus.
but out of the Scriptures.

2* The Scriptures are able to make the man of God, that is the Minister of the
word, perfect and complete unto every work of his Ministry, whether it be by
teaching true doctrine, or confuting false, by exhorting and setting forward to
that which is good, or dehorting from that which is evil.

Paul would not have us think that all and every writing, viz. of Plato
Aristotle is divinely inspired, for in the 15. v. he not only uses the
plural number, calling them the holy * writings; thereby to note the word of
God, and not one sentence or Book, but all the sentences and Books of the
Scripture, and also uses the Article, which has force of an universal note,
therefore the Greek word the whole Scripture signifies the whole altogether,
and not every part severally in this place. 2. No one part of holy Scripture is
able to make the Minister perfect, therefore it must needs be understood of the
whole body of holy Scripture, wherein this sufficiency is to be found. The
Ancient Fathers and other Divines, have from this place proved the perfection
and sufficiency of the Scripture in all things necessary to salvation.

We do not reason thus (as the Papists charge us) it is profitable, therefore
it is sufficient; but because 1. The Scripture is profitable for all these
Nul'us Papista apt and plene huic argumento unquam respondit, aut respend^bit
Whitake^us.
ends (viz. to teach sound doctrine, to refute false opinions, to instruct in
holy life, and correct ill manners) therefore it is sufficient; Is not the
Scripture (said Hawks the Martyr) sufficient for my salvation? yes, says one
of Bonners Chaplain^s, it is sufficient for our salvation, but not for our
instruction. Hawks answered, God send me the salvation and take you the
instruction. Fox. Marty^ol.
or it is profitable to all those functions of the Ministry, that a Minister
of the Church may be perfect; therefore much^more for the people. Argumentum
non nititur unica illa voce (utilis) sed toto sententiae camplexu. Chamierus.
Hitherto of the perfection of the Scripture absolutely considered, now follows
the sufficiency thereof in opposition to unwritten traditions or verities, as
the Papists speak.

Doctor Davenant premiseth these things for the better understanding of the
sufficiency of the Scripture. Episc. Dav. de Judice Controvers. c. 5.


1. We speak of the State of the Church (says he) in which God has ceased to
speak to men by the Prophets or Apostles divinely inspired, and to lay open
new Revelations to his Church.

2. We grant that the Apost^es living and preaching, and the Canon of the New
Testament being not yet sealed, their Gospel delivered viva voce, was no less
a rule of faith and worship, then the writings of Moses and the Prophets.

3. We do not reject all the traditions of the Church; for we embrace certain
Historical and Ceremonial ones; but we deny that opinions of faith or
precepts of worship can be confirmed by unwritten traditions.

4. We call that an opinion of faith, to speak properly and strictly when a
Proposition is revealed by God, which exceeds the capacity of nature, and is
propounded to be believed, as necessary to be known to salvation. Fundamental
opinions are those which by a usual and proper name are called Articles of
faith.

5. What is not in respect of the matter an Article of says, may be a
Proposition to be believed with a Theological faith if you look to the manner
of revealing, as that the Sun is a great light, the Moon a less, Genesis 1.
16. that Rachel was beautiful, Leah bleare-eyed.

The Papists do not cease to accuse the Scripture of imperfection Minima
veritatis particula in Scripturis continetur Charronaeus.
and insufficiency, as not containing all things necessary to salvation. The
Council of Trent sess. 4. decret. 1. Says that the truth and discipline is
contained in libris scriptis and sine scripto traditionibus. The Papists
Bellarm. de verbo Dei l. 4. c. 3* Rhemists annotat. ^n John 21. ^ect. 3. and
annotat. in 2 Thess^ 2. 16. and annotat^ in Act. 15. sect. 3. and in Apoc.
(...) sect. 1.
generally divide the word of God into the word written and traditions. They
affirm that there are many things belonging to Christian faith, which are
neither contained in the Scriptures openly nor secretly. This opinion is
maintained by the Papists, but it was not first invented by them. The Jewish
Fathers did use the traditions of the Elders, and it has been said of old,
Mark 7. 5. Matthew. 5. 21. for their errors and superstitions, yea, at length
they affirmed firmed that God gave to Moses in mount Sinai the Scripture and
the Cabala, or a double Law, the one written, the other Ass^rimus in Scripturis
non contineri express totam doctrinam necessariam, sive de fide sive de
morib^s and proi^de praeter verbum Dei scriptum requiri etiam verbum Dei non
scriptum, idest, divinas and Apostolicas traditiones. Bellarm. l quarto de
verbo Dei non scripto. Omnes libros veter^s and novi. Testamenti, nec non
traditiones ipsas tum ad fidem tum ad m^res pertinentes, tanquam vel ore tenus
a Christo vel a Spiritu Sancto dictatas, and continua successione in ecclesia
catholica conservatas part pieta^is affectu ac reverentia suscipit ac veneratur
Tridentiva synodus. sess 4. Sect. 1.
unwritten. The Tridentine Fathers session 4th do command Traditions to be
received with the same reverend affection and piety with which we embrace the
Scripture; and because one Bishop in the Council of Trent refused this, he was
excluded. In the mean space, they explain not what those traditions are which
must be so regarded, none of them would ever give us a list and Catalogue of
those Ordinances, which are to be defended by the authority of unwritten
traditions, not of the word committed to writing; only they affirm in
general, whatsoever they teach or do, which is not in the Scripture, that it
is to be put into the number of Traditions unwritten. The cause of it self is
manifest, that at their pleasure they might thrust what they would upon the
Church, under the name of Traditions. Vide Whitak. de Script. controviae quaest
Sexta. c. 5. See also Moulins Buckler of Faith p. 51.

Lindan the Papist was not ashamed to say, that it had been better for the
Church, if there had been no Scripture at all, but only Traditions. For (says
he) we may do well enough with Traditions though we had no Scripture; but
could not do well enough with Scripture, though we had no Traditions.

Baldwin says, a Testament may be either scriptum or nuncupativum, set down
in writing or uttered by word of mouth. But a nuncupative Testament, or Will
made by word of mouth without writing, must be proved by solemn witnesses. The
solemn witnesses of Christ's Testament are the Prophets, and Apostles. Let
Papists if they can, prove by them that part of the Testament of Christ is
unwritten.

Because our Adversaries Bellarmine has a whole Book de verbo Dei n^^ spripto,
of the word of God unwritten.
do contend for Traditions not written hotly and zealously, against the total
perfection of the Scripture, that they might thrust upon us many points (by
their own confession) not contained in Scripture; and usurp to themselves
irrefragable authority in the Church, it shall not be amiss largely to
consider of this matter: And 1. to enquire of the signification of the words
Greek and Latin, which are translated Tradition; and then to come to the
matter which is controverted between us and the Papists.

The Greek word signifying Tradition, (...), which in the new Testament is
used only in these places Matthew. 15. 2. 3. 6. Mark 7. 3. 5. 8. 9. 13. 1 Cor.
11. 2. Gal. 1. 14. Col. 2. 8. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 15. and 3. 6. and in the vulgar
Latin is rendered Traditio, Matthew. 15. 2. 3. 6. Mark 7. 3. 5. 8. 9. 13. Gal.
1. 14. Col. 2. 6. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 15. and 3. 6. and praecepta 1 Cor. 11. 2. Whereto
the Rhemists translation (which seems to be but a bare translation of the
vulgar Latin) does wholly agree, using the word Tradition every where,
excepting 1 Cor. 11. 2. where they use the word precepts, but set in the
margent the word Tradition. Arias Montanus in his Interlineall translation does
render it traditio. Beza does commonly express it by the word traditio. In the
English Geneva Bible, we translate it by the word instruction, tradition,
calling men's precepts traditions* the Apostles doctrine Ordinances, or
instructions, not that we feared the word tradition, but because we would not
have the simple deceived, as though the unwritten verities of the papists were
thereby commended, or as though we had some honorable conceit of them; and
what we did herein, the signification of the word does give us free liberty to
do; in our last English Translation we use the word tradition, as often as the
vulgar Latin or the Rhemists have done; not that we were driven by fear or
shame to alter what was done before, but because we would cut off all occasion
of carping at our translation, though never so unjust.

First we contend not about the name The word originally may import any thing
which is delivered howsoever either by word or writing. Thus whatsoever we have
received in the Scriptures, was first tradition as delivered by word, and still
is tradition because it is delivered in writing. But though the word in it
self have this general and indifferent signification of any thing that is
delivered, yet in our disputation it is restrained to one only manner of
delivering by word and relation only, and not by Scripture. We deny that
either in the Law or Gospel there was any thing left unwritten which
concerns us to know, for attaining of true faith and righeteousnesse toward
God. Abbot against Bishop.
tradition, the word may lawfully be used, if the sense affixed thereto be
lawful. 2. All traditions unwritten are not simply condemned by us. 3. The
Apostles delivered by lively voice many observations dispensable, and
alterable, according to the circumstances of time and persons, appertaining to
order and comeliness; only we say that they were not of the substance of
Religion, that they were not general concerning all Churches. 4. We receive
the number and names of the authors of Books Divine and Canonical, as
delivered by tradition; but the Divine truth of those Books is in it self clear
and evident unto us, not depending on the Churches authority. The Books of
Scripture have not their authority (quoad nos) from the approbation of the
Church, but win credit of themselves, and yield sufficient satisfaction to
all men of their divine truth, whence we judge the Church that receives them
to be led by the Spirit of God; yet the number, authors, and integrity of the
parts of those Books, we receive as delivered by tradition. 5. The continued
practice of such things as are neither expressly contained in Scripture, nor
the example of such practice expressly there delivered, though the grounds,
reasons, and cause of the necessity of such practice be there contained, and
the benefit and good that follows of it, we receive upon tradition, though the
thing it self we receive not for tradition. Of this sort is the Baptism of
Infants, which may be named a Tradition, because it is not expressly delivered
in Scripture, that the Apostles did Baptize Infants, nor any express precept
there found that they should so do; yet is not this so received by bare and
naked tradition, but that we find the Scripture to deliver unto us the ground
of it. I^ Matthew. 15.


Bellarmine and Maldonate Vide Whitakerum de Script. c. 9. quaest. Sexta page
405. and 406. In his Book de verbo Dei standing for unwritten traditions as a
part of the word of God, he will have Baptism of Infants to be one, but when
he disputes for Baptism of Infants against Anabaptists, then he heaps up Texts
of Scripture. Mr. Blakes. Birth. priv.
both do confess that the Baptism of Infants may be proved by the Scripture;
and therefore Maldonate concludes, nobis vero traditio non est. Bellarmine *
(as Whitaker shows) contradicts himself; for first he says, that the
Baptism of Infants is an unwritten tradition, and after, that the Catholics
can prove Baptism of Infants from the Scriptures.

To this head we may refer the observation of the Lords day, the precept
whereof is not found in Scripture, though the practice be. And if for that
cause any shall name it a Tradition, we will not contend about the word, if he
grant withal, that the example Apostolical has the force of a Law, as
implying a common equity concerning us no less then it did them.

If any man shall call the summary comprehension of the chief heads of
Christian doctrine contained in the Creed, Symbolum Apostolicum ex traditione
est secundum formulam rationemque verborum; at secundum substantiam est
scriptura ipsissima-lunius Animad. in Bellarm. controv. 1. l. 4. Negamus ullum
esse in toto Symb^lo vel minimum articulum, qui non diserte constet, ac totidem
pene dixerim verbis in Scriptura sancta: adeo ut merito dici possit opus
tesellatum, utpote constans ex varijs locis hinc inde excerptis, atque in unum
collatis, artificioseque compositis. Chamierus.
commonly called the Apostles Creed, a tradition, we will not contend about it.
For although every part thereof be contained in Scripture; yet the orderly
connection, and distinct explication of those principal Articles gathered into
an Epitome, wherein are employed, and whence are inferred all conclusions
Theological, is an Act humane, not divine, and in that sense may be called a
Tradition. But let it be noted withal, that we admit it not to have that
credit as now it has, to be the rule of faith; for this is the privilege of
holy Scripture. The Creed it self was gathered out of Scripture, and is to be
expounded by the Scripture; therefore it is not given to be a perfect Canon of
faith and manners.

By Tradition is noted 1. Whatsoever is delivered by men divinely inspired and
immediately called, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 15. Hoc fuit primum Pharisaeorum dogma, quod
negarunt omnia quae spectant ad religionem script^ esse. Joseph. Antiq. l. 13.
whether it be by lively voice or by writing. 2. In special it notes the word
of God committed to writing, 1 Cor. 15. 3. 3. It signifies rites expressly
contained in writing. Act. 6. 14. 4. It betokens that which is not committed to
writing but only delivered by lively voice of the Apostles. 5. It signifies
that which is invented and delivered by men not immediately called. In
Scripture Tradition is taken 1. in good part, for any rite or doctrine of God
delivered to his Church either by word or writing, whether it concern faith and
good works, or the external government of the Church. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 15. 1 Cor.
11. 15. and 23. 2. In ill part, it notes the vain idle and unwarrantable
inventions of men, whether Doctrine or Rites, Matthew, 15. 3. Mark 7. 8, 9.

When the Fathers speak reverently of Traditions, by the word Tradition,
either they understand the holy Scripture, which also is a Tradition, it is a
Doctrine left unto us; Traditiones istae non Scriptae ^harisaeorum nurquam in
N. Test. dicuntur simpliciter and absolute Traditiones, sed notantur semper
aliquo el^gio, ut quum dicuntur. Traditiones seniorum, Traditiones humanae;
siquando traditionis Vox ponitur simpliciter, sumitur in bonam partem and ipsum
Dei verbum Traditio est Cameron in Mat. 15.
Or by Traditions, they understand observations touching Ecclesiastill policy D.
Moulin.

Reasons confirming the sufficiency of Scripture against Popish traditions.

1. The whole Church is founded upon the Doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles;
Ephesians. 2. 20. Apoc. 21. 24. Ephesians. 41. 4.
which were not true if any doctrine was necessary to salvation not revealed by
the Prophets and Apostles.

2. The Prophets, Christ taxes the ignorance of Scripture, commends the
knowledge of it, was careful to fulfill the Scripture, did interpret it and
gave ability to understand it.
and Christ and his Apostles condemn Traditions, Esaias 29. 13. Matthew 15. 3. 6.
Col. 2. 8. Therefore they are not to be received; Christ opposes the
Commandment and Scriptures to Traditions, therefore he condemns Traditions
not written.

If the Jews might not add to the Books of Moses, Deuteronomy. ^. 2. and 12. ult.
then much less may we add to the Canon of Scripture so much increased since.

3. Those things which proceed from the will of God only, can be made known
to us no other way but by the Revelation of the Scripture; all Articles of
Faith and Precepts of Manners, concerning substance of Religion proceed from
the Will of God only, Matthew 16. 17. 1 Cor. 2. 9, 10, 11.

Locus est egregi^s, eoque nastri omnes utuntur, qui contra Papisticas
Traditi^nes aliquid scr^bunt Whitakerus long illustrissimus locus est.
Chamierus
Gal. 1. 8. As in this place, the Apostle would have nothing received besides
that which he Preached, so 1 Cor. 4. 6. He will have nothing admitted above or
more then that which is written. See Act. 26. 22.

John 20. ult. whence it is manifest that all necessary things may be found in
Scripture, since full and perfect Faith arises from thence, which eternal
salvation follows.

Bellarmin says, John speaks only of the miracles of Christ, that he wrote
not all because those sufficed to persuade the World that Christ was the Son
of God. Those words indeed in the 30 Verse are to be understood of Christ's
Miracles, but those in the 31. Verse rather are to be generally interpreted;
for the History only of the Miracles suffices not to obtain Faith or Life.

The question betwixt the Papists and us is, de ipsa doctrina tradita, Nobis
adversus Papistas non de quibusvi^ traditionibus controversia est, sed duntaxat
de traditionibus dogmatum: quibus continentur fides and mores, ^oc est, de ipsa
Doctrina. Chamierus l. 9. de Canone. c. 1.
non de tradendi modo, touching the substance of the Doctrine delivered, not of
the manner of delivering it, and of Doctrine delivered as the Word of God, not
of Rites and Ceremonies. They maintain that there be doctrinall Traditions,
or Traditions containing Articles of Faith, and substantial matters of Divine
worship and Religion, not found in the holy Scriptures, viz. Purgatory,
Invocation of Saints, Adoration of Images, Papal Monarchy.

Bellarmin, (and before him Vir and ob ingenium laboremve, and ob Episcopatus
dignitatem inter Papistas non postremi nominis. Chamierus. vide Malodanat. ad
Joan 16. 12. and Estium ad Romans 16. 17.
Peresius,) distinguishes Traditions both from the authors and the matter.

From the Authors, into Divine, Apostolical, and Ecclesiastical.

From the matter into those which are concerning Faith, and concerning Manners,
into perpetual and temporal, universal and particular, necessary and free.

Divine Traditions, Received from Christ himself teaching the Apostles.
that is, Doctrines of Faith and of the worship and service of God, any of
which we deny to be but what are comprised in the written Word of God.

Apostolic Traditions (say they) are such Ordinances as the Apostles
prescribed for ceremony and usage in the Church, as the observation of the
memorial of the Nativity, Death, and Resurrection of Christ, the alteration of
the seventh day from the Jews Sabbath, to the day of Christ's Resurrection.

Ecclesiastical, Illud erat explicandum, qu^ discrimine istae. Traditiones tam
multiplices graduque habendae sunt. Nullum discrimen faciunt, fors^n ergo
volunt, Ecclesiasticas etiam Traditiones parem cum divinis. Scripturis
Authoritatem habere.
ancient Customs which by degrees through the Peoples consent obtained the
force of a Law.

Traditions concerning Faith, as the perpetual Virginity of Mary the Mother of
Christ, and that there are only four Gospels; of Manners, as the sign of the
Cross made in the forehead, Fasts and Feastings to be observed on cetaine
days.

Perpetual, which are to be kept to the end of the World.

Temporal for a certain time, as the observation of certain legal
Ceremonies, even to the ^ull publishing of the Gospel.

Universal Traditions, which are delivered to the whole Church to be kept,
Whitakerus de Scrip c. 3 quaest. 6.
as the observation of Easter, Whitsontide and other great Feasts.

Particular, which is delivered to one or more Churches, as in the time of
Austin fasting on the Sabbath day, which was kept only at Rome.

Necessary Traditions, Traditionum (...) perniciosa est, hac ^emul aper^a.
nihil est qu^d non i^de ^^umpat in Ecclesiam. Chamierus.
which are delivered in the form of a Precept, that Easter is to be
celebrated on the Lords Day.

Free, which are delivered in the form of counsel, as sprinkling of holy
water.

Objection, The Scripture it not perfect with a perfection of parts, because
many parts are either defective or excessive

1. Some labor wi^h a defect, 1 Chronicles. 1. 18.
as Genesis 11. 12. a person is omitted in the Genealogy of Cainaan, which was
the Son of Aph^xad, Luke 3. 36.
but it is reckoned in Luke in Christ's Genealogy, not in the old Testament,
therefore there is a defect.

Sol. Luke reckons it according to the vulgar opinion of the Jews, Eorum mihi
videtur sententia sanior, qui negant vel e Lxx, ve^a Luca nomen Cainani fuisse
insertum, existima^tes potius aliunde irrepsisse post ^vangelium a Luca
conscriptum, cujus suae conjecturae rations habent non l^ves, in videre est
apud Corneliam a Lapidein cap. 11. Geneseos. Rivet. Isag. ad Script. Sa^. c.
10. vide plu^a ibid.
Junius in his paralels would have the fault to be in the Septuagint, whom Luke
followed, not approving of their error, but yielding to the time, least the
Gospel otherwise should have been prejudic^d; but Bezas opinion is rather to
be approved of, that this word is inserted from the Ignorance of those who
undertook to correct this Text, according to the translation of the Seventy
Interpreters. For in an Ancient manuscript which Beza followed, this word
Cainaan was not to be found, therefore he omitted it in his translation, and so
has our great English Bible.

Ob. There is something found in the Scripture against the Commandment of God,
Deuteronomy. 4. 2. therefore there is excess as well as defect; for many Books which
we believe to be Canonical are added.

Sol. He does not forbid adding by Gods Command, but from the will of man, for
God himself added afterward.

The Papists arguments for Traditions answered.

Ob. Bellarmine says, l. 4* de verbo Dei c quarto. Vix ullum vid^as de
Traditionibus agentem, qui non hic magn^ fastu immoretur.
Religion was preserved for 2000 years from Adam to Moses only by Tradition;
therefore the Scripture is not simply necessary.

Sol. By the like reason I might argue that Religion was long preserved not
only without the Pope of Rome, but also without Baptism and the Lords Supper,
with the like institutions; therefore they are not simply necessary; yet none
of ours hold the Scriptures simply necessary. Chamierus.
Secondly, it is false that Religion was preserved all that while by ordinary
Tradition only; Disting^^nda sunt and tempora and personae; non erant
necessariae Scripturae ante legem ergo ne quidem post legem, non erant
necessariae Apostolis, ergo ne nobis quidem, negatur consequentia Ratio est,
quia aliter Israelitas doceri volui^ post legem Deus, aliter a^te legem. Aliter
Christus Evangelium voluit Apostolis revelari, aliter nobis praedicari
Chamierus.
for the living voice of God sounded most perpetually in the Church, and the
doctrine of Religion was conveyed successivly from the Father to the Son;
which living voice of God by little and little ceasing, writing afterward
succeeded, and has the same necessity now which Gods living voice had before.

Ob. Whatsoever things are commended from Scripture are necessary, but so are
Traditions, ergo they are necessary. Joh* 16. 12. I have yet many things to say
unto you; but ye cannot bear them now; therefore (say they) the Lord spoke
many things which are not written.

Sol. 1. He says not that he had many things to tell them, John ^. 2^.
Jansenius affirmat haec multa non fuisse diversa ab illis, quae hactenus
docuerat, sed illustriorem illorum explica^ionem, and hue adducit illud
apposite, quod habetur 1 Cor. 3. Christus testatur se discip^lis su^s omnia
tradidisse Joan. 15. 15 nihil ergo tacuit.
which he had not taught them before, but which they were not now so well
capable of: for it appears that he taught them that which they understood
not, and therefore they needed to be further taught of them by the holy Ghost,
which should not teach them any new thing that Christ had not taught, but only
make them understand that which they had been taught of our Savior Christ.

2. If the holy Ghost did teach them any thing which our Savior Christ had not
before spoke unto them of, yet that makes nothing for Traditions; seeing that
which the holy spirit taught them, he taught them out of the Scriptures.

3. If the holy Ghost should have taught the Apostles some things, which
neither Christ had told them of, nor the Scriptures had taught them, yet this
is rather against the Papists. For that which the holy Ghost taught them, they
undoubtedly left in record unto the Church, as being faithful Stewards, and
revealing the whole Counsel of God unto the people.

4. It has been the practice of Heretics (as Austine affirms) at all times
to cover their dreams and fantasies, with this sentence of our Savior
Christ. Lastly, if it be asked what were those grave and great mysteries, which
the Apostles could not for their rudeness bear; they are forsooth Oil and
Spittle in Baptism; Candles light at noone days (which was not in the darker
time of the Law) Baptizing of Bells, and such like gue-gaws as the grossest and
carnallest men are fittest to receive.

Ob. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 15. Therefore Brethren, stand fast, and hold the Traditions
which ye have been taught, Hic locus omni^^^ celeb^^rimus est; Papistisque
nostris inter primos in delic^js. Chamierus.
whether by word, or our Epistle. From these words (say our Adversaries) it
appears that all things were not written and nullum Papistae in Scripturis
locum probabiliorem inveniunt, says Whitaker.

The Heretics (say the Rhemists on this place) purposely, guilefully, and of
ill conscience refrain in their translations, from the Ecclesiastical and
most usual word Tradition, evermore when it is taken in good part, though it
express most exactly the signification of the Greek word; but when it
^oundeth in their fond fantasy against the Traditions of the Church (as indeed
in true sense it never does) there they use it most gladly. Here therefore and
in the like pl^ces, that the reader may not so easily like of Traditions
unwritten, here commended by the Apostle, they translate (...), ^onstitutions,
Ordinances, and what they can invent else, to hide the truth from the Rimple or
unwarry Reader, whose translations have none other end, but to be guile such by
art and conveighance.

Thus far the Rhemists.

Paul taught the Thessalonians some things by word of mouth, which he taught
them not in his two Epistles which he wrote unto them; therefore he taught some
doctrines which he wrote not, as if that Paul wrote no more Epistles then these
two; whereby that which he taught not them in writing unto them, he taught them
by writing unto others. Secondly, how follows this argument? Paul wrote not
all the doctrines of God unto the Thessalonians, therefore they are not all
written in the Prophetical and Evangelicall writings: 2 Timothy 3. 15* 16.
whereas it is plainly testified, Luke 16. 29. 31.
that the Old Testament contains a perfect rule of the doctrine of salvation;
the new being written for a Declaration of the fulfilling and further clearing
of that in the Old Testament. Act. 17. 3.
Thirdly, it appears manifestly in the Acts, what was the sum of that which
Paul taught the Thessalonians by word of mouth. What the tr^dition was he
preached is expressed.
For there it is witnessed, that Paul taught out of the Scriptures, that it
behoved Christ to suffer and rise again from the dead, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 6.
and that Jesus was Christ; this teaching then by word is there limited to the
Scriptures of the Law and Prophets. Neither ought it to seem strange; that
this was the sum of all which the Apostle taught at Thessalonica, 1 Cor. 2. 2:
where he tarried so small a while, when amongst the Corinthians (where he
remained longest of any place, and consequently taught most) he shows that he
taught nothing but Christ and him crucified.

Fourthly, the Apostle himself, in this very place, calling (verse 14.)
whatsoever he taught by word, or wrote by the name of the Gospel, does declare
evidently, that he taught nothing but that which is contained in Scripture,
seeing the Apostle defines the Gospel which he preached, to be that which is
contained in the Scriptures.

Fifthly, Doctor ^ulke against Mar^^a in his Preface.
That the Thessalonians had some part of Christian doctrine, delivered by word
of mouth: that is, by the Apostles preaching at such time as he did write unto
them, and some part by his Epistles, the Text enforces us to grant. But that
the Church at this day, or ever since the Testament was written, had any
Tradition by word of mouth necessary to salvation, which was not contained in
the Old and New Testament, we will never grant. The Papists Papistae maximi,
qui u^quam fue^irt, Traditionarij Chamierus.
do commonly abuse the name of Tradition, which signi^ieth properly a
delivery, or a thing delivered for such a matter as is delivered only by word
of mouth, and so received from hand to hand, that is, never put in writing, but
has his credit without the Holy Scripture of God, as the Jews had their
Cabala, and the Scribes and the Pharisees their Traditions besides the Law of
God. For the justifying of our translation, it is true, that we alter according
to the circumstances of the place, especially considering that the word
Tradition, which of it self is indifferent, as well to that which is written
as to that which is not written, has been of us and them, appropriated to note
forth only unwritten constitutions, therefore we must needs avoid in such
places as this, the word Traditions, (though our last translation uses it)
where the simple might be deceived, to think that the Holy Ghost did over
commend any such to the Church, which he would not have committed to writing in
the holy Scriptures, and in stead of the word so commonly taken (although it
do not necessarily signify any such matter) we do use such words as do
truly express the Apostles meaning, and the Greek word does also signify;
Syrus interpre^ habet praecepta sive mand^ta.
therefore we use these words Ordinances, or Instructions, Institutions, or the
doctrine delivered, all which being of one or near sense, the Greek word (...)
does signify, and the same does Tradition signify if it be rightly understood.

Ob. 1 Timothy 6. 20. O Timothy, keep that which is committed to thy trust.

By the name of pledge (says Bellarmine) not the Scripture, but the treasure
of unwritten doctrine is understood. Depositum (say the Rhemisis) is the whole
doctrine of Christianity, being taught by the Apostles, and delivered their
successors.

Sol. Though other learned men interpret this pledge or gage to be the gift of
the holy Ghost; Cartw. Annotat. on the Rhem. Test.
yet we willingly acknowledge that it is to be understood of the doctrine of
Christianity, as that which has best ground both by circumstance of this, and
conferrence of other places. Whence we infer, that the doctrine of truth is
not the Churches d^crees, but the Lords; given to the Church to keep only,
wherewith the title of a pledge cannot stand, unless one may lay to pledge a
thing in his own hands, since in Popery the Church her self makes the
doctrine, which her self takes to pledge: Herein they handle it like a
pledge, that they lock it up fast, where the people of God, for whose use it is
given to be kept, cannot come unto it.

What had become of the Law of God, if others had not been more faithful
keepers of it then the Priests, to whom the principal Copy thereof, written
with the singer of God himself, was committed?

There are some points of faith not contained in Scripture, Hic Achilles est
Papistarum, mag no fastu oftentatus ab omnibus and singul^^ qui versantur in
hac co^^oversia. Chamierus de Canone. l. 9. c. 8.
neither in the Old nor New Testament; therefore it is not perfect. In the old
Testament, no doubt but the females had some remedy, whereby they might be
purged from original sin as well as the males; circumcision was instituted
only for the males the Scripture mentions not what was instituted for the
females.

In the new Testament, the perpetual virginity of Mary the mother of Christ.

Two things are considered in circumcision Cicumcisio faeminarum continetur sub
illa masculorum. Signum in soli^ masculis erat, pro utrisque tamen faciebat, si
sinem and usum ejus spectes.
1. Signum. 2. Res signata, or the end and use of the sign.

Sol. The thing signified or efficacy of the outward sign of circumcision,
was common both to Males and Females; the very institution of circumcision
teaches that; for it was a sign of the Covenant, the Covenant belonged to all
which were of the seed of Abraham, if they renounced it not.

Although there were no decision of the other point out of the Scripture,
Mariae perpetua virginitas non est fidei a^ticul^s, ideo libenter amplectimur
eam sententiam quae jam ab initio inter Christianos videtur invaluisse, ut
virgo fu^rit, hoc est, pura a coitu viri non tantum in toto Christi
generationis mysterio, quod sane ut credamus necesse est, sed etiam toto
deinceps vitae tempore. Ch^mierus de canone l. 9. c. 9.
yet would it not thence ^ollow which the Jesuits pretend, that some necessary
point of Christianity wanted the ground of holy Scripture, it being sufficient
for us to know, that she was a Virgin when our Savior Christ was borne of her,
as the Prophets did foretell. Yet (as Chamier says well) we believe that she
continued a Virgin all her life time, for in those things (says he) which are
not properly de fide, we hold the authority of the Church is great, if it
contradict not Scripture, or produce no other absurdity. Vide Riveti Apologiam
pro virgin Maria* l. 1. c. 15.

Helvidius would gather from those words, 1 Matthew. 25. until, and first borne,
that Mary after Quam pertinac^^r ludebat Helvid^us in prim^genito Mariae and
fratribus Christi ^ ut negaret perpetuam virginitatem. Chamierus.
had Children by her husband: The word till does not import so much. See Genesis
8. 7. and 28. 15. 1 Samuel 15. 35. 2 Samuel 6. 23. Matthew. 28. 20. He is called the
first borne in Scripture, which first opens the womb, whether other follow or
no.

7. The Scripture is plain and Perspicuous.

The Perspicuity of the Scripture, is a clear and evident manifestation of the
truth delivered in it.

It is Perspicuous Augustinus dicit, nihil ad sidem necessarium obscure in
Scripturis doceri, quin idem ^pertioribus locis ali^^ ex^^ice^ur.
both in respect of it self and us.

1. In respect of it self, as appears.

1. In the things delivered, which although they seem obscure for their
Majesty and dignity, yet they carry the light of truth before them, Verbum Dei
co^latum cum lace, anal^gia mult^plex; Lucis est d spellere tenebras, omnia
manifestare, ali^^ lucere no^ sibi; luce nihil pu^ius, illustrius, gratius,
utilius, faecundius, cae^stis ejus o^ig^, odio hab^tur, saeped malis, est b^num
Commune plurium, penetrat sordes sine inquinamento. Spanhemius Dab. Evangel.
part t^rtia Dub. 94. Scriptura se (...) prof^etur tum formaliter tum
effective, lumi^^sam and illuminantem. I. l. ibid. Esaias 59. 21. Jer. 32 40. and
31 31.
therefore the Scripture is frequently termed a light Psalm. 19. 8. and 119.
105. Deuteronomy. 30. 11. Prove. 6. 2. 2 Pet. 1. 19. 2 Cor. 4. 3. 4. 6. the Scripture
is a most bright light. There are 2 things in Gods revealed will, verbum rei,
the word, and res verbi, the mystery. The Scriptures are hard if we look to
the mystery, but not if we look to the word; as for example, the Scripture
teaches that there is one God in three persons, the words are plain and
easy; every man understands them; but the mystery contained in those words
passes the reach of man; we may well discern these things to be so, though we
cannot fully conceive how these should be so.

2. In the manner of delivering or kind of style, which is fitted to the things
and persons; showing the greatest simplicity both in words, either proper or
figurative; and in the clear sense and mos^ perspicuous propriety of
signification, viz. that one which is called literal and Grammatical.

2. In respect of us, because the Scripture is to us the principle, means and
in^^rument of faith; every Principle ought to be by it self, and in its own
nature known and most Intelligible, and there being 3 degrees of faith,
knowledge, assent, and full assurance, these cannot consist without the
perspicuity of the Scripture; the divine promises also of writing the Law in
our heart, and concerning the spreading abroad, and clear light of the
Gospel, should be to no purpose, if the Scriptures should not ^e plain in
things necessary to salvation.

All difficulty Difficultas aut a rerum ipsarum natura est, quae percipiuntur,
aut ab ipsis percipientibus, aut ab ijs quae intercurrunt media, Re^ quae
percipi^ntur natura sua intellectu difficiles sunt aut per obs^uritatem, ut
res, futurae, aut per majestatem ipsarum, ut mysterium S. Trinitatis. Sic quid
Sol^ clarius? quid difficilius aspectu? nam heb^scit acies (...) nostrorum vi
r^^liorum ^llius. A perciprientibus difficultatem esse quis sanus neget, nam
res quae sunt Spiritus homo naturalis non pot^st capere A^edijs quae Deus ipse
ecclesiae obtulit, id est, a Scriptura, negamus difficultatem esse. lunius.
in understanding the Scripture arises not from the obscurity of it, but from
the weakness of our understanding, corrupted by natural ignorance, or blinded
by divine punishment and c^rse; therefore it no more follows from thence, that
the Scripture cannot be an infallible and only rule of faith and life,
(because some obscure things are found in it, not understood of all) then that
the Books of Euclide are not perfect elements of Geometry, because there are
some abstruse theoremes in them, which every vulgar Geometrician can not
demonstrate, or that Aristotle's Organon is not a perfect Systeme of Logic,
because a fresh Sophister understands not all its subtilties. More distinctly
we say that the Scriptures are plain, and obscure in a threefold respect.

1. They are plain and easy to be understood by all men in Fundamentals, and
the Special points necessary to salvation, as the Decalogue, the Apostles
Creed, the Lords Prayer, and the like; unless by those whose minds the God of
this world has blinded; if they be obscure in some less principal and
circumstantiall matters, there is need of interpretation, that the meaning may
be more clearly unfolded.

2. A difference of persons is to be considered, either more generally, or more
specially.

1. More generally, The fundamentals in Scripture are plain to the Elect, who
are all taught, of God so much as is necessary for their salvation John 6. 45.
the least as well as the g^eatest.
as they are elect and regenerate, or reprobate and unregenerate; to those the
Scripture is plain and pe picuous; to whom alone it is destinated, and whose
minds the Holy Ghost will inlighten by the Scripture. John 7. 17. Romans 12. 2. 1
Cor. 12. 15. Psalm. 19. 7. Matthew. 11. 5. and 25. 25. Psalm. 9. 10. 12. 13. 14.
Yet the flesh and unregenerate part in them puts in impediments, but that
Ignorance is removed at last. Luke 8. 10 The reprobates continue involved in
perpetual darkness and blinded with Ignorance, hypocrisy, covetousness,
pride and contempt of divine learning, even seeing they see not Psalm. 36. 3.
Esaias 29 9. Jer. 5. 21. Esaias 6. 9. 2 Cor. 3. 14. there is a veil over their
hearts, 2 Cor. 4. 3. 4. which is the cause why is so many ages under the
Papacy, the Scriptures were not understood, because they preferred a lie before
the love of the truth. 2 Thessalonians. 10. whose Ignorance is a deserved punishment of
that contempt which they showed to the Scriptures and their authority.

2. More specially, the persons are distinguished according to the diversity

1. Of Conditions of life and vocations; for so, many places of Scripture are
hard to this sort of men, which are more easy to another, neither is it
required that all things be understood of all men; the knowledge of more places
is necessary in a Minister, then in a Tradesman and Husbandman, yet it is an
(...) Rule to every one in his Vocation.

2. Of capacities and wits, for every one has his measure of gifts; so among
Ministers, some understan^ the Word more obscurely, some more plainly, yet it
is to all a perfect rule according to the measure of Gifts.

3 Of times, all things are not equally obscure or perspicuous to all ages,
many things are better understood now then in times past; as the prophesies and
predictions of Christ and the times of the Gospel, so in the Mysteries of the
Revelation the exposition rather of modern Interpreters then Fathers is to be
received; because in our times not theirs, there is an accomplishment of those
Prophesies, and many things were more clearly known by them in those days,
the Ceremonies, and Types of Moses his Law were better perceived by the Jews
then us.

God the Author of the Scripture could speak perspicuously; In the first times
of the Church, there were no commentaries upon the Scriptures, the Fathers read
them without, and yet then the Scriptu^es were nnderstood. Origin (who lived
200 years after Christ) was the first that wrote any Commentary upon Scripture.
The pure Text of Scripture was ever read to the people, and never any
Commentaries, and yet was understood by them. Apoc. 1. 3.
for he is wisdom it self; and He would speak so because he caused the
Scripture to be written to instruct us to our eternal salvation, Romans 15. 4.
and he commands us to seek in the Scripture eternal life.

We do not account the prophecy of Esaias touching Christ, which the Eunuch read,
to be a dark and obsure prediction; but we know it was clear and plain
enough, though the Eunuch a raw Proselyte understood not the meaning of it.

The Fathers proved their opinions out of the Scriptures, therefore the
Scriptures are more clear then the writings and commentaries of the Fathers.

To every one which reads (with humility and invocation of God) the Book of
the Apooalypse, the obscurest Solet obscuritas lectores absterreve: quo modo
ajunt olim quendam dixisse Authorem obscur^m a se rem^ventem. Tu non vis
intelligineque ego te intelligere.
and hardest Book to understand of all other, blessedness is promised, which
when it cannot be^all to any that understands nothing, it is manifest that
the promise of blessedness includes a warrant of understanding of it, so much
as is necessary to salvation.

We affirm that many places Especially in Genesis, Job, Canticles, Ezeck.
Daniel, and the Revelation. In regard of the manner of writing, there are many
obstruse phrases in Scriptures, as diverse Hebraismes, which pe^haps we^e
familiar to the Jews, but are obscure to us.
in the Scripture are very obscure, and that either from the obscurity of the
things, as in the Prophesies of future things, the event must interpret them,
as Daniels Prophecies of the four Monarchies were in times past very dark,
but easier since when all things were fulfilled; so the coming of Antichrist
in the new Testament, drew the Fathers into diverse opinions; so even yet there
are many things obscure in the Revelation The ^0 Chap. especialy Camierus de
Canone l. 15. c. 4.
which are not accomplished. So those things which are spoken of the Messiah in
the old Testament are either not understood, or not fully without the new
Testament. Sometimes the ambiguity of words breeds a difficulty, as I and the
Fathers are one, the Arrians understood it of a union of will, as when Christ
prayed John 17. that the Disciples might be one. Hitherto may be referred those
places which are to be understood allegorically, as the Canticles, the first
Chapter of Ezechiel. 3. Some places are obscure from the ignorance of ancient
Rites and Customs, as that place, Plato, Aristotle, Euclid, have their nodos,
and the Scriptures have their (...), 2 Pet. 3. 16. in them are dark sayings
Psalm 78. 2. Riddles, Ezekiel, 17. 2. Parables, M^t. 13. 35. Mysteri^s, Mat. 4.
13. Mr. Greenhill. That is a very difficult place, 1. Cor. 3. 15. See
Laurentius, Augustine says thisis one of the places of which Peter speaks, 2
Pet. 3. 16. and that Heb. 6. 4. 1 Pet. 3. 19. the last, Luther says, is one of
the obscurest places in the new Testament. Vide Tarnovium in exercitat. Bib.
and Cameronis Myroth Evang.
1 Cor. 15. 29. See Laurentius and D. Featly on the place, in the last large,
Annotations on the Bible.
of Baptizing for the dead is diversely explained by interpreters, both old and
new. There are six interpretations of it in Bellarmine l. 1. de purgatorio c.
8. Ambrose says Paul had a respect to that custom of some who Baptized the
living for the dead. Piscator and Bucane say the custom of the ancient Church
is noted here, who Baptized Christians at the Graves, that so it might be a
symbol of their belief and confession of the Resurrection of the Dead;
Tarnovius proves that that rite was not in use in the Apostles time; Calvin
interprets it of those who were Baptized, when they were ready to die; but Beza
thinks by Baptizing is understood the (...) of washing the bodies before the
Burial. Andreas Hyperius shows in a peculiar tract what various opinions
there are about this place Voetius has written a tract de insolubilibus
Scripturae, Estius, and Dr. Hall on the hard places, of Scripture Diverse
rea^ons may be rendered, why God would have many things in the Scripture obscure
and difficult.

1. To make us deligent both in Prayer to him, Augustinus de Doctrina
Christina. lib. 2. c. Sexto. Ita Scriptu^as dicit a Deo temperatas, ut locis
ap^^ti^ribus fa^^i (...) fasti^ia de^er ge^e^tur. Idem Augustinus ait, nos
aper^s Scripturae locis pas^i, obscuris exer^eri.
to open to us the meaning of the Scriptures, and likewise in Reading,
Meditating, Searching and Comparing the Scriptures.

2. To remove disdain from us; we quickly slight those things that are easily.

3. That we might more prize Heavenly truths gotten with much labor.

4. To tame our arrogance and reprove our ignorance, John 16. 12.

5. God would not have the holy Mysteries of his Word prostituted to Dogs and
Swine; therefore many a simple godly man understands more here then the great
Rabbis.

6. That order might be kept in the Church, some to be Hearers, some Teachers
and Expounders, by whose diligent search, and travel, the harder places may be
opened to the people.

Hear the Lamb may wade, and the Elephant may swim, says Gregory. The
Scriptures have hoth milk for Babes and strong meat for men, says Austin.

It is a note of a learned Interpreter, that the benefit of knowing the
prophecies concerning the Church, Apo^. 5. 1. 4, 65. M. Buroughs on ^6 of
Isaiah v. 10.
Christ before he was slain had it not so as He had after his death; it was
the purchase of the Blood of Christ to have those things opened.

We do no^ therefore hold, that the Scripture is every where so plain and
evident, Bellarm. l. 3. de verbo Dei c. 1.
that it needs no interpration, as our adversaries do slander us, and here they
fight with their own shadow. We confess, that the Lord in the Scriptures has
tempered hard and easy things together. But this we affirm against the
Papists: first that all points of Faith necessary to salvation, and weigh^y
matters p^rtaining to Religion are plainly set forth in the Scriptures. 2.
That the Scriptures may with great profit and to good edification be read of
the simple and unlearned, notwithstanding the hardness of some places, which
in time also using the means they may come to the understanding of.

Therefore I migh save that labor in answering the Arguments of our
adversaries, since they are of no force against us, not indeed touch our cause,
proving only that some places in the Scripture are difficult which we deny not;
But I shall first take off their answers whereby they would evade the strength
of our reasons for the perspicuity of the Scripture, and then refute their own
Objections.

First, Psalm. 19. 9. and 119. 115. 2 Pet. 1. 19.
when we urge diverse places to prove the Scripture to be a light the use of
which is to dispell darkness, which it would not if it self were obscure.

Bellarmine answers, that those places are not to be understood of all the
Scripture, but only of the Commandments: and that these also are called a
light, not because they are easily understood (although that be true) but
because being understood and known they direct a man in working, 2. If it be
understood of all the Scriptures, they are called light not because they are
easily understood, but because they illustrate the mind when they are
understood. But the Apostle Peter speaks not only of the precepts of the
Decalogue, but of all the Scripture of the old Testament: which if it be light,
much more shall the Scripture of the new Testament, and therefore the whole
body of Scriptures which the Christians now have, shall be light.

Secondly, that place 119. Psalm. 130, does not speak of the precepts alone, of
thy words by which is signified the whole Genebra^dus testatur aliqu^s de tota
Scriptura locum interpretari, nec l^quitur de nostris, sed aut suis, aut
antiquis, Hieronymus quidem a part est ^jus opinionis, and Lyranus, and alii
^ulti. Whitakerus.
Scripture; in the 19 Psalm, David speaks of the word of God in general,
which he ador^eth with many titles, the Law or Doctrine of the Lord, the
Testimony of the Lord, the Statutes of the Lord, the Precepts of the Lord, the
Fear of the Lord, it is so called metonymically because it teaches us the
Fear and Reverence of the Lord, he says this Doctrine is perfect, converts
the soul, and makes wise the simple, therefore he understands the whole
Scripture the mistress of true and perfect wisdom. Secondly, it is called a
light because it has light i^ it self, and because it il^ightneth others
unless they be quite blind or willingly turn away their eyes from this light.

Thirdly, if the Commandments be easy, the rest of the Scriptures is likewise
as the Prophets and Historical Books, being but commentaries and expositions
of the Decalogue.

That evasion of the Papists will not serve their turns, that the Scripture is
a light in it self, but not quoad nos (as if the Scripture were a light under
the bushel) for that the Scripture is light effective as well as formaliter,
appears by the addition, giving understanding to the simple. It was a smart
answer, M. Durant.
which a witty and learned Minister of the reformed Church of Paris gave to a
Lady of suspected chastity, and now revolted; Dr. Halls peacemaker, sect. 15.
when she pretended the hardness of the Scripture; why, said he Madam, what
can be more plain then Thou shall not commit adultery?

The Scriptures and reasons answered which the Papists being for the obscurity
of the Scripture.

2 Pet. 3. 16. Peter says there, Ob.
that in the Epistles of Paul there are (...) some things hard to be
understood, which they that are unlearned and unstable wrest, as they do also
the other Scriptures unto their own destruction.

First, Sol.
Peter re^traineth the difficulty of Paul's writings to that point himself
presently wrote of, touching the end of the World; therefore it is unreasonable
that for one hard point in the Epistles the people should be debarred the
reading of all the rest.

Secondly, even in that point he affirms that some things only are hard, and
not all.

Thirdly, the understanding of the Scriptures d^pendeth not principally on the
sharpness of men's wits, or their learning, but on the Spirit of God which is
given to the simple that humbly seek it by Prayer; therefore though the whole
Scripture were hard to be understood, yet that is no good cause to bereave the
people of God from reading of his word.

Fourthly, Peter assigning the true cause of error and abuse of the Scripture,
to be the unstability and unlearnednesse of such as deal with them, cannot
thereby be understood to speak that of the body of the Church and of the
people.

Laurentius in his Book entitled, S. Apostolus (...), hoc est, explieatio
locorum difficilium in Epistolis Paulinis, reckons up 40 hard places in Paul's
Epistles.

Romans 1. 19. 20. 28. and 2. 12. 13, 14, 15. and 4, 5. and 5, 6. 12, 13, 14 15.
20. and 7. 9. 14. and 8. 3. 4. 19, 20, 21, 22. and 9. 3. 11. 12. 13. 18. and
11. 25, 26. 1 Cor. 2. 15. 1 Cor. 3. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. 1 Cor. 4. 9. and 5. 11.
and 6. 2, 3. 1 Cor. 7. 1. 7. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. 1 Cor. 11. 7. 10. and 15.
29. 51. 2 Cor. 2. 15, 16. and 3. 6. 15, 16. Galat. 1. 8. and 2. 14. and 3. 10.
1 Thessalonians. 4. 15, 16, 17. 1 Timothy 1. 9. Heb. 6. 4, 5, 6. and 10. 26.

They say the Scriptures are difficult also in the manner of writing as well as
in the matter, 8 Act. 31.
for which they allege Psalm. 119. 18. the Eunuch, and Luke 24. 45. also the
diverse expositions of old and New writers.

The first place is directly against them: for teaching that it is the gift of
Gods Holy Spirit obtained by Prayer to understand the Scripture, the Spirit
through Prayer, being as well obtained by the simple as learned sort, yea,
rather by them then the others, it follows that the reading of them belongs
to the simple as well as unto the learned.

The like answer serves for the place of Luke 24. 45. for by that abuse of the
place, they may wring the reading of the Scriptures from all men* even
Ministers or the word commanded to attend the reading of them, since they of
whom they say that they understood not the Scriptures, were Ministers of the
word, and that in the highest and most excellent degree of Ministry in the
world, which was the Apos^leship. The cause o^ want of understanding then was
this, the Spirit of God was not given because Christ was not glorified, which
can have now no place* Besides that, in saying they understood not the
Scriptures concerning the suffering and glory of Christ, it must needs be
understood comparatively that they did not clearly* paricularly, and
sufficiently know them. For that place in the 8th of the Acts, it is to be
understood comparatively, viz. that a man faithful and already gained to the
truth, as this Eunuch was, cannot understand the Scriptures by the bare reading
of them, so well and thoroughly as when he has one to expound them. The Lord
which helped the endeavor of the Eunuch searching the Scriptures by sending of
Philip, will never suffer those which seek him in careful reading of his word,
to go away ashamed without finding that which they seek for, in directing
unto him some lawful and sufficient ministry to instruct him by. The mystery
of the Gospel then (indeed) fulfilled, remained notwithstanding unpublished to
the world by the Apostles, which is now by their preaching and writings laid
open and made more manifest. The Eunuch which professed that he could not
understand the Scripture without an Interpreter, did notwithstanding busy
himself in reading of it.

The multitude of Commentaries There was a time when the Scriptures were read
without Commentaries, and there was a time when they were hardly understood
with Commentaries Dr. Ames.
was not so necessary (because the Scripture might have been understood
without them) although they deserve singular respect amongst all those that are
desirous to understand the Scripture, who write learned and elaborate
expositions on the Scripture.

That was a witty speech of Maldonates on Luke 2. 34. Nescio an facilior hic
locus fuisset si nemo eum exposuisset.

Secondly, These Commentaries are published, that the Scriptures may better and
more easiely be understood.

3. The Papists confess that the Articles of the Apostles Creed being
necessary for all, are easy; Yet there are many commentaries of the Ancients
upon the Creed, as Ruffinus, Augustine, Cyrill, Chrysostom, Chrysologus; and
of Papists also.

Some Scriptures are hard for the matter which they handle, Cartwrights Letter
to Mr. Hildersham, for the Study of Divinity.
as are the Books of Daniel, Ezechiel, Zachary; or throng of much matter in few
words, as are in the Old Testament the Poetical Books, wherein no doubt the
verse has caused some cloud, and amongst them the Proverbs from the tenth
Chapter, and the Prophecy of Hosea.

CHAP. IX.
Of the Interpretation of Scripture.
THis The interpretation of the Scripture is necessary in the Church of God. 1
because it is commanded by Christ John 5. 39. 1 Cor. 4. 1. 39. 2. It is
commended to the faithful by the Holy Ghost. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 19. 20. 3. I^
conduces much to the edification of the Church. 1 Cor. 14. 3. 4* It was used
by Christ and his Apostles Luke 4. 16. and 24. 27. Mark 4. 34.
question divides it self into 3 parts.

First, concerning the diverse senses of the Scripture.

Secondly, to whom the chief authority to expound Scripture is committed.

Thirdly, what means must be used in the interpretation of Scripture.

1. Of the diverse senses of Scripture.

The Interpretation of Scripture is 2 fold.

One of the words, which is called version or Translation, this has been
handled already.

2. Of things which is called explication, the finding out of the meaning of
any place, which is more Theological the other being rather Grammatical. And
this signification of the thing they commonly call the sense Nehem. 8. 9.
Interpreting Scripture is 1. Ancient, Nehem. 8. 8. 2. Honorable, Mark 4. 34.

The Scripture has often two senses, one of which the latter Divines call
Literal, Grammatical, or Historical, another mystical or Spiritual.

The sense of the Scripture is that which God the Author of the Scripture in
Glassius Phil. Sac. l. a part 1a Tract. 1, Literalis
and by the Scriptures gives to men to know and understand. The right
expounding of Scripture consists in 2 things. 1. In giving the right sense. 2.
In a right application of the same 1. Cor. 14. 3.

The Literal sense is that sensus est is, que^ Sp. Sanctus author Scripture
intendit. Chamierus. R^inoldus de lib. Apoc. Est ille literalis sensus qui
proxime per ipsa verba sive propria sive figurata sunt, sign ficatur, velut
Glassius, quem intendit proxime Spiritus Sanctus. Am^ma.
which the letter it self, or the words taken in their genuine signification
carry. And because the genuine signification of the words is that, in which the
Author uses them, whether speaking properly or figuratively, therefore the
literal sense is subdivided into plain and simple, and figurative, which
arises from the words translated from their natural signification into
another, as where Christ says 10. John 16. I have other sheep which are not of
this fold; whereby he understands other people besides the Jews.

The mystical of spiritual Sensus secundarius, diversus a liter^li, simili^
tamen. Chamier. Not the Letter but the right sense and meaning of the Scripture
is Gods word. John 19.
sense is that in which the thing expressed in the literal sense signifies
another thing in a mystery, for the shadowing out of which it was used by God.
The waters of the Flood, with which the Arc was upheld signified Baptism, by
which the Church is saved under the new Covenant, as the Apostle teaches 1
Pet. 3. 21. that History Exodus 12. it is a Passover unto the Lord, is spoken
figuratively, the other words properly. The mystical sense is, the bones of
Christ were no more broken then of the Paschall Lamb, which did signify
Christ.

The Papists say the literal sense is that which is gathered immediately out of
the words, Litera gesta docet; quid cre^as; allegoria Moralis quid agas, quo
tendas anagogia.
the spiritual which has another reference then to that which the words do
properly signify. The last they subdivide into Allegorical, Tropologicall,
Anagogicall, they say that the Scripture beside the literal sense, may have
these also.

The Allegorical sense, is when the words of the Scripture besides the plain
historical and literal meaning, signify something in the new Testament,
which belongs to Christ or the Church, as Gal. 4. besides the truth of the
story of the bond and freewoman, Saint Paul applies it unto the two
Testaments.

Tropologicall when the words and deeds are referred to signify something
which belongs to manners; as Paul 1 Cor. 9 teaches from that place, Deuteronomy. 25.
thou shall not muzle the mouth of the Ox that treads out the Corn; that
things necessary are to be allowed to Pastors.

Anagogigall, when words or deeds are referred to signify eternal life as
Psalm. 94. I swear unto them they shauld not enter into my rest, this is
literally understood of the rest in Can^an, but applied by Paul 4 Heb to life
eternal.

Becanus In Manuali Controvers. c. 1. de Script. quaest. 3.
says, as there are 3 Theological virtues, Faith, Hope and Charity, so there
are 3 mystical senses. The allegorical answers to faith, the Anagogicall to
hope, the Moral to Charity. Jerome (says he) excelled in the literal sense,
Ambrose in the Allegorical, Augustine in the Anagogicall, Gregory in the
Moral.

The Papists err three ways in this Subject.

1. In that description, which they make of the literal sense.

2. In that they hold there are diverse literal senses of one place.

3. In their division of the mystical sense into Allegorical, Tropologicall,
Anagogicall.

First, that is false which Bellarmine says, Literalis sensus est quem verba
immediate prae se ferunt. What then shall the literal sense of those words be
Psalm. 91. 13. Let them show the Lion which Christ did tread o^, and what shall
be the literal sense of those places, Esaias 11. 6, 7, 8. and 65. ult. And what
literal sense shall those words of Christ have, Matthew 5. 29. Origin Origenes
sio Paradi^^^n ter^^strem allego rizat, ut historiae au^erat veritatem, dum pro
arbori^us Angelos, prost^ minibus vi^^utes Caelestes (...), and ru^^icas
pelliceas Adae and Evae, corpora humana interpretatur. Bellarminus ex
Hieronymo. Concedit Bellarminus ex solo literal sensu pe^i posse argumenta
efficacia. To prove any matter of faith, or manner no sense must be taken, but
the literal sense. Aquinas.
(though otherwise he allegorized much) interpreted that place according to the
letter, but foolishly. That therefore is rather the literal sen^e which
arises from the words, whether properly or figuratively taken; as for example,
this is the literal sense of those words, the Seed of the woman shall break
the Serpents head, viz. Christ shall over come Satan and subdue all his force
and power, although the Devil neither be a Serpent nor has a head.

2. We hold that there is but one true proper and genuine sense of Scripture
viz. the literal or Grammatical, whether it arise from the words properly
taken, or figuratively understood, or both. For that there should be diverse
literal senses of one and the same place, is against the truth, the Text
Chamierus tomo 1^ de Scripturae sensu l. 15. c. 3.
and reason.

1. The truth, because of one and an Individual thing there is one constant
truth and not various; verum and unum convertuntur.

2. The Text, because it draws away from its one true sense.

3. And lastly reason, because this is the chiefest reason in explaining the
Text, that the true literal sense of it may be found out.

The literal sense then can be but one in one place, though a man may draw
sundry consequences Confundunt Pontificij sensum scripturae cum applicatione
s^nsu, and accommodatione ejus ad usus Apostolicos. 2 Timothy 3 16. dum vel cum
literali and mystico sensus alios i^troducunt, vel mysticum subdividunt in
all^goricum, tropologicum, and anagogicum, and totidem diversos sensus in
Scriptura dari contendunt, confundendo heterogen^, sensum and applicationem
sensus* Sp^nhem, Dub. Evang* part. tertia. Dub. 66.
a contrarijs, a similibus.

3. We do not altogether reject the third, for we hold there are Allegories,
Anagogies and Tropologies in the Scriptures, yet these are not many and diverse
senses of the Scripture; but diverse collections from one sense, or diverse
applications and accommodations of one sense Besides the Tropologies and
Anagogies are unfitly opposed to an Allegory, since they are certain kinds of
it.

Haec nominum curiosa distinctio, ex Scholarum potius morosiuscula diligentia,
quam ex ulla eorum vocabulorum necessitate, Itaque Salmero agnoscit esse quid
novum, and a p^sterioribus patribus tr^ditum. Chamierus tomo de Sensu Literali
and mystico. l. 15. C. 1. Galat. 4. the Apostle says not that there is a
double sense; but that it may be Allegorically applied, which is Historically
set down. There is then but one sense of the place; part whereof consists in
the Story, part in the Allegory: So that the whole sense is contained in them
both.

So for the second example of the Tropologicall: there is not a twofold sense
of that place, but one general sense, that as the mouth of the Ox was not to
be muzled, so the Minister of the Gospel must be provided for. Likewise of the
Anagogicall kind: it is not one sense to understand the rest of C^naan,
another the Kindome of God: but there is one whole sense, that as they for
their Idolatry were deprived of the Land of promise, so we should take heed
least by our disobedience we lose the hope of the Kingdom of heaven. So we
conclude that those are not diverse senses, but one sense diversely applied.

The literal sense is the only sense of the place, because out of that sense
only may an argument strongly be framed: wherefore seeing Allegories and Tropes
do no: Theologia Symbolica non est argumentativa. This is good reasoning, the
Oxes mouth muh not be muxled, ergo the Minister must be maintained, because it
is part of the sense.
conclude, they are not the senses of the place; and Allegories devised beside
the sense prove not, though they may illustrate. It is manifest that is always
the sense of the holy Ghost, which is drawn from the very words. But we are
not so certain concerning any mystical sense, unless when the holy Ghost
himself teaches us; as for example, it is written 11. Hosea 1. Out of Egypt
have I called my Son and Exodus 12. 46. Ye shall not break a bone of him. It
is evident that the first place is understood of the people of Israel, the
latter of the Paschall Lamb. Who durst have applied those things to Christ, The
Fathers were too much addicted to Allegories. Jerome sometimes went out of the
way, through a likeing of Allegories, as a great reader and follower of Origin,
who handled the Scriptures too licentiously. Rainolds against H^rt* Sess. 4.
unless the Holy Ghost had first done it, and declared his mind and meaning
to us? viz. that son in the first place does not only signify the people of
Israel, but Christ also, and by bone in the latter place, not only the bone of
that Lamb but of Christ also is understood.

Secondly, To whom the chief authority to expound Scripture is committed.

It was decreed in the Council of Trent, that Scripture should be expounded,
as the Church expounds it, and according to the common and unanimous consent
of the Fathers. If the Fathers agree not, the matter is referred to a general
Council: if there it be not determined, we must have recourse to the Pope and
his Cardinals.

We say also that the Church is the interpreter of Scripture, and that this
gift of interpreting resides only in the Church, but we deny that it belongs
to certain men, or is tied to a certain place or succession of men.

The Ministry of judgment Judicium est triplex. 1 Direction^^, quale habet
Minister. 2 lurisdiction^^ quale habet ecclesia. 3 Discretionis quale habet
privatus ut Act. 17. 10. Dr. Pride. There is Judex Supremus, and judex
Ministerial^s, visibilis but not supremus, and judicium practic^ discretion^^
which is left to every one. B. Downam.
the Lord has given to his Church 1 Cor. 2. 15. and 10. 15. 1 John 4. 1. Act.
15, 16 2 Cor. 14. 29. 31. 32. but the Sovereignty of judgment he has reserved
to himself.

The Holy Ghost is the Judge, and the Scripture is the sentence or definitive
decree.

We acknowledge no public Judge except the Scripture, and the holy Ghost
teaching us in the Scripture. He that made the Law should interpret the same 1
Cor. 1. 12. 1 John. 2. 27.

Arguments brought by the Papists for their opinion.

Ob. 1. They object that place, Exodus 18. 13. 26.

Sol. Moses was a Prophet endued with singular wisdom, Primo Non sequitur a
lege ad Evangelium. Secundo non sequitur ^ Mose ad Episcopum Romanum qui hic
non eundem lorum tenet inter Christianos, quem Moses inter Judaeos. Chamierus.
adorned by God with extraordinary gifts, sent immediately by him and commended
by divine Testimonies to the people, the Pope is not so. He had chiefest
authority from God over all the Israelites; but the Pope has not so over all
Christians. Moses his authority was extraordinary, no man succeeded in his
place; I^shua was a Captain only, or Judge in Civil things. Aaron only a
Priest to administer in things sacred, But Moses exercised both functions.

Ob. 2. They urge that place, Deuteronomy. 17. 9.

Sol. Here the Civil Magistrate and the Judge are joined together, as v. 12.
If it will follow hence that the Pope must be Supreme Judge in all
Ecclesiastical matters, the Emperor ought to be as well in Civil. 2. The
Pope does not hold the same place among Christians, that the High Priest did
among the Jews. For he was the chiefest, having all the rest of the Priests
subject to him; but the Pope is one amongst all, having Colleagues, many Bishops
as at first, or a few Patriarchs as after.

Ob. 3. Eccles. 12. 11. If the chief Pastor in the Old Testament had such
authority, much more the chief Priest in the New.

Sol. This one pastor Hieronymus in locum a^t: Etsi plures verbum Dei doceant,
unus tamen est illius doctrinae author, nempe Deus; ubi Manichaeos refellit,
qui unum statuerunt authorem veteris Testament, alterum vero novi. Alij
Spiritum volunt esse hunc unum Pastorem, ut Vatab^us, Alij Christum ut
Mercerus; Papam nulli, praeterquam ^nsulsi Papistae, Whitake^us. Interpretes
omnes de Deo expo^^uerunt, cum veteres tum recentes, etiam Papistae, Chami^ru^.
signifies neither the High Priest in the old Law, nor the Pope in the New;
but Jesus Christ the High Shepherd for our souls.

Ob. Matthew. 16. 19. Christ says to Peter, to the^ will I give the Keys of the
Kingdom of Heaven; therefore the Pope has authority to expound Scripture.

Sol. First, by the Keys here is meant Commission to preach the Gospel; not
authority of interpreting the Scriptures. When the Gospel is preached, the
Kingdom of heaven is opened to the believers, and shut to the unbeleevers.

2. That authority of the Keys was not committed to Peter only, but to the
other Apostles also, Matthew. 28. 18. 19.

There is a twofold judgment, 1. Of discretion, 1 Cor. 10. 15. 2. Of
authority, as the Parllament judges Capital crimes. If the Papists understand
the word Judge to ^ignifie Discerning (as when we judge of meats by the
taste)* every faithful person ought to pray unto God for grace to judge, to
discern, and to know the true sense of the Scripture. But if by judging, they
understand to pronounce decrees, definitive and infallible judgments, touching
the sense of the Scriptures, thereby to bind other men's consciences; there is
no man in the world that has that power. See Moulin^ Buckler of Faith. We have
a more compendious way, to come to the understanding of the Scripture. It were
too long when we doubt of any place, to stay till we have the general consent
of the Pastors of the Church, or to expect a general counsel or to go up to
Rome. But the word of God is amongst us; the Scriptures themselves, and the
Spirit of God opening our hearts, do teach us how to understand them. And yet
we say not (as the Papists falsely charge us) that we allow every private man's
interpretation of Scripture, refusing the judgment of the Pastors of the
Church Cap significast* de Elect. Review of the Council of Trent. l. c. 8. p.
45.
Panoruitan says, Deum atque homines testamur, cum plurima nobis in Papis^o
displiceant, ^um hoc omnino intolerandum videri, quod Scripturas quilibet apud
eas doc ^or culas, ita sibi in manum ^radi^as arbitretur ut eas sursum de^rsum
versare queat, quid libet inde con^ecturus suo arbitrio; suo, in quam arbitri^,
suo mart, quidlibet excogitans and comm^ntans. Ita enim even^t, ut qui maxim
prae se ferant detestari privatum spiritum, ij hu^c ipsi indulgeant omnium
maxima.
the opinion of one godly man ought to be preferred before the Popes, if it be
grounded upon better authority of the Old and New Testament. 2 Pet. 1. 20. No
prophecy of the Scripture is of any private interpretation. Enimvero quis
docuit prophetiam illam ex Psalmo 72. adorabunt ^um omnes reges terrae, omnes
gentes servient ei, impletam ess^^ L^o^e. ^eci^o. Chamietus tomo 10 de
Sc^pturae interpretatione l. 16. c. 1o. vide Cameronem ad 2 Pet. 1. 20. Matthew.
23. 8* 9. 10.
Stapleton says, interpretation is private, either ratione personae when the
man is private, or ratione medij when it is not taken out of the context and
circumstances, or ratione finis when it is for a false end. Now private
interpretation in regard of the person, if it be public in regard of the
means, is not forbidden; for it is lawful for one man with Scripture toti
resistere mundo, says the Gloss of the Canon Law; the meaning of this place
is, that the Prophets were no Interpreters or Messengers of their own minds but
Gods. The Catholics hold (says Chamier) meaning still by that Title the
Protestants) that the Scripture is to be interpreted by private labor and
industry, viz. of Augustine, Jerome, Chrysostom, but not in a private sense,
that is in a sense arising from the brain of the Interpreter.

It is true (says Cartwright against the Rhemists) that the Scriptures cannot
be expounded of every private Spirit, nor (which is more) of any private
spirit, nor yet of all private spirits together; but only of those which are
inspired of God, viz. the Prophets and Apostles, which are here opposed unto
private Interpretation. And therefore it is evident that the exposition of the
Scripture, ought not to be fetched from Ecclesiastical either Fathers or
Councels, which speak not by inspiration, but from the Scriptures themselves;
what he means, he declares in the next verse, where he shows the reason of
his saying* namely, that it must be interpreted as it was written; and by as
high authority. Seeing therefore it was first spoken by holy men, which spoke
as they were led by the holy Spirit, and were inspired of God, it follows,
that it must be interpreted by the same authority. The interpretation therefore
that is brought but of the Apostles and Prophets, is not private, although it
be avowed by one man only. On the other side that interpretation which is not
brought from thence, although it have the allowance of whole General Counsels,
is but private.

This is a principal meaning of our Savior Christ, when he wills that we
should call no man father or Master in the earth, Matthew. 17. 5.
that is, in matter of doctrine, we should depend upon the authority of no man,
nor of all men in the earth, but only upon Christ and upon God.

Our reasons by which we prove, that the chiefest judgment and authority of
interpreting Scriptures is to be given not to the Church, Soli scripturae vel
spiritui in scriptura loquenti competunt requisita summi Iudic^^que tria sunt
1o ut certo sciamus, veram esse sententiam, quam pronunciat. 2. Vt ab illo ad
alium judicem non liceat prov^care. 3. Vt nullo partium (...) ducatur*
Wendelinus in Prolegom. Christ. Theol. c. 3.
but to the Scriptures themselves and the Holy Ghost.

1. That which only has power to beget faith, that only has the chiefest
authority of interpreting Scripture, and of determining all controversies
concerning faith and religion; but the Scriptures only, and the Holy Ghost
have this force, Romans 10. 17. the Holy Ghost only can infuse saving faith into
our hearts, which is called by the Schoolmen infusa fides. The faith which we
have from the Church is acquired, and suffices not to a certain persuasion.

2. The Scriptures cannot be interpreted but by the same Spirit wherewith they
were written; Cathedr^m^^in c^lo habet qui ^ corda doce^ Aug. Luke 10 21. 22
Jer. 31. 33, 34. Convenit inter nos and adversarios, Scripturas intelligidebe^e
^o spiritu quo ^actae sunt, id est, Spiritu Sancto. Bellarm. l. 3^ de verbo
dei. c. 3. 11. Dr. Rain. against Heart.
that spirit is found no where but in the Scripture; whosoever have promises
from God to understand the Scripture may interpret it, but so have all the
faithful.

3. Christ himself makes the Scripture a Judge, John 12. 48. and still
appealed to it.

4. Although the Fathers were men endued of God with excellent gifts, and
brought no small light to understanding of the Scriptures: yet learned men in
our days may give a right sense of sundry places thereof which the Fathers saw
not, yea, against the which perhaps they consent.

Has any man living read all the Fathers? nay, have all the men living read
them? nay, can they show them? can they get them? I had almost said can they
name The number of Ancient Fathers (whose works are yet extant) who lived
within Six and Seven hundred years, after Christ are recorded to have been
about 200. Bishop Mor^on of the Mass l. 7. c 6.
them.

In the exposition of those words Tu es Petrus, and supra hanc petram almost
every one of the Fathers, at least the most part of them, and the best expound
it of Peter's faith: yet the Papists understand it non de fide sed de persona
Petri. Here they dis-agree themselves from the Fathers, John 10. 16. by the
title of one Shepherd, Augustine, Chrysostom, Jerome, Cyrill, Theodoret,
Theophylact, Euthimius, Rupertus, The Fathers wrote some things (...) to
confute the adversaries with whom they had to deal, and in these they err
sometimes; some things. (...), to praise the Saints of God, and stir up
others to their virtue wherein they overlash. Rainolds against Heart.
Cyprian and other Fathers agree that Christ is there designed; but Stapleton
says the Pope is there meant.

In the division of the Law, they go clean contrary to the greatest part of
the Fathers: For they divide the Commandments as we do, but the Papists make
the two first one, and the tenth two. 2. They have no Father to countenance
them in this, but Augustine.

There were no writings of the Fathers for a time, many of them wrote 400
years after Christ, but some 500 and 600 years after Christ; what rule had
they before that time of interpreting Scriptures.

The Fathers were given too much to allegorizing, Cajetane therefore in the
Preface of his Commentaries upon the Books of Moses says, that the exposition
of the Scripture is not tied by God to the sense of the Fathers; therefore he
admonishes his readers not to take it ill if he sometime dissent from the
stream of the Fathers.

4. The doctrine of the Church must be examined by the Scriptures, Act. 17. 11.
If Paul's doctrine, much more may the decrees of the Pope, Church, Councels be
examined by the Scriptures.

5. The interpretation of the Scripture is a gift freely given by God, for the
edification of the Church, Romans 12. 6. 1 Cor. 12. 10. therefore it is not tied
to a certain kind of men, but common to the faithful.

6. The faithful are commanded diligently to try and examine every doctrine 1 Thessalonians. 5. 21. 1 John 4. 1. which cannot be altogether done without
interpretation.

3. What means must be used in the interpretation of Scripture. Of the means
to find out the true sense of the Scripture.


The end of the Scripture (we heard) was to direct the Church to all saving
truth.

The means to be used for the attaining of that end, by the Minister, is
diligent Study and humble Prayer; by the people attentive reading, Orationi
lectio, lectioni succedat oration.
hearing, Prayer and meditating.

First, the teachers must Pray earnestly to God for his spirit to inlighten
them, Matthew. 7. 7. 8, 9. Romans 15. The Scriptures are understood by that spirit
that dictated them.

Secondly, The Pastors and teachers of the Church, must diligently and
painefully study the Scriptures, giving themselves to read, (...)
compare place with place Act. 9. 22. There must be a comparing of obscure
Places with such as are more evident Genesis 11. 35 with Gal 3. 16. of like with
like, Exodus 12. and 1 Cor. 11. 24. unlike with unlike John 6. 53. with Deuteronomy. 5.
^3.
John 5. 39. search the Scriptures, it is a metaphore taken from such as search
for Gold and Silver Oar in the earth, who will search and sift and break
every clod to find out the Gold. Solomon uses the same metaphore, Prove. 2. 4.
and to this diligence in searching does the Apostle exhort Timothy 1 Timothy 4.
13. This diligence is often expressed in Scripture in the old Testament, by the
phrase of meditating in the word, Josh. 1. 8. Psalm. 1. 2.

Thirdly, they must labor for a competent knowledge in the original tongues
the Hebrew and Contra ignota ^igna magnum est remedium linguarum cognitio, and
Latinae quidem linguae homines duabus alijs ad scriptura^um cognitionem opus
habent. Hebraica and Graeca Augustinus. 2 Timothy 2. 15. Tit. 1. 9. Aug. de
doctrina Christiana l 2.
Greek, in which the Scripture was written, that so they may consult with the
Hebrew Text in the old, and the Greek in the new Testament; and see with their
own, not another eyes.

4. They should likewise be expert in all the liberal Arts, especially in
Grammar, Logic, Rhetoric, general Philosophy, and History. All the
Treasures Dr. Fea^ely in a (...) Psalm. ^. 10. Logic teaches the Preacher to
Analize and divide his Text. ^ teaches to collect true and proper Doctrines
from it, assisteth him in confuting of Haeresies, and in resolving all
questions.
of wisdom and knowledge are hid in the Scriptures, the treasures of natural
Philosophy in Genesis, of Moral Philosophy in Exodus, Deuteronomy, and
Ecclesiastes, of the Politics in the Judicials of Moses, and the Proverbs of
Solomon, of Poetry in the Psalms, of History in the Books of Chronicles, Judges
and Kings; the Mathematickes in the dimensions of the Arc, of the Temple, of
the Metaphysics in the Books of the Prophets and Apocalypse.

5. They must consider.

1. The several words. 2. The Phrases.

In the several words, they must consider.

1. Whether the word be taken properly or tropically, and that they may the
better understand the words, an inspection,

1. Of Lexicons Lexicon Chaldaicum, talmudicum, and rabbinicum opus immensi
laboris atque fructus, and incomparabili multorum annorum, industria patri^
atque filij Johan. Buxtorfij elaboratum. Bootius.
is needful, some of which observed the order of the Alphabet, but so as they
distinguished between the roots and the Derivatives, as Pagnine has done for
the Hebrew, and Stephanus for the Greek.

The best Lexicons* for understanding the Hebrew Text, are, Buxtorfe,
Avenarius, Forster, Schindler, Mercer on Pagnine, and Brixianus his arca Noae;
for the Greek are Stephanus, Budaeus, Scapula; my own two (I hope) may be
useful for understanding both Testaments.

2. Of Concordances Concordantiae Bibliorum hebraicae, editae a Joh. Buxtor^io
juniore, magni patris Majore filio. Arnoldus. Boatius. Henrici, Stephani
maximae and absolutissimae Concordantiae,
some much extol Buxtorfe for the Hebrew, Kirchers is a very useful one both
for the Hebrew and the Septuagint, Stephanus for the Greek is the best.
Cottons Concordance (as it is now enlarged by Newman,) is esteemed the best for
the English.

See Dr. Featlies, and Dr. Gouges Prefaces to it commending it, and showing the
use of Concordances in general.

They must,

1. Consider the Text exactly in it self, the Grammar of it must be sifted,
the nature of every word by it self and the alteration it admits in diversity
of construction. 2. The Rhetoric, whether any word leaving the proper
signification receives a borrowed. 3. Above all the Logic, as to know what
he proves and by what. 2. Compare parallel places and obscurer with plainer.
To interpret that place, this is my body, This Bread is my body, 1. the
communion of my body. The Prophets explain the Books of Moses, and the New
Testament interpretes the Old.
make use of that other, The Bread which we break, is the Communion of the
body of Christ, because both places are not only concerning the Eucharist, but
also one and the same kind.

3. Make use of Paraphrases and versions among which the Chaldee and the
Septuagint for the Old Testament, the Syriacke and the Arabicke for the new
excel.

For the knowledge of the phrase, they must proceed the same way; and to
understand the better both the words and phrases, they must diligently consider
of the scope and circumstances of the place, as the coherence of that which
went before with that which follows after, and of the matter whereof it does
entreat.

All expositions ought to agree with the Analogy of faith, Analogia fi^ei
nihil aliud est, quam constans and propetua semen^ia Scripturae, in apertis and
minim^ obs^uris Scripturae locis: quales sunt articuli fidei in Symbolo,
quaeque continentur in oratione Dominica, in Decalog^. Whitakerus. Rainoldus de
lib. Apoc. Plura Rabbinis debemus, nos prae^ertim qui accuratum istud
interpretandi genus sectamur, quam quisquam existimet. Drus. observe. Sac. l.
15. c. 6.
Romans 12. 6.

Analogy is eitherof faith comprehended in the Doctrine of the Creed L. P.
Command. Sac. and gathered out of evident places of Scripture, or of the Text,
by the coherence of antecedentia and consequentia, by the propriety of the
phrase.

6. The Jewish expositors, the Ancient Fathers, and other Interpreters Ancient
and Modern Popish and Protestant, are useful for the right understanding of
the Scripture, if they be read with judgment.

Not many but a few, and those the best commentaries are to be consulted with,
of the Hebrew Interpretes and Rabbis? two were most learned R. David Kimbi and
Rabbi Aben Ezra, says Dr. Rainolds.

The pure Masters of the Hebrews (says Mayerus in Philologia Sacra) are
specially Maymonides, Rabbi David Kimchi, wise Aben Ezra, Rabbi Solomon Jarchi,
although the last two much favor Talmudicall dreams.

The Cabalists and many of the Rabbines are very fabulous, and men in a burning
fever cannot dream of things more ridiculous, then some of the Rabbines have
seriously written and taught, says Censura in exercitat. 4. Morini c. 80.
Doctissimus Hebraeorum Grammaticus idemque interp^es Kimchius. Fuller Miscell.
l. 5. c. 8. vide l. 2. c. 3. and l. 3. c. 12. and l 4. c. 18. David Kimchius e
cujus Grammatica and Lexico sive radicum libro tanquam ex equo Trojano prodiit,
quicquid Grammaticarum and Lexicorum Hebraicorum ubique videmus. Morinus l. 1.
exerci^. 6. c. 4. Ebraeorum Interpretum Coryphaeus Kimchi Amama Antib. Bibl.
Aben. Esra. merito audit sapientissimus ebraeorum. Mayerus in Philo. Sac.
Muis against Morinus. Vide Spanhem Dub. Evangel. part tertia. Dub. 21. and
Dub 129. Glass. Philol. Sac l. 2. partem primam. Tract. 1. Thalmud liber
fabulosissimus. Chamier.

Abarbanel has done well of the greatest part of the Old Testament. Scriptor
famosissimus, says Buxtorfe of him in Decalogo. Yet he was unknown (it
seems) to Mercer and Drusius, for neither of them mention him.

The Jews say of Rabbi Moses Ben-Maymon, that from Moses to Moses, there arose
not such a Moses. He was the first of the Rabbines that ceased to dote.
Maimonides antiquus and celeberrimus inter Judaeos Scriptor. Capellus de
Literis Ebr. Mr. Gregory styles him the very learned Maimon.

The Church of God is much beholding to the Hebrew Rabbines, Quid fuerint Vrim
and Thummim, ne Rabbinorum quid^m Principes jam diuscire potuerunt. Chamierus.
See Bu^^h. on 3. of Hos. 4.
being great helps unto us for understanding holy Scripture in many places, as
well of the New Testament as the Old.

2. The Fathers, Doctores scil. probati antiquae ecclesiae qui scriptis suis
fidem illustrarunt, as Voetius speaks.

For the Fathers, Jerome among the Latins, and Origin among the Greeks were
learned in the Hebrew says Chamier.

Jerome Dexter^imus ille literarum sacrarum interpres. Glassius. Hieronymus
solus inter Patres ^uit doctus Hebraeas literas, quas quia reliqui ignorabant,
saepe in v. Testamento explicando lapsi sum Tarnov. exercit. Bib.
was the chiefest among them, for skill in the Hebrew, Chaldee, Greek, Latin
tongue and the most diligent searcher of the Jewish affairs, Capellus arcano
punctationis revelato.
he spared no labor, cost, nor time, that he might attain to skill in that
tongue. He made use of the Jews for that purpose, and the skilfullest amongst
them. Whose labor he purchased with a great deal of Money, this he often
witnesses of himself, 5 times says Morinus he made use of them.

That one labor of his deserves eternal praise, that he translated the
Scripture out of the Hebrew, into Latin.

That was a most laborious Opus laboriosum and divinum, maximo ecclesiae damno
amissum, cujus operis jacturam deplorare possumus, compensare nunquam possumus.
Whitaketus,
work of Origens in gathering together diverse Editions of Scripture. 1. The
Greek of Aquila Symmachus, the Septuagint and Theodosion into one Volume
distinguished by 4 Columns, called Tetrapla, to which he after added 2 more,
one in Hebrew, the other in Greek Characters, and called it his Hexapla; at
last he joined two other Editions, and then called it Octapla; by them one
might have compared the several Greek Editions together, and with the Hebrew
Text.

It was said of him, Vbi been nemo melius, Vbi male nemo pejus.

Quod attinet ad. Originem, mea certe nihil interest, quid ille senserit: quem
scio Theologum fuisse audaciorem, quam Vide Whitak. de authoritate, Script. l.
2. c. 1.
saniorem. Chamierus.

Salmasius, Whitaker, Sixtus Senensis and others say Origin Inter antiquos
ecclesiastic^s auctores Graeci generis non tantum primus, sed, fe^e^olus
Hebraice ^uit doctissimus. Salmasius de m^do usurarum. Author non purus, ut vix
unquam nominari possit in rebus fidei absque praefatione. Chamierus.
was skillful in the Hebrew. He wrote so many Books, that Jerome says, Quis
nostrum tanta potest legere, quanta ille conscripsit?

Vir tantae fuit eruditionis and in genij, ut ei parem doctissima Graecia
faelicissim^rum ingeniorum parens, nunquam habuerit. Sixtus Senensis
Bibliothecae sanctae l. quarto.

He says much more there in his commendation. Tantum in scripturas divinas
habuerit studium, ut etiam. Haebraeam linguam contra aetatis gentisque suae
naturam edisceret. Hieronymus de viris illustribus.

Austen Magnus Augustinus ingenio, eruditione, sanctitate, zelo, quae res
tantam. illi meri^^ authoritatem concilia^m, ut nemosit amiquorum qui in (...)
nostris a^ Pontificijs pluris aestimetur aut aestimari debeat. Rainoldes de
libris Apocriph^^omo prae. ^9. Augustinus habitus Theologorum veterum:
acutiss^imus, neque immerito I^. Graeco^um dis^ertissimus Chrysostomus.
Fullerus. See a ^reat commendation of T^rtullian in Jack en^raging tempest p.
8. Vir prof^cto acris ac vehemeniis ingenij, multa latino (...) scripsi^, sed
stylo elaborato ac duro, and propter (...) vocum novitatom obscuro. Sixtus
Senensis.
for the Latin Church, and Golden-mouthed Chrysosostome for the Greek Church,
were most famous. He is abridged by Theophylact. A Father so Ancient, so
learned, so godly, so skillful in the Scriptures says Rainolds of Chrys^stome,
Austen for disputations, Jerome for the tongues, Gregory for Morals.

Augustine,

Vir supra omnes, qui ante eum and post eum huc usque fuerunt mortales,
admirabili ingenij acumine praeditus, omnibus liberalibus disciplinis
instructus, Divinis scripturis long omnium eruditissimus, and in earum
explanatione ultra, quam dici queat, incomparabili subtilitate sublimis, omnes
Latinae ecclesiae scriptores scribendi labor, and lucubrationum multitudine
superavit. Sixtus Senensis Biblioth. Sanct. lib. quarto.

Subtilissimus Pat^um Augustinus Dr. Prideaux lectione quarta.

Gregory Nazianzene for his excellency in divine knowledge was surnamed the
Divine.

Irenaeus (says Capellus) was almost the ancientest of all the Fathers whose
genuine writings are extant. He was Polycarpus his Disciple.

Tertullian was one of the Latin Fathers most Ancient, and very near the
Apostles, flourishing in the reign of Severus the Emperor, about 200 years
after Christ's Birth, and not past one hundred after the death of John the
Evangelist. Jerome being urged with his authority, said De Tertulliano nihil
aliud respond^o, quamecclesiae hominem illum non fuisse.

In Graecia celebres agnosco Patres, Clementem, Athanasium, Cyrillum, and
Damascenum. Montacutius Analect. Eccles. exercit. 1. Sect. 6.

Cyprian the Martyr was of great authority amongst all for his holiness of
life. He was so diligent a reader of Tertullian, that he intermitted no day, Da
Magistrum, Augustmus Copiosus est, Hieronymus succinctus: Lactantius Ciceronem
imitatur, Tertullianus obscuritatem amat: Chrysostomus ornatus and apertus est,
Nazianze^us pressus and acutus Whitakerus de Scripturis.
but would call to have his Master (meaning Tertullian) given him. Doctor Hall
calls Lactantius the Christian Cicero Jerome calls him eloquentiae Tullianae
Flievium. Epist. ad Paul. tom. 1. and Mr. Seldom de Dis Syris calls him
Politissimum Patrum.

Sententious Tertullian, grave Cyprian, resolute Hierome, * flowing
Chrysostom, divine Ambrose, devout Bernard, heavenly Augustine. Bish. Hals 4th
Decade of Epist. Epist. third. One says, he that looks upon the Fathers works
would think they did nothing but write, he that looks on their devotions would
think they did nothing but pray, he that looks on their learning would think
they did nothing but read.

Bernard was a worthy man in the corrupt age in which he lived, but Bernardus
non vidit omnia say the Papists.

Bernardum non admitto, ut pote recentiorem, and long post confirmatam Romani
Pontificis tyrannidem, scribentem ex more and errore sui temporis. Chamierus de
Canone l. 3. c. 3. etc. 5.

Dand^ venia bonis illis and sanctis patribus qui ignorantia linguarum multae
saepe aliena a germana scriptura senserunt, Mercerus in Genesis v. 16.
pia alioquin attulerunt.

3. For Protestant Interpreters.

Calvin Ex Scriptura ipsa Calvinu ita scripturam interpretatus est, ut inter
aequos rerum judices, doctissimi interpretis nomen jure meritus fit. Rivetus in
Catholico Orthod^xo.
is not only commended by our own writers, but by the very Papists. See Watson
in his Quodlibets.

I would content my self among the new writers with Mr. Calvin, who performs
best of all other that which he of himself professes, that a man in reading
his expositions reapeth this benefit, that for the shortness he uses, he
departs not far from the Text it self. Cartw. letter to Mr. Hildersham.

Piscator has done well in his Scholia on all the Bible. He follows Junius for
the Old Testament, and Beza for the New, and in his Aphorisms he follows
Calvin's Institutions.

Bucer Quo ne^^ aetate sua solidior and nervosior Theologus Whitakerus in
conci^ne ultima.
also was an excellent Divine. He has written a twofold Exposition on all the
Psalms, one more large and Paraphrasticall, the other briefer and ad verbum.

Francis Junius Incomparabilis illa editio Tremellian^, opera and cura
doctissimi Theologi Francisci I^ni^elucubrata and expolita plur. i^ busque
Scholi^^ locupletatae. Fulle 1 miscel. Sac. l. 2. c. 1. Vide Boo^ij censuram in
Indice Au^orum. Animadversionibus Sacr^^ praefixo. In novo Testamento laboravit
Erasmus Roter^damus non inutiliter, cum vertend^, tum paraphrasi explicando,
tum annotando. Chamierus de Canone l. 12. c. 1.
the very Oracle of Textuall and Scholasticall Divinity, as Dr. Hall calls him,
Epist. 7. Deead. 1.

Vatablus his Annotations upon the Old Testament, and Bezas on the New are
commended by Zanchie in his Miscellanies: But Arnoldus Boot in his Jndex
Autorum before his Animadversiones Sacrae, says Robert Stephens, and not
Vatablus was the Author of those Scholia which are in Vatablus his Bible.

Quid hac phrasi denotetur, optime exposuit D. Beza suis in novum Testamentum
nunquam satis laudatis notis. Constantin L' Empereur in Dan. c. 2 v. 8.

See more of him in Zanchies Epistles.

Amania, Paulus Fagius, Drusius, Ludovicus Capellus, Livelie, Cameron,
Ludovi^us de Dieu, have been Great lights, and by their skill in the tongues,
have excellently interpreted Scripture.

Peter Martyr, Lavater, Musculus, Zanchie, Pareus, Rollock, Rivet are sound
Expositors.

Ex omnibus antiquis and recentioribus medullam variarum interpretationum, and
circa eos disceptationem collegit Willetus in hexaplis ad Genesin, Exodum,
Leviticum, Danielem, Epistolam ad Romanos (in libros Samuelis sibi dissimilis
est, and compendio atque alia plane methodo commentatur) optandum esset telam
illam a Willeto tam faeliciter c^^ptam, eadem methodo in reliquos Scripturae
libros pert^xi. Voet. Biblioth. Theol. l. 1. c. 14.

4. For Popish Expositors.

Aquinas Papa Innocentus primum l^cum tribuit Thomae post scripturas, and
^e^i^o, nam melius de Papatu meruit quam omnes Patres-Rainoldus B. Mortons
App^ale. l. 2. c. ^. Sect. ^2. Papistarum Homerus Thomas Aquinas Rainold. de
lib. Apoc.
is esteemed by the Papists as the Oracle of the Romish School, Rainolds
against Heart. Thomas Aquinas adhuc infans chartam versans, imo comedens
significabat quam studiosus foret adultior factus. Cornel a L^pide in Genesis 25.
22.
whom for his profound learning and search into the mysteries of all Divinity
they surnamed Angelical.

He was the first through Papist of name that ever wrote, and with his rare
gifts of wit, learning and industry did set out Popery * most.

Maximo and altissimo ingenio vir, cui ad plenam absolutamque totius tam
divinae, quam humanae eruditionis gloriam solus defuit linguarum and
eloquentiae usus, quem aeruditi istius saeculi, ut pote sublimioribus studijs
intenti, neglexere. Sixtus Senensis. vide plara ibid.

Luther on 9 of Genesis chiefly commends Lyra for following the literal
sense. Nicolaus Lyranus, vir tanta tamque pura, vera and germana sacrae
Scripturae scientia praeditus ut in illa exponend^ nullum habeat illius
temporis parem. Rainoldus de lib. Apoc. tom^ 1. praelect. 21.

Ex antiquioribus tanquam universales and communes commentatores habiti fuerunt
Lyrasnus and Glossa. Voetius in Biblioth. Theol. Jansenius eruditus and
moderatus Spanhem. dub. Evang. part ^ecunda. Dub. 34. vide ibid. Dub. 5. p.
132. 133.
Interpres.

Cajetane went over all the Scripture, Chamierus.
saving the Canticles and Prophets, which dying he left begun, and the
Revelation, quam de industria attingere noluit.

He was both a learned and moderate Papist, as Chamier and Whitaker both show.
He was chiefly intent on the literal sense Cardinalis Cajetanus omnes
Epistolas novi Testamenti and Actorum librum recensuit ad veritatem* Graec^m
and annotationibus illustravit, intra spatium circiter december mensium, Chamierus
tomo 1^ de Canone l. 13. c 4. Vir meo judicio quamvi^ Papista, tamen candidus
plurimumque distans abea pertinacia, quam in reliquis deplorare cogimur. Idem
de Canone. l. 12. c. 1. Vide Whitakerum de Scripturis page 16, 17 and 196.
Andradius mentione Cajetani facta su^jungit, omnes illum aetatis suae long
superasse.
and that according to the Hebrew truth, of which tongue he had little
knowledge, but had by him those that were skilled in the Hebrew, who would
interpret ad verbum not only exactly, but superstitiously, and often
absurdly, which often drew the like expositions from the Cardinal.

There are now 5 Papi^s joined together in several Volumes on the whole
Scripture, Immanuell Sa, Estius, Gagneius, Tirinus, and Menochius, the last of
which Grotius commends in his Preface to his Annotations on the Old Testament.
Estius does excellently on all the Epistles.

Maldonate does well on the Evangelists, but was a most supercilious writer;
and no marvel, since he was for his Country a Spaniard and his profession a
Jesuit.

Masius Andraeas Masnes. Papista quidem, at sanior and dexterrimus scripturae
Sacrosanctae interpres. Glassius onomat.
has written learnedly on Joshua.

Quanta vir ille linguae Graecae sed preaesertim Hebrae^cae, Rabbinicae, and
Syriacae cognitione fuerit imbutus, nemini docto opinor incognitum. Morinus l.
1. exercitat. 9. c. 6. and exercit. 1. c. 4. Andreaeas Masius linguae Hebraicae
and Syriacae peritissimus, atque in lectione Rabbinica egregie exeroitatus.

The Popish Postils are the burden of many Camels (as Lipsius speaks of the
Books of the Law) and are fitly s^iled by godly Divines pigrorum pulvinaria.
Vide Zepperi Artem Habendi and Audiendi conciones, sacras. l. 1. c. 4 p. 38 39.
etc.

Ministers to all the means formerly mentioned for the interpreting of
Scripture, must add a conscionable practice of what they know, and must in all
humbleness of mind seek the peoples edification.

The means to be used by the people, to understand the Scripture and find out
the sense and meaning of it.

1. If they be learned, they may make use of most of the former means
prescribed to Ministers.

2. Such as are unskilful, and know not how to make use of those means, are

1. Diligently to read the Scripture, in which are to be considered.

1. Antecedent preparation that they come to the reading and study of the
Scriptures with Prayers Pater quidem dixit se orand^ magis, quam s^udendo ac
legendo, in cognitione Scripturarum profecisse^
and greatest reverence relying on the Divine promises, for the inlightening of
their minds by the Holy Ghost. The Scripture may well be called the Revelation
of Christ. Rev. 1. 1. See Rev. 5. 5.

2. The adjuncts of reading, which are,

1. Chiefest attention in reading, and a pious disposition and spiritual frame
of the heart, Prove. 4. 13.
that they may not understand only but cordially affect what they understand

2. Application of all things to the Examination, Correction, John 7. 17.
and amendment of their own lives,

3. Diligent Meditation.

4. Conferring of it with others, Deu^. 6. 6. 7.
and Catechizing.

2 They ought to have recourse to those that are more skillful then themselves,
and to consult with the best Commentaries and Expositions of the Scripture, and
read them judiciously.

We teach of our Means, that they all together, do make a perfect way whereby
we may find the right sense of the Scripture. Praxis ecclesiae P^at. um
consentiens interpretatio.


Our Adversaries prescribe this method and course to be taken in expounding of
Scripture, which consists in 4 rules: Conciliorum praescripta and decreta,
Regula fidei.
The general practice of the Church, the Consonant interpretation of the
Fathers, the decrees of general Councels; lastly, the rule of faith consisting
partly of the Scriptures, partly of traditions unwritten.

In all these means the Pope is implicitly understood, for the rule of faith
is that which the Pope approves: the practice of the Church is that which the
Pope observes, the interpretation of the Fathers is that which the Pope
follows, the determination of Councels, what the Pope confirms; so that the
Pope must interpret all Scripture. But diverse reasons may be alleged to show
that the true interpretation of Scripture is not to be sought for from the
Popes of Rome.

1. Because the Popes of Rome have frequently and grossly erred in
interpreting of Scripture, as in the 8th of the Romans 8. v. those that are in
the flesh cannot please God; that is those that are married, said Siricius the
Pope. Innocent so expounded those words John 6. unless you eat the flesh of
the Son of man and drink his blood you shall have no life in you, that he
thence concluded, that there is no salvation without receiving the Eucharist,
and that it is to be given to Infants. Pope Boniface interpreted Luke 22. 38.
of the temporal and spiritual sword delivered to the Pope.

2. Because the Popes of Rome Inter Pontifices Roman^s multi fuerunt scelerati,
ex quorum improb^ vita plus redijt ad Christianos scandali, quam ex ^orum
autoritate adificationis. Non potuit vit humani ingenij, non fremere, cum
legenti Pontificum Romanorum vita^t^t occurrerent monstra scelerum. Chamierus.
de Canone l. 3. c. 6. Vide plura ibid. Absit ut unius homuncionis, and quidem
Infirmissiimi, arbitrio stare credamus vel eadere veritatem Dei. Chamierus.
ibid. c. 7.
do differ among themselves in Interpreting of Scripture, as Matthew. 16. 18.
Some Pop^^ say rightly that by the Rock Christ or the confession of faith given
by Peter concerning Christ is meant, others interpret it of the person of
Peter the Apostle, others expound it to be the Roman Seat or Chair.

3. Because many of the Popes of Rome have not only erred but been gross and
wicked Heretics. Liberius the Pope about the year 350 was an Arrian and
subscribed to the unjust condemnation of Athanasius, and afterward as an
obstinate Heretic was deposed. Honorius the first was a Monothelite, he held
that Christ had but one will and so but one nature, and for this heresy was
condemned in 3. General Councels. Some Popes were Atheists, as Leo the tenth
who called the Gospel fabulam de Christo.

One calls the Pope that great Heteroclite in religion; another says, The Pope
is the worst of Cardinals, who are the worst of Priests, who are the worst of
Papists, who are the worst of Christians.

For Counc^ls.

Gregory the Pope did reverence the 4 first general Councels, as the 4
Evangelists.

But if these four general Councels be of equal authority with the four
Evangelists, the Popes authority (as Papists say) being above the authority of
the Councels, it follows, that his authority is greater then the Evangelists;
then which what can be more blasphemously spoken?

We say the true interpretation of Scripture is not to be sought from general
Councels.

1. Because even universal Councels have erred; the Chalcedonian Council,
Plus credendum est simplici laico scripturam proferent^, quam toti simul
Concilio. Panormitanus*
one of the 4 so much magnified by Pope Gregory in rashly preferring the
Constantinopolitane Church before that of Alexandria, and Antioch. Those that
condemned Christ were then the universal visible Church Matthew 26. 65. John 11.
47. See Act. 4. 18.

2. General councels have been opposite one to another, that of Constance to
the other of Basil; whereof one sets down that Councels could err and so
also the Pope, and that a Council was above the Pope; the other affirms the
quite contrary.

3. There were no General Councels after the Apostles for 300 years till the
first Council of Nice, when yet the Church had the true sense of the
Scriptures.

4. The general Councels interpreted Scripture by Scripture as Athanasius and
Ambrose teach concerning the first Council of Nice.

5. Because they cannot be so easily celebrated to declare any doubtful sense
of Scripture. They have expounded but few places of Scripture, neither is it
likely the Pope will assemble them to expound the rest.

The Papists say, that the Scripture ought to be expounded by the rule of
faith, and therefore not by Scripture only. But the rule of faith and
Scripture is all one.

As the Scriptures are not of man, but of the Spirit; so their interpretation
is not by man, but of the Spirit likewise.

Let Councels, Fathers, Mr. Greenhill on third of Ezekiel. v. 14. p. 316.
Churches, give their sense of the Scripture, it is private, if it be not the
sense and interpretation of the Spirit. Let a private man give the true sense
of the Scripture it is not private, (...).
because it is Divine; the sense of the Holy Ghost, and private, in 2 Pet. 1.
20. is not opposed to public, but to Divine; and the words are to be read, no
Scripture is of a man's own interpretation; Analysis 1. Grammatica quae proprias.
that is, private, contrary to Divine.

The word is interpreted aright by declaring 1. The order, 2. Rhetorica quae
tropicas dictiones excutit.
2. The summne or scope 3. The sense of the words, which is done by framing a
Rhetorical and Logical Analysis of the Text. In giving the sense, three Rules
are of principal use, and necessity to be observed. 3. Logica quae scopum,
q^ae antecedentium and consequentium seriem, pr^bationumque vim indicat.


1. The literal and largest sense of any words in Scripture must not be
embraced farther, when our cleaving thereunto would breed some dis-agreement
and contrariety between the present Scripture and some other Text or place,
else shall we change the Scripture into a Nose of wax.

2. In case of such appearing dis-agreement the Holy Ghost leads us by the hand
to seek out some distinction, Altingius.
restriction, limitation or figure for the reconcilement thereof, and one of
these will always fit the purpose; for Gods word must always bring perfect
truth, it cannot fight against it self.

3. Such figurative sense, limitation, restriction or distinction must be
sought out, as the word of God affords either in the present place or some
other, and chiefly those that seem to differ with the present Text, being
duly compared together.

The end of the first Book.
THE SECOND BOOK*
CHAPTER. 1.
OF GOD.
HAving handled the Scripture, which is principium Cognoscendi, in Divinity, I
now proceed to Treat of God Illum Graeci (...) vocant, Latini post eos, and
abijs Deum dix^re: Galli, I^ali, Hispani, mut^^to a Latini^ nomine, Dieu, Dio,
Dios, appellant. Germani, Angli, Belgae Go^t, vel God ^um nuncupant,
who is principium essendi. or thus, the Scripture is the rule of Divinity, God
and his works, are the matter or parts of Divinity.

This Doctrine is,

1. Necessary,

1. Because man was made for that end; that he might rightly acknowledge and
worship Act. 17. 27. Romans 1. 20. 21.
God, love and honor him.

2. It is the end of all divine Revelation John 5. 39.

3. To be Ignorant of God is a great misery; being alienated from the life of
God, Ephesians. 4. 18.
through the Ignorance that is in them.

2. Profitable,

Our welfare and happiness consists in the knowledge of God Jer. 9. 23. John
17. 3. the knowledge of God in the life to come, is called the Beatificall
vision.

3. Difficult, There is no equal proportion, between the faculty, and the
object.


God being infinite, and our understanding finite; betwixt which two there is
no proportion; who knows the things of God, save the spirit of God? A created
understanding, can no more comprehend God; Deum digne aestimamus dum
inaessimabilem dicimus. Cyprian. De Deo etiam dicere vera periculosum est.
Ruffin. in exposit. Symb.
then a Viall-glasse can contain the waters of the Sea. His wisdom is
unsearchable, Romans 11. Job. 11. 7. and 26. 13. Euclide answered very fitly to
one asking many things concerning the Gods: Coetera quidem nescio, illud scio,
quod odere curiosos. Simonides being enjoined by Hiero, to tell him what was
God, required a days time to be given him, before he answered; and at the end
of that, two; when they were expired, four, still doubling his time for
inquiry; till at the last being by Hiero, Things that excel in Scripture
phrase usually are said to be things of God, Psalm. 36. 6. and 80. 10. John. 3*
3.
asked a reason of his delays, he told him plainly that by how much the more
he thought of God, by so much the more he apprehended the impossibility of
declaring what he was. We know God per viam eminentiae, negationis, causationis.

1. All perfections which we apprehend, must be ascribed unto God, and that
after a more excellent manner, then can be apprehended; as that he is in
himself, by himself and of himself: that he is one, true, good, and holy.

2. We must remove from him all imperfections whatsoever; he is Simple,
Eternal, Infinite, Unchangeable.

3. He is the Supreme cause of all.

There is a threefold knowledge of God.

1. An implanted knowledge which is in every man's conscience, a natural
ingraffed principle about God, O anima naturaliter Christiana! said Tertullian.

2. An acquired knowledge by the Creatures, Psalm. 19. 1. That is the great
Book, in evey page whereof we may behold the Diety. Praesentemque refert
quaelibet herba Deum.

3. Revealed knowledge of faith, spoken of Heb. 11. 6. and this is only
sufficient to Salvation.

The Heathens had the knowledge of God in a confused manner, Romans 1. 19. 21.
and 2. 14. a practical knowledge 15. v. which show the work of the Law
written in their hearts, not the gracious writing promised in the Covenant; the
light of nature is not sufficient to bring man Some u^g^ this, what Moses was
to* the Jews Christ in the new Testament, that was Philosophy to the
Heathens; enough to save them. Erasmus had much ado to forbear saying, Sancte
Socrates, ora pro nobis, But omnis doctrina Philosophorum ^ine Capite quia Deum
ignorabant, Lactantius, and extra ecclesiam nulla salus. See Matthew. 4. 16. 2
Cor. 4. 3. and Doctor Prideaux, in his eighth L^^ure de Salute Ethnicorum. To
believe there is a God is the foundation of all Religion* Caput est primum
Divine legis, ipsum Deum n^sse. Loctamius. It is a question, whether ^man by
the light of nature may know that there is a God. Though this be denied by the
Socinians, yet those Scriptures, Romans 1. 19. and Psalm. 19. heg. seem to prove
it.
to Salvation; only in Judah is God known, 76. Psalm. 1. 2. and 147. 19. See
John 14. 6. and 11. 27. Ephesians. 2. 11. 12. The Heathen might know Gods nature
and attributes, that he was the Creator of the world, that by his providence he
did preserve and rule all things, but they could not by the most industrious
use of all natures helps, attain unto any the least knowledge of God as he is
man's Redeemer in Christ; they knew not the truth as it is Jesus Ephesians. 4. 21.

In God we will consider.

1. His Nature. 2. His works.
In his nature, two things are considerable.

1. That he is. 2. What he is?
That God is, is the most manifest, clear, evident, ungainsayable truth in the
world. It is the first verity, and the principal verity; from which all other
truth has its original; and it is the foundation of all true goodness and
religion truly to believe it; so says the Author to the Hebrews, He that
comes to God, to do him any Service, or to receive any benefit from him, must
believe, that is, be firmly and undoubtedly persuaded, that God is.

By a God we mean an essence bett^^ ^hen all other things, and before all
other things; and of whom another things are, such a first essence is God, and
such an essence there must needs be; neither is any thing of absolute necessity
but this one thing; even the divine essence.

Reasons to confirm this, that there is a God are taken from authority or
Testimony and reason.

The Testimonies are,

1. Of God himself. 2. The Creature.
1. General of all men. 2. Particular of each man's conscience.
Reasons may be drawn from two chief places, viz. the efffects and the
contrary.

The effects are either, There are two kinds of Demonstrations or proofs.


1. Ordinary, 1. A demonstrating of the effects by their causes, which is a
proof ^ priori. Principles cannot be demonstrated a causa and ^ priori, because
they have no superior cause.
and those. 1 Natural, both General, the making and preserving of the world;
and Special, the framing, or maintaining of each man, or other like creature
in the world.

2. Civil the upholding and altering the States of Kingdoms, A demonstrating
of causes by their effects: which is a proof drawn a posteriori. So
principles may be demonstrated. All principles being Prima, and Notissima of
themselves are thereby made indemonstrable.
and particular Countries.

2. Extraordinary, miracles.

Arguments from the contrary are two,

1. The Being of the Devils.

2. The slightness of the reasons brought to disprove this truth or to show
the Contrary.

Though no man can prove a causa, why there should be a God, yet every man may
Collect ab effectu, that there is a God: by that wisdom, which we see to have
been in the making; that Order, in the Governing; and that Goodness, in the
preserving and maintaining of the world. All which prove as effectually, that
there needs must be a God, as either warming or burning, that the fire must
needs be hot.

That there is a God is proved. Quad sit D^us


1. By Testimony. 2. By R^^on.
1. By the Testimony of God The weightiest Testimony that can be brought to
prove there is a God, is to produce the Testimony of God speaking in his own
word. None other in the world can have equal authority, John 8. 13. 14. Yet
this Testimony is not allowed by the Atheists. For as they deny that there is a
God, so they deny likewise that the Scripture is his word. Atheomastix l. 1. c.
2. Nulla gens tam effera ac barbara qvae non cognoscat esse Deum. Cicero de
natura Deorum. Epicurum ipsum, quem nihil pudendum pudet, tamen Deum negare
pudet. Mornaeus.
himself; he that testifies of himself, either by word or writing, is. God
has written a Book to us, in which he affirms of himself that he is; every
page almost, and line of Scripture point to God. He begins his Book with
himself, saying, In the beginning God made heaven and earth. He concludes this
Book with himself, saying, if any man shall take ought from this prophecy, God
shall take away his part out of the Book of life. In every particular
prophecy, he testifies the same thing, saying, thus says the Lord.

2. By the general Testimony of all men, by the universal and constant
consent of all Nations in the world, Romans 2. 15. It is called a Law written in
their hearts; all publicly confess and profess their belief of God; we never
read nor heard of any so barbarous and uncivil which acknowledged not a
deity. There is no History which shows the manners of any people, but
shows also their Religion. All Commonwealths had always some thing, which
they worshipped, and called in their Language God; this principle is written by
God himself in the Table of every man's soul. That which is written in the
hearts of all men, which with one mouth all acknowledge, must needs be a truth,
seeing it is the voice of reason it self.

Munster in his Cosmographie, and Ortelius in his Theatrum Orbis, have
delivered unto us not only a Cosmographicall description of all Countries, but
also a Tropographicall description of their manners, yet neither of them has
noted any Nation to be without all Religion, Inveniuntur qui si^e rege, sine
lege vivunt, qui sub dio degunt, qui nudi serarum instar sylvas oberrant, avia
querunt and obvia depascuntur. Qui religion^^ specie, qui sacris, qui numinis
sensu plane carerent, nulli inventi sunt, nulli et^amnum inveniuntur. Morneus
de veritate Christianae relig. C. 1. A Jove principium musae.
none to be professed in Atheism. Idolatry it self (as Calvin observes in his
Institutions) is a sufficient Testimony of a Dietie; men will rather have false
God then none, and worship any thing then nothing.

Porrum and Caepe nefas violare ac frangere morsu.

O sanctas gentes, quibus haec nascuntur in hortis Numina -- Invenal, Satyr.
15. Pythagoras, Plato, and all the Poets began their works with Gods name.

3. By the particular Testimony of each man's conscience. Conscience The most
pregnant and undeniable p^oofe of the Godhead with the Heathen, was the voice
of conscience. The Scripture shows, that the wicked were much terrified in
their consciences, after the committing of heinous sins, R^m. 2. 15. Is^y.
57. 20. 21. Mark 6. 14. 16. So does common experience teach, in Murderers,
Thieves, and the like. Mark 9. 44. Act. 16. 25. Act. 12. 6. Psalm. 3. 6. and
46. 1. 2. Si fractus illabatur orbis impavidum ferient ruinae. Horat.
proclaims a Law in every heart, and denounces a punishment for the breach of
Gods Law. Conscience is a natural ability of discerning the condition and
State of our Actions, whether good or bad; and that not alone in respect of
men; but of some other thing above men; for when one has done things
unlawful, though such as no man can accuse us of, because no man does know;
yet then he is accused and tormented, then he has some thing in him,
threatening, arraigning, accusing, and terrifying; a Deputy of God, sitting
within him, and controlling him; a man must therefore confess, there is a
higher power to whom that conscience of his is an Office, and a Supreme Judge.
That which the conscience of every man bears witness unto, is sure a truth;
for that is a thousand witnesses. The fears of an ill conscience, the joy and
security of a good conscience, prove this, that there is a God, a revenger of
sins, and a rewarder of virtues. Nero having killed his Mother Agrippin^,
confessed that he was often troubled with her Ghost. Caligula at the least
thunder and lightening would cover his head, and hide himself under his bed;
whence Statius says -- Primus in orb Deos fecit Timor. On the contrary, Paul
and Sylas could sing; and Peter could sleep securely in Prison; David could
triumphantly rejoice in God in the greatest dangers, 1 Samuel 30. 6. Austin calls
peace of conscience the Souls Paradise; and Solomon a continual Feast, Prove.
15. 15. -- Hic murus abeneus esto Nil conscire sibi, nulla pallescere culpa.

2. Diverse reasons may be brought to prove that there is a God, from the
effects and the contrary.

1. From his effects, Ordinary. Extraordinary.

1. Ordinary, Natural, Civil,

1. Natural,

1. General, the Creation and preservation of the world

1. Creation, Every effect has its cause, whatsoever is wrought or done, is
wrought or done by some thing, which has ability and fitness to produce such
an effect; seeing nothing can do nothing, and what has not sufficiency to
produce such and such effects, cannot produce them.
or making all things,

The world must needs be eternal, or must be made by it self, or by some
thing which was before it self, and therefore also was far better then it
self. But it could not make it self; for what makes* works; what works,
is; but what is made, is not till it be made: Now nothing can be, and not be at
the same time; for both the parts of a contradiction can never be true
together. Neither could it be eternal; for a thing compounded of parts, must
needs have those parts united together by some other thing beside it self, and
above it self; and if they be compounded wisely, artif^cially, strongly, and
excellently, by some wise, strong, and excellent worker, seeing it is
inimaginable how each of these parts being not reasonable, should come together
of themselves; therefore sure there was some worker, which did so handsomely
dispose and order them; and this worker must needs have a being, Of whom there
be works and effects, he is; of God there be works and effects; therefore
there is a God.
before he could so work; and therefore also before the conjunction of them;
and so things in such sort made by composition of parts, could not be eternal;
for that neither has, nor can have any thing before it; therefore it must
needs be made by some thing which was capable of being from Eternity. What is
Eternal, is of it self; what is of it self is God; the world is not God;
because the parts of it are corruptible, therefore it is not eternal; As God
is to be felt sensibly, in every man's conscience, so is he to be seen visibly
in the Creation of the world, and of all things therein contained* Man the best
of the creatures here below was not able to raise up such a Roof as the
Heavens, nor such a floor as the earth. D^cter Preston, Job. 12. 9. Serviunt
omnia omnibus, uni omnia. Mundi Creatio est Dei Scriptura, cuius ^ria sunt
f^lia Caelum, terra, mare.
and what is Finite in quantity, cannot be infinite in continuance. It could
not be made by any creature in it; for the part cannot possibly make the whole;
because it is of far less virtue then the whole, and because it has its
being in and of the whole; wherefore it must needs be made by some thing better
then it self, which is no part of it self; and that is no other then God; so
the making of the world proves a God. What Created the world, is, and is better
then the world; and before the world, and above all creatures in the world. God
Created the world. When we see the glorious frame of Heaven and earth; the
excellency, magnitude, and multitude of natural things; the beautiful order
and harmony; so great variety; we cannot but conclude that there is a God, who
made and orders all these things.

2. The Preservation and continuance of the world in that Order which we see,
The preserving and ordering of the world, and humane societies in it; the
planting, and defending of the Church. A number of wheels in a Clock, do
work together, to strike at set times, not any one of them, knowing the
intention of the other; therefore they are ordered and kept in order by the
care of some wise person; which knows the distance and frame of each and of
the whole. An Army of men could not meet together at one time, and in one
place, to fight for, or against one City, if the wisdom of one General did
not Command over all. A number of Letters cannot all fall orderly together, to
make perfect sense without some Composer. Protogenes by the smallness of a
line, drawn in a Table, knew Apelles, the chiefest Artificer. He that sees but
the shape and ^ffigies of a man, presently thinks of a Painter.
makes it manifest, that there is a God which preserves and orders it. For
either it must be preserved, ruled, and ordered by it self, or by some more
excellent thing then it self; not by it self; for what could not make it
self, cannot of it self keep and uphold it self, seeing no less power is
required to its continuation then to its constitution; for it could not
continue, if each of the parts did not so work as to help and uphold the
other in some respect or other. Now these several parts could not so work for
one Common end, if they were not guided thereto by some common and
understanding guide which were acquainted with, and had power over each of
them; therefore it has one ruler and upholder. That which is effected by the
constant, orderly, and subordinate working of innumerable particulars for one
common end, whereof no one of them has any knowledge or acquaintance, must
needs be wrought by some common Ruler, and Governor which knows the motion
and working of each, and rules all, and each to that end in their several
motions. What upholds the world; is; but God upholds the world; therefore he is.

1. This is Aquinas his reason, natural bodies which want knowledge, work for
a certain end, because they frequently work after the same manner; therefore
there must be a mind understanding, and governing all things, and directing
them to that special and chief end. The whole world does aptly conspire
together for the attaining of one end, the good and benefit of man. All
creatures incline to their proper operations, the stone downe-ward, the fire
upward; the seasons of the year constantly follow each other.

2. Particular, the framing and maintaining of each creature in the world; the
Heavens and Man especially; these two were most artificially made, as the
Scripture shows. The Psalmist calls the heavens, the work of Gods Fingers,
Psalm.. 8. 4. because they were made with greatest ease, and with exquisite Art,
Heb. 11. 10. whose builder ((...) Artifex) is God, speaking of the Heavens.

Psalm. 139. 14, I am fearfully and wonderfully made, 15. v. curiously wrought
in the lowest parts of the Earth. The Hebrew word is very Emphaticall; it
signifies Embroydered, or wrought with a needle, that is cunningly wrought
with Nerves, Veins, Arteries. Galen upon the contemplation of the admirable
workmanship in the body of man, breaks out into an Hymn, in the praise of
him that made Hic compono canticum, in Creatoris nostri laudem. Si Humani
corporla admirabilem constructionem intus extraque conspicimus, and ut omnia
ibi etiam minima suos usus habeant, nullo studio nulla industria parentum, art
vero tanta, ut philosophorum ac medicorum praestantissimi nunquam eam satis
possint admirari. Grotius. The Sun is moved by another, by whom he is tied
unto such a str^ct and unalterable motion, that Astronomers can surely tell
(unto the very minute) all the Ecclipses* that shall ever fall out, so long as
the world it self shall last.
him.

1. The Creation of the Heavens proves, that there is a God.

The largeness, roundnesse, pureness, solidnesse, the continual and constant
motion of the heavens; does excellently declare the glory of God. The very name
of Astronomy (whose object is the motion of the heavenly Orbs and Stars) in
exact signification imports that the Stars observe a Law in their motion:
Psalm. 148. 6.
which Law is given unto them only by God himself, who is their true
Lawgiver.

Suidas affirms, that even Abraham himself was first occasioned, to seek
after God by considering the motion of the Stars; for he being by nation a
Chaldean (who, as Aristotle observes, are naturally given to that kind of
contemplation) and observing in their motion, a wonderful order and variety,
and yet no less a constancy, he presently collected that these strange
revolutions were directed and guided by some God.

2 The Creation of man proves this truth, that there is a God.

1. A man may reason from his own framing in the womb, and preserving in the
world. Man is framed in the womb, by some most noble, wise, and excellent
workman. The Parents frame him not there, for they know nothing of his framing,
neither when, nor how, he was so formed; therefore some more excellent thing
then a man did frame him there, and does daily, and hourly, frame other men;
and that is a wise worker, which is a like wise, and potent in all places of
the world at all times, seeing there is something more excellent then man which
has set down this Order for producing of men, and so a God.

2. The Nobility and Excellency of the soul, shows plainly, that it is of
Divine Original; The Heathens called the Soul of man divinae particulam
aurae, a parcel of the Divine essence; but that speech must be taken ^um grano
satis.
it being Spiritual and Incorporeall, could not but proceed from that which is
Incorporeall. The effect cannot be toto genere better then the cause. Diverse
works are done by man, arts invented, Zach. 12. 1.

3. The being and preservation of each particular man. Each particular man in
the world, may reason from his own being thus; either there must be an
infinite number of men, or else there must be a first man, which was the
beginning of all men; but an infinite number of particular men is not possible;
seeing there can be no infinite number at all; for every number begins with an
unity, and is capable of being made greater by the addition of an unity:
therefore there cannot be an infinite number of particular men. Therefore we
must come to some first man; and that first man could not make himself, nor be
made by any inferior thing to it self; therefore it must be made by some
thing more excellent then it self. viz. One infinite thing, from which all
particulars had their Original.

4. God is manifested in the consciences of men, as was touched before.

1. By the Ministry of the word, by which he powerfully works on their
consciences. 2. By the inward Checks of conscience after finne committed. 1. In
the godly, 1 Samuel 24. 5. and 2. Sam. 24. 10. 2. In the wicked, Matthew. 27. 3. 4.
5.

2. Civil. Civil Eff^cts. Politiae and Leges probant mentemesse divinam
intelligentem, illas hominibus tum m^nstratem tum conervantem, ne Diaboli and
impiorumodio and machinationibus dissolutae corruant; Deus enim est Deus ordinis


States and Kingdoms consist, and the Governed by a few Magistrates and
Rulers. There are innumerable more men, that wish and desire the overthrow, and
ruin of the State, then that would live under Government, and be subject to
Order.

This effect must have some cause, either the wisdom, and goodness of the
governed, or of the Governors, or of some higher cause then they both. Now it
cannot be attributed to the wisdom of the Governors; as being often times
foolish, and men of mean understanding, at the best such as cannot prevent the
conspiracies of those under them. Nor yet does it arise from the goodness of
the persons governed, most of which most times are wicked, and unwilling to
come under government, therefore it must be of God; that is, a common Superior
which holds all in awe.

2. Extraordinary, Miracles.

There is a work of Miracles, Miraculous Effects.
for all stories both of Scripture, and other Countries, do agree in relating
diverse Miracles. Now the worker of a Miracle, is he that can lift Nature off
the Hinges as it were, and set it on again as seems best to himself; and
therefore is above the course of nature, and the Commander of the course of
nature, Exodus 15. 11. 72. Psalm. 18. and 136. 4.
and so is the Author of all things under himself, under nothing; and that is
none but God. Isay 41. 23.
The certain and plain predictions of things future long before, whose events
could by no wit of man, be either gathered from their causes, A Miracle is a
work of infinite strength, or omnipotency; surpassing the whole power of
created nature, as to turn water into wine, to multiply seven loaves, to the
feeding and satisfying of 4000 men, to give the use of sight to one borne
blind, to arise up a man indeed dead, to cure a leprosy with the word.
or conjectured from their signs. Miracles are wrought beyond, and above the
course of nature; therefore some supreme Power must work them.

Secondly, Arguments may be drawn from the contrary, to prove that there is a
God.

Reasons,

From the contrary are two.

1. From the being of Devils.

There is a Devil, an Enemy to God, which sets himself against God; and
desires, and strives, and prevails in many places, to be worshipped as God;
therefore it must needs be, there is a God, to whom the Service and honor is
due, of being confessed, and adored as God; which these do unduly affect and
seek. The Brideling of wicked Spirits and men.
Again the Devil is a Creature for strength, wisdom, nimblenesse, able to
destroy all mankind quickly; and out of his Malice and Fury, very willing to
do it. Yet he cannot do it, it is not done; of this restraint there is some
cause, therefore there must be something, which over-commands, and overrules
him, and that can be no other then a God; that is, something of Higher Power,
and in wisdom far beyond him. Now there are Devils, it is apparent by the
horrible temptations, which are cast into the hearts of men; quite against and
beyond their natural inclinations, as Blasphemous Suggestions, and as
appears by the practices of conjurers and witches, who practice with the
Devil; and of those Countries, which worship him instead of God, and as a God,
being beguiled by him.

2. From the sleightnesse of the reasons brought to disprove this truth, or to
show the Contrary.

The reasons produced to show there is no God are fond and weak; and what is
opposed alone by weak and false reasons is a truth.

1. If there were a God, some man should see him, and sensibly converse with
him.

This is a brutish reason, what cannot be seen is not, then man has no soul;
God is above sense; more excellent then to be discerned by so poor, weak, and
low a thing as sense is.

2. God daily makes himself, after a sort visible to men by his works.

2 If there were a God, he would not suffer wicked men to prosper, and oppose
better men then themselves; nor himself to be so blasphemed as he is.

Those things that to us seem most unjust and unfit; if we could see the whole
tenor of things from the beginning to the ending, would appear just and wise.

3 All Divine Religion (say the Atheists) is nothing else but an humane
invention, The Atheists third objection, that Religion is but an humane
invention.
artificially excogitated to keep men in awe; and the Scriptures are but the
device of man's brain, to give assistance to Magistrates in Civil government.

This objection strikes at the root and heart of all Religion, and opposes two
many Principles at once; 1. that there is a God. 2. That the Scripture is the
word of God, which, though it be but a mere idle fiction; yet it prevailed too
much with some learned men; Tullie, and Seneca, were the chiefest Patrons of
that conceit, that Religion is no better then an humane invention.

1. Religion is almost as Ancient as man; Genesis 4. 3. 4.
when there were but three men in the universal world, we read that two of
them offered up their sacrifices unto God.

2. The universality of Religion declares that it is not a humane invention,
Genesis 3. 3.
but a Divine impression; yea, and a Divinity-Lesson, of Gods own heavenly
teaching. Lactantius accompteth Religion to be the most proper and essential
difference between a man and a Beast.

3. The perpetuity of Religion proves also that it was planted by God. Matthew.
15. 13.


For the second part of the objection about the Scriptures, I answer.

Nothing is more repugnant to Prudence and Policy.

What Policy was it in the old Testament, to appoint circumcision, to cut a
poor Child, as soon as he comes into the world? 2 Chronicles. 7. 5.
two and twenty thousand Oxen, and a hundred and twenty thousand Sheep were
spent by Solomon, at the dedication of one Altar. To slaughter so many Oxen and
Sheep (such useful creatures) was enough to bring a Famine.

They were to give away the seventh part of their time to God.

Christ was not the Son of the Emperor Augustus, to commend him to the
Grandees of the world; but the supposed Son of a poor Carpenter; a Star leads
the Wise Men to a Stable, though that shined gloriously without, yet there was
nothing within, but what was base, and contemptible.

Christ fell on the Pharisees, the great Doctors, 23. of Matthew, called them
fools, and blind, and threatened them with Hell; he cried down the Ceremonial
Law, the Ministry which had been practiced di^^rs hundred years; the Jews
were naturally tenacious of their Customs Christ chose silly unlearned men to
propagate the Gospel.

Nothing crosses humane wisdom more then the whole Scripture from the
beginning to the end.

Martin Fotherby He sp^nds his whole second Book about this reason. The
Greeks insinuate, that all Arts come from God; in making Minerva, the daughter
of Jupiter: and to have had her generation in his Divine brain. As God the Son
is called (...); so Grammar, Logic, Rhetoric, carry upon them the same
name. There is (...) verbam, that is Grammar* (...) Ratio, that is Logic;
(...) oration, and that is Rhetoric.
Bishop of Salisbury (who wrote Atheomastix) adds another reason, to prove
that there is a God, and it is taken from the grounds of Arts: There is no Art
(says he) neither liberal nor illiberall, but it comes from God, and leads
to God.

1. From Metaphysics he urges, that the bounding of all natural bodies, is
the work of God; to be unlimited and boundless, is only the Prerogative of
the Maker of all things. Every finite body being thus limited, must needs have
those bounds prescribed unto it, by some other thing, and not by it self. For
every thing by nature, seeking to enlarge it self, as far as it is able, if it
had the setting of its own bounds it, would set none at all; but would be as
infinite, as God himself is, who has the setting of limits unto all things;
who could circumscribe all things within their limits, but only God Himself:
who is both the Maker and Ruler of all things? Psalm. 33. 7. Job 38. 11.

2. From Philosophy; All second causes, depend on the first, and we cannot
proceed in Infinitu^*
every thing that is, must needs have a cause, and nothing can be the cause of
it self, and among all the causes, there can be but one first, and principal
cause; which is the true cause of all the rest, and of all those effects which
proceed from all of them: then the first cause can be nothing else but God:
for what can that be, which gives being unto all things, but only God?

All motion depends on some mover, Quicquid movetur, ab alio movetur. Some
derive Deus from (...) fear, because the fear of him is planted in the very
natures, and consciences of all reasonable Creatures, others a dando; in
English God, quasi Good; his daily mercies and blessings show that there is a
God, Act. 14 17,
the motion of sublunary things depends on the motion of the Heavens, and their
motion must needs be caused by some supreme first mover. Therefore we must
necessarily come at last to some first mover, which is moved of no other, and
that is God.

Others add these reasons to prove that there is a God. The Heathens lift up
their eyes and hands to Heaven in any sudden distress. Psalm. 9. 16.


1. The heroic motions and prosperous success of some famous men in
undertaking and acting those things which exceed the common capacity of humane
nature; the gifts of mind in Aristotle, Achilles, Alexander.

2. The heinous punishments inflicted on particular men, Familes and Kingdoms
for great offenses, some of which were wonderfully brought to execution, when
by their power and subtilty they thought they could escape the Magistrates
Sword.

If we speak of Atheists strictly and properly, The pure Atheist (according to
the propriety of that name) is he, which generally and constantly denies all
Deity, and believes as he says. The stou^est Atheist that ever lived, can not
resolutely and constantly believe there is no God.
meaning such as have simply denied all Deity and denied it constantly, Tullies
sentence is most true, that there was never any such Creature in the World as
simply and constantly to deny God. The name of an Atheist in this sense, is
nomen ^ciosunt; a name without a thing. It we speak of Atheists in a larger
sense, for such as have openly (though not constantly) denied the Divinity, of
such professed Atheists, there have not been past two or three. If we speak
of Atheists in the largest sense, meaning such as denied Gods providence,
justice, goodness, though they have done it but weakly, rather upon some
sudden passion, then any settled resolution, their number has scarcely
amounted to a score, I mean of such open Atheists, as have made any public
profession of their Atheism, though but even in these secondary points.

Those Atheists that denied a God, spoke what they wished rather then what they
thought; or else they opposed the Heathenish Gods, or to show their Diagorus
made a very eloquent Oration, that there was no God; but the people coming to
him applauded him, saying that in his Oration he had almost persuaded them, but
he did so ^l^quently that they thought he was the God,
wit; Diagoras (the chiefest of them) did Morn^eus cap. 1. de verit. Relig. p.
16.
Potius Gentilium Deos ridere, quam Deum negare: He rather derided false Gods,
then denied the true; that he was not a mere Atheist, appears, in that he
thus began his Poem, Quod a numine summ^ reguntur omnia.

The Athenians also condemned Protagoras for an Atheist: yet not for denying
God, but for seeming to doubt of him: Because in the beginning of his Book he
propounded this Problem: De diis quidem statuere nequeo; neque an sint, nec
ne: For this the Athenians banished him, and decreed, that his Books should be
publicly burned. Theodoras (who for his notable profaneness was surnamed
Atheos) though at the first he was noted of When he wanted fire he took one of
Hercules wooden Images and made a fire of it, saying, go to Hercules, thou
shall now go through thy thirteenth labor.
Atheism, yet at the last he fell into Autotheisme, professing himself a
God, as Laertius reports; though carrying God in the name, he was an Atheist
in his opinion says Fuller in his profane state of this Theodorus. A Pope
dying said, now I shall be resolved of three things, 1. Whether there be a
God, 2. Whether the soul be immortal, 3. Whether there be an Heaven and Hell.

Some indirectly deny God by denying his providence as Epicurus, Psalm. 14. 1.
and 53. 15.
who denied not Gods Essence, but only his Providence. He granted that there
was a God, So Genebrard and Muis expound that, 14. Ps. of indirect Atheists,
who deny Gods Providence. Heb. 11. 6.
though he thought him to be such an one as did neither evil nor good. But God
sits not idle in Heaven, regarding nothing that is done upon the Earth (as
the Epicure conceiteth). He is a most observing God, and will reward or punish
men according to their actions.

1. This serves to blame and condemn the miserable corruption of our evil
hearts, It is not only innatum, sed etiam in animo insculptum esse Deos Cic l.
2. de natura Deorum:
which are so far overrun with Atheism; though this be the very first Truth
which God has engraven into the soul of a man, that there is a God, yet we
weakly hold this conclusion; for all sin may and must be resolved into the
ignorance of God and Atheism; we should be humbled for our thoughts of
Atheism, for saying in our hearts that there is no God; No Atheists almost can
be named, neither in the holy Scriptures, nor in Ecclesi^stical Histori^s, nor
in Heathen writings, which came not unto some fearful end, See Atheomastix. l.
1. chap. 15.
the Devil in judgment never was an Atheist, we should take notice of and
bewail this foul vice. Though the Atheist did never so carefully, or
cunningly dissemble it, yet he could not but inwardly know, that there was a
God.

2. We should oppose this Atheism and labor to grow more and more in the
knowledge of God, and to strengthen our Faith in this principle that God is;
meditate and ponder of his Works, and be perfect in those Lessons which the
common Book of nature teaches, pray to God to clear the eye of our mind,
and to imprint a right knowledge of himself in us; The Papist is a make-God,
and the Atheist is a mock-God, The Papist deludeth his conscience, and the
Atheist derideth his ^onscience; Popery comfort the flesh, and Atheism
suppresseth the spirit.

As the Heathen Emperors took upon them the Title So Domitian, Dominus Deus
noster, sic fieri jubet. Suetonius. edictam Domini Deique nostri. Martial More
Caligula, Dominum se, Deumque vocarit coegit. Aurelius Victor.
of God, so does the Pope Dominus Deus noster Papa. His Decrees and Canons are
called Oracles; Oracle signifies the answer of God, Romans 3 2. and 11. 4. And
his decretall Epistles are equalled to the Canonical Epistles.

Deal with thy heart as Junius his Father dealt with him: he seeing his son
was Atheistical, he laid a Bible in every Rome, that his son could look in no
Rome, but behold a Bible haunted him, upbraiding him, will thou not read me
Atheist? will thou not read me? And so at last he read it, and was converted
from his Atheism. The often meditating in the Scriptures will (through Gods
blessing) settle us in these two great Principles, 1. That there is a God. 2.
the Scripture is the Word of God; That God which made Heaven and earth is the
only true God; we must believe that this God which we read of in Scripture is
the only true Psalm. 48. 14.
God; so it is not enough to believe there is a Scripture, but that Esaias 40. 5.
8.
the Scripture of the old and new Testament is the Word of God.

CHAP. II.
What God is.
IN him consider, Quid su (...).

First, his Nature.
Secondly, his Works.
In his Nature two things are considerable:
First, his Essence.
Secondly, the distinction of persons in that essence.
1. Of Gods Essence.
God is an Infinite Essence which is of Himself, and gives being to all other
things.

Some things have their being wholly in another, as accidents, whitenes in the
Wall, Wisdom in the mind, 2. Some things have a being by themselves not
inhering in another, as substances, which are of two kinds, 1 Bodily
substances which have dimensions, length, breadth and thickness, possessing a
place by commensuration of parts, 2. Spiritual, freed from dimensions and from
all circumscription of place; God is not an accident, that is the most weak
and imperfect being, nearest to a not being, and most easily reduced into
nothing, as if the Grass and Flower fade, then the color and fashion of it
comes soon to nothing. God is not in any other thing, but all things are in
him.

God is a Spirit, a being void of all dimensions, circumscriptions and
divisiblenesse of parts. Other Spirits are compounded of substance and
accidents at least, and exist in a place by limitation of Essence by which they
are here and not there; but God is an Essence altogether simple and
immateriall, utterly free from all manner of composition any way, in whom are
no qualities nor any limitation of essence. He is a Spiritual, Simple, and
Immateriall essence. His essence is substantial, an essence which has a being
in it self not in another, simply and wholly immateriall (He is one most pure
and mere Act) but incomprehensible, Job. 11. 7, 8. and 26. 14.
goes quite beyond our knowledge, so that we cannot comprehend his essence,
nor know it as it is. He only perfectly knows himself, but he may be known in
some sort.

1. By his Names. 2. By his Attributes.
The word God is attributed.

First, properly to him who is essentially God, Esaias 42. 8. 1 Cor. 8. 6. and
either personally, commonly, without a determination of a certain Person, John
4. 24. Or singularly to some one person by a Synecdoche John 3. 16. Acts 20.
28. 1 Timothy 3. 16.

Secondly, improperly to those which by nature are not God* 1 Cor. 8. 5. Gal.
4. 8. and that name is given to these, either from Gods ordination, for the
dignity and excellency of their office as to Angels, Psalm. 8. 6. to
Magistrates, Psalm. 82. 6. to Moses, Ex. 4. 16. or from their own unjust
usurpation, as to the Devil, who is called the God of the World, 2 Cor. 4. 9.
or from the erroneous persuasion of men, as to Idols, 1 Cor. 8. 4, 5.

For the ten Hebrew names of God (having handled them in another place) I shall
say but little of them here. In the Epistle to my Hebrew Critica Sacra, and in
the Book it self.
The name, Jehovah, Jah, Ehejeb signify Gods Perfect, Absolute and simple
being of and by himself, 2. Such a being as gives being to other things and
upon whom they depend, 3. Such a God as is true and constant in his promises,
judaei in legendis et scribedi^ n^mi nibus, Dei ^ppido quam superstitiosi sunt,
interpretantur tert^^ praeceptum, nomen lehovae non esse prenunciandum, and
librum in quo integre scriptum est, nudis manibus non esse contrectandum. Of
those two Greek names, See my Greek Critica Sacra. As
ready to make good whatsoever he has spoken. His names El, Elohim, Schaddai,
Adonai signify a God all-sufficient in himself, strong and powerful, able to
bless, protect, and punish.

The Jews in Pronouncing or writing the Names of God were reverent even to
superstition. D. Fulk against Martin.

In the new Testament Gods most frequent Names are (...) and (...) God and Lord.

He is also called the Father of lights. JAmes. 1. 17.

The essential names of God are, 1. Proper, Jehovab, Jah Ehich, Exodus 13. 19.
which agree to no Creature not Analogically. 2. Common which are applied to
others, but agree to God principally by way of excellency, as God, King, and
good.

The Name of God is used five ways in Scripture:

First, essentially for God himself, Esaias 30. 27.

Secondly, for the power and efficacy which comes from God, Ps. 118. 10, 11, 12.

Thirdly, for the command and authority of God, 1 Samuel 17. 45.

Fourthly, passively for those actions whereby he is acknowledged by us, Mat.
18. 19. that is nothing but worshipping and calling upon the Father, Son and
Holy Ghost, for assistance.

Lastly for that Word whereby he is distinguished from creatures, and by which
we are to have our thoughts directed about him.

2. God may be known by his Attributes and essential properties, of which some
show what he is in himself, 2. What he is to us.

They are called Attributes. Vocantur Attributa quia ea sibi attribait Deus
nostra causa Zanchius de Attributis l. 2. c. 11.
because they are rather said to be attributed to God (that we might by them
better conceive what he is) then to be in him. They are that one most pure God
diversely apprehended, and the same with the Divine essence; but for the
weakness of our capacity they are diversely distinguished. They are called
properties, because they are peculiar to his Majesty, Attributum est Divinae
simplicissimae essentiae pro diversa agendi ratione diversa, and vera habitudo
and conceptio nobis expressa.
and are so in him, as they are not in any Creature.

Some do distinguish of Gods Attributes and Properties. M. Stock on Gods
Attributes.
Attributes are those which belong to the Essence, and Properties to the
Persons themselves.

A property Proprietates Divinae naturae, seu essentiae, sunt Attributa Dei
essentialia, quibus essentiae Divinae veritas ac Majestas nobis innot^scit, and
abaliis distinguiturs Wendelinus.
in God is an essential Attribute in him, whereby his nature is known in it
self, and is distinguished from all other things.

Some Rules are to be observed in attributing these to God.

First, These Attributes differ not among themselves, nor from the Divine
essence Esaias 43. 25. For my self, not for my Mercy; to teach us that his Mercy
is himself, and not different from his Essence, as it is with us.
they are all essential to God; for in him is no accident at all; whatsoever
is in God the same is God. All these are also one in him; his Mercy is his
Justice, and his Justice is his Mercy, and each are his essence, only they
differ in our apprehension.

Secondly, they are all absolute properties in God, and so distinguished from
those respective properties whereby every person in the Trinity has his own
subsistence.

Thirdly, they are all equal to all the three Persons, and alike affirmed of
all. The Father Eternal, most Holy, Almighty, merciful; so is the Son and
Holy Ghost.

Fourthly, God is so light that in him there is no darkness at all. 1 John 1.
5.
these Attributes are altogether in God alone, and that in the highest degree
and measure, yea above all degree and measure; they are eternal and infinite
in him. He alone is good, Mat. 19. 17. and only wise, Romans 16. 27. And Kings
of Kings, 1 Timothy 6. 15. They are affirmed of him, both in the concrete and
abstract; John 8. 12. 1 John 1. 5. and 4. 16.
He is not only wise and good, but wisdom and goodness it self, Life and
Justice it self.

Fifthly, they are all actually and operatively in God. He does and will; his
holiness makes us holy.

6. All these are in God objectively and finally; our holiness looks upon his
holiness, as the face in the looking-glass on the man, whose representation
it is; and our holiness ends in his.

7. The attributes of God are everlasting, Psalm. 105. 8.
constant and unchangeable, for ever in him, Jam. 1. 17.
at one time, as well as another.

This may minister comfort to Gods people; Psalm. 136. 1. and 100. 5.
Gods attributes are not mutable accidents, but his very essence, his love and
mercy are like himself, Psalm. 117. 2.
infinite, Number. 23. 10.
immutable, and eternal.

2. We should imitate God, and strive to be immutably good and holy as he is,
Levit. 11. 44. Matthew. 5. 48.

These attributes are diversely divided.

1. They are Affirmative, and Negative, as Good, Just, Invisible, Immortal,
Incorporeall.

Proper and Figurative; as God is good, wise; members and humane affections are
also attributed to him.

Absolute and Relative, without any relation to the creatures; as when God is
said to be Immense, Eternal; he is likewise said to be a Creator, King, Judge.

Some describe God, as he is in himself; he is an essence Spiritual,
Invisible, most Simple, Infinite, Immutable, and Immortal. Some as he is to
us, he is omnipotent, most good, just, wise and true.

Some declare Gods own sufficiency; Proprietates Dei sunt primi vel secundi
generis. Primi generis proprietates sunt, quae ita Deo competunt, ut earum
contrariae, omni in sint creaturae. Cujus^odi sunt independentia, simplicitas,
immutabilitas, immensitas, aeternitas Secundi generis sunt, quae ita Deo
competunt, ut earum expressae imagines in creaturis reperiantur. Wendelinus
Christian. Theol. l. 1. C. 1.
so he is said to be Almighty, infinite, perfect, unchangeable, eternal;
others his efficiency, as the working of his power, justice, and goodness over
the creatures; so he is said to be patient, just, merciful.

Some are incommunicable and agree to God alone; as when he is said to be
eternal, infinite. Others are communicable in a sort with the creatures, as
when he is said to be wise, good.

Those two kind of properties, which are said to be in God, differ from those
properties, which are given to men and Angels.

In God they are infinite, unchangeable, and perfect, even the Divine essence
it self; and therefore indeed all one and the same; but in men and Angels they
are finite, changeable, and imperfect, mere qualities, diverse, they receiving
them by participation only, not being such of themselves by nature.

It is hard to observe an accurate method in the enumeration of the
Attributes. Zanchie, Doctor Preston, and Mr. Storke have handled some few of
them, none (that I know) has written fully of them all.

CHAP. III.
GOd in respect of his nature is a Spirit; that is, a substance, or essence
altogether incorporeall. This the Scripture expressly witnesses, John 4. 24.
2 Cor. 3. 17.

An understanding Spirit is either created or uncreated.

Created Spirit, as the soul of man or an Angel, Psalm. 104. 4. 1 Cor. 6. ult.
uncreated, God.

Whatsoever is affirmed of God, God is called a Spirit. 1. Negatively, because
he is not a body. 2. Analogically, or by a certain likeness, because there
are many perfections in Spiritu^Il subst^nces, which do more shadow forth the
Divine nature, then any bodily ^^ng can. Doctor Ammes. Theol.
which is also communicable to the creatures, the same must be understood by a
kind of excellency and singularity above the rest. Angels are Spirits, and
the souls of men are spirits, but God is a spirit by a kind of excellency or
singularity above all spirits, the God of spirits, Number 16* 22. the Father of
spirits, Heb. 12. 9. the Author of spirits, and indeed the spirit of spirits.

The word spirit in Greek (...), in Hebrew Ruach, is used chiefly of God, and
secondarily of the creatures* when it is used of God, it is used either
properly or metonymically; properly, and so first essentially, then it
signifies the Godhead absolutely as John 4. 24. or more restrictively the
divine nature of Christ, Heb. 9. 14. 1 Pet. 3. 18. secondly, personally for the
third person in the Trinity, commonly called the Holy spirit or Ghost, 1 Cor.
2. 11. I^ the word be taken metonymically, it signifies sometimes the effects
of grace, either the common graces of Gods spirit, prophetical, 1 Samuel 10. 6.
10. miraculous, or the sanctifying graces, Ephesians. 5. 13.

Reasons.

1. God is a spirit, God is of a pure and spiritual nature.
because a spirit is the best, highest and purest nature; God being the most
excellent and highest nature, must needs be a spirit too.

2. God is a most simple and noble being, To be a spirit implies, 1.
Invisibility. 2. Efficacy, and activity, Ezekiel. 1. 20.
therefore must needs be incorporeall; Angels and Souls have a composition in
them; their essence and faculties are distinguished; they are compounded of
Subject and Accidents, their nature and qualities or graces; but Gods holiness
is his nature.

3 God is insensible, 3. Simplicity.
therefore a Spirit. Spirits are not subject to senses, God is invisible, 14.
Luke 39. Col. 1. 15 John 1. 18.
John 1. 18.

This confutes 1. Consectaries
Tertullian lib. adver, Prax. and de anima, Romans 1. 23. Anthropomorphites, a
sort of Heretics so called because they misconceived, that God had a bodily
shape like man.
who held God to be Corporeal, then he should consist of matter and form.

2. The Anthropomorphites who ascribed to God the parts and members of a man;
they allege that place, Genesis 1. 27. But some think the soul is the only
subject and seat, in which the Image of God is placed; grant that it was in the
body likewise, it being capable of immortality, yet a man was not said to be
made after the Image of God in respect of his corporal figure, but in respect
of knowledge, righteousness and holiness, Ephesians. 4. 23. Col. 3. 10. not in
respect of his substance, but qualities.

Ob. God is said to have members, face hands, eyes, in some places of
Scripture, Psalm. 34. 16.
and yet in others he is said not to be a body but a Spirit; Zach. 4. 10.
and consequently to have no hands nor eyes.

Sol. The word hand and eye is taken figuratively, Quod de Deo dicitur (...)
intelligi debet (...). Dextra Dei significat potentiam and majestatem Dei:
oculi and aures Omniscientiam. The Scripture referring eyes to God, by them
intends. 1. His knowledge, and notice of things, Prove. 15. 3. 2. His care,
Psalm. 34. 15. 3. His direction, Psalm. 42. 8.
for the power of seeing and working, which are actions, that men perform with
the hand and eye as an instrument; and so it is attributed to God, because he
has an ability of discerning, and doing infinitely more excellent then can be
found in man. Sometimes again, those words are taken properly for members of
the body of some such form, fashion, making; so they are not to be attributed
unto God; who because he has no body, cannot have an hand, an eye. A body is
taken three ways. 1. For every thing which is opposite to a fancy and notion,
and so what ever has a being, may be called a body; in this sense Tertullian
attributes a body to God. 2. For that thing which has some composition or
change; so God only is incorporeall. 3. More strictly for that which consists
of matter and form, so Angels are incorporeall.

3. This shows the unlawfulness then of painting the Godhead; Cajetane
disliked it. Bellarmine L. 2. de Imag. Sanct. C. 8.
argues thus, Man is the Image of God, but man may be pictured, therefore the
Image of God may be pictured.

Man is not the Image of God, but in the faculties of his soul which cannot be
pictured; therefore the Image of God cannot be pictured. Although the whole man
may be said Synecdochically to be pictured; yet is not man called the Image of
God in his whole, but in a part, which is his reasonable and invisible soul,
Consectaries from Gods being a spirit, and invisible.
which cannot be pictured.

1. We must call upon God, and worship him with the Spirit; our Savior Christ
te^cheth us this practical use, John 4. 24. Bless the Lord O my soul, Psalm.
103. whom I serve in the Spirit, Romans 1. 9.
says Paul. The very Heathen made this inference, Si Deus est animus, Romans 1.
20.
sit pura mente colendus.

2. God though invisible in himself, may be known by things visible: He that
sees the Son, has seen the Father, John 14. 9. We should praise God as for
other excellencies, so for his invisibility, 1 Timothy 1. 17.

2. Learn to walk by faith, as seeing him who is invisible, Heb. 11. 27.

Matthew. 5. 8
3. Labor for pure hearts, that we may see God hereafter.

Invisibile aliquid dicitur dupliciter, inquit Cham. primo per se, and ipsa sui
natur^^ ut Deus, ut Spiritus sunt invisibiles. Secundi, per accidens; ^um quid
in se tale est quidem ut possitvideri: sed, al qua externa superveniente causa,
fit invisibile ijs a quibus vel alias, potuit, vel etiam debuit videri: quo
modo ijs, qui sunt ad Septentrionem invisibiles sunt stellae ad Austrum, quo
modo stellae quaedam minutissimae sunt invisibiles.
4. Here is comfort against invisible Enemies, we have the invisible God, and
invisible Angels to help us.

3. God has immediate power over thy Spirit, to humble and terrify thee. He
is the Father of Spirits, he cannot only make thee poor, sick, but make thy
conscience roar for sin, it was God put that horror into Cain, Judas,
Spira's spirits. He is a Spirit, and so can deal with the Spirit.

2. Take heed of the sins of the heart and spirit, pride, unbeleefe,
insincerity, 2 Cor. 7. 1. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 23. such as not only arise from, but are
terminated in the spirit. These are first, most abhorred by God. He is a
Spirit, and as he loves spiritual performances, so he hates spiritual
iniquities, 6 Genesis He punished the old world, because all the imaginations of
the thoughts of their hearts were evil. 2. Most contrary to the Law of God,
which is chiefly Spiritual. 3. Sin is strongest in the spirit, as all evil
in the fountain, Matthew. 15. 19. 4. Spiritual evil make us most like the
Devils, who are Spiritual wickednesses. The Divine essence, is simple and
altogether uncompounded.
All sin is from Satan per modum servitutis, these per modum imaginis. God is
most Simple, Ens Simplicissimum. Simplicity is a property of God, whereby he is
void of all composition, mixtion and division, being all essence; whatsoever
is in God, is God. Simpleness is the first property in God, Simplex proprie
dicitur quod compositum ex diversis non est.
which cannot in any sort agree to any creature.

This is proved that God is Simple, by removing from him, all kinds of
composition, which are five.

1. Of quantitative parts, as a body. 2. Of essential parts, matter and form,
as a man consists of Soul and body. 3. Of a genus and difference, as every
species. 4. Of subject and accidents, as a learned man, a white Wall. 5. Of act
and power, as the Spirits.
Every creature is subject to composition, and consequently to division. 2 Cor.
12. 3. The Gospel and the ways of it are not Simple, as Simplicity is opposed
to the depth of wisdom (for therein is made known the manifold wisdom of
God; Ephesians. 3. 10.) But as Simplicity is opposed to mixture. Every thing the
more simple (in this sense) the more excellent. In Deo idem est esse and
essentia, vivens and vita, quia Deus non vivit per aliud essentiae
superadditum, sed vitam habet inscipso and est ipsa vita, vivit a scipso and
per scipsum.
All things which are Created, are made by joining together more things then
one in one, and so they consist of diverse things.

Some have a more gross and palpable composition of parts, both essential and
integrall, as a man of soul and body, and the body of flesh, blood, bone, and
such parts. The Spirits which have not so plain a composition, are yet
compounded of substance, and accidents sustained by that substance, and
inherent in it; for the substance of an Angel and his faculties, and qualities
are different things; his life is one thing, his reason another, his will
another, his power, wisdom, nimblenesse, other things. So the soul of a man,
and all Created things, are made up of many things conjoined in one.

God is absolutely Simple, he is but one thing, and does not consist of any
parts; he has no accidents; but himself, his essence, and attributes are all
one thing, though by us diversely considered and understood. If he did consist
of parts, there must be something before him, to put those parts together; and
then he were not eternal, Isay 43. 10. he is one most pure and mere act. In
God to be, to will, and to do are the same, John 15. 26. compared with John
14. 6. and 1 John 1. 7. compared with 1. of John 1. 5. where to have life, and
be life; to be in the light, and be light, are the same. God is therefore
called in the abstract light, life, love, truth, John 14* 6. 1 John 4. 8.

This is one reason why God is so perfect, because he is Eus Simplissimum. In
every kind a thing is so much perfect, by how much it is more Simple and pure.
Whence the same Hebrew (...)
word signifies both Simple and perfect.

2. No accidents are in God, when we affirm that God is good and gracious; we
mean it not as when we say so of men; in men they are qualities, virtues, in
God they are his essence.

1. We should be simple as Doves, Consectaries. of God simpleness.
Matthew. 10. 16. Simplicitas Columbina, non asinina. Carthusian, Ephesians. 6. 5. 2
Cor. 1. 12. It is called godly sincerity, which God works, and which is
pleasing to him. Simplex quasi sine plicis. Sincerus, sine cera. See prove. 11.
20.
Simpleness and Simplicity of heart, is the maine thing in A great French
pair is called Le bon Chr^stien, the good Christian, because (they say) it
never rots at the core. 22. Matthew. Christ opposes a single eye and corrupt
one, an Israelite in whom is no guile, is worth an ecc^, a rare man: M^s.
Elizabeth Juxton said, she had nothing to comfort her, but poor syncerity.
Christianity, Ephesians. 6. 5. Col. 3. 22.

2. Here is matter of joy and comfort to the good; mercy and love are Gods
essence, Isay 54. 8. and of fear and terror, to the wicked because Gods anger
and justice are his essence, and he is unchangeable.

God is Living.

He is often called the living God in opposition to dead Idols; 1 John 5. 20.
21. 115. Psalm. 4. 5.
turn from Idols to serve the living God, Genesis 16. 14. and 24. 62. and 25.
11. Deuteronomy. 5. 26. Ruth. 3. 13. Judge. 8. 19. Isay 3. 10. Jer. 10. 10. Ezekiel. 3.
11. Dan. 4. 34. Math. 16. 76. Act. 14. 15. Psalm. 42. 2.
He is called life, 1 John. 5. 10. the fountain of life, Romans 9. 26.
Psalm. 36. 9. He has his name in Greek from life; Graeci Deum vocant (...) a
vivendo, quoniam solus vere vivit and omnia vivificat, ut merito: sic ut
vocatur (...) ita appellari possit (...).
He says often of himself I live; as if he should say, I alone do truly
live, and he often adds for ever, Deuteronomy. 32. 40. The oath which the Fathers
used, is most frequent, the Lord lives, Jer. 5 2. and 12. 16. for they swore
by him, who truly and always lives. He himself swears by nothing but by his
life and holiness, Jud. 8. 24. Ruth. 3. 3. This Oath is used 14. times in
Ezekiel. Zeph. 2. 9. Jer. 46. 18. 22. 24. Isay 49. 18. Deuteronomy. 32. 40. Numb. 14.
21. 28. God is called the living God.

1. To distinguish him from the false Gods of the Gentiles, which were dead and
senseless Stocks, Act. 17. 15.

2. To represent unto us, the vivere est esse actuosum in se, perse, singulari
vi; unde and Latinis viv^ a vi, ut Graecis (...) dicitur. Deuteronomy. 30. 20.
active nature of God, he is all life.

3. To direct us to the Fountain or Well of life, from whom all life is
derived unto the creature by a threefold stream.

1. Nature, God is the author of the life of nature, Genesis 2. 7. Act. 17. 28.

2. Grace, he is the author of that life, John 1. 2. Ephesians. 4. 18.

3. Glory, he is the author of the life of glory, Romans 2. 7.

A reasonable life (to which God resembles his) is a power to perform variety
of regular and limited actions, to a certain known end, and that out of choice
and council. Gods life is his power of working all things according as seems
good to himself after his own Council for his own glory; to say he lives,
is to say he does perpetually work.

Life in things bodily arises from the union of the body and the soul
together; and in things that be not bodies but spirits, from the perfection of
the matter and qualities of them.

Our own life is a power, by which we are able to produce lively actions; Gods
life is that power, whereby he is fit to work or produce all sorts of actions,
suitable to the perfect essence of his divine Majesty; Or it is that, whereby
he knows, wills and affects, and can do all sort of actions, beseeming
his excellent nature.

Reasons. 1. From the effects of life, God understands, wills, loves, therefore
he truly lives; for these are all the properties of livers, therefore Aristotle
often concludes from this that.

Because God understands all things, that he lives a blessed life.

2 Those things live which move and stir themselves; God does all things by
himself, Act. 17. 28.
he is the first and perfectest cause of all; therefore he most properly lives,
and that a most blessed life.

3. From his name Jehovah, he is Jehovah, who is by himself and most
perfectly, and of whom all things are, which are and live; Genesis 2. 7. God lives
because life is originally in him, Psalm. 36. 9 John 1. 4. in him was life.
God therefore so lives, that he is the Author of all life to all livers, and
therefore he is called our life, Deuteronomy. 30. 20. John says of Christ, in him was
the Author of life, and Act. 3. ye have killed the Author of life.

Amongst the creatures which are subject to our sense, there is a three fold
kind of life. Two more imperfect; the third more perfect.

The former is the life of vegetation or growth; by which things are able to
do what is requisite for the attaining and maintaining of their full strength
and nature, and the propagating of their kind, according to their several
kinds.

The second is the life of sense, whereby things are enabled to discern things
hurtful to them, and things good for them; to shune the one, and to seek the
other.

These are imperfect kinds of life, because they are inherent after a sort in
the bodies of things, accompanying a corporal being, which is the meanest
being.

But thirdly, A man has four kinds of faculties in the exercise of which he
lives; and life in him is an ability to exercise them. He has understanding,
will, affections, and a power to move and wo^ke outwardly. The living God sees
it fit to ascribe all th^se to himself.
there is a more worthy and noble kind of life called reasonable, such as is
seen in men and in Angels, which is an ability to proceed reasonably and
understandingly in all actions, for the attaining of good and shunning of
evils, fit for the welfare of the person endued with reason. Now we must not
conceive in God any such imperfect thing as growth or sense, for he is a
spiritual, a Simple and Immateriall essence; but his life is to be understood
by the similitude of the life of reason, for he is a perfect understanding. To
the being then of God adjoyn reasonableness in our concerning of him, and we
conceive his life somewhat aright.

God life differs from the life of the creature.

1. His life is his nature; or essence, he is life it self, theirs the
operation of their nature, he is life, they are but living.

2. His life is his own, Their life has a cause, his none.
he lives of, and by, and in himself; their life is borrowed from him, in him
we live and move, Act. 17. 25. 28. He is life, and the fountain of life to all
things.

3 His life is infinite, without beginning or ending; their life is finite, and
had a beginning, and most of them shall have an end.

4. His life is entire altogether, His life consists in r^st, and he
possesses all his life in one instant, our life is a flux and succession of
parts.
and Perfect, theirs imperfect, growing by addition of days to days. He
lives all at once, has his whole life perfectly in himself, one infinite
moment.

5. He lives necessarily, they contingently, so as they might not live.

6. His life is immutable, theirs mutable and subject to many alterations.

1. This serves to blame those which carry themselves no otherwise to God,
Consectaries from Gods l^fe.
then if he were a very dead Idol, not fearing his threats, or seeking to obey
him.

2. To exhort us all often, to revive in our selves, the memory and
consideration of his life, by stirring up our selves, to fear his threats,
respect his promises, obey his Commandments, Dan 6. 27.
decline his displeasure, and seek his favor. Let us serve, Heb. 9. 14, 15.
fear, and trust in him, which lives for evermore. Provoke not the Lord by
your sins; Rev. 4. 9 10.
for it is a fearful thing, to fall into the hands of the living God. Heb.
10. 31.

3. Here is comfort to all the faithful servants of this God, which desire to
please him; for they have a King which lives and has lived for ever, Psalm.
18. 46.
a King eternal, immortal, invisible and only wise; in his life they shall
enjoy life; though friends dye, God ever lives. His life is the preserver,
upholder, and comforter of your life. God living of himself, can bless you
with natural, spiritual, and eternal life John 14. 19. Romans 8. 10. 17. Men
will give skin for skin, and all that they have for life. It is reported of
one, that he offered to redeem his life, thrice his weight in Silver, twice in
Gold, once in Pearl. But we do little for the living God, and communion with
him in the life of grace, and for obtaining eternal life.

God is immortal and incorruptible, he lives for ever in like perfection.

The Scripture confirms this.

1. Negatively, when it removes mortality, and corruption from God, Romans 1. 23.
1 Timothy 1. 17. and 6. 16.

2. Affirmatively, when it gives life to God, Genesis 16. 14. Deuteronomy. 5. 26. Jer.
2. 13.

The property of Gods life is, it is endless, incorruptible, Deuteronomy. 32. 40.
Life is essential to God, he is life it self, but the life of other things is
accidental. His life is also effective, he gives life to all living creatures.

2. God is of himself eternal, of himself, and absolutely immortal, and
incorruptible. He only has immortality, 1 Timothy 6. 16. Angels are not
immortal in and of themselves, they have not original, or absolute
immortality; their immortality is dependent and derivative.

3. Because he is void of all composition, therefore he is free from corruption.

4. Because he is simply, and every way immutable.

5 This is proved from the Nobility, and perfection of the Divine essence.
Living bodies are more perfect then such as do not live; but God is the most
perfect, and noble being, John 5. 26.

6. Because he is blessed, therefore he is immortal, Ezekiel. 37. 14

1. This comforts all Gods people, who have the living God for their friend;
who lives for ever, and they shall live eternally with him; the life of God
comforted Job. 19. 25. Let them trust in the living God. This should comfort us
against spiritual weakness, John, v. 5. 21.
and deadness, though we be dull, and dead in Prayer, God is life, and will
quicken us.

2. We miserable men for sin are all subject unto The Latin word for men, is
mortales. ipso vo cabulo suae conditionis admonentur. Erasmus in colloq. Psalm.
17. 15.
death, 2 Samuel 14. 14. Psalm. 144. 4. Psalm. 90. 6. Job. 14. 1. Job describes
there the brevity, frailty, instability* and manifold miseries of this life;
therefore let us place all our confidence and hope in God, who is immortal and
incorruptible; our soul is immortal, and made for immortality, it is not
satisfied with any thing, nor rests but in God, who is immortal and
incorruptible. A thing may be said immortal two ways; first, Simpliciter,
absolute per se, suaque natura, so that there is no outward, Zanchius de
immortalitate l. 2. C. 8.
nor inward cause of mortality; so only God. Secondly, which in its own
nature may be deprived of life, yet ex voluntate Dei neither dies, nor can dye;
so the soul and Angels are immortal.

CHAP. IV.
GOd is truly Infinite, Col. 3. 3.
in his nature and essence, actually and simply, by himself, and absolutely he
is Infinite. It is a vain conceit, Exodus 40. 12. 15. 17. Psalm. 145. 3.
that there cannot be an infinite thing in Act.

He is not infinite

1. In corporal quantity and extension, but in essence and perfection. Spiritu
Iufinitus, non corpore; non inquam quantitate, magnitudine, mole, sed
qualitate, virtute bonitate, and si quid praestantius ab homine de Deo dici vel
cogitari potest. Mornaeus Cap. quarto de veritate Relig. Christ. Infinitas
absoluta est essentiae Dei proprietas qua neque causae neque mensurae ullim
terminis finitur. Goma^us.


2. Not privative but negative, he has simply no end.

3. He is Infinite not according to the Etymon of the word, which respects an
end only; for he is both without beginning and end; although the word be
negative, yet we intend by it a positive attribute and perfection.

The Scripture demonstrates God to be Infinite.

1. Affirmatively, Psa. 143. 3.

2. Negatively, in the same place.

3. Comparatively, Job. 11. 8. Isay. 40. 12. 15. Dan. 4. 32.

2. reasons prove this.

1. From the perfection of God; whatsoever thing has not an end of its
perfection and virtue, that is truly and absolutely infinite. Infiniteness is
to be without bounds, to be unmeasurable, to exceed reason or capacity; it is
opposed to Finite, which is to bound or limite, to define, to end, or conclude.

Infiniteness is that, whereby God cannot be limited, measured, or determined
of any thing, being the first cause from whom, and the end wherefore all things
were made.
Infiniteness is such a property in God, that he is not limited to any time,
place, or particular nature and being; or it is that whereby God is free
altogether from all limitation of time, place, or degrees.

He has all good things in him in all fullness of perfection, above all
measure and degrees, yea above all conceiveable degrees by us. He has all
wisdom and power, above all that all creatures can conceive and think; Ephesians.
3. 20. that goodness which is in him is Infinite, All his properties are
infinite.
his love is infinite, his mercies are infinite, and so is his anger. That
which is of it self cannot be limited by any thing. Every creature is limited
and has certain bounds set to it by its causes, especially the efficient and
the matter; but God is no way limited, he has not any bounds of any kind, but
is altogether infinite or boundless. Isay. 40. 12. 15. 17.

Every creature has a threefold limitation.

1. Of kinds of being.

2. Of degrees of its being.

3. Of circumstances of its being.

First each thing is set in its own rank or order with other things, some
being of one kind, some of another; some things are simple, some compounded,
some corporeal, some incorporeall, some things living, some things void of
life, some things sensible, and some things senseless; and so in the rest. The
maker of all things Nature triumphs in nothing so much as in dissimilitude.
has as it were sorted them into diverse kinds, for the greater beautifying of
the whole, and demonstration of his wisdom in this variety.

Again All creatures have such a measure and degree, as the author of them
would communicate unto them.
things of the same kind and of other kinds too, differ in the degrees of
being; some have lower some higher degrees of what they have, some a more
lively life, some a quicker sense, some more power, some less, some greater
degrees of wisdom.

God is not limited to any kind of being, but has in himself all kinds of
being, not subjectively but eminently. He Infinite power is that whereby God
can do more tben all creatures can do, yea more then all creatures can
conceive he can do; infinite understanding by which he knows more then all
creatures do know, or can conceive that he does know.
has a being beyond all degree and measure, whence all his properties are
Infinite, allsufficiency, omnipotency, omniscience, infinite wisdom and truth,
and all in him incomprehensible and infinite.

He is unlimited in regard of time or duration, and so is Eternal; in regard
of place, and so is immense or omnipresent, in regard of degrees of all things
that are in him, and so is perfect. Infinite in stability, immutable in his
power, omnipotent.

Gods infiniteness makes all wonderful, his mercies are infinite, his love
infinite, his goodness and excellencies infinite.

A thing may be said to be infinite, either absolutely and in the whole kind of
being, so God, all good is in him formally or eminently. 2. In some certain
kind only, as if there were infinite quantity, it were only infinite in the way
of a body; it would not contain all other things in it.

From Gods Infiniteness arises his All Sufficiency, he is enough for,
himself and all things else, to make them happy and perfect in their several
kinds; his all sufficiency is that whereby God is of himself all-sufficient
for himself to make himself most blessed, and to satisfy all other things,
and make them happy in their several kinds; God has therefore taken this name
upon him, Genesis 17.
and by the commemoration of it did comfort Abrah^m, and encourage him to be
his servant.

But Dr. Preston has written so largely and well of this Attribute, This one
Attribute of Gods all sufficiency, may answer all the scruples of a Christian.
that I shall not need to say any more of it.

Object. The Angels and Saints see the Essence of God, therefore it is not
infinite. Math. 18. 10. 1 Cor. 13. 12. 1 John 3. 2.

Sol. 1. We must distinguish between vision and comprehension, God is seen of
the Angels and Saints; but not comprehended.

2. The finite understanding knows God beatifically, not by the force of
nature, but by a supernatural illumination of the Holy Ghost and benefit of
grace.

1. This is a terror to wicked men; Consectaries from Gods infiniteness.
his anger and hatred are Infinite, therefore his anger is compared to all
things terrible. 2. serves to reprove their folly who will loose God to get any
pleasure or profit, infinite glory and happiness for finite things.

2. Exhorts us not to pronounce rashly of his decrees and attributes, for this
only can be comprehended of God that he cannot be comprehended; we must not
measure Gods infinite power and wisdom by our shallow capacities: the
endeavoring to measure the nature and decrees of God by our humane reason,
has been one maine cause of many desperate errors in the world; therefore Paul
Romans 11. silenceth high and inquisitive disputes by this exclamation, Oh the
depth of the wisdom and knowledge of God, how unsearchable are his ways!

3. What is a sinful mortal man in comparison of God, See Genesis 18. 17.
Esaias. 40. 15. 16. 17. therefore he should humble himself before him and
acknowledge his nothingnesse. Esaias, 6. 2.


All the whole world compared to the Infinite God, is but as a point; let us
therefore stand amazed at the consideration of this Infiniteness, and say with
David. Psalm. 8. 5. and 86. 8.

God is infinitely good, therefore deserves all our love and obedience; the
best Angel in heaven cannot love God according to his excellency; we should
love him with a love, 1. of union, 2. complacency, 3 friendship, 4. dependence.
We should love God intensively with our chiefest affection, and extensively
above all things. He is an Infinite Ocean of all joy and happiness, he is a
continual object of joy and delight to the Saints and Angels in Heaven, they
are not weary of him; our infinite desires are fully satisfied with him alone
that is Infinite.

This Attribute of Gods being everywhere, is called Immensity, Omnipresence, or
Vbiquitie.
God is Immense or Omnipresent, Psalm. 139. 7. 8. 9. 10. Josh. 2. 11. Job. 11.
8. Jer. 23. 23. 24. Immensity is taken 1. largely, so it is the same with
Infiniteness, signifying that God is neither measured by place nor time, nor
by any other thing, but is in his own nature and Essence Infinite and Immense.
Immensum proprie est quod non possis metiri; 2. strictly, so it differs from
Infiniteness as the Species from the Genus, there being 2. kinds of
Infiniteness, Immensity and Eternity.

Immensitas est proprietas, Dei qua omnes essentia terminos excludit, vbique
quoad essentiam simul in caelo and in terra, imo and extra caelum est: absque
ulla tamen expansione vel multiplicatione. Wendelinus. Christ. Theol l. 1. c. 1.
Immensity is such a property of God, by which he can not be measured nor
circumscribed by any place, but fills all places without multiplying or
extension of his essence.

He is neither shut up in any place, nor shut out from any place, but is
immense, everywhere present; he is without place and above place, present
everywhere, without any extension of matter, but in an unspeakable manner.

He is above all, in all, and through all, Ephesians. 4. 6. over all (men) by his
power, in all (the Saints) by his Spirit; and through all (the world) by his
providence.

God is every where by his essense, presence and power;

Enter, praesenter, Deus hic and vbique potenter.

1. By his Essence, because he fills The Jewish Doctors call God, (...) that is,
place, as containing all things, himself being not contained of any thing.
all places and spaces with his Immensitie. 1 King. 8. 27. Isay, 66. 1. Acts.
17. 27.

2. By his presence.

3. By his power and operation, because he works all in all, 1 Cor. 12. 6.

This Immensity, and Omnipresence of the divine essence, is proved to be
essential to God.

1. From Scripture, and that

1. Affirmatively, when he is said to be everywhere present. David proves it by
a particular enumeration, of places, Heaven and the Grave, the farthest parts
of the earth, yea all things, Psalm. 139. 7. 8. 9. 10. He compares places most
opposite together, and showing that God is present in them he understands, that
he is present in the places between, Amos 9. 2. Iovis omnia plena.

2. Negatively, when he is denied to be concluded and comprehended in a
certain place, 1 King. 8. 27. 2 Chronicles. 2. 6. and 6. 18. Act. 7. 48. and 17.
24. 27.

3. Symbolically, Isay 66. 1. Act. 7. 49.

2. From Reasons.

1. From the Simplicity of the Divine essence, God is a pure act; therefore
altogether indivisible, and therefore he is in every thing, and in every part
of every thing, whole and undivided.

2. Whatsoever is in its essence infinite, that also is every where present,
else it should be terminated in place. God is infinite in his essence, and
being; therefore also of an infinite presence.

The Angels are in an ubi though not in a place properly in English we cannot
so well distinguish these words. They are limited, and confined to some space,
an Angel cannot be at the same time, in heaven and earth.
Each creature is limited by place, though spirits do not fill up a place by
commensuration of parts, yet they have a certain compass (as I may call it)
beyond which their essence extends not, they are so here, that they are not
there; so in heaven, that they are not the same time on earth. But God is
altogether above place; he is omnipresent, not by any material extension, but
after an incomprehensible and unexpressible manner. He is quite above all
place, wholly without, and within all and every place; and that without all
local motion, or mutation of place. He is everywhere totally, and equally; he
was as well in the Jewish Synagogues, as in the Temple of Jerusalem, or Holy of
Holies as well in earth or hell, as in the heavens in respect of his essence.

Gods being in every place, is not first by multiplication; there is not a
multiplication of his being, as loaves were multiplied, so that they held out
to do that which otherwise they could not; for then there should be many
divine essences; nor secondly by division, as if part of his nature, were in
one part of the world, and part in another; but he is wholly wheresoever he is.

Nor thirdly by commixtion, as if he came into composition with any creature.
He is not the air or fire, but he is every where effectively with his essence
and being, repletively he fills all places, heaven and earth. Yet he fills not up
a place, as a body does; but is present everywhere, by being without limitation
of place; so that he coexists with every creature. Where any creature is, there
is he more then the creature, and where no creature is, there is he too; all
the sins that we commit, are done in his presence, and before his face, Isay
65. 3. Psalm. 51. 4. as if a thief should steal, the Judge looking on. We
should set the Lord therefore always before us, as David Psalm. 16. 8. We
should be comforted in troubles, and patient, Phil. 4. 5. a Child will not care
so long as he is in his Fathers presence, Psalm. 23. 4.

Ob. God is said to descend and ascend. God is said to descend and ascend two
ways.


Sol. This hinders not his being every where.

1. He is said to descend, as often as by any visible shape objected, he
testifyeth his presence, as Genesis 18. 21. Exodus 3. 8. when God withdrawes that
presence, he is said to ascend, as Genesis 35. 13.

2. When God by the destruction of his Enemies, Cameron praelect. in Psalm. 68.
19.
and deliverance of his own, testifyeth of his Church that he is with it on
earth, Isay 64. and the contrary, Psalm. 68. 19.

Ob. If God be everywhere, how is he then said to dwell in heaven. Psalm 2. 4.

Sol. In respect of his essence God is every where and in every thing as well
as in heaven; Psalm. 103. 49. and 115. 3. Matthew. 6. 9.
but he does more manifest his glory, John 14. 2.
wisdom, power and goodness, and bestows his grace more liberally on his
Angels, Act. ^. 49.
and Elect in heaven, then he does here below.

Ob. How can God be said to depart from man, if he be every where.

Sol. He departs not in respect of his essence, but in respect of the
manifestation of his presence.

The Schoolmen, say God is five ways in the creatures.

1. In the humanity of Christ; by hypostaticall union.

2. In the Saints, by knowledge and love.

3. In the Church, by his essence and direction.

4. In heaven, by his Majesty and glory.

5. In Hell by his vindicative justice.

1. This may teach the godly to be sincere and upright; Consectaries from Gods
Immensity, or Omnipresence, Job. 31. 14.
because they walk before God, Genesis 17. 1. he is present with them,
understands their secret thoughts, and imaginations. Psalm. 139. 7. 8. Jer. 23.
23. 24 This should curb them from committing secret sins; and encourage them
to perform private duties, Matthew. 6. 6. approving themselves to their Father,
who sees in secret. Solitariness should not imbolden us to sin, nor hinder
us from well-doing. It was Joseph's reason to his Mistress, how can I do this
great evil? though they were alone, God was present.

Two religious men, took two contrary courses, with two lewd women; whom they
were desirous to reclaim from their ill course of life; the one came to one of
the women as desirous of her company, so it might be with all secrecy; and when
she had brought him to a close room, that none could pry into, then he told
her, that all the bolts and bars which were, could not keep God out. The
other desired to accompany with the other woman openly in the street; which
when she rejected as a mad request, He told her, it was better to do it in
the eyes of a multitude, then of God.

2. This serves to confute the Lutherans, who hold Ubiquity to be communicated
to Christ's body, and therefore they say his body is in the Sacrament, and every
where else; because it is assumed by God, but this is false; for the reason of
Gods omni-presence, is the infiniteness of his nature, and therefore it can be
no more communicated to the body of Christ then the Godhead can; for his humane
nature might as well be eternal as everywhere. Christ's body is a finite
creature, and though it be glorified, yet is not deified. It is an
incommunicable attribute of the Deity, to be in many places at one and the same
time.

3. Let us esteem God a greater good then any creature; friends are distant
one from another; God is with us in our journies and families. He only is the
object of Prayer, for he is everywhere to hear thee; and so are not Angels.
God himself comforts his people, by promising his gracious presence, Genesis 46.
4. Exodus 3. 12. Josh. 1. 9. Isay 43. 1.

4. No man by wit, or policy, flight, or hiding himself, can escape the hand
of God; for he is everywhere present, Amos 9. 1. 2.

5. This is a terror to the secret devisers of wickedness, their Plots are
discovered.

God is Eternal.

Eternity Boethius defines Eternity to be interminabilis vitae tota simul and
perfecta possessio. l. 5. de ^onsol. pros. 6. The Schoolmen define it to be
duratio interminabilis, indivisibilis and independens; interminabilis quia
excludit terminum a quo and ad quem; indivisibilis quia excludit omnem
successionem temporis; independens quia excludit omnem imperfectionem and
mutationem. Philosophi distinguunt inter aeternitatem, aevum, and tempus: and
aeternitatem principio and fine carentem tribuunt soli Deo: Aevum solo. fine
carens, or^aturis nunquam desituris: Tempus nec principio nec fine carens
creaturis aliquando desituris. Wendelinus
is a being without limitation of time: Time is the continuance of things past,
present, and to come, all time has a beginning, a vicissitude, and an end, or
may have; but Gods essence is bounded by none of these hedges.

First, he is without beginning, he is before time, beyond time, behind time as
it were, and above all circumscription of time. From everlasting to
everlasting, thou art God. He is what he is in one infinite moment of being, as
I may speak. I am Alpha and Omega, Rev, 1. 8. In the beginning, God made all
things; and he that made all things could not have a beginning himself. What
has no beginning, can have no succession, nor end. We cannot properly say of
God, that he has been, or that he shall be, but he is. To him all things are
present, though in themselves they have succession.

He is an everlasting King, everlastingly powerful, and glorious; as the
conclusion of the Lords Prayer shows.

He is called the King eternal, 1 Timothy 5. 17. and the eternal God, Romans 16.
26. the maker of times, Heb. 1. 2. He inhabiteth eternity, Isay 67. 15. God
only is properly, and absolutely eternal; Angel, and men's souls, are said to
be eternal a posteriori, or a part post, God a priori and a posteriori, ex
part ante and post, since he has neither beginning, succession, nor end.

The Scripture confirms this eternity of God diverse ways.

1. With a Simple and plain asseveration, Genesis 21. 33. Isay 40. 28. and 57.
15. Dan. 6. 26. Romans 16. 26.

2. By denying to him time and succession, Job. 36. 26. Isay 43. 10. Psalm. 90.
5. 2 Pet. 3. 8.

3. By attributing to him eternal properties and operations; his mercy is said
to endure for ever, Psalm. 103. 17. and 136.

1. Eternal council is attributed to him, Psalm. 33. 11. Eternal Kingdom,
Exodus 15. 18. Eternal power, Dan. 6. 26. eternal glory, 1 Pet. 5. 10. his
dominion is an everlasting dominion, Dan. 7. 14. his righteousness is
everlasting, Psalm. 119. 142. and his truth.

4. By a metaphorical description, days and years are attributed to him; but
most distinct from our days and years, Job. 10. 5. Dan. 7. 9, 22. He is
called the Ancient of days, Psalm. 102. 28. thy years are not consumed.

1 Samuel 15. 29. He is called eternity it self; Christ is called the Father of
eternity, Thou Lord remainest for ever, say the Scrptures often. Prove. 23. 25.
He was said to be before the world, Psalm. 90. 2. Ephesians. 1. 4.
Isay 9. 6. most emphatically, to signify that he is eternity it self, and
the Author of it. The French style God in their Bibles l' Eternell, because he
only is perfectly eternal.

Reasons.

1. God is the best thing that is, Of necessity there must be a first cause,
and therefore must be something without a beginning.
therefore it must needs follow, that he is an eternal essence; for that which
is eternal; is better then that which is not.

2. Else he should depend on some thing else, if he were not eternal; and then
he were not God.

3. If he were not eternal, he must have a beginning; and then something else
must give it him, and so be better then he.

4. God created all things, even time it self, Heb. 1. 2. He is therefore
before all things, and without beginning, Romans 1. 2. and whatsoever was before
time, must needs be eternal.

5. He is the Author, and giver of eternal life to those that have it,
therefore he must needs be eternal himself; for whatsoever can give eternity,
that is eternal.

Ob. If God were eternal; where was he before the world was? and what did he
before he made all things; Vide Augustine Confess. l. 11. c. 12.
and why did he make the world no sooner then a few thousand years since?

Sol. These are curiosities, but for answer, as he was of himself, so was he
in and with himself. He is that himself, to and in himself, which to us our
being, time and place are found to be. 2. He injoyes himself, and his own
happiness. 3. He made the world no sooner, because it did not please him.

The creature is limited by the circumstance of time, by which it has its
being measured out as it were by parcels, past, present, and to come; it had
beginning, has succession, and may have an end. The most glorious Angel, as
well as a worm, is thus limited by time; once he was not, then he began to be;
that which is past is gone; and that which is to come is not yet, and he has
but a little time present. But Gods essence had no beginning, has no
succession, can have no end. We cannot say of it properly, it was or shall be,
but alone it is; Gn^lam from Gnalam, because the beginning and end of eternity
lies hid.
he has his whole being at once; not some after, some by parcels, one
following another, Genesis 21. 13. and 23. 33. Psalm. 90. 2. 24. Isay 57. 15.
Eternity is the continual existence, and duration of the divine essence. The
creatures being, is a flux or perpetual flowing, from one moment to another;
God is a being above time, has not his being measured by time, but is wholly
eternal.

1. Gods love and election are also eternal, Consectaries from Gods eternity.
and he will give eternal life to all believers. That which is eternal, is
perfect at once, therefore he should be adored and obeyed, his counsel
followed, old men are honored for their wisdom. God says to Job, where wast
thou when I laid the foundation of the earth?

2. Let it be a foundation of comfort to us, Psalm 48 13. 14.
as Psalm. 102. 12. though friends dye, Isay 46. 4.
goods be taken away, God remains for ever, H^b. 1. 12. 13.
he fails not.

3. It must encourage the people of God to serve him, and do his will
faithfully; for he will recompense it, what ever we hazard or loose, he lives
for ever to requite.

4. It is a terror to the wicked; Zeux^^ the Painter, was exact and curious,
because he did pingere aeternitati. We are to pray, live, speak, and do all
for eternity. Creed, stude, vive aeternitati. Cornel a Lap. in Evangel.
he shall be ever to make them everlastingly miserable; as heaven is an
eternal Palace, so hell is an everlasting Prison.

5 We must carefully and earnestly seek him, Psalm. 117. 2. and 146. 6.
place our happiness in him that is everlasting; all other things are
fleeting; if we get his favor once, we shall never loose it; he will be an
everlasting friend, his truth and mercy remains for ever.

6. Every one should resolve in his own thoughts and covenant with God,
Precious a^e the serious thoughts of eternity; the treasures of eternity, are
are opened in the times of Gospel 2 Timothy 1. 10
to spend but one half quarter of an hour every day, in meditating of
eternity; renew these thoughts every day; this body of mine though frail and
mortal, it must live for ever; and this soul of mine, it must live eternally.
Eternal life is one of the principal Articles of our Creed, 1 Timothy 1. 16.

CHAP. V.
GOd is in himself, and in his own nature Immutable, Numb. 23. 19. 1 Samuel 15.
29.

Immutability, is that whereby any thing in its essence, existence or operation
is unchangeable Gods unchangeablenesse is that, whereby God in his essence,
properties, and decrees is unchangeable.

The Scripture proves the Immutabilitie of God, both affirmatively, Exodus 3. 6.
Psalm. 102. 29. and negatively. Mal. 3. 16 Jam. 1. 17.

Immutability is twofold.

1. Independent and absolute, and that is only in God.

2 Dependent and Comparative; this may belong to some creatures, which they
have from God, but yet infinitely different.

1. God is unchangeable originally and of himself, these from him.

2. In the manner, God is in his essence Immutable, that and his being are all
one, therefore he is both potentially and actually so; the creatures are only
actually.

3. God is so from eternity, they only from their first being.

All other things are subject to change and alteration; they may loose what
they had, and attain something which before they had not; Angels have an
external though no internal mutability.
even the Immortal Spirits are thus mutable; they may fall into sin, be
annihilated; but in God there is no change; he is what he is, always the same,
void of all mutation, corruption, alteration, and local motion, Psalm. 90 2.
and 102. 26. 27. 1 Timothy 1. 17. Psalm. 110. 4. Heb. 1. 11. and 6. 2.

A reasonable creature may be changed five ways.

1. In respect of existence, if it exist sometimes, and sometimes not.

2. In respect of place, if it be moved from one place to another.

3. In respect of accidents, if it be changed in quantity or quality.

4. In respect of the knowledge of the understanding, as if it now think that
to be true, which before it judged to be false.

Geth. loc. commune. Marim^us de Deo. and Wendelinus. Christ. 1 ^el. l. 1. C. 1.
5. In respect of the purpose of will, if it now decree to do something, which
before it decreed not to do.

God is not changed any of these ways.

Not the first, Psalm. 120. 27. 28.
because he is eternal, neither beginning nor ever ceasing to exist.

Not the second, because he is present every where, not newly beginning to
exist in any place.

Not the third, because God is a Simple Essence, and there is no accident in
him.

Not the fourth, because he is omniscient, and cannot be deceived in his
knowledge.

Not the fifth, because he changes not his decrees, since he most wisely
decrees all things* Heb 4. 13.


God is unchangeable every way.

1. In essence or being; he cannot be changed into another nature, neither can
that nature which he has, be corrupted and decay.

2. In essential properties; his mercy endures for ever, he does not love and
after hate.

3. In his will and counsel; Psalm. 33. 11. Romans 11. 29. the counsel of the
Lord shall stand, Prove. 19. 21.

4. In place, the Sun runs from one place to another, but God does not
remove from one place to another; but is always where he was, and shall be
always; viz. in himself.

5. In his word and promises, Matthew. 5. 18.
Isay 14. 24. 2 Cor. 1. 19. Romans 4. 16.

Reasons.

1. From his perfection, all change is a kind of imperfection; there is indeed
a change corruptive, and perfective; but the perfective alteration, supposes
the Subject to be imperfect.

2. He is uncompounded, therefore altogether Immutable, a pure act.

3. He is truly and properly eternal, therefore Immutable; for he is truly
eternal, who is always the same, without beginning, change or end.

4. If God, should change, then either he must change for the better, and then
he was not best and perfect before; or for the worse, and then he is not best
now.

5 If he should be changed, it must be from some other thing stronger then
himself, and there is none such. Nothing without him can change him, because
he is omnipotent, and nothing within him, for there is no Ignorance in his
mind, inconstancy in his will, nor impotency in his power.

Ob. God does repent, Genesis 6. 6. 1 Samuel 15. 11 2 Samuel 24. 16. Psalm. 135. 14.
Jer. 26. 13. and 18. 8. to repent, imports a change.

Sol. God is not said properly to repent; but after the manner of Cum nos
paenitet, destruimus quod fecimus. Sic Deus paenituisse dicitur secundum
similitudinem opera^ionis in quamum hominem quem fecerat, per diluvium a terrae
facie delevit. Aquinas quaest. 19. Artic. 7. partis primae
men, not affective but effective. God does that which men use to do when they
repent, they forbear to do what they have done, and do the contrary, change
their actions; Gods repenting of the evil in those places, is a putting on a
resolution not to do the evil he had threatened, or not to persist in doing
that which he had begun to do. There is a change in the creature, but no
change in God either in respect of his nature or decree; therefore in other
places it is said, he does not repent; that is, not change or alter his mind.
God wills Mutat facta, non mutat confilia. August. Aliud est mutare voluntatem
aliud velle mutationem Aquinas quaest. 19. Artic. Septimo partis primae.
a change, but changes not his will. The change is in us not God; as Houses and
Trees seem to move to them which are in a Ship, but the Ship moves and they
stand firm, one may with the same will continuing immutable (says Aquinas)
will that now this thing be done, and after the contrary, but the will should
be changed, if one began to will, what he willed not before.

Ob. God promises and threateneth some things which come not to pass.

Jer. 18. 8. and 26. 2. 3.
Those threatenings and promises were not absolute but conditional; and how
soever the condition was uncertain in respect of men, yet it was most certain
in respect of God. His promises are made with condition of faith and obedience,
Deuteronomy. 28. 13. and his threatenings with an exception of conversion and
repentance, Psalm. 7. 12.

Ob. God is reconciled with men, with whom he was offended before.

Sol. The object is changed, God is still the same; as the Sun which was
troublesome to sore eyes is pleasant to them being healed, the Sun here is
not changed but their eyes.

Ob. Why are Prayers or means, if God be Immutable? why do I pray or hear?

Sol. God Immutably wills both the end and the means, and therefore as he wills
thy pardon, so he wills thy prayer.

Ob. God created the world, and so Christ was incarnate and made man; now he
that was made something, he was not before, or did make something he made not
before, seems to be changed. He is a man, he was not so once; he is a Creator,
he was not so from eternity.

Sol. Christ did only assume, Wenlelinus Christ. Theol. l. 1 c. 1.
and take to himself an humane nature, he was not changed into it. Creation is
nothing but Gods will from eternity, that the world should exist in time, so
that the creature has something now, which it had not before, but Gods will
has not.

God is not changed any way, C^osectaries from Gods Immutability
though he change his actions according to his good pleasure.

1. This is terrible to wicked men, God is unchangeable which has threatened
to curse them, and bring destruction upon them; 1 Samuel 15. 18. 19.
they must change, or else there is no repealing of the curse. The wicked hope
he will change, the godly fear he will change.

2. It comforts the godly, to whom he has made many promises, Gods promises
are faithful and firm words. What good thing the Lord has promised, what
grace or privilege (as Christians) any ever received, or succor found, the
same may the faithful look for.
Numb. 23. 23. Heb. 13. 5. He is constant and will perform them. He told Adam,
that the Seed of the woman should break the Serpents head. He was long, but
sure, for it was fulfilled at the last. His Covenant is everlasting, Isay. 55.
3. I am God and change not, therefore you are not consumed. Mal. we should
labor for Gods love, it is a free hold, and like himself immutable; whom he
loves once, he loves for ever: Gods people shall never fall from grace, never
be wholly overcome of temptations.

3. We should imitate Gods Immutability in a gracious way, Gal. 6. 9. ^ Tim. 3.
14. 1 Cor. 15. ult. Queen Elizabeth's word was Semper eadem.
be constant in our love to God and men, in our promises and good purposes, as
the Martyr said. Rawlins you left me, and Rawlins you find me, we should pray
for the establishment of our faith and patience.

4. We should admire the glorious nature of God; for what an Infinite Glorious
God must he be, which has had all that happiness and glory from eternity; 2.
worship the true God, because he is Immutable, and we shall be so hereafter,
being made most like to him, Psalm. 102. 27.

5. It confutes the Eutichians, and Ubiquitaries which held, that the Godhead
became flesh; can a Spirit be a body, and both visible and invisible?

CHAP. VI.
GOd is exceeding Great, Deuteronomy. 32. 3.
1 Kings 8. 42. 2. Sam. 7. 22. Psalm. 95. 3. and 96. 4. and 99. 2. 3. and 145.
3. Tit. 2. 13. God is Great and greatly to be praised, Nihil magnum, nisi
magnus Deus.
and who is so Great as our God? He is Great.

1. In his nature and essence.

2. In his works.

3 In his authority.

His name is Great. Jer. 10. 6. 11. Josh. 7. 9. his power is great, Psalm. 147.
5. His Acts are great, Psalm 111. 1. his judgments are great Exodus 7. 4. He is
great in counsel, Jer. 32. 19. and mighty works* Deuteronomy. 32. 4.

There is a double Greatness. Of Gods Perfection.


1. Of quantity or bulk, and that is an attribute of a body, by which it has
very large bodily dimensions, as a mountain is a great substance, the Sun a
great body; and this cannot be found in God, who is not a body, but an
Immateriall essence.

2. Of Perfection, Greatness is attributed to God metaphorically and denotes
an incomprehensible and unmeasurable largeness of all excellencies.
worth and virtue, and that is abundance of all excellencies and largeness, of
whatsoever makes to perfection of being, and this is in God. He is so perfect
every way that he stands in need of nothing. God is absolutely and simply
Perfect, because he has all things which are to be desired for the chiefest
felicity.

He is pefect 1. In the highest degree of perfection, The Apostle by an Hebrew
pleonasme says the same thing twice illustrating it by the contr^^y.
simply without any respect or comparison, secondly he is perfect in all kinds
1. John 1. 5. John says he is light in which there is no darkness, that is
Perfect and Pure without the least mixture of the contrary, the Author and
cause of all perfections in all the creatures, they are all in him, but more
perfectly and in a perfecter manner. God is most absolutely Perfect, Job. 22.
2. Psalm. 16. 2. Matthew. 5. 48. The words in Scripture, Reasons of Gods Perfection
attributed to God, which signify this, are

1. Schaddai, 1. That which is the chiefest being and Independent is most
Perfect.
which is as much as one sufficient to help himself, or one that gives
nourishment to all other things, and therefore Genesis 17. 1. when God was to make
a Covenant with Abraham, to leave all earthly things, and so trust in him
only, he brings this argument, that he was such a sufficient God.

2. Gomer. 2. That which is Infinite in essence can want nothing.
The verb is used five times in the Psalms; Psalm. 7. 10. and 7. 6. 8, and
137. 9. Psalm. 56. 3. and 11. 1.
as much as Perfect from the effect, because God does continually preserve to
the end.

3. Tom. Job. 37. 16. It signifies both Simple and Perfect.

4. Calil. a Col. omnis, 3. The more Simple a thing is, the more perfect,
that in which all good things are.

God is perfect.

1. Essentially, he is Perfect, in and by himself, containing in him all
perfections eminently, Romans 12. 2.
Matthew. 5 48. He has all needful to a Deity.

2. Nothing is wanting to him; Perfect in the general, is that to which
nothing is wanting, therefore that is most Perfect, to which agrees no
imperfection.
he has no need of any other thing out of himself, Job. 22. 2. 3. Psalm. 16. 2.

3. Originally, he is the cause of all perfection; what have thou, which thou
have not received? Jam. 1. 17.

4. Operatively, all his works are Perfect, Deuteronomy. 32. 4. A thing is Perfect.

1. Negative, which wants nothing which is due by nature to its integrity.

2. Privative, which wants no perfection, and so God only is Perfect.

2. God is Great in his works, Little works of nature and of providence have
a greatness in them, considered, as done by God.
Deuteronomy. 4. 36. Gods Perfection stands in an Infiniteness of goodness, Matthew.
19. 17. wisdom, Romans 11. 33. power, Genesis 17. 1. perfect wisdom, goodness,
righteousness, moderation, holiness, truth, and whatsoever may possibly be
required to grace and commend an action, that is found in the whole course and
frame of Gods actions; the work of Creation is a perfect work; he made all
things in unsearchable wisdom; 2 Samuel 22. 31. All Gods works are perfect,
Genesis 1. 31. Alphansus was wont to say, if he had been of council with God* in
the making of his works, he should have made some of them melius and
ordinatius. Ezekiel. 36. 23. Job. 38 34 35. 37.
no man could have found any want of any thing in the world, which might be
reasonably desired; no man could have found there any evil thing worthy to be
complained of. The work of Providence is perfect, all things are carried in
perfection of wisdom, justice, and goodness. So is the work of Redemption
likewise Perfect. The perfectest measure of justice, wisdom, truth, power,
that can be conceived of, does show it self forth in that work.

Reason. Isay 40. 12.
Such as the workman is, Elihu alleges Gods works to Job, to show his
greatness, Job. 36. 27 28. 29. and 37. 1. ^^ 7.
such must the work be, a perfect Artists workmanship will resemble himself.
The perfection of God, is his incomprehensible fullness of all excellenci^s, He
is absolutely and simply perfect.

Ob. Why does God use the help of others?

Sol. Not out of need, as the Artificer his Instruments, so that he cannot work
with them, but out of choice and liberty, to honor them the more. Hence
sometimes he will use no means at all, sometimes contrary means, to show that
they help not, and that we should not rely upon them.

Ob. Why is there sin in the world, seeing God needs not any glory that comes
to him by Christ, and by his m^rcy in pardoning of sin? why does he suffer it.

Sol. Because sin is not so great an evil as Christ is a good, and therefore
God would not have suffered sin, if he could not have raised up to himself
matter of honor; God makes an antidote of this poison.

Ob. How comes it to pass, that God makes one thing better then he did at
first? as in the creation, all things had not their perfection at first.

Sol. Those things were perfect ex part operantis, he intended not they should
have any farther perfection at that time; the essence of nothing can be made
better then it is, because it consists in indivisibili. God makes not out
graces perfect in us because he aims at another end.

Gods Perfection has all imperfections removed from it, 2 Timothy 2. 13. Titus.
1. 2. Jam. 1. 3. There be 6 imperfections found in every creature. 1.
Contingency. 2. Dependence. 3. Limitation. 4. Composition. 5. Alteration. 6.
Multiplication.

Now God is free from all these. He is 1. a necessary essence. 2. Independent.
3. Unlimited. 4. Simple. 5. Unchangeable. 6. Wholly one. Three of these, viz.
Gods Simplicity, unlimitednesse in respect of time and place, and
unchangeablenesse, I have handled already; I shall speak of the other three,
when I have dispatched this attribute of Gods Greatness or Perfection.

3. God is Great in his Authority.

I have showed already that he is Great in his nature and essence, and also in
his works; now his Greatness in Authority is to be considered.

He is a Great King, God is Great in his Authority. He is King of Kings, the
only Potentate.
he has Sovereign, absolute and unlimited Authority over all things, they
being all subject and subordinate to him; for at his will they were and are
created. This is signified by the Title of the most High so frequently given
him in Scripture. He is the High and lofty one Isay 57. 15.

1. In respect of place and dwelling, God is most High. The Greatness of Gods
authority stands in two things. 1. The universality of it, Gods authority
reaches to all things; the whole world, and all creatures in it are subject to
his will and dispositng. 2. The absoluteness of it; what he wills must be
done.
he is in heaven, Eccles. 5. 2. above the clouds.

2. In respect of essence, he is High indeed, unexpressibly high, the high God,
Genesis 14. 22. the Lord most High, Psalm. 7. 17.

3. In respect of Attributes, he has more wisdom, power, justice, mercy,
then all creatures.

4. In respect of State and dominion; he is exalted in Authority, power,
jurisdiction; he is above all, as Commander of all.

God has supreme dominion and power over all creatures, Absolute Dominion is a
Power to use a thing as you please, for such ends as you think good.
to order them as he pleases, Job. 9. 12. Jer. 16. 6. Isay 45. 9. Dan. 6. 26.

Dominion in the general is two fold.

1. Of jurisdiction, whereby he rules all subject to him, as he pleases.

2. Of propriety, whereby he having a right to every creature, may order it as
he pleases.

The first is employed in that of JAmes, JAmes 4. 12.
there is one Lawgiver, who is able to save and to destroy. The second in that
he is called the Lord of the Earth; and all the beasts of the field are said to
be his.

Gods dominion is that absolute right and power, whereby he possesses all
things as his own, and disposes of them as he pleases.

Reason. The supreme excellency of his nature; whereby he is infinitely
above, not only those things which are actual, but likewise possible.

Gods first dominion of jurisdiction has these parts.

1. To Command.

2. To forbid, as Adam the eating of the Tree.

3 To permit, thus he suffers sin to be, being Supreme Lord.

4. To punish, or reward.

Secondly, his dominion of propriety consists in these particulars.

1. That he can order every thing as he pleases for his honor and glory, Romans
9. 17.
Psalm. 8. 1. the strange punishments laid on Pharaoh, were for this, God raised
him up to show his glory.

2. He is bound to give none account of what he does; Job. 9. 12.
that is true of God, Romans 9. 20.
which the Papists attribute falsely to the Pope, none may say to him cur ita
facis?

3. He can change and alter things as he pleases, Dan. 2. 21. as when he bid
Ahraham kill his Son, and the Israelites take the Egyptians goods.

4. Can distribute his goods unequally to whom, and when he pleases, to one
health, sickness to another.

The adjuncts of this dominion.

1. It is Independent; he has this dominion of himself, as he is God of
himself.

2. Universal; it comprehends all places, times; this kingdom is everlasting,
God rules in heaven, earth, hell.

3. Full and Perfect, 1 Chronicles. 29. 11. 12. His dominion is infinitely greater
then all others.

4. It extends to the soul and heart; God is called the Father of Spirits, the
hearts of Kings are in his hand; he can terrify the conscience.

We should first prefer God ab^ve all things: Consectaries from Gods,
Greatness in his nature.
the Greatest person in any society is set before the rest. The Sun is
respected above other Stars; the King above other persons; we should highly
esteem his favor, 40. Isay 12. there is a lofty description of Gods
Greatness. Secondly, We should perform all duties to him with the greatest
care, diligence and reverence, and in the highest degree; love him greatly,
fear him greatly, praise him with all our might, yield unto him a service
proportionable to his incomprehensible greatness. Great is the Lord, Psalm.
145. 3.
and greatly to be praised in one Psalm, and to be feared in another. Thirdly,
It is a terror to all those to whom this Great God is an enemy; the wrath of a
Great King is terrible, he must needs inflict great punishments on such as
rebel against him. Fourthly, Here is great consolation to those to whom he is
a friend and Father; he will do great things for their good, they shall have
great happiness.

We should choose the Lord to be our Portion, Corollaries of Gods perfection.
for in him alone is true happiness, and contendednesse to be found; in our
wants, we should confidently go to him for help; he being Perfect can supply
them.

We should place all our confidence in God alone, expect all good things from
him, Deuteronomy. 18. 13.
since he is an inexhausted fountain of all good things; Matthew. 5. 48.
we should imitate him, be Perfect as our Heavenly Father is perfect. Let
Patience have her perfect work, let us perfect holiness in his fear. Those
which would be excellent Orators propound to themselves Cicero and Demonsthenes
to follow. Paul pressed on forward; labor first to be perfect in heart, Psalm.
119. 80. then in your ways. This may serve also to comfort the godly against
their weaknesses; Psalm. 18. 22.
God will make his works perfect. He that has begun a good work in them will
perfect it; they should be comforted therefore against all their imperfections
to which they are subject in this life, and seek perfection from him. He will
supply all their wants, bear with them here, and make them perfect in the
other life, 1 Cor. 13. 10.
1 Cor. 15. 28. the understanding shall have perfect sight, the will perfect
goodness, the heart perfect joy.

We should not mutter under any affliction; for he himself cannot do better
then he does, he makes all things perfect. Eccles. every thing beautiful in
its season, this is the most perfect State and Condition for thee, and so
account it, God has perfect wisdom, power, love.

Let us not be puffed up with any thing we do to him; the Papists abound in
this when they maintain merit; for that supposes some eminency, as if God
needed their graces, obedience and service; but let us walk more humbly; say
rather if I had no corruption in me, if I could do every duty required with as
much purity as Angels; yet this would add nothing to thee; thou art a perfect
God, perfectly happy, though I were not at all.

Gods works are wonderful great; Consectaries from Gods Great works.
far exceeding the power of all creatures, either to do the lik to them, or
to stop and hinder them. Let all the men on earth lay their hands and heads
together, There is a twofold greatness in the works of God. 1. In the bulk
or quantity of them, as the work of Creation. 2. Of quality or virtue Genesis 1.
16. The moon is a great light, in regard of light and influence, excellency
and usefulness to the world.
let all Kings unite their counsels, and their forces; can they make an
Earthquake, a Whirlwind? can they make the thunder to roar? can they cause
the flashes of lightening to flame out? It is not a mortal worm to whom the
course of nature will submit it self. And if God will that these effects be
wrought, what can any man, all men do for the hindering thereof?

2. Gods works are unsearchable, and past finding out, Job. 5. 9. who can dive
into the secrets of nature, and tell us the true reason of the wind, the
Earthquake, the Thunder, the rain, the Snow? We cannot dive into the bottom
of Gods works, nor find them out by any Study or Wisdom.

3. We should so much the more honor, dread, and wonder at God, by how much we
can less comprehend his works.

4. Let us learn often to contemplate God in his works; see his goodness,
greatness, wisdom, power in them, and so we shall profit much in the
knowledge of him.

The exaltation of God is a terror to those who will needs be his Enemies,
Consectaries* from Gods being most high.
and slight and dis-esteem him, as the greatest part of men do. O how unhappy
are they, that have so high and so great a person to be their Enemy, seeing
they have nothing to save themselves from his wrath.

2. We should labor to exalt him now, by striving to form and fix in our
selves a most reverent esteem of him, and by exercising in our selves this
virtue of honoring God, often reviving in our minds these thoughts, how high
is God, and making them familiar with him; O how excellent is he that has made
and governes all! Why do I not esteem him more and more! The more we can lift
up our hearts to exalt God, the more we shall grow in all holiness and
righteousness.

3. His friends and servants shall also be exalted at last; though for a time
despised and set light by.

We should often and seriously consider of this great perfection of Gods
nature, authority, and works. The very Saints and Angels have a Negative
imperfection, though not a privative; they are not deprived of that which
should be in them, but there are many perfections which they have not. God is
simply and universally Perfect; and he only has all kind of perfection,
according to his essence.

God is a Necessary Essence.

Contingency is found in the essence of every creature, it might not have been,
as well as have been; it may not be, as well as be; there was a possibility of
its not being; as there is a possibility of its not being; yea, there was an
equal or greater possibility of its not being, then its being.

God is a necessary essence; it is absolutely necessary that he should be, and
he cannot but be, and be as he is, and his actions upon himself are altogether
and simply necessary; they must be as they be, and cannot but be so.

God is Independent Esaias 44. 6. Rev. 1. 8. and 21. 6. and 22. 13. Romans 11. 35.
36.

Every Creature as a Creature, Independentia est proprietas Dei, qua quoad
essentiam, subsistentiam and actiones a nulla alia dependet causa, cum a seipso
sit, subsista and agat. Wendelinus.
is Dependent, and hangs upon some other thing then it self, and owes its being
and continuance to another, Nehem. 9. 6. It has causes of its being, from
which, of which, by which, and for which it is; and further then these causes
did, and do contribute to its being, it cannot be. The Angels have an efficient
cause and end, and they do as much stand indebted to God for their being and
continuance as the poorest worm; and would no more have been without God, nor
continue to be then the silliest gnat; but God is altogether independent of
himself, John 1. 3. Act. 17. 25. Ab independentia Dei non differt sufficientia.
qua ipse in se and a se sibi and nobis sat habet, nullaque re indiget: cum
omnia alia uti a Deo dependent, it^ sibi ipsis minime sufficiant. Proprietatem
hanc indigitat nomen Dei Schaddai.
by himself, for himself; he has no causes, but is to himself instead of all
causes.

He is what he is, without any help from any other thing; as himself shows in
his name, I am that I am.

There are many things which have a beginning from some other thing; there must
be something therefore that is of it self, or else we should wander infinitely,
a selfe-essence, and subsistence. Gods being is neither ab alio, ex alio, per
aliud, nor propter aliud.

We should acknowledge God to be a necessary and Independent essence.

3. God is wholly one Deuteronomy. 6. 4. Gal. 3. 20. 1 Timothy 2. 5. Hos. 13. 4. Mal. 2.
10. Genesis 17. 1. and 35. v. 11. Wendelinus.
All creatures are subject to multiplication; there may be many of them and are
many; many Angels, men, stars, Psalm. 18. 32. and 86. 10.
and so in the rest. Not one of them is singular and only one so; but one
might conceive that there should be more; for he that made one of them, Deuteronomy.
4. 35. 39. and 32. 39.
can make another and another, and as many as he pleases; Psalm. 18. 31. 45.
but God is simply one, singular, and sole essence; Isay 44. 68.
there neither is, nor can be more then one God, Ephesians. 4, 5, 6.
because he is ths first and best essence; 1 Pet. 2. 9.
and there can be but one first, Mark 12. 2. 19 32.
and one best. He is Infinite, and there cannot be but one Infinite because
either one of them should include the other, 1 Cor. 8. 5.
and so the included must needs be finite, or not extend to the other, John 17.
3.
and so it self not be Infinite.

There was a first man, 2 Samuel 2. 2.
and a first in every kind of creature, but not any absolute first save God:
Isay 42. 36. and 44. 1. and 45. 5. and 21. and 48. 11. 12.
one Eternal, and one Incomprehensible, says Athanasius in his Creed.

There can be but one chief Good, which we desire for it self, Hinc disces
(Cinquit Plato Epist. 13. ad Dionysium) scribam ego serio nec ne. Cum serio,
ordior Epistolam ab uno Deo, cum secus, a pluribus.
and all other things for it, say the Moral Philosophers; and this must needs
be God, for no Infinite good can be conceived but He.

Some places of Scripture, simply deny other Gods; and others exclude all but
this one God; Though there be Gods many, In respect of some excellent Majesty,
and glory above others, Angels are called ^o^s 1 Heb. 6. and Ps 97. 7. and
Magistrates, Ps 82 6. in respe^t of usurpation, the Devil, 2 Cor. 4. 4. 1 Cor.
8 5. 6. Primo Omnis multifudo revocanda est ad unitatem. Cum igitur in mund^
multae sint Creaturae, revocari eos oportet ad unum primum Creatorem. Secundo
Res omnes sunt per aliud, ergo reducendae crint ad unum per se.
and Lords many; that is, that are so called, and reputed by men, who deceive
themselves in their own imaginations; yet to us (in the Church) there is but
one God, Zach. 14. 9. after Christ shall come, the Gentiles with the Jews
shall all worship one and the same true God.

That which is perfect in the highest degree can be but one; because that one
must contain all perfections; that which is omnipotent can be but one; if one
can do all things; what need is there of many Gods; If there were more Gods
then one, we might and ought to do service to more then one, to acknowledge
them, praise and love them, and be at least in mind ready to obey them, if they
should command us any thing, and we might lawfully seek to them for what we
need, and give thanks to them, Matthew. 4. 10. We must love him only, have one
heart for one object.
for what we received. But the Lord professes himself to be a jealous God, and
cannot endure any Copartner in worship. The Romans refused Christ, because they
would have had their Gods with him, and he would be worshipped alone without
them.

He is one God.

Not numerically, Unity here notes not number but rather a denial of
multitude; for unity as it denotes number, leaves also a place for a second and
third, at least in apprehension and conceit; though there ^e but one Sun,
yet we may conceive of a hundred. Deus est monarcha mundi, rex unicus esto.
Homerus. Essentia Dei unica est unitate absolutissima, non generis, speciei,
Subjecti, Accidentis, causae, consensus, sed numeri quae unitas est
restrictissim^ vide Cornelium a Lapide in Deuteronomy. 6. 4. Atheomastix l. 2. c. 9.
as one is a beginning of number (for that is a quantity) but transcendently as
Ens and unum are counted only one, solely and alone God; there cannot be two
Infinites in essence, for then one should not have all the other has in it;
God is Infinite, for of his Greatness there is no end.

Secondly, others would be imperfect or superfluous, he being Infinite and
Perfect.

Thirdly, From his absolute Lordship, and dominion over all; he is King of
Kings, and Lord of Lords. My God (said Luther to the Pope) will make your God
know, that you are too weak for him; if there were two Gods, there would be a
strife between them (as between Caesar and Pompey) who should be the Greater
and chiefest of all. God may be said in a special manner to be one, two
several ways.

1. For the purity and simplicity of his substance, which is not compounded
with any thing else. For that is most truly and properly one, which is nothing
but it self, and has no other thing mixed with it. God is so pure and simple
an essence, that he is not compounded so much as of parts.

2. From his singularity, because there are no more Gods, but one, God is not
only one, but he is also the only one. He is such a one as has no Copartners
in worship. Deuteronomy. 6. 4.
Both which Titles are expressly ascribed unto God in the Scriptures: Isay 43.
10.
Both that he is one, He is God, and there is none else, Deuteronomy. 4. 35 and 32. ^9.
and that he is the only one. God is not only unus but also unicus, or to use
Saint Bernards word, unissimus. If that word may be used, he is of all things,
the onest. Socrates, and Plato in their definition of God, ascribe to him
unity, with particular respect unto his singularity.

Pythogoras his advice to his Scholars was to search the unity.

There is a threefold unity; Doctor Rainolds, against Heart.
first, of persons in one nature, so there is one God, Deuteronomy. 6. 4. The second,
of natures in one person, so there is one Christ. 1 Cor. 8. 6. Thirdly, of
sundry natures and persons in one quality; so there is one Church Cant. 6. 8.
The Socinians reject these three unions, because they so far transcend
reason, Consectaries from Gods unity.
and they receive not those things, which their reason cannot comprehend.

The more we content our selves with God only, Christians should be one in
affection, as God is one in essence,
the happier we are; he is the only Infinite riches, wisdom, goodness; how
happy are they that have him in quo omnia? spend all thy pains in getting him.

2. If he be your enemy, Mal. 2. 10.
there is none else to rescue you; he is God, John 17. 21.
and there is none else; he will destroy, and none shall be able to deliver out
of his hands. Ephesians. 4. 3. to 7. Act. 4. 32.


3. It shows the wickedness of those, which set up other Gods, besides the
true God. The Epicure makes his belly, and the covetous man Gold his God;
themselves of Stocks and Stones; this is a great dishonor to him, the Papists
worship the Cross, invocate Saints and Angels, make a God of the Pope.

The Heathens were guilty of Polytheisme, The Gentiles although they were
Polytheists, yet are called Atheists, Ephesians. 2. 12. not worshipping him which
is the only true God, they worshipped none, Gal. 4. 8.
they worshipped many Gods: they had their Dij majorum, and minorum gentium.
Hesiod reckons up thirty Aug. l. 4. de Civitate Dei and Varr^ lib. 1. de rebus
divin^a.
thousand Gods; the Manichees said there were two Gods, the Thritheites that
there were three.

This is the very first of all Gods Commandments, thou shall have no other
Gods before me. If there were more, for us not to acknowledge, adore, and
honor them, were a wrong and act of in justice against them; so the first and
foundation of all the rest of the Commandments, should be a most Injurious,
and unlawful Command; and therefore we must either conceive of him, which gave
that Commandment, as a most envious, vaineglorious, arrogant and self-seeking
God, that could not endure, that other Gods perhaps his equals should enjoy
their due glory and homage, (which were most absurd, and blasphemous) or else
we must needs confess that which is the truth, that he forbade us to make any
other, because there is no other, Cum praeter unum Israeli^ Deum inscriptura
aliorum quoque Deorum fit nentio, vel fictitij intelliguntur Dij: quales
gentilium fuerunt vel improprie dicti Dis, quales sunt summi Magistratus, qui
Dei in hisce terris vices gerunt. Psalm. 82. v. 6. Wendelinus. Apollinis
oraculum apud Porphyrium legitur, quo ait caeteros Deos aereos esse spiritus,
colendum autem unum Hebraeorum Deum; cui dicto siparent Apollinis cultores jam
tales esse desinunt: si non parent, suum Deum mendacij accusant. Grotius.
and he would not have us misplace our devotion and service, by tendering it to
that which is not God.

If there be many Gods, then either they must all be Subordinate, one being
Superior; or else Coordinate each being equal to other. If one be inferior
to another, that which is at the Command of another, or exceeded by another, is
not god; if coordinate and equal, then one of them may cross another; or many
may hinder one, and what can be hindered in its working is not God.

If there be more Gods, they cannot be eternal; for an eternal being admits
not of multiplicity; for that is eternal which is simply first; and that which
is simply first has nothing of as long as continuance as Variety is the
pleasure of nature, but unity is the business of nature-Holiday.
it self.

God united heaven and earth, and made them one world the Sea and the Land, and
made them one Globe; soul and body, and made them one man; Jews and Gentiles,
and made them one Church; Adam and Eve, and made them one flesh, nay, God and
man, and made them one Christ.

CHAP. VII.
THe next Attribute in God is his understanding; which is the Divine Matthew. 11.
27. 1 Cor. 2. 10. *
essence, understanding, and knowing all things always, and by one act. It is
called also Science, knowledge, and omniscience. God knows all things, because
first he knew himself In homine differunt intellectus tanquam facultas,
scientia tanquam habitus intellectus, cognitio tanquam actio a facultate per
habitum proficiscens. In Deo omnia sunt unum, and tantum nostro concipiendi
modo distinguuntur.
directly in himself, by himself, and primarily as a most perfect object; which
knowledge in God, is of absolute necessity (for he could not exist without the
knowledge of himself) and infinite apprehending an Infinite object, 147. Psalm.
5.

Secondly, because he knows the creatures all See 21. of John 17. Heb. 4. 13.
and singular De singularibus, qualia sum, hic angelus hic homo, haec planta,
olim multi Philosophi dubitaru^t an Deus haec nesset. Sed manifesta vetitas
est. Creavit enim Deus singularia; judicia sua exercet cicra singularia; reddit
cuique secundum opera sua, supputat numerum stellarum, and nominibus suis
singula^ vocat Psalm. 47. v. 4. vide Psalm. 56. 9. and Matthew. 10. 30. Pertinet
huc totus Psalmus 147. Wendelinus. Simul and semel uno actu and uno ictu.
viz. all things which have been, are, or shall be, might have been, and may
be; not only the substances, but all the accidents of creatures, not only
things necessary, but also contingent, all good things by himself, and all
evils by the opposite good; and that infallibly without error.

For the manner of divine knowledge, God knows all things by his essence, not
by species abstracted from the things; for so things should be before the
divine knowledge, on which yet they depend. God does not understand by
discoursing from a known thing to that which is unknown, in a doubtful and
successive reasoning; but by looking on them, and by one most simple
Individual and eternal act Comprehending all things. He apprehends by one act
of his understanding, and by himself simple things without species, compound
without composition and division, syllogismes and consequences without
discourse; lastly, he most perfectly understands all the multitude of things
without distraction, and distance both local and temporal, without
distinction of former and later, past or future, according to the beginning,
progress, and end, possessing all things together and always present; which
with us are revolved in time, Dan. 2. 21. 22. 1 Cor. 3. 19, 20. 44. Isay 7.
Romans 11. 33. Heb. 4. 13. Psalm. 94. 9. 10. 11.

The Scripture proves Gods omniscience.

1. Affirmatively or positively, Job. 28. 24. 1 Samuel 2. 3. he is called by
Hanna in her Song, Psalm. 139. l. 2, 3 4. 6. 12.
a God of knowledge, 1 Samuel 16. 7. 1 King 8. 39. Psalm. 94. 11. He knows from
eternity, Act. 15. 18. 1 John 3. 20.
by one simple act, before all time, before there was a world; secondly,
certainly; he cannot be deceived.

2. Negatively, Job. 42. 2. Psalm. 139. 45. Heb. 4. 13.

3. Metaphorically and Figuratively, for when eyes and ears be given to God,
his omniscience is signified, 2 Chronicles. 16. 9. Psalm. 11. 7. when he is called
light, 1 John 1. 5.

2. It is proved by reason.

1. By way of negation, ignorance is a defect, and imperfection; but God is
most Perfect, therefore all Ignorance is to be removed from him.

2. By way of causality; God governs all things in the whole universe and
directs to convenient ends even those things which are destitute of all
knowledge and reason. Therefore he foreknows and sees all things; all creatures
are Gods works, and an artificer knows his work; the Prophet knew what was in
Gebezis heart, God revealing it to him. God made the heart; shall not he know
it?

3. By way of eminency. God has made creatures intelligent and full of
knowledge, viz. Angels and men; therefore he knows and understands in a far
more perfect and eminent manner, Psalm. 94. 10.

He knows.

1. The substantial natures of all other things; as of Angels, Men, Beasts,
Plants, Genesis 1. He saw all things which he had made, Matthew. 6. He is said to
take care of Sparrows, which could not be without knowledge.

2. Their accidentals, as actions, and passions with the circumstances of them.
Psalm. 33. 14. 15. and 94. 11. and 73 9. per totum. Prove. 15. 11. Psalm. 139. ^.
God is totus ocnlus quia omnia videt. Aug.
Hence he is said to know the hearts, and try the reins of men; and there is
nothing hid from him, Matthew. 6. The Father which sees in secret.

3. He knows things which are to come, not as if they were to come; for to him
all things are present. God makes this an argument of his Divinity, when he
bids them see, if their Gentile Gods can tell what is to come. He does not
only know what things naturally shall be, but likewise what is possible.

By his Prophets, he has often foretold future things.

4. He is privy to all our actions, Psalm. 119. 168. Job. 34. 21. 22. 2. knows
our words, 2 King 6. 12. Psalm. 139. 4. Matthew. 12. 36. 3. He knows our
thoughts, It was said of Christ, he knows what is in man.
Prove. 15. 11. Job. 42. 2. 4. 1 Samuel 16. 7. Psalm. 94. 11. God is (...) he sees
and knows the heart, Genesis 6. 5. Psalm. 90. 8. and Romans 8. 27 Apoc. 2. 23. He
made the heart, and will judge men for their thoughts, he gives laws to the
heart, saying thou shall not Covet thy neighbors house; else God were not
infinite in knowledge if he knew not the heart.

Our understanding differs from Gods, many ways.

1. We have our knowledge from others, from him; he his from himself. He
understands by himself without any help; man needs many helpers, his senses,
fancy and intellgible species.

2. In extent; we know but some things, he all, general and particular.

3. Our knowledge is simply finite, but Gods infinite.

4. We understand things by species or Images, abstracted from them, he by his
essence.

5. We understand things successively one after another, with pains of
discourse, proceeding from an unknown thing to a known, or from a less known
to a more known: but God knows all things together, and by one most simple,
immutable, and eternal act of understanding.

6. He knows himself, He is primus intelligens and primum intelligibile.
and all other things perfectly, all things past, present and to come, open,
secret, certain, contingent, that which shall be, which shall be never be; we
cannot show the causes nor properties of an Herb, and understand only those
things which are, or at least have been, and we know doubtingly.

There is in God (say the Schoolmen) scientia visionis, a knowledge of all
future things; 2. Simplicis intelligentiae, a most perfect knowledge of all,
and the several things, which may be done.

1. This is a terror to the wicked, who is Ignorant of God, 2 Thessalonians. 1 8. The
Study of the knowledge of God, and our Lord Jesus Christ, is the highest,
noblest, the most soul perfecting and exalting knowledge that can be; all
other knowledge without this will nothing advantage us.

2. It is necessary for us to be ruled by him, who is so full of knowledge, and
to believe all which he says by way of relating, promising, threatening.

3. This may comfort Gods people, Against worldlynesse. 6. Matthew. 30. 32.
my witness is in heaven, said Job. if they know not how to express
themselves in Prayer, God knows their groans.

To Gods understanding are referred his Wisdom, or Prudence, and Prescience.

The wisdom or Prudence and counsel of God, Great in councello Jer. 32 19.
Romans 11. 33. Job 9. 4. The wisdom of God is sometime taken personally, and so
the Son of God is called wisdom, Prove. 8. 1. sometime Essentially which is
common to all the persons in the Trinity.
by which God rightly perceives the best reason of all things which are do^e.
Hence it is that all things are joined, and knit together in a most perfect
harmony, and beautiful order, so that they well agree, both amongst themselves
and with God.

God is wisdom it self, Prove. 8.

His wisdom is.

1. Infinite, Psalm. 136. 5. and unsearchable Job. 11. 7.

2. Essential to himself. He is the only wise God, Romans 16. 27. 1 Timothy 1. 17.

3. He is perfectly, originally, unchangeably wise Isay 40. 13.

4. The fountain of all wisdom; was there such wisdom in Adam, to give names
to things according to their natures? and in Solomon to discourse of all
things? and is there not much more in God?

Wisdom Wisdom is a virtue of right understanding things to be known and
making right use of that knowledge to the ordering of himself and his actions
for the best.
is an ability to fit all things to their ends. He that works for a worthy
and good end, and fitteth every thing unto it, works wisely. God does 4
Actions to all his ^reatures as Creatures, viz.

1. He made them. 2. Sustaineth them. 3. Actuateth them. 4. Guides and
disposes them all wisely; aiming at a noble end, viz. his own glory, content
and satisfaction.

He has set also to each of them special ends, to which they serve in nature,
and that end is the mutual preservation one of another, and common beautifying
of the whole workmanship, in subordination to that high end of his glory; and
so he has fitted each thing for that particular end he made it; and all for
the universal end, to which he intended all. The Sun was made to distinguish
day and night and the several seasons, it is most fit for that end, it is most
fit for the end in its quantity, quality, motion, and all that pertain to it.
God made Grass for the food of Beasts, it is fit for that end; so in the rest.

Wisdom has two principal acts, foresight, and forecast, by which a man
can beforehand see what will be after to make his use of it; 2. disposing and
ordering things, by taking the fittest means and opportunities to attain his
own good and right ends. This virtue is Infinitely in God, for he does foresee
all thiings eternally; and in time disposes of them most fitly, by the fittest
means and opportunities for the best that can be, to his own glory, which is
the highest end that he can and should aim at; for to that which is the best
of all things, must all things else be referred; therefore God is the only
wise God. Gods knowledge differs from his wisdom, in our apprehension thus.
His knowledge is conceived as the mere apprehension of every object, but his
wisdom is conceived as that whereby he does order and dispose all things. His
knowledge is conceived as an act; his wisdom as an habit or inward principle;
not that it is so, but only we apprehend it in this manner.

Gods wisdom is seen in these particulars.

1. In making of this great world, 1 Cor. 1. 21. all things therein are
disposed in the best order, place, time, by the wisest Architect. Prove. 3. 19,
20. Eccles. 3. 11. Pro. 12. 12. 13. 16.
How does David in the Psalms, admire the wonderful power and wisdom of God,
in making of the world Psalm. 136. 5. and 104. per totum. Much wisdom and art
is seen in the Sun, Stars, creeping things; Solomon in all his glory was
not comparable to one of the lilies; for that is native and imbred, his
adventitious.

2. In particular, in making of man, the little world, David is much affected
with this Psalm. 139. 14. 15.

3. In the order which is in these things, God has made every thing beautiful
in his season, says Solomon. He is called the God of order, Genesis 1. 31.
Psalm. 19. The heavens are said to have a line, which is likewise called their
voice, because God by this exact order and art, which he showed in making of
them, does plainly declare to all the world, his glory and power.

4. In that nothing is defective or superfluous.

5. In contrivi^g things by contrary means. He brings about contrary ends, by
contrary means; by death he brought life to believers, by Ignominy and shame
the greatest glory. By terrors for sin, he brings the greatest comfort, and
leads men by hell to heaven.

6. By catching those which are wise in their own craftiness, Psalm. 59. Job.
9. 4.

7. In finding out a way to save man by Christ, 1 Cor. 2. 7. Ephesians. 1. 8.
Ephesians 3. 10. (...) wisdom in many curious passages, 1 Pet. 1. 12. the very
Angels desire to pry into this mystery; and indeed here was so much wisdom,
that if the understanding of all men and Angels had been put together, they
could not have devised a possible way for man's salvation.

8. In the Church, in the Oracles of Scripture, exceeding all sharpness of
humane wit, in the original, progress, change, and migration of the Church,
Ephesians. 3. 10.
and other mysteries of the Gospel, Romans 11. 33.
the profound and immense wisdom of Gods councels shines. Matthew. 11. 25.


9. In the particular passages of his Providence to his Children, about their
outward condition; in taking David from the sheepfold to be a King; but how
much misery did he undergo before he was settled? So to Jacob, Abraham and
Paul; in doing them good by their sins, making them wary.

10. In Heaven, in which the Councels, acts, decrees, and promises of God (all
obscurity being removed) shall be most clearly unfolded.

Do thou want wisdom, go to this fountain, Jam. 1. 5. Psalm. 94. 10. all the
wisdom of men and Angels comes from him. Dan. 2*
The godly have a most wise teacher, Job. 36. 22.

2. Take heed of trusting in thy own crafty wisdom, 1 Cor 3. 18.

3. Gods wisdom calls for our fear; the people feared Solomon for his wisdom;
and praise, Romans 16. 27.

4. The order and variety of things arises not from nature, but the Divine
working.

5. We should be content with the portion which God gives us, that weather
which he sends, those troubles he brings on us; since he is wisest, and knows
best what is fittest for us, and when is the best time to help us.

6. Admire that in the works of God which we understand not* Gods wisdom is
unsearchable, and his Counsel like unto the great depth.

7. Be constant and diligent in reading, and pondering upon the Scriptures;
they will make you wise to Salvation, to which add Prayer and Practice. Act.
2. 23.


Gods Prescience or foreknowledge is that, whereby God fore-knew all future
things necessarily, certainly, immutably, and from everlasting. Neither
foreknowledge It is called Prescience, not in respect of God but men. Genesis 18.
1. and 15. 16. Praescientia Dei est cognoscitiva, non causativa. Act. 2. 23.
Romans 8. 29. 1 Pet. 1. 2.
nor remembrance are properly in God, all things both past, and to come, being
present before him.

Although Gods prescience bring not a nec^ssity upon events, yet it is
necessary for all things to happen so as God has foretold, because God so
fore-knows, as he has decreed and wil'd it shall be; but his decree gives
existence.

So much for Gods understanding; his will follows; by which God Voluntas, qua
Deus seipsum vult per se, and extra se omnia propter se, seu suam gloriam.
Wendelinus. Job. 9. 12. Psalm. 115 3. and 135. 7. Dan. 4. 25. Exodus 33. 19. Romans
19. 18. 21. 2 Cor. 12. 11* God created all things, because he would, he
redeemed us of his good pleasure, shows mercy to whom he will show mercy. God
is 1. most Perfect. 2. Truly blessed, therefore most free.
freely immutably, and efficaciously wills and approves of Good and that only,
both the chiefest and first, viz. himself and his own glory, as the end: and
also the Secondary, inferior and subordinate good, viz. that of the creature,
asfarre as it has an Image of that chiefest good, and tends as a mean to that
ultimate end. God wills, 1. Most freely; for as liberty is essential to every
will; so it is chiefly proper to the Divine, because it is a will especially;
yet God wills good necessarily with a necessity of Immutability, but not with a
necessity of coaction; for he is necessarily and naturally Good, and that which
he once willed, he always wills immutably and yet freely; 2. God wills
efficaciously; for no man resists, nor can resist his will, Dan. 4. 32. Romans
9. 19. voluntas Dcisemper impletur aut de nobis aut a Deo in nobis Augustine.

Will is taken.

1. For a faculty or power of the soul whereby we will; so we say there are
these faculties in the soul, the understanding and the will.

2. For the act of willing called volitio.

3 The object or thing willed, so John 6. this is the will of my Father, that
is, that which he wills and has decreed. So we say, it is the Princes will,
that is, that which the Prince will^th.

But Gods will is his essence The Scripture often ascribes a will to God, Isay
46. 10. Rom 9. 19. John 6. 39. The will of God is an essential property
whereby the Lord approves that which is good and dis-proveth the contrary,
Matthew. 19. 17. Jam. 1. 17. Psalm. 5. 4.
whereby he freely wills good, and nilleth evil; or it is a faculty whereby
God chooses all and only good, and refuses all and only evil.

The will of God is.

1. Most holy Romans 12. 2. Psalm. 119. 137. the rule of justice, Lam. 3. 37.
Ephesians. 1. 11. Deuteronomy. 29. 29. Isay 8. 20.

2. Eternal, Romans 9. 11.

3. Unchangeable, Mal. 3. 6. Romans 11. 1.

The will of God is one and the same; but it is Every distinction of Gods will,
must be framed ex part volitorum. non ex part volentis Doctor Jackson. S^e
Doctor Prideaux his Sermon on 2 Chronicles. 32. 24. p. 17.
distinguished 1. In respect of the object into voluntatem been plac^ ti and
placiti. God wills good things, and good effects with the will of his good
pleasure, approving them first of all, and by h^mselfe, he intends their end
and means, Ephesians. 1. 5. but evil and evil effects as they are evil, he
nils, disapproves and dislikes. Yet he voluntarily permits evil, and as there
is a good end of it, he wills it with the will of his pleasure, for it is good
that there should be evil. Psalm. 81. 12. Act. 14. 16. 1 Cor. 10. 5. 2. In
respect of application to the creature, into 1. Absolute, when God wills and
concludes any thing concerning us withont any condition in us. Miro and
ineffabili modo not fit praeter ejus voluntatem. quod etiam contra ejus fit
voluntatem, quia non ^^eret si non si^eret, nec utique (...), sed volent. Nec
si^eret bonus fieri male, nisi omnip^tens etiam de malo facere p^ssit (...)
August. Enchir. ad Laurent. c. 100.
2. Conditional, when he wills some condition being put in us; so God would
have all men saved on this condition if they can believe. The first of these is
by another name called voluntas beneplaciti, the last voluntas signi.

Gods will is 1. Secret, that whereby he has absolutely, and freely determined
with himself what he will do, permit, or hinder.

2. Revealed, Psalm. 115. 3. Ephesians. 1. 11. Rom 9 18. called the will o^ God,
concerning us.
that whereby God has manifested what he would have believed, done or left
undone by his reasonable creatures, Mark, 3. 35. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 3. That
distinction of Gods will into beneplaciti and signi differs little from this.
Signi is the same with revealed, beneplacitum is the decree properly so called,
which may be either hidden or manifest.

It serves first to comfort us in adversities; God is a most free agent,
therefore he is not bound to second causes, so as he cannot help without them,
Psalm. 115. 3.

2. To exhort us to sobriety in our judgment of Gods works. Romans 9. 20. 21. 22.
He is a most free agent, therefore we should not rashly exact of him a reason
of his deeds.

2. We should labor first to know Gods will; so did Eli. 1 Samuel 3. 17.

2. Our wills should be pliable to the will of God, we should be careful; 1. To
do his will Psalm. 110. Deuteronomy. 16. 14.
cheerfully, Psalm. 119.
speedily, Psalm. 51. 8. a Rev. 2. 4. Levit. 10. 3. Jo^. 1. 21. Psalm. 39. 19.
Psalm 119. 6. Prove. 30. 6.
sincerely, constantly; a Christian makes God in Christ his portion that is his
faith, and the word of God his rule, that is his obedience.

3. Be patient under the hand of God in all afflictions, for nothing can befall
us but that which is the good pleasure of our heavenly Father. 2 Samuel 6. 7. and
7. 7.


3. We should not depart from the word of God, but make that the warrant of all
our actions; for there is nothing sin but what God forbids; and nothing
acceptable, but what he commands. A man may with a good will, will that which
God nils; as if a good Son desire Aug. Ench. ad ^aur. c. 101.
his Fathers life whom God would have dye, and one may will with an ill will,
that which God wills with a good will, as if an ill Son should desire his
Fathers death, which God also wills.

4. Pry not into the Lords secrets Deuteronomy. 19. 29. R^m. 9. 20. Eccles. 7. 15. 16.
, they belong not unto thee, but be wise unto sobriety.

5. We should be afraid to sin against God, who can punish how he will, when
he will, and where he will; God wills seriously the conversion of all men, by
the preaching of the word, voluntate approbitionis, by way of allowance, Master
Pemble, vin^licie gratiae p 108. 109. Apostolus 1 Timothy 2. 4. non intelligit
si^gulos homines, (...) quos^is ^omi^es, hoc est, om^l^ genr^^ (...), genera
singul^rum, non singul^ generum.
but not voluntate effectionis and intentionis, not effectually, by way of full
intention to work it in them. It is one thing to approve of an end as good,
another thing to will it with a purpose of using all means to effect it. Gods
Commandments and exhortations, show what he approves and wills, to be done as
good; but his promises or threatenings show what he intends effectually to
bring to pass.

Under Gods will are comprehended affections, which are attributed to God, and
are diverse motions of his will according to the diversity of Objects. Yet they
are not sudden and vehement perturbations of God God pleases to ascribe to
himself our humane affections, not because he has any perturbation or passion
or troublesome stirring, and working within, as we have; but because he has an
aptness to produce such effects, as we out of those passions do accustom to
produce, but without any manner of those weaknesses or distempers, which
accompany us in such actions.
as they are in man, rising and falling as occasion serves, but constant,
fixed, tranquil, and eternal Acts and inclinations of the will, according to
the different nature of things, either contrary or agreeable to it. There are in
man some habitual and perpetual affections as love and hatred; much more has
the Eternal will of God Eternal affections, whiles it moves it self to the
objects, without alteration, impression and passion. God is so far affected
toward particulars, as they agree or disagree with the universal and immutable
notions, and Ideas of good existing in God from eternity; so God hates evil,
and loves good, both in the abstract and universal Idaea, and also in the
concrete in particular subject as far as it agrees with the General.

CHAP. VIII.
THe Affections, which the Scripture attributes to God, are.

1. Love which is an act It is an attribute, whereby God loves himself above
all, and others for himself.
of the Divine will, moving it self both to the most excellent good in it self,
and to that excelling in the reasonable creature, approving it, delighting in
it, and doing good Amor Dei est, quo se oblectat in eo quod approbat, eique
been vult, and ^ibi unit. Wendelinus. God is first affected toward himself,
and his own glory.
to it, John 6. 16. 35. Romans 5. 8. In which definition 2 Things are to be noted.

1. The object of Gods love.

2. The effect or manner of Gods love.

The primary object of Gods love is himself, for he takes great pleasure in
himself, and is the Author of greatest felicity and delight to himself. The
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, love one another mutually, Matthew. 3. 17. and 17.
5. John 3. 33. 35. and 5. 20. and 10. 17. and 15. 9. and 17. 24. The Secondary
object of Gods love is the reasonable creature Angels and men. John 14. 23.
Ezekiel. 33. 11. Amor Divinus est
For though he approve of the goodness of other things; yet he has chosen
that especially, to prosecute with his chiefest love, 1. Naturall^ quo Deus
necessario amat seipsum.
for these reasons.

1. For the excellency and beauty of the reasonable creature, when it is
adorned with its due holiness.

2. Because between this only and God, 2. Voluntatius.
there can be a mutual reciprocation of love, 1. universalis, quo omnes
creaturas aliquo modo Deus diligit. Amare enim est velle alicui bonum Matthew. 5.
45.
since it only has a sense, and acknowledgement of Gods goodness.

3. Because God bestows Eternity on that which he loves; but the other
creatures besides the rational shall perish.

Gods love to Christ is the foundation of his love to us, Matthew. 3. 17. Ephesians.
1. 6.

God loves all creatures with a General love, Matthew. 5. 44. 45. as they are
the work of his hands; 2. Speciall^, quo deus inaequaliter amat has and illas
creaturas, respectu boni inaequalis, quod ijs vult; sic magis diligit creaturas
rationales, and inter illas electos, and Christum. Wendelinus.
but he does delight in some especially, whom he has chosen in his Son, John
3. 16. Ephesians. 1. 6.

2. The effect or manner of Gods love is, that God makes the person happy whom
he loves. 1 John 4. 16. John 3. 35. Romans 5. 8. Mal. 1. 2.
For he does amply reward that joy and delight which he takes in the holiness
and obedience of the Elect, while he pours plentifully* upon them all gifts,
both of grace and glory.

This love of God to the Elect is 1. Free, 1 John 4. 10. 19.
Hos. 15. 5. He was moved with nothing but his own goodness.

2. Sure, firm, and unchangeable, Romans 5. 8. 10. 1 John 4. 10. John 13. 1. and
31. 3. Infinite and Eternal, Jer. 31. 3.
which shall never alter John 3. 16.

3. Effectual, as is declared both by his temporal and eternal blessings, 1
John 3 1.

4. Great and ardent, Romans 8. 1. 2. and 5. 5.
John 3. 16. and 15. 13. Romans 5. 6. 7. God bestows pledges of his love and
favor upon them whom he has chosen, and sometimes he sheds the sense of his
love abroad in their hearts.

We must love God Appreciative love him above all things, God is the only
immediate and proper object of love Psalm. 103. 1. Beatus qui amat te, amicum in
te and inimicum propter te. August.
and in all, Psalm. 73. 24. Math. 10. 37. Intensive and intellective withal our
might and strength. Affectu and effectu love him for himself, and all things
for the Lords sake. We should express our love to him by our care in keeping
his Commandments. 1 John 2. 3. John 14. 25. and 15. 10. and earnest desire of
his presence, Psalm. 4. 2. 2.

2. Our love should be conformed to Gods, in loving the Saints, 16. Psalm. 3.
Gal. 6. 10. and Christ above all, desiring to be united to him, 1 Cor. 5. 44. 1
Pet. 1. 8.

3. We should admire the love of God, 1 John 3. 1. For the surenesse,
greatness, and continuance of it, it passes our knowledge, Ephesians. 3. 19. He
has given his Son for a price, his Spirit for a pledge, and reserves
himself for a reward.

That Tantus so great a God should love tantillos so little creatures as we
before we were, Romans 9. 11. tales when we were Enemies, Romans 5. 10. tantum so
much.

Means to love God. 1. Beg this love much of God in Prayer. Master Bradford
when others were merry at Table, fell a weeping, because he could not get his
dull heart to love God.


2. Study much to know him, his nature, attributes, excellencies. 3. Labor to
enjoy communion with him. 4. Mortify other loves contrary to this, inordinate
self-love and love of the world, 1 John 2. 15.

There are many promises made to the love of God. 1. Of Temporal blessings,
Psalm. 91. 14. Romans 8. 28. 2. Spiritual, all the comforts of the Gospel, 1
Cor. 2. 9. 3. of heavenly and Eternal blessings, Jam. 1. 12. and 2. 5.

1. God is maxim amabilis, he is truly lovely 2. Consider the great benefits
we receive from him, 116. Psalm. 12. 3. He desires us to love him, Deuteronomy. 10. 4.
Mark. 12. 33. 4. this affection only and joy abide for ever, 1. Cor. 13. 20.
ult.

The second affection in God, contrary to love, is Hatred, which is an act Gods
hatred is that whereby he is ready to that which we do when we hate, even to
separate a thing from himself. Ezekiel. 33. 11. Romans 9, 14. Psalm. 45. 7. and 5.
6: Esaias 1. 14.
of the Divine will, declining, disproving and punishing of evil, prevailing
and reigning in the reasonable creature.

In which definition three things are to be noted.

1. The object of Gods hatred.

2. The cause and condition of the object hated.

3. The effect of Gods hatred.

1. The object of Gods hatred is the reasonable creature, Hatred is of things
contrary to us, as God hates sin, being contrary to his* 1 Nature, 2 Law. 3
Hononr. Psalm, 45. 8.
for that only sins. He hates iniquity, Psalm. 71. 59. Prove. 11. 1. and the
creature which obstinately and stubbornly persisteth in evil, so that he does
rejoice in the calamity and destruction thereof, Psalm. 11. 5. and 5. 6. Prove.
16. 5.

2. The cause and condition of the object hated, is sin; for which God abhors
the delinquent creature; only the reasonable creature has left his station,
and defiled himself with the filth of sin; all the rest of the creatures,
whether brute beasts or insensible creatures, persist in the state of goodness
wherein they were created, although perhaps not in the same degree of
perfection and excellency for man's sin. But although God cannot hate the
creature unless as sinful: yet not every degree of sin, but a high measure
of it, makes the person hated. It is true that God abhors the least sin, yet he
does not abhor the persons of the godly, in which are the relics of sin, as
he does those of the wicked in whom sin reigns.

3. The effect of Gods hatred is to punish the person whom he hates, whom when
once it is rejected by God troops of evil do invade, God both permitting and
commanding; and this actual hatred or outward manner of manifesting it may not
unfitly be referred to the Divine justice. Hatred in God is a virtue, and fruit
of his justice, and not a vicious passion.

1. We should hate sin (for God hates it) and that with the greatest hatred,
Prove. 6. 16.
even as hell it self, Romans 12. 9. sin is the first, Hatred in a reasonable
creature is a motion of the will, whereby it flies from that which it
apprehends to be evil and opposes it. It arises from a disconformity of the
object.
principal and most immediate object of hatred. Paul mentioning diverse evils
says, God forbid, I hate vain thoughts, says David. Our affections must be
conformable to Gods. He hates nothing simply but sin, and sinners for sins
sake. 2. Sin is as most injurious to God, so most hurtful to man; therefore
it is in it self most hateful. The ground of hatred of any thing is the
contrariety of it to our welfare, as we hate wild, fierce, and raging beasts,
for their mischievousnesse, a Toade and Serpents for their poysonfulnesse,
which is a strong enemy to life and health. Sin is the most mischievous and
harmfull thing in the world. Just hatred is general of whole kinds, as we hate
all Serpents, so we should all sins.

Means to hate ^inne.

1. Pray to God, that his Spirit may rule and order our affections, There is a
twofold hatred, ^ Odium abominationis, a flying only from a thing. 2. Odium
inimicitiae, whereby I pursue what is evil.
and set the same against evil.

2. Exercise our selves in meditating of the infinite torments of hell, which
sin deserves, and the fearful threats denounced against it in the Word of
God of all sorts of evils.

3. We should labor to get out of our natural estate, for the unregenerate
man hates God, Psalm. 81. 15. Romans 1. 30. Christ John 7. 7. and good men, eo
nomine, as Cain did Abell, 1 John 3. 10, 12. they hate Gods ways and
Ordinances, 1 Prove. 22. 29. This hatred is, As much of our original corruption
is found in his affection as any.
1. Causeless, Psalm. 69. 44. 2 Entire, without any mixture of love. 3.
Violent, Psalm. 55. 3. 4. Irreconcilable, Genesis 3. 15.

CHAP. IX.
OTher affections which are given to God metaphorically, and by an
Anthropopathy, are 1. anger Anger is given to God, Non secundum turbationis
affectum, sed secundum ul^ionis effectum, say the Schoolmen. Gods wrath is his
revenging justice; which justice of God, as it simply burns against sin, the
Scripture calls his anger: when it does most fiercely sparkle out, it is called
his wrath; the same justice when it pronounces sentence is called his
judgment; when it is brought into execution, it is called his vengeance. M.
Marshall on 2 King. 23. 26.
and its contrary, complacency or gentleness, which are improperly in God, for
he is neither pleased nor displeased; neither can a sudden either perturbation
or tranquillity agree to God* but by these the actions of God are declared,
which are such as those of offended and pleased men are wont to be, viz. God by
an eternal and constant act of his will approves obedience and the purity of
the creature, and witnesses that by some sign of his favor, but abhorres the
iniquity and sin of the same creature, and shows the same by inflicting a
punishment not less severe but far more just then men are wont to do when
they are hot with anger, Exodus 32. 10. Now therefore, let me alone, that my
wrath may wa^ hot against them, and that I may consume them, and I will make of
thee a great Nation.

Gods Anger is an excellency of his own essence, by which it is so displeased
with sin, as it is inclined to punish the sinner; or a settled and
unchangeable resolution to punish sinners according to their sins.

God is greatly moved to anger against all impenitent sinners, Gods anger
signifies three things. 1 The eternal decree, whereby God has purposed in
himself to take vengeance upon all evil doers, John 3. 36. Romans 1. 18. 2 His
menacings or threatenings, Psalm. 6. 1. Jonah 3. 9. Hos. 11. 9. 3 It is put for
the effects of his anger, for punishment and revenge, Romans 3. 5. Matthew. 3. 7.
Ephesians. 5. 6. Dr. Benfields Sermon 10, on Heb. ^0. 30.
especially the unjust enemies of his people, Romans 1. 18. and 2. 8, 9. 1 Cor.
10. 22. Ephesians. 5. 6. and Col. 3. 6. Deuteronomy. 32. 21. Psalm. 106. 40. because such
wrong God; He cannot be hurt, for that were a weakness; but he may be wronged,
for that is no weakness, but a fruit of excellency, seeing nothing is more
subject to be wronged then an excellent thing or person: for wrong is any
behavior to a person not suitable to his worth. And the more worthy a person
is, the more easy it is to carry ones self unseemlily.

Sin wrongs God:

1. In his authority; when a just and righteous Governor has made just and
right Laws: then it is a wrong to his authority, a denying and opposing of it,
to neglect, dis-regard, and infringe those Laws. Sin is a transgressing of
Gods Law, and impenitent sin, doing it in a very wilful manner, with a kind
of carelessenesse, and bold disrespect of the Lawmakers. God should not have
showed himself wise, just, good, careful of mankind, that is to say, of his
own work, if he had not made his Law; for it is a rule tending to guide man
to order his life most fitly for that which was the maine end of it, the glory
of his maker, and that which was the subordinate end of it, his own welfare.

2. It wrongs him in his honor, name, and dignity; it is a denying of his
perfect wisdom and justice.

3. In his goods, abusing them.

4. In his person, sin being offensive to the purity of his holy person.

Lastly, the opposing of Gods people wrongs him, in those that are nearest him.

The properties of Gods anger:

1. It is terrible; See Nehem. 9. 32. Heb. 10. 27. Revel. 6. 16, 17. See those
words Zagnam, Zagnath, and Charad in my Hebrew Critica.
he is called Bagnall Chemath, the Lord of anger, Nahum. 1. 5. His wrath is
infinite like himself. If we consider it, 1. in regard of its intention, for
God is called a consuming fire, Heb. 12. 29. it pierces the soul, and the
inmost part of the Spirit. 2. In respect of its extension, it comprehends in it
all kinds of evil, Corporeal, Spiritual, To this belongs the Catalogue of
curses repeated Deuteronomy. 21. and Levit. 26.
in life, death, after death; it reaches to Kingdoms, as well as to
particular persons or families; to the posterity, as well as to the present
generation. 3. In respect of duration, it continues to all eternity, John 3.
36. it is unquenchable fire.

2. Irresistible; compared to a whirlwinde.

God is most wise, God is infinitely just, a perfect hater of sin.
of great and perfect unsterstanding. He is slow to anger, never moved till
there be great cause; therefore he holds out in his anger. Great persons
inflict great punishments on those with whom they are displeased.

Ob. Fury is not in me, Esaias 27. 4.

Sol. Take fury The word Chamah in the the original is rendered excandescentia,
burning or fiery wrath, which the last Translation fitly calls fury.
for unjust, undue and excessive anger, which rises too soon, works too
strong, and continues too long; so it is not in God; but a discreet and well
advised motion against any offender, by which one is moved to punish him
according to his offense; anger so taken is in him.

Anger, wrath, and rage, Dr Burges on Psalm. 76. 10.
(or fury) are sometimes promiscuously put one for another, and sometimes
distinguished. Anger is a boiling of the blood about the heart, causing a
commotion of the spirits that are near. Wrath is the manifestation of that
inward distemper by looks, gestures, or actions, tending to revenge; but rage
is the extremity of both the former, Prove. 27. 4.

This may humble and astonish impenitent sinners, Consectaries from Gods anger.
Hos. 8. 5. Psalm. 90. 11. We must quench Gods wrath as men do fire at the
first, by casting in water and taking away the fuel; by repentance and
reformation; pour out water, 1 Samuel 7. 8. Jerem. 4. 14. Psalm. 6. 8. Pray
earnestly to him, Zeph. 3. 3. Moses by prayer turned away Gods hot anger from
Aaron and Israel.

2. Let us take heed of sinning, and so provoking God to anger; and let us be
angry with all sin, as he is. He is angry sometimes at the best people, Israel,
his peculiar treasure, Judges 2. Numb. 11. 2 At the best of his people, with
Moses, Aaron and Miriam, Mi^. 6. 4. Exodus 4. 14. 3 At the best of their
performances, Deuteronomy. 9. 9.
their prayers, Psalm. 80. 4.

Gods Meekness or Clemency is a property in him whereby he does so moderate
his anger, that it does not exceed, yea it does not match the heinousness of
the offense; or it is a property, whereby the Lord in judgment remembers
mercy, Psalm. 103. 10.
not laying such grievous punishments, or of so long continuance upon his
creatures, as their sins deserve, no not when he does correct them, 2 Samuel 7.
14. Jer. 3. 5. Joel 2. 13. Jon. 3. 9, 10.

Queen Elizabeth said, God commands meekness in his word; Christ patterneth
it in his life and death, the holy Spirit produces it in our hearts.
next the Scripture she knew no Book did her so much good as Seneca de
Clementia. Her clemency was such, that her brother King Edward was wont
commonly to call her His sweet sister Temperance.

Magistrates and Ministers, and all Christians should labor for this grace
they should be slow to anger, and moderate wrath. Magistrates should rule, and
Ministers instruct in meekness. No virtue is so generally commended, 1 Timothy 6.
11. Titus 3. 2. JAmes 3. 17, 18. Matthew. 5. 5.
Humbleness of mind and meekness of spirit are often in Scripture set down
together, Ephesians. 4. 2. Coloss. 3. 2.

God takes to himself also Grief and Joy. Gods grief is his aptness to be
displeased with a thing, as a man is with that which grieves him. Joy is the
excellency of his nature, by which he is well pleased with other things.

So God attributes to himself desire and detestation, hope and fear. Desire
is that whereby he uses fit means to effect any thing; Detestation is that
whereby he uses fit and due means to prevent any thing.

God is said to expect or hope for that which he has used due means to
effect, Much what the same with desir^ and detestation.
and therefore requires that it should be. To fear what he has used due
means to prevent, and so will order the means that it may not be.

CHAP. X.
SO much concerning the affections attributed to God, his virtues follow;
which, as they have their seat in man, in the will and affections: so it is
not inconvenient for methods sake to refer them to the same in God. Gods
virtues Virtues in men are certain excellent and confirmed habits, by which
they are made apt and prompt to use their faculties well and orderly.
are his essence considered, as it always works orderly, fitly, and
agreeable to perfect reason. They are not things differing from his essence as
in us, but we must conceive of them according to our capacity, and handle them
distinctly.

By virtues we understand first in general the idea of virtue, or the chiefest
moral perfection, by which God is in himself absolutely the best, and in
respect of which all the virtues of Angels and men are only slender shadows
and representations. For God is Summum bonum the chiefest good and most perfect
goodness, both metaphysically and morally; so that his nature and will is the
first rule of goodness and rectitude, Luke 18. 19.
with which as far as things agree, Matthew. 19. 17.
so far they are, and are called good. 2. He is the cause of all goodness in
the creatures, which have so much goodness as God works and keeps in them.

Gods Goodness is an essential property whereby he is infinitely and of
himself good, Exodus 33 19. Psalm 34 8, 9. and 73. 1. and 117. 2. Romans 2. 4.
and the author and cause of all goodness in the creature.

Goodness Bonum est id quod omnes appetunt. Aristotle seu quod natura sua
appetibile est. Goodness is a property of things by which they are fit to
produce actions requisite for their own and the common welfare. David seems
to give us this description of Gods goodness, Psalm 119. 68. Bonitas Dei est,
qua Deus in se maxim perfect^^ and appetibilis, o^niumque extra se
appetibilium and bonorum causa est. Wendeli^us. Goodness is the fitness of
every thing for its own end, and for the actions which for that and it ought
to perform. Whatsoever thing is excellent in the creatures, is much more in
God, Ja^ 1. 17.
is the perfection of thiugs for which they are desirable; good and appetible
are convertible; what is good, is to be desired. God is to be desired of all,
he is the chiefest good. The properties of which are these:

1. It is propter se amabile, to be desired for it self; so only God.

2. It is able to satisfy the soul, and that satisfaction which it gives is
perpetual. In God there is both satiety and stability; satisfaction of the
appetite and continuance of that satisfaction.

2. God is causally good, works all goodness in the creature, and does good
to them, Psalm. 33. 5.

3. Eminently and absolutely good, the only good. There is a goodness in the
creature, its nature is good, but goodness is not its nature; so there is none
good but God, viz. essentially, originally.

Our Savior Matthew. 19. 17. reproved one for calling him good. Not that he is
not so essentially, but because he thinking him to be no more then a Prophet,
did yet call him so. God is only good essentially, independently;
comparatively to God the creature is not good; as a drop is no water compared
to the Ocean.

The Scripture proves Gods goodness,

1. Affirmatively, when it affirms that God is good, and commends his
goodness. Psalm. 25. 8.


2. Negatively, when it denies that there is any evil in him. Psalm. 92. 16.
Deuteronomy. 32. 4.

3. Symbolically, when it celebrateth the riches of his goodnsse, Romans 2. 4.

4. Effectively, when it affirms that all the works of God are good, There
are naturally, the good Heavens, the good Sun, and Moon, good Food, and
Raiment. Spiritually, good Angels and Men, because there is a good God.
Genesis 1. 31. It was said of every thing particularly when it was made, The Lord
saw that it was good; and in the conclusion of the whole creation, God saw all
his works that they were good, yea, very good; that is, commodious for the
comfort of man, and all other creatures. He made all things good, therefore he
is good himself. This may be proved by the godnesse which still remains in
the creatures; each creature has yet remaining in him a power and fitness to
do much good, and bring much comfort to man, as daily experience proves;
therefore he that notwithstanding the rebellion of man has continued yet much
good in the world, is surely good; the beasts do good to their young, man to
his children; this power they received from God.

5. God is to be loved, honored, praised, and served by man, therefore he is
good; or else he were not worthy this respect from the creature.

The goodness of God is either considered ad intra and absolutely, or else ad
extra and respectively. For the first, God in himself is good. This appears:

1. In reckoning up all the kinds of good things that are, for there is 1.
Bonum utile, the profitable good; now how happy must they needs be who have him
which can command all things; if thou have him thou have all things else in
him. 2. There is bonum jucundum, Psalm 34.
taste and see how sweet he is, at thy right hand are pleasures for evermore.
3. Bonum ^onestum, he is the holy God, the author of all holiness, and the
exemplar of it.

2. This goodness of his cannot be increased, it being his essence, it cannot
be made better; for God has in him not only all the actual, but all the
possible goodness that is in the creatures; any creature still may be better;
thy riches, honors, comforts may be better; but thy God cannot be a better
God; therefore we should infinitely affect him more then all creatures.

3. It is independent goodness, he is omnis boni bonum; hence he is said to be
only good, that is, essentially and immutably.

4* It is essential; the essence and goodness of the creatures is different;
goodness in the Angels the perfectest creatures is a superadded quality to
them, they may be good; but ille bono suo bonus est. He is good with his own
goodness, he can not be God if he be not good.

5. It is illimited goodness, infinite, without all bounds, above all that can
be conceived; he being essentially so, and not limited to this or that being,
neither is his goodness.

6. It is immixed goodness, 1 John 1. 5. He is light, and there is no
darkness in him, not the least evil of sin.

7. It is the sampler and form of all goodness in the creatures so far a
thing is good as it does resemble him.

All the good of a creature is in God always.

1. Eminently, as you consider it in its kind, without imperfection.

2. Efficiently, as he is the Author and cause of all the good the creature
has.

3. Exemplarily, as he is the rule and pattern of all goodness.

4. Finally, as he is the chiefest good of all creatures, so that all terminate
their desires in him.

Secondly, God is good respectively, in what he does to the creatures, that
appears in the good things bestowed upon them. He gives to all liberally,
especially the rational, creatures, as Men and Angels partake of his
goodness, being made capable of enjoying him for ever. James 1.
2. In the evil he keeps of from the elect; as he will withhold no good
thing, so he will let no evil befall them.

Ob. God is infinitely good (say the Arminians) therefore he can not but
naturally will good to the creature.

Sol. It does not follow; for out of his goodness he made the world, his
goodness freely communicated, not out of necessity, then it will follow that
he naturally made the world. 2. God is infinitely just; therefore he also
naturally wills the perdition of all sinners, which they will not admit. 3. He
is infinitely good in himself, R^^etor sortis*
not therefore so to his creatures, for so he should will all good to them, and
actually communicate it, and so should save all. Notwithstanding Gods goodness
of nature he suffered man to fall; Bonitas D^i erga creaturas est mere
voluntaria atque arbi^ria, nisi quum est aliquid in creatura quod referat Dei
imaginem qua sanctus est.
but yet he was so good that he would not have suffered it, unless he could
have showed as much goodness to man another way; and indeed Christ is a
greater good to us by faith, then Adams innocence could have been: but yet
since that evil is come into the world, how many calamities might befall thee,
did not Gods goodness prevent it? that the earth swallows thee not up it is
Gods goodness. The goodness of God is so great, that no creature should
suffer punishment, Fieri non potest ut creaturam suam non ^met in qua re
fulgere videt imaginem suam, at cum aliquid est in creatura ab illa imagine
abhorrens and ei repugnans, tum sapientia moderatur bonitatem. Cameron
praelect. in Manh. 16. 20.
but that the justice of God does require the same, or else some greater good
may be drawn from thence. Ezekiel. 33. 11.

Ob. How does it agree with Gods goodness, that it is said Psalm 18. 27. With
the froward he will show himself froward?

Sol. In the general, the meaning is, only that Gods judgments shall agree
with men's manners, and David shows not how God is in himself, but relatively
how he is to us.

We should 1. love God because of his goodness, Consectaries from Gods
goodness. Two things make men happy in Heaven, 1. Because they w^ll, nothing
but what is good.
for it is the proper object of love. That which is the chief good ought to be
the principal object of all the powers of our souls. God is the principal
good. O that we could account him so, and accordingly carry our selves toward
him.

2. Imitate him, be good as he is good, be like our Heavenly father, good to
all, Romans 12. 9. cleave to that which is good, we should still be doing or
receiving of good.

3 Gods goodness will support his children in their calamities, 2. They enjoy
what they will.
Nehem. 1. 7. and arm them against poverty, and the fear of death it self. I
do not fear to die (said Ambrose) because we have a good Lord. G^lat. 5. 22.
Paul calls it the riches of Gods goodness, Romans ^. 4. and makes this use of
it, that it should lead us to repentance, to consider, 1. What we were
originally, good, the Creator being so, the creature must needs be; and ^ what
we are now, unlike him.
Nec pudet vivere nec piget ^ori, quia bonum habemus Dominum.

We are much to be blamed for sleighting, despising, Esaias 5. 25.
or neglecting him the fountain of all goodness. Man is a most loathsome
creature, that hates, and foolish that sleighteth this chief good.

Here is a use of thankfulnsse to Gods people, which enjoy the goodness of God
in part here in the creature, Luke 6. 36.
and shall hereafter immediately and fully. God is good to all in bestowing
upon them gifts of nature, of body or of mind; but he is especially good to
some, whom he has chosen to life eternal.

We may see the great evil of sin; nothing is so opposite to this attribute
of Gods goodness as sin; the Devils are not evil as creatures, but as
sinful.

CHAP. XI.
SO much in general of Gods virtues. Secondly, in special, the virtues which
imply not imperfection in the reasonable creature, are attributed to God. The
principal of which are

1. Bounty or Graciousnesse, Gods bounty. God is like a most liberal
householder, which takes order that nothing in his house or about it shall want
that which is necessary, further then the fault is in it self.
by which God shows favor to the creatures freely, and that either commonly
or specially; 1. Commonly, when he exercises beneficence and liberality toward
all creatures, pouring upon them plentifully all goods of nature, body, mind
and fortune, so that there is nothing which tastes not of the inexhausted
fountain of his blessings and goodness. Matthew. 5. 44, 45. Psalm. 36. 5, 6.
Gods bounty is a will in him to bestow store of comfortable and beneficial
things on the creature in his kind. This bounty he showed to all things in the
creation, even to all Spirits, all men and all creatures, and does in great
part show still, for he opens his hand and fills every living thing with his
bounty, he gives all things richly to enjoy. He gives more then we ask, and
before we ask. Vb^rior gratia quam precatio.


2. Specially toward the Church, by which he bestows eternal life on
certain men fallen by sin, and redeemed in Christ, Titus 2. 11. and 3. 4. As
this is exercised toward the whole Church, so in a special manner toward some
members of it, as toward Enoch, 2 Chronicles. ^0. 7.
Moses, Jacob, David, Paul, and especially Abraham, Esaias 41 8 James 2. 23.
who is therefore often called the Friend of God; he made with him and his seed
a perpetual league of friendship, and he constantly kept his Laws and
Statutes, John 15. 14, 15.

Gods Graciousnesse is an essential property, whereby he is in and of himself
most gracious and amiable, Psalm. 145. 8. God is only gracious in and of
himself, and whatsoever is amiable and gracious, is so from him.

Gods Graciousnesse is that Gratia est, qua Deus in seipso est ama^il^s,
sua^que creaturae favet and benefacit, unde hoc respectu gratia Dei est favor
quo creaturas suas and inprimis hemi^^es prosequitur. Wendelinus.
whereby he is truly amiable in himself, and freely bountiful unto his
creatures, cherishing them tenderly without any desert of theirs, Psalm. 86. 15.
and 111. 5. Genesis 43. 29.

God is gracious to all, Psalm. 145. 8, 9, 10. but especially to such whom he
does respect in his wel-beloved Son, Jesus Christ. Exodus 33. 19. Es^y 30. 19.
Luke 1. 30. Genesis 6. 8. 1 Cor. 15. 10. Gods free favor is the cause of our
salvation, and of all the means tending thereunto, Romans 3. 24. and 5. 15, 16.
Ephesians. 1. 5, 6. and 2. 4. Romans 9. 16. Titus 3. 5. Heb 4. 16. Romans 6. 23. 1 Cor.
12. 4, 9. The gospel sets forth the freeness, fullness, and the powerfulness
of Gods grace to his Church, therefore it is called the Gospe^^ of the grace of
God, Acts 20. 24.

Gods Graciousnesse is firm and unchangeable, so that those which are once
beloved, can never be rejected, or utterly cast off, Psalm. 77. 10.

God bestows, 1. Good things. 2. Freely. 3. Plentifully. Psalm. 111. 4. 4. In
a special manner He is gracious toward the godly.

Love is 1. grounded often on something which may deserve it; the grace Dr.
Jackson* of Gods Attributes, l. 1. c. 14.
of God is that love of his which is altogether free 2. Grace is such a kind of
love as flows from a superior to an inferior; love may be in inferiors
toward their superiors*

We should be also liberal in our services toward God, in our prayers and good
works.

We should desire and strive to obtain the grace and favor of God.
Consectaries of Gods graciousnesse.
David often calls on God to cause his face to shine upon him, and to lift up
the light of his countenance upon him. The holy Patriarchs often desired to
find grace in the eyes of the Lord. It is better then life to him that has
it; it is the most satisfying content in the world, to have the soul firmly
settled in the apprehension of Gods goodness to him in Christ. It will comfort
and stablish the soul in the want of all outward things, in the very hour of
death. 2. It is attainable: those that seek Gods face shall find him.

Means of purchasing Gods favor.

1. Take notice that your sins have worthily deprived you of his favor, and
press these thoughts upon you till you feel your misery; meditate on the law,
to show you your cursednesse.

2. Consider of the gracious promises of the Gospel, and see the grace of God
in Christ. His grace was exce^ding abundant, says the Apostle.

3. Confess and bewail your sins, with a full purpose of amendment, and cry
to God for grace in Christ.

This stays our hearts when we apprehend our own unworthiness; Psalm 103. 8
9.
God is gracious and shows mercy to the undeserving, 1 Pet. 5. 16.
the ill deserving. 2. We should acknowledge that all grace in us does come
from him the fountain of grace, Nehe. 9. 17, 31.
and we should go boldly to the Throne of grace, Romans 5. 20, 21.
and beg grace of him for our selves and others, Heb 4. 16. Paul in all his
Epistles says, grace be unto you. We should take heed of encouraging our
selves in s^nne, because God is gracious; this is to turn Gods grace into
wantonness. We should frequent the Ordinances, where God is graciously
present, and ready to bestow all his graces on us; the word begets grace,
prayer increases it, and the Sacraments seal it.

It refutes 1. the Papists, Ephesians. 2. 9. 2 Timothy l. 9.
which boast of their own merits; By the grace of God I am that I am, 1 Cor.
15. 10. Romans 11. 6. By grace we are saved, B^na mea (...). Aug. l. 10. confess.
c. 4. Every one is born with a Pope in his belly, men had rather be saved by
something of their own then be beholding to Christ for salvation. Ignorant
people say, they hope to be ^aved by their good deeds and meaning.
Ephesians. 2. 8. They distinguish grace into that which is gratis data freely
given, as the work of miracles, the gift of prophesying, and that which is
gratum faciens making us accepted, as faith and love are graces making us
accepted; but the grace which makes us accepted is freely given, therefore
they are not opposite members. 2. The Arminians (the patrons of man's free will,
and enemies of Gods free grace) who say that a man may so far improve
naturals as to merit grace, and that God gives effectually grace to the wicked
which Dr. Twisse in a Manuscript.
shall never be saved, to Judas as well as Paul. How is that effectual, which
moving men unto faith and repentance, does never bring them to one nor other?
it seems these Remonstrants never learnt this Lesson, A^minio praeceptore; for
he defines effectual grace to be that quae sortitur effectum, which obtaines
the effect. In Johannem tract. 81.
They say that a man without Gods grace may keep all Gods Commandments,
whereas Christ says not (as Augustine notes) John 15. 5. without me you can
do little, but without me you can do nothing. Haec recitasso est refutasse.

It comforts us against sin, and fear of eternal death, Romans 5. 20, 21.
Paul and Silas sung in prison.

We ought to love and reverence God above all; and return praise to him for
his free goodness; gracious and amiable men win love and reverence from
others. Some Divines think David is called a man after Gods own heart,
especially for his frequent praising of God in the Psalms. We should learn
contentation and patience also under Gods hand, and to bear losses quietly in
these times, since all that we have we received freely from God. This was Jobs
argument, The Lord has given, and the Lord has taken, though he was plundered
by the Chaldeans and the Sabeans.

2. Mercy, which is as it were a sense of another misery, with a prompt and
ready inclination of the will to help the creatures freely in their miseries.
Exodus 33. 19. and 34. 6.
This affection God challenges as proper to himself, and glories in it.
Heroicke and Noble Spirits are most gentle and merciful; Psalm 103. ^.
cruelty is a sign of a weak and base mind. This merciful nature of God
although it principally appear toward man, as appears by the Laws given
concerning orphans, Exodus 22. 22. Esaias 30. 18. Lament. 3. 22. Titus 3. 5.
Exodus 34. 6, 7. Ephesians. 2. 4. Romans 4. 19. and 11. 30, 31.
widows, strangers, poor, and others oppressed with any calamity, yet his
mercy is exercised also toward the bruit beasts, Deuteronomy. 22. 4, 6, 7. Exo. 23. 5.
11. 12.

Mercy is a disposition toward the creature considered as sinful and miserable
by his sin.

It is a readiness to take a fit course for the helping of the miserable, or
it is an Attribute in God Misericordia est, qua propensus est Deus ad
succurrendum su^^ creaturis in aliqua miseria constitutis, iisque re ipsa
succurrit. Wendelinus.
whereby the Lord of his free love is ready to succor those that be in misery,
Judges 2. 18. and 10. 26. He is called the father of mercies, 2 Cor. 1. 3. said
to be abundant in mercy, 1 Pet. 1. 3. rich in mercy, Ephesians. 2. 4. He has a
multitude of mercies, Psalm. 51. 1. is said to be of tender mercy, Luke 1. 58.
to have bowels of mercy, Psalmxs 40. 12. Gods mercy in Scripture usually has
some epithet: Matchless, Jer. 3. 1. Great, Nehem. 13. 22. Everlasting, Psalm.
25. 6. Luke 1. 50. Free, Ephesians. 2.

Gods mercy to his Church shines in these things, The Scripture has three
notable words to express the fullness of Gods mercy in Christ, Ephesians. 2. 7.
Romans 5. 20. 1 Timothy 1. 14. 3 (...) put upon Gods mercy.
1. In passing by her infirmities, Exodus 34. 7. 2. In accepting her endeavors.
3. In correcting, 1. sparingly. 2. unwillingly. 4. In providing all things
needful for it.

Mercy in God is not any passion or quality as it is in men, Luke 1. 50. 54.
Psalm 48. 2, 3. and 89. 28.
but it is the very divine essence it self, and therefore Ephesians. ^* 4. 1 Pet.
1. 3.
perpetual and in^inite, such as no tongue can express.

Mercy in God and in us differ.

1. It is in him essentially, in us as a quality.

2. In him primarily, Mercy and compassion d^ffer only in the ex^rinsecall
denominations taken from different objects. Compassion is good will toward
othe^s provoked from notice of their misery; mercy is an excess of bounty not
estranged from ill deserves in distress.
in us secondarily.

Gods mercy is the cause of all mercy, it is without motive or worth in us,
natural, free, Romans 9. 18. boundless, extends to a man's soul, body, this
life, the next; to a man and his posterity, Exodus 34 6, 7. it is above all his
works, Psalm. 145. 9. it is beyond his promise, and our expectation.

Reasons.

1. Whatsoever good and commendable thing is to be found in the creature, That
God has mercy in him.
that must needs be found eminently and excellently in the Creator, from whom
it is derived to the creature; and who could not derive it t^ the creature, if
he had it not more perfectly in himself. Now mercy is to be found in all good
men, and it is a lovely and commendable thing in them, such as begets good will
and liking toward them; therefore it is much more fully in God.

2. He has great mercy in him; if God be merciful at all, he must needs be
merciful in great measure, He is ready to forgive more sins th^n we can
imagine.
yea above all measure, beyond all degrees, in all perfection; for the essence
of God is infinite, and his wisdom, power, and mercy are inf^nite.

There is a mercy of God which extends to all his creatures, Psalm. 145. 9. Luke
6. 35. Luke 6. 11.
God is merciful unto all men, but especially to some Exodus 20. 6. The mercy
of God which reaches to the pardon of sin, is peculiar to the Catholic Church.
men whom he has chosen unto himself.

The special mercy of God is offered unto all within the Church, Ezech. 16. 6.
Acts 13. 40. but is bestowed only upon some, viz. such as receive Christ, John
1. 11, 12.

This life is the time of mercy, wherein we obtain pardon for sin; after
this life there is no remission or place for repentance.

All blessings Spiritual and Corporeal are the effects of Gods mercy. Esaias 33.
24. Luk^ 16. 24, ^5 Titus 3. 5. Luke 1. 77, 78. Lament. 3. 2^.
Common blessings of his general mercy, special blessings of his special
mercy.

The effects of Gods special mercy, are

1. The giving of Christ for us. 2. His Word. 3. Justification. 4.
Sanctification. 5. giving his Spirit for a comforter in our griefs and
afflictions, John 14. 16. 6. The Sacraments.

Mercy must accord with wisdom, On what terms God will show mercy.
justice, and truth; therefore those that stoop to justice by acknowledging
their offense, and worthiness to be punished for it, and are sorry they have so
offended, and ^esolve to offend so no more, and earnestly also implore Gods
mercy, shall partake of it. The Lord is plenteous in mercy to all which call
upon him, and the Lords delight is in them which fear him, and hope in his
mercy. Judge your selves, and you shall not be judged; humble your selves under
the hand of God, 2 To whom he will show mercy.
and he will exalt you. On these terms he will show mercy universally to all,
which submit to him thus, and seek to him for mercy, without any exception of
person, fault, time.

Quest. Whether mercy and justice be equal in God, and how can he be most just
and most merciful?

Answ. Mercy and Justice may be considered ad intra, as they are essential
properties in God, and so he is equally just as well as merciful. 2. Ad extra,
as he puts himself forth into the outward exercise of mercy and punishment. In
this latter sense, we must distinguish between this present time, where mercy
triumphs against judgment, E^si omnes h^m^nes Deus damnaret un^ excepto, tame^
adhuc major esset misericordia quam judicium, nimirum quia nullum (...) judicii
divini effectum ^isi propter merita eorum qui damnantu^: at miseric^rdia nulla
invenit merita. Chamier. (...) 3. lib. 7. c. 8. Misericordia and justitia Dei
in se and quatenu^ in Deo sunt, pares sunt; respectu effect^rum and objectorum
major est miseri^ordia. Wendelinus.
Jam. 2. 13. and the day of judgment, that is a time of justice and
retribution to the wicked, and so David speaking of this present time, says,
All thy ways are mercy and truth, Psalm 25. and that of the Schools is true,
remunerat ultra condignum, punit infra.

Gods justice and mercy are both infinite and equal in him, only in regard of
man there is an inequality. For God may be said to be more merciful unto them
that are saved then just to them that are damned; for the just cause of
damnation is in man, but of salvation is wholly from God. In himself and
originally they are both equal, and so are all his attributes; but in respect
of the exercise and expression upon his creatures and abroad in the world,
there is some difference. Mr Bolton on Prove. 18. 14.

1. We should believe this point, labor to be fully persuaded in our hearts
that Gods mercies are great and many; he has preventing mercies; how many
sins has he preserved thee from? 2. sparing mercies, Lam. 3. 22. behold Gods
severity toward others, and mercy toward thee; 3. renewing mercies; 4.
pardoning mercies. He is willing and ready to help us out of misery. Therefore
we should praise him for this attribute; how excellent and desirable a thing is
mercy, therefore give him the glory of his mercy.

2. It is full of comfort to a child of God, he need not be dismayed with any
thing, not his imperfections; since the devil himself cannot hurt him: for
God is more merciful to help him then the devil can be malicious to hurt him.

3. We should be encouraged to seek to him for mercy, seeing there is so great
store of it in him. There is an infiniteness of mercy in God, so that what ever
my sins have been, if now I will turn he will accept me; Matthew. 18. 30.
if I strive to turn he will enable me; Therefore I will now run to him The
Papists s^ek^ to the Virgin Mary, and other Saints, Maria matter gra^iae, matter
miserioo^diae, Tu nos ab host protege and hora mortis suscipe.
for mercy, I will fall down before the Throne of justice, and confess I have
deserved wrath, and nothing but wrath, but will cry to him for mercy.

4. Those that have and do seek, should give him the glory of his mercy, and
take comfort themselves in the confident hope of finding mercy. Praise him for
his mercy to others, and he will give thee some comfortable hope of finding it
thy self. Psalm 106. 3. Luke 1. 46, 50.


5. We should be merciful like God to our selves and brethren, Luke. 6. 36.
their souls and bodies, imitate his mercy; be you merciful to the afflicted
and distressed, show mercy freely and constantly, and then we shall obtain
mercy, Matthew. 5. 7.

6. We should labor to be qualified for mercy.

1. Confess our sins and forsake them, Prove. 28. 13.

2. Fear God, his mercy is on them that fear him, Luke 1. 50. Psalm. 103. 11,
17, 18.

3. Love God, He shows mercy to them that love him, Exodus 20. 6.

4. Trust in God, then mercy shall compass us, Psalm. 32. 10.

5. Think on good things, then we shall have mercy, Prove. 14. 22.

6. Keep close to the rule of Gods Word. Gal. 6 16.

CHAP. XII.
AThird virtue in God is Justice, by which God in all things wills that which is
just; or it is the Attribute whereby Justiti^ est ^ua De^^ in se justus est,
and extra se constanti voluntate suum cuique ^ribuit. Wen^^linus.
God is just in and of himself, and exercises justice toward all creatures,
and gives every one his due, Esaias 45. 21. Psalm. 11. 7. Genesis 18. 25. Zeph. 3.
5. Romans 2. 6, 7. 1 Pet. 1. 17. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 6, 7. 2 Timothy 4. 8. 1 John 1. 9. and
2. 29. Justice in man is a settled will to do right in every thing to every
person, so God has a settled will to do right. Shall not the Judge of all the
world do right? Genes. 18. 25.
and are not my ways equal? God styles himself by this title, and gives
himself this Attribute Zep^. 3. 5.

Gods justice is twofold.

1. Disposing, Justitia disp^nens, qua Deu^ univ^rsa and ^ingula jus^^o ordine
disp^^it and gu^ernat.
by which as a most free Lord and supreme Monarch of all he disposes all
things in his actions according to the rule of equity, and imposes most just
Laws upon his creatures, commanding and forbidding only that which is fit for
them in right reason to do and forbear.

2. Distributive, Deuteronomy. 32. 4. Psalm 11. 7. and 48. 11. and 145. 17.
which renders to every one according to his work without respect of persons.
Psalm. 62. 12. I^b 34. 11, 19. Prove. 24. 12. Jerem. 32. 19. Ezekiel. 7. 27. Matthew.
16. 27. Deuteronomy. 16. 17. 1 Pet. 1. 17. Romans 2. from the 6. to the 12. 2 Cor. 5.
10. Col. 3. 25. Rev. 22. 12.
2 Chronicles. 19. 7. Acts 10. 34. Ephesians. 6. 9. Gal. 2. 6. and this distributive
justice is also twofold, praemii, and paenae, of reward and punishment.

1. Of reward, when God bountifully rewards the obedience of the creature with
a free reward, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 5, 7. Matthew. 10. 41, 42. Mark 9. 41. Justitia
Distribuens est gratiae v^l irae: illa ^st (...) v^^untas praestandi promiss^s
is^a volunt^^ implendi comminati^nes, Wendelinus. Matthew. 19. 29. God assigns
fit rewards for well and evil doing.
God bestows this reward not only on the godly, both by heaping diverse
mercies on them in this life, and by the fullness of glory and felicity in the
life to come, but also on the wicked, whose moral actions he rewards with
t^mporary rewards in this world, as the obedience of Jehu, the repentance of
Ahab.

2. Of punishment, by which he appoints to the delinquent creature the equal
punishment of eternal death for the least sin, Genesis 2. 17. Romans 6. 23 which
death is begun in this life, in diverse kinds of miseri^s and punishments,
which for the most part are proportionable to their sins, Genes. 3. 17. and
20. 18. but is perfected in the life to come, when the full wrath of God is
powered upon it, Romans 1. 18.
John 3. 36. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 6.

This justice is so essential Gods justice is not a quality or accident in
him, but his very nature, essential to him.
to God, immutable, and (as I may so speak) inexorable, that he cannot remit
the creatures sin, nor free them from punishment, unless his justice be
satisfied; God can not dispense against himself, because sins do hurt the
inward virtue of God, and the rule of righteousness, the integrity therefore and
perfection of God can not stand, A man may be a man and yet be unjust; but God
can not be God, and be unjust.
if he satisfy not that; yet through his bounty and goodness he has found
out a way by which due satisfaction may be given thereunto, viz. by Christ, who
has borne a punishment equivalent to our sins, for us.

The Scripture proves the justice of God,

1. Affirmatively, when it calls him just, a revenger, holy, right, and extols
his justice, Exodus 9. 27. Psalm. 11. 7. Jerem. 12. 1.

2. Negatively, when it removes from him injustice and iniquity, Ge^h. loc.
com^un.
respect of persons, and receiving of gifts, and also all the causes and
effects of injustice, Deuteronomy. 32. 4. and 10. 17. Dan. 9. 14. Job 8. 3.

3 Affectively, when it Attributes to him zeal, anger, fury, Exodus 20. 5. and
32. 10. Number. 11. 10. which are not in God such passions as they be in us, but
an act of the immutable justice.

4 Symbolically, when it calls him a consuming fire, Deuteronomy. 4, 24. compares him
to an angry Lion, an armed Soldier. Esaias 38. 13.

5 Effectively, when it affirms that he renders to every one according to his
works, 1 Samuel 26. 23.

Gods justice comprehends his righteousness and truth; he is just in words and
deeds.

Gods justice The righteou^nesse of God is taken diverse wa^es in Scripture,
sometimes for the essential Attribute of G^d, sometimes for the righteousness
of faith, which is called the righteousn^sse of God, because it is such a
righteousness as God does app^ove, of and with which we may appeal boldly in
his presence; again, righteousness is taken for his truth and faithfulness
in promises. David prays God to do good to him for his righteousness, he
means his faithfulness in his promises. See Mr Bu^^howes on Matthew. 5. 6.
is considered four ways.

1 As he is free Lord of all, and so his decrees are just, Romans 9. 13, 14.

2 As he is God of all, and so the common works of preserving both the good
and bad are just, 1 Timothy 4. 14. Matthew. 5. 45.

3 As a Father in Christ, and so he is just in performing his promises, and
infu^ing his grace, and in bestowing the justice of his Son, 1 John 1. 5.

4 As Judge of all the world, and so his justice is not only distributive but
corrective.

His justice is,

1 Impartial; he will not spare

1 Multitudes, all Sodom and Gomorrha, and the old world perished.

2 Great ones, the excellency or greatness of any creature will not exempt it
from punishment; the Angels and Adam fell, he spared not the Angels but threw
them into hell. Adam was cast out of Paradise for one sin.

3 Neernesse; the Jews, Gods people formerly, are now cast off; Moses and
David were punished.

2 General, it extends to a man's posterity; God will visit the iniquity of
fathers upon their children.

3 Inexorable, no sinners can escape unpunished; the sins of the godly are
punished in their surety Christ, and they are afflicted in this life. God is
justice it self, justice is essential to him, his will is the rule of
justice, a thing is just because he wills it, and not he wills it because
its just. He will right the wrongs of his children, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 6, 7, 8. He can
not be corrupted nor bribed.

Gods justice comprehends two things under it.

1 Equity, in that he directs men equally and requites them equally, commanding
all and only good things, such as they in reason ought to do, promising and
threatening fit and due recompenses of their obedience and disobedince.

2 Truth, whereby he declares nothing to them but as the thing is, and
fidelity whereby he fulfilleth all that he has spoken.

The Arminians urge, how can God in justice command a man by his word the
performance of that which cannot be done by him without the inward help of the
Spirit, and yet in the mean time God denies this inward grace unto him?

God may without blemish to his justice command man to perform his duty,
although he have now no strength to do it, because once he had strength, and
he has now lost it.

It reproves such as live in sin, Consectaries from Gods justice.
Exodus 34. 17. Psalm 5. 5. Gal. 6. 6. if God be merciful that he may be
feared, much more is he just that he may be feared. 2. We must take heed of
justifying the wicked; we should be just in our actions to man, in buying and
selling, in rewarding and punishing, Magistrates, Ministers, Masters, Parents
should be just. We should not murmur at Gods disposing justice in making us
poor, ^ Chron. 2. 5. Nehem. 9. 33. Psalm. 119. 137. Dan. 9. 7. Romans 3. 16.
and should yield to his directing justice, obeying his Commandments seem they
never so unreasonable. We should get Christ's righteousness to satisfy Gods
justice for us, and to justify us.

The consideration of Gods justice should affright us from hypocrisy, sinning
in secret, keeping bosom sins. It ministers comfort to the godly, who are
wronged by the wicked, they shall have an upright and just Judge, who will
uphold them in a good cause, Psalm 33. 24.

It may serve to exhort us to glorify Gods justice, both in fulfilling of his
promises, and punishing wicked men, Psalm. 7. 18. and 51. 15. Rev. 19. 1.


4 God is True.

Truth or veracity is, by which God is true as in himself, so in his sayings
and deeds. John 14. 6. God is aet^rna veritas and vera aetern^as.
He reveals himself to his creature such a one as indeed he is.

Real truth, or the truth of things, is a property of them by which they are
the same indeed which they seem. If God (said one) were to be corporeal, he
would have light for his body, and truth for his soul, Truth is originally
from God, the first Ide^, rule, or standard of truth is Gods will, which is
veritas Dei. Whereby he is what he is, essentially, simply, immutably: by which
he wills all things to be what indeed they are, and knows them to be such as
they are most certainly. Veritas rei, entitatis, whereby things are such as God
would have them to be, and so are true and good.
It is an agreement betwixt the being and appearance of things. It is double,
1. Essential, or of the very substance of things. 2. Accidental, of the
qualities and actions of things; and this, as it is referred to the reasonable
creature (for such truth can be no where but in it) is inward and outward
according as the actions are.

Inward truth of understanding is an agreement betwixt its conceit of things,
and the things themselves, contrary whereto is error, or misjudging, and of
the will contrary to hypocrisy and dissimulation.

Outward, 1. of word which is Logical when I speak as the thing is; moral
when I speak as I conceive the thing to be; and also in the matter of
promises, when I mean as I say, and hold still that meaning till I have
actually made good my words.

2 Of deeds, when they are such in the intention and meaning of my mind, as in
the outward pretense, and are agreeable to the promises I have made.

God is true in all these respects.

1. His essence is real and true, he is a God indeed, not in imagination
alone; the Scripture calls God the true God; to know thee, says our Savior
Christ, the only true God, and whom thou have sent, Jesus Christ. He is the
true God, not a bare conceit of our own head, or fiction. He has not an
imaginary and counterfeit, but a very real being; he is indeed such he says
he is; An Idol is nothing in the world.
for that which gives being to other things, must needs it self be in very
deed. The other supposed Gods alone in name and in fancy of the worshippers,
^ut he is.

2 He has a true, not an erroneous conceit of things, lie knows all things
most exactly; he is indeed a willer of true goodness.

3 He speaks nothing but as the thing is, and as he does conceive it. Matthew 24.
35.
He means what he promises, and does what he means, John 17. 17.
the Lord dissembleth not with men. He is true in his Word, Which truth of God
in his promises may be referred to justice, because it is just to perform what
thou have promised.
and his whole Word, whether narrations, promises, threats, visions, or
predictions; what he tells it is as he tells it; what he promises or
threatens to do, he intends, and will perform, Psalm 89. 33, 34. Deuteronomy. 7.
9. 2. Cor. 1. 20. Promissa tua sunt; and suis falli timeat, cum promittit
veritas? Aug. Confes^. l. 12. c. 1.

4 God is true in his works, they are not done counterfeitly, 2 Timothy 4. 8.
as those of the Devil, but truly, Psalm 145. 17. Revel. 15. 3.

The Scripture proves the truth of God, 1. essentially, when it affirms God to
be true in his works, Deuteronomy. 32. 4. Psalm 25. 10. Revel. 15. 3. and 16. 7. 2 In
his words, which is proved both affirmatively, John 17. 17. 2 Samuel 7. 28. and
negatively, Number. 23. 19. 1 Samuel 15. 29. Heb. 6. 18.

Reas. 1. All lying and fashood arises from weakness If I speak falsehood out
of error and mistake, I am weak; if wilfully, I am wicked. If I keep not
promise, it is either because I cannot, and then I am weak: or will not, then
I am wicked; therefore God cannot possibly lie. 1 Kings 22. 23. Ezekiel. 14. 9.
and imperfection or wickedness, neither of which is in God, seeing to be God
is to be perfect and absolute. He is the Lord God of truth, Psalm 34. 5. his
son is truth, John 14. 6. his holy Spirit, the Spirit of truth, John 17. 6.
the Gospel is the word of truth, Col. 1. 5. God is the chief and first truth,
the Author of truth, truth is in him essentially and immutably, Psalm 100. 5.
only true, Romans 3. 4. This distinguishes him from false Gods, 2 Chronicles. 15. 3.
John 17. 3. God is worthy to be trusted, honored, and esteemed, ergo most
true. Where it is said, God seduced the Prophets, it is not so understood, as
if God inspired a false prophecy and an error, but that he delivered them to
the devil to be seduced.

1. It serves to reprove the wicked, Consectaries from Gods truth.
who believe not threats; and the weak Christians who in temptations and
desertions doubt of promises.

2 It exhorts us to desire the manifesting of this truth, Psalm 43. 3. we
should be true like God, Zach 8. 16. in our words and deeds, Ephesians. 4. 25.
keep our vows with God, and promises with men. God loves truth, as in
himself, so in his creatures; but abhors dissimulation and hypocrisy, Prove.
12. 22.

The true Church is the pillar of truth, Gods Word the word of truth, Psalm 19.
9. We should therefore believe Gods Word, and depend upon his promise, seem it
never so unlikely or impossible, Heb. 20. 23.
give him the glory of his truth; he that believes sets to his Seal that
God is true, he that believes not makes God a liar. Will you receive the
testimony of men, and will you not much more receive the testimony of God? He
that believes Gods promises, will surely do the things to which the Lord by
promises encourages him. He that believes the threats will forbear the thing
which God by his threats seeks to deter him from.

This is matter of solid comfort for all the true children of God, if he be
faithful they must be happy.

Truth is that virtue of the will by which it is moved to goodness for Gods
sake, when the thing moving us to be good, is Gods Commandment, and the end
whereat we aim is the glorifying and pleasing of God, then we serve God in
truth.

5. God is Faithful. 1 Cor. 19. 18. Rev. 19. 11.

First, in himself, by an uncreated faithfulness.

Secondly, in his decrees. Esaias 14. 24, 27.

Thirdly, in all his ways and works. Psalm. 145. 17.

1 Of creation, 1 Pet. 4. ult. 2 Of Redemption, Heb. 2. 17. 3 Of Justification,
John 1. 19. 4 Of protection and preservation of his Church, Rev. 19. 11.
Fourthly, in all his words and speeches.

1 His Commandments are the rule of truth and faithfulness to us, Psalm. 19.
9. 2 His predictions are all faithfully accomplished many thousand years
after, as Christ's incarnation in the fullness of time, so Genesis 49. 10. 3 His
menaces are most faithful. 4 His promises, Exodus 12. 41. Heb. 10. 23.
There is a difference between faithfulness in the Creator and in the creature.

1 This is the ocean and full fountain from whence all faithfulness and truth
in men and Angels issue. 2 This is the rule and measure of that, and the nearer
it comes to this, the more complete it is. 3 It is unchangeable in him; the
Angels that fell were faithful, but soon changed, so Adam. 4 It is in God in
most high perfection.
Reasons.

1 Because of his most just and righteous nature, whose most righteous will is
the rule of all his ways, Psalm. 145. 17. 2 He is most perfect and unchangeable
in perfection. 3 Because of his most pure and holy affection. 4 There is no
imperfection in him to hinder his faithfulness.
Gods faithfulness is the ground of all true Religion.

1 We must ground all the doctrine of faith, all the Articles of faith, all our
judgment and opinion in matters of faith upon this faithfulness of God, and
this by holding fast all the faithful word, Titus 1. 9. Romans 3. 4.

2 All our obedience of faith must be grounded on this, John 3. 33. Heb. 11.
11. and 10. 23. Zeph. 3. 5. Heb. 6. 30.

3 All our prayers of faith must be grounded on Gods faithfulness, Dan. 9. 16.
1 John 1. 9. 1 Pet. 4. 19, 31. Psalm 1. 5.

4 All sound profession of faith must be grounded on this, Genesis 17. 1. Psalm.
91. 4.

5 All true perseverance in the faith, 1 Cor. 1. 8. and 10. 13. Psalm 91. 4.

We must be faithful:

1 To God, Consectaries from Gods faithfulness.
by being faithful in his Covenant, as the Psalmist speaks. 2 To men for
Gods sake in our several places, in friendship as David and Jonathan.
Moses and Christ were faithful, the Apostle says in Stewards it is required
that they be found faithful, Heb. ^. 15.
1 Cor. 4. 1. Titus 2. 10. Heb. 3. 5.
1 Cor. 4. 10. Ephesians. 6. 21. Col. 4. 7, 9. 1 Samuel 3. 20. 2 Samuel 2. 35. Nebem.
13. 13. 1 Timothy 3. 11. Faithfulness is required and commended in all sorts of
men.

Reasons.

The welfare and prosperity of all estates depends upon man's fidelity and
faithfulness, it will be impossible for any good to be done amongst men if
each in his person and place be not faithful; this therefore is required of
all men.

Faithfulness is that virtue by which a man is careful to perform constantly
and in truth all those duties to which either his place or promise, What
faithfulness is.
or both, do bind him. Or, it is that virtue by which a man is as good as his
word, when one does speak good, and is indeed as good as in speech, this is
faithfulness. It has two parts: 1. the agreement of his meaning with his
words at the time that he speaks, when he purposes to do according as he
speaks. 2 The agreement of his actions with his words and meaning, when he
continues constant in his purpose till he have done what in him lies to effect
it; as it is said of B^az, that when he had said the thing, he would not be
quiet until he had brought it to pass. A promise is the proper subject of
faithfulness, in the well making and welkeeping of that stands fidelity.

CHAP. XIII.
GOd is Patient, Nahum. 1. 3. Esaias 30. 18.
Psalm 103. 8. Job 2. 17. Gods patience is that whereby he bears the reproach
of sinners and defers their punishment; or it is the most bountiful will of
God Patientia est, qua ita iram suam moderatu^ Deus erga creaturas, ut vel
poenas differat, vel iram un^ ^^mento non effundat. Wendelinus.
, whereby he does long bear with sin which he hates, sparing sinners, not
minding their destruction, but that he might bring them to repentance.

This is aggravated

1 In that sin is an insinite injury offered to him, therefore in the Lords
Prayer it is called a Trespas^e.

2 He is is infinitely affected God is sensible of the wrong offered to him,
and provoked to wrath thereby. 2 Pet. 3. 13. he not only restraines his anger,
but gives them time to repent.
with this; hence in the Scripture he is said to be grieved with our sins, to
be wearied, as a cart full of sheaves; A lea^ned Divine says, if but any
tender hearted man should sit one hou^e in the Throne of God Almighty and look
down upon the earth as God does continually, and see what abominations are done
in that hour, he would undoubtedly in the next set all the world on fire. Mr.
Bol^^n.
he is said to hate sin, for although he be such a perfect God that none of
our sins can hurt him, yet because he is a holy and just God, he can not but
infinitely distaste sinners.

3 He can be revenged immediately if he please; men many times are patient
perforce, they would be revenged, but they know not how to compass it. He
apprehends at the same time what he has done for us, and withal our
unthankfulness, unkindnesse, and yet he endured Cain, S^ul, Judas a long time.

4 He beholds the universality of sin, all men injure him, the heathens are
given to Idolatry, blasphemy among Christians, the prophaner sort are full of
oaths, adulteries, the better negligent, lazy, cold.

5 God not only not punishes, but still continues his benefits; the old
drunkard is still alive.

6 He sets up a Ministry to invite us to come in, and we have that many years;
Forty years long was I grieved with this generation.

7 In Christ patience was visible, Matthew. 26. 39.
there was living patience.

8 He afflicts lightly and mercifully to win us; he makes thee sick and poor,
to see if it will make thee leave thy sinning.

7 God is Long-suffering, This is in effect the same with Patience.
Exodus 34. 6.

It is that whereby he expects and waits a long time for repentance; or it
is the most bountiful will of God not suffering his displeasure suddenly to
rise against his creatures offending, Number. 14. 18.
to be avenged of them, Nehem. 9. 17.
but he does warn them before hand, 2 Pet. 3. 9. 15, 20.
lightly correct and seek to turn them unto him. Christ endured Judas till
the last.

Long-suffering is a dilation of revenge though we be provoked. Longan^mity is
toward them of whom we can, patience toward them of whom we can not be revenged.
It is a further degree of patience, patience lengthened out further, Romans 9.
22.

God endures to wonderment, above measure, beyond all expectation.

Reas. 1 That men might not despair, 1 Timothy 6. 16. 2 For his glory. 3 From his
love* a husband will forbear his wife. 4 To leave men without excuse, Genesis 6.
3. and 15. 16. 1 Pet. 3. 20. God cannot properly suffer, for all things are
active in him.

It denounces a woe to all those who despise and abuse the riches of Gods
patience to us, Consectaries from Gods patience and long suffering.
the Apostle calls it treasuring up wrath, that is, as a man lays up something
every day till at last he get a great sum, so thou addest still to thy
damnation; God will so much more severely damn thee, by how much he has dealt
more kindly with thee.

We should glorify God for sparing us so long, and waiting for our repentance;
Posse and noll^ nobile.
we should be like him, slow to anger, patient, not easily provoked, Romans 15.
4. Magistrates, Ministers, and all must be like God, wait for repentance,
Eccles. 8. 11.

It reproves them that hence take liberty to sin, (patience abused turns into
fury) and are the worse for Gods forbearance, Matthew. 24. 48. Luke 12. 45.

Christian patience is that grace of God whereby a man is enabled through
conscience of his duty to God, What patience is.
to bear what evils God shall lay on him, It is a grace of the sanctifying
Spirit of God whereby the soul does freely submit to the will of God in
bearing its own burden without inordinate sorrow or fretting discontent.
and to wait for the promises not yet performed, that is the fruit of faith
and hope.

As by faith we enjoy God, and by love we enjoy our neighbor, so by patience
we enjoy our selves, says a Father.

We had need of patience that our faith may be lively, and our hope continue to
the end. Without patience we can not worship God, believe in him, love him,
pray, hold out, deny our selves, suffer losses, bear reproaches. God will
exercise us with many trials, defer the bestowing of good things, therefore we
have need of patience.

There is a threefold patience, 1 In working, to be able to go through the
difficulties which clog holy duties. 2 In waiting, P^tience is 1. Commanded
Luke 21. 19. Jam 5. 7. 2 It is commended to us by special examp^e^. 1 Of
Christ, Heb. 12. 2. Rev. 1. 9. 2 Of all the Saints, 1 Pet, 2. 20, 21. James 5.
10.
to wait Gods time in fulfilling the promises, Hab. 2. 3. 3 In suffering, when
we quietly submit to the will of God In bearing our own burden, 10 Levit. 3.

A Christian in these suffering times may write this as his Motto, Periissem
nisi periissem.
Sit miser, qui miser esse potest. Let him be miserable that can be miserable,
2 Cor. 4. 8, 9. and 6. 10.

8 God is Holy, the Holy one, Job 6. 10. He is called the holy one of Israel,
There is a twofold holiness; 1 Original, absolute, and essential, in God,
which is the incommunicable eminency of the divine Majesty, exalted above all,
and divided from all other eminences whatsoever. For that which a man takes to
be, and makes an account of as his God, (whether it be such indeed or by him
fancied only) he ascribes unto it, in so doing, a condition of eminency above
and distinct from all other eminencies whatsoever, that is of Holiness, Psalm.
49. 18. Esaias 17. 7. Habak. 1. 12. 2 Derived or relative in the things which are
his, properly called Sacra holy things. Mede on Matthew. 6. 9.
Esaias 41. 20. and 43. 14. that is, Isreal's most eminently and incommunicable
one, or his God. The holy one of Jacob Esaias 49. 23. Holy is his name, Luke 1.
49. I the Lord am holy, and be you holy as I am holy, Psalm 99.

Holiness in the general nature of it is the moral goodness of a thing.

Holiness in man is that virtue whereby he gives and yields himself to
God, in doing all for and to Him, in regard of which, the actions he does are
acceptable to God.

Gods holiness is that excellency of his nature, by which he gives himself
(as I may say) unto himself, doing all for himself, and in all, and by all,
and above all, aiming at his own pleasure and glory; or it is the purity of
his nature, and his abhorring of evil, Exodus 34. 30. Revel. 15. 4. He is holy
without iniquity, Psalm 5. 5, 6. and 145. 17. 1 Samuel 2. 2. Hab. 1. 13. Zeph. 3.
5. the Lord is said to swear by his Holiness, Psalm 89. 35. Amos 4. 2. that
is, by himself.

Holiness is in God, essentially and originally, 1 Samuel 2. 2. he is the
Author of all holiness; all the holiness in Saints or Angels comes from God,
and is a quality in the creature. He is holy of himself, men and Angels are
sanctified by him; his holiness is a substance, in men it is an accident. The
essence of many Angels continues, though their holiness be lost; most men
never had holiness, and the man would remain, though his holiness were lost.

2 Holiness is in him without measure, in the highest degree, man's may be
limited, it is in him immutable and infinite like himself, and cannot be
lessened or augmented.

3 He is holy formally and subjectively, holiness is a conformity to the will
of God; how holy then must he needs be when his nature and will are all one?

4 Objectively he is the object of all holnesse, Our holiness is terminated in
him.
for there is no holiness but what has him for the object.

5 Exemplarly, Exodus 28. 36.
Be ye holy as I am holy, so Christ bids us learn of him for he was meek and
humble.

God is holy in Heaven, holy in earth, holy in hell it self, holy in
glorifying Angels, holy in justifying men, holy in punishing devils, holy in
his Nature, Word, Works, Glorious in holiness, Exodus 15.

Reasons of Gods holiness. Why God must be holy. God has manifested his
holiness, 1. In his word, his precepts.


1 This is the foundation of all his other excellencies; for if he were not
thus taken up with himself, he could not be perfect in wisdom, power,
justice, mercy, neither could he carry himself to the creature as were fit, if
he did not first carry himself to himself as were fit. If a King do not duly
regard himself in his royal authority, 2 By instituting the Sabbath to be
kept holy. Esaias 58. 3.
he can never duly govern his subjects.

2 Else he could not be perfectly happy; whatsoever thing looks to somewhat
without it self, to make it be well and contented, and enjoy it self, 3 By
causing a holy Tabernacle and Temple to be erected wherein were all holy things.
that is but imperfectly happy, because not happy without another. That alone
is capable of perfect blessedness which has all things in and of it self,
without respect to any other thing, by which it enjoyes it self. 4 By
instituting holy Priests. 5 By inflicting his judgments on those which
profane holy things, 2 Samuel 6. 7. and 1 Samuel 6. 19, 20.


God is holy in these particulars:

1 In his will; whatsoever God wills is holy, whether it be his secret will and
purpose, or his revealed will and word.

2 In all his works, Ephesians. 1. He has predestined us to be holy, this is
the end of all his graces to make us like himself; Gods Word will make holy
persons and families.
this is likewise the end of his Ordinances, his Word and Sacraments are to
make us holy, so his works of justice, Christ's death.

3 In his Laws and Commandments, Psalm 19. His Commandments are just and
right, and require holiness of heart, not suffering the least sinful motion,
Thou shall not covet.

Holiness is the beauty of all Gods Attributes, without which his Wisdom
would be but subtilty, Mr. Scudder.
his Justice cruelty, his Sovereignty tyranny, his mercy foolish pity.

This distinguishes him from all Heathen gods which were wicked, Holiness is
(as it were) the Character of Christ Jesus, the Image of God, the beauty, the
strength the riches, the life, the soul of the soul, and of the whole man. It
is a very beam of the Divine light, called therefore by the Apostle the divine
nature.
holiness distinguishes between Angels and devils, Heaven and Hell.

Amongst the Turks, Jews, Indians, Persians, and the Papists themselves at
this day, the most zealous and holiest as they conceive them in their Religion,
are most esteemed and honored, and only in the greater part of the Protestant
Churches, the most knowing and tenacious of the Evangelicall truth, and the
most strict and godly in their lives are hated, nicknamed, disgraced, and
vilified. Sir Simonds D'Ewes primitive practice for preserving truth, Sect. 17.

1 This condemns the Pope, Consectaries from Gods ^olinesse.
who proudly arrogates the Title of the most Qua de re lepida sabula accidisse
narratur in Concilio Tridentino, de quodam Episcopo, quem offendit ille papae
titulus propterea, Nam si Deus inqui^bat tantum sanctus, quomodo ejus vicarius
dici potest sanctissimus? Adiit magnumspericulum ea de causa. Drusius in 15
number. c. 64.
holy, and holiness it self; the high Priest was to be holy, Numb. 16. 7. but
he will be termed most holy.

2 Hypocrites, civil honest men, and profane men, who scoff at purity and
holiness which is Gods excellency; it was the Devils device to bring that
slander on early holiness, A young Saint, an old Devil.

Angelieus juvenis, senibus satanisat in anhis. Erasmus (in his pietas
puerilis) says, that proverb was devised by the devil himself; it is
contrary to that of Solomon, Prove. 22. 6. It was a great commendation of Origin
that he learned the Scripture of a child. Eusebius. The like Paul says of
Timothy, 2 Timothy 3. 15.

3 Confutes merits, the Angels are impure in his sight.

4 We should be holy like God, not in degree, but in resemblance, 1 Pet. 1. 15,
16. we should be holy in our affections, actions. Holiness should be prized
and admired, the Seraphi^s sing one to another Holy, holy, holy, Esaias 6. 3.
They choose this out of all Gods Attributes to praise him for. We should
esspecially think of the holiness of God when we worship him. 17 John 11: 22,
Psalm 3. because then we draw nigh to God.
We should pray to God with pure hearts, worship him holily, John 4. 24. Zach.
14 20, 21. that is, men should be holy in those ordinary natural actions of
eating and drinking.

5 This ministers comfort to the Saints, and assures them that they shall find
favor with him; and is for terror to the unholy which are altogether carried
to themselves, led by themselves, and set up themselves and these things below.
They love that which God lo^thes; God must necessarily hate sin, Levit. 10. 3.
because it is so contrary to him. That he does so, it appears, If we may judge
of the privation by the habits perfection, how great an evil must sin be,
when God is so great a good.
1. In his depriving man of an infinite good, Infinite glory and happiness. 2.
In inflicting on him infinite torments.

6 We should labor after holiness, 1. to go quite out of our selves, and all
creatures, and go wholly as it were unto God, making him the ground, measure
and end of all our actions, striving above all things to know him, esteem him,
and set all our powers upon him. This is the felicity of the creature, (...)
quasi (...) say the E^ymologists, Holy is as much as not earthly.
to be holy as God is holy; this is the felicity of the Saints in Heaven, they
care for nothing but God, are wholly and altogether carried to him and filled
with him. He is all in all unto them, as he is all in all unto himself. In
being thus carried to him, they are united to him and enjoy him and are
blessed. Holiness is a separation both from sin and the world. The will of
God is the rule of holiness, as his nature is the pattern of it. See Acts 13.
22.


9 God is kind, This Attribute of kindness is the same with goodness before
spoken of viz. communicative goodness.
Exodus 34. 7. Keeping kindness for thousands, so it should be rendered; he
spoke of Gods mercy in the sixth verse, see Ephesians. 3. 7. Titus 3. 4. it is
called great kindness, Neh. 9. 17. Mavelous kindness, Psalm 31. 21.
Merciful kindness, Psalm 119. 2. Everlasting kindness, Isa. 54. 8. Excellent
loving kindesse, Psalm 36. 7. Multitude of loving kindness, Isa. 63. 74. We
should show loving kindness unto Christ, and one unto another, 2 Pet. 1. 3. 1
Cor. 13. 4.

Some mention two other virtues

1 Gods jealousy, by which he will have all due glory given to him, and
suffers not the least part of it to be communicated to the creature. This care
of his honor and fame is manifest by the grievous punishments inflicted on
those who have dared to arrogate part of the Divine glory to themselves, Esaias
48. 11. and 42. 8. Exodus 20. 5.
as on the builders, of Babell, Genesis 11. 4. the Bethshemites, 1 Samuel 6. 19
Nebuchadne^ar, Dan. 4. 29, 30. and Herod, Acts 21. 22, 23.

2 His humility, by which God descends to our capacity, and graciously provides
for our weakness, Psalm 113. 5, 6.
examples of which are both Gods familiar conversing and conference with Moses
and Abraham interceding for Sodom, with David and others, and especially the
incarnation of Christ. Genesis 18. 1 Samuel 30. 8.


CHAP. XIV.
SO much be spoken concerning Gods will, God is Omnipotent.
affections, and virtues: 2 Cor. 6. 18.
there follows Power in God, by which God by the bare beck of his will, Revel.
1. 8.
effects all things which he will, and howsoever he will, Luke 18. 28.
perfectly without labor and difficulty, and can do perfectly all things
which he can will; Matthew. 19. 26.
this is called Absolute Matthew. 3 9.
Power, Ephesians. 1. 19.
by which he can do more things then either he does or will. Phil. 3. 21.
Actual Psalm 135. 6. and 115. 3.
power is when God causes those things to exist which he will have exist.

Both Gods Absolute and Actual power is Active Ephesians. 3. 20.
only, and no way Passive.

This power of God is infinite, 1 In se and per se quia idem est cum essentia
divina. Wendelinus.


1 In respect of the Divine essence, since it flows from the infinite nature
of God; for it is a most certain rule, that the faculties and powers of the
Subject flow from the form and agree with the form.

Secondly, in respect of the object Potentia Dei infinita est respectu
objectorum: quia innumera sunt, quae produci ab ea possint. Respectu actionis
infinita est: quia nunqnam effectum producit tam praestantem, quin
praestantiorem possit producere. Wendelinus.
and effects, for God does never so many and so great works, but he can do
more and greater; although we must hold that God can not make a creature of
infinite perfection simply, or creatures indeed infinite in number, for so they
should be Gods; for the Divine power is so far exercised on the object as the
passive power of the object extends it self, but infinite perfection imports a
pure act.

Thirdly, in respect of duration, which is perpetual as his essence is, Luke
1. 37.
therefore this force and power of God is deservedly styled Omnipotency, Job
42. 2. Gods power is not only potentia, or multipotentia, but omnipotentia,
for degree infinite; shall any matter be hard for the Lord?

The Scripture con^irmes the omnipotency of God, Revel. 15. 3.


1 Affirmatively, Omnipotent is often put for God.
when it calls God Abbir, Job 34. 20. Shaddai Alsufficient, Genesis 35. 11. Deuteronomy.
10. 17. Psalm 89. 13. Gibbor powerful, Ruth 1. 20, 21.
Deuteronomy. 10. 17.

2 Effectively, Job 21. 15. and 27 10. and 31. 2.
when it witnesses, that God can do all things, Matthew. 3. 9. and 19. 16.
Mark 14. 36. Luke 18. 26. Ephesians. 3. 20. Hitherto belong all the works of the
divine power and supernatural miracles.

3 Negatively, when it denies any thing to be difficult to him, much less
impossible, Genesis 18. 14. Jer. 32. 17, 27. Luke 1. 37. Matthew. 19. 36.

4 Symbolically, when it gives him a strong right hand, a stretched out arm, 1 Chronicles. 29. 12. Jer. 32. 17. Ephesians. 1. 19.

Reason proves it also.

1 His essence (as was said) is infinite, therefore his power. 2 He is most
perfect, therefore most powerful. 3 Whatsoever good thing is to be found in
any creature, There is strength in Angels, Men, beasts, and all creatures in
their kind, therefore it is much more perfectly and eminently in God from whom
they have it.
the same is perfectly and infinitely in God.
Some observe that this is expressed seventy times in Scripture, that God is
Almighty. He is the only Potentate, 1 Timothy 6. 15. The Psalmist says, Power
belongs to God* the first Article of our faith teaches us to believe that
God is omnipotent.

God can work by weak means, without means, contrary to means.

Gods power is

Essential and Independent, it is the cause of all power, John 19. 8. it
reaches beyond his will, Matthew. 26. 35.

2 It extends to things that are not nor never will be, Power is Gods
originally and p^imarily, all power of all creatures is derived from him, and
continued and ordered by him.
as to raise up children of stones to Abraham, Matthew. 3. 9. to give Christ more
then ten legions of Angels.

The object of Divine power are all things simply and in their own nature
possible, which neither contradict the nature of God, nor the essence of the
creatures; those which are contrary to these are absolutely impossible; such
things God can not do, because he can not will them, nor can he will and do
contrary things, God can do all things, quae ^abent rationem fallibilitatis,
quae contradictionem non implicam.
as good and evil, or contradictory, as to be, and not to be, that a true
thing be false, that any thing while it is should not be; God cannot sin,
lie, deny, change or destroy himself, suffer, he can not, not beget his Son
from eternity: for all these things do ex diametre, oppose the Divine,
Immutable, Simple, most true and perfect essence. Titus 2. 2.
God can not create another God, nor cause a man to be unreasonable, 2 Timothy 2.
13.
nor a body to be infinite and every where, for these things contradict the
essential definitions of a creature, There are impossibilia naturae which
exc^ed natures sphere, as to make a thing of nothing, to raise the dead to
life, these God can do; and impossibilia na^ura, those things which are by
themselves simply impossible. G^d can not will the same thing at the same time
to be and not to be, nor cause that which has been not to be, this would argue
inconstancy. Propterea quaedam non potest, q^ia omnipotens est. There is
impossibility ex part Dei and ex part rei. See Dr. Willet on Genesis 18. 12.
of a man and a body; not to be able to do all these things is not impotency
but power, for to be able to do opposite things is a sign of infirmity, being
not able to remain altogether in one and the same state.

God is therefore omnipotent, because he cannot do these things which argue
impotency, as if I should say the Sun is full of light, it cannot be dark.
Yet it is not so proper a speech to say God can not do these things, as to
say, these are acts too mean, base, and worthless to be effects of Divine
power, Haec non possunt ^ieri, rather then, Deus non potest facere, says
Thomas.

Gods omnipotence lies in this, Matthew 3. 9.
that he is able to do whatsoever is absolutely, simply and generally
possible. A possible things is that, the doing of which may be an effect of
Gods wisdom and power, and which being done would argue power and perfection;
and impossible that which can not be an effect of wisdom and power, but if it
should be done would argue weakness and imperfection in God. 2 In respect of
manner, Psam 148. 5.
he does it with a word, Let there be light, said he, and there was light. 3 He
can do all things of himself without any creatures help. Gods power is
^^iled Might of power. Eph^s. 1. 19. and it is seen in his works of creation,
making all things of nothing, therefore that follows the other in the Creed. 2
In his works of providence. 3 In his Word, Romans 1. 16.

Gods power is limited and restrained.

1 By his nature, he can not contradict himself. 2 Regulated by his will, he
can not do evil. 3 By his glory, he can not lie, he is truth it self, nor be
tempted of evil, Jam 1. 13.
There is a difference between (...) and (...), potentia and p^t^stas* (...) or
potestas is pr^perly authority, right to do a thing, as a King has over his
Subjects, a father over his chil^dren, a husband over his wife, a master over
his servants, of which Christ speaks John 17. ^. Matthew. 28. 18. (...) or potentia
is properly strength to do something, as some great King may have power to
overcome his enemies over which he has no authority. A layman has power to
give Bread and Wine, but he has not potestatem a calling or right to do it.

It serves both for a spur^e to do well, Consectaries from Gods power or
omnipotency. Whatsoever God has promised or uttered, we may be sure shall be
fulfilled. Acts 26. 8. Matthew. 22. 29.
since God is able to save, Genesis 17. 1. and a bridle to restrain from evil,
seeing he has power to destroy, we should therefore humble our selves under
his mighty hand, 1 Pet. 5. 6. Luke 12. 5.

It reproves the wicked which care not for Gods power, but provoke the Almighty
God, Matthew. 10. 28. and so contend with power it self, none shall deliver them
out of his hand, 1 Cor. 10. 22. Ephesians. ^. 20.
and it condemns the godly which distrust the power of God, Prove. 18. 10.
Number. 11. 21. John 21. 32. Remembering not that he has unlimited power. The
Lords Prayer ends thus, For thine is the power.

This ministers comfort to those which have God on their side, John 10. 39.
Romans 8. 38. 2 Timothy 1. 12. This power of God is not idle but creates sustaines,
and governes all things.
they need not fear what man or devil can do against them. He can strengthen
them in spiritual weaknesses against sin, and unto duty, all the devils in
hell are not able to pluck them out of his hands, Matthew. 16. 18. John 10. 28,
29. If a people fall from him he is able to graffe them in again, Esaias 44. 22.
Romans 11. 23. they are kept by his power through faith to salvation, 1 Pet. 1.
5. He can protect them against their enemies, though they be never so many,
Dan. 3. 17. Psalm 3. 6. He can and will make you strong in his power to bear
patiently all afflictions. God is able to raise them up again when they are
rotten in the grave at the general resurrection, Heb. 11. 19.

We should not despise a weak Christian, Of all the Attributes of God, this
only is mentioned in the Creed, I believe in God the Father Almighty, and
sits at the right hand of God the Father Almighty, because our faith is
specially to be fixed on the power of God and Christ.
God is able to make him strong; we should by this strengthen our faith in Gods
promises, as Abraham Romans 4. 22. it is prefixed in the Creed as the prop of our
belief in the Articles of our Christian faith. That Commandment be strong in
Christ and in his power, includes a promise, that he will give us his power, if
we seek to him and rest on him; for it were a very mocking to bid us be strong
in him, if he would not communicate his strong power to us; if we have any
strength either of body or mind to do any thing, we must return to him the
glory of it, and be ruled by him in the use of it, because we have it from him,
and hold it at his mere pleasure. Oh says God to Job can you do this and
that, and then who made the clouds? by which question he would cause Job to see
his own impotency, and Gods omnipotent power.

CHAP. XV.
FRom all these beforementioned Attributes arises the Glory or Majesty of
God, which is the infinite excellency of the Divine essence, Heb. 1. 3. Exodus
33. 18. Psalm 29. 9. This is called the face of God, Exodus 33. 20. and light
inaccessible, 1 Timothy 6. 16. which to acknowledge perfectly belongs to God
alone, yet the revelation and obscurer vision thereof is granted to us in this
life by the ministry of those things which are seen and heard, Esaias 6. 1.
the clearer in the life to come, Ez^k. 1. 28.
where we shall see God face to face, Numb. 12. 8:
1 Cor. 13. 12. Matthew. 18. 10. Exodus 33. 23.


God is and ever shall be exceeding Glorious, Exodus 15. 11. Deuteronomy. 28. 58.

Glory is sometime taken for outward luster and shining, Non perceperunt vim
gloriae qui eam def^^erunt n^titiam claram cum laud; nam si ita se res
haberet, ne ita quidem Deus gloriosus esset, volo dicere praeditus gloria, nam
Latin^^ gloriosus superbus est. Cameron. de Ecclesia. Gloria quasi claria,
says Aquina^ it is the manifestation and shining forth of Excellency. God is
said to glorify himself, when he manifests his unspeakable and
incomprehensible excellency Number. 14. 21. Psalm 72. 19. Levit. 10. 3. Angels and
men glorify him when they extol his greatness and testify their
acknowledgement of his glory, Esaias 6. 3. Psalm 29. 1, 2. Luke 2. 14. Rev. 4. 11.
as one glory of the Sun; sometimes for outward decking and adorning as long
hair is a glory to a woman; but the proper signification of it is, excellent
estimation by which one is preferred before others.

Glory is used metonymically for that which is the ground and matter of glory,
as Prove. 19. 11. and 20. 29. Sometimes the glory of God signifies the very
essence and nature of God, as Exodus 33. 18. Sometimes it is used to signify
some of Gods Attributes, Ephesians. 1. 12. that is, his grace and good will, by
showing forth of which he makes himself glorious. Sometimes it is put for some
work of God which is great and mavelous, John 11. 40. that is, the grace and
powerful work of God in raising up thy brother Lazarus unto life again,
Exodus 25. 16. and 40. 35. that is, some extraordinary splendour, as R. Moses
expounds it, which God created, thereby to show forth his magnificence and
glory.

Glory is taken essentially, as it signifies the nature and attributes of of
God; or else respectively, as it signifies the acknowledgement and celebration
of his Majesty, and this is called properly glorification; this may have more
or less.

Or secondly, much to the same purpose, the glory of God may be taken two ways:

1 For the inward excellency and worth whereby he deserves to be esteemed and
praised.

2 For the actual acknowleding of it, for glory is defined a clear and
manifest knowledge of another excelcellency; therefore the glory of God is
twofold.

First, Internal, which is again twofold.

1 Objective, that glory of God is the excellency of his Divine nature, for
such is his Majesty and excellency, that he is infinitely worthy to be praised,
admired and loved of all.

2 Formal, is his own knowledge, love, and delight in himself; for this is
infinitely more the glory of God, that he is known and beloved of himself,
then that he is loved and praised by all creatures, Men or Angels, because this
argues an infinite worth in Gods own nature, that an infinite love and delight
is satisfied with it

God has this kind of glory objectiv and formal, most fully even from all
eternity; therefore when he is said to make all things for himself or his
glory, it is not meant of this inward glory, as if he could have more of that.

Secondly, External; and that again

1 By way of object, viz. when he made the Heavens and Earth, and all these
glorious creatures here below, which are said to show forth his glory, Psalm
19. that is, objectively, they are the effects of his glorious wisdom^ and
power, and so become objects of men's and Angels praises of him; and as the
glory of men consists in outward ornaments, so Gods glory consists in having
such creatures, men and Angels to be his followers.

2 Formal, when men and Angels do know, love, and obey him, and praise him to
all eternity.

The Scriptures every where extol the Majesty and glory of God.

1 Essentially, when it calls God Great, Most high, Glorious, Acts 7. 2. The God
of glory, King of glory, Psalm 24* 8. Father of glory, Ephesians. 1. 17.

2 Efficaciously, when it affirms that all the earth is full of the glory of
God, Esaias 6. 3. and propounds the glorious and wonderful works of God to be
considered by us, Exodus 32. 18. He means he will show him so much of his glory
as it is possible for a creature to behold and live, we can not behold the
fullness of it.

God is glorious in his nature, 1 Cor. 11. 7. his glory obscureth all other
glory, Esaias* 6. 2. Genesis 18. 17. 1 King. 10. 13.

His glory is manifested

1 Extraordinarily in the cloud, Exodus 16. 10. Ezekiel. 1. 28.
in apparitions and visions.

2 Ordinarily in his word and works. Exodus 9. 15. Fearful in praises, because
Gods Majesty is so excellent, that even with trembling we are to praise him,
but especially because he works such mira^ulous deliverances and shows his
terrible power.
The Law sets forth the glory of his justice, and the Gospel that of his
mercy, 2 Cor. 3. 8. it is called his glorious Gospel, Luke 2. 14.

All his works set forth his glory, both those of creation and preservation or
providence, Psalm 19. the whole creation must needs show forth his glorious
power and wisdom, the souud is said to go over all the world, that is, al^
creatures must needs gather, that if the Heavens be such glorious Heavens, the
Sun so glorious a Sun, how much more must that God be a glorious God who is
the author and worker of them.

God is glorious in all his works upon the hearts of believers, he puts a
glory upon them, so that in this sense he is effectually glorious, Ephesians. 5. a
glorious Church, and Psalm 43. The Kings daughter is all glorious within; this
glory is grace when God makes one holy, heavenly-minded, meek, zealous;
hereafter we shall have glorious bodies and souls.

God made all things for his glory, for of him and to him are all things, Romans
11. All the unreasonable creatures are for Gods glory.

1 In that they are serviceable to man, for herein God is glorified in that
they can accomplish those ends for which they were made, and that is for man,
Genesis 1. the Sun and Stars are for him as well as creeping things; these
creatures are for a twofold use.

1 To give him habitation and to be means of his corporeal life.

2 To be continual quickners of him, to praise Gods glorious power and
wisdom; God is said Acts 4. not to leave himself without witness; the
reasonable creatures are made chiefly for his glory, because they know and love
him.

That God is Glorious appears

1 God has made many of his creatures glorious, Dan. 10. 8. so there is one
glory of the Sun, another of the Moon; the King clad with gorgeous attire,
and being arrayed with the Ensigns of his Sovereignty is glorious, so Solomon.

2 This glory shall continue for ever because God has it from himself, and
derived it not from another. He is a perfect being, independent, all things are
under him; the inferior can not work without the superior.

There is a double glory in things.

1 Inherent in themselves, Salomons glory was in part visible, the shining of
his Throne, his glittering apparel, but his wisdom and understanding were
not; God perceives his own glory, and that it shall continue for ever; the
Apostle beheld the glory of Christ as of the only begotten Son.
which is partly visible as that of the Sun; partly intelligible, an
excellency in a thing which affects the understanding.

2 From without, given by others; so there is a kind of glory and excellency
in some precious stones which affect a man with a kind of wondering; so in an
Angel a great shining, as in that which appeared to Zachary; so in the vision
that Paul saw, and when God appeared to Moses.

There is an inward glory standing in being worthy of highest esteem, and an
outward glory standing in being highly accounted of; God is worthy to be
esteemed above all, and is so by the holy.

The chiefest and highest cause of any benefit showed to us, is not our selves,
but the name of God, even his glory, and the clear declaration of his own
excellencies, Ezekiel. 20 9. 14. 22. Psalm 25. 1. Ezekiel. 36. 22.

Reas. 1 The thing which induced God to make all things, must needs be the
cause of all other benefits bestowed after the creation; now he made all things
for himself and his own name; for neither had they any being, nor could they
have any before, and therefore could not be any moving cause to their own
creation, therefore neither to do any other thing.

2 All creatures are nothing, and less then nothing in comparison of God,
therefore he could not by them be moved to work any thing, but does it for his
own names sake. Things mean and triflng are not fit to be the highest end of
an excellent work. God is most high and glorious, and all creatures are less
then nothing before him, therefore himself must be moved by himself, not by
them chiefly to do any thing for them. For as God has no efficient,
material; or formal cause at all, but is to himself instead of all these,
because he is of himself, so neither can he have any final cause but
himself. For if he have any other end then himself, that is, his own glory,
he were some way dependent upon some other thing which is impossible.

If it be objected, how is it said then, that God does this or that for
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacobs sake, as often Moses presses him in his prayers.
The answer is, he looks upon them still in subordination to his own name, so
that they are motives but in reference to his name, and no otherwise. He
glorifieth himself, and aims at his own glory, in keeping covenant and
promise with them.

Gods glory is the end of predestination, both reprobation, Prove. 16. 1. and
election, Ephesians. 1. 5, 6. of the creation and administration of all things,
Romans 11. 36. of all benefits obtained in Christ, 2 Cor. 1. 20. and should be of
all our actions, 1 Cor 10. 35.

Quest. Whether the infinite glory which God has as God, be communicated to
Christ's humane nature.

Answ. That being a creature can not have that glory which is due to the
Creator. It is true Christ is infinitely to be glorified, because he is God and
man, but not therefore his humane nature. Our Divines distinguish between a
glory merely divine, and a Mediators glory, which is next to divine, far above
all creatures.

Ob. Christ prayed for the glory which he had before the beginning. John 17. 5.


Sol. Christ had it in decree and predestination, and that was not Gods
essential glory, which is a property, for he requires he may have it now,
which could not be if he had it from eternity.

We glorify God not by putting any excellency into him, but by taking notice
of his excellency, and esteeming him accordingly, and making manifest this our
high esteem of him. There is a twofold glory.

1 Essential, infinite, everlasting; this is called gloria, it receives
neither addition nor diminution by any created power.

2 Accidental, finite, temporary, called glorificatio; this ebs or flows,
shines, or is overshadowed, as goodness or gracelesnesse prevails in the
world.

It serves

1 To show the vileness and baseness of all wicked men which oppose Gods
glory, Consectaries from Gods glory.
and strive to obscure it, dishonor this glorious God, setting light by him in
their hearts, and blaspheming him with their tongues; a sinner in sinning lifts
up himself above God, preferring his own wisdom before Gods, and his will
before his; therefore David worthily concludes the 104 Psalm with an
imprecation against sinners, God will gain glory of them in despite of their
hearts by magnifying his justice.

2 We should labor to partake of Gods Image, that we might be partakers of his
glory; we must earnestly desire that Gods glory may be communicated to us, that
he would send forth his Spirit of glory to rest upon us, by which means we
shall commend our selves to God, Christ, the Angels and Saints, and our own
consciences.

3 We must learn to contemplate the glory of God with admiration; by this one
principally differs from a beast. He has not a capacity to behold the
excellency of God, Those that do not take notice of Gods name* lose the chief
fruit of his works.
the Saints in Heaven are even taken up and filled with beholding Gods glory;
set your eyes round about to behold Gods works and his glory in them, so as
you may admire God, this will make your souls to enjoy God. Paul says, In the
mystery of the Gospel we behold as in a glass the glory of God; be much in
this exercise.

4 We must long to go out of this world to behold Gods glory It is said of
Fulgentius when he came out of Africa to Rome, that he said, Quantum fulget
C^lestis Hierosolyma, cum adeo splendet ^^^estris Roma?
fully, Jobn 17. 24. raise up your hearts to heavenly desires, wish earnestly
to be in Heaven. Every one would be willing to go to Heaven when he dies, but
we must desire to leave this life to go thither.

5 This should comfort us

1 Against reproaches and contempt in the world; It is a comfort to Gods people
when they go to him for any favor: Let them not be out of heart because they
find nothing in themselves upon which to ground their prayers or faith. There
is enough in his own Name, the Lord does not look upon any thing in us, but
upon himself for argument of doing good to us. His name is the more magnified
by how much we are more vile.
if God be glorified, we must sacrifice our names as well as our lives to him.

2 Against death, then we shall no more dishonor God.

3 The day of judgment should be longed for, because it is Gods glorious day,
2 Thessalonians. 1. 10. we run to glorious sights on earth, as the Queen of Sheba.

6 We should ascribe all glory to God, the fountain of glory, We should
ascribe unto his Name all the mercies we enjoy, giving all the praise from our
selves wholly to him. God for his Names sake has made and redeemed us.
1 Chronicles. 29. 11, 12. Psalm 115. 1. God challenges this from men, Give unto
the Lord glory and strength, give unto the Lord the glory due to his name. He
is very jealous of his glory, and will not suffer the least part of it to be
given to the creature.

7 Take heed of those Tenets which oppose Gods glory, as

1 The lawfulness of giving religious honor to images; the Popish Doctors
have wearied themselves and wracked their brains to coin distinctions, how
divine worship may be given to Images, but the second Commandment forbids
Imageworshipping, and God acknowledges himself a jealous God, and says he
will not give his glory to another.

2 Attributing too much to our free will or setting up our merits, Hereby we
may judge which is the true Religion, what Doctrine is sound, pure, and of God,
and what corrupt and from men. That Doctrine which sets forth the praise of
God comes from Heaven, but that which is from men advances the power, pride,
and merit of man.
this is robbing God likewise of his glory.

Let us first live to his glory, and do all for his glory: 1. Because he
intended it. 2. He has joined our happiness and his glory together. 3. It is
infinitely more worth then all the world. 4. It is his condescending, that he
will take this for glory. 5. He will have glory of us against our wills. 6. The
Creatures glorify God in their way. 7. How much glory do we give to things of
an inferior nature? 8. God will hereby give us glory.

We should do all we do for him and to him, John 7. 18. Ephesians. 1. 6. and 2.
4. Romans 3. 21.
even to show forth our apprehension of his name. Doing whatsoever good we do,
and leaving whatsoever evil we leave, that we may declare our high esteem of
him, and make it appear that we do judge and repute him most wise, good,
just, excellent, worthy all the service that we can do, and more too. And
whatsoever is not thus done with reference to the name Duobus modis refer^i
aliquid ad Dei gloriam dicitur. Primum formaliter and explicit, quando aliquis
cogitat cum animo, hoc sibi agendum esse, quia nomini divino sit glori^sum.
Deinde virtualiter and implicit, cum quis divinae studens gloriae eoque nihil
facere decernens, nisi quod legi congruat, and ad hoc gratiam Dei quotidie
exposcens, boni quippiam facit, de universali fine actu non cogitans; sed solum
particularis finis bonum intendens. Voss^us in Thesibus. Though we can not
actually intend Gods glory always in every thing, yet we should virtually.
of God as the motive and end of it, does want so much of goodness as it wants
of this reference. Nothing is good farther then it has reference to God the
chief good. If we aim only or chiefly and be moved only or chiefly by
temporal benefits and respects of this kind, looking to our selves, our deeds
are hollow and seemingly good alone, not real. If we look to our selves alone
even in respect of eternal benefits, and not above our selves to him and to
his name, that also is but hypocrisy. But this is truth to make our ends and
motives the same with Gods, and to have an eye still above and beyond our
selves, even to Gods name, that we may cause it to appear to him and our
selves and others, that we know and confess his great name. Omnibus operibus
nostris coelestis intentio adjungi debet, Aquinas.

God glorified himself, John 12. 28. Christ glorified him, his whole life was
nothing but a seeking of his Fathers glory, John 17. 4, the Saints and Angels
spend eternity in setting forth his glory, Esaias 6 23. Reu. 4. 10, 11. and 7. 9,
10. all the creatures do glorify God in their kind, Psalm 145. 10. and 148.
the worm is not exempted, therefore that man (says Chrysostom) which does
not glorify God, is baser then the basest worm. This is all the first table
of the Decalogue, and above half of the Lords prayer. The three first
Petitions concern Gods glory, and the conclusion likewise has reference to
it. We should glorify God in all conditions, in adversity as well as in
prosperity, Psalm 50. 15. in all the parts of our bodies in our hearts, To
glorify is to manifest ones excellency as appears John 17. 4. compared with
verse 6. See of glorifying God, Church his miscelanies, p. 11. to 18.
1 Pet. 3. 15. with our mouths, Romans 15, 6. in our lives, 1 Cor. 6. ult.
Matthew. 5. 16.

Let us often think of the personal glory and excellency which the Saints
shall enjoy when they come to Heaven.

1 In Body. 2 In Soul.

The bodies of the Saints in Heaven shall be

1 Perfect, free from all blemishes and every way fit for the souls use.

2 Incorruptible, not liable to sickness, weakness, 1 Cor. 15. 42, 43.
mortality.

3 Spiritual, 1 In regard of state and condition, because they shall be upheld
by the Spirit of God, without the use of meat, drink, and sleep. 2 In regard
of quality and operation, active and agile as a Spirit, they shall move swiftly
upward, downward, any way at the command of the soul.

4 Glorious, the bodies of the Saints shall then shine as the Sun, and be like
the glorious body of Christ.

The soul shall 1. be totally freed from all Spiritual evils, There is (say
the Schools) beatitudo objectiva, so whatever is the chiefest good of the
soul is the souls blessedness.
all relics of sin, and all possibility of sin; the corruption of the
understanding, will affections, conscience, shall be quite taken away. 2 From
all apprehensions of wrath and eternal death.

2 It shall perfectly enjoy all Spiritual good* 1 The Image of God shall be
absolutely perfect in every one of the glorified Saints, Every faculty of the
soul shall have all grace that faculty is capable of, 2 Formalis, when the
soul and its beatifying object are united, as the fruition of God.
and that in the highest degree. The mind shall have all intellectual virtues,
the will and affections all moral virtues, and that in the highest degree they
are capable of 1 Cor. 13. 10. The understanding uno intiuitu shall know omne
seibile, the will shall be fully satisfied with God, the conscience filled with
peace, The soul is here united to God remorely and imperfectly, there
immediately and perfectly. 2 Samuel, 22. 47. 1 Kings 1. 48. Paul intitleth him,
God blessed for ever, the only blessed Potentate*
the affections of love and joy shall have their full content, the memory shall
represent to you perpe^ually all the good that ever God did for you.

God is most Blessed, 1 Cor. 11. 31. Romans 9. 4. 1 Timothy 1. 11. and 6. 15. 2 Cor.
11. 31. yea blessedness it self, he is blessed in himself, and to be blessed
by us.

Gods Blessedness is that by which God is in himself, and of himself
All-sufficient. Or thus, Gods happiness is that Attribute whereby God has all
fullness of delight and contentment in himself, and needs nothing out of
himself to make him happy.

The Hebrews call blessed Ashrei in the abstract, and in the plural number,
Vide Amesium Psalm 1. 1.
Blessednesses, Psalm. 1. 1. and 32. 1. Because no man (says Zanchy) can be
called and be blessed for one or another good, unless he abound with all
goods. Blessedness is a state of life wherein there is a heap Beatitudo
status est omnium bonorum aggregatione perfectus Boethius de consol. Phil.
of all good things. The Greeks called blessed (...), one that is not subject
to death, miseries. By the etymologies and significations of these two words,
it appears (says Zanchy) that there are two parts of blessedness, one to be
free from all miseries, another to abound with all goods, and so to abound with
them that thou desire nothing more. A third particle (says he) is to be
added per se and sua natura, and a fourth condition that he well know his own
blessedness. So that he is truly blessed (says Zanchy) which of himself and
from his own nature is always free from all evils and abounds with all goods,
1 Timothy 6. 15.
perfectly knowing his own felicity and desiring nothing out of himself, but
being fully content with himself, which description agrees only to God.

God is blessed essentially, primarily, originally, of himself such, and not
by the help of any other thing.

Reasons.

1 He that is the fountain He that is the cause of all welfare to other
things, and makes them in their several kinds happy, he must needs be
therefore most happy himself. God is the au^^our of all blessedness, Psalm
132. 1, 2.
of all blessedness to others, how can he be but infinitely blessed himself.
He makes all those things happy to whom he vouchsafes in any sort to
communicate himself. Wherefore as that which makes hot and light, that is
more hot and light then that which is made so; so must he exceed all other
things in blessedness, which makes all those persons blessed which have any
part of bliss.

2 Either he has blessedness or there should be none; for if it be not found
in the first and best essence and cause of all other essences, it can not be
found in any other thing. All men and things affect it, therefore such a
natural and universal inclination can not be wholly in vain, as it should be
if there were no blessedness to satisfy it. The happiness of every thing
stands in the perfect enjoying of it self, when it has all which it inclines
to have, and inclines to have all and only that which it has, then it is
fully satisfied and contented, and full contentment is felicity. Goodness
fills the reasonable appetite of man's soul, therefore must he needs be happy
whose will is filled with good, for then he enjoyes himself, then is his being
truly comfortable to him, and such as he cannot be weary of. Nothing is happy
in enjoying it self and of it self, but God alone; all other things do enjoy
themselves by help and benefit of some other things besides themselves. And if
they enjoy themselves by help, favor, and communication of a perfect,
lasting, constant, eternal and full goodness, then have they a real, solid,
and substantial happiness; but if by a vain, short, momentany, partial,
defective goodness, then have they but a show and resemblance of happiness, a
poor, weak, feeble, imperfect, nominall happiness. The happiness of a man
consists in enjoying himself by virtue of the possession of the greatest good,
whereof he is capable, or which is all one, by enjoying the greatest good; for
enjoying it he enjoyes himself in and by it; and enjoying himself by it, he
does enjoy it, these are inseparably conjoined. So when a man is possessed of
such a thing as does remove from him all that may be discontentfull and
hurtful to him, and can fill him full of content, then is he happy, and that
is when he has possession of God as fully as his nature is capable of
possessing him. Accordingly we must conceive Gods happiness to be in the
enjoyment of himself; he does perfectly enjoy his being, his life, his
faculties, his Attributes, his virtues. I say himself in himself and of
himself does perfectly enjoy himself, and this is his perfect happiness. He
lives a most perfect life, abounds with all perfect virtues, sets them a work
himself in all fullness of perfection, and in all this enjoyes himself with
unconceivable satisfaction.

Blessedness or felicity is the perfect action or exercise of perfect
Aristotle.
virtue in a perfect life. The Lord has a most perfect life, and perfect
faculties, and also most perfect virtues, and does constantly exercise those
perfect virtues and faculties. He is blessed because he is strong, and enjoyes
his strength, wise and enjoyes his wisdom, just and enjoyes his justice,
eternal and enjoyes his eternity, Infinite, Perfect, and that without any
dependence, reference or beholdingness to any other.

God is Happy.

1 Formally in himself, which implies 1. that there is no evil of sin or
misery in him, neither is he less happy because men offend him. Secondly, that
he abounds with all positive good, he has infinitely himself and after a
transcendent manner the good of all creatures; this is implied in that name,
when he is called a God All-sufficient; he made not the Angels or the world
because he needed them.

3. That he is immutably happy because he is essentially so. Happiness is a
stable or settled condition; therefore Saints and Angels also are happy but
dependently, they have it from God.

Gods happiness is more then the happiness of any creature. The creatures are
happy by the aggregation of many good things together, they are happy in their
knowledge, in their love, joy, and these are diverse things; but now God is
happy by one act which is the same with his essence. A man here on earth is
happy, but it is not in Act always, it is sometimes in habit.

2 Those Acts by which Angels are happy are successive, they have one act of
understanding, Happiness is taken two ways. 1 Octjectively, for the object
wherein one is happy, as Gods infinite essence is the object both of Gods,
Angels, and men's happiness. 2 Formally, for those acts whereby we possess
that object. God is happy formally, because he knows, loves, and enjoys
himself; therefore it is said, our goodness extends not to him; so Angels
and men are formally happy, when they know and enjoy God.
one of love, one of joy after another; but Gods happiness can be no more
multiplied then his very nature or being can.

3. He is happy effectively, he makes his children happy, Deuteronomy. 28. 3. Happy
are the people whose God is the Lord. He can bless the conscience with peace
though Hell and devils rage, the soul with grace, he is the author of all
blessedness, all the blessedness in Heaven is from him.

4. He is objectively blessed, God the only object and good thing, which if a
man have, he must needs be blessed.

God is also to be blessed by us, which blessing adds nothing to his
blessedness, but is therefore required of us that we may somewhat enjoy his
blessedness. The reasonable creature ought to bless God, that is, to observe
and know his blessedness, and for to do two things to him.

1 To applaude it. 2 To express and acknowledge it.
In Scripture Phrase to bless signifies two things.

1 To praise a person for those things which are praiseworthy in him, as Gods
name is said to be above all blessing and praise, Bless the Lord O my soul,
and all that is within me bless his holy Name.

2 To wish well to it, that my soul may bless thee before it die, pronounce
and wish thee blessed. We cannot pronounce any blessing upon God, We should
praise God, 1. Intensive Psalm 36. 10. and 103. 1. 3. Extensive, with all
praise, Psalm 9. 14. and for all mercies, Psalm 71. 7, 8.
nor bestow any benefit upon him. He is too excellent to receive any thing by
way of promise or performance from us, but we must perform these two things,
viz. wish well to him, speak well of him. Wish well to him, that is,
acknowledge his exceeding happiness, and will that he may be ever what he is,
as we know he ever will be. For to wish a thing continue being that is, is
possible, and to will Gods eternal, blessed, and glorious being, that is one of
the most excellent acts of the creature, and in doing so we bless God so much
as a creature can bless him.

Perfect happiness is not to be had here, Dicique beatus a^te obitum nemo
supremaque funera possit.
but so much happiness as can be had here is to be had in him, he can give
himself to those which seek him in some degrees, and then are they in some
degrees happy; he can give himself to them in the highest degree, and then
they are in the highest degree happy, according as he does communicate himself
to us more or less, so are we more or less happy.

1 We have little mind to wish well to God, Consectaries from Gods Blessedness.
or rejoice in his welfare, or to acknowledge and speak of it.

2 We should stir up our selves to bless God, and say, how blessed art thou,
and blessed by thy Name. We should set our minds and our tongues aworke to set
forth to our selves and others his exceeding great excellencies. When we see
and know excellent abilities in any man, we cannot but be often talking with our
selves and others of his great worth: so we seeing and knowing the
infiniteness of God must be often telling our selves and others what we do
know by him, thereby to stir up our selves and others more and more to know
him, and we must declare before the Lord his goodness, and his loving
kindness to the sons of men.

3 We must learn to seek happiness where it is, even in God, and in his
favorable vouchsafing to be ours, and to give himself to us. It is not
possible for the creature to be happy and enjoy it self, unless it enjoy the
best and greatest good, whereof it is capable, and which will fully satisfy
all the longings and inclinations of it. We should 1. see our misery, that
being alienated from God must needs be miserable till this estrangement be
removed. 2 Set our selves to get true blessedness by regaining this union and
communion with God the fountain of all bliss, The happiness of man consists
in the enjoying of God.
and hate sin which only separates between God and us, and hinders us from
enjoying the Blessed God. 3 We should place all our happiness in him, All
other things are no otherwise means of happiness or helps to it, then as we
see and taste God in them. We must account our selves happy in this thing wholly
and only in that God is ours. Happiness is the enjoyment of good commens^^ate
to our desires.
and in him alone, for he is not only the chief but the sole happiness; we
should use the world, but enjoy him, Psalm 16. 11. we should use the means
which may bring blessedness, Psalm 1. 1. Matthew. 5. 3, to 12. if we live holily
we may look for happiness. All the promises in the Scripture belong to godly
men, they shall be blessed here and hereafter who serve God in sincerity. We
must expect and look for happiness only in our union with and fruition of
him. Austin alleges out of Varro 288 several opinions of Philosophers
concerning felicity. Blessedness is the enjoying of the Sovereign Good, now
what that is, we must judge by these two Characters Bish. Lake.
, it must be 1. Optimum the best, otherwise it will not sistere appetitum give
us content, we will be ever longing. 2. Maximum the most complete, otherwise it
will not implere appetitum, we shall not be satisfied therewith; God is Optimus
Maximus. Happiness it the sum of all our desires, and the aim of all our
endeavors.

Perfect Blessedness consists in the immediate Man in the state of
blessedness can not see God absolutely as he is in himself; for that which is
Infinite can not be comprehended of that which is limited. Visio beatifica est
cognitio non comprehensiva sed quidditativa. But God does manifest himself so
far forth as a creatu^e is able to know him* As a vessel may be filled with
the water of the Sea, but it can not contain all the water in the Sea. The
Apostle says, we shall know God even as he also is known. But as is not a
note of equality, but of likeness. As God knows me after a manner agreeable
to his infinite excellency, so shall I know God according to my capacity.
fruition of the chief, perfect, and all-sufficient good, even God himself.
The good to be de^ired simply for it self is God only, who being the first
cause of all things, the first, essential, eternal, infinite, unchangeable
and only good, must needs be the chief good, and therefore the last end
intended by man, given by God, who being not only desired but enjoyed, of
necessity must fully satisfy the soul that it can go no further, not only
because the subject is infinite, and so the mind can desire to know no more,
but also because fullness of all good that can be wished is to be found in God.
Therefore our happiness is complete and perfect when we enjoy God as an object
wherein the powers of the soul are satisfied with everlasting delight.

This may suffice to have spoken concerning Gods Essence and Attributes, by
which it appears, that God is far different both from all feigned Gods, and
from all creatures. The consideration of the Divine persons follows, for in
one most simple nature of God there are distinct persons.

CHAP. XVI.
Of the Trinity The Word ^ssence or Trinity are not found in Scripture, but
Essence is duly derived thence; for seeing God says that he is, Essence is
fitly ascribed to him. Trinity has a sufficient ground, there are three that
bear witness in Heaven, 1 John 5. 7. The word person is extant, Heb. 1. 3.
therefore these words are rightly used in the Church.
or distinction of Persons in the Divine Essence.
WE cannot by the light of nature know the mystery of the Trinity, nor the
incarnation of Jesus Christ. But when by faith we receive this doctrine we may
illustrate it by reason. The similies which the Schoolmen and other Divines
bring drawn from the creature, are unequal and unsatisfactory, since there can
be no proportion between things Finite and Infinite.

Two resemblances are much used in Scripture, the Light and the word. The Light
which was three days before the Sun, Genesis 1. and then condensed into that
glorious body, and ever since diffused throughout the world, is all one and the
same light. So the Father of lights which inhabiteth light which none can
approach, Jam. 1. 17. and the Sun of righteousness, Mal. 4. 2. in whom all
the fullness of the Godhead dwells bodily, Ephesians. 1. 17, 18.
and the holy Ghost the Spirit of illumination are all one and the same God.

Again, it is the same thing that the mind thinks, and the word signifies,
and the voice utters: so is the Father as the mind conceiving, the Son as
the word conceived or begotten, the holy Ghost as the voice or speech uttered
and imparted to all hearers; and all one and the same God.

A studious Father meditating on the mystery of the Trinity, there appeared
unto him a child with a shell lading the Sea into a little hole; he demanding
what the child did, I intend, said the child, Par on Romans 11. 23.
to empty the Ocean into this pit. It is impossible, said the Father; as
possible, said the child, as for thee to comprehend this profound mystery in
thy shallow capacity.

The mystery of the Trinity is necessary to be known and believed of all that
shall be saved; it was not so plainly revealed to the Jews of old, as it is to
us in the new Testament, a perfect and full knowledge of this mystery is not
attainable in this life.

Although Trinity in its native signification signify the number of any three
things, Exodus 33. 20. 1 Cor. 13. 9.
yet by Ecclesiastical custom it is limited to signify the three Si recte
dicuntur tres Elohim, etiam recte dici possit tres Dii; nam Elohim Latin sonat
Dii vel Deu^, Drusius de quaefi^^s per Epistolam. Epist. 6^. Sic concidit
gravis querela and expostulatio viri D^cti adversus libri cujusdam titulu, De
tribus Elohim. Non n. voluit author libri illius voce Elohim proprie
significare Personas, ac proinde tot esse Elohim quot fides Christiana agnoscit
esse personas in Divinis, cum Scriptura aperie contra flet, que ^estatur Deum
nostrum esse Deum unum. Non ^ic erravit, aut cecutiit doctus ille Theologus, ut
diceret and doceres Tres esse, prop^ie loquendo, Elohim. Sed quoniam vocis
illius terminatione plurali Scriptura innuere voluit S. S. Trinitatis
mysterium, ipse huc resciciem and eo vol^s in libri (quem de S. S. Trinitate
scribebat) titul^ alludere catach^esi non infrequenti, sed ^^ainaria. Capel.
Davidis Lyra.
Persons in the Trinity. This is not meant as if the Essence did consist of
three Persons as so many parts; and therefore there is a great difference
between Trinity and Triplicity. Trinity is when the same Essence has diverse
ways of subsisting; and Triplicity is when one thing is compounded of three as
parts, they are three not in respect of Essence or Divine attributes, three
Eternals, but three in respect of personal properties, as the Father is of
none, the Son of the Father, and the holy Ghost of both; three Persons but
one God, as to be, to be true, to be good, are all one, because Transcendents.

Opera Trinitatis ad extra sunt indivisa, the outward works which concern the
creature, belong to one person as well as the other, as to create, govern; but
opera ad intra sunt divisa, the personal properties or internal works are
distinguished, as the Father begets, the Son is begotten of the Father, and
the holy Ghost proceeds from the Father and the Son.

There is in the Trinity alius and alius, another and another, but not aliud
and aliud, another thing and another thing, as there is in Christ; the Father
is another person from the Son, but yet there is the same nature and Essence
of them all. They differ not in their natures as three men or three Angels
differ, for they differ so as one may be without the other; but now the Father
is not without the Son, nor the Son without the Father, so that there is
the same numericall Essence.

The Father in some sense is said to be the only God, John 17. 3. that is,
besides the Divine nature which is common to the three persons, there is not
another God to be found, the word (alone) is opposed to all feigned Gods, to
every thing which is not of this Divine nature; so when it is said, None
knows the Father but the Son, and the Son but the Father, that excludes
not the Holy Ghost which searches the hidden things of God, but all which are
not of that Essence.

Though there be no inequality in the persons, yet there is an order, not of
dignity but of beginning Matthew. 28. 19. John 5. 26, 27. The Father is the
fountain and original of all the Deity, and the cause of the Son, which the
very wo^d Father signifies; therefore he is said to be unbegotten; and hence
the name God is often pecul^arly and by an excellency given to the Father in
Scripture.
. The Father in the Son by the holy Ghost made the world, not as if there
were so many partial causes, much less as if God the Father were the
Principal and these Isntrumental, but only mere order. Persona divina est
essentiae divinae subsistentia incommunicablis. Wendelinus. The Essence
considered with the manner of subsisting is called a Person.

A Person is such a subsistence in the Divine nature, as is distinguished from
every other thing by some special or personal property, or else it is the
Godhead restrained with his personal property. Or it is a different manner of
subsisting in the Godhead, as the nature of man does diversely subsist in Peter,
JAmes, John, but these are not all one. It differs from the essence as the
manner of the thing from the thing it self, and not as one thing from another;
one person is distinguished from another by its personal property, and by its
manner of working.

The personal property of the Father is to beget, that is, not to multiply his
substance by production, but to communicate his substance to the same. The
Son is said to be begotten, that is, to have the whole substance from the
Father by communication. Psalm 2. 17. proves that the Father begets, and the
Son is begotten of the Father. Galat. 4. 6. See John 15. 26. and 14. 26. Haec
est differentia inter essentiam divinam and personam divinam; Essentia divina
est communu pluribus divinitatis personis. Persona autem una alteri non est
communicabilis. Vnde Pater non est Filius nec Filius Pater 2 Essentia divina
est una, Personae plures. Wendelinus.
The Holy ghost is said to proceed or to be breathed forth, to receive his
substance by proceeding from the Father and the Son jointly; in regard of
which he is called the Spirit of the Father, and the Spirit of the Son both,
Gal. 4. 6. The Father only begets, the Son only is begotten, and the
holy Ghost only proceeds; both procession and generation are ineffable. In
the manner of working they differ, for the Father works of himself, by the
Son, and through the holy Ghost; the Son works from the Father by the
Holy Ghost; the holy Ghost works from the Father and the Son by himself.
There is so one God, as that there are three persons or diverse manners of being
in that one Godhead, the Father, Son, and the holy Ghost.

1 Whatsoever absolutely agrees to the Divine nature, that does agree likewise
to every person of the Trinity.

2 Every person has not a part, but the whole Deity in it self.

A person is one entire, Persona est individuum subsistens, vivum, intelligens,
in communicabile, non sustentatum ab alio, nec pars alterius.
distinct subsistence, having life, understanding, will and power, by which he
is in continual operation.

These things are required to a person

1 That it be a substance; for accidents are not persons, they inhere in
another thing, a person must subsist.

2 A lively and intelligent substance endued with reason and will; an house is
not a person, nor a stone, or beast.

3 Determinate and singular, for mankind is not a person; but John and Peter.

4 Incommunicable, Persona igitur non est ^ssentia quae pluribus est
communicabilis. Personae vox non hic sig^sicat ossicium aut rel^tionem (ut
persona principis) vel vultum and visibilem speciem, gestum, vel formam
alterius representamem ut Personae in drammate, sed modum quo essentia divina
subsistit.
it can not be given to another; hence the nature of man is not a person,
because it is communicable to every particular man; but every particular man is
a person, because that nature which he has in particular, can not be
communirated to another.

5 Not sustained by another, therefore the humane nature of Christ is not a
person, because it is sustained by his Deity.

6 It must not be the part of another; therefore the reasonable soul which is
a part of man, is not a person.

That there are three persons in the Deity, viz. Father, Son, and holy Ghost,
is manifest by express testimonies of Scripture, Genes. 1. 1. Gods created,
and v. 26. Psalm 33. 6. there three are named, the Word, the Lord, and the
Spirit. Esaias 6.3. Holy, Holy, Holy.

But this truth is most clearly taught in the new Testament. Matthew. 3. 16.
Quinescis Tri^^tem, ito ad Jordanem.
Luke 3. 22. The first person in the Trinity utters his voice from Heaven, This
is my beloved Son; the Son is baptized in Jordan, the holy Ghost descends
in the shape of a Dove upon Christ. Pater auditur in voce, Filius manifestatur
in homine, Spiritus Sanctus dignoscitur in columba. Aug. tract. 6. in Joh.

Add to this the History of Christ's transfiguration, described Matthew. 17. 5.
Mark 9. 7. Luke 9. 35. In which likewise the voice of the Father was heard
from Heaven, This is my beloved Son, the Son is transfigured, the Holy
Ghost manifests himself in a bright cloud.

Matthew. 28. 19. The Apostles are commanded to baptize in the Name of Father,
Son, and holy Ghost Cameron thinks that is the most evident place to prove
the Trinity. But that is as ^pposite a place as any for this purpose, 1 John 5.
7. For there are ^hree that bear record in Heaven, the Father, the Word, See
John 15. 26.
and the Holy Ghost. The Arrians wiped this place out of many books. 2 Cor.
13. 14. The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ and the love of God, and the
communion of the holy Ghost be with you all.

The Arrians, Samosatenians, Sabellians, Photinians, and others deny the
Trinity of persons in one essence of God. The Heretics that are
Antitrinitarians. See John 8. 58. Psalm 2. 12.
Servetus a Spaniard was burnt at Geneva in Calvin's time; he denied that Christ
was Gods Son till Mary bore him. Servetus Trinitatem idolum, item Cerberum
Tricipitem vocabat. See Mr Cbeynels rise of Socinianisme. chapter 1. p. 6.

Socinus calls him Deum tripersonatum, Paulus Samosetanus, more fitly.
Semisathanas, held Christ was but a mere man. Matthew. 6. 6.
ridiculum humanae curiositatis inventum. Infaustus Socinus omnium haereticorum
audacissimus, says Rivet. See Cheynels rise of Socinianisme, Chap. 3.

That the Father is God, is confessed by all, and it is manifest from
Scripture, we are directed to pray to him. The Apostle says, See Acts 4, 24.
25, 26, 27. and John 8. 54.
Grace to you, and peace from God our Father, Philem. v. 3.

That Christ is God, is proved

1 By clear Texts of Scripture affirming this truth in so many words. The
Prophet foretelling of him, says this in his name by which you shall call him,
Jehovah, or the Lord our righteousness, Jerem. 23. 6. and the mighty God, Esaias
9. 6. Paul says Rom 9. 5. who is God over all, blessed for ever; and St John
says, 1 John 5. 20. This is very God; and St Paul says, 1 Timothy 3. 16. Great
is the mystery of Godliness, God manifested in the flesh; God purchased his
Church with his blood Acts 20. 28.
and accordingly Thomas made his confession, John 20. 28. My Lord, and my God,
which title he accepts and praises Thomas for believing, and that he could
not have done without extreme impiety, had he not been God.

2 By evident reasons drawn from the Scripture.

He has the Name, Titles, Works, essential Attributes and worship of God
ascribed unto him in Scripture.

1 Divine Names and Titles are given to Christ; He is the only blessed
Potentate. 1 Timothy 6. 15. The King of Kings, Revel. 1. 5. and Lord of Lords,
Apoc. 17. 14. and 19. 16. He is called the Image of the invisible God, Col. 1.
25. the brightness of his glory, John 1. 1, 2.
Heb. 1. 3. the word and wisdom of the Father, Prove. 8. 12. and 9. 1. He is
called the Word, because he is so often spoken of and promised in the
Scripture, and is in a manner the whole subject of the Scripture; he is called
(...) cum articulo, John 1. 1. Acts 20. 28. 1 Timothy 3. 16. the great God, Titus
2. 13. the true God, 1 John 5. 20. God over all, or blessed above all, Romans 9.
5. the most high, Luke 1. 76. and (...) by which name the Septuagint have
expressed Jehovah the proper name of God alone, 1 Cor. 8. 6. By the Apostle
Christ is expressly called (...).
John 20. 28. My Lord, Jude 4. the only Lord, Acts 10. 36. the Lord of all, 1
Cor. 15. 48. the Lord from Heaven, 1 Cor. 2. 8. the Lord of glory, 1 Cor. 2. 8.
the Lord of Heaven and Earth, Matthew. 28. 18. These Titles are too high and
excellent to be given unto any mere man whatsoever, God therefore who will not
have his glory given to another, would never have given these Titles to
another, if he were not God.

2 The works of God, even the principal and most eminent of all, Divine works.
which are proper to the Lord only, are ascribed to Christ.

1. The work of Creation, even of creating all things John 1. 3. and Col 1.
16. He for whom and by whom all things were created, is very God, for Christ
and by him all things were created, therefore he is very God.

2 The work of preservation and government is attributed to him also, He
governes his Church. Ephesians. 4. 11. 1 Pet. 3. 19.
he is before all things, and by him all things consist, Heb. 1. 2. He who
upholds all things by his powerful word is God, so does Christ, therefore he
is God.

3 The working of Divine miracles, raising up the dead by his own power is
given to him, Matthew. 8. 2. compared with 2 Kings 5. 9. Christ cured those that
were borne blind.
John 6. 54. and John 5. 21. He that can quicken and raise the dead is God, so
does Christ, therefore he is God.

4 Redeeming of mankind, Luke 1. 68. Matthew. 20 28. Ephesians. 1. 7. Rev. 1. 5.

5 Sending of the Holy Ghost, John 21. 22. and 14. 16. and of Angels, is
ascribed to him, Matthew. 13. 41. Revel 1. 1. He forgives sins, John 10. 28.
Mark 9. 2, 5. He gives eternal life.

3 The principal and incommunicable attributes of God are given to him.

1 Omniscience, John 2. 24, 25. He knew all men, See Rev. 2. 23.
and he knew what was in them, John 21. 17. Lord, thou know all things.

2 Omnipotency, Rev. 1. 8. Phil. 3. 21.

3 Eternity, John 17. 5. Revel. 1. 18. John 1. 1. Esaias 9. 6. He is called the
everlasting Father.

4 Omnipresence, Matthew. 18. 20.

5 Unchangeablenesse, Heb. 1. 11, 13. and 13. 8. He that is Omniscient, John
17. 5.
Omnipotent, Eternal, Omnipresent, Unchangeable, equal to the Father in
Majesty and glory, Phil. 2. 16. is God, so is Christ, therefore he is God.

La^^ly, worship due to God is ascribed to him, Heb. 1. 6. Let all the Angels
of God worship him, Psalm 45. 11.
Revel. 5. 13. the Lamb, that is Christ, John 5. 22.
has the same worship tendered to him that the Father has. We are commanded to
call upon his name, to believe and trust in him, John 14. 1. and 3. 16. and 6.
39. to hope in him, Esaias 11. 10. we are baptized in his name, Matthew. 28. 19.
Acts 8. 16. and swear by him, Romans 9. 1.

Ob. Christ is called God of God, and light of light.

Sol. Christ as God is from himself, but if the Deity of Christ be considered
as in the person of the Son, so it is from the Father.

The Son in respect of his essence is from none; in respect of the manner of
subsistence he is from the Father.

Ob. Matthew. 19. 17. Christ denies that he was good because he was not God.

Sol. Christ applies himself to Juvenis iste, quamvis in Jesu majus homine
nihil agnosceret sperabat tamen co monstrante se per venturum ad possession^m
ejus boni quo vita aeterna paratur, quasi ad eam rem monstratore tantum egeret,
Caetera per se consecturus. At Jesus occurrens huis errori, simulque mo^^stiae
nobis p^oebens exemplum, ait non esse multos boni (...), sed unicum, Deum
scilicet, h^o ipso indicans, non satis esse bonum nobis monstrati, nisi Deus
mentem illustrans vires nobis suggerat. Grotius in loc.
him to whom he spoke; now he called Christ good in no other sense then he
would have done any other Prophet, and in this sense Christ rebuked him for
calling him good.

Ob. John 17. 3. God the Father is called the only true God.

Sol. Some refer both these to God himself and Christ, but others give a
general rule, that the word alone is not opposed to the other persons, but to
the creatures, and feigned Gods, and so John 8. 9 the woman is not excluded,
but her accusers; the added expressions show him to be God, because it is life
eternal to know him as well as the Father.

Ob. Ephesians. 4. 6.

Sol. The word Father is not there used relatively or personally, for the first
person in the Trinity; but essentially, as Mal. 2. is there not one Father of
us all? and so he is God, called Father in regard of his works ad extr^i.

Ob. John 14. 28. My Father is greater then I.

Sol. As he was man only or mediator, the Father was greater then he, but as
he was God that is true, John 10. 38. I and my Faher are one; not in union of
will (as John 17. 21.) but in unity of nature. See Phil. 2. 6.

Ob. Prove. 8. 22. Arrius Arrius stumbleth at the Greek Text (...), the Lord
created me, and on that corrupt Translation grounded his heresy, That Christ
was a creature.
objected this place.

Sol. This place much puzzled the Fathers for want of skill in the original
Tongue; it is in the Hebrew, possessed me, in the beginning, not created me in
the beginning. See Verse 25.

Ob. Col. 1. 15. Christ is called the firstborn of every creature, therefore
he is a creature.

Sol. It is a figurative speech, Christ had the pre-eminence over the
creatures, was Lord over them as the firstborn.

An Arrian executed at Norwich for blasphemy against Christ, in the days of Q.
Elizabeth, being moved to repent that Christ might pardon him, replied to this
effect: and is that God of yours so merciful indeed as to pardon so readily
those that blaspheme him? then I renounce and defy him.

The Socinians deny Christ to be God, and oppose his merits and satisfaction
unto God for our sins, they hold Christ is God salvo meliori judicio or prout
mihi videtur, In the first Nicene Council gathered together against Arius the
Prince of all Heretics who denied the Divinity of Christ, there were 318
Bishops.
till they can examine it better.

Many Heretics denied the Godhead of Christ, as Ebion, Cerintbus, Arrius, the
Jews also and Mahometans, some denying him to be God, others saying that he
was not absolutely God, but inferior to him.

He is God not by office, nor by favor, nor by similitude, nor in a figure, as
sometimes Angels and Magistrates are called Gods, but by nature, he is equal
and coessentiall with his Father, there is one Godhead common to all the three
persons, A man would think that there were but small difference (it is but a
little Iota) between (...) and (...). yet the right believers could never be
brought (as Theodoret witnesses) either to omit the one, or admit the other,
D^ Prideau^ Ephesus (...),
the Father, the Son, and the Spirit; and therefore it is said, Phil. 2. 6.
that He was in the the form of God and thought it no robbery to be equal with
God. Lo^anequality to God the Father ascribed to him, he is not God in any
secondery or inferior manner, but is in the very form of God equal to him,
the Godhead of all the three Persons being one and the same. To beat down
Arrius his here^^e the first Council of Nice was called, the Nicene Creed made.

The difference between the Council of Nice and Arrius was but in a Letter
whether Christ was (...) 1. like in essence; or (...) coessentiall to the
Father. The Arrian heretic presses Austin to show where the word (...) is
read in Scripture. Austin asks what is Homoousion Consubstantiall, but I and
my Father are one. See of Arrius his heresy and end, Heilius Geog. p. 725.

3 That the holy Ghost is also God, is proved by the same arguments.

1 The names and titles of God are given to him, 1 Cor. 3. 16. Acts 5 3, 4.
Compare Acts 1. 16. with Acts 4. 24. Numb. 12. 6. with 2 Pet. 1. 21. He is
called the Spirit of Glory, 1 Pet. 4. 14.

2 Divine Attributes are given to the Holy Ghost.

1 Omniscien^e, he knows all things, 1 Cor. 2. 10, 11. John 14. 26. 2
Omnipresence, Psalm 139. 7. Romans 8. 9. John 14. 26. 3 Omnipotency, Heb. 3. 7. 4
Eternity, Heb. 9. 14.
3 The works of the true God are given to the Holy Ghost.

1 Creation, Job 26. 13. Psalm 33. 6. 2 Preservation and sustentation of all
things created is attributed to the holy Ghost, He is called the Spirit of
truth, John 14. 26. the Spirit of adop^ion, Romans 8. 15. the Spirit of
sanctification, Romans 1. 4, the Spirit of renewing, Titus 3. 5.
Genesis 1. 2. Zach. 4. 6. 3 Redemption 1 Cor. 2. 10. 4 The power of working
miracles is ascribed to the holy Ghost, Matthew. 12. 28. Acts 2. 4. Romans 15. 19.
the resurrection of the flesh is ascribed also to the Holy Ghost, Romans 8. 11. 5
Distributing of graces according to his pleasure, 1 Cor. 12. 4. and 11.
instructing of the Prophets, 2 Pet. 1. 21. governing of the Church, and making
Apostles, Acts 13. 2. and 20. 28.
4 Divine honor and worship is given to him, Apoc. 2. 29. we are baptized in
his Name as well as in the Name of the Father and Son, Romans 9. 1.
Matthew. 28. 19. we are commanded to believe in him, and call upon him.
Blasphemy against the holy Ghost shall never be forgiven Matthew. 12. 31.
therefore he is no less religiously to be worshipped then the Father and the
Son.

In the first Constantinopolitane Council assembled against Macedonius who
denied the Divinity of the holy Ghost, there were 150 Bishops.

The communion and distinction of these three persons is to be considered.

1 Their communion; the same numericall essence is common to the three, All the
modern Socinians and Photinians deny the holy Ghost to be God, and a distinct
person from the Father.
in one God, or of one essence there are three persons, by reason of which
community of Deity all the three persons remain together and are coeternall
delight to themselves. Prove. 8. 22. 30. John 14. 10.

2. The Persons differ, 1. From the Essence, not really as things and things,
but modally, as manners from the things whereof they are manners, as degrees of
heat from heat, and light from light.

2 They differ amongst themselves as degrees from degrees, as relations in a
subject from other relations in the same; as for example, if three degrees
should remain distinctly in the same heat, this is a distinction not of
degree, state, or dignity (since all the Persons are equal) but in other
respects, and it is either Internal or External.

Internal is threefold.

1 In order, the Father is the first person from himself, not from another
both in respect of his Essence and person. The Son is the second Person, from
his Father in respect of his Person and filiation, existing by eternal
generation, after an ineffable manner (and is so called God of God) by reason
of his Essence he is God himself. The holy Ghost is the third Person,
proceeding or flowing coeternally from the Father and the Son in respect of
his person, by reason of his Essence God of himself with the Father and Son.

2 In the personal property unchangeable and incommunicable, which is called
personality, and it is

1 Of the Father, Proprie^^^es Patris personales, quibus a Filio distinguitur
and Spiritu fancto, (...). duae.
paternity, and to beget in respect of the Son; to send out or breath in
respect of the holy Ghost.

2 Of the Son, generation or to be begotten of the Father, Psalm. 2. 7. Heb.
1. 5. John. 3. 16. and 5. 18. 1 John 4. 9. Absque ulla essentiae, temporis,
gloriae imparitate. Chamier.

In this generation we must note

1 That the begetter and begotten are together in time. 1 Esse a se; Peter enim
ab alio (...) ^st.


2 He that begets communicates to him that is begotten, 2 Gignere filium ab
aeterno (...). Wendelinus
not a part of his Essence but the whole Essence; that which is begotten is
within, not without the begetter.

In respect of this generation, the Son is called the Word of the Father,
John 1. 1. not a vanishing, but an essential word, because he is begotten of
the Father, as the word from the mind. He is called the Word of God, both
internal and conceived (that is, the Divine understanding reflected upon it
self from eternity, or Gods knowledge of himself) so also he is the inward
wisdom of God, Prove. 8. because God knows himself as the first and most
worthy object of contemplation; and external or uttered, which has revealed
the councels of God to men, especially the elect; that we may know the Father
by the Son as it were by an Image, John 1. 18. so also he is the external
wisdom, instructing us us concerning the will and wisdom of the Father to
salvation, 1 Cor. 1. 21. and v. 30.

3 The Property of the Son in respect of the Holy Ghost is to send him out,
John 15* 26.

Hence arose the Schism between the Western and the Eastern Churches, they
affirming the procession from the Father and the Son, these from the Father
alone.

To deny the procession of the holy Ghost from the Son, is a grievous error
in Divinity, and would have grated the foundation, if the Greek Church had so
denied the procession of the Holy Ghost from the Son, as that they they had
made an inequality between the Persons. But since their form of speech is,
that the Holy Ghost proceeds from the Father by the Son, D^ Field somewhat
qualifieth this opinion of the Graecians, and says, they differ but modo
loquendi, they held (says he) that the Holy Ghost was not a Patre and Filio,
but a Patre per Filium. See Dr Hals Peacemaker, Sect. 4.
and is the Spirit of the Son, without making any difference in the
consubstantiality of the Persons, it is a true though an erroneous Church in
this particular; diverse learned men think that a Filio and per Filium in the
sense of the Greek Church, was but a question in modo loquendi in manner of
speech, and not fundamental.

3 The personal propriety of the holy Ghost is called procession or emanation,
John 15. 26. neither has the word defined, nor the Church known a formal
difference between this procession and generation.

The third internal difference among the Persons is in the number, for they
are three, subsisting truly, distinctly and per se, distinguished by their
relations and properties, for they are internal works and different, and
incommunicably proper to every person.

There follows an external distinction in respect of effects and operations
which the persons exercise about external objects, namely the creatures; for
though the outward works are undivided in respect of the Essence, yet in
respect of the manner and determination, all the persons in their manner and
order concur to such works. As the manner is of existing, so of working in the
persons.

The Father is the original and principle of action, works from himself by
the Son, 1 Cor. 8. 6.
as by his Image and wisdom, and by the holy Ghost. Romans 11. 36.
But he is said to work by his Son, not as an isntrumental but as a
principal cause distinguished in a certain manner from himself, Heb. 1, 2, 3.
as the Artificer works by an Image of his work framed in his mind, which
Image or Idea is not in the isntrumental cause of the work but his hand.

To the Son is given the dispensation and administration of the action from
the Father by the holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 8. 6. John 1. 3. and 5. 19.

To the holy Ghost is given the consummation of the action which he effects
from the Father and the Son, Job 26. 13. 1 Cor. 12. 11.

The effects or works which are distinctly given to the Persons, are, Creation
ascribed to the Father, Redemption to the Son, Sanctification to the holy
Ghost; all which things are done by the Persons equally and inseparably in
respect of the effect it self, but distinctly in respect of the manner of
working.

The equality of the Persons may be proved 1. by the work of Creation,
jointly, Psalm 33. 6. severally; for the Father, those places prove it, 1 Cor.
8. 6. Heb. 1. 2. the Son, John 1. 3, 10. Col. 1. 16. the holy Ghost, Job. 33.
4. 2 By the work of Redemption, the Father sends and gives the Son, the Son is
sent and given by him, the holy Ghost perfects the work of conception and
incarnation, Luke 1. 35. 3 By the work of Sanctification, the Father
sanctifies, John 17. 17. Jude v. 1. the Son, Ephesians. 5. 26. the holy Ghost, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 13. 1 Pet. 1. 2. 4 By the worship of religious adoration. The Father
is religiously adored often in the Scripture, Ephesians. 1. 17. the Son Acts 7.
59. Heb. 1. 6. the holy Ghost Acts 28. 25, 26. Romans 9. 1.

This is a wonderful mystery rather to be adored and admired then inquired
into; yet every one is bound to know it with an apprehensive knowledge, though
not with a comprehensive. No man can be saved without the knowledge of the
Father; he has not the Father who denies the Son; and he receives not the
Holy Ghost who knows him not John 14. 17. John ^. 23.


2 We must worship the Unity in Trinity, and Trinity in Unity, as it is in
Athanasius Creed. We must worship God as one in substance, and three in
Persons, as if Thomas, John and Matthew had one singular soul and body common
to them all, and entirely possessed of every one; we were baptized in the Name
of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

3 We should praise God for revealing this mystery to us in his word, and be
assured that what he promises or threatens shall be accomplished, being
confirmed by three witnesses.

The end of the Second Book.
A Treatise of Divinity.
The third Book.
CHAP. I.
Of Gods Works.
HAving spoken of the Scripture, and God; the Works of God in the next place
are to be handled, which some make two; the Decree, and the Execution of the
Decree: others, three, Decree, Creation, Providence. The Works of God, whereby
he moves himself to his Creatures, are three; Decree, Creation, Providence;
not three individually; for so they are innumerable, but in the species and
kinds of things.

The Works of God, are,

1. Before time or eternal, his Decree. 2. In time. 1. Past, Creation of all
things. 2. Present, Gubernation, and Suste^tation, Government and Preservation.

Or thus, Gods Works are,

1. Internal, which are in the very will of God from eternity, and they are
called the Decrees of God, by which God determined from eternity, what he
would do in time: We follow the received Phrase of Divines, when we call the
Decrees, the works of God, and speak of God after our capacity. Therefore we
call Decrees of God, his Works; because the Decrees of man are Works, or
Actions from man, and really distinct from his understanding and will, by which
we conceive the Decrees of God, or rather God decreeing.

2. External; Creation, and Providence.

1. Of Gods Decree.

Decree is a speech taken from the affairs of men, 1. Quid nominis*
especially Princes, in the determination of causes between parties at
variance, whose sentence is called a Decree: or secondly, it is a resolution of
things consulted of, either negatively, or affirmatively, according to the
latter use of the Phrase, it is applied to God, Esaias. 46. 10.

Decretum in the Latin is indifferent; 2. Quid Rei.
to signify either in the Abstract, Gods Decree; or, in the Concrete, a thing
decreed.

Gods Absolute Decree Decretum Dei est definita ejus sententia de rebus omnibus
per omnipotentiam et se cundum consilium suum efficiendis. Ames. Medulla Theol.
Ephesians. 1. 11.
is that whereby the Lord, according to the Counsel of his own Will, has
determined with himself what he will do; command, or forbid; permit, or
hinder, together with the circumstances of the same, Acts 2. 23. and 4. 28.
Luke 22. 22. John 7. 30.

Or, Gods Decree is an eternal and infinite act of the Divine Essence, by
which he does determine to do, or not to do, whatsoever is, or shall be done,
from the beginning to all eternity that good is; and to permit or suffer
whatsoever evil is done, or shall be.

Gods Decree is called Counsel Decretum Dei est actio illius interna atque
aeter^^ quae ex rebus possibilibus atque indefini^is, ea omnia and sola, quae
jam fuerunt, sunt, and erunt, secundum sapientiae suoe judicium, immutabili
liberrimae voluntatis placito, ut ita fierent, ad suam gloriam recte
praefinivit. Gomarus in Thesibus. Decretum est actio Dei ex consilio and
proposito suae voluntatis omnia omniumque rerum circumstanti^^ omnes ab aeterno
in se certo and immutabiliter and tamen libere definiens.
, because it is done most wisely; all things being so ordered, as is most
agreeable to t^^est reason; as if things had been long debated, or consulted of
before; though the Divine Nature be free from all need of cousulting; and it is
called the Counsel of his Will; because his Will does determine all things
agreeably to that Counsel.

It is an eternal determining of all things which have been, are, or shall be,
so as himself saw fittest to have them, upon best reasons known to him,
though not to us.

The Decree of God extends to all things good and bad; and the rule of it his
own wisdom, and good pleasure guided by his wisdom, the end is for his
glory; that is, the manifestation of his excellencies. His mercy moved him to
decree, his wisdom orders the Decree, his power perfects it, and brings it to
pass.

The Properties of Gods Decree.

1. It is complete, that is, it comprehends the determination of every thing,
whatsoever the Creature it self works, or God concerning it, that was decreed
from eternity so to be, Matthew. 10. 29. it reaches to greater matters; the
Incarnation and coming of Christ, Psalm 40. 6, 7, 8. Compared with Heb. 10.
5, 6, 7. the Kindome of Christ, Psalm. 2. 2. to less matters, in things which
befall the Church, as the ordering of things in Egypt, when the Israelites were
in Captivity. Nothing comes to pass but what God has decreed shall come to
pass; and nothing com^s to pass otherwise then as he has decreed it shall
come to pass, we do not only subject res ipsas, but modos rerum to the Will
and Decree of God. Neither has God decreed only good things, Acts 2. 23. and
4. 28. Genesis 45. 5, 6, 7. 1 Cor. 10. 13.
but even justly the evil works of evil men; for evil in respect of Gods
ordering it, habet rationem boni. Habet rationem boni triplici respectu: 1^* ut
est poena peccati, poena enim est bonum morale qui^ justitiae opus est. 2^, ut
est mera actio ab ipsa creatura producta. 3^, ut est castigatio atque
exercitium fidei: ut Martyrium vel satisfactio pro peccatis; ut mors Christi.
viz. that by it the glory of God may be revealed in his Justice and Mercy. He
does order, determine, and direct the sinful actions of men, but not effect
them.

2. It is most wise, Ephesians. 1. 11. 1 Timothy 17. Romans 11. 33.

3. Just.

4. Free, Romans 9. 18. Nothing moved the Decree of God without, or beyond
himself: ^v^nso, O Father, says Christ, because it pleases thee.

5. Certain, firm, 2 Timothy 2. 19. infallible, unchangeable, Matthew. 18. 14.

6. Eternal, Acts 15. 18. It was one of Vorstius prodigious Doctrines, to
maintain, that Gods Decrees are not eternal; then he would be changeable.

7. Absolute; not so as to exclude means, but Causes, Merits, and Conditions.

The Decree is twofold.

1. Common and General, which concerns all Creatures, the Decree of Creation,
and Government, or Providence.

2. Special, which belongs to reasonable Creatures, Angels and men; it is
called the Decree of Predestination: and it consists of two parts; viz. of a
Decree of Election, about saving: and of Reprobation about damning some Angels
and Men.

The Execution likewise of the Decree is twofold.

1. Common; the execution of the Decree of Creation, which is Creation: and of
Government, called Providence.

2. Special: 1. the execution of the Decree of Election, in good Angels, their
confirmation in that state, and in elect men. Redemption, and Restoration, and
all the gracious works of God. 2. the execution of the Decree of Reprobation,
partly in evil Angels, casting them out from their state and condition, and
their punishments in Hell; partly in men, viz. their rejection, obduration, and
all effects of divine anger upon them.

But I shall handle the special Decree, first, called Predestination, and
speak briefly concerning the two parts of it; Election and Reprobation, and
then proceed to treat likewise of Creation and Providence.

Of Predestination.

To Predestinate To Predestinate, signifies to Decree, Appoint, and Define a
thing before it come to pass: and also to separate a thing to this, or that
use. Praedestinare nihil aut majus aut minus significat quam destinare.
Chamierus.
, is to Decree the attaining of some end, by such like means as counsel shall
prompt us with. It differs from Election; Election, is in the Will;
Predestination, in the understanding, Acts 4. 28. Election is only of the end,
this is of the means also.

By Divines, Predestination is used to signify the Decree of God concerning
the eternal and Supernatural estate of Angels and men, or of men elect and
reprobate: although predestination concern Angels and men alike; yet the
Scripture especially inculcates to us men the Predestination of men.

Predestination in Scripture (say some) is all one with Election almost every
where, as Romans 8. 30. But with the ancient Latins, Destinare, is used of
punishment as well as reward; and ancient Devines make a Predestination to
punishment, as well as to glory.

Predestination is the Sentence, Ephesians. 1. 4. 6. Romans 9. 22, 23. 2 Timothy 1. 9.
Acts 1. 25.
or Decree of God, according to Counsel, determining with himself from all
eternity, to create and govern mankind for his special Glory, viz. the
praise of his glorious Mercy, or excellent Justice.

Or thus;

Predestination is the secret and immutable purpose of God, whereby he has
decreed from all eternity, to call those whom he has loved in his Son
Christ, and through faith and good works, to make them vessels of eternal
glory. Or thus

Predestination is the Praedestinatio, quatenus pro objecto habet hemines, est
aeternum and immutabile Dei decre^um de ^uturo hominum statu aeterno.
Wendelinus. Matthew. 24. 24. John 10. 15. Dan. 12. 1. Ezekiel. 13. 9. Exodus 33. 19.
John 13. 18. 2 Pet. 1. 10.
infallible purpose of God, whereby he has made choice of some, and rejected
others, according to the pleasure of his own will.

The Lord has not only decreed in general, that he will save some which
believe, and condemn those which continue in infidelity: but he has
determined whom, and how many he will bring to holiness, and life eternal,
for the praise of his Grace, and how many he will leave to themselves, and
punish for sin, for the praise of his Justice. The ancient Fathers call that
Verse, Romans 8. 30. The golden chain of our salvation.

The parts of Predestination are two; That is a full place for Election, Ephesians
1. 3, 4, 5, 6.
Election, and Reprobation.

This Doctrine of Election is profitable to be taught in the Church of God; for
it sets forth the profound depth of the Lords love, the glory and riches of his
grace and mercy, Rom, 11. 22. Mal. 1. 2, 3. Joh 3. 16. ^ ^. 9. 23 Ephesians. 2. 14.
Titus 3. 5.
ascribing the whole praise of our Vocation, Justification, Adoptition, and
Glorification, to the Mercy of God; it holds forth the wonderful Wisdom of
God, Romans. 11. 33. It sets out his Power and Sovereignty, Romans 9. 20.

The word Election signifies, The Doctrine of Election is 1. one part of Gods
Counsel, Acts 20. 27. 2. It will support us in trouble to consider that every
thing falls out by Gods Decree: yet it ought to be taught wisely. Romans 12. 3.
Psalm 105. 6. 1 These. 1. 4.


1. The choosing or taking of one into some office, 1 Samuel 10. 24. Luke 6. 13.
and 17. 12. either in the Commonweal, Psalm 78. 70. or Church, John 6. 70.

2. The making choice of a Nation to be Gods peculiar people, upon whom
(passing by others) he will bestow his Laws, Ordinances, and singular pledges
of his love, Deuteronomy. 4. 37. and 7. 7. and 10. 15. and 32. 8. Romans 11. 5. 25.

3. It is put for the Elect themselves, as Romans 11. 7.

4. It is taken for the execution of Gods eternal Decree, or the separation of
certain men in time by effectual vocation, Luke 18. 7. Col. 3. 12. Apoc. 17.
14.

5. It notes the eternal decree of God separating some men to holiness and
glory, for the praise of his rich grace, Ephesians. 1. 4. 11.

Election is the decree of Gods good pleasure, Ephesians. 1. 11. Romans 9. 11. Ephesians.
1. 4, 5, 6.
according to Counsel, whereby he has from eternity chosen and determined
with himself to call some men to faith in Christ, to justify, adopt,
sanctify, and endue them with eternal life, for the praise of
incomprehensible grace, and rich mercy.

Or, it is an action Electio est praedestinatio hominum quorundam ad vi tam
aeternam in Christo per fidem obtinendam, ex solo Dei beneplacito ad
declarandam in iis miserecordiam divinam. Wendelinus.
of God ordaining some men out of his mere good will and pleasure to eternal
life, which is to be had by faith in Christ, for the manifestation of his grace
and mercy.

1. The General nature of it, it is an action of Gods ordaining.

2. The impulsive Cause, of his mere good will, Ephesians. 1. 6. Romans 9. 16. 18.
There can be no other reason given, when men have wearied themselves out in
disputes, but only Gods will, Quare Deus hunc trahat and illam non trahat,
noli velle judicare si non vis errare. August.
Even so Father, because it pleases thee, Matthew. 11. God will have mercy on
whom he will have mercy. Gods mere free will makes us differ in naturalls;
thou art a man, and not a Toad; how much rather must it make us differ in
supernaturalls? To fly to a scientia media, or a congrua motio divina, or to
the preparation and use of Free Will, is to wander, and to say any thing in man
makes a difference.

3. The object of Election, Some men whether fallen, or not fallen.
whether man absolutely considered, or respectively, as good by Creation;
miserable by sin. Some make homo Dr. Twisse.
condendus, man to be made the object of Election, some man made, but not
fallen; some man made and fallen. But these opinions may be reconciled, for
those who hold homo Condendus, If men extend the Decree of Election to the
Creation of man, and the permission of his fall, then man created and fallen
could not be the object of Election so called, but the effect of it rather.
or massa pura to be the object, do extend Election further than the latter
do, even to comprehend in it a decree to make man, and to permit him to fall;
but as for that actual Election, and Separation, Calvin and Beza hold it to be
from the corrupted Mass; of which opinion these reasons may be given.

1. We are chosen, that we might be holy and unblameable; this supposes that
we were considered in Election, as finners, Ezekiel. 16. 6. 9. 1. Romans 2. 9.
Election is of God, that shows mercy, and we are called vessels of mercy;
mercy presupposes misery.

2. We are elected in Christ as our head; and he is a Mediator and Savior
which presupposes sin; he came to save sinners, Matthew. 20. 16. the means of
salvation are given to few, few are holy, the effect of Election, Matthew 7. 13.

3. Man simply considered is the object of Predestination, in respect of the
preordination of the end; but man corrupted, if we respect the ordination of
the means which tend to that end; or man absolutely, in respect of the
supreme or last end, or in respect of this, or that subordinate end.

4. The end Finis electionis est patefactio divinae misericordiae in gratuita
quorundam peccatorum salute. Wendelinus. Ephesians. 1. 4. 2 Timothy 1. 7. and 2. 19.
of Election is twofold: 1. near and immediate eternal life. 2. farther off
and ultimate, the glory of his name, Ephesians. 1. 3, 4, 5, 6.

5. The means to bring about these ends, Christ's merits, apprehended by faith.

Consider also the adjuncts of this Decree, the eternity, immutability, and
certainty of it. There is a certain and determinate number of the Elect, which
cannot be diminished, or augmented.

Christ prayed to his Father that the Faith Se^el electus semper dilectus.
of his Elect might not fail, Joh. 17. 16. 20. It is impossible they should be
deceived, Mat. 24. 24.

The Papists think that the certainty of immutable election begetts in a man
a certain carnal security, No regenerate man can fall totus a toto, in
totum, not the whole man with full con-sent, from all grace for altogether to
the end.
and prophannesse: but Peter thinks far otherwise, 2 Pet. 1. 10.

God was not moved by any thing outwardly to choose us to eternal life, but it
was only the mere will of God.

Some of the Papists say, God did choose man to eternal life upon the
foresight of his good works and his perseverance in them.

2. The Lutherans A man is elected (say they) on foresight that such a man will
believe and persevere in this, and if he do not so, he shall not be elected.
say for faith foreseen, not because of any dignity in faith, but for Christ
apprehended by it.

Object. If God should not predestinate for some thing in us, he is an accepter
of persons, for all were alike, Judas was no more opposite then Peter; why then
should one be elected and not another?

Sol. 1. This makes the Doctrine of Election such a depth, that God loves
Jacob and hates Esau, in the Angels, some are elected, and some fallen.

2. To accept of persons is then when we prefer one before another, and ought
not to do so, now that God chooses some; it is of his mere grace, Laudet
misericordiam Dei qui liberatur non culpet judicium qui punitur, August.
Eepist. 106.
for all deserve eternal damnation.

Arguments against the Papists and Lutherans.

That which is the effect and fruit of election, that cannot be a cause or
condition, for then a thing should be a cause to it self, but these are
effects, Ephesians. 1. 4. It should be according to them, he has chosen us because
we were foreseen holy, Acts 13. 48. A man is not ordained to eternal life,
because he believes, See Romans 9. 16. and 11. 35.
but he believes because he is ordained to eternal life. Secondly, then we
should choose God and not he us, contrary to that, John 15. 19. Thirdly,
Infants are elected, who cannot believe or do good works. Fourthly, if man
were the cause of his own election, he had cause to glory in himself,
election should not be of grace. Romans 11. 5. 6.


All the Sons of Adam without exception are not elected: for election supposes
a rejection. He that chooses Elegit qui e multis aliquos legit, The very word
Election signifies a separating and culling out of some from the rest, John
15. 19. 2 The. 3. 2.
some refuses others. See Esaias 41. 9. John 13. 8. Whom God electeth he does
also glorify, Romans 8. 30. but all are not glorified, 2 These. 1. 10. and 2. 13.

2. Saving faith is a true effect of Gods election, peculiar to the elect, and
common to all the elect which live to be of age and discretion, but many are
destitute of faith for ever: therefore they must needs be out of Gods election.

3. The Scripture says expressly, Matthew. 8. 11.
that few were chosen, Matthew. 20. 16. Few saved, Romans 5. 19.
Luke 13. 23. The elect considered apart by themselves, Rev. 7. 9.
are a numberless number, and exceeding many, Hebr. 2. 10.
in comparison of the wicked, they are but few, even a handful, Matthew. 7. 13.
14. and 22. 14. Luke 12. 32.

Though some of the places of Scripture may be expounded of the small number of
Believers in the days of our Savior, yet some are more generally spoken,
showing plainly that only few do find the way to life.

At this day, if the world were divided into thirty parts, 19. of them do live
in Infidelity, without the knowledge of the true God. The Mahometans possess
other six parts of the world. Amongst them which profess Christ, scarce one
part of those five remaining do embrace the true religion: And many more do
profess with the mouth, then do with the heart believe unto salvation.

The Arminians say there is an election axiomaticall, not personal: they
acknowledge that there is a choice of this or that particular means to bring
men to salvation. God (say they) has revealed but two ways to bring men to
life, either by obedience to the Law, or by faith in Christ. But they deny that
there is an election of this or that particular man. But God has set down with
himself from all eternity, who shall lay hold on Christ to salvation, and who
not, 2 Pet. 1. 10. speaks of an election personal, Romans 9. 11, 12. of both
elections, axiomaticall and personal. Some hold that Gods election is so
uncertain and changeable, as that the elect may become reprobates, and the
reprobate elect. But Gods election is most firm, certain, and unchangeable,
John 6. 37. and 10. 28. Matthew. 24. 24. So much concerning Election.

Reprobation Reprobatio est praedestinatio quorundam ad aeternam mortem,
propter peccata infligendam; ad declarandam justitiam divinam.
is the purpose of God to leave the rest of men to themselves, that he may
glorify his justice in their eternal destruction.

The Schoolmen and others distidguish between a negative and positive or
affirmative act of Reprobation. The negative act is called preterition
non-election, or a will of not giving life. The positive or affirmative act is
called pre-damnation, or a will of damning.

The object of it are some sinful men, Wendelinus Reprobavit Deus propter
voluntatem damnavit propter peccatum. Romans 9. 22.
or the greatest part of sinful men, which are called vessels of wrath sitted
for destruction, Romans 9. 22. that there are more damned then saved; is proved,
Matthew. 20. 16. and Matthew. 7. 14.

The end of reprobation is the declaration of Gods justice in punishing of sin.

There is no cause of reprobation in the Reprobate, that they rather then
others are passed by of God; that is, wholly from the unsearchable depth of
Gods good pleasure, but that damnation whereto they are ad^udged, is for their
own sins.

Obj. 1 Timothy 2. 4. Who will have all men to be saved. Sol. That is, God would
have some Qui quos vis homines vult servari.
of all sorts of men to be saved, so all men is taken. 1. verse, Let prayers be
made for all men, that is, all manner of men; he instanceth in one kind, viz.
Kings. All is likewise here to be taken, not prosingulis genem, but progenerum
singulorum. All manner of men of all Nations and qual^^es. All in this place
does not signify uniniversally: every man in every age and condition, but all
opposed to the Jews only, all indefinitely and that in the times of the new
Testament, of which the Apostle speaks, 2 Pet. 3. 9. Not willing that any
should perish, but that all should come to repentance: therefore there is not
an election of some, and reprobation of others.

Sol. He speaks there only of the Elect: and he would have none of them to
perish. That any of his Elect should perish.
He speaks that for the comfort of the godly, and includes himself amongst
them, long-suffering to usward: therefore he means those in the same
condition with himself. He shows why God stays the execution of his wrath,
because all his Elect are not gathered*

There is nothing does more set out the glory, Consectaries of Gods Decree.
excellency, and sufficiency of God then his Decree. O the infinite depth of
the wisdom of God which has foreseen, decreed, and determined with
himself, the innumerable things that ever did or shall come to pass, we
should not search into the depths of his counsels, Deuteronomy. 29. 29. But in all
things profess our dependence on him, and refer all to his decree, Psalm. 37. 5.

They are justly blamed that ascribe any thing to chance, Psalm 115. 3. and
135. 6. Jam. 1. 14.
fate, fortune, or good luck, as also such as are impatient under any cross.

Admiring the methods of Gods eternal Counsel, and the execution of it, for
the salvation of our souls will be a great part of our work in heaven.

That is a desperate inference: Consectaries of Predestination, Ephesians. 1. 4.
If I be predestined, I shall be saved, though I neglect and scoff at
sanctity. God has predestined the means as well as the end: he has decreed
us to be holy as well as happy, in good things, the Devil strives to sever the
means from the end, in evil, the end from the means. We must not reason
whether we be predestined, but use the means, prove our Election, by our
calling we should judge of our predestination, not so much descendendo, by
prying into Gods secret Counsel, as ascendendo, by searching our own hearts.
It was good counsel that Cardinal Poole gave to one who asked him how he
might most profitably read the Epistle to the Romans. He advised him first to
read the 12. chapter to the end, and then the beginning of the Epistle to the
12. Chapter. Because in the 12^h. Chapter the Apostle falls on matter of duty
and sanctification, which is the only way to attain to the knowledge of those
great mysteries handled in the beginning of Predestination. Take heed of
abusing this Doctrine.

1. In respect of God, Consectaries of Gods election and reprobation.
quarrel not with his justice, because he has determined not to give grace
to some, Romans 9. 14. that any are saved it is from Gods mercy, there can be no
injustice in refusing, when it is the mere mercy of God to take any: Austin
and some others which have written largely of election, write sparingly of
reprobation, because there appears more seeming offensive harshnesse in the
Doctrine of reprobation, then in that of election: 2. the first being known
gives light to the other.
as if of many Traitors the King spare some, and hang up the rest: neither have
the Elect a just cause to glory, nor the reprobate to complain; since
undeserved grace is showed to the one, due punishment inflicted on the other.
It bewraies no more want of mercy in God, that he takes but such, then it did
want of power, because he made not many worlds, since the exercising of one and
the other, is determined by his wisdom.

2. This may comfort the people of God, This Doctrine of absolute election is
very comfortable and useful, Ephesians. 15. 6. 11. The Apostle there inculcats it 3.
times in one Chapter, Romans 8. 33. It is absolute as it opposes cause or
condition in us, not as it opposes means.
who may be certain of their election and salvation, Romans 8. 38, 39. Paul had
not this by immediate revelation, because he concludes upon such arguments as
are general to all the godly, see 1 John 3. 14. Certainty of man's election and
salvation is not such as we have of arts and sciences, yet the truths of God
are more to be adhered unto then any humane principle.

3. Nor is it such as we have of doctrinall truths, we are not so persuaded of
Gods favor in particular to us, as that there is a God, and that there is
Jesus Christ, because the dogmaticall truth is contained in the Scripture, the
other is but a practical conclusion drawn from the General. 3. It is not such
an assurance as expels all doubting and wavering, Mar. 9. 24. yet doubting
is a sin, and we are to bewail it: but the Papists teach doubting, and praise
it under the name of humility, and say it keeps us from presumption.

4. It is not such as presumption and carnal security, It is the duty of
Christians to make their Election sure by their calling 2 Per. 1. 10. Make it
your maine study: there is the adverb of correction rather: you would rather
look after other matters, but study this most.
excluding all use of the means, work out your salvation with fear; those
which have been most persuaded of Gods love to them, have been most active for
him: the love of Christ constrains us.

5. It is more then probable, conjecturall, or moral.

6. It is not of our own conscience and Spirit only, but enabled by the Spirit
of God thus to conclude and determine, Romans 8. The Spirit witnesses with our
Spirit.

Those that find this in themselves, should feed upon this eternal comfort, it
is absolute, eternal, immutable, nothing shall oppose it, who shall lay
anything to the Elect? It is full of love and grace. 1 The Apostles exhortation
shows it is a thing possible. 2 It is necessary, of great concernment, use all
diligence and rather show, that 3 it is profitable, Such shall never fall into,
1. sin, 2. destruction. 3. apostacy. An entrance shall be ministered unto
them abundantly into the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ.
We may make our election sure by our calling, Romans 8. 29, 30. and our
effectual calling by two things. 1. by a new light. 2. a new life, 2 Cor. 4.
5. 1 Pet. 2. 9. John 12. 36. Ephesians. 5. 8. We have a new knowledge wrought in us
of our selves; we see our misery by sin, and our inability to help our selves,
Romans 2. 23. 2 of God, God in Jesus Christ is discovered to us, 2 Pet. 1. 3. We
see our need of Christ, and know him to be a mediator, who must reconcile God
and us. 2. a new life is wrought in us, Ephesians. 2. 1. We now die to sin, and
live to God, 1. By faith, Rev. 17. 14. These three are put together faithful,
chosen and called. 2. By new obedience.

CHAP. II.
2. The Execution of Gods Decree.
GOD executes his Decree by Actions, 2. Gods exterternall works.
Creation, and Providence.

Gods works are in time, Psalm. 33. 6.


1. Past Creation of all things. Heb. 10. 13.
2. Present Government and preservation.
Creation is taken, 1. Strictly, when God makes any Creature of nothing, merely
of nothing, not as if nothing were the matter but the term, so the souls of
men and Angels are created of nothing.

2. Largely, when of some prejasent matter but very unfit and indisposed a
creature is made, as Adam of the earth.

Creation is the action of God, Creatio est actio Dei externa, qua in princip^
temporis, s^x dierum spacio, mundum produxit solo voluntatis suae imperio, ad
nominis sui gloriam. Wendelinus.
whereby out of nothing he brought forth nature it self and all things in
nature, both substances and accidents, in and with the substances, and finished
them in the space of six days, both to his own glory and the salvation of
the Elect.

Or, it is an action whereby God the Father by his word and holy Spirit made
all things exceeding good for the glory of his name.

Or thus, Creation is a transient or external action of God, whereby in the
beginning He made the world by a mere command out of his own free will in
six days space to the glory of his name.

1. An action,] not a motion or change, motion argues some succession, but in
the things created, the fieri and factum esse is all one, nor is it a change,
because that supposes some alteration in the Agent.

2. Transient,] it passes from the Agent to the thing created, whereas in
immanent actions, as Gods will, decrees, and personal actions, they abide in
himself.

3. Of God,] Genesis 1. 1. And the beginningning of the Apostles Creed, The
Father is said to work all things by his word and spirit, not as by an
instrument, but as by a principal efficient of the same substance and equal
with himself.
The efficient cause of Creation, is God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost.
Creation is the proper work of God alone, so that He is God which created the
world, and he created the world who is God, Jer. 10. 11. It is without
controversy that the work of creation agrees to God the Father, the same is
expressly given to the Son, John 1 3. Col. 1. 16. and to the Holy Ghost
also, Psalm. 33. 6.

4. In the beginning,) By the Scripture it is a matter of faith to hold that
the world was not from all eternity in the beginning, that notes not that there
was time first, and then God created the world (for time is a creature and
concreated) but it denotes orde, that is at first.

5. The world) that is, Romans 1. 20. Ephesians. 1. 4.
the Heaven and Earth and all things contained in them, Acts 4. 4. and 17. 24.
(...), that well ordered, decent, beautiful and comely frame of heaven and
earth.

6. By his mere command,) Psalm. 33. 9.
as appears Genesis 1. Let there be light, let there be heavens, which argues his
omnipotency.

7. Out of his own free will,) for God did not need the world, and therefore
he created it no sooner.

8. The final cause to the glory of his name, Romans 2. 20. Three Attrbiutes,
especially manifest themselves in this work of Creation, Gods power, wisdom,
goodness, his power in that he made all things by a word and of nothing: his
wisdom is seen in the order and exceeding wonderful and particular uses,
all creatures have his goodness, in that he would communicate being to the
creatures, He needed not the world, but was happy enough in himself without
men or Angels.

The work of Creation (say some Pareus and alis. Acts 17. 24. Col. 1. 16.
set out generally in a general proposition, In the beginning Dubitari non
potest primum fidei articu^^^, (...) in Deum creatorem coeli and terrae, ex
tructum esse ex hoc. Mosis aphor^s^no, Pa^eus. Pro. ^. 23. John 17. 24. Ephesians.
1. 4. 1 Pet. 1. 20.
God created the Heavens and the Earth; Which proposition He after explains by
its parts.

That the world was not from eternity but was made by God these arguments may
persuade.

First, and principally Faith Heb. 11. 3. which is grounded upon diverse places
of Scripture, Quam vis natural lamine demonstrar^ posset (...) a Deo fuisse
c^nditum, tamen recte A^gustinus de Civit. Dei. l. 11. c. 4. Quod Deus ^undum
fecerit, nulli tutius credimus quam ipsi Deo.
as the first and second chapters of Genesis, 38 and 39 chapters of Job, and
some Psalms almost whole, as 104. and 136. this also is the first Article of
our Creed, that the world was created in time by God. The Apostle Paul Acts
14. 15. and 17. 24. does point out God to the Heathen by this work above
others.

Secondly, and probably, the light of nature shining in these reasons.

1. The original of Nations laid down by Moses, Genesis 10. and else where,
which could not be fained by him, since some memory of them was then extant
among many, which yet in progress of time was extinguished.

2. The beginning of Arts, the first inventers Joseph. Antiqu. l. 2. c. 2. See
Polid. Virgil de inventoribus rerum.
whereof are known, and in what time they flourished: for it is not probable
that so many ages before, mankind lived without arts, and that in these last
times they were all both invented and perfected.

3. The newness of all Heathenish histories, the ancientest of which tell of
nothing before Noah's flood, or the beginning of the Assyrian Empire under
Ninus. The holy history it self is only of 4000. years or thereabout, Master
Pemble in his Treatise of the providence of God.
which nevertheless i^ the greatest monument of antiquity. Now it would be a
most unworthy reproach and contumely cast upon all those men who had lived so
many infinite ages ago, to say that they were so ignorant that they could not;
or so sloathfull that they would not deliver in writing what was done in their
times.

4. The decay of man's body and age, which from a great strength, quantity,
bigness and time of life is now come down to a narrow scantling, which if had
decreased so alwais in infinite August. de civitate Dei l. 15 c. 9. Pliny. l.
7 c. 16. Aul. Gell. lib. 3. cap. 15. Juven Sat. 13.
ages, it would by this time have been brought almost to nothing.

The certain series and order of causes and impossibility of their proceeding
in infinitum: for it must needs be that there should be one first, which is the
universal cause: but first it is not unless it be one, nor one except it be
God.

6. As a thing is, so it works, but God does not depend upon another in his
being, therefore neither in working does he require a pre-existent matter.

7. Art presupposes nature, and nature matter; but God in working is a more
excellent cause then art or nature, therefore presupposes nothing in working.

8. The first cause, viz. God is infinite, therefore he can do whatsoever
implies not a contradiction, but the Creation of things in time implies it
not.

9. Whatsoever perishes has a beginning: Lacta^^ius.
the world does perish, because all its parts decay, and are subject to
corruption, therefore the whole. The Angels and souls of men are changeable by
nature; as appears by the fall of the Devil and man's fall.

10. Either the world was eternal or had a beginning, it could not be eternal.

1. Because it is compounded That the Wworld is (...) compounded our senses
tell us, seeing some things are heavy, some light, some hot, some cold, and one
of these is apt to destroy another, as is the nature of Contraries.
of diverse parts, and those in nature contrary one to another, which could not
meet together in that order themselves, therefore it was made by somewhat,
and then either by it self, which could not be: for that which maks, is before
that which is made; and the same thing cannot be before it self, or by some
creature which could not be; because that is but a part of the whole, and
therefore meaner then it considered as whole, and not able to make it.

2. The world could not be eternal, because it is limited in respect of place,
quantity, power, therefore it is not infinite in time. That which is eternal
What is eternal, is without beginning, mutation, succession, or end, so only
God. See Doctor Hackwells Apology of Gods providence. p. 39. 46. De qu^ re
inter duos Rabbinos est Controversia R. Eliezer, and R. Josue altero mundum in
martio: altero in Septembri contendente condium esse. Quod quia nobis Scriptura
non exprimit, tanquam curiosum relinquamus Mercer.
is the first thing, and consequently the best, therefore God is only so,
having no parts, nor being subject to corruption.

By these reasons it is evinced, that the world is not eternal, but was created
by the chief workman of all things in time. But concerning the time of the
year, when the world was made, whether in Summer, Autumn, or the Spring, we
will not raise any curious and unprofitable questions. See Sarsons Chronologia
vapulans, page 123. Let it suffice to know that it was created by God in the
beginning, Genesis 1. 1. that is, in the beginning of time, or rather together
with time then in time; for the instant and moment of Creation was the
beginning of all following, but not the end of precedent time.

Hitherto concerning the efficient cause, there follows the matter of
Creation.

Of the first and immediate Creati^n, there was no matter at all, the Divine
power drew out nature it self, not out of any pre-existent matter, but out of
mere nothing.

Materiam noli quaerere, nulla fuit. Nothing negatively.
N^thing but nothing Silvester. When we say God made the World out of nothing,
our meaning is not, that nothing was the matter whereof the world was made: but
only that it was the terminus a quo, non materia exqua.
had the Lord Almighty,
Whereof, wherewith, whereby to build this City.
Thus were created all incorporeall and immateriall substances; the Angels, the
reasonable soul, and the highest Heaven (as some say) for those things which
are void of matter, cannot be framed out of matter.

2. The mediate Creation is, when a thing is brought forth of a praexistent
matter; yet so rude and indisposed, that it may be accounted for nothing; so
Adams body was created of the Dust or Slime of the earth, Genesis 2. 7. Beasts and
Birds out of the earth, Genesis 1. 19. which yet God did merely of his good
pleasure, no necessity compelling him, nor the matter he took any way helping
him in working; it was nothing privatively, as they call it.

Divines observe four things in Gods Creation.

1. His command; whereby he said, Let there be light, and there was light. Gods
words are things.

2. His approbation; whereby all things are acknowledged as good. God saw they
were good. That is, apt for the end Bonitas rei creatae est illa perfectio, qua
apta sit ad usum, cui inservit, ^mesius haec bonitas duplex est, 1, Generalis
omnium creaturarum, viz. integritas and perfectio omnium do^orum and ^^rium
naturalium, qua^um beneficio suas operationes exercere possunt conformi^er ad
divinam voluntatem and ordinate ad proprios fines. 2^, Specialis, creaturae,
rationalis Angelorum and hominum; qui donis supernaturalibus ornar^ sunt, qua
vocantur (...) nomin^ sanctitas ^ive imag^ Dei. Genesis 1. 26.
for which they were made, free from all defect and deformity, or punishment,
Genesis 1. 31.

3 Ordination and appointment, whereby He assigned unto all creatures their
use. Jeremy. 52. 1^. He made nothing in vain.

4 A sanction of a Law and Decree which the creatures must always observe,
called a Covenant with day and night.

Hitherto of the efficient cause and the matter, there follows the form of
Creation which may be considered either in respect of God, or in respect of the
things created.

1 The manner of Creation in respect of God is this, He did not create the
World by a necessity of nature, but according to the Eternal and Immutable;
yet most free decree of his will.

2 By his word and b^ck alone, without any change, weariness, or toil, He
made and established all things.

2 The form of Creation in respect of the things created is two fold.

1. Internal, (viz.) the very force and power of nature imprinted by God both
in all things in a common manner and respect, and in the several kinds
according to the particular essence and condition of every thing, by which they
are made powerful to proper or common operations.

2. The external form is twofold, partly a sudden and momentary production
of all things, M^. ^emble. ubi supra.
partly a most beautiful disposing and excellent order of all things produced,
both in themselves, and among one another. The world has its name in Greek
from beauty, God could have created them all at once, but he made them in the
space of si^e* That opininion of Austin, that God made all things in a moment,
and distributed them into days, because of our better understanding, is
exploded by all. Although Creation was done in a moment, in respect of the
particular bodies severally considered, yet in respect of all, it was not
perfected in an instant, but in the space of six days; which spaces of days,
note not a temporal succession of the same, but the order of diverse Works.
days, that he might show,

1. His power in producing whatsoever effects he would without their general
causes, while he enlightened the world, made the earth fruitful, and brought
plants out of it before the Sun and Moon were created.

2. His goodness and liberality while he provides for his creatures not yet
made, and brings the living creatures into the earth filled with plants and
nourishment, men into a world abundantly furnished withal things for necessity
and delight.

3. That we might thereby more easily conceive, that the world was not made
confusedly or by chance, but orderly, and by counsel; and might not
perfunctorily but diligently consider the works of Creation. How should we
deliberate in our actions Festina lent.
which are subject to imperfection? (...) it pleased God not out of need to
take leisure.

So much for the form of Creation, there remains in the last place the end
which is twofold.

1. The last and chiefest, the glory of God the Creator, in manifesting his
goodness, 1 Gods goodness in making all things good Genesis 1. Ps. 33 5. 2. His
power, in creating all things of nothing, Psalm. 96. 4, 5. 3. His Wisdom in
making such various things. Psalm. 104. 24.
power, and wisdom, which excellencies of God shining forth in the existence
order and wonderful workmanship of all creatures, and in the wise government
and administration of them; God would have acknowledged and praised by
reasonable Isa. 40. 26. Consectaries from Creation in general.
creatures. Psalm. 19. 1. and 10. 24. Prove. 16. 4. Romans 1. 20. and 36.

2. The next end for the work it self, that all things should serve man, and
be useful to him, especially to further the salvation of the Elect. Genesis 1.
20. Psalm 8. 4, 5, 6. 1 Corinthians. 3. 21. 22.

It serves to confute sundry errors.

1. The Arrians, which said the world was made by Christ as the instrument and
secondary cause, that place Romans 11. 36. does not prove an inequality of
persons.

2. The Manichees, which held two beginnings contrary to themselves, God the
author of good things, and the devil the author of evil, this is blasphemy
against God, and is contrary to what Moses says, Genesis 1. 31.

3. Aristotle, that held the world was eternal, though some Albertus Magnus,
Et eo major discipulus. Thomas Aquinas persuasum nobis cupiverunt non ^am
propositum Aristoteli fuisse, aternitatem mundi (...) ac invictis rationibus
^omprobare quam illad so^um estendere, mundum non esse genitum, hoc est non
incepisse per motum, quae philosophorum priorum sententia erat. Vossius in
Thesibus de creatione vide plura ibid. Et Hackwell Apol. page 442, 443, 444.
say he did not. Democritus who held that the world was made by a casual
concourse of atoms, and that there were infinite worlds, when the Scripture
speaks but of one; God sent his Son into the world, not worlds; See the
discovery of the world in the Moon. Proposit. 2. Galene who having read the
fifth Chapter of Genesis, said, that Moses said much, but proved little.

2. It condemes.

1. Those which set their affections on the creature, if there be beauty in
that, what is in the Creator?

2. Those that abuse the creatures by cruelty, or pretended Lordship.

3. Those which mock at the parts of any man; if borne lame, or deformed; this
is to despise the Workman, to murmr at the Potter.

3. It shows that God has first, chief, absolute, and perpetual sovereignty
over all his creatures; Jer. 27. 5. and 45. 4.
so that he can use, command, and do with them, as in equity seems good to
his heavenly wisdom. Romans 9. 21.


4. When we behold the Heavens, the Earth, Air, and Sea, how they are filled,
what use and commodities they have, we should contemplate God in these things
we see with our eyes, 2. We should learn what a one God is, He bounds the Sea
with his Word only; God instanceth in the work of creation to Job, to show his
power. His wisdom shines in the exquisite workman ^ip, variety, order, and
subordination of them one to the service of another.
1. Eternal, He that made heaven and earth, is ancienter than both. 2.
Almighty; Great works cannot be brought to pass without great strength: he
must needs be Infinite in power, which made heaven and earth, and hangs the
earth as a Ball, without any pillar to support it.

3. Most wise; strength separated from wisdom, is little worth: God knows
all things, the nature of the Heavens, Earth, Water, perfectly; because he put
such a nature into them: tell your selves, that God is a wise understanding
Essence, can order all to the best.

4. Exceeding good; he has infused goodness into the Heavens, Waters, Earth;
they are helpful and and serviceable to man: how much more goodness is there in
God, he is good, and does good.

5. See his love in making man Man was magnified in Creation, in being made so
excellent a Creature, Psalm. 8. 5. and in having so many excellent creatures
made for him, Psalm. 8. 3, 6, 7, 8.
best of the Creatures here below: we should honor God in our minds, account
him the chiefest and only good, and his favor the chiefest felicity, bring
our wills to long after him, to desire him above all other things, choosing him
as our happiness, loving him and desiring to enjoy himfully: Learn to fear
him above all, not daring to offend him, and obey and please him; what more
agreeable to reason, then that the Maker of all, should be Ruler of all? we are
more his, than a child his Parents, a servant his Masters. We should also
acknowledge that he made us, David. beheld the works of God with admiration,
Psalm. 8. Rev. 4. 11.
Psalm 100. and praise him: Gods great works call for great praise; commend
him with our tongues, and speak good of his Name, Psalm 19. 2. The heavens
declare the glory of God. i.e. give occasion to man of declaring it.

5. This is a comfort to those who acknowledge God to be such a one as he is;
is not he rich enough to maintain them? wise enough to direct them? strong
enough to protect them? If thou want goodness, he can create in thee a new
heart; it may comfort the godly in regard of the resurrection^ God can raise
them up at the last day.

6. It is a great terror to the wicked, which do not fear but despise him;
God will hate, despise, and destroy them: God can do it; he made heaven and
earth, and he will do it because he is true, Esaias 17. 11.
he has threatened it: oh the misery of that man which has him for his enemy.

7. We may learn from all the Creatures in general, 1. to bewail our
Rebellion against God, which all of them reprove, for they all stand in their
kind and station in which God set them at first. The Sun rejoices to run
his course: the Sea keeps her bounds, the earth stands upon her foundation,
the heavens keep their motion, and declare Gods glory, the very winds and
seas obey him. 2. All of them teach He that studi^s the creature much shall
find much of God, and of himself. Some conceive Isaac, Genesis 24. 63. studied
the Book of the Creatures.
the invisible things of God, Romans 1. 20. as was before showed.

8. We should make a right use of the creatures: use them first devoutly, 1 Timothy 4. 5. in faith, Romans 14. 14. and ult. with Prayer and Thanksgiving, Matthew.
15. 36. Acts 27. 35. Secondly, soberly, 1 Cor. 10. 31. 3. thankfully, 1 Timothy 4.
4.

Having handled the works of Creation in general, I now proceed according to
Moses his Method, to a more particular enarration of each days work.

The whole first Chapter of Genesis may be thus divided.

1. The Author of the worlds Creation, God. 2. The Work. 3. The approbation of
it.
1. verse. In the beginning of time, or being, therefore the World was not
eternal.

John begins so, and took it hence* but beginning there may mean from
Eternity: or as here, Christ did not begin then, but was then, Prove. 8. 22.

Bara Elohim, Gods Created Aliis scriptuturiaelocis apertius, and expressias
potest trinitas confirmari and efficacacius adversum I^daeos est pugnandum ne
nos illis ridiculos praebeamus linguae eorum im^eritia, Mercer in loc. Ego cum
Calvino, mercer^ and aliis, imea re sentio, ex solo vo^e Esohim terminationis
pluralis, conjuncta cum verbo singulari, non posse solidum duci argumentum pro
tanto mysterio, quia rations a^^a^ae mihi videntur (...) adductis pro
sententia contraria praeponderare. Etsi e^s^imen (...) esse (...) stodi^^, qui
(...), and ex hoc loco sic intellecto mysterium tri^ratis probare conantur* sed
quia non ^gitur de intention eorum, q^am piam and bonam conso^us, verum de
Mosis proposito, in hujus vocis usu, missa eorum intention, rem ipsam in se
spectantes, judicamus solidiora consectanda esse argumen^^ quam quae a vocula
aut constructione aliqua grammatica deducuntur, quam Judae^ and haereticis
proclive sit eludere, and quasi de re ipsa triumphata, ex talium argumentor^m
refutatione gloriari. Rivet 9. in (...).
. That difference between the Noune Plural, and Verb Singular (says Rivet)
signifies not the mystery of the Trinity, but is an id^otisme of the Hebrew
tongue, in which such enallages are frequent, as Numb. 32. 25. How ever there
is no difference in the thing it self; for the name of Gods being taken here
essentially, (not personally) is common to the 3. Persons; Gods created, is as
much as the Father, the Son, and Holy Ghost created* for elsewhere it is
manifest from Scripture, that not only the Father, but the Son and Holy
Ghost also created the world.

Created, signifies an act of infinite power, and is not communicable to any
creature. 1. Ex nihilo fecit, and quidem potentissime ac magnificentissime.
Junius.

Heaven and Earth. In the first day were created Heaven and Earth; as it were
the foundation and roof of the building, Psalm 104. 5. Esaias 40. 21, 22.

The work of the first day, was 1 Heaven, under which name are comprehended
partly the Empyr^an, first and immovable Heaven, which is called in Scripture,
the third Heaven, and Heaven of Heavens, Ephesians. 4* 10. 2 Chronicles. 6. 18. Acts 1.
11. and partly the Celestial Spheres, which it is probable were made the first
day; but without those lights of the Stars, with which at length in the
fourth day, they were adorned: the Hebrew word for Heaven being of the Duall
number may imply both. The heavenly Intelligences or Angels, the Inhabitants of
the Invisible Heaven were then made, as is probable, says Chemnitius, Coelum
id est, extimum illum hujus universitatis ambitum cum super Caelestibus incolis
illius and spiritualibus formis atque intelligentiis, Gen, 2. 1. Job 38. 7.
Junius in loc.

2. The four first simple things, or elements, as some think, Earth, Water,
Air Fire, and the fitting of them for use, by making day and night. Though
other hold, that the air and fire are comprehended under Firmament, the work
of the second day. For the earth, there is he emphaticall: this earth which we
dwell in, though then unpolished. The earth is described in the second verse;
it was without form and void, informitie and vacuity in the original, without
inhabitants and without ornament, the earth and waters were joined together
among themselves; the waters at first did encompasse and cover the earth round
about, as it were a clothing and garment, Psalm. 104. 6. Darkness was on the
face of the deep; that is, the waters which enclosed the earth in themselves.

3. v. There is an extraordinary light mentioned; It is questioned whether this
light was spiritual or corporeal, a substance or Accident.
(the ordinary fountain of light is the Sun) which in what subject it did
inhere is not certain: some say water in the thinner parts of the superficies,
some the Heavenly Spheres, others say the Element of fire: for that (say they)
is either included under light, or we know not whether to refer it; and God
created not accidents without subjects.

The work of the second day were twofold: The out-spead thing Expansu^ in
Latin. Estendue in French.


1. That most vast firmament, viz. that space between the earth and sky: the
Hebrew word signifies the extending of any thing, or the thing it self.

2. The division of the waters above, from the Waters below This made some hold
that there were waters above the skies, as Brentias says, alleging that
place, Psa. 148. 4. The Schoolmen understand it of the Christalline heaven.
, that is of the clouds which are in the middle Region of the Air, from the
Fountains, Rivers, and Sea, which remain under the lowest Region. But by the
name of Clouds and Waters above the firmament, we may understand all the
Meteors, both waterie and fiery, which were created then in their causes. Jer.
10. 13.

The approb^tion given of other days, is here omitted in the Hebrew, not
because Hell was created on this day, as the Hebrews Mercerus in Genesis
say: but because this work of distguishing the waters was yet imperfect and
finished on the third day.

The work of the third day was threefold.

1. The conflux, 1 Eccles. 7. Job. 26. 10. and 38. 13. Psalm 104. 9.
or gathering of the waters below into one place in regard of the greater part
of them, called Sea, that so they might not overflow the earth: and by this
command of Gods, they still continve so: Luther said well, that all a man's life
upon the earth is as great a miracle, as the Israelites passing through the red
sea.

2. The drying of the earth, to make it habitable, and fit for nourishing
plants, and living creatures.

3. The producing of Herbs and Trees of all kinds.

The works of the fourth day were, the Lights both greater, as Sun and Moon;
and lesser, as the other stars, placed in the Heavens as certain
receptacles, or vessels, wherein the Lord did gather light, which before was
scattered in the whole body of the heavens.

2. The use of them; they were to give light to the world, to distinguish the
night from the day, Genesis 8. 22. Pallida ^una pla^, rubicunda flat^ alba
serenat. Rogue soir and blanc matin, ^est le plais^r du pelerin. See Plinies
Natural Hist. l 18 c. 35. See Josephus, and Luke 21. 25
the day from the week; as also to distinguish seasons, Summer, and Winter,
Spring, and Autumn, Seed-time, and Harvest. They are Signs;

1. Natural: by them we may guess of the Weather, Matthew. 16. 2, 3. from the
color and figure of the Moon, some will conjecture what weather is like to be.

2. Civil, Husbandmen, Gardners, Fishermen, Mariners, gather observations from
them.

3. Ecclesiastical; to know the New Moons, and spiritual st^ange apparitions
in them, are signs of Gods anger, as extraordinary Eclipses As at ^hrists
Death, which Eclipse Dionysius Areopaeita, a great Astronomer, beholding, and
little knowing of Christ's death, he cried out, Aut Deus naturae patitur aut
mundi machina dissolvetur.
, Blazing-starres.

The works of the fifth day; were,

The Fishes of the Sea, and Fowls of the Air, diverse i^ nature, shape,
qualities; virtues and manners of living: the fishes were appointed to
increase, multiply, and fill the waters: and the fowls to increase, multiply,
and fly in the air.

The work of the sixth day is twofold.

1. All terrestrial brute creatures, Beasts The Beasts of the earth are here
distinguished into three ranks, 1. Catell, that is all tame and domestical
Beasts. 2. Creeping things, whereby are understood those which have no feet, as
Serpents, and those which have but very short, as Worms, Ants. 3. Beasts,
whereby are understood all wild Beasts, which have their name from life in the
Hebrew.
, Cattle, and every thing which creeps upon the earth in their kind, having
virtue and power from God to increase and multiply.

2. Man, male, and Female, Adams body of the dust of the earth, viz. that he
might have in his own bosom an argument, and incentive of humility, left for
his excellency he should wax proud against God; Eves body out of a rib of
Adam, for a sign of most near conjunction, and love betwixt man and wife. The
Creation ceased in man, as in the Masterpiece of Gods skill, and as in the end
to which all other things were destinate. For all other Creatures, by the
bounty of the Creator, were to serve Adam, as their Lord and Prince.

CHAP. III.
I Shall now insist more largely on the particular Creatures, All Philosophy is
in the first^Chapter of Gen^sis; Ba^sil, Ambrose, Zanchie, Polanus, have drawn
discourses of Philosophy hence. Of the Heavens, the Angels, Elements, and
Light, the Creation of days and nights. 1. Of the Heavens.
and draw some Consectaries from them, saying little of the reasonable
Creatures, Angels and Men; because I intend more fully to treat of them by
themselves.

The Creation of the Heavens is a great and wonderful work of God; the
Heavens were not always, neither came they by chance, or any other way, but by
the wonderful power of God creating them. So the Scripture tells us often,
Psalm. 102. 15. Esaias 40. 12. and 22. and 42. 5. and 45. 2. and 48. 13. God
frequently challenges to himself the glory of this exceeding great work,
alleging it as an effect of his wonderful power and greatness. The
excellency and greatness of this work appears in diverse things. 1. The
abstrusenesse of the matter. 2. The perfection of the form. 3. The exceeding
hugeness of its quantity. 4. The height of it. 5. Its swift motion. Lastly,
the excellent usefulness of if for the Creatures here below, and all other
things contained in it.

First, the matter of the Heavens is dark and hidden, and goes beyond the
power of mortal creatures, certainly to determine of it. Philosophers know not
what to say here; some of them do think, that the upper heavens are made of
the same matter with these inseriour bodies, and some again do deny it, and
think it consists of another, which they call the fifth E^sence; because they
perceive it to be of such different working and qualities front the things
below.

2. The perfection of the Figure Among all Geometrical Figures, the
sphaericall, or the round is the most perfect; and amongst all natural bodies,
the heaven, is the most excellent. It was therefore good reason the most
beautiful body should have the most perfect and exquisite shape. Mr. Pemble.
of the heavens, and all the Stars of heaven does marvellously grace it: for
it is of an Orbicular or round form, a Circle encompassing the earth and
waters round, which is of it self also for the maine Orbicular; and this
concerning the Stars our senses do declare, and concerning the whole Heavens
the motions of the Stars, which our eye does tell us; for the Sun rises
every morning over against the place it did set the evening before, and so
evinceth that its course is round The earth is round but not precisely: There
are Hills like Warts, and Valleys, like Wrinkles in a man's body. Exact
roundnesse is not found in any body but the Heavens.
: The round figure is the most beautiful, strong, perfect, and capacions
figure, and this may mind us of Gods Inf^^itenesse, Perfection, and
unchangeablenesse.

3. Consider the hugeness of its How else could it contain the Sun, Moon, and
Stars, in convenient distance from the earth, one from another.
quantity: for who can measure the backside of heaven? or tell how many miles
space that mighty Circle does contain? the Globe of Earth and water is very
great, but all that is, as it were, an undiscernable Point, compared to the
whole Globe of heaven: how incomprehen^^bly great is he which has made a
building so great? The whole circuit of the heavens, wherein are the fixed
Staus, is reckoned by Astronomers to be a thousand and 17. millions of miles at
least.

4. It is a high and stately building, Job. 22. 1^. 160. millions Mr. Greenhil
on Ezekiel. p. 104.
of miles high from earth to heaven: it is so far by the Astronomers rules.
It is a wonder (says Bishop Hall in his Contemplations on the Creation.
one) that we can look up to so admirable a height, and that the very eye is
not tired in the way. If this ascending line could be drawn right forward,
some that have calculated curiously, have found it five hundred years journey
unto the starrie heaven. This puts us in mind of the infinite mercy and
goodness of God, The Heavens for height Prove.
Psalm 103. 3. and of his Majesty; the highest heavens are a fit Palace for
the most High, Psalm. 104. 3.

5. Its admirable swift motion and revolution in 24. hours, Vide Fullers
Miscellanea. l. 1. c. 15.
which our conceits cannot follow; teaches us, that God is far more swift
and ready to help us in our need. A Bullet out of a Musket flies swiftly,
Insita a Deo vis quae in scripturis saepe appellatur praeceptum Domini est
causa motus.
it will fly 180 miles an hour according to its motion. The Sun moves swifter,
Mr. Greenhil ubi supra. Philosophers say, the Heavens work upon Inferior
bodies by three instruments, viz. Light, Motion, Influence.
1160000 miles in one hour; the fixed stars some of them 42 millions of miles
each hour.

6. The use of it is admirable, the motion of the heavenly bodies is the cause
of generation, and corruption here below: if they should cease moving, the
being of sublunary bodies would cease. The inferior heavens are fitted for the
generation of Meteors, Rain, Snow Thunder, Lightning by its fit distance, as
it were from the Earth and Stars. Here is room for the making and showing of
them all. The lower part of it also, by reason of its thinness and subtilty,
is fit for the flying of Birds, and for the breathing and the living of man and
beast; and it is fitted to be enlightened by the Sunbeams, and to receive that
illumination and heat, without which the Creatures here below could not
subsist, and the stars, c^iefly the Sun, are placed at a convenient
distance; and it is fitted for the swift motion of the heavenly bodies, in
regard of its raritie and subtilnesse, which if it were thick and gross could
not have so speedy a passage through, or about the same; especially the highest
heavens are fitted for the inhabitation of those immortal persons; some of
which do, and others shall inhabit a being so spacious, bright, and every way
glorious, that the multitude of those happy persons may have space enough to
see the beauty of GOD.

The Philosophers divide the Regions of the world into two Regions, the
Celestial, and Elementary Region. The Celestial, they divide into diverse
Orbs, or Globes: for the Heaven of heavens, seeds Beatorum, the feat of the
blessed Saints and Angels, they had little knowledge of, if any at all. The
first moveable, as they termed it, the highest Orb by the unspeakable, swift
circumrotation of which, they thought all the other Orbs were carried from
East to West, in the space of 24. hours. This is the tenth Globe or Orb; the
next they call the Chrystalline or watery Orb, because it is clear bright, and
apt to to shine through as water. Some say the Orbs are contiguous each ^o
other, and clo^ely infold each other as the skins of an on^on contain one
another, and others think there is no such var^ety or maltitude of Orbs, but
alone one first moveab^e in which they conceive the fixed stars to be placed,
and they think the planets move not in Orbs but of themselves, as birds fly
in the air.
The next is the Starrie heaven, which has eight Spheres, one for the fixed
Stars, and seven other for the Planets, each Planet having (as they say) his
distinct Orb. Saturn is the uppermost, next Jupiter, then Mars, in the
midst the Sun, then Venus, next Mercury, the la^t and lowest of all, is
the Moon. So is the division of the heavenly Region; the Elementary, they
divide into the region of fire, next to the Moon, and of air next to that;
and that they distinguish into three Regions, the highest, middle, and lowest;
then that of the Water and Earth, compounded together: so they: But now the
Scriptures divide the World into two parts, Heaven, and Earth, as you read in
the first words of the Bible, In the beginning God made heaven and earth. By
Earth, it means this Globe of Earth, and Water, where men, Beasts, and Fishes
are. By Heaven, all the space from the Earth upward; and of this heaven it
makes three parts. 1. The highest Heaven, the heaven of Heavens, 1 Kings 8.
27. the habitation of God himself; and all his Saints and Angels, Job. 14.
where God reveals his glorious presence to them for ever. This is called by
Paul the third Heaven, 2 Cor. 12. 4. for its situation, above the Air and
sky, both which have the name of Heaven and Paradise It is called the Paradise
of God, Rev. 2. 7*
, 2 C^r. 12. 4. because the earthly Paradise was a figure of it; and because it
is a place of endless joy and pleasure.

2. The Starry It is called by the Greeks ^ast (...), that is altogether
shining, because of the great number of Stars in it.
, Sky, where the Stars are; it is described in Job to be firm, as a molten
Looking-glass.

3. The lower Heavens; all that place above our heads to the Starrie Heaven.
Hence the Clouds are called the clouds of Heaven, and the Fowls of Heaven, and
Birds, are said to fly in the face of the Heavens.

Every one is to fall out with himself, and blame himself for slighting and
neglecting the consideration of this work, that offers it self so constantly
to our eyes, even this so curiously wrought Curtain, which God has Psalm. 104.
2. There he alludes to Genesis 1. 6. ^et there be a Firmament or stretching forth.
God made the heavens with as great ease as one can stretch out a curtain when
it is folded up.
spread forth, especially let us blame our selves for not seeing God in the
workman-ship of heaven; that we take not notice of him, as the Author of it,
and raise our hearts higher than the heavens to him that measures them forth,
as with a Span, we should believe that he is so. Great, Good, and Wise, as this
Heaven proclaims him the Maker thereof to be. Let us see and bewail this
blindness; there is no place in the earth, which has not the Heavens spread
over it. Oh that we could put our selves in mind of him that did spread out
the Heavens, and remember, that he sees us every where; for where any work of
his is to be seen, surely, the^e is himself to be seen; and there he sees all
things that are there; especially, let us learn to press this knowledge upon
our will and affections, that it may beget in us obedience, love, fear, joy,
confidence, and other holy virtues; without which, all talking, How beautiful
art thou that have adorned the heavens says Job.
yea and thinking of God, is idle and fruitless. Let us press our selves to
become subject to him, who has the heavens at command, because he made them,
to love him that has formed, for our use, so excellent an house, so richly
vaulted above; see the invisible things of him that made all in these things
which you behold, thy conversation should be there where Christ is, Col. 3
There is thy Fathers house, thine own Country, thy inheritance, It is a great
deal of comfort to Gods people, that have such a Father, who can so easily
stretch out Heaven, trust in him for house-roome, that can build a world with
so much ease.

For the Angels (because I intend to speak more largely of them afterward) I
shall here only answer one question athem. Consectaries from the Angels.


Why are they not spoken of in the Creation, where man and beasts are
mentioned, and why is not the special day named wherein they were made?

Answ. Not so much, for fear the Jews, a people prone to Idolatry should
have worshipped them: for then by the same reason Moses should have forborne to
have mentioned them in the whole story of Genesis, which was published at the
same time, and to the same people, that the first part of it: but it may be to
give us to understand, that God did not use any of their help in the Creation,
and had no need of them at all, but made the whole world without them, or
because he relates the making of sensible things Quia Moses ruditatise nostrae
accommodare voluit, ideo quae a^tiora nostro captu erant praetermissis, ea
tantum commemoravit quae sub oculis sunt. Zanchius de S^mb. Apost. Ego Mosen
puto voluisse populo creationem rerum aspectabilium proponere, and nihil de
invisibilibus dicere, unde in toto sex dierum opere ne unius quidem invisibilis
Creaturae mentionem fecit. Mercerus in Genesis 1. 1. idem habet in caput secundum
versum primum; idem habet Pareus.
only, but that they were created, appears, Coloss. 1. 16.

The Scripture has not so clearly expressed the precise time and day of their
Creation, therefore Ambrose and Danaeus confess that they know not when they
were created. But it is probable they were made with the Heavens, which some
say were made the first, others the second day.

As man was then first made, after his habitation, the earth was made and
adorned; so it is probable that the Angels were made together in a great
multitude. After the Heavens, their habitation was finished. Chemnit. in loc.
commun.

Genesis 2. 1. The Heavens and all the host of them. It is plain from Job 38. 7.
that they were made before the Earth. When God laid the foundations of the
earth, and laid the Cornerstone thereof: then the Sons of God (that is, the
Angels) Job 1. 7. Snouted for joy.

An Element is that whereof any thing is compounded, and it self uncompoun^ed
Each element is superior to other, not more in place then dignity.

The dry land is called earth, Of the four Elements.
which is a firm, 1. ^f the earth.
cold, and dry Element, round and heavy, hanging unmoveably in the midst of
the world, fit for habitation.

The Psalmist describes the creation of the earth, A Base is the lowest part of
a pillar. The dry land appearing firm above the waters, God called (...) erets,
of which our English name, Earth is derived, and has the sound of it.
Psalm. 104. verse. 5 Who has laid the foundation of the earth, or founded the
earth upon his Basis, that it should not be removed for ever. The earth is the
heaviest and lowest element. It is so made that it does stand firm in its
place, so that neither the whole earth is moved out of its place, nor yet the
great parts of it. This is an exceeding wonderful work of God to settle the
earth so upon certain foundations, that it is not shaken out of its place.
Take a little piece of earth not bigger then ones fist, nay then ones eye, or
the apple of it: hold it up in the air, let it fall, it will never cease
moving till come to lie upon some solid body, Nec circumfuso pendebat in aere
tellus ponderibus librata suis Ovid met.
that it may hold it up and stay the motion of it. Now how is it, that this
whole lump of earth, the whole body I say of the earth hangs fast in the wide
and open air, and does not sway and move now hither and now thither: what is
it that holds it up so steadfast in the very midst of the air? It is Gods
work who has founded it on his Basis that it cannot be moved. Carpenter in
his first book of Geog. chapter 4. says the earths circular motion is probable;
Copernicus said, that the earth moved, and the heavens ^ood still. See more of
this after about day and night.
This work is often mentioned in the Scripture, Joh 26. 7. There is nothing
which might hold it up, and yet behold it hangs still and quiet, as if it had
some pillar or base upon which to rest it self. The Lord does in larger words
commend it to the consideration of Job, when himself comes to speak with him,
Job 38. 4. and 6. God there compares himself to a builder that lays the
foundation, and then sets up the building by line and measure, and convinces
Job of his weakness, that knows not how this earth should be set up or
founded, whereas the Lord himself effected this building long before Job was.
David tells of it, Psalm. 24. 2. as a ground of Gods right unto it, and to all
things that are in it: for says he, He has founded it upon the seas, and
established it upon the floods. And Solomon mentions it, Prove. 8. 29. and 30.
4. Eccl. 1. 4. This is a great work, because it is both necessary and
unsearcheable. It is necessary, for it is the cause of the order of things in
all the world, and of their not being jumbled and confounded together.
Aristotle would have Earthquakes to proceed from a spirit or vapor included
in the bowels of the earth (2d. of his mereors 7. ch.) which finding no way to
pass out, is enforced to tutne back, and barred any passage outseeks every
corner: and while it labors to break open some place for going forth, it
makes a tumultuous motion which is the Earthquak. It is 1. universal, which
shakes the whole earth in every part, at least in the upper face, the cause
whereof is not natural, but the immediate and miraculous power of God, such a
one happened at our Saviors passion. 2. particular that which is limited to some
one or more particular places. What Thunder is in the clouds, the Earthquake is
in the Earth.
If the lowest part of any building be not firm, all that is built upon it,
will totter and tumble, and come down quickly: so if the earth, this lowest
part of the world should shake or reele, and be apt to move hither and thither,
the things that be upon it by nature, or that are built upon it by the
workmanship of man, could not possibly subsist or endure. Rivers and Channels
would be daily altered, dry ground would ever and anon become Sea, and Sea, dry
ground: trees would often totter and fall, or else be changed from place to
place: building and houses would still be falling and tumbling down off the
earth, did it not keep its own room: nay heaven and earth would come together,
utter confusion would overturne the face of the earth, and men, beasts, and all
things below would come to nothing. So needful it was for this great Architect
to set the Cornerstone of the earth, fast, firm, and immovable. But the cause
of it is unsearcheable, who can find out to the full the reason of this so
necessary a work? Every heavy thing we see must have something to keep it up,
something on which to rest it self, that it may go no further but abide where
it is: but what does this earth rest on? How is it held so even in the very
midst, and sweyed neither one way nor another? who can tell me a full, just,
satisfactory reason in nature? We must not think that God does hold it up by
an immediate, violent, supernatural, or miraculous working, but in a natural
way by ordering the principles of nature so, that they shall necessarily
concur to effect this setlednesse. Philosophers give this reason of it, they
say, the simple bodies were made, some of a light, subtle, thin, and
spiritual nature: and their property is to ascend, to go upward still, so as
the light still flies higher; and some of a more gross, thick, and heavy
nature, and the property of these is to move downward, and still the heavier to
make it self a way through the lighter, and to press toward the Center, that
is the middle point of the whole round of the world; for it must be confessed
that the world is round. Wherefore seeing every part and portion of the earth
presses toward the very middle point of all, it cannot be, but that all must
stand fast in the midst, seeing each part thronging the other, and leaning upon
the other toward the very middle: all will be quiet if the parts be even
poised. But now how heavy things should be made so to move toward the Center,
and how each part should so evenly move, and a number of other questions more,
let them answer that are able, especially seeing the earth does not carry in it
self to sense, a perfect, even, and smooth roundnesse, it is hard then to
answer to the question which God propounded to Job, upon what be the sockets
of it fastened? It is a work of God exceeding our capacity, and must therefore
quicken and call up our admiration.

We should blame our selves for so seldom putting our selves in mind of this
great work, to stir up our selves, to magnify the Author of it, and make it an
argument of our blessing his name, for which David speaks of it, Psalm. 104.
or of humbling our selves before him in acknowledgment of his power and
wisdom, and of our weakness and folly, to which end it is mentioned in other
places, or indeed to any good purpose of informing our selves the better,
either of his nature or our duty. Oh how brutish and blockish are we! So
strange and so mighty a work is done and continued in our sight, here it was
done before I was here, and here it will remain and be continually done after
I am gone hence. I enjoy the benefit of it as well as any other, and with all
others, and yet when did I take it into consideration? When did I once offer it
to the serious meditation of my mind? When did I say to my self, how does
this great ball of earth remain unmovable in the midst of this wide and
spacious Heaven? Why does it not reele or totter toward the North or South, the
East or West, or now upward, now downward? What hand does hold it up, and that
so steadfastly, that for thousands of years it has not moved? surely some
potent and intelligent workman has in such a wonderful manner reared up and
founded this building. That is he whom we call God; why do I not fasten in my
self a more sure and firm, notion of his being, and a more lively, firm, and
effectual acknowledgement of his excellency?

We are worthy of great blame that have scarce ever directed our minds to the
contemplation and fruitful meditation of this great act of God among the rest,
for any good, spiritual, and holy intent. Scholars sometimes in their
Philosophical studies stumble upon these questions, and set their wits on
work to find out the natural reason of them, but alas in how unsanctified a
manner, so as not at all to enforce the thing upon their souls, for making of
them more thankful and obedient! But for the plain man that is no Scholar,
though he have wit enough for all things else, yet he has no wit to enter
upon these cogitations: and when he finds the matter so far above his
reach, yet to tell himself that this is one of Gods works, and so to call on
himself to fear, know, and obey him, this, this is that we must every man
lament in himself, as a just and due cause why the Scripture should ascribe
brutishness unto us, and we unto our selves, and why we should present our
selves before the divine Majesty with bashful and lowly confessions of our
wrong done to God, in robbing him of the honor due unto him for his works
which our selves have the fruit of. Secondly to our selves, in depriving our
selves of the best and most excellent fruit of them, which is to be led by them
above themselves unto him.

This may exhort every one of us to take this work of God from David, and to
make it as it were our theme, or the object of our meditations. Whosoever
applies himself to raise up such thoughts, shall find a great unaptnesse in
himself, and a kind of weariness to them with a vehement inclination to
entertain other fancies, and the Devil will take occasion hence to dissuade
him from doing the duty at all, as if it were as good omit it, as perform it
so weakly: it is a false tale which Satan tells, for God has promised
acceptance to the weakest endeavors, in calling himself a Father, but to
accept of the nonperformance, he has never promised, for even a Father cannot
do that.

Lastly, we must learn to seek unto God, and trust in him for spiritual
stability of grace in our souls, and must thus importune him. Lord, when there
was never an earth, thou made one, and did lay the foundation of it so
sure, that no force nor skill can move it. O, thou can also create a frame of
holiness in my heart and soul, and so stablish, settle, and confirm it that
it shall never be moved. I beseech thee, and trust that thou will do this as
thou have done the former. One prime use to which we must improve these
natural benefits, is to quicken our prayers, and confirm our faith in
begging, and expecting such as are spiritual. When God will confirm the faith
of his people, and win them to call upon him for good things, he puts them in
mind of these wonders in nature, they must make use of them therefore, for
this purpose.

^The second Element is water, Exodus 17. 6. Numb. 20. 2.
so necessary a creature, 2 King. 3. 16. 20.
as nothing can be more dangerously or uncomfortably wanting to the life of
man. It is an Element moist in some degree, and cold in the highest, therefore
it cooles the body, and tempers the heat that it grow not excessive. It has
manifold uses constantly.

1. We and our Cattle drink of it, and neither can continue without water or
something made of it, our bread must be kneaded with it, and our meat boiled
with it.

2. It serves to wash our bodies and the apparel we wear: if our hands and
feet were never washed, what an evil smell should we carry about?

3. It makes the earth fruitful. The Husbandman loses his labor, if after
sowing there come no rain; it is

1. Of large and common use, no Country can want it, neither rich nor poor,
man nor beast.

2. Of constant use, we must have it daily, or something made of it, and our
beasts also.

3. Very profitable, we drink it, and wash with it, and our meat is prepared
by it, and beasts drink it.

It reprehends us, that so ungratefully enjoy and devour this benefit without
lifting our hearts up to God, and praising him for it; A secret Atheism
prevails in our hearts, which is the cause of this great blockishnesse and
ingratitude, and corrupts all things to us, and forfeits them, and provokes
Gods justice against us, Say, Lord, thou might justly choke me for the time
to come, for want of water, that have not been particularly thankful to thee
for this mercy. We should bring in the parcels of Gods goodness for bread,
water, fire; when thou washest thy hands, let thy heart be lifted up to God
that made the Element; Say, O that I could praise, love, and obey him, that
has done this for me.

The usefulness, abundance, and easiness to come by, does highly commend this
benefit, and the giver of it, showing water to be very good, and our selves
much beholding to him that gives it.

Aunciently, in those warmer Countries especially, water was the usual drink
of men; therefore in the description of the cost of famillies in housekeeping,
when we read of so many Oxen and Sheep slain, and so much meal and fine
flower, we read not of any wine; which would have been mentioned, if it had
been usually drunk.

3. The Air or all the void place between the clouds and the earth, giving
breath of life to all things that breath, this is the third Element, light and
subtle, moving upward, not downward, because it has no heaviness in it.

It is divided into three regions or stages. The highest is said to be
exceeding hot, and also dry, because it is near the fiery Element and stars,
by the force of whose beams it receives the heat, which also is much
increased by following the motions of the Heavens. The lowest region is (they
say) hot and moist: hot by the reflection of the Sunbeams meeting with the
earth, and moist from its own proper nature, and by reason of the vapors
exhaled out of the earth and water: or rather it is variable, now bot, now
cold, sometime temperate, differing according to times and seasons of the
year, and places also, or several climates. The middle region of the air, is
cold in respect of the two other, because it cannot follow the motions of the
Heavens, (as the upper region does) being hindered by the tops of mountains; 2.
being free from the reflex beams of the Sun, by which the lower region of the
air is made hot.

The Air is most thin, The qualities and use of the Air.
without light or color, but apt to receive heat, light and cold, heavier
then the fire, lighter then the earth or water placed in the midst of them, fit
for breathing, seeing, smelling and moving.

This Element also leads us to God. For 1. It t^uly and really subsisteth
though it be not seen: So also the Lord, the maker of it, has a real, but
invisible existence. 2. It is every where within and without us, so is God
every where present. 3. It is the preserver of my life, and we may say of it
truly, as the Apostle of God himself, Acts 17. 28.
in it (under God) we live, move, and have our being.

4. Fire, which is (some say) to be understood in light, an adjunct and quality
of it, Fire is a most subtle Element, most light, most hot, most simple, and
immi^t. Therefore the Persians worshipped fire as a God, the Chaldeans adored
Ur, and the Romans worshipped holy fire.
Scaliger would prove a fiery Element because fire tends thither. First, God
made the Elements of the earth and water, which in Geography make one globe.
Others say light neither is that Element, nor proceeds from it, but the Sun:
however I shall handle it here among the works of the first day.

Without light Gods other works could not have been discovered by men. Light is
an excellent work of God, tending to manifest his excellency to men, it is a
comfortable thing to behold the light; Psalm. 104. 2. Who coverest thy self
with light as with a garment, that is, createdst the light: thereby showing his
excellency as a man does, by making and wearing a rich and glorious suite of
cloths: he made and does maintain the light in its perfection.

God expresses his greatness above Job, Job 38. 19. 24.
in that he could not make light, nor knew not what it was, q. d. Job, thou
art a mean Creature, thou do not create nor order the light, neither do
thou know the nature and working of it. The greatness of this work appears
principally by two considerations.

1. The hidden, See Sir Walter Ralegihs history of the world, l. 1. c. 1. Sect.
7. If this light be not spiritual, it approaches nearest unto spirituality:
and if it have any corporality, then of all other the most subtle and pure; for
as it is of all things seen the most beautiful and of swiftest motion: so it
is most necessary and beneficial. Sir Walter Raleigh.
abstruse, and difficult nature of it. Philosophers cannot tell what to say of
it, whether it be a substance or accident: and if a substance whether
corporeal or incorporeall and spiritual, it is a quality (say they) which
makes other things visible: that is the effect of it. This word, light, in
English, signifies both that which the Latins call lux, and that which they
call lumen, which yet are two distinct things: The first being in the Sunn^ or
Moon properly, the second in the Air, and an effect of the other.

Some think that it is a substance, and one of the simple substances, which
they call Elements; of which compounded substances are made, by mixing them
together; and is nothing but the Element of fire, which Philosophers speak of,
being more subtle then the Air. And as the water compassed the earth, and the
air the water, so did light the air, and was far greater then the air, as
that was then the water and earth, so as this is the highest of all the
Elements.

2. It is very useful, needful, and beneficial; For first it carries heat
in it, and conveigheth heat, and the co^lestiall influences unto all other
things. 2. It distinguishes day and night each from other: without it, what
were the world but a dungeon?

3. It is exceeding necessary for the dispatch of all business. It is a great
paradoxe to think light to be a body, which yet is maintained by Sir Kenelm
Digbie in a Book lately set forth. But that light should be a spiritual
substance, is much more absurd, for how then should it be visible?


4. To make the beautiful works of God visible, Heaven and Earth, and
dissipate those sad thoughts and sorrows, which the darkness both begets
and maintains.

1. We cannot see light without light, Consectaries.
nor know God without his teaching.

2. This serves to condemn our selves which cannot see God in this light,
though we see it with content, and lament this blindness. When the day begins
to peep in at your windows, let God come into your thoughts, he comes
clothed and thus attired, tell your selves how beautiful and excellent he is.

3. It may exhort us to labor to raise up our hearts to God in hearty
thankfulness for the light, The eye cannot see any thing without a double
light Lumine innato, an inward light in the Christalline humor of the eye. 2.
Lumine illato, an outward light in the air, and on the object.
how merciful and gracious art thou, who give me light and the sight of it!
take heed of abusing it to sin, and thy eyes, whereby thou discernest it,
especially magnify God that gives you spiritual light, and sight. Christ is
the light of the world; natural darkness is terrible, light comfortable, what
is spiritual?

Light is so pure, fair and clear, that nothing can pollute it, a resemblance
of Gods infinite purity.

The creation of day and night, Genesis 1. 4. 5.
and the distinction and vicissitude of both is the last thing in the first
days work.

Day The da^ is in Greek (...) of (...) of (...) gentle or tame; because it is
appointed for tame creatures, or of (...) I desire, because it is to be
desired. In Latin it is dies a Deo of God, as a divine thing.
is the presence of light in one half of the world, The night is called (...)
of (...) to strike, as in latin nox a nocen do of hurting.
and night the absence of it in the other. So that the dispute whether day or
night were first, seems superfluous, seeing they must needs be both together:
for at what time the light is in one half of the world, it must needs be
absent from the other, and contrarily, for all darkness is not night, nor all
light day: but darkness distinguished from light, that is night, and light
distinguished from darkness, that is day; unless we will take day for the
natural, not the artificial day, that is, the space of 24. hours, in which
the Sun accomplisheth hi^. diurnall motion about the Earth. Darkness is
nothing but the absence of light. Night is the space of time in every place,
when the light is absent from them. Day is the space of time in every place,
when the light is present with them, it is not simply the presence of light,
but presence of light in one half of the world, when the other is destitute of
it; and Night is not simply the absence of light, but the absence of it from
one half of the world, when the other half enjoys it. God made the Sun the
chief instrument of continuing the course of day and night forever, by its
diurnall and constant motion. Dies Diem docet: Alpham Beta Corrigit.
This is a wonderful work of God, and to be admired

The Scripture notes it, the day is thine, and the night also is thine says
the Psalmist, and the ordinances of day and night cannot be changed.

The greatness of this work appears in the cause of it, and the beneficial
effects.

First, for the cause, It runs (say Astronomers) above a 1000. miles within the
compa^e of every minute: this incredible swiftness gave occas^o^ to Copernicus
and others to conceive the globe of the earth did rather move, and the Sun
stand still. See Dr. Hackwels Apology, and Carpenters Geography. Some think
there is a greater probability the earth should move round once a day, then
that the heavens should move with such an incredible swiftness, scarce
compatible to an^ natural body* Others deny it, grounding their opinion upon
Scripture, which affirms the earth to stand fast, so as it cannot be moved;
and upon sense, because we perceive it not to move: and lastly upon reasons
drawn from things hurled up, and let fall upon the Earth. Maste^ Pemble in his
brief introduction to Geography, page 12.
it is the incredibly swift motion of the Sun which goes round about the
world in the space of 24. hours, that is the space of 60. miles every hour in
the earth, but how many thousand 60. miles in its own circle or circumference,
for the Earth is a very small thing, compared to the Sun. The body of the
Sun is 166. times (as it is thought) greater then the Earth, therefore the
circumference that it goes must needs be at least so much larger then the
compass of the Earth, therefore its course must needs be at least so much
larger then the compass of the Earth, therefore its course must needs be at
least 160. times 60. miles every hour, that is, almost 16000. miles every
hour, that is, 166. miles every minute.

The celerity of this motionb is incredible, it goes beyond the thoughts of a
man to conceive distinctly of the passage through every place; if a man should
divide the circumference of the circle of the Sun into certain parts, he
could not so soon have thought of them, as the Sun runs through them. God does
this great work, it is thought to be caused by the turning round of the highest
Sphere or the Firmament, which pulling along with it self the inferior Orbs,
makes them to move according to its course: but who can give a reason why that
Sphere it self should go so swiftly, even much more swiftly then the Sun,
because it is far higher then the Sun, as much as that is higher then the
earth: but the immediate power of God who does move all in moving this one. But
that God should make the Sun fulfill such a daily race to make day and night,
it highly commends the work.

Again, the usefulness of it is great: for if it should be in any place
always night, what could they do? how should they live? How would any thing
grow, seeing the nights are cold, light and heat being companions, and cold
and darkness being companions. If no light had been in the world, the world
would not have been a place fit for living things. But if one half only of
the world should have had light with it always, it would have caused excessive
heat, and so would have burnt up and consumed all things, and been no less
harmfull then the defect of heat: but now the succession The night eases the
burden of the day: and the day drives away the terror of the night.
of one of these to the other, viz. light and heat to darkness and cold, does
so temper them by a kind of mixture, that it is in such proportion in every
place, as is necessary to bring forth all sorts of living things, especially
the fruits of the earth. So God has assigned such a way and race to the
Sun, which by his presence makes day, and by his absence night, as was fit,
and only fit for the quickening, enlivening, and comfort of every kind of living
creature, so that upon this course the wel-being, yea the very being almost of
all things does depend.

We should lament and bewail our exceeding great blindness, Consectaries
from day and night.
that live day after day and night after night, and yet busy not our selves
about this work, not see God in it, though it be so constant as it was never
stopped but twice since the beginning of the Creation, viz. in Hezekiah's time
by going back of the Sun, and in Joshuah's time by stopping of the Sun for a
certain time by the immediate power of God.

We have the profit of the day and of the night, but neither in one nor other
do we mark the wisdom, goodness, and power of God. Night is the time of
rest. Sleep is the paranthesis of our troubles.
In the night men rest and refresh their bodies with sleep; Psalm. 104. 20. 21,
22, 23.
wild beasts then wake and hunt for their prey. In the day men and tame
creatures make and dispatch their business, and eat and drink, and wild
beasts then rest in their dens. God is still working for us, our thoughts are
still idle toward him: this is a proof of our Atheism and estrangement from
him; this is the blindness of our minds, a not being able to discern of
things by discourse of reason, and the power of understanding; for the
conceiving of which, just and plain reasons are offered unto us. There is a
natural blindness of the eye, when it is unable to discern things by the
light of the Sun: this is felt and complained of, but spiritual blindness of
mind is, Spiritual blindness.
when it is unable to discern supernatural truths which concern the soul,
and another and better life, by the use of reason, and help of those
principles which are as light unto it: this is not felt nor lamented, but it is
therefore not felt, because it is so natural to us, and because we brought it
into the world. The beginning of the cure of spiritual blindness, is to see
it: let us see it therefore, and be troubled at it; why do not I see Gods great
work in making night and day to succeed each other?

Let us look up to God in this work, Sol exprobrat dormientem. Erasm.
I have the benefit of it, and now light visits me. Oh that I could honor
thee, and magnify thy power and the greatness of thy hand, and use the light
of the day to do the services that are required at my hand in my place. Again
in the evening a little before we sleep, we should think of the great work of
making day, for these many hours the Sun has been within our sight, and
showed its beams and light unto us, and has run a long race for our good,
bringing with it lightsome cheerfulness, the companion of the day. Now it is
gone to the other part of the world to visit them, that God might show his
goodness to one place as well as to another. Where a multitude of things
concur to one effect, with which none of them in particular is acquainted,
there we cannot but know that one common wisdom rules them all, and so it is
in the working of the Sun, Moon, and Stars, to make the Seasons of the day and
night, and of Summer and Winter, therefore some common wisdom must overruled
all of them. There is a spiritual light in our Horizon: whereas Judaisme and
Turcisme is darkness; and Popery, a glimering light. We should pray to God to
give us spiritual light, and be thankful for it. He makes day and night also
in respect of prosperity and adversity: weeping may continue for a night: this
vici^litude keeps the soul in growth, in good temper, as the other is
profitable for the body, pray to God to send Christ to them which sit in
darkness and in the shadow of death, and vouchsafe to make it day with them as
well as with us. He has said in his word, that he will discover the glory of
his Son, Esaias 40. 5.
and all the earth shall see it together.

CHAP. IIII.
BY the name of Clouds and Waters above the Firmament, Genesis 1. We may
understand all meteores both watery and fiery which were then created in their
causes, and so by clouds and winds, Psalm. 104. 3. must be understood all the
meteors, the great works of God by which he shows himself and works in
this lower Heaven.

They are called Meteors Meteora a loco quia in sublimi regione pendent,
Brierwood.
because they are most of them generated aloft in the air.

Zanchius says there are four sorts of Meteors, others make but 3. sorts.

1. Fiery, There are 3. sorts of Meteors, one of fire and hot, the other of
air or water and cold, the other mingled,
which in the Supreme Region of the air are so enflamed by the fire, that
they are of a fiery nature, as Comets, Thunder.

2. Airy, which being begotten of dry vapors of the earth, come near the
nature of air, as winds.

3. Waterie, which retain the nature of the water, as snow and rain.

4. Earthly, which being begot of earthly vapors, are also dug out of the
Earth, as metals, stones.

The efficient cause is God, He sends snow like wool.
according to that of the Psalmist, hail, snow, ice, wind and storm do his
will.

The remote matter of the Meteors are Elements, the next matter are
exhalations, which are twofold, fumus et vapor, smoke is of a middle nature
between earth and fire, vapor between water and air. If it come from the
earth or some sandy place, it is fumus a fume or kind of smoke, Vapor est
calidus and humidus, oriturque ex aere et aqua, exhalatio calida et sicca,
oriturque ex igne and terra. Zab.
if it come from the water or some watery place it is a vapor.

Vapors or exhallations are fumes raised from the water and earth by the
heavenly bodies, into one of the 3. Regions of the air, whence diverse
impressions are formed according to the quality and quantity of the exhalations.

Thunder is a sound heard out of a thick or close compacted Cloud, which sound
is procured by reason of hot and dry exhalations shut within the cloud: which
seeking to get out with great violence rend Like chestnuts or eggs breaking in
the fire.
the cloud, from whence proceeds the tumbling noise which we call Thunder.

The Earth sends out partly by its own innate heat, and partly by the
external heat and attraction of the Sun, certain hot and Cum exhalatio Calida
and sicca in nubibus ocurrit humidae and frigidae illam violenta eruptione
perrumpit atque ex hac collisi^ne fragor oritur qui tonitrudicitur atque
accensio and inflammatio exhalationis, quae fulgur nominatur. Arist. l. 2.
Meteor. c. 2. and 8.
dry steames, which the Philosopher calls exhalations: and these going up in
some abundance, are at last enclosed within some thick cloud, consisting of
cold and moist vapors, which finding themselves straightned, do with violence
seek a vent, and break through the sides or low part of the cloud. There is
first a great conflict and combat there of the contrary qualities, a great
rumbling and tumbling and striving of the exhalations within the cloud, until
it break forth into a loud and fearful crack. Then the exhalation by its
heat incensed in the strife, proves all on a flame as it comes in the air,
and that is Lightning.

Lastly the exhalation falling down upon the earth is so violent, that
sometimes it breaks trees, sometimes it sings and burns what it meets
mith, it kills men and living creatures, and in the most abundance of it, there
is a Thunder bolt begotten through exceeding great heat, hardening the earthy
parts of it.

God has power over the Thunder. Job 37. 4.
He commands it, 1 Samuel 7. 10. 29. Psalm. per tot. and 18. 1^.
rules it, orders it, for time, place, manner of working and all circumstances,
the Thunder in Egypt at the delivering of the Law proves this. Therefore in the
Scripture it is called the voice of God, and the fearfulness and
terriblenesse thereof is made an argument of the exceeding greatness of God,
that can at his pleasure destroy his enemies even by the chiding of his voice;
A winters thunder is a summers wonder. In Autumn or Spring are oftener meteor*
seen then in the summer and winter except in such places where the Summer and
Winter are of the temper of Spring and Autumn.
in Egypt he smote them with hail, lightning, thunder and with stormy tempest.

At the delivering of the Law, mighty thunderclaps made way to the Lords
appearance, and were his harbingers to tell of his coming, and prepare the
hearts of the people with exceeding great awfulnesse and obedience to receive
directions from him. The Lord puts down, Job 40. 9. with this question, Can
thou thunder with a voice like God, speak terribly, and with as big and loud a
voice as thou can; and if thy voice be answerable to loud thunder, either in
terriblenesse or loudness, then will I confess my self to be thy equal; and
Elihu reasoned for God by consideration of this great work. Job 37. 1* to 6.


David, Psalm. 29. shows the greatness of God in the greatness of this
mighty sound. But it pleases God to effect this work, not immediately but
mediately, using natural and ordinary causes according to his own good will
and pleasure for the eff^cting thereof.

There do arise from the ends of the earth as the Scripture speaks, that is,
from all quarters of this inferior part of the world, consisting of earth and
water, certain steams or fumes partly drawn up thence by the heat and
influence of the Sun and other Planets or constellations, partly breathed out
of the earth by the natural heat thereof. Whereof some are hot and moist,
being as it were of a middle nature betwixt water and air: some hot and dry
being of a middle nature betwixt fire and air as some Philosophers think, of
which two, as of the matter, are brought forth these strange things which we
see in the air, and among the rest, Thunder. Though thunder be first in
nature, being by the violent eruption it makes out of the cloud the cause of
fulgurations, yet we see first the lightning before we hear the Thunder,
because of the swiftness of the fire above the air, and because the eye is
quicker in perceiving its object then the ear.

This is done for the benefit of the world, Plutarch in the life of Flaminius
reports that there was such a noise made by the Grecians after their liberty
was restored, that the birds of the air that flew over them were seen to fall
down by reason that the air divided by their cry, was made so thinue, that
there was no strength in it to bear them up, therefore the thunder must needs
rarifie and make thin the air.
that by shaking of the air it might be purged and made fit for the use of
man and beast, being cleansed from those ill and pestilent vapors, which
otherwise would make it too thick, gross, and unwholesome for our bodies, for
this is one special end of winds, thunders, and the like vehement works that
are in the air, besides the particular work for which God assigns them, and
therefore with thunder likely is joined much rain, because the cloud is
dissolved at the same time, and sometimes violent winds and tempests, because
the exhalation inflamed, snatcheth with it self such windy fumes as it meets
withal in the air, and so by violent stirring the air purges it, and
opens the parts of the earth by shaking and moving it.

1. We must turn all this to a spiritual use, viz. to instruct us in the
fear of him that is Lord of Hoasis, who shows his greatness in these mighty
deeds of his hand, to which purpose always the Scripture speaks of it,
exhorting the mighty to give unto the Lord glory and strength in regard of this.

2. We must observe God so in this and all his great works, as to cause our
minds to increase in the knowledge of his excellency, and our hearts in the
love and fear of him. All his works are therefore exhorted to praise him,
because we by all should learn his praise and greatness. How able is God to
destroy sinners, how quickly and in a moment can he bring them to ruin! let
him but speak to the thunder, hail, tempest, and they will beat down and
consume his adversaries before his face, o then tremble before him.

3. We must learn to put our confidence in God, and boldly to promise our
selves deliverance when he promises it.

God is wonderful in making and ruling the clouds. This is a work which God does
often allege in Scripture to prove his greatness, If it be a great cloud it
is called nubes, it but a little one, it is called nubecula.
Job 37. 26. He binds the waters in a garment, Prove. 30. 4. that is, makes
the Clouds. How as it were by an even poysing of one part with the other God
makes these Clouds to hover a great while over the earth before they be
dissolved, is a thing worthy admiration, and greatly surpasses our knowledge,
Ab obnubendo, operiendo coelum.
Job 38. 34. Psalm. 14. 78. and Prove. 8. 28. Psalm. 104. 3. The cloud is water
rarefied drawn upward till it come to a cold place, The clouds are called the
bottles of heaven, Job 38. 37. The windows and floodgates of heaven, Gen 7.
11. and Mal. 3. 10. the fountains of the deep, Prove. 8. 28. and the watery
roof of Gods chambers, Psalm. 104. 3. The pavilion, chariot, and treasure of
the Lord, Psalm. 18. 11. 2. Sam. 22. 12. swaddling bands for the Sea, Job 38. 9.
The cloud is a thick and moist vapor drawn up from the earth by the heat of
the Sun to the middle region of the air, and by the coldness there further
thickened, so that it hangs, until either the weight or some resolution,
cause it to fall down.
and then it is thick, and drops down.

They are but nine miles (say some) from the earth, but they are of unequal
height, and are lower in Winter then in Summer, when the Sun has the greater
force, then they ascend higher, and in his smaller force they hang the lower.

Let us consider the causes of these clouds, and the uses of them.

The efficient causes are thought to be the heat and influence of the Sun and
the Stars which does rarifie the water, and draw thence the matter of the
clouds, as you shall perceive, if you hold a wet cloth before the fire, that a
thick steame will come out of it, because the fire makes thin the thickness of
the water, and turns it into a kind of moist vapor, and the earth has some
heat mixed with it through a certain quantity of fire that is dispersed in the
bowels of it, which causes such like steames to ascend out of it, and the
coldnsse of the middle region does condensate and thicken these steames or
breaths, and turn them again into water at length and at last to thick
clouds.

2. The matter is the steams that the waters and earth do yield forth by this
heat.

The uses of it are to make rain and snow, (snow is nothing but rain
condensated and whi^ened by the excessive cold in the winter time as it is in
descending) for the watering of the earth and making it fruitful, or else for
the excessive moistning of the earth to hinder the fruitfulness of it, if God
see fit to punish. The earth without moisture cannot bring forth the fruit^
that it should, and some parts of the earth have so little water near them
below, that they could not else be sufficiently moystened to the making of them
fruitful. God has therefore commanded the Sun among other offices to make
the vapors ascend from the Sea and Earth, that he may power it down again upon
the forsaken wilderness or other places, whether for punishment or otherwise.

Ob. How can it be conceived, that the clouds above, being heavy with water,
should not fall to the Earth, seeing every heavy thing naturally descends and
tends down-ward.


Sol. No man by wit or reason can resolve this doubt, but only from the word of
God, which teaches that it is by virtue of Gods Commandment given in the
Creation, that the Clouds fall not, Genesis 1. 6. Let the Firmament separate the
waters from the waters: Mr. Perkins on Jude 12.
by force of which commanding word the water hangs in the clouds, and the
clouds in the air, and need no other supporters, Job 26. 7, 8. setting out the
Majesty and greatness of God in his works, here begins, that He hangs
the Earth upon nothing, be binds the waters in the Clouds, and the Cloud is
not rent under them. Philosophy is too defective to yield the true reason of
this great work of God which commonly attributes too much to natura naturata,
nature, and too little to natura naturans the God of nature.


Now we must here also blame our own carelessness and folly which forbear to
consider of this work that hangs over our heads. Consectaries.
The clouds are carried from place to place in our sight, Job 37. 11. to 17.
and cover the Sun from us. Job 36. 32.
They hinder the over-vehement heat of the Sun from scorching the earth,
Psalm 91. 1.
and yet we never think what strange things they be, and what a merciful
Creator is he that prepared them. Not seeing God in the works of nature,
shows great stupidity, and should make us lament. Let us endeavor to revive
the thoughts of God in our minds by his works. When we see the clouds
carried up and down as we do sometimes one way sometimes another, swiftly,
then let us set our heart a work to think there goes Gods Coach as it were,
Psalm 104. 3.
here he rides above our heads to mark our way, and to reward or punish our
good or bad courses with seasonable rain for our comfort, or excessive showers
for our terror. O seek to him and labor to please him, that he may not
find matter of anger and provocation against us.

When the Clouds either favor or chastise us, let us take notice of Gods hand
in these either comfortable or discomfortable effects, and not impute it all to
the course of nature.

By means of the Clouds God waters the earth, yea the dry wilderness:
without moisture there can be no fruitfulness, without Clouds no rain,
without that no corn or grass, and so no man or beast.

Rain Great rain is called nimbus, small rain imber.
is as it were the melting of a Cloud turned into water, Psalm. 104. 13.

It is a great work of God to make rain, and cause it fitly and seasonably to
descend upon the earth. Amos 4. 8.
It is a work often named in Scripture* Deuteronomy 11. 14. and 28. 12. Levit. 26. 4.
Jer. 5. 24. It is noted in Job diverse times 36. 27. He makes small the drops
of water. God propounds this work to Job. as a demonstration of his
greatness, Job 38. 25. 34. See Jer 30. 13. Psalm 137. 8. Now this work is the
more to be observed in these respects.

1. The necessity of it in regard of the good it brings if it be seasonable
and moderate, and the evil which follows the want, excess or untimelinesse
of it.

2. In regard of man's utter inability to procure Though all men should unite
all their wits, purses, and hands together, to make or to hinder one shower of
rain, they are unable. Rich men; great, wise men, have not these waters at
command: the less a creature can do to effect it, the more does the greatness
of God shine forth in it.
or hinder it, as in the days of Noah, all the world could not hinder it, and
in the days of Ahab none could procure it.

3. In regard of the greatness of the work in the course of nature for the
effecting of which, so many wonders concur.

First, without this drink afforded to the fields, we should soon find the
world pined and sterved, and man and beast consumed out of it for want of food
to eat. It is the cause of fruitfulness, and the want of it causes
barrenness, and so destruction of all living creatures that are maintained by
the increase of the earth. As mischievous and terrible a thing as a famine is,
so good and beneficial a thing is rain which keeps off famine.

Secondly, It procures plenty of all necessaries, when the Heavens give their
drops in fit time and measure, the earth also sends forth her offspring in
great store and fit season, In Egypt there is seldom rain, it is made fruitf^l
by the inundation of Ni^us.
and so both men and beasts enjoy all things according to their natural
desire, this so comfortable a thing as plenty is, so worthy a work of God, is
the effect of rain, I mean rain in due season and proportion.

Lastly, In India rain is not so frequent as with us. Jerome says he never
saw rain there in the months of June and July: hence rain in harvest was there
unusual, Pro. 26. 1. 1 Samuel 12. 16.
The greatness of the works which must meet together for making and
distributing of rain does magnify the work. The Sun by his heat draws up
moist steams and breath from the earth and water, these ascending to the middle
region of the air which is somewhat colder then the lower, are again thickened
and turn into water, and so drop down by their own heaviness: by drops, not
altogether as it were by cowles as they do in the Ind^^* Verbum Dei comparatur
pluviae, Deutr. 32. 2. Ideoque Hebraei uno verbo jorah and doctrinam and
pluviam efferunt. Mollerus.
full, partly from the height of place, from which they fall, which causes the
water to disperse it self into drops, and partly because it is by little and
little not all at once thickened and turned into water, and so descends by
little portions as it is thickened. So the Sun and other stars, the earth,
the water, winds, and all the frame of nature are put to great toil and
pains as it were to make ready these Clouds, for from the end^ of the earth
are the waters drawn which make our showers.

God is the first efficient cause of rain, Genesis 2. 5. It is said there God had
not caused it to rain, Job 5. 10. Jer. 14. 22. Zach. 10. 1. The material
cause of it is a vapor ascending out of the earth. 3. the formal, by the
force of the cold, the vapors are condensed into Clouds in the middle region
of the air. 4. The end of rain, to water the earth, Genes. 2. 6. which
generation and use of rain David has elegantly explained, Psalm. 147. 8.

The cause of the Rainbow is the light or beams of the Sun in a hollow and
dewie cloud, Thaumantis filiam dixere Iridem Poetae; Colores ejus tam exacti,
ut vix artificis possit exprimere manus.
of a different proportion, right opposite to the Sun beams, by the reflection
of which beams, and the diverse mixture of the light and the shade, there is
expressed as it were in a glass the admirable Rainbow.

We should be humbled for our unthankfulness and want of making due use of this
mercy, Consectaries from the rain and Rain bow.
the want of it would make us mutter, yet we praise not God nor serve him the
better when we have it, Jer. 14. 22. intimating, without Gods omnipotency
working in and by them, they cannot do it. If God actuate not the course of
nature, nothing is done by it; let us have therefore our hearts and eyes fixed
on him when we behold rain, Job 5. 8, 9, 10.
sometime it mizleth, gently descending, sometimes falls with greater drops,
sometime with violence, this arises from the greater or less quantity of the
vapor, and more or less heat or cold of the air that thickneth or melts,
or from the greater or smaller distance of the cloud from the earth, or from
the greater purity or grossness of the air by reason of other concurring
accidents; either we feel the benefit or the want of rain likely once every
moneth^ Let not a thing so admirable pass by us without heeding to be made
better by it. Want of moisture from above must produce praying, James 5. 17, 18.
confessing, See Genesis 9. 13.
turning, 1 Kings 8. 35. 36.

The colors that appear in the Rainbow are principally 3. 1. The Cerulean or
watery color, which notes the destroying of the world by water. 2. The grassie
or green color which shows that God does preserve the world for the present.
3. The yellow or fiery color, showing the world shall be destroyed with fire.

Dew consists of a cold moist vapor which the Sun draws into the air, from
whence when it is somewhat thickened through cold of the night, and also of the
place (whether the Sun exhaled it) it falls down in very small and
indiscernable drops to the great refreshment of the earth. Hosea 14. 5.
It falls only morning and evening.

Has the rain a Father? or who has begotten the drops of dew? Out of whose
womb came the rain and the hoary frost of heaven, who has gendred it says
God to Job, Chapter 38. 28, 29.

A frost is dew congealed by overmuch cold. It differs from the dew, because
the frost is made in a cold time and place, the dew in a temperate time; both
of them are made when the weather is calm and not windy, and generated in the
lowest region of the air.

Hail and ice is the same thing, viz. water bound with cold, they differ only
in figure, viz. that the hailestones are or bicular begotten of the little
drops of rain falling, Valessus de sa^ra philosophia.
but ice is made of water continued, whether it be congealed in rivers, or sea
or fountains, or pooles or any vessels whatsoever, and retains the figure of
the water congealed.

Though ice be not Crystal, yet some say Crystal is from ice; when ice is
hardened into the nature of a stone it becomes Crystal; more degrees of
coldness, hardness, and clearenesse, give ice the denomination of Crystal,
and the name Crystal imports so much, that is, water by cold contracted into
ice; Pliny in his natural History says, the birth of it is from ice
vehemently frozen. lib. 37. chapter 2
But Doctor Brown lib. 2. chap. 1.
in his enquiries into vulgar errors doubts of it.

The winds are also a great work of God, he made and he rules the winds
Psalm. 104. 24 and 135. 7.
. They come not by chance, but by a particular power of God, causing them to
be, and to be thus, he brings them out of his treasures, It is a dry and hot
fume ascending upward, and beaten back again by the coldne^se of the middle
region, and some comes downward again sideling, with more or less violence,
as the sum is larger, or subtiler, and the cold more or less.
He caused the winds to serve him in Egypt to bring Froggs, and after Locusts,
and then to remove the Locusts again. He caused the winds to divide the red
Sea that Israel might pass. He made the winds to bring quails; and the
winds are said to have wings for their swiftness, the nature of them is very
abstruse.

The efficient causes of them are the Sun, and stars, by their heat
drawing up the thinnest and dryest fumes or exhalations, which by the cold of
the middle region being beaten back again, Ventus a violentia and vehementia
nomen habet quod veniat abunde, and magna vi irruat in unum aliquem locum mag.
Ph.
do slide obliquely with great violence through the air this way or that way.
The effects of it are wonderful, they sometimes carry rain hither and
thither, they make frost and they thaw, they are sometimes exceeding violent,
and a man that sees their working can hardly satisfy himself in that which
Philosophers speaks about their causes, the wind blows where it lists, we
hear its sound but know not whence it comes, nor whether it goes. It is a
thing which far surpasses our understanding to conceive fully the causes of
it. Some think the Angels cause the winds to blew, Revel 7. 1. but that is
but a conceire, Prove. 30. 4.
Amos 4. 13.


They blow most ordinarily at the Spring and fall, for there is not so much
wind in winter, because the earth is bound with cold, and so the vapor the
matter of the wind cannot ascend; nor in summer because vapors are then raised
up by the Sun, and it consumes them with his great heat.

These Winds alter the weather, some of them bringing rain, some dryness, The
profit of the wind. Dr. Fulke of meteors.
some frost and snow, which are all necessary; there is also an universal
commodity which rises by the only moving of the air, which air if not
continually stirred, would soon putrify and infect all that breath upon the
earth.

It serves to condemn our own blindness that cannot see God in this great
work; It made Adam tremble when God came in the wind.
the wind comes down unto us, it is near us, we feel the blasts of it, and
yet we feel not the power and greatness of God in it. When God does so
plainly, and so many ways discover himself to us, yet blind wretches we
perceive him not. We are now to stir up our minds to the consideration of
God in this his mighty work. See him walking through the earth, and visiting
it in the swift wings of this creature. It has also an apt resemblance and
image of God in it, 1. In the subtilnesse and invisible nature of it, the
swiftness of the wind may note his omnipresence, who is said to ride on the
wings of the wind. 2. In its powerful motion and efficacy which no man can
hinder or resist. 1 Cor. 12. 11.
3. In the freedom of its motion, John 3. 7. 4. In the secrecy of his working
of mighty works, the winds are invisible.

The consideration of the winds, leads us into our selves, and that

1. For humiliation; for who knows the nature of the wind, the place of the
wind, the way of the wind, to see in it our own vanity, Job 7. 7. Psalm. 78.
39.

2. Instruction, Matthew. 8. 26.
shall so fierce a creature be at a beck, Jer. 18. 17.
and shall not I? 2. See the miserable estate of wicked men, on whom
destruction and fear shall come as a whirlwind, Prove. 27. 18. They shall be
as stubble or chafe before the wind, Psalm. 1.

Metalls Metalla, i. e. (...), that is, which is engendered or bred about, or
with some other thing, as gold about silver, and silv^r abo^^ brass. Plinis. l.
33. chap. 6.
are mineral substances, susible and malleable. They are commonly
distinguished into perfect and imperfect; perfect, because they have less
impurity or heterogen^ity in them, as gold and silver: imperfect, because they
are full of impurities, as iron, copper, tin and lead.

Gold of all metalls is the most solid, and therefore the most heavy. It will
loose none of his substance neither by fire nor water, therefore it will not
make broth more cordial, being boiled in it. Silver is next in purity to gold,
but it is inferior unto it.

Precious stones (in Latin Gemmae) are esteemed for their rarity, or for some
virtue fancied to be in them, or for their pureness and transparentnesse.

The Psalmist declares the great work of God in distinguishing the waters from
the earth, Third days work.
and making Sea and dry land. Psalm. 104. 89.
The waters at the first did encompasse and cover the earth round about as it
were a garment, and overflow the highest parts of it altogether, It is called
mare either from the Latin Amarum, or the Chaldee marath signifying also
bitter, because the Seawater is bitter and salt. For the use of man and all
other living creatures God made a separation of the earth and water, causing
the water to sink down into huge hollow channells prepared to receive it, that
so the dry land might appear above it.
so that no dry ground was seen or could be seen in the world, this was the
first constitution of them as Moses relates, Genesis 1. 2. The deep was the
whole Orb of waters which enclosed the earth in themselves. But then God
pleased to divide the waters from the earth, so as to make dry land appear,
and for that end. 1. He drove the waters into one place, spreading the earth
over them, and founding it upon them, Psalm. 104. v. 6. 7. God by his mighty
power (compared there to a thundering voice) did make the waters to gather
together into the place that he had appointed for them under the earth, and
that by raising up hills and mountains, and causing dales and valleys, then
God appointed the waters their bounds that they should still continue in these
hollowes under the earth, and not return to cover the earth, as else of their
own nature they would have done.

There are diverse profitable questions about these things?

1. Whether the Sea would not naturally overflow the land, as it did at the
first creation, were it not withheld within his banks by divine power?

The answer is affirmative, We must consider the earth and waters. 1.
absolutely, as they are Elements and solid bodies, so the water has the higher
place, being lighter. 2. In respect of the superficies of either, so the
superficie of the earth is higher. Carp. Geog. If we compare the Coasts and
the nearest Sea, then the land is higher then the Sea: but if we compare the
land and the maine Sea, then the Sea is higher then the Land, and therefore the
Sea is called Altum, where ships fly faster to the shore then from it.
and the reason is evident, the water is lighter then the earth, and heavier
things are apt to pierce through the light, and the light will take to
themselves an higher place, and give way to the heavier things to descend
through them; mix a great deal of dirt and water, and let it stand a while
and take its own proper course, and the dirt will sink to the bottom,
leaving the water above it self. Aristotle and others say that the Sea is
higher then the earth, and they can render no reason why it (being apt to run
abroad) should be kept from overflowing the land, whence he proves Gods
providence.

2. Whether there be more Sea or Land. The multitude of waters made by God at
first did cover the earth, and enclose it round, the Sea therefore must needs
be far greater then the Earth. The Mapps show it to be greater in quantity
then the Earth.

3. Whether the deepnesse of the Sea Carpenter in his 2d* book of Geographie,
c. 10. says the perpendicular height of the highest mountains seldom exceeds
^en fur longs.
does exceed the height of the mountains. See Sir Walter Raleighs History of
the world, l. 1. c* 7 Sect. 11.


It was a great work of God to make mountain and valleys, hills and dales. The
Scripture often mentions it, Pro. 8. 25. Psalm. 65. 6. and 95. 4. and 90. 2.
Psalm 104. 8. Amos 4. 13. Therefore are the mountains exhorted to praise God,
Psalm. 146. 9. Esaias 40. 12. He is said to have weighed the mountains in scales
and the hills in balances, that is, to have poised them even, so that the earth
might remain unmoveably in the parts of it as well as in the whole. The
greatness of this work appears:

1. In the strangeness and hiddennesse of it.

How should so heavy a thing as the earth thus heave up it self into so great
ascents, to give place unto the waters under it? the immediate power of God is
the cause of it, Ps. 24. 2. and 136. Psalm. It may be some hills were made by
the fury and violent motion of the waves of the waters of Noah's flood, but
the most and greatest were created on the third day.

2. In the usefulness of it?

1. For beauty and ornament, it gives a more delightful prospect to see hills
and dales, then to look upon all one even and flat piece of ground without any
such risings.

2. It conduces to the fruitfulnsse of the earth. The vales are much more
fruitful then if they were flats without hills, because of the dew and
moisture that descends upon them, from the hills, and some things grow better
upon the higher places, on the sides or tops of the mountains.

3. Without these hills and mountains there could not have been room for the
waters which before did swallow up the earth in its bowels, neither could the
dry land have appeared.

4. Without such hills and dales there could not have been rivers and springs
running with so constant a course.

5. Hills and mountains are the receptacles of the principal mines for
metalls and quarries for all kind of useful stones, Deuteronomy. 8. 9. and 33. 15.
They are for boundaries betwixt Country and country, Kingdom and Kingdom.
We should tell our selves how admirable and useful this kind of frame and
situation the earth is.

4. Whether Insulae portiones terrae sunt oceano cinctae ortus varia habent
principia. Emersere quaedam ex mari, a continenti av^lsae quaedam, aggesta
nonnullis ortum dedit materia. Johnstoni Thaumato graphia naturalis.
Islands came since the flood.

5. What is the cause of the saltness of the Sea. Duo maxima quae mari
tribuuntur mira, salsedo and reciprocatio. Johnstoni Thaumat^ graphia naturalis.


The water of the Sea is salt, not by nature but by accident. Aristotle refers
the saltish quality of the Seawater to the Sun as the chief cause, for it
draws up the thinner and fresher parts of the water, leaving the thicker and
lower water to suffer adustion of the Sunbeams; and so consequently to become
salt, De Origin Fontium, c. 8. and 9. See Plinies book of natural history
from chapter 97. to 100.
two things chiefly concur to the generation of saltishnesse, drowth and
adustion. Our Uurine and excrements for the same reason are also salt, the
purest part of our nourishment being employed in and upon the body. Lydiat
attributes it to under-earth or rather under-sea fires of a bituminous nature,
causing both the motion and saltness of the Sea. Aristotle affirms that the
Sea in Summer, and toward the South is more salt then elsewhere, and is
fresher toward the bottom then top.

The Sea is salt, 1. to keep it from putrefaction, which is not necessary in
the floods, because of their swift motion. 2. for the breeding and nourishing
of great Fishes, being both hotter and thicker.

7. What is the cause of the ebbing and flowing of the Sea.

There have been many opinions of the cause of the ebbing and It is called
reciprocatio and aestus maris, because it is caused by a hot exhalation boiling
in the Sea, or because the Sea suffers as if it boiled again with heat.
flowing of the Sea. De quo plura pro ingeniis differentium, quam pro veritatis
fide expressa.

Some say it is the breathing or blowing of the world, as Strabo, Albertus
Magn. One said it was because the waters getting into certain holes of the
earth, were forced out again by Spirits remaining within the earth. Macrobius
said it was by meeting the East and West Ocean. Cicero seems to ascribe it only
to the power of God, others for the most part ascribe it to the various light
or influences of the moon, which rules over all moist bodies. Brierwood de
meteoris.
Some attribute it to certain subterranean or under-Sea fires. The final cause
of the Seas motion is the preserving and purging of the waters, as the air is
purged by winds.

Coelius Rhodiginus (Antiq. lect. l. 29. c. 8.) writes of Aristotle, that when
he had studied long about it, at the last being weary, he dyed through
tediousness of such an intricate doubt. Some say he drowned himself in
Euripus, because he could find no reason why it had so various a fluxion and
refluxion seven times a day at least, adding before that his praecipitation,
quoniam Aristoteles non cepit Euripum, Euripus capiat Aristotelem. Since
Aristotle could not comprehend Euripus, it should comprehend him. But Doctor
Brown in his Enquiries l. 7. chapter 13.
seems to doubt of the truth of this story.

Other questions there are concerning r^vers. What is the original of See
Doctor Jorden of Bathes. chapter 3.
springs and Rivers? what manner of motion the running of the rivers is?
whether straight or circular.

As one part of the waters, Rivers are said to be engendered in the hollow
concavities of the earth, and derive both their birth and continual sustenance
from the air; which penetrati^g the open chinks of the earth, and being
congealed by the extreme cold of that element, dissolves into water, as the
air in winter nights is melted in a pearly dew sticking on our glass windows.
and the far greater part is gathered into one place, and much of it hidden
in the bowels of the earth, and there as it were imprisoned or treasured up by
making the Sea and dry land so another part of them was appointed to run up
and down within the earth, and upon it in springs and rivers, which rivers are
nothing but the assembling of the waters into diverse great channells from the
fountains and springs, which the Psalmist describes by its matter and use or
effect. He sends the springs into the valleys which run along the hills,
that is, He made the springs and fountains to conveigh waters from place to
place, the use of this is to give drink unto the beasts, even to the wild
asses who quench their thirst there. There be many other uses of springs and
rivers, but this is noted as the most manifest and evident. Another use is for
the fowls, which have their habitation in the trees which grow near and by
means of these springs, and there they sit and sing. These spring bring up so
much moisture to the upper parts of the earth as causes trees to grow also for
fowls to build and sing in. Some of the waters also were drawn up into the
middle region of the world, and changed into Clouds, that so they may be
dissolved and powered down again from thence upon the hills also and other
places which cannot be watered by the Springs, that so the whole earth may be
satisfied with the fruit of Gods works.

The Poets feigned that Jupiter, Neptune, and Pluto divided the Universe, and
that Neptune had the Sea for his part, which is called Neptunus either a nando
from navigation, or a nubendo, from covering, because the Sea covers the earth:
and Pontus; the nations about Pontus thought no Sea in the world like unto
their own, and doubted whether there were any other Sea but that, whence
Pontus was used for the Sea in general.

The Sea is a wide and spacious place, Doctor Halls Contemplation.
Psalm. 104. 25. The great deep, the womb of moisture, the well of fountains
the great Pond of the world.

The reason of the greatness and wideness of it is the multitude of waters
which were made by God at the first, which because they did cover the earth and
enclose it round, it must needs be far greater then the earth, It must be
large to contain so many creatures.
and therefore when God saw fit to distinguish the dry land from the earth,
must needs have very great ditches cut for it in the earth, and caverns made to
hold it; and therefore the earth in Scripture is said to be spread out upon the
Sea, because a great part of it is so in respect of the waters that are under
it.

Again, the use the principal use of the Sea and waters thereof was; that it
might supply vapors for making of the clouds by the attraction of the Sun
and native heat of the Sea in respect of some fire which God has mixed with
the earth and waters, Amos 5. 8. and 9. 6.
that they may be more fit to give life to living things.

Now if the superficies of the Sea were not very large and wide, the Sun
could not have power enough by its attractive heat and warmth, by which it
does attenuate and make thin the waters into vapors: which after the cold of
the air, when they come into the middle region of it, does again thicken and
turn it into waters. I say the Sun could not else have power to draw out of
the Sea sufficient store of these vapors for watering of the earth with
showers. So the multitude of the waters and the necessity of having much of
them drawn up for rain required, that they should not have little receptacles,
but one so great and spacious a receptacle which we call the Sea. Oceanus, the
Ocean is that general collection of all waters which environeth the world on
every side. Mare the Sea is a part of the Ocean, to which we cannot come but by
some straight.

In the Sea are innumerable creatures, Psalm. 104. 25. 107. 23, 24, 25, 26, 27,
28.
small and great, there walk the Ships, there play the Leviathans. What
living mountains (such are the Whales, some of which have been found 600. Dr.
Halls Contemplat.
foot long, and 360. foot broad) roll up and down in those fearful
billows; for greatness of number, hugeness of quantity, strangeness of
shapes, variety of fashions, neither air nor earth can compare with the waters.

Another use of the Sea is, Psalm 104.
that there go the Ships, as the Prophet speaks in a kind of wonderment.

The whole art of Navigation is a strange art, the Lord sitted the Sea for this
purpose, that it might be useful to transport men from place to place, and
other things from country to country. Men build moveable houses, and so go
through the waters on dry ground: they fly through the Sea by the help of
winds gathered in fitly with sails, as birds do through the air: and having
learnt of birds to steer themselves in the Sea, they have an helm, at the
which the Master sitting, does turn about the whole body of his ship at his
pleasure. The swiftness of the motion of a ship is strange, some say that with
a strong wind they will go as fast and faster then an arrow out of a bow. The
Lord has given understanding to man to frame a huge vessel of wood cut into
s^t pieces, and to join it so close with pitch and rozin and other things mixed
together, that it shall let in none or but a little water, and it shall carry a
very great burden within, and yet will not sink under water; and has given
wisdom also to man to make sails to receive the strength of the wind, and
cords to move them up and down at pleasure, and to make masts to hang on those
sails, and has given men a dexteterity to run up to the tops of these masts,
by means of a cord framed in fashion of a ladder, that can but even amuze an
ordinary beholder, and all this for a most excellent use, viz. of maintaining
commerce betwixt Nation and Nation, and of conveighing things needful from one
place to another, that all places might enjoy the commodities one of another.

To this art of Navigation do Kingdoms owe most of their riches, 1 Kings 19. 26
and 10. 22.
delights and choice curiosities, a great part of Solomon's riches came in this
way; it is the easiest, safest, and quickest way of transportation of goods.

How obnoxious are we to God, Consectaries rom the Sea.
therefore we should not be bold to offend him, how much danger do we stand in
if he should let the waters take their own natural course, and exalt
themselves above the mountains.

At the flood he gave leave to the great Deeps to break their bounds, and
permitted the waters to take their own place, and the waters were some 7. yards
higher then the tops of highest mountains. He can do as much now for the
demonstration of his just wrath, for though He has promised that the waters
shall never overflow the whole earth, yet not that they shall never overflow
England which stands also in the Sea.

2. Let us praise the goodness of God which preserves the whole world alive
by a kind of miracle, even by keeping the water from overflowing the earth. God
would convince us that we live of his mere favor, and that his special power
and goodness keeps us: the waters if they were left to their own natural
propensity would soon overwhelm the earth again, but that God locked them up
in the places provided for them. This work is mentioned in diverse places, Job
38. 8. and 26. 10. Psalm 37. 7. Prove. 8. 29. Jer. 5. 22.

First, it is absolutely needful for the preservation of the lives of all
things that live and breath out of the Sea.

2. It is a strange and hidden work, God effects it by some settled reason in
the course of nature, but we cannot by searching find it out. Perhaps this may
be it, the natural motion of every heavy thing is toward the Center, and then
it will rest when it has attained to its own proper place. Now the earth is
stretched over the floods, and it may seem that a great part of them does fill
the very bowels and concavity of the earth in the very place where the Center
or middle point of it is seated.

Hence it is, that they will not be drawn up again, nor follow the upper
parts which toss themselves up and down, but rather pull down those rising
graves again, especially seeing it is most evident in nature by many
experiments every day, that it is utterly impossible there should be any vacuum
as they call it, any mere empty place in which nothing at all is contained,
because that would divide the contiguity of things, and so cause that the world
should be no longer an orderly frame of diverse things together: for the parts
would not be contiguous and united together if such a vacuum should fall out,
therefore water will ascend, air will descend, and all things will even loose
their own nature, and do quite contrary to their nature, rather then such a
thing should be.

Now it may seem the Lord has hidden the water in the earth with such
turnings and windings, some places in which it is, being larger some less
large, that the larger places having no open vent for air to succeed the
water, cannot be so soon filled from below, as they would empty themselves
upward, and so there must needs be vacuity, if they should not return back
again and stop their course, and therefore they must needs stop as it were in
the midst of their carriere. And this also may seem to be a great and
principal cause of the flux and refluxe of the Sea, which if it were not, the
waters having their course always one way, must needs by little and little
return again to cover the earth. If this be the cause (as is probable) it is
wonderful, that God should set such an inclination into all parts of the
world, that they will suffer any crossing of their own particular natures,
rather then not maintain the general course of nature in the close joining
together of things: for if they might be sundred one from another, at length
the whole must needs be quite out of frame, and a general confusion would
follow.

We must even chide and reprove our selves for our extreme stupidity that are
so little (if ever a whit) affected with this work so great in it self, and
so behoofefull for our very life and being.

How are we daily and hourly preserved from the swelling waves: how comes it
that in all this length of time the Sea has not broken in upon us, See the
history of Canutus in Cambden.
and overtopped the earth? We do not tell our selves of our debt to God for
commanding the waves not to be so bold as to drown us.

It may exhort us to fear him that has appointed the Sands for a bound of the
Sea, and will not let the waves prevail over us for all their tossing and
tumbling. He is of great power, and can overruled so furious an Element, and
fear not though the waters roar, and though the mountains were cast into the
midst of the Sea.

This commends unto us Gods greatness who does so infinitely surpass the Seas
greatness, and who has made so much water for it, and it a place for so much
water. Let us think of it in particular, and dwell a little upon it, that we
may also know our nothingnesse. What a great thing is the Sea in it self
considerd! What is this Island in comparison of the Sea, and yet we call it
Great Britain? It must needs be greater then the earth, for the waters did
round about involve and encompasse the earth, what then is the whole globe of
Earth and water, and yet that whole globe is a thing of nothing in comparison
of heaven, and yet all that is nothing in comparison of God. O how great is
he, and how much to be admired? Great, not in quantity and extension of
dimensions, but in perfection of Essence. How great is he that is beyond Earth
Sea and world and all more then these are beyond Nothing.

And let us a little compare our selves with this great and wide Sea. The Sea
is but part of this Globe, yet has in it water enough to drown all the men
that are in the world, if either it were suffered to overflow as once at Noah's
flood, or else they were cast into it, so that all men are but a small trifling
thing in comparison of this Sea, and then what am I must every one say to
himself, and what compared to God the maker of the wide Sea and this wide
world. Oh how nothing is man, am I my self among other men, and why am not I
humble before God, why do I not cast down and abase my self in his presence,
and carry my self to him as becomes so poor, mean, and small a creature,
to so Infinite and great a Creator. Let us morally use the things we see, else
the natural knowledge will do us no good at all.

We may see in the Sea a map of the misery of man's life, it ebbeth and flows,
seldom is quiet, but after a little calm a tempest arises suddenly. So must I
look for storms upon the sea of so troublesome a world.

For the great work of Navigation, and so of transportation of things by Sea,
and for the fitness of the Sea to that use we must praise God, every man has
the benefit of it. By virtue of it we have Pepper, Cloves and Mace, Figs and
Raisms, Sack and Wines of all sorts, Silks and Velvets, and all the
commodities of other Kingdoms distant a thousand of miles from us, and by this
they have from us such commodities as our Land affords above theirs.

There is no art which helps more to enrich a Nation, The safety of this
Kingdom consists much in its wooden walls. The ^s. Navv exceedes all others in
the world in beauty, strength, and safety.
and to furnish it with things for State, pomp and delight. And yet how is it
abused by Mariners, who behold Gods wonders in the Deep, being the worst of
men, and never good but in astorme, and when that is gone, as bad or worse then
ever.

The materials of a ship are wonderful.

First, it is made of the strongest and durablest wood, the Oak and Cedar. See
Plinies natural history, l. 16. c. 40.
Now it is a strange work of God to make such a great tree out of the earth.

2. The nails in it are made of iron, that the pieces may be closely compacted.

3. Tar and pitch to stop every crevise, that no water or air might enter,
this they learned of God himself, who bid Noah to plaster the Arc within and
without with pitch.

4. Cords made of flax, a multitude of strange things concur to this work.

What pity is it that Soldiers and Mariners (as was said) who are sosubject
to dangers, He that carries his life in his hand, must carry grace in his heart.
Doctor Sibbs in his Epistle to Sir Ho ratio Vere prefixed before his Bruised
reed. Qui nescit ^rare discat navigare.
and have such frequent experience of Gods goodness and mercy to them in their
preservation, should generally be so profane and forgetful of God. For the
Soldier it is an old saying

Nulla fides pietasque viris qui castra sequuntur. And for the Marriuer
nautarum vota is grown into a proverb.

In the third days work were likewise created grass, herbs, plants and trees

The first is grass, or green herb, which is that which of it self springs
up without setting or sowing.

2. Herb bearing seed, Latini distribuunt plantas in tr^agenera, herbam,
fruticem, and arborem. Hebraei aliter in (...) Mercerus in rimum caput, Genes.
5. 11.
that is, all herbs which are set or sown, and increase by man's industry.

The third, trees and plants, which are of a woody substance, which bear fruit
and have their feed, which turns to fruit in themselves.

God by his powerful word, Voluit Deus per primam germinationem terrae non
modo pastui animaniium, sed^etium immortalitati specie^ consultum. Pareus.
without any help of man's tillage, rain, or Sun, did make them immediately out
of the earth, and every one perfect in their kind, grass and herbs, with
flowers and seeds and trees with large bodies, branches, leaves and fruits,
growing up suddenly, as it were in a moment by Gods word and power,

The great power of God appears in this, He is able to work above nature
without means, the fruitfulness of the earth stands not in the labor of the
Husbandman, but in the blessing of God. He also caused the earth to yield
nourishment for such diverse herbs and plants, yea herbs of contrary quality
will grow and thrive close one by another, when those which are of a nearer
nature will not do so.

The herb was given at first for man's use as well as beasts, Genesis 1. 9. Psalm
104. 14. Herbs are one wonderful work of God. The greatness of the work
appeare^h in these particulars:

1. The variety of the kinds of herbs.

2. The variety of their uses, of their shapes and colors, and manner of
production, and of their working and growth. Some come forth without seed,
some have seed, some grow in one place, some in another, some are for food,
some for medicine, and some for both.

That out of the earth by the heat of one Sun, with the moisture of one and
the same water, there should proceed such infinite variety of things, so
differing one from another, is a wonder; some are hot in operation, some cold,
some in one degree, some in another, some will draw, some heal, some are
sweet, some sour, some bitter, some of middle tastes.

In the bowels of the earth the Lord created gold, Job 28. 1. 2. Ezekiel. 6. 16,
17. Joel 3. 5. Hag. 2. 8. Genes. 1. 11, 12.
silver, precious stones, and the face of the earth above was beautified with
grass, herbs and trees, differing in nature, qualities, and operations.

Plants grow till they dye, whence they are called vegetables.

At the first, Vide Mercerum in primu^ caput Genesis v. 29. Before the flood both
herbs and fruits of trees were so wholesome and good, as that man needed no
other food, after it the earth was so corrupted by the inu^dation thereof, and
man's body became so weakened, that he stood in need of more solid and
nourishing meat,
herbs were the ordinary meat of men, Genesis 1. 20. and they have continued ever
since of necessary use, both for meat to maintain life, and for medicines to
recover health.

Solomon's wisdom and knowledge was such, that he was able to set out the
nature of all plants, from the highest Cedar to the lowest Moss, 1 Kings 4. 33.

We must here condemn our stupidity and blindness of mind that are not
provoked many times by this particular to magnify the name of God. When a man
has occaslon to travel through a Close or ground, how great store of herbs
sees he, whose nature, yea names he is ignorant of, yet admireth not God in
them, nor confesses his power and goodness.

Secondly, we are to lament the fruit of our sin, which has made us blind,
there is nothing hurtful to man's body, but some herb or other rightly applied
would cure it.

It is a great and worthy work of God to make grass on the earth Genesis 1. 11,
13.
. Psalm. 104. 14, 15. and 147. 8. He makes grass to grow upon the mountains.
The omnipotent power of God was exercised to make this creature, else it could
not have been, and at his appointment it came forth. This is one of the
benefits which God promises to his people upon their obedience, Deuteronomy. 11. 5.
Zach. 10. 16. There are many things considerable in this work of making grass.

1. The plenty, It is a Carpet upon the earth to adorn and beautify it.
store, and commonnesse of it: It grows every where, and in abundance,
covering the face of the earth, and hiding the dry and naked face thereof.

2. The color of it. It is of a green and somewhat of a durke green color,
which is neither over-light nor overdarke, but of an indifferent and middle
nature, and so most fit to content and delight the eye, refresh and preserve
the sight.

3. The usefulness of this creature for the Cattle, it is a soft covering to
make the lodging of the poor beasts more easeful for them, even as it were a
mattresse for them to lie upon. It has a sweet juice and verdure in it by
which it is pleasant to the tastes of the beasts, as any dainty meat can be to
us, and is fit to nourish them to be turned to blood and flesh, so to make them
fat and well liking.

4. The ways, means, and manner for bringing it forth for this use, the whole
course of the Heavens, Sun, Moon, and Stars, which run a large race daily
with great swiftness, and the great works done in the air for producing
diverse Meteors, do tend in great part for the bringiug forth of this grass.
The grass it self has a life and vigor in the root of it, by which it
draws from the earth that moisture which is agreeable to it, and disperseth it
likewise.

1. We are dull and blind, and behold not God in this great work, when we
go into the fields, and can scarce tread beside it: We do not consider Gods
greatness and goodness in making so beneficial a thing so common; We let
this work of God perish in respect of any spiritual use we make of it, to
make our souls the better.

2. Let us stir up our selves to observe Gods hand in this work with others,
and confess our debt to him, that gives us Commons and Pasture for all our
Cattle.

Trees are certain plants springing from a root with a single Trunk or
Stem (for the most part) shooting up in height, and delineated with lims,
sprigs or branches.

Leaves are ornamenta arboris, and munimenta fructus, they serve to grace the
tree, make it pleasant to behold and defend the fruit from the injury of the
weather.

The Philosopher says, homo est arbor inversa: a man is a tree turned upside
down, for a tree has his root in the ground, and his branches spread above
ground, but a man's root is in his head, therein is the fountain of sense and
motion, and there does he take in nou-rishment, but the arms and legs are
branches of this tree, they spread downe-ward. The Psalmist compares a good man
to a tree, Psalm. 1. 3.

The Palm Tree grows in Egypt all along the shores of the red Sea. See rare
things of a tree called Coco in Doctor Primrose on the Sac. p. 30.
It is said to yield whatsoever is necessary to the life of man. The pith of it
is an excellent sallet, better then an Artichoake, which in taste it much
resembles. Of the branches they make Bedsteds and Lattices, of the leaves,
Baskets, Matts, Fannes, of the outward half of the Codde, cordage, of the
inward, brushes.

It is the nature of this tree, though never so huge or ponderous a weight be
put upon it, Rem miradam Arist. in 8^. problematum and Plutar. in 8^.
Symposiacorum dicit. Si supra palmae (inquit) arboris lignum magna pondera
imponas, ac tam graviter urgeas ut magnitudo oneris sustineri non queat, non
deorsum palma cedit nec infra flectitur, sed, adversus pondus resurgit, and
sursum nititur recurvaturque. Aul. Gell. Noct. At. l. 3. cap. 6.
never to yield to the burden, but still to resist the heaviness thereof, and
to endeavor to lift and raise it self the more upward; for which cause it was
given to Conquerours in token of Victory. Hence. figuratively it is used for
the victory it self, plurimarum palmarum homo: and for the sign of it

-- Palmaque nobilis,
Terrarum dominos evehit ad Deos.
Rev. 7. 9. With white robes in token of their innocence, and palms in their
hands in token of their victory.

It is reported that the Arms of the Duke of Rhoan in France which are
lozenges, are to be seen in the wood or stones throughout all his Country,
so that break a stone in the middle, or lop a bough of a tree, and one shall
behold the grain thereof (by some secret cause in nature) diamonded or
streaked in the fashion of a lozenge. Fullers profane State, l. 5. c. 6.

It was a great work of God in making all sorts of trees to proceed out of the
earth, Psalm. 104. 16, 17. The nature of the trees is wonderful in these
respects principally:

First, the way and manner of their growing and being. An Oak comes from an
acorne, an Apple Tree from a kernel. What a kind of power and virtue is that
which God has put into a kernel being so small a thing, that it should pull
to it self by an unknown way the juice of the earth, and should send some of
it down-ward into little small strings as it were to fasten it self in the
earth, and send some upward to spread it self above the ground; and yet it
should distribute the moisture so fitly, as to grow in due proportion within
the earth and without; that it should frame to it self a body and diverse
branches in such fashion, that it should b^d and put forth leaves, that it
should cause a fruit to grow upon it, or seed and that in great numbers,
every one of which is able to make another tree, and that tree to yield as much
more.

2. The great variety of kinds of trees; we in our Country have diverse Oaks,
Elmes, Ashes, Beech-trees, Chesnut-trees, Sally, Willow, Maple, Syccamore,
besides Apple and Peare-trees of diverse kinds, Cherry-trees, Hazell,
Walnut-trees. Some trees are of huge growth, as Oaks, Cedars, Elmes, some low
as the Thorn, the nut. Some of one fashion, color, making and manner of
growth, some of another: this shows an exceeding great measure of wisdom in
him that made them all.

The use of trees in the next place is manifold.

1. They serve for fruit: what great variety of fruit do they yield, what
pleasant and wholesome fruit, what store and plenty of fruit. Some Summer fruit
that will be gone quickly, some Winter fruit that will last most part of the
year, and some all the year.

2. For building both by Land and Sea, to make us houses both strong and
stately, warm, dry, and cool, under which we may rest our selves, in Summer
free from scorching heat; in Winter and stormy times, free from pinching
cold, and the injury of the weather. With wood also we make floating and
fleeting houses, with which we may dwell upon the face of the waters, and
pass through the deep Sea. as upon dry ground.

3. It yields fuel too, by which we do both prepare our food, and keep
our selves warm in the winter, and in the time of weakness and sickness. Had
we not something to burn, we could neither bake our bread, nor brew our beer,
nor sees our meat, nor roast it, nor at all make use of flesh, to eat it as
now we do.

4. For delight: How comfortable a shade does a spreading Ash or Oak yield in
the hot Summer, how refreshing is it to man and beast.

How pleasant a place was Paradise, and what made it so, but the artificial
order, fashion, and growing of all sorts of trees fit for food and shadow.

We must observe our own faultiness with sorrow and humiliation, Corallaries.
for that we have not observed more seriously and usefully this work of God.
We have perpetual use of Timber and fuel: we eat much fruit from these
trees, we reap the benefit of this work of God from time to time. We sit upon
wood, we feed upon wood, we dwell under wood, under trees cut down and fitted
for our use: we cannot step out of doors but our eyes are fixed upon some tree
or other, great or small: but we take not notice of God in this work, and
praise his name that made all these trees.

Let us mend this fault, and stir up our selves to consider God in this work,
praise him for fruitful trees, and all other kinds of trees. Let us
acknowledge his power, wisdom, and goodness in them, and his exceeding bounty
and tender care to man that has so furnished the world with innumerable sorts
of trees.

Let us be careful of preserving these works of nature for our own use and
the use of Posterity, let us set and plant trees for Serunt arbores, quae
prosint alteri saeculo. Cicero.
after ages.

CHAP. V.
ON the fourth day were made the Sun, Genesis 1. 14. 15
Moon, and Stars, which are as it were certain Vessels wherein the Lord
did gather the light, which before was scattered in the whole body of the
Heavens. The Hebrew word translated Lights, signifies Lamps, Torches, or other
things which shine forth and give light.

It was a great work of God in making and ordering the Sun, Moon, and other
heavenly bodies. This work is often spoken of in Scripture, Genesis 1. 14. Psalm
104. 19. 20. 21, 22, 23. Psalm 136. 7. 8. 9. Psalm 148. He calls upon the
Sun, Moon, and Stars of light to praise God: and Psalm. 19. He says of
the Sun, God has set a Tabernacle for the Sun. In another place he says, he
guides the stars and calls them by their names.

The wonderfulnesse of these works of God is seen,

First, in the very matter and substance of them, which is wonderful and
inexplicable, who can tell what the Sun is made of.

2. In their quantity both in respect of multitude and greatness. For
multitude they be innumerable, and for magnitude, many of the stars are far
greater then the earth.

3. In their qualities, which are principally three.

1. Their figure, the fittest for motion and use, round and orbicular.

2. Their brightness and shining, especially the splendor of the Sun and Moon.

3. Their durablenesse: they do not change.

4. In their motion which is very swift and regular.

5. In their effects, working so constantly and variously in the seasons of the
year. 2 Chronicles. 33. 3. Jer. 44. 17. Deuteronomy. 4. 19.


The most beautiful bodies of the Stars which we see fastened in Heaven, are
not Gods, as Plato in Timaeo called the Stars, by the worshipping of which
the blind Gentiles and the Jews also horribly polluted themselves: but
excellent works of God, by the contemplation of which we ought to be stirred
up to acknowledge and celebrate the Majesty, glory, wisdom and power of the
Creator, Psalm. 8. 3. 4.

First, for the Sun that is called the greatest light, and that most truly
and properly, both for the body and substance of it, and also for the
brightness and abundance of light which is in it. For the most skillful
Mathematicians have demonstrated that the very body of the Sun does exceed
the whole earth in bigness 166. times. King David did aptly compare the Sun to
a Giant (for strength) refreshed with wine (for the heat) to run his course,
for his swift motion.

The Sun Sol usitatissime Hebraeis dicitur (...) Schemech. a ministrando (quod
(...) Schimmesch. quia dei Ministerin natura clarissimus aliter a calore (...)
Chammah. Graecis ab (...) i. e. splandore, (...) Latinis Sol, vel quia solus ex
omnibus sideribus est tantus, vel quia quum est exortus, obscuratis aliis sol^s
appareat. Martinius.
is the glorious servant of all the world, therefore it has its name in Hebrew
from serving. The continual motion, great swiftness, exceeding heat, and
admirable brightnsse of the Sun does utter the praise of God, Psalm. 19. 3, 4, 5.

The Sun is the fountain of heat and light, the life of the Universe, the
great Torch of the world, and the Ornament of Heaven.

The Sun is fitly situated, being in the midst of the six other Planets,
neither too high nor too low.

Altins egressus coelestia tecta cremabit,
Inferius terras: medio tutissimus ibis.
Ovid. lib. 2. de Metamorph. See Dr. Brownes Enquiries, lib. 6. chap. 5.

Secondly the Moon is also called a great light, not for the bigness of the
body of it, but because it is the lowest of all the Planets, and nearest unto
the (...) ad corporum quam splendoris eorum respexit Moses, and ad popularem
captum and aspectum, qui haec judicat esse maxima sydera in coelo juxta sensum
Mercer. See Doctor Hackewells Apology of Gods providence, page 74. 76. 77.
earth, and therefore appears biggest of all next unto the Sun, and gives to
the earth a greater light then any of the stars, which are far greater in
substance, and brighter in light.

Some say it is the cause of the ebbing and flowing of the Sea, for it agrees
exactly with the revolution of the Moon, it causes it 1. by its motion, as it
brings its beams, 2. by its beam, as that brings the influence. 3. by
infusion, as that stirs the waters.

It is called in Latin Luna a lucendo says Tullie, Dominatur corporibus
humidis; as over women (the brain) shel-fish. From the new Moon to the full,
all humors do increase, and from the full to the new Moon decrease again.
or because sola lucet nocte, says Varro. In Hebrew Jareach and Jerech, which
words signify a month, because it is renewed every month.

A star is the thicker part of Heaven, round and full of light.

In the day the glistering light of the Sun obscures all the stars, but in
the night how many hundred thousand of them do we see, Only God can number the
Stars, Psalm. 147 4. It is impossible for man to number them, which God
intimates to Abraham, Genesis 15. 5.
besides those that are hidden from us in the other part of the Sphere which is
not seen by us. The number of stars set upon the Globe are 1025. and diverse of
them have proper names. All the stars of the Heaven are not numbered nor cannot,
since diverse of them are so small: but these 1025. are the principallest
amongst them, and all that have ever been accounted of.

Philosophers distinguish them into fixed stars and Planets. The Planets are
apparently, 7. Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, then the Sun in the midst as it were the
King of all, after Venus, Mercury, and the Moon. Neither Moses, Job, nor the
Psalms (the most frequent in Astronomicall observations) mention any of the
Planets but the Sun and Moon.

Of these stars some are greater then other, and are distinguished into six
sorts of bignesses. Their proportions are thus delivered, viz. A star of the
first bigness or magnitude is 107 times bigger then the earth.

A Star of the second magnitude ninety times bigger then the Earth.

A Star of the third bigness, 72. times bigger then the Earth.

A Star of the fourth bigness, is 54. times bigger then the globe of the earth.

A star of the fifth magnitude is 36. times bigger then the Earth.

A star of the sixth bigness is eighteen times bigger then the globe of the
earth.

We are to bewail our own great folly and blindness that we have not more
admired, Corollaries.
honored, feared, loved that great worker to whom these Creatures do point
us. We do not often enough tell our selves, this Moon, this Sun, these stars
could not, nor did not make themselves. They could not possibly be without any
beginning at all, for they are but parts of the whole world, and no part of any
whole can be eternal, because there must be something before that did unite
those parts together; wherefore they were made by some superior essence, and
more excellent then themselves, and that is God. How great, how wise, how good,
how infinitely excellent is He whose hand framed and ordered these things. The
Sun arises to us constantly, the Moon also keeps her course with like
constancy. Does not that mighty army of stars which in a clear night show
themselves, even speak to us as it were to consider of his incomprehensible
excellency which made and rules them?

Let us accustom our selves hereafter to these meditations, if God had not
beautified heaven with these excellent bodies, light and heat could not have
been equally and in due quantity conveyed into all the quarters of the world.
We must observe this work so as to praise God for it, to inform our selves of
his nature, and strive to work more love, fear, obedience, and confidence in
our selves toward him. The Apostle says, that in the times before the
Gospel, the Gentiles might have found God as it were by groping, Acts 17. 27.

Now we that have the Scripture to direct us as in the daylight, shall not we
find God out by these illustrious works of his?

CHAP. VI.
THe fifth days work was the Creation of all living creatures which live and
move in the two moist Elements, Genesis 1. 20. 21, 22.
the water and the air, viz. Fishes The Fishes were appointed to increase and
multiply, and to fill the waters: the fowls were appointed to increase and
multiply and fly in the air.
and moving creatures, which live and move in the waters; and all kind of
Fowls which fly in the open Region of the air, diverse in nature, shape,
qualities, and manner of living.

The Hebrew verb (...) of which the word (...) which is here translated the
moving creature, is derived; is used as here, so in other Scriptures
frequently, first to signify creeping or moving forward without feet, as
Genes. 7. 21. and Levit. 11. 19. and secondly also to bring forth abundantly as
here, and also Exodus 1. 7. Fishes breed and bring forth young in great
abundance, more then any other creatures do, by the multitude of spawn they
would increase beyond all measure and number, if by one means or other the
spawne were not devoured and consumed.

Who can render a reason of their ability to swim so in the waters, to support
themselves in the midst of the waters, and convey themselves up and down in it?

Fishes are in Scripture termed Reptilia, Psalm. 104. 25. In the great and wide
Sea there are things creeping innumerable both small and great, so called,
because things when they swim seem to creep along in the water. As birds have
their wings and trains by means whereof they cut their way, and make smooth
passage through the air, so fishes are furnished with finnes wherewith they
guide themselves in their swimming, and cut the current of the streams and
waves for their more easy passage, wherein their course is directed by their
tail, as shtps are conducted by their Helm.

The Sea gives more and greater dainties then the earth, those that did most
affect to please their palate of old, set great store by fishes, and paid
dearer for them then flesh. God has furnished them with a strong power of
increasing. Birds bring forth some four or five in a nest, some three, and
some but two, the most but twenty, as the little Wren, for being so little, the
kind would be consumed by the things which devour such weak creatures, if
those that be, did not bring forth very many: but every fish brings forth a
great multitude, many hundreds as we may see in their spawne.

That God should give unto these things a power to multiply so very fast, is
wonderful, and it is agreeable to reason too, for the fishes do more devour
one another then the beasts do, the greater being much more ravenous then any
beast, as being bigger, and their stomachs by an antiperistasis of the cold
water more vehement in digesting.

They are said to be without number, Psalm. 104. 25. not simply, but to us, for
we cannot tell the number of them, though God (which made them) do know the
particular number of them. He can tell how many fishes there be in the Sea,
though to us they exceed the power of counting, yet he has the precise and
exact number of them.

We know not the kinds of fishes, how much less the particulars.

There be (says Pliny) of fishes and other creatures living in the Sea,
Plinies Natural history, l. 32. chapter 11.
one hundred seventy and six several and distinct kinds.

What Philosopher can tell how many Dolphins, Herrings, Whales, sword-fishes
there be in the Sea?

The Echeneis Remora, Plinies Natural hist. l. 32. chapter 1.
or stop-ship, but half a foot long is able to stay the greatest ship under
sail. Keckermannus humori frigido a Remora fuso adscribere videtur qui aquam
circa gubernaculum conglaciet. in Disput. Phisic. The Cramp-fish Torpedo is
able to benum and mortify the arms of the lustiest and strongest Fishers that
be by touching only the end of any part of an angle-rod, Id. ibid.
which they hold in their hands, although they stand aloft and a great way from
her: hence it has its name, Johnstoni Tbaumato graphia.
quod torpore manus afficiat, because it benummeth the hands.

The Naturalists tell us of one fish which they call the Uranoscope, which has
but one eye, and that in a vertical point, on the top of the head, directly
upward: by which it avoids all rocks and dangers.

There have been known Whales six hundred foot Pliny Ibid. Four Acts long in
the Indian Sea. Idem l. 9. c. 3. Amama Antibarb. Bibl. l. 3. Chamierus t^m.
2do. l. 9. chapter 11. Plin. Ibid. c. 2.
long, and three hundred and 60. foot broad, some like mountains, and some like
Islands. God himself speaking of his own power, of all the creatures,
rehearses only two, the Behemoth, Job 40. 15. to the end, that is the
Elephant, and the Leviathan, Job 41. per totum, that is the Whale, this being
the greatest among the Fishes, as that among the beasts.

The Sword-fish has a beak or bill sharp pointed, wherewith he will drive
through the sides and planks of a ship, and bore them so, that they shall
sink withal.

The Dolphin is said to be a fish of such exceeding great swiftness, as that
oftentimes he outstrippeth a ship under sail, in the greatest ruff and
merriest wind, in swiftness of course. In this fish is propounded to us an
example of charity, and kind affection toward our Children, as Pliny li. 9.
chap 8.
in his description of the nature of this fish shows, and Aelianus l. 5. c.
18 As also of his singular love toward man, whereof Aelianus produces strange
examples.

It may seem strange that it should please the Pope to forbid flesh to men
rather then Pisces Deus noluit sibi offferri tum quod extra aquam non vivant
(nihil autem mortuum ex animalibus offerri sibi Deus velit) tum etiam quod ex
Serpentum genere ce^sentur. Pisces-Serpentum vero genus universum damnatum est
a Deo, propterea quod per serpentem deceptus fuerit homo, fuitque serpeus
organon Diaboli, Gen 3. (...) Isag. Christ. l. 2. c. 23
fish, i. the less dainty and luxurious, before the more: for what is of some
alleged, that the curse fell upon the earth, and not the Seas, is fondly
affirmed, seeing when it is said, cursed be the earth. By earth is meant the
whole globe of the earth, consisting of Sea and dry land.

Some fishes are exceeding small, and for their smalnesse and workmanship
bestowed upon them, admirable. In the Sea the Cockles, a little kind of
shel-fish, yet in its kind very artistciall, somewhat resembling a Cre-fish,
which are dainties for rich men.

Those little and small things are made with so many joints and parts and
turnings, such a proportion and shape, and every thing so exact and suitable,
as would stir up astonishment in any beholder. Gods power is likewise in the
greatness of some fishes, as the Whale, some of which are 80, yards long,
their eyes are as big as an hogshead, and their mouth so wide, that a man
sitting on horseback might be held in it.

God has created the Fowls of heaven among other creatures, Psalm 104. 12.
Genesis 1. 20, 21.

The things wherein the Fowls differ from other creatures are 1. That they be
winged, having feathers and wings by which they are covered, and by which they
do pass through the air, and the place wherein they fly, viz. in the open
firmament in this lower heaven. Their creation is wonderful in diverse respects.

First, their making is wonderful, far differing from that of beasts, fishes,
and men.

2. They have great variety of kinds, some wild, some tame, some great, some
little, some Sea or water birds, some land birds.

3. Their manner of breeding, they lay eggs and hatch them, and out of a kind
of confused substance, that to us seems void of life, by the heat of their
bodies they do bring forth their young naked at first, which after by the same
cherishing of warmth, do bring forth feathers to cover them. Many of them are
so beautifully adorned with their feathers for color, and are so glorious, as
a man cannot but look upon them with wondering and delight, for where does
nature show more variety, and a pleasinger composition of colors then in Doves
neck, a Peacocks tail, and some other like birds.

4. For their swiftness of flying, that they can with such celerity pass
through the air.

5. They are many ways serviceable to many: they are a dainty food for weak
stomachs, they pull up many kinds of worms and vermin, that else would be
very harmefull to us.

Fowls or birds are more worthy than Fishes, because they do more participate
of air and fire (the two noblest Elements) than of water and earth. All birds
are mustered under the name of Fowls as under their Genus.

There are examples of virtues in the fowls propounded for us to imitate, Job
12. 7. One cannot say of the Phoenix being only one in the world, increase and
multiply, there were two of all creatures in the Arc, therefore there is no
Phoenix. Aldrovandus and Pliny,
and of vices for us to shun.

In the Phaenixe an example of the Resurrection: in the Storke of loving
affection: in the Dove of innocence and conjugall faith: in the Crows and
Estridges of unnaturalness.

We should imitate the Stork, Crane and Swallow Job 39. 13, 14, 15, 16. Lam. 4.
3. Jer. 8. 7.
in acknowledging the seasonable time of our repentance.

The Storke has her name from (...), love, and the * (...) She is somewhat like
a Hern having a long neck and feet.
Hebrew word is near of kin with another, which signifies bowels of
compassion, as which indeed are most tender in her. A story whereof Doctor
Twist against Doctor Jackeson. Petronius Arbiter and Solinus call the Stork
pietatis cultricem. They count it there a happy Omen for the Storke to build in
their houses.
we have in the description of the Netherlands, viz. of a Storke, that when
the house was on fire where her nest was, kept the fire off from her young ones
with her own body and wings so long till she was burnt her self.

It is loving to mankind, delightful to build in the tops of houses and
chimneys, as is usual to be seen in Germany.

It is the emblem of a grateful man: for at her departure from the house
where she builds (as some report) she usually leaves a young one behind her.
Aelian writes of a Storke which bred on the house of one which had a very
beautiful wife, which in her Husbands absence used to commit adultery with one
of her base servants; which the Storke observing, in gratitude to him who
freely gave him house-roome, flying in the villans face, struck out both his
eyes.

The Eagle is reckoned the Sovereign Queen of all Fowls, as the Lion is
reputed the King of all beasts.

It is Altivolans avis, Job 39. 27, 28, 29.
an high soaring bird, that sometime flies so high a pitch as she transcendeth
the view of man: she has a tender care of her young, when they be flush and
ready for flight, See of the Nightingales singing. Plinies 10. l. of natural
history, c. 29. and Famianus Stradas Prolusions.
then she stirs up her nest and fluttereth over them; yea she takes them on
her wings, and so soareth with them through the air, and carries them aloft,
and so freeth them from all danger. In that she carries her young ones rather
upon her wings then in her tallons, she shows her tender care and love that
she bears unto them

The Hebrew name (...) which is translated Foul, Genesis 1. 26. signifies in
general every living thing, which by help of wings flies above the earth in
the air: so that not only birds but also bees, wasps, hornets, and all other
winged things may here be understood. Bees are notable, Deuteronomy. 32. 11.

1. For their good husbandry, Bees are principal among In^ects.
she is very painful, she flies to every herb and flower, and seeks and
searches into every corner of the same. She so abhors idleness that she
punishes the idle drone, When bees are most angry in swarming, cast but a
little dust upon them, and they are presently quiet, and leave their hu^ming.
and will not give it any quiet harbor in the hive. 2. She is thrifty, which
is another part of good husbandry, what she has gotten in the Summer, she
charily lays up in her Cells, and does not spend it till she must needs.

2. For their care of the common good, she is an admirable lover of that, she
labors, eats, fights in common, and all her pains is directed to the common
good, she will with unresistable courage assail any enemy though never so
strong, which shall offer to wrong the common body.

3. For their concord, Bees of the same hive are linked together in the bond of
amity, though they be many of them, yet they know and love each other, and keep
peace among themselves, and fly domestical sedition, unless the rulers be
multiplied, and by their disorders set the rest of the Bees at variance.

4. For their dutifulness to their King or Prince, See Plinies natural
history, l. 11. c. 17.
they are most loyal subjects to him, they labor for him, and build him more
then one palace, and that more large and sta^ely then their own, they fight
for him, and go abroad with him.

We see and use the fowls, and eat their flesh, and lie upon their soft
feathers, Corollaries.
and yet contemplate not the goodness of God in them.

We have diverse kinds of tame foul in our back-sides, they bring us young, and
we kill and dress them, and set them upon our Tables and feast with them. They
lay eggs, and we eat of them: they sit and hatch and cherish their young, and
we see that admirable manner of drawing actual life out of a potentiall life
by the working of heat. And we have many wild foul, but who sees Gods
wisdom, power, bounty, in giving them to us.

Let us stir up our selves to give God his due glory, in respect of this
kind of creature.

Amongst other creatures, the Lord has stored the world with diverse kinds of
foure-footed beasts, which move and walk upon the face of the earth, Psalm. 104.
11, 12. these were created on the sixth day.

These beasts are creatures endued not with life alone, but with sense also.
They consist of a body and of a sensible soul, and besides the life of
vegetation which is to be found in plants, by which they grow and are
nourished; They have also a soul whereby they discern diverse bodily objects,
and can both discern and follow that which is good for them, and shun what
is evil, and so preserve themselves alive by using things helpful for them,
and avoiding the contrary. All these beasts were made to walk upon the ground
with four feet, having their heads bowing down to the gronnd to seek their
diet, without which they could not live, and which is provided for them upon
the face of the ground. There are diverse kinds of brute beasts differing in
nature, qualities, figure, color, quantity, voice.
They were made on the sixth day before man was created, Genesis 1. 24.

This work is wonderful in respect of the diverse sorts of these beasts, some
great, and some small, some of one shape and nature, some of another.

We see great variety of them in our own Country, and there is far greater
variety abroad in the world which we have never seen. That out of the same
earth and water all these kinds should grow by a word spoken with the mouth of
God, let it be so, is a strange and wonderful thing. By virtue of these words,
there were Sheep, Goats, Kine, Horses, Camels and Dromodaries, Elephants,
Lions, Bears, Dogs, Tigers, Wolves, Foxes, Dear. What are all these but a
most artificial mixture of earth and water put into a certain shape or form
of members, having head, feet, back, breast, belly, brain, liver, heart,
guts, and other intrailes, and having power to see, hear, to touch, smell, taste,
to eat, drink, go, generate, to remember, to have a kind of thought of
things within, to imagine and discern, having also affections and passions.
They carry us, feed us, cloth us, till the ground for us. How full of tedious
and toilsome pains would our lives be, if we had not a horse to bear us up
and down from place to place, and horses or oxen to convey all manner of
things for us.

We must magnify the name of God, and frame our selves to sincere
thankfulness unto him who has made such a multitude of creatures inferior
to our selves, and given to us the use of them. O what a wonderful skillful
workman is he, that out of the earth could produce such a number of such
creatures. And how good was he to us, that he did not give reason unto them as
well as sense; for if they had reason to know their own strength and our
weakness, we should never keep them under as we do.

Let us not abuse these creatures of God to bad purpose, or use them in a
cruel and inhumane manner; they are our fellow creatures, made of a little
courser earth; and since they obey us with all cheerfulness, let us be
likewise obedient to God.

There is no creature among all the beasts of the world which so amply
demonstrates the power and wisdom of Almighty God as the Vtrum ea vox Elephas
ab Eleph bos, an vero potius ab Alaph quod Syris and Ebraeis discere est,
derivata sit, merito dubites. Adeo verisimilis utraque sententia est; Nam quod
primam attinet, in confesso est apud Graecos and Latinos, nobilitatam semper
fuisse bovis praecaeteris terrestribus anima^tibus magnitudinem. Ita credibile
est, Ebraeos, Syros and Phoenices cum hoc animal and mole and figuratione
corporis ad bovem quam proxime accedens primo vidissent, bovis nomine
appelasse. Quod ad alteram attinet, quis ignorant ea, quae de hujus belluae
docilitate narrat Plinius, l. 80. c. 1. 3. 7. Cicero Epist. Famil. 1. 7. and
plena manu Lipsius. Centuria prima Epist. 5^. Amama. Antibarb. Bibl. l. 3.
Elephant, both in respect of his proportion of body and disposition of spirit.
He is by the Hebrews called Behemoth, by way of excellency, as the Latins for
the same cause call him Bellua, and by Job chap. 40. verse. 15. he is likewise
called Behemoth in the plural number. He is wittily called by Julius Scaliger,
Bestiarum Heroes: and by Job in the same Chapter, verse. 19. the chief of the
ways of God, that is, the greatest, strongest, and most understanding of all
earthly irrational creatures, as Deodate interprets it. Vide Fulleri miscel.
Sac. l. 4. c. 10. Elephas peregrinum est apud nos animal, Indis and aliis
notissimum and obvium. Johnstoni Thaumatographia certe turres olim armatorum in
proelia ferebant. Id ib. The Elephants were useful in the wars, they carried
Castles and armed men.

Aristotle lib. 9. de hist. animal. cap. 47. makes mention of a memorable thing
to make men fly incest. The King of Scythia had a Mare of a most excellent
race, which brought forth most excellent colts; among the rest she had one
which excelled them all; the King was desirous that this colt might horse his
damme, that so he might have an excellent race of them: but the colt when he
was brought to his damme, would not horse her; the King seeing this, he caused
them to cover the damme that he might not know her. But he perceiving
afterward that it was his damme, ran away and cast himself over a steep rock,
and brake his neck.

There are many things wonderful in the Dog, his sagacity, docility, fidelity.

A dog in Epyrus, in a great assembly of people, knowing the man that had
murdered his Master, flew upon him with open mouth, Plinies natural history,
lib. 8. chapter 40.
barking and snapping at him so furiously, that he was ready to take him by the
throat, until he at length confessed the fact, that caused the dog thus to
rage and foame against him.

The dogs which be near unto Nilus, Id. ib. Vide adagium, canis de Nil^.
lap of the River, running still, and never stay while they are drinking, for
fear of the greedy Crocodiles. Aegyptio canes e Nilo nunquam nisi currentes
lambitant, dum Crocodilis insidias cavent.

It happened, that upon a narow thin planke that lay for a bridge, one goat
met another, both coming from diverse parts: now by reason that the place was
so narrow, that they could not pass by, nor turn about, nor yet retire
backwards blindly, Plinies natural history, l. 8. c. 50.
considering how long the planke was, and so slender withal; moreover the
water that ran underneath, ran with a swift stream, and threatened present
death if they failed and went besides. Mutianus affirms, that he saw one of
them to lie flat down, and the other to go over his back.

In Sibaris there was a young man named Crathis, A memorable story of the
punishment of buggery.
which being not able to retain lust, but forsaken of God, and given over to a
reprobate sense, committed buggery with a female Goat, the which thing the
Master Goat beheld and looked upon, and dissembled, concealing his mind and
jealousy for the pollution of his female. Afterward finding the said young man
asleep (for he was a Shepherd) he made Topsell de quadrupedibus.
all his force npon him, and with his horns dashed out the buggerers braiues.

Alexander the Great had a very strange and rare horse called Bucephalus,
Bucephalus siguifieth an ox head. Plinies natural hist. l. 8. c. 42. lib. 6.
cap. 20. Aul. Gell. Noct. At. l. 5. c. 2. This horse is also celebrated by
Plutarch, and Quintus Curtius.
either for his crabbed and grim look, or else of the mark or brand of a bulls
head, which was imprinted upon his shoulder. He would suffer no man to sit him,
nor come upon his back but Alexander, when he had the Kings saddle on, and was
also trapped with royal furniture, for otherwise he would suffer any
whomsoever. When he was dead the King solemnized his funerals most sumptuously;
erected a Tomb for him, and about it built a City that bare his name,
Bucephalia.

That is a lofty description of a horse, Job 39. 19. to 26. If Banks Sir
Walter Raleigh.
had lived in elder times, he would have shamed all the Inchanters of the
world: for whosoever was most famous among them, could never master or instruct
any beast as he did his Horse.

That story of Androdus and the Lion Hic est leo hospes hominis, hic est homo
medicus leonis. See Doctor Willet of the Camel on the 11. of Levit. quest. 14.
is commonly known. Vide Auli Gellii noctes Atticas, l. 5. c. 14.

There is in some kind as much of the Creator in the Ant, as in the Lion, in
the former excellent skilfulesse, in the other power and majesty.

CHAP. VII.
AMong the works of Creation, Angelorum nomen Graecum est. (...) Enimest
nuncius (...) nunciare Graecum nomen Angeli. Europaeae gentes fere retinent,
nisi quod id inflectant ad terminationem uam and Galli id (...) dicunt ange
Germani a in e mutato engel. Martinius de Creatione.
the principal are the reasonable Creatures, Angels and Men.

The name Angel, comes of the Greek (...), which signifies a Messenger, sent
forth from some superior person or State to deliver a message, and to declare
the mind of him or them that sent him. The Hebrew name (...) which is the name
of an Angel in the Old Testament, signifies also a Messenger; but yet in a
more full and large sense: For it siguifies such a Messenger as does not only
deliver and declare a Message by word of mouth, but also does act and execute
indeed the will of him that sent him, and does perform his work enjoined as a
faithful Minister and servant.

First of all it signifies that chief and principal Messenger and
Ambassador of God, his Son Jesus Christ, who is called Mal. 3. 1. The Angel
of the Covenant.

2. Pastors are called Angels, Revel. 2d. and 3d. Chapters, being Gods
messenger sent to the Church.

Thirdly, this word is most frequently used to signify the heavenly Spirits,
who are so called, because they are both ready to be sent on Gods message, and
often are sent out to do the will of God, Genesis 19. 1. Psalm. 103. 20. 21.
Matthew. 18. 10.

That there are Angels is proved out of Scripture, That there are Angels.
where they are often mentioned, Psalm. 68. 17. Dan. 7. 10. Col. 1. 16. and 2.
10. Hebrews 12. 12. and by the manifold apparitions of them, Genesis. 3. 24.
Cherubims, that is, Angels appearing in the form of flying men to keep the
entrance into the Garden. Abraham entertained Angels unawares. They were sent
to destroy the filthy Sodomites, and the Cities about them that ran into the
like exorbitancies. An Angel stopped Abraham's hand which he lifted up according
to Gods Commandment to slay his only son Isaac. Esse Angelos vel hinc
liquet, quod sint in rerum natura quae dam quae nullis possint adscribi causis
Physicis, unde necesse est Spiritusesse unde illa profisciscantur. Tum etiam
videtur ipse ordo universi id requirere ut sint Angeli, nempe certum est
natural esse corpoream, and certum item est mediam esse naturam, quae nempe
partim corporea, partim incorpore sit; consequens igitur est, ut sit natura
quemadmodum mere corporea, sic etiam mere in corporea Scriptura (...) non
probat esse Angelos, quemadmodum neque probat animam esse immortalem, sed hoc
sumit. Cameron tomo 2do Paelect.
Abraham told Eleazar that God would send his Angel with him to prosper him in
the business of taking a wife for his son Isaac. An Angel of the Lord met
Hagar and sent her back to her Mistress, when through discontent she had
played the Fugitive. An Angel appeared to Zachary and foretold the conception
and birth of John the Baptist. An Angel acquainted the blessed Virgin that she
should conceive our Savior in her womb by the over-shadowing of the Holy
Ghost. A multitude of Angels celebrated the Nativity of our Blessed Savior
with an hymn of joy. Angels Ministered to Christ after his temptation in the
wilderness, and in his bloody agony in the Garden. An Angel acquainted the
women with his resurrection, after he had terrified the men that were set to
keep the Sepulcher, and rolled the stone from the doors thereof. An Angel
also set Peter at liberty when he was imprisoned between two soldiers. An
Angel shook the foundation of the Prison wherein St. Paul and Silas were laid
fast in the stocks. An Angel showed unto John the vision of the Revelation at
the appointment of our Lord Jesus Christ. Now besides these and many more
apparitions of the heavenly Spirits, we read that the Angels of God are many
thousands, yea millions, and of the company of innumerable Angels, and of
Angels pitching their tents about the righteous, and holding them up in their
hands, and chasing the wicked and destroying them.

And besides the testimony of Scriptures, The Peripate ricks call them
Immateriall substances, Intelligences, abstracted and separated forms.
the Heathens also had some notions of them as appears in their writings, but
indeed it was in some respect a false notion; for they conceived them to be a
certain kind of petty Gods, and did perform worship unto them, the evil
Angels beguiling them: and if there be evil Angels, there must needs be
likewise good.

The Angels are diversely called in Scripture: The angels are material.
Psalm 104. 4. to express their nature: and Angels to their office, 1. They
are perfect effects, therefore must have all the 4. causes. 2. Finite,
therefore terminated in their essence nothing terminates things but matter and
form. Barlow in Hierons last farewell. Zanchie and others hold otherwise.
as Messengers sent from God; they are called Sons of God, Job 1. 6. and 38.
7. Yea Elohim, Gods, Psalm. 8. Cherubims, Genesis 3, 24. Ezekiel. 10. 1. from the form
they appeared in, viz. like youths, Seraphims, Esa 6. 2. for their ardour and
fierceness in the execution of Gods anger: Watchmen, or the watchful ones,
Dan. 4. 10. 13. being in heaven as a watch tower, and keeping the world.
Stars of the morning, Job 38. 7. from their brightness of nature; a flaming
fire, Psalm. 104. 4. because God uses their help to destroy the wicked.

In the New Testament they are called Principalities for their excellency of
nature and estate, and Col. 1. 16. and 2. 10.
powers for their wonderful force.

Reasons why God made Angels. The will and power of God, therefore they are,
because God saw it fit to make them, yet two reasons may be rendered of this
work.

1. God saw it fit to raise up our thoughts from meaner, to more excellent
Angels are a mean betwixt God and man, as man was betwixt the Angels and the
beasts.
creatures, till we came to him: first things (say some) were made which had no
life, then living things without sense, as plants and trees, then sensible,
then reasonable.

2. It was convenient that every part and place of the world should be filled
with Inhabitants fit for the same, as the air with birds, the earth with
beasts and men, the Sea with fishes, and the heavens which we behold with
Stars, and the highest Heavens with Angels.

God is the maker of Angels. God made the Angels, Psalm 104. 4. Coloss. 1. 16.
These glorious Creatures which shall have no end, had a beginning as well as
the silliest beast, bird, or fish, and they are equally beholding (nay more,
because they have received more excellent endowments) unto God for their being
with the silliest worm. And though Moses mentions not in particular either the
act of creating them, or the time, yet St. Paul says, that by him were all
things made, visible and invisible: and it is evident by discourse of reason,
that the Angels were made by God. For either they must be made by God or some
other maker, or else they must be eternal, for whatsoever is not made by some
maker, cannot be made at all: and whatsoever is not at all made, is eternal.
Now if the Angels were eternal, then were they equal with God in selfe-being,
they might be called selfesubsisting essences, and so should be equal with
God, standing in no more need of him then he of them, owing no more service,
homage, and praise to him, then he owes to them, and so they were Gods as
well as he, and then we should have multitude of Gods, not only one God, and
so should not God be the first and best Essence, there being so many others
beside him, as Good and Omniscient as he; wherefore they must be made by some
Maker, because they cannot be Eternal: and if made, then either by themselves
or some other thing besides themselves, not by themselves, because that implies
and absolute contradiction: and if by some other thing, then by a better or
worse thing, not by a more mean, for the less perfect, cannot give being to a
more perfect thing, for then it should communicate more to the effect then it
has in it self any way, which is impossible, that any efficient cause should
do; not by any better thing then themselves, for excepting the Divine Majesty
which is the first and best, there is no better thing then the Angels, save the
humanity of our Lord Jesus Christ, which could not be the Maker of them,
because they were created some thousands of years before the humanity was
formed in the Virgins womb, or united to the second person in Trinity.

We are not able to conceive of their Essence, Their nature.
they are simple, incorporeall, Spiritual substances, therefore incorruptible.

An Angel is a Spiritual, An Angel defined.
Created, complete substance, endued with an understanding and will, and
excellent power of working. Wendelinus.


An Angel is a substance?

1. Spiritual, that is, void of all corporeal and sensible matter, whence in
Scripture, Angels are called Spirits They are spirits, Heb. 1. 14. glorious
Spirits Hebr. 9. 5. Heavenly Spirits, Matthew. 24. 36. Immortal Spirits, l^u.
26. 36. For their nature or substance they are called Spirits, for their
property or quality glorious, for their place orabode heavenly, for their
continuance Immortal.
, Psalm. 104. 4. Heb. 1. 14. Therefore the bodies in which either good or evil
Angels appeared, were not natural to them, but only assumed for a time, and
laid by when they pleased, as a man does his garments, not substentiall, but
aeriall bodies: they were not Essentially or personally, but only locally
united to them, so that the body was moved, but not quickened by them.

2. Created, by which name he is distinguished from the Creator.

3. Complete, by which an Angel is distinguished from the reasonable soul of
man, which also is a spiritual substance, but incompleate, because it is the
essential part of man.

4. Endued with 1. an understanding, by which an Angel knows God and his
works. 2. a will, by which he desires or refuses the things understood. 3. An
excellent power of working, by which he effects what the will commands, this
is great in them, Psalm 103. 20. See 2 Kings 19. 35.

The Angels are most excellent creatures, when the highest praise is given of
any thing, it is taken from the excellency of Angels, Psalm. The bread of the
mighty, or Angels food, not because they brought it, but because it was most
pleasant, so that should Angels need food, they could not feed on better. See
River and Willet on Exodus 16. Their faculties.
78. 25. 1 Cor. 13. 1. They are called holy Angels, Luke 9. 26. Mark 8. 36.
therefore they are clothed with linen, Dan. 11. 4. to signify their purity,
and are called Angels of light, 2 Cor. 12. 14. to note the purity wherein they
were created. All the Individual Angels were made at once; and as God made
Adam perfect at the first, so they were made of a perfect constitution. They
have all our faculties, save such as be badges of our weakness: they have no
body, therefore not the faculties of generation, nut^ition, augmentation. They
have reason, conscience, will, can understand as much as we do and better too,
they have a will, whereby they can refuse evil and choose good, Matthew. 28. 5.
a conscience, reasonable affections, though not such as depend upon the body.

They are endowed with excellent abilities, know more of God, themselves, us,
and other things then we do, love God, themselves and men, are obedient to
God. The good Angels obey God.

1. Universally in all things, Psalm 103. 20.

2. Freely and readily, make have to do what he would have done, therefore
they are said to have Harps, Revel. 15. 2. as a sign of their cheerful mind.

3. With all their might, they serve God with diligence and sedulity, therefore
they are said to have Angeli alas habere dicu^tur propter velo citatem and
celerem in cuncta discursum. Hicron in Jesai. 6. and vento alas quoque ad
fingunt ob eandem causam. Drus. in Observat. Sac. l. 4. c. 19.
wings to fly.

4. Constantly, Rev. 7. 15. and 14. 4. They have incredible strength, and
therefore by an excellency they are called strong in strength, Psalm. 103. 20.
Angels of the power of the Lord Jesus, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 7. Powers, Romans 1. 38. One
Angel is able to destroy all the men, beasts, birds, and fishes, and all the
creatures in the world, and to overturne the whole course of nature if God
should permit it, to drown the earth again, and make the waters overflow it,
to pull the Sun, Moon, and Stars out of their places, and make all a
Chaos; therefore we read of wonderful things done by them, they stopped the
mouths of Lions that they could not touch Daniel; they quenched the violence of
the fire that it could not touch so much as a hair of the three Childrens
heads, nor a thread of their garments; they made Peter's chains in an instant
fall from his hands and feet, they can move and stir the earth (say the
Schoolmen) as appears Matthew. 28. 2. The Angels shook the foundation of the
Prison where Paul and Silas lay, and caused the doors to fly open, and every
man's bands to fall from him. They destroyed the first borne of Egypt, Sodom
and Gomorrah. One Angel slew in one night in the host of Senacherib and hundred
fourscore and 5000. men.

Reas. Their nature in respect of bodily things is wholly active not passive,
they are of a spiritual nature, what great things can a whirlwind or flash of
lightning do?

They are swift and of great agility, they have no bodies, therefore fill not
up any place, neither is there any resistance to them, they move with a most
quick motion, they can be where they will, they move like the wind
irresistibly and easily, without molestation, and in an unperceivable time;
they move more swiftly then the Sun, can dispatch that space in as few minutes
which the Sun does in 24. hours.

They have admirable wisdom, Acts 6. 15. Mark 16. 32.
1 Samuel 18. 14. and 14. 20. the knowledge of the good Angels is increased since
their Creation: for besides their natural knowledge they know many things by
revelation, Dan. 9. 22, 23. Matthew. 1. 20. Luke 1. 30. either immediately from
God or from his Word, Ephesians. 3. 9, 10. 1 Pet. 1. 12. Luke 15. 18. by experience
and conjecture.

How an Angel does understand is much disputed, their understanding is not
infinite, they know not all things, Mar. 13. of that day the Angels know not:
again, they cannot know future contingent things any farther then God reveals
these things to them, neither can they know the secrets of man's heart, 1 Kings
8. 39. Psalm. 7. 10. for that is proper to the Lord alone,

They are said indeed to rejoice at the conversion of a sinner, but that is no
further then their inward conversion puts it self forth into outward actions.

They do not know the number of the Elect, nor the nature of spiritual
desertions, the manner of mortifying sin, unless by the Church and Ministry of
the word. So again, for the manner of their knowledge, that of the Schools
about their morning and evening knowledge is vain, but it is plain they know
discursive as well as intuitive: though some say they are creaturae
intelligentes, but not ratiocinantes.

There are three degrees of their knowledge (say the Schoolmen Tum veteres
patres, tum etiam Doctores Scholastici triplicem cognitionem tribuunt Angelis
ex Patribus. Augustinus triplicem in Angelis statuit rerum cognitionem: unam,
quares in verbo, in filio scilicet Dei vident, alteram qua eas cernunt in earu^
naturis: Tertiam, qua eas norunt in suis men t^bus Casmannis Angelographia.
) 1. natural, which they had from the Creation, John 4. Some abode in the the
truth, others fell from it. 2. revealed, 1 Pet. 1. 12. Ephesians. 3. 10. the Greek
word signifies to look into it narrowly. Piscator thinks it has reference to
the Cherubims who did turn their faces to the propitiatory which was a type of
Christ. 3. Experimental which they have by the observation of those things
which are done among us, so they know the repentance of the godly, Luke 16. 10.

2. The will of * Angels is to be considered: will in the good Angels is that
whereby they desire good things known, and forsake evil.

The Angels would never have sinned if they had not been voluntary, for
although the good Angels be now so confirmed in holiness, that they can will
nothing but good, yet that hinders not liberty no more then it does in God or
Christ himself; to be a free Agent is a perfection, to sin is a defect, and
arises not from the liberty, but the mutability of the will.

3. Their motion and place. That they are in a place is plain by Scripture,
which witnesses that they are sometimes in heaven and sometime on earth, as
their service and office does require.

They are not in a place as bodies are, they are not circumscribed by place:
Luke 8. 30.
for a legion of Devils was in one man: they are so here, that they are not
there, and therefore one Angel cannot be in many places, although many Angels
may be in the same place, and they move not in an instant, though they move
very speedily. Matthew. 18. 10. and 22. 30.
They continue in the highest heavens, unless they be sent thence by the Lord
to do something appointed by him: Psalm. 68. 1.
where being freed from all distractions and humane necessities, Luke 2. 13.
they behold the glorious presence of God, Mark 12. 25.
their understanding and will being pitched upon him.

4. Their society and communion: Esaias 6. They cry one to another, Holy, holy,
holy.
for it cannot be conceived that these glorious Spirits should not signify to
one another their meaning: but how this should be, it is hard to determine;
they say that the Angels make known their minds to one another by their mere
will.

5. Their multitude and order? Mighty Princes are attended with many followers.
That there are many Angels, appears Dan. 7. 10. and Heb. 12. 22. an
innumerable company of Angels. But that is a foolish dream, that just so many
Angels fell as Numerus lapsorum in Scriptura non est definitus. Quod
Scholasticicum Thoma definiu^t ex, 2. Reg. 6. 16. plures a^gelos permansisse in
gratia quam pecrasse, parum soliditatis habet. Voet. Disput. de natura Daemo.
there are men elected, and they are chosen by God to make up their number
again.

Some say the good Angels exceed the number of the wicked Angels: by how much
evil men exceed the good, the greatest number of evil angels that we read of,
is but legion, the good very many, as that place in Daniel and Revel. 5. 11.
will show.

As for their order, There are degrees of them, C^l 1. 16. Romans 8. 38. 1 These.
4. 16. Some are named Angels, some A^ch-angels, 1 Thessalonians 4.
the Apostle indeed Coloss. 1. shows that there is an order among them, so
that one may be above another in dignity, but not in power and command: hence
they are called an host, which word signifies chiefly what has a complete
order.

Dyonisius Areopagita makes nine That ancient and high soaring (though
counterfeit) Dio^ysius describes the Hierarchy of Angels, as exactly as if he
had dwelt amongst them, delivering unto us 9 orders of them out of 9. words,
sound partly in the old, partly in the new Testament, and tells us the several
natures, distinctions, and properties of them all. Master Mede on Zach. 4. 16.
see more there.
orders of Angels, and distinguishes them into threes. The first containing
Cherubims, Seraphims, Thrones. The second Dominions, Armies and powers. The
third, Principalities, Arch-angells, and Angels. Much more modest is Augustine:
qui fatetur se rationem hujus distinctionis ignorare cont. Priscil. c. 11. etc.
57. Enchirid ad Lau-See Doctor Prideaux on Matthew. 18. 10. for their nature,
properties, order, and Ministry.

The Scripture makes mention only of two orders of Angels, Angels and
Archangels, Heb. 1. 4. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 16. Seraphim is a common name unto all
Angels: they are all described to be flames of fire, Psalm. 104. 4. and all the
Angels are Cherubims, as is evident by the Curtains of the Tabernacle which
were set forth and garnished with Cherubims only, Exodus 26. 31. signifying the
presence of the Angels in the Assembly of the Church, as the Apostle expounds
it, 1 Cor. 11. 10.

It is evident (says Mr. Cartwright) that the Apostle, Cartwright on Ephesians. 1.
21, in his Annotat. on the Rhem. Test.
Col. 1. 16. heapeth up diverse words of one and the same signification, thereby
the more effectually to set forth Quatuor ijs vocabulis thronorum,
dominationum, principatuum, and potestatum, Apostolus complexus est universam
caelestem societatem. Quid inter se distant quatuor illa vocabula dicant qui
possunt, si tamen possunt probare quae dicunt, Ego m^ ista ignorare confiteor.
August. Enchirid. ad Laurent. c. 58.
the supereminent power of our Savior Christ above all.

6. The names of the Angels. The first and most common name is that of Angel,
which name is common to the good and evil angels, yet in a far different
sense. The evil spirits are seldom called so simply, (though they be
sometimes to note the excellency of their original) because they fell from
their blessed condition, 1 Cor. 6. 3. Jude 6. In the first place to show the
prerogative of the Saints: and in the second to show the reason of Gods justice.

The evil spirits are called Angels, the name which was first given them.
Otherwise they are not absolutely called Angels, (that name being peculiar to
the Angels which stood) but Angels of the Devil and angels of Satan, Cameron
tomo 2do Praelect.
viz. because they are sent by the Devil their Prince.

Some as proper names are given to certain Angels, Michael, Dan. 10. 13. which
is compounded of 3. Hebrew particles, Mi-ca-el, who is like or equal to the
strong God. It signifies the power of God, because by him God exercised his
power: and Gabriel, Dan. 8. 16. and 9. 21. Luke 17. 19. that is, the glory of
God, who executed the greatest Embassages in Gods name to men. Vide Sculteti
exercitat. Evangel. l. 1. c.9.

7. The Angels Ministry and service. Their service may be considered either in
respect of God, the Church, or the enemies of the Church. Respecting God, and
the Church, and the people of God, they have diverse services.

The office of good Angels in respect of God:

1. They enjoy God and glory, They are called Thrones (says a School man)
because they do attend on the Throne of God.
Matthew. 18. 10. and 22. 30. This implies their great purity and happiness,
and withal their Ministry: what God bids them do they are ready to do. They
shall attend Christ when he comes to judgment.

2. They praise God and celebrate his Name, cleave inseperably unto him, and
obey his Commandments, Esaias 6. Psalm 103. 20, 21. and 104. 4. Dan. 7. 10. Job.
1. 6. they see the worth and excellency of God, that he deserves more praise
then they can give.

3, They praise and worship Christ as the head of the Church, Apoc. 5. 11, 12.
Heb. 1. 6. Phil. 2. 10. also as his Ministers, Matthew. 4. 11. Luke 22. 43.
Matthew. 28. 2. they stand always ready to do him service, so in his agony an
Angel comforted him.

2. Their service in respect of the Church and people of God. Heb. 1. 14.


1. They are glad for the good which befalls the Elect: so when Christ came
into the world how glad were they, Luke 2. they cried glory be to God on high:
they further rejoice at their conversion, Luke 15. 10.

2. They reveal unto them the will of God, Dan. 8. 9 Rev. 1. 11.

3. They keep the elect from dangers both of soul and body, Psalm 68. 17.
so far as is expedient, Genesis 19. 16. and 28. 12. and 25. 7. and 32. 1. 2.
Psalm. 34. 7. and 91. 11. Numb. 22. 1 King. 19. 7. 2 Kings 6. 16. and 8, 9, 10.
Both in the curtains of the Tabernacle, Exo. 26. 1. and the wall of the Temple
Cherubims were painted up and down to signify (as judicious Divines think)
what protection the people of God have in serving him. Exodus 34. 24.


4. They comfort them in distress, heaviness and distraction, Genesis 10. 9.
Matthew. 4. 10.
Genesis 20. 17, 18. and 32. 1, 2. Esaias 6. 6. Luke 1. 30. and 2. 10. Matthew. 28. 5.
Acts 10. 4. and 27. 23, 24. Judges 6. 12. and 13. 10. Dan. 10. 12. Matthew. 1.
20. and 2. 12, 13.

5. They suggest holy thoughts into their hearts as the Devil does evil and
unclean thoughts: Joh. 13. Act. 5.
resist Satan as in Jude.

6. They carry the souls of the elect into heaven at the end of this life, They
are present at our Assemblies, Ephesians. 1. mysteries are made known to them, and
the woman must be covered because of the Angels.
Luke 16. 22. and at the day of judgment they shall gather the elect from the
four winds, and separate between the elect and reprobate, Matthew. 24. 31. and
13. 27.

3. Their services against the wicked and all the enemies of the Church? An
Angel defeated Senacheribs army. Revel. 16.


They are ready to execute vengeance upon the enemies of Gods people, Esaias 37.
36. An Angel smote bloody persecuting Herod, Acts 12. At the last day the
Angels shall hurrie the wicked to Christ's Tribunal, and cast the reprobate
into hell, Matthew. 13. 40. 41. 42. 49, 50.

8. The speech of Angels?

Angels and Devils communicate with God, and one with another, not by speeches,
Mr. Baylie on Zach. 3. 1. p. 43. See Doctor Preston on Prayer.
for language requires bodily instruments, which these Spirits want: but as
they apprehend every object without senses, so they express it without
language in a secret way.

We come now to some profitable questions about the Angels.

The first is this, if the Angels be so beneficial to us, whether may they not
be prayed unto.

The ground and cause which brought in praying to Angels is laid down Col. 2.
13. Origines angelos docet invocandos certamque invocationis formulam
praescribit. Homil. in Ezech. Jelem. Casmannus.
where you have a general prohibition of religious worshipping of Angels, with
the cause of it.

There are three causes why they attempted this?

1. They entered into things which they did not know, as the Papists, how can
they tell whether the Angels pray for us, whether they know our wants.

2. They follow their carnal mind, because they see in the world, that to
great Magistrates we use Mediators and Intercessors, they dare not go of
themselves, so here.

3. Humility, for this they talk as Papists do now, we are unworthy to go
directly to God, and therefore we need the help of Angels: but this is vain,
for Christ is nearer to us then Angels are, Ephesians. 3. 12. Tutius and jucundius
loquar ad Jesum, quam ad aliquem sanctorum.

We say that all lawful and moderate reverence is to be given to Angels which
consists in these particulars.

1. We acknowledge the great gifts of God in them, and praise God for them. We
confess it is his mercy, that he has made such noble creatures to be
serviceable to us, and then for themselves in our judgments.

1. We honor them and judge them more noble creatures then man, they have
greater wisdom, holiness and power then man has.

2. For our will and affections, we love them, because they love us and delight
in our good, being ready to help us every where.

3. We should be careful of our carriage, because of their presence, we should
not sin because of the Angels.

4. We desire to make them examples of our lives, that we may do Gods will as
they do.

5. If Angels should appear visibly to us, we should honor them as more
excellent creatures, but yet stll keep within the bounds of civil or
fraternall honor Cultus fraternae societatis.
as to our fellow servants: but yet above us and not honor them with religious
worship.

The Papists say a religious worship is due unto them, but (yet that we may
do them no wrong) not indeed such as is due to God, but secondary; yet still
religious, and so they say they intercede for us, not as Christ, but in an
inferior way: and in this sense they hold they may be worshipped and prayed
unto.

Now we will refute their arguments, and then confirm the truth with strong
reasons.

For the first, all lawful reverence is commanded by the first Table, and that
is religious, or else by the second, and that is civil: but that manner and
degree of their worship is neither, therefore it is merely invented.

2. By general consent, religious worship is that whereby we do acknowledge
God to be the primum principium, the ultimum finem, and summum bonum, now this
is but one: and we may as well say there is a summum bonum secundario, as there
is a secondary religious worship.

3. There is the same reason of a religious worship as there is of a divine act
of faith, love and hope: but if a man should say, we may with a divine faith
believe in God primarily, and Angels secondarily, it were ridiculous, therefore
here if religious worship were due because of supernatural excellencies, then
every godly man were religiously to be worshipped.

Our arguments in general against this are these?

1. Matthew. 4. 10. Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou
serve, Heb. 1. it is applied to Christ.

2. The promise is to those only which call upon him, 51 Psalm. 15. call upon
me.

3. It cannot be of faith, for how shall I know whether they hear me, whether
they be present.

4. Coloss. 2. 9. It is condemned for will-worshi^, so that Idolatry is here
committed, that kind of it, quando divine colitur id quod non est verus Deus.
John was reproved for this, Rev. 19. 10. and 22. 9. Now John might have
distinguished, I do not worship you religiously, as God, but in the second
place.

The second question is, whether every man has his peculiar Angel?

This is not a question of faith, Scriptura piis tantum angelorum custodiam and
ministerium attribuit, Psalm. 148. 91. Heb. 1. 14. impiis non item. Imo plures
angelos indefinite circa pios excubare docet, non unu^, Psalm. 34. 8.
Spanhemius. Matthew. 18. 10. Vnde concludunt tum Patres tum Scb^lastici singulis
pueris, atque adultis etiam certos angelos esse attributos. Sic interpretati
sunt hunc locum Chrysostomus, Augustinus, Hieronimus and alii Casmannus. It is
greater both Dignity and benefit, that every one of the faithful have many
Angels appointed by the Lord for his guard, whereof the proof is manifest,
Psalm. 34. 7. and 91. 12. an host of Angels pitch their Tents round about them.
As many reprobate Angels seek the destruction of one only man, Mark 5. 9.
and 12. 45. so the Lord encountreth them by a number of his elect-Angels,
Master Cartwright.
but yet the more to be suspected, because it was generally held among the
Heathens, who did ascribe to every man born a bad angel to afflict, and a good
one to defend him: a good and ill Genius as they called the^. Becanus brings
places of Scripture to prove it, but there is altogether silence in the
Scripture concerning it: for when the Angels are charged to have care over us,
it implies that it is all their care. The chiefest place which most seems to
favor that opinion, is Acts 12. 15. where they said that it was his Angel:
Now to this some answer, that the men spoke according to the opinion of men
then generally received, and not according to the truth, as we may give an
instance concerning the blind man, when they asked whether he or his parents
had sinned that he should be borne blind: how could he sin before he was
borne: but some answer, that there was an opinion generally received, which all
the Platonists held (and so Origin and many of the Ancients) that the soul was
created before it was put into the body: and as it did good or il, it was put
into a well tempered or a maimed body: especially they thought these Angels
did appear a little before or after men's death.

Calvin thinks that it was an Angel peculiarly destinated to Peter for that
time of his imprisonment. If it were a peculiar Angel, then it would follow,
that he spoke and had the same gestures that men have to whom they belong.
Therefore it may well be rendered it is his messenger, Luke 7. 24.
as the word is elsewhere translated. But you will say then, they thought the
messenger spoke like him; No, but it might fall out, that they thought Rhode
did mistake: and when he said I am Peter they might think he said I am come
from Peter, and so it may be answered. If every man have one Angel, why did
more then one carry Lazarus his soul to heaven, and he has given his Angels
charge over thee, that is, many over one particular man. Cameron tomo 2do
Praelect. vide Rainold, de lib. Apoc. tomo 10. cap. 61.

The third question, 1 Cor. 11. 10. See the last large Annotations.
what is the meaning of that, let her be covered because of the Angels. Where
the Apostle commands a woman in public duties to have power, that is, covering
in sign of her subjection to God, and that because of the Angels. Some
understand this properly of the Angels, the heavenly Spirits but differently,
some because they are present at our Assemblies: and if you ask what need
that, seeing God and Christ are there, they answer that he mentioned God and
Christ before, and now adds these as inseparable servants which are sent for
the salvation of believers: others as probably make it a new argument from the
Angels, Esaias 6. as they covered their feet before God to show their subjection,
so should these.

Others understand it of the Ministers Vnicus, quod sciam, ex veteribus
Ambrosius, and ex Papistis Caietanus, and ex nostris unicus Beza, angelos
exponunt, Sacerdotes, seu pastores ecclesiae, Rectissime omnes alij, tum
veteres, tum recentes, intelligunt ip. sos angelos, eosque bonos ac sanctos.
Laurentius, Mal. 2. 7. Revel. 1. 20.
who are called Angels, because they are the Messengers of God, and so they
compare this place with that, Eccles. 5. 6. before the Angel Beza in loc.
Ministers (says Laurentius) are not any where in the Scripture called Angels
absolutely but always with addition.
, there is He notificative, by which is signified the high Priest, before whom
vows were made, Levit. 27. 8. Some interpret it generally of all good men, for
we all ought to be as so many Angels.

The fourth is, what is the meaning of those places, Acts 7. 53. and Gal. 3.
19. Learned Junius renders the words, Acts 7. 53. Jun. Paral. l. 1. par. 92.
You have received the law in the midst of the ranks of Angels, viz. who Ipse
Deus locutus est immediate ad Mosem praesentibus ac testibus angelis
Laurentius. See Willet on 19. of Exodus 37 quest. Ordination is put for
ministration.
accompanied God to be their Sovereign Lord when himself came to deliver the
Law. The same answer may be made as it is by the same learned writer (among
Angels) they attending God when he ordained and delivered it. It seems
improper that Angels in the plural number Master Palmer and Master Cauderie of
the Christian Sabbath, part 1. chapter 4.
should have been employed in speaking of the Law. For without extraordinary
guidance of God many speakers, at once would have bred confusion of sounds, and
by an extraordinary guidance one would have sufficed. There is no necessity to
ascribe the delivery of the law of the Decalogue to Grotius and Rivet and
Doctor White say, God spoke not immediately but by an Angel. See Psalm. 78. 49.
Angels. Exodus 20. their is not so much as a word of the Angels in the whole
matter. The earthquake, thunder, lightening on mount Sina were raised by the
Angels (says Cameron) who can easily change the state of the elementary Region.

The fifth. What is the meaning of that story. Jude 9, v. Michael striving
with the Devil, the Apostle aggravates the sines. of those, who speak evil
of dignities by an argument from the greater to the less, the Archangell durst
not do so, where you have the chief cause, Michael, which is as much as who
is like God, and then you have the adjunct, he is the Archangell that is, Dan.
10. 13.
a chief among the Angels therefore it cannot be meant say some of Cartwright
on the Rhem. Test. interprets it of Christ. See M. Perkins on Jude.
Christ, because Christ is expressly distinguished from him. 1. These. 4, 6. Now
what this dispute is, and where the Apostle had it, it is hard to say: but that
there was such a thing done is plain. The matter of the strife was Moses dead
on mount Nebo. Deuteronomy. 34, 6. which is added either by Samuel, Joshua, or Esdras,
Some make this to be the body of Christ, and therefore called Moses his,
because he prophesied of it. very likely the dispute was, that it should not be
buried to occasion idolatry, the Archangel rails not on him, but leaves him to
God. Now, Deuteronomy. 3, 44. where it is said the Lord buried him, that is to be
understood by the means of the Archangell, and no man knew his burial, that
divine honor might not be given him, and the Devil might say how fit it was
such a man should be solemnly buried.

The sixth. What is meant by the voice of an Angel, 1. These. 4. 15. where the
Apostle discribes the great and glorious coming of Christ to judgment, from
some circumstancies which commend his power and majesty, the Lord himself
shall come down in his onwne person with a shout (...) is that voice which
mariners and soldiers use when they call one another to put to their
strength, so that it is no more then a great command of God that all be ready
Math. 25. like that, there was a voice, behold the bridegroom comes, or like
that Joh. 5. all that are in their graves shall hear his voice; So it shall be
the instrument to raise them up as it was Lazarus, for this may be compared
with Matthew. 24. the voice and the trump of God are all one, that is a great
noise expressed by this metaphor, so that it should go to all in their graves.

The 7th. Whether they have any efficacy in our conversion.

Though they be sent 1. Heb. for ihe salvation of those that believe, yet they
have no efficacious power on the heart of man, for it is God only that can
turn the heart, and therefore it is a wicked opinion of some, who give God no
more efficacy in moving the heart to conversion, then good Angels have which
can be but by persuasion, it is true in the Scriptures you may read of their
admonishing and comforting, so an Angel comfort Elias: and Christ himself
as he was man; Joseph was admonished in a dream, but then you must know this
was a sensible appearance or like it, viz. in dreams. But now you may read of
the Devil tempting in Scripture Judas and David without such a way, the change
of our hearts is to be ascribed to God.

The eight, whether the Angels need Christ as a mediator.

Some say no, they never sinned and therefore need not a mediator Angels are
the best creatures, yet they are mutable Creatures, they were created blessed
(as the Schools determine) with a natural blessedness, not with a
supernatural, which consists in the vision of God, for then they had never
fallen. The good Angels indeed have obtained by Christ a supernatural
blessedness, though he be not a Redeemer, yet he is a confirmer, a supporter
of the holy Angels. In reference whereunto he is called the hea^ of all
things, Ephesians. 1. 22. and 3. 15. Col. 1. 20. and that last place is not to be
restrained to men, but takes in all things both in Heaven and Earth Mr. Carill
on 4. of Job 18.
to reconcile them to God. 1. Tim. 2, 5. Heb. 2, 16. A mediator is where two
parties do disagree. As for that place (say they) Ephesians. 1, 22. He has
reconciled all things in heaven and earth, some do mean by those things in
heaven the souls of those departed, the Greek word signifies briefly to
recollect the things which were more largely spoken, and so a sweet consent of
all things together, as by sin God was angry with us so were the Angels, for
they hated whom God hated, but by his death it is otherwise. But though Angels
needed not such a reconciliation as supposes a breach of peace, yet they
needed such a one as consists in the continuance of that peace which they had
before. The Lord has now so fully reaveled himself and his excellencies unto
them and his love and favor, and the necessity of their being obedient, that
they cannot, but continue to obey and serve him, they were not so far
enlightened and sanctified at the first creation, but that the^ in respect of
themselves there was a possibility of sinning as well as of theirs that did
sin, but now they are so confirmed In bono confirmatio non tollit bonorum
angelorum liberum arbitriam Bernardus triplicem ostendit e sacris literis
libertatem, quarum unam vocat libertatem a peccato 2 Cor. 3. 17. Alteram vocat
libertatem a miseria, Romans 8, 20. 21. Tertiam appellat libertatem a
necessitate, hoc est a coactione; necessitas enim hic non opponitur voluntario,
sed coactioni. Casmannus.
by the clear sight they have of God, that they cannot be willing to sin
against him.

The Angels which abode in the truth are called good Angels, not only in
respect of the righteousness which God bestowed upon them at their creation,
but also in respect of the obedience which they performed, and their
confirmation in that good estate. The causes why they abode still in the truth,
are the firm and unchangeable decree of God. 1. Tim. 5, 21. his free grace,
Phil. 2, 13. wherewith they were helped, and their own free choice of will
cleaving firmly unto God.

The ninth and last question concerning Angels is; How can they be happy in
enjoying Gods face, and yet be on the earth, Matthew. 18, 10. By heaven there is
not meant the place but their heavenly estate and condition, now though thy go
up and down doing service, yet this hinders not their happiness, for they do
not this with distraction: and these things are appointed as means for the
end, viz. enjoying of God, and as the soul is not hindered in its happiness by
desiring the body again, so it is here.

1. We should imitate the Angels. Consectaries from Angels.


2. It shows us how much we are beholding to Christ, no Angels could love us
if it were not for him. Let us not by our ill carriage thrust away our guard.


How much are we to love God who has provided helps for man, especially Christ
who took our nature upon him, not that of Angels. Gods Angels are our Angels
to defend and keep us. One Angel would quickly destroy all the wicked if God
should charge him to do it.
God has committed the care of us to these ministering Spirits.

3. It shows the woeful condition of the impenitent, when Christ shall come
with all these Angels, when those great shoutes shall be, come thou swearer,
drunkard how terrible will this be?

The more potent God is in himself and in his ministers, Use the 4th.
the more wretched are they, and the surer is their destruction.

4. This confutes the Papists in three errors.

1. In that they hold nine orders of Angels They are distinguished ratione
objectorum et officiorum, in respect of the object and massage they go about,
See Elton on Collos. 1. and Cameron on Act. 12.


2. They would have them worshipped, but the Angel forbad John.

3. They say every one has his good Angel to keep him, so Bucan thinks in
his common places.

2. The Saduces who said there was neither Angel nor Spirit, Acts. 24, 8. but
held good Angels only to be good thoughts, and evil Angels to be evil lusts
and affections. There names, offices, actions, apparitions show plainly, that
they are not bare qualities but true substances.

It serves for instruction, 1. To see the blindness and erroneousnes of
mankind, in that a great number of men of learning and wit and parts good
enough, and that such as lived in the Church and acnowledged the five books of
Moses to be divine, should yet make a shift to wink so hard, as to mainaine
that there were no Angels.

What falsehood may not the Devil make a man entertain and defend, and yet
seem not to deny the Authority of Scripture. If a man confessing Moses
writings to be true, will yet deny that there be either Spirits or Angels,
which are things so plainly revealed by Moses, that a man would account it
impossible to receive his writings and not confess them. But if God leave man
to the Devil and his own wit, he will make him the verier fool because of
his wit, and he will err so much the more palpably by how much he seems better
armed against error, even as a man's own weapon beaten to his head by a far
stronger arm will make a deep wound in him.

Se we our aptness to run into and maintain false opinions, Superbi sunt,
nec noverunt Moysi sententiam, sed amant suam; non quia vera est, sed quia sua
est. Aug Confess. l. 12. c. 25.
and let us not trust in our own wits, but suspect our selves, and seek to
God for direction.

Secondly. Let us learn humility from this, and by comparing our selves with
these excellent Spirits, learn to know how mean we be, that we may be also
mean in our own esteem. So long as a man compares himself with those things
and persons which are baser then himself, he is prone to lift up himself in
his own conceit and to think highly of himself, but when he does weigh
himself in the balance with his betters, he begins to know his own
lightness. The Lord has set us men in the midst as it were betwixt the brute
beasts and the celestial Spirits, we do so far exceed them as the Angels
exceed us, as for bodily gifts, the beasts in many things go beyond us, some
are more strong, swift, have more excellent sight and smell then we, but in
few things do we equal the Angels. They are swifter and stronger then we, and
their excellent reason goes beyond ours in a manner, as the understanding which
is in us excels the fancy of the beasts, they know a thousand things more
then we do or can know, One Angel can do more then all men, can speak more
languages, repeat more histories, in a word can perform all acts of
invention, and judgment, and memory far beyond us.

Thirdly. Since God has made Angels to serve and attend him, should not we
that are far Inferior to them, be content also to serve him, yea exceeding
glad and thankful that he will vouchsafe to admit us into his service. Does he
need our service, that is served with such ministers and messengers? Let us
frame our selves to obedience, and do Gods will on earth with all readiness
and cherefulnesse, seeing there is so great store of more worthy persons in
heaven that do it. An Angel will not esteem any work too difficult or base,
why should we?

Fourthly. The Angels which wait about the throne of God are glorious, and
therefore the Lord, himself must needs excel in glory. Esa. 6, 1, 2. Ezekiel.
1, 28.

Of the Devils or evil Angels.

The Angels which persisted in the truth, Some Angels fell from God John 8. 44.
2 Pet. 2. 4. Jude 6. Their names. 1 Samuel 18. 10. 1 King. 22. 23. Acts 19. 15.
are called good Angels, Luke. 9, 26. but those which revolted and kept not the
law were called evil Angels, or evil Spirits, Angels of darkness There is
but one word (Dajiva) in the Syriacke for the raven ink, and the Devil,
because commonly he appears to men in some black and terrible shape. Weemes.
Luke. 8, 20. and 19, 42. and Angels absolutely. 1 Cor. 6. because they were so
created of the Lord. In respect of their nature they are called Spirits, 1.
King. 22, 21. Matthew. 18, 16. Luke. 10, 20. In respect of their fall they are
called evil Spirits 1. Sam. 18, 10. Luke. 8, 2. unclean Spirits, Matthew. 10,
1. Zach. 13, 2. not so much because of their instigation to lust, as because
their natures are defiled with sin, lying Spirits, 1. King. 22, 22. John, 8,
44. Devils Levit. 17, 7. 1. Cor 10, 20.

The Hebrew names for the Devil are 1. Satan an adversary 2. Sam. 19, 22. of
Satan to oppose and resist, 2. Pet. 2, 14. Belial. 2. Cor. 6. though some read
it Beliar unprofitable, He is likewise called Beelsebub or Beelsebul, which
word comes of Bagnall Dominus, a Lord or Master, and Zebub a fly, the Idol of
the Quia civitatatem Accaron invocatus a civibus, a muscis liberarat. Cornel. a
Lap. They have figurative names likewise in the Scripture, as Lion, Serpent,
Dragon, the Accuser of the Brethren.
Achronnes, because they thought these best of those pestiferous creatures, or
else because the Devils were apprehended, as flying up and down in the air,
but if it be read Zebul, then it signifies by way of contempt a Dunghill-God
Levit. 17, 7. the Devils are called Shegnirim the hairie ones, because they
appeared to their worshippers, like hairy goats and in the mountains.

The Devil is called (...) from (...) to accuse, because he accuses men to
God and God to men, (...) from (...) scio, because they know much by creation
and by experience.

The Devil is called an enemy or the envious man Math. 13, 39. the Tempter.
Matthew. 4, 3. 1. These. 3, 5. a Destroyer. Apoc. 9, 11. the old serpent. Apoc.
12, 7, 9. a roaring Lion. 1. Pet. 5. 8. the strong man armed, Matthew. 12, 24.
the Prince of the world, 2. Cor. 4, 4. John. 12, 31.

2. Their nature.

The evil Angels are Spirits created at first entire and good, Gen 1. vlt. But
by a willing and free Apostacy from their Creator, are become enemies to God
and man; and for this eternally tormented, John. 8. 44. That they are Spirits
appears by the opposition, Ephesians, 6. We wrestle not with flesh and blood, and
this is to be opposed to those that deny that there are any Spirits, or that
the Devils are Incorporeall.

For their sin, what, when and how it was, it is hard to determine. That they
did sin is plain; but the sin is not specified. Some say it was lust with
women, misunderstanding that place, the Sons of God saw the Daughters of men,
for it is plain the Devils were fallen before, Chrysostom and our Divines
Verisimile est ex superbia Daemones esse lapsos, quod Filium Dei contempserunt,
and se ei voluerunt anteferre Lutherus in primum cap. Genesis 26. Doctor Ames.
generally Downam. Mr. Ball.
conclude it was pride from that place in Timothy 1 Timothy, 3. 6. though there be
different opinions, about what this pride showed it self, whether in affecting
a higher degree than God Mr Caryll on the fourth of Job 18. v. Some bring that
place Esa. 4. 12. that is literally meant of the Assyrian King. It is probable
the Devils s^nne was pride, seeing man was enticed to offend with an argument
drawn from the promise of excellency. Genesis 3. 4, 5. vide Voet. disputat de
natura and operationibus Daemonum.
created them in, or, refusing the work and office God set them about; which
(some conceive) was the ministration or the guardianship of man, which trust
they diserted or scorned, Zanchius thinks their sin was, that they were not
contented with the truth of the Gospel Concerning Christ propounded to them at
the beginning, and that they chose rather to leave their heavenly mansion, then
subscribe to the truth. An inordinate desire of power to be like God in
omnipotency say the Schoolmen.

Concerning the time when the Devil first sind it is uncertain, Tempus lapsus
non definit scriptura; It seems they continued in their integrity till the
sixth day was past Gen, 1, 31. It is likely that neither man nor Angel did fall
before the 8th. day, Genesis 2. 1. 2.

The Devils stood not long, John, 8. He was a mansl^yer from the beginning,
they fell before man, that is plain.

3. How the Devil sinned, seeing his understanding and will were perfect.

It was initiatively in his understanding and consummativly in his will. Many
of them fell, as appears Luke, 8, 30 there was a legion in one man: See Mat.
25. 41. Revel. 12. 9. and 20. 2.
one of the chiefest (as some conceive) fell first, and drew the rest with him,
by his persuasion and example; yet Voetius seems to doubt of this.

They fell irrecoverably Hoc est Angelis casus quod est, Hominibus, mors.
Damascen.
being obstinate in wickedness. The Schoolmen and Fathers give reasons why,
they fell so and not man.

Aquinas gives this reason from the condition of an Angels will; whose nature
is such (they say) that what it has chosen with full deliberation, it cannot
refuse it again, but this is noe good reason, because the choice made cannot
alter the nature of the will. The Fathers give these reasons. 1. The Devil
sinned of himself, but man was tempted. 2. In man's fall all mankind would
have been damned, but in the Angels fall, not all Angels.

The best answer is this, The Angels are not by propagation one from another,
but were created all at once, so that of them some might fall and others stand,
but men descend by generation from one stock or root, and therefore the first
man falling and corrupting his nature, derived to all his posterity a sinful
nature.
when thy had sinned, God, out of his justice refused to give them any help of
grace; by which they might rise from sin, and without which it was impossible
for them to recover, and this is the Apostles argument, if God were so severe
that he would not give these so great and noble Creatures time of repentance,
neither would he others. The Angels were intellectual Spirits, dwelling in
heavenly places in the presence of God: and the light of his countenance, and
therefore could not sin by error or misperswasion, but of purposed malice,
which is the sin against the Holy Ghost and irremissible. But man fell by
misperswasion, and being deceived by the lying suggestion of the Spirit of
errou.

The Devils malice against mankind appears, Vide Amesij medullam. l. 1. c.
11.
Genesis 3. where there is an imbred enmity in the Devil, as likewise, 1 Pet.
where he is said to be a roaring Lion, a Lion roares when he has got his pray
by way of triumph, or when he is hungry and almost starved and so most cruel.

This malice of his appears in his going up and down the whole world to damn
men, and that though he get no good by it, nay, though his condemnation be so
much the greater, and therefore if God should let him do what he would against
us. He would first bring all outward misery as upon Job, and then eternal
damnation. And though he knows God will defend the godly, yet he never leaves
to vex them, to tempt them to sin, to overwhelme them with grief and
despair, so that he is opposite to God. The Devils malice is beyond his
wisdom, else he would never oppose the people of God as he does, since he
does hereby advance their glory and his own ruin.

Their craft is seen in their diverse and suitable temptations, Hence the Devil
is compared to a Serpent, what subtlety did he show in beguiling of Eve.
2 Cor. 2. 12. we read of his methods Ephesians. 6. and depths. Rev, 3.

His first stratagem and device is to observe the natural constitution of every
man's mind and body, and to fit his temptations thereunto.

2. To observe our natural abilities and endowments, and accommodate his
temptations thereunto.

3. To apply his temptations to men's outward estate, condition and place.
Leonem agit and saevit, Draconem agit and fallit.


4. To tempt us by method, beginning with questionable actions, thence
proceeding to sins of infirmity, and so to wilful transgressions, and at
last to obstinacy and final impenitencie.

5. To bring us from one extreme to another.

6. To persuade that this suggestions are the motions of Gods Spirit.

7. To make advantage of time by alluring every age to the peculiar vices
thereof, as children to idleness and vanity, youth to lust, perfect age to
violent and audacious attempts, old age to covetousness, and every one to the
sins of the time.

The Devil is called the Tempter, He tempts first by inward suggestions, for
being a spirit he has communion with our souls and can dart thoughts into us,
so he filled the heart of Judas. 2 By outward objects he has one temptation
for the proud, another for the timorous.
because of his trade and way. He takes advantages, tempted Eve when she was
alone, our Savior in the wilderness, and being hungry. He has variety of
temptations, if one will not take another shall, if not presumption then
dsepaire, and strives to prevail by his importunity.

The Devil is very powerful. The Devils power is not a physical but a
moral power only, that is, by suggestions and temptations from suitable
objects Astutiam suadendi, non potentiam cogen^i habet diabolus. Austin. Psalm
72. 48. and 136. 4.
Ephesians. 6. 12. the Devils are called principallities and powers. He is said
Ephesians. 2, 2. to be the God of the world which rules in the Children of
disobedience, He is called the strong one Matthew, 12, 29. He has a strong
power over every one by nature. John 12. 31. the Lord represented this
spiritual bondage by the Egyptian and Babylonish bondage.

But here is our comfort, Christ is stronger then he: He has bruised his
head, Col. 1. He has led them captive and triumphed over them; and their power
is wholly limited by God. The Devil is chained up as it were Jude; he could
not enter into the swine without a permission. He cannot produce any substance,
or change one substance into another, he cannot call the souls of men out of
their place and unite them to the body again, he cannot turn the will of
man, whether he would: nor do that which is properly a miracle.

The works of the Devil are called lying wonders Thy are so 1 ratione cause
they proceed from the Devil who is the Father of ^ies, 2 ratione formae in
manner of working, they are but delusions. 3 ratione ^inis.
2 These, 2, 9.

In respect of the work it self, they are for the most part fained though not
always, but in respect of the end they always tend to deceive and beguile.

The Devil can 1. Hurrie bodies up and down in the Air. Matthew. 4, 5. Luke.
8, 29, 33.

2. Raise tempests, Job. 1, 16, 19.

3. Bring diseases both of body and mind. Luke. 13, 16. and 9, 31.

4. Overthrow houses and buildings. Job. 1, 18.

5. Break chains and bars. Mark. 5, 4.

They are used as instruments by God, to punish the wicked and exercise the
godly; as we may read in that story where God sent one to be a lying spirit in
the mouth of the Prophet, and so Paul had one. 2. Cor, 12. to humble and try
him.

Therefore in all thy temptations, in all the sad exercises and buffetings of
Satan, still remember this. He is at Gods command, he bids him go and he
goes, leave off and he leaves. That is a difficult place, 2. Cor. 12, 7. Paul
repeateth the first words in that verse twice as a thing worthy to be observed,
(...) Cameron says Paul was beaten black and blew by some Angel of Satan
least I should be exalted above measure, there was given to me a thorn in
the flesh, the messenger of Satan (so we read it) it may be rendered with Beza
the Angel of Satan to buffet me. Some interpret this of a bodily disease,
others of the concupiscence of the flesh; others think he means some inward
suggestion of Satan, working upon his corruption, whatsoever it was. I proceed
to resolve some questions concerning the Devils.

Question first. Whether the Devils have all their punishment already.

No; what art thou come to torment us before our time? and they are reserved in
chains.

They have the beginning of eternal wrath, Quocunque volitant gehennam suam
portant. say the Schoolmen.
although the aggravation and increase of it shall be hereafter as men's souls
damned are full of Gods anger, yet shall have greater torment at least
extensively when sovle and body are united at the day of judgment, and while
they are in the air and go up and down tempting, they have not all they
shall have, but hereafter they shall have the accomplishment of all: and shall
never be had into favor again, although Origin held otherwise.

2d. Question. Nobis certum, ignis and flammarum in inserno nihil esse, nisi
metaphoricum and pueriliter nugari, quicunque corporea sive materialia sunt
imaginati. Chamierus tomo. 2o. l. 5. c. 2o.
How can they be punished with fire.

Seeing the fire is corporeal, how can it work upon immateriall substances.

Some therefore to answer this: do deny that there is material fire in Hell,
only the torments thereof are set forth by what is most terrible, and the
worm is metaphorical, others say by Gods power it is elevated.

3d. Question. Whether the Devils shall torment the wicked after the day of
judgment; this is handled by the Schoolmen; I see no reason (says Boethius)
why the affirmative may not be admitted, although it is not to be made an
article of faith.

The Scripture says to be tormented with, not by the Devil and his Angles.

4th. Question. What is the meaning of those stories, possessed with Devils.

More were possessed with them in the time of the Gospel, then ever before or
after. The reason is because as our Savior had spiritually, so he would
corporally or externally manifest his power over Devils. This possessing was
nothing but the dwelling and working of the Devil in the body: one was
demoniacke and lunaticke too; because the Devil took these advantages against
his body, and this has been manifested by their speaking of strange tongues
on a sudden. The causes of this are partly from the Devils malice and desire
to hurt us, and partly from our selves who ar^ made the slaves of Satan: and
partly from God who does it sometime out of anger, as he bid the Devil go
into Saul; or out of grace, that they may see how bitter sin is

Fifthly. The meaning of Christ's temptation by Satan, and how we shall know
Satan's temptations?

Matthew. 4. The Devil carried Christ's body upon the pinnacle of the Temple. See
D. Tailor on Temptation
It is hard to say whether this were done in deed or vision only, although it
seem to be in an unanswerable argument, when he bid him to throw himself
down headlong: but now this was much for our comfort, that we see Christ
himself was tempted, and that to most hideous things. Satan was overcome by
him.

Satan's temptations may be known by the unnaturalness or violence of them, Mr
Elton on 10^ Commandment gives 2 rules to know 1. If the temptations be
against the light of nature corrupted, as for one to kill a Parent without any
cause, 2. Blasphemous thoughts, Genesis 3. 4. 1 Timothy 2 14. 1 Samuel 15 2 Cor. 11. 3.
or by the show of piety, he can transform himself into an Angel of light,
or by the so dainnesse of them, although the best way is not much to trouble
our selves about them.

The Devil tempts some to sin under the show of virtue, Job 16. 2. Phil. 3. 6.
some under the hope of pardon, by stretching the bounds of Gods mercy,
lessening of sin, propounding the example of the multitude, setting before men
what they have done, and promising them repentance hereafter before they dye.

The difference between Gods temptations and Satan's, they differ:

1. In the matter: the matter of Gods temptations is ever good, as either by
prosperity, adversity, or commandments, by chastisements which from him are
ever good: but the matter of Satan's temptations is evil, he solicits us to sin.

2. In the end, the end of Gods temptation is to humble ns and do us good: but
of Satan's, to make us dishonor God.

3. In the effect, God never misseth his end, Satan is often disappointed.

4. What is meant by delivering up to Satan, 1 Cor. 5. 5. Some with Chrysostom
think it was a corporal delivering of him, so that he was vexed of him by a
disease or otherwise, and that they say is meant by destruction of the flesh,
and so expound that Mark 6. They had power over the unclean spirits, that is,
not only to expel them, but to put them in whom they pleased: but this is not
approved, therefore others make it to be a casting out of the company of the
faithful, It seems to be taken from 1. Sam. 16. 14.
and so from all the good things that are appropriated unto that condition, and
therefore to the destruction of the flesh, they expound to be meant of his
corruption, for so flesh is taken in Scripture Romans 8. 13. Gal. 5. 20. Satanae
tradi idem est at ^e ex ecclesia, (extra quam r^gnat Satan) e^ectam d^^larari
quempram, n^n tanquam apud Satanam p^^mansurum, and cum eo periturum, sed
contra ut miserrimi sai status sensu permotus, (...): atque ita carne abolita
quae antea ipsi dominabatur, spiritus superior evadat (...) de
ea^^m^^o^i^ati^n^.
.

6. Whether the Devils may appear, 1 Samuel 28. He which appeared was 1. subject
to the witches power, therefore it was not the true Samuel, Agrippa hoc ipso
exemplo Pythonissae Samuelem evocantis confirmare conatur, posse Spiritus
sanctoru^ art magica evocari.
2. If Samuel had been sent of God, he would not have complained of trouble no
more then Moses did, Matthew. 17. 3. The true Samuel would not have given
countenance to so wicked a practice, to the Magic art. 4. True Samuel would
not have suffered himself to be worshipped as this did. 5. Saul never came to
be with the soul of Samuel in bliss: yet he says As yesterday is put for
the time past, though long ago, Genesis 31. 2. 5. Exodus 4. 10. Josh. 3. 4. So
tomorrow is put for the time to come, not the next day only, Exodus 13. 14.
Matthew. 16. 30.
to morrow shall thou be with me. 6. God refused to answer Saul by Prophet,
vision, Vrim, Rainoldus de lib Apoc. tomo 1o. c. 75. vide plura ibid.
or Thummim, therefore he would not answer him by Samuel raised from the dead.
7. True Samuel after his death could not lie nor sin, Heb. 12. 23. He said Saul
caused him to ascend, Esaias 57. 2. Rev. 13. 14.
and troubled him, if he had been the true Samuel, Saul could not have caused
him to ascend, if not, he lied in saying he was Samuel, and that he troubled
him.

If God had sent up Samuel the dead to instruct the living: why is this reason
given of the denial of the rich man's request to have one sent from the dead,
because if they would not believe Moses and the Prophets, Luke 16. Willet in
loc.
they would not believe though one rose from the dead. In so doing the Lord
should seem to go against his own order.

The souls of Saints which are at rest with the Lord, are not subject to the
power or enchantment of a witch: but Samuel was an holy Prophet now at rest
with the Lord. Bell. de purg. l. 2. c. 6.
Bellarmine answers, that Samuel came not by the command of the witch, but by
the command of God, and that rather impeached then approved Art magic, which
he proves, because the witch was troubled. But the Scriptsre expressly shows,
that her trouble was, because it was the King: who (having lately suppressed
Witches) had now in disguised aparrell set her on work, and so deceived her.

Bellarmine objecteth, Bell. de purg. l. 2. c. 19.
the Scripture still calls him that appeared, Samuel, as if it were not an
ordinary thing in Scripture, to call things by the names of that which they
represent, or whose person they bear, the representations of the Cherubims are
called the Cherubims. And things are often called in Scripture not according to
the truth of the thing, or Scriptures judgment thereof, but according to the
conceit and opinion of others. Genesis 18. 2. and 32. 24.
The Angels which appeared to the Patriarks are called men: the Idols of the
Heathen are called Gods.

1. We must walk warily and watchfully against Satan's temptations.
Corrolari^^.
We should be sober, 1 These. 5. 6. 8. strong, 1 Cor. 16. 13. 1 Pet. 5. 8, 9.
Watchful, 2 Timothy 4. 5. Matthew. 26. 41. Prove. 4. 23. Wise, Heb. 5. 14. Prove. 2.
9, 10. and of good courage, Josh. 1. 9. 1 Chronicles. 28. 10. Taking unto our selves
the whole armor of God, Ephesians. 6. 12, 13, 14. that we may be able to stand in
the evil day.

2. Believe not Satan though he flatter, 2 Cor. 11. 3. 1 Timothy 2. 14. fear him
not though be rage, 1 Pet. 5. 8, 9. hearken not to him though he tell the
truth, 2 Cor. 11. 14. Acts 16. 17. for if he transform himself into an Angel
of light it is to seduce.

3. See Gods great goodness, who offers us repentance, and Christ, when he
absolutely refused the Devils.

4. See the exact justice of God, no greatness can privilege one from
punishment, 2 Per. 2. 4. Per Caliginem intelligunt non^ulli miserrima^ and
horroris plenam vitae conditionem, sumpta translatione a facinorosis damnatis,
qui in carceris pedore retinentur constrictl, dum ad ultimum judicium
protrahantur. Casmannis Angelographia.
none can be greater, nearer, holier, then Angels: yet if they sin they shall
be tumbled out of heaven. Therefore we must leave all sin if we desire to
go to heaven, it would not hold the Devils when they had sinned, no unclean
thing shall come thither.

5. Be not like the Devils, then thou art one of his children: 1 John 3. 7, 8.
wicked men are called sons of Belial. Certain particular sins make us like
the Devil, a liar or murderer is like him, John 8. 44.

2. A slanderer or an accuser of another.

3. Envious and malicious persons, as witches.

4. He that tempts others, or persuades them to sin: the Devil is called the
tempter, Eve spoke for the Devil, therefore she has two punishments more then
man, sorrow in childe-bed, and subjection to her Husband.

5. He that goes about to hinder others from godliness, as Elimas, Acts 13.
Thou child of the Devil.

6. A drunkard, 1 Samuel 1. 15, 16.

7. A proud person: especially take heed of pride, in spiritual illuminations
and gifts.

6. See the folly of those who do the Devil service, how ill will he repay
them. Never did any trust in the Devil, but he deceived him, Perkins on the
11. of Heb.
even for the base things of this life. Witness all witches (his most devoted
and professed servants) if ever he made any one of them wealthy: all ages are
not able to show one.

7. Satan's great business in the world is to study men; have thou considered
my servant Job? when he comes near to us in his temptations, there is
something in us to take part with him, 1 John 5. 6. there is abundance of
self-love, selfe-flattery, and natural blindness, 2 Cor. 2. 11. He has a
strange power to make all his suggestions take with us, they are called fiery
darts: 2 Cor. 2. 7.
fire will quickly take: we are led captive to do his will. He comes to us
sometimes in the name of God, and can transform himself into an Angel of light,
2 Cor. 11. 14. he can raise up in men's Spirits strange ravishments, and can
swallow them up with joy as well as sorrow.

CHAP. VIII.
2. Of Man.
WHen God had created heaven and earth, he rested not in heaven nor any
heavenly thing: neither in earth, nor any earthly thing, but only in man,
Vocabulum homo est duar^^ substantiarum fibula. Tertullian. Man was made last,
because he was worthiest, the soul was inspired last, because yet more noble
Dr. Halls Contemp. of Paradise. Man was created after Gods image. 1. To awe the
creature, whose Sovereign he was. 2. That he might acknowledge God to be his
Lord, and do him homage, and that God and he might delight in each other: ad
imaginem at similitudinem, id est, imaginem valde similem. Eman Sa ad loc.
Significatur absoluta similitudo utraque voce que quid sit ita effectum ad
exemplar altetius ut pro^im^ adillud accedat, and quam maxim exprimat ac
referat, ut in eo agnoscas illud ipsum Archetrpo^ad cujus effigiem sit factum.
Mercetus in loc.
because he is a heavenly thing for his soul, and earthly in regard of his
body. Man is a living creature made after the image of God, Genesis 1. 26.

The efficient cause of man was the Holy trinity, God the Father, Son, and holy
Ghost.

In the Creation of man 3. things are considerable:

1. The consultation of the Trinity, let us make man, Genesis 1. 26. quia
rationalis creatura quasi cum consilio facta videretur.

2. The work made, not an Hermophradite as some would have it (though Adam
comprehended both sexes) but he is distinguished into both sexes: thus it
follows after, male and female.

3. The pattern of it, the image of God, 1 Cor. 11. 7. Col. 3. 10. Bellarmine
distinguishes between an age and similitude; the first (says he) consists in
natural endowments: the other in supernatural graces: rather image and
similitude represent an exact likeness. These two words are in an inverted
order joined together, 5 chapter ver. 3 JAmes 3. chapter 9. v. mentions only likeness,
leaving out image, which is a certain sign, that there is no difference
between them, but that the second is added to insinuate the perfection of the
image.

There is a fourfold image or likeness?

1. Where there is a likeness with an absolute agreement in the same nature,
and so the Son of God is called the express image of the Father.

2. By participation of some universal common nature, so a man and beast are
like in the common nature of animality.

3. By proportion only, as when we say, the Governor of a Commonwealth, and
the Pilot of a ship are like.

4. By agreement of order, The Schoolmen make Images and similitudes diverse;
and again they distinguish between imaginem Dei, and ad imaginem Dei.
when one thing is a pattern or exemplar, and the other thing is made after
it: now when man is said to be like God, it is meant in those two last ways
Christ was the essential image of God. Man's was imago repraesentantis aliter
imago imperatoris in nummo; aliter, in filio. Augustine.

The Image of God in which man was cteated, is the conformity of man unto God,
1. In his soul. 2. In his body for his soul. 3. In the whole person for the
union of both.

The soul of a man is conformable to God in respect of its nature, faculties,
and habits.

1. In respect of its nature, essence, or being, as it is a spiritual and
immortal substance. This was great controversy between Hierom and August. An
anima sit ex traduce, an immortalis. Hierome held the immediate creation of it,
and this is most suitable to the perfection and simplicity of the soul. Austin
did at least incline to the latter, that it is by propagation. That of Zach.
12. 1. and Heb. 12. 9. makes it the more probable opinion, that it is by
immediate creation, and for that of original sin, the soul is created as
part of man, and so justly deprived of that original excellency.
The Scripture witnesses, 1. that the soul of man is a spirit, Matthew. 27. 20.
Acts 7. 59, 2. That it is immortal.

1. Because it cannot be destroyed by any second cause Matthew. 10. 28.

2. Being served from the body, it subsists by it self, and goes to God,
Eccles. 12. 7. Luke 16. 22.

3. Because it is a simple and immateriall substance, not depending on matter:
the mind works the better, the more it is abstracted from the body, when it
is asleep or dying.

4. Because it transcends all terrene and mortal things, and with a wonderful
quickness searches after heavenly, divine, and eternal things. There is an
invincible argument for the thing secretly imprinted in the instinct and
conscience of the soul it self. Because it is every good man's hope that it
shall be so, and wicked man's fear.

5. The food of the soul is immortal, 1 Pet. 1. 23. the evident promises of
eternal life prove the soul to be immortal, He that believes in me has
eternal life: and to day thou shall be with me in Paradise. Nothing can
satisfy the soul but God.

6. Man is capable of virtue and vice, of immortal desires and affections.

7. The souls of Adam and Eve were not made of any matter, but came by
immediate creation, in whom God gave a specimen, what he would perpetually do
with other men. That is but a Cavil, that Solomon, Eccles. 12. 7. speaks only
of our first Parents.

Children are called the fruit of their Parents body, to note that, Bishop Lake
on Ps. 132. 11. See Numb. 27. 16. Ps. 35. 15. Esaias 57. 16.
that they are only fathers of their flesh: they have another, namely God,
which is Father of their Spirits. Saint Paul teaches it, Heb. 12. 9. and the
use of it. And this checks their opinion who will have souls propagated, no
less then bodies.

Many collect the immortality of the soul, and salvation of Jobs children,
because they were not doubled as the rest of his estate was.

2. The soul of man is conformable to God in respect of its Imago divinae
sapientiae in intellectu effulsit imago bonitatis mansuetudinis, tolerantiae in
ejus animo, imago charitatis and misericordiae in cordis affectibus imago
justitiae sanctitatis and puritatis divinae in voluntate imagocomitatis,
benignitatis and veritatis ingestibus and verbis, and imago divinae potentiae
in dominio concesso super omnia animalia. Rivetus.
faculties, in its understanding, will and memory, is like the Trinity.

3. In the qualities, graces, and admirable endowments of it. In the
understanding there was 1. An exact knowledge of God and all Divine things,
Coloss. 3. 10. knowledge is a principal part of Gods image, by reason he was
enabled to conceive of things spiritual and universal.

2. A perfect knowledge of all inferior things, Adam knew Eve, See Mr.
Burgess on 1 Timothy 1. 8. Lect. 12 p. 111. 112. 113. 114. 115. 116. Adam was by
his natural frame and disposition apt and fit to know, do, and forbear all
that God would have him know, do, and forbear, Genesis 9. 6.
and imposed names on the creatures suitable to their natures. He had most
exquisite prudence in the practical part of his understanding in all doubtful
cases. He knew what was to be done. 2. In the will there was holiness, Ephesians.
4. 24. 3. His affections were under the power of grace. From this image did
necessarily follow peace with God, fellowship and union. He knew God to be his
Creator and to love him, in all good things, he enjoyed God, and tasted his
sweetness. Man's body also after a sort is an image of Divine perfection.

Observe 1. The Majesticall form of it, Os homini sublime ded^t, etc. Man only
has a hand, which is the instrument of instruments. All other oreatures but
man have only four muscles, one to turn downwards, another to hold forwards,
a third to the right hand, a fourth to the left: only man h^th a (...) muscle
in his eye to rou^e it up to God. Columb. de re Anotem.
of which the Heathens took notice; but the structure of the body a man
should be taught to contemn the earth which his feet tread upon, and to set
his heart upon heaven whether his eyes naturally tend.

2. Gods artifice in it, Psalm. 139. 15. Thou have curiously wroug^^ me and I
was wonderfully made. Materiam superabat opus. Of the basest matter, dust, God
made the noblest creature.

3. The serviceablenesse of every part for its end and use.

4. There is matter of humiliation, because it was made of the dust, Dr. Clerk.
Genesis 3, 19. Job. 14. 18, 10. and 5, 15. The Greek name makes man proud, calls
him (...) bids him aspire, look up, but the Hebrew Adam ab Adamah Homo ab humo.
and Latin humble him, bids him stoop, look down.

Adams body was mortal conditionally if he had not eaten of the tree, there
could be noe outward cause of his death, for Gods protection kept that off: nor
noe in ward cause because original righteousness was in his soul, and for
old age and weakness, the tree of life would have preserved him from that.

3. The whole person (consisting both of soul and body) was conformable to
God, Experientia docet multo excellentius in statu inocentiae habuisse hominem
hanc potentiam, quam instatu peccati. Tunc subjectio animalium erga hominem
fuisset perfecta, quae nunc diffioilis est, and non obtinetur nisi adhibita
cura maxima and assiduo labor sunt n^ quaedam animalia fera and indomitv, quae
nunquam cicurantur, See Genesis 2. 7.
in respect of his felicity and dominion over the creatures, Genesis 1. 26, 28.
The image of God does not principally consist in this, but secondarily,
therefore though the man and woman were created perfectly after Gods image in
other respects, yet in this respect the woman had not the image of God, as the
Apostle shows. The power which Adam had over the creatures, was not absolute
and direct (that God reserved to himself) but it was for Adams use, then the
stoutest and fiercest beasts would be ruled by Adam, this dominion since the
fall is lost for a great part of our rebellion against God, the creatures
rebellion should mind us of ours: we may see sometimes a little child driving
before him 100. oxen or kine this or that way as he pleases: for the infusing
of the soul, the time when it was infused, it is most probable that the body
was first made as the organe or instrument, and then the soul put into it, as
God did make heaven and earth before man was made.

God did not create all the souls of men at once, but he creates them daily as
they are infused into the body.

There are these two Questions to be resolved.

1. Whether immortality was natural to Adam. 2. Whether original
righteousness was natural to Adam.
For the first. A thing is immortal four ways.

1. Absolutely, so that their is no inward or outward cause of mortality 1.
Tim. 6. so God only.

2. when it is not so by nature, but immortality is a perfection voluntarily,
put into the constitution of the creature by the Creator, so Angels are
immortal.

3. Not by any singular condition of nature but by Grace, so the bodies of the
Saints glorified.

4. When it is mortal inwardly but yet conditionally it is immortal, that is,
if he do his duty and so Adam was immortal.

For the second Question. Affirmatiuam tuentur ci Eva^geli Pontificios contra.


The properties of it are these.

1. It is original righteousness, because it is the natural perfection of
the whole man and all his faculties, for distinction sake we call it original
righteousness. It is so both in regard of it self, for it was the first in
the first man.

2. in regard of man, because he had it from his very beginning.

3. In regard of his posterity, because it was to be propagated to others.

2. It is universal, it was the rectitude of all parts, it could not else be
an image of God, unless it did universally resemble him in all holiness. His
understanding had all things for truth, his will for good, his affections for
obedience.

3. Harmonious every faculty stood in a right order, the will subject to the
understanding and the affections to both.

4. It was due to him not by way of desert, as if God did owe Adam any thing
but conditionally, supposing God made Adam to injoye himself and by way of
means.

5. Natural. Rivetus exercitat. 6. in Cap. 1. Genes.
1. Subjectiue, that which inwardly adheres to the nature of a thing from its
beginning. 2. perfective, that which perfects nature for its end and actions. 3.
propagative. when it would have been propagated in a natural way, if man had
continued in innocence, but constitutive and consecutive, supernatural.

The Papists deny that that was natural to man in innocence, and therefore
they say man's nature is not corrupted by the fall, because a supernatural gift
only is taken from him, all his naturals being left, which is the opinion of
the Pelagians who affirm, that the nature of man fallen is perfect before the
committing of actual sins.

Paradise is spoken of in the 2. of Genesis. See Sir Walter Raleigh in the
History of the world, page 1. Multi quia locum a Mose hic descriptum reperire
nusquam potuerunt, hortum, arbores, flumina, aquas, and omnia haec in
allegorias transformarunt, quod rect August. refellit, quamvis and ipse se idem
sensisse, fateatur. Alij eodem decepti errore Paradisum finxerunt proxime
sphaeram Lunae in aere suspensum. Pareus in loc.
Some of the Ancients (as Origin, Philo) yea and of latter Authors have turned
all this into an allegory, but now that it was a real corporal place, we may
prove. 1. because God planted a garden and put Adam into it, and there went a
river out of it which was divided into four streams; but these were visible,
and corporeal as Euphrates and Tigris, and in the third Chapter, it is said
that Adam hid himself with the leaves of the tree, therefore the trees in
paradise were real and not allegorical, and lastly Adam was cast out of it.
The ground of allegorizing all these things arises from the vanity of man's
mind, which thinks these things too low for the Spirit of God to relate, and
therefore endeavors to find out many mysteries.

2. In what part of the earth it was. Mihi dubium non est, terram Canaan fuisse
delicias totius orbis terrarum, itaque facile illis accedo, qui eo in loco
fuisse ante diluvium Paradisum putant. Solus ille locus est, in q^o postea Deus
voluit Ecclesia^ and populum suum esse Lutherus in decimum caput Genes.


Some have thought it to be the whole world, but that cannot be, for it is
said, God took Adam and put him into it, and likewise that he was cast out of
it; others thought Paradise to be a very high place reaching to the very globe
of the Moon, but that cannot be habitable for the subtlety of the air,
others (as Oleaster and Vatablus) think it was in Mesopotamia only, and that
it has lost his beauty by the flood. But the safest way is not to trouble our
selves any further then Moses text, which says it was in the region of the
East, in respect of Judaea, Egypt, or Arabia, and as for the limits and bounds
of it, they cannot now be known.

However had his invention of Alcinous Gardens, (as Justin Mayrter notes) out
of Moses his description of paradise, Genesis 2. and those praises of the Elisian
sieldes were taken out of this story, ver erat aeternum etc. Ovid Metam Homer
lib. 2. and from the talk between Eve and the Serpent, Aesops fables were
derived.

Thirdly. Whether the waters of the flood did destroy it.

Bellarmine and generally the Papists will not admit, that it was destroyed by
Noah's flood, Paradise was a little model of heaven, and a sign of the great
heaven, assuring Adam, that if he continued in obedience to God, he should be
translated in: to heaven, to enjoy God supernaturally, as there he did enjoy
him naturally: for the Law saying, Do this and live, means it of ever lasting
life. So Mr. Wheately held, but Mr. Ball seems to differ from him in his book
of the Covenant. Pareus in capu^ secundum. Genesis ^. 7.
and it is to maintain a false opinion, for they say that Enoch and Elias (who
are yet in their bodies) are the two witnesses spoken of, and that they shall
come when Antichrist shall be revealed, and then he shall put them to death,
and therefore they hold that Enoch and Elias are kept alive in this paradise
which they say still remains; but that this is a mere fable, appears,
because John Baptist is expressly said by Christ to be the Elias that was to
come, because he came in the Spirit of Elias. Therefore we hold that
wheresoever Paradise was, yet in the great flood it was destroyed, not but that
the ground remains still, only the form, beauty and fruitfullnesse is
spoiled Genesis 7. 19. Paradise signifies a garden, the word being translated out
of Greek into Latin, and so into french and English, In Hebrew it is called
Heden, which signifies delights, a Garden of all manner of delights, a place
beset with all kind of fruitful and beautiful trees. There were two
special trees in it, one called the tree of life, the other of the knowledge
of good and evil.

Some say it was called the tree of life from the effect, because of the hidden
power and force it had The Poets from the tree of life took their Nectar, and
Ambrosia, Nectar, signifies making young, and Ambrosia Immortality: therefore
they are said to be the meat and drink of the Gods.
of sustaining and prolonging man's life. Although it be a dispute, whether it
had this force as meat to prolong life or as medicine to prevent death, old age
and diseases, as likewise whether this power in the tree were natural or
supernatural.

Therefore others say it was called so not from the effect, but signification,
because it was an outward sign, that God would give them immortality if they
did continue.

It is questioned, whether the tree of lif was a Sacrament.

Pareus answers, that it was a Sacrament three ways.

1. As an admonishion to them, that the life which they had, they had it from
God, for as often as they tasted of it, they were to remember that God was the
author of life,

2. As it was a symboll of a better life in heaven, if he did continue in
obedience.

3. Sacramentally of Christ, as in whom Adam and Angels did obtain life. Rev.
2. 7. He is called the tree of life in the midst of Paradise, but that is only
allegorical and allusive, so that what the tree of life was to Adam in
innocence, the same is Christ to us in our corrupt estate.

2. The tree of Good and Evil.

It was not so called from any internal form as if it self were knowing good
and evil, Pareus.
nor from the effect, as if by eating thereof it would have procured wisdom
in man and made him wiser, nor yet was it called so from the lying promise of
the Devil, concerning omniscience, for God called it so before they met
together, therefore it was named so from the Event, for God by this name
foretold what would follow, if man did not abstain from it; that he should
experimentally know what was good and what was evil, he should practically
feel what he had lost and what evil he had plunged himself into. Some have
thought, that those words Genesis 3. 24. should not be understood Historically but
allegorically, Pareus.
that is, that God gave him noe hopes of coming into this place again, but the
text contradicts that, some have understood by Cherubims, some species and
images of terrible creatures, Corrrollaties from Gods goodness to man in his
Creation.
as we call Scarecrowes, but that is simple to think that Adam was so
childish to be afraid of those; others interpret it of the fire of Purgatory.
The more probable Interpretation is, that by Cherubims are meant Angels, who
did after a visible manner shake up and down this fiery sword, 1. It serves to
blame mankind for his wonderful naughtiness in striving against God, who has
bestowed so great and undeserved benefits upon him. 2. Let us seriously
consider of our selves and of our making, that we may come to a due knowledge
of God, of our selves, One says, the soul is not altogether immateriall, for
what has accidents, has matter, nothing but that is the subject of accidents.
2. what is finite is material: seeing finitenesse is the attribute of matter
by which it is contained within its own limits: but it subsists, lives and
works, being separated from the body, it is immateriall.
Moses does therefore call them Cherubims, because the Jews knew what he meant,
having such forms over the Arc. Therefore it is taken for Angels, not simply
but as they appeared in some shape. It is a curiosity to enquire how long they
staid there, although it is certain they ceased when Paradise was destroyed,
which was by the flood

Therefore this serves 1. For information, to instruct us.

1. That everyman and woman has a soul, there is a body and a spirit which
enlivens and acts the body for all performances of the Compositum we must
glorify God in both. 1. Cor. 6. 20.

2. It is immortal by Gods appointing (but in it self endable because it has
a beginning) that it may be capable of everlasting weal or woe.

3. It is so immortal that it admits of no cessation or intermission, the
Anabaptists say it is asleep when it parts from the body, as soon as it
leaves the body, it goes either to Abraham's bosom or a place of torment.

4. At the last day it shall be united with the body, and the body raised up
for it, and both be happy or miserable for ever.

2. Be thankful to God that has given us our souls, and redeemed them by the
blood of his Son, propter hanc Deus facit mundum propter hanc filius Dei venit
in mundum, Chrysostom. bless him especially for sovle-mercies Ephesians. 1. 3. 3.
John. 2, 4. and let the soul praise him Psalm. 103. and 104. first and last

We should love our selves. Psalm. 22. 26. David calls his soul his darling,
it is the immediate work of God.

CHAP. IX.
Of Gods Providence.
TWo things are to be discussed about it. Moses affirms Genesis 2. that God
rested from all the works which he had made, that is, from Creating new
species, but he creates individua, daily and both governs and preserves them,
and the species or kinds of things already made, Joh. 5. 17


1. That there is a Providence, wh^reby the world is governed.

2. What it is.

1. That there is a Providence which governs the world, and that nothing is
done in the world without the certain and determinate counsel of God, is thus
proved.

1. Faith which leanes and rests on testimonies of holy writ. Psalm. 14. 2. and
33. 13. the 104. Psalm. wholly and 91. Psalm. 8, 9, 10, 11. Act. 17. 25. 28.
Ephesians. 1. 11. At the feast of Tabernacles, the Jews were wont to read the
Book of Ecclesiastes, principally because it speaks so much of the works of
Gods providence.

2. Certain demostrative reasons, taken

1. From the causes; viz. the Attributes and nature of God.

1. There is a God: therefore providence, because he is a most powerful and
wise King.

2. The omnipotent will of God, whereby all things are done, without which
nothing can come to pass.

3. His infinite wisdom, whereby he can be present with all things which are
done in his kingdom

4. His justice in distributing rewards and punishments, and goodness whereby
he communicates himself to the creatures.

5. His foreknowledge of all things ^ unchangeably depending on the counsel
and decree of God. God by his Prophet infallibly foretold suture Contingents.


6. He regards the ends of things, therefore also the means to those ends.

7. He is the first cause: therefore on him depend the second causes.

2. From tbe effects: the works of God.

1. The most wise order of things both natural and politic, which could not
be settled, much less preserved, by blind nature, chance, or fortune.

2. Natural notions, or the law of nature in the difference of honest and
dishonest things,

3. Peace or torment of conscience from keeping or violating the Law.

4. Punishments and rewards agreeable to men's deeds: which prove there is some
Judge of the world, and revenger of sins, whose severity we cannot shun.

5. Heroicke motions, virtues and singular gifts given by God to Princes,
Magistrates, Inventers of Arts, Artificers and others, for the common benefit
of mankind.

Lastly, by the same reasons it is proved, that there is both a God and
Providence.

2. what providence is:

It is an external and temporal action of God, whereby he preserves,
governs, and disposes all and singular things which are and are done, both
the creatures, and the faculties and actions of the creatures, and directs
them both to the mediate ends, and to the last end of all, after a set
determinate manner, according to the most free Decree, and Counsel of his own
will; that himself in all things may be glorified.

1. The matter or object of Gods providence, is the whole world, and whatsoever
isb God observes all our particular speeches and actions, seem they never so
small and trifling. God therefore pleases of purpose to put into writing
things that seem not otherwise worthy the registring.
in it, for God cares for, and governs all things, Substances, Accidents,
things great and little, necessary and contingent, good and evil, Hebr. 1. 3.
Nehem. 9. 6. The care of God for the brute beasts, living creatures, all
Meteors is described, Psalm. 135. Job 37. 2. and chapter 38. Matthew. 6. 26. Also
concerning voluntary things and actions of men, good and bad, as Prove. 26. 1.
9. Jer. 10. 23. Psalm 139. 1. Psalm 33. 13. 15. concerning things that are
contingent, Exodus 21. 13. Prove. 16. 33. Matthew. 10. 29, 30.

The least and smallest things are by the God of heaven ordered and disposed of
according to his own pleasure and wisdom for very good purpose: See Psalm.
104. and 147.
not so much as a sparrow falls to the ground without Gods providence; God is
maximus in minimis.
he says the hairs of our head are all numbered, Mat. 10. 29, 30.
therefore Cicero was out when he said Dij magna cu^ant, See Psa. 147. 8.
parva negligunt: and the Poet, Non vacat exiquis rebus adesse Iovi.

The reasons of this are these: God is an understanding essence, present in all
places at all times, with all persons, therefore he must needs observe and
know all their motions. 2. All things are spoken and done by an influence of
power derived from him. He is the most principal worker of every action,
without a special and immediate operation of whose might the secondary cause
would be dead and powerless. 3. God has given us a law to order men in all
their words and carriages, little and great. 4. He is the Judge of all the
world: he must judge certainly, infallibly, and perfectly.


1. God is infinite in all excellencies, infinite in wisdom: there may as
much wisdom be seen in little as in great things: all things in the world, yea
even all things which might have been as well as those that have fallen out,
are subject to his wisdom and power, nothing so small, but it is a fit
subject of knowing and ordering.

2. There is a necessary connection and mutual dependence between great and
small things, the one supporting and upholding the other, so that it is not
possible to conceive how any thing should be ordered by God if all things were
not, the little things being like the pins of a house which hold the building
together, or the hinges of a great gate, upon which the whole is moved.

Object. These things are so small, as it is an abasement to the Divine Majesty
to intermeddle with them.


Sol. It is his highest commendation to be infinite, so that nothing can be
hid from his knowledge: the Lords manner of working in the smallest things is
so wise and excellent, as it serves sufficiently to free him from all
imputation of baseness in regarding them. No Philosopher would count it a base
thing to be able to dispute accurately of the nature of a flea, and to give a
reason of its making and working: why therefore shall it be an impeachment to
Gods glory in a more perfect manner then we can conceive of, both to know and
guide them.


Ob. 1. Cor. 9. 9. Does God take care for Oxen?


Sol. He does not take care for Oxen cheifely and principally, but
subordinately as his care is toward the other bruit creatures. Psalm. 36. 7. and
147. 9. Paul does not simply exempt the Oxen from Gods care, but denies that
the law, thou shall not muzzell the mouth of the Ox that treads out the
corn was especially written for oxen, but rather for men, that they may
understand what their duty is to the Ministers of the Gospel, whose labors
they make use of.


2. The kinds of Gods providence.

1. The providence of God is either 1. General and common to all Creatures,
that whereby God takes care of the world, and all things therein according to
their nature, Act. 17. 25. Heb. 1. 3. Genesis 9. 1, 2, 3. Psalm. 36. 6.

2. Special, that which does peculiarly appertain to Creatures endued with
reason and understanding, viz. Men and Angels: and among them he looks chiefly
to this Elect with a fatherly care, 1 Timothy 4. 10. and of this Providence is
that place before noted, 1 Cor. 9. 9. to be understood.

2. Gods Providence is either, 1. Mediate, when God governs creatures by
creatures, as by means and instruments. But God uses them:

1. Not necessarily for want of power in himself, but of his own Free Will in
the abundance of his goodness.

2. Providence includes means * which if we neglect, we tempt God.

3. God well uses evil instruments besides and beyond their own intention,
Qui ordinat ad finem ordinat ad media.
as the Jews, Acts 2. 23. and Joseph's brethren, Genesis 45. 5.

2. Immediate, To show that he is not tied to second causes, Gal. 1. 1.
when God by himself, without the Ministry of the creatures does preserve and
govern things. Thus the Apostles were called: thus God made the world
immediately without any instruments.

3. Gods Providence is. 1. Ordinary and usual when God governs the world and
things of the world according to the order and laws which himself set in the
Creation.

2. Extraordinary and unusual, when he works either against or beside that
order so appointed, as in working miracles.

3. The degrees and parts of Gods providence?

1. Conservation, Nehem. 9. 6. Heb. 1. 3. Acts 17. 28.
Job 12. 14, 15. Psalm. 44. 2. It is that whereby God does uphold the order,
nature, quantity and quality of all and every Creature both in their kind and
in particular, Tres sunt gradus divinae pro videntiae 1 Conservatio, actio Dei,
qua essentias Creaturaru^ quod species vel individua, continuat, eorumque
agendi vires conservat.
until their appointed end, Psalm. 19. 1, 2. and 36. 6. and 65. 2. Psalm. 135.
6. 7. and 136. 25. He conserves those things quoad species, which are subject
to death in their individua, as trees, herbs, brute beasts, men; He preserves
things, quoad individua, which are incorruptible, as Angels, Stars.

2. Government, it is that whereby God does dispose and order all things
according to his own will and pleasure, so that nothing can come to pass
otherwise then he has determined, 2. Gubernatio, actio, qua prae summa sua
autoritate, potentia and sapientia de rebus omnibus disponit easque pro
arbitrio suo regit. 3. Ordinatio, qua Deus pro admiranda sua sapientia and
potentia omnia in ordinem redigit, fines certos and bonos constituendo, and
med^o ad fines disponendo and disposita regendo. Wendelinus.
Psalm* 33. 13, 14, 15. Eccles. 8. 6. Psalm. 75. 6, 7.

It is a great work of God to continue a succession of living creatures in the
world, Psalm. 104. 30. This is that for which God took order in the beginning;
when having made the several things* he bade them increase and multiply, and
fill the face of the earth, Genesis 1. 22. God challenges this work to himself
in his speech to Job 39. 1. One generation comes and another goes. It is noted
as an act of Divine blessing to increase the fruits of the Cattle and the
flocks of sheep and kine, Deuteronomy. 28. 4. Psalm. 107. 38.

Reasons. 1. If this work were not wrought, the world would be empty of
living creatures within one age: beasts, birds and fishes and all would fail
within a few years, and so should men be deprived of that help and benefit
which they enjoy by them.

2. The powers of propagating kinds is a wonderful work no less then that of
Creation, done by a wisdom and power infinitely surpassing all the wisdom
and power of all men.

Let us sanctify God in our hearts by contemplating this great work. We see
the truth of one part of the narration of Scripture, in the increasing and
multiplying of creatures, and we see it done by a secret and hidden way, let us
therefore believe his promises. Can God promise any thing to us more exceeding
our reason, to conceive how it should be effected, then it exceeds our reason
to think how the kinds of things are increased and contin^ed in the world for
so many hundreds of years? We can see no reason how an egg by the hens
sitting upon it for a few days should be made a sparrow, starling, hen, or
other bird.

God prepares fit nourishment for all the creatures to eat, and conveyeth it
to each of them in that quantity and season which is fittest for them, Psalm.
104. 27, 28. and 145. 15. and 147. 9. and Psalm. 136. 25.

Reasons. He that provideth food for all, must know their number, their
nature, and places of abode, and their several needs, and he that knows these
particulars, must be none other but God: he must know the quantity of the thing
provided for food, and the quality of it, and the season of it, and none can
do these things but an infinite Essence, that is to say, a God. 2. God in
providing for the Creatures, provideth for man who feeds on them, and he
declares his own wisdom and goodness in continuing the kinds of things,
and continuing them in welfare.

This should teach us faith in Gods promises, by which he has undertaken to
feed and to provide for us, so our Savior argues Matthew. 6. 26.

Object. The adversity of the good, and prosperity of the wicked seem to
oppose Gods providence. If there were any providence, God would see that it
should be bonis been, and malis male.


Sol. There is no man absolutely good or absolutely evil, God turns the
misery of the godly to their special good, and the prosperous estate of the
wicked is an occasion of their woe*
but as the best have some evil, so the worst have some good, and therefore
God will punish that evil which is in the good, with temporal punishments, and
give temporal blessings to the evil for the good that is in them: that seeing
all good must be rewarded with good, and all evil with evil: the good of the
good might have an everlasting reward of good: and on the contrary, the evil
of the evil might have an everlasting reward of evil.


1. It refutes the fancy of Atheists and Epicures, Consectaries from Gods
providence.
which pretend that the observation of such slender matters, holds noe
correspondence with Gods greatness. Aristotle said it was as unfit for Gods
knowledge to descend into these inferior things, Gods providence is like a
well-drawn picture which eyeth each in the room.
as for a Prince to know what is done in the kitchen. Whereas it is Gods
greatest greatness to be infinite, the light of the Sun extends to every little
hole. 2. Some say he cares for universal things only, and not singular; but
then he should not care for himself, O tu bone Omnipotens, qui sic curas Vnum
quemque nostru^ tanquam solum cures and sic omnestanquam singulos. August.
Confess. lib. 3. cap 11.
and his knowledge should not be infinite.

2. We must admire and adore the excellency of God which knows all things.
David contemplating this point, confesses this knowledge is too wonderful for
him.

3. Let us often put our selves in mind of this truth, that it may work in us
a reverent care of ordering all our words and actions aright in his sight, that
nothing may slip from us unworthy his eye and ear, offensive to his most great
and most pure Majesty, and all-seeing eye. How careful are we of our
speeches and actions, when we know that they are marked by some one of note
and quality.

4. God has a general providence about all things, yea even in sins. God
determines sin in regard of time and measure, and orders it: and evils of
punishment, Job 1. 21. and 2. 10. The Lord has taken away: when the Sabaeans
spoiled him, Amos 3. 6. Is there evil in a City, and the Lord has not done
it? and Esth. 6. That the King should not sleep that night, and that then he
should call for a book rather then anything else, and that book of the
Chronicles, and that in that Book he should light on that place which specified
Mordecais service.

We shall never feelingly applaude and acknowledge Gods wisdom, justice,
goodness, or other excellencies, if we contemplate not the exercise of them in
the works of his providence, but in observing these, we shall surely attain
an high esteem of him, and be ready to confess his worth. When Gods works
imprint not in our hearts a reverent fear of him, a hearty love to him, a
confident trusting in him, a dutiful submission to him, and the like virtues,
they are fruitless to us, and we receive no profit by them.

In respect of God, there is no confusion, but he rules wonderfully in the
midst of all disorder that seems to be in the world, wisely disposing of the
same to the glory of his great name, Eccles. 5. 7. and 3. 17. Esaias 26. 20, 21.
Job 21. 30.

It teaches us thankfulness and patience if things make for us, Eliz. Young.
to praise God: if against us, to be humbled.

If thou be hungry and in penury, murmr not nor repine, but say with the
blessed Martyr; If men take away my meat, God will take away my stomach.
Merlin during the massacre at Paris, some fortnight together, was nourished
with one egg a day laid by an hen that came constantly to the hay-now where he
lay hid in that danger. The whole power almost of France being gathered
together against the City Rochel, I trust God which hitherto has preserved and
led me by the hand, will not now of his goodness suffer me to go alone. Queen
Elizab. Stow Chron.
and besieging them with extremity who defended the Town: God in the time of
famine and want of bread, did forsome whole months together daily cast up a
kind of fish unto them out of the Sea, wherewith so many hundreds were
relieved without any labor of their own.

Be of good comfort brother (said Ridly to Latimer) for God will either assuage
the fury of the fire, or else strengthen us to abide it.

In the time of the massacre at Paris, there was a poor man, who for his
deliverance crept into a hole, and when he was there, there comes a Spider and
weaves a Cob-web before the hole; when the murderer came to search for him;
says one, certainly he is got into that hole: No says another, he cannot be
there, for there is a cob-web over the place; and by this means the poor man
was preserved.

Let us observe the signal acts of Gods providence of late in this Kingdom.
Psalm. 106. 2.
He studies not the Scripture as he should, which studies not providence as
he should; Psalm. 92. 4, 5.
we should compare Gods promises and providence together. Psalm. 107. ult.
What we hear of him in his word with what we see in his works. Psalm. 48. 8.
We should make a spiritual use of all occurrents, look above the courage of
a Commander, the cowardice of an enemy.

How much of God has been seen in many battles, at Keinton, Gods providence is
most conspicuous in the managing of waters, for contingences are no where more
ticklish then in war, therefore he is often styled the Lord of Hosts.
Newbery, Marston-moare, Naseby. Gods providence appeared in calling this
Parliament then, when the people thought there would never be Parliament more,
when our laws, liberties, and religion were almost gone. God overruled the
hearts of the people in the election: his providence was wonderful as in
calling, so in continuing this Parliament, and in keeping our Worthies
together, when there were so many plots against them, and many fell off from
them, many persons and letters have been strangely discovered.

Austin preaching once forgot what he had purposed to utter, and so made an
excursion from the matter in hand, and fell* into a discourse against the
Manichees. Possidonius and others dining with him that day, Augustine told them
of it, and asked them whether they observed it. They answered that they
observed it, and much wondered at it. Then Augustine replied, Credo quod aliquem
errantem in populo dominus per nostram oblivionem and errorem curari voluit.
Two days after one came to Augustine before others, falling at his feet and
weeping, confessing also that he had many years followed the heresy of the
Manichees, and had spent much money on them; but the day before through Gods
mercy, by Austines Sermon, he was converted, and then was made Catholic.

FINIS.
An Alphabeticall Table.
A.
ACts of the Apostles, why so called, Lib. 1. page 69 Who are the best
Expositors on it ibid. Air, the use of that element l. 3 p. 38 It is divided
into three Regions l. 3. p 37, 38 Affections, what they are in God l. 2. p. 70
Amos, why so called; and who is the best Expositor of it l. 1 p. 60 Angels, why
not spoken of in the Creation l. 3. p 30, 31 Their names, nature; God made
them; diverse questions about them l. 3. from p. 85 to 103 Anger, what in God l.
2. p. 74 75, 76, 77 Anthrophomorphites, who l. 2 p. 24 Apocalypse, why so called
l. 1 p. 81 Questioned by some, but is Canonical l. 1. p. 81, 82 Who are the
best Expositors of it l. 1. p. 83 Apocrypha, which Books are so called l. 1.
p. 84, 85 Why so called p. 85 And why they are added to the Scripture ibid. Why
they are not Canonical l. 1. p. 86, 87, 88, 89 Apostle, what it signifies l.
1 p. 68 Arabique translation l. 1. p. 98 99 Assurance of salvation l. 3. p. 12
13 Astronomy, what it signifies l. 2. p. 10 Atheists, several sorts of them
l. 1. p. 39, 40 They have come to some fearful end l. 2. p. 17 The Atheists
reasons against God and the Scripture l. 2 p. 13 What Atheists are l. 2. p. 15.
161 And who were so esteemed ib. Helps against Atheism l. 2 p. 17, 18
Attributes, why so called l. 2 p. 20 How they differ from properties l 2 p. 21
What rules are to be observed in attributing them to God l. 2. p. 21, 22 How
they are divided ibid. Authentical, what it is l. 1 p. 91 Which are the
Authentical editions of Scripture l. 1 p. 92, 100, 101, 102 Neither the
Translation of the Seventy, nor the vulgar Latin are Authentical l. 1 p. 119,
120, 121, 122 Authority of Scripture is Divine l. 1. p. 8 to 24. and 130 131
B
BEasts, their usefulness l. 3 p. 81 to 85 Bees, for what they are notable l.
3. p. 80 Bible, why so called l. 1. p. 8. m. Who first distinguished the Bible
into Chapters and Verses l. 1. p. 46 Blessed, God is most Blessed l 2 p. 119 to
126 What Blessedness is l. 2 p. 120, 121 Blindness natural and Spiritual l.
3. p. 42, 43 Body taken three ways l. 2. p. 25 God is not a Body l. 2. p. 24,
25 Bounty in God, what it is l. 2 p. 83, 84, 85, 86
C
CAnon, why the Scripture is called a Canone, or Canonical l. 1. p. 42, 43 The
condition of a Canon l. 1. p. 43 There is a threefold Canon in the Church l. 1.
p. 43, 44 83, 84 Some abolish, some add to, others diminish the Canone ibid.
Which are the Canonical Books of the old Testament l. 1. p. 48 to 60 Which of
the New l. 1 65, 66 67 Seven Epistles are called Canonical, and why l. 1 p.
77, 78 Canticles why so called, and who best expounds it l. 1 p. 56 Catholic,
why seven Epistles are so called l. 1. p. 77, 78 Chaldee, why some part of the
old Testament was written in Chaldee l. 1. p. 93, 94 The Chaldee Paraphrast l.
1 p. 94, 95, 96 Christ is God l. 2. p. 131, 132 133 Chronicles, why so called,
and who best expounds them l. 1 p. 51, 52 Crystal, what it is l. 3. p. 53
Church, it has a fourfold office in respect of the Scripture l. 1 p. 29 The
true Church has given testimony to the Scripture in all ages l. 1. p. 20, 21
We believe not the Scripture chiefly for the Churches testimony l. 1 p. 26, 27,
28 29, 30 Clemency in God, what it is l. 2 p. 77 Clouds what they are, a great
work of God l. 3. p. 47 48, 49 Colosse the chief City of Phrygia l. 1. p. 74
Who best expound the Colossians ibid. Conclusion, whether that of the Lords
prayer be true Scripture l. 1. p. 115 Conscience, what it is, the testimony of
it is strong to prove that there is a God l. 2. p. 6 Corinth, famous for diverse
things l. 1. p. 73 Who best interpret ^oth the Corinthians ibid. Council, the
Florentine and Trent Councels not lawful Councels l. 1. p. 89, 90 Creation,
what it is l. 3. p. 13, 14 Taken strictly and largely ib. The efficient cause,
matter, form, and end of it l. 3. p. 14 17, 19, 20 Consectaries from it l. 3.
p. 20 21, 22 The works of each day l. 3 p. 23, 24, 25, 26
D
DAniel, why so called, and who best expounds it l. 1 p. 58, 59 Day, what it
is, and the benefit of it l. 3. p. 40, 41, 42 Decree, what the word signifies,
and how it is defined l. 3 p. 2 How far it extends and the properties of it l.
3. p. 3, 4 The kinds of it, and the execution of it l. 3. p. 4 Devils, their
names and nature l. 3. p. 105, 106 What the sin of the Devils was l. 3. p.
106, 107 Why they fell irrecoverably l. 3 p. 107 108 They are malicious,
subtle, powerful l. 3. p. 108, 109 110 Some questions about the Devils l. 3.
p. 110, 111, 112 113, 114 Deuteronomy, why so called, and who best expounds it
l. 1 p. 49 Dew, what it is l. 3. p. 52 Divine, why John so called l. 1 p. 69
Divinity, that it is l. 1. p. 1, 2 What it is l. 1. p. 3, 4 The several kinds
of it l. 1 p. 2, 4 How it is to be taught l. 1 p. 4, 5 How to be learnt l. 1.
p. 5 The excellency of it l. 1. p. 6, 7 The opposites of it l. 1. p. 6
Dominion, what it is, Gods Dominion l. 2. p. 52, 53
E
EArth, the Creation of it is a great work l. 3. p. 31, 32 It is firm and
stable l. 3. p. 32 to 36 Earthquake l. 3. p. 33. m. Ecclesiastes, why so
called, and who best expound it l. 1. p. 55 56 Election, the several
acceptions of the word, and how it is defined l. 3. p. 6 The object and end of
it l. 3 p. 7, 8 All are not elected l. 3. p. 9 Consectaries from Gods Election
l. 3. p. 11, 12 Element what it is, and the number of the Elements l. 3 p. 31,
32 Elephant, whence derived, his excellency l. 3. p. 82, 83 End, the Ends of
the Scripture l. 1. p. 128, 129 Ephesus, a famous City l. 1 p. 73 Who best
expounds the Ephesians l. 1. p. 73, 74 Epistles, why so called l. 1. p. 67 How
they are divided and who best expounds them l. 1 p. 70, 71, 72 In what order
they were written l. 1. p. 70 Which Epistles were doubted of for a time l. 1.
p. 65 Esaias, an Evangelicall Prophet l. 1. p. 57 How often quoted in the new
Testament, and who have best expounded it l. 1. p. 57 Esther, why so called,
and who has best expounded it l. 1 p. 52, 53 Eternal, God is Eternal l. 2 p.
40, 41, 42, 43 The world was not Eternal l. 3. p. 15, 16, 17 Evangelists, who
l. 1. p. 68 How they agree and differ l. 1 p. 64, 65 Who best expound them l.
1 p. 67 Exodus, why so called, and who are the best Expositors on it l. 1. p.
48 Expositors on Scripture, who are the best among the Jews, Fathers, Papists,
Protestants, l. 1. p. 183 to 189 Ezekiel, why so called, and who has best
interpreted it l. 1 p. 58 Ezra, why so called, and who has best expounded it
l. 1. p. 52
F
Faithful, God is faithful l. 2. p. 97, 98, 99 Fire, the qualities of that
Element l. 3 p. 38 Fishes, their nature and use l. 3 p. 75 76, 77, 80, 81
Fowls, their nature and use l. 3 p. 78, 79, 80 Frost, what it is l. 3. p. 52
G
GAlatians, the subject of that Epistle, and who best expounds it l. 1. p. 73
Ghost, the Holy Ghost is God l. 2. p. 135, 136 Glorious, God is glorious l. 2
110 to 120 God, how he is called in several languages l. 2. p. 1. m. The
knowledge of God is necessary, profitable, and difficult l. 2. p. 1, 2 We know
God three ways, and there is a threefold knowledge of him l. 2 p. 2 What the
Heathens knew of God l. 2. p. 3 That there is a God l. 2. p. 3 to 16 What God
is l. 2. p. 18, 19 How the word God is taken in Scripture l. 2. p. 19 The Names
of God l. 2. p. 19 20 His Attributes, what they be l. 2. p. 20 How they differ
from Properties, and what rules are to be observed in attributing them to God
l. 2. p. 21, 22 How the Attributes are divided l. 2. p. 22, 23 Goodness, what
it is, and what in God l. 2. 79 to 84* Graciousnesse, what it is, in God l. 2.
p. 83 84* Grass, the usefulness of it l. 3 p. 67, 68* Great, God is exceeding
great in nature, works, and authority l. 2. p. 48 to 51 Greek, the Greek
translation is not Authentical l. 1. p. 119* 120, 121
H
HAbakuk, who interprets him best l. 1. p. 61 Haggai, why so called, and who
best expounds him l. 1. p. 61 Hail, what it is l. 3. p. 52 Hatred, what it is,
and what in God l. 2. p. 73, 74 Heavens, the creation of the Heavens is a
wonderful work of God l. 3. p 26 to 30 Its motion is exceeding swift l. 3. p.
41 Hebrew Text in the old Testament Authentical l. 1. p. 104 105 Whether the
Hebrew Text had Vowels or Points from the beginning l. 1. p. 116 to 119
Hebrews whether that Epistle be Canonical, written by Paul and in Greek l.
1. p. 75, 76 77 Who best interprets it ibid. Herbs, their usefulness l. 3.
p. 65 66 67 High, God is most High l. 2. p. 51 52 History is delightful,
especially of the Scripture l. 1. p. 16 Why some Books of the new Testament
are called Historical l. 1. p. 66 Holy, God is Holy l. 2. p. 102 to 105 The
Scripture is Holy l. 1 p. 136, 137, 138 Hosea, why so called, and when he wrote
it l. 1. p. 60 Who expounds him best ibid. The chiefest among the small
Prophets l. 1. p. 59
I
JAmes, how it came to be doubted of by same l. 1. p. 78, 79 Who best expounds
it l. 1. p. 79 Ice, what it is l. 3. p. 52 Jeremy when he prophesied, and who
best interprets him l. 1 p. 58 Jews, corrupted not the Hebrew Text of the old
Testament l. 1 p. 103 to 111 Image, fourfold l 3 p. 116 Immortal, God is
Immortal l 2. p. 31, 32 The soul of man is Immortal l. 3. p. 119, 120
Immutability, what it is l. 3 p. 44 God is Immutable l. 3 p 44 to 48 Impossible
l. 2. p. 108 Independent, God is in Independent l. 2. p. 36 Infinite, God is
Infinite l. 2 p. 32 to 35 Inspiration, what it is l. 1. p. 9 Interpretation of
Scripture l. 1 p. 171, 172, 173, 179, 180 To whom it belongs l. 3. p. 173 174
Means to interpret Scripture l. 1. 180 to 184 Job, who the Author of it, and
who best expounds it l. 1. p. 54 Joel, who best expounds him l. 1 p. 60 When he
prophesied l. 1. p. 69 John, what it signifies, and what Books of Scripture
he wrote l. 1. p 69 Who best interprets him, why he is called The Divine he
has something more then all the other Evangelists l. 1 p. 69 The second and
third Epistles are doubted of by some l. 1 p. 80 Who best expounds them all
three ibid. m. Joshua* why so called, and who best expounds him l. 1 p. 49
Jude, doubted of by some l. 1. p. 80 who best interprets him l. 1 p. 81 Judges,
why so called, and who have best expounded that book l. 1. p. 50 Just, God is
Just l. 2. p. 91 to 94
K
KInd, God is Kind l. 2 p. 105 Kings, why so called, and who best expounds both
those Books l. 1. p. 51 Knowledge, God knows all things l. 2. p. 60 to 63
L
LAmentations, why so called, and who best expounded them l. 1. p. 58 Latin
translation of the Bible l. 1. p 99, 100 Legends, why so called l. 3. p. 36
Leviticus why so called l. 1. p. 48 49 Who best expounds it l. 1 p. 49
Lexicons, which are the best Lexicons for expounding the words both Hebrew and
Greek in Scripture l. 1. p. 182 Life, Gods life differs from ours l. 2. p. 30
Light, what it is, and the benefits of it l. 3. p. 38, 39, 40 Lightning, why we
see that before we hear the Thunder l. 3 46 Living, God is Living l. 3. p. 28
to 31 Long-suffering, God is Long-suffering l. 2. 100, 101 Love, what it is in
God l. 2. p. 70 71, 72 Luke, what he was and who best expound him l. 1. p. 69
M
MAlachy, why so called, and who best expounds him l. 1. p. 62 Man, created
after Gods Image l. 3. p. 115, 116, 117 Mark, when he wrote l. 1. p. 20 And
whether originally in Latin or Greek l. 1. p. 64, 68* who best interprets him
p. 68. Martyrs, diverse suffered for the truth l. 1. 21, 22 How they of the true
Church differ from other Martyrs l. 1 p. 22, 23 Matthew, when he wrote l. 1 p.
68 Whether he wrote in Hebrew or Greek l. 1. p. 63 68 Who best expounds him l.
1 p. 68 Meditation, what it is l. 1. p. 38 And what in God l. 2. p. 86 to 91
Meteors, what they are, how divided, and of what they consist l. 3. p. 44, 45
Metals, what they are l. 3. p. 54 Micah, why so called, and who best expounds
him l. 1. p. 60 Miracle, what it is l. 2. p. 12 Miracles, twofold l. 1. p. 19
The true Miracles differ much from the false l. 1. p. 20 The Devils works are
called lying wonders, and why l. 3. p. 109, 110 Moon, the nature and use of it
l. 3. p. 73 Montaines, a great work of God l. 3. p. 56
N
NAhum, why so called, and who best expounds him l. 1. p. 61 Navigation, the
benefit of it l. 2 p. 61, 64 Necessary, God is a Necessary Essence l. 2. p. 56
The Scripture is Necessary l. 1 p. 135, 136 Nehemiah, why so called, and who
best expounds it l. 1. p. 52 Night, the benefit of it l. 3. p. 42 43 Numbers,
why so called, and who best interprets it l. 1. p. 49
O
OBadiah, why so called, and who best expounds it l. 1 p. 60 Omnipotent, God is
Omnipotent l. 2. p. 106 to 109 Omnipresent, God is Omnipresent l. 2. p. 36 to
39 Christ's body is not everywhere l. 2. p. 39, 40 One, God is wholly One l. 2.
p. 56 to 60
P
PAradise, not allegorically to be understood l. 3. p. 121 122 What it
signifies, and whether it was destroyed by the flood ibid. Patient, God is
Patient l. 2 p. 99, 100, 101 Pentateuch, why so called l. 1 p. 47 Who have
written well on it l. 1. p. 47, 48 The Turks honor it l. 1. p. 48 It is often
quoted in the new Testament ibid. Perfect, the Scripture is perfect l. 1. 138
to 148 God is perfect l. 2. p. 48, 49, 50 Person, what it is in the Trinity l.
2. p. 128, 129, 130 How the Persons in the Trinity differ l. 2. 136, 137, 138
Perspicuous, the Scripture is plain and perspicuous l. 1 p. 161 to 171 Peter,
why those Epistles are called Catholicall l. 1. p. 79 Who has best expounded
both the Epistles, the second is Canonical l. 1. p. 79, 80 Philippi, the
Metropolis of Macedonia, who best expounds the Philippians p. 1. p. 74
Preaching, whether it be divinely inspired as well as the word written l. 1. p.
25 Predestination, what it is l. 3. p. 4, 5 Predictions, the truth of the
Scriptures predictions proves it to be of God l. 1. p. 14, 15 The difference
between the predictions of the true Prophets and those of the Heathen l. 1. p.
15 Prescience, what it is in God l. 2 p. 67 Properties of the Scripture l. 1 p.
130 to 171 Proverbs, why so called, and who best expounds them l. 1. p. 55 56
Providence, that there is a Providence l. 3. p. 125 What providence is, the
extent of it l. 3. p. 125, 126 The kinds of it l. 3. p. 127, 128 The degrees
and parts of it l. 3 p 128, 129 Psalms, how called, and divided by the Hebrews
l. 3. p. 54 55 The chiefest part of Scripture, and often quoted in the new
Testament ibid. Who best interprets the Psalms ibid. Pure, the Scripure is pure
and holy l. 1. p. 136, 137, 138
R
Rain, what it is, the usefulness of it l. 3. p. 50 51, 52 Rainbow, the cause
of it, and what the colors in it signify l. 3. p. 52 Reading, all are
commanded to read the Scriptures l. 1. p. 32 33 What reading of the Scriptures
is l. 1. p. 35, 36 It may be the instrument of regeneration ibid. How the
Scripture is to be read l. 1. p. 36, 37 The Papists will not suffer the
Scriptures to be read by the people l. 1. p. 303 Religion, not a humane
invention l. 2. p. 131 Reprobation what, and the object of it l. 3. p. 10
Reveal, God re^^aled his will three ways to our fathers l. 1 p. 7, 8 We must
now expect no further revelation l. 1. p. 65 Revelation, why so called l. 1. p.
81 The subject of the Book, it is Canonical l. 1. p. 81 Difficult l. 1. p.
82, 83 Who best interpret it l. 1. p. 83 Rivers, their original and use l. 3.
p. 59 Romans, that Epistle is an Epitome of Christian Religion l. 1. p. 73 Who
best interpret it ibid. How we may most profitably read it l. 3. p. 11 Rule,
the Scripture is the rule of faith and life l. 1. p. 132 133, 134 Ruth, why so
called, and who best expound it l. 1. p. 50
S
SAmuel, why so called, and who best expounds both books l. 1. p. 50, 51
Scripture, the rule of Divinity l. 1. p 7 The rule of faith and life l. 1 p.
132, 133, 134 Why it is called Scripture, and the diverse Epithites given to it
l. 1. p. 8 The authority of the Scripture l. 1. p. 8 to 25 The description of
Scripture l. 1. p. 11 It was no device of man's brain l. 1. p. 25 It has its
authority from it self, not the Church l. 1. p. 25 to 31 The Scriptures are to
be read by the common people l. 1. p. 30 to 35 It crosses humane wisdom l. 2.
p. 14 Who contemn and unreverently handle the Scriptures l. 1. p. 39, 40, 41
What parts of Scripture have been questioned l. 1. p. 65, 66 75, 79, 80 Some
titles and Subscriptions are not part of Scripture p. 66 Whether any books of
the Scripture be lost l. 1. p. 116 117 Sea, the largeness and usefulness of
it l. 3. p 60 to 63 Sense of Scripture, what it is l. 1 p. 171, 172, 173
Septuagint Translation l. 1 p. 96, 97 Ship, the materials and uses of it l. 3.
p. 65 Simple, God is most Simple l. 2 p. 26, 27 Soul, its excellency l 2. p.
10 It is Immortal l. 3. p. 117, 118 Spirit, God is a Spirit l. 2 p. 23 24
Consectaries of it l. 1. p. 25, 26 Stars, their nature and usefulness l. 3.
p. 74 Sun, the name nature, and usefulness of it l. 3. p. 70, 71 Syriack
Translation l. 1. p. 98
T
TEmptation, how Gods temptations and Satan's differ l. 3. p. 112 Testament, why
the Scripture is called a Testament l. 1. p. 34 The Scripture is distinguished
into the books of the old and new Testament l. 1. p. 44 The Books of the old
Testament were written in Hebrew ibid. Of the new in Greek l. 1. p. 62 63 The
Books of the old Testament how divided l. 1. p. 45, 47 The new Testament, how
divided, and who best expounds it l. 1. p. 62 The number of the Books both of
the old and new Testament l. 1. p. 46 Theology, what it is l. 1. p. 2
Thessalonica, the chief City in Macedonia l. 1. p. 74 Who best interprets the
Thessalonians ibid. Thunder, what it is l. 3. p. 45 A great work of God, and
the use of it l. 3. p. 45, 46, 47 Timothy, what it signifies, who best
interprets both the Epistles l. 1. p 74 Titus, what it signifies, like the
first to Timothy; who best expounds it ibid. Traditions, what they signify l.
1. p. 150, 151, 153 The several kinds of them p. 155 Reasons against the
Popish Traditions l. 1. p. 153 154 The Papists arguments for Traditions
answered l. 1 p. 158, 159, 160 Translate, the Scriptures ought to be translated
into vulgar tongues l. 1. p. 33, 34 Vulgar Translation is very faulty l. 1. p.
122, 123 124 Trees, their nature and usefulness l. 3. p. 68 to 71 Trees of
life, and of knowledge, of good and evil, why so called l. 3. p. 122, 123
Trinity, There are three distinct Persons in the Trinity l. 2 p. 126 to 132
True, The Scripture is True and certain l. 1. p. 131, 132 God is True l. 2. p.
94, 95 96, 97
V
VErsion, The several Versions of Scripture l. 1. p. 94 95, 96 Virtues, what
in God and man l. 2. p. 78, 79 Vulgar, whether the Vulgar Latin be
Authentical l. 1. p. 122 123 It is very faulty l. 1. p. 123 to 127
W
WAter, the use of that Element l. 3. p. 36, 37 Will, what it is, and what in
God l. 3. p. 68, 69 Winds are a great work of God l. 3. p. 53, 54 Wisdom, what
it is, God is most wise l. 2. p. 64 65, 66 Word, why the Scripture is called
the Word, and why the Word of God l. 1. p. 8 Works, the Works of God divided
l. 3. p. 1, 2 Wrong, sin wrongs God diverse ways l. 2. p. 75, 76
Z
ZEchary, why so called, and who best expounds it l. 1 p. 61 Zephany, why so
called, and who best expounds him ibid.
FINIS.

