TWO LETTERS OF NOTE, The one Master Speakers Letter, Ordered by the Honorable
House of Commons, to the high Sheriff, and Gentry of Yorke-Shire, The Other
From the Lords of the Counsel in Ireland, to the High Court of Parliament here
in England, etc.

The Names of the Lords.
Cork. Loftus. Ormond. Ridgway. Kildare. Munster. Carey. Courtney, etc.
H. Elsings Cler. Par. D. Com.

London Printed for F. Coules 1641.

Master Speakers Letter.
SIR,
THe House has received information by Letters from your self, that the
malice of some has proceeded so far of late, as to endeavor first, to persuade
your Country, that the Petition to the Parliament were ill rellished by this
House. And that your free offers therein of putting your selves into a posture
of defense, has given such testimony of our abilities, that it has utterly
taken away the hopes of paying your Billet money, till the Parliament knows not
how else to dispose of it. Secondly, to cry down Exercises (which have already
done much good) and to draw off some Ministers by persuading them that they are
not acceptable to this House. Thirdly, that some in Holdernesse have dissuaded
the Trained Bands from going unto Hull upon the Parliament Order.

Which information of yours, the House takes for an especial service, and for
so full a testimony of your fidelity to the Parliament, and of love to your
Country, as they hold it an evident Character of your worth, and for this
commands me to give you very hearty thanks, And to desire you in the name of
the house to declare to the Country, how false and malicious these reports are:
since the House was so far from disrellishing their Petitions, or turning their
free offer to their disadvantage, as that they returned their public thanks
when the petition was received: passed a Vote to approve of their offer and
since by another Vote justified them in the same act upon his Majesty's taking
notice thereof. And have since ordered that the same Counties which paid their
Polemony heretofore at York, shall now pay all their proportions of the bill
of four hundred thousand pounds shortly to be raised to the discharge of the
Billet money in your County and those other Counties where it is owing, which if
it shall not fully satisfy, they will discharge as soon as the great
necessities of the Kingdom can possibly permit. And likewise they command me
to let you know that they do very much wonder at the impiety and impudence of
those men who dare to hinder the advancement of the glory of God, and of his
worship. And also to scandalize the piety of this house in so high a measure,
as to say those good Ministers endeavors are not acceptable to it, they
accounting it their greatest honor to patronize painful Preachers in the
performance of their duties. And being resolved to cherish and advance with
their utmost power, whatsoever may tend to the propagating of Religion of which
they hold those exercises to be an especial means. This house therefore being
very sensible of the great inconveniences which may happen by their misreports
in these distracted times, and from the malice of these men, if it should
proceed uncontrolled desires, and enjoins you to return the names as well of
those who have vented these untruths, as likewise of those who have dissuaded
the Trained Bands in Holdernesse, from entering into Hull upon the Parliaments
Order: Persuading themselves that you who have already given such proof of
your affection to the Kingdom, will still continue it by your endeavors, to
prevent the practices of any ill-affected persons upon any of that County, to
the disturbance of the peace.

Die Mercurii 16. Martii, 1641.
It is this day ordered by the House of Commons now assembled in Parliament,
that this Letter be forthwith printed.

H. Elsyngs Cler. Parl. D. Com.

A LETTER FROM THE LORDS OF THE COUNCIL IN IRELAND to the High Court of
Parliament here in England assembled, etc.
Right Honorable,
THe present distractions and troubles raised in this Kingdom by the Rebellion
of the Catholic party still increasing more dangerous and perilous to this
Kingdom, enforced us again to apply our addresses to the High Court of
Parliament for speedy prevention of the same, with great joy and thankfulness,
acknowledging the vigilant care and painful endeavors of the same hitherto,
to relieve us in our present troubles.

That your Lordships have manifestly showed your Noble and affectionate desires
to preserve and defend this Kingdom from utter ruin and desolation, by your
willing and cheerful concurrence, with the Honorable House of Commons, in all
their proceedings for our assistance: and removing the obstructions and
hindrances that have been procured in expediting the same by evil and
malignant instruments, the Prelaticall faction, in taking away their Votes, and
sitting in Parliament, which hitherto we conceive have been much prejudicial,
and of great disadvantage to our timely assistance.

The Noble Courage and Magnanimity of the Parliament, in wading through all
troubles and distemper of State, has infused into our drooping spirits life
and vigor, which were ready to faint with despair, but holden up with
confident assurance of your tender (...) and indulgent affections toward us in
our miseries, we received strength and courage, not doubting but at length
through Gods mercy, and your provident wisdoms we should have relief and
remedy against our Enemies.

We now humbly inform your Lordships of the present Condition now standing,
viz. the County of Cork is wholly subdued by the Rebels, L^mster, Munster, and
Vlster, even at the last gasp of yielding up themselves. The Earl of Cork
has lost all his Lands and means, and this Kingdom in apparent hazard of
utter confusion and ruin, unless your Wisdoms prevent it in time by a speedy
supply of more men, money, and munition.

The Rebels are grown to that height of impudency and boldness, that they
give forth in their Declarations, they fight in defense of the honor and
prerogatives of their King and Queen. And we are credibly given to understand,
they have presumed to send a Letter to his Majesty, intimating they take Arms
only for the preservation of his Majesty, and his rightful government over
them, his Queen and posterity, the defense of their Religion, Laws, and
Liberties, in the exercise of the same. That they take not Arms, as did the
Scots, for lucre of gain, to raise their own fortunes by the ruin of others,
but only out of Conscience and duty to God, and his Majesty; which by their
inhumane and savage behaviors since their Rebellion, have manifested to the
Contrary.

We rejoice with great thankfulness, that the Wisdom and care of your
Lordships, and the House of Commons, have provided and sent over for our (...)
assistance, such worthy and valiant Commanders, (...) whose prowess and
magnanimity, many great overthrowes and victorious exployts have been atchi^^^^
against the Rebels in diverse places of this Kingdom to the great refreshing
and encouragement of the (...)sed Protestants.

Our further desires therefore are that the High Court of Parliament would be
pleased to proceed in expediting that effectual Remedy, to reduce this
Kingdom to due obedience to the Crown of England, and the Laws and
Ordinances of the States of both Kingdoms, their Design in agitation upon the
Propositions propounded by the House of Commons, for the speedy raising of
money for that purpose, of such persons willing to be purchasers, by their
moneys and persons, of the Lands won and obtained by the Rebels, and our
endeavors shall not be wanting to comply with them in the same to the loss of
our lives and fortunes.

From his Majesty's Castle of Dublin, March. 10. 1641.
FINIS.

