I do Allow of the Reprinting of These Four Parts of Leonards Reports.

Febr. 20. 1685/6. EDWARD HERBERT.

REPORTS AND CASES OF LAW: Argued and Adjudged in the Courts at Westminster, In
the Times of the Late QUEEN ELIZABETH, AND KING JAMES.

In Four Parts.

The Second Impression, carefully Corrected, with the Addition of Many Thousand
of References, never before Printed.

Collected by a Learned Professor of the LAW, WILLIAM LEONARD, Esquire, Then of
the Honorable Society of GRAY'S INN.

Published by William Hughes of Gray's Inn, Esquire.

With Alphabetical TABLES of the Names of the Cases, and of the Matter
contained in each Part.

LONDON, Printed by William Rawlins, Samuel Roycroft, and Miles Flesher,
Assigns of Richard and Edward Atkins, Esquires.

For H. Twyford, H. Herringman, T. Basset, R. Chiswell, B. Griffin, C. Harper,
T. Sawbridge, J. Place, and S. Keble, MDCLXXXVII.

Academiae Cantabrigiensis Liber
bookplate

TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
THese Cases were Collected and taken in the French Tongue, by William Leonard
Esquire, sometimes of the Honorable Society of Gray's Inn; a Learned Professor
and Practiser of the Common Law, in the time of the Reign of the late Queen
Elizabeth: One Copy of some of these Cases (many years past) came into the
hands of Sir Robert Hitcham Knight, afterward Sergeant at Law; Another Copy of
other of these Cases came then into the hands of Humphry Davenport Sergeant at
Law; afterward Sir Humpry Davenport Knight, late Lord chief Baron of the Court
of Exchequer; Both which said learned persons approved of them, and made use of
them in the course of their several Practice. Some other Copies of some of
these Cases are now dispersed abroad, and are in the hands of diverse Practisers
and Students of the Law, who make the like use of them. The Originals
themselves of all these Cases (amongst many others of the said Mr. Leonards
collecting) all of them under his own handwriting, are now in my hands, having
been delivered to me by a worthy Gent. of the said Society of Gray's Inn, who
had them out of the Library, sometimes belonging to the said Mr. Leonard. These
Cases having been lately, truly and carefully Translated by me out of the
Original French Copy into English, have since the Translation thereof, been
perused and approved of by many Eminent Professors of the Law. Wherefore I
finding that the same do contain many excellent Matters and Points of Law,
which have not heretofore been Printed, or published, do here offer the same
unto thy Judgment upon a serious consideration, hoping they may be of some use
and benefit to thee, in the like course of thy study and practice of LAW.

From my Study at Gray's Inn, November. 20th. 1658. Will. Hughes.

The Names of the Learned Lawyers, Sergeants at Law, and Judges of the several
Courts at Westminster, who argued the cases, and were Judges of the several
Courts, where the Cases were argued viz.
A.
ANderson, Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas. Anger. Altham, afterward
one of the Barons of the Exchequer. Atkinson. Ayliffe, Justice of the Kings
Bench.
B.
BEamount, Sergeant at law, afterward Judge of the Common Pleas. Bromley, Lord
Chancellor of England. Barkley.
C.
COok, after Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas. Clench, one of the Judges
of the Kings Bench. Cooper, Sergeant at Law. Clark, Baron of the Exchequer.
D.
DAniel, Sergeant at Law, after Judge of the Common Pleas. Drew, Sergeant at
Law. Dyer, Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas.
E.
EGerton, Solicitor of the Queen, after Lord Chancellor.
F.
FLeetwood, Sergeant at Law, Recorder of London. Fuller. Fenner, Sergeant at
Law, after Judge of the Kings Bench.
G.
Gaudy, Judge of the Kings Bench. Golding, Sergeant at Law. Glanvile, Sergeant
at Law, after Judge of the Common Pleas. Gent, Baron of the Exchequer. Godfrey.
H.
HAughton, Sergeant at Law, after Judge of the Common Pleas. Hammon, Serjant at
Law. Harris, Sergeant at Law. Heal, Sergeant at Law. Hobart.
K.
KIngsmil, Judge of the Kings Bench.
L.
LAiton.
M.
MEad, Sergeant at Law, after Judge of the Common Pleas. Morgan. Manwood, Lord
Chief Baron of the Exchequer. Mounson, Justice of the Common Pleas.
O.
OWen, Sergeant at Law, after Baron of the Exchequer.
P.
POpham, Attorney General of the Queen, after Lord Chief Justice of B. R.
Periam, Judge of the Common Pleas. Pepper, Attorney of the Court of Wards.
Plowden. Puckering, the Queens Sergeant at Law.
R.
RHodes, Judge of the Common Pleas.
S.
SNag, Sergeant at Law. Shuit, Judge of the Kings Bench. Shuttleworth, Sergeant
at Law.
TAnfield, Sergeant at law, after Lord Chief Baron of the Exchequer. Topham.
W.
WRay, Lord Chief Justice of the Kings Bench. Windham, Judge of the Common
Pleas. Walmesley, Sergeant at Law, after Judge of the Common Pleas.
Y.
YElverton, Sergeant at Law, after Judge of the Kings Bench.
The Names of the Cases.
Note 1. P. stand for Principal Case 2. B. stand for a Vouched Case.


A. Sect.
ALlington and Bails Case 34 p Albany and Bishop of Saints Asaphs Case, 39 p
Ashpool, and Inhabitants of Everinghams Case 72 p Arden and Gents Case 75 p
Arundel and Morris case 98 p Allen and Palmers case 133 p Atkinson and Rolfs
case 141 p Atkins and Hales case 192 p Askew and Earl of Lincolns Case 196 p
Ashegel and Dennis case 272 p Arundel, and Bishop of Gloucesters case 278 p
Alexander and Greshams case 306 p Askew and Fuliambs case 310 p Austin and
Smiths case 441 p Lord Abergavennies case 469 p Anonimus, 2 p 8 p 15 p 17 p 38
p 40 p 45 p 61 p 73 p 75 p 81 p 83 p 86 p 94 p 104 p 108 p 109 p 116 p 132 p
145 p 150 p 157 p 173 p 220 p 221 p 222 p 224 p 226 p 266 p 285 p 290 p 296 p
308 p 335 p 349 p 350 351 252 353 354 355 356 357 358 359 360 361 365 371 386
390 392 393 396 397 400 401 408 418 443 444 451.
B.
Bornford and Packingtons case 1 p Benicomb and Parkers case 31 p Bedows case
32 p Braybrooks case 51 p Bullers case 64 p Bishop of York and Mortons case 69
p Bunny and Wright, and Staffords case 77 p Bonefant and Sir Richard
Greenfields case 78 p Beverleys and Cornwallis case 84 p Bracebridge and
Baskarviles case 87 p Barker and Pigets case 89 p Blaunchstower and Friars case
91 p Basset and Kerns case 92 p Bret and Auders case 95 p Brook and Kings case
99 p Baldwin and Cocks case 101 p Bret and Shepherds case 114 p Baxter and
Bales case 115 p Butler and Airs case 118 p Bushies case 122 p Birds case 125
p Branchers case 139 p Bear and Underwoods case 142 p Beverley and Bawds case
148 p Bears case 154 p Bronker and Robothams case 162 p Brook and Doughties
case 173 p Bilford and Foxes case 189 p Burgesses of Southamptons case 199 p
Lord Buckhurst, and Bishop of Winchesters case 213 p Brookesley and Wickams
case 232 p Bow^y and Popes case 234 p Bedel and Moors case 238 p Bulleyn and
Grants case 244 p Boyton and Andrews case 259 p Bunbury and Birds case 265 p
Bradstocks case 288 p Bagshaw, and Earl of Shrewsburies case 292 p Bishop and
Harecourts case 295 p Byne and Playns case 303 p Blaygrave and Woods case 309 p
Bownsel and Tylers case 314 p Beal and Tailors case 320 p Blunt and Whitacres
case 327 p Bishop of Lincolns and Cowpers case 336 p Bennet and Frenches case
339 p Bracebridges case 355 p Bishop and Redmans case 375 p Baskervile and
Bishop of Herefords case 379 p Bedingfield, and Bedingfeilds case 385 p Burgess
and Fosters case 395 p Barret and Kings case 412 p Bighton and Sawls case 428 p
Bond and Richardsons case 432 p Bears case 440 p Beal and Carters case 462 p
Bond and Bails case 464 p Burchets case 466 p Birchleys case 466 p
C.
CAters case 12 p Cham and Dovers case 19 p Cordel and Gibbons case 22 p
Carters case 55 p Case of the Manor of Wadhurst 70 p Cook and Songats case
137 p Sir Julius Caesar's case 144 p Cibelt and Hills case 149 p Charnock and
Worsleys case 157 p Carter and Booths case 170 p Colborn and Mixtons case 176 p
Chamberlain and Thorps case 178 p Chamberlain and Stantons case 193 p Carry and
Dennis case 201 p Chapman and Hursts case 208 p Lord Conniers case 228 p
Creckmere and Patersons case 242 p Churchwardens of Fetherstons case 248 p
Cheney and Langleys case 252 p Cockshall and the Mayor of Barltons case 269 p
Collman and Sir Hugh Portmans case 273 p Cranmers case 279 p Castle and
Ouldmans case 282 p Cottons case 297 p Cheney and Smiths case 298 p Lord Cobham
and Browns case 299 p Chamberlains case 302 p Cook and Huets case 317 p
Cleypools case 369 p Carriton and Godburies case 372 p Caries case 380 p Cole
and Friendships case 391 p Crisp and Goldings case 405 p Collet and Andrews
case 417 p Carter and Cleycocks case 427 p Corbets case 434 p Crossman and
Reads case 448 p Cole and Walls case 463 p Cony and Barhams case 444 p Crew and
Bayles case 465 p Lord Cromwell and All Souls case 467 p Corbet and Cleers case
467 b
D.
DUke of Northumberlands case 27 p Dayrel and Thynns case 28 p Sir Wolston
Dixies case 125 p Docton and Priests case 136 p Dellabay and Hassalls case 167
p Dorrington and Dorringtons case 179 p Lord Dudley and Lacies case 195 p Sir
Ed. Dyers case 203 p Degory and Roes case 211 p Dean and Cannons of Windsors
case 228 p Dove and Williots case 243 p Dethicks case 337 p Danvers case 180 p
Lord Darcie and Sharps case 381 p Lord Dacres case 394 p Darsley and Nevills
case 414 p Dennis and Saint John's case 453 p Dormers case 132 p
E.
EStops case 33 p Earl of Warwick and Lord Barckleys case 68 p Earl of Arundel
and L. Dacres case 117 p English and Pellitories case 169 p Earl of Lincolns
case 238 p Edwards and Tedburies case 268 p Erbery and Lattons case 270 p
Estons case 341 p Englishes case 157 p Earl of Leicester and Tanfields case 377
p Elmes and Medcalfs case 426 p Evesq. of Coventry and Liechfields case 427 p
F.
FOrman and Bohans case 18 p Flood and Sir John Perrots case 35 p Fullwood and
Fullwords case 74 p Fordleys case 88 p Ferrers case 146 p Foster and Thorns
case 173 p Sir George Farmer and Brooks case 199 p Fox and Collins case 205 p
Fisher and Boys case 228 p Fish and Browns case 253 p Fenwick and Mitfords case
256 p Foster and Pitfalls case 347 p Ferrand and Ramseis case 362 p Flemings
case 403 p Fabian and Windsors case 425 p Friend and Batts case 450 p Foster and
Wilsons case 458 p
G.
GIlbert and Sir George Hearts case 5 p Gray and Jets case 63 p Gamock and
Cliffes case 78 p Gill and Harewoods case 80 p Gellibrand and Hearts case 83 p
Gunerston and Hutchers case 103 p Gerings case 107 p Gloss and Haymans case
110 p Sir Thomas Greshams case 113 p Gates and Holliwels case 130 p Lord Greys
case 156 p Gage and Paxtins case 158 p Gatefould and Penns case 174 p Gomersal
and Bishops case 175 p Sir Henry Goodiers case 185 p Geslin and Warburtons case
187 p Gibbs case 225 p The Gild of Bostons case 228 p Galliard and Archers case
267 p Greenwood and Weldens case 294 p Green and Edwards case 300 p Gawton and
Lord Dacres case 301 p Gore and Dawbneys case 316 p Greenliff and Bakers case
317 p Green and Pendletons case 318 p Guilfords case 322 p Gallery and
Bunburies case 328 p Geofries and Coites case 329 p Greens case 348 p Gibbs and
Rowleys case 367 p Gerrard and Sherringtons case 388 p Gravenor and Masseys
case 398 p Glanvil and Mallaries case 421 p Gillam and Lovelaces case 435 p
Greeves case 436 p Green and Hundred of Bucklechurches case 456 p
H.
HAddons case 10 p Harvy and Hervyes case 26 p Hungerfords case 36 p Higham and
Harewoods case 42 p Henly and Broads case 53 p Hudson and Leighs case 65 p
Heydons case 96 p Hawks and Mollineux case 100 p Hamington and Ryders case 120
p Howel and Trivanians case 121 p Hudsons case 121 p Higham and Reynolds case
123 p Haithsome and Harvies case 166 p Hoskins and Jones case 177 p Hunt and
Gilborns case 182 p Hedd and Challoners case 204 p Hayes and Allens case 210 p
Hawkins and Lawses case 214 p Huson and Webbs case 229 p Hambleden and
Hambledens case 230 p Hauxwood and Husbands case 249 p How and Connys case 254
p Holland and Franklyns case 257 p Hill and Hills case 321 p Hill and Lockhams
case 331 p Harvy and Thomas case 332 p Hartopps case 342 p Henningham and
Windhams case 346 p Hales case 374 p Huddy and Fishers case 377 p Hollingshed
and Kings case 384 p Harris and Bakers case 417 p Hare and Okeleys case 439 p
Hudsons and Leighs case 447 p Hoskins and Stapers case 468 p
I.
SIr Henry Isleys case 102 p Jerome and Neales case 143 p Jerome and Knights
case 146 p Jennings and Winches case 214 p Ivory and Friars case 216 p Isleys
case 264 p. James case 264 p Jones case 281 p Jennings and Gowers case 311 p
Jeofry and Coites case 329 p Johnson and Bellamies case 330 p Jennor and
Hardeys case 383 p
K.
KEmpe and Hollingborns case 25 p Kimpton and Bellamies case 56 p Knights case
37 p Kinters case 59 p Kempe and Carters case 70 p Keys and Stedds case 105 p
Knight and Footmans case 124 p Kinnersly and Smarts case 206 p Kirdler and
Leversages case 209 p Kimpton and Dawbennets case 227 p Knight and Savages case
260 p Kirby and Eccles case 261 p Kensam and Redings case 334 p Kellet and
Kellets case 355 p Kempton and Coopers case 437 p Knightly and Spencers case
467 p
L.
LEndel and Pinfolds case 24 p Lodge and Luddingtons case 26 p Lassels case 28
p Lepur and Wrothes case 44 p Lewknor and Fords case 62 p Leigh and Hamwers
case 67 p Liveseys case 106 p Littleton and Perns case 186 p Lee and Maddox
case 235 p L. Lumley and Fords case 263 p Long and Hemmings case 289 p
Lancasters case 291 p Linacres case 313 p Lancaster and Lucas case 316 p Lacies
case 363 p Lodges case 376 p Lees case 387 p Lee and Curetons case 412 p Lacy
and Fishers case 413 p Loves case 421 p Lemons case 427 p Leigh and Okeleys
case 438 p
M.
MOore and Farrands case 6 p Manies case 7 p Marquess of Winchesters case 18 p
Marsh and Smiths case 33 p Molleneux case 39 p Marquess of Northamptons case 44
p Mascals case 82 p Moile and Earl of Warwicks case 85 p Martin and Stedds case
111 p Mounson and Wests case 112 p Mitchel and Hides case 119 p Lord Mountioys
case 157 p Musket and Coals case 168 p Mebb and Friends case 178 p Mounson and
Wests case 181 p Lady Mallories case 189 p Mallet and Ferrers case 191 p Marsh
and Astreys case 203 p Marriot and Pascalls case 228 p Mustid and Hoppers case
241 p Matthew and Hassals case 245 p Mills and Snowbals case 287 p Matheson and
Trotts case 293 p Martingale and Andrews case 319 p L. Mortdant and Vaux case
330 p Mordants case 207 p Manning and Andrews case 345 p Maunser and Annesleys
case 374 p Mayor of Lynns case 404 p Maidwel and Andrews case 429 p Marshes
case 433 p Mitchel and Hares case 452 p Marshes case 459 p Marbery and Worrels
case 466 p
N.
LOrd Norris and Braybrooks case 28 p Nash and Edwards case 155 p Nash and
Mollins case 325 p Norwood and Dennis case 455 p
O.
OLdfeild and Wilmers case 194 p Osbon and Kirtons case 258 p Offley and
Sattingstons case 321 p Ognel and Underwoods case 339 p Ognel and Sheriffs of
London 374 p Oglethorp and Hides case 430 p
P.
LOrd Paget and Sir Walter Ashtons case 4 p Lord Paget and the Bishop of
Coventries case 9 p Punsany and Leaders case 14 p Parmort and Griffins case 47
p Partridge and Patridges case 48 p Pendleton and Gunstons case 60 p Potter and
Steddals case 66 p Parson of Facknams case 67 p Prowse and Caries case 131 p
Pearl and Edwards case 134 p Pawlet and Lawrences case 138 p Pierce and
Leversuches case 163 p Page and Jordans case 165 p Piers and Hoes case 171 p
Pierce and Howes case 179 p Palmer and Smalebrooks case 180 p Provost of Queens
College case 183 p Park and Mosses case 200 p Pexhals case 156 p Palmer and
Thorps case 239 p Palmer and Knowles case 247 p Petty and Trivilians case 276 p
Pagets case 284 p Palms and Bishop of Peterboroughs case 312 p Pet and Basdens
case 318 p Page and Fawcets case 328 p Pendleton and Haw's case 175 p Pawley
and Siers case 370 p Penruddock and Newmans case 378 p Perry and Alleins case
420 p Pett and Callys case 422 p Piggot and Harringtons case 445 p
Q.
QUeen and Lord Vaux case 49 p Queen and the Bishop of Londons case 50 p Queen
and Middletons case 58 p Queen and Jews and Greens case 162 p Queen and Bishop
of Canterburies case 190 p Queen and Buckberds case 207 p Queen and the Bishop
of Canterbury, and Fanes case 280 p Queen and the Bishop of Yorks Case 307 p
Queen and Braybrooks case 364 p Queen and the Dean of Christchurch case 399 p
R.
REaresby and Rearesbies case 16 p Richards and Bertletts case 23 p Rumney and
Eves case 128 p Rivet and Rivets case 159 p Read and Nashes case 205 p Read and
Johnsons case 217 p Rockwood and Rockwoods case 275 p Rigden and Palmers case
277 p Russel and Pratts case 278 p Randal and Browns case 339 p Russell and
Handfords case 368 p Rotchesters case 380 p Rolston and Chambers case 382 p
Ruddoll and Millers case 409 p Rawlins case 416 p Rider and Cobbams case 447 p
S.
STonely and Bracebridges case 10 p Sutton and Dowses case 13 p Smith and
Peazes case 21 p Stacie and Carters case 30 p Lord Sturtons case 33 p Searches
case 93 p Smith and Kirfoots case 97 p Savell and Woods case 122 p Sulhard and
Everets case 126 p Stebbs and Goodlacks case 127 p Saint John and Pettits case
129 p Staffords case 151 p Samford and Wards case 152 p Stamp and Hutchins case
153 p Stone and Withypolls case 156 p Smith and Smiths case 159 p Stretton and
Tailors case 161 p Skipwiths case 163 p Severen and Clarks case 164 p Leonard
Sturtons case 171 p Stransham and Medcalfes case 177 p Stephens case 188 p
Smith and Bustards case 198 p Scholars of All Souls and Tamworths case 212 p
Seaman and Brownings case 223 p Slywright and Pages case 231 p Sames and Pains
case 233 p Salloway and Lusons case 236 p Smith and Lanes case 237 p Sherly and
Albanies case 240 p Sweeper and Randalls case 250 p Slugge and the Bishop of
Landaffs case 255 p Smith and Edmunds case 291 p Steed and Courtneys case 265 p
Smalwood and the Bishop of Lichfeilds case 284 p Sutton and Hallowaies case 286
p Somes case 297 p Sheldens case 326 p Sly and Mordants case 333 p Strait and
Braggs case 338 p Sherewood and Nonnes case 339 p Sybthorp and Turners case 206
p Smith and Hitchcocks case 340 p Shaw and Nortons case 362 p Lord Staffords
case 396 p Short and Shorts case 389 p Southcotes case 395 p Symms and
VVestcotes case 410 p Style and Millers case 411 p Scovel and Cavells case. 446
p Stevensons case 457 p Sovers case 461 p Sutton and Danses case 467 p
T.
TReshams case 11 p Tringe and Jews case 20 p Tailor and Moors case 41 p
Troublefield and Troublefields case 46 p Tacker and Elmers case 90 p Toff and
Tompkins case 172 p Tempest and Mallets case 246 p Thetford and Thetfords case
274 p Thetford and Thetfords case 283 p Tillocks and Holts case 323 p Trupenies
case 330 p Thomas and Wards case 331 p Tedcastel and Halliwells case 344 p
Tooly and Prestons case 406 p Trivilians case 414 p Tracy and Ives case 431 p
Trussels case 460 p
U.
VPton and Wells case 202 p Vandrink and Archers case 304 p Vaughan and Alcocks
case 305 p Underhil and Savoyes case 442 p
W.
WAde and Bemboes case 3 p Withy and Sanders case 29 p Wates and Jourdains case
37 p Watkins and Astwichs case 43 p Wilshalge and Davidges case 52 p VVood and
Fosters case 54 p Walker and Nevills case 71 p Wiseman and Wisemans case 73 p
Wakefords case 135 p VVilks and Prestons case 140 p Wheeler and Twogoods case
160 p VVaynemans case 172 p VVignal and Brooks case 177 p Wooden and Hazells
case 184 p Ward and Blunts case 197 p Wright and the Bishop of Norwiches case
218 p VVhisker and Cleytons Case 219 p Ward and Blunts case 251 p Weston and
Grendons case 255 p VVoodshaw and Fulmerstons case 262 p Windham and Sir
Edward Cleeres case 263 p VVickes and Dennis case 271 p VValgrave and Ogdens
case 305 p Ward and Knights case 315 p Wise Man and VVaringers case 339 p
Weston and Garnons case 343 p Willis and Crosbies case 373 p Williams and
Blowers case 402 p VValpoole and Kings case 407 p VViggot and Clarks case 419 p
VVangford and Sectons case 423 p VVilmer and Oldfeilds case 424 p VVolman and
Fies case 449 p Willis and VVhitewoods case 454 p VVade and Presthalls case
466 p Wharton and Morleys case 467 p VValgrave and Agars case 469 p
Z.
ZOuch and Bamfeilds case 102 p
REPORTS AND Cases of Law, Argued and Adjudged in the Time of Queen Elizabeth,
From the twenty fourth to the three and thirtieth year of Her Reign.
I. Borneford and Packingtons Case. Hill. 25. Eliz. in the Kings Bench.
IN Trespass, It was found by special verdict, Custom of Free-Bench.
That the Defendant was seized of the Manor of B. whereof the place where is
parcel, demised and demiseable by Copy, etc. And that B. the Granfather of the
Plaintiff was seized of the place where, etc. according to the custom of the
said Manor, in Fee-simple, and that within the said Manor there is this Custom,
That if any Copyholder dies seized, his Wife over-living him shall hold all
the Land during her Widowhood as Free-bench, and shall be admitted Tenant to
the Lord, 2 Brownl 21.
and that the Heir shall not be admitted to it during the life of his Mother:
And found also another Custom within the said Manor, That if any Copyholder be
convicted of Felony, and the same be presented by the Homage, that then the
Lord might seize, etc. And it was further found, that the Grandfather of the
Plaintiff took a Wife, and died seized, having issue A. Father of the
Plaintiff. The Wife is admitted to her Free-bench, A. is convicted of Felony,
and that is presented by the Homage; and afterward A. died, after which the
Wife died, etc. It was argued by Atkinson, that A. is not within the danger of
this Custom, for during the life of his Mother, who by a Claimer is Tenant to
the Lord, and admitted to it, she is Copyholder; and it is not like to the
Case lately adjudged of possessio fratris, without admittance, for there the
party was admittable, and so he was not here: And also it appears by the
Custom as it is found, That the Lord upon such matter shall seize, and
therefore we ought to make construction that this Custom does not extend to
Cases where the Lord cannot seize; but in the Case at Bar, the Lord cannot
seize by reason of this Free-bench; And we ought not by any construction to
extend a Custom beyond the words in which it is conceived, but it shall be
taken strictly, and not be supplied by Equity with a Custom in the place of a
Seizure. But notwithstanding all this, afterward Judgment was given against
the Plaintiff.

II. Hill. 25 Eliz. in the Kings Bench.
A Copyholder does surrender to the use of one A. upon trust, that he shall
hold the said Land until he has levied certain moneys, and that afterward he
shall surrender to the use of B; the moneys are levied, A. is required to make
surrender to the use of B. he refuses, B. exhibits a Bill to the Lord of the
Manor against the said A. who upon hearing of the Cause decrees against A.
that he shall surrender; he refuses, now the Lord may seize, and admit B. to
the Copyhold, for he in such Cases is Chancellor in his own Court, per totam
Curiam.

III. Wade and Bemboes Case. Hill. 25. Eliz. in the Kings Bench.
IN a Writ of Error by Wade against Bembo upon a Judgment given in the Court of
the City of Bristol, the Case was, That Bembo was Plaintiff in the said Court
against Wade in an Action of Covenant, and declared of a Covenant made by word
by the Testator of Wade with Bembo; and declared also, that within the said
City there is a Custom, That Conventio ore tenus facta, shall bind the
Covenantor as strongly as if it were made by writing: And it was holden by the
Court, that that Custom does not warrant this Action, for the Covenant binds by
the Custom the Covenantor, but does not extend to his Executors, and a Custom
shall be taken strictly, and therefore the Judgment was reversed.

IV. The Lord Paget and Sir Walter Ashtons Case. 25 Pasch. 25. Eliz. in the
Kings Bench,
THe Lord Paget brought an Action of Trespass against Sir Walter Ashton, who
justified because he is seized of three Messuages to him and his Heirs, and
that he and all those whose estate he has, etc. have had the Woodwardship of
the Forest of C. within which, the place where, etc. and also have had within
the said Forest Estovers without number: And that one Rowland Bishop of
Coventry and Lichfield was seized of the Forest aforesaid in the right of his
Church, and by Indenture betwixt him and Sir Edw. Ashton his Ancestor, whose
Heir he is, setting forth that diverse debates had been betwixt the said parties
concerning some profits within the said Forest; It was agreed betwixt them,
that the said Sir Ed. Ashton should release unto the said Rowland all his right
in the said Office and Estovers, and that the said Rowland shoud grant de novo
unto the said Edw. and his Heirs the said Office, and one hundred loads of
Estovers per annum out of the said Forest: After which the said Ed. according
to the said agreement, did release to the said Bishop ut supra, after which the
said Bishop by Indenture reciting the said former Convenants in compl.
Indenturae praedict. Convent. did grant to the said Sir Ed. the said Office and
Estovers pro easiamento dicti Edwardi, and haered. suorum by assignment of the
Officers of the said Forest; and if the assignment he not made within ten days
after request, that then the said Ed. and his Heirs should cut dow wood where
they pleased; and averred, the things released were of as great value as the
things granted: And upon this matter the Plaintiff did demurr in Law, and it
was adjuded for the Plaintiff, for here no Inheritance in the things granted
passed to the said Sir Ed. but only an Interest for his own life; 1. Inst. 148.
a. 398. b. ib. Die. 253. 1 Cro. 644.
for the grant was to Sir Ed. only without the word, Heirs; and the reference
to the Indentures, by which the Bishop has covenanted to grant the
Inheritance, nor the words in the grant imply an estate in Fee, s. pro
easimento dict. Ed. and haered. suorum, and that in default of Assignment it
should be lawful for Sir Ed. and his Heirs, shall not supply the defect of the
words in the grant.

V. Gilbert and Sir George Hearts Case. Mich. 25 and 26 Eliz. in the Kings Bench.
GIlbert brought Debt upon Escape against Sir George Heart Sheriff of Kent, and
declared, Escape. 1. Cro. 188. 271.
That he recovered a certain debt against A. who was taken in Execution, etc.
And the Case was, That the said A. was taken in Execution in the time of the
old Sheriff, and escaped also then: and afterward the Defendant being Sheriff,
the Plaintiff again sued a Scire facias against the said A. upon the Judgment
aforesaid, upon which Execution was awarded by default, and thereupon issued a
Capias ad satisfaciendum, by which A. was taken, and escaped: And by the
opinion of all the Justices, the Defendant in this Case shall be charged; for
notwithstanding that A. was once in Execution, which was determined by escape
in the time of the old Sheriff, yet when Execution was now awarded against him
upon his default in the Scire facias, the same shall bind the Sheriff out of
whose custody he escaped.

VI. Moor and Farrands Case. Mich. 25 and 26 Eliz. in the Common Pleas.
MOore leased Lands to Farrand upon condition that he, 1. Cro. 26. Condition
where shall not bind Administrators. 1. Anders. 123. Die. 6. 1 Cro. 26. 757 3.
Len. 67.
his Executors or Assigns should not alien without the leave of the lessor;
Farrand died intestate, his Wife took Letters of Administration, and aliened
without leave, and by Periam Justice, she is not within the penalty of the
Condition, for the Administrator is not merely in by the party, but by the
Ordinary: And by Meade and Periam, If a Lease for years upon such a Condition
be extended upon a Recognisance, the same is not an alienation against the
Condition: But if feme lessee for years upon such Condition takes a Husband
and dies, the Husband is within the danger of the Condition, for he is
Assignee: If the King grant to a Subject bona and catalla felonum, and the
lessor for years upon such a Condition be outlawed, upon which the Patentee
enters, Now by Periam the Patentee is not bound by the Condition. Meade
contrary, for the Condition shall go with the Land.

VII. Maynyes Case. Mich. 25 and 26 Eliz. in the Exechequer.
MAyney seized of Lands in Fee, took a Wife, Co. 1. Inst 41. ^.
made a Feoffment to a stranger, commits Treason, and thereof is attainted,
and has a Charter of Pardon and dies. It was moved by Plowden in the
Exchequer, if the Wife of Mayney shall have Dower against the Feoffee: Dower.
Manwood Chief Baron, by reason of this Attainder Dower cannot accrue to the
Wife, for her title begins by the Enter-marriage, and ought to continue and be
consummated by the death of the Husband, which cannot be in this Case; for the
Attainder of the Husband has interrupted it, as in the Case of Elopement:
Attainder where an Estoppel.
And this Attainder is an universal Estoppel, and does not run in privity only
betwixt the Wife and him to whom the Escheat belongs, but every stranger may
bar her of her Dower by reason thereof; for by the Attainder of her Husband the
Wife is disabled to demand Dower as well as to demand his Inheritance; and he
cited the Resolution of all the Justices of England in the Case of the Lady
Gates, 4. Ma. Dyer. 140. and the Pardon does not help the matter, for the same
extends but to the life of the Offender, but does not take away the Attainder
by which she is barred to demand Dower during the said Attainder in force: See
the Statute of 5. E 6. cap. 11. Vid. Fitz. Dower 82. 13. E 3. 8 E 3. Dower 106
Fitz. Utlag. 49.

8 Mich. 25, and 26 Eliz. in the Exchequer.
4. Len. 117. Leases for three lives of Copyhold estate are not within Stat.
41. Eliz.
IN the Exchequer it was found by special verdict, That the Guardians and
Chanons Regular of Otlery, were seized of the Manor of O, etc. and that 22 H
7. at a Court holden there, granted the Lands in question to W. and W. his Son
for their lives by Copy, according to the Custom of the said Manor, and that
afterward 30 H 8. They leased the Lands by Indenture to H. rendering the
ancient and accustomed Rent, and afterward surrendered their College, etc. and
afterward W. and W. dyed: And if that Lease so made during the customary estate
for life, notwithstanding the Statute of 31 H 8. be good or not, was the
Question, being within a year before the surrender, etc. It was argued by
Egerton Solicitor, that the said Lease is void by the Statute; the words of
which are (whereof or in the which any estate or interest for term of life,
year, or years, at the time of the making of any such Lease, had his being or
continuance, and was not then determined finished, or expired) and therefore we
are to see, if that right or possession which W. had at the time of the making
of the Lease were an interest, or an estate for life: And as to this word
(estate) it is nothing else than measure of time, for an estate in Fee-simple
is as much as to say, an interest in the Lands for ever, and the like of other
estates, and therefore here W. and W. had at the time of the making of this
Lease an estate for life in the thing demised: And although such customary
Tenants are termed in Law Tenants at will, yet they are not simply so, nor
merely Tenants at will, but only Tenants at will, secundum Consuetudinem
Manerii, Copy-holde^^ Interest.
which Custom warrants his possession here for his life, and therefore it is a
more certain estate than an estate at will, for the Copyholder may justify
against his Lord, so cannot a Tenant at will, whose estate is determined at the
will and pleasure of his Lessor: And although this estate is but by Custom, and
by no Conveyance the estate is raised; it is as material, so as it be an
estate: and this estate being supported by Custom is known in Law an estate and
so accounted in Law; and the Law has notably distinguished Copyhold Tenancies
by Custom, and Tenancies at will by the Common Law; for a Copyholder shall do
Fealty, shall have aid of his Lord in an Action of Trespass, shall have and
maintain an Action of Trespass against his Lord, his Wife shall be endowed, the
Husband shall be Tenant by the Courtesy without new admittance: and it was
adjudged in the Common Pleas, 8. Eliz. That if a Copyholder surrender to the
use of another for years, the Lessee dies, his Executors shall have the
residue of the Term without any admittance, M 14. and 15. Eliz. a Copyholder
made a Lease for years by Indenture warranted by the Custom, it was adjudged
that the Lessees should maintain Ejectione firm. although it was objected, that
if it were so, then if the Plaintiff does recover, Post 16 2 Len. 119.
he should have Habere facias possessionem; and then Copyholds should be
ordered by the Laws of the Land, 10 Eliz. Lord and Copyholder for life, the
Lord grants a Rentcharge out of the Manor, whereof the Copyhold is parcel,
the Copyholder surrenders to the use of A. who is admitted accordingly, he
shall not hold it charged, but if the Copyholder dies so that his estate is
determined, and the Lord grants to a stranger de novo to hold the said Lands
by Copy, this new Tenant shall hold the Land charged: and so was it rated and
adjudged in the Common Pleas. It was adjorned.

IX. The Lord Paget and the Bishop of Coventry and Leichfields Case. Mich. 25.
and 26 Eliz. in the Kings Bench.
THE Bishop of Coventry and Leichfield was endicted of Trespass in the County
of Srafford, Endictment.
of breaking and entering of the Close of Thomas Lord Paget, called the
Vineyard; Challenge.
the Bishop traversed the Endictment, and at the day of appearance of the Jury,
the Bishop challenged the Array, because that he being a Peer of Parliament, no
Knight was returned, etc. Upon which challenge the Queens Counsel did demur in
Law, but at last, for expedition, etc. the Court delivered to the Council of
the Bishop, a Bill sealed to save him the advantage of the said challenge: And
the Enquest was taken, de been esse, who found, that one A. by the Commandment
of the Bishop entered into the said Close called the Vineyard, being then in the
occupation of one B. at will, of the said Lord Paget, and did the Trespass,
viz. dug a Turff there, and there left it, and so departed. The matter of
challenge was many times argued, and it was argued against the said challenge,
because that the King is party, against whom no Lord of Parliament shall have
such Prerogative. To which it was answered on the other side, that so much the
rather the challenge lies in the Case, for where a Peer of the Parliament is
to be tried upon an Endictment of Treason or Felony, it shall be per pares; if
upon appeal of Murder, or Felony by ordinary trial, See 33. H. 8. Br. Trial 42
and Br. Enquest, 49. It was said on the Plantiffs side, that here the Bishop is
quodam modo, and the Venire facias issued at his own Suit, and therefore the
mismaking of the Pannell is his own fault; But by Gaudy Justice, the Venire
facias in this Case is reputed in Law, the Suit of the Queen, notwithstanding
that the parry endicted for his expedition, does pay the Fees for the Process,
for that the Clarks of the Court have encroached for their gain, for otherwise
there should be none paid by the Queen; and by the better opinion of the Court,
the challenge was holden good. Another matter was moved, because the Endictment
is (clausum Domini Paget) and it appears by the Verdict, that the said close
at the time of the Trespass was in the occupation of B. at the will of the Lord
Paget: for the Lord Paget cannot have an Action of Trespass against the said
Bishop, or the said A. upon the matter; and by Wray, the Lord Paget cannot have
Trespass, Quare clausum fregit and intravit upon this matter; but for digging
upon the Land, demised, or cutting of Trees, an Action lies, 19 H. 6. Tit.
Trespass, 36. But here the Endictment is, that one F. entered by the commandment
of the Bishop, upon which matter no Action lies against the Bishop, by the
Lord Paget, and especially in this case where the said A. did not carry away
the said Turff from thence. But by Wray; notwithstanding that the Action of
Trespass does not lie for the Lessor, yet it is well enough by way of
Endictment. Another exception was taken to the Endictment, because it is
alleged, 2 Len. 183.
that A. by Commandment of the Bishop entered, and did the Trespass, and no
place is showed where the commandment was, and for this cause the Bishop was
discharged.

X. Stonley, and Bracebridges Case. Mich. 25 and 26 Eliz. in the Kings Bench.
IN Ejectione firmae, by Stonley against Bracebridge, the case was, P^o. Com.
417. 418.
Thomas Bracebridge Father of the Defendant was seized of the Manor of
Kingsbury, to him and to the heirs males of his body, and 32 H. 8. Leased a
Field called Stalling, parcel of the said Manor, to Tho. Coke for years, and
afterward, 4 E. 6. Leased the said Field (the first Lease being in esse) to
Sir Geo. Griffith for seventy years, who assigned the same to A. Bracebridge
Brother of the Lessor, and to Joyce Wife of the Lessor, and afterward, 5 E 6.
the said Tho. Bracebridge, the Lessor, by his Deed Indented, gave the said
Manor to the said Sir George by these words (dedi, concessi, barganizavi, and
vendidi) Proviso, and upon condition, That the said Sir George, should pay to
the said Thomas Bracebridge, within fifteen days after, ten hundred pounds, and
if he fail of payment thereof, that then after the said fifteen days, the said
Sir George should be seized of a Tenement, parcel of the said Manor of the
yearly value of three pounds (now of sat in the occupation of Thomas Smith) to
the use of the said Thomas Bracebridge for his life, and after to the said Sir
George, until he had levied five hundred pounds for the payment of the debts,
and the education of the children of the said Thomas Bracebridge, and after to
the use of the Defendant in tail: And of the residue of the said Manor, to the
use of the said Tho. Bracebridge, and of the said Joyce his Wife for their
lives, etc. Tho. Bracebridge, made livery to the said Sir George, in one place
parcel of the said Manor, which was in his own occupation in the name of the
whole Manor: the fifteen days incur without payment of the said ten hundred
pounds, the Indenture is enroled, Coke attorns, Joyce dies, Tho. Bracebridge
grants the Lands to a stranger by Fine, and before Proclamations, Thomas his
Son and Heir apparent, within age, enters in the name of the Feoffees by reason
of the forfeiture, Proclamations are made, Tho. Bracebridge the Father dies,
the Term of Coke expireth, A. enters, and leaseth to the Plantiff, who enters,
upon whom Tho. Bracebridge the Son enters, upon which Entry the Action is
brought, it was argued by Beamount the elder: Although here in the Indenture of
bargain and sale, there is not an express consideration set down in the common
form of a consideration, yet because the consideration is implied in the
condition, it is good enough (see the Proviso and condition, ut supra, that the
said Sir George should pay, etc.) As if I bargain and sell to you my Land,
Proviso that you pay to me for the same at such a day one hundred pounds, that
consideration set down in the form of a condition is as effectual, as if it had
been formally expressed in the usual Terms. As to the second payment, Where a
man bargains and sells his Lands by Deed indented to be enroled, and before
enrolment he makes Livery to the Bargainee, and afterward the Indentur is
enroled, the Court discharged Beamount from the arguing of that Point, Live^y,
where it prevents operation of an Enrolment.
for by Wray, the Livery does prevent the operation of the Enrolment, and Sir
George shall be accounted in by the Livery, and not by the bargain and sale;
for Livery is of more worth, and more worthy ceremony to pass estates, and
therefore shall be preferred: and then the Livery being made in such part of
the Manor, which was in the possession of the Feoffor in the name of the whole
Manor, no more of the Manor passes but that which was then in the possession
of the Feoffor: And the Reversion of such part of the Manor which was in Lease
shall not pass without Attornment, but when the Enrolment comes, now the whole
passes, and then the Reversion being settled by the Enrolment, the Attornment
coming afterward has no relation: See 48 E. 3. 15, 16. The Jury here have
found the default of payment, whereby the conditional use which passed by the
bargain and sale, upon the condition broken, shall be reduced to the Bargainor
without any Entry, 1. Cro. 382.
and then the uses limited after are void, for an use limited upon an use
cannot rise; quod fuit concessum per totam curiam: Then Bracebridge the Father,
having the Inheritance of the said Manor in his own right, and the interest de
futuro for years in the right of his Wife jointly with the said A. when he
sells the said Manor by Deed indented and enroled now thereby the interest for
years which he has in the Right of his Wife does not pass, for a bargain and
sale is not so strong a conveyance as a Livery. As if I have a Rentcharge in
the right of my Wife, out of the Manor of D. which Manor afterward I purchase,
and afterward by Deed indented and enroled, I bargain and sell the said Manor,
etc. the Rent shall not pass. Then the said Thomas Bracebridge the Father
having the said Right of an entail to him and to the Heirs Males of his body,
and being Tenant for life, by his own conveyance, the Remainder in tail to his
Son and Heir apparent, the now Defendant, when he levyeth a Fine, and the Son
enters for forfeiture before Proclamations pass, and his Father dies, in that
case the Defendant is not remitted unto the first entail, although after
Proclamations pass in the life of the Father, and so he shall not avoid the
Leases; for notwithstanding that the Issue in tail by that Entry has defeated
the possession which passed by the Fine, yet as to the right of the old entail,
the Fine does retain its force, and so he entered, quodam modo, in assurance of
the Fine: As if Tenant in tail does discontinue and disseiseth the
Discontinuee, and levieth a Fine with Proclamations, and the Discontinuee
enters within the five years, now although the Fine as to the Discontinuee be
avoided, so as the possession which passed by the Fine is defeated, yet the
right of the entail does continue bound: Egerton Solicitor contrary: and he
conceived, that all the Manor does pass by the Livery to Sir George, and
nothing of it by the Enrolment, and that the meaning of the parties was, that
all should pass by the Livery, for if the assurance should enure by the bargain
and sale, then the second uses limited upon default of payment, should never
rise; for an use upon an use cannot rise, and then the said uses limited for
the payment of the debts of the Feoffor, etc. should be defeated; and also
where at the beginning of the assurance, the condition was entire, the warranty
entire, etc. and if such construction should be allowed, here shall be a
divided condition, a divided warranty: And also the meaning of the parties that
the whole Manor should pass, by such construction should be dismembered, and
part pass by the Livery, and part by the bargain and sale, and we ought to make
such constructions of Deeds, that things may pass by them according to the
meanings of the parties; as if I be seized of a Manor to which and Advowson is
appendant, and I make a Deed of Feoffment of the same Manor, cum pertinencijs,
and deliver the Deed to the party, but no Livery of seisin is had, the Advowson
shall not pass, for then it should be in gross, whereas the meaning of the
parties was, that it should pass as appendant, and that in such case cannot be,
for there is no Livery, therefore it shall not pass at all, and so it has been
adjudged: So if I bargain and sell my Manor of D. and all the Trees in the
same, and I deliver the Deed, but it is not enrolled, the Trees shall not pass,
for the intent of the parties was, that the Trees should pass, as parcel of the
Freehold and not as Chattels. And as to the remitter, I conceive, that the
Heir entering as Heir, by the Law is remitted, but where the Entry is given by a
special Statute, there the Entry shall not enure further than the words of the
Statute; As Land is given to the Husband and Wife, and to the Heirs of the body
of the Husband, the Husband levieth a Fine and dies, the wife enters, this
Entry shall not avail to the issue in tail, for the Entry is given to the Wife
by a special Law: And he cited Sir Richard Haddons Case, the Husband aliened
the Lands of his Wife, they are divorced, the Husband dies, the Wife shall not
enter by 32. H. 8. but is put to her Writ of Cui in vita ante divor. And
afterward the same Term the Justices having considered of the Case, delivered
their opinions upon the matters by Wray chief Justice, viz. That the one moiety
of the Lease was extinct by the Livery, viz. the moiety of Joyce the Wife of
the Lessor; and as to the other moiety it is in being, for here is no remitter;
for if any remitter had been in the Case, it should be after the use raised,
which is not as yet raised, for the Land ought to remain in Sir George until
the said five hundred pounds be levied, and that is not found by the Verdict,
and therefore for the said moiety, the Plaintiff had Judgment.

XI. Treshams Case. Mich 25 and 26 Eliz. in the Exchequer.
SIR John Tresham seized of the Manor of D. holden of the King in Capite by
Knights service, 4 H. 7. enfeoffed Edmund Earl of Wilts and N. Vaux Knight, who
gave the said Manor to the said Sir John in tail, upon condition that he should
not alien, etc. quo minus, etc. John Tresham dyed seized, by whose decease the
Manor descended to Tho. Tresham, who entered, 2 Len. 55, 56.
and 18 H. 8. aliened with license, by recovery, etc. N. Vaux the surviving
Feoffee died, having issue W. Lord Vaux; the purchasor died seized, his Son and
Heir 14 Eliz. levied a Fine Sur Conusans de droit, etc. and that Fine was
levied to the use of the Conusee, etc. and that without license: The Lord Vaux
within five years after the Fine levied, entered for the condition broken: and
now issued forth a Scire facias against the Conusee for that alienation without
license, who made default, whereupon issued process to seize the Lands;
whereupon came Sir Tho. Tresham, Fine for Alienation without License.
and showed the whole matter aforesaid, and prayed to be discharged. It was
said, that this Prerogative to have a Fine for alienation without license, had
lately beginning upon the original creation of Seignories, so as this
prerogative is as it were paramount the Seignory, and shall go paramount the
Condition, as well as the Condition is paramount the Alienation, but if the
disseisor of the Tenant of the King makes a Feoffment in Fee, now upon the
entry of the disseisee, the person of the Feoffee shall be charged with a Fine,
but the Land by the re-entry of the disseisee is discharged: and such is the
opinion of the Lord Frowick, in his Reading upon the Statute of Prerogativa
Regis, and the reason is, because the disseisor is not Tenant to the King, and
so when he aliens, it cannot be said an Alienation by the Kings Tenant. See 45
E. 3. 6. If the Tenant of the King in chief seaseth for life with license, and
afterward grants the Reversion over without license, Entry for Condition, what
acts it shall defeat.
the Tenant for life is not bound to atturn in a Quid juris clamat; wherefore it
seems, that if such Tenant does attorn, the King shall seize presently. This
Entry for the Condition broken is not to have so violent a retrospect to the
first livery to which the Condition was annexed, that it shall defeat all
things mean between the Creation and the breach of the Condition, but it shall
defeat all mean things which rise upon the act of the party, as Rent, Dower,
etc. But charges which accrue by reason of Tenure, do remain, notwithstanding
the Entry for the Condition broken: As if such a Tenant of the King makes a
Feoffment in Fee upon condition, which is broken, the Feoffee dies seized, his
Heir of full age, the Feoffor re-entereth, this re-entry by force of the
condition broken has not so avoided the descent, but the King shall have
Relief upon the said descent, for the Relief is paramount the Livery, and the
condition. So if a Feoffee upon condition disclaim in Avowry, Condition shall
not avoid an Interest vested.
by which the Lord brings a Writ of Right Sur Disclaimer, and has Judgment;
the Feoffee enters for the condition broken, the said re-entry shall not avoid
the interest of the Lord by the Judgment on the Writ of Disclaimer, but he may
enter at his pleasure; and it was moved by Plowden who argued for Tresham, that
if the Tenant of the King, being Non Compos mentis, makes a Feoffment in Fee,
and dies, his Heir entering upon the Feoffee shall not pay a Fine for the
Alienation of his Father, but the person of the Father shall be charged with
it. And at the end of this Term, after many Arguments and Motions, Judgment was
given for the Queen, that she should seize the Land and hold the same for the
Fine, and that she should not be driven to sue the person of the Feoffee or
Conusee: And by Manwood chief Baron, at the Commom Law in many Manors, Tenant
in soccage upon every alienation shall pay a Fine, nomine relevii, a fortiori,
in the Kings case, and therefore he was of opinion, That this Prerogative to
have a Fine for alienation without license is by the common Law, and not by any
Statute.

XII. Caters Case. Mich. 25 and 26 Eliz. in the Exchequer Chamber.
A Bill of Intrusion was in the Exchequer against Cater, Intrusion. 7 Co. 12. 1
Anders. 95.
who pleaded the Grant of the Queen, the Plaintiff replicando said, that before
the Queen had any thing, etc. Sir Francis Englefield was seized of the Manor,
of which, etc. and he being beyond the Seas, the Queen sent her Letters under
the Privy Seal, Quod ipse in fide, and legeantia qua dictae Reginae tenebatur,
indirecte rediret in Angliam, praedict. tamen Franciscus (spretis mandatis
dict. Reginae) venire recusavit, for which a Certificate was by the said Queen
into the Chancery, Quod dictus Franciscus in portibus transmarinis sine
licentia dict. Reginae remansit: And thereupon a Commission was awarded to
seize the Lands of the said Sir Francis, which was entered in the Replication in
haec verba, reciting also the Queens Privy Seal, and that the said Sir Francis
did stay there (spretis mandatis, etc.) for which the Queen seized and granted
to the Plaintiff: And afterward the Statutes of 13 and 14. Eliz. were made:
after which the said grant was made to the Defendant, upon which matter there
was a Demurrer and Judgment given for the Plaintiff. Error.
And now Cater brought a Writ of Error in the Exchequer Chamber, and it was
first assigned for Error, because that the Record is entered Inter Johannem
Cater present. hic in Curia by I.S. Attornatum suum, and that cannot be, for it
is oppositum in objecto, that one can be present in Court and also by Attorney,
simul and semel, for the Attorney is to supply the default of the personal
presence. To which it was said by Wray, Anderson and Periam, that the matter
assigned was no Error, for there are many Presidents in the Exchequer of such
Entries, which were openly showed in Court. 48 E 3. 10. R 2. 20 H 7. 20 H 8.
And by Manwood chief Baron it is not so absurd an Entry as it has been
objected, for if one has an Attorney of Record in the Kings Bench, and he
himself is in the Marshalsey, there is an Action against him, he is present as
Prisoner, and also by Attorney; and by them, notwithstanding that here
appears a contrariety, for such Entry properly is (presentem hic in Curia in
propria persona sua) yet because many proceedings are according, it is the more
safe course to follow them, for if this Judgment be reversed for this cause,
many Records should be also reversed, which should be very perilous: An other
Error was assigned, because it is not alleged in the Replication, of what date
the Privy Seal was, nor that any notice of the said Privy Seal was given to Sir
Francis; to which it was said, that the Privy Seal need not any date,
especially in this case, for the matters which are under the Privy Seal are not
issuable. See 2 Eliz. Dyer. 177. Privy Seal.
nor any traverse can be taken to it; and this Privy Seal is not as other Writs
and Praecipes are, returnable in any Court, but the Queen her self from whom
originally it came shall receive it, and also the Message upon it, and she her
self in such case is Judge of the contempt, and no Record of that Privy Seal
does remain in any Court, but the Queen her self shall keep it, and then when
the Queen is informed of the contempt, she makes a Warrant sometimes to the
Chancellor to award a Commission, sometimes to the Treasurer and Barons of the
Exchequer to the same purpose to seize the Lands, and that Warrant is signed,
with the Seal manual of the Queen, and the Queen may certify, and set down the
cause of such seizure in such Warrant, and no other Certificate is made by the
Queen, and the Queen may certify the same Commission by word of mouth, and if
the other party will say that the Queen has not certified it, he shall be
concluded by the commission which is under the great Seal; and diverse
Prsidents were showed openly in Court to that effect. And all the matter
aforesaid, was agreed by the Chancellor, Treasurer, and the said Justices, and
no certificate at all needs to be in the Case, and then a superfluous
Certificate being naught, shall not hurt: for Nugation is surplusage. Another
matter was to consider, what interest the Queen has in the Lands of Fugitives
by the common Law; And as to that they were all clear of opinion, Fugitives.
that the Queen in such case as aforesaid may seize, and assign her interest
over: And that such Assignees may grant Copy-holds, parcel of the Manor
assigned, which grants shall bind him who comes in after, cum manus Domini
regis amoventur; and also when the Statutes of 13 and 14 Eliz. come, Die. 375 b.
the Statutes do not amend the estate of the Queen, but the estate of the Queen
does continue as before, and all the Estates under it. And there was showed
unto the Court diverse Presidents of seizures in such Cases, 18 E 2. Edmond de
Woodstock, Earl of Kent, went beyond Sea without License of the King, and he
went with Robert de Mortimer, and the King did certify the same into the
Chancery, reciting that he had sent his Privy Seal, etc. but that the said
Edmond (spretis mandatis nostris redire recusavit) upon which issued a
commission to seize, etc. And it was holden that the Queen having seized hy
force of the common Law, and making a grant of a Copyhold out of it, now when
the Statutes of 13 and 14 Eliz. are made, she has not any estate thereby, for
she had such interest before, and this new seizure after the Statutes works
nothing, and nothing accrues to her thereby, whereof she can make a seizure:
For she has departed with the whole before, See 23 Eliz. Dyer 376. And note,
that the grant of the Queen in the case at Bar was, quamdiu in manibus nostris
fore contigerit. And afterward Judgment was given, that judicium praedictum in
omnibus affirmetur.

XIII. Sutton, and Dowses Case. Ter. Mich. 25 and 26 Eliz. in the Common Pleas.
SUtton, Vicar of Longstoke, Libelled against Dowse in the spiritual Court,
Tithes.
and showed in his Libel, that upon the Erection and Endowment of his
Vicaridge, four quarters of Corn were assigned to the Vicar out of the Granary
of the Prior of B. of the Tithes of the Parson of Longstoke, and that the
Parson or Fermor of the said Rectory of Longstoke, had always paid the said
four Quarters of Corn to the said Vicar and all his Predecessors, and alleged
further, that the Lord Sands was seized of the said Rectory, and leased the
Barn and Tithe-Corn parcel of the said Rectory, to the said Dowse, his Wife and
Son, Habendum to Dowse for Term of his life, the Remainder to the Wife for Term
of her life, the Remainder to the Son for life: And showed further, that the
said Dowse had covenanted with the said Lord Sands, to render the said four
Quarters of Wheat to the Vicar and his Successors, upon which Dowse procured a
Prohibition, and Sutton prayed a Consultation, and it was moved in stay of the
Consultation that the Vicar had Libelled upon a Covenant wherein Dowse is taxed
to pay the said Corn, and that is a lay Title, and determinable by the Law of
the Land, and not in the Ecclesiastical Court: But as to that the opinion of
the Court was, that the Libel is not grounded upon the covenant, as the sole
Title to the said Corn against Dowse, but upon the Endowment of the Vicaridge,
and the Lease by which Dowse is become Fermor of the Rectory. Another matter
was moved, because that upon the Libel it appears, that the Lease aforesaid
made by the Lord Sands was made to Dowse his Wife, and his Son, jointly, in the
Premises, Habendum ut supra, in which case it was objected, that Dowse his
Wife, and his Son, are all three Fermors of the said Barn and Tithes jointly in
possession, against all whom Sutton ought to have Libelled, etc. and not
against Dowse only, for the Habendum has not severed their estates which were
joint before, Co. 1 Just. 783 l.
qund tota curia negavit, for the Habendum has severed the joint estates
limited by the Premises, and has distinguished it into Remainders, but if the
Habendum had been Habendum successive, the estate had remained joint: Another
matter was moved, because it appears upon the Libel, that the Parson, or
Fermor of the said Rectory ought to pay to the Vicar the said Corn, and also it
appears upon the matter that Dowse is not Parson, nor Fermor of the said
Rectory, for the Lord Sands had leased to Dowse and his Son, only the Barn and
the Tith-Corn parcel of the said Rectory; so as Dowse is Fermor but of parcel
of the Rectory, and the residue of the Rectory does remain in the Lord Sands,
in which the said Sut. ought to have Libelled against the Lord Sands, and
Dowse, and not against Dowse only; And for that cause the Consultation was
denied. And in this case it was further agreed by the Court, that if upon a
Libel in the spiritual Court, the Defendant makes a surmise in Banco to have a
Prohibition, if such surmise be insufficient, the other party needs not to
demur upon it, and to have it entered upon Record, but as amicus Curiae, he
shall show the same to the Court, and the Court shall discharge him.

XIV. Punsany, and Leaders Case. Mich. 25 and 26 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
OSmond Punsany brought an Action upon the case against Leader, and declared,
Prescription of Foldage.
that one Bedingfield was seized of the Manor of D. and that he and all those
whose estate he has in the said Manor time out of mind have had Libertatem
Faldagij and cursum Ovium, in the Town of D. and pro meliori pasturatione
omnium Ovium suorum, the Inhabitants of the said Town having any Lands within
the said Town, every second year left their Lands to lie fresh and untilled,
and prescribed further, that the Tenants of the Lands within the said Town
might erect Herdals in in their Lands, with the License of the Lord of the said
Manor, and not otherwise: and further declared, that the said Bedingfield had
let to him the said Manor, and that the Defendant had erected Herdals upon his
Lands without License, so as the profit of his Foldage is impaired by it: And
all this matter was found by Verdict: And it was objected in stay of Judgment,
that the prescription is not good, for it is against Law and common right to
abridge the Subject of the profits of his Lands: But the whole Court was clear
of opinion, that the prescription is good enough, as 15 E 2. Prescription 51.
Prescription to have common appendant in other Land afte that the Hay is cut,
and v E. 1. Prescription, 55. A. seized of Lands may Plow it and Sow it, and
cut and carry away the Corn, and afterward when the Corn is carried, B. by
prescription may have the said Land as his several, and the other who sowed it
cannot meddle with that land, but to plow and sow it in season, etc. And the
Cattle cannot eat and pasture in the Land when they come to plow or sow it, or
to carry it away, nor have any profit but the Corn, and yet the Freehold of
the Land is in such person, etc. and that was holden a good Prescription, and a
difference was taken by the Court, where one does prescribe to take away the
whole interest of the Owner of the Land, and where a particular profit is
restrained: And here this prescription does not extend but to restrain the
Ter-tenant to erect Herdals, which is a reasonable prescription, See 1 H 7 24.
The Lord of the Town does prescribe to have free Foldage of the Beasts of his
Tenants in D. and see there, that libera Falda is not any other, but to have the
Beasts of the Tenants to manure the lands of the Lord, etc. And afterward
Punsany the Plaintiff had Judgment to recover.

XVI. Mich. 25 and 26 Eliz. at Sergeants Inn.
IN the Duchy Chamber, the case was, that King E 6. leased for years certain
lands parcel of his Duchy of Lancaster, rendering rent, with clause of
re-entry, and that a lease was made to one Bunny; It was found by Office that
the Rent was arrear, and by another Office, that the Servant of the said
Lessee, had tendered the rent in his absence, and by the commandment of his
Master, and that afterward one I. S. Receiver General of the Duchy, received
the said Rent, and had accounted for it, and upon his account it was allowed;
And this matter was opened at Sergeants Inn in Fleet Street, before Wray,
Anderson, Manwood, Clench, Rhodes, Plowden, and Stanhop; and it was argued by
Shuttleworth, that in this case of rent reserved upon a Lease for years, made
by the King of Dutchy-Land, The King not bound to demand Rent.
the King is not bound to demand it, but he may for default of payment of it,
re-enter without demand, and that the Lessee is tied to tender it at his peril,
as well as if the Queen had been seized of the said land in the right of her
Crown; and as to that payment, the Statute of 1 H 4. is to be considered, by
which it is enacted, that the possessions of the said Duchy Taliter, and tali
modo, and per tales officiarios and ministros in omnibus remaneant, deducantur,
and gubernentur sicut remanere, deduci, and gubernari debuissent, si ad culmen
Regis Dignitatis assumpti non fuissemus, and these words ought to be intended
of things which concern the Lands themselves; but this Act of demand is a
personal thing, and concerns the person of the King, and touches the Majesty,
and dignity of the King, and in all cases of the Duchy the person of the King
shall hold his privilege, notwithstanding that the possession of the Land be
carried in the course of a private person: And therefore if the Queen will
alien Lands parcel of her Duchy, she ought to make Livery, for now she meddles
with the possession it self: but if the Queen will sue for parcel of her
Duchy, non omittas shall be in the Writ, for she cannot sue but as Queen, and
the Queen has such Prerogative, that none shall execute her Writs at her own
suit, but the Officer of the Crown, 21 E 4. 60. for Livery, if it be not Land
within the County Palatine, and for the residue, See 10 H. 4. 7. 3. Eliz. 216,
217. Plowden, Lessee for years of Lands of the Duchy, shall have aid of the
King before Issue joined, etc. And if the King make a Feoffment of Lands of his
Duchy out of the County Palatine, to hold of him in Capite, the Feoffee shall
hold it so, and a Feoffment of such Lands upon condition that the Feoffee shall
not alien is a good condition, and Lapses shall not bind the Queen in case of
an Advowson which the Queen has in the right of the Duchy, and if the Villain
of the Queen in the right of the Duchy purchases Lands in Fee, and aliens,
yet the Queen shall seize, and that has been adjudged in the Exchequer
Chamber; and if the Queen make a Lease of such Land, and afterward makes
another Lease of the same Land without recital of the first Lease, it has been
adjudged that the second Lease is void. It was argued contrary by Beamount the
younger, that this condition which goes to the realty, to reduce the Land
again, ought to be ordered and governed by the Queen, as it ought to be by a
Subject; and therefore, if the Queen will take advantage of this condition, she
ought to make a Letter of Attorney under the Duchy Seal, to her own Officer,
authorizing him thereby to make demand of the said Rent, etc. And by
Shuttleworth here be two Offices, the one contrary to the other, the best shall
be taken for the Queen, 14 E 4. 5. in Skreens Case in the end of it: And if the
Rent of the Kings Farmor be behind, now although that after the Receivor of the
Duchy does receive it, yet the same does not purge the forfeiture, as if the
Bailiffs of a Manor receive rent of a new Feoffee, the same will not change the
Avowry of the Lord without notice given to him, 41 E 3. 26. And if a Copyhold
escheat, the Steward without a special Warrant cannot grant it over de novo.

XVI. Rearsbie and Rearsbies Case Intrat. Trinit. 25 Eliz. rot. 746. Mich. 25
and 26 Eliz. in the Kings Bench.
REplevin by W. Rearsbie against A. Rearsbie, and L. Rearsbie, who avow the
distress, because that one W. Vavasour was seized of the Manor of Deniby,
whereof the place where, etc. is parcel in his Demesne as of Fee, and so seized
gave the said Manor to one L. Rearsbie Father of the Plaintiff, and of the
Avowants and Jane his Wife, and to the Heirs of Lyonel, who by his Will devised
unto A. Rearsbie a Rent of four pounds out of the said Manor, with clause of
distress, for his child's part, to be yearly paid, Lyonel the Father died 3
Eliz. and afterward, 22 Eliz. Jane died, and for the arrearages of the said
Rent encurred mean between the death of Loynel and Jane his Wife, etc. upon
which Avowry the Plaintiff did demurr in Law, for the Rent does not begin in
effect, but after the death of the Wife of the Devisor, Construction of Devise.
for such construction ought be made of the Devise, as not to charge the
Inheritance with the whole arrearages, etc. and it was argued to the contrary,
that the Defendant might well avow the distress for these arrearages; for if he
in the Reversion upon a Lease for life grant a Rent charge after the death of
the Grantor, the Grantee shall distrein for all the arrearages encurred after
the grant, etiam, during the life of the Grantor, Distress.
quod Curia concessit: and it was said by the Council of the Avowant, that the
Case at Bar is a stronger Case, for this Rent, as it appears by the words of
the Devise, was devised to the Avowant for his livelihood, and for his child's
part, which words imply a present advancement, and these words yearly to be
paid are strong and pregnant to that intent. It was adjourned.

XVII. Hill. 25 Eliz. in the Kings Bench.
THe Earl of Northumberland brought debt upon arrearages of Account, the
Defendant showed that before the Account, Account.
the Plaintiff of his own wrong did imprison the Defendant, and assigned
Auditors to him being in prison, and so the Account was made by duress of
imprisonment: And the same was holden a good Plea by all the Justices of both
the Benches. And Judgment was given accordingly.

XVIII. Pasch. 26 Eliz. in the Kings Bench. Pasch. 26. Eliz.
Forman and Bohans Case.
REplevin by Forman against Bohan, Replevin.
the Defendant avowed for a Rent charge, and showed, that one Wingfield was
seized of the Manor of Wesham, whereof the place where, was parcel: And 33 H 6.
made a Feoffment in Fee of the place where, etc. to one Orlow, rendering Rent
and Suit at the Court of the said Manor, and that the said Wingfield was seized
of the said Rent and Suit accordingly, and died thereof seized, and that the
same descended to Anthony Wingfield as Son and Heir, 1 Cro. 39.
etc. who was seized of the said Rent as parcel of the said Manor, and that the
said Anthony, so seized of the said Manor and Rent, bargained and sold the said
Manor and Rent, 26 H 8. to Nicholas Bohan Father of the Avowant, by these
words; Manerium de Wesham, and omnes omnimodos redditus, reputed, deemed, or
adjudged part or parcel of the said Manor, who entered, and died seized, and the
same descended to the now Avowant, as Son and Heir, etc. and averred, that the
said Rent at the time of the bargain and sale aforesaid, and diu ante, was
reputed parcel of the Manor aforesaid: Upon which Avowry, the Plaintiff did
demur in Law, and it was argued by Gaudy Sergeant for the Plaintiff, and he
took an Exception to the Avowry, because the Avowant shows, that Anthony
Wingfield 26. H 8. bargained and sold the said Manor to Bohan, Virtute Quar.
bargain and venditionis, and vigor. cujusdam Actus Parliamenti 27 H 8. de
usibus, etc. the said Bohan was seized, etc. where he ought to have said; by
force of which bargain and sale the said Anthony Wingfield was seized of the
said Manor aforesaid, to the use of the said Bohan, and that afterward by
reason of the said Statute of 27 H 8. the said Anthony then seized to the use
aforesaid, the said Bohan was seized in his Demesne as of Fee: For it might be
for any thing appearing in the Avowry, that before the said Statute of 27 H 8.
Anthony Wingfield had made a conveyance upon consideration to him who had not
notice of the use, so as the use being suspended, when the Statute came, it
could not be executed, for there was not any seisin to the use, and to that
purpose he cited the Case of 7 H 7. 3. where a gift of Trees by Cestuy que use
is pleaded, without alleging that the Feoffors were seized to the use of the
Donor at the time of the gift: To that Exception it was answered by Popham
Attorney General, Averment.
That there is a difference betwixt the Case at Bar, and the Case of 7 H 7. for
where a man entitles himself by Cestuy que use, he ought to maintain such title
by every necessary Circumstance, which the Law without expressing will not
intend; but where a man alleges a matter, which is but a conveyance, there
needs no especial recital; as if a man will pretend the grant of a Reversion,
and that the lessee for years did attorn, he needs not to show, that at the
time of the Attornment the Grantor was seized, 1 Cro. 746. ^4^.
etc. and he cited the Case of 10 E. 4. 18. In Trespass, the Plaintiff by way
of Replication made to him a title, that A. was seized and leased to him at
Will, by force of which the Plaintiff was possessed, until the Defendant did
the Trespass, and Exception was taken to it, that the Plaintiff in his
Replication had not averred, that A. was alive at the time of Trespass, and it
was not allowed, for the subsequent words (by force of which the Plaintiff was
possessed until the Defendant did the Trespass) do amount unto so much, for the
Plaintiff could not be possessed by force of the said Lease at Will if A. were
not alive. So here, Bohan could not be here seized by force of the said
Statute, if the seisin of the use which was raised by the bargain and sale had
not continued until the coming of the said Statute: As to the matter in Law,
Gaudy conceived that the averment in the perclose of the Avowry is contrary to
the matter of the Avowry, for the creation of the Rent set forth in the Avowry
proves, that the Rent is not parcel of the Manor, but a Rent in gross, and then
the general averment, that the Rent is parcel of the Manor, without showing
how, against the special matter of the Avowry, is not receivable. Reputation.
And also nothing can be by reputation parcel of a Manor which in rei veritate
cannot be parcel of a Manor, but a Rent charge cannot be in rei veritate
parcel of a Manor, ergo, nor by reputation: Popham contrary; That the averment
is not contrary to the matter of the Avowry, for the matter disclosed in the
Avowry proves, that it is not rei veriate parcel of the Manor, but it does not
exclude Reputation, and the Averment does not extend ad veritatem facti, which
is set forth in the Avowry, but only to reputation, and so both stand together
well enough: Rent charge parcel of a Manno^
And that a Rent charge may be parcel of a Manor, see 22 E 3. 13. 31. E 3. 23.
in the Lord Tiptofts Case, where it is ruled, that title made to a Rent charge
as parcel of a Manor is a good title, and the Assize awarded upon it, and in
our Case the Reputation is enforced by the suit at the Court, which was also
reserved upon the said Feoffment together with the said Rent, so as the intent
of the parties to the Feoffment was, that this Rent so reserved and accompanied
with the said suit shall be esteemed a Rent service, and so parcel of the
Manor; and as to the continuance of Reputation it suffices, if at the time of
the bargain and sale aforesaid, which was 26 H 8. it was by many reputed parcel
of the Manor, and he cited the Case of the Marquess of Winchester: The King
gave to his Ancestor the Manor of Dale and all lands then antea reputed parcel
of the said Manor, and in a Bill of Intrusion against the said Marquess he
pleaded the grant with averment, that the Land then antea reputed parcel
Manerii praedict. And because he did not show certainly at what time the Land
was reputed parcel of the Manor, Judgment was given for the Queen; for it might
be for any thing in his Plea, that the said Land was reputed parcel of the said
Manor before time of memory, which Reputation would not serve: but such
Reputation ought to be within time of memory and understanding: He cited also
the Case of the Earl of Leicester. King Edward the sixth seized of the Manor of
Clibery, of which a Wood was parcel, granted the said Wood in Fee, which
afterward escheated to the King for Treason; Queen Mary granted the said Wood
to another in Fee, who granted it to the now Queen, who granted the said Manor
and omnes boscos modo vel ante hac cognit. vel reputat. ut pars, membr. vel
parcel. Manner. praedict. to the Earl of Leicester, and it was resolved in the
Exchequer, that by that grant the said Wood did pass to the Earl, and Judgment
was given against the Queen, Die. 362 ^.
for it was part of the Manor in the time of E 6. at which time (ant' hac)
without the word (unquam) shall be extended ad quoddamcunque tempus
praeteritum. And Reputation needs not so ancient a Pedigree for to establish
it; for general acceptance will produce reputation: As the house of the Lord
Treasurer now called Tibould was of late a private Manor, but now has a new
name by which it is known, and that within these twenty years, which is not so
long a time as we have alleged for our Reputation, and would pass in a
conveyance by such name; so Nonesuch. But as to Reputation, I conceive that
Reputation is not what this or what that man thinks, Reputation. quid.
but that which many men have said or thought, who have more reason to know it;
and quaenam est inter illos reputatio, There was a Case ruled in the Exchequer
13 Eliz. in a Bill of intrusion; the Case was, that King Hen. 6. was seized of
a Manor, to which a Neif was regardant, who purchased Lands, which the King
seized, and let by Copy as parcel of the said Manor, and so continued until the
time of E 6. who granted the same to Allice Hardwick, and all Lands, Tenements,
reputed parcel of the said Manor; And it was adjudged, that the said Land so
purchased by the said Neif, and demised by Copy, did pass by the said grant to
Hardwick. And afterward, the same Term, the Justices, without any solemn
Argument, showed their opinions in the principal Case, viz. That this Rent did
not pass by the bargain and sale made as above, by Anthony Wingfield, to Bohan
father of the Avowant; for here in the premises of the Avowry is not any
matter set forth importing Reputation, or by which it may appear that the Rent
in question was ever reputed parcel of the said Manor, but rather to the
contrary; and the bare averment of Reputation in the conclusion of the Avowry
is not sufficient to induce Reputation. But if the Avowant had set forth in his
Avowry any special matter to induce the Court to conceive a Reputation upon the
matter of the Avowry, as to show that the Bailiffs of the said Manor had always
received the said Rent as parcel of said Manor, and as Bailiffs of the said
Manor had accounted for it, as parcel of the Manor, and that the Lessees of the
said Manor had enjoyed the said Rent as parcel of the said Manor, the same had
been good matter to induce a Reputation, and to have incorporated the said Rent
with the said Manor: and so judgment was given against the Avowant; and of such
opinion (as was affirmed by Wray) was Anderson, chief Justice of the Common
Pleas, and Manwood, chief Baron of the Exchequer.

XIX. Cham and Dovers Case. Pasch. 26 Eliz. in the Kings Bench.
Ejectione firmae.
IN an Ejectione firmae, the Case was, that one Michel was seized of the Manor
of D. within which diverse parcels of Land, part of the said Manor, where
customary Tenements demised and demisable by copy, etc. according to the Custom
of the said Manor for one, two or three lives, within which Manor there was a
Custom, scil. that the Lord of the Manor, for the time being, might grant
Copyhold estates for life in Reversion; The Lord granted such Lands for life
by copy in possession, took a wife, and granted the same Copyhold to a
stranger in Reversion for life, and died, the Copyholder in possession died,
the Land demised by copy is (inter alia) assigned to the Wife for her Dower,
who had Judgment to recover in a Writ of Dower, who entered and made a Lease
thereof to the Defendant, who entered, against whom, the Lessee of the
Copyholder brought Ejectione firmae, Custom ad pasturandum, non ad colendum.
and all this matter was found by Verdict, and further found, that every
Copyholder of the said Manor, might Lease his Copyhold for a year, ad
pasturandum, sed non ad colendum, and that the Lease made to the Plaintiff was
for a year, ad pasturandum. 1. Cro. 469. Wells versus Partridge. Post 100.
Popham Attorney General, of Council with the Defendant, took exception to the
Declaration, because the Plaintiff had declared a Lease at the common Law, and
the Jury have found a Lease by the custom, which cannot stand together: And
such a Verdict does not maintain the Declaration, as if the Plaintiff had
declared upon a Lease for years of Lands, and the Jury found a devise for
years, etc. but the exception was disallowed by the Court. As to the matter in
Law he argued, that the Tenant in Dower should hold the Land discharged of the
Copyhold for her life, and he put this case, If the Lord of such a Manor
takes a Wife, a Copyholder for life dies, the Lord grants a Rentcharge out
of the customary land, and afterward grants the said land by copy for life,
and dies, the wife shall hold the land discharged of the Rent, but the
Copyholder shall be charged; and he put a difference where the Lord grants
such Copyhold in possession, and where in Reversion, for in the first case the
Wife shall hold charged, but contrary in the last: And he cited the Case of one
Slowman, who being Lord of a Manor (ut supra) by his Will devised, that his
Executors should grant estates by Copy, 2. Len 109.
and died having a Wife, the Executors make estates accordingly, Dower
discharged of a grant of Copyhold.
the Wife in case of Dower shall avoid them: Plowden contr. the Lord of such a
Manor is bound by recognisance, and afterward a Copyholder for life of the
said Manor dies, the Lord grants his Copyhold, de novo, the said new Grantee
shall hold his Copyhold discharged of the Recognisance, which Gaudy Justice
granted; and by Wray, if the Lord of such a Manor grants a Copyhold for three
lives, and takes a Wife, the three lives end, the Lord enters and keeps the
lands for a time, and afterward grants them over again by copy, and dies, the
copyholder shall hold the Land discharged of the Dower, and this is a clear
case, for the copyholder is in by the custom which is paramount the title of
Dower and the Seisin of the Husband; and by him in the case of the Earl of
Northumberland, 17 Eliz. Dyer 344. That the grant of a copyhold in Reversion
by the Earl of Northumberland, does not make such an impediment as was intended
in the condition there, for it is by the custom, and not by the act of the
party; And afterward, the same Term Judgment was given for the Plaintiff, that
he and his Lessor should hold the lands discharged of the Dower.

XX. Fringe and Jews Case. Pasch. 26 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
DEbt by Fringe against Jews upon a Bond who pleaded, Debt.
that the condition was, that whereas the Defendant was Executor to one Morris
Degle, that if the Defendant should perform, observe, fulfill, and keep the Will
of the said Morris Degle in all points and Articles according to the true
intent and meaning thereof, that then, etc. and pleaded further, that the said
Morris by the said Will bequeathed to the Poor of such a Town ten pounds, to be
distributed amongst them, and also to the Churchwardens of the Parish ten
pounds, and to I S. three pounds, and that he had distributed the said ten
pounds to the Poor, and that he had paid the ten pounds to the Churchwardens,
and as to three pounds, Uncore pri^^ a good Plea.
he said that he is and always was ready to pay the same to the said I. S. if
he had demanded it, upon which there was a demurrer: And as to the ten pounds
to be distributed amongst the Poor, the same was holden good enough without
showing the names of the Poor amongst whom the money was distributed; so the
pleading of the first payment to the Churchwardens was sufficient without
nameing of them, See 42 E 3. brief, 539. Scire facias out of a Recovery against
Executors, and the Writ was challenged, because it was Scire facias Executors,
not naming their proper names; It was holden to be no exception, for Executors
are as a corporation known, in that they are Executors; and as to the third
part of the Plea, scil. always ready and yet is, the plea is well enough, for
this Obligation (the Condition of which being general to perform the Will etc.
Poph. 10^
) has not altered the nature of the payment of the Legacy, but the same
remains payable in such manner as before upon request, and not at the peril of
the Defendant. See 22 H 6. 57, 58. 11 E 4 10. 6 E 6. Br. Tender 60. And
afterward the same Term, the Court was clear of opinion, and so delivered the
Law to the Counsel on both sides; that in this case the Legacies are to be paid
upon request, and not at the peril of the Executors in such manner as they were
before the Obligation, and afterward Judgment was given against the Plaintiff.

XXI. Sir John Smith, and Peazes Case. Pasch. 26 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
SIr John Smith brought Debt upon an Obligation against Peaze, who pleaded,
that the Bond was upon condition to perform covenants contained in an
Indenture, and showed what, and that he had performed them, the Plantiff
assigned the breach of one covenant, that where the Plaintiff had leased to the
Defendant for years, certain messuages by the same Indenture, the Defendant by
the same Indenture, did covenant to repair all the said Messuages, Covenant
alia quam quae appunctuatae forent divelli per script, dicti Johannis Smith,
and showed further, that the Defendant had not repaired the said Messuages to
him demised as aforesaid, and averred that the said house in which the breach
of the covenant is assigned, non fuit durante termino praedicto appunctuata
divelli, and upon that matter of reparation they were at Issue, and found for
the Plaintiff: It was moved in Arrest of Judgment, that the Averment in the
Replication was not sufficient, for the Lease was made in November to begin the
Michael. after, Averment.
and it might be that the Message, in the not repairing of which the breach of
the covenant is assigned, was appointed to be pulled down, scil. divelli,
before the Term for years began, and then the Defendant is not bound to repair
it, and then the breach of the covenant is not well assigned, and so the
Averment does not answer the exception, and because this clause (alia quam) is
in the body of the Covenant, it ought to be satisfied by him who pleads it,
scil. by him who assigns the breach in the Covenant, in which the exception is
contained; As by the Lord Dyer in his argument, in the argument of Stowels
Case, reported by Plowden 376. Where a man pleaded the Feoffment of Cestuy que
use, he ought to plead, that Cestuy que use, at the time of the Feoffment was
of full age, sanae memoriae, etc. for that is within the purview, contr. upon
the Statute of 4 H. 7. in pleading of a Fine, for that is in a clause by it
self, which conceit of Plowden, the Lord Wray denied to be Law, for he said, he
that pleads the Feoffment of Cestuy que use, or a Fine according to the Statute
of 4 H. 7. shall not be driven to show that the Feoffor, or Conusor at the time
of the Feoffment, or Fine levied was of full age, etc. but he who comes in by
such Fine, (...) 21,
or Feoffment shall show the same for his own advantage. And at last after many
motions it was resolved by all the Justices, Averment ^here super^luous.
that the Averment aforesaid was superfluous and ex abundanti, for it had been
sufficient for the Plaintiff to have assigned the breach of the Covenant in the
not repairing the Message without any Averment, de non appunctuando, and if
the house in the not repairing of which the breach of Covenant is assigned, was
appointed to be pulled down, the same shall come in on the defendants part to
whose advantage it trencheth, for such appointment does discharge the Covenant
as to that: In the same plea, it was moved in stay of Judgment that one Sharp,
Solicitor of the said Sir John in the said suit, had given eight shillings to
the Jurors, mean betwixt the Charge and their Verdict, and that matter was
testified by the oaths of two men, upon which the Court examined the said
Sharp, who upon his oath denied the matter, and also the Foreman of the Jury to
whom the money was supposed to be given, who upon his oath denied the same: And
it was moved, if receipt of money by any of the Jurors should make the Verdict
void; and by Wray it shall not, for it is but a Misdemeanor, which is
punishable on the person of him who takes the money: But Gaudy and Ayliff
Justices, the Verdict is void. See 24 E 3. 24. 14 H. 7. 1. 20 H. 7. 30. And for
that cause the Judgment was reversed.

XXII. Cordall and Gibbons Case. Pasch. 26. Eliz. Intr. Trin. 25. Eliz. Rot.
492. In the Kings Bench.
IN an Ejectione firmae, upon not guilty pleaded the Jury found the special
matter, viz. that one Hierom Heydon was seized of two Messuages, whereof the
Action is brought, and came to Cordall the Plaintiff, and prayed him to send
him ten pounds; Cordall asked him, what assureance he would give him for the
re-payment of it; he answered, that he would mortgage to him the said two
Messuages, whereupon Cordall lent him the money, and afterward they both went
to the said two Houses, and being before the doors, of them, Heydon called,
Tenants at will of the Houses, and said to them, Sirs, I have borrowed of this
Cordall ten pounds upon these Houses, and if I pay this money at Michaelmas
next, I must have my Houses again, and if not, then I bargain and sell these
Houses to Cordall; and my Will is, that you become his Tenants, after which
Heydon put the said Cordall into the Houses, and seeing him in the Houses, he
put in the Keys of the said Cordall, by the Windows, etc. And it was adjudged
by the whole Court, that this conveyance, by word of mouth, was good enough to
pass the estate, ut supra, and the words of bargain and sale in this Case, are
as strong, as of gift and grant, See 38 E 3. 11. 43 E 3. 11. 27 E 3. 62. 28 E
3. 11.

XXIII. Richards and Bartlets Case. Pasch. 26 Eliz. Intr. Mich. 25 and 26 Eliz.
Rot. 72. In the Kings Bench.
DOrothy Richards Executrix of A. her former Husband, Assumpsit.
brought an Action upon the Case upon a promise against Humfrey Bartlet, and
declared, that in consideration of two weighs of Corn delivered by the Testator
to the Defendant, he did promise to pay to the Plaintiff ten pounds, to which
the Defendant said, that after the Assumpsit the Plaintiff in consideration,
that the said two weighs were drowned by Tempest, and in consideration that the
Defendant would pay to the Plaintiff for every twenty shillings of the said ten
pounds three shillings four pence, scil. in toto thirty three shillings four
pence, did discharge the said Defendant of the said promise, and averred
further, that he has been always ready to pay the said sum newly agreed, upon
which there was a demurrer. And the opinion of the whole Court was clearly with
the Plaintiff, first because that here his not any consideration set forth in
the Bar, by reason whereof the Plaintiff should discharge the defendant of this
matter, for no profit but damage comes to the Plaintiff by this new agreement,
and the Defendant is not put to any labor or charge by it, therefore here is
not any agreement to bind the Plaintiff, See 19 H. 6. Accord, 1. 9 E. 4. 13. 12
H. 7. 15. See also Onlies Case, 19 Eliz. Dyer, then admitting, that the
agreement had been sufficient, yet because, it is not executed, it is not any
Bar: And afterward Judgment was given for the Plaintiff.

XXIV. Lendall, and Pinfolds Case. Pasch. 26 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
IN Trespass for breaking of his Close, by Lendal against Pinfold, Trespass.
the Case was, that two brake the Close and entered, and did the Trespass, the
Owner of the land brought an Action of Trespass against one of them, and had
Judgment, and execution accordingly, and afterward brought Trespass against
the other, Bar. 1 Cro. 667. 2 Cro. 73. 1 Cro. 30. 31.
and declared upon the same Trespass: And by Ayliff Justice, it is a good Bar,
and he likened it to the case of one Cobham, who brought an Action of Trespass
of Assault and Battery, and recovered and had execution, and afterward brought
an Appeal of Mayhem against the same person upon the same matter, the said
Recovery and execution is a good Bar, etc. so here as to the breaking of the
close, but not as to the Entry: But by Wray, it is a good Bar for the whole,
and he likened it to the case of Littleton, Pl. 376. A Release to one of the
Trespassers, shall discharge both. Gaudy agreed in opinion with Ayliff.

XXV. Kempe, and Hollingbrooks Case. Pasch. 26 Eliz. In the Exchequer.
IN an Ejectione firmae for Tithes, the case was upon the Statute of 18. Eliz.
Cap. 6. By which it is enacted, that no Masters, Tithea.
and Fellows of any College in Cambridge, or Oxford shall make any Lease for
life or years of any Farm, or of any their Lands, Tenements, or other
Hereditaments to the which any Tithes, arable Land, Meadow, or Pasture does, or
shall appertain, unless the third part at least of the accient Rent be
reserved, and paid in Corn for the said Colleges, etc. otherwise every Lease
without such Reservation shall be void, etc. If now, the said Statute shall be
construed to extend to Leases of such extraordinary pecuniary Tithes which are
not natural or paid in kind. It was argued, that the said Statute is to be
intended of Tithes in kind, and also of such things to be demised which render
Corn, Hay, etc. But the Tithes in London which is the thing demised in our
case, does not render any such thing, Tithes in London.
but only money according to the decree made for payment of Tithes in London in
the time of E. 6. And although the words of the Statute be (other
Hereditaments) to the which any Tithes, etc. Yet the said Statute does extend
to Tithes in gross, but they ought to be such Tithes which are of such nature
as Tithe-corn, and Tith-hay: And Manwood chief Baron held clearly, that the
Lease of these Tithes is good enough, notwithstanding the defect by the special
Reservation which is limited and appointed by the Statute, and so by him, a
Lease of a House, Rent, Mill, Ferry, etc. are out of the said Statute: And as
to the Tithes, notwithstanding the words of the Statute are general, any
Tithes; yet he conceived, the Statute ought to be intended of Tithes of common
Right, and not of such customary Tithes as those of London are, and therefore,
if all the Parishoners prescribe in modo Decimandi, scil. to pay a certain sum
of money for all manner of Tithes, upon demise of such a Rectory, such special
Reservation is not necessary, for these are Tithes against common Right, and no
Tithes are within the purview of the said Statute but those which are annual,
and therefore a Lease of Tithe-wood is out of the meaning of this Statute, for
non renovantur in annum; and he said that upon a Lease of the Tithes of Chery
Trees, a rent ought to be reserved according to the Statute, and the Farmer may
bring his Cheries to the Market, and buy Corn. Shute Justice contrary, for the
words of the Statute are general. And note, that this Lease was of the Rectory
of Saint Lawrence in the City of London. There was another matter moved in this
case, because the lease whereof the Action is brought, was made by the name of
Master or Guardian, and the Fellows, whereas the true name of their College is
Master and Fellows. Misnosmer.
And it was argued by Atkinson, that the same is not such a Misnosmer which
makes the Lease void, for (sive custos) are words of surplusage, v. 7 H. 6. 13.
And also the case of the Cooks, 20 Eliz. Plow. 531. The Corporation was by the
name of Masters or Governors and Comonalty, mysterii coquorum, etc. And they
made a conveyance by the name of Masters or Governors, and Comunalty, artis
sive Mysterii, etc. the same is no such Misnosmer as shall make void the
conveyance, for Art and Mystery are both of one sense.

XXVI. Harvey, and Harveys Case. Pasch. 26 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
Consultation.
CLare Harvey, one of the Daughters of Sir James Harvy Alderman of London
Libelled in the Spiritual Court against Sebastin Harvy, Son and Executor of the
said Sir James, for a Legacy bequeathed to her by her Father; Sebastian did not
appear, for which he was excommunicated and taken by a Writ of excommunicat.
capiendo, and imprisoned; and afterward he came into this Court, and surmised
to the Court, That the said Sir James in his life had given to the said
Sebastian all his Goods and Chattells, and was also bound unto the said
Sebastian in a Statute-staple of two thousand pounds, whereupon he had
prohibition, and now the Plaintiffs counsel prayed a Consultation, quatenus non
agitur ad validitatem facti, aut Statuti. And Egerton Solicitor of Counsel with
the Plaintiff cited a Judgment given in the like Case betwixt Lodge and
Luddington, where such a special Consultation was granted: But Wray put a
difference betwixt the said Case and the Case at Bar, for here in this Case is
a gift by the Testator himself, but in the Case cited, the gift was by the
Executor; and also here is a Statute of two thousand pounds, in which Case the
Obligations which could not pass by the deed, shalll be subject to the said
Statute.

XXVII. The Duke of Northumberlands Case. Trin. 26 Eliz. In the Exchequer.
THe late Duke of Northumberland seized of five Messuages in the Parish of St.
Sepulchers London, in the Tenure of W. Gardener, Bargain and sale. 3 Co. 9.
by deed intented and enrolled for money bargained and sold to I. L. all his
Tenements situate in the Parish of St. Andrews in Holborn in the Tenure of W.
Gardener, to have to the said I. L. for life, the remainder to K. his Daughter
in Fee. Atkinson, The bargain and sale is void by reason of the Misnosmer of
the Parish, notwithstanding the truth of the Tenure, for by the grant and
bargain and sale of all his Tenements in the Parish of St. Andrews nothing
passes, and the truth of the Tenure subsequent shall not help it: And by
Manwood chief Baron, the sale is utterly void, for the falsity does preceed the
truth and certainty: And it was argued, that I. L. entering by color of the
same bargain and sale is a disseisor; as the Case is betwixt Croft and Howel,
20. Eliz. Com. 537. Yet if he was but Tenant at Will when he made the Lease for
years, the same was a Disseisin to the said Duke; and then the Duke being
disseised, he is attainted of treason, 10. Mariae. And now we are to see what
things accrue to the Queen by the said Attainder: and as to that it was said,
that at the Common Law a Right of Entry should Escheat, but not without office
found thereof, no more than Lands in possession: And by the Statute of 26 H. 8.
it is enacted, that every person attainted of high treason, shall forfeit all
his Lands and Tenements which he had of any estate of Inheritance, by which
Statute a Bishop, Abbot or Tenant in tail in such Case shall forfeit even
without Office: But in the Statute of 33 H. 8. there is a saving to every other
person all such right, possession, so as in that Case by that Statute the King
shall not be in possession without Office, but shall have a right, but cannot
enter before Office or after. And he is to have Sci. facias against him, who
has the possession, and he shall make his defense as well as he can; and the
words of the said Statute, That the King shall be in actual possession, shall
not be construed to extend to an actual and absolute possession, but such a
possession, only which he had at the Common Law after Office found, so as the
Statute does not give to the King a larger possession but an easier, without
the circumstance of an Office: And of that opinion was Manwood chief Baron, and
Shute second Baron: And then it was moved further by Cook, because that the
Quen by the Attainder has but a Right, and the Queen makes the grant of the
Messuages themselves, the same grant is void. And he granted that the Queen
might grant a real Action, and a Right of Entry; but such a grant ought to be
conceived in special words, as to say, That the Duke of Northumberland was
seized of five Messuages, and by such a one disseised, and after the Duke was
attainted, and so granted; for the Queen may grant such a Right by reason of
her Prerogative, and therefore the same ought to be granted by special words,
as in the Case of Mines in the Commentaries, and according to that was the
opinion of the Justices in Cromers Case, 8 Eliz. which Case see reported by
Coke in the Case of the Marquess of Winchester.

XXVIII. Dayrel and Thinns Case. Trin. 26 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
Error.
EDward Dayrel brought a Writ of Error against Sir John Thinn upon a Judgment
had by the Defendant against the Plaintiffs Father of the Manor of Mexden: And
Error was assigned for want of warrant of Attorney. And the Plaintiff prayed
one Certiorare to the chief Justice of the Common Pleas, and another Certiorare
to the Custos Brevium, both which returned, non inveni aliquod war. and now
Sir John Thinn being dead, the Plaintiff brought another Writ of Error by
Journeys accounts against John Thinn Son and Heir of the said Sir John Thinn, 3
Cro. 91. 2 Cro. 13. 597. 396. 5 Co. Page 36. b. 446.
who appeared and alleged Diminution, in hoc, that the Warrant of Attorney is
not certified, and prayed another Certiorare unto the chief Justice of the
Bench, and another to the Custos Brevium, and it was argued by Clark, that in
this Case Certiorare ought not to be granted, for a Certificate is in the
nature of a trial, which shall not be crossed in the same Action; but the
parties to the Action, and their Heirs shall be bound by it, especially when
the matter is certified by one who is Judge of the Record, and that Certiorare
sued at the prayer of the Plaintiff shall be as peremptory, as if it had been
sued at the prayer of the Defendant, for the Plaintiff may allege Diminution
as well as the Defendant, 7 E 4. 25. by Yelverton. And a man cannot have
Certiorare of a thing which is contrary to the Record, which is certified, 11 E
4. 10 by Laicon: So Diminution cannot be alleged in this Warrant of Attorney,
because it has been certified here, that no Warrant of Attorney is to be
found, etc. 9 E 4. 32. by Billing; Egerton Solicitor, contrary: For the
Certiorare obtained at the suit of the Plaintiff, shall not prevent the
Defendant. And the course of proceeding in a Writ of Error, when Error is
assigned out of the Record, and not of a thing within the Record, is such:
After Error assigned, before that a Sci. fac. issues against the Defendant ad
audiendum errores, the Plaintiff may pray a Certiorare to the Custos Brevium,
in whose hands such collateral thing remain, for the Plea Roll does remain in
the custody of the chief Justice, but the Original Writs, Essoins and Warrants
of Attorney remain in the hands of the Custos Brevium; and such a Certiorare
the Court may grant to the Plaintiff, without making the Defendant privy to it.
And notwithstanding that the Defendant has pleaded, in nullo est erratum, and
so has affirmed the Record to be such as is certified, yet the Court ex
Officio, shall award a Certiorare to ascertain themselves if there be any such
Warrant of Attorney or not: which see 9 E 4. Certiorare.
32. by Billing, and therefore the Certiorare being awarded ex Officio, shall
not prejudice the Defendant; and to this purpose he cited the Case betwixt the
Lord Norris and Braybrook in a Writ of Error, where the Lord Norris being
Plaintiff prayed a Certiorare to the Custos Brevium, to certify an Original
Writ, upon which a common Recovery was had, and had it, and the Custos Brevium
certified, that there was no Original; and afterward the Defendant prayed
another Certiorare, and had it: and so in our Case here especially, because the
Defendant was not party to the Record, nor has day in Court, at the time that
the said Certiorare was granted, for the Defendant is not party before the Sci.
facias ad audiendum errore^ be issued forth against him: and therefore he comes
timely enough to pray a Certiorare. See 28 H. 6. 10. and 11. And I grant that
the Certificate upon a Certiorare which was awarded after a Sci. fac. ad
audiendum errores is peremptory and final, but contrary where it is granted
before the awarding of such Scire facias: See Book of Entries 271. The
Plaintiff assigns Error in the Original Writ, and petit br. Domini Regis
Custodibus Brevium, etc. ad breve illud origin. certificand. and upon the
return of the Certiorare, the Plaintiff prayed a Scire facias ad audiendum
errores. And see there 293. where it appears, fol. 272. that Certiorare
issued at the suit of the Defendant in Error after he had alleged Diminution:
and that is after Scire facias ad audiendum errores returned; and see
Certiorare before Sci. facias awarded 271, etc. and this Certiorare is only ex
officio, and awarded only to enform the Court: And in respect of the Certiorare
the chief Justice of the common Pleas, to whom the Certiorare is directed, is
but a Minister, and not a Judge. And as to the Case of 9 E 4. 32. before cited,
he could not have a Certiorare, Diminution.
for he could not allege Diminution, because he had pleaded in Nullo est
erratum, by which Plea he had confessed the Record which is certified to be a
full and perfect Record, and fully certified, and against that matter he shall
not allege Diminution: And in our Case there is not any such contrariety as
has been objected, for the return of the Certiorare is, Non inveni aliquod
warrant. not precisely, quod non habetur aliquod warrantum; And therefore if
the Court now at the prayer of the Defendant grant another Certiorare, upon
which is a Retorn (quod habetur war. Attornat.) the same is not contrary to
the return of the first Certificate, but they may both stand together, for upon
further search such Warrant of Attorney may be found: so upon the matter the
Court shall not be enveigled by any such contrariety, for (non inveni aliquod
warrant.) returned upon the first Certiorare, and (inveni quoddam war.) upon
the second Certiorare are not mere contrary; And it seemed to Wray chief
Justice, that it would be hard to grant a new Certiorare in this Case, but if
any variance could be alleged it should be otherwise, as it was adjudged in
the Case of one Lassell, who certified no Warrant of Attorney, and afterward
it was moved for another Certiorare, as it is here, and because the Original
was inter Johannem Lassels ar. executor. Testi. etc. where he was not named
Executor in the first Certiorare; upon that matter a new Certiorare was granted.

XXIX. Withy and Saunders Case. Trin. 26 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
WIthy libelled against Saunders in the Spiritual Court, Tithes will not pass
by grant without deed
and now came Saunders and surmised, that Withy had libelled against him for
Tithe-grass, and showed, that all the claim that Withy had to the said Tithes
was by a grant without deed, and by the Law such things would not pass without
deed; And also that the Spiritual Court would not allow of this Plea, and
therefore prayed a prohibition: And the Court upon the first Motion conceived a
prohibition should pass, for if the grant be without deed, nothing passed, and
then has not Withy cause to claim these Tithes against the said Saunders. And
notwithstanding that Tithes are quodam modo spiritual things, and so demandable
in a Court of that nature, yet now in diverse respects they are become a
Lay-fee, and lay-things, for a Writ of Assise of Mortdauncester, and an Assise
of novel disseisin lies of them, and a Fine may be levied of them. But it has
been doubted, whether Tithes be devisable by Will: But at another day the
matter was moved, and the Court was clear of opinion, that a Consultation
should be awarded, for whether Withy has right or not right to these Tithes,
Saunders of common right ought to pay his Tithes, and he ought to sever them
from the nine parts, and whosoever takes them, whether he has right to them or
no right, Saunders is discharged: But Saunders may prescribe in modo decimandi,
without making mention of any severance, and may surmise, that the Tithes do
belong to I. S. with whom he has compounded to pay such a sum for all Tithes,
and afterward a Consultation was awarded.

XXX. Stacy and Carters Case. Trin. 26 Eliz. in the Kings Bench.
STacy brought an Action of Trespass for breaking his Close against Walter
Carter, And declared of a Trespass in Somers-Land in Tunbridge; The Defendant
pleaded, that heretofore he himself brought an Assise of Novel disseisin
against the now Plaintiff, and supposed himself to be disseised of his
Freehold in Lee juxta Tunbridge, and the Land where the Trespass supposed to
be done was put in view to the Recognitors of the said Assise, and further
averred, that the Land where, etc. and the Land then put in view is one and the
same, etc. upon which there was a Demurrer: Exception was taken to the form of
the Demurrer, because in the perclose and conclusion of the Demurrer these
words are omitted, Averment.
Et hoc paratus est verificare. But as to that, it was said by the Court, that
the Demurrer was well enough, with or without such Averment in the conclusion
of it, which see oftentimes in the Commentaries, etc. and in the Book of
Entries 146. the greater part of the Demurrers have not any such conclusion.
Another Exception was taken to the bar, because the Defendant pleads, that
heretofore Walter Carter had brought an Assise against the now Plaintiff, etc.
and that the Land put in view to the Recognitors of the Assise per praefatum
Warrhamum Carter, etc. and the Land where, etc. is all one, etc. here is
Warrhamum for Walterum, and notwithstanding that it was after demurrer, and not
after verdict, it was adjudged amendable; and as to the matter of the bar, it
was said by the Defendants Council, that recovery of Lands in one Town, by
Praecipe quod reddat, is not a bar for Lands in another Town; but where the
recovery is by Assise it is otherwise, ^
for there the Plaint is general De lib. ten^to, and the Plaintiff shall
recover per visum Juratorum, and the view is the warrant of the Judgment and
Execution. And therefore if a recovery in an Assise be pleaded in bar, Not
comprised, is not any Plea against it, as in the Case of recoveries upon a
Praecipe quod reddat; but not put in view, and so not comprised, etc. which
proves that the Record does not guide the recovery, but the view of the Jurors.
See 26 E 3. 2. Assise brought of Lands in D. the Tenant says, that he holds
the said Lands put in view jointly with A. not named in the Writ, etc. and
shows the deed of Ioynttenancy, which speaks of Tenements in B. and the plea
holds good, because he alleges the Ioynt-tenancy and the Lands put in view:
See 24 E 3. It was said on the Plaintiffs side, that recovery in Lee juxta
Tunbridge could not extend to Lands in Tunbridge, no more than a recovery of
Lands in one County can extend to Lands in another County: See 23 E 3. 16.
Assise of Novel disseisin brought of Lands in N. the Defendant pleads recovery
in Assise, etc. brought before by him against the now Plaintiff of Lands in H.
and the same Lands put then and now in view, and adjudged no bar. See also 16 E
3. 16. in an Assise of Tenements in W. the Tenant pleads a Recovery of the same
Lands against one A. by Assise brought of Tenements in C. which was found by the
Assise, and that C. is a Hamlet of W. and the Plaintiff notwithstanding that
recovery so pleaded had Judgment, for a recovery of Lands in one Town shall not
be a bar in an Assise of Lands in another Town. See Br. Tit. Judgment 66. 10 E
3. And the whole Court was clear of opinion, that the plea in bar was not good,
for in the Assise which is pleaded in bar in the principal Case, the Tenant
there, who is now Plaintiff in this Action of Trespass, pleaded Null tort null
disseisin, which is no plea, as to the Freehold in Lee juxta Tunbridge, and
therefore it cannot be like to the Case which has been put of 26 E 3. for
there the Tenant pleaded, that he held the said Lands put in view jointly, for
there he agrees with the Plaintiff in the Lands demanded, the which Lands are
put in view; but if in the Case at bar the Defendant being Plaintiff in the
Assise, the now Plaintiff being then Tenant, had pleaded to the Land put in
view in bar, and the Plaintiff in the Assise had recovered, now in this Action
of Trespass the Plantiff in the Assise being Defendant in the Action of
Trespass, might well plead this Recovery in bar, for by his plea in the Assise
he has tied himself to the view, and to the Land put in view, but it is not so
in the Case at Bar, where the Tenant in the Assise pleads, null tort, null
disseisin, for there he does not plead expressly to the Land put in view, but to
the supposal of the Plaintiff, sc. de libero tenemento in Lee juxta Tunbridge:
afterward Wray, with the assent of the other Justices awarded, that the
Plaintiff should recover his damages: See by Wray, 44 E 3. 45. in Assise of
Tenements in B. the Plaintiff pleads, that he himself brought an Assise of the
same Tenements, and his plaint was of Tenements in E. and the same Tenements
put in view, and recovered, and holden a good Plea, because the Tenant has
said, that the same Tenements were put in view, and that took by Assise, upon
which the Plaintiff said, not put in view, and so not comprised.

XXXI. Benicombe and Parkers Case. Trin. 26. Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
IN an Action of Trespass the Jury found this special matter, that the
Grandfather of the Plaintiff was seized, and made a Feoffment to the use of
himself for life, the remainder to the use of John Father of the Plaintiff in
tail, the Grandfather died, the Father entered, Feoffments
and by Indenture by words of bargain and sale, without any words of Dedi and
concessi, conveyed the Lands to the use of A. in Fee, and in the same Indenture
was a Letter of Attorney to make Livery, which was made accordingly; and the
said A. by the said Indenture covenanted, that if the said John should pay
before such a day to the said A. forty shillings, that then the said A. and his
Heirs would stand seized, etc. to the use of the said John and his Heirs; and
if the said John did not pay, etc. then if the said A. did not pay to the said
John within four days after ten pounds, that then the said A. and his Heirs
from thenceforth shall be seized to the use of the said John and his Heirs,
etc. and the said John covenanted further, by the said Indenture, to make such
further assurance as the Council of the said John should advise. Each party
failed of payment. John levied a Fine to A. without any consideration; it was
adjudged upon this matter a good Feoffment well executed by the Livery, Hob.
151. Dyer 361. a More 194. Post. 195, 196, 197. More 35. b.
notwithstanding that the words of the conveyance are only by bargain and sale;
and that the Covenant to be seized to the new uses upon payment, and not
payment being in one and the same deed, should raise the use upon the
contingency, according to the limitation of it; and Judgment was given for the
Plaintiff accordingly.

XXXII. Bedows Case. Trin. 26 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
IN an Action of Debt upon a Bill sealed against one Bedow; he demanded Dyer of
the Bill, which was, Memorandum that I John Bedow have agreed to pay to R. S.
the Plaintiff twenty pounds, and thereupon there was a Demurrer, first, that
the Deed wanted the words In cujus rei testimonium, etc. but notwithstanding
that the Court held the Deed good, and said so it was lately adjudged: Another
matter was because the words of the contract are in the preter Tense, I have
agreed; but notwithstanding that exception the Plaintiff had Judgment to
recover, as by Wray, these words dedi and concessi, according to the
Grammatical sense imply a gift precedent, but yet they are used as words of a
present conveyance, and Judgment was given for the Plaintiff.

XXXIII. Marsh and Smiths Case. Pasch. 27. Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
1 Cro. 38. 39.
GEorge Marsh brought a Replevin against Smith and Paget, who make Conusans as
Baylies to Ralph Bard, and upon the pleading the Case was, That Sir Francis
Askew, was seized of the Manor of Castord in his Demesne, as of Fee, which
Manor did extend unto Daston, North-kelsey, Grants. Manor. 2 Len. 41, 42.
South-kelsey D. and C. and had demesnes and services, parcel of the said
Manor, in each of the said Towns, and so seized, granted totum manerium suum
de North-kelsey in North-kelsey, to the said Bard and his Heirs, and granted
further, all his Lands Tenements, and Hereditaments, in North-kelsey; and to
that grant, the Tenants in North-kelsey did attorn; And the Land in which the
said Distress was taken is in North-kelsey; the only question in the case was,
if, by this grant to Ralph Bard, a Manor passed, or not: And the case was
argued by the Justices; And Periam Justice argued, That upon this grant no
Manor passed, for before the grant, there was no Manor of North-kelsey, or in
North-kelsey, therefore no Manor can pass, but the Lands and services in
North-kelsey shall pass as in gross, for they were not known by a Manor, but
for parcel of a Manor: And a Manor is a thing which cannot be so easily
created, Manor, what it is.
for it is an Hereditament which does consist of many real things, and
incorporated together before time of memory; common reputation cannot be
intended of an opinion conceived within three or four years, but of long time;
And appendancy cannot be made presently, but by a long tract of time: As an
Advowson in gross cannot be made by an Act appendant, and the Queen her self by
her Letters Patents cannot make a Manor at this day, a multo fortiori a
subject cannot, and the Queen cannot by her Letters Patents without an Act of
Parliament annex a Manor to the Duchy of Lancaster, which see 1 Ma. Dyer 95.
And where it is usual, that the Queen does grant Lands, Reputation.
tenendum de manerio suo de East Greenwich in communi soccagio, if upon the
death of such a Grantee without heir, the said Land does revert unto the Queen
in point of Escheat, the said Land shall not be parcel of the said Manor, for
the Land was not parcel of the Manor in truth, but in reputation: And he cited
a case, that the Lord Sturton was seized of the Manor of Quincamore, and was
also seized of the Manor of Charleton which was holden of the said Manor of
Quincamore; The Lord Sturton was attainted of Felony; and afterward Queen Mary
gave the said Manor of Quincamore to Sir Walter Mildmay cum omnibus suis
juribus and parcellis, it was adjudged that the Manor of Charleton did pass,
for it is now become parcel of the Manor of Quincamore; and I grant, that
things which go with the Land shall pass well enough: As if the Queen grant to
three Coparceners of three Manors, 1 Inst. 122. a 32 ^^. 6 11.
the liberty of Warren in all the said three Manors, they afterward make
partition so as each Coparcener has a Manor, and the one of them grants her
Manor, the Grantee shall have Warren: Grants of the King.
But if the Queen grant a Leet (ut supra) and the Coparceners make Partition,
and each of them has a Manor, she shall not have also a Leet, but the Leet
which was grantted does remain in common, and there shall not be there, upon
such partition, several Leets: And also I grant that in the case of two
Coparceners of a Manor, if to each of them upon partition be allotted demeans
and services, each of them has a Manor, for they were compellable to make
partition by the common Law being in by descent, See 26 H. 8. 4. 9 E. 4. 5.
contrary of Ioynt-tenants, for they are in by purchase, and were not
compellable by the common Law to make partition, and therefore upon partition
betwixt them a Rent cannot be reserved for the equality of the partition: And
in every Manor a Court is requisite, for a Court Baron is incident to a Manor,
Court Baron.
but a Court cannot at this day be founded or erected, but it ought to be of
long time: And in our Case, no Court has ever been holden in North-kelsey: And
if I be seized of the Manor of B. which extends into C. and B. and I grant my
Manor of B. in D. now a Manor passes, and does extend into D. and the residue
which is in C. shall remain in me in gross, v. 9 E. 4. 17. Catesby; And if I be
seized of a Manor which does consist of services, and of twenty Freeholders,
and one hundred Acres of Demesnes, and I grant the services of my twenty
Freeholders, and forty or twenty Acres of the said one hundred Acres, a Manor
shall pass, although it was not granted by the name of a Manor; but if I grant
the services of three, four, or five of my Freeholders, and forty or twenty of
the said one hundred Acres, upon such a grant no Manor shall pass: Windham
Justice contrary, We are not here to speak of the creation of a Manor, that is
a foreign matter, but we are here to consider upon the division, and
apportionment of a Manor. They that have argued in this case at the Bar, have
stood much upon the words of the Conveyance, manerium suum de North-kelsey, and
that Sir Fr. Askew at the time of that assurance, had not any Manor of
North-kelsey, or in North-kelsey, but that is not any reason, for if Cestuy que
use (mean between the Statute of 1 E. 3. and 27 H. 8.) will make a Feoffment of
the Manor which was in use, by these words, manerium suum, the same had been
good, and yet it is not manerium suum, but the Manor of the Feoffees, but it
may be said suum, by receiving of the profits according to the trust and
confidence reposed in the Feoffees; so in our case, in as much as Sir Fr. Askew
had before this grant as well demesnes as services in North-kelsey, it may
collaterally be said a Manor there, and notwithstanding that tempore
concessionis (proprie loquendo) no Manor was in North-kelsey, yet now upon
operation of the Law, upon this grant a new Manor shall rise, for in diverse
cases where a thing which was not in esse before, upon a grant may rise; As if
I grant unto you out of my Land a Rent de novo; And also a thing which was not
in esse before, may upon a grant take upon it a new nature; As if I. seized of
a great Wood, grant to you Estovers out of it, they were not before in me but
as Woods and Trees, now by this grant they are become Estovers in the Grantee,
so as they are in the Grantee in another nature, than they were in me: So in
our case, although North-kelsey was not a Manor in Sir Fr. Askew, yet now upon
the grant it is a Manor in Bard, 9 E. 4. 17. And as to the matter which has
been objected, because a Court cannot now begin, the same is not any reason,
for the Court Baron is incident to the Manor, and also to every part of the
Manor, and transitory through the whole Manor, and if Sir Fr. Askew had sold
all the demsnes of the Manor in Castord, where the Court Baron for the said
Manor had always been held and not elsewhere, yet such a Court might be holden
in any part of the Demeans in any other of the said Towns: The Lord Anderson,
to the same purpose, It has been argued of the other side, that the Manor does
not pass, because the grant is in these words, manerium de North-kelsey, in
North-kelsey, I conceive that these words, (de North-kelsey) are void, as
matter of surplusage, and the grant shall be construed as if the words had been
manerium suum in North-kelsey: And a Manor is such a thing, as may be
determined, divided, and suspended: As if the Lord of a Manor leaseth for years
all the Demeans of the Manor, the Manor is suspended during the term for years,
as lately it has been adjudged. And a warranty may be divided, as if a
Feoffment in Fee be made to two with warranty, and the one of them releaseth
the warranty: vide L. 5. E. 4. 103. A. seized of a Manor which extends in
four Towns, B. C. D. and E. and he gives his Manor in B. C. and D. by this gift
the Manor and all that is in the said four Towns passes. And he cited also a
Case 21 E. 4. 3. The Lord of a Manor erected a Chapel within his said Manor as
a Chapel of Case, etc. and afterward it is a Parish Church, now it is become
presentable; an Advowson appendant, as the soil upon the which the Church is
built is parcel of the Manor. See 32 H. 6. 9. One Manor may be parcel of
another Manor, as A. holds of B. twenty acres of Land, as of his Manor of C.
which Manor B. holds of D. as of his Manor of E. B. dies without Heir, so as
his Manor of C. is escheated unto D. now the twenty acres are holden of the
Manor of C. as they were before, and the Manor of C. is by the Escheat become
parcel of the Manor of E. and by Lease of the Manor of E. it shall pass. Post.
32.
And I do not know any difference between the Case of Parceners, and the Case
of Ioynt-tenants, for now they are both equally compellable to make partition:
And he cited the Case of one Estopp. lately adjudged, viz. the Queen was seized
of the Rectory of D. which extended into the Counties of Lincoln and York, and
the Queen granted her Rectory of D. in Lincoln, these are several grants, and
now upon the matter they are become several Rectories. And as to that which
has been objected concerning a Court Baron which ought to belong to this new
Manor, and that such a Court cannot now at this day be erected, and therefore
here cannot be a Manor; here needs not the erection of any new Court, but
forasmuch as the Court Baron before this grant might be by Law holden in any
place within the Manor: therefore every part of the Demeans of the Manor is
capable of a Court to be holden there. As where one is seized of a Manor to
which an Advowson is appendant, now is the Advowson appendant not only to the
said Manor, but to every part of it; for if he alien an acre, parcel of the
Manor with the Advowson, the Advowson is now appendant to the said acre: See 43
E. 3. 26. So in the Case at Bar, because this liberty and franchise of a Manor
is throughout the whole Manor, and in every part of the Services and Demesnes
upon this grant of the Services and Demesnes in North-kelsey, and of his Manor
in North-kelsey, a Manor passes; which Windham also granted and agreed unto.
Note at this time there were but three Judges in this Court: And afterward
Judgment was given for the Defendant.

XXXIV. Alington and Bales Case. Pasch. 27 Eliz. In the Kings Bench, Rot. 584.
1 Cro. 660. 661.
ALington and others, Executors of Sir W. Cordel late Master of the Ross,
brought an Action Debt against Bales: The Case was this, One Bream being seized
of certain Lands, by Indenture bargained and sold the same to one Platt by
these words (give, grant, bargain, sell) and by the said Indenture covenanted
with Platt, that the said Platt and his Heirs should quietly enjoy the said
Lands without interruption of any person or persons: And afterward certain
controversies rising betwixt them concerning the said Lands, Arbitrament.
the said Bream and Platt submitted themselves to the award and arbitrament of
Sir W. Cordel, to whom they were bounden severally for the performance of such
award, the which Sir W. amongst other things awarded, that the said Platt and
his Heirs should enjoy quietly the said Lands, in tam amplo modo and forma, as
the said Land is conveyed and assured by the coveyance and assurance aforesaid:
And the truth was, that the said Bream at the time of the said Assurance was
bounden in a Recognizance of six hundred pounds to one More, 15. Eliz. and
afterward More 16 Eliz. sued a Sci. fac. upon the said Recognizance; and 18
Eliz. the bargain and sale aforesaid was made; and afterward 19 Eliz. More
sued forth Excution by Elegit, and the moiety of the said Land assured to Platt
was delivered in Execution to More. And if upon the whole matter the
Arbitrament was broken was the question. It was argued by Godfrey, that the
Plaintiff ought to be barred; and first, 1 Hob. 35. Mor. 175. 3 Len. 43. Post.
93. Post. 179, 279. 1 Inst. 366. a. b. 388. Die: 42.
he conceived that these words in the Indenture (give and grant) did not help
the Action, for the Lands passed with a charge, and the general words Dedi and
concessi, do not extend to this collateral charge, but to the direct right of
the Land only; but if a stranger had put out the bargainee, there upon such
general words, an Action would lie, but as the Case is, they do not give any
cause of Action, for the Recognizance was a thing in charge at the time of the
Assurance: and yet see 31 E 3. Br. War. Chartae, 33. A. enfeoffeth B. with
warranty, who brings a Warrantia Chartae, and recovers pro loco and tempore,
and afterward a stranger does recover against him a Rent charge out of the
said Land, and it was holden, that upon the matter B. should have execution:
the special words of the Aribitrament, upon which the Action is brought, are,
that the said Platt and his Heirs should enjoy the said Lands in tam amplo modo
and forma, as it was assured and conveyed to the said Platt; ergo, not in more
ample manner: 1 Cro. 660. 661. Owen Rep. 65. 2 Cro. 571. 1 Roll. 425.
and the said Land was conveyed to Platt, chargeable to the said Recognizance,
therefore if Platt enjoy it charged, there is no cause of Action: And as to the
Covenant in the Indenture, that Platt and his Heirs should enjoy quietly the
said Lands without interruption of any person, the same is a Collateral surety;
and the words of the Award are, that Platt shall enjoy it in tam amplo modo and
forma, as it is conveyed and assured by the assurance aforesaid without
interruption, these are not words of assurance, for the assurance does consist
in the legal words of passing the estate: scil. bargain, sale, Dedi, concessi,
and in the limitation of the estate, and not in the words of the Convenant: And
therefore it has been adjudged, that if I. be bounden to A. in an Obligation,
to assure to him the Manor of D, etc. if A. tender to me an Indenture of
bargain and sale, in which are many Covenants, I am not bound upon the peril of
my Bond to seal and deliver it. Also here does not appear any interruption
against the Covenant in the Indenture, for here is not any lawful Execution,
for it appears here, that More has sued Execution by Elegit 4 years after
the Judgment in the Scire facias, in which case he shall be put to a new Scire
facias, for the Sheriff in this Case ought to have returned, that the Conusor
after the Recognizance had enfeoffed diverse persons, and showed who, and upon
that matter returned, the Conusee should have a Sci. facias against the
Feoffees, vide F. N. B. 266. And the Court was clear of opinion against the
Plaintiff.

XXXV. Flood and Sir John Perrotts Case. Trin. 27 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
Flood recovered against Sir John Perrot, 1 Cro. 63. Post. 264. 3 Len. 240.
in an Action upon the Case upon a promise, eighty six pounds, against which
Flood and Barlow affirmed a Plaint of Debt in London, and attached the said
moeny in the hands of the said Sir John, and had execution according to the
custom of London. And now the said Flood sued a Scire facias against the said
Sir John, who appeared, and pleaded the said Execution by attachment; upon
which Flood the Plaintiff did demur in Law: And it was adjudged no plea, for a
duty which accrueth by matter of Record cannot be attached by the custom of
London. And notwithstanding that the custom of London be laid generally in
aliquo debito, and damages recovered are quoddam debitum, as it was urged by
the Council of the Defendant: Yet the Law is clear, that Judgments given in the
Courts of the King ought not, Judgments in the Kings Courts not to be defeated
by particular custom of places.
nor cannot by such particular customs be defeated and avoided, as it was
lately adjudged in a Western Case, Damages were recovered, the Sheriff by
virtue of a Fieri facias levied the money, which one to whom the Plaintiff was
endebted, did attach by the custom, in the hands of the Sheriff; but it was
adjudged the attachment was not good, for the custom of attachment cannot reach
upon a thing of so high a nature as a Record is; the same Law of Debt upon a
Recognizance and Statute, etc. and it was affirmed by Wray chief Justice, that
upon great deliberation it was agreed, by Bromley Lord Chancellor himself, the
Lord Anderson, Mead and Periam Justices, that where a Merchant, having in an
Action recovered certain damages, became Bankrupt, upon which issued an
Commission upon the Statute of 13 Eliz. of Bankrupts, that such Commissioners
could not entermeddle with such damages, to dispose of them to the Creditors,
according to the said Statute: But now see the Statute of 1 Jacobi. The
Commissioners have power to dispose of such debts, etc.

XXXVI. Sir Walter Hungerfords Case. Trin. 27 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
Grants of the King.
IN a Replevin by Sir Walter Hungerford, the Case was this, the Queen being
seized of a great Waste called Ruddesdown in the Parish of Chipnam, granted to
the Mayor and Burgesses of Chipnam, the moiety of a Yard-land in the said
Waste, without certainty in what part of the Waste they should have the same,
or the special name of the Land, or how it was bounded, and without any certain
description of it. And afterward the Queen granted to the said Sir Walter the
said Waste, and afterward the said Mayor and Burgesses by warrant of Attorney
under the Common Seal, authorized one A. to enter in the said Waste, and in the
behalf of the said Mayor and Burgesses to make election of the said moiety,
Election.
etc. who did so accordingly. And upon this matter gives in evidence the
parties did demur in Law, and the Jury were discharged. 12 Co. 86. 87. Die. 372.
b. 281. Noy. 29.
And it was holden and resolved by the whole Court, that the grant to the
Mayor, etc. was utterly void for the incertainty of the thing granted: And if a
common person do make such a grant it is good enough, and there the Grantee may
make his choice where, etc. and by such choice executed, the thing shall be
reduced into certainty: which choice the Grantee cannot have against the Queen,
which difference was agreed by the whole Court: And it was further holden, that
this grant was not only void against the Queen her self, but also against Sir
Walter Hungerford her Patentee. It was further holden by the Court, that if a
common person had made such a grant, which ought to be reduced to certainty by
Election, and the Corporation to whom the grant was made (ut supra) should not
make their election by Attorney, but after that they were resolved upon the
Land, they should make a special warrant of Attorney, reciting the grant to
them, and in whih part of the said Waste their grant should take effect, East,
West, etc. or by buttals, etc. according to which direction the Attorney is to
enter, etc.

XXXVII. Watts and Jordens Case. Trin. 27. Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
IN Debt by Watts against Jorden, process continued until the Defendant was
Outlawed, and upon the Capias utlagatum he appeared and pleaded to issue,
which was found for the Plaintiff, and Judgment given accordingly. And now came
Jourden and cast in a Writ of Error, Error.
and assigned for Error, that he appeared upon the Capias utlagatum, and
pleaded to issue, the Original being determined, and not revived by Scire
facias, upon his Charter of pardon; Anderson Justice was of opinion, that it
was not Error, for the Statute of 18 Eliz. had dispensed with it, being after
verdict; for the words of the Statute are, For want of any Writ Original or
Judicial. Windham Justice contrary, for the Statute does not extend, but where
the Original is imbeselled, but in this Case it is not imbeselled, but in Law
determined, and at last the Writ of Error was allowed:

XXXVIII. Trin. 23 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
THe Case was, A. seized of Lands by his Will devised, 3 Len 119.
that his Excutors should sell his Lands, and died, the Executors levy a Fine
thereof to one F. taking money for the same of F. If in title made by the
Conusee to the Land by the Fine, It be a good plea against the Fine to say,
Quod parts ad finem nihil habuerunt, was the question. Fines levied.
Anderson conceived that it was: But by Windham and Periam, upon Not-guilty,
The Conusee might help himself by giving the special matter in evidence, in
which Case the Conusee shall be adjudged in; not by the Fine, but by the
Devise: As by Windham. A. devises, Devise. Co. 1 Inst. 113. a.
that his Executors shall sell a Reversion of certain Lands, of which he dies
seized; they sell the same without deed, and good; for the Vendee is in by the
Devise and not by the conveyance of the Executors: See 19 H. 6. 23. And by
Periam the Conusee may help himself by pleading, as he who is in by the
Feoffment or grant of Cestuy que use by the Statute of 1 R. 3.

XXXIX. Albany and the Bishop of St. Asaphs Case. Trin. 27 Eliz. In the Common
Pleas.
ALbany brought a Quare impedit against the Bishop of St. Asaph, 1 Cro. 119.
who justified for Lapse: The Plaintiff by Replication said that before the six
months expired, he presented to the said Bishop one Bagshaw, Quare impedit.
a Master of Arts and Preacher allowed, etc. The Defendant by way of Rejoinder
said, that the Church upon the presentment to which the Action is brought is a
Church with Cure of Souls, and that the Parishioners there are homines Wallici,
Wallicam loquentes linguam and non aliam. And that the said Bagshaw could not
speak or understand the Welsh Language, for which cause he refused him, and
gave notice to the Plaintiff of such refusal, and of the cause of it, etc. upon
which the Plaintiff did demur in Law. And first it was agreed and resolved by
the whole Court, that in the computation of the six months in such Cases, the
Reckoning ought not to be according to the Calendar, January, February, etc.
but Secundum numerum singulorum dierum, Co. 2 Inst. 361. Co. 6. 61. b. Yel.
100. 2 Cro. 141. Departure.
allowing eight and twenty days to every month: Walmesley Sergeant argued for
the Plaintiff, and he took exception to the Rejoinder; for in that the
Defendant had departed from his Bar; for in the Bar the Defendant intitles
himself to the presentment by reason of Lapse, and in the Rejoinder he
confesses the presentment of the Plaintff, and pleads his refusal of his
Clark, and shows the cause of it; sc. the want of the Welsh Language, which is
a Departure: And he cited diverse Cases to the same purpose, 27 H 8. 3. In
forfeiture of Marriage, the Defendant pleaded the Feoffment of the Ancestor of
the Heir to diverse persons, absque hoc, that he died in the homage of the
Plaintiff; the Plaintiff by Replication said, that the said Feoffment was made
to the use of the said Ancestor and his Heirs: The Defendant by Rejoinder
says, that the said Ancestor did declare his Will of the said Lands, the same
was holden a Departure, for he might have pleaded the same in Bar, and 21 H. 7.
17, 18. and 37 H 6. 5. in Trespass the Defendant pleaded, that I. S. was seized
of the Land where, etc. being Land devisable, and devised the same to him and
his Heirs; the Plaintiff by Replication said, that I. S. at the time of the
devise was within age, etc. The Defendant by Rejoinder said, that the custom
there is, that every one of the age of fifteen years might devise his Lands,
etc. the same was holden a departure: But to this Exception the Court took not
much regard: But as to the matter in Law, it was argued by Walmesley, that the
defect of the Welsh Language assigned by the Defendant in the presence of the
Plaintiff is not a sufficient Cause of refusal; for notwithstanding that it be
convenient that such a Presentee have the knowledge of such Language, yet by
the Law of the Land, ignorance of such Language, where the party has more
excellent Languages, is not any disability; and therefore we see, that many
Bishops in Wales, who have the principal Cure of Souls, are Englishmen; and
the Welsh Language may easily be learned in a short time by converse with
Welsh-men: And the Statute of 1 Eliz. which establishes the Book of Common
Prayer, ordains, that the said Book of Common Prayer shall be put in use in
all the Parish Churches of Eng. and Wa. without any provision there for the
translation of the said Book into the Welsh Language. But afterward by a
private Act it was done, by which it is enacted, That the Bishop of Wales
should procure the Epistles and Gospels to be translated, and read in the Welsh
Language, which matter our Presentee might do by a Curate well enough: And he
conceived, that by diverse Statutes, Aliens by the Common Law were capable of
Benefices. See the Statute of 7 H 2. Cap. 12. 1 H 5 Cap. 7. 14 H 6. Cap. 6. and
before the said last Statute Irish-men were capable of Benefices. Gaudy
Sergeant contrary: and he confessed, that at the Common Law the defects
aforesaid were not any causes of refusal; but now by reason of a private Act
made, 5 Eliz. Entitled, An Act made for the translating of the Bible, and of
the Divine Service into the Welsh tongue, the same defect is become a good
cause of refusal; in which Act the mischief is recited, viz. That the
Inhabitants of Wales did not understand the Language of England, therefore it
was Enacted, That the Bishops of Wales should procure so many of the Bibles and
Books of Common Prayer to be imprinted in the Welsh Language, as there are
Parishes and Cathedral Churches in Wales, and so upon this Statute, this
imperfection is become a good cause of refusal. And he likened it to the Case
of Coparceners and Ioynttenants, Ante 28.
who now, because that by the Statute of 32 H 8. Ioynt-tenants are equally
capable to make partition as Coparceners were by the Common Law; Now Partition
betwixt Ioynt-tenants within age is as strong as betwixt Parceners within age.
But as to that point it was said by the Lord Anderson, that it is very true,
that upon the said Statute the want of the Welsh Language in the Presentee is
now become a good cause of refusal; but because the said Act being a private
Act has not been pleaded by the Defendant, we ought not to give our Judgment
according to that Act, but according to the Common Law. Another matter was
moved, because here appears no sufficient notice given to the Patron after
the said Refusal, for the Plaintiff did present the thirtenth of August (the
Church voyding the fourteenth of March before) the nine and twentieth of August
the six months expired; the fourth of September the Defendant gave notice to
the Patron of the refusal, and the fourteenth of September was the Collation;
and it was said by the Lord Anderson, that it appears here, that there are
two and twenty days between the Presentment and the Notice, which is too large
a delay: And the Defendant has not showed in his Plea any cause for the
justifying or excuse of it and therefore upon his own showing we adjudge him to
be a disturber: See 14 H. 7. 22. 15 H. 7. 6. and note by Periam, it was
adjudged in the Case of Mollineux, if the Patron present, and the Ordinary does
refuse, he ought to give notice to the person of the Patron thereof, if he be
resident within the County, and if not, at the Church it self, which is void.

XL. Mich. 27 and 28 Eliz. At Sergeants Inn.
THis Case was referred by the Lords of Council to the Justices for their
opinions, I.S. by Indenture between the Queen of the one part, and himself of
the other part, reciting that where he is indebted to the Queen in eight
hundred pounds, to be paid in form following, twenty pounds at every Feast of
St. Michael, until the whole sum aforesaid be paid, covenanted and granted with
the said Queen, to convey unto the Lord Treasurer, and Barons of the Exchequer,
and to their Heirs, certain Lands to the uses following, viz. to the use of the
said I.S. and his Heirs, until such time as the said I. S. his Heirs Executors
or Administrators shall make default in payment of any of the said sums; and
after such default, to the use of the said Queen, her Heirs and Successors,
until her Heirs and Successors shall have received of the issues and profits
thereof such sums of money parcel of the said debt as shall be then behind and
upaid, and after the said debt so paid and received, then to the use of the
said I.S. and his Heirs for ever. I.S. levyeth a Fine of the said Land to the
said Lord Treasurer and the Barons, to the uses aforesaid; and afterward being
seized accordingly, by deed indented and enrolled bargains and sels the said
Land to a stranger: default of payment is made, the Queen seizes, and grants
it over to one and his Heirs, quousque the money be paid, and after the money
is paid: And upon conference of the Judges amongst themselves at Sergeants Inn,
they were of opinion, that now I.S. against his Indenture of bargain and sale,
should have his Lands again, for at the time of the bargain and sale he had an
estate in Fee, determinable upon a default of payment, ut supra, Post. 93. 3
Len. 43. Owen. Rep. 6. 1 Inst. 49. 2
which accrued to him by the first Indenture and the Fine, which estate only
passed by the said Indenture of bargain and sale, and not the new estate which
is accrued to him by the latter limitation after the debt paid, for that was
not in esse at the time of the bargain and sale; but if the conveyance by
bargain and sale had been by Feoffment or Fine, then it had been otherwise, for
by such conveyance all uses and possibilities had been carried by reason of the
forcible operation of it.

XLI. Tailor and Moors Case. Hill. 28 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
Tailor brought Debt upon an Obligation against Moore, Debt. Error.
who pleaded in Bar, upon which the Plaintiff did demurre, and the Court
awarded the Plea in Bar good, upon which Judgment the Plaintiff brought a Writ
of Error, and assigned Error in this, that the Bar upon which he had demurred,
as insufficient, was adjudged good: Upon which now in this Writ of Error the
Bar was awarded insufficient, and therefore the Judgment reversed: But the
Court was in a doubt what Judgment shall be given in the Case, viz. whether the
Plaintiff shall recover his debt and damages, as if he had recovered in the
first Action, or that he shall be restored to his Action only, etc. And Wray
cited the Case in 8 E. 4. 8. and the Case of Attaint 18 E. 4. 9. And at last it
was awarded, that the Plaintiff should recover his debt and damages: See to
that purpose 33 H 6. 31. H 7. 12, 20. 7. Eliz. Dyer 235.

XLII. Higham and Harewoods Case. Hill. 28. Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
More Rep. 221. 3 Len. 132.
IN an Ejectione firmae the Case was, that one Butty was seized of the Land
where, etc. and also of a Message, with which Message the said Land had been
usually occupied, time out of mind, etc. and being seized and lying sick,
commanded a Scridener to be brought to him, and the said Scrivener being
brought to him, he gave him Instructions to make his Will, and amongst other
things declared unto him, that his meaning was, that the said Message, and all
his Lands in Westerfield should be sold by his Executors; and the Scrivener in
making of the Will penned the matter in this manner: I will that my house, with
all the appurtenances, shall be sold by my Executors; Butty died, the Executors
sell forty acres of the said Land to the Def. and all this matter was found by
special verdict, and it was moved by the Plaintiffs Counsel, that the sale of
this Land by the Executors is not warranted by the Will: Another matter was
moved, scil. admitting that the Executors have authority by the Will to sell
the Land, if the sale of parcel of the Land be good and warrantable: As if I
make a Charter of Feoffment of ten acres, and a Letter of Attorney to make
livery of them to the Feoffee, if the Attorney makes several liveries of the
several acres the same is void: But by Cook the Cases are not like, for in the
Case put he has a special Commission, in which the party to whom, and all the
other circumstances are set down certainly, contrary in the Case at the Bar,
there the Commission is general, etc. and peradventure the Executors shall
never find a Chapman who will contract with them for the whole. More Rep. 222.
Co. Inst. 113. a.
And afterward upon conference amongst the Judges, Clench, Gaudy, and Wray, it
was resolved, that by this devise the Lands do pass by the sale of the
Executors to the Defendant, which sale also by process is warranted by the
Will, for by Wray, these words, with all the appurtenances are effectual and
emphatical words to enforce the devise, and that does extend to all the Lands
especially; because it is found, that the Testator gave to the Scrivener his
Instructions accordingly: And afterward Judgment was given against the
Plaintiff. See 3 Eliz. Plowd. 210. Betwixt Sanders and Freeman, there the
Devise is pleaded in this manner, Messuagium cum pertinentiis ad illud
spectantibus in perpetuum in villa de Arthingworth.

XLIII. Watkins and Astwicks Case. Trin. 28 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
1 Cro. 132.
IN an Ejectione firmae, it was found by special verdict, that one Maynard was
seized, and made a Feoffment in Fee upon condition of payment of money on the
part of the Feoffor by way of Mortgage at a certain day, before which day the
said Maynard dyed, his Son and Heir being within age, Tender to redeem a
Mortgage.
afterward at the day of payment limited by the Mortgage, a stranger at the
instance and request of the Mother of the Heir tendered the money to the
Mortgagee in the name of the Heir being within age, who refused it. And it was
resolved by the whole Court, that the same is not a sufficient tender to redeem
the Land, according to the Mortgage, for it is found by the Jury, that the Heir
at the time of the tender was within age, 2 Len. 213.
generally, not particularly of six or ten years, etc. then it might well stand
with the verdict, that the Heir at such time was of the age of 18 or 19 years,
at which age he is by the Law out of the Ward of his Mother, or any other
prochein amy, in which Case it is presumed in Law, that he has discretion to
govern his own affairs: and in this Case the Mother is but a stranger, for the
Law has estranged the Mother from the government of the Heir; but if the Jury
had found that the Heir at the time of the tender was of tender age, viz.
within the age of fourteen years, in which Case by Law he ought to be in Ward,
in such Case the tender had been good.

XLIV. Leput and Wroths Case. Trin. 28. Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
A Replevin by Lepur against Wroth, 6 Co. 33. Replevin. 3 Len. 132.
and declared upon a tortious taking in Burnham in the County of Essex; the
Case upon the pleading was, that Robert Earl of Sussex was seized of the Manor
of Burnham in Fee, and leased the same to the King for one and twenty years,
and afterward the said Earl died, by which the said Manor descended to Thomas
late Earl of Sussex, and he being seized, 4 and 5 Phil. and Mary it was Enacted
by Parliament, That the Lady Frances, Wife of the said Earl, by virtue of the
said Act of Parliament should have, hold and enjoy; etc. during the widowhood
of the said Frances, for and in consideration of the Ioynture of the said
Frances the said Manor: Provided always, and it is further enacted,
Construction of Statutes.
That it should be lawful for the said Earl, by his writing indented,
dimissionem vel dimissiones facere pro termino 21. annorum vel infra de eodem
Manerio pro aliquo redditu annuali, ita quod super omnes and singulos hujusmodi
dimissionem and dimissiones antiquus redditus and consuetus vel eo major and
amplior reservaretur, and that every such demise should be of force, and
effectual in Law against the said Frances for term of her life, if the said
term should so long continue: And further the said Act gave to the said
Frances, Distress, Avowry, Covenant, etc. against such Lessee, and for the said
Lessee against the said Dame; And afterward the said Thomas, the said former
Lease not expired, leased the said Manor to Wroth the Defendant for one and
twenty years, to begin at the Feast of Saint Michael next following (and note
the Lease was made the third of April before) rendering three hundred and forty
pounds per annum, which was redditus amplior antiquo and usuali. Popham
Attorney general argued, that the said Lease did not bind the said Lady
Frances, and that for two Causes: 1. because it is to begin at a day to come:
2. because it was made, a former Lease being in esse; and he argued much upon
construction of Statutes to be made not according to the letter, but according
to the meaning of them: And he cited a Case upon the Statute of 2 H 5. 3. by
which it is Enacted, that in no Action in which the damages do amount to forty
marks, any person should be admitted to pass in trayl of it, who had not Lands
or Tenements of the clear yearly value of forty shillings, yet the said Statute
shall not be by construction extended, where in an Action between an
Englishman and an Alien, the Alien prays medietatem linguae; and yet the
Statute is general. So in our Case, although this private Act does not seem to
provide expressly but for two things: 1. Leases.
the number of the years, 21, and non ultra: 2. antiquus redditus vel eo
amplior, yet in reason and good understanding we ought to think, that the
intent of the Act was, that the said Manor should now come to the said Lady
Frances surcharged with Leases in Reversion, or to begin at a day to come, for
if by this Act the said Earl might make a Lease to begin three months after, by
the same reason he might make a Lease to begin twenty years after, and also to
begin after his death. It has been objected, that the Lord Treasurer had a
Commission to make Leases of the Queens Lands, and that by virtue thereof he
made Leases in Reversion: I know the contrary to that, for every such Lease is
allowed by a Bill assigned, and not by the ordinary Commission aforesaid, the
words of our Act are, Dimissiones facere pro termino 21. annorum, that shall be
meant to begin presently: As if I lease to you my Lands for one and twenty
years, it shall be intended to begin presently; and he cited the Case betwixt
Fox and Collier upon the Statute of 1 Eliz. cencerning Leases made by Bishops:
That four years of a former Lease being in being, the Bishop leased for one and
twenty years, the same was a good lease, notwithstanding the former lease, for
the lease began presently betwixt the parties. And it has been adjudged, that
a lease for years by a Bishop, to begin at a day to come, is utterly void. And
he cited the Case of the late Marquess of Northampton, who by such an Act of
Parliament as ours was enabled to make leases of the Lands of his Wife for one
and twenty years, and of the said Lands an ancient lease was made before the
said Act, which was in esse, and before the expiration thereof he made a lease
by virtue of the said Act to commence after the expiration of the former lease,
and that lease was allowed to be a good lease warranted by the said Statute,
because that the first lease, which was in esse, was not made by force of the
said Act, but if the said former lease had been made by virtue of the said
Statute, the second lease had been utterly void.

XLV. Trin. 28 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
Copyhold. Surrender by Attorney not good.
A Copyholder of the Manor of the Earl of Arrundel did surrender his customary
Lands to the use of his last Will, and thereby devised the Lands to his
youngest Son and his Heirs, and died, the youngest Son being in prison makes a
Letter of Attorney to one to be admitted to the Land in the Lords Court in his
room, and also after admittance to surrender the same to the use of B. and his
Heirs, to whom he had sold it for the payment of his debts: And Wray was of
opinion, that it was a good surrender by Attorney, but Gaudy and Clench
contrary: 3 Cro. 218. 9 Co. 75.
and by Gaudy; If he who ought to surrender cannot come in Court to surrender
in person, the Lord of the Manor may appoint a special Steward to go to the
prison and take the surrender, etc. and by Clench; Lessee for years cannot
surrender by Attorney, but he may make a deed purporting a surrender, and a
letter of Attorney to another to deliver it.

XLVI. Troublefield and Troublefields Case. Trin. 28 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
Die. 337. b. Co. 1 Inst. 15. 2. b. 52. 245. b. 252. 6. Post. 51. Entry.
THe Case was, that a Copyholder did surrender to the use of his Will and
thereby devised the Land to his Wife for life, the remainder over to his son in
tail, and died, the Wife entered, and died, a stranger did intrude upon the
Lands, and thereof made three several Feoffments to three several persons, he
in the Remainder entered upon one of the said three Feoffees in the name of all
the Lands so devised, and made a lease of the whole Land: And by Clench and
Wray it was a good Entry for the whole, and by consequence, a good lease of the
whole, Gaudy contrary: Note, all the Lands were in one County: See 16 Eliz.
Dyer 337. 9 H. 7. 25.

XLVII. Parmort and Griffina's Case. Trin. 28 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
IN Debt upon an Obligation by Parmort against Griffina a Merchant-stranger,
the Defendant pleaded, Debt.
that the Obligation was made upon condition for the performance of certain
Covenants contained within certain Indentures, and showed what, etc. and
alleged further, that in the said Indenture there is a proviso, that if aliqua
lis, vel controversia oriatur imposterum, by reason of any clause, article, or
other agreement in the said Indenture contained, that then, before any suit
thereupon attempted the parties shall choose four indifferent persons for the
ending thereof, which being done, the Indenture and Obligation shall be void:
And in fact says, that Lis and controversia, upon which the Action is brought,
grows upon the said Indenture, upon which there was a demurrer in Law. And
because the Defendant has not showed specially upon what controversy or
strife, and upon what article certain: The Court was clear of opinion, that the
Bat was not good: And also the Court was of opinion, Proviso taken strictly.
that the said Proviso did not extend to subject and submit the breach of every
Covenant or Article within the said Indenture to the Arbitrament of the said
four persons, but only where strife and controversy does arise upon the
construction of any Covenant, etc. within the said Indenture; so as the
Defendant ought to have showed such matter which fell within the Arbitrament,
by the meaning of the said Indenture; and Judgment was given against the
Defendant.

XLVIII. Partridge and Partridges Case. Mich. 28, and 29. Eliz. In the Common
Pleas.
IN Dower by Partridge against Partridge, the Case was, Dower.
that Land was given to the Father for life, the reversion to his Son and Heir
for life, the remainder to the right Heirs of the body of the Father: The
Father and Son join in a Feoffment to the Uncle in Fee, scil. to the Brother of
the Father. The Uncle takes a Wife, the Father dies, the Son being his Heir in
tail, the Uncle dies without issue, so as the Land descends to the Son, as
Heir to his Uncle, against whom the Wife of the Uncle brought Dower: It was
moved, if the Son being Herein can to his Father, and Heir also to his Uncle,
for the Fee descended, be now remitted? for then no Dower accrueth to the Wife
of the Uncle, for the estate of which she demands Dower is gone: but if the
livery in which the Son joined with his Father be the livery of the Son, Remitt^
the same lies in his way in the impediment and preventing of the Remitter, so
as during his life he shall be adjudged seized of the Lands in Feesimple by
descent from his Uncle: Then Dower lies, for the same estate is inherited, of
which the Wife demands her Dower: And the Court doubted, if it were the
livery of the Son or not. And note, that the Feoffment was without deed. See
Dyer 16 Eliz. 339.

XLIX. The Queen against the Lord Vaux and others. Mich. 28 and 29 Eliz. In the
Exchequer.
A Bill of Intrusion was brought for the Queen against the Lord Vaux, Rich.
Vaux, and Hen. Vaux, Intrusion.
supposing to have intruded into the Rectory and Parsonage of Ethelborough in
the County of Northampton, and showed that in the time of Hen. the fourth, the
College of Saint Peter of Ethelborough was founded at Westminster, in the
County of Midd. by the name of Decani and capituli; and showed further, that
the Rectory of Ethelborough, was appropriated to the said College, and that
afterward by the Statute of 1 E. 6. the said College was dissolved, and the
said Rectory, amongst other possessions of the said College, came to the hands
of the King, and that the Defendants, 1. Eliz. intruded into the said Rectory,
and took one thousand Sheep, one thousand Calves, and one thousand Loads of
Corn, bona and catalla dictae Dominae Reginae provenientia ex decimis rectoriae
praedict. apud Westminster. predict. The Defendants pleaded, etc. That the said
College of Ethelborough was founded in Ethelborough, Foundation.
etc. per nomen Decani, canonicorum, and fratrum, etc. who leased the said
Rectory so appropriated to one Clark for forty six years, in Anno 30 H. 8. who
assigned the same to the Defendants, by force of which they justified the
taking at Ethelborough, absque hoc, that the said College of Saint Peter in
Ethelborough, was founded, per nomen Decani and capituli Ecclesiae Sancti Petri
de Ethelborough, at Westminster aforesaid, and absque hoc, that they took the
said Sheep, etc. at Westminster, etc. Upon which the Queens Attorney did demur
in Law. Manwood chief Baron argued; that Judgment ought to be given for the
Queen: Exception has been taken to the Information, because mention is made in
it of a College, and it is not showed what person was the Founder: And also an
appropriation is alleged of the Rectory aforesaid to the said College, and
the Appropriation is not showed certain, who was Patron, Ordinary, etc. as to
that he argued that the alleging of the Appropriation and foundation, is but
matter of surplusage, and therefore the insufficiency of alleging the same
shall not prejudice the Queen, for it had been sufficient to say, That the said
College of St. Peter, was seized of the Rectory aforesaid, and then to show
the Statute of Chauntries, 1 E. 6. and the same is a good title for the Queen,
The possession of the College, and the Dissolution of it by the Statute: For
this Bill of intrusion is but in the Nature of a possessory action, College in
Reputation.
as an action of Trespass, in which case it is sufficient to make title to the
possession only, without relying upon the right; but as to the curious and
exact pleading of an appropriation, or a foundation, it needs not in this case;
for admit that the College were not well and duly founded, yet such pleading
is sufficient, for a College in Reputation is within the Statute of 1 E. 6.
and where the party claims by or under such Foundation, there the Foundation
ought to be certainly showed, not precisely but conveniently, General pleading.
not as we plead a common Recovery, but as we plead the creation of a Bishop,
scil. debito modo praefectus, without showing the particulars of the creation,
so if an Abbot will plead in discharge of his House of a Corody, he ought to
show the Foundation, and convenient certainty, which see L. 5. E. 4. 118.
Robert Milam founded the Abbey of Leicester, and conveyed the right of Patronage
and foundership to the King by Attainder, and the same was good pleading,
without showing the particulars of the Foundation specially, so 3 H. 7. 6. in
the Case of the Priory of Norwich, the pleading is, quod Prioratus de Norwich
est de fundatione Episcoporum Norwich, for in such case, refert quis sit
Fundor, so the King be not Founder; but in our case, non refert quis fit
Fundor, for whosoever be Founder, whether the King, or a Subject, all is one,
the Statute in both Cases gives the possessions to the King: And as to the case
of Appropriation, the pleading thereof is well, if it be conveniently showed,
in case where the party who shows it claims by such Appropriation, as 6 H. 7.
14. 11. H. 7. 8. Concurrentibus his quae de jure, etc. without showing the
particulars of the Appropriation. Now in our case, the Queen is merely a
stranger to this Appropriation, and she does not claim by it, but the
possession of the College is the title of the Queen, by the Statute of 1. E.
6. and therefore it suffices for the Queen to show that the College was
seized, etc. without making mention of the manner of the Appropriation: And as
to the traverse of the County, he conceived, that the County, is not
traversable in this case, for when the Tithes are severed from the nine parts,
they are presently vested in the party who has right, Traverse.
and they are things transitory, and also the taking of them, for the party may
take them in any place as well as in his own Parish, scil. as well at
Westminster, where the Queen supposes the taking, as at Ethelborough where the
Defendant does justify, etc. and in such cases the place where is not
traversable. See ^ H. 6. 62, 63. by Babbington, 35 H. 6. 5. In Trespass of
Goods taken in the Parish of Saint Clements, in the County of Midd. the
Defendant did justify by buying in open Market in the County of Essex, there
needs no traverse, for the Defendant has made title by an open Market, 34 H.
6. 15, 16. In Trespass of Battery at D. in the County of Essex, the Defendant
pleaded, that the Plaintiff made an assault upon him at B. in the County of
Kent, and the Defendant fled, and the Plaintiff pursued him continually unto D.
aforesaid, at which place the Defendant did defend himself, and so the hurt
which the Plaintiff had was of his own assault, and demanded Judgment if
Action, the same is a good Plea without traversing of the County, for a Battery
may be continued from one County to another. And it was observed by Manwood in
citing of that case, that although, prima facie mirum videri potest that a
Battery may be continued from Essex into Kent, because the River of Thames is
betwixt them, and yet, re intellecta, it is plain, for one parcel of Land
containing thirty Acres of Lands of the Coasts of Essex is within the County of
Kent, See also 34. H. 6. 5. by Prisot, In Trespass of Goods taken at Coventry,
the Def. does justify the taking because the Plaintiff gave the said Goods to
the Defendant at London, by force of which he took them at London, absque hoc,
that he took them at Coventry, and that traverse not holden good, for the
Defendant by such a gift might justify the taking of the Goods in any place as
well as in the place where the gift was made; but if in such case the Defendant
had pleaded, that the Plaintiff delivered the said goods to him at London to
deliver them over to A. by force of which he took them at London, and delivered
them over accordingly, in such Cases the Defendant may well traverse the place
supposed by the Declaration, for by his Plea he has confessed an immediate
delivery of the said goods to him by the Plaintiff; and the delivery and the
taking all at one time and at one place, and it had not been a good plea for
the Defendant to say, that the Plaintiff delivered to him the said goods at
London, by force of which he took them at Coventry, for the possession is
confessed by the first delivery of the goods at London; and the supposal of the
Plaintiff of a taking in Coventry, and the justification of the Defendant of a
taking by reason of a delivery at London, cannot stand together. But if the
Defendant plead, that the Plaintiff gave to him the goods in London, by force
of which he took them there, there he may take traverse to the place supposed
by the Declaration, for by the gift it is lawful to the Defendant to take the
goods in any place. So see 19 H. 6. 35. In false Imprisonment supposed in the
County of W. the Defendant does justify as Sheriff of the County of B. by force
of a Writ to him directed to attach the Plaintiff, and so he attached him and
imprisoned him at C. in the County of B. there the Defendant traversed the
County supposed by the Declaration, for otherwise he does not meet with the
Plaintiff, and the authority of the Defendant does not extend to the County
supposed by the Declaration. See also to the same purpose 22 E. 4. 39. by
Hussy, where the difference is taken when justification is by reason of a
Warrant to take goods in any place whatsoever, and where in a place certain, as
to the traverse of the Foundation, absque hoc, quod praedict. Collegium
fundatum fuit per nomen Decani, and Capituli Ecclesiae colleglatae Sancti Petri
de Ethelborough apud Westminster. he has here traversed that which was not alleged,
for the placing of the last words of the traverse, scil. apud Westminst. in the
end of the traverse seems by common construction to be intended thereby, that
there is no such College at Westminster. and not that the College was not founded
at Westminster. for then the traverse should be, absque hoc, quod collegium
praedictum fundatum fuit at Westminster, per nomen, etc. But the most proper
traverse, that the Defendant could have taken in this case had been, absque
hoc, quod Decanus and Capitulum Ecclesiae collegiat. de Ethelborough was
seized; for the Corporation mentioned in the Bill, and that which is mentioned
in the Bar, are not all one, but differ in this manner, scil. in the Bill the
Dean and Chapter, etc. in the Bar the Dean, Cannons, and Brethren, and perhaps
there are two such Corporations, and then both cannot be seized, and therefore
upon the seisin of one of them, the traverse shall be taken: And afterward
Judgment was given for the Queen.

L. The Queen, against the Bishop of London, and Scot. Mich. 28 and 29. Eliz.
In the Common Pleas.
Quare Impedit. 3 Len. 175.
THe Queen brought a Quare impedit against the Bishop of London, and Scot, and
the Case was, that A. seized of an Advowson in gross, holden of the Queen in
chief, aliened the same by Fine without License; the Church became void, the
Conusee presented; The Queen without office found, brought a Quare impedit, the
question was, if the Queen without office found, Office trove.
should present; And it was argued by the whole Court, that if the Alienation
had been by Deed only, that there the Queen without office found should not
have had the presentment, for upon such an Alienation by matter in fact,
without License no Scire facias should issue without office found of the
Alienation, Scire facias.
but upon an Alienation without License by matter of Record, a Scire facias
lies before office, which was granted by the whole Court: And in the last case
the Queen shall have the mean profits from the time of the Scire facias
returned, but in the first case from the time of the office found, See for that
Stamford Prerogative, fol. penult. 8 E. 4. 4. It was also moved, if the Queen
entitled to the presentment as above, pardons to the Conusee all Alienations
without License, and Intrusions, if the estate of the Incumbent be thereby
confirmed, but the Court would not argue that point; but it was adjorned until
another day.

LI. Braybrooks Case. Mich. 28 and 29. Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
Pines levied.
THe Case of one Braybrook was moved, which was, Land was given to A. for life,
the Remainder to B. for life, the Remainder to the said Braybrook in Fee: B.
being in possession levied a Fine to a stranger, sur conusans de droit come ceo
etc. A. dyed, if now Braybrook might enter for the forfeiture was the question:
And it was agreed by the whole Court, that by that Fine the Remainder in Fee is
not touched, or discontinued, Co. 1 Inst. 251, b. 252. 2 Forfeiture. 9 Co. 104.
Post. 211, 212. 1 Cro. 219. 220.
but because B. had done as much as in him lay for the disposing of Fee-simple
by the Fine, and has taken that upon him, the same amounts to a forfeiture:
And it was also agreed by Anderson and Periam, that if Tenant for life in
possession leveyeth a Fine, etc. if the Lessor does not enter within five years
after, he shall be bounden: Windham contrary, for by him it is in the election
of the Lessor to re-enter immediately for the forfeiture, or to expect the death
of the Lessee.

LII. Willshalge and Davidges Case. Mich. 28, and 29 Eliz. In the Exchequer
Chamber.
WIllshalge brought Error in the Exchequer Chamber, En^r.
upon the Statute of 27 Eliz. Cap. 8. against Davidge, upon a Judgment given in
the ^ings Bench, Hill. 28. Eliz. and assigned for Error, that where Davidge had
heretofore brought Debt against the now Plaintiff, and declared upon diverse
Contracts, scil. that he had sold to Willshalge such Merchandises for so many
Portugues, and such Merchandises for so many Ducats, which in toto amounted to
seven hundred pounds Sterling, which sum he demanded, scil. in Sterling many, 2
Cro. 88. 3 Cro. 536. Yel. 80. 135. 136.
and not in Ducats and Portagues, according to the Contract; And upon the
Declaration the said Willshalge had demurred in Law, and the Court gave
Judgment for the Plaintiff, for it is in his election to demand his debt in
which of those Coyns he pleased, either in the proper Coin of the Contract, or
of Sterling, scil. in current money. And afterward the said Judgment was
affirmed.

LIII. Henly and Broads Case. Mich. 28, and 29 Eliz. In the Exchequer.
HEnly brought Trespass against Broad in the Kings Bench, 3 Len. 77: Trespass.
and declared, that the said Defendant simul cum quodam I. S. clausum suum
fregit, etc. The Defendant pleaded to Issue, and it was found for the
Plaintiff, and it was objected in stay of Judgment, that the count was not
good, for it appears therein, upon the showing of the Plaintiff himself, that
the Action ought to be brought against another also, not named in the Writ,
Counts.
and because the same appears of the Plaintiffs own showing, the Declaration
was not good, and notwithstanding that said Exception, Judgment was given for
the Plaintiff. Upon which Broad brought a Writ of Error, and assigned the same
matter for Error; And there the Case of 2 H. 7. 16. 17. was cited, Error.
where a difference is taken, where the Plaintiff declares, that the Defendant
with one B. did the Trespass, him naming in certain, and where the Declaration
is, that the Defendant, cum quibusdam alijs ignotis, etc. See 8. H. 5. 5. And
at length all the Justices of the common Pleas, and Barons of the Exchequer
were clear of opinion, that by the common Law the Declaration was not good, for
the reason, and upon the difference aforesaid: but if in Trespass against one,
who pleads that the Trespass was done by himself and one B. to whom the
Plaintiff has released, and the Plaintiff traverse the Release, in that case,
for as much as the matter does not appear upon the Plaintiffs own showing, but
comes in on the part of the Defendant, and not denied by him, the Declaration
is good enough: And it was further agreed by them all, that now this defect
after Verdict is helped by the Statute of 18 Eliz. for it does not concern
substance but only form: And afterward the first Judgment was affirmed.

LIVE. Wood and Fosters Case. Mich. 28, and 29 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
Replevin. Owen Rep. 139. Godbolt 113.
WOod brought a Replevin against Humfrey Foster and others; and made his plaint
of the taking of one thousand Cattle; Foster pleaded, Non cepit, and the
others, that the property was in another; upon which matters they were at
issue. And as unto the first issue, the Case upon the Evidence was: that the
late Lord Windsore was possessed of certain Sheep, and by his Will devised them
unto Eliz. his Daughter for her advancement in marriage, and of his Will made
his Wife his Executrix, and died, his Wife took to her Husband one Puttenham,
who being thus possessed leased the said Sheep with a Farm for eleven years by
Indenture, upon which it was agreed between the said parties, that the Lessee
should keep so much of the Rent reserved upon the said Lease, to buy therewith
so many Cattle over, so as the whole stock of the said Sheep upon the said Farm
should amount to the number of one thousand Cattle; and the Lessee also
covenanted to yield and render to the said Puttenham at the end of the said
Term one thousand Sheep between two years shorn, and four years shorn.
Afterward Puttenham by his deed gave unto one A. who had married the said
Eliz. the said one thousand Cattle, to have them after the said Term; the Term
expired; Puttenham sold and granted them unto Wood, who brought them away with
him. And the said A. pretending that the said Sheep passed to him by the said
grant of Puttenham during the said Term, seized them, and the same was
noctanter as they were driven in the highway, unde magna contentio orta suit
between the said parties, the one charging the other with felony, whereupon the
Constable of the Town where, etc. supposing the said matter would grow to an
Outrage, seized the said Cattle as felons goods, and afterward went to the
house of the said Foster, which was near unto the highway, and asked his
advise upon the matter, but he would not meddle therewith: Afterward one
Perkins, who had bought the said Cattle of the said A. came to Foster, and
showed to him, that the highways there were not sufficient for pasturage of
the said Cattle until the said controversy be determined, and prayed that the
Cattle be delivered to him the said Perkins to keep in the mean time; to whom
Foster answered, that if the said Perkins would find sufficient sureties to
deliver back the Cattle to him who had right, that he would be content the said
Perkins should take them; whereupon the said Perkins was bound to Foster to
that purpose, and took away with him the said Cattle; And it was also given in
Evidence, that the servants of the said Foster had seized the Cattle for the
use of their Master. And by the clear opinion of the Court upon the whole
matter showed, Foster non cepit, and according to such direction of the Court
the Jury found, that Foster non cepit; and as to the matter of property, the
Court was clear of opinion, that the grant made by Puttenham of the said
Cattle, during the Term, was utterly void, for Puttenham during the same Term
had not in the said Cattle either a general or a special property, nor also
after the Term; but if after the Term expired the Lessee will not according to
his covenant deliver to Puttenham one thousand Sheep, then Puttenham is put to
his Action of covenant, for here the Lessee was bound to deliver to Puttenham
at the end of the Term, not the same Cattle which were leased, but such a
number of Sheep, and the same ought to be between two years shorn, and four
years shorn, which could not be the Sheep demised, for they did exceed such
degree before the end of the said term, and then the grant of Puttenham during
the Term is merely void: And then when after the Term, the Lessee, according to
the covenant, delivered to Wood one thousand Sheep, he might well sell them to
the Plaintiff; And such was the opinion of the whole Court; and it was said by
Justice Windham, that if I let certain Sheep to one for two years, Property.
now upon that Lease somewhat remains in me, but that cannot be properly said a
Property, but rather the possibility of a Property which cannot be granted
over. See 11 H. 4. 177. 178. 22 E. 4. 10. 11. In the same plea it was also
holden, that in a Replevin where the plaint is of one thousand Beasts, and the
Defendant justifies by reason of property, upon which the parties are at issue;
Now upon the Evidence the Defendant may surmise a lesser number of Beasts, and
drive the Plaintiff to prove a greater number than that which the Defendant
has confessed upon the Evidence; Notwithstanding that the number set down in
the plaint be by the plea of the Defendant quodam modo admitted, and the lesser
number surmised, and the contrary not proved shall go in mitigation of the
damages, and the Jury shall conform their verdict in the right of damages,
according to the proof of the number, notwithstanding that the number set forth
in the plaint be not by the Plea denied by the Defendant, and so it was put in
ure in this Case: for the Plaint was of the taking of one thousand Cattle, but
the proof extended but to eight hundred sixty five. Note also in the same Plea
it was holden, that whereas one Chock was returned upon several Iuries in two
several Courts at Westminster, and both the Iuries are adjourned to one day;
now in which of the said two Courts the said Chock was sworn, he shall be
discharged of his attendance at the other Court the same day.

LV. Carters Case. Mich. 28, and 29 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
CArter brought an Action upon the Case against I.S. and declared, Assumpsit.
that A. was possessed of certain Lands for years, the Inheritance thereof
being in the Wife of the Plaintiff, upon which Lease a Rent was reserved: The
Defendant, in consideration that the Plaintiff would procure the said A. to
assign the said Lease to the Defendant promised to pay the said Rent to the
Plaintiff for all the residue of the Term: It was objected that upon this
matter the Action does not lie, because that the Plaintiff has a higher
remedy, scil. an Action of Debt or Distress; but the opinion of the whole Court
was that the Action did lie, for here upon the promise an Action is given to
the Husband alone in his own right, whereas the Rent is due to the Husband in
the right of his Wife in its nature, and the Rent is also to be paid for the
Land. But upon this Assumpsit it is payable to the person of the Husband. And
afterward Judgment was given for the Plaintiff.

LVI. Kimpton, and Bellamyes Case. Mich. 28, and 29 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
GEorge Kimpton brought a Replevin against Wood and Bellamy, Replevin.
who make Conusance as Baylies to George Burgain for Damage Feasance. The
Plaintiff in Bar of the Conusance, shows; That he himself, and all those
whose estate he has in one hundred and forty Acres of Land time out of mind,
etc. have had common for all manner of Cattle in six Acres of Lands, whereof
the place where, etc. is parcel, and so put in his Cattle, etc. against which,
the Defendants say that the Plaintiff, etc. had common in forty Acres of Land,
whereof the said six Acres are parcel, all lying in Communi campo, and that the
Plaintiff, a long time before the taking, had purchased two Acres parcel of the
said forty Acres, etc. upon which there was a demurrer in Law; It was argued by
Sergeant Shuttleworth, that the Replication to the Bar to the avowry is not
good, for in the Bar to the Avowry, the Plaintiff has showed, that he has
common in six Acres, and the same shall be intended common in six acres only,
for common in forty acres cannot be the common in six acres; as 35 H. 6. 38. In
Debt for Rent reserved upon a Lease for years, the Plaintiff declared that he
leased to the Defendant ten acres of Land, rendering the Rent in demand, the
Defendant pleaded, that the Plaintiff leased to him the said ten acres, and
also such a Rectory, rendering the same Rent, the same is no plea without
traverse, absque hoc, that he leased the ten acres only: See Dyer 29 H. 8. 32.
And the whole Court was clear of opinion, that for want of such traverse,
Traverse.
the plea is not good; for by Periam the Common supposed in the bar to the
Conusans out of the six acres, cannot be intended the Common supposed in the
Replication, scil. out of the forty acres. And by him if in Trespass the
Defendant justify by reason of Common in six acres of Land, upon which the
parties are at issue; and the Defendant in Evidence shows, that he has common
in forty acres, whereof the said six acres are parcel, the same does not
maintain his title, but the issue shall be found against him: Post. 80, 81.
But by the Lord Anderson, because that this Demurrer is general, the other
party shall not take advantage of that defect of pleading, for the want of the
Traverse, and that by reason of the Statute of 27 Eliz. For Traverse is but
matter of form, and the want of the same shall not prejudice the other party in
point of Judgment, but the Judges ought to judge upon the substance, and not
upon the manner and form of the pleading: And as to the matter of the Common,
Extinguishment.
the Court was clear of opinion, that by the purchase of the said two acres,
the whole Common was gone.

LVII. Knights Case. Mich. 28, and 29 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
KNight brought Debt against three Executors, and now surmised by his Counsel,
that one of the Executors is dead, pendant the Writ; Debt.
and prayed the opinion of the Court, if the Writ should thereby abate or not;
for by some it is not like where a Writ is brought against two Executors,
Abatement of Writ.
for there if any of them dies, pendant the Writ, it shall abate, for now the
plural number is gone, for there is but one Executor, but in our Case the
plural number continues: But notwithstanding that, the Court was clear of
opinion, that the Writ should abate: Wherefore the Plaintiff seeing the opinion
of the Court, prayed that upon his surmise aforesaid, he might have a new Writ
by Iourneys Accounts, which was granted to him.

The Queen and Middletons Case. Mich. 28, and 29 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
Quare Imped.
THe Queen brought a Quare Impedit against Middleton, and counted, that W. Lord
Say was seized of the Manor of Bedington in the County of Hertford, to which
Manor the advowson of the Church was appendant, and ad Ecclesiam praedict.
praesentavit Coo Clericum suum, and afterward died seized, having issue two
Daughters, Mary married to the Earl of Essex and Ann to the Lord Mountjoy, who
make partition, and the said Manor of Bedington, inter alia, was allotted to
the said Mary for her part; and afterward the said Earl and Mary died, having
issue Ann, who took to Husband the Marquess of Northampton, and afterward 33
H. 8. a Fine was levied of the said Manor inter etc. Querent. and the said
Marquess and Ann Deforceants, by which Fine the said Manor was granted and
rendered to the said Marquess for term of his life, the remainder to the said
Ann his Wife in tail, the remainder over to Hen. the eighth in Fee; the
Marquess is attainted of High Treason, by which the King seized, and afterward
Ann died without issue, after which in the seisin of the Queen that now is the
Church voided, by which it belonged to the Queen to present; The Defendant did
confess the seisin of the Lord Say, and the whole matter contained in the Count
until the Attainder; and pleaded further, that after the said Attainder Queen
Mary leased the said Manor with the advowson to Rochester and Walgrave for
forty years, if the said Marquess should so long live, who were possessed
accordingly, and in their possession the Church became void, to which Avoidance
one Twiniko did present the Defendant, who upon his presentment was instituted
and inducted: Upon which Plea the Queens Sergeant did demur in Law. It was
argued by Sergeant Shuttleworth for the Queen, That the counter-pleading of the
title of the Queen by the Incumbent, without showing title in his own Patron
could not be good, nothwithstanding the Statute of 25 E. 3. Cap. 7. before
which Statute, the Incumbent could not plead any matter which went to the right
of the Patronage, but only in discharge or excuse of the disturbance, and
therefore we ought to observe the words of the said Statute, sc. the possessor
shall be received to counter-plead the Kings title, and to have his Answer, and
to defend his Right upon the matter, although he claim nothing in the
Patronage; upon all which words taken together it appears, that the Incumbent
ought not only to counter-plead the title of the King, but also to show and
defend his own right, and that has not the Defendant done here; For Twiniko,
of whose presentment he is in the Church, does not claim under the lease made
by Queen Mary to Rochester and Walgrave, but during their said Lease and their
possession of it, by usurpation presented the Defendant, 46 E. 3. 13. by
Finchden, The King brought a Scire fac. upon a Recovery in a Quare Impedit, the
Defendant being Incumbent pleaded, that after the said Judgment the King had
presented to the said Church I.S. his Clerk, who was admitted accordingly; and
exception was taken because the Defendant did not show a title in himself to
maintain his possession, but it was not allowed; for a difference is taken
betwixt a Plea in a Quare Impedit, and a Plea in a Scire facias, Where in
pleading the party must make title to himself.
for in a Scire facias it is sufficient to extort the Plaintiff of execution
without any title, contrary in a Quare impedit: And it is a general Rule, that
in all Cases where an Office is to be traversed, none shall be received to
traverse the title of the King, without making a title to himself, which see 38
E. 3. 18. So in the Case of the Lady Wingfield, 3 H. 7. 14. and Stamford 63,
64. And it is true in Actions real it is sufficient to traverse the title of
the Demandant, without making title to the Tenant himself: As in a Formedon, Ne
dona pas; But in Actions personal it is otherwise, as 2 H. 4, 14. In Ravishment
of Ward, it is not sufficient to traverse the title of the Plaintiff, but the
Defendant ought also to make title to himself. Fenner Sergeant contrary: who
took exception to the Writ, 2 Len. 5^.
because it is brought against the Incumbent only without naming the Patron or
Ordinary: For here the Defendant has pleaded, that he is Parson impersonee of
the Church aforesaid of the presentment of the said Twiniko, and that he is
admitted, instituted and inducted, and has continued in his Church so many
days and years, in which Case the Writ ought to have been brought as well
against the Patron and Ordinary, as against him the Incumbent: But in some
Cases it is sufficient against the Incumbent only, as upon a Collation by
Lapse, 9 H. 6. 32. by Babbington: So where the Defendant is disturber without
any presentment, 7 H. 4. 93. so where the Defendant was deprived, and kept
himself in 4 E. 4. 18. So where the Pope makes Provision, 11 H. 4. Quare
Impedit 120. So a Scire facias upon a Recovery in a Quare Imped. shall be
brought against the Incumbent only 1 H. 5. 8. for by the Judgment in the Quare
impedit, the right of the Patronage is bound; and the Scire facias is only for
the possession, which concerns the Defendant only, and no other. And to prove
that by the Common Law, a Quare Impedit lay not (but upon such special matter)
against the Incumbent alone, it is clear upon the said Statute of 25 E. 3. For
before the said Statute the Incumbent could not plead any matter which did
trench to the right of the Patronage, and therefore we ought not to presume
that the common Law was so unreasonable to give an Action against a singular
person, who could not by the Law show and defend his own right, nor traverse
the right of the other party: And as to the plea here, he conceived that the
same plea which the Patron might have now after the Statute of 25 E. 3. the
Incumbent shall have; but he who is only a disturber not in by presentment,
etc. he shall not plead any matter but in discharge or excuse of the
disturbance, 47 E. 3. 8. The King in a Quare Impedit counted, That King H. was
seized, and presented one A. King H. died, and the Advowson descended to King
E. 3. A. died, the now King presented B. and now B. is dead, so it belongs to
the King to present; that the Defendant being Incumbent traversed the
institution and induction of B. without making title to himself. So 44 E. 3.
19. in a Quare Impedit the King declared that he himself was seized and
presented one B. who at his presentment was received, etc. B. died, by which it
belonged to the King to present; to which the Defendant being Incumbent
pleaded, that the said B. is yet alive, and that plea was allowed without other
title made to himself. Note, that at the first Argument of this case, that the
Court was of opinion against the Defendant, because he had not in his plea any
interest in the Advowson; and by Periam the Patron himself could not have had
such plea if he had been party to the Writ, therefore not the Incumbent; and it
is no good pleading in any Action, to discover in pleading any wrong, as force,
disseisin, usurpation. But at length, Mutata opinione, all the Justices were
agreed, that Judgment should be given against the Queen: And the Lord Anderson
showed openly the reason of their Judgment, for here is not bare usurpation
pleaded against the Queen, but also an estate, scil. a Lease for years in the
said Advowson derived from Queen Mary, and that the Avoidance upon which the
Action is brought falls within the said Term, so as the Queen who is
Plaintiff is encountered with the Lease of her Ancestor, against which she
cannot make title to present, without special matter; wherefore Judgment was
given against the Queen.

LIX. Kynters Case. Mich. 28, and 29. Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
Debt.
KYnter brought debt upon an Obligation, the condition was, that whereas the
Plaintiff had bought of the Defendant a Ship, if then the Defendant shall enjoy
the said Ship, with all the furniture belonging to the same without being
disturbed for the said Ship or any furniture appertaining to it; that then,
etc. and the Case was, that after the sale of the said Ship a stranger sued the
Plaintiff for certain moneys due for certain Ballast bought by the Defendant
for the same Ship and put into the said Ship before the sale of it, and in the
said suit the Plaintiff obtained a Judgment and Execution, and thereupon the
said Ship was seized, and all the matter was, if Ballast be furniture of a Ship
or not; And it was moved by Sergeant Gaudy, that it was; for Ballast is as
necessary to a Ship as a Sail; but the Court was against him, for sometimes a
Ship may sail without Ballast, for it may be laden with such Merchandises which
are convenient Ballast in themselves, as Coals, Wheat, etc. Periam at the first
doubted of it: and by him, if I be bound upon condition, ut supra, I am bound
to deliver the Guns being in it at the time of the sale, but yet he conceived,
that the Plaintiff should be barred because he had not specially showed, that
at the time of the sale the Ballast was in the Ship.

LX. Pendleton and Gunstons Case. Mich. 28, and 29 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
PEndleton informed against Gunston upon the Statute of 13 Eliz. Cap. 5. for
that, where the said Pendleton had before brought a plaint of Debt against I.S.
in the Guild Hall of Norwich; upon which issued out of the said Court an
Attachment against the said I.S. by which the Sheriff of Norw. being ready by
virtue of the said process to attach the said I. S. by his goods, there, the
now Defendant in disturbance of the said process and the execution of it, did
publish and show to the Sheriff a conveyance, by which he claimed the said
goods as conveyed to him by the said I. S, etc. and averred the fraud, etc. and
it was moved by Sergeant Snagg, that the matter of which the Defendant is
charged is not within the said Statute, because the avowing of the said
conveyance does not go in delay of the execution; for no Judgment is given but
only in delay of process; but the Court was clear of opinion to the contrary,
and that by reason of the Statute and the words of it, scil. delay, hinder, or
defraud Creditors of their just and lawful Actions, suits, etc. for here is a
delay; for want of serving the said Attachment, the Appearance of I.S. to the
suit of the Plaintiff is delayed, which mischief is within the remedy of the
said Statute. And Periam and Rhodes Justices conceived, that such avowing of
such conveyance, where no suit is depending is within the said Statute, which
Anderson doubted. See the pleading of this Case reported in the second Book of
Entries, 207, 208. 30 Eliz. per quod secta impedita fult, etc.

LXI. Mich. 28, and 29 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
FEnner Sergeant moved this Case. 4 Len. Alien, Purchasor.
An Alien purchases Lands in Fee; The Queen confirms it to the Alien, Office
is found, if the confirmation shall bind the Queen; and it seemed to some that
it should, for by the Lord Anderson, Confirmation.
when an Alien is enfeoffed he receives by the Livery the Fee-simple, of which
he shall be seized, until Office be found; and a Praecipe quod reddat lies
against him. And by Fenner an Alien and Denizen Ioynt-tenants are disseised,
they both shall join in Assize, vide 11 H. 4. 26. and by him, the Kings Nief
being an Inheritrix takes a Husband, and has issue, Office is found, the
Husband shall be Tenant by the Curtesy, which see 33 E. 3. Traverse 36. It was
argued of the other side, that the estate of the Alien is so feeble that a
confirmation cannot enure upon it; for an Alien cannot take but to the use of
the King, and cannot be enfeoffed to another use; and if he be, such use is
void, for there is not a sufficient seisin in the Alien to carry an use. And it
has been adjudged in the Case of one Forcet, that where an Alien and the said
Forcet were Ioynt-purchasors, and the Alien died, Forcer had not the whole by
the Survivor, but that upon an Office found, the Queen should have the moiety:
See Dyer 11 Eliz. 283.

LXII. Sir Roger Lewknor and Fords Case. Mich. 28, and 29 Eliz. In the Common
Pleas.
1 Cro. 17. Co. 5. Rep. 12. b.
SIr Roger Lewknor seized of the Manor of Wallingford, leased the same to A. for
years, and died, after which it was Enacted by Parliament, That the said Manor
should from henceforth be deemed and reputed in the Heirs of the body of the
said Sir Roger, begotten upon Eliz. his Wife, the said Sir Roger having three
Daughters only, without any other issue: The Daughters married Husbands and had
issue: A. assigned his enterest in the said Manor to B. C. and D. and also to
one Shelley; B.C. and D. assigned their interest to one Sponer, one of the
Defendants, and Shelly assigned his fourth part to Ford another of the
Defendants, excepting the Woods and Underwoods. Wast is committed; one of the
Daughters having issue dies, living her Husband, the two surviving Sisters and
their Husbands, the Term being expired, brought a Writ of Wast, leaving out the
Husband of the third Sister, who was Tenant by the Curtesy, against Shelley and
Sponer, who Tenuerunt. Shuttleworth Sergeant took Exception to the Writ: scil.
praedictus Rogerus cujus haeredes ipsae funt, which shall be intended Heirs
general, and by the Declaration it appears, that the Daughters have to them
by Act of Parliament an especial inheritance as Heirs in special tail, and that
by a special conveyance: and therefore the Plaintiffs ought to have brought a
special Writ, according to their Case, as where Cestuy que use, makes a lease
for years by the Statute of 1 R. 3. and the Lessee commits Wast, now the
Feoffees ought to have a special Writ of Wast, according to their Case, 26 H.
8. 6. but that exception was disallowed, and the case cited out of 6 H. 8. is
upon another reason, for in such case the estate of the Lessee for years is
created by the said Statute. Another Exception was taken to the Writ, for the
Writ is tenuerunt, which shall be intended prima facie, conjunctim tenuerunt,
and in the Declaration it appears, that one of the Defendants is assignee of
three parts of the Lands demised, and the other Defendant of the fourth part,
and so separatim tenuerunt, but that Exception was also disallowed, because
originally it was one and entirely demised interest and estate, and so it
remains as to the Plaintiffs, although it be devised by the Lessee himself.
Another Exception was taken to the Writ, because here it appears upon the
Plaintiffs showing, that Sir Roger Lewknor had three Daughters, and that they
have all taken Husbands, and that they have issue, and that one of the said
Daughters is dead, living her Husband, who is not named in the Writ, for which
cause the Writ shall abate: See 22 H. 6. 24, 25. But that Exception was also
disallowed; for as this Case is, there is not any reason, that the Tenant by
the Curtesy should join in this Action, for no judgment shall be given here,
that the Plaintiffs shall recover the place wasted, for the term is expired, as
it appears by the words of the Writ, scil. quas tenuerunt, and the Tenant by
the curtesy is in possession, and where Tenant by the courtesy and the Heir
join in an Action of Wast, Tenant for life shall have Locum vastatum, and the
Heir the damages, which see 27 H. 8. 13. As unto the matter of Law, upon the
Exceptions of Woods and Underwoods, it was argued by Shuttleworth, that the
Action of Wast was not well brought against Ford, etc. for the Assignment made
by Shelley to Ford was with an exception of all Woods and Underwoods, and
therefore Shelley remained Tenant, and he ought to answer for the Wood and the
Underwood in the Action of Wast, for upon every demise of Lands the Woods there
growing are as well demised as the Land it self, for so it appears by the
Writ of Wast in domibus and boscis dimissis ad terminum annorum, etc. which
proves, that the Trees are parcel of the demise, and so may be execepted: See
Dyer 28 H 8. 19. by Shelley and Baldwin. A man leaseth a Manor, except Woods
and Underwoods, the Lessee cuts the Trees, an Action of Wast does not lie
against him for the same, for the thing in which the Wast is supposed to be
committed was not demised, etc. and therefore the Lessee shall be punished as a
Trespassor and not as Farmer: Fenner Sergeant contrary, and that the Exception
of the Woods and Underwoods is merely void; for Shelley who assigns his
interest with the said Exception, has not any such interest in the Woods and
Underwoods, so as he can make such exception, for he had but an ordinary
interest in them as Farmer, viz. House-boot, Hedge-boot, etc. which interest
cannot by any means upon an Assignment be reserved to the Assignor, in gross of
the estate, no more than if one has common appendant to his Land, and he will
make a Feoffment of the Land, reserving, or excepting the common. And he who
has the inheritance of the Land, has an absolute property in the Trees, but
the Lessee has but a qualified interest, and therefore 21 H 6. 46. the Lessor
during the term for years may command the Trees to be cut down: and 10 H. 7. 3.
Lessee for years has not any interest in the Trees, but for the loppings, and
for the shadow for his Cattle: And in the Case cited, where Lessee for life and
he in the Reversion make a Lease for life unto a stranger, and wast is
committed, Co. 1 Inst. 42. 2.
and they bring an Action of Wast, the Lessee for life shall have the place
wasted, and he in the Reversion the treble damages, for in him was the true and
very property of the Trees, and therefore the treble damages do belong unto
him, and not to the Lessee for life, who joyneth with him; and the reason
wherefore the Lessee for life or years shall recover treble damages against a
stranger who cuts down any Trees growing upon the Land to him demised, is not
in respect of any property that the Lessee has in the Trees cut down, but
because he is chargable over to his Lessor in an Action of Wast, in which he
shall render damages in such proportion. So see 27 H. 6. Wast. 8. A lease for
life is made without impeachment of wast, a stranger of his own wrong cuts down
Trees, against whom the Lessee brings an Action of Trespass; in such Case he
shall not recover treble damages, not for the Trees, but only for the breaking
of the Close, and the loppings, for he is not chargeable over to his Lessor for
the same, because that his Lease was made without impeachment of Wast; and if
the Lessee has such a slender interest in the Trees where his Lease is without
impeachment of wast, his interest is less, where it is an ordinary lease
without any such privilege: And the property which the Lessee for years has
in the Trees in such Case, is so appropriated to the possession, that it cannot
be severed from it. Windham and Anderson Justices were of opinion, that the
Exception above is merely void: For Ford the Assignee of Shelly is now Termer
and Farmer, who alone can challenge interest in the Trees against all but the
Lessor, and Shelley after his Assignment, is merely a stranger. The interest of
the Lessee, and also of his Assignee in the Trees is of necessity, and follows
the Farm and the Land as the shadow does the body; And by him, where Lessee for
years by reason of his lease is to have Wind-fals, yet he cannot employ them
but to the benefit and profit of his Farm, for if he sell them or spend them
elsewhere he shall be punished. Rhodes and Periam Justices, that the exception
is good, as the fruits of the Trees, Shovelers, etc. And afterward the Case
was adjudged upon another point in the pleading, so as the matter in Law did
not come to Judgment: See Saunders Case. 41 Eliz. Where Lessee does assign,
excepting the Timber Trees, it is a void Exception.

LXIII. Gray and Jeffes Case. Pasch. 29 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
1 Cro. 55. Action of assault and Batterry.
IN an Action upon the Case by Gray against Jeffe, the Plaintiff declared, that
where he had placed his Son and Heir apparent with the Defendant, to be his
Apprentice, and to learn of him the Art of a Tailor: That the Defendant had so
beaten his Son with a Spade, that he thereupon became lame, by reason of which
he could not have so much with his Son in marriage of him as otherwise he might
have, because the same lameness is a disparagement to his said son: And further
showed, that he himself might spend twenty pounds per annum in Lands. Haulton
argued for the Plaintiff. The Action Quare filium and haeredem cepit and
abduxit, is given to the Father in consideration that the marriage of his Son
and Heir does appertain to him by the Law, and here by the Battery the Son is
become so same, that he is not so commendable to a Marriage as before, and if
the Father had lost the whole marriage, then the Father should have had the
Action Quare filium and haeredem, etc. but here he has not lost the whole
marriage, but the marriage is lessened by it, and therefore he shall have this
Action. Tanfield contrary; I confess, that the Father ought to have the
marriage of his Son and Heir so long as he is sub potestate patris; but here
the Father has committed all his interest, power and authority in his Son to
the Defendant his Master, with whom he has bound his Son Apprentice for seven
years, during which term the Father has not any thing to do with his Son or
his Marriage. Wray: The Action Quare filium and haeredem, etc. is not given to
the Father, because his marriage belongs to him, but because of the Education;
and such was the opinion of Clench Justice, and the marriage does not belong
properly to the Father: For if the Son marries himself without the leave of
the Father there is not any remedy for the Father. And afterward Judgment was
given against the Plaintiff.

LXIV. Bullers Case. Pasch. 29 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
^^^^evin.
EDmund Buller brought a Replevin against two, who make Conusans as Baylies to
A. for rent arrear reserved upon a lease for life, To which the Plaintiff in
Bar of the Conusans pleaded, that two strangers had right of Entry in the place
where, 2 Len. 196.
etc. and that the said two Defendants by their Commandment entered, etc. and
took the Cattle of which the Replevin is brought, damage feasant, absque hoc,
that they took them as Baylies to the said A. and upon that Traverse the
Defendants did demur in Law. 2 Len. 216. Post. 327.
Shuttleworth Sergeant; the Traverse is not good, for by that means the intent
of the party shall be put in issue, which no Jury can try, but only in Case of
Recaption. See 7 H. 4. 101. by Gascoign. If the Bailey upon the distress shows
the cause and reason of it, he cannot afterward vary from it, but the other
party may trice him by Traverse; but if he distrain generally without showing
cause, then he is at large to show what cause he will, and the other party
shall answer to it. ^ Co. 7^.
And it was said by the Court, that when a Bailey distreins, he ought, if he be
required, to show the cause of his distress, but if he be not required, then he
is not tied to do it. Anderson. We were all agreed in the Case betwixt Lowin
and Hordin, that the Traverse, as it is here, was well taken. The Number Roll
of that Case is M. 28, and 29 Eliz. 2494.

LXV. Hudson and Leighs Case. Pasch. 29 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
HUdson recovered against Leigh in an Action of Battery, for which a Capias pro
fine issued against Leigh; and also a Capias ad Satisfaciendum, returnable the
same Term at one and the same Return: Process.
As to the Capias pro fine the Sheriff returned Cepi, and as to the Capias ad
Satisfaciendum, non est inventus: And for this contrariety of the Return, the
Court was of opinion, that the Sheriff should be amerced; but it was moved by
the Council of the Sheriff, Return of the Sheriff.
that the awarding of the Capias pro fine was merely void, for the Fine is
pardoned by the Parliament. And it is also Enacted, That all process awarded
upon such Fines shall be void; and then the Capias pro fine being void, it
matters not how or in what manner it be returned, for the Court shall not
respect such process, nor any return of it, and then the Court not having
resepect to that Return, there is not any contrariety, for the Capias ad
Satisfaciendum only is returned, and not the Capias pro fine. And at another
day it was moved again; the Battery was supposed: Junij 1586. and Judgment
given the thirteenth of February the same year, upon which issued Capias pro
fine, Escape. 5 Co. ^^.
and before the Return thereof the Parliament ended, which pardoned such Fines
and made all process thereupon void: And it was said by the Court, that if the
Sheriff in such Case takes the party by a Capias pro fine, now upon that taking
he is in Execution for the party, and if the Sheriff let him go at large, he
shall answer for the escape: And in that case the Capias pro fine was well
awarded, and the Court ought to regard it, and the Defendant lawfully taken by
virtue of it, and also in execution for the party in Judgment of Law; and
afterward, when the Parliament came and Enacted ut supra, although the process
be made void thereby, the same ought to be meant as to the interest of the King
in the Fine, and the vexation of the Subject by it, but not as to the Execution
of the party, but the Sheriff shall answer for that. Execution.
And it was also holden by the Court, that if the Plaintiff sueth an Elegit,
then upon the Capias pro fine executed, the Defendant shall not be adjudged in
Execution for the party, for he has made his Election of another manner of
Execution, scil. of the Land, and he shall never resort to an Execution of the
body, 13 H 7. 12. And as our case is there was an Elegit obtained, but it was
not on Record, nor any Record made of it, and therefore the election of the
Execution remained to the Plaintiff. And as to the point aforesaid, that such
process shall be void as to the King only, not as to the party: See now 5 Ja.
C. 6. part. 79. Sir Edward Phittons Case.

LXVI. Potter and Stedals Case. Pasch. 29 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
IN Trepass by Samuel Potter against Stedal the Case was, Trespass.
Tenant for life of Land leased parcel thereof to hold at Will, and being in
possession of the residue, levied a Fine of the whole, the Lessor entered into
the Land which was let at will in point of forfeiture, in the name of the
whole; it was holden the same is a good entry for the whole: Ante 56.
But if the Disseisor leaseth for years part of the Land, whereof the disseisin
was committed, Entry. 1 Inst. 252.
and the disseisee afterward enters into the Land which continues in the
possession of the Disseisor in the name of the whole, the same Entry shall not
extend to the Land leased, for here the Lessee is in by title, but in the other
Case not, for when Tenant for life leaseth it at will, and afterward levies a
Fine, the same is a determination of the Will. 16 Eliz. Dyer 377. 1. In the
same plea it was holden, that if there be lessee for life, the remainder for
life, the remainder in fee, Lessee for life in possession levyeth a Fine Sur
Conusans de droit, etc. to his own use, upon that Fine a Fee-simple accrues.

LXVII. Leigh and Hanmers Case. Pasch. 29 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
Debt upon a Recognizance
THomas Leigh Esquire brought an Action of Debt upon a Recognizance in the
nature of a Statute Staple against John Hanmer Esquire, before the Mayor and
Aldermen of Land. in Camera Guild Hall Civitatis pr^ed. and demanded 1500
pounds, upon such Recognizance acknowledged 20 November 20 Eliz. and upon
default of the said Hanmen, Owen 25.
according to the custom of London used in course of Attachment, attached six
hundred pounds in the hands of one W. Bolton of Gray's Inn, in part of
satisfaction of the said debt of one thousand five hundred pounds; and now
within the year came the said Hanmer, and ad disonerandum debitum praedicti had
a precept of Scire facias against the said Thomas Leigh, and after pleaded, and
demanded Dyer of the said Recognizance, and had it, and quod ipse restitutionem
of the said 600 pounds, in manibus dict. W. Bolton attachiat. habere debet: And
upon the whole Record the Case was thus: Rowland Leigh Esquire, being seized of
certain Manors and other Lands in the County of Glocest. had issue Eliz. his
Daughter and Heir inheritable to the said Lands, and by Indent. dated 20 Maii
19 Eliz. granted Custodiam, regulam, gubernationem, educationem, maritagium
dict. Eliz. to the said Thomas Leigh, after which the said Thomas Leigh by
Indenture 14 Martii 29 Eliz. granted and assign^d the said custody, Dyer 190,
191.
rule, government, education, and marriage, and all his interest therein, and
the said Indenture, to Sir John Spencer, after which the said Sir John Spencer
and Thomas Leigh, by their Indenture the 26. of August 20 Eliz. granted and
assigned to the said John Hanmer the said custody, rule, government, education
and marriage o^ the said Eliz. and all their interest in the same, and all the
recited Indenturs; by which last recited Indenture 29 August, the said John
Hanmer covenanted with the said Leigh, that Thomas Hanmer Son and Heir apparent
of the said John Hanmer, maritaret and in uxorem duceret dictam Elizabetham: ad
vel antequam dicta Eliz. and dictus Tho. Hanmer perimplerint, suas separales
aetates 14 annorum, si dicta Eliz. ad id condestendere and agreare vellet; and
afterward before the said Tho. Hanmer and the said Elizabeth, suas separales
aetates 14 annorum, perimplevissent, sc. 8 die Sept. 20 Eliz. the said Tho.
Hanmer took to wife the said Eliz. the said Tho. Hanmer then being aetatis 13
annorum and no more, and the said Eliz. then being of the age of nine years and
no more, and Tho. Hanmer aforesaid over-lived, etc. And pleaded further, that
the said Tho. Hanmer after he attained his full age of fourteen years, and
before any agreement or assent by the said Tho. Hanmer to the marriage
aforesaid betwixt the said Tho. Hanmer and the said Eliz. had, at or after,
idem Thomas Hanmer came to his age of fourteen years, scil. 10 die Sept. Anno
22 Eliz. ad dictum matitagium disagreavit, and maritagium illud renunciavit;
and all this matter was pleaded in Bar, as performance of the Covenant
contained in the Indenture of defeazance made upon the Recognizance, whereupon
the Action is brought. And concluded his plea, unde petit, judicium si dictus
Tho. Leigh actionem suam praed^ct etc. Et quod ipse idem Johannes Hanmer
restitutionem dict. 600 li sc. ut praefert a^achiat habere valeat. And all the
question here was, if this marriage had by this manner, and afterward
renounced as is aforesaid, be such a marriage as is intended in the Covenant,
so as the said Covenant be satisfied by it. And it was argued before the Mayor
Recorder, and Aldermen of London, in their Guild Hall by Angier of Gray's Inn,
on the part of Leigh the Plaintiff; and he in his Argument did much rely upon
the definition of marriage, by Justinian in his Institutions. Nuptiae maris and
faeminae conjunctio individua continens viae societatem; and the marriage here
in question is not according to the said difinition, for the persons, parties
to this contract, are not persons able by Law to make such contract, because
that non attigerunt annos nubiles, Ergo nuptiae esse non possunt, but only
sponsalia, a step unto marriage; And there is also rendered one reason of the
said definition upon the word individua, individuam dico, quia non nisi morte
aut divortio separandum, but the marriage now in question might be dissolved
without death or divorce, as it is in our case by disagreement: And see
Jurisprudentiae Romanae, Lib. 1. Cap. 33. Societas and consortium omni vita
inter marem and faeminam ad concubitum, which is societatis hujus consummatio;
And as every Act does consist upon three things, 1. Inceptio, 2. Progressio, 3.
Continuatio, so is it in the Case of marriage; but in this case when Thomas
Hanmer took the said Eliz. to Wife, that is but an inception, but the
progression and consummation of it is cut off by the disagreement; and he much
relied upon the words of the Covenant, s^ dicta Eliz. ad id condescendere and
agreare vellet, so as there is not any liberty left to the Defendant for the
agreement or disagreement of the Son, but he ought, to agree at the peril of
his Father; but if Eliz. will not agree, then the Defendant is not at any
mischief, for in such case the Covenant does not extend to him; and also here
the Father is bound that his Son, a stranger to the Obligation should marry the
said Elizabeth, which he ought to procure at his peril, or otherwise he shall
forfeit his Bond. Egerton Solicitor of the Queen argued to the contrary; This
marriage as much as concerns this Covenant, is to be considered according to
the reason of the common Law, and not according to the rules and grounds of the
Canon or Civil Law, not as a marriage to right, but as a marriage in
possession, and marriage in possession is sufficient always in personal things
and causes, especially where the possession of the Wife is in question, 2 Roll.
585.
but where the possession of the Husband is in question, there marriage in
right ought to be, and where marriage in possession falls in averment, there it
shall not be tried by the Bishop, as in the Case of a marriage of right, where,
never accoupled in loyal matrimony, is pleaded, but by the Country, for in case
of Wife in possession, never accoupled in matrimony, is no Plea, Postea. 181.
12 Len 170. 171. ^3 Len. 129.
but not his Wife, which see 12 E. 3. br. 481. A. brought an Action of Trespass
against B. and C. B. pleaded that C. is Wife of the Plaintiff, and demanded
Judgment of the Writ; the Plaintiff by Replication said, never accoupled in
Lawful matrimony, but it was not allowed, but was driven to say, not his Wife,
for if C. was the Wife of the Plaintiff in possession or by Reputation, it is
sufficient to abate the Writ: see also 49 E. 3. 18. by Belknap, the right of
the Espousal is always to be tried by the Bishop, but the possession of the
marriage* not as in Assize by A. and K. his Wife* the Tenant demanded Judgment
of the Writ upon special shatter and concluded, so is the said K. our Wife, and
not the Wife of A. So in a Cui invita by B. and C. his Wife, the Tenant
pleaded, never accoupled in loyal matrimony, the same is no answer to the Wife,
for she demanded in her own right, and if he who aliened was her Husband in
possession, the Wife could not have other Action, for Assize does not lie,
because he was her Husband in fact at the said time in possession. And see also
50 E. 3. 20. adjudged according to the opinion of Belknap: And see also 39 E.
3. As to the marriage in right, as the case in question is; for upon such
marriage, if the Husband be murdered before disagreement, the Wife shall have an
Appeal of Murder, and a Writ of Dower: so where Appeal is brought of the Rape
of his Wife, although she be his Wife but in possession, and not in right, 11
H. 4. 13. by Hulls 168. and by Littleton, if the Wife be of the age but of nine
years, she shall have Dower, which see also 35 H. 6. and yet Dower shall never
accrue but in case of marriage in right, for there, never coupled in marriage,
is a good Plea, See 12 R. 2. Dower 54. In Dower the Tenant pleaded, that the
Husband at the time of his death was but at the age of 10 years, and the
Demandant now but 11 years, and yet Judgment was given for the Demandant, for
by Charleton the same was a marriage in right until disagreement, See 22 Eliz.
Dyer 369. A woman at full age marries a Husband of 12 years, who dies before
the age of consent, the same is a good marriage, and so ought to be certified
by the Bishop; and 7 H. 6. 11. by Newton, a woman married within age of consent
may bring an Action as a feme sole, and the Writ did abate. Stamford Prerogat.
27. 19 E. 3. Judgment 123. In a Writ of Ward, the Jury found, that the Infant
was of the age of 10 years, and no more, but they did not know whether she was
married or not, but de been esse, if she be married, assess damages one hundred
pounds, and if not, five pounds; upon which it appears that marriage at such
an age is such a marriage upon which the Lord shall recover damages; See 13 H.
3. guard. 148. such marriage in the life of the Ancestor, infra annos nubiles,
if there be no disagreement shall bind the King: And after the death of the
Ancestor, the heir shall remain in custodia Domini Regis, usque ad aetatem ut
consentiat, vel dissentiat, 45 E. 3. 16. In a Writ of Ward, the Infant was
found of the age of 12 years, and the Jurors gave damages 300 marks, if he were
married, and 27 H. 6. guard. 118. and 47 E. 3. Br. Trespass 420. and Fitz.
Action upon the Statute 37. Trespass de muliere abducta cum bonis viri, where
the wife is within the age of consent: and if I be bounden unto another in an
Obligation, upon condition to pay a sum of money upon the marriage day of I S.
now, if I S. be married within the age of consent, I am bound to pay the money
the same day, although afterward the parties do dissent, and the Wife after
such marriage shall be received in a Plea real upon the Default of her Husband;
and the words, si dicta Eliz. ad id condescendere and agreare vellet, are to be
understood of an agreement at the time of the marriage, and here the time is
limited for the solemnization of the marriage, scil. at or before they shall
have accomplished their several ages of 21 years, makes the matter clear; For
it is in the election of Hanmer the Father, to procure this marriage, scil.
that his Son shall take to Wife the said Elizabeth, at which of the two times
he will, scil. at or before, etc. to the marriage before etc. is as effectual
in respect of the performance of this condition, as if the marriage had been
had after; and as the case is, the condition could not be better performed, for
if the marriage had been stayed till after 14 years, etc. although the marriage
does not ensue, yet the Obligation had been forfeited, and that the marriage be
solemnized just at the age of both of 14 years, was impossible, for Thomas
Hanmer was the elder by 2 years than the said Elizabeth, and therefore they
ought to be married at such time which might stand with the condition, and the
same is done accordingly: And as to that which has been objected, That now by
disagreement the marriage is determined, we ought to observe that Hanmer was
bounden for the performance of the Covenant, and that his son and heir apparent
maritaret, and in uxorem duceret dictam Eliz. ud vel ante, etc. which is
executed accordingly, and he is not bounden for the continuance of the said
marriage, but the continuance of the same ought to be left to the law, which
gives to the parties liberty to continue the marriage by agreement, or to
dissolve it by disagreement: And therefore if I am bounden to you, that I S.
(who in truth is an Infant) shall levy a Fine before such a day, which is done
accordingly, and afterward the same is reversed by Error, yet notwithstanding
the condition is performed, etc. and afterward Judgment was given against the
Plaintiff.

LXVIII. The Earl of Warwick and the Lord Barkleys Case. Pasch. 29 Eliz. In the
Common Pleas.
AMbrose Earl of Warwick and Robert Earl of Leicester brought a Writ of
Partition against the Lord Barkley, Partition. Challenge.
in which the parties pleaded to issue. And now at the day of the Enquest the
Defendant did challenge, that in the whole Panel there were but two
Hundreders; and at the first it was doubted by the Court, if upon the Statute
of 27 Eliz. cap. 6. by which it is Enacted; That no further challenge for the
Hundred shall be admitted if two sufficient Hundreders do appear, the Enquest
shall be taken: But at length the whole Court was clear of opinion, that the
said Statute did extend but to personal Actions; but this Action of Partition
is a real Action; and Summons, and severance lies in it, but not process of
outlawry, and therefore here four Hundreders ought to be returned; so in an
Action of Wast, although it be in the personalty: and therefore the Council of
the Plaintiffs prayed a Tales.

LXIX. The Archbishop of York and Mortons Case. Pasch. 29 Eliz. In the Common
Pleas.
THe Archbishop of York recovered in an Assize of Novel disseisin against one
Morton before the Justices of Assize; 3 Len. 159. Error upon recovery in Assize.
upon which Judgment Morton brought a Writ of Error before the Justices of the
Common Pleas, and after many motions at the bar, it was adjudged that a Writ of
Error upon the said Judgment did not lie in the said Court. 18 Eliz. Dyer 250.
F. B. 22. That upon Erroneous Judgment given in the Kings Bench in Ireland,
Error shall be brought in the Kings Bench in England, 15 E. 3. Error 72. Fenner
who was of Council with the Archbishop demanded of the Court how, and in what
manner the Record shall be remanded to the Justices of Assize, so as the
Archbishop might have execution; To which the Court said, that the surest way
is to have a Certiorare out of the Chancery into the Common Pleas directed to
the Judges there; and then out of the Chancery by Mittimus to the Justices of
Assize. But Fenner made a difficulty of it to take such course for the
remanding of it, for doubt they would not allow it to be a Record where it is
not a Record, for upon the matter the Record is not removed, but remains with
the Justices of Assize. Then Anderson said, Sue Excution out of the said
Record; but because the Record came before us by Writ of Error, it shall be
also removed and remanded by Writ: and so it was.

LXX. Kempe and Carters Case. Pasch. 29 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
THomas Kempe brought Trespass, Copyhold.
for breaking of his Close against Carter: and upon pleading they were at
issue, if the Lord of the Manor aforesaid granted the said Lands per copiam
rotulorum curiae manerii praedict: secundum consuetudinem manerii praedict. and
it was given in Evidence, that within the said Manor were diverse customary
Lands, and that the Lord now of late at his Court of the said Manor granted the
Land, etc. per copiam rotulorum curiae, where it was never granted by copy
before: It was now holden by the whole Court, that the Jury are bound to find,
Dominus non concessit, for notwithstanding that de facto Dominus concessit per
copiam rotulorum curiae, yet, non concessit secundum consuetudinem manerii
praedict. for the said Land was not customary, nor was it demisable, for the
custom had not taken hold of it. In the same Case it was also showed, that
within the said Manor some customary Lands are demiseable for life only,
Evidence of customs.
and some in Fee; and it was said by the Lord Anderson, that he who will give
in Evidence these several customs, ought to show the several limits in which
the several customs are severally running, as that the Manor extends into two
Towns, and that the Lands in one of the said Towns are grantable for lives
only, and the Lands in the other in Fee, and he ought not to show the several
customs promiscue valere through the whole Manor: And he remembered a Case of
his own experience: scil. The Manor of Wadhurst in the County of Sussex
consisted of two sorts of Copyhold, scil. Sook-land and Bond-land, and by
several customs disseverable in several manners: As if a man be first admitted
to Sook-land, and afterward to Bond-land, and dies seized of both, his Heir
shall inherit both; but if he be first admitted to Bond-land, and afterward to
Sook-land, and of them dies seized, his youngest Son shall inherit, and if of
both simul and semel, his eldest Son shall inherit; But if he dies seized of
Bond-land only, it shall descend to the youngest: and if customary Land has
been of ancient time grantable in Fee, and now of late time for the space of
forty years has granted the same for life only; yet the Lord may if he please
resort to his ancient custom and grant it in Fee. It was also moved in this
case, If customary Land within a Manor has been grantable in Fee, if now the
same Escheat to the Lord, and he grant the same to another for life; the same
was holden a good grant and warrantable by the custom, and should bind the
Lord, for the custom which enables him to grant in Fee shall enable him to
grant for life: and after the death of the Tenant for life, the Lord may grant
the same again in Fee, for the grant for life was not any interruption of the
custom, etc. which was granted by the whole Court.

LXXI. Walker and Nevils Case. Pasch. 29. Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
Dower.
WAlker and his Wife brought a Writ of Dower against Jervice Nevil, and
judgment was given upon Nihil dicit, and because the first Husband of the Wife
died seized, a Writ of Enquiry of Damages was awarded, by which it was found,
that the Land which she ought to have in Dower, the third part was of the value
of eight pound per annum, and that eight years elapserunt a die mortis viri sui
proxime ante inquisitionem and assident damna to eight pounds; and it appeared
upon the Record, that after Judgment in the Writ of Dower aforesaid the
Demandants had execution upon habere facias seisinam, Damages.
so as it appears upon the whole Record put together, that damages are
assessed for eight years, where the Demandants have been seized for part of the
said eight years, upon which the Tenant brought a Writ of Error, and assigned
for Error, because damages are assessed until the time of the Inquisition,
where they ought to be, but to to the time of the Judgment; but the Exception
was not allowed; Another Error was assigned, because that where it is found,
that the Land was of the value of eight pounds per annum, they have assessed
damages for eight years, to eighty pounds, beyond the Revenue; for according to
the rate, and value found by verdict it did amount but to sixty four pounds:
but that Error was not also allowed; for it may be, that by the long detaining
of the Dower, the Demandants have sustained more damages than the bare Revenue,
etc. Another Error was assigned, because Damages are assessed for the whole
eight years after the death of the Husband, where it appears, that for part
of the said years the Demandants were seized of the Lands by force of the
Judgment and execution in the Writ of Dower; and upon that matter the writ of
Error was allowed.

LXXII. Archpool against the Inhabitants of Everingham. Pasch. 29 Eliz. In the
Common Pleas.
IN an Action upon the Statute of Winchester of Huy and Cry by Archoopl against
the Inhabitants of the Hundred of Everingham, the Jury found, that the
Plaintiff was robbed 2 Januarii post occasum solis, sed per lucem diurnam, and
that after the Robbery committed, the Plaintiff went to the Town of Andover,
and advertised the Baylies of the said Town of the said Robbery; and further
found, that the said Town of Andover is not within the said Hundred of
Everingham, and that there is another Town nearer to the place where, etc. the
Robbery was done, than the said Town of Andover within the said Hundred, but
the said Town of Andover was the nearest place where, etc. by the Kings
highway: It was moved that upon this matter, the Plaintiff should not have
judgment, for that he has not made his Fresh suit according to the Law, for he
ought to have begun his Fresh suit within the Hundred where the Robbery was
done: and it was also objected, that the Robbery was done post occasum solis,
in which Case the Hundreders are not to pursue the Malefactors. And Walmsley
Sergeant cited a Case out of Bracton: Si appellatus se defenderit contra
appellantem tota dle usque ad horam in qua Stellae incipiunt apparere, recedat
quietus de appello, and it is not reason to drive the Hundreders to Follow
felons at such a time, 1 Cro. 270.
when for want of light they cannot see them. And all the Justices were clear
of opinion, that if the Robbery was done in the night time, the Inhabitants are
not bound to make the pursuit: And by Rhodes, if in a Praecipe quod reddat of
Lands, the Sheriff summons the Demandant upon the Land in the time of night,
such a summons is merely void.

LXXIII. Wiseman and Wisemas Case. Pasch. 29 Eliz. In the Common Pleas. Intrat.
Trin 28. Rot. 1458.
IN an Action of Debt by Wiseman against Wiseman, the Case was, Debt. 1 And.
160. Owen 140.
that one Wiseman was seized of the Lands, and by his Will devised, 1. I will
and bequeath unto my Wife B. acre for the Term of her life, the remainder to my
Son Thomas in tail: Item I will and bequeath unto my Son Thomas, Devises.
all my Lands in D. and also my Lands in S. and also my Lands in V. Also I give
and bequeath unto the said Thomas my Son all that m^ Island or Land enclosed
with water which I purchased of the Earl of Essex: To have and to hold all the
said last before devised premises unto the said Thomas my Son, and the Heirs
of his Body: The only matter was, If the Habendum shall extend to the Island
only, in which Case Thomas shall have but for life in the Lands in D. S. and V.
or unto the Island, and also to the Lands in D. S. and V; 2 Roll. 60. Roph. 126.
in which Case he shall have Fee-tail in the whole. And it was argued by
Fenner, that the Habendum should extend to the Island only; as he said, the
opinion of the Justices of this Court was in 4 Eliz. in another Case. I devise
my Manor to D. my eldest Son, and also my Land in S. in tail, in that Case the
entail limited for the Land in S. shall not extend to the 1 Roll. 844.
said Manor, and of such opinion was Weston, Welsh, and Dyer; Brown contra,
that the Son has tail in both. But if the words of the devise had been, I
devise my Manor of D. and my Lands in S. to my Son in tail, here the Son had an
estate tail in both. So it has been adjudged, that if I devise Lands to A. B.
and C. successively as they be named, the same is good by way of Remainder.
Walmesley contrary, and he relied much upon this, that the words of the
Habendum are in the plural number, 2 Bulst. 180. 181.
All the last before devised premises, whereas the thing lately devised by the
Will was an Island in the singular number, which cannot satisfy the Habendum,
Extent of an Habendum.
which is in the plural number, and therefore to verify the plural number in
the Habendum, the Habendum by fit construction shall extend to all the Lands in
D. S. and V. and so upon his motion made at another day, it was resolved by all
the Justices, that the Habendum should extend to all the said Lands, and the
Habendum should not streighten the Devise to the Island only.

LXXIV. Fullwood and Fullwoods Case. Pasch. 29 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
Bail renders himself in Court.
IN an Action upon the Case, the Defendant put in bail to the Court to answer to
the Action; and now Judgment being given against him, he came into Court and
rendered himself, and prayed, that in discharge of his sureties, that the Court
would record the rendering of himself, which was granted: And the Court demanded
of the Plaintiff, if he would pray execution for the body against the
Defendant, who said, he would not, whereupon the Court awarded, that the
sureties should be discharged; and the Rule was entered, that the Defendant
offered himself in discharge of his sureties, and Attornatus Querentis
allocatus per curiam, etc. dixit se nolle, etc. Ideo consideratum fuit per
curiam, quod tam praedict. defend. quam praedict. Manucaptores de recognitione
praedict. and denariis in eadem contentis exonerentur.

LXXV. Pasch. 29 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
THe Case was, He in the Reversion upon a Lease for years, makes a Charter of
Feoffment to diverse persons to the use of himself for life, Feoffments.
and after to the use of his eldest Son in tail; and the words of the Charter
were, Dedi, Concessi, Barganizavi, and Feoffavi, and he sealed and delivered
the deed, but no livery of seisin was made; and afterward he came to his
Lessee for years, and said to him, that he had made a Feoffment, and showed
also the uses, but did not show to whom the Feoffment was made; to whom the
Lessee said, you have done very well, I am glad of it: Attornment.
And if that were a good Attornment was the Question: It was said, that that
was the Case of one Arden. And Gent, and Manwood were of opinion, that the same
was no Attornment, because it was not made to the Feoffee, scil. to the Grantee
of the Reversion; and so it was ruled in this Case, for Attornment ought to be
to the Grantee himself, and not to Cestuy que use.

1 Cro. 251. Tithes, and where the spiritual court shall have jurisdiction of
them.
LXXVI. The Parson of Facknams Case. Pasch. 29 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
THe Parson of great Facknam brought an Action of Trespass against the Parson
of Hannington, and the Case was, If the Parson of one Parish claim by
prescription a portion of Tithes out of the Parish of another, if the Spiritual
Court shall have the Jurisdiction, for the trial of it: And the opinion of the
whole Court was clear, that it should, because that the matter is betwixt two
spiritual persons, and concerning the right of Tithes. As 35 H. 6. 39. I. Vicar
of B. brought Trespass for taking away of forty loads of Beans, etc. The
Defendant pleaded, that he is Parson of the said Church of B. and the Plaintiff
is Vicar, etc. and before the Trespass, etc. the Beans were growing in the same
Town, and severed from the nine parts, and he took them as belonging to his
said Church, and demanded Judgment of the Court, etc. The Plaintiff said, that
he and all his Predecessors Vicars, etc. time out of mind, etc. have used to
have the Tithes of such a Close, etc. belonging to his Vicaridge, and within
the said Close the Beans were growing and were parcel of his endowment; and
that at the time of the taking they were severed from the nine parts, whereupon
he took them. And it was holden by Ashton and Danby, because it is confessed on
both sides that the Beans whereof, etc. were Tithes, the Right of which would
come in debate betwixt the Parson and the Vicar, and both are spiritual
persons, that the trial thereof does belong to the Spiritual Court. See 6 E. 4.
3. 22 E. 4. 23. 24. in such a matter betwixt the Parson and Vicar there the
Temporal Court was ousted of the Jurisdiction. See also 31 H. 6. 11. betwixt
the Parson and the Servant of another Parson. 7 H. 4. 102. In Trespass by a
Parson against a Layman, who said, that one A. is Parson of a Church in a Town
adjoining to a Town where the Plaintiff is Parson, and that A. let to him the
Tithe, and demanded Judgment, etc. and pleaded to the Jurisdiction, and by
Gascoigne, the Plaintiff may recover his Tithes in the Spiritual Court.

LXXVII. Bunny against Wright and Stafford. Pasch. 29 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
IN Trespass the Case was this: Leases within 1 Eliz. and 32. 7, 8. made by
Bishops.
Grindal Bishop of Land. leased parcel of the possessions of his Bishopric for
one and twenty years, and afterward ousted the Lessee and leased unto another
for three lives, rendering the ancient and accustomed Rent, which was confirmed
by the Dean and Chapter. And afterward Grindal is translated: Cook argued,
That the Lease is warranted by the Statute of 1 Eliz. At the Common Law a
Bishop might make an Alienation in Fee-simple being confirmed by the Dean and
Chapter: But by 32 H. 8. cap. 28. Bishops without Dean and Chapter, or their
confirmation may make a Lease for one and twenty years, but with the
confirmation of the Dean and Chapter may make a Lease for one thousand years.
Co. 1. Inst. 45. 2. More 107. 1 Anderson 65.
But by the Statute of 1 Eliz. the power of Bishops in that right is much
abridged, for now with confirmation or without confirmation they cannot dispose
of their possessions but for one and twenty years or three lives; and this
Lease is in all points according to the Statute of 1 Eliz. for first it begins
presently upon the making of it: Secondly, the ancient rent is reserved payable
yearly during the term; for although here be an old Lease in esse, yet the Rent
reserved upon the second Lease is payable during the second term, for payable
is a word of power and not of action, as 1 H. 4. 1. 2. 3. Lord, Mesne, and
Tenant, the Mesne gives the Mesnalty in tail, rendering Rent, it is a good Rent,
and well reserved, although here be not a present distress; yet it may be the
Tenancy will escheat, and then the Donor shall distrein for all the Arrearages:
And so the Rent is payable by possibility. And 10 E. 4. 4. A. leaseth for
years, and afterward grants the Reversion to a stranger, if the Beasts of the
stranger come upon the Lands during the term; A. may distre^^ for the
Arrearages incurred, and if he happen seisin, he shall have a^^ Assise during
the continuance of the first term. And he cited a Case lately adjudged in the
Exchequer. A Lessor entered upon Lessee for years, and made a Feoffment rendering
Rent with clause of Re-entry, the Lessee re-entred, claiming his Term, and
afterward during the said Term for years, the Rent reserved upon the Feoffment
upon demand of it is behind: Now has the Lessor regained the Reversion: And so
a Rent may be demanded although not distreinable. And all that was affirmed by
Egerton Solicitor General: And see the words of the Statute of 32 H. 8. cap.
28. Rent reserved yearly during the said Lease due and payable to the Lessor,
etc. such Rent, etc. and yet by the said Statute, such Leases may be good,
although there be a former interest for years in being, if the same shall be
expired, surrendered, or ended within one year after the making such new lease,
and so not expressly payable in rei veritate, annually during the Term.

LXXVIII. Bonefant and Sir Rich. Greenfields Case. Pasch. 29 Eliz. In the Kings
Bench.
Sale of Lands by the Executors of the Devisor.
BOnefant brought Trespass against Sir Rich. Greenfield, and upon the general
issue, this special matter was found: Tremagrie was seized of a Manor, whereof
the place where, etc. was parcel, in his Demesne as of Fee, and by his Will
devised the same to his four Executors, and further willed, Post. 260.
that his said Executors should sell the same to Sir John Saintleger for the
payment of his debts, if the said Sir John would pay for it one thousand one
hundred pounds at such a day, and died, Sir John did not pay the money at the
day; One of the Executors refused Administration of the Will, the other three
entered into the Land and sold it to the Defendant for so much as it could be
sold, and in convenient time. It was moved, that the sale was not good, for
they have not their authority as Executors, but as Devisees, and then when one
refuses, the other cannot sell by 21 H. 3. Cestuy que use Wills, that is
Executors shall alien his Land, and dies, although the Executors refuse the
Administration, yet they may alien the Land. 19 H. 8. 11. 15 H. 7. 12 Egerton
Solicitor argued, that the sale is good by the Common Law, and also by the
Statute 49 E. 3. 16, 17. Devise, that his Executors shall sell his Land, and
dies, and one of the Executors dies, another refuses, the third may sell
well enough, 1 And. 145.
and the sale is good. See Br. Devise 31. 30 H. 8. 39 E. 3. Br. Assise 356. And
he put a difference where an Authority is given to many by one deed, there all
ought to join; contrary, where the Authority is given by Will; And if all the
Executors severally sell the Lands to several persons, such sale which is most
beneficial for the Testator shall stand, and take effect: And here it is found
by verdict, that one of the Executors, recusavitonus Testamenti, Ergo, he
refused to take by the Devise, for it was devised unto him to the intent to
sell, therefore if he refuses to sell, he does refuse to take, and so it is
not necessary that he who refuses join in the sale, and although we are not
within the express words of the Statute, yet we are within the sense and
meaning of it. And afterward it was adjudged, that the Condition, for the
manner of it, was good.

LXXIX. Gamock and Cliffs Case. Pasch. 29 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
Ejectione firmae.
EJectione firmae was brought by Gamock against Cliff of the Manor of Hockly,
in the County of Essex, and upon the evidence the case was: That the King and
Queen, Philip and Mary, seized of the said Manor of Hockley, seized the same to
Edmund Terrel for years, exceptis and Reservat. grossis arboribus super
praemissis crescentibus and existentibus; Proviso, Conditions.
that if the said Lessee his Executors, or Assigns shall do any voluntary Wast
in any of the Premises before demised, that then the said demise shall be void
and accounted none in Law; the said King and Queen after that lease grant the
Reversion to the Lord Rich and his Heirs, the Lessee cuts down certain great
Trees, which at the time of the demise were not great, but little Trees, but
after, tractu temporis became great, and at the time of the cutting down were
great, upon whom the Lady Rich, Wife and Widow of the said Lord Rich, being
Tenant in Dower, the said Manor (inter alia) being assigned to her in Dower,
did enter, for the condition broken: It was moved; If the exception did extend
to the trees which at the time of the demise were but little trees, but
afterward at the time of their cutting down were become great; for if the
exception do extend to such Trees, then upon the matter they were not demised,
and if so, then wast cannot be assigned in the cutting down of them, and then
by the cutting of them, the condition is not broken: But if the exception shall
be construed to extend to such Trees only which were great Tempore dimissionis,
then those Trees in which, etc are demised, and by the cutting down of them,
the condition is broken. And the Lord Anderson was of opinion, that the
exception did extend to Trees, which at any time dimissionis praedict. became
great, Where the Tenant in Dower shall take advantage of a condition.
although at the time of the demise they were but little, so as upon the
matter, such Trees were never demised, and so the condition does not extend to
them; otherwise it should be if the words had been modo crescentibus and
existentibus. Another matter was moved, because if the Lady Rich, being Tenant
in Dower, and so in by the Law, not by the party, and so not privy, nor as
Assignee, could enter for the condition broken: And the Court was clear of
opinion, that because, that the words of the condition are, Quando dimissio
praedict. erit vacua, etc. and no clause of reentry is reserved, so that
privity is not requisite, the Lady Rich shall take advantage of the condition,
11 H. 17. Where the words of a Lease are, that upon the not going to Rome, that
the Lease shall cease; it was holden that the Grantee of the Reversion by the
common Law should take advantage of such a condition; contrary where the
condition is conceived in words of re-entry, 21 H. 7. 12. It was moved further,
that here is not any voluntary wast in the Lessee as to the condition, Dyer
281. Owen 93.
because done by a stranger, and not by the Lessee himself, and for that the
condition is not broken, only the Lessee is subject unto an Action of Wast;
otherwise, if the Lessee had expressly commanded the Vendee to cut them down, or
had given to him express authority. The sale was, All his Woods growing, etc.

LXXX Gill and Harewoods Case. Pasch. 29 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
GIll brought an Action upon the Case against Harewood, and declared, Assumpsit.
that where the Defendant was endebted to the Plaintiff in such a ^um, and
showed how; the Defendant in consideration that the Plaintiff, per parvum
tempus deferret diem solutionis, etc. did promise to pay, and. And, upon Non
Assumpsit pleaded, it was found for the Plaintiff, and it was moved in arrest
of Judgment, that here is not any consideration, for no time is limited for the
forbearance, but generally, parvum tempus, which cannot be any commodity to the
Defendant, for the same may be, but punctum temporis, etc. But the exception
was not allowed, for the Debt in it self is a sufficient consideration.

LXXXI. Pasch. 29 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
2 Co. 74. 5 Co. 38. 8 Co. 155.
FEnner Sergeant would have drawn a Fine which was by Dedimus Potestatem, and
the Fine was to two, and their heirs, but the Court would not receive such Fine
for the incertainty of the Inheritance, which always in case of Fine ought to
be reposed in a person certain, and not left to uncertainty of the Survivor,
and the said Sergeant prayed presently, that the said Fine be received at the
peril of the Conusees, but the same was denied him by the whole Court.

LXXXII. Mascals Case. Mich. 29, and 30 Eliz. In Communi Banco.
Covenant. 2 Cro. 644.
MAscal leased a House to A. for years by Indenture, by which A. covenanted
with Mascal to repair the House Leased, and that it should be lawful for Mascal
his Heirs and Assigns to enter into the House to see in what plight for matter
of Reparation the said House stood, and if upon any such view, any default
should be found in the not repairing of it, and thereof warning be given to A.
his Executors, etc. Then within four months after such warning, such default
should be amended: the House in the default of the Lessee became ruinous:
Mascal granted the Reversion over in Fee to one Carre, who upon view of the
House gave warning to A. of the default, etc. which is not repaired, upon which
Carre, as Assignee of Mascal, brought an Action of Covenant against A. It was
moved by Fenner Sergeant, that the Action did not lie, because the House became
ruinous before his interest in the Reversion; But the opinion of the whole
Court was against him, for that the Action is not conceived upon the ruinous
estate of the House, or for the committing of Waste, but for the not repayring
of it within the time appointed by the Covenant, after the warning, so as it is
not material within what time the House became ruinous, but within what time
the warning was given, and the default of the Reparation did happen.

LXXXIII. Mich. 29, and 30 Eliz. In Communi Banco.
Dower.
IN a Writ of Dower, brought by a Woman of the third part of certain Lands, etc.
The Tenant pleaded; That the Lands of which Dower is demanded, are of the
nature of Gavel-kind, and that the custom of such Land is, that Dower ought to
be demanded of the moity of it, and not of the third part, upon which the
Demandant did demur: And the opinion of Windham and Anderson Justices was; That
such a Woman of such Land might at her pleasure demand her Dower either
according to the Custom, 1 Cro. 825. Poph. 133.
or according to the common Law; for by Anderson, the common Law was before the
Custom, quod quaere, And by Windham, if the Demandant here recover her Dower
according to the common Law, yet if she takes another Husband, she shall lose
her Dower as if she had been endowed according to the Custom. Coke, an
Apprentice the of Inner Temple being at the Bar, when this Case was moved, said
unto Sergeant Shuttleworth, that the Case had been adjudged against the
Demandant, and Scot Prothonotary did affirm, that the Lord Dyer was of opinion,
that the Woman ought to be endowed according to the Custom, and not otherwise.
And Sayer one of the Clarks of Nelson, chief Prothonotary said, that it was
adjudged accordingly, 16. Eliz. and that the Case was betwixt Gelbrand
Demandant, and Hunt Tenant.

LXXXIV. Beverlie and Cornwals Case. Mich. 29 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
BEverlie brought a Quare Impedit against Cornwall, Quare Imped. 2 Roll. 805.
Out-lawry pleaded.
and had Judgment to recover upon a Demurrer in Law: Which see Mich. 28, and 29
Eliz. And now the Queen brought a Scire facias upon the matter, That the said
Beverly after the said Judgment was outlawed in an Action of Trespass at the
suit of I. S. and upon that a Scire facias issued, ad respondendum Quare dicta
Domina Regina, should not have execution of the Judgment aforesaid, by reason
of the Out-lawry aforesaid, and declared in all as aforesaid: And further, that
the said Cornwall had resigned. Upon which Beverlie did demur in Law. And this
Term it was argued by Puckering Sergeant for the Queen, that by that Out-lawry
the Interest to present is tranferred to the Queen. Which see 5 H. 5. 3. Tenant
at will of a Manor, to which an Advowson is appendant, is outlawed in an
Action of Trespass; the Church voided; by award of the Court it belongs to the
King to present: And see 8 R. 2. scil. Quare Imped. 200 A. seized of an
Advowson, the Church becomes void. A. is Outlawed in a personal Action; the
King shall have a Quare Impedit in that Case. And as to the Exception taken,
because the Out-lawry is not sufficiently laid in the Writ, but only
generally, viz. utlagatus in Com. Lincoln, ad sectam. J.S. in placito
transgressionis, without showing the Out-lawry at large There is a difference
where an Out-lawry is pleaded by way of ^^r, and disability of the person, etc.
and where it is set down in a Writ, for a Writ ought shortly and compendiously
to comprehend the cause of the Action, especially judicial Writs which are not
tied to any form certain, especially because that the Out-lawry set forth in
the Writ is a Record of the same Court: For the perclose of the Scire facias
is, prout per recordum hic in curia before apparet: And that Record being in
the Court the party cannot plead Null tiel record, as if the Record had been in
any other Court: But he ought to demand Dyer of the Record: Which vide 5 H. 7.
24. Walmesley Sergeant contrary. By Out-lawry in an Action personal, the King
cannot seize Land, but only take the profits of it, 9. H. 6. 20. 21 H. 7. 7.
And as our case is, nothing does accrue to the Queen by this Out-lawry, for the
Queen her self is seized of the Advowson, because she, usurpando presentavit,
and her Clerk admitted; and although Beverlie has recovered in a Quare Impedit
against the Presentee of the Queen; yet because he is not removed by a Writ to
the Bishop, the Queen continues Patron, and nothing remains in Beverlie that
may be forfeited. But Rhodes and Periam contrary, for by Periam if after such
Recovery the Incumbent dies, the Patron shall present, for by the Judgment in
the Quare Impedit for Beverlie, the Patronage is rev^^ted in him without any
other execution: And by Rhodes, If after such Judgment the Patron dies, his
Executors shall have a Writ to the Bishop. And by Walmesley, the Scire facias
does not lie for the Queen, for that Writ always runs in privity of the Record
upon which it is grounded, to which Record the Queen is a stranger, and by
Out-lawry in an Action personal no Action real shall escheat, and therefore
this Scire facias being in the nature of a Quare Impedit upon which it is
grounded, which is a real Action, or at least a mixed, shall not be forfeited;
and also it shall be absurd to grant now a Writ to the Bishop for the Queen;
whereas Judgment was given against the Queen, as in our case it has been. And
in no Case the Judges shall respect the title of the Queen, being a stranger to
the Writ: But where a title for the Queen does appear upon the pleading or
otherwise within the Record, 11 H. 4. 224. by Hankford. If a clear title for
the King be confessed by the parties upon pleading, a Writ to the Bishop shall
issue for the King; so if such matter appear in Evidence, 3 Cro. 427.
etc. the Land in question is seisable into the Kings hands. See 9 H. 7. 9. 16
H. 7. 12. so 21 E. 4. 3. by Choke and F.N.B. 38. e. In a Quare Impedit betwixt
two strangers if title does appear to the Court for the King, a Writ to the
Bishop shall issue forth for the King; but in our Case nothing is within the
Record to entitle the Queen, but all the matter upon which a Writ to the Bishop
is prayed for the Queen is out of the Record, and a foreign thing. And as to
the Out-lawry, he conceived it is not sufficiently alleged; for he ought to
have made mention of the Exigent and of all the proceeding upon it, and the
Judgment of the Coroners, and for defect of that no title is given to the
Queen; and of that opinion was the Lord Anderson, and that it ought to be set
forth in the Writ in what Term the said Beverly was outlawed, and the Number
Roll also, so that if Beverly had demanded Dyer of the Record, the Court might
know it: And by Nelson chief Prothonotary, the Term in which the Out-lawry was,
ought to be comprised in the Scire facias. Vide Book of Entries 485. where in a
Quare Impedit for the King upon such a title, the King showed in his Count,
that A. was seized of such an Advowson, and granted the next Avoidance to B.
and that afterward one C. impleaded the said B. in a Writ of Account in such a
Court, where Nihil was returned upon the summons, upon which issued forth a
Capias, upon which is returned, Non est inventus, etc. upon which an Exigent,
upon which the Sheriff did return, quod ad com. tent. etc. and ad v. comitat.
tunc prox. praecedent. the said B. exactus fuit, and non comparuit, and quia ad
nullum eorundem comitat. apparuit, utlagatus fuit, and after the the Church
voided, and that by reason thereof it did belong to the King to present: vide
ibid. 196. accordingly. And as to the Scire facias all the Judges agreed, that
upon the matter the Writ lay well enough: And it is good discretion in the
Court to grant such a Writ: And by Rhodes, If two Coparceners of an Advowson
make composition to present by turns, and afterward one of them dies, her
Heir within age, and in Ward to the King; The Church voideth, and the King is
disturbed in his presentment, he shall have a Scire facias upon such
composition, notwithstanding that he be a stranger to it: See F.N.B. 34 H. And
by all the Justices, if one recover in Debt upon a simple contract, and before
execution the Plaintiff is outlawed in an Action personal, the King shall sue
execution: And see 37 H. 6. 26. Where in Debt upon an Obligation it was
surmised to the Court, that the Plaintiff was outlawed: And the Kings Attorney
prayed delivery of the Obligation, etc.

LXXXV. Moile and the Earl of Warwicks Case. Mich. 29, and 30 Eliz. In Communi
Banco.
Quare Impedit.
A Quare Impedit was brought by Walter Moile against Ambrose Earl of Warwick,
and the Archbishop of Canterbury. And now came the Serjeanes of the Queen, and
showed an Office, to entitle the Queen to have a Writ to the Bishop, containing
such matter, viz. That one Guilford was seized of the Manor of D. to which the
Advowson of the Church was appendant, and that Manor was holden in chief by
Knights service, and that Guilford and his Wife levied a Fine thereof to the
use of themselves for their lives, the remainder over in tail to their eldest
Son, and that Guilford is dead, but who is his next Heir, ignorant: And it was
showed by the Council of the other side, that the truth of the Case was, that
the said Guilford was seized of the said Manor in the right of his Wife, and so
levied the Fine, in which Case the said coveyance is not within the Statute of
32 H. 8. for it was for the advancement of the Husband, not of the Wife, which
Anderson granted. Vide Dyer 19 Eliz. 354. Caverlies Case, but that is not in
the Office: And it was moved at the Bar, that the Office is imperfect, because
no Heir is found. But Anderson, the Office is sufficient for the King to seize,
although it be insufficient for the Heir, etc. And it was agreed by the whole
Court, Office trove.
that the Court ought not to receive the Office, although one would affirm upon
oath, that it is the very Office, but it ought to be brought in under the Great
Seal of England; and also the Court shall not receive it without a Writ; and
yet Nelson Prothonotary said, that the Statute of Huy and Cry of Winchester was
brought into the Court without a Writ under the great Seal, A Record not to be
brought into Court without a Writ. 63.
and that was out of the Tower: And in that Case also the Justices held, that
if a Record be pleaded in the same Court where it abides, the other party
against whom it is pleaded may plead Null tiel Record, as if the said Record had
bin remaining in another Court, which all the Prothonotaries denied, and that
always it had been used to the contrary. At another day the Case was moved
again. The Plaintiff in the Quare Impedit counted, that Richard Guilford was
seized of the said Manor, etc. in the right of Bennet his Wife, and so seized,
they both levied a Fine thereof to a stranger, Sur Conusans de droit come ceo,
who rendered it to the Husband and Wife for their lives, the remainder to the
Heirs of the body of the Husband, the remainder to the right Heirs of the
Husband; and they so being seized, the Husband alone levied a Fine to a
stranger, Sur Conusans de droit come ceo, etc. and by the same Fine the Conusee
rendered to the Husband and Wife in tail, the remainder to the Heirs of the body
of the Husband, the remainder to the right Heirs of the Husband, the Husband
died seized, the Wife entered and leased the said Manor to the Plaintiff, and
then the Church did become void: And now the Queens Sergeants came and showed
unto the Court an Office, which came in by Mittimus: In which Writ the perclose
is, Mandamus vobis quod inspectis, etc. pro nobis fieri faciatis quod secundum
leges and consuetudinem Regni nostri Angliae faciend. Statuetis; And the Office
did purport, that the said Richard was seized of the said Manor, and held the
same of the Queen, as of her Castle of Dover, by Knights service in chief, and
levied the Fine, ut supra, and that the said Richard died, sed quis sit
propinquior haeres dict. Ric. penitus ignorant; and upon that Office prayed a
Writ to the Bishop for the Queen: And two Exceptions were taken to the Office,
First because it is not found by the said Office that the said Richard died
seized, 1 Cro. 895.
in which Case it may be for any thing that appears in the Office, that the
said Richard after the said Fine had conveyed his estate in the said Lands unto
others, or that he was disseised, etc. See 3 H. 6. 5. If it be not found of
what estate the Tenant of the King died seized, the Office is insufficient. But
see there by Martin, that such an Office is good enough for the King, but not
for the Heir to sue his Livery upon it. And by Anderson, Periam, and Rhodes,
that defect in the Office is supplied by the Count, for there it is expressly
alleged, that the said Richard died seized. Secondly, because no Heir is found
by the said Office. To which it was said by the Lord Anderson, that
peradventure at the Common Law the same had been a material Exception. But we
ought to respect the Statutes of 32 and 34 H. 8. of Wills. And therefore as to
the Wife the Queen is entitled to Primer seisin, because the conveyance was
made for her advancement. And by Windham, the Queen in this Cale shall not have
Primer seisin, for by the Statute the Queen shall not have Primer seisin, but
in such Case, where, if no conveyance had been made, the Queen should have had
Primer seisin; but in this Case for any thing that appears before us, if this
conveyance had not been made the Queen should not have had Primer seisin,
forasmuch as no Heir is found, and if he died without Heir there is no Primer
seisin, because there is not any in rerum natura to sue livery. Rhodes, Periam,
and Anderson contrary; Admitting that Richard died withou Heir, the Queen shall
have Primer seisin against the Wife of Richard, notwithstanding the escheat.
Walmesley Sergeant, If the Tenant of the King by Knights service in chief dies
seized of other Lands holden of a common person by Knights service, without
Heirs, the King shall not have Primer seisin of such Lands holden of a Subject,
which Windham granted: But by Anderson the Lord is put to sue an Ouster le
main of the Land holden of him. And afterward Exception was taken to the
Count, because the Plaintiff has not averred the life of the Tenant in tail,
that is, of Bennet the Wife of Richard, to whom the Land was entailed by the
second Fine: But that Exception was disallowed by the whole Court, and a
difference put by Anderson, Where a man pleads the grant of an Advowson in
gross by Tenant in tail, in such case the life of the Tenant in tail ought to
be averred, for by his death the grant cease. But where a man pleads the
Lease of Tenant in tail of a Manor with an Advowson appendant, in such case
such averment is not necessary: So accordingly Smith and Stapletons Case, 15
Eliz. 431. And here it was moved, if, in as much as by the first Fine an estate
for life was rendered to the Wife, and by the second Fine, in which she did not
join, an estate tail was limited unto her, and now when the Husband dies if he
shall be remitted to her estate for life; Co. 1 Inst. 357. 2 Cro. 489.
which Windham granted; for that was her lawful estate, and the second estate
tortious. But by Rhodes, Periam, and Anderson the Wife is at liberty to make
her election which of the two estates she will have. And as to the Writ to the
Bishop for the Queen, the Court was clear of opinion, that it ought not to be
granted upon this matter: But all the question was, if Regina inconsulta, the
Court would or ought to proceed: And it was holden clearly by the whole Court,
that the tenure alleged modo and forma, could not be a tenure in chief, for it
is said, that the Land was holden of the King, as of the Castle of Dover, in
Capite.

LXXXVI. Mich. 29 and 30 Eliz. In Communi Banco. Intr. Pasc. 28 Eliz. Rot. 602.
Wast. ^ Cro. 40. 4^.
WAst was brought by F. and his Wife against Pepy, and counted, that the said
Pepy was seized, and enfeoffed certain persons to the use of himself for life,
and afterward to the use of the Wife of the Plaintiff and her Heirs. The
Defendant pleaded, that the said Feoffment was unto the use of himself and his
Heirs in Fee, etc. without that, that it was to the uses in the Count; Upon
which they were at issue: And it was found by verdict, that the said Feoffment
was unto the uses contained in the Count: But the Jury further found, that the
estate of the Defendant by the limitation of the use was privileged with the
impunity for Wast, that is to say, without impeachment of Wast. And it was
moved, if upon this verdict the Plaintiff shall have Judgment: And Anderson and
Rhodes Justices, he shall, for the matter in issue is found for the Plaintiff,
and that is the Feoffment to the uses contained in the Count; and this impunity
of Wast is a foreign matter not within the charge of the Jury, and therefore
the traverse of it but matter of surplusage. As if I plead the Feoffment of I.
S. To which the other pleads, that he did not enfeoff, and the Jury find a
conditional Feoffment, the Court shall not respect the finding of the
condition, for it was not in issue, and no advantage shall ever be had of such
a liberty if it be not pleaded. 30 H. 8. Dyer 41. In Dower the Tenant pleaded,
Ne unques seisi que Dower; the Tenant pleaded, that before the coverture of the
Demandant, one A. was seized of the Lands, of which Dower is demanded in tail,
who made a Feoffment to a stranger, and took the Demandant to Wife, and took
back an estate in Fee, and died seized, having issue inheritable: Now although
upon the truth of the matter she is not dowable de jure, yet when the parties
are at issue upon a point certain, Hob. 53. Owen. 91.
no foreign or strange matter not in question betwixt the parties shall be
respected in the point of the Judgment. But if the Defendant had pleaded it in
bar, he might have foreclosed the Demandant of her Dower: Vide 38 H. 6. 27. 47
E. 3. 19. In a Praecipe quod reddat in the default of the Tenant one cause and
showed how the Tenant who made default was but Tenant for life of the Lands in
demand, the reversion in Fee to himself, and prayed to be received. The
Demandant did counter-plead the receipt, saying, the Defendant had fee, upon
which issue was joined. And it was found, that neither the tenant, nor he which
prayed to be received, had any thing in the Land; In that case the Court did
not regard the matter which was superfluous in the verdict, for they were at
issue upon a point certain, that is, whether the Tenant was seized in Fee, for
it was confessed of both sides, that he had an estate for life; and with that
matter the Jury was not charged, and they are not to enquire of it, and so it
was found against the Demandant, for which cause the Receipt was granted. 7 H 6.
20. The parties were at issue upon a dying seized, which is found by verdict,
but the Jury further find, that the other party made continual claim; this
continual claim shall not be regarded in the point of Judgment, because it was
pleaded in avoidance of the descent. Windh. Justice contrary, Forasmuch as it
appears unto us upon the verdict, that the Plaintiff has not cause of
Action, and therefore he shall not have Judgment; As in Detinue, No advantage
of impunity for Wast shall be taken, where the same is not pleaded though found
by verdict. Judgment. Hob. 53. Owen. 91.
The Plaintiff counts of a bailment by his own hand; the Defendant pleads,
that he does not detain, etc. the Jury find the Detinue, but upon a bailment by
another hand: In this case, notwithstanding that the Detinue be found, yet the
Plaintiff shall not have Judgment: But Rhodes, Periam, and Anderson in the
principal case were of opinion, Judgment should be given for the Plaintiff, for
in no case the party shall have advantage of such a Liberty of impunity of
Wast, if he do not plead it; And the Jurors are not to meddle with any matter
which is not in issue: And if it be but matter of surplusage it is to no
purpose. And afterward Judgment was given for the Plaintiff.

LXXXVII. Bracebridge and Baskerviles Case. Mich. 29 and 30 Eliz. In Communi
Banco.
AN Action of Debt is brought against three Executors, Debt against Executors.
one of them pleads in Bar a Recovery against himself in the Kings Bench: The
other two plead plene administr. Against the first plea the Plaintiff did aver
covin; and upon the second plea they are at issue: The first issue is found for
the Plaintiff, and as to the other plea, it was found, that the Defendants have
in their hands thirty pounds of the goods of their Testator not administered.
Note, the debt in demand was one hundred pounds, upon which the Plaintiff had
Judgment to recover the goods of the Testator, and thereupon had execution. Now
the Plaintiff brought a Scire facias against the said Executors, supposing that
many other goods of the Testator have come unto their hands after the Judgment,
and prayed execution thereof: upon which the Defendant did demur in Law. Vide
2^ H. 6. 40. 41. In debt against Executors of forty marks, the Defendant
pleaded, that he had fully administered, and it was sound, that the Defendant,
at the day of the Writ brought, had of the goods of the dead twenty marks and
no more, and gave damges five marks. There the Plaintiff had Judgment for the
twenty marks of the goods of the dead, and the five marks of their own goods:
And as to the other twenty marks, that the Plaintiff should be amerced: 33 H.
6. 24. Where Executors plead that they have nothing in their hands, which is
found accordingly: Afterward goods of the Testator came to the hands of the
Executors: Now the Plaintiff upon a surmise shall have out of the same Record a
Scire facias to have execution of the said goods: Scire facias, to have
Execution of Assets come to Executors hands, after ^iens enter maynes pleaded.
But see 4 H. 6. 4. contrary, for there it is said, that upon the matter the
original is determined, and so no Record, upon which a Scire facias can be
grounded: And see Fitzh. abridging the Case Scire facias, 25. by the verdict
and the Judgment the Original is abated: Vide 7 E. 4. 9. by Moile, according to
33 H. 6. and so 46 E. 3. 9. by Belknap. And the Lord Anderson demanded of the
Prothonotaries the manner of the entry of the Judgments given in such Cases,
who said, that their Entry is in this manner: (i. e.) Quod querens recuperet,
that which is expressly found by the verdict, but nothing of the residue, for of
that no mention is made at all. And the Court seemed to be of opinion, that
where, upon nothing remaining in their hands, pleaded, It is found that some
part of the sum in demand is in the hands of the Executors, there the Plaintiff
upon a surmise of goods come to the hands of the Executors shall have a Scire
facias; 3 Cro. 272. Hob, 199. 1 Cro. 318. 319 592. 8 Co. 134.
contrary, where upon such issue, it is found fully for the Defendants, that
they have nothing in their hands.

LXXXVIII. Fordleys Case. Mich. 29 and 30 Eliz. In Communi Banco.
Tender pleaded. 9 Co. 79. Die. 25. a. 1 Inst 207. Post. 69. 70. a.
FOrdley brought debt upon an Obligation, the Condition was, that if the
Defendant, viz. the Obligor deliver unto the Plaintiff the Obligee, at a such a
day and place, twenty pounds or ten Kine, at the then choice of the Obligee,
etc. that then, etc. The Court was clear of opinion, that the Defendant in
pleading the performance thereof ought to tender to the Plaintiff as well the
twenty pounds as the ten Kine, and for default thereof Judgment was given
against the Defendant. See the Number Roll T. 29 Eliz. 1. part. 324. vide 14 E.
4 4. b.

LXXXIX. Barker and Pigots Case. Mich. 29 and 30 Eliz. In Communi Banco.
EDward Barker brought Debt against Rich. Pigot Executor of the Will of E.
Executrix of the Will of R. The Defendant pleaded, that he had fully
administered the goods of his Testator E. upon which they were at issue, Debt.
which was found for the Plaintiff. And it was moved in arrest of Judgment,
that here is not any issue joined, which answers to the Action, for the Action
is brought against the Defendant in the quality of the Executor of an Executor,
and the verdict extends to the Defendant, but is Executor of the said E. for it
is found by it, that the Defendant has fully administered the goods of his
Testatrix, without any enquiry of the Administration of the goods of the first
Testator R. in which capacity the Defendant is charged. So as here the Writ
charges the Defendant in the quality of an Executor of an Executor and in
respect of the first Testator, and the issue and verdict does concern the last
Testator: Execution must follow the nature of the Action.
And the whole Court was clear of opinion, that although that now after verdict
Fee-tail be saved, and no Judgment shall be given upon it, yet here the Court
shall give Judgment as upon a Nihil dicit, in which case the Execution of the
Judgment, shall not fall upon the goods of the last Testator according to the
verdict, but shall follow the nature of the Action which was brought against
the Defendant as Executor of an Executor.

XC. Thacker and Elmers Case. Mich. 29 and 30 Eliz. In Communi Banco.
THacker recovered in an Assize of Novel disseisin against Elmer certain Lands
in Hackney, and had execution: Re-disseisin, and the Judgment in it. 1 Cro. 323.
Elmer entered upon Thacker and ousted him, and Redisseised him. Thacker
re-entred, and afterward brought a Redisseisin; And it was moved, whether
Thacker against his Entry might have a Redisseisin: And the opinion of the
whole Court was, that he might well maintain the Writ, for he is not thereby to
recover any Land; but the Defendant of that Redisseisin being convicted, shall
be fined and imprisoned, and render double damages: Vide Book of Entries 502.
the Judgment in a Redisseisin is, Quod recuperet seisinam suam of the Land.

XCI. Blaunchflower and Fryes Case. Mich. 29 and 30 Eliz. In Communi Banco.
BLaunchflower brought debt upon a Bond against Elinor Frye, as Executrix of
one Andrew Frye her late Husband, who pleaded, Debt.
that this Writ was brought 9 July, 27 Eliz. whereof she had notice the first
of October after, within which time one Lawrence had brought an Original Writ
against the said Elinor as Administratrix of the said Andrew: And after the
bringing of the Writ, the Bishop of Bath and Wels committed Administration of
the goods of the said Andrew to the said Elinor, which Elinor confessed the
Action, upon which Judgment was given for the said Lawrence, beyond which she
had not goods, upon which the now Plaintiff did demur in Law. And by Anderson,
the Recovery pleaded in bar shall not bind the Plaintiff, because it appears
unpon the plea of the Defendant, that the Administration was committed after
the Writ purchased, which matter if the Defendant had pleaded, Administration
granted, pendant the Writ.
Lawrence could not have had Judgment to recover. As where there are three
Executors, and debt is brought against two of them, if they do not plead that
matter in abatment of the Writ, but plead, etc. or confess the Action, so that
the Plaintiff has Judgment to Recover, that Recovery shall not bind a stranger
who has cause of Action against them, but that he may well falsify it; and yet
it was said that in such Case, the Defendant by the obtaining of the Letters of
Administration had made the Writ good against her, vid. 13 H. 4. Fitz.
Executors, 118. Administration committed before the Writ purchased shall abate
the Writ brought against the Defendant as Executor, but such Administration
obtained, depending the Writ shall not abate it, vid. 21 H. 6. 8. 2 R. 3. 20.
Another matter was moved by Anderson, because the Defendant had pleaded a
Recovery by confession had against her without Averment that it was a true
Debt, in which Case Covin is presumed. Windham and Periam were of opinion, that
the matter of Covin ought to come in on the part of the Plaintiff, which
Anderson denied, vid. 9 E. 4. 13, 14. 33. the Cardinals Case.

XCII. Basset and Kerns Case. Roll. Tit. Election. Debt by Executors. 1 Cro. 819
In Communi Banco Intrat. Mich. 26 and 27 Eliz. Rot. 12.
BAsset the Executor of Moris Sheppheard brought debt upon a bond against
Kerne, the Case was: That Kerne was bound to Moris in a Obligation upon
Condition, that the said Kerne should pay to the said Morris his Executors, 1
Roll. 446. Tit. Condition.
etc. at the choice and election of the said Morris, within a month after the
death of the Lady Kerne, thirty pounds, or twenty Kine, Election.
to which the Defendant pleaded that the Plaintiff within the month after the
death, etc. did not make any choice or election, upon which the Plaintiff did
demur in Law: And the Court was clear of opinion, that it was a good Plea in
Bar, for the Obligor is not bounden to make a tender of both, viz. of the money
and the Ri^e; but the Obligee himself is bounden at his peril to make election
within the time limited; As if I be bounden to you, to make unto you such
further assurance within such a time by Fine or Feoffment as you shall choose,
it behooves you to make election of your assurance, Fine, or Feoffment; and in
the principal Case, the election of the Plaintiff ought to precede the tender
of the Defendant: vid. the Lord Lisles Case, 18 E. 4. 15. 17. 20. 21. Where the
Defendant was bound to the said Lord to show his Evidences touching such a
House to the said Lord or his Council, the election was to the Defendant to
whom he would show them; and there by Brian, if I be bound to you to marry your
Daughter, or to go to York on your Businesses upon request, before you require
me to marry your Daughter I may do it, or go to York, which Coke granted, vid.
13 E. 4. 4. Where the condition is in the disjunctive, before the day of
performance the Election is to the Defendant, but if at the day he make
default, the Election is to the Obligee; vid. 9 E. 4. 36, 37. And by Windham,
if I be bound unto you in an Obligation of ten pounds, to pay to you such a day
ten pounds in Gold, or Silver, if you do not make your election before the day,
yet the duty remains payable, for the thing to be paid is parcel of the
penalty, quod fuit concessum; And as to the principal Case, the Court was clear
of opinion, that upon this matter the Plaintiff should be barred. See before
this Term, Forteleyes Case.

XCIII Searches Case. Mich. 29 and 30 Eliz. In Communi Banco.
Antea 68. Habeas Corpus.
A Habeas Corpus issued forth out of the Court of Common Pleas, to the Steward
and Marshal of the House, etc. for one Will. Search, which was returned in this
manner, viz. quod Domina Regina per litteras suas Patentes suscepit, in
protectionem suam regiam, Johannem Mabbe, and his sureties, and of her further
grace by the said Letters, voluit, that if any person should arrest, or cause
to be arrested the said John Mabbe or any of his sureties, that then the
Marshal of her House, or his lawful Deputy might arrest every such person, and
detain them in Prison until such person should answer before the Privy Council
for the contempt; And that the said William Search caused one John Preston one
of the said sureties of the said John Mabbe to be arrested, etc. And upon that
return, the said William Search was discharged; And also because that after the
said discharge the parties caused the said William Search to be arrested again
for the same cause, that is, by color of the said protection; An Attachment
was granted against them.

Note, that the same Term, Mich. 29 and 30 Eliz. Another Habeas Corpus was
directed to the Steward and Marshal of the Marshalsey, for one Howel, Habeas
Corpus.
who made return, that the said Howel was committed to his custody, per
mandatum Francisci Walsingham Militis Principalis Secretarij, and unius de
privato concilio Dominae Reginae, and that return was by the Court holden
insufficient, because the cause upon which he was committed, was not set down
in the return; and therefore day was given to amend the return, and now they
returned the Writ in this manner, ss. infra nominatus Johannes Howel commissus
fuit, etc. ex sententia and mandato totius concilii privati Dominae Reginae;
Ita quod corpus ejus habere non possumus, etc. And that return was also holden
by the Court to be insufficient, for (by whatsoever person, or by what means
soever he was committed) the conclusion of the return ought to be, Corpus tamen
ejus paratum habeo, and if it shall seem good to the Court, that the Prisoner
shall have his Privilege, and shall be dismis't, he shall be discharged, but
if not, then he shall be remanded. And the Court took a difference, where one
is committed by one of the Privy Council, for in such case the cause of the
committing ought to be set down in the return; But contrary where the party is
committed by the whole Council, there no cause need to be alleged.

XCV. Bret and Audars Case. Mich. 29 and 30 Eliz. In Communi Banco.
BRet brought Debt upon an Obligation against Audar, Debt upon a Bond to
perform Award. Owen. 7.
the Condition of which Obligation was, that the Defendant should stand to the
Award, etc. And the Arbitrator awarded, that the Defendant should pay unto the
Plaintiff ten pounds, without naming day or place; And as to that the Defendant
pleaded, that he was always ready, and yet is, etc. without showing any tender:
And it was moved, That although that would have been a good Plea in debt upon
an Arbitrament, as the Case is, 7 H. 4. 97. See 21 E. 4. 40, 41, 42. Yet now by
the Obligation and the Condition of it, the sum is payable in another manner
than it was before, see the pleading of the Case, 21 E. 4. In Debt upon an
Obligation to perform the Award; That the Award was made between the Terms of
Pasch. and Trinity, and he, the eighth of September after, tendered the twenty
pounds, and the Plaintiff refused it. And the Lord Anderson put a difference
between the Case, in 22 H. 6. 57. Tender.
and the Case at the Bar, for in our Case the Obligation does precede the duty
which accrueth by the Award subsequent, but in the former Case the duty did
precede the Obligation which was made for the further assurance of the duty:
And here the Defendant ought to have pleaded the tender, and see 14. E. 4. 4.
A. is bound unto B. that, where he has granted to the said B. a Rentcharge
out of such Land, now if the said B. shall enjoy the said Rent according to the
form and effect of the said Grant, that then, etc. there he needs not to plead
any tender, for the Rent is not payable in other manner than it was before;
contrary if the Condition had been for the payment of the Annuity: And of that
opinion was the whole Court, that he ought to have pleaded a tender. Another
matter of the Award was, that the said Audar should yield up, surrender and
relinquish to the Plaintiff all such Houses and Tenements which he had in his
possession by reason of the custody of the said Plaintiff: As to that the
Defendant pleaded, that he had yielded up, etc. All such Houses, etc. generally
without showing which in certain; And for that cause the Court was clear of
opinion, that the Plea was not good; which see 9 E. 4. 16. If I be bounden upon
condition to enfeoff the Obligee of all Lands, and Tenements, which were to
I.S. in pleading the performance of that Condition, I ought to show what Lands
and Tenements in certain, for they pass out of me by the Feoffment; See also 12
H. 8. 7. 13 H. 8. Non damnificatus, generally, where no Plea.
19. Another point of the Award was, That the said Audar should acquit and
discharge, and save harmless the Plaintiff of such an Obligation, to which the
Defendant pleaded, that Querens non fuit damnificatus, and that Plea was holden
insufficient, for he ought to have showed, how he had discharged him, and it is
not sufficient to answer only to the damnification, as if I be bounden to
convey unto you the Manor of B. in pleading the performance of the condition,
it is not sufficient to show, that I have conveyed the said Manor, but to show
by what manner of conveyance, viz. by Fine, or Feoffment, etc. 22 E. 4. 43. If
the condition be to discharge the Plaintiff, etc. then the manner of the
discharge ought to be showed, but if it be to save harmless only, then non
damnificatus generally is good enough, 40 E. 3. 20. 38 H. 6. 39. The condition
of an Obligation was, that the Obligor should keep without damage the Obligee,
of such a sum of money against B. to whom he was bounden for the payment of it,
and the said Obligor pleaded that at such a day, etc. the said B. at his
request delivered the Obligation to the Plaintiff in liew of an acquittance,
without that, that the Plaintiff was damnified by the said Obligation, before
the delivery of it; and it was holden by the Court, that if the Defendant had
pleaded, that he had kept the Plaintiff without damage, and had not showed how,
that the Plea had not been good. See 22 E. 4. 40. The Lord Lisles Case. And
afterward Judgment was given for the Plaintiff.

XCVI. Heydons Case. Mich. 29 and 30 Eliz.
RAlph Heydon pretending title to certain Land, entered into it, and made a
Lease of it to try the title: Upon which his Lessee brought an Ejectione
firmae, in which the parties were at Issue; And now at the day of the Enquest,
the Jurors were called, and but five of them appeared, whereupon, the Defendant
came and showed to the Court, that the said Heydon by his Friends and Servants,
had labored the Jury, not to appear, and that for the further vexation of the
Defendant who had four Verdicts in affirmance of his title, that the said
Heydon to procure the Jury not to appear, had surmised to them, that he and the
Defendant were in course of an agreement, whereas in truth no such
communication of agreement had any time passed betwixt them: And all this was
openly deposed in Court, as well upon the oath of the Defendant himself as upon
the oath of one of the Jurors, upon which the Court awarded an Attachment
against the said Heydon, to answer the contempt; And also granted to the
Defendant, that he might sue a December tales with proviso, for his own expedition.

XCVII. Smith and Kirfoots Case. Mich. 29 and 30 Eliz. In Communi Banco.
Debt upon Arbitrament.
SMith brought Debt upon an Arbitrament against Kirfoot, and declared that the
Defendant and he, imposuerunt se in arbitrium, ordinationem, and judicium
Johannis Popham ar. arbitratoris indifferenter electi, de jure, titulo, and
inturesse in quibusdam Messuagijs, etc. Who taking upon him the burden of the
Arbitration, ordinavit, that the said Defendant should pay unto the Plaintiff
ten pounds, in plenam satisfactionem, etc. and thereupon he brought his Action;
It was moved by Walmesley Sergeant, that the Declaration is not sufficient, for
it appears that the Arbitrament set forth in the Declaration is utterly void;
because whereas ten pounds is awarded to the Plaintiff, nothing is awarded to
the Defendant, and so the Award unequal, and so void. But the Court was clear
of opinion, that notwithstanding that such an Arbitrament be void in Law, yet
it may be for any thing that appears, that the award is good enough: 1 Cro.
904. ^ Cro. 354. 355.
For the Plaintiff is not to show in his Declaration all the Award, but such
part only of it which does entitle him to the thing, etc. and if the Defendant
will impeach the Award for any thing, that is to come in on his part, vide. ac.
Book of Entries, 152. 123. vide. For the Arbitrament, 39 H. 6. 12. by Moile, 7
H. 6. 41.

XCVIII. Arundel against Morris. Mich. 29 and 30 Eliz. In Communi Banco.
RIchard Arundel sued an Audita Querela against Morris, and it was comprehended
in the Writ; That Morris had recovered against him a certain Debt, and that he
was taken by a Capias ad satisfaciendum; Audita Querela.
at the suit of the said Morris, by Hickford Sheriff of the County of
Gloucester; who let him go at large, etc. And they were at issue, upon the
voluntary escape, and it was found for the Plaintiff. It was objected in arrest
of Judgment, that the Writ of Audita Querela is not good, for the words are,
that the Plaintiff, captus fuit virtute brevis nostri judicialis; whereas this
word (judicialis) is not in the Register; but only brevis nostri de capiendo.
But by the whole Court, the Writ is good, for the word (judicialis) is but a
word of surplusage, and shall not make void the Writ: And afterward Judgment
was given for the Plaintiff.

XCIX. Brook against King. Mich. 29 and 30. Eliz.
IN Debt upon an Obligation by Brook against King, the Defendant pleaded that
the Bond was endorced, with such condition, viz. Debt.
That it the said Defendant King shall procure one I.S. to make reasonable
recompense to the Plaintiff for certain Beasts which he wrongfully took from
the Plaintiff, that then, etc. And he said in facto, That the said I. S. had
stolen the said Beasts from the Plaintiff, Condition against Law.
and thereof he was endicted, etc. and so the condition being against the Law,
the Obligation was void, upon which the Plaintiff did demurr in Law. And it was
argued by the whole Court: That where the condition of an Obligation shall be
said against the Law, and therefore the Obligation void, the same ought to be
intended where the condition is expressly against the Law in express words, and
in terminis terminantibus, Post. 103.
and not for matter out of the condition, as it is in this case; And Judgment
was given for the Plaintiff.

C. Hawks against Mollineux. Mich. 29 and 30 Eliz. In Communi Banco.
IN a Replevin by Hawks against Mollineux who avowed for Damagefesant; The
Plaintiff in Bar of the Avowry, pleaded that Sir Gervase Paston Knight, was
seized of a Message and twenty Acres of Land; And that always those whose
estate, Replevi^ Yelv. 185. Prescription.
etc. have used to have Common in the place where, etc. for all their Cattle
commonable in this manner, viz. If the said Land be sowed by assent of the
Commoner, then no Common, until the Corn be mowed, and when the Corn is mowed,
then Common until the Land shall be sowed again by assent of the Commoners: And
this Prescription was found by Verdict, and exception was taken to this
prescription because against common right, so as a man cannot sow his Land
without the leave of another. But the exception was disallowed by the Court;
for the prescription was holden to be good by the whole Court, for by the Law
of the Land, the Owner of the Land cannot plow the Land where another has
Common; but here is a benefit to each party, as well for the Owner of the Land
against the Commoner, as for the Commoner against the Tenant of the Land, for
each of them has a qualified Interest in the Land.

CI. Baldwin and Cocks Case. Intr. Pasch. 29 Eliz. Rot. 1410. In Communi Banco.
Replevin. Owen 52. Post. 225. 1 Inst. 225. 2.
BAldwin was Plaintiff in a Replevin against Cocks, and upon the pleading the
Case appeared to be this, That Sir Richard Wayneman was seized of the place
where, etc. and leased the same to one Truepeny and one Eliz. Read for term of
21 years, if the said Truepeny and Eliz. or any child or children betwixt them
begotten should live so long; Eliz. within the term died without issue; If now
the term for 21 years be determined was the Question. And the Lord Anderson
conceived, that the estate for years is not determined by the death of
Elizabeth. And it was argued by Shuttleworth Sergeant, that upon the matter the
term is determined: And he put the Case of the Lord Bray, 3 Eliz. Dyer 190.
Where the Lord Bray sold unto four great Lords the marriage of his Son and
Heir, to the intent to be married at the appointment and nomination of the said
Lords, the Lord Bray died, one of the said Lords before any marriage, 5 Co. 9 1
Brown. 31. 46, 47. 80. 101. 2 Br. 83. 148.
or appointment, or nomination, died, the Son is married by the appointment,
etc. of the surviving Lords; That marriage is not within the intent of the
Covenant, and adjudged that upon that marrriage no use shall accrue. And also
he cited this Case adjudged in the Kings Bench. The administration is committed
to one durante minore aeta^e of two Infants, one of them becomes of full age,
the power of the Administration is determined, which Walmesley Sergeant
granted, for it is but an authority; but here in the Case at Bar is a matter of
interest. And by Anderson all the construction of this lease and grant rests
upon this point, if this word (Or) either shall be taken as disjunctive as it
is in its nature, or as a conjunctive; and if it be taken as a disjunctive, if
it make the whole sentence in the disjunctive as if the limitation had been, if
the Husband or Wife or any Child, etc. And Fenner, put this Case out of 17 E.
3. as he cited it. Land is given to I. S. in Fee so long as A. B. has issue of
his body. A. B. dies without issue, his Wife priviment en^^ent, Now the estate
is determined, and upon birth of the issue after shall not revive, which Rhodes
and Anderson denied, for in many Cases the Law shall respect the existency of
the child in the mothers belly: And see 7 Eliz. Plow. 289. where a Copulative
shall be taken in the disjunctive, as a covenant with B. to make a lease for
years of such Lands to the said B. and his Assigns, Exposition of words in
deeds. 244. Post. 251. 1 Roll. 444.
the same shall be construed, or his Assigns. And it was clearly agreed by the
other parties, that if the words had been, If Truepeny, Elizabeth, or any child
or children, etc. so long, etc. upon the death of any of them the interest is
determined: And by Rhodes, Periam and Windham in the principal Case, the lease
shall endure as long as any of the persons named in the Proviso shall live, and
so seemed to be the meaning of the parties. And Anderson haesitavit in the
words of the limitation, i. the Habendum to the said Truepeny and Eliz. for 21
years a festo Sancti Johannis Baptist. post terminum annorum (the expiration of
a former term) if the said Truepeny and Elizabeth, or any child etc. And he
conceived, that the limitation did go to the commencement of the lease only,
and not to the expiration or determination, as if the lease should not begin if
they all were not alive at the commencement of the lease: And all the other
Justices were clear of the contrary opinion, for by them this limitation shall
go, and shall be referred to the determination of the Lease, and not to the
commencement of it.

Anderson, If any cause should be, for which the lease should endure until the
years be encurred, notwithstanding the death of the Husband or Wife, it was
because the lease was intended a common advancement to both, for it should be
in vain to name the Wife in the lease, if the lease should cease by the death
of the Husband. And afterward after many arguments on both sides, it was
adjudged, that by the death of Elizabeth, the lease was not determined, for the
disjunctive before (Child) makes all the limitation in the disjunctive.

CII. Zouch and Bamfields Case. Mich. 29 and 30 Eliz. In Communi Banco.
THe Case between the Lord Zouch and Bamfield was now argued by the Justices.
And Rhodes the puisne Justice argued, 1 And. 165. 3 Co. 88.
that the Lord Zouch the Demandant should be barred. Four Exceptions have been
taken to the bar: First, because it is not showed in the bar that the moiety of
those sixty messuages, etc. of which he pleads the Fine, was parcel of the
Manor at the time of the Fine levied; for the pleading is, that the Grandfather
of the Demandant was seized of the said Manor, unde medietas praedictorum 60.
messuagiorum, etc. a tempore cujus contrar. memoria, etc. was parcel, and so
seized de manerio praedict. unde, etc. Finis se levavit; and he conceived that
the pleading, notwithstanding that was good enough; for he has said as much in
effect, contrar. cujus memoria hominum non existit, in the present tense, which
amounts to this, that men cannot remember, etc. but that this moiety was parcel
of the said Manor: As 10 H. 7 12. In an Assise of Common, the Plaintiff makes
his title, that he was seized of a Message and Carve of Land in D. to which
the said Common is appendant, and that he and all his Ancestors, and all those
whose estate he has, etc. have used to have Common, etc. Exception was taken
to the title, because the Plaintiff does not show in his title, that he is
seized of a Message, etc. for if he has aliened the Message the Common
passes, so if he be disseised, etc. but the Exception was not allowed, for it
appears upon the words of the title, that the Plaintiff is seized: i. all
those whose estate he has in the present tense, which words do show and
declare possession and seisin in the Plaintiff, the time of the plea pleaded;
so in this case, the substance of the words, in which the defect is assigned,
is ut supra; That men cannot remember, but that this moiety was parcel of the
Manor, and then the words after, unde, etc. reddidit Manerium praedict. unde,
etc. shall have the same construction as before. Periam conceived, that the Bar
is naught for the cause aforesaid, for it is not so pleaded, that we can
adjudge upon it, that the said moiety was parcel of the Manor at the time of
the Fine levied, and then the Fine cannot extend unto it. And the reason
alleged by my brother Rhodes shall not help that matter, for the said words
cannot be construed otherwise, but that no man can remember but the said moiety
was parcel, but not that it is parcel, or at the time of the Fine levied was
parcel. Vide 32 H. 6. 24. In Trespass the Defendant pleaded, That A. was seized
of the Manor of D. whereof the place, etc. is parcel, he ought to say expressly,
that the place where was parcel of the Manor at the time of the trespass
supposed. Windham conceived, that the plea was good, and that it appears well
upon this plea, that the said moiety was parcel of the said Manor at the time
of the Fine levied, for he pleads, that the Grandfather of the Demandant was
seized of the Manor of N. Unde medietas praedictorum, etc. a tempore cujus
contrar. memoria hominum non existit, and sic scisitus existens, Finis se
levavit; sic scisitus; i. e. seized of the Manor in such sort, as the Manor is
set forth before, and that is good pleading, especially by way of bar, which if
it be good to a common intent, is well enough; and the word (unde, etc.) so
often repeated after shall be idle and to no purpose if the Law shall not give
such a construction. Anderson to the same purpose. And he much relied upon the
reason of Windham, and so seized. Another Exception was taken to the Bar,
Averrment.
because in pleading of the Fine, it is not averred, that the Conusor at the
time of the Fine levied was of full age, out of prison, etc. And as to that
Rhodes took the difference between the pleading upon the Statute of 1 H. 3.
where these disabilities are within the purview of the said Statute, and upon
the Statute of 4 H. 7. where in the body of the Statute no mention is made of
them, but afterward in an especial Exception by it self; and he cited the
opinion of the Justices, especially of the Lord Dyer in the Case reported by
Plowd. 5 Eliz. 365. betwixt Stowel and the Lord Zouch. Periam to the same
intent, and upon the same reason, and further he said that although the Statute
of 32 H. 8. contains in its purview the same disabilities; Yet this Fine is
pleaded upon the Statute of 4 H. 7. and therefore the pleading of the same
shall not be directed nor waged by the Statute of 32 H. 8. which does not alter
the pleading of a Fine which was before, nor the reason of it; for it is not
properly a Statute, nor do Fines receive any strength or virtue by it, but is
but a construction of the said former Statute. And he put the Case betwixt Hide
and Umpton; where Umpton mean betwixt the Statutes of 32 and 34 H. 8. Declared
his Will of all his Lands, which devise if it be good for two parts of the Land
devised it was doubted, or that the devise should be void for the whole;
afterward came the Stat. of 34 H. 8. and cleared the doubt, for to that intent
it was made; and in the said Statute there is a Proviso, that the said Statute
shall not extend to the Will or the Devise of Tho. Umpton, or shall be
prejudicial or hurtful to any person or persons for any Lands etc. contained or
specified in the said Will or Devise, but that the said Will and Devise shall
stand, remain and be in the same case, in force and effect in the Law, as the
same was before the making of this Act. Now, notwithstanding that Proviso, the
Will of Umpton was holden good but for two parts, for so the Statute of 34. H.
8. construed the Statute of 32 H. 8. So in our Case, the Statute of 32 H. 8. of
Fines construes the Statute of 4 H. 7. to extend to Fines levied by Tenant in
tail, therefore the estate tail shall be adjudged in Law to be bound by the
Statute of 4 H. 7. and not by 32 H. 8. which is rather a Judgment upon the said
Statute of 4 H. 7. than any new Statute. Windham to the same intent, and he
relied upon the reason aforesaid. And further said, if one will plead a Lease
made by Tenant in tail upon the Statute of 32 H. 8. he need not to aver the
full age of the Lessor, and yet that quality of full age is within the purview
of the said Statute. First all Leases to be made, etc. by any person being of
full age, etc. and so is the common use of pleadings. And of the same opinion
was the Lord Anderson for the said Exception, for the reasons, and upon the
difference aforesaid. Another Exception was taken to the Bar, because it is not
alleged, that the said Fine was engrossed in the same Term in which it was
levied. And as to that, it was holden by Rhodes, that in pleading of a Fine it
needs not to show any engrossing of it; and so are many Presidents, vide Plowd.
Com. Smith and Stapletons Case, 15 Eliz. 428. Where a Fine was pleaded, Quaedam
finalis concordia facta fuit in Octav. Sancti Hillarii 35 H. 8. and postea a
die Pasch. in quindecem dies 36 H 8. concessa and recordata, etc. Super quem
finem proclam. secundum formam Statuti factae fuer. viz. prima proclam. 7.
Maii. Term. Pasch. 36 H. 8. without any mention of the engrossing of it: And
see the Case betwixt Stowel and the Lord Zouch, where the Fine is pleaded as it
is pleaded in the Case at Bar, quiquidem finis in forma praedict. levatus (and
that fine was levied Pasch. 30 H. 8.) ingrossatus fuit, and postea in Curia
praedict. secundum formam Stattui, etc. lectus, and proclamatus fuit, viz.
prim. proclam. Term. Pasch. 30 H. 8. And so upon the matter it is sufficient to
show, that the Fine was engrossed the same term in which it was levied, for the
Fine is pleaded to be levied Term. Pasch. qui quidem Finis ingrossatus fuit,
and postea proclam. viz. prim. proclam. Termino Pasch. which was the same Term
it was levied: And so, admit, that in pleading it ought to be showed that the
Fine was engrossed in the same Term in which it was levied, etc. Now it appears
here to us by necessary consequence, that the Fine was engrossed accordingly.
And also the Ingrossment is pleaded as the Statute is penned, for the words of
the Statute of 4 H. 7. are, after the engrossing of every Fine, the same Fine
to be openly read and proclaimed in the same Court, the same Term, and so the
words of our plea here pursue the words of the Statute; for the said Statute
does not require by express words, that the Fine be engrossed the same Term,
but the same is to be conceived by matter of construction and implication, and
according to such manner of speech this plea is pleaded. And of the same
opinion was Windham, and upon the same reason Anderson conceived, that the
Tenant in pleading of the Fine ought to show in express words, that the Fine
was engrossed the same Term in which it was levied; for whosoever in pleading a
plea will take the benefit of the Statute ought precisely to follow the Statute
in all points; and it is clear, that if the Fine be not engrossed, according to
the Statute, that then it is not any bar by the Statute, and therefore it ought
to be expressly alleged according to the Statute, and not by implication only.

Another Exception was taken to the Bar (as was remembered by Windham) i. pro ut
per finem hic in Curia de recordo remanen-plenius apparet; without saying, and
per proclamation. inde, etc. But that Exception was disallowed by Periam and
Windham, for the Fine had been good and well pleaded, without any such
conclusion, pro ut, etc. And also the proclamations are endorsed upon the Fine,
and then they appear upon the Fine, according to the words of the said
conclusion. And so by Windham are many Presidents, and so in the said Case
between Stowel and the Lord Zouch cited before, pro ut per finem illum hic de
record. remanen. plane liquet. And See 1 Eliz. Plowden 224. between Willion and
Barkly, a Fine pleaded without any pro ut, etc. Anderson took an Exception to
the Bar at the beginning of it, i. Quod medietas 60 Messuagiorum, etc. parcel.
medietatis 70 Messuag. praedict. that that is no good pleading; for one moiety
cannot be parcel of another moiety, for every moiety is entire.

Rhodes took Exception to the Replication, because the Demandant in avoidance
of the Fine, that at the time of the Fine levied Bamfield was seized, and
semper postea, and hucusque, etc. of the moiety in Demesne, and does not
traverse the seisin of the Conusor at the time of the Fine levied, for here two
contrary pleas stand before us in equity of truth; aeque vera, aeque falsa,
aeque dubia, and a traverse would have made an end of all, and reduced the
matter to certainty: And by Periam, the Bar is not answered, for every Bar
ought to be traversed, confessed, or avoided, See 6 H. 7. 5, and 6. where it is
said by Hussy and Fairfax, where matter in fact is alleged by way of Bar it
ought to be traversed, if it be not for the mischief of trial, as in case of
Basterdy, where a thing is alleged to be done beyond the sea; or to leave the
matter in Law to the Court, without putting the same to the Judgment of the
Lay People, etc. See also 5 H. 7. 12. Where it is holden, that a thing material
alleged in the Bar ought to be directly traversed, or confessed, or avoided in
fact or in Law, or conclude the other party by matter of estoppel: And that two
affirmatives cannot make a good issue; But the matter alleged in the
Replication scil. that Bamfield was seized at the time of the Fine levied shall
be holden for void, and the matter alleged in the Bar, scil. that the Counsor
was seized, as not answered; for it shall be taken true, until it shall be
avoided and destroyed by matter in Law, traverse, etc. Vide Librum. So he in
default of traverse, the Bar is not answered but argumentative, scil. Bamfield
was seized, ergo, the Conusor was not seized: And it is a common learning that
in every Replication there ought to be certainty as to that: See the Case
betwixt Fulmerston and Steward 2 Ma. 103. that a Bar ought not to be answered
by argument: And as to the certainty which is requisite in a Replication. See
the Case betwixt Wimbish and Talboies, Plow. Com. 4 E. 6. 42. where the
Plaintiff showed in his Replication his title as Heir, but because he did not
show, how heir, for want of such certainty in the Replication, the Plaintiff
could never have Judgment, although the Justices for the matter in Law then in
question were clearly resolved for the Plaintiff; and here in this Replication
the incertainty is such, that the Court does not know to which to give credit,
to the Plaintiff, or to the Def. and the bare matter of the Replication is not
sufficient; For in avoidance of a Fine, to say, that a stranger to the Fine, at
the time of the Fine levied, was seized, was never received, but that, parts
Finis nihil habuerunt, that was the ordinary plea. Windham to the same intent;
that which the Demandant has alleged in avoydance of the Fine, is but matter
of Argument and implication. And we ought in this Case first to be insured of
the matter of fact; scil. Whether Zouch or Bamfield were seized, and the Court
does not know to which to give credit, 39 H. 6. 49. in Debt by an Executor, the
Defendant pleaded, that the Testator made the Plaintiff and one A. his
Executor, which A. is living, and the Plaintiff pleaded, that the said A. died
within such a Ward before the Writ brought, etc. and adjudged no plea, without
traverse, without that, he was dead, for here are 2 affirmatives, whereon a
good issue cannot rise, which see 32 H. 6. 23. The Def. in a Replevin avows for
a Rent service, the Plaint. pleads, out of his Fee, the Avowant says, within
his Fee, he ought to traverse, without that it is out of his Fee, and for
default of the traverse the pleading of both parties; as to the several
allegations of the seisin in Bamfield and Zouch may be true, for they both
might be Ioynt-tenants of the said moiety at the time of the Fine levied, in
which case, as to the moiety of the moiety it is good enough. And yet when in
pleading it is alleged, that A. was seized, etc. If the other party plead,
that A. had nothing but jointly with B. he ought to take a Traverse, without
that, that A. was sole seized, and yet sole seisin is not expressly alleged;
but when the other party pleads, that A. was seized, it ought to be intended a
sole seisin. Which See 1 E. 4. 9. 37 H. 6. 31. And it was never a plea
admittable against a Fine, to say, that the Conusor had nothing at the time of
the Fine levied, which see 41 E. 3. 14. and also 38 E. 3. 13. 8 H. 6. 27. In
Trespass the Defendant pleaded the Fine of the Ancestor of the Plaintiff, who
said, at the time of the Fine levied he himself was seized, without that that
parts ad finem aliquid habuerunt, which see 46 E. 3. 14. and a Fine ought to
be avoided by not seisin of the parties to the Fine, and not by the seisin of a
stranger to the Fine; and there is not any Book in the Law that allows such
an averment of seisin in a stranger to the Fine, without answering to the
seisin of the parties to the Fine, but 13 H. 8. In Assise, the Tenant pleaded a
Fine upon Render of the Ancestor of the Plaintiff, to which the Plaintiff said,
that before the Fine, at the time of the Fine, and afterward continually, he
himself was seized, and the same was held no plea against such a Fine upon a
Render, notwithstanding the privity of blood; contrary, against a Fine, which
proves a gift precedent.

Anderson to the same intent. The Replication for want of Traverse is
incurable, for we as Judges do not know what to do, because that the truth of
the matter in fact does not appear unto us, and so neither the matter in Law;
for every plea ought to be traversed, or confessed, and avoided, otherwise
nothing appears to us, and we cannot know whether the Conusor or Bamfield were
seized at the time of the Fine levied, for otherwise the matter in Law cannot
rise; and yet I well know, that although a traverse may be spared in respect of
a matter in Law which should be choked and put out of the Book by the
traverse, or for the mischief of the trial as aforesaid, where a thing is
alleged to be done beyond sea. 19 E. 4. 6. In debt the Defendant pleaded, that
the Plaintiff was born at Denmark, under the obedience of the King of Denmark,
the Plaintiff by Replication said, that he himself was born at D. in England in
the County of York, there he shall not take a traverse without that, that he
was born at Denmark, for there such trial connot be, but in such case the
Defendant by way of Rejoinder shall say, that the Plaint. was born at Denmark,
without that that he was born at D. in the County of York: And it is true, a
supposal of a Writ or Count may be answered to an Affirmative; but a matter
alleged by express words cannot.

Rhodes, admitting now that the Bar be naught, and the Replication faulty, as
it is, then I conceive, that if the point of the Action be confessed by the
Bar, the Court shall give Judgment upon the Bar, and shall not meddle with the
Replication; but if it be not confessed by the Bar, that then there shall be a
Repleader. And I do conceive, that a Repleader may be awarded upon a Demurrer
in Law: which see Plowd. 1 Ma. in the Case betwixt Browning and Beston 138. In
Trespass the Plaintiff does suppose the Trespass in two places, scil. in
Bermestreet and in Southwark in the County of Surrey; as to the Trespass in
Southwark the Defendant does justify by special matter of a Lease, without
answering any thing to the Trespass in Bermestreet. The Plaintiff does reply,
and makes his title by a Lease more ancient than the Lease to the Defendant;
upon which the Defendant does demurr in Law. Now the defect in the Bar
appearing, the Court awarded a Repleader. And 9 H. 6. 35. in a Replevin the
Defendant avowed for damage fesant. The Plaintiff made title by Common. The
Defendant pleaded a Release of the Common by deed, which was not a perfect
deed, upon which the Plaintiff did demurr in Law: And the Replication, in which
the imperfect Release was, was holden naught, but because there was a defect in
the Bar to the Avowry by the title of Common, the Court awarded, that the
parties should replead, not in respect of the vicious plea upon which it was
demurred, but in respect of the defect in Bar: And so in this Case Periam said,
that nothing should be awarded in this Case but where an Issue is joined, for
an Issue is always joined upon a point certain. But upon a demurrer all the
parts of the pleading, the Count, the Bar, etc. are referred to the Court, as
well for the form as for the matter. The Book which has been vouched to the
contrary out of 9 H. 6. I have procured search to be made for the Roll, but it
cannot be found, and it is inconvenient, that after a demurrer a Repleader
should be granted, for then Causes should never have an end: And as to the Case
betwixt Browning and Beston, the Repleader there was permitted by the assent of
the parties, rather then awarded by the Rule of the Court.

Windham to the same intent, that no Repleader shall be in this Case, and he
said, that in the time of the Lord Dyer the opinion of the Court was so: And as
this case is, the plea a Bar being good, and the Demurrer being upon the
Replication, no Repleader should be, for a Repleader shall never be granted,
where the plea upon a Demurrer is not good; but if the Bar be not good, and the
Defendant does demurr upon the Replication, there a Repleader may be. And as to
Browning and Bestons Case he conceived, that the parties did plead de novo, but
not replead, for if it had been a Repleader, then the parties should begin to
plead where the first defect was, as if the defect be in the Bar, there the
Repleader shall begin, but the Declaration shall stand: But in the said Case of
Browning and Beston, the Plaintiff pleaded all de novo, as a new Count, etc.
and yet the first defect was in the Bar, and therefore he conceived, that there
it was not a Repleader, but that the parties by assent did plead de novo.

Anderson was of opinion, that as this Case is, no Repleader shall be, and yet
he held the Repleader might be upon a Demurrer as well as upon an Issue joined;
For a Demurrer joined is an Issue to be tried by the Judges, etc. and such was
the opinion of Manwood chief Baron. And the Judgment in the Case betwixt
Browning and Beston is not that the parties shall plead de novo, but that they
shall replead. See there folio 138. a. and in that Case there might well be a
Repleader, for there the truth of the matter in fact is confessed in the
pleading, but in the Case at Bar it is otherwise, for the pleading is so
obscure, that we do not know the truth of the matter, and the right of the
matter does not appear unto us.

And by Periam, as to that which has been said, that upon the demurrer upon
the Replication, the seisin of Bamfield at the time of the Fine is confessed.
Sir, its not so, for no more shall be holden confessed by a demurrer, but that
which is duly and sufficiently pleaded, and because the seisin of Bamfield is
not sufficiently pleaded, therefore not confessed; and for proof of that
learning, see the Case betwixt Wimbish and Talboies; and the Case betwixt Hill
and Graunge: 1 Mar. Plowd. 171. and see the Case betwixt Partridge and Croker;
and so was opinion of the Lord Anderson, who relied much upon the Case, where
it is said, that in pleading a plea, all matters in fact well and materially
alleged by a general Demurrer are confessed to be true.

Rhodes. Now we are to see, if by the Statute of 27 Eliz. cap. 5. This defect
in the Replication may be salved, and I conceive, that this Statute does extend
to all imperfections which happen by the Act; Misprision, or negligence of the
Clarks or Counsel; for the Clyent propounds his Cause to the Clark and his
Counsel to manage in the course of his suit, and if the Clark or Counsel err
therein, or in that which to them belongs, the Csyent as to that shall be
releived by the Statute; but if there be any defect in the matter, so as the
matter will not serve, it is otherwise. As 5 H. 7. 1. In the Roll of a plea
there were diverse spaces (for the year and day) void and blank, in another
Term, the Judges could not amend them, but now by the said Statute they may. So
color in Assise wanting is helped by this Statute, so the usual averment, and
hoc paratus est verificare, etc. left out, the Court has power to amend it,
and so by him the Court by this Statute has power to amend that defect in
Trespass.

Antea 43, 44.
Periam to the contrary. And that this default of Traverse is not amendable by
the said Statute, for it is enacted by the said Statute, that upon a Demurrer
the Judges shall give Judgment as the right of the cause and matter in Law
shall require; but in our case, as the pleading now is, no right of the cause
or matter in Law appears according to which we can judge, for we upon this
pleading cannot tell whether the Conusor or Bamfield was seized at the time of
the Fine levied, for upon the Demurrer upon the Replication the seisin of
Bamfield is not confessed, because it is not well alleged: And if it had been
well alleged, yet it had not been confessed, because that the Tenant who
demurrs upon the Replication, has in his Bar expressly alleged, that the
Conusor was seized: An Original Writ of Debt against one as Executor in the
debet and detinet could not be amended by 8 H. 6. but now by the Statute of 27
Eliz. it may. See 22 E. 4. 21, 22. So nominare for praesentare in a Quare
Impedit shall be now amended by this Statute; And in a Writ of Formedon,
discendere for remanere shall be amended by the said Statute of 8 H. 6. 44 E.
3. 13. vide. 11 H. 7. 1, 2 3. In Assise, upon whom the Plaintiff, where it
should be upon whom the Defendant entered; And if the Averment usual as above
was miss-set down, it was amendable, but if it were utterly left out, not, but
now in both Cases it is amendable, so, defendit vim and injuriam quando, etc.
if it be left out, it is amendable, for all these matters lie in the Conusance
of the Clark, but in our Case, the right of the cause and matter does not
appear unto us, for if Bamfield was seized at the time of the Fine levied, then
as the Demandant and his Counsel pretend, the Law is with the Demandant, and if
the Conusor and not the Demandant, then the Law is with the Tenant, as his
Counsel has argued, so as the right of the cause consists and depends upon the
truth of the seisin, which matter does not appear unto us: And if we enter in
course of amendment, we do not know if the Demandant would have traversed,
without that that the Conusor was seized, which shall not be a good Traverse,
or absque hoc, quod parts ad finem aliquid habuerunt, etc. which although it
be a good Traverse in Law, yet we do not know if the truth of the cause will
serve to maintain such matter, and because without altering matter we cannot
amend the Plea. Windham to the same purpose; For by the Statute of 27 Eliz. we
ought to judge in this case, as the right of the cause and matter in Law shall
appear; but in this case neither the right of the cause nor the matter in Law
appears unto us, according to which we can judge, for we know not to which of
the parties to give credit, touching the seisin of the Conusor, or Bamfeild at
the time of the Fine levied, for as to our judicial knowledge, both Pleas are
to us equally dubious; And he agreed the Cases put before touching amendment of
matters upon default of the Clark, scil. de hoc ponit se super patriam, left
out, so color in Assize, and Trespass wanting, so, and hoc paratus est
verificare, all which matters are amendable by the Statute of 27. Eliz. But he
said, that if in Trespass the Defendant does justify by a Lease for years,
without showing the place where the Lease is made, it is not amendable, for it
is matter which lies in the notice of the party only, and not in our judicial
knowledge: And as to the Case of 5 H. 7. 1. of the places left, he conceived it
is not amendable in another Term by this Statute, for that is material, and the
filling of those spaces the parties themselves shall supply and not the Court,
for the Court shall never amend, where their amendment makes alteration of the
substance of the pleading, or of the Verdict, as 20 H. 6. 15. In Trespass, the
Plaintiff declared of a continuando usque diem impetrationis brevis, viz. 18.
die Martii, where the Test of the Writ was, 2 die Januarij, the Defendant
pleaded to Issue, which was found for the Plaintiff, and that Misprision of the
Test or date of the Writ could not be amended. And no amendment upon this
Stat. of 27 Eliz. two things are to be considered.

First, that the Judges, in such amendment, meddle not with matter, nor alter
the substance.

Secondly, that they do not amend but according to their judicial knowledge.

Anderson, to the same intent, for as it has been said before, the truth of
the Case does not appear unto us according to which we can judge, and I
conceive that upon any amendment upon this Statute, we cannot take out one Roll
and put in another, and as our case is we cannot amend this defect without
taking out the whole Roll, and therefore in the Case of Leonard, which was late
Custos brevium here, where in a Replevin he avowed for a Rent-service, and upon
especial Verdict the Case was, that Sir Henry Isley held of the said Leonard by
Fealty, and the Rent mentioned in the Avowry, and was attainted of high
Treason, and the King seized and granted the Land to the Plaintiff, upon whom
Leonard avowed for the Rent-service, and I and my companions were agreed, that
the rent, notwithstanding the seizure and grant of the King remained
distrainable of common right, but Leonard could not have return of the Cattle,
because he had avowed for a Rent-service, and now it appears to us upon the
Verdict, that he had right to so much rent, but not to such a Rent, but a
Rent-seck distrainable of common right, so a Rent in another degree; and we
also agreed, that the Avowry was not amendable, for then upon such amendment,
we ought to take out a whole Roll, which was not intended by this Statute: And
he conceived also, that in debt against Executors in the Debet and detinet,
such a Writ shall not be amended by this Statute, and he conceived, that his
exception to the Bar, quod ad medietatem, 60. Messuag. etc. parcel. medietatis,
etc. is relieved by this Statute, for the meaning appears: And also the
exception, that it is not expressly showed that the Fine was engrossed in the
same Term in which it was levied. And Periam moved another matter, Co. 1 Inst.
71. b. 72. a.
if now the parties demurring in Law as to part of the Land in demand, and
being at Issue upon the residue, if the Court shall adjudge the matter in Law,
before the Issue be tried, or not, 32 H. 6. 5 and 6. In Trespass for taking of
his Cattle, the Defendant as to parcel pleaded not guilty, and as to the
remnant pleaded another Plea, upon which the parties did demur, and there they
proceeded to trial before the matter in Law determined, and found for the
Plaintiff, and he had Judgment thereupon for the damages, but the costs were
suspended until, etc. And the Defendant brought his Writ of Error. 48 E. 3. 15.
In an Action of Wast, as to parcel the Defendant pleads, no Wast, and as to the
rest pleaded matter in Law, upon which there was a demurer joined; It was
holden, that the Issue should not be tried until the matter in Law be
determined: But it was said by Fulthorpe in Trespass, if the Defendant to
parcel plead the Enquest, and to other parcel matter in Law, in such case he
should proceed to trial presently, and damages should be taxed of the whole, as
well of that upon which there was a demurrer in Law, as of that of which the
Issue was joined, ad quod non fuit responsum. See also 11 H. 4. 228. In
Trespass, the Defendant pleaded to Issue for part, and for the residue did
demur in Law, Process for the trial issued before the matter in Law determined;
And Periam conceived that the Court might proceed in such Case, the one way or
the other: As to the matter in Law, whether the issue in tail upon this Fine
should have the Averment, he conceived, that he should not have the said
Averment, for that it should be very perilous to the Inheritances of the
subjects. And he argued much upon the dignity of Fines out of Bracton and
Glanvil, whom he called Actores, non Authors Legis; and that Fines at the
common Law were of great authority until the Statute of West. 2. And afterward
by the Statute of 34 E. 3. of non-claim, from whence they became to be of so
little value in Law, that they were accounted no other than Feoffments upon
Record, so as thereby no assurance was of Inheritances but a general
incertainty until the Statute of 4. H. 7. by which Statute they were restored
to their ancient power and virtue: After which Statute many shifts were
devised, to creep out of it: So as the Statute of 32 H. 8. was made to take
away all questions and ambiguities which were conceived upon the said Statute
of 4 H. 7. And therefore we who are Judges ought to frame our Judgments for the
maintaining of the authority of Fines, for so the possessions and inheritances
of the Subjects shall be preserved; And that is the reason, that if a stranger
levy a Fine of my Land in my name, that I have not any remedy but a Writ of
Deceit against him who levyes the Fine, so if a Feme-covert levyeth a Fine of
her Land as a Feme-sole, the same shall bind her after the coverture, if the
Husband do not enter upon the Conusee during the coverture and interrupt the
possession gained by the Fine: And 17 E. 3. and our Books are very plentiful to
this purpose that the Law does aerge admit of such allegations against such
Fines: A Fine was pleaded in Bar of Land in A. B. and C. he against whom it was
pleaded was not received to aver against the supposal of the Fine, that there
was no such Town or Hamlet as A. 46 E. 3. 5. A woman Tenant in tail, had Issue
a Daughter, who was inheritable to the tail, the Daughter took a Husband, and
they both living the Mother, and during her seisin, levied a Fine of the Land
entailed to a stranger, sur conusans de droit, come ceo, etc. who rendered the
Land to the Husband and Wife in specil tail, the Husband died having Issue, the
Wife took another Husband, had Issue, and died, the Husband to entitie himself
to the Land as Tenant by the curtesy, would in pleading have averred the seisin
of the Mother at the time of the Fine levied, and he could not, and yet he was
a stranger to the Fine, but he was privy to the estate, and his claim was by
her who levied the Fine, 6 E. 3. 46. Fitz. Averment 40. In a Writ of Entry, sur
dissei sin, the Fine of the Ancestor of the Demandant was pleaded in Bar by the
name of W the Demandant in avoidance of it would have said that the name of his
Father was R. to have avoided the Fine, but to that he was not received. And 3
E. 3. 32. scil. Averment, 42. In a Formedon, the Tenant pleaded Ne dona pas,
The Demandant by Replication said, That a Fine was levied of the same Lands,
between the Father of the Demandant, and one T. by which Fine the Father of the
Demandant did acknowledge to T. the Lands come ceo, etc. and the said T. gave
by the said Fine to the Father of the Demandant the Land in tail. Where it is
said by Stone, that since the gift is proved by as high a Record, a man shall
not aver against such matter in avoidance of the said Fine, etc. and yet the
party against whom it was was a stranger to the Fine: And see 38 E. 3. 7. The
Lord shall not be received against a Fine levied by his Tenant to aver the
dying seized of his Tenant in his Homage. And as to the Issue in tail, he
conceived, that the Averment does not lie for him, for the Issue in tail is as
much privy, as the Heir of a Tenant in Fee-simple. And see 33 E. 3. scil.
Estoppel 280. In a Formedon, the Tenant voucheth, the Demandant
Counter-pleaded, that the Vouchee nor any of his Ancestors had any thing in the
Land in demand after the seisin, etc. to which the Tenant said, that to that
the Demandant should not be received, for the Father of the Demandant after the
gift levied a Fine to the Ancestor of the Vouchee of the said Land in demand,
sur conusans de droit come ceo, etc. and the same was holden a good bar to the
Counter-plea.

And it was said by the Justices, That although the Statute of West. 2. of
Donis conditionalibus, does not avoid the Fine as to the fore-closing of the
Issue in tail of his Formedon, yet it remains in force as to the restraining
of the heir in tail to aver a thing against the Fine as well as against the
heir in Fee-simple; and in all Cases, where he against whom a Fine is pleaded
claims by him who levieth the Fine, he shall not have the same Averment, but
where he claims by a stranger to the Fine, there he shall have it well enough;
see 33 H. 6. 18. If my Father Tenant in tail, or in Fee, grant the Land by
Fine, and afterward I make Title to the same Land by the same Ancestor, and
the Fine is pleaded against me, I shall not be received to say that those who
were parties to the Fine had not any thing at the time of the Fine levied, but
such a one an estranger whose estate, etc. but it is a good Plea for me to say,
that after the Fine such a one was seized in Fee, and did enfeoff me, vid. 22 E
3. 17. before 33 E. 3. Estoppel 280. And Dyer 16 Eliz. 334. The Father is
Tenant for life, the Remainder in Fee to his Son and Heir, levieth a Fine to a
stranger, sur conusans de droit come ceo, etc. with warranty, and takes back an
estate by the same Fine, in that case it was holden that the heir should not be
received to aver continuance of the possession and seisin, either ante finem,
tempore finis, or post finem, in the Tenant for life, for it is a Feoffment
upon Record, and makes a discontinuance of the Remainder and Reversion. The
only Book in our Law to maintain the Averment is 12 E. 4. 15. by Brian, who
although he was a reverend Judge in his time, yet he erred in this, that if
Tenant in tail be disseised, and levieth a Fine unto a stranger, sur conusans
de droit, come ceo, etc. that the Issue in tail may well say, that parts ad
finem nihil habuerunt, but Coke and Lit. were clear of a contrary opinion and
see in the same year, fol. 12 by Fairfax and Littleton, that if Tenant in tail,
where the Remainder is over to a stranger, levieth a Fine sur conusans dodroit,
come ceo, etc. he in the Remainder may aver continuance of seisin against that
Fine, for he is not party, nor heir to the party, etc. And the Stat. of 4 H. 7.
goes strongly, to extort such Averment out of the mouth of the Issue in tail,
for the words concerning the same point are, saving to every person or persons,
not party, nor privy to the said Fine, their exception to avoid the said Fine,
by that, that those which were parties to the said Fine nor any of them had
ought in the Land at the time of the said Fine levied: And it is clear, that
the Issue in tail is privy to his Ancestor whose heir to the tail he is, which
see agreed, 19 H. 8. 6. 7. And he vouched the Case of one Stamford late
adjudged, Land was given to the eldest Son in tail, the Remainder to the Father
in tail, the eldest Son levied a Fine, sur conusans de droit come ceo, etc. and
died without Issue in the life of his Father, and afterward the Father died;
the second Son shall inherit; but if the eldest Son had survived the Father,
and afterward died without Issue, the second Son should have been barred.

Periam to the same intent: It should be very dangerous to the Inheritances of
the Subjects to admit of such Averments, and by such means Fines which should
be of great force and effect should be much weakened, and he put many Cases to
the same purpose as were put before by Rhodes Justice, and he showed how that
Fines, and the power of them were much weakened by the Statute of non-claim,
whereof followed (as the preface of the Statute of 4 H. 7. observes) the
Universal trouble of the Kings Subjects, and therefore by the said Statute of 4
H. 7. Fines, for the good and safety of the Subjects were restored to their
former Grandeur and authority, which should be construed by us who are Judges,
strongly and liberally for the quiet and establishment of present possessions,
and for the barring and extinguishing of former rights, and so did the Judges
our Predecessors; which see in the Argument of the said Case between Stowel and
the Lord Zouch: So see such liberal construction, 19 Eliz. Dyer 351. Where if
Land be given to Husband and Wife in special tail, and the Husband alone
levieth a Fine and dies having Issue, the Issue is barred: And it has lately
been adjudged by the advice of all the Judges of England, upon the Statute of 1
Ma. viz. All Fines levied, whereupon Proclamations shall not be daily made by
reason of Adjournment of any Term, shall be of as good force and strength to
all intents and purposes, as if such Term had been holden and kept from the
beginning to the end thereof, and not adjourned, and the Proclamations shall be
made in the following Term, which reason in construction of the said Statute,
the Judges in the case of the Cooks of London, 20. Eliz. have observed, which
see Plowden 538. For although Successors are not mentioned in the said Statute
of 4 H. 7. but only Heirs, yet the Judges did construe the said Statute to
extend to them that they should be bounden as well as the Heirs; for it is in
the like mischief, and the said Statute was made for the public good, and for
the repose of the Inheritances of the Subjects of this Realm, and therefore the
same ought to be largely extended in the meaning and sense of it, and for the
benefit of the Possessors of the Lands, and to the destroying of former rights
which were not claimed. It has been said, that this Fine is but a Fine by
conclusion, and not in verity; and therefore not within the Statute. But
without question, Fines by conclusion are within the Statute. And that is clear
by the Saving, scil. to all persons other than parties to the said Fines, etc.
And Periam was against the opinion in Stowells Case by Sanders 356. A Disseisor
maks a Feoffment in fee upon condition, the Feoffee levies a Fine with
Proclamation, five years pass, the condition is broken, the Disseissor
re-entreth, and Periam conceived that in such Case the Disseissee is bounden,
for by the Fine, and five years non-claim, the right of every stranger is
barred, and when the Disseissor enters for the condition broken, the Fine is
not annoyed, but rather confirmed, and former rights shall not be revived.
Windham to the same intent, and vouched the Books before remembered, and that
the meaning of the Statute of 32 H. 8. made upon the Statute of 4 H. 7. was to
bind the Issue in tail as strongly as the heir of Tenant in Fee-simple was
bound at the common Law, and that Fines by conclusion are as fully within the
purview of that Statute as Fines in verity, for Fines by conclusion are
Assurances; And as to the objection against our Fine, that it is not rite
levatus because that parts ad finem nihil habuerunt, etc. the same is no
reason, wherefore this Fine should not be rite levatus, for these words rite
levatus, to the external form of a Fine are to be taken as to a Fine levied,
coram Edmundo Anderson and socijs suis, where all the Justices ought to be
named, and so it seemed also to Periam and Anderson. Our case had little
resemblance to the Case where Tenant in tail maks a Lease according to the
Statute of 32 H. 8. if he be not seized at the time of the demise, it is void;
for the Stat. speaks seized in tail: but so are not penned the Statutes of 4 H.
7. and 32 H. 8. as 4 H. 7. a Fine levied shall bind privies, and strangers,
etc. and 32 H. 8. Fines levied of any Lands entailed to the Conusor or any of
his Ancestors, and it is not a Fine in respect of the possession which passes
by the Fine, but in respect of the Concord and Agreement,

And Tenant in tail by these Statutes has as great power to bind the right of
the entail, although he cannot meddle with the possession, as the Tenant in
Fee-simple at the common Law.

Anderson to the same intent, All the matter rests upon this point, if the
Issue in tail be privy or not, for if he be privy, then clearly he is bounden.
And as to that, the Issue in tail before the Statute of 32 H. 8. has been
always accounted privy. See 29 H 8. Dyer 32. Tenant in tail of the gift of the
King levieth a Fine, the same shall bind his Issue, for they are privy. And he
argued much upon the Cases cited by the other Justices before, and especially
upon the said Case of Stowel and the Lord Zouch; how that the Issue in tail is
there holden privy; and that the Statute of Fines ought to be taken and
construed to enfore the operation of Fines against former rights, and for the
establishment of the present possessions and estates. And by him diverse rights
and persons are excepted by the said Statute, but this right in gross of
possession, nor the Issue in tail, whose Ancestor being out of possession
levieth the Fine is not excepted, therefore both of them comprehended in the
Statute. And in his argument he stood much upon it, how dangerous a matter it
should be, to receive such averments and allegations which go merely in
avoidance of Fines, for so every Fine might fall in the mouth of the Lay-Gens,
which would be very inconvenient. And he concluded his Argument with this Case.
Tenant in tail does discontinue, and disseiseth his discontinnuee, and levieth
a Fine, the discontinuee before the proclamations reentreth, the proclamations
are made, Tenant in tail does re-enter, and dies seized; against this Fine his
Issue shall not be remitted. See as to the averment 3 H. 627. 33 H. 6. 18. 42
E. 3. 20. 8 H. 4. 8. 12 E. 4. 19. by Fairfax and Needham, and fol. 15. by Brian
and Choke. And afterward Judgment was given, that the Demandant should be
barred.

CIII. Gunerston and Hatchers Case. Intr. Pasch. 24 Eliz. Rot. 2112. In Communi
Banco.
CHarles Duke of Suffolk was seized of three parts of the Manor of D. and Poole
was seized of the fourth part of the said Manor, Avowry.
and afterward the Duke granted out of the said three parts a Rentcharge of
five marks to Gunerston; and afterward the said Duke of the said three parts
did enfeoffe Hatcher in Fee, after which Poole conveyed his said fourth part of
the said Manor to the said Hatcher in Fee, and afterward Hatcher being seized,
ut supra, reciting the said several purchases, especially the said fourth part
devised to Katherin Hatcher at Will, and Gunerston distreined the Cattle of
Katherin Hatcher for the arrearages of the said Rent, and in a Replevin avowed
the distress: and by the opinion of the whole Court the Avowry was not
maintainable, for the fourth part of the said Manor, which was in the
possession of Poole, was not charged with the Rent; and although all the Manor
be now in the possession of Hatcher, yet the Manor is not so consolidated nor
united by this unity of possession, but that the owner might well enough single
out eandem quartam partem, and grant it, and the grantee shall hold the same
discharged, as the said Poole held it; and the beasts of the said Katherin
shall not be distreined; and so Judgment was given against the Avowant.

CIV. Mich. 29 and 30 Eliz. In Communi Banco.
Voucher. Post. 291.
IT was moved by Sergeant Walmesley, If a common Recovery be to pass at the Bar,
and the Tenant is ready at the Bar and voucheth to war. A. for whom one is
ready at the Bar to appear for the vouchee by his warrant of Attorney; It was
holden, that this appearance is merely void, for in such case the vouchee ought
to appear in person, because without summons; but where summons issues, and
the same is entered upon the Roll, there may the vouchee at the Return appear in
person, or by Attorney, at his Election. And that was the clear opinion of all
the Justices, and also of the Prothonotaries.

CV. Keys and Steds Case. Mich. 29 and 30 Eliz. In Communi Banco.
IN a Formedon by Keys against Sted, the Case was, the Sted and his Wife were
Tenants for life, Formodon. 2 Len. 9.
the Remainder over to a stranger in Fee; and the Writ of Formedon brought
against Sted only, who made default after default, whereupon came his Wife and
prayed to be received to defend her right; which was denied her by the Court,
for this Recovery does not bind her, and it is to no purpose for her to defend
her right in that Action which cannot here be impearched; Whereupon he in the
Remainder came and prayed to be received, and the Court at first doubted of the
Receipt, forasmuch as if the Demandant shall have Judgment to recover, he in the
Remainder might falsify the Recovery, because his estate, upon which he prays
to be received, does not depend upon the estate impleaded, scil. a sole estate,
whereas his Remainder does depend upon a joint estate in the Husband and Wife,
Falsifier of Recovery.
not named in the Writ; But at the last, notwithstanding the said Exception,
the Receipt was granted. See 40 E. 3. 12.

CVI. Liveseys Case. Mich. 29 and 30 Eliz. In Communi Banco.
Writ of Right.
IN a Writ of Right against Thomas Livesey of the Manor of D. and de duabus
partibus Custodiae Forrestae de C. the Tenant did demand the view and he had
it, and return was made, and now the Writ of Habere facias visum, was viewed by
the Court, and it was, Visum Manerii and duarum partium Custodiae, etc. And it
was holden by the Court not to be a sufficient view, for the Forest it self
ought to be put in view, scil. the whole Forest, View.
and not duae parts tantum, as where a Rent or Common is demanded, the Land
out of which the Rent or Common is going ought to be put in view; and there a
Writ of Habere facias visum de novo issued forth.

CVII. Germys Case. Mich. 29 and 30 Eliz. In Communi Banco.
GErmy brought Debt upon a Bond against A. as Executor, Debt. 2 Len. 119.
and the Case was, That the Testator of A. by his Will did appoint certain
Lands, and named which, should be sold by his Executors, and the moneys thereof
arising distributed amongst his Daughters when they have accomplished their
ages of one and twenty years; the Lands are sold, if the moneys thereof being
in the hands of the Executors until the full age of the Daughters shall be
assets to pay the debts of the Testator? And by the clear opinion of the whole
Court, Assets. Post. 224.
the same shall not be assets, for that this money is limited to a special use.

CVIII. Mich. 29 and 30 Eliz. In Communi Banco.
IN an Action of Debt upon an Obligation, the Defendant says, that the
Plaintiff shall not be answered, for he is outlawed, and showed the Outlawry
in certain, by the name of I. S. of D. in the County of, etc. The Plaintiff
showed, that at the time of the suit begun against I.S. upon whom the Out-lawry
was pronounced, the said I.S. now Plaintiff, was dwelling at S. absque hoc,
that he was dwelling at D. Vide 21 H. 7. 13. And it was holden a good
Replication, to avoid the Out-lawry without a Writ of Error, by Anderson. 10 E.
4. 12. For if he were not dwelling at D. then he cannot be intended the same
person: See 39 H. 6. 1.

CIX. Mich. 29 and 30 Eliz. In Communi Banco.
IT was agreed by the whole Court, and affirmed by the Prothonotaries, That if
in Account the Defendant be adjudged to account, and be taken by a Capias ad
computandum, and set to mainprize, pendent the Account before the Auditors, and
does not keep his day before them, that now a Capias ad computandum de novo
shall issue forth against him.

CX. Gloss and Haymans Case. Mich. 29 and 30 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
JOan Gloss brought an Action of Trespass, vi and armis, Trespass, vi and
armis, against a Servant for carrying away his Masters goods. Owen 52. More 248.
against John Hayman, who pleaded the general Issue, and the Jury found this
special matter, That the Plaintiff was a Grocer in Ipswich, and there held a
Shop of Grocery, and quod illa reposuit fiduciam in the Defendant, to sell the
Grocery Wares of the Plaintiff in the said Shop: And further found, that the
said Defendant being in the said Shop in form aforesaid, cepit and asportavit,
the said Wares, and did convert them, etc. It was moved in Arrest of Judgment,
that this Action, vi and armis, upon this matter does not lie, but rather an
Action upon the Case. But the Court was clear of opinion, that the Action does
well lie, for when the Defendant was in the Shop aforesaid, the Goods and Wares
did remain in the custody and possession of the Plaintiff her self. And the
Defendant has not any Interest, possession, or other thing in them, and
therefore if he entermeddle with them in any other manner, than by uttering of
them by sale, according to the authority to him committed, he is a Trespassor;
for he has not any authority to carry the Wares out of the Shop not sold, but
all his authority is within the Shop. And Rodes put the Case of Littleton 25.
If I deliver my Sheep to another to manure his Land, or my Oxen to plow his
Land, and afterward he kills them, I shall have an Action of Trespass against
him: And afterward Judgment was given for the Plaintiff.

CXI. Martin and Stedds Case. Mich. 29 and 30 Eliz.
RIchard Martin, Alderman of London, brought an Action upon the Case against
Stedd, and declared, That whereas the Queen by her Letters Patents dated, the
27. of August, anno 24. of her Reign, had granted to the Plaintiff the Office
of Master of the Mint, through all England, to exercise the said Office,
secundum formam quarundam Indent. betwixt the said Queen and the said Plaintiff
conficiendam, and that in January following the said Indenture was made, by
which it was agreed betwixt the said Queen and the Plaintiff, that the money,
in posterum, should be made in such manner, etc. according to the true
Standard; and declared, that he had duly and lawfully made all the money
according to the said Standard: Yet the Defendant, machinans, etc. had
slanderously spoken and given out speeches in these words, Mr. Martin has not
made the money as good and fine as the Standard, by an half penny in the ounce,
and so he has saved four thousand pounds. It was objected against this
Declaration by Walmesley Sergeant, that here the Plantiff has declared upon
the Letters Patents, and the Office given by the Letters Patents ought to be
exercised according to the Indenture, etc. And here appears upon the
Declaration no Indenture, for no enrolment of such Indenture is showed, and if
it be not enrolled, then there cannot be any Indenture betwixt the Queen. etc.
and then the Qeeen cannot have an Action upon it for want of enrolment. See 21
H. 7. 21. 1 H. 7. 28. and 31. 5 E. 4. 7. and also if there be not a sufficient
Indenture, then the Plaintiff is not Master of the Mint, and then also there is
not any new Indenture: And then the Plaintiff ought to make the money according
to the the old Standard, and then might the Defendant well justify the words.

Another Exception was taken, because the Plaintiff is not at any damage, for
the Queen cannot have against him but an Action of Covenant upon the said
Indenture, because the Defendant has not made the money accordingly, which
matter is not actionable, no more than if the Farmer of the Queen had brought
this Action against one, for speaking that he had broken the condition or
covenants of his Lease. And as unto these words, So that the Defendant has
saved four thousand pounds, those words are not actionable, for it may be he
has saved this four thousand pounds to the Queen; and such construction the
Judges ought to make of such ambiguous words in such cases, scil. in optimam
partem. It was adjorned.

CXII. Mounson and Wests Case. Mich. 29 and 30 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
Challenge. 3 Len. 22^.
IN an Action of Trespass between Mounson and West, the parties were at Issue,
and now at the Return of the Panel the Defendant challenged the Array, because
it was made by Bartholomew Armin, who took to Wife the Cousin German of the
Plaintiff, and ex ea had Issue living, the mother being dead: And upon this
challenge the Plaintiff did demur in Law; And it seemed to the Lord Anderson,
that it is not a principal challenge, but only to Favor. For the matter of the
challenge is not consanguinity, but only affinity: And so it seemed to Periam.
And Rhodes cited a case adjudged in the Kings Bench. Markham brought an Action
upon the Case against Lee, who at the Nisi Prius challenged the Array, because
the Sheriffs wife was sister to the Plaintiffs Wife, and that was before the
Lord Dyer at Nottingham, and that challenge was holden there, not to be a
principal challenge, upon which Error was brought in the Kings Bench: And Error
assigned in that, and for that cause the Judgment was reversed: And by Windham
the Writ of Venire facias is, quia nulla affinitate, etc. so as affinity is
presumed in Law not indifferent. And by Anderson that is to be intended of the
Jurors, and not of the Sheriff, 22 E. 4. 2. The Array was challenged, because
that the Sheriff, etc. had married A. Daughter of Eliz. Sister of the Mother of
the Plaintiff, and that was holden a principal challenge 20 H. 7. 7. 26 E. 3.
21. And afterward at another Term the Case being moved, Anderson, Rhodes and
Windham were clear of opinion, Die. 37. 191. 319.
that it is a principal challenge; but Periam haesitavit, and put a difference
betwixt consanguinity and affinity, for affinity is not a principal challenge,
unless it be averred, that the Issue, etc. is inheritable to the Land. And
Anderson put the Case in 14. H. 7. 2. Where one challenged, because one of the
Jurors had married the Mother of the Defendant, it was holden a principal
challenge. And 15 H. 7. 9. where the challenge was for that the Brother of the
Wife of the Defendant had married the Daughter of the Sheriff.

CXIII. Sir Thomas Greshams Case. Mich. 29 and 30 Eliz. In the Exchequer.
SIr Tho. Gresham being seized of the Manors of Walsingham and Milcham in the
County of Norfolk, 12 Eliz. Revocation of uses.
enfeoffed B. and C. to certain uses, and that was with clause of Revocation
upon the tender of forty shillings, and that after such Revocation he might
limit new uses; and afterward the year following, Sir Tho. Gresham made the
like conveyance of his Lands in the County of Suffolk to the said persons, to
the like uses, upon like clause of Revocation upon the tender of forty
shillings, Sir Thomas tendered to the said Feoffees one sum of forty shillings,
to revoke the uses raised upon both the Feoffments; and afterward raised
diverse uses of diverse of the said Manors holden in Capite, Dyer. 372.
and afterward Sir Thomas died: And afterward it was resolved by the opinion
of the Justices, that by that tender the uses were not revoked, but that the
Revocation was utterly void, for two several sums of forty shillings ought to
have been tendered, for they were several Indentures and could not be satisfied
by one sum. After which by a private Act of Parliament, 23 Eliz. the said
Revocation was enacted and adjudged to be good and sufficient in Law. And now
the Lady Gresham was called by process into the Exchequer for a Fine due to the
Queen for the said alienation, Fine for Alienation.
because that now the said uses newly raised were good, and the said Manor
possessed according to the limitation of them, for now the Revocation is good,
because done by the said Statute which recited the whole special matter, and
that for want of a sufficient Tender, the Revocation was void in Law; and also
reciting the new uses which were declared for the payment of his debts, and
many honorable Legacies, and also for the security of those who had purchased
underneath the said new uses: For remedy whereof it was enacted, and quod
praedict. Revocationes bonae and sufficientes in lege habeantur, reputentur,
and recognoscantur. And it was argued by Coke, that upon the matter, no Fine is
due, for all those new uses took their essence and effect by that Act of
Parliament, to which the Queen her self is a party, and the principal Agent,
and therefore against her own Act she shall not claim a Fine, etc. And also the
alienation without license is a wrong and trespass; and an Act of Parliament
cannot do wrong, and if partition be made betwixt Parceners by Act of
Parliament, no Fine is due to the Queen, which was in ure 23 Eliz. for by
Parliament then a Partition was made betwixt the Coheirs of the Lord Latimer,
and I do not know that any Fine has been demanded for it.

CXIV. Bret and Sheppards Case. Mich. 29 and 30 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
Debt.
BRet brought Debt upon a Bond against Sheppard, the Bond was endorced, upon
condition, that where the Defendant was arrested at the suit of one A. if now
the Defendant shall appear in the Kings Bench, where the process is returnable,
that then, etc. And the Defendant said in fact, that he had appeared, secundum
formam and effectum conditionis supradict. and hoc petit quod inquiratur per
patriam, and praedict. Brett similiter: It was moved, that the parties should
replead for this matter, upon which they are at Issue, scil. the appearance is
not triable by Jury, but by the Record: And the Court was clear of opinion,
that the parties should replead for the cause aforesaid: And it was moved by
the Lord Anderson, that if A. be bound to appear in the Kings Bench at such a
day, and A. at the said days go to the Court, but there no process is
returned, then the party may go to one of the chief Clerks of the Court, and
pray him to take a Note of his appearance: And by Nelson, we have an acient
form of entry of such Appearance in such Cases, Ad hunc diem venit I. S. and
propter indemnitatem suam and Manucaptorum suorum petit quod comparentia sua in
Curia hic recordetur. And see for the same 38 H. 6. 17. And afterward the Lord
Anderson, inspecto Rotulo, ex assensu sociorum awarded a Repleader: And so by
Nelson, it has been done oftentimes here before, and put in ure: The same Law
is, where at the day of appearance no Court is holden, or the Justices do not
come, etc. he who was bound to appear, ought to have an Appearance recorded in
such manner as it may be; and if the other party pleads Null tiel Record, it
behooves that the Defendant have the Record ready at his peril, for this Court
cannot write to the Justices of the Kings Bench, for to certify a Record
hither.

CXV. Baxter and Bales Case. Mich. 29 and 30 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
Debt not extinct by administration.
BAxter brought Debt upon a Bond as Executor of I. against Bale; who pleaded
that the Plaintiff after the death of the Testator was cited to appear before
the Ordinary or his Commissary to prove the Will of the said I. and at the day
of his appearance he made default, upon which the Ordinary committed Letters of
Administration to the Defendant, by force of which he did administer, so the
debt is extinct, etc. but the whole Court was clear of opinion, that the debt
was not extinct, for now by the probate of the Will the administration is
defeated, and although the Executor made default at the day which he had by the
Citation before the Ordinary, yet thereby he is not absolutely debarred, but
that he may resort to the proving of the Will whenever he pleases; But if he
had appeared and renounced the Executorship it had been otherwise; and the debt
is not extinct by the Administration in the mean time.

CXVI. Mich. 29 and 30 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
IN a Franchise the parties are at Issue upon a matter triable out of the
Franchise. And it was moved, if now the Record should be sent into the Common
Pleas, and there tried, and after trial sent back into the Franchise: Which
Periam and Anderson utterly denied; and by Periam, there is no reason that we
should be their Ministers to try Issues joined before them: And it is not like,
2 Len. 37.
where in a Liberty or Franchise a Foreign Voucher is to warrant Lands, in such
cases we shall determine the Warranty; but that is by a special Statute of
Gloucester cap. 12. And Nelson Prothonotary said, that such an Issue was tried
here of late. Quod nota.

CXVII. The Earl of Arundel, and the Lord Dacres. Case. Mich. 29 and 30 Eliz.
At Sergeants Inn.
PHilip Earl of Arundel, and the Lord William Howard his Brother married the
Daughters and Coheirs of the late Lord Dacres: And now came Francis Lord
Dacres as heir male of the said Family, and claimed the Inheritance, etc. And
after long suit betwixt both parties, they submitted themselves to the award of
Gilbert Lord Talbot, and of Arthur Lord Gray of Wilton, and Windham and Periam
Justices; And before them at Sergeants Inn, the matter was well debated by the
Council learned on both sides; and as unto Greistock Lands, parcel of the Lands
in question, the Case was. That Tenant in tail makes a Feoffment in fee unto
the use of himself for his life, the Remainder in tail to his eldest Son, with
diverse Remainders over, with a Proviso, that if any of the Entailees do any act
to interrupt the course of any entail limited by the said Conveyance, that then
the use limited to such person should cease, and go to him who is next
inheritable; And afterward Tenant in tail dies, his eldest Son to whom the
use in tail was first limited enters, and does an Act against the said
Proviso, and yet held himself in and made Leases, the Lessees enter, the Lessor
dies seized, his Heir being within age, and in ward to the Queen; It was
holden by Shutleworth Sergeant, Yelverton, Godfrey, Owen, and Coke, who were of
Council with the Heirs general of the Lord Dacres, that here is a Remitter, for
by this Act against the Proviso, the use, Remitter.
and so the possession does accrue to the enfant Son of him, to whom the use in
tail was limited by the Tenant in tail: Then when the Tenant in tail after his
said Feoffment holds himself in, this is a disseissin; for a Tenancy by
sufferance cannot be after the cesser of an estate of Inheritance; But admit
that he be but a Tenant at sufferance, H^b. 255. Die. 54.
yet when he makes Leases for years, the same is clearly a disseisin, and then
upon the whole matter a Remitter, and although the Enfant takes by the
Statute, yet the right of the tail descending to him afterward by the death of
his Father does remit him, as if Tenant in tail makes a Feoffment in fee to
the use of himself for life, the Remainder in tail to his eldest Son
inheritable to the first intail, notwithstanding that the eldest Son takes his
Remainder by the Statute, and so be in ^^ force thereof, yet when by the death
of his Father, the right of the Entail descends to him, he is remitted.

CXVIII. Butler and Airs Case. Mich. 29 and 30 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
Dower.
BUtler and his Wife brought a Writ of Dower against Thomas Air, Son and Heir
of Bartholmew Air, first Husband of the said Margaret Wife of the Plaintiff,
and demanded Dower of Lands in A. and B; the Tenant pleaded, never seized que
Dower, and the Jury found that the said Bartholmew was seized during the
Coverture, de omnibus tenementis infra script. preterquam, the Tenements in
(sic ut dicta Margareta dotari potuit) Exception was taken to this Verdict;
because that this preterquam, etc. does confound the Verdict. To which it was
said by the Court, that the preterquam is idle, and surplusage, for it is of
another thing than that which is in demand, and the seisin of the first Husband
of Lands in A. and B. is confessed, and the (preterquam) works nothing: Another
matter was objected, because here the Jury have assessed damages, as in case
where the Husband died seized, Die. 370.
the which dying seized is not found by the Verdict: In which Case it was said
by the Court, the Demandant might pray Judgment of the Lands, and release
damages; or the Demandant may aver that the Husband died seized, and have a
Writ to enquire of the damages, quod omnes Pregnotarii concesserunt.

CXIX. Michel and Hydes Case. Mich. 29 and 30 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
Dower.
DOwer by Michel and his Wife against Lawrence Hyde, who appeared upon the grand
Cape; And it was because that the said Hyde in truth was but Lessee for years
of the Land of which etc. in which case he might plead non-tenure, if now he
might wage his Law of non-summons, so as the Writ be abated: for by the wager
of Law he has taken upon him the Tenancy, and affirmed himself to be Tenant,
33 H. 6. 2. by Prisoit, to which it was said by Rhodes, and Windham Justices,
that here the Tenant being but Lessee for years is not at any mischief, for if
Judgment and Execution be had against him, he notwithstanding might afterward
enter upon the Demandant. Another matter was moved, That where the Writ of
Dower was, de tertia part Rectoriae de D. and upon that the grand Cape issued,
Cape in manum nostram tertiam partem Rectoriae, and the Sheriff by color of
this Writ took the Tithes severed from the nine parts, and carried them away
with him: And it was agreed by the said Justices, that the same is not such a
seizure as is intended by the said Writ, but the Sheriff by virtue of such Writ
ought generally to seize, but leave them there where he found them. And the
Court was of opinion to commit the Sheriff to Prison for such his misdemeanor.

CXX. Hamington and Ryders Case. Mich. 29 and 30 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
RIchard Haming. Executor of Isabel Haming. brought Debt upon an Obligation
against Ryder, Debt. Savil Rep. 74. Owen Rep. 6. 1 Co. 52. 1 And^ 162.
the Case was, that Kidwelly was seized, and leased for years to John Hamington
Husband of Isabel, and afterward John Hamington being so possessed, by his
will devised, that the said Isabel should have the use and occupation of the
said Land for all the years of the said Term as she should live and remain
sole, and if she died or married, that then his Son should have the residue of
the said Term not expired; John died, Isabel entered, Devises.
to whom the said Lawr. coveyed by Feoffment the said Land in Fee, and in the
Indenture of the said Conveyance Lawr. covenanted that the said Land from
thence should be clearly exouerated, de omnibus prioribus barganijs, titulis,
juribus and omnibus alijs oneribus quibuscunque, Isabel took to Husband, the
Son enters: If now the Covenant be broken was the question. It seemed to
Anderson at the first motion, that this possibility which was in the Son at the
time of the Feoffment, was not any of the things mentioned in the Covenant,
scil. former bargain, title, right, or charge; But yet it was conceived by him
that the word bargain did extend to it, for every Lease for years is a
contract, and although that the Land at the time of the Feoffment was not
charged, yet it was not discharged of the former contract: And by Windham, if I
be bounden in a Statute-staple, and afterward I bargain and sell my Lands, and
covenant (ut supra) here the Land is not charged, but if after the condition
contained in the defeazance be broken, so as the Conusee extends, now the
Covenant is broken; And by him, the word (charge) does extend to a possibility,
and this possibility might be extinct by Livery as all agreed; but not
translated by grant, Ante 33. 3 Len. 43. Covenant.
or extinguished by release, as it was lately adjudged in the Case of one
Carter. At another day, it was argued by Walmesley, and he much relied upon the
words (clearly exonerated) utterly discharged, or altogether exonerated, and
without doubt it is a charge which may happen, and if it may happen, then the
Land is not clare exonerated: And also former bargains do extend to it, and the
Term is not extinct by the acceptance of the Feoffment aforesaid of Kidwelly,
and although, that at the time of the Feoffment it was but a possibility, and
no certain interest, yet now upon the marriage of Isabel, it is become an
actual burden and charge upon the Land; and he cited a Case adjudged, 8 Eliz.
A man seized of Lands grants a Rentcharge to begin at a day to come before
which day he bargains and sells the Lands, and covenants that the said Lands
are discharged of all charges, in that case when the day when the Rent ought to
begin is incurred, the Covenant is clearly broken, for the Lands were not
clearly exonerated, etc. At another day the Case was moved at the Bar. And
Anderson openly in Court declared, that he and all his companions were agreed,
that the Land at the time of the Feoffment was not discharged of all former
Rights, Titles and charges; and therefore commanded, that Judgment should be
entered for the Plaintiff.

CXXI. Howel and Trivanians Case. Hill. 30 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
HOwel brought an Action upon the Case against Trivanian in the Common Pleas,
and declared, Assumpsit.
that he delivered certain goods to the brother of the Defendant, who made the
Defendant his Executor, and died, after which the Plaintiff came to the
Defendant, and spoke with him concerning the said goods, upon which
communication and speech the Defendant promised the Plaintiff, that if the
Plaintiff could prove, that the said goods were delivered to the Testator, 2
Roll. 594.
that he would pay the value of them to the Plaintiff: And the Declaration was
in consideration, that the said goods came to the hands of the Testator, and
also afterward the goods came to the Defendants hands, and upon non Assumpsit
pleaded, It was found for the Plaintiff, and Judgment given: And afterward
Error was brought in the Kings Bench, and Error assigned, because that the
Plaintiff had not averred in his Declaration, that he had proved the delivery
of the said goods to the said Testator, 1 Cro. 105.
for the words of the promise are, si probare potuisset: And also it was
assigned for Error, that here is not any consideration upon which this promise
could receive any strength, for the Defendant has not any profit or advantage
thereby, scil. by the bailment of the said goods to the Brother of the
Defendant; And also it is a thing before executed, and not depending upon the
promise, nor the promise upon it: As the Case reported by the Lord Dyer 10
Eliz. 272. The Servant is arrested in London, and two men to whom the Master is
well known, bail the said Servant, and after the Master promises to them for
their friend-ship, to save them harmless from all costs and damages, and in an
Action upon the Case brought upon that promise, the Plaintiff was barred, for
here is not any consideration, for they bailed the Servant of their own head
without the request of the Master, and the matter which is alledgged for
consideration is executed before the Assumpsit, and the promise was not before
the enlargment, and the said bailment was not at the instance, Claytons Rep.
45. 1 Cro. 756.
or request of the Master. And the Case of one Hudson was cited, adjudged in
the Kings Bench: The Defendant in consideration that he was Administrator, and
natural Son of the Intestate, and that the goods of his Father have come to his
hands, promises to pay the debt to the Plaintiff. And in an Action upon the
Case upon that promise, the Defendant pleaded he made no such promise, and it
was found that no goods came to the hands of the Defendant; And it was holden,
that the consideration that he was Administrator and Son to the Testator, was
not of any force to maintain the Action, and afterward in the principal Case
the Judgment was affirmed. And it was moved by Coke that Judgment should not be
given against the Executor of his own goods if he had not goods of the
Testator, for the charge does not extend beyond the consideration, i. e. That
the goods of the Testator came to the hands of the Defendant. But Wray Justice
was of opinion, that Judgment shall be of his proper goods, as in Case of
confession. Kemp Secondary, if the Action be brought upon Assumpsit of the
Testator, Judgment shall be of the goods of the Testator; but of the promise of
the Executor, of his own goods; but the Original Judgment which is now affirmed
was general.

CXXII. Savel and Woods Case. Hill. 30 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
1 Cro. 71. 3 Len. 203. 265. Post, 128.
THe Case was; That a Parson did Libel in the spiritual Court against a
Parishoner for Tithes of such Lands within his Parish, the Defendant came into
the Kings Bench and surmised, and that he and all those whose estate he has in
the Lands out of which the Tithes are demanded, have used to pay every year
five shillings to the Parish Clark of the same Parish for all the Tithes out of
the same place: And it was argued by Coke, that that could not be, for a Parish
Clark is not a person corporate, nor has succession: But if he had prescribed,
that they had used to pay it to the Parish Clark to the use of the Parson, it
had been good: Also he ought to show, that the Parson ought of right to find
the Parish Clark, etc. And he cited the Case of Bushie the Parson of Pancras,
who libelled in the Spiritual Court for Tithes, The Defendant to have a
prohibition did prescribe, that he, and all those, etc. had time out of mind,
etc. used to pay to the Vicar, etc. and at last a Consultation was awarded
because it was triable in the Ecclesiastical Court, for both parties as well
Vicar as Parson are spiritual persons, and the modus decimandi is not in
question, but cui solvend. And at another day, it was agreed by the Justices,
that of common right, the Parson is not tied to find the Parish Clark, for then
he should be said the Parsons Clark and not the Parish Clark: But if the Parson
be tied to find such a Clark, Challenge.
and such a sum has been used to be paid to the Parish Clark in discharge of
the Person, the same had been a good prescription, and so by way of
composition; and by Clench Tithes are to be paid to spiritual Persons, but a
Parish-Clark is a Lay-person: And afterward the Court granted a Consultation.

CXXIII. Higham and Reynolds Case. Hill. 30 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
IN an Action of Trespass the Plaintiff declared, that the Defendant 1 Maii 28
Eliz. cut down six posts of the house of the Plaintiff at D. The Defendant does
justify, because that the Freehold of the house, 10 Aprilis 27 Eliz. was to
I. S. and that he by his commandment the same day and year did the Trespass,
etc. upon which the Plaintiff did demur in Law, because the Defendant did not
traverse, without that that he was guilty before or after. And the opinion of
Wray was, that the traverse taken was well enough, because the Freehold shall
be intended to continue, etc. Vide 7. H. 7. 3. But all the other three Justices
were of a contrary opinion to Wray: But they all agreed, that where the
Defendant does justify, by reason of his Freehold at the day supposed in the
Declaration, there the traverse (before) is good enough: And afterward
Judgment was given against the Defendant.

CXXIV. Knight and Footmans Case. Hill. 30 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
IN Trespass by Knight against Footman, the Case upon the pleading was, that
one Margaret had issue two Sons, Richard and Thomas, Surrender of Copyhold
Land.
and surrendered to the use of Richard for life, and afterward to the use of
Thomas in Fee; they both, Thomas being within age, surrender to the use of one
Robert ^ap John in Fee, who is admitted; Richard dies, Co 1 Inst. 248.
Thomas dies, having issue A. who is also admitted, and enters into the Land,
and if his entry be lawful, or that he be put to his plaint in the nature of a
Dum fuit infra aetatem was the Question. And Wray was clear of opinion that it
was: And if a man seized of Copyhold Land in the right of his Wife, or Tenant
in tail of a Copyhold does surrender to the use of another in Fee, the same
does not make any discontinuance, but that the issue in tail and the Wife may
respectively enter; 1 Cro. 372. 380. 391. 483. 717. More 596.
and so was it holden in the Sergeants Case, when Audley, who afterward was
made Chancellor of England, was made Sergeant; and afterward it was adjudged,
that the entry of the Enfant was lawful.

CXXV. Sir Wollaston Dixies Case. Mich. 29 Eliz. In the Exchequer.
AN Information was in the Exchequer against Sir Wollaston Dixie, upon the
Statute of Usury, and upon not guilty pleaded, Information upon the Statute of
13. Eliz of Usury.
The Informe^ gave in evidence an usurious Contract upon a bargain of Wares:
The opinion of the Court was, that the Information being exhibited for the loan
of money, that the Evidence was not pursuing nor leading to the Issue. And yet
the Jury against the opinion of the Court upon that evidence found the
Defendant guilty. And it was moved in arrest of Judgment, that the Evidence did
not maintain the Information, nor prove the Issue, ex part Querentis, and it
was said, there are three things within the Statute, i. three words, i.
bargain, loan, and cheivizance, and these three are several things, and
therefore, if the Information be conceived upon loan, and the Informer gives
in Evidence a corrupt bargain for cloth, as it is in this Case, the same does
not maintain the Information; So if the Information be granted upon usurious
contract by way of mortgage, and gives in Evidence an usurious loan, ut supra.
But if the Information had been conceived generally, upon an usurious
agreement, and gives in Evidence a loan, the same is good enough, for every
loan is an agreement.

Manwood, There cannot be any loan without bargain, nor any forbearing without
bargain, for he contracts or bargains to do it, viz. to lend, or forbear:
Bargain of forbearing is where the first day of payment, is not kept and the
parties have agreed for a further day for payment, etc. And it appears in
this Case, that it was a bargain to forbear a sum of money which should have
been paid before; And the Information here is upon a bargain by way of loan,
where was a bargain for forbearing. Fuller, this word (Bargain) in the Statute
cannot be intended a bargain for wares or such things, and so distinct from the
other two things, etc. If in Information upon loan, an usurious contract had
been given in Evidence, that would not maintain the Information: And it was
moved in this Case, if the time of the loan or forbearance of the money shall
be accounted according to eight and twenty days to every month, or by the
months in the Calendar, viz. January, February, etc. And it seemed to some
according to the days, as in case of the Statute of 23 Eliz. of Recusants; and
others conceived contrary in both Cases. And Fuller said, That in the Case of
policy of Assurance made to warrant a Ship, one was bound to warrant a Ship for
twelve months; and the truth was, she did not perish within the time of the
twelve months, being accounted according to eight and twenty days, but being
accounted by the Calendar, as January, Feb. etc. it perished, etc. and it was
said and holden, that he had not forfeited his Bond. Gent Baron. If I lend one
a hundred pounds without any contract for Interest, and afterward at the end
of year he gives me twenty pounds for the loan thereof, the same is within the
Statute, for my acceptance makes the offense* without any bargain or contract.
And by Clarke Baron, the place where the Defendant accepted excessive Interest
ought to be showed in the Information, but not the place where the contract for
the loan or forbearance was made, for the same is not needful. See the Case
betwixt Stradling and Morgan, Plowd. 200. for the setting down of the place in
the Declaration, where the Extortion was committed: The Information here is by
way of corrupt bargain and loan. The Defendant took at Dertford such a sum,
where the taking is laid, apud Dertford, but no place of the corrupt bargain
or of the loan. And by Gent. If I lend to Beesie for a year, and afterward he
takes further forbearance of another year beyond the rate, the same is within
the Statute: but in all Cases, the place where the corrupt bargain was made
ought to be certainly alleged: Manwood Baron, the Information is not good for
the incertainty of the place, where the corrupt bargain was made; and although
there are many Presidents on the Informs part, it is not to purpose, for they
were admitted without exception, and then they passed sub silentio, and so of
no force. There are three things, or rather degrees of offenses within the
Statute. In usury, within the Statute, there ought to be corrupt loan,
cheivisance, or shift, 1. corruption, 2. he ought to take more than eight pound
for one hundred pounds, 3. it ought to be for lending or forbearing. There was
a Case in this Court in the time of this Queen, that the Defendant had taken
more than ten pounds in the hundred pounds, but in the Information no
corruption in the bargain was alleged; and therefore Judgment was given
against the Informer: But in the Case at Bar corruption is set forth in facto,
and therefore as to that the Information is good enough: As unto the forbearing
and giving of days of payment the same is alleged in the Information, but not
according to the Statute, for the Statute is in the disjunctive, but the
Information is in the copulative; here in our Case the issue is Not guilty,
under which general issue all the points of the Statute are included and ought
to be tried; as unto the corruption the same is not sufficiently laid, for no
place is assigned where the corrupt bargain was made, ergo no visne for it to
be tried, ergo, no trial can be, ergo, no issue for it, ergo, this point of the
Statute does not come in issue, nor can it be tried upon the general issue, Not
guilty. Also he held, that all the Offense ought to be within the year, for if
one make a corrupt bargain for this year, and ten years after he takes
excessive usury, the same is not within the Statute to inform upon it. And in
truth there is no such offense without corrupt bargain, so as he conceived,
that the word (Lending) is a strange word, but where the Statute is forbearing
or giving day of payment, and in the Information it is giving and forbearing in
the copulative, that is good enough, for the one word enforces the other, and
is not double. Also the Information has not showed whose money it is, and
therefore it is not good: And afterward Judgment was given against the
Informer; and a Writ of Error thereupon brought in the Erchequer Chamber. And
it was argued by Popham Attorney General, that Judgment ought to have been
given for the Queen and the Informer, for the showing of the place where the
corrupt bargain was made needs not to be alleged in the Information, for the
offense punishable by the Statute is the receipt of excessive usury, and not
the contract: And it was the Case of one Bird, 20 Eliz. where the Plaintiff
showed the place of the Receipt, and not of the contract, and yet had Judgment
for the Queen, without any exception to it before Judgment, or Error after, for
the contract is but inducement to the receipt, and it shall be tried where the
taking was; therefore it is not necessary to show the place of the bargain: And
it was adjorned.

CXXVI. Saliard and Everats Case. Mich. 30 Eliz. In the Exchequer.
THomas Saliard and Hen. Everat being Recusants convicted, Recusants. Owen.
Rep. 37.
and not having paid twenty pounds for every month, a Commission issued forth
to enquire of their Goods and Lands in the County of Suffolk, to levy thereon
the Debt and penalty due to the Queen. And now the Commission being returned,
the parties appeared, and by their Council showed, that some of their Lands
returned in the Commission are Copyhold, and prayed as to those, Manus Dominae
Reginae amoveantur, and that upon the Statute of 29 Eliz. cap 5. concerning
Recusants: viz. that upon default of payment of penalties, etc. which process
issued out of the Exchequer to take and seize all the goods, and two parts as
well of all the Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, Leases and Farms of such
Offender, as of all other the Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments, liable to
such seizure, or to the penalties aforesaid, by the true meaning of this Act,
leaving the third part, etc. And Popham Attorney General moved, If a Recusant
has more than a third part of his Lands in Copyhold land, if this Copyhold
as to the surplusage shall be liable to the penalty. Manwood chief Baron
conceived, that the Copyhold is liable in this Case by the Statute, although
not directly by express words, yet within the intent of it, and that by reason
of these words all other the lands, etc. liable to such seizure, etc. Walmes.
Sergeant, Copyhold is not liable to a Statute Merchant or Staple; also if the
Queen has the Copyhold, how shall the Lord have the services which the Queen
cannot do? Also a Copyhold is not an Hereditament within this Statute, which
extends only to Hereditaments at the common Law, and not by custom: Also in
Acts of Parliaments which are enacted for forfeiture of Lands, Tenements, and
Hereditaments, by those words they shall not forfeit Copy-holds. Clark Baron,
this Statute was made to restrain Recusants from taking the benefit of their
Livings, and Copy-holds are their Livings as well as Free-holds, and by this
Statute, the Queen shall not have every estate in the Copyhold Land, but only
the taking of the profits; but the scope of the Statute was to impair the
Livings of Recusants, and that by driving of them for want of maintenance to
repair to the Church.

Walmesley, If the Statute had given to the Queen to seize two parts of their
livings, then the Statute had extended to Copy-holds. Manwood, when a Statute
is made to transfer an estate by name of Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments,
the Copyhold is not within such Statute; but if the Lords Signiory, his
Customs and Services, are not to be impeached, or taken away by such Statute,
then it is otherwise; for such Statute does not make another Tenant to the
Lord; And by him Copyholder shall pay Subsidies, and he shall be assessed
according to the value of his Copyhold as well as of his Freehold, and in this
Case, the Queen is to have the profits of the Lands only, but no estate. At
another day, the case was argued for the Recusants by Snag Sergeant, and he
said, that these words Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments are to be construed,
which are such at the Common Law, not by Custom: If I give to one all my Lands,
Tenements, and Hereditaments in D. my Copy-holds do not pass, and Statutes
which are made to take away Possessions and Hereditaments out of persons ought
to be strictly taken, and not by Equity: The Statute of 13 Eliz. of Bankrupts
enacts, that the Commissioners may sell the Lands and Tenements of the
Bankrupts; if the Statute had not made a further provision, the Commissioners
could not sell Copyhold Lands, but there are express words in the Statute for
that purpose, i.e. as well copy as fee: Also the Staute of 13 Eliz. cap. 4. of
Auditors and Receivers of the Queen does not extend to Copy-holds: And it
should be a great prejudice to the Lords of such Copy-holds, that the Queen
should have the Land. Popham, the intention of the Law sometimes causes a
liberal construction of a Statute in the letter of it, What Statutes extend to
Copy-holds.
sometimes a strict and precise exposition, and here it appears, that the
intention of the Statute was, that the Queen should have all the goods of the
offender, and two parts of the Lands, etc. Leases and Farms, and the Recusant
but the third part of all his Lands only; And therefore the Recusant is not to
have any other thing but only that which is allotted to him by the Statute, and
that is the third part, which is all the maintenance which the Law allows him;
and then if Copy-holds be not within this Statute, a Recusant who has great
possessions in Copy-holds, and has no Freehold should be dispunishable, and
has his full maintenance, against the meaning of the Statute: And he said that
many things are within the meaning of a Statute, ^y. 5. 6. Co. 3. Inst. 109
Yel. 60. 12 Co. 12.
which are not within the words, as Bonds, Obligations and Specialties made to
Recusants, shall pass to the Queen by this Statute by force of the word, goods,
according to the meaning of the Statute, and all personal things are within the
Statute, etc. profits of the Lands, Advowsons, and the like; and the very scope
of the Statute was to take away from Recusants all personal things whatsoever,
and two parts of real things, as Leases, Farms, Lands, Tenements, etc. with the
intent that with the superfluity of their goods and possessions, she should not
maintain Jesuits, and Seminary Priests, people more dangerous than the
Recusants: And by him, Lands in ancient demesne are liable to the penalties by
the Statute; although not by express words; So if a Recusant has Lands
extended by him upon a Statute acknowledged unto him, that Interest is not
properly a Lease, or Farm, yet it is Land within this Statute liable, etc. And
if I be Tenant by Elegit, or Statute, etc. of Lands in D. not having other
Lands in the said Town, and I grant all my Lands in D. my Interest ut supra,
shall pass; contrary, If I have other Lands there: And I grant, that if I have
Copyhold Lands in D. and none other, and I grant all my Lands in D. Copyhold
Land shall not pass by such assurance; because that Copyhold cannot pass but
by surrender; If I put out a Copyholder out of his Lands, the same is a
Disseisin to the Lord of whom the Copyhold is holden: And if I levy a Fine of
such Lands and five years pass, not only the Lord is bounden as to his
Freehold and Inheritance, but also the Copyholder for his possession, for the
intent of the Statute of 4 H. 7. was to take away controversies, and litibus
finem imponere, 5 Co. 124.
and contention may be as well for Copyhold as for Land at the common Law. One
has a Lease for years to begin at a day to come, he who has the Freehold
thereof is disseised, the Disseisor levieth a Fine, five years pass, he who
has the Freehold is bound by it, but not he who has the Interest for years
in futuro, as it has been lately adjudged; But he said, That if that point
were to be handled again, the Law would be taken to the contrary; but it is
clear that a Lease in possession shall be bound by such Fine: And as unto any
prejudice to the Lord it is clear, that notwithstanding that the Queen has the
Copyhold Land, yet the Lord shall have the Rent during the possession of the
Queen, which is the most valuable part of the services of the Copyholder. The
Statute of 1 E. 6. of Chantries, does extend to Copyhold, by the general
words, Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments, for otherwise the Proviso which
excepts Copy-holds were not necessary: And in our Statute, the words are Lands,
Tenements, and Hereditaments, which are forceable words, which proves that our
exposition to extend it to Copy-holds is proper and agreeable to the Statute,
and this in the first branch of it; for Copyhold is some Land, Tenement, or
Hereditament; the clause in this branch of the Statute is, and also all other
the Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments liable to such seizure, etc. the same
is to be meant of such Lands which are bound with clause of revocation, of
which is spoken in the former part of this Statute. He who departs out of the
Realm against the Statute of 5 R. 2. shall forfeit his goods, and thereby his
debts also: The King grants omnia bona and catalla felonum, Debts of Felons
shall pass; Ergo Copy-holds also, 2 L^n. 56. Post. 201. 202.
by the name of Lands, Tenements, etc. as well as debts by the name of goods.
In our Case, the meaning of the Statute was, that the Queen should have two
parts of the whole estate of the Recusant, be it Copyhold, Ancient demesne,
etc. If upon the Statute of Bankrupts, a Copyhold estate be sold to the King,
the King shall pay the Rent, but shall not do any of the services, and in so
much the Lord shall be prejudiced; patiatur etiam and hic, rather than
Recusants should not be punished; and it is not a strange thing in Law, that
the Lord of a Copyholder should be prejudiced for the offense of his Tenant;
as where a Copyholder is outlawed, the King shall have the profits of his
Copyhold Lands, and the Lord has not any remedy for his Rent.

CXXVII. Stebbs and Goodlacks Case. Pasch. 30 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
BEtwixt Stebbs and Goodlack, the Case was, the Parson of Letcome in the County
of Berks, libelled in the Spiritual Court for Tithes, Fraud shall not avoid
payment of Tithes.
the Defendant showed, that the custom of the Town of Letcome is, that the
Parson shall have for his Tithes the tenth Land sowed with any manner of corn,
and he shall begin his reckoning always at the first Land which is next to the
Church, etc. The Parson showed that the Defendant, by fraud and covin sowed
every tenth Land which belonged to the Parson, ut supra, very ill and with
small quantity of corn, and did not dunge or manure it as he did the other nine
parts, by means whereof, whereas the other nine every of them yielded eight
Cocks, the tenth yielded but three Cocks, and for this matter the Parson
libelled in the Spiritual Court and confessed the custom, but for abusing of
the custom prayed to have his Tithes in kind; the Defendant prayed a
prohibition, and the Parson afterward a consultation: And the opinion of Wray
Justice was that the custom was against common reason, and so void, but if it
be a good custom, then the Parson shall have the Action upon the case.

CXXVIII. Rumney and Eves Case. Pasch. 30 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
Copyholder.
IN Ejectione firmae by Jane Rumney against Lucie Eve, it was holden, that if
customary Land do descend to the younger Son by custom, and he enters and
leaseth it to another, who takes the profits, and after is ejected: Poph. 39. 4
Co. 22.
That he shall have an Ejectione firmae without any admittance of his lessor or
presentment that he is heir. For which the Defendant showed, that there were
thirty years incurred betwixt the death of the Father, and the making of the
Lease, so that here is supina negligentia, which shall disable his person to
make any demise, quod fuit concessum. In answer of which it was said, that the
Lessor at the time of the death of his Ancestor was but of the age of two
years, and that after his full age no Court had been holden for a long time,
and that at the first Court that was holden, which was of late, he prayed to be
admitted, but the Steward refused to admit him; and the same was holden a good
excuse of his negligence: And it was holden, that the Plaintiff ought not to
show that the Lease is warranted by the custom, 1 Cro. 469. 483. 717. 728. Ante
16.
but that shall come of the other side; and so it had been lately adjudged,
which Wray granted: And by him, if a Copyholder surrender in extremis to the
use of himself for life, etc. If he shall be well again, the surrender shall
stand, 4 Len. 30. 31. 8 Co. 100.
for he has reserved an estate to himself. It was further holden in this Case,
that if a Copyholder dies, his Heir within age, he is not bound to come at
any Court during his nonage to pray admittance, or to tender his Fine: Also if
the death of the Ancestor be not presented, nor proclamations made, he is not
at any mischief, although he be of full age.

CXXIX. Saint-John and Petits Case. Pasch. 30 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
IT was covenanted betwixt Saint-John and Petit, that Saint-John should present
Petit to the Church of A. and that afterward Petit should lease the Parsonage
to Saint-John, or to any other person named by him, and that the said Petit
should not be absent by eighty days, and that he should not resign; and Petit
was bound to perform these Covenants, and Petit is presented to the Benefice:
Saint-John brought an Action upon the Obligation, pretending, that he could not
enjoy his lease by reason of the absence of the said Parson, etc. And the Lease
was made to the Curate at the nomination of Soint-John. The Parson said, that
the Obligation is void by the Statute of 14 Eliz. cap. 11. See the Statute, All
Leases, etc. made by any Curate shall be of no better force, than if it had
been made by the beneficed Parson himself. Tanfeild by 13 Eliz. 20. When a
Parson leaseth to his Curate, who leaseth over, The Statute does not make the
Lease void by any absence of the Parson, but of the Curate by forty days.
Quaere. For that it seems, that by the Statute of 14 Eliz. the Curate cannot
lease, etc.

CXXX. Gates and Halliwels Case. Pasch. 30 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
BEtwixt Gates and Halliwel the Case was, one having two Sons, 3 Len. 55.
devised, that his eldest Son with his Executors should take the profits of his
Lands until his youngest Son should come to the age of two and twenty years,
and that then the said youngest Son should have the Land to him and the Heirs
of his body: It was holden clearly by the whole Court, that the eldest Son
should have Fee in the interim until the youngest Son came to the said age.

CXXXI. Prowse and Carys Case. Pasc. 30 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
PRowse brought an Action upon the Case against Carry for words: That the
Plaintiff did subborn, procure, and bring in false Witnesses in such a Court at
Westminster, etc. The Defendant pladed, Not guilty: And it was found, that he
did procure and brought in false Witnesses, but was acquitted of the suborning.
It was objected, 1 Cr. 296. 554. 607.
That the Action does not lie, for it may be, that the Defendant did not know
that he would depose falsely: Thou art a forger of false Writings are not
actionable, and so it was adjudged, for it may be understood of Letters of
small importance; but that Exception was not allowed, for it shall be taken in
malam partem, and cannot be spoken of any honest man.

CXXXII. Pasch. 30 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
A. Was bounden in an Obligation to B. upon condition, that if A* deliver to B.
twenty Quarters of Corn the nine and twentieth of February next following,
datum presentium, that then, etc. and the next February had but eight and
twenty days: And it was holden, that A. is not bounden to deliver the Corn,
until such a year as is Leap-year, for then February has nine and twenty days,
and at such nine and twentieth day he is to deliver the Corn, and the
Obligation was holden good.

CXXXII. Allen and Palmers Case. Pasch. 30 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
THe Case was, a Copyholder did surrender his Lands to the use of a stranger
for life, Copyholder surrenders where his heir shall be in by purchase. 2
Roll. 416. Co. 1 Inst. 226.
and afterward to the use of the right Heirs of the Copyholder, who
afterward surrendered his Reversion to the use of a stranger in Fee, and died,
and the Tenant for life died, and the right Heir of Palmer the Copyholder
entered; And by Cook nothing remained in the Copyholder upon the said
surrender, but the Fee is reserved to his right Heirs, for if he had not made
any such second surrender, his Heir should be in, not by descent but by
purchase. And the common difference is, where a surrender is to the use of
himself for life, and afterward to another in tail, the remainder to the right
Heirs of him who surrendreth, there his Heirs shall have it by descent;
contrary where the surrender has not an estate for life or in tail limited to
him, for there his Heir shall enter as a purchasor, as if such use had been
limited to the right Heirs of a stranger. And by him, if a Copyholder
surrender to the use of his right Heirs, the Land shall remain in the Lord
until the death of the Copyholder, for then his Heir is known, etc. See Dyer
99. The Husband made a Feoffment to the use of his Wife for life, and
afterward to the use of the right Heirs of the body of the Husband and Wife
begotten, they have issue, the Wife dies, the issue cannot enter in the life
of his Father, for then he is not his Heir. See Dyer 7 Eliz. 237. The Husband
is sole seized in Fee, and levieth a Fine of the Land to the use of himself and
his Wife, and the Heirs of the Husband, and they render the Land to the Conusor
for the life of the Husband, the remainder to B. for life, the remainder to the
right Heirs of the Husband: The Husband dies, B. dies: Now the Wife shall
have the Land for the life of the Wife, for she shall not lose her estate by
that render; and this remainder to the right Heirs of the Husband is void, and
the Land and estate in it is in him as a Reversion, and not as a Remainder. And
a man cannot tail a Remainder to his right Heirs whilst he is living, unless
it begin first in himself. See Br. 32 H. 8. Guard. 93.

CXXXIV. Pearl and Edwards Case. Pasch. 30 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
THe Case was, that the Defendant had leased Lands to the Plaintiff rendering
Rent for certain years, Assumpsit. Consideration. 1 Cro. 94.
and after some years of the Term expired, the Lessor in consideration that the
Lessee had occupied the Land, and had paid his Rent, promised the Plaintiff to
save him harmless against all persons, for the occupation of the Land past, and
also to come: And afterward H. distrained the Cattle of the Plaintiff being
upon the Lands, upon which he brought his Action* Golding, Here is not a
sufficient consideration, for the payment of the Rent is not any consideration,
for the Lessee has the ocupation of the Land for it, and has the profits
thereof; and also the consideration is past. Cook, The occupation, which is the
consideration, continues, therefore it is a good Assumpsit, as 4 E. 3. A Gift
in Frank-marriage after the espousals, and yet the marriage is past, but the
blood continues, so here; and here the payment of the Rent is executory every
year; and if the Lessee be saved for his occupation, he will pay his Rent the
better. Godfrey, If a man marries my Daughter against my will, and afterward
in consideration of that marriage I promise him one hundred pounds, the same is
no good consideration, 2 Len. 111.
which Clench Justice denied. And afterward the Plaintiff had Judgment to
recover his damages.

CXXXV. Wakefords Case. Pasch. 30 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
Extinguishment of Copyhold by Release.
THe Earl of Bedford Lord of the Manor of B. sold the Freehold Interest of a
Copyholder of Inheritance unto another, so as it is now no part, but divided
from the Manor, and afterward the Copyholder does release to the purchasor.
It was holden by the Court, that by this Release the Copyhold Interest is
extinguished, and utterly gone; but if was holden, that if a Copyholder be
ousted, so as the Lord of the Manor is disseised, and the Copyholder releaseth
to the Disseisor nihil operatur.

CXXXVI. Docton and Priests Case. Pasch. 30 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
IN Trespass for breaking of his Close, 1 Cro. 95.
it was found by special verdict, that two were Tenants in common of a house,
and of a close ^djoyning to the house, and they being in the house make
partition without deed of the house and the close, see 3 E. 4. 9. 10. Partition
without deed upon the Land is good enough: Vide 3 H. 4. 1. And it seems by 3 E
4. Partition made upon the Land amounts to a Livery: Vide 2 Eliz. Dyer 179.
Partition by word out the County void, 19 H. 6. 25. Betwixt Tenants in common
not good without deed; 2 Roll. 255.
47 E. 3. 22. being upon the Land it is good without deed: Two Ioynt-tenants
make partition by word, and make partition in another County, the same is no
partition, for as to that matter the common Law is not altered by the Statute,
but as to compel such persons to make partition. Wray Justice conceived, that
the partition here being without deed was not good, although made upon the
Lands: Vide 18 Eliz. Dyer 35. And at another day Wray said, Die. 179.
that partition by Tenants in common without deed wheresoever it is made is
good; but in this case it appears, that the parties who made the partition were
in the house (for they were Tenants in common of the Message and a close
adjoining to it) and made partition, that one should have the house, 6 Co. 12.
and the other the close, so as they were not upon the close when they made the
partition, and then it was void for the close, and if for the close then also
for the house. And Judgment was given accordingly.

CXXXVII. Cook and Songats Case. Pasch. 30 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
IN an Action upon the case by Cook against Songat, the Plaintiff declared,
Quod cum quaedam Lis and controversy had been moved betwixt the Plaintiff Lord
of the Manor, etc. and the Defendant claiming certain Lands parcel of the said
Manor, to hold it by copy; and whereas both parties submitted themselves to the
Judgment and Arbitrament of I. S. Counselor at Law, concerning the said Land,
and the title of the Defendant to it: The Defendant in consideration that the
Plaintiff promised to the Defendant, that if the said I. S. should adjudge the
said Copy to be good and sufficient for the title of the Defendant, that then
he would suffer the Defendant to enjoy the said Land accordingly without
molestation: The Defendant reciprocally promised the Plaintiff, that if the
said I. S. should adjuge the said Copy not sufficient to maintain the title of
the Defendant, that then he would deliver and surrender the possession of the
said Land to the Plaintiff without any suit: And showed further, that I. S. had
awarded the said Copy utterly insufficient, etc. yet the Defendant did continue
the possession of the Land, etc. And by Godfrey, here is not any consideration:
But by Gaudy, the same is a good and sufficient consideration, because it is to
avoid variances and suits: And Judgment was given for the Plaintiff.

CXXXVIII. Pawlet and Lawrences Case. Pasc. 30 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
GEorge Pawlet brought an Action of Trespass against one Lawrence, Parson of
the Church of D. for the taking of certain Carts loaded with Corn, which he
claimed as a portion of Tithes in the Right of his Wife; and supposed the
Trespass to be done the seven and twentieth of August, 29 Eliz. and upon Not
guilty it was given in evidence on the Defendants part, that the Plaintiff
delivered to him a License to be married, bearing date the eight and twentieth
of August, 29 Eliz. and that he married the Plaintiff and his said Wife the
same day, so as the Trespass was before his title to the Tithes: And it was
holden by the whole Court, that that matter did abate his Bill: But it was
holden, that if the Trespass had been assigned to be committed one day after
that, it had been good; but now it is apparent to the Court, that at the time
of the Trespass assigned by himself, the Plaintiff had not Title, and therefore
the Action cannot be maintained upon that evidence, for which cause the
Plaintiff was Nonsuit.

CXXXIX. Sir John Branches. Case. Mich. 30 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
Forfeiture.
IN the Case of Sir John Branch, it was said by Cook, that if a Copyholder be
dwelling in a Town long distant from the Manor, a general warning within the
Manor is not sufficient, but there ought to be to the person notice of the day
when the Court shall be holden, etc. For his not coming in such case cannot be
called a wilful refusal: Copyholder.
So if a man be so weak and feeble that he cannot travel without danger, so if
he has a great Office, etc. these are good causes of excuse: It was also
holden, that if a Copyholder makes default at the Court, and be there amerced,
although that the amercement be not estreated, or levied, yet it is a
dispensation of the forfeiture. Gaudy Justice, If the Copyholder be impotent,
the Lord may set a Fine upon him, and if he will not pay the Fine, then it is
reason that he shall forfeit his Land. Egerton Solicitor, Warning to the
person of the Copyholder is not necessary, for then, if the Lord of a Manor
has one Copyholder of it dwelling in Cornwall, and another in York, etc. the
Lord ought to send his Bailiff to give notice of the Court to them, which
should be very inconvenient, and by him continual default at the Court does
amount to a wilful refusal. And by the whole Court, general warning within the
Parish is sufficient, 1 Cro. 353. 505. 506.
for if the Tenant himself be not Resient upon his Copyhold, but elsewhere,
his Farmer may send to him notice of the Court: And it was further given in
evidence, that Sir John Branch had by his Letter of Attorney appointed the Son
of his Farmer his Attorney to do the services for him due for his said
Copyhold: And it was holden that such a person so appointed, might essoin Sir
John, but not do the services for him, for none can do the same but the Tenant
himself.

CXL. Wilkes and Persons Case. Mich. 30 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
JOhn Wilkes and Margery his Wife, and Thomas Persons brought Trespass, Quare
clausum fregit, herbam suam messuit, and foenum suum asportavit, Trespass.
ad damnum ipsius Johannis, Margeriae, and Thomae; And exception was taken,
that it was not the Hay of the Wife, nor she was not damnified by it, but her
Husband: Wray Justice, the Declaration is good enough, 1 Cro. 96. Record.
for although it be not good for the Hay, yet clausum fregit and herbam
messuit, makes it good: And Judgment was given for the Plaintiffs.

CXLI. Atkinson and Rolses Case. Mich. 30 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
IN an Action upon the case by Atkinson against Rolfe, the Plaintiff declared,
that the Defendant in consideration of the love which he ^ore unto A. his
Father, did promise that if the Plaintiff would procure a discharge of a Debt
of I. S. which his said Father owed to the said I. S. that he would save the
Plaintiff harmless against the said I. S. And declared further, that he had
discharged the Father of the Defendant from the said Debt, and is become
bounden to the said I. S. in an Obligation for the payment of the said Debt,
upon which Obligation the said I. S. has sued the Plaintiff, and has
recovered, and had execution accordingly, and so has not been saved harmless,
etc. It was objected, that the Declaration was not good, because the Plaintiff
has not showed in his Declaration, that he had given notice to the Defendant
of the said Obligation, or of the suit brought against him; but that was not
allowed, but the Declaration was holden to be good, notwithstanding the
exception. Shuttleworth. if I be bound to make to you such an assurance as I.
S. shall devise, I am bound at my peril to procure notice: Notice.
but if I be bound to you to make such assurance as your Counsel shall advise,
there notice ought to be given unto me. It was adjorned.

CXLII. Bear and Underwoods Case. Mich. 30 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
IN a Replevin it was agreed by the whole Court, that the Plaintiff cannot
discontinue his suit without the privity of the Court; for as Leonard, Custos
brevium, said, the Entry is, Recordatur per curiam; Discontinuance of suit in
court.
And if the Plaintiff would discontinue without moving the Court, the Defendant
may enter the continuance if he will. It was also holden, that where an
Original is discontinued, the Defendant shall not have costs; but if the
Plaintiff be nonsuit the Defendant shall have costs, by 32 H. 8. 15. But after
a discontinuance in a Latitat, the Defendant shall have costs by the Statute of
8 Eliz. cap. 2. And in this case it was agreed, that the Plaintiff may be
nonsuit after a Demurrer, and so he was.

CXLIII. Jerome against Neal and Clave. Pasch. 30 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
GEorge Jerome, and Avice his Wife brought an Action of Trespass of Assault and
wounding of the Wife, Assault and Battery.
and the Action was laid in Midd. and brought against Neal and Cleave, who
pleaded that Salisb. is an ancient City, and that within the same, there is
this custom, that if any make an Affray and assault any Officer of the said
City, or any other person, if he upon whom such assault is made, complain unto
the Mayor of the said City, that the Mayor for the time being may send for him
who made the Affray as a Justice of Peace, to make him to answer to it, and
showed further, that the said Jerome made an Affray within the said City; of
which complaint being made to the Mayor, the said Mayor sent the Defendants
being Constables to bring the said Jerome to him, by virtue whereof, they went
to the House of the Plaintiff, and signified to him the commandment of the said
Mayor, and would have brought the Plaintiff to him, and the Wife of the
Plaintiff did assault them, and they moliter put their hands upon the said
Wife, Imprisonment not good.
which is the same assault, battery, and wounding, etc. upon which it was
demurred in Law. Coke for the Plaintiff; This custom is not good or reasonable:
See Magna charta 29. Nullus liber homo capiatur, vel imprisonetur, etc. nisi
per legale judiciam parium suorum vel per legem terrae, therefore shall not be
taken or imprisoned upon a bare suggestion, and see 24 E. 3. Br. Com. 3. where
a Commission issued to take all which were suspected notoriously for Frionies
and Trespasses, although they are not endicted, and the same was holden against
the Law, and therefore it was revoked, and see the Statute of 5 E. 4. 9. 25 E.
4. 13. 28 E. 4. 13. 28 E. 3. 3. 37 E. 3. 18. and 42 E. 3. 3. 2. To be a Justice
of Peace does not lie in Prescription. For one Justice of Peace was before the
Statute of 1 E. 3. and then the Commencement being known, prescription cannot
be of it. 3. Admit, that the Mayor was Justice of Peace, yet he cannot determine
any thing out of the Sessions. 4. The Prescription is, that the Mayor might
send for him, and does not say within the City, and it shall be an unreasonable
Prescription to say, that the Mayor might send for him in such Case, in any
place within England. 5. It is not showed that they of Salisbury have a
corporation, so as they might be enabled to prescribe. 6. The wounding is not
answered, for moliter injicere manus cannot be taken for a wounding; it may
well answer the battery, etc. Fleetwood Recorder of London, if the Statute of
Magna Charta should be observed, no Felon is duly handled at Newgate, and here
we have not pleaded by way of Prescription, but of usage; consuetudo and usage
are all one. 1 Cro. 268.
And afterward Judgment was given for the Plaintiffs, for the Plea in Bar was
holden to be naught, because the wounding is not answered; and the Custom is
too general, and also for the 4th exception.

CXLIV. Sir Julius Caesar's Case. Pasch. 30 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
FLeetwood came to the Bar and showed, that Julius Caesar Judge of the
Admiralty had libelled against an Officer of the Mayor of Land. Simon Nicholas,
for measuring of Coals at Wiggins Key, in the Parish of St. Dunstan in the
East, and it was upon the Thames, and prayed a prohibition, because such
measuring of Coals had always appertained to the Mayor of London; for the
Statute of 28 H. 8. 15. gave Jurisdiction to the Admiralty in Case of robbery
and murder: And that prohibition was grounded upon the Statutes of 13. and 15
R. 2. 2 H. 4. 11. And it was said, that this measuring whereof, etc. was in the
body of the County; And note, that the said Julius Caesar, being Judge of the
Admiralty had put in this Bill, ex officio judicis, upon which it was said by
Wray Justice, that it was hard that he should be both Plaint. and Judge, and
that his Jurisdiction should be tried before himself, and afterward, it was
moved by Egerton Solicitor, who said he had spoken with the Lord Admiral, who
told him that the Mayor of Land. used to take a Fine for measurage, and had
made an office of it, and that he conceived, the same is extortion, and being
made upon the water, he conceived he is punishable in this Court, for by the
same reason the Mayor might take a Fine for the measuring of Corn, Clothes,
etc. Wray and Gaudy Justices; If it be extortion in the Mayor, there is no
remedy for it in the Court of Admiralty: But in the Kings Court. Gaudy; It
shall be redressed here in a Quo warranto.

CXLV. The Town of Sussex. Pasch. 30 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
THe Town of Green in Sussex was amereed for the escape of a Felon, Amercement.
and the said Amercement was grounded upon an inquisition taken before the
Coroner, by whom the escape was found; and it was moved for the Town, that here
is not any such escape found, Escape.
for which the Town ought to be amerced, for it is found, that he who escaped,
10 die Januarij, 30 Eliz. circa horam quartam post meridiem, with a Pitchfork
mortally struck one A. which A. of the said stroke died at eight in the Evening
of the same day, and that then the other escaped, for which escape being made
in the Night, the Town by the Law ought to be amerced, for it is not Felony,
until the party dies, which see 11 H. 4. and Coals Case, Pasch. 23 Eliz. 401.
And therefore the Town nor any other was chargeable with the offender before
that the party was dead. Wray; It should be hard, that the Town should be
amerced upon this matter, for although the Town in discretion might have stayed
the offender before the death of the party, yet it is not bound so to do: And
the Court took time to advise of the Case.

CXLVI. Jerome and Knights Case. Pasch. 30 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
JOan Jerome brought an Action upon the Case in the nature of Conspiracy against
one Knight, and declared, Conspiracy, 1 Cro. 70.
that the said Knight had maliciously caused the Plaintiff to be endicted of
Felony, and to be arrained upon it, and that she was legitimo modo acquietat.
etc. And the Case was, that the Defendant came into the Court where the
Sessions was holden, and complained of the Plaintiff for the said Felony, for
which the Justices there commanded her to cause an Indictment to be drawn, etc.
Coke upon the Books of 27 H. 6. 12. 35 H. 6. 14. 27 H. 8. 2. Fitz. 115. It
appears, that if one come voluntarily into the Court and discover Felonies,
and if it be true which he says, or if he come in Court and draw an Indictment
by the command of the Justices, or if he be bound by order of Law, to cause the
party to be Indicted, or to give in Evidence, although he do it falsely, yet he
shall not be punished for the same in Conspiracy, or in an Action upon the
Case; But if he come gratis with malice in him before, and maliciosly and
falsely cause the party to be Indicted, so as falsity and malice are the ground
of it, etc. it is otherwise. Gaudy Justice; How shall it be tried, if he does
it with malice or not? Coke, It may be enquired of, for malice makes the
difference betwixt Murder and Manslaughter; and in such case it is to be
enquired, and here he came to do the same without Process or cohersion in Law.
But if he will safely do such office, his direct course is to come to a Justice
of Peace, and to show to him, that his Goods are stolen, and that he does
suspect such a one, and then upon examination he shall be bound to come and
give in Evidence against the party, etc. and in such case although that his
Evidence he false, yet he is not punishable: Owen 158.
At another day, it was said by Coke in the same case, ut supra. If a man be
bound to give Evidence against any person, although he give false Evidence, no
Action lies: Also if one come into Court gratis, and discloseth a Felony, and
gives Evidence, if no malice proceed against the party, it is not punishable;
and here fore thought malice is alleged, and put in the Declaration, to which
the Defendant has pleaded not guilty; And now he is found guilty. See the
Statute of Westminster, 2. Cap. 12. Si inveniatur per inquisitionem quod
aliquis sit abettator per malitiam, etc. Wray Justice; It should be hard to
charge one with this Action, where he has his goods stolen from him, and
therefore causes an Indictment to be drawn against one who he suspects of it,
who shall be found guilty, who should be punished for it; for many Malefactors
notwithstanding that the Evidence against them be full and pregnant, in favor
of life are acquitted, whereas by Law they ought to be hanged; and it is not
reason, Upon an Acquital of Grace, no Conspiracy lies.
that upon such an acquital of grace and mercy, he should have this Action; if
such person had used any words of malice before the Sessions, an Action upon
the case would have lain: And afterward Judgment was given for the Plaintiff,
Trin. 27 Eliz. 750. Ratford, and afterward a Writ of Error was brought, Trin.
29 Eliz. Rot. 669. In the Original Action the Writ and Declaration were that
the Defendant, malitiose intendens querentem in nomine, vita, fama, and bonis
defraudare quandam Billam Indictamenti scribi fecit, and eam exhibuit to the
grand Enquest, and ibidem false deposuit omnia in ea contenta esse vera, which
by Coke is full matter of conspiracy; for the drawing of an Indictment is not
the office of a witness, but if it were by the commandment of the Court, or of
one Justice of Peace, it should be otherwise, for there he goes by course of
Justice, 21 E. 3. 17. If one conspire with another, and afterward he procures
himself to be one of the Indictors, his oath shall not excuse his malice
before. Gaudy, If the party had taken upon him to proceed against the party
upon any good presumtions, he might have pleaded it, as to say, he found the
party in the house suspiciously, etc. but because he does not plead any such
matter, but generally not guilty, and the Writ and Declaration stand not
answered specially, nor controlled with the Verdict, there is no reason but
that the Judgment should be affirmed; And afterward, the Judgment was
affirmed, and it was said by Wray, that here the words in the Writ and
Declaration are all one as the words in a Writ of conspiracy, and the Defendant
has not showed any special matter to enduce him to the proceedings.

CXLVII. Ferrers Case. Pasch. 30 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
HUmphry Ferrers brought an Action upon the case, and declared, that he is
seized of an ancient message in the Town of Tamworth, Prescription.
and that he and all his Ancestors, whose heir he is, owners of the Message,
etc. have used time out of mind, etc. to erect Herdells, in aperta platea of
Tamworth juxta Messuagium praedict. every Market day, to make Penns there for
Sheep, and that he, etc. have used for such penning of Sheep, there to take
diverse sums of money of such persons who would Penn their Sheep there; and
further declared, that the Defendant had broken and pulled down his Herdels,
per quod proficuum suum inde amisit; And upon this Declaration, Godfrey did
demur in Law, 1. The Plaintiff has not showed in his Declaration, specially
where he has used to erect his Herdels, but generally in aperta platea,
without showing in his own Land, or in the Land of another; if in the Land of
another, it is no good title, for although that those who fish in the Sea may
prescribe to set Stakes on the Land adjoining to the Sea, to hang their Nets to
dry after they have done Fishing, and that is through the whole County of Kent
8 E. 4. for their prescription is for the common Wealth, but the same is not so
here, but only for a private gain; also no prescription is good, but where some
profit comes to him who prescribes for it, which see in the case of the Abbot
of Buckfast, 21 E. 4. 4. 21 H. 7. 20. Also the Declaration is, that the
Plaintiff has taken diversas denariorum summas, and see the Prior of
Dunstables case, 11 H. 6. 19. 19 R. 2. Action surle Case 51. But the certainty
of the sums do not appear in this Declaration, so as the reasonableness of the
custom might be known: Also it appears here upon the Declaration, that
Trespass, vi and armis, should lie and be brought, for the Declaration is, that
the Defendant did break and pull down the Herdels which cannot be without
express force, as 42 E. 3. 24. Trespass upon the case against a Miller, and
declared that the Plaintiff used to grind at the said Mill without Toll, and
that he sent his corn to the said Mill to be ground, and there the Defendant
came and took two Bushels of his said corn; And the Writ was upon the
prescription to grind sine multura, and that the Defendant, praedict. querent.
sine multura molire impedivit, and by Award of the Court the Plaintiff took
nothing by his Writ, for he has declared that the Defendant has taken Toll,
and therefore he ought to have a general Writ of Trespass. Beaumont, to the
contrary; A Market is as well for the common Wealth as a Fishing: Also he is at
the costs for providing of Herdels, and the erecting of them, so (as he has
declared) he has taken diverse sums of money for it; and as to any sum not
certain, it is well enough, for peradventure sometimes he has taken a penny,
sometimes two pence, as the parties could agree: And as to the exception of vi
and armis, the same is not material, for the Plaintiff does not rely upon the
pulling down of the Herdels only, but upon the loss of the money also, which he
should have had if the Defendant had not broken his Herdels: And afterward
Judgment was given for the Plaintiff.

CXLVIII. Beverly and Bawdes Case. Pasch. 30 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
BEverly brought a Writ of Error to reverse an Out-lawry pronounced against him
at the suit of one Bawdes, and showed, Error.
that he was outlawed by the name John Beverly of Humby in the County of
Lincoln Gent. And that within the said County there are two Humbyes, scil.
Magna Humby, and Parva Humby, and none without addition; To which it was said,
of the other side, that the truth is that there are two such Towns, and that
Humby Magna is known as well by the name of Humby only, as taken for the name
of Humby Magna: And upon that they are at Issue: And it was moved, Trial by
Inquest of what County or place.
if the Inquest to try this Issue shall come de corpore comitatus, or from
Humby Magna. And by Cook, it shall be tried by an Inquest of Humby Magna; and
he confessed, that if the Issue had been, No such Town; then the Inquest ought
to be of the body of the County, but here is another Issue to be tried, 22 E.
4. 4. In Trespass done in Fulborn and Hinton in the County of C. The Defendant
said, that there is no such Town nor Hamlet of Hinton within the same County.
Judgment of the Writ. See there by Briggs the trial shall be, de corpore
comitatus. See 14 H. 6. 8. Over-dale and Nether-dale, and none without
addition, and so at Issue tried by them of the body of the County, 35 H. 6. 12.
And by him, wheresoever an Issue may be tried by an Inquest out of a special
Visne, there it shall never be tried by the body of the County. As the case
before, 22 E. 4. Trespass in two Towns A. and B. The Def. as to A. pleads,
there was no such Town, and as to B. pleaded another plea. Now the whole
Inquest shall come out of B. for the Inquest in one Town may try any thing
within the same County, which see Fitz. Visne, 27. 22 E. 4. 4. And here in our
case the Issue is, if Humby Magna be as well known by the name of Humby only,
as by the name of Humby Magna. And therefore the same may well be tried by
Inquest out of the Town of Humby Magna. But by Wray Justice, this Issue does
amount to no such Town, for the perclose of the plea is, and no Humby without
addition; and the book cited out of 22 E. 4. is not ruled, but is only the
opinion of Brian. and afterward it was awarded, that the trial was well.
Another matter was objected, because it is not showed in the Writ of Error
betwixt what parties the first Writ did depend, for otherwise how can the
Plaintiff in the Writ of Error have a Scire facias ad audiendum Errores, if
none be named in the Writ of Error against whom it shall issue. And Godfrey
affirmed, that upon search of Presidents it was both ways, so as it is at the
pleasure of the Plaintiff to do it or not. And Kemp Secondary showed diverse
Presidents to that purpose: And afterward the Out-lawry was reversed.

CXLIX. Cibel and Hills Case. Pasch. 30 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
Debt for a Nemine pene.
A Lease was made of a certain House and Land rendering Rent, and another sum,
Nomine poenae; and for the Nominae poenae the Lessor brought an Action of Debt:
The Lessee pleaded, that the Lessor had entered into parcel of the Land demised,
Roll. Tit. Extinguishment
upon which they were at Issue, and found for the Plaintiff: and now the Lessor
brought Debt for the Rent reserved upon the same Lease: to which the Defendant
pleaded, ut supra, scil. an Entry into parcel of the Land demised: And issue
was joined upon it; And one of the Jury was challenged, and withdrawn, because
he was one of the former Jury: And the Issue now was, whether the said Cibel
the Lessor, expulit and amovit and adhuc extra tenet, the said Hills. And to
prove the same, it was given in Evidence on the Defendants part, that upon the
Land demised there was a Brick-kill, and and thereupon a little small cottage,
and that the Lessor entered, and went to the said cottage and took some of the
Bricks and untiled the said cottage: Suspension of Rent by entry upon part of
the Land.
But of the other side it was said, that the Lessor had reserved to himself the
Bricks and Tiles aforesaid, which in truth were there ready made at the time of
the Lease made, and that he did not untile the Brick-kill house, but that it
fell by tempest, and so the Plaintiff did nothing but came upon the Land to
carry away his own goods: And also he had used the said Bricks and Tiles upon
the reparation of the house. And as to the Extra tenet, which is parcel of the
Issue, the Lessor did not continue upon the Land, Hob. 326. Rolls ubi supra.
Post. 172.
but went off it, and relinquished the possession: But as to this last point,
it seemed to the Court, that it is not material if the Plaintiff continued his
possession there or not, for if he once does any thing which amounts to an
Entry, although that he depart presently, yet the possession is in him
sufficient to suspend the Rent, and he shall be said, extra tanere the
Defendant the Lessee, until he has done an Act which does amount to a
Re-entry. And afterward to prove a Re-entry, it was given in Evidence on the
Plaintiffs part, that the Defendant put in his Cattle in the Field where the
Brick-kill was, and that the Cattle did estray into the place where the
Defendant had supposed that the Plaintiff had entered. And by Anderson Justice,
the same is not any Re-entry to revive the Rent, because they were not put into
the same place by the Lessee himself, but went there of their own accord. And
such also was the opinion of Justice Periam.

CL. Pasch. 30 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
TEnant in tail covenanted with his Son to stand seized to the use of himself
for life, and afterward to the use of his Son in tail, the Remainder to the
right Heirs of the Father: The Father levied a Fine with proclamation and died.
It was moved by Fenner, if any estate passed to the Son by the Covenant, for it
is not a discontinuance, and so nothing passed but during his life, and all the
estates which are to begin after his death are void. Anderson, The estate
passes until, etc. and he cited the case of one Pitts, where it was adjudged,
that if Tenant in tail of an Advowson in gross grant the same in Fee, and an
Ancestor collateral releaseth with warranty and dies: That the same is a good
Bar for ever.

CLI. Staffords Case. Pasch. 30 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
THe case was, Attachment upon a Prohibition. More. 599.
that the Parson of the Church of B. did libel in the Ecclesiastical Court for
Ttithe-milk of eight Kine depasturing within such a Field within his Parish:
The Defendant said, that he and all those, etc. had used time out of mind, etc.
to pay every year a certain sum of money to the Parson, etc. for the Tithes of
the same Field; which plea the Judges of the Ecclesiastical Court would not
allow, and therefore the party had now a Prohibition and an Injunction against
the Judges, Doctors, Proctors, etc. And afterward the same Parson libelled
again for the same Tithes against the same Parishioner; and in both libels
there was no difference, but that in the later libel it was for a less number
of Kine, and now the Parishioner upon this matter prayed an Attachment upon the
Prohibition, which was granted unto him by the Court, for otherwise a
Prohibition should be granted to no purpose.

CLII. Samford and Wards Case. Pasch. 30 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
SAmford brought a Ravishment of Ward against Ward, Ravishment of Ward.
and counted hat one A. Ancestor of the Infant, whose Heir he is, was seized of
certain Lands in Fee, and held the same of the Bishop of Winchester in Socage,
and died, his Heir within the age of 14 years; and that the custody of the
Infant did belong unto him as his prochein Amy; by force of which he seized him
and was possessed, etc. The Defendant says, that the Land was holden of him by
Knights service, absque hoc, that it is holden of the Bishop of Winchester as
the Plaintiff has counted. And upon the Issue was joined. And it was moved by
Serjant Puckering on the Plaintiffs part, that the truth of the Case was, that
all the Land descended is holden in Socage, and no part in Knights service, but
that part of it is holden of another in Socage: And prayed the opinion of the
Court, if that matter shall trench to the Issue as the same is joined: And the
Court was of opinion, that it did not: for if all be holden in Socage, it is
not material if part of it be holden of another, so as it be holden in Socage.

CLIII. Stamp and Hutchins Case. Pasch. 30 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
THe Case was, the Obligor makes his Executors and dies; 1 Cro. 120.
the Executors become bounden to the Obligee for the payment of the said Debt,
and the Obligee does deliver back the Obligation of the Testator to them; and
afterward another Creditor of the Testator sues the Executors, who pleaded,
that they have fully administered, upon which they are at issue, and the said
especial matter was found by verdict. And by Shuttleworth and Walmesley, The
Jury have found for the Plaintiff, and that the Defendants have not fully
administered: And yet they agreed the case of 20 H. 7. 2. The Executors paying
to the Creditors of the Testator a Debt with their own goods, they may retain
so much of the goods of the Testator; but that case is not like to this, for
here the Executors have not made any payment or satisfaction of the Debt, nor
disbursed any money, etc. nor other things, but only have made an Obligation, to
pay a sum of money at a day to come, before which day it may happen that the
Obligation be cancelled or released; but it may more fitly be compared to the
case of 27 H. 8. 6. where an Executor had compounded with a Creditor of the
Testator for the payment of 20 l. for a debt of 40 l. and had an Acquitance
testifying the payment of the 40 l. where it was holden, that the other 20 l.
is Assets. And by Rhodes, this making of an Obligation by Executors,
Administration. Assets.
(although the Obligation, in which the Testator was bounden, be delivered to
the Executors and cancelled) is not any administration nor payment of the said
debt due: So if the Executors pledge the goods for the payment of such a debt,
yet they shall be accounted Assets until payment be made, which Periam denied.
And Periam and all the other Justices held clearly, Retainer by administrations.
that if in such case the Executors make a sufficient Obligation to the
Creditor of the Testator, and sufficiently discharge the Testator without fraud
or covin, that they may retain the goods of the Testator for so much: and the
goods retained shall not be said Assets: And this case is all one with the case
of 20 H. 7. for here they have discharged the Testator, and the Executors do
remain charged with the same to the Creditor; and it is so fully administered,
as if the Executors had expressly paid the debt. And it is not like to the case
of 27 H. 8. cited before, for there, although they have discharged the
Testator, yet they have not charged themselves, otherwise it is in the
principal case; and although they have appointed ulteriorem diem, for the
payment of the said debt, yet the same is not material: But the Lord Anderson
conceived, that if the Creditor does deliver unto the Executors the Obligation
as an Accquittance or discharge, and in consideration thereof they promise to
pay the debt, the same is not any administration as to the said debt. And by
some of the Serjants, If the plea stand good to prove fully administered, then
Executors in such case may make an Obligation to pay the debt 40 years after,
and so defraud the other Creditors, which is not reasonable: If a Feoffment in
Fee made upon condition to pay certain money at such a day, and at the day the
Feoffees make an Obligation to the Feoffor for the payment of it, the same is
no performance of the condition. And by Periam, If the Executor be taken in
Execution for the debt of the Testator, he may retain so much of the goods of
the Testator amounting to the sum for which he is in Execution, and it shall be
accounted Assets in his hands. Anderson, If he to whom the Testator was
endebted in 20 l. be endebted to the Executors in so much, and the Executor in
satisfaction of the debt of the Testator releaseth his debt, the property shall
be altered presently of the whole goods in the hands of the Executors, so where
the Debtor makes the Creditor his Executor. And Judgment was given for the
Executors.

CLIV. Bears Case. Pasch. 30 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
Formedon.
A Formedon in the Discender was brought by Samuel Bear, James Bear, and John
Bear of Lands in Gavel-kind; and the Warranty of their Ancestor was pleaded
against them in Bar, upon which they were at Issue. If Assets by descent. And
it was found by special verdict, that Thomas, Father of the Demandants, was
seized in Fee of the Lands supposed to be descended to the Demandants, being of
the nature of Gavel-kind, and devised the same to the Demandants, being his
Heirs, by the custom, and to their Heirs equally to be divided amongst them:
Devise of Lands in Gavel-kind Owen. 65. Die. 350. 1 Cro. 431. More 594. 558.
Sty. 434. 3 Cro. 330. 443. 695. 696.
And if the Demandants shall be accounted to be in of the Lands by descent, or
devise, was the question; for if by devise, then they shall not be Assets.
Anderson, Let us consider the devise by it self without the words (equally to
be divided amongst them.) And I conceive, that they shall be in by the devise,
for they are now Ioynt-tenants, and the survivor shall have the whole, whereas
if the Lands shall be holden in Law to have descended, they should be
Parceners, and so as it were Tenants in common. And although the words
subsequent, equally amongst them to be divided, makes them Tenants in common,
yet that does not amend the matter; and so also was the opinion of Windham and
Rhodes Justices.

CLV. Nash and Edwards Case. Pasch. 30 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
IN an Ejectione firmae by Nash against Edwards, 1 Cro. 100.
it was found by special verdict, that one Dover Ancestor of the Plaintiff,
whose Heir he is, being seized of certain Lands holden in Socage, devised the
same by word to his three Sisters; And a stranger being present recited to the
Devisor the said words of his Will; and he did affirm them: 3 Len. 79.
And afterward the said stranger put the said words in writing for his own
remembrance, but did not read them to the Devisor, who afterward died. And it
was moved, If this devise being reduced in writing, modo and forma, be good or
not. Spurling conceived that not, for the Statute intends a Will in writing,
Devises.
but not such writing as is here without privity or direction of the Devisor,
and it is not like to the case of Brown and Sackvil, 6 E. 6. Dyer 72. For the
Notes were written by the commandment of the Devisor, but here it does not
appear that the meaning of the Devisor was, that the devise should be put in
writing: And devises in Law are favored, as the case in the Chancery was, that
Sir Richard Pexhal devised certain Lands to his Wife, and the Scrivener
inserted of his own head a condition, scil. (that she should be chaste) which
was disallowed by the Devisor himself, for which after his death, the
condition, although it was put in writing, was void. And by the whole Court the
devise is void. And by Wray, 2 Len. 35.
if he appoint A. to write his Will, and it is written by B. it is void; but if
after he had written the Will if he had read it to the Devisor, and he had
confirmed it, it had been a good Will, which Gaudy granted: And afterward
Judgment was given, that the Plaintiff should recover.

Stone and Withypolls Case. Trin. 30 Eliz. Rot. 771. In the Kings Bench.
STone brought an Action upon the Case against Dorothy Withypol the Executrix
of W. Withypol her Husband, 1 Cro. 126. Owen. 94. 9 Co. 94.
and declared that where hersaid Husband for certain yards of Velvet of the
value of fourteen pounds, and pro diversis alijs mercimonijs, was endebted to
the Plaintiff in the sum of ninety two pounds, and made the Defendant his
Executrix and died, that after his death he came to the Defendant, and demanded
of her the said debt, who gave to him such answer, Forbear me until Michaelmas,
and then I will pay it you, or put you in sufficient security for the true
payment thereof: And declared further, that at Michaelmas aforesaid, the
Defendant did not pay, nor has found any security, and showed a request, to
which the Defendant said that the said Testator at the time of the said
Contracts for the Velvets and other Wares, was within age: Assumpsit.
And upon that Bar the Plaintiff did demur in Law. Egerton Solicitor, for the
Plaintiff. As I conceive these Contracts made by the Plaintiff are not merely
void, so that if an Action of Debt, or upon the Case, had been brought against
the Testator himself, he could not have pleaded upon the matter Nihil debet, or
Non Assumpsit, or Non est factum, but he ought to avoid the matter by special
pleading, and therefore here it is a good consideration; and I conceive that if
the Testator at his full age had assumed to pay the debt, that that promise
would have bound him, 9 Eliz. it was the Case of the Lord Gray, his Father was
endebted to diverse Merchants upon simple Contracts, and died seized of diverse
Lands which descended to his Son and Heir in Fee, the Creditors demanded their
debts of the Heir, who answered unto them, if my Father were endebted unto you,
I will pay it, and upon that promise an Action was adjudged maintainable,
although the Heir by the Law was not chargeable; and also here the Defendant is
to have ease, and shall avoid trouble of Suits, for perhaps if she had not made
such promise, the Plaintiff would have sued her presently, which should be a
great trouble unto her, and therefore it is a good consideration. Cook
contrary, No consideration can be good, if not, that it touch either the charge
of the Plaintiff, or the benefit of the Defendant, and none of them is in our
case, for the Plaintiff is not at any charge, for which the Defendant can have
any benefit, for it is but the forbearance of the payment of the debt, which
she was not compellable to pay, and as to the suit of the Chancery, the same
cannot make any good consideration, for there is not any matter in the Case
which gives cause of suit in Chancery, for they will not order a matter there
which is directly against a Rule and Maxim of the common Law. As if a Feme
Covert be bound, etc. and the Obligee bring her into the Chancery, and if a man
threaten me, that if I will not pay to him ten pounds, he will sue me in
Chancery, upon which I promise to pay it him, no Action will lie: And an Infant
is not chargeable upon any contract, but for his meat, drink, and necessary
Apparel, 19 Z. 4. 2. And in Debt upon such necessary Contract, the Plaintiff
ought to declare specially, so as the whole certainty may appear upon which the
Court may judge, if the expense were necessary and convenient or not, and upon
the reasonableness of the price, for otherwise, if the necessity of the thing,
and reasonableness of the price does not appear, the Chancellor himself would
not give any remedy, or recompense to the party. Wray Justice conceived, that
the Action would not lie, for the contract was void, and the Infant in an
Action against him upon it may plead Nihil debet: And if an Infant sell goods
for money and does not deliver them, but the Vendee takes them, he is a
Trespassor; but if the Infant had been bounden in an Obligation with a surety,
and afterward at his full age he in consideration thereof promises to keep
his surety harmless, upon that promise an Action lies, for the Infant cannot
plead non est factum, which see Mich. 28, and 29 Eliz. in the Case of one
Edmunds: And afterward it was adjudged against the Plaintiff.

CLVII. Charnock and Worsleys Case. Trin. 30 Eliz. Rot 833. In the Kings Bench.
Owen. 21. 1 Cr. 129.
CHarnock and his Wife brought a Writ of Error against Worsley; the Case was
that the Husband and Wife, the Wife being within age levied a Fine, and the
Wife upon inspection was adjudged within age, and it was moved, if the Fine
should be utterly reversed, or as to the Wife only, and should stand against
the Husband; and by Godfrey the Book of 50 E. 3. 6. was vouched where it is
said by Candish, that where such a Fine is reversed, the Plaintiff shall not
have execution till after the death of the Husband; and by Coke and Atkinson, a
Fine acknowledged by the Husband and Wife, is not like to a Feoffment made by
them, for in case of Feoffment something passes from the Husband, but in case
of a Fine all passes out of the Wife, and the Conusee is in by her only: And
Atkinson showed a Precedent in 2 H. 4. where the Fine was reversed for the
whole, and also another Precedent, P. b. H. 8. Rot. 26. A Fine levied betwixt
Richard Elie Plaintiff, and N. Ford. and Jane his Wife Deforceants, the Wife
being within age, and Judgment was given quod finis praedict. adnulletur, and
pro nullo penitus habeatur, and that the Husband and Wife should be restored,
and thereupon a Writ issued to the Custos Brevium, to bring into Court the Foot
of the Fine, and it was presently cancelled in Court. Wray, this is a strong
Precedent, and we will not varse from it, if other Precedents are not contrary.
Gaudy (who was the same day made Justice) the Fine cannot be reversed as to
one, and stand as to the other, and resembled it to the Case of Littleton 150.
where Land is given to Husband and Wife in tail before coverture, and the
Husband aliens, and takes back an estate to him and his Wife for their lives,
they both are remitted, for the Wife cannot be remitted if the Husband be not
remitted: And a Precedent was cited to the contrary, 7 Eliz. where the Case was
that the Husband and Wife levied a Fine, the Husband died, the Wife being
within age the Wife took another Husband, and they brought a Writ of Error, and
the Wife by inspection adjudged within age, Fine reversed as to one, to stand
good against another.
and the Fine was reversed as to the Wife and her Heirs. And it was argued by
Golding, that here the Writ of Error ought to abate, for the Writ is too
general, whereas it ought to be special, Ex querela A.B. nobis humillime
supplicantis accepimus, etc. See the Book of Entries 278. Also the purclose of
the Writ is, ad damnum impsorum, the Husband and the Wife, whereas the Wife
only has loss by it; and as to the Fine it self, he conceived that it should
be reversed but as to the Wife; as if a man of full age, and a man within age,
levy a Fine, in a Writ of Error brought, the Fine shall be reversed, as to the
Infant only, and shall stand against the other; and he cited the Case of the
Lord Mountjoy, 14. Eliz. Where a man seized in the right of his Wife
acknowledged a Statute, and afterward he and his Wife levied a Fine, and he
said that during the life of the Husband, the Conusee of the Fine should hold
the Land charged with the Statute: Also in the Precedent of 2 H. 4. the
Judgment is, that propter hunc and alios errores, the Fine should be reversed,
and I conceive that another Error was in the said Writ, for which the Fine
might be reversed in all viz. the Fine was levied of two parts of the Manor of
D. without saying in tres parts dividend. And see that where two parts are
demanded in a Writ, 3 Co. 58, 59. Modern Rep. 182.
the Writ shall say so, Brief 244 Coke contrary, and as to the last matter I
confess the Law is so in a Writ, but not in a Fine, for the same is but a
Conveyance, for it I be seized of a Manor, and I grant to you two parts of the
said Manor, it is clear, it shall be intended in three parts to be divided. And
as to the principal matter, I conceive, when the Fine is levied by the Husband
and Wife, it shall be intended that the Land whereof, etc. is the Inheritance
of the Wife, if the contrary be not showed, and therefore if the party will
have an especial Reversal, he ought to show the special matter, as in Englishes
Case: A Fine was levied by Tenant for life, and he in the reversion being
within age, brings a Writ of Error, now the Fine shall be reversed as to him
in the Reversion, but not as to the Tenant for life, but here it shall be
intended the Inheritance of the Wife, and that the Husband has nothing but in
the right of his Wife, and therefore she shall be restored to the whole, for
nothing passes from the Husband, but he is named with his Wife only for
conformity, 11 H. 7. 19. A. takes to Wife an Inheretrir, who is attainted of
Felony, the King shall not have the Land presently, by which it appears that
all is in the Wife, and she shall be restored to the whole, and the Judgment
shall be according to the Presidents cited before: And as to the President
cited 7 Eliz. the same is not to the purpose, for the second Husband was a
stranger to the Fine, for it would be absurd to reverse the Fine as against
him. Egerton Solicitor General; Presidents are not so holy, quod violari non
debeant, as to be rules to other Judges, in perpetuum; and I conceive that the
Fine shall be reversed as to the Wife only, for the Fine is but a Conveyance,
and the Husband may lawfully convey the Land of his Wife for his life; and if
the Husband alone had levied the Fine, the same had bounden the Wife during his
life: If a woman Lessee for life takes to Husband him in the Reversion, and
they join in a Fine, the Fine shall stand as to the Inheritance of the Husband,
but shall be reversed as to the Interest of the Wife. Coke, it shall be
intended here, all the Interest and estate in the Land to be in the Wife, as 20
H. 7. 1. Where the Husband and Wife are vouched, it shall be intended by reason
of the Warranty of the Wife only, and so the Counter-plea shall be of the
seisin of the Wife and her Ancestors. Wray, when the Husband and Wife join in
the Fine, it shall be presumed the Inheritance of the Wife, and if it be
otherwise, it ought to be specially showed; and as to that which has been
said, that if the Husband alone had levied a Fine, it should have bounden the
Wife during the life of the Husband, the same is true, but such Fine is but a
discontinuance, but the right continues in the Wife; but when the Husband and
Wife join in the Fine, all passes out of her, and if the Fine in such case for
the Inheritance shall be reversed in all, to whom belongs the Freehold, and to
whom shall he be attendant? Gaudy, 12 H. 7. 1. In a Praecipe quod reddat
against three, they vouch severally, the Voucher was not received, and yet they
might have several Causes of Voucher, but the Law presumes they are
Ioynt-tenants, and have a joint cause of Voucher, if the contrary be not
showed: And afterward Judgment was given, quod finis predict. reversetur; and
Wray said he had conferred with many of the other Justices, who were of the
same opinion. Gaudy, the Fine shall be reversed in all, for this is an Error in
Law of the Court, F. B. 21. D. For by this Fine the Husband gives nothing
divided from the estate of the Wife, but all passes from the Wife, and
therefore all shall be reversed, and if the Fine should be reversed as to the
Wife only, then the Fine levied now by the Husband alone is a discontinuance,
by which the Wife by the common Law shall be put to her Cui in vita, and that
is not reason. Also we cannot by this Reversal, make the Conusee to have a
particular estate during the life of the Wife: And therefore the Fine is to be
reversed for the whole, and as void for the whole to the Conusee.

CLVIII. Cage and Paxlins Case. Trin. 30 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
1 Cro. 125. 3 Len. 16.
DAniel Cage brought an Action of Trespass against Thomas Paxlin for Trespass
done in a Close of Wood, called the Frith-Close, and in the Park, and for
taking of certain Loads of Wood: the Defendant pleaded, that the Earl of Oxford
was seized of the Manor of W. of which the place where, etc. is parcel, and
leased the same to J. S. for years, excepting all Woods, great Trees,
Timber Trees, and Underwoods, etc. And covenanted with the Lessee and his
Assigns, that he might take Hedg-boot, and Fire-boot super dicta premissa, and
showed further, that the said I. S. assigned his Interest unto the Defendant,
and that he came to the said Close called the Frifth-Close, Lease of Lands
excepting the wood
and cut the Wood there for Fire-boot, as it was lawful for him to do, etc. And
note, that after the Lease aforesaid, the said Earl had assured the Inheritance
thereof to Cage the Plaintiff. And it was argued by Godfrey, that the Lessee
cannot take Fire-boot in the said Close, for the wood, etc. is excepted, and
was never demised, and by the exception of the wood, the soil thereof is
excepted: See 46 E. 3. 22. A. leased for life certain Lands reserving the great
wood, by that the soil also is reserved, vi. 33 H. 8. Br. Reservation, 39, 28
H. 8. 13. 3 Len. 16.
And by the words of the Covenant, the intent of the Lessor appears, that the
Lessee shall have his Fire-boot out of the residue of the Lands demised, for
praemissa here is equivalent with praedimissa: And he cited the Case moved by
Mountain chief Justice, 4 E. 6. in Plowden, in the Case betwixt Dive and
Manningham, 66. A. leaseth unto B. a Manor for years, excepting a Close, parcel
of it, rendering a Rent, and the Lessee is bounden to perform all Grants,
Covenants, and Agreements, contenta and expressa aut recitata in the Indenture;
if the Lessee disturb the Lessor, upon his occupation of the Close excepted, he
has forfeited his Obligation, etc. But our Case is not like to that: Post. 122.
And if I let the Manor of D. for years, except Green-meadow, and afterward I
covenant that the Lessee shall enjoy the Premises, the same does not extend to
Green-meadow. Snagg Sergeant to the contrary, and by him praemissa, are not
restrained to praedimissa, but to all the Premises put in the former part of
the Indenture of Demise, therefore the Less shall have Fire-boot in the one,
and the other; 2 Roll. 455. 2 Cro. 524. Post. 122.
and he put a difference betwixt all Woods excepted, and all woods growing
excepted, for in the one case the soil passes, in the other not; And as to the
Case cited before in Plowden. 66. that is true, for exception is an Agreement:
And he said that by that exception the soil it self is excepted, and these
woods which are named by name of woods; contrary where a Close contains part
in woods, and part in Pasture; And by the exception of Timber Trees, and Under
woods, all the other woods are excepted but not the soil: As if a man grant all
his Lands in D. Land, Meadow, Pasture, and woods thereby passes; by exception
of this Close of wood, the soil also is excepted, and he conceived, that
although all the woods be excepted, yet by the Covenant an Interest passes to
the Lessee, Select Case 155 Hob. 173. Die. 19, 198, 314. 21 H. 7, 31. More 23. 1
Roll. 939.
so as he may take Fire-boot without being put to his Action of Covenant: As 21
H. 7. 30. A. leaseth unto B. for life, and Covenants in the Indenture of lease,
that he shall be dispunished of Wast, although the same be penned by way of
Covenant, yet it is a good matter of Bar, being all by one Deed: And afterward
Judgment was given for the Plaintiff, as to that Close of wood called
Frith-Close; but as to the Park, for the Defendant, for that Frifth-Close was
all excepted, scil. the wood and the soil: And these words, supra praemissa,
shall be intended such things which were demised, and no other, and by this
Covenant, Die. 199. Hob. 173. 2 Cro. 172. Bridge. 117.
the Lessee has power to take the wood upon the other Lands, although that the
wood be excepted, for the soil was demised, and he shall not be punished in
Trespass, and put to his remedy, by Action of Covenant against the Lessor: And
by Wray, there is not any color against the Plaintiff for the Frith-Close, if
not that the Defendant had averred, that there is not any wood upon the other
Lands not excepted but demised; And this word, Praemissa, does not extend by
construction to this mentioned before, being excepted, but only to the things
demised.

CLIX. Rivett and Rivetts Case. Trin. 30 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
EDmund Rivett brought an Action upon the Case against Geoge Rivett, and
declared, that where it was pretended by the Defendant, that one R. made his
Will, and by the same devised certain Legacies to the Defendant, and the
Plaintiff upon that had sued in the Prerogative Court of Canterbury for to
disprove the said Will: And if he prosecutus fuisset, he might have disproved
the said Will, and so defeated the Defendant of his pretended Legacies:
Assumpsit. Owen 133, 134.
The Defendant in consideration that the Plaintiff, ultra non procederet, did
promise to give to the Plaintiff one hundred pounds; and averred, that he had
surceased his said suit; And further declared, that licet the Defendant, ad hoc
requisitusfuerit tali die and anno, etc. It was moved in arrest of Judgment,
that here is not any consideration, for the Defendant has not any means to
compel the Plaintiff for to surcease his suit, for there is not any cross
promise set forth in the Declaration; And although that he does surcease his
suit, yet he may begin the same again, and therefore the Plaintiff ought to
have showed in his Declaration a Release or other discharge of it, as the case
was 3 Eliz. reported by Bendloe. A. was bound unto B. in twenty pounds, and
afterward A. promised B. that in consideration the said A. should not be
damnified by reason of the said Bond, to give the said B. ten pounds, and upon
that promise B. brought an Action upon the Case, and showed, that the Defendant
was not damnified by reason of the said Bond. But it was adjudged, that the
Action was not maintainable upon that matter, because that the Plaintiff did
not show in his Declaration, that he had released or otherwise discharged the
Defendant of the said Bond, and so no consideration in the case.

Request.
Another Exception was, because the request is not laid certainly, but
generally, licet requisitus, and does not say by whom he was required, or what
thing to do: And afterward a Precedent was showed, Trinit. 28 Eliz. rot. 523.
betwixt Smith and Smith. An Assumpsit, in consideration that the Plaintiff
should not implead the Defendant upon Bond; And the Plaintiff had Judgment to
recover. And as to the request it ws said by Kempe, that there are many
Precedents, that a Request generally laid is sufficient: And afterward in the
principal Case Judgment was given for the Plaintiff.

CXL. Wheeler and Twogoods Case. Trin. 30 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
WHeeler brought an Ejectione firmae against Twogood, and it was found by
special verdict, that the Earl of Oxford was seized of the Manor of Hornely, in
which were diverse Copy-holds: And that the said Earl leased the said Manor to
one Heywood for one and twenty years, to begin two years after. Except all
casualties and profits of Courts, which severally did not pass the value of six
shillings eight pence. And afterward the Earl bargained and sold the Reversion
to Anthony Cage: And afterward a composition was made betwixt Anthony Cage and
the Lessee, by which the Lessee did grant and covenant to and with the said A.
Cage, that he would permit the said Anthony Cage peaceably to hold the Courts
and to take the profits to his own use, Proviso, that the said Lessee should
have the Rents of the Copyholders and Freeholders: And afterward the Lessee
granted over his Interest in the said Term. It was moved by Towse, that by this
Exception the Court Baron is not excepted nor severed from the Manor, nor
destroyed, Covenant amounts to a grant.
for it is incident to the Manor, and this Covenant betwixt the Lessee and
Anthony Cage amounts to a grant of the Court to Anthony Cage. See 44 E. 3.
Fitz. Manors de faits 144 and 29 E. 3. Burr. 280. and see 37 H. 8. and 1 E. 6.
Br. Leases 60. That where I.S. Covenants, and concessit to I. N. that he shall
have twenty acres of Land in B. for one and twenty years, it is a good Lease,
for this word concessit is as strong as dimisit. And it was moved, that here
the Earl leased for years to begin two years after, and the Lessee being in
possession, does continue it after the two years, and afterward before any
entry the Lessee assigns over his Interest, that the same is not a good grant,
but only a Right: But by the whole Court the grant was holden good,
notwithstanding the said Exception: And it was holden also, that the Covenant
(ut supra) was void; for although that Anthony Cage has authority to hold the
Courts, yet it ought to be in the name of the Lessee.

CLXI. Stretton and Tailors Case. Trin. 30 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
STretton did inform against Tailor upon the Statute of Usury: Information upon
the Statute of Usury. Retraxit by the Queens Attorney shall not bind the
Informer. 1 Cro. 138. and 583.
Qui sequitur tam pro Domina Regina, quam pro seipso: And the Queens Attorney
entered upon it, etc. non vult prosequi, and that was pleaded in Bar against the
Informer for the whole: And by Wray, the same is not any Bar to the Informer.
But Popham the Attorney general said, that by the favor of the Court he would
maintain the authority of his place, which his Predecessors had enjoyed, for he
said, it cannot be found by any Record in this Court, Common Pleas, or the
Exchequer, that the Informer had proceeded where the Attorney General had made
such an Entry, for we have not used to do it without great consideration; for
if the Informer has ceased to prosecute the Suit two or three Terms, then we
used to enter a Non vult prosequi. For it is not reason that the Subject should
be molested or attendant so long without just cause, and it is not against Law,
that in personal Suits the act of one should prejudice the other: And the Queen
is the principal party in this Suit, for the Replication shall be made in the
name of the Queen only, and not of the Informer. And afterward by Award of the
Court it was ruled, that that Entry by the Attorney is not any Bar, quoad the
Informer, so if the Queen be Nonsuit, so the Nonsuit of the Informer is no Bar
against the Queen: And Wray said, that such was the opinions of Anderson and
Gaudy Justices, etc.

CLXII. The Queen against Lewis, Green, and others. Trin. 30 Eliz. In the Kings
Bench. Intrat. Hill. 30 Eliz. Rot. 10.
AN Information for the Queen against Lewis, Green, and others: Grants of the
King. 2 Roll. 51. 1 Co. 46.
The Case was, King E. 6. was seized of the Manor of Stepneth, and twenty acres
of Lands in Stepneth, called Stepneth Marsh, and of another Marsh also called
Stepneth Marsh, and granted unto the Lord Wentworth and his Heirs the Manor of
Stepneth, in the County of Midd. Nec non mariscam in Stepneth, appel. Stepneth
Marsh in com. praedict. nec non omnia terr. and ten. eidem Manerio five
premissis pertinent. And if twenty Acres, called Stepneth Marsh, not parcel of
the said Manor pass, or not, was the Question: Cook, that they shall pass: Here
this grant does consist of three parts; 1. The grant of the Manor; 2. Nec non
mariscum in Stepneth; 3. Nec non omnia terras and tenementa dicto Manerio sive
praemissis pertinen. And by the second clause these twenty acres shall pass, be
the same parcel or not; and the latter words cannot refer to that, for it is
certainly expressed before. And the case lately agreed in the Court of Wards
betwixt Bronker and Robotham was cited, which was, That the King being seized
of the Manor of Sandridge and Newnam, parcel of the possessions of the
Monastery of Saint Albans, and part of the Manor of Newnam extended into the
Parish of Sandridge, and the King granted the Manor of Sandridge, nec non omnia
terras and tenementa sua in Sandridge, dicto nuper Monasterio pertinen. nec non
omnia terras and tenementa sua dicto Manerio de Sandridge pertinen. By which
grant, although that the latter clause does restrain it to the Manor of
Sandridge, yet the general words of the second clause shall extend to make pass
all the whole Manor of Newnam, which extended into the Parish of Sandridge, and
a Decree was in the said Court accordingly.

Hob. 175. 303. Die. 207. 6 Co. 39.
At another day the case was argued, and the case put to be thus. King E. 6. was
seized of the Manor of Hackney and Stepneth in the County of Midd. within which
was a great Marsh, called Stepneth Marsh, parcel of the Manor of Stepneth,
which the King had by exchange of the Bishop of London, and there were also
twenty acres of Lands which were lying in Stepneth Marsh, and were known by the
name of Stepney Marsh, late parcel of the possessions of the Priory of Grace,
and granted unto the Lord Wentworth and his Heirs, Dominia sive Maneria sua de
Hackney and Stepney, nec non mariscos suos de Stepney in Stepney praedict. nec
non omnia Maneria terras and tenem. and mariscos dictis Maneriis aut caeteris
praemissis pertinen. If these twenty acres pass in the general words in the
first Nec non, or if the words in the second Nec non (dictis Maneriis
pertinen.) does restrain the generality of the first words, was the question:
And by Phillips the twenty acres do not pass, for the grant of the King shall
be always taken to a common intent: And because here the King has these
Marshes by several titles, that Marsh only shall pass, which by general
entendment shall be intended to pass, scil. the great Marsh, which was in truth
parcel of the Manor of Stepney, and not the twenty acres which the King has by
a special title, although, that ex vi termini, the grant may extend unto it:
Also the grant of the King shall be taken, secundum intentionem Regis, Grants
of the King taken according to his intent.
and not in deceptionem; and here it appearth, that the intent of the King was
not, that these twenty acres should pass, i. the King grants Maneria sua and
terras, and all Lands, etc. iisdem pertinen. but it is not part of any thing
pertinen. to those twenty acres, therefore his intent was not to pass them.
Secondly, the grant is to have them as fully as the Bishop of London had them,
without mentioning of the Prior. Thirdly, as fully as the Bishop had granted
them to us, but the Bishop had not granted these twenty acres to the King.
Fourthly, in the Letters Patents the King recites the value of the Manor of
Hackney and Stepney, but no value of the twenty acres, ( Quaere, what
difference there is betwitxt Stepney Marsh and the Marsh of Stepny.) As to the
first, the grant is iisdem and ita praemissis pertinen. which word praemissis
includes the premises or otherwise should be void: Secondly, the words, as the
Bishop had, and as amply as we have from the Bishop, are suplusage, and nihil
operatur by them. And if the King had not the same of the Bishop it is not
material, but they shall pass notwithstanding, because by a special name: As if
the King grants to me Manerium de Dale, quod a nobis nuper concelat. fuit, and
in truth it ws not concealed, yet it shall pass by his special name: But if the
grant had been, Proviso, that if the said Manor were concealed, etc. the same
had been good, for it is good by way of Proviso, but not by reference. As to
the valuation the same is not material, for who can restrain the bounty of the
King. 29 E. 3. 7. and 8. The King granted omnes Advocationes pertinend. to such
a Priory, quas nuper concessimus patri of the Patentee, although the King had
not ever made such a grant, yet it is a good grant to the Sons, causa qua
supra. Gaudy Justice conceived, that the twenty acres did pass, and he
confessed the case betwixt Bronkor and Robotham to be good Law, for there the
intention is fully, that all appertaining to the Monastery, whether it were
parcel of the Manor of Newnam or of Sandridge, passes, 6 E. 6. 8. Dyer. A man
leaseth all his Meadows in A. containing ten acres, whereas in truth they are
twenty acres, all passes, etc. And if the King grant the Manor of D. to A; and
further says, Damus and concedimus, so freely as I. S. had it, and I. S. never
had it, yet the grant is good: And as to the misrecital of the value, the same
is helped by the Statute. Clench Justice to the same intent; and the Jury has
found, that the twenty acres are parcel of Stepney Marsh. Wray to the same
intent, Against express words no favor shall be given to the King. And note,
that the Marshes pertaining to the Manor are in the third clause, ergo, the
Marsh in the second clause shall be intended a Marsh in gross, or otherwise it
should be idle. And afterward Judgment was given against the Queen.

CLXIII. Piers and Leversuchs Case In Ejectione firmae. Trin. 30 Eliz. In the
Kings Bench.
IT was found by special verdict, that one Robert Leversuch Grandfather of the
Defendant, was Tenant in tail of certain Lands, whereof, etc. and made a Lease
for years to one Pur. who assigned it over to P. father of the Plaintiff.
Robert Leversuch died: W. his Son and Heir entered upon P. who re-entred. W.
demised without other words the Land to the said P. for life, the remainder to
Joan his Wife for life, the remainder to the Son of P. for life with warranty,
and made a Letter of Attorney therein to enter and deliver seisin accordingly.
P. died before that the Livery was executed, and afterward the Attorney made
livery to Joan. W. died; Ed. his Son and Heir entered upon the Wife, she
re-entred, and leased to the Plaintiff, who upon an ouster brought the Action.
Heal. When P. entered upon W. Leversuch the issue in tail, he was a disseisor,
and by his death the Land descending to his Heir, the entry of W. Leversuch,
the issue in tail, was taken away. 3 Cro. 222.
Cook contrary. P. by his entry was not a disseisor, but at the Election of W.
for when P. accepted such a deed from W. it appears that his intent was not
to enter as a disseisor; and it is not found that the said P. had any Son and
Heir at the time of his death, and if not, then no descent; and there is not
any disseisin found that P. expulit Leversuch out of the Land. And Judgment was
given against the Plaintiff. And Cook cited a Case which was adjudged in the
Common Pleas, and it was the Case of Shipwith; Grandfather, Tenant in tail,
Father and Son; The Grandfather died, the Father entered and paid the Rent to
the Lessor, and died in possession, and adjudged, that it was not any descent,
for the paying of the Rent does explain by what title he entered, and so he
shall not be a Disseisor but at the Election of another.

CLXIV. Severn and Clerks Case. Trin. 30 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
^ts.
THe Case was, that A. by his Deed Poll recited, That (whereas he was) possessed
of certain Lands for years of a certain Term; By good and lawful conveyance he
assigned the same to I. S. with diverse Covenants, Articles and Agreements in
the said deed contained, which are or ought to be performed on his part. It was
moved, if this recital (whereas he was) be an Article or Agreement within the
meaning of the condition of the said Obligation, which was given to perform,
etc. Gaudy conceived, that it is an agreement: For in such case I agree, that I
am possessed of it, for every thing contained in the deed is an Agreement, and
not only that which I am bound to perform: As if I recite by my deed, that I am
possessed of such an interest in certain Land, and assign it over by the same
deed, and thereby covenant to perform all Agreements in the deed, if I be not
possessed of such Interest, the covenant is broken. And it was moved, if that
recital be within these words of the condition (which are or ought to be
performed on my part.) And some were of opinion, that it is not within those
words; for that extends only in futurum, but this recital is of a thing past,
or at the least present.

Recital. 2 Cro. 281. Yyl. 206.
Clench. Recital of it self is nothing, but being joined and considered with
the rest of the deed it is material, as here, for against this recital he
cannot say that he has not any thing in the Term. And at the length, it was
clearly resolved, that if the party had not that Interest by a good and lawful
conveyance the Obligation was forfeited.

CLXV. Page and Jourdens Case. Trin. 30. Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
IN Trepass betwixt Page and Jourden the case was: A Woman Tenant in tail took
a Husband, who made a Feoffment in Fee and died. The Wife without any Entry
made a Lease for years: It was moved, that the making of this Lease is an Entry
in Law. As if A. make a Lease for years of the Land of B. who enters by force
of that Lease, A general entry amounts to a disseisin.
now the Lessor without any Entry is a Disseisor. And it was resolved, that by
that Leas^, the Freehold is not reduced without an Entry.

CLXVI. Havithlome and Harvies Case. Trin. 30. Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
Action upon the Statute of 5 Eliz. cap. 9. 1 Cro. 130. 3 Cro. Goodwin. verse.
West.
HAvithlome brought an Action upon the Statute of 5 Eliz. cap. 9. against Harvy
and his Wife for the penalty of ten pounds given by the said Statute against
him who was served with process, ad testificandum, etc. and does not appear,
not having any impediment, etc. and showed that process was served upon the
Defendants Wife, and sufficient charges, having regard to her degree and the
distance of the place, etc. tendered to her, and yet she did not appear. And it
was found for the Plaintiff. It was moved in arrest of Judgment, that the
Declaration is not good, because the Plaintiff in setting forth that he was
damaged for the not appearance of the Wife according to the process, has not
showed how damnified: Also it was moved, that a Feme Covert is not within the
said Statute, for no mention is made of a Feme Covert, and therefore upon the
Statute of West. 2. cap. 25. If a Feme Covert fail of her Record, she shall not
be holden disseisseress, nor imprisoned. Also here the Declaration is, that the
Plaintiff tendered the charges to the Wife where he ought to have tendered the
same to the Husband.

To these three Exceptions it was answered. 1. That although the party be not
at all damnified, yet the penalty is forfeited. 2. Feme Coverts are within the
said Statute, otherwise it should be a great mischief, for it might be that she
might be the only witness: And Feme Coverts, if they had not been expressly
excepted, had been within the Statute of 4 H. 7. of Fines. 3. The wife ought to
appear, therefore the tender ought to be to her: And afterward Judgment was
given for the Plaintiff.

CLXVII. Dellaby and Hassels Case. Pasch. 30 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
IN an Action upon the Case, 1 Cro. 132.
the Plaintiff declared that the Defendant in consideration that he had
retained the Plaintiff to go from London to Paris to Merchandise diverse goods
to the profit of the Defendant, promised to give to him so much as should
content him, and also to give him all and every sum of money which he should
expend there in his Affairs; and further declared, that he was contented to
have twenty-pounds for his labor, which the Defendant refused to pay: And
exception was taken to the Declaration, because there is not set down any place
or time of the notification of his contentment, for the same is traversable.
Gaudy, The Issue here is, non Assumpsit; Assumpsit.
and therefore that matter is out of the Book. Cook, If one assume to pay
twenty pounds to another upon request, although the Defendant plead, non
Assumpsit, yet if the place and time of request be not showed, Judgment many
times has been stayed, for no Action without a Request; so here without
notification of his contentment, no Action, therefore he ought to show it.
Gaudy, The ground of this Action is the Assumpsit, but that cannot be certain
without Declaration, and thereof notice ought to be given to make certainty of
the duty, but not to enforce the promise; but in our case, without a Request
Assumpsit will not lie; But here it being but conveyance, the certainty of the
time and place is not necessary to be showed, but the general form shall serve,
for it is but inducement: As if a man will plead a devise of goods to him, and
assent of the Executors to take them, he need not to show the time and place of
the assent. Gaudy, at another day, said that Judgment ought to be given for the
Plaintiff; the Assumpsit is the ground and cause of the Action, and the showing
of the contentment is only to reduce the Action to certainty: And Judgment was
given for the Plaintiff.

CLXVIII. Musket and Coals Case. Trin. 30 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
WIlliam Musket brought an Action upon the Case against Cole, 1 Cro. 13.
and declared that in consideration, that the Plaintiff had paid unto the
Defendant forty shillings, for the Debt of Simon his Son, the Defendant
promised to deliver to him, omnes tales billas and Obligationes, in which his
Son was bounden to him; which thing he would not do, and it was found by
Verdict for the Plaintiff: And it was moved for stay of Judgment, because the
Plaintiff had not averred in his Declaration, that the said Defendant had Bills
or Obligations, in which Simon his Son was bounden to the Defendant, Averment.
for if there were none, then no damage. And see Onlies Case, 19 Eliz. Dyer
356. D. in consideration that the Plaintiff had expended diverse sums of money
circa the businesses of the Defendant, promised, etc. Exception was taken to
that Declaration by Manwood and Mounson Justices, because it was not showed, in
what businesses certain, and betwixt what persons. Gaudy, The Plaintiff here is
not to recover the Bills or Obligations, but damages only, and therefore
needs not to allege any Bills in certain. And 47 E. 3. 3. A. covenants with
B. to assure unto B. and his Heirs, omnia terras and tenementa quas habet in
such Counties, and for not assurance, an Action of Covenant was brought, and
the Plaintiff declared, that the Defendant had broken the said Covenant, and
that he had required the Defendant to make a Feoffment unto him of all his
Lands and Tenements in the said Counties; and the plea was not allowed, for the
Land is not in demand, but only damages to be recovered. See also 46 E. 3. 4.
and 20 E. 3. And in the principal case, the Plaintiff had time enough for the
showing to the Jury what Bills or Obligations for the instructing of the Jury
of the damages.

CLXIX. English, and Pellitary and Smiths Case. Trin. 30 Eliz. In the Kings
Bench.
Assault and Battery. 1 Cro. 139, 140.
IN an Action of Trespass of Assault and Battery and wounding: The Defendants
say, that they were Lessees of certain Lands, and the Plaintiff came to the
said Lands, and took certain Posts which were upon the Lands, and they gently
took them from him. S. pleaded, that he found the Plaintiff and P. contending
for the said Posts, and he to part them mollite, put his hands upon the
Plaintiff; which is the same, etc. The Plaintiff replied, De injuriis suis
propriis absque tali causa per ipsos P. and S. allegat. upon which issue was
joined, which was found for the Plaintiff. It was moved in arrest of Judgment,
that here was not any issue, for the Plaintiff ought severally to reply to both
pleas aforesaid, for here are several Causes of Justification, and his
Replication, absque tali causa, Nomen Collectivum. Post. 139. Die. 182.
does not answer to both. Cook, This word (Causa) is, nomen Collectivum, which
may be referred to every Cause by the Defendants alleged, reddendo singula
singulis, and their Iustifications are but one matter, and the Defendants might
have all joined in one plea. Wray, Both pleas depend upon one matter, but are
several causes; for two justify by reason of their Interest, and the third for
the preservation of the Peace. And by him and the whole Court, although it be
not a good form of pleading, yet by reasonable construction this word (Cause)
shall be referred to every cause, and so the pleading shall be maintained: And
afterward Judgment was given against the Plaintiff.

CLXX. Cater and Boothes Case. Trin. 30. Eliz. In the Kings Bench. Intrat.
Hill. 30 Rot. 58. or 581.
IF a Writ of Covenant the Plaintiff declared, that the Defendant by his deed,
bearing date the first of October, 28 Eliz. did covenant, that he would do
every act and acts at his best endeavor to prove the Will of I. S. or
otherwise, Covenant.
that he would procure Letters of Administration, by which he might convey such
a Term lawfully to the Plaintiff, which he had not done, licet saepius
requisitus, etc. The Defendant pleaded that he came to Doctor Drury into the
Court of the Arches, and there offered to prove the Will of the said I. S. but
because the Wife of the said I.S. would not swear, that it was the Will of her
Husband, they could not be received to prove it; Upon which it was demurred in
Law. It was moved by Williams, that the Action does not lie, for there is no
time limited by the Covenant when the thing should be done by the Defendant,
for which he has time during his life, for as much as it is a collateral
thing. See 15 E. 4. 31. if there be not a Request before; but admit that the
Covenant had been to perform upon request, Request.
then the Plaintiff in his Declaration ought to have showed an express request
with the place and time of it, for that is traversable. See 33 H. 6. 47, 48. 9
E. 4. 22. Gaudy, If the Covenant had been eypresly to do it upon request, there
the request ought to be showed specially: But when a thing upon the exposition
of the Law only is to be done upon Request, such Request alleged generally is
good enough. And by Wray, the Covenantor has not time during his life to
perform this Covenant, but he ought to do it upon request within convenient
time; but in some case a man shall have time during his life, as where no
benefit shall be to any of the parties, as if the condition were to go to Rome:
And as to the Request, he conceived, that it ought to be showed specially and
certainly; for it is for the benefit of the Covenantee, for without request,
the Action does not lie, which Clench granted. And it was holden by the whole
Court, that the bar shall not help the insufficient Declaration: No more, if
the Defendant plead, Non Assumpsit, yet the defect in the Declaration of a
Request not duly showed, remains. Gaudy, The bringing of the Action is a
Request. Clench, A Writ of Debt is a Praecipe, for which there, licet saepius
requisitus, is sufficient; but a Writ of Covenant is not so.

CLXXI. Piers and Hoes Case. Trin. 30 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
IN an Action of Trespass, it was found by special verdict, Trespass. 1 Cro.
131. 1 Roll. 854.
that A. seized of Land in the right of his Wife, being her Ioynture by a
former Husband, he and his Wife made a Feoffment to a stranger and his Heirs,
Habend. to the use of the stranger and his Heirs during the life of the Wife
only. Shutleworth, The same is a forfeiture, for if the same Feoffment had been
without any use expressed, Forfeiture.
then it should be to the use of the Feoffor and his Heirs, and by consequence
a forfeiture; and as the case is here, it is also a forfeiture, for during the
life of the Wife the use is expressly to the use of the Feoffee and his Heirs,
and the remainder of the Fee-simple is to the use of the Feoffor, scil. the
Husband and his Heirs. Popham, I conceive that here is a forfeiture, Owen 64. 2
Cr. 200, 201. 3 Cr. 167. Hob. 373.
for here are several limitations, limitation of the estate unto one, and of
the use unto another: And the words (for the life of the Wife) do not refer to
the estate, but to the use, with proximum antecedens; And he resembled the same
to the case of Leonard Sturton, in which he was of Council. A man granted
Lands, Habend. unto the Grantee, to the use of the Grantee, and the Heirs of
his body; the same is no estate tail in the Grantee, but only an estate for
life, for the Limitation of the use cannot extend the estate. Cook contrary.
The case is, that A. Wife of one Piers, being Tenant for life of the Ioynture
of the said Piers, took to Husband Hoe, they both by Deed grant totum suum
Messuagium to one Clarke, Habendum to him and his Heirs for the life of the
Wife only, I conceive, that here is not any forfeiture, for it is but one
entire sentence: And if there be a double construction of a deed, that which is
most reasonable shall be taken, so as wrong be not done, Construction of Deeds.
and therefore these words (for the life of the Wife) shall refer unto both,
scil. the estate and the use, and their intent was not to commit a forfeiture,
as appears by the words of the Deed, for they grant solum messuagium, and
that was not but for the life of the wife ad solum usum of the Feoffee and his
Heirs, during the life of the Wife, and violence should be offered to this word
(solum) if the Feoffee or his Heirs, should have ultra the life of the Wife;
and the word (tantum) cannot otherwise be expounded, but that the estate for
life only shall pass from them: And he cited the Case of 34 E. 3. Avowry 258.
A. gives Lands unto B. in tail, and for default of such issue, to the use of C.
in tail, rendering Rent, the same render shall go to both the estates: So a
Lease for life to A. the remainder to B. to the use of C. the same use goes
out of both the estates, and not only out of the Remainder; so here upon the
same reason, Regula.
these words, for the life of the wife, shall refer to the first estate, as
well as to the use; And in such Cases the rule of Bracton ought to be observed,
viz. Benignae faciendae sunt interpretationes verborum, ut res magis valeat,
quam pereat. As the Case in 6 H. 7. 7. in a Cessavit, the Plaintiff counted,
that the Tenant held by Homage, Fealty, Suit at Court, and certain Rent, and in
the doing of the services aforesaid, the Defendant had cessed, and in not doing
of Homage and Fealty, a man cannot cesse by two years; But it was holden that
the said Cessavit should be referred to such services only, in which one might
cease, and that is Suit of Court, and Rent; And if pleadings shall have such
favorable construction, a multo fortiori, shall a Deed, 4 E. 3. Wast. 11. A
man leased for life, and by the same deed granted power unto the Lessee, to
take and make his profit of the said Lands, in the best manner should seem good
to him without contradiction of the Lessor or his Heirs; yet by those words it
is not lawful for him to do wast, for there it is said, that in construction of
Deeds, we ought to judge according to that intent, which is according to Law
and Reason, and not to that which is against reason: See 17 E. 3. 7.
accordingly, so in the principal Case, the words in the Deed of Feoffment shall
be so expounded, that the estate be saved and not destroyed.

Popham contrary, The Cases put by Coke are not like to the Case in question;
For where the Rent is out of both estates the same is but reason, for the Rent
is in respect of the Land, and because he departs with both estates, it is
reason the Rent issue out of both; and the like reason is of the Case of an
use, for if a man makes a Lease for life to A. the Remainder over to B. the
same shall be to their use respectively, and if he do express the use, the same
shall be accordingly, and shall bind both estates, but there Clark has two
estates, one by the common Law, and the other by the Statute; 3 Cro. 167.
But the words subsequent (for the life of the wife only) cannot refer to both
estates: A. gives Lands to one and his Heirs for forty years, the same is but a
plain Term for years: But if a Feoffment in Fee be made to one and his Heirs to
the use of another for forty years, there the Fee passes to the Feoffee, and
the Term to Cestuy que use. Gaudy conceived, that it is not any forfeiture, for
these words (during the life of the wife only) were put in the Deed to express
the intent of the parties, and therefore the same shall not be void; and he
conceived that they were put in, to exclude the forfeiture, and therefore they
shall serve for that purpose. And afterward it was resolved by all the
Justices except Gaudy, that it was a forfeiture, for by the Feoffment the
Fee-simple passes, and that to the use of the Feoffor; and the estate, and the
use are several things, and the limitation for the life of the Wife cannot
extend to both: And as to the Book of 24 H. 8. Br. Forfeiture 87. 3 Cro. 167,
168.
Tenant for life aliens in Fee to B. Habendum sibi and haeredibus suis, for
Term of the life of the Tenant for life, the same is not a forfeiture, for the
whole is but the limitation of the estate: And afterward it was adjudged that
it was a forfeiture, Gaudy continuing in his former opinion: And Wray said
that he had conferred with the other Judges of their House, and they all held
clearly, that it is a forfeiture.

CLXXII. Toft and Tompkins Case. Trin. 30 Eliz. In the Kings Bench. Rot. 528.
UPon a special Verdict the case was, that the Grandfather, Tenant for life,
the Remainder to the Father in tail, Discontinuance. 1 Cro. 135.
that the Grandfather made a Feoffment in fee to the use of himself for life,
the Remainder to the Father in Fee; And afterward they both came upon the
Land, and made a Feoffment to Tompkins the Defendant. Coke, There is not any
discontinuance upon this matter, for the Father might well wave the advantage
of the forfeiture committed by the Grandfather; then when the Father joins
with the Grandfather in a Feoffment, the same declares that he came upon the
Land, without intent to enter for a forfeiture: It was one Waynmans Case,
adjudged in the common Pleas, where the Disseissee comes upon the Land to
deliver a Release to the Disseissor, that the same is no Entry to revest the
Land in the Disseissee: Then here it is the Livery of the Tenant for life, and
the grant of him in the Remainder, and he in the Remainder here was never
seized by force of the tail, and so no discontinuance. Godfrey, Here is a
Remitter by the Entry, and afterward a discontinuance, for by the Entry of
both, the Law shall adjudge the possession in him who has right, etc. Gaudy,
This is a discontinuance, for when the Father enters, ut supra, he shall be
adjudged in by the forfeiture, and then he has gained a possession, and so a
discontinuance, for both cannot have the possession. Clench, The intent of him
in the Remainder when he entered was to join with the Grandfather, and when his
intent appears, that the estate of the Grandfather, and his own also shall
pass, that does declare that he would not enter for the forfeiture: Shute
agreed with Gaudy.

CLXXIII. Broake and Doughties Case. Hill. 31 Eliz. Rot. 798. Trin. 30. Eliz.
In the Kings Bench.
AN Action upon the Case for words, Action upon the Case for words. 1 Cro. 135.
viz. Thou wast forsworn in the Court of Requests, and I will make thee stand
upon a Stage for it: It was found for the Plaintiff. It was moved in arrest of
Judgment, that the Action will not lie for these words, for he does not say,
that he was there forsworn as Defendant, or witness: And Trin. 28 Eliz. betwixt
Hern and Hex, thou wast forsworn in the Court of Whitchurch; And Judgment given
against the Plaintiff, for the words are not Actionable, and as to the residue
of the words, I will make thee stand upon the Stage for it, they are not
Actionable, as it was adjudged between Rylie and Trowgood, If thou had
Justice thou had stood on the Pillory; and Judgment was given against the
Plaintiff. Daniel contrary, thou wast forsworn before my Lord chief Justice in
an Evidence, these words are Actionable, for that is perjury upon the matter,
and between Foster and Thorn, T. 23 Eliz. Rot. 882. Thou wast falsely forsworn
in the Star Chamber, the Plaintiff had Judgment, for it shall be intended that
the Plaintiff was Defendant or a Deponent there: And yet the words in the
Declaration are not in the Court of Star Chamber. Wray, Thou art worthy to
stand upon the Pillory, are not Actionable, for it is but an implication; but
in the words in the Case at the Bar there is a vehement intendment, that his
Oath was in the quality of a Defendant, or Deponent; which Gaudy granted. In
the Case 28 Eliz. Thou wast forsworn in Whit-Church Court, there the words are
not actionable; for that Court is not known to you as Judges. And it may be it
is but a great House or Mansion house called Whit-church Court: But here in the
principal case it cannot be meant but a Court of Justice, and before the Judges
there juridice, and the subsequent words sound so much, I will make thee stand
upon a Stage for it. And afterward Judgment was given for the Plaintiff.

CLXXIV. Gatefould and Penns Case. Trin. 30 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
Prescription for tithes. 1 Cro. 136. 3 Len. 203, 265. Antea. 94.
GAtefould Parson of North-linne libelled against Pen in the spiritual Court
for tithes in Kind of certain pastures: The Defendant to have prohibition does
surmise, that he is Inhabitant of South-linne, and that time out of mind, etc.
every Inhabitant of South-linne, having pastures in North-linne has paid
tithes in Kind for them unto the Vicars of South-linne, where he is not
resident, and the Vicar has also time out of mind paid to the Parson of
North-linne for the time being two pence for every acre. Lewis, This surmise is
not sufficient to have a prohibition, for upon that matter Modus Decimandi
shall never come in question, but only the right of tithes, if they belong to
the Parson of North-linne, or to the Vicar of South-linne, and he might have
pleaded this matter in the spiritual Court, because it touches the right of
tithes, as it was certified in the Case of Bashly by the Doctors of the Civil
Law. Gaudy, This prescription does stand with reason, for such benefit has the
Parson of North-linne, if any Inhabitant there has any Pastures in
South-linne. And afterward the whole Court was against the prohibition, for
Modus Decimandi shall never come in debate upon this matter, but who shall have
the tithes, the Vicar of South-linne, or the Parson of North-linne? and also
the prescription is not reasonable.

CLXXV. Gomersal and Bishops Case. Hill. 31 Eliz. Rot. 175. Trin. 30 Eliz. In
the Kings Bench.
1 Cro. 136.
BIshop libelled in the Spiritual Court for tithe Hay; the Plaintiff Gomersal
made a surmise, that there was an agreement betwixt the said parties, and for
the yearly sum of seven shillings to be paid by Gomersal unto Bishop, Bishop
faithfully promised to Gomersal, that Gomersal should have the tithes of the
said Land during his life. And upon an Attachment upon a Prohibition Gomersal
declared, that for the said annual sum Bishop leased to the Plaintiff the said
tithes for his life: And upon the Declaration Bishop did demur in Law for the
variance between the Surmise and the Declaration; for in the Surmise a promise
is supposed, for which Gomersal might have an Action upon the Case, and in the
Declaration a Lease. But note, that the Surmise was not entered in the Roll, but
was recorded by it self, and the Declaration only enrolled. Godfrey, It was
resolved in the Case betwixt Pendleton and Hunt, Prohibition for tithes.
that an Agreement betwixt the Parson and any of his Parishioners is a good
cause to grant a Prohibition, if he libel in the Spiritual Court against such
Agreement, because the Spiritual Court cannot try it, and they will not allow
such Plea. Curia, The Surmise is as a Writ, for which if variance be betwixt
the same and the Declaration all his naught.

CLXXVI. Colebourn and Mixstones Case. Intrat. Hill. 31. Eliz. Rot. 146. Trin.
30. Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
COlebourn was sued in the Spiritual Court, for that being Executor to one
Alice Leigh, he had not brought in a true Inventory of all the goods of the
said Alice, but had omitted and left out a lease of two houses, and this suit
was at the pursuit of two Daughters of the Testator. Colebourn sueth for a
Prohibition; and surmises and declares, how this Lease is extinct, and the
matter was this, H. Leigh was seized of a house called the Marigold, and two
other houses in London, and leased the said two houses to one Alice Cheap for
21 years, if she should live so long, and afterward made a Lease in Reversion
of the said two houses to the said Alice Leigh for 21 years, and afterward he
devised these two houses, Devises.
and also the house called the Marigold to the said Alice Leigh for her life
for to bring up his children, and died, after whose death the said Alice Leigh
entered into the said house called the Marigold, and took the rents and profits
of the said two houses for the space of 7 years, virtute testament. praedict.
upon which Declaration the Defendants do demurr in Law. Coke, the Declaration
is not good, and for the matter of it, it is clear, that by this devise unto
Alice, her Term in futuro is not extinct without her agreement to it: And also
in this Case the Devise is not for the benefit of the said Alice Leigh, but of
her children, and she has liberty to accept or refuse the said estate by
devise, and to make her election: Extinguishment.
And the Plaintiff has declared, that she has accepted the Rent reserved upon
the Lease of the said two houses for 7 years: And therein the Declaration
naught in diverse respects. 1. He has declared, that the said Alice Leigh has
accepted the Rents of the said two houses, by reason of the reversion, and
virtue testament. praedict. by 7 years, which is double and treble; for
acceptance of a Rent at one day, scil. one rent day is a sufficient election:
As if the Issue in tail, after the death of his Ancestor, who has made a Lease
not warranted by the Statute, once accepts the Rent, the Lease is affirmed; but
if in plea pleading, the acceptance of the said Rent for 3 years be pleaded,
the same clearly is not good; for no good Issue can be taken thereupon. 2. This
acceptance is not pleaded (as the Law wills) and in the phrase of the Law, viz.
to which devise she agreed, but pleads the acceptance of the Rent, which is
matter of evidence, the which is not good pleading. As 5 H. 7. 1. One swears
another to enter into his Land, and the same to occupy for a certain time,
Estate executed.
the same is a Lease in Law; and if in pleading the party is to make his title
to the same Land, he ought to plead it as an expres Lease, and not as a
License; and if the Lease be traversed, he may give the License in evidence.
Tanfield, presently by the devise, the estate for life is in the Devisee and
the Term extinct by it, and that is sufficient for the Plaintiff: And if there
was any disagreement the same is to be showed on the other side. But if Alice
had not notice of the Devise, but dies before notice, the same amounts unto
a disagreement. And as to the pleading of the Agreement, I conceive its well
enough pleaded, for if the Lease had not been she might have entered, and then
if such Entry had been pleaded it had been good enough; and then because she
could not enter by reason of the said Lease, she has taken the rents and
profits which is an actual agreement, and as strong as an Entry. Also we have
showed that she had entered into the house called the Marigold, Assent not to be
apportioned.
of which the Devisor died seized in possession, and that is a sufficient
agreement for the whole, for it is an entire Legacy. As 18 E. 3. Variance 63.
If the Reversion of three acres be granted, and the Tenant for life attorneth
for one acre, it is a good attornment for the whole, for he cannot apportion
his assent: and 2 E. 4. 13. If the Executor deliver unto the Devisee goods to
him devised to redeliver them to him again at such a day, the same is a good
assent, and execution of the Devise, and the words of the re-delivery are void.
Gaudy, The devise does not vest the estate in the Wife until agreement, where a
man takes in a second degree, as in a Remainder the same vests presently before
agreement, but where he takes immediately it is otherwise, and he held the
agreement was well enough pleaded. Wray, Presently upon the death of the
Testator, the Freehold rested in the Devisee, and it was not an Agreement, ut
supra, by taking of the Rents, yet the entry into the Marigold was a consent,
and an Execution of the whole Legacy; and as to the rest he agreed with Gaudy.
Clench, The Freehold rested presently in Alice Leigh before agreement, also
the entry into the Marigold is an execution of the whole Legacy to the Devisee,
for her entry shall be adjudged most beneficial for her; and that is, for all
the three houses.

CLXXVII. Stransham and Medcalfes Case. Trin. 30 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
1 Cro. 178.
STransham libelled in the Court of the Bishop of Norwich against Medcalfe, for
a portion of Tithes, as Farmor of the Rectory of Dunham: the Parson of Stonham
came in and said, that the Land, whereof the Tithes are demanded, is in his
Parish of Stonham, and not in the Parish of Dunham; and afterward sentence
passed against Stransham; who brought an Appeal, and notwithstanding that, by
the Statute of 32 H. 8. cap. 7. the spiritual Judges may proceed to make
process against the Appellant for costs, for the principal matter, scil.
parcel, or within such a Parish or not, is tryable at the Common Law. Cook now
prayed a Consultation; and he confessed (ut supra) that the matter was tryable
at the Common Law; but yet the costs were not given for the matter, but for the
unjust vexation, No Prohibition for costs in the spiritual Court.
and it was his suit and own act to prosecute the same in the Spiritual Court.
Note, that Stransham had a Prohibition to stay the proceedings for the costs,
for in some cases the Plaintiff himself, who libelleth, may have a Prohibition,
and that was the case betwixt Wignal and Brook. And afterward a Consultation
was granted by the Court; for Stransham had begun the suit in the Spiritual
Court in the principal matter, and therefore he cannot have a Prohibition for
the costs. But afterward Judgment was stayed, for the said Statute speaks
specially in case of Tithes, where the Court has Jurisdiction, and here it
has not of the matter: But it was said, that if a Consultation be once
granted, 1 Cro 277.
the party shall never have another Prohibition in the same cause, as it was
holden in the case betwixt Hoskins and Jones.

CLXXVIII. Chamberlain and Thorps Case. Pasch. 31 Eliz. Rot. 186. In the Kings
Bench.
Recognizances in London, by custom. 1 Cro. 186.
IN Debt upon a Recognizance acknowledged in London, the Plaintiff declared,
that London is antiqua Civitas, and that they have used time out of mind, etc.
That the Mayor take Recognizances of any person being of full age, and not a
Feme Covert, every day in the year, except Sundays, Holy Days, Counsel days,
and days of Quarter Sessions and Jail-deliver; And declared further, now that
the Defendant such a day did acknowledge a Recognizance to him, etc. Tanfield,
the Declaration is not good, but the custom, as it is laid is unreasonable, for
thereby the Mayor may take Recognizances of Idiots, men of Non sanae Memoriae,
etc. nor is it restrained to any persons, or to any matters, but is too
general, and therefore cannot be a good custom. Gaudy, The Declaration is good
notwithstanding the Exception for want of averment, for that ought to come in
on the other side. And as to the custom I conceive it is not good, for it is
hard, That they should take Recognizances of all Persons, and for all Causes
which rise out of the City, and through the whole Realm, as well as within the
City: also none shall take a Recognizance, but a Judge of Record, and a
Recognizance cannot be taken by prescription. As to the first Exception, Wray
agreed with Gaudy; and as to the Custom, he held the same to be good. For it
has been always allowed, and their customs are confirmed by Act of Parliament
which makes them good. But if the custom be not confirmed by Parliament it is
not good; also it is not an unreasonable Custom, for it is for the benefit of
the Subjects to have security for their Debts. Coke, The Recognizance makes the
Debt local, and therefore 13 Rich. 2. bar. 649. Debt was brought in London upon
a Recognizance acknowledged in the Chancery at Westminster, and the Writ was
abated; for the Recognizance makes it local there; and by him the custom stands
with reason: The Mayor is such a person who may take a Recognizance, for he is
a Judge of Record. See 1 H. 7. 20. and Br. Recognizance 8. and the Recognisee
cannot have an Action of Debt upon this Recognizance elsewhere than in London.
For it is not a Debt out of the Jurisdiction of the Court, for the Recognizance
has made it local. Wray, If the Recognisor be within age, the same shall come
in of the other side, and the Plaintiff needs not show the same in his
Declaration. Cook, It was agreed betwixt Mabbe and Friend, That such a
Recognizance was good. Tanfield, The said Recognizance was taken for Orphans
goods which is a thing within their Jurisdiction. Clench, They of London cannot
take Recognizance of more than they can hold plea of it. Wray, They have used
of long time to take Recognizances, and their customs are confirmed by
Parliament, and a more strange custom than this has been allowed of here
before, scil. That a feme Covert shall sue an Action alone without her Husband,
for she is a sole Merchant; Also they do certify Recognizances ore tenus.
Gaudy, A feme Covert may have an Action within the City, but not here.

CLXXIX. Pierce against How. Hill. 32 Eliz. Rot. 434. In the Kings Bench.
AN Action upon the Case for these words, Action upon the case for words. 1
Cro. 185.
Pierce has taken a false Oath in the Consistory Court of the Bishop of
Exeter, and upon the Declaration, the Defendant did demur in Law. And by
Prideaux these words are Actionable, although the perjury be supposed to be
committed in the spiritual Court; For he shall be excommunicated if he will not
appear, and he shall do penance in a White sheet, which is as great a disgrace
as to be set upon the Pillory. And it was ruled in an action upon the case
betwixt Dorrington and Dorrington, upon these words, Thou art a Bastard, that
an action lies, and yet Bastardy is a spiritual matter, and there
determinable; So for these words, Thou art a Pirate, an action lies, and yet
Piracy is not punishable by the common Law, but in the Court of Admiralty. And
these words, He has taken a false oath, do amount to these words, He is
forsworn. Wray conceived, that the words are not actionable, for there is a
proviso in the Statute of Eliz. cap. 9. That the said Act shall not extend to
any Ecclesiastical Court, but that every such offender shall be and may be
punished by such usual and ordinary Laws as heretofore have been, and is yet
used, and frequent in the said Ecclesiastical Court. Gaudy upon these words, an
action does not lie, for they are not pregnant of any perjury in the Pl. for he
may be mere passive in it: for if one of the Masters of the Chancery minister
an Oath unto any person, or any Commissioners, etc. and the Plaintiff swears
falsely, a man may say, That the Master of the Chancery, or the Commissioner
has taken a false oath, and yet he is not guilty of falsity. And afterward
Wray, mutata opinione, That the Proviso in the said Statute, is to this intent,
That notwithstanding the said Statute, such an offense may be enquirable and
examined in the Ecclesiastical Court in such manner as it was before, but the
same does not take away or restrain the authority of the Common Law, but that
such an offense may be here examined. And it has been lately adjudged in the
Star Chamber, That such perjury was examinable there, for it is not restrained:
and as to the latter exception, upon these words (he has taken a false oath)
it shall be intended actively, and not passively, and if so, the Defendant
ought to have so pleaded it, and afterward Judgment was given for the
Plaintiff.

CLXXX. Palmer and Smalbrooks Case. Trin. 30 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
1 Cro. 178. Owen 97. 3 Len. 227.
IN an action upon the Case by Palmer against Smalbrook, The Plaintiff declared,
That the Defendant had recovered a certain Debt against A. and thereupon
purchased a Writ of Capias against A. to take his body, and delivered the said
Capias to the Plaintiff being then Sheriff, and prayed a Warrant for the
serving of the said Capias; and that he would name in it, one B. for special
Bailiff, and promised the Plaintiff that if B. arrested A. by force of the said
Capias, and suffered him to escape, That he would not sue the Plaintiff for the
escape: and showed further, That he made a Warrant according to the said
Capias, and therein named and appointed the said B. his special Bailiff, who
arrested A. accordingly and afterward suffered him to escape, and the
Defendant notwithstanding his promise aforesaid, sued the Plaintiff, for the
said escape. And it was found for the Plaintiff; It was moved in arrest of
Judgment, That the promise is against the Law, to prevent the punishment
inflicted by the Statute of 23 H. 6. upon the Sheriff, and it is merely within
the Statute, and so the promise void. Cook, The same is not any Bond or
promise taken of the Prisoner, nor of any for him, and therefore it is not
within the Statute, as it was in Danvers Case. Wray, A promise is within the
Statute as well as a Bond; but the Statute does not extend but where the Bond
or promise is made by the Prisoner, or by any for him; And after Judgment was
given for the Plaintiff.

CLXXXI. Mounson and Wests Case. Hill. 30 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
IN Trespass by Mounson against West, the Jury was charged and evidence given,
and the Jurors being retired into a house for to consider of their evidence,
Owen 38. Plowd. 520. Co. 1 Inst. 227. Dyer 37.
they remained there a long time without concluding any thing; and the officers
of the Court who attended them seeing their delay, searched the Jurors if they
had any thing about them to eat; upon which search it was found, that some of
them had figs, and others pippins; for which the next day the matter was moved
to the Court, and the Jurors were examined upon it upon Oath. And two of them
did confess that they had eaten figs before they had agreed of their verdict:
and three other of them confessed, That they had Pippins, but did not eat of
them, Where Jurors shall be fined for eating before verdict; but it shall not
make void the verdict.
and that they did it without the knowledge or Will of any of the Parties. And
afterward the Court set a fine of five pound upon each of them which had
eaten, and upon the others who had not eaten forty shillings. And they would
advise, if the verdict was good or not, for the Jury found for the Plaintiff.
And afterward at another day, the matter was moved, and Anderson was of
opinion, That notwithstanding the said Misdemeanor of the Jury, the verdict was
good enough, for these victuals were not given to them by any of the Parties to
the action, nor by their means, or procurement. Rhodes thought the contrary,
because some of the Jurors had eaten, and some not, contrary if all of them had
eaten. See 14 H. 7. 1. A Jury was charged and before their verdict, they did
eat and drink, and it was holden that upon that Misdemeanor, their verdict was
void, for which cause a venire facias de novo was awarded. And it was prayed by
the Counsel of the Defendant West, That the said Misdemeanor so found by
examination might be entered of Record, which the Court granted. And afterward
at another day, the matter was moved again. And upon great advice and
deliberation, and conference with the other Judges, The verdict was holden to
be good notwithstanding the Misdemeanor aforesaid. See 24 E. 3 24. 15 H. 7. 1.
2 H. 7. 3. 29 H. 8. 37. and 35 H. 8. 55. where it was holden, where the eating
and drinking of the Jury at their own costs is but fineable, but if it be at
the costs of the parties, the verdict is void. And see Book of Entries 251. The
Jurors after they went from the Bar ad seipsos of their verdict to be advised,
comederunt quasdam species, sci. raisins, dates, etc. at their own costs, as
well before, as after they agreed of their verdict; And the Jurors were
committed to prison; but their verdict was good, although the verdict was given
against the King.

CLXXXII. Hunt and Gilborns Case. Hill. 30 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
IN Dower brought by Hunt and his Wife against Gilborn, The Defendant pleaded,
That the Land of which Dower is demanded, Dower of Gavelkind by Custom. Ante.
62, 63. 1 Cro. 825.
is of the nature of Gavelkind, and that the custom is, That in Dower of Land
of such nature The Wife ought to be endowed of the moity of such Land, Tenendum
quam diu non maritata remanserit, and non aliter; upon which plea in Bar, the
Demandants did demur in Law; and the Lord Anderson was of opinion, That the
Custom is strongly pleaded against the Dower in the affirmative with a Negative
and non aliter; and that is confessed by the Demurrer, That Dower out of such
Land ought to be so allowed, and so demanded, and in no other manner. And by
Periam, If those words (and non aliter) had not been in the Plea, yet the
Demandants should not have Judgment: For Dower by moiety, and non maritatis, is
as proper in case of Gavelkind, as Dower of the third part of Land at the
Common Law, and as the descent in such case of Lands to all the Sons. And
afterward Judgment was given against the Demandants.

CLXXXIII. The Case of the Provost and Scholars of Queens College in Oxford.
Hill. 30. Eliz.
THe Provost, Fellows, and Scholars of Queens College in Oxford, are Guardians
of the Hospital, or Meason de Dieu in Southampton. And they make a Lease of the
Land parcel of the said Hospital to one Hazel for Term of years by the name
Praepositus Socii and Scholares Collegii reginalis in Oxonia, Gardianus
Hospitalis, etc. And in an Ejectione firmae upon that lease It was found for
the Plaintiffs; and it was objected in arrest of Judgment, That the word
Gardianus, ought to be Gardiani, for the College does consist of many persons,
and every person is capable, and it is not like unto Abbot and Covent: But the
whole Court was of opinion, that the Exception was not good, but that as well
the Lease as also the Declaration was good, for the College is one body, and
as one person: And so it is good enough Gardianus.

CLXXXIV. Wooden and Hazels Case. Hill. 30 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
IN an Ejectione betwixt Wooden and Hazel they were at issue upon, Not Guilty:
and a Venire facias awarded returnable, Tres Trinit. And the Essoin adjudged
and adjorned by the Plaintiff until Michaelmas Term; Nisi Prips.
And at next Assizes, the Plaintiff not withstanding that Essoin, and the
adjorning of it procured a Nisi Prius, by which it was found for the Plaintiff:
And now it was moved in Court for the stay of Judgment, because no Nisi Prius
ought to issue in the Case. Essoin.
For the Essoin was adjudged and adjorned until Michaelmas Term by the
Plaintiff himself. And Leonard custos Brevium said, That the words of the
Statute of Westminster 2 cap. 27. Postquam aliquis posuerit se in aliquem
inquisitionem ad proximum diem allocet. ei esson. Imports, That the Essoin
shall not be taken at the return of the Process against the Jury, although the
Jury be ready at the Bar. Anderson was of opinion, That the awarding of the
Nisi Prius ut supra, is but a misawarding of the Process, and then relieved by
the Statute. And afterward the case being moved at another day, 1 Cro. 367.
the Court was clear of opinion, That no Nisi Prius ought to issue forth in
this case, because that the Plaintiff himself, by the adjorning of the Essoin,
cast by the Defendant until Michaelmas Term, had barred himself of all
Proceedings in the mean time: But afterward it was surmised to the Court on
the Plaintiffs part, that he the Defendant was not essoined, for the name of
the Defendant is Edward Hazel, and it appeared upon the trial that Edward
Russel was essoined, Amendment.
but no Edward Hazel, and then if no Essoin, no adjornment, and then the
Plaintiff is at large, etc. and may proceed, etc. But the Remembrance of the
Clark was Edward Hazel, as it ought to be, and yet it was holden of no effect,
being in another Term: And afterward the Counsel of the Defendant prayed, that
the Roll in hac part, be amended according to the Remembrance of the Clark:
But the Court utterly denied that, for no Statute gives amendment, but in the
affirmance of Judgments, and Verdicts, and not in defeazance of Judgments or
Verdicts: and afterward it was resolved by the whole Court, That Judgment be
entered for the Plaintiff.

CLXXXV. Sir Henry Goodiers Case. Hill. 32 Eliz. Intratur M. 29 and 30. Eliz.
Rot. 2116.
IN an Ejectione firmae the Case was, Sir Ralph Rowlet possessed of certain
Lands for years made his Will, and ordained Sir Nicholas Bacon, Renouncing of
an Executorship. Owen. 44. Office of Executors. 54. 1 Cro. 92. 9 Co. 37.
Keeper of the great Seal of England, Sir Robert Catline, Lord Chief Justice of
England, Justice Southcote, and Gerrard Attorney General his Executors, and
died. And afterward the said persons named Executors, sent their Letters to
the Chief Officer of the Prerogative Court as follows. Whereas our Loving
friend Sir Ralph Rowlet Knight, lately deceased, made and ordained us Executors
of his last Will, and whereas our business is so great, that we cannot attend
the execution of the said Will, Therefore we have thought good to move the
bearer hereof Mr. Henry Goodier one of the Coheirs of the said Sir Ralph to
take upon him the execution of the said Will. And therefore we pray you to
grant Letters of Administration in as ample manner as the justice of the cause
does require; and afterward an Entry was made in this manner in the same
Court, Executores Testamenti praedict. executionem inde super se assumere
distulerant and adhuc distarent: And upon that the said Goodier obtained
Letters of Administration, and granted a Lease to A. for years, of which the
said Sir Ralph Rowlet died possessed. And afterward Sir Robert Catline
claiming as Executor, granted the same Term to another, etc. and all the matter
of difficulty was, If this Letter written by the Executors be a sufficient
Renunciation of the Executorship in Law, so as the Executors cannot afterward
claim or use the said authority, etc. 2. If the Entry of the said Renuntiation
be sufficient and effectual. And it was argued by Ford, one of the Doctors of
the Civil Law, That as well the Renunciation as the Entry of it is good and
sufficient in Law, so that none of the Executors could not after entermeddle.
And he said, That in their Law, there is not any certain form of Renuntiation,
but if the meaning and intention of the Renouncer appears, it is sufficient
without any formal Terms of Renunciation: And he put many rules and Maxims in
their Law to the same purpose, Ego dico me nolle esse haeredem, are sufficient
words to such intent. Non vult haeres esse quin ad aliam transfer debet
haereditatem. Qui semel repudiavit haereditatem non potest eam repetere. Quod
semel placuit, post displicere non potest. Variatio non permittitur in
contractibus. So that after the Executors have signified to the Officer of
their Court their pleasure to renounce the Execution of the Will, they cannot
afterward entermeddle, nam interest reipublicae ut dominia rerum sint in
certo. And as to the Entry of the said Renunciation inter acta Curiae,
distulerint et adhuc distarent, that was the error of the Clark. And it is Rule
in our Law, veritas rerum gestarum non vitiatur Errore factorum. And the Lord
Anderson demanded of the said Doctor, how far those words haeres, et haereditas
did extend in their Law, who answered, That haereditas comprehends all
Chattels, as well real as personal, Inheritance as well as Chattels, for by
their Law, Haereditas nihilaliud est quam successio in universum jus quod
defunctus habuit tempore mortis suae. And afterward the Court gave day to the
other party to hear an Argument of their side, but the case was so clear, That
no Professor of the Civil Law would be retained to argue to the contrary. And
afterward Judgment was given, That the said Renunciation, and the entry of it
was sufficient.

CLXXXVI. Littleton and Pernes Case. Mich. 30 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
Debt.
LIttleton brought Debt upon an Obligation against Humphry Pernes, who pleaded,
that the said Obligation was endorced with this condition, for the performance
of certain Articles and Covenants contained in certain Indentures, by which
Indentures the Plaintiff first covenanted, that Edward brother of Humphry
should enjoy such Land until the Feast of Michaelmas next following, rendering
such Rent at the end of the said Term: and the said Humphry covenanted, that
the said Edward at the Feast aforesaid should surrender quietly and peaceably
the said Lands to the Plaintiff, and that the said Plaintiff to such of the
said Lands as by the Custom of the Country, tunc jacebant frisca, should have
in the mean time free ingress, egress, etc. at his will and pleasure, with his
servants, ploughs, etc. And as to that Covenant, the Defendant pleaded, Quod
permisit querentem habere intrationem and exitum, etc. in tales terras, quales
tunc jacebant secundum consuetudinem patriae, etc. And Exception was taken to
this plea, because he has not showed in certain, which Lands they were which
then then did lie Frecy, according to the custom of the Country; which Anderson
allowed of, but Walmsly strongly insisted to the contrary: And he confessed,
that where an Act is to be done, according to a Covenant, he who pleads the
performance of it ought to plead it specially; but as our case is, here is no
Act to be done, but a permittance as abovesaid, and it is in the Negative, not
a disturbance, in which case permisit is a good plea; and then it shall come on
the other side on the Plaintiffs part, to show in what Lands the Defendant non
permisit: Which difference see agreed, 17 E. 4. 26. by the whole Court. And
such was the opinion of the whole Court in the principal case.

1 Co. 127.
Another Exception was taken to it, that the Defendant had covenanted, that his
brother Edward should pay to the Plaintiff the said Rent; To which the
Defendant pleaded, that his said brother had paid to the Platntiff before the
said Feast of Michaelmas, in full satisfaction of the said Rent, three
shillings, and that was holden a good plea; and upon the matter the Covenant
well performed, for there is not any Rent in this Case, for here is not any
Lease, and therefore not any Rent. For if A. covenant with B. that C. shall
have his Land for so many years rendering such a Rent, 1 Roll. 847. 1 Cro. 173.
Owen 97.
here is not any Lease, and therefore neither Rent. But if A. had covenanted
with C. himself, it had been otherwise, because it is betwixt the same parties.
And if the Lessee covenant to pay his Rent to the Lessor, and he pays it
before the day, the same is not any performance of the Covenant, causa patet,
contrary of a sum in gross: Another Covenant was, that the said Humphry
solveret ex part dicti Edwardi 20 l. to which the Defendant pleaded, that he
had paid ex part dicti Humfridi 20 l. and that defect was holden incureable,
and therefore the Plaintiff had Judgment to recover.

CLXXXVII. Geslin and Warburtons Case. Mich. 30 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
1 Cro. 128.
IN an Ejectione firmae by Joan Geslin against Hen. Warburton and Sebastian
Crispe of Lands in Dickilborough in the County of Norf. Mich. 30. and 31 Eliz.
rot. 333. upon the general Issue, the Jury found a special verdict, that before
the Trespass supposed one Martin Frenze was seized of the Lands, of which the
Action was brought in tail to him and his Heirs males of his body, so seized
suffered a common Recovery to his own use, Devises.
and afterward devised the same in this manner: I give my said Land to
Margaret my Wife, until such time as Prudence my Daughter shall accomplish the
age of nineteen years, the Reversion to the said Prudence my Daughter, and to
the Heirs of her body Lawfully begotten, upon condition that she the said
Prudence shall pay unto my said Wife yearly during her life, in recompense of
her Dower of and in all my Lands 12 pounds, and if default of payment be made,
then I will that my said Wife shall enter and have all my Lands during her
life, etc. the Remainder ut supra, the Remainder to John Frenze in tail, etc.
Martin Frenze died, Margaret entered, the said Prudence being within the age of
fourteen years; Margaret took to Husband one of the Defendants, John Frenze
being Heir male to the former tail brought a Writ of Error upon the said
Recovery and assigned Error, because the Writ of Entry upon which the Recovery
was had, was Praecipe quod reddat unum Messuag. and twenty acras prati in
Dickelborough, Linford Hamblets, without naming any Town: And thereupon the
Judgment was reversed. And it was further found, that in the said Writ of
Error, and the process upon it, Hutt. 106. 2 Cro. 574. 3 Cro. 196.
no Writ of Scire facias issued to warn dictam Prudentiam ten. existentem
liberi ten. praemissorum, ad ostendendam quid haberet, vel dicere sciret quare
Judicium praedict. non reversaretur: The Jury further found, that the said
Margaret, depending the said Writ of Error was possessed virtute Testamenti and
ultimae voluntatis dict. Martini, reversione inde expectant. dictae Prudentiae
pro ut lex postulat: And they further found, Error.
that six pound of the said tewlve pounds were unpaid to the said Margaret at
the Feast, etc. and they found, that the said John Frenze, praetextu Judicii
sic reversat. entered into the premises as Heir male, ut supra. And so seized,
a Fine was levied betwixt John Frenze Plaintiff, and one Edward Tindal, Owen
157. Dyer 321. 1 Cro. 471. 739.
and the said Prudence his Wife Deforceants, and that was to the use of the
said John Frenze: And that afterward Humphry Warburton and the said Margaret
his Wife, brought a Writ of Dower against the said John Frenze, Edw. Tindal,
and Prudence his Wife, of the said Lands: The said Edward and Prudence made
default, and the Demandants counted against the said Frenze, and demanded
against him the moity of the third part of the said Lands: To which the said
Frenze pleaded, that the default of the said Edward and Prudence idem John
Frenze nomine non debet, quia he said, that he the said John was sole seized of
the Lands aforesaid at the time of the Writ brought, etc. and pleaded in Bar,
and it was found against the said John, and Judgment given for the Demandants
of the third part of the whole Land, and seisin accordingly: And that
afterward, 17 Eliz. the said Frenze levied the Fine to the said Tindal, to the
use of the said Tindal and his Heirs: And they found, that after the said Feast
the said Henry Warburton and Margaret his Wife came to the Message aforesaid
half an hour before Sunset of the said day, and there did demand the Debt of
the said twelve pounds, Dower.
to the said Margaret, by the said Martin Frenze devised to be paid unto them,
and there remained till after Sunset of the said day, demanding the Rent
aforesaid, and that neither the said Tindal nor any other was there ready to
pay the same.

And first it was moved, if the said yearly sum of twelve pounds appointed to
be paid to the said Margaret were a Rent, or but a sum in gross: And the
opinion of the Court was, that it was a Rent, and so it might be fitly
collected out of the whole Will, where it is said, that Prudence his Daughter
should have the Land, and that she should pay yearly to Margaret twelve pounds
in recompense of her Dower, etc. But if it be not a Rent, but a sum in gross,
it is not much material to the end of the case: For put case it be a Rent, the
same not being pleaded in Bar, the Dower is well recovered, and then when
default of payment is made, if the Wife of the Devisor shall have the whole,
was the Question: And the Court was clear of opinion, that by the suit and
Judgment in the Writ of Dower, the Wife of the Devisor had lost all the benefit
which was to come to her by the devise: For the said Rent was devised to her in
recompense of her Dower, so as it was not the meaning of the Devisor that his
Wife should have both; And therefore by the Recovery in Dower she had dismissed
her self of the Rent, and by consequence of the benefit of the penalty for not
payment of it.

CLXXXVIII. Stephens Case. Hill. 30 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
Fines levied to raise an use.
IN an Ejectione firmae the case was, that the Father covenanted with one A.
that in consideration of a Marriage to be had betwixt the Son of the Covenantor
and the Daughter of A. that he before such a day would levy a Fine, which Fine
should be to the uses of the Son and Daughter in tail for the Ioynture of the
Daughter. The Fine is levied accordingly to the uses aforesaid: The Father
dies, but in the Fine no mention is made of any marriage had: And upon that
matter the Court was clear of opinion, that notwithstanding that the marriage
was not accomplished, yet the estate tail was well enough executed in the Son
and Daughter, for the Fine without any consideration does carry the uses, but
without a Fine such a consideration would not raise such an use without
accomplishment of the marriage, for the consideration executed ought to produce
the use. But in this case the uses are perfected by the Fine, and A. upon the
matter might have had covenant against the Father to have the Fine before the
marriage.

CLXXXIX. Billford and Foxes Case. Mich. 30 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
BIllford brought an Action of Debt against Fox and his Wife, Executrix of one
A. her former Husband, Debt.
process continued against them till the Exigent, upon which the Husband
appeared, and put in a supersedeas for himself only, 1 Cro. 118.
without making mention of his Wife, and the case being moved to the Justices,
they demanded of the Prothonotaries what was to be done, for the same is
practice and a dangerous case for example. And it was answered by the
Prothonotaries, that the Court cannot remedy it, for now by the Supesedeas the
Husband is sine die, for he shall not be driven to answer without his Wife, as
this case is, and he is impleaded, as in the right of his Wife, and therefore
the Wife shall be waived, Supersedeas by the Husband is not good for the Wife.
and the Husband discharged. See the Book of Entries 187. Debt against the
Husband and Wife, and process continued until the Exigent, the Husband rendered
himself, and the Wife was waive, and Judgment given, quia videbatur
Justiciariis hic that the Husband absque praefata uxore sua respondere non
potuit, and ratoni dissonum sit, ipsum in Curia hic, cum in eadem loquela
respondere non potuit, ulterius detineri, ideo eat inde sine die. And so see 43
E. 3. 18. Detinue against the Husband and Wife, the Wife is waive, and the
Husband rendered himself at the Exigent. And the point of the Action was upon a
bailment to the Wife, dum sola suit, and the Husband was sine die, for he could
not answer in such case without the Wife. But at the last the Justices advised
thereof, and gave order that the Supersedeas should by stayed without recording
the appearance of the Husband. And by Anthrobus one of the Attorneys of the
Court, that was the case of the Lady Malory and her Husband, who were sued in
an Action of Debt, and process continued against them till the Exigent, upon
which the Husband appeared and put in a Supersedeas for himself, without
speaking of his Wife; and his Supersedeas was not allowed, but process
continued until Out-lawry.

CXC. The Queen against the Bishop of Canterbury and others. Hill. 30 Eliz. In
the Common Pleas.
THe Queen brought a Quare Impedit against the Archbishop of Canterbury, the
Bishop of Chichester, and the Incumbent: And counted, Quare Impedit.
that Ashburnham was seized of the Advowson, and that he was outlawed in an
Action personal at the suit of such a one, and showed the whole Out-lawry
certain. And Exception was taken to the Count, because in the setting down of
the Out-lawry, the process is alleged to be returned by the Sheriff, but the
name of the Sheriff is not there expressed. As to that, it was agreed by the
Court that the truth is, that it is provided by the Statute of 12 E 2. cap. 5.
That the Sheriffs in their returns put their names to the said Returns; but it
is not requisite so to plead it, for the omitting thereof does not make the
Return void, but the Sheriff shall be amerced.

Another matter was objected, for that whereas the Patron had pleaded one plea,
and the Incumbent the same plea by himself in Bar. The Queen demurred in Law in
this manner, quoad seperalia placita per dictos, 1 Cro. 140. Dyer 181, 182.
Ante 124.
etc. seperaliter placitat. etc. Dicta Domina Regina necesse non habet, nec per
legem terrae tenetur respondere: And the Court was clear of opinion, that the
Demurrer ought to have been several, upon the plea of the Patron by it self,
and upon the plea of the Incumbent by it self.

CXCI. Mallet and Ferrers Case. Hill. 30 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
IN Trespass of Battery; the parties were at Issue upon not guilty, Damages
increased of a Maim by the Court.
and at the Nisi prius it appeared, that the Thumb of the right hand of the
Plaintiff was clear cut off, and so maimed; And it was found for the Plaintiff,
and damages taxed to forty pounds, and now the party came in person into Court,
and prayed, in respect of the heinousness of the Maim, that the Court would
increase the damages; Dyer 105. 1 Cro. 223. 544. Sty. 310, 311.
which damages, upon great consideration had, were made one hundred pounds, and
Judgment given accordingly. See that the cutting off any of the Fingers is a
Maim, 28 E. 3. 54. by Stone; and as for the damages further assessed by the
Court, than the damages taxed by the Jury, See Book of Entries, 46. 8 H. 4.
135. 39 E. 3. 20.

CXCII. Atkins and Hales Case. Hill. 30 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
RIchard Atkins of Lincoln's Inn brought a Writ of Forger of false Faits against
Hale of Gloucester, and counted upon the Forger of an Indenture, Forger of
false faits.
in quo continetur quod quidam Abbas Monasterii de Gloucester Demisit Situm
Manerii de R. and terras dominicales, etc. The Defendant pleaded, Not guilty.
And it was given in evidence on the Plaintiffs part, a Lease supposed to be
made and forged; containing that the said Abbot leased the said Site and all
the demesne Lands of the said Manor, exceptis duobus seperalibus clausuris
inde, etc. vocat. etc. And it was moved, if this Evidence does not maintain the
Issue. And it was holden by the whole Court, that the Evidence was good enough,
for it is not necessary to construe terras Dominicales, omnes terras
Dominicales, for the Lands not excepted are terrae Dominicales, and so the
Count is satisfied by that Evidence, etc.

CXCIII. Chamberlain and Stauntons Case. Hill. 30 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
CHamberlain brought Debt upon an Obligation against Staunton, and upon non est
factum, Deeds, and sealing of them. Owen 95.
the Jury found this special matter, that the Defendant subscribed and sealed
the said Obligation, and cast it upon a certain Table, and the Plaintiff took
it without any other delivery, or any other thing amounting to a delivery. And
the Court was clear of opinion, that upon that matter the Jury had found
against the Plaintiff, and it is not like the case which was here lately
adjudged, that the Obligor subscribed and sealed the Obligation, and cast it
upon a Table, saying these words, this will serve, the same was held to be a
good delivery, for here is a circumstance, the speaking of these words, by
which the Will of the Obligor appears, that it shall be his deed.

CXCIV. Oldfield and Wilmers Case. Hill. 30 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
Arbitrament. Postea. 304.
IN Debt upon an Obligation, the Defendant pleaded, that the Obligation was
endorced with condition, that the Defendant should stand to the Award of I.S.
etc. who awarded, that the Defendant should pay to the Plaintiff at such a day
100 l. or should find two sufficient Sureties to be bound with him to the
Plaintiff to pay the said 100 l. to the Plaintiff, by twenty pound a year,
until the whole sum be paid: And pleads further, that he had performed the said
Award. The Plaintiff by Replication says, that the Defendant has not paid
unto him the said one hundred pounds, and so in that assigned the breach of the
Award, and upon the Replication the Defendant does demur in Law, because by the
pretense of the Award, the Defendant had election either to pay the one hundred
pounds at the day, or to find two Sureties for the payment of it by twenty
pounds per annum, etc. for so is the Award in the disjunctive. But the Court
was clear of opinion, that the Replication was good, for although that the
Award be set down and conceived in words disjunctive, yet in Law and in
substance it is single, for as to the finding of Suretis the Award is void, and
so nothing is awarded but the payment of the one hundred pounds at the day, 1
Cro. 4.
to which the Plaintiff in his Replication has fully answered: And Judgment
was given for the Plaintiff.

CXCV. The Lord Dudley and Lacyes Case. Hill. 30 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
Audita querela.
THe Lord Dudley brought an Audita querela against Lacy, and upon it a Scire
facias against the same party; And at the day it was moved by the Counsel of
Lacy, that in as much as no execution was sued against the person of the Lord
upon the Statute Merchant in which the said Lord was bound to the said Lacy, so
as he was not in prison, a Scire facias ought not to issue, but a Venire
facias. And the Court was clear of opinion, That it is at the election of the
party grieved, which of them he will sue, scil. a Scire facias, or a Venire
facias. See 15 E. 4. 5. by Cook, Scire facias and Venire facias are all one in
effect: Another matter was moved on the part of Lacy; 1 Cro. 208, 384.
That this Audita Querela ought to be sued in the Chancery and not in the
Common Pleas. But the Court was clear of opinion, that the party might sue in
which of the Courts he would. See 16 Eliz. Dyer 332. An Audita Querela upon a
Statute Merchant directed to the Justices of the Common Pleas; but upon a
Statute Staple, the Suit shall be in the Chancery by Audita Querela directed to
the Chancellor, or by Scire facias directed to the Sheriff, quod sit in
Cancellaria, etc.

CXCVI. Askew and the Earl of Lincolns Case. Hill. 30 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
ASkew was bound to the Earl of Lincoln in a Statute Staple, Audita querela.
the Earl sued execution, by which Askew was put in prison; and now the friends
of Askew offered the money in Court, and cast an Audita Querela for Askew, and
prayed he might be bailed, and the money remain in Court till the Audita Querela
determined. But the Earl presently demanded the money to be delivered to him,
but the Court denied it, and commanded the Prothonotaries to keep the money,
until the Audita Querela were determined: And let Askew to bail for the costs
of suit.

CXCVII. Ward and Blunts Case. Trin. 31. Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
WArd brought an Action of Trover and Conversion against Blunt of forty loads
of Corn: Trover and Conversion.
as unto twenty loads the Defendant pleaded not guilty, and as to the residue a
special plea, upon which the Plaintiff did demur in Law, and it was adjudged
for the Plaintiff, upon which issued a Writ of Enquiry of Damages, which is
returned: It was moved, that the Writ of Enquiry of Damages ought not to have
issued forth, for the Issue does yet depend untryed, and the Book of 34 H. 6.
1. was vouched, and there the case was, that in Trespass against many, one of
them made default after a plea pleaded; Now a Writ of Enquiry of Damages shall
be awarded, but shall not issue forth until the plea of the others be tried;
and if the Issue be tried for the Plaintiff, then the Enquest who tried the
Issue shall assess damages for the whole, and if for the Defendant against the
Plaintiff, then the Writ which was awarded to issue forth. See 44 E. 3. 7.
Cook, It is in the discretion of the Court, to award such Writ or not, which
Wray granted, but it is usual here to grant the Writ presently. Gaudy, The case
in 39 H. 6. is not like this case, for in this case the Trespass is divided,
and as it were apportioned in twenty loads, and twenty loads, but in the other
case not.

CXCVIII. Smith and Bustards Case. Trin. 31 Eliz. Rot. 666.
IN an Ejectione firmae it was found by special verdict, that one S. was seized
of Lands, and leased the same to F. for 31 years, 10 Co. 129.
yiedling and paying twenty pounds per annum at the Font-stone in the Temple
Church (the Land it self lying in Essex) upon the Feasts of the Annunciation of
our Lady and St Michael, or within twelve days after either of the said Feasts,
by even portions, upon condition, that if the said Rent or any part thereof be
unpaid by the said space of twelve days, Proxime post aliquod festorum vel
dierum solutionis inde, that then it should be lawful for the Lessor to
re-enter. T. assigned his interest to Bustard the Defendant, at Michaelmas the
Rent is behind, and the twelfth day after the Lessor demanded the Rent at the
Temple Church, and for not payment thereof re-entred. Dyer 142.
Towse, The re-entry of the Lessor was not lawful, for by the said Reservation
the Rent was not due until the twelfth day after Michaelmas, for before that he
cannot have an Action of Debt, or distrein for it; Conditions expounded
liberally for the party who is to perform it.
and these words (dierum solutionis) are greatly material, for conditions are
odious in Law, and if the words thereof be doubtful, they shall be construed
for the avail of him who is bound by it. As in the case of 28 H. 8. 17. If I be
bound to you upon condition, to pay to you before the Feast of St. Thomas
twenty pounds, if there be in one year two Feasts of St. Thomas, the latter
Feast shall be my day of payment. Wray, This Rent is not due until the last day
of the twelve days, for neither debt or distress lies for it, then the day of
payment mentioned in the condition ought to be the last day of the last twelve
days, and dict. spatium shall be construed the same number of days, and not the
same days. 4 Len. 91.
And at last it was resolved and adjudged, that the entry of the Lessor was not
congeable, but he ought to expect the latter day of the twelve days.

CXCIX. Sir George Farmer and Brooks Case. Trin. 31. Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
IN an Action upon the Case the Plaintiff declared, that time out of mind,
Prescription. Owen 67. 1 Cro. 203. 8 Co. 125.
etc. there had been a Manor called Tocester, and also there had been there a
Town called Tocester, and that all the Messuages, Lands and Tenements within
the said Town had been holden of the said Manor, and that he is Lord of the
said Manor, and that he, and all those whose estate he has in the said Manor,
have used to have a Bake-house, and a Baker, to bake white bread and house
bread for all the Inhabitants and Passengers there, which bread has been of a
reasonable Assize and price, and sufficient for all the Inhabitants and
Passengers there (but does not say wholesome) and that time out of mind, etc. no
person had or used any Bake-house there, but by the appointment of the said
Lord of the Manor for the time being: But that now the Defendant had erected a
Bake-house unto the Nuisance of the Plaintiff: The Defendane showed, that at the
time he had set up his Bake-house, there were three Bakers there; and showed,
how that he was Apprentice to the Trade, and that at the time, he set up the
said Bake-house for the benefit of all persons, as it was lawful for him to do.
Morgan, The matter only is, if this prescription made by the Plaintiff be good
or not: It is to be considered, if all prescriptions at the Common Law are one,
and if all prescriptions be guided by one rule and line: And I conceive, that
prescription at the Common Law is but one: And there are two points in
prescriptions, Usage and Reasonableness, but they are not guided by one line,
for some prescriptions are against strangers, and then there ought to be
consideration and recompense: Some prescriptions against privies, as between
Lord and Tenant, for there the Tenure is sufficient, and volenti non fit
injuria. For the first, see 5 H. 7. 9. where in Trespass the Defendant does
justify, that the place where, is his Freehold, and that he had a Foldage,
and that he, and all those whose estate he has, etc. have used, that if any
man depasture his Sheep with the Sheep of the Defendant for the day time, that
it was lawful at night to take all the Sheep and put them in his fold all the
night, and in the morning to put them out, and the same was holden a good
prescription, for which the Plaintiff traversed the prescription: And for the
other see 11 H 7. 13, 14. 21 H 7. 40. betwixt Lord and Tenant, that every
Tenant for every pound-breach should forfeit three pounds; and see the Prior of
Dunstables case, 11 H. 6. 19. Br. prescription 98. The Prior declared, that he
and his Predecessors time out of mind, etc. had had a Market in D. every week
one day, and that Butchers and others, who sold victuals, should sell the same
in the high street upon stalls of the Prior to them assigned, and that the
Prior should have one penny for every stall every day; and showed, that the
Defendant had sold in his house, whereby the Prior had lost the advantage and
profit of his stalls there. And the same was holden a good prescription. And on
the other side, the Defendant did prescribe, that he and all house-holders of
D. had used to sell in their houses: The same was holden a naughty
prescription. See 43 E. 3. 5. and see also Suit ad moliendum, upon prescription
without tenure, for peradventure he had not any Mill there before, and now it
is an ease to the neighbors: Vide Register 105. where the Writ is, Cum querens
habeat ratione Dominii sui apud R. talem libertatem quod nullus in eadem villa
uti debeat seu consuever. Officio, sine Mysterio tinctoris sine licentia ipsius
querentis, the same is good by way of prescription, but is void by way of
grant: And there the Defendant is forbid to use the trade of his Dye-house
whithin his Manor without his license, which appears upon the Writ which is
in the Register (which Register was made by the Judgment and advise of the
grave Judges of the Law) and there is remedy given for the like case, as in the
case at the Bar. And see F. B. 122. b. Sectam ad furnam, and although such a
manner of prescription should bind a stranger, yet here our case is stronger,
for the Defendant is our Tenant. And Hill. 15 Eliz. Rot. 166. an express
Judgment was given in such case for the Plaintiff. Buckley contrary, although
here be a loss to the Plaintiff, yet there is not a wrong, as the case in 12 H.
8. 3. If I have an acre of Land adjoining to your acre, and my acre is drowned,
I may make a sluice to carry away the water, and although that by so doing your
acre is drowned, yet I shall not be punished for it, because it is lawful for
me to make a trench in my own Land, and then if it be any Nuisance to you, you
may make a trench in your ground, and so carry away the water until it come to
a River or ditch. See the case 11 H. 4. of Schoolmasters 200. for it is damnum
absque injuria. And it is against the liberty of the Commonwealth, 1 Cro. 112,
113.
that liberty of Contracts be not free but restrained with Privileges to one
only: Vide 22 H. 6. 14. If one erect a Mill near to my Mill, no Action lies
against him, for it is for the use of the Kings Subjects, and God forbid, that
Bread and the baking of it should be restrained to any special person,
especially in a Market Town. And as to the case of the Prior of Dunstable, that
is not to the purpose, for there he prescribed to have a Market and the
correction of it; and the fault there is not in the usurping of a Market in
Nuisance of the Plaintiff, but because the Defendant sold meat there secretly,
so as the Plaintiff could not have the correction of it. See 22 H. 6. 14. And
it is not reasonable, that such profits be restrained and drawn from the
public good to the private commodity of any person. And he cited a case which
was ruled in the Exchequer 9 Eliz. upon an Information exhibited there by the
Burgesses of Southampton, that the King had granted to the Burgesses of
Southam. that all the sweet Wines brought within the Realm should be unladen at
Southam. only: Grant of the King void.
And it was agreed by Wray, that such a grant was not good to deprive the
Commonwealth of such a benefit, and to appropriate it to one, which might be
profitable to many: And it was further said by the Lord Wray, that if the King
will grant by his Letters Patents, that A.B. shall be of Counsel only with the
Defendant in the Chancery, and C.B. with the Plaintiffs in the Exchequer
Chamber, the same is no good grant, etc.

CC. Park against Moss and How. Trin. 31 Eliz. In the Kings Bench. Intrat.
Hill. 31 Rot. 31.
Trover and Conversion. 1 Cro. 181. More 352. 1 Roll. 893.
IN an Action upon the Case upon Trover and Conversion. The Defendant pleaded,
that one A. recovered in Debt against I. P. Executor of E. P. one hundred
pounds and twenty pounds in Damages: The Debt of the goods of the Testator, and
the Damages of the goods of the Testator, si quae fuerint, and if not, of the
goods of the Executor. Upon which A. procured a Fieri facias directed to the
Sheriff of N. who made his Warrant to the Defendants to execute the said Writ.
And before Execution I. P. died intestate, and administration was committed to
the Plaintiff, and the Defendants afterward did execution of the proper goods
of I. P. and sold them, and delivered the money to the Sheriff, which is the
same Trover and Conversion, and averred that E. P. had no other goods. The
Plaintiff by Replication said, that the Sheriff upon return of the said Writ of
Execution, returned as to the principal Debt, That the goods of the Testator
were wasted, and as to the Damages that he could not execute the Writ, quia
tarde.

Tanfield, I conceive that the false return of the Sheriff shall not make the
Defendant punishable, for they did execution secundum exigentiam brevis, and
delivered the moneys coming thereby to the Sheriff; and if they should not be
excused it should be a great inconvenience, for it is necessary that the
Sheriff have inferior Officers under him. As 37 H. 6. an Executor named in the
Will, named one to take the goods of the Testator in such a place, who did
accordingly, and afterward the Executor does refuse; yet the servant shall not
be punished for that meddling, 13 H. 7. 2. 21 H. 7. 23. Where it is said by Read
chief Justice, that if the Baily delivers the body of one who he has taken
in Execution to the Sheriff, he shall be excused, although that the Sheriff
does not return the Capias; And we have pleaded in this case, that we have
delivered the money to the Sheriff, and that is confessed by the demurrer.
Altham, I conceive that this Execution after the death of the party is not
good. For an Administrator is another person, wherefore new process shall issue
against him, as in all cases where the person is changed: 18 E. 3. If one sueth
a Certificate out of a Statute, and before execution had he dies, his
Executors shall not have execution upon that Certificate, but first they ought
to have a Scire facias: And 28 H. 8. Dyer 29. Transcript of a Fine is removed
by the Ancestor out of the Treasury into the Chancery, and comes in by Mittimus
to have execution, and the Ancestor dies before Execution; Now the Heir cannot
proceed without a new Mittimus, for he is another person. See 36 H. 8. Br.
Statute Merchant 43. and in our case here, at the time of the Execution these
are not the goods of the Executor, for he is not in esse, and it ought to
appear whose goods they are which are taken in Execution: If Lands be recovered
against the Father who dies, and the Heir be ousted by Execution, without a
Scire facias against the Heir, he shall have an Assise. And 6 E. 6. Dyer 76. is
our case. A. is condemned in Debt, and a Fieri facias is awarded, and before
execution A. dies intestate: The Sheriff levied the Debt upon the goods of the
Intestate in the hands of the Administrators; upon which the Administrators
brought Error and reversed the Execution. Tanfield, The Execution is erroneous,
but is not void, but shall stand until it be reversed by Error. And it was
holden by the whole Court, that the false return of the Sheriff should not
prejudice the Defendants: At another day it was moved again, and it was holden,
that the averment, that the goods put in Execution were the goods of the
Testator the day of the Writ of Execution sued, was a good averment without
saying, Execution against an Administrator, after the death of the Intestate of
the Intestates goods; good. Execution shall relate to the date of the Writ. 3
Cro. 106, 330 1 Roll. 893.
The day of Execution done, for the award of the Writ of Execution shall bind
all his goods against whom the Judgment was given which he had at the day of
the Writ of Execution awarded. And it was also holden, That notwithstanding the
death of the party against whom, etc. The Sheriff might do execution of the
goods of the dead in the hands of his Executors, according to the opinion of
Bryan. 16 H. 7. 6. and afterward in the principal Case Judgment was given
against the Plaintiff.

CCI. Carry and Denis Case. Trin. 31. Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
THe Case was; Upon a Latitat, the Sheriff returned, Retorn of the Sheriff.
That by virtue of the said process he had arrested the Body of the Defendant,
and that such a day after, and before the Return of the Latitat, a Habeas
Corpus came to him to bring the body immediately into the Chancery, which was
done accordingly, and there the Prisoner was discharged by the Order of the
said Court: And the same was holden a good Return, for the Sheriff is bound to
obey the Kings Writs, and to execute them, and he cannot compel the party to
put in Sureties to appear here: And the truth was, That the party was brought
before the Master of the Rolls, and he did discharge him. And per Curiam, the
same is no offense in the Court; but it was an ill act of the Master of the
Rolls: For we oftentimes have persons here upon Habeas Corpus who are also
arrested by Process out of the Exchequer, or of the Common Pleas, but we will
not discharge them before they have found Sureties for their appearance, etc.
and so the said Courts use to do reciprocally: and we cannot punish the
Sheriff, for the Hebas Corpus was first returnable before the Latitat, but the
party may have an action against the Sheriff, but we will speak with the Master
of the Rolls, etc. and afterward Baill was put in. But afterward another
Exception was taken to the Return: scil. a custodia nostra exoneratus fuit,
which might be intended as to the Cause in the Chancery only, and not for the
Cause here, for he has not alleged, that he has not alleged, That he was
committed to any other in custody, and for that cause day was given to the
Sheriff to amend his Return.

CCII. Upton and Wells Case. Trin. 31. Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
IN an Ejectione firmae by Upton against Wells, Judgment was given for the
Plaintiff, and upon the habere facias possessionem, The Sheriff retuned that in
the Execution of the said Writ he took the Plaintiff with him, and came to the
house recovered, and removed thereout a woman, and two children, which were all
the persons which upon diligent search, he could find in the said house, and
delivered to the Plaintiff peaceable possession to his thinking, and afterward
departed, and immediately after three other persons which were secretly lodged
in the said house expulsed the Plaintiff again: 2 Len. 12, 13. Latch. 165.
upon notice of which he returned again to the said house to put the Plaintiff
in full possession, but the other did resist him, so as without peril of his
life, and of them that were with him in company he could not do it. And upon
this Return the Court awarded a new Writ of execution, for that the same was no
Execution of the first Writ, and also awarded an Attachment against the parties.

CCIII. Marsh and Astreys Case. Trin. 31 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
1 Cro. 175.
MArsh brought an Action upon the Case against Astrey, and declared, That he
had procured a Writ of Entry sur disseisin against one A. and thereupon had a
summons for Lands in London, and delivered the said Summons to Astrey being
Undersheriff of the same County; virtute cujus, the said Astrey summoned the
said A. upon the Land, but notwithstanding that did not return the said
Summons. Astrey pleaded Not guilty; And it was tried in London, where the
action was brought for the Plaintiff; and it was moved by Cook in arrest of
Judgment, That here is a mis-trial, for this issue ought to be tried in the
County where the Land is, because that the cause is local; but the Exception
was not allowed, for the action is well laid in London, and so the trial there
also is good. Trial.
Another Exception was moved because the action ought to be against the Sheriff
himself, and not against the Undersheriff, for the Sheriff is the Officer to
the Court, and all Returns are in his Name; and I grant that an action for any
falsity or deceit lies against the Undersheriff, as for embesseling, rasing
of Writs, etc. but upon Non feasans, as the Case is here, the not Retorn of the
Summons, it ought to be brought against the Sheriff himself. See 41 E. 3. 12.
And if the Undersheriff take one in Execution, and suffers him to escape,
debt lies against the Sheriff himself. Another Exception was taken because the
Declaration is that the said Astrey Intendens and machinans ipsum querent. in
action sua praedict. prosequend. impedire, etc. did not retorn the said
Summons, but does not say, tunc exist. Undersheriff. Snag, contrary, If a
Baily Errant of the Sheriff, take one in Execution, and he suffer him to
escape, an action lies against the Baily himself. And that was agreed in the
Case of a Baily of Middlesex, and Sir Richard Dyer Sheriff of Huntington, and
his Undersheriff, who suffered a Prisoner to escape, and the action was
brought against the Undersheriff; for it may be the Sheriff himself had not
notice of the matter, because the Writ was delivered to the Undersheriff, and
he took a Fee for it, and therefore it is reason that he shall be punished. As
if a Clerk in an Office mis-enter any thing, he himself shall be punished, and
not the Master of the Office, because he takes a fee for it. But if the Retorn
made by the Baily be insufficient, Then the Sheriff himself shall be amerced;
but in the principal case it is clear, That the action lies against the
Undersheriff if the party will, and such was the opinion of Gaudy and Clench:
As to the other matter, because it is not alleged in the Declaration, That the
Defendant was Undersheriff at the time, the Declaration is good enough
notwithstanding that, for so are all the Presidents, and if the Defendant were
not Undersheriff the same shall come in of the other side. See 21 E. 4. 23.
And afterward in the principal Case, Judgment was given for the Plaintiff.

CCIV. Hedd and Chaloners Case. Trin. 31 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
1 Cro. 176. 2 Roll. 42. 176.
IN an Ejectione firmae by Hedd against Chaloner upon a Demise for years of Jane
Berd, It was found by especial Verdict, That William Berd was seized in fee,
and made a Feoffment to the use of himself for life, and afterward to the use
of his two Daughters Joan and Alice in fee, and died, and Joan entered into the
Land, and by Indenture by the name of Jane Berd, leased the same to the
Plaintiff for three years. And it was further found; That Joan intended in the
Feoffment, and Jane who leased, are one and the same person. Wray, It has been
agreed here upon good advice and Conference with Grammarians, that Joan and
Jane are but one Name. And Women because (Joan) seems to them a homely name,
would not be called Joan but Jane: But admit that they were several Names, Then
he and Gaudy were of opinion, it should not be good: But afterward, it was
said by Gaudy, That this action is not grounded merely upon the Indenture, but
upon the Demise, and that is the substance, and the Indenture is but to enforce
it, sci. the lease, 44 E. 3. 42. Another matter was moved here, the remainder
was limited to Joan and Alice in fee, by which they are Joint Tenants, and then
when one of them enters, the same vests the possession in them both; Then by
the demise of Joan a moiety passes only to the Plaintiff. Wray, Here the Term
is incurred, and the Plaintiff is to recover damages only, and no title at all
is found for the Defendant, and so there is no cause but that Judgment should
be given for the Plaintiff; and thereupon Judgment was given for the Plaintiff.

CCV. Read and Nashes Case. Trin. 31. Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
IN an action of Trespass by Read and his Wife against Nash, for entering into a
house called the Dayry-house; upon Not guilty pleaded, The Jury found this
special matter, Sir Richard Gresham Knight, was seized in Fee of the Mannours
of I. and S. and of diverse other Lands mentioned in his Will, and 3 Edw. 6.
devised the same to Sir Thomas Gresham his Son for life, the Remainder to the
first son of the said Sir Thomas Gresham in tail, the Remainder to the second
son, etc. the Remainder to the third son, etc. The Remainder to Sir John
Gresham his brother; Proviso, That if his Son go about or made any Alienations
or discontinuance, etc. whereby the premises cannot remain, descend and come,
in the form as was appointed by the said Will, otherwise than for Ioyntures for
any of their Wives for her life only or leases for 21. years, whereupon the old
and accustomed Rent shall be reserved, That then such person shall forfeit his
estate. Sir John Gresham dyed; Sir Thomas Gresham his son built a new House
upon the Land, and, 4 Mariae, leased to Bellingford for one and twenty years,
rendering the ancient Rent. And afterward 2 Eliz. he levied a fine of the said
Manours and of all his Lands: and 5 Eliz. he made a Iointure to his Wife in
this manner, sci. He covenanted with certain persons to stand seized to the use
of himself, and his Wife for their lives, and afterward to the use of his
Right Heirs, and afterward, 18 Eliz. he leased unto Read and his wife for one
and twenty years to begin presently (which was a year before the expiration of
the said Lease made unto Bellingford;) which Lease being expired, Read entered.
It was argued by Cook, That here, upon the words contained in the Proviso, Sir
Thomas had power and authority, not being but Tenant for life, to make a Lease
for years, or Iointure, and that upon implication of the Will, which ought to
be taken and construed according to the intent of the parties; for his meaning
was to give a power, as well as an estate, otherwise the word (otherwise)
should be void; and it is to be observed, That the parties interessed in the
said conveyance were Knights, and it is not very likely, That the said Sir
Richard Gresham did intend, that they should keep the Lands in their own
manurance as Husbandmen, but set the same to Farm for Rent. And it is great
Reason, although he wille^ that the order of his Inheritance should be
preserved, yet to make a Provision for Iointure; and it is great reason and
cause to his family to enable and make them capable of great Matches, which
should be a strengthening to his posterity, which could not be without great
Iointures, wherefore I conceive it reasonable to construe it so, That here they
have power to make Iointures for their Wives. It has been said, That no grant
can be taken by implication, as 12 E. 3. Tit. Avow. 77. Land was given to I.
and A. his wife, and to the heirs of the body of I. begotten: and if I. and A.
die without heir of their bodies, betwixt them begotten, that then it remain to
the right heirs of I. and it was holden that the second clause did not give an
estate tail to the wife, by implication being in a grant, but otherwise it is
in Case of a devise, as 13 H. 7. 17. (and there is no difference) as some
conceive (when the devise is to the heir, and when to a stranger) but these
cases concern matter of Interest, but our case concerns an Authority: And admit
that Sir Thomas has power and authority to make this lease, Then we are to
consider if the Iointure be good, for if it be, Then being made before the
Lease, Use cannot rise out of a power.
it shall take effect before, and the woman Iointress is found to be alive. But
I conceive, That this Iointure is void, and then the Lease shall stand, for an
use cannot rise out of a power, but may rise out of an estate of the Testator,
and out of his Will, 19 H. 6. A man devises, That his Executors shall sell his
reversion, and they sell by Word, it is a good Sale, for now the Reversion
passes by the Will. But an use cannot be raised out of an use, and a man
cannot bargain, and sell Land to another use than of the Bargainee. And it is
like unto the case of 10 E. 4, 5. The disseisee does release unto the disseisor
rendering Rent, the render is void, for a rent cannot issue out of a right, so
an use cannot be out of a Release by the disseisee, for such release to such
purpose shall not enure as an Entry and Feoffment: Also here after that
conveyance Sir Thomas has built and erected a New house, and no new Rent is
reserved upon it, and therefore here it is not the ancient Rent, for part of
the sum is going out of the new house. But as to that, It was said by the
Justices, do not speak to that, for it appears that the Rent is well enough
reserved. Another matter was moved for that, That a year before the Expiration
of the Lease made to Billington, this Lease was made to Re^d for 21 years to
begin presently from the date of it; although by the same authority he cannot
make Leases in Reversion, for then he might charge the Inheritance in
infinitum. But yet such a Lease as here is he might make well enough, for this
Lease is to begin presently, and so no charge to him in the Reversion, as in
the Case betwixt Fox and Colliers, upon the Statute of 1 Eliz. A Bishop makes a
Lease for three years before the Expiration of a former Lease, to begin
presently, It was holden a good Lease to bind the Successor, for the
Inheritance of the Bishop is not charged above one and twenty years in toto.
But if a Bishop make a Lease for years, and afterward makes a Lease for three
lives, the same is not good, 8 Eliz. Die. 246. Tenant in tail leaseth to begin
at Michaelmas next ensuing, for twenty years, it is a good Lease by the Statute
of 32 H. 8. so is a lease for 10 years, and after for eleven years, and yet the
Statutes are in the Negative, but this power in our Case is in the Affirmative;
and the Inheritance is not charged in the whole with more than one and twenty
years.

CCVI. Kinnersly and Smarts Case. Trin. 31 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
(...) upon a usurious Contract. 1 Cro 155.
IN Debt upon a Bond, The Plaintiff declared, That the Bond was made in London;
The Defendant pleaded, That an usurious Contract was made betwixt the parties
at D. in Staffordshire, and that the Obligation was made for the same
contract. The Plaintiff by Replication says, that the Bond was made bona fide,
and non pro usura, and that Issue was tried in the County of Stafford, and was
found for the Plaintiff: And it was moved in arrest of Judgment, that that
Issue ought to be tried in London, where the contract was made. Gaudy
conceived, that the trial is well, As 8 E. 3. 8. In debt upon an Obligation in
London, the Defendant pleaded, that the Obligation was made by duresse at York,
the same Issue shall be tried at York. At another day the case was put more
certain, scil. that the contract was made at W. in Staffordshire, by which it
was agreed, that for a Horse and two Tun of Iron, the Plaintiff should have for
them and the forbearing of the money for such a small time fifty pounds; whereas
in truth they were but of the value of forty pounds, Trial.
and that the said Bond was made for the payment of the said fifty pounds.
Cook, The Issue is well tried, for the ground of the matter is the usurious
contract, and those of Staffordshire may better know it than they of London.
And according to this Trial it has been before adjudged. H. 28. Eliz. rot.
209. Betwixt Sybthorpe and Turner. And P. 31. Eliz. rot. 303. betwixt Pain and
Wilkenson, where the Issue was, absque hoc, that it was a corrupt agreement,
but the pleading was, ut supra. And afterward Judgment was given for the
Plaintiff.

CCVII. The Queen and Buckberds Case. Trin. 36 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
THe Queen recovered against Buckberd in a Quare Impedit; Quare Impedit. 1 Cro.
162.
and thereupon a Writ of Error was brought, and it was assigned for Error, that
the Queen, post tempus semestre, had Judgment to recover damages for the value
of the Church for half a year. Cook, The same is no Error, as it was adjudged,
7 Eliz. 236. See also 34 H. 6. 51. And these damages are not as damages, but as
a penalty inflicted upon the disturbance. See Book of Entries, 483. The King in
a Quare Impedit counted to his damage of forty pounds, and 484. 1000 li. and
although, tempus semestre transierit, yet the King shall recover damages, but
the value of the Church for half a year, for the King at all times may present
in his own right; for nullum tempus occurrit Regi. Damages in a Quare Impedit
where by King, and e contra.
At another day it was moved by Fenner Sergeant, and he conceived, that here
the Queen is not to recover damages, for she does not present in her own right,
for the Incumbent had two Benefices without Qualifications, and therefore the
first was void, and the Lapse encurred, and therefore the Queen did present in
the right of the Crown, and so is not verus Patronus. 14 E. 3. Quare Impedit
54. The King shall not recover damages, although he count of damages, 3 H. 6.
Damages 17. And as to the case of 7 Eliz. it does not appear there, that the
King did present by reason of his Prerogative, and he showed diverse Presidents,
that the King shall not recover damages in such case. P. 7. H. 5. rot. 402. 2
H. 6. rot. 316. For the Statute was intended to give damages to the very
Patron, and not otherwise. Cook, Where the King presents by Lapse he is verus
Patronus hac vice, as Grantee of the next Avoidance: Vide T.E. 1. Quare Impedit
181. The King recovered damages in the case of a Prior. Godfrey said, he had
searched the Roll of 7 Eliz. and there is more reported in the Book than is in
the Roll, for Judgment is given for the Presentee, but as for the damages, the
Court would advise of it. Gaudy, It is clear, that the Queen shall not recover
double damages, Where only single damages.
for she cannot lose her presentment, quia nullum tempus occurrit, and because
eo quod tempus semestre transierit, but she shall have single damages, for they
are given for the wrong and disturbance, and not for the presentment; and
therefore the damages are well awarded. Wray, If the King be not within one
part of the Statute (as it is agreed as to the double damages) it is hard that
he be within the other branch.

Popham Attorney general, The Queen ought to recover damages, but only single
damages, but not double damages; and the words of the Statute are general,
therefore the Queen shall have the benefit of it, and of all Statutes made for
the benefit of the Subjects, the King shall take advantage: The Statute of
Gloucester gives damages in a Writ of Cosinage, Ai^ and Besail, and the King
brings an Action upon the seisin of his Ancestors, he shall recover damages,
and in construction of Statutes, the opinions of them which were next to the
making of them is to be much respected: Vide 19 E. 2. Rot. 90, 19 E. 1. Rot.
255, 231, 136. And always the King counts to his damage, etc. and that should
be in vain, if he should not recover damages: And as to the Presidents showed
to the contrary, that was the default of those Clerks which the King had
presented; and when in a Quare Impedit the King had prevailed, they contented
themselves with the Incumbency without regard of the damages: But if damages be
not to be given, yet the Judgment to recover the presentment is not erroneous.
And the Judgment only as to the giving of damages shall be reversed, and the
Defendant in the Quare Impedit here shall not assign the same for Error,
because no damages are given, 5 Co. 58.
for it is for his advantage. And always where it is found for the Queen in a
Quare Impedit, they enquire of the value of the Church, A man shall not assign
for error, that which is for his advantage.
which should be a trivolous thing, if the Queen should not recover damages.
Gaudy, Of things transitory the Queen may be disturbed, and if she be,
wherefore shall she not recover damages? but the doubt is, if the intent of the
Statute be, if the party shall have single damages in any case: And here in
this case the Judgment is one and entire, and if it be reversed in part it
shall be reversed in the whole; as in Dower, the Tenant pleads, that he is
always ready, etc. the Demandant shall have Judgment to recover her Dower, and
a Writ shall issue forth to enquire of the damages. And see also 17 E. 3. In an
Assize of Darrein presentment, the Plaintiff had Judgment to have a Writ to the
Bishop: And the Assize was taken after for the damages: And in the mean time
the Defendant brought a Writ of Error, and it was holden maintainable, for they
are several Judgments; but it is not so here, for the Entry is, Quod querens
habeat bre. Episcopo, and quia nescitur quae damna, etc. for it is one Judgment.

Wray, It is but one Statute, and therefore it shall be construed with one
construction, and it should be a strange construction, that the King should be
within one part of the Statute, and out of the other. And 34 H. 6. 3. The Kings
Attorney could not have damages, which is a great proof and authority, that the
Judgment for damages in such case is Error: The experience and usage of Law is
sufficient to interpret the same to us, and from the time of E. 3. until now,
no damages have been given in such case. Thrice this matter has been in
question, 1. 3 H. 9. and the Justices there would not give damages, 34 H. 6.
there the Council learned of the King, could not have damages for the King. And
7 Eliz. there was no damages: And whereas it has been said, that a man shall
not have a Writ of Error, where Judgment is given for his benefit, that if
Judgment be entered that the Defendant be in Misericordia, where it ought to be,
Capiatur, yet the Defendant shall have a Writ of Error. And he conceived also,
that here is but one Judgment: Clench, The first President after the making of
that Statute was, that damages were given for the King in such case; but
afterward the practice was always otherwise, and that the said Statute could
not be construed, to give in such case damages, and the reason was because the
Justices took the Law to be otherwise: And the King is not within the Statute
of 32 H. 8. of buying of Tithes, nor any Subjects who buy any title of him: And
here in our case, the Queen is not verus Patronus but has this presentment, by
Prerogative: And if title do accrue to the Bishop to present for Lapse, yet the
Patron is verus Patronus.

At another day the case was moved, and it was said by Wray, that he had
conferred with Anderson, Manwood, and Periam, who held, that the Queen could
not have damages in this case, but Periam somewhat doubted of it. Gaudy, In 22
E. 4. 46. In Dower the Demandant recovered her Dower, and damages by verdict,
and afterward for the damages the Judgment was reversed, and stood for the
Lands. Clench, It shall be reversed for all, for there is but one Judgment. And
afterward Judgment was given, and that the Queen should have a Writ to the
Bishop and damages. Popham, The Court ought not to proceed to the examination
of the Errors, without a Petition to the Queen, and that was the case of one
Mordant, where an Infant levied a Fine to the Queen, and thereupon brought a
Writ of Error, and afterward by the Resolution of all the Judges, the
proceedings thereupon were stayed. See 10 H. 4. 148. a good case.

CCVIII. Chapman and Hursts Case. Trin. 31 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
BEtwixt Chapman and Hurst, Tithes.
the Defendant did libel in the spiritual Court, for Tithes against the
Plaintiff, who came and surmised, that whereas he held certain Lands by the
Lease of Sir Ralph Sadler for term of years within such a Parish, that the now
Defendant being Farmor of the Rectory there: The Defendant, in consideration
that the Plaintiff promised and agreed to pay to the Defendant ten pounds per
annum, during the Term, for his Tithes, he promised, that the Plaintiff should
hold his said Land without Tithes, and without any suit for the same, and
thereupon prayed a Prohibition: And by Gaudy; the same is a good discharge of
the Tithes for the time, and a good Composition to have a Prohibition upon; and
it is not like unto a Covenant. See 8 E. 4. 14. by Danby.

CCIX. Kirdler and Leversages Case. Trin. 31 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
IN Avowry the case was, Avowry. 1 Cro. 241.
that A. seized of Lands leased the same at Will, rendering rent ten pounds per
annum, and afterward granted eundem redditum, by another deed to a stranger
for life, and afterward the lease at will is determined. Periam was of
opinion, that the Rent did continue; and although that the words be, eundem
redditum, yet it is not to be intended, eundem numero, sed eundem specie, so as
he shall have such a Rent, scil. ten pounds per annum: As where the King grants
to such a Town, easdem libertates quas Civitas Chester habet, it shall be
intended such Liberties, and not the same Liberties, so in the principal case:
Also he held, that a Rent at will cannot be granted for life, and therefore it
shall not be meant the same Rent: But it was afterward adjudged, that the Rent
was well granted for the life of the Grantee.

CCX. Heayes and Alleyns Case. Trin. 31 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
Cui in vita. 1 Cro. 234. Poph. 13.
HEayes brought a sur cui in vita against Alleyn. And the case was this, The
Discontinuee of a Message, had other Lands of good and indefesible title
adjoining to it, and demolisht and abated the said house, and built another
which was larger, so as part of it extended upon his own Land, to which he had
good title. And afterward the heir brought a sur cui in vita, and demanded the
house by the Name of a Message, whereas part of the house did extend into the
Land to which he had no right. And by Periam, The Writ ought to be of a
Message with an Exception of so much of the house which was erected upon the
soil of the Tenant, Demand, and the manner of it, in a writ.
as demand of a Message except a Chamber: And it was argued by Yelverton, That
the Writ ought to abate, for if the Demandant shall have Judgment according to
his Writ, then it shall be entered quod petens recuperet Messuagium, which
should be Erroneous, for it appears by the verdict it self, that the
demandant has not title to part of it; and therefore he ought to have demanded
it specially 5 H. 7. 9. parcel of Land, containing 10 Feet. 16 E. 3. Br.
Mortdanc. of a piece of Land containing so much in breadth, and so much in
length. And the moyetie of two parts of a Message, and 33 E. 3. br. Entry 8.
a Disseisor of a Marsh ground made Meadow of it; Now in a Writ of Entry it
shall be demanded for Meadow. Drue Sergeant contrary, and he confessed the
Cases put before, and that every thing shall be demanded by Writ in such sort,
as it is at the time of the action brought: as a Writ of Dower is brought of
two Mills, whereas during the Coverture they were but 2 Tofts; but at the day
of the Writ brought, Mills; and therefore shall be demanded by the name of
Mills, 14 H. 4. 33. Dower 21. 13 H. 4. 33. 175. 1 H. 5. 11. Walmesly, part of a
Msseuage may be demanded by the Name of a Message: and if a House descend to
two Coparceners, if they make partition that one of them shall have the upper
Chamber, and the other the lower, here if they be disseised, they shall have
several Assisses, and each of them shall make his plaint of a Message; and by
him a Chamber may be demanded by the name of a house. And afterward the Writ
was awarded good, but a special Judgment was given, ita quod querens recuperet
Messuagium praedict. viz. so many feet in length, and so many in breadth,
according to that which was found by the Verdict.

CCXI. Degory and Roes Case. Trin. 31 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
Debt.
DEgory brought Debt upon an Obligation against Roe, as heir to his Ancestor,
The defendant pleaded, That his Ancestor by his deed did covenant with Sir W.
Winter, and A. Marsh, to stand seized to the use of himself for life, and
afterward to the use of the Defendant and his heirs, and so he had nothing by
descent. The Plaintiff replicando said, non convenit; and it was found by
special verdict That such a deed of Covenant was made by the Ancestor of the
Defendant, but the first use was limited to the Covenantor and his wife, for
their Lives, etc. And that he delivered the same to I. S. as his deed, to the
use of the said Sir W. VVinter, and the said Marsh, if the said Sir W. VVinter
would agree to the same, and take the charge of it upon him, and if he will not
agree, That then it should not be his deed, and further found, That Sir W.
Winter died before any agreement; and it was moved by Periam, If the same be
presently the Deed of the Ancestor, or if it do not take effect till the
condition be performed, sci. until Sir W. Winter has agreed to it. See 14. H.
8. 17, 18, 19, 20, 23. And by Walmesly, Deeds, when to take effect.
The same is not the Deed of the Ancestor until Sir William has agreed; But by
Anderson and Periam, although Sir William Winter does not agree to it, yet it
is the deed of Roe; for although a deed be upon condition, ut supra, yet
because he delivered it as his deed, and the Condition is subsequent to it, It
shall be taken for his deed, and the condition after shall be void, because
repugnant: For although that in Estates limited to men, the estate may be
precedent, and the condition subsequent, and the not performance of the
condition may destroy the estate, for the estate is always subject to the
condition, yet it is not so in Deeds, for being once the deed of the party, it
can never cease to be his deed, after it is once delivered as his deed, Owen,
Although the same be the deed of the party, yet it is not well pleaded; and he
conceived the issue is found against him, for the Covenant is pleaded, to stand
seized unto the use of himself for life, the Remainder over: To which the
Plaintiff Replicando says, non convenit, so as the Issue is, if any such Deed
of Covenant was, and the Jury find, That the Covenant was to stand seized to
the use of himself, and his wife, etc. so as it is not such a Deed as the
Defendant has pleaded, for other estates are limited by it, and therefore it
shall not be intended the same Deed. Periam, The same is not material, for the
substance of the Plea is, Nothing by descent, etc. and it was adjourned.

CCXII. The Scholars of All Souls in Oxford, and Tamworths Case. Trin. 31 Eliz.
In the Common Pleas.
IN a Writ of Night by the College of All Souls in Oxford against Tamworth:
Writ of Right 1 Cro. 232.
the Writ was, Quod clamat tenere de nobis in liberam puram et perpetuam
Elemosinam. And exeception was taken to it, because it ought to be in liberam
Eleemosinam, sans pura and perpetua, also it ought to be Eleemosina, with a
Double e, and not Elemosina, with a single e, but the exception was not
allowed. For as to the first Exception, it is but surplusage, and as to the
other, It is the common course. Another exception was taken to the Writ,
because the words are quod clamat esse jus and haereditatem suam, without
saying in jure Collegii. Anderson, The Writ is good enough. If a Parson plead
that he is seized, he shall say in jure Ecclesiae, for he has two capacities,
and without such words here shall be intended seized in his own Right: But if
an Abbot plead that he was seized, there needs not such words, for he has no
other capacity; so of Dean and Chapter, Mayor and Comminalty: And afterward,
the Writ was awarded good, and that the Tenant should answer over, etc. See
Book Entries 236, 237. It was also moved, If the College shall count of its
seisin within 30 years, because that the Corporation never dies, and then if he
count of its own possession, the same is without limitation. And it was holden,
that if the Guardian of the College which now is, was ever seized, he ought to
count upon a seisin within thirty years; But upon the seisin of his Predecessor
he ought to count of a seisin within 60 years as another common person; for the
change of the Test of such a seisin, is as the dying seized, and descent of a
common person.

CCXIII. The Lord Buckhurst and the Bishop of Winchesters Case. Trin. 31 Eliz.
In Communi Banco.
Quare Impedit.
THe Lord Buckhurst brought a Quare Impedit against the Bishop of Winc. and
counted, that he was seized of the Manor of D. to which the Advowson was
appendant, and that the said Church became void, and that he presented Maurice
Sackvil his Clark. The Defendant pleaded, that he was seized of the said
Advowson, as in gross, and presented one Maurice Sackvil, absque hoc, that the
Advowson was appendant. It was moved, that the Defendant ought to traverse the
Presentment, and not the Appendancy, especially as the cause is here, where
they both present one and the same person: To which it was said, that that does
not appear, for the Defendant has pleaded, that he presented Maurice Sackvil,
but does not say, praedict, Maurice Sackvil, so as it may be he is not the same
person, but another. See 10 H. 7. 27. The Traverse is well taken; contrary
where the Plaintiff declares of an Advowson in gross, and that he to the same
presented, and the Defendant pleads, that he is seized of such a Manor to
which the Advowson is appendant, etc. without that, that the Advowson is in
gross, there he shall traverse the presentment, for the presentment shall make
it in gross. See 13 H. 8. 12.

CCXIV. Jennings and Winches Case. Trin. 32 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
Assumpsit.
IN an Action upon the Case by Jennings against Winch. The Plaintiff declared
upon an Assumpsit by the Defendant, 1 Maii. 32. Eliz. and counted upon a
Mutuatus for twenty shillings, and an Indebitatus for four pounds. The
Defendant pleaded, that he being endebted to the Plaintiff in five pounds, and
W. S. in another five pounds, they became bounden to the Plaintiff in twenty
pounds for the payment of ten pounds in satisfaction of the said sum of five
pounds, and five pounds, and that the Obligation was sealed before the day of
the Assumpsit supposed, and added, that the same is the same debt, and that the
Obligation was made for the same debt. And by the opinion of the whole Court,
the same cannot be a good plea, for an Obligation cannot deraign a Contract or
an Assumpsit afterward made. And the truth of the matter was, that the
Obligation was made after the Assumpsit, although that the Plaintiff declared
of an Assumpsit made after. And in that case it was holden, that the Defendant
might plead the special matter; that the Obligation was made after the said
Assumpsit, absque hoc, that he Assumpsit, etc.

CCXV. Hawkins and Lawse Case. Trin. 32 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
Debt.
HAwkins brought an Action of Debt against Lawse, Executor of one A. for Rent
reserved upon a Lease for years made to the Testator. 3 Cro. 62, 63.
The Defendant pleaded, fully administered, and upon the Evidence it appeared,
that the said A. made the Defendant his Executor, and that he did meddle with
the possession of diverse goods of the Testaor, and so administered, and
afterward ^^^used in Court; and that the Administration was afterward
committed to one B. and that the Inventory of the goods of the Testator came to
one thousand pounds: And it was given in Evidence for the Defendant, that he
himself had paid certain debts, and that diverse persons have recovered against
the Administrator diverse sums of money amounting to one thousand pounds, and
ultra; And it was moved, if that evidence did maintain the Issue for the
Defendant, because that the Defendant had pleaded, plene adminstravit, which
implies an Administration by himself. And now upon the Evidence it appears,
that the greatest part of the goods of the Testator were administered by the
Administrator.

Periam, If that Administrator (who in truth is but a stranger) pay any debts
with the goods of the Testator without commandment of the Executor, the same is
not an Administration, Administration.
and the Executor cannot give such matter in Evidence, to prove his plea of
fully administered. Drew Sergeant, If an Executor of his own wrong, 3 Cro. 62,
63.
meddle with the goods of the Testator, and afterward the Administrator meddle
with the residue and administer them; In Debt against the Executor, who pleads
fully administered, if he can prove that he himself has administered part, and
the Administrator the Residue, the same is good Evidence to maintain his Issue.
Periam, It may be so there, but here in our case, the Defendant is the very
Executor, and he has administered, in which case afterward he cannot refuse;
and so the Administration is not well committed, and is granted without cause;
and he to whom the Administration is committed is a mere stranger, and what he
did was without warrant; and therefore it is no Administration to prove the
Issue: And then the whole matter by direction of the Court was found by special
verdict. And by Periam, in this case an Action may be brought, either against
the Executor of his own wrong, or the Administrator, but not against both of
them jointly. See 21 H. 6. 8. by Yelverton and Portington. Periam, If the
Testator mortgages a Lease for years and dies, and the Executors redeem it with
their own monyes, the said Lease shall be Assets in their hands, for so much as
the same is worth, above the sum which they have paid for the redemption of it.

CCXVI. Ivory and Fryes Case. Trin. 32 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
IT was ruled by the whole Court in this case: That if A. make B. his Executor,
and B. makes C. his Executor and dies, and a Debt is due to A. the first
Testator. If C. bring an Action of Debt for the said Debt, as Executor to B.
the Writ shall abate: It was moved, if an Infant within the age of one and
twenty years be made Executor, and administration is committed, durante minore
aetate, in whose name the Action shall be brought, in the name of the Infant,
or the Administrator. Periam, If the Will be proved before the Administration
be committed, the Action shall be brought in the name of the Infant Executor.

CCXVII. Read and Johnsons Case. Trin. 32 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
IN an Action upon the Case betwixt Read and Johnson, Assumpsit.
the Plaintiff declared that where the Defendant was endebted to him, 1 Cro.
242.
he assumed to pay it: And upon Non Assumpsit pleaded, this special matter was
found, that the Plaintiff ^ased unto the Defendant certain Lands for years,
rendering rent eight pounds per annum, and that the said Rent was behind for
three years, and that the Defendant was not otherwise endebted to the
Plaintiff, nor made any other promise but the contract upon the Reservation of
the Rent: And by the clear opinion of the whole Court, the Action does not lie,
because he has a proper Action, scil. an Action of Debt, in which no wager of
Law lies.

CCXVIII. Wright and the Bishop of Norwiches Case. Trin. 32 Eliz. In the Common
Pleas
Quare Impedit. Die. 348. 360.
IN a Quare Impedit betwixt Wright and the Bishop of Norwich, it was moved, if
the King has title to present for Lapse, and presents; and his Clerk is
admitted and instituted, but not inducted, and dies before Induction; If now
the King shall present for the said Lapse, because the Church was not full
against the King. And the Justices were all clear of opinion, that the King
might repeal such presentment before induction: And as to the principal matter,
the Court seemed to incline, that the King might present again.

CCXIX. Whiskon and Cleytons Case. Mich. 30 and 31 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
Intrat. Trin. 30 Eliz. Rot. 1160.
Devises.
IN an Ejectione firmae, upon a special verdict found, the case was this, That
C. was seized in Fee, and devised the same to Solomon Whiskon his God-son after
the death of his Wife; and if he fail, then he willed all his part to the
discretion of his Father, and died; Solomon survived, Post. 283.
the Father being dead before without any disposition of the Land. Gaudy was of
opinion, that upon those words, that the Father had a Fee-simple, as, I will
that my Lands shall be at the disposition of I. S. by these words, I. S. has a
Fee-simple, quod Periam concessit; and they amount to as much as, I will my
Land to I. S. to give and sell at his pleasure: And by Windham and Periam,
there is no difference where the Devise is, that I. S. shall do with the Land
at his discretion, and the devise thereof to I. S. to do with it at his
discretion.

CCXX. Mich. 31 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
A leased to B. for years, and before the expiration of the said Term leased
the same by Indenture to a stranger to begin presently, and the first Lessee
committed Wast. A. brought an Action of Wast against the second Lessee, and
declared upon a Lease made for years without speaking of the Indenture. And
Gaudy Sergeant demanded the opinion of the Court, if the Defendant might safely
plead no Wast? And they conceived, that it should be dangerous so to do. Then
it was demanded, if the Defendant plead, that the Plaintiff had nothing tempore
dimissionis, whereof he had counted, if the Plaintiff might estop the Defendant
by the Indenture, although he had not counted upon it, and if such Replication
be not a departure. And it seemed to Periam, and Leonard, Custos brevium, that
it was not, for it is not contrary to the Declaration, but rather does enforce
the Declaration.

CCXXI. Mich. 31 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
WAlmesley Sergeant demanded the opinion of the Court upon this matter. Land is
given to Husband and Wife in special tail (during the Coverture) they have
issue, the Husband is attainted of Treason and dies, the Wife continues in as
Tenant in tail, the issue is restored by Parliament, and made inheritable to
his Father, saving unto the King all advantages which were devolded unto him by
the Attainder of his Father, the Wife dies. And he conceived, that the issue
was inheritable, for the Attainder which disturbed the inheritance is removed,
and the blood is restored, and nothing can accrue to the King, for the Father
had not any estate forfeitable, but all the estate did survive to the Wife, not
impeachable by the said Attainder. And when the Wife dies, then is the Issue
capable to enherit the estate tail. Windham and Rhodes, prima facie, thought
the contrary, yet they agreed, that if the Wife had suffered a common Recovery,
the some had bound the King.

CCXXII. Mich. 31 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
IN an Action upon the Case the Plaintiff declared, Assumpsit.
that he had delivered to the Defendant, diversa bona ad valentiam 10 li. the
Defendant in consideration thereof did promise to pay to the Plaintiff the Debt
owing, pro bonis praedictis, and did not show, that the Defendant bought the
said goods of the Plaintiff, and so it does not appear that there was any Debt;
and then a promise to pay it, is merely void, which was agreed by the whole
Court.

CCXXIII. Seaman and Brownings Case. Mich. 31 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
GEorge Seaman brought Debt upon a Bond against W. Browning and others,
Executors of one Marshal; the condition was, Debt.
that where the said Marshal had sold certain Lands to the Plaintiff, if the
said Plaintiff peaceably and quietly enjoy the said Lands against the said
Marshal, etc. and assigned the breach in this, that the said Marshal had entered
upon him, and cut down five Elms there, upon which the parties were at issue;
And it was found, that A. servant of the said Marshal, by commandment of his
said Master, had entered and cut, etc. in the presence of his said Master, and
by his commandment, for he is a principal Trespassor: And it was so holden by
the Court.

CCXXIV. Mich. 31 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
IF the Kings Tenant by Knights service dies, his Heir within age, 8 Co. 172.
and upon Office found the King seiseth the Body and Land, yet the Heir during
the possession of the King may sell the Lands by Deed enrolled, or make a Lease
of such Land, and the same shall bind the Heir notwithstanding the possession
of the King; but if he makes a Feoffment in Fee, it is utterly void, for the
same is an intrusion upon the possession of the King; but where the King by
Office found is entitled to the Inheritance, as that his Tenant dies without
Heir, whereas it is false, for which the King seiseth, in such case the Tenant
of the King, before his Ouster le main, cannot make a Lease for years, or sell
the Land by Deed enrolled: The Case depended in London before the Judges of the
Sheriffs Court. The King, by color of a false Office, which does falsely
entitle him to the Inheritance, is seized of certain Land; he who has right,
leased the same for years by Deed indented; and then an Ouster le main was
sued, and he enfeoffed a stranger; And it was holden, that the Lease should not
bind the Feoffee, although it was by Deed indented, for the Feoffee is a
stranger to the Indenture, and therefore shall not be estopped by it. 18 H. 6.
22. A stranger shall not take advantage of an Estoppel, and therefore shall not
be bound by it: As if one take a Lease for years by Indenture of his own Lands,
the same shall bind him, but if he dies without Heir, it shall not bind the
Lord in point of Escheat.

CCXXV. Gibbs Case. Mich. 31 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
Trover and Conversion. 1 Cro. 861. Owen. 27.
GIbbs brought an Action upon the Case upon Trover and Conversion of a Gelding;
and the Case was, that one P. had stolen the said Horse, and sold the same unto
the Defendant in open Market, by the name of Lister, and the said false name
was entered in the Toll-book. And it was holden clear by the Court, that by that
sale the property was not altered.

CCXXVI. Mich. 31 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
Owen. 45. Hutton. 105. 1 Cro. 734. Post. 322.
TEnant in Socage leased his Lands for four years, and died, his Heir within the
age of eight years, the Mother being Guardian in Socage, leased the Land by
Indenture to the same Lessee for fourteen years; It was holden by the Court,
that in this Case the first lease is surrendered, but otherwise upon a Lease
made by Guardian by Nurture.

CCXXVII. Kimpton and Dawbenets Case. Mich. 31 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
IN Trespass, the Defendant did justify by a grant of the Land, where, etc. by
Copy: The Plaintiff by Replication says, that the Land is customary Land (ut
supra) and claimed the same by a former Copy: The Defendant by Rejoinder says,
that well and true it is, that the Lord may grant Copies in possession at his
pleasure, and also estates by Copy in Reversion, with the assent of the
Copyholder in possession, but all estates granted by Copy in Reversion without
such assent, have been void. It was argued, that this custom is not good, for
it is not reason, that the Lord in disposing of the customary possessions of
his Manor should depend upon the will of his Tenant at will; and the same is
not like to the case of Attornment, for there the Attendancy is to be respited,
which is not to be done here, for the Copyholder in possession shall continue
attendant to his Lord, notwithstanding such a grant in Reversion: And see for
the unreasonableness of the custom, 19 Eliz. 357. in Dyer, Sallfords Case: It
was moved on the other side, that the Custom was good enough; and 3 H. 6. 45.
was vouched, That every Freehold of a Manor upon alienation might surrender
his Land, etc. It was adjourned.

CCXXVIII. Marriot and Pascalls Case in a Writ of Error. Mich. 30, and 31 Eliz.
In the Exchequer-chamber.
RObert Marriot one of the Attorneys of the Court of Exchequer, Misnosmer of a
Corporation. 10 Co. 123.
brought an Ejectione firmae against Mary, Pascal, and upon Not guilty pleaded,
the Jury found a special Verdict, containing this matter; viz. That King H. 7.
the fourth year of his Reign erected and founded an Hospital, by the name of
the Master and Chaplains of the Hospital of King Henry the eighth, de le Savoy:
And afterward in the time of Queen Mary, the said Master and Chaplains being
seized, etc. leased the same to the Defendant by the name of W. Holgil Master
of the Hospital, Henrici nuper Regis Angliae septimi vocat. le Savoy and
Capellani Hosspitalis praedict. And afterward by the former name (which was in
truth their very name) leased the same to Thomas Fanshaw, who leased the same
to the Plaintiff: And if the Lease aforesaid made unto the Defendant in ^^rm
and by the name aforesaid, be a good Lease, was all the question. And this
matter was argued, and many times debated in the Exchequer, as well at the
Bench as at the Bar. And it was agreed by Clerk and Gent, Barons there, That
the said Lease made to the Defendant was utterly void by reason of the
Misnosmer. Manwood argued strongly to the contrary; and Iudment was given for
the Plaintiff, according to the opinions of the said two Barons: Upon which the
Defendant brought a Writ of Error in the Exchequer-chamber before the Lord
Chancellor, Treasurer, etc. And now this Term it was argued by Godfrey on the
part of the Defendant: Three variances have been supposed in this Lease from
the Original Foundation of the Hospital in the name of it. 1. The name of the
Foundation is the Master of the Hospital, etc. Et Capellani dict. Hospitii; So
that in the Lease rests part of the name (Capellani) as not immediately annexed
to Master, as it is in the name of the Foundation. But as to that point, the
Justices Assistants delivered Godfrey from the arguing of it, as of a variance
not material: Another variance has been objected, because that in the
Foundation the words are Hospitalis Regis H. 7. and in the Lease the words are,
Hospitalis Henrici septimi nuper Regis Angliae, so as this word (Nuper) is
Surplusage, and ex abundant. But of that matter he was also discharged, because
it is no variance in substance: But all the difficulty rested in this, that in
the Foundation the words are (de le Savoy) and in the Lease (vocat. le Savoy)
And he put the Case 4 Mar. Dyer 150. The College of Eaton was incorporated by
the name of Praepositi and Collegii regalis S. Mariae de Eaton juxta Windsor,
and a Lease is made by the name Praepositi and Sociorum Collegii regalis de
Eaton, and that was holden a void Lease: And I confess that in the names of
Corporations, we ought to resort to the Foundation of the Corporations, for the
name of a Corporation is as a name of Baptism, and ought to be as precisely
observed, but that ought to be intended in matter of substance, and not
otherwise, vide 10 Eliz. Dyer 278. The Dean and Chapter of Carlisle was
incorporated by the name of Decanus and Capitul. Ecclesiae Cathedralis Sanct.
and individuae Tri. Carl. and they make a Lease by the name, Decanus Ecclesiae
Cathedralis S. Trin. in Cant. et totum Capit. de Ecclesia praedict. And the
same was holden a good Lease, notwithstanding that variance, which is not in
substance of the name. And the Dean and Chapter of Peterborow was incorporated
by the name of Decanus et Capitul. Ecclesiae Petriburgensis, and they made a
Lease by the name Decanus et Capitulum Ecclesiae de Peterborow, and holden good
enough, because the variance was not in any matter of substance: And he cited
the Case betwixt Croft and Howel, 20 Eliz. Plow. Com. 537. The Cooks of London
were incorporated by the name of Masters, and Governors, and Commonalty of the
Mystery of Cooks, and they by the Name of Master and Wardens of the said Craft
and Mystery of Cooks made a Conveyance, and it was holden that the variance
assigned in the abundance of this word (Craft) in the Conveyance, which was not
in this Corporation, was not any material variance, but only matter of
surplusage, for (Craft) and (Mystery) are all one, and of one sense, etc. And
so in the principal Case, The Hospital de le Savoy, and the Hospital vocat. le
Savoy, sound the same, and in effect do not differ. And as it was said by the
Lord Chief Baron in his Argument in the Court of Exchequer, in this case, four
things are only to be respected in the Name of a Corporation: Post. 162, 164.
First the Name of the living persons who are the Corporation, as in our Case
the Master and Chaplains: Secondly, the house in which they are resident, and
make their abode: Thirdly, The Name of the Founder: Fourthly, the place upon
which the place of their abode is built and erected. And if these four matters
are sufficiently set down, although not formally, it is good enough. It has
been objected, That the Hospital de le Savoy, and the Hospital vocat. le Savoy,
do much differ, for de le Savoy, implies the demonstration of the Place, but
vocat. le Savoy, trencheth only to the Name, As if the Dean and Chap. de Paul's
in London, make a Lease by the Name of Dean and Chap. of St. Paul vocat.
London, so if the Master and Fellows of Trinity College; in Cambridge make a
Lease by the Name of Master and Fellows of Trinity Coll. vocat. Cambridge, such
Leases are utterly void. I do well agree those Cases, for the Dean and Chapter
is not all London, but part of London, and therefore cannot be called or said
London; and so Trinity College is but part of Cambridge, and therefore cannot
be called Cambridge; but here in our case, The Hospital is not parcel of the
Savoy, but the whole Savoy is the Hospital, and there is not any part of the
Savoy, which is not the Hospital; But if Trinity College in Cambridge make a
Lease by the Name of Master and Fellows Collegii vocat. Trinity College in
Cambridge, it is a good Lease: And he put a difference, where the word in the
Name of the Corporation, which precedes (de) is all one and of the same Nature
with the word which follows (de) and where on the contrary, as in our case, The
word which precedes (de) is Hospital, and the words which follow (de) are le
Savoy, are all one and the same thing, so as the Hospital and Savoy are all one
and the same, and therefore may be well called Le Savoy, and also (de) and
(vocat.) in construction are the same, and so our Lease is good enough: And it
is found by verdict, That this Hospital was erected upon the Manor of Savoy,
and thereupon it is now commonly called Le Savoy, without any addition of
Hospital, for as it was called Savoy before it was erected into an Hospital, so
it is also called after the Erection; and true it is that the misnaming of a
Corporation in any small thing shall abate a Writ, for there is only delay, yet
it is not of force in a Conveyance, unless the misnaming be in a point
material. Coke to the contrary, The variance from the true Name of a
Corporation which shall prejudice a Conveyance ought to be in matter of
substance, for variance in matter of form and circumstance will not hurt it,
sed parum differunt quae re concordant. And first it is to be confessed, That
the Name of a Corporation is as the Name of Baptism, which admits of no
variance, and therefore it is said 38 E. 3. 15. by Knivet, when a Man founds a
Chantry or a house, etc. it ought to bear such a Name as his Founder has given
to it, for that is its proper name. And so it has been Reported by Bendloes,
Sergeant, 4 and 5 Phi. and Mar. That it was holden for a positive Law, by all
the Judges of England, That the mistaking of the Name of a Corporation in any
matter of Substance, makes the Conveyance utterly void, for a name is given to
a Corporation upon the Foundation, and that by the same Name they shall implead
and be impleaded, but that ut idem nomen, et sub eodem nomine sint habiles ad
perquirend. and concedend. to be impleaded, and to implead, but that is to be
meant idem re, for it is not necessary, that it be idem litera, for, qui haeret
in litera haeret in Cortice, but if it be idem re with the Foundation it is
well enough. And therefore it has been adjudged, That where the College is
incorporated by the Name of Masters and Fellows Collegii St. and individ. Trin.
in Cantabrig. and they make a Lease by the Name of Collegii Trin. this is good
enough, for the word Trinity, implies, and imports St. and individ. And
therefore such variance was holden not material. But here in our case is a
variance in Substance, betwixt the Name given to the Hospital upon the
foundation, and the name usurped in the Lease. And the same will clearly appear
upon my Argument, viz. If the Name given to this Hospital upon the foundation
of it, and the Name usurped in the Lease be not unum in sensu (not in your
private understanding as private persons, but in your judicial knowledge upon
the Record quod coram vobis residet, as Judges of Record) then this lease is
void; For although you as private persons, otherwise than by Record, know, That
the Hospital of Savoy, and the Hospital vocat. le Savoy, are all one Hospital;
you ought not upon that your private knowledge to give Judgment, unless also
your judicial knowledge agree with it; that is, the knowledge which is out of
the Records which you have before you: But if the Name given upon the
Foundation, and the usurped Name be not idem sensu in your Judicial knowledge;
and you cannot otherwise conceive the Identity of these two Hospitals, nor make
any Construction to imagine it but by the Record, for the Record is your eye of
Justice, and you have no other eye to look unto the cause depending before you,
but the Record; and to this purpose he cited the case of 7 H. 4. 108. Where a
man killed another in the presence of a Judge traveling on the way where the
murder was, And at the next Assizes in the said County before the same Judge,
another man is indicted of the same murder, and arraigned, and convicted by
verdict; In that case, The Judge he ought not to carry himself according to his
private knowledge, which he has of the said fact, sci. to acquit the Prisoner,
but all that he can do is to respite Judgment against the party, because of the
Judges knowing to the contrary, and to make further Relation thereof to the
King for his Pardon of grace for the Party. So in our Case, It may be that you
in your private knowledge know, That the Hospital de le Savoy, and the Hospital
vocat. le Savoy, is all one, but that does not appear unto you upon the Record
which is before you, but it may be for any thing that appears in the Record,
that they are diverse and several Hospitals; Therefore the Lease is void. To
prove my Minor, I do say that this word (de) as here, de Savoy, designs a
place, so as by this Word (de) the place is become parcel of the Name, but this
word vocat. locum non denotat, but only the very name, and so here is a
material difference and variance, for here by pretense of the Name in this
Lease, there is not any place of the Corporation in the Name, but the
Corporation is transitory, which cannot be, for a Corporation especial
consisting of many persons, as Corpus aggregatum ought to have a certain place
of their abiding, or otherwise it cannot be discerned by the Law, and it is but
a Mathematical thing, and nothing else but a fiction, and they cannot be
otherwise considered in Law, but as they are circumscripti within the bounds of
their house, and they cannot appear but by Attorney: and if a Prebend consist
upon a Manor, and afterward the Manor by Writ be demanded against the Prebend,
and he lose it, here he has lost his Name, because he has lost that which
gives to him his Name, by Contrary by Blake, for his estate and place in the
Chapter, does remain unto him: And secondly, for another Cause here is a
material variance, for this word (de) supposes a place before the Foundation,
as the place upon which the Hospital was erected was called Le Savoy before the
Erection of it; but these words (vocat. le Savoy) supposes the same Name Savoy
was imposed upon the Foundation. Thirdly, these words (de le Savoy) do import
the Hospital to be part of the place, which before the Foundation, was called
Savoy, but vocat. trencheth only to all the place called Savoy: Fourthly; (de
le Savoy) is matter of certainty and verity; (vocat.) but matter of Reputation.
And so for these four reasons, great difference in substance appears betwixt
the very name of the Hospital, and the Name usurped in the Lease. And he cited
the Case 29 Eliz. in the Kings Bench betwixt Hall and Wingat. King E. 4. did
incorporate the Dean and Cannons of Windsor, by the Name of Dean and Cannons of
the King and Queens Free Chapel of Saint George the Martyr within his Castle
of Windsor; and made a Lease by another Name, viz. by the Name of Dean and
Cannons of the King and Queens Free Chapel there, and the same Lease was made
in the time of Queen Mary, and it was holden that the same was a variance in
Substance. And he cited another Case 30 Eliz. in the Kings Bench betwixt Fisher
and Boys. A College in Oxford was by Act of Parliament incorporated by the
Name of Warden and Scholars, Domus sive Collegii Scholarium de Merton in
universitate Oxoniae, and they make a Lease by the Name Custos Domus sive
Collegii de Merton in Oxonia, and Scholares ejusdum Domus, and the variance in
that point, because in the very name of the Foundation, Domus five Collegii
Scholarium de Merton, and in the usurped Name in the Lease Domus sive Collegii
de Merton, was holden material, and the true name was de Merton in universitate
Oxoniae, but in the Lease, in Oxonia only, leaving out the word University, and
the same was holden a variance in substance: For Oxford does contain in it self
the University, which is a thing of it self, and also the City is a thing by it
self: and it may be that there is a College in the City called Merton
College, and also a College which is called by such Name in the University:
and so in our Case, it may be that there is an Hospital which is called the
Savoy, and also another which is Le Savoy, and then the Court shall be
enveigled, etc. And in the end of the Argument, the Lord Treasurer, which was
the Lord Burleigh, put this Case, which was adjudged in his time. The Guild of
Boston in Lincolnshire, was incorporated by the Name of the Guild of St.
Nicholas, and our Lady the Virgin Mary, etc. and they made a Lease for years by
the Name of the Guild of our Lady the Virgin, and St. Nicholas, Religione
quadam motus ut nomen Virginis Mariae, in charta dimissionis, proponeretur
nomini Sancti Nicholai; and it was adjudged a void Lease for the variance
aforesaid. And afterward at another day, the matter was argued by Atkinson, on
the part of the Defendant. Starkey 21 E. 4. 56. says, That the Name of the
Corporation, by which it is incorporated, is as properly the Name of a
Corporation, as the Name of Baptism is the Name of a single and individual
person, and yet there is a great difference in the misprision of them, for the
Name of Baptism does consist of one word, and therefore it cannot admit of any
variance, but the name of a Corporation does consist of many words: in which
case variance in words which are supplied by other words, and not in matter of
substance, shall not hurt; and that hearing is notably discussed in the case of
the Cooks of London, cited before by Godfrey. Four things are to be considered
in the Name of a Corporation, which are of the Essence and Substance of it:
First, the persons incorporated, of which the Corporation does consist, as here
the Master and Chaplains de Savoy. Secondly, The quality of the Corporation, as
Dean and Chapter, Mayor and Commonalty: Thirdly, the Patron or Founder, as,
Merton College; Fourthly, The Place whereupon the Corporation is founded. As
to this last point, see 31 E. 3. 28. and fo. 15 by Knivet; and see 6 Eliz.
Dyer. King H. 8. erected the Dean and Prebend of Chester, by these words, scil.
Decanus et Capit. Cathedralis Ecclesiae Christi, et Sanctae Mariae Virginis
Cestriae. And afterward by Letters Patents, gave to the said Dean and Chapter,
certain Manors, Decano et Capitulo Ecclesiae Cathedralis Christi et Sanctae
Mariae Virginis, by us before erected, and that grant was holden void, because
that the place where, etc. is not expressed in the said Letters Patents, for
Cestria is the local place of the Incorporation. And as to the Objection made
upon the word (de) that this word (de) goes only to part, and (vocat.) goes to
the whole, and so here is a great difference; the same is not any reason, for
this word (de) extends as well to the whole as to part. As a Rent granted
percipiend. de Manerio de D. the same shall go to the whole Manor, 5 E. 4, 5.
ad respondendum I. Abbati Monasterii Sanctae Mariae Ebor. where the Obligation
was, Abbati Monasterii Sanctae Mariae Virginis extra Muros Ebor. and yet the
Writ was well enough, notwithstanding such variance, a fortiori, in the case of
a conveyance and Interest. And I conceive that it appears in the Record, That
the Lease given in evidence of the part of the Defendant, is a Lease made by
the Master and Chaplains of the Hospital of the Savoy, for it is found by
verdict, That King Henry the eighth, upon the Site of the Manor of Savoy,
betwixt the house of the Bishop of Worcester, and the house of the Bishop of
Carlisle, and that it was incorporated by the Name, etc. and that afterward Q.
Mary by her Letters Patents, reciting the foundation of the said Hospital
called the Savoy, and lamenting the Ruin of it, being surrendered in the time of
E. 6. did restore it, by which it appears, That the Hospital of the Savoy,
and Hospital called the Savoy is one and the same in respect of the Bounds,
Foundation, and Situation. And in the whole course of our Books, no case can be
found, That any Corporations have avoided their own acts, by such cause of
Misnosmer, nor of such matter, is any question moved in our Books. And as to
that which has been objected, That although the Judges in their private
knowledge well know, That the House de le Savoy, and the House vocat. the
Savoy, be all one, yet they ought not to judge according to such their private
knowledge, but according to their judicial knowledge, which they have out of
the Record. I conceive, That the Judges of necessity ought to use in such cases
their private knowledge; as where Misnosmer of a College was objected, viz.
Trinity College in Cambridge, where it was incorporated by the Name of
Masters, Fellows, and Scholars Collegii Sanctae and individuae Trin. and they
made a Lease by the Name of Master, Fellows, and Scholars of the College of
Trinity, the same was holden a good Lease, for the Judges knew well enough,
That this word Trinity does imply in it self Sancta and individua, but by what
knowledge? not by their judicial knowledge, but by their private knowledge; So
in our case. Egerton the Queens Solicitor to the contrary: It is a clear and
plain Rule in our Law, That the name of a Corporation is as a name of Baptism
to a natural man, and if there be any difference, I conceive, that the Law
requires more strict certainty in the name of a Corporation than in the Name of
any particular person, For a name is more necessary to a Corporation than to
another, for when an infant is born, he is presently a perfect creature, before
any name given him, and the giving of the Name is not a matter of necessity,
but of policy for distinction, etc. but in the case of a Corporation, The Name
is the substance and essence of it, and it is not a Body before a Name be
imposed upon it, and therefore in the Charters of Corporations there is always
such a clause, per tale nomen implacitare, and implacitari, acquirere, etc.
possint, and without their Name, they are but a Trunk: but contrary in the case
of particular persons; Land is given primogenito filio J. S. It is a good gift,
although there be no Name of Baptism: Lands given omnibus filiis J. S. is a
good name of purchase, and if a man be bound in an obligation by a wrong or
false Name, and in an action brought upon the same, if it appears upon
evidence, that he was the same person which sealed and delivered it, the same
is sufficient, and the Bond shall bind him. But contrary in the case of a
Corporation, and we cannot give any thing to a Corporation by circumstances,
inducing or implying their true name. As Land given to the first Hospital which
the Queen shall found, Ante. 161, 162.
although that it sufficiently appear, That such a one was the Hospital which
the Queen first founded, yet the gift is void: And he denied, That the four
things remembered before are necessarily required in the Name of a Corporation:
for if the Queen will found a Corporation, as an Hospital by the Name of
Utopia, the same is well enough without any respect of persons, place, Founder,
etc. set forth in the Charter. And also other things besides the said four
things are sometimes necessary in a Corporation; As if the Queen will found an
Hospital by the Name, Quod fundavimus ad roga. Christ. Hatton Cancel. Angliae.
all the same ought to be expressed in every grant made by, or to the said
Hospital; So Quod fundavimus ad relevandum pauperes; and sometimes the number
of the persons incorporated, if it be in the Charter, it ought to be used in
all acts made by or to them; As Master and sir Chaplains; so as the said four
things recited before, are not so necessary in the Name of a Corporation, but
so far forth as they are parcel of the Name given to them in the Charter of the
Corporation: And in our case, 1. The place de le Savoy, is part of their name,
set down in the Charter of their Corporation, and therefore the same ought to
be precisely followed. And he relied much upon the argument of Cook in noting
material variances betwixt de le Savoy, and vocat. le Savoy, as (de) signifies
part (vocat.) the whole; (de) signifies the place de facto, vocat. implies
reputation only. There is a place near unto Whitehal called Scotland, because
that the Kings of Scotland, when they came to our Parliament used there to
reside, as the Lord Treasurer affirmed. There is also a place in England called
Normandy, and another called Callais, and also a place here in Westminster
called Jerusalem, but these, Scotland, etc. but by Reputation, so as what
difference is betwixt the very Scotland and Scotland here, etc. such and so
much difference is there betwixt the Hospital de le Savoy, and the Hospital
vocat. the Savoy. And as to that which has been objected by Atkinson, That
that word (de) signifies as well the whole as part, as a Rent granted
percipiend. de Manerio de D. I confess that this word (de) has many
significations, so that we ought not only to consider what (de) signifyes of it
self, but rather to observe what goes before, what follows; for, as says
Hillary, intelligentia verborum ex causa dicendi sumenda est. And this word
(de) is a material word in the Name of a man, therefore also in the name of a
Corporation, 26 H. 6. 31. Assise by I. de S. and it was found for him, and
afterward the Tenant in the Assise brought attaint, and in the rehearsal of the
Assise in the writ of attaint he was named I.S. leaving out (de) and for that
cause the Writ did abate, 28 E. 3. 92. Debt brought by the Executor of John
Holbech, where the Testament was John de Holbech, and for want of this word
(de) in the Writ, it was abated by Award. And in a Praecipe quod reddat against
Mich. de Triage, he cast a Protection for Michael Triage, leaving out (de) and
for such variance the Protection was disallowed, and a Petit cape awarded. And
although the Judges in their private knowledge know well enough, That the
Hospital de le Savoy, and the Hospital vocat. the Savoy, be all one, yet in
point of Judgment they ought not otherwise receive information, but out of the
Record, and therefore, if sufficient matter be not within the Record to inform
the Judges of the Identity of the said two Hospitals, their private knowledge
shall not avail. And he cited the cause of the Lord Conniers, where the Parties
being at issue, and the Jury charged for the trial of it; It was found by
special verdict, That a fine was levied of the Lands in Question, etc. but
nothing found of the Proclamations, whereas in truth, the Proclamations were as
well given in evidence as the fine, But found, Quod finis levatus fuit prout
per recordum finis ipsius, in evidenciis ostensum, before apparet, Now in that
case, although that the Justices, knew well enough, That the Proclamations were
expressly given in evidence, yet because it did not appear unto them as Judges
out of the Record, They would not give Judgment, according to the truth of
matter, but according to the Record, for they cannot take notice if the
Proclamations be in the Chirographers Office or not: But after it appeared unto
them, That that defect was but a slip of the Clerk, they commanded the Record
to be brought before them, and the Proclamation to be inserted in the verdict;
and then gave Judgment according to the verdict reformed as aforesaid. And as
to the Case of Martin College cited before, he said he was of Council in it,
and he knew, That the Judgment there was not given for the cause alleged by
Cook, but because that this word, Scholars, was left out in the Lease. And he
held, that if in the principal Case, the Lease had been, That the Master and
Chaplains of the house called the Hospital of the Savoy, etc. it had been well
enough, for there is, de le Savoy. See a good case 36 H. 6. fitz. Brief. 485.
by Danby a Corporation cannot be Tenants of Lands, but according to their
Corporation, and their foundation, and their very Name, nor they cannot be
impleaded, nor take Lands by a wrong Name, nor purchase, nor dispose of their
possessions, but by their true Name. And afterward the matter was compounded
by the mediation of Friends: and Fanshaw had the Lease for a certain sum of
money. See now Cook 10 Report, The Case of the Mayor and Burgesses of Lyn Regis:
See also Cook 11. Report. 18. Doctor Arays Case, to this purpose.

CCXXIX. Huson and Webbs Case. Mich. 30 and 31 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
RObert Huson brought an action of Debt against Anne Webb, Debt lies not
against Executor of an Administrator. 1 Cro. 121. Yel. 20. 9 Co. 87.
Administratrix of Joan Webb, and declared of a Contract without specialty, The
Defendant pleaded, That she had fully administered, and it was found against
her. And now it was moved for the Defendant, That upon the matter an action of
Debt does not lie against the Executor or Administratrix; which was granted by
the Court. But the doubt was, If now, forasmuch as the Defendant by pleading
the plea above, has admitted the action, she shall now take advantage of the
Law in that point. For the reason why this action does not lie against an
Executor or Administrator is, because the Testator himself might have waged his
Law, if he had been impleaded upon it; and by intendment of Law the Executor or
Administrator cannot have notice of such a Debt, or of the discharge of it; But
now by answering to the Declaration as above, the Defendant has taken notice
of the Debt, and in manner confessed it. And by Rhodes and Anderson, Judgment
shall be given against the the Plaintiff, because it is apparent to the Court,
that the action does not lie. And by Anderson, If Judgment be entered against
the Administratrix, in such an action upon Nihil dicit, the Court, ex officio
shall give judgment against the Plaintiff. Periam and Windham doubted at the
first that the Defendant by her plea had admitted the whole matter upon the
specially administered, pleaded, and had taken notice of the Debt, 41 E. 3. 13.
46 E. 3. 10, 11. 13 E. 4. 25. 13 H. 8. Fitz. Execut. 21. And afterward
Anderson, ex assensu of the other Judges, caused to be entered, Querens capiat
nihil per breve.

CCXXX. Hambleden and Hambledens Case. Mich. 30 and 31 Eliz. In the Common
Pleas. Intrat. Mich. 29. and 30 Eliz
Devises. 1 Cro. 163. 1 And. 381.
THe case was, William Hambleden the Father of the Plaintiff, and the.
Defendant, was seized of the Lands, etc. And by his Will devised to his Eldest
Son, Black Acre; to his second Son, White Acre; and to his third Green Acre, in
tail. And by his said Will further willed, That in Case any of my said Sons do
dye without issue, that then the Survivor be each others heir, The Eldest son
dies without issue, etc It was moved by Gaudy Sergeant, That the second Son
shall have Black Acre in tail, and he cited the Case 30 E. 3. 28.
propinquioribus haeredibus de sanguine puerorum, for the construction of such
devises. Walmesley argued, That both the surviving Brothers should have the
said Black Acre, for the words of the devise are quilibet supervivens, which
amounts to uterque; and the Court was in great doubt of this point. And they
conceived, That the estate limited in Remainder to the Survivor, etc. is a
fee-simple by reason of the words, Each others heir; And also they conceived,
That both the Survivors should not have the Land, for the same is contrary to
the express words of the devise, The Survivor shall be each others heir, in the
singular number; see 7 E. 6. Br. Devise 38. A man seized of Land has issue
three Sons, and devises part of his Lands to his second Son in tail, Heb. 75.
and the residue to his third son in tail: and wills, That none of them shall
sell the Land, but that each shall be heir to the other, The second son dies
without issue, the same Land shall not revert to the eldest Son, but shall
remain to the third son, 1 Len. 261.
notwithstanding the words each shall be heir to the other.

CCXXXI. Slywright and Pages Case. Mich. 30, and 31 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
Maintenance. More. 266. 1 And. 201. Golds. 101, 102.
AN Information was in the Common Pleas, by John Slywright against Page, upon
the Statute of 32 H. 8. of Maintenance; and declared that the Defendant took a
Lease of one Joan Wade, of certain Lands, whereas the said Joan was not seized
nor possessed thereof according to the Statute; and upon Not guilty, the Jury
found this special matter, That Edmund Wade was seized, and made a Feoffment in
fee thereof unto the use of himself, and of the said Joan, who he then intended
to marry, and the heirs of the said Edmund. The marriage took effect, Edmund
enfeoffed a Stranger, who entered, Edmund died, Joan not having had possession
of the said Land after the death of Ed. her husband nor bing now in possession,
by Indenture demised the said Land to the Defendant for years, without any
Entry or delivery of the Indenture upon the Land, The said Defendant knowing
the said Joan never had been in possession of the said Land, and also the
Defendant being Brother of the half blood to the said Joan. The first Question
was, If the Lease being made by one out of possession, and not sealed or
delivered upon the Land, and so not good in Law as to pass any interest, be
within the Statute aforesaid. And the whole Court was clear of opinion that it
was: for by color of this pretended Lease, such might be undertaken and
advanced to the trouble and disquiet of the possession, for amongst the vulgar
people, it is a Lease, and it is a Lease by Reputation: Another matter was
moved, because that the entry of the wife is now made lawful by 32 H. 8. and
then she might well dispose of the Land.

But as to that, It was said by the whole Court, That the meaning of the
Statute was to repress the practices of many, That when they thought they had
title or right unto any Land, they for the furtherance of their pretended Right
conveyed their interest in some part thereof to great persons, and with their
countenance did oppress the possessors: And although here the Lease was made by
the said Joan to her Brother of the half blood, yet by the clear opinion of the
Court the Lease is within the danger of the Statute, and yet in some Case the
Son may maintain his Father, and the Kinsman his Kinsman. And note in this case
it was holden by the Justices, That of necessity it ought to be found by
verdict, That the Defendant knowing that the Lessor never had been in
possession. And Judgment was given for the Plaintiff.

CCXXXII. Brokesby against Wickham and the Bishop of Lincoln. Mich. 30, and 31
Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
IN a Quare Impedit, the Plaintiff counted, Quare Impedit. 3 Len. 256. 1 Cro.
173. Owen 85, 86. Popham. 189.
That Robert Brokesby was seize of the Advowson, and granted the next Avoidance
to the Plaintiff, and Humphrey Brokesby, and that afterward the Church became
void, and after during the avoidance, Humphrey released to the Plaintiff, and
so it belongs to him to present. And upon this count the Defendant did demar in
Law. For it appears upon the Plaintiffs own showing, that Humphrey ought to
have joined with the Plaintiff in the action, for the Release being made after
the Church became void, is not of any effect, but utterly void. So is the grant
of the presentment to the Church where the Church is void, for it is a thing in
action. See the Lord Dyer, 28 H. 6. 26. 3 Ma. Dyer 129. 11 Eliz. Dyer 283,
Walmsley Sergeant put this Case, Two Ioint-tenants of a Rent, the one may
release to the other, but if the Rent be behind, now the one cannot Release his
Interest in the Arrearages to the other. And afterward in the Principal case
Judgment was given that the Release was void.

CCXXXIII. Sammes and Pains Case. Mich. 30, and 31 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
Intr. Trin. 29 Eliz. Rot. 721.
IN an Ejectione firmae the case was, That the Mother being seized of certain
Lands, had issue two Daughters, Tenant by the courtesy. 1 And. 184. Goldsb. 81.
82. 8 Co. 34.
and by Indenture covenanted with diverse persons to stand seized to the use of
Eliz. her eldest Daughter in tail, upon condition that the said Eliz. should
pay to her other Daughter within a year after the death of the Mother, or
within a year after the said other Daughter should come to the age of eighteen
years, 300 l. And if the said E. should fall in the payment of the sum
aforesaid, or should dye without issue before such payment, then to the use of
the said second Daughter in tail, The Mother dies, E. takes Husband, has
issue, and afterward dies without issue before the day of payment. And if the
Husband shall be tenant by the courtesy or not, was the Question, And by the
Court clearly, he shall be, For as to the condition of payment of the said Sum,
the same is not determined; for she died without issue before the day of
payment, scil. before the second Daughter came of the age of eighteen years;
and as to that there is no condition broken; and as to the point of dying
without issue, The same is not a condition but rather a Limitation of the
Estate, and the same is no more than what the Law says, and the estate tail in
Elizabeth is spent and determined by the dying without issue; and does not
cease, or is cut off by any Limitation; and afterward Judgment was given for
the Tenant by the courtesy. And by Anderson, If a Feoffment be made to the use
of I. S. and his heirs, until I. D. has done such a thing, and then unto the
use of I. D. and his heirs, the thing is done, and I. S. dies, his wife shall
be endowed.

CCXXXIV. Bowry and Popes Case. Mich. 30, and 31 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
1 Roll. 676. Plow. Queries verse. finem.
BOwry brought an Action upon the Case against Pope, and declared, that in the
time of E. 6. the Dean and Chapter of Westminster, leased two houses in Saint
Martins in London to Mason for sixty years, The which Mason, leased one of the
said Houses to one A. and covenanted by the Indenture of Lease with the said A.
that it should be lawful for the said A. his Executors, and assigns to make a
window in the shop of the house so to him assigned, and afterward in the time
of Queen Mary, a window was made accordingly, where no window was there before.
And afterward A. assigned the said house to the Plaintiff. And now Pope having
a house adjoining, had erected a new building super solum ipsius Pope ex
opposito the said new Window, Nuisance.
so as the New Window is thereby stopped. The Defendant pleaded, Not guilty,
and it was found for the Plaintiff; and it was moved for the Defendant in
arrest of Judgment, that here upon the Declaration appears no cause of
action, for the window, in the stopping of which the wrong is assigned, appears
upon the Plaintiffs own showing to be of late erected, scil. in the time of
Queen Mary, The stopping of which by any act upon my own Land, was holden
lawful and justifiable by the whole Court. But if it were an ancient window
time out of memory, etc. there the light or benefit of it ought not to be
impaired by any Act whatsoever; and such was the opinion of the whole Court.
But if the case had been, That the house and soil upon which Pope had erected
the said building, had been under the estate of Mason, who covenanted as
abovesaid, Then Pope could not have justified the nuisance, which was granted by
the whole Court.

CCXXXV. Lee and Maddoxes Case. Mich. 30, and 31 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
Intrat. Mich. 29, and 30 Eliz. Rot. 1737.
Covenant.
WIlliam Lee brought a Writ of Covenant against Richard Maddox, and Isabel his
Wife, and declared, That one Errington the first husband of the said Isabel was
endebted to the Plaintiff in 20 l. and that one Georgy Ashley was also endebted
to the said Errington, in the like sum of 20 l. And also that the said
Errington made and constituted the said Isabel his Executrix, and died, and
afterward the said Isabel by Indenture dum ipsa sola fuit, reciting that
whereas her said late husband was endebted to the Plaintiff in the sum
aforesaid, and whereas the said George Ashley was also endebted unto her said
late Husband in the like sum, Now for the better satisfaction of the Plaintiff
for his said Debt, she appointed and constituted the Plaintiff, atturnatum suum
irrevocabilem ad petendum, levandum, recuperand. and recipiend. ad usum suum
proprium in nomine dict. Isabellae de dicto Georgio, the said twenty pounds;
And the said Isabel covenanted, quod ipsa ad requis. dict. quer. de tempore in
tempus, adjuvaret, and manu teneret quamlibet and omnes sectam and sectas quam
vel quas dictus querens commensaret and prosequeretur in nomine dictae
Isabellae, against the said George, to the use of the Plaintiff Non existendo
Nonsuit voluntary, or making any Discontinuance, Release, Revocations,
Anglice, Countermand, without the assent of the Plaintiff: And declared
further, that the Plaintiff had brought a Suit against the said George for the
said Debt, and showed all in certain. And that the said Isabel, depending the
said Suit, Countermand.
had taken to Husband the Defendant without the assent of the Plaintiff: And if
by this Marriage the said Suit be countermanded was the Question. And first it
seemed to the Court that the Declaration was insufficient, Request.
because there is not any request surmised in the Declaration, for the words of
the Covenant are, Quod ipsa ad requisitionem, etc. So as it seemed to the
Justices, that the Plaintiff ought to have notified to Isabel that he had
commenced such Suit, otherwise the Action will not lie. And also the Court was
of opinion, that here is not any Countermand, for by the taking of the Husband
the Writ is not abated, but only abateable; and therefore the Plaintiff ought
to have showed, 1 Roll. 781.
that by the taking of the Husband, the Writ by Judgment was abated, otherwise
it is not any Countermand, and their no cause of Action.

CCXXXVI. Salway and Lusons Case. Mich. 30, and 31 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
MAtthew Salway brought a Writ of Right against Luson, Writ of Right. 2 Len. 36.
and the Writ was, Messuag. and 200. acr. jampnor. and bruerae. And exception
was taken to the Writ, because jampnor. and bruerae, are counted together,
where they ought to be distinguished severally, As so many acr. jampnor. and so
many acr. bruer. although it were objected on the part of the demandant in the
maintenance of the Writ, that in the Register the Writ of Right is reditu unius
librae of Cloves and Mace together, Abatement of a Writ.
without distinction or severance. And it was said, that in a Writ of Right we
ought to follow the Register, and therefore a Writ of Right was abated, because
this word (Pomarium) was put in the Writ, for in the Register there is no such
Writ, because the word Gardinum comprehends it: But in other Writs as Writs of
Entry, etc. it is otherwise. See the Case of the Lord Zouch, 11 Eliz. 353, In a
Writ of Enter sur disseisin mill acr. jampnor. and bruer. But this exception
was not allowed, for it may be that jampnor. and bruer. are so promiscuous that
they cannot be distinguished: Vide 16 H. 7. 8. 9. The respect the Justices had
to the Register, was such, as they changed their opinions and conformed the
same to the Register. Another exception was taken to the Writ, because thereby
the Demandant does demand Duas parts Custodiae del Hay in the Forest of C.
And the Court was of opinion that the Writ ought to be Officium Custodiae
duarum partium de Hay, etc. and not Duas parts Custodiae, As Advocationem
duarum partium Ecclesiae, And not Duas parts Ecclesiae. Another Exception,
because the Writ was, duas parts, etc. in tribus dividend. where it should be
Divis. for Dividend. is not in any Writ, but only in a Writ of Partition; And
by Windham the parts of this Office are divided in Right, which the Court
granted. Another Exception was taken, because that in the Writ it is not set
down in what Town the Forest of C. is, so as the Court does not know from
whence the Visne should come: For no Venire shall be de vicineto Forestae, as
de vicineto Hundredi, 1 Cro. 200.
and Manerii; And the same was holden to be a material Exception. Another
Exception was taken, Visne.
because a Writ of Right does not lie of an Office: for at the Common Law an
Assise did not lie of it, but now it does by the Statute of West. 2. Cap. 25.
for it was not Liberum ten. but the party grieved was put to his Quod
permittat: And of this opinion was the whole Court.

CCXXXVII. Smith and Lanes Case. Mich. 30, and 31 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
THe Queen was seized of a Manor whereof Bl. acr. was holden by Copy in Fee;
the Queen leased Bl. acr. to B. for one and twenty years, who assigned the same
to the Copyholder, who accepted of it. The Queen granted Bl. acr. to C. in Fee,
Copyholder determined by acceptance of a Lease. 2 Co. 16, 17.
the term expired, C. entered, and his entry was holden to be congeable, for by
acceptance of the sam Term, the Customary Estate was determined, as if the
Copyholder had accepted it immediately from the Queen: It was also holden by the
Court, that a Lease for years under the Seal of the Exchequer may be pleaded,
and that without making mention of the Commission, by which the Court of
Exchequer is authorized to make such Leases: And so are all the Presidents as
well in this Court as in the Court of Exchequer. And whereas the Court was upon
the point of giving their Judgment, It was objected by Shuttleworth Sergeant,
That here is pleaded a Bargain and Sale of Land, without, saying pro quadam
pecuniae summa: And he stood much upon the Exception, and the Court also
doubted of it, and demanded of the Prothonotaries what is their form of
pleading: Bargain and Sale, and consideration of it.
And by Nelson chief Prothonotary; these words Pro quadam pecuniae summa, ought
to be in the pleading. Scot Prothonotary contrary. Anderson conceived it was
either way good, but Pro quadam pecuniae summa is the best: And so Leonard
Custos Brevium conceived. And the opinion of the Justices was, that a Bargain
and Sale for dives Causes and Considerations is not good without a sum of
money. 1 Co. Mildmays Case.
And by Windham, Bargain and Sale Pro quadam pecuniae summa, although no money
be paid, is good enough, for the payment or not payment is not traversable: And
by Periam, If Pro quadam pecuniae summa, be not in the Indenture of Bargain and
Sale, yet the payment thereof is averrable. And for this Exception the Judgment
was stayed.

CCXXXVIII. Bedel and Moors Case. Mich. 30, and 31 Eliz. In the Exchequer
Chamber.
Action upon the Case for not performing an Award.
BEdel brought an Action upon the Case against Moore in the King's Bench, and
declared, That the Defendant did assume to perform the Award of J.S. and
assumed also, that he would not sue Execution upon a Judgment which he had
obtained against the Plaintiff in an Action of Account, etc. And showed
further, that the Award was made, etc. (which Award in Law was utterly void)
and that the Defendant had not performed the said Award, and also that he had
sued Execution against the Plaintiff. 10 Co. 131. 5 Co. 108.
The Defendant pleaded Non-assumpsit, and it was found for the Plaintiff, and
Judgment given accordingly. Upon which Moore brought a Writ of Error in the
Exchequer-chamber, upon the Statute of 27 Eliz. And assigned Error, Error.
because the Plaintiff had declared upon two Breaches, whereas for one of them
there was not any cause of Action, for the Award is void in Law, and then no
breach could be assigned in that; and then when the Jury has assessed Damages
intirement for both breaches, whereas for one there was not any cause of Action
by the Law, the Verdict was void, and then the Judgment given upon it
reversable; for it is not reason that the Plaintiff have Damages for such
matter for which the Law does not give an Action.

And if the Jury had assessed damages severally, viz. For the not performance
of the Award so much, Damages.
and for the suing forth Execution so much, then the Judgment had been good,
and the damages assessed for the not performance, etc. void. Manwood Chief
Baron: The verdict is well enough, for here the whole Assumpsit is put in
issue, and there is but one issue upon the whole Assumpsit, but if several
issues had been joined upon these several points of the Assumpsit, and both had
been found for the Plaintiff, and damages assessed entirely for both breaches,
then was the Judgment reversable, for being several issues the Jury might have
assessed the damages severally, scil. for each issue several damages, but here
is but one issue, and it was the folly of the Defendant that he would not demur
in Law upon the Declaration for one part, scil. the not performance of the
Award, and traverse the other part, scil. The suing of the Execution, or the
Assumpsit of it. And in our case, it may be that the Jury did assess the
damages for the suing of the Execution without any regard had to the
performance of the Award: And note that the verdict for assessing of the
Damages was in these Terms, scil. Et assidunt damna occasion non
performationis Assumpsionis praedict. etc. And Cook who was of Council in this
Case, put this Case. The late Earl of Lincoln, Admiral of England, brought his
Action of Scandalis Magnatum, and declared, That the Defendant exhibited in the
Star Chamber against him a Bill of Complaint, containing diverse great and
infamous slanders: viz. That the said Earl was a great and outrageous
oppressor; and used outrageous oppression, and violence against the Defendant,
and all the Country also. The Defendant pleaded, Not guilty, and found for the
Plaintiff, and assessed damages, and it was moved in stay of Judgment, first,
That the Plaintiff had declared upon matter of slander for part, for which an
Action lies, and for part not. For the oppression supposed to be made to
himself, no Action lies, because every subject may complain for wrong done
unto him, and although he cannot prove the wrong, an Action will not lie. But
as for the oppression done to others by the supposal of the Bill an Action
lies, for what is that to him, he has not to do with it, for he is not pars
gravata. But because the Jury assessed Damages entirement, the Judgment was
arrested, for the cause aforesaid. And afterward in the principal case, the
last day of this term, Judgment was stayed.

CCXXXIX. Palmer and Thorps Case. Hill. 31. Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
BEtwixt Palmer and Thorpe, the Case was this, 1 Cro. 152
A man demised his Manor of M. for thirty two years, and the day after let the
same Manor for forty years, to begin from Michaelmas, after the date of the
first Lease, and the Tenant attorned. And by Cook the same is a good grant,
although to begin at a day to come, for it is but a Chattel; and so was the
opinion of Wray Chief Justice, for a Lease for years may expect its
commencement, as a man seized of a Rent in Fee grants the same for twenty years
from Mich. following, and good, for no estate passes presently, but only an
Interest. See 28 H. 8. 26. Dyer.

CCXL. Sir Anthony Shirley and Albanyes Case. Hill. 31 Eliz. In the Kings
Bench. Rot. 668.
IN an Action upon the Case, upon Assumpsit by Sir Anthony Shirley against
Albany. Assumpsit. 1 Cro. 150.
The Plaintiff declared, That he was seized of the Manor of Whittington for the
term of his life, the Reversion to the Earl of Arrundel in Fee, and so seized,
surrendered all his Estate to the said Earl, who afterward by his Deed granted
a Rentcharge of 40 l. per annum out of the said Manor to him, and afterward
conveyed the Manor to the Defendant in Fee. And afterward, 27 Maii 22. Eliz.
upon a Communication betwixt the Plaintiff and the Defendant concerning the
said Rent; the Defendant did promise to the Plaintiff, that if the Plaintiff
would show unto the Defendant any Deed, by which it might appear that he ought
to pay to the Plaintiff such a Rent, he would pay that which is due, and that
which should be due from time to time. And further declared, that 27 April 27
Eliz. he showed unto the Defendant a Deed, by which it appeared that such a
Rent was granted, and due; And for eighty pounds due for the two last years, he
brought the Action. The Defendant pleaded, that after the said promise, and
before the showing of the said Deed, scil. 14 Jan. 22 Eliz. the Plaintiff
entered into the said Land, and leased the same for three years. The Plaintiff
Replicando said, that 1 December. 27 Eliz. the Defendant did re-enter, upon which
they were at Issue, and it was found for the Plaintiff. It was moved by Glanvil
Sergeant, that by the entry the Promise was suspended, and being a personal
thing once suspended, it is always extinct. Wray, The Action is brought for the
Arrerages due the two last years, and so at the time of his re-entry the
Plaintiff had not cause of Action, and therefore it could not be suspended.
Suspension of Rent. Ante. 110.
Gaudy, When the Plaintiff shows the Deed, the Defendant is chargable to
arrerages due before and after the promise; wherefore if the entry makes a
suspending of the Rent, the suspension does continue: but I conceive here is
not any suspension, for this promise is a mere collateral thing, and so not
discharged by the entry into the Land, for it is not issuing out of the Land.
But if the Plaintiff before the Deed showed had released all Actions, the same
had been a good Bar; and I conceive that the Deed was not showed in time, for
it ought to be shown before any arrerages due after the promise, but here it is
shown five years after: But that was not denied by all there other Justices.
Another exception was taken, that where the promise was, that if the Plaintiff
showed any Deed by which it might appear, that the Defendant should be charged
with the said Rent, and the Declaration is, by which it might appear, that the
Plaintiff ought to have the Rent, etc. so as the Declaration does not agree in
the whole. See 1 Ma. 143. in Browning and Bestons Case, the Condition of the
Lease was, if the Rent should be arrear, not paid by two Months after the
Feast, etc. and the Rejoinder was by the space of two months, etc. And the
pleading holden insufficient, for per duos menses does not affirm directly post
duos menses, but by Implication and Argument: And here it was holden, that the
Condition was a good consideration. Another exception was taken, because the
promise is laid, All the Rent ad tunc debitum aut deinceps debend. It was
holden, that this word (ad tunc) does refer to the time of the showing of the
Deed, and not to the promise. And as to the last exception but one, it was
resolved, that the Declaration, notwithstanding the same, was good enough
(scil.) ostendit factum per quod apparet quod redditus praedict. solvi deberet
in forma praedict. Another exception was taken, because here no breach of the
promise is alleged, for it is pleaded, thath eight pounds de annuali redditu
arrer. fuer. but it is not said, de redditu praedict. 8 l. ergo it may be
another Rent, and then the promise, as to this Rent, is not broken. Wray,
Although the word (praedict.) be wanting, yet the Declaration is well enough,
and it shall be intended the Rent mentioned before. See 21 H. 7. 30. b. Where
(Villa West.) shall be intended Villa praedict. 19 E. 4. 1. In a Quare Impedit
the Plaintiff does entitle himself by grant of the next Avoydance cum
acciderit, and does not show in his Count that the same was the next Avoydance,
and yet the Count was holden to be good, for so it shall be intended; so here:
And he said, It is not necessary that a Declaration be exactly certain in every
point, but if one part of it expound the other, it is well enough: And although
the Identity of the Rent does not appear by the word praedict. yet it appears
by other circumstances, as by the days of payment, etc. and no other Rent can
be intended. And now, this Exception is after Verdict, and therefore favorably
to be taken: And afterward Judgment was given for the Plaintiff.

CCXLI. Musted and Hoppers Case. Hill. 31 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
IN an Action upon the Case, the Plaintiff declared, Assumsit. p 1 Cro. 149.
That where he and one Atkinsal, were jointly and severally bounden by
Obligation in fifty pounds, to a stranger, for the only Debt of the said
Atkinsal, which Atkinsal died, and the Defendant married afterward his Wife,
and so the Goods of Atkinsal came to his hands; yet the Plaintiff, the first
day of May after, which was the day of payment of the money, paid five and
twenty pounds for avoiding the Forfeiture of the penalty. The Defendant as well
in consideration of the Premises, as in consideration that he might peaceably
enjoy the Goods of the Testator promised to pay the said sum, cum inde
requisitus fuer. And upon Non Assumpsit, the Jury found the payment of the said
sum, and all the precedent matter: And that the Defendant in consideration
praemissiorum, promised to pay the said sum if he might peaceably enjoy the
Goods of the said Testator. It was moved in arrest of Judgment, that although
here the Jury have found sufficient cause of Action, yet if the Declaration be
not accordingly, the Plaintiff shall not have Judgment. Verdict.
And here the Plaintiff has declared upon two Considerations, and the Jury
has found but one, scil. if he peaceably enjoy the Goods of the Testator. Also
the Plaintiff declared of a simple promise, and the Jury have found a
Conditional, Si gaudere potest, etc. And so the promise set forth in the
Declaration, is not found in the Verdict.

Gaudy was of opinion, That the first consideration is good, Consideration.
for the Plaintiff entered into Bond at the request of the Defendant, and then
the promise following is good: But the second consideration is void, scil. That
the Defendant shall enjoy the goods of the Testator, etc. as if it had been
that he should enjoy his own goods. And all the Justices were clear of opinion.
That the Promise found by the Jury is not the promise alleged in the
Declaration, and so the issue is not found for the Plaintiff, and so the
judgment was stayed.

CCXLII. Creckmere and Pattersons Case. Trin. 30 Eliz. In the Kings Bench. Rot.
568.
Devise conditional. 1 Cro. 146. 1 Roll. 410. 1 Inst. 236. b.
UPon a special Verdict, the Case was this, Robert Dookin was seized of certain
Lands in Fee, and having issue two Daughters, devised the same to Alice his
Eldest Daughter, that she should pay forty pound to Ann her Sister at such a
Day; the money is not paid, whereupon Ann enters into the moiety of the Land:
And it was holden by the whole Court, that the same is a good Condition, and
that the Entry of Ann was lawful. It has been adjudged, That where a man
devised his Land to his wife, Proviso, My will is, That she shall keep my house
in good Reparations, that the same is a good Condition. Wray, A man devises
his Lands to B. paying 40 l. to C. it is a good condition; for C. has no other
remedy, and a Will ought to be expounded according to the intent of the Devisor.

CCXLIII. Dove and Williots and others Case.. Hill. 31 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
1 Cro. 160.
IN an Ejectione firmae, upon a special Verdict, the case was, That W. was
seized of the Land, where, etc. and held the same by Copy, etc. and surrendered
the same unto the use of E. for life, the Remainder to Robert and A. in Fee,
Robert made a Lease to the Defendant; E. Robert, and A. surrendered the said
Land, scil. a third part to the use of Robert for the life of E. the Remainder
to the Right heirs of Robert, and of another third part to the use of Robert
for life, the Remainder to E. the Remainder to Richard, etc. and of another
third part to the use of A. and his Heirs. After which Partition was made
betwixt them, and the Land where, etc. was allotted to Richard, who afterward
surrendered to the use of the Plaintiff. It was holden, That Judgment upon this
verdict ought not to be given for the Plaintiff, For the Lessee of Robert had
the first possession; and that Lease is to begin after the death of E. who was
Tenant for life, and when E. and he in the Reversion join in a surrender,
thereby the estate for life in that third part is extinct in Robert, who has
the Inheritance, and then his Lease took effect for a third Part. So that the
Parties here are Tenants in Common, 1 Inst. 200.
betwixt whom Trespass does not lie.

CCXLIV. Bulleyn and Graunts Case. Hill. 31 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
Copyhold.
UPon Evidence to a Jury, the Case was, That Henry Bulleyn the Father, was
seized of the Land being Copyhold, and had Issue three Sons, Gregory, Henry,
andy Thomas, and afterward surrendered to the use of the last Will, Devise. 1
Cro. 148.
and thereby devised the said Land to Joan his Wife for life, the remainder to
the said Henry, and the Heirs of his body begotten: Joan died, after
admittance, Henry died without Issue, and afterward the Lord granted it to
Thomas and his Heirs, who surrendered to the use of the Defendant then his Wife
for life, and afterward died without Issue: Gregory eldest Son of Henry
Bulleyn entered, etc. Coke, When the Father surrendreth to the use of his last
Will, thereby all passes out of him, so as nothing accrueth to the Heir, nor
can he have and demand any thing before admittance. Wray, The entry of Gregory
is lawful, and admittance for him is not necessary, for if a Copyholder
surrendereth to the use of one for life who is admitted, and dies, he in the
Reversion may enter without a new Admittance. It was moved by Coke, if this
Estate limited to Henry be an Estate tail, or a Fee conditional, For if it be a
Fee-simple conditional, then there cannot be another Estate over: but yet in
case of a Devise an Estate may depend upon a Fee-simple precedent, but not as a
Will, but as an Executory Devise. Wray, It is not a conditional Estate in Fee,
but an Estate tail. Coke, They who would prove the Custom to entail Copyhold
Land within a Manor, it is not sufficient to show Copies of Grants to persons
and the Heirs of their bodies, Copyhold Estate.
but they ought to show that surrenders made by such persons have been enjoyed
by reason of such matter. Wray, That is not so, for Customary Lands may be
granted in tail, and yet no surrenders have been made within time of memory.

CCXLV. Matthew and Hassals Case. Mich. 31 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
IN an Ejectione firmae, betwixt Matthew and Hassal, the Plaintiff had Judgment
to recover, and the Defendant brought a Writ of Error, Error. 1 Cro. 144.
and assigned Error in this, that the Judgment was entered, Quod querens
recuperet possessionem, etc. where it should be (Terminum) vent. in ten.
praedict. See 9 Eliz. Dyer 258. Coke contrary, That the Judgment is good
enough, for the Writ of Execution upon it is Habere facias possessionem, and in
a real Action the Writ is, Quod perens recuperet sesinam, and not terram. And
afterward Judgment was affirmed.

CCXLVI. Tempest and Mallets Case. Hill. 31 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
IN an Action of Trespass by Tempest against Mallet, Judgment was given, and
Eror brought, and assigned for Error; 1 Cro. 153, 145.
that whereas the Action was brought against four, one of them died, Mesne
betwixt the Award of the Nisi prius, and the Inquest taken: And it was said on
the part of the Defendant in the Writ of Error which was entered upon the
Record, that the Plaintiff showed unto the Court the death of one of the
Defendants, and prayed Judgment against the others. See 4 H. 7. 2 Eliz. 175.
And there is a difference, where in an Action of Trespass there is but one
Defendant, and where many. Another Error was assigned, the Defendant Obtulit se
per Higgins Attornat. suum, without showing his Christian Name, as John, or
William; for Higgins only without the Christian Name, is not any Name, for it
is but an addition to show, which John, or William. Coke. The same is helped
by the Statute of 32 H. 8. cap. 30. Where it is enacted, that after Verdict,
Judgment shall be given notwithstanding the lack of Warrant of Attorney of the
party against whom the Issue shall be tried, or any default or negligence of
any the parties, their Counselors or Attorneys; and of necessity this default
here in the Christian Name ought to be the fault of one of them. See also 18
Eliz. Cap. 14. for want of any Warrant of Attorney, etc. Glanvil, The Statute
provides for default of Warrant of Attorney, etc. Then (Coke) To what end was
the Statute of 18 Eliz. made? for the Statute of 32 H. 8. provides for defects
of Warrants of Attorney. Glanvil, The first Statutes for Warrants of Attorneys
of such persons against whom the Issue was tried, but the later Stat. is
general. Another Error was assigned, Quod defendens Capiatur, where the
Offense, and so the Fine is pardoned by Parliament, and therefore the entry of
the Judgment ought to be, Et de fine nihil, quia perdonatur. Coke, The Judgment
is well enough, for in every general Pardon some persons are excepted; and it
does not appear if the Defendant here were one of them, and then the Fine is
not pardoned, 1 Cro. 768. 778. 3 Cro. 22.
for the Court cannot take notice of that, as it was holden in Sergeant Harris
Case: but if the Defendant be charged with the Fine, then he ought to plead the
pardon, and to show that he was not any of the persons excepted. And afterward
at another day the Defendant did allege, that there was a Warrant of Attorney
in the Common Pleas. And also it appears upon Record, that the Defendant did
appear upon the Supersedeas by Attorney, who had his full Name, and therefore
prayed a Certiorari de novo, to certify the same matter, vide 9 E. 4. 32.
Wray, A Case here greatly debated betwixt the Lord Norris and Braybrook, In
nullo est erratum.
and upon Advice such a Writ of Certiorari was granted after the Plaintiff had
pleaded In nullo est erratum; for this Plea, in nullo est erratum, goes but to
that which is contained within the body of the Record, and not unto collateral
matter, scil. Warrant of Attorneys: And afterward the Writ of Error was
allowed, and upon the day of return thereof, it appeared upon the Record of
Supersedeas, that the Defendant did appear by such a one his Attorney: But it
was said by the Court, that there ought to be two appearances, the one upon the
Supersedeas, and the other when the Plaintiff declares. See as to the name of
the Attorney, Tirrells Case, 1 Mar. Dyer 93.

CCXLVII. Palmer and Knowllis Case. Hill. 31. Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
1 Cro. 160.
PAlmer recovered Debt against Knowllis, and sued Execution by Elegit, upon
which the Sheriff returned, that he had made Execution of the lands of the
Defendant by the Oath of twelve men, but he could not deliver it to the party,
Execution.
for it is extended to another upon a Statute, upon which the Plaintiff sued a
Capias ad satisfaciendum. And now came the Defendant by his Counsel, and moved
that after Elegit returned, the Plaintiff could not resort to the Execution by
Capias, and therefore prayed a Supersedeas, Caplas after Elegit.
because the Capias erronice emanavit. But the whole Court was clear to the
contrary; for upon Nihil returned upon Elegit, the Plaintiff shall have a
Capias, 17 E. 4. 5. See 21 H. 7. 19. A man shall have a Capias after a Fieri
facias, or Elegit, 34 H. 6. 20. and here the special return does amount to as
much, as if the Sheriff had returned Nihil: Also the Statute of West. 2. which
gives the Elegit, is not in the Negative, and therefore it shall not take away
the Execution which was at the Common Law. And here is no Execution returned,
for after the former extent ended, he ought to have a new Elegit; which Wray
granted: And afterward the said Knowllis was taken by force of the Capias ad
satisfaciend. and came into Court in the Custody of the Sheriff, and the Case
was opened, and in the whole appeared to be worthy of favor; but by the Law he
could not be helped, and although he instantly prayed a Supersedeas, yet the
same was denied unto him.

CCXLVIII. The Churchwardens of Fetherstones Case. Hill. 31 Eliz. In the
Common Pleas.
AN Action of Trespass was brought by the Churchwardens of Fetherstone in the
County of Norfolk, and declared, Churchwardens. 1 Cro. 145. 179.
That the Defendant took out of the said Church a Bell, and declared, that the
Trespass was done 20 Eliz. And it was found for the Plaintiffs. And now it was
moved by Godfrey in arrest of Judgment, That it is apparent upon the
Declaration, That the Trespass was done in the time of their Predecessors, of
which the Successor cannot have action; and actio personalis moritur cum
persona. See 19 H. 6. 66. But the old Churchwardens shall have the action.
Cook contrary, and that the present Churchwardens shall have the action, and
that in respect of their office, which the Court granted. And by Gaudy,
Churchwardens are a Corporation by the Common Law. See 12 H. 7. 28. by
Frowick, That the New Churchwardens shall not have an action upon such a
Trespass done to their Predecessors, contrary by Yaxley. See by Newton and
Paston, That the Executors of the Guardian in whose time the Trespass was done,
shall have Trespass.

CCXLIX. Hauxwood and Husbands Case. Pasch. 31 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
IN an Action upon the Case, the Plaintiff declared for disturbing of him to
use his common, etc. and showed, that A. was seized of certain Lands, to which
this Common was appendant, Prescription. 1 Cro. 153.
for the term of his Life, the Remainder to B. in tail, and that the said A.
and B. did demise unto him the said Lands for years, etc. Pepper, The
Declaration is not good, for it is not showed how these particular estates did
commence. See 20 E. 4. 10. By Piggot, Lessee for life and he in the Remainder,
cannot prescribe together; and he in the Remainder cannot have common. Also he
declares, That Tenant for life, and he in Remainder demised to him, whereas in
truth it is the demise of Tenant for life, and the Confirmation of him in the
Remainder; also he does not aver the life of Tenant for life. Popham, He needs
not to show the commencement of the particular estates, for we are a stranger
to them, the Prescription in them both is well enough, for all is but one
estate, and the Lease of both. See 27 H. 8. 13. The Lessee for life, and he in
the Reversion made a Lease for life, and joined in an action of wast, and there
needs no averment of the life of the Tenant for life, for he in the Reversion
has joined; which Gaudy granted as to all. And said the particular estates are
but as conveyance unto the action. Wray conceived the first Exception to be
material, etc.

CCL. Sweeper and Randals Case, Rot. 770. Trin. 31 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
IN an Action of Trespass for breaking of his Close, and carrying away his
goods, by Sweeper against Randal, upon Not guilty pleaded, i Cro. 156.
The Jury found, That one John Gilbert was seized of the Land, where, etc. and
leased the same to the Plaintiff at Will, who sowed the Land, and afterward
the Plaintiff agreed with the said Gilbert, to surrender to him the said Land,
and his interest in the same; and the said Gilbert entered, and leased to the
Defendant, who took the Corn. It was moved, if these words, I agree to
surrender my Lands, be a present and express surrender. Gaudy, It is not any
surrender, for Tenant at will cannot surrender, but it is but a relinquishing
of the estate, if it be any thing; Surrender.
but in truth it is not any thing in present, but an act to be done in future.
Wray, I agree. A. demiseth the Manor of D. at will, it is no Lease, no more
shall it be here any Surrender, or any relinquishing of the estate. Clench
conceived, That the intent of the Party was, to leave his estate at the time of
the speaking, otherwise those words were void, for he might leave it at any
time without those words. Gaudy, If such was his intent, the Jury ought to find
it expressly; and afterward Judgment was given for the Plaintiff.

CCLI. Ward and Blunts Case. Trin. 31. Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
Trover and Conversion. 1 Cro. 146.
IN an Action upon the Case of Trover of certain Loads of Corn at Henden in
Middlesex, and the conversion of them; The Defendant pleaded, That before the
conversion, he was seized of certain Lands called Harminglow in the County of
Stafford, and that the Corn whereof, etc. was there growing, and that he did
sever it, by force of which he was possessed, and the same casually lost; and
that the same came to the hands of the Plaintiff, and the Plaintiff casually
lost the same, and the same came to the hands of the Defendant at Henden,
aforesaid, and he did convert the same to his own use, as it was lawful for him
to do: upon which the Plaintiff did demur in Law. Atkinson, The Plea is good,
for the conversion is the point of the action, and the effect of it. For if a
man take the same, and do not convert, he is not guilty. And here the Defendant
does justify the conversion, wherefore he cannot plead, Not guilty. The
general issue is to be taken where a man has not any color, but here the
Defendant has color, because the Corn whereof, etc. was growing upon his
Land, which might enveigle the Lay people, and therefore it is safest to plead
the special matter. But admit, that it does amount but to the general issue;
yet there is not any cause of Demurrer, but the Plaintiff ought to show the
same to the Court, and pray that the general issue be entered; and the Court ex
officio ought to do it. Egerton, the Queens Solicitor, contrary. The Plea in
Bar is not good; The Plaintiff declares of a Trover of his goods, ut de bonis
suis propriis, and the Defendant pleads, That he took his own goods, which is
not any answer to the Plaintiff. See 22 E. 3. 18. In Trespass of taking and
carrying away his Trees, The Defendant pleads, That they were our Trees,
growing in our own soil, and we cut them and carried them away, and the plea
was challenged, wherefore the Defendant pleaded over, without that that he took
the Trees of the Plaintiff. So 26 Ass. 22. and 30 E. 3. 22. Another matter was,
The Plea in Bar is, That before the time of the Conversion, the Defendant was
seized of the Land, and sowed it; and that after the Corn was severed, (but he
does not say that he was seized at the time of the severance) and then it might
be that he had severed the Corn of the Plaintiff, etc. and that was holden by
the Court to be a material exception, wherefore Judgment was given for the
Plaintiff: But as to the first Exception, the same was disallowed, For the
Court ex Officio, in such case ought to cause the general issue to be entered,
but the Plaintiff ought not to demur upon it.

CCLIV. Cheiny and Langleys Case, Hill. 31. Eliz. Rott. 638. Trin. 31 Eliz. In
the Kings Bench.
THe case was, That Tenant for life of certain Lands leased the same for years
by Indenture, with these words; I give, grant, 1 Cro. 157. Leases.
bargain, and sell my interest in such Lands for twenty years, To have and to
hold, in such manner, and form as I my self did hold the same, and no
otherwise: Tenant for life died within the Term, and he in the Reversion
entered, and the Lessee brought an action of Covenant. Godfrey, The action does
not ly, for here is not any warranty, for the Plaintiff is not Lessee, but
Assignee, to whom this Warranty in Law cannot extend; but admit that the
Warranty does extend to the Plaintiff, yet it is now determined with the estate
of the Tenant for life, and so the Covenant ended with the estate. See 32 H. 6.
32. by Littleton 9. Eliz. Dyer 257. Covenant.
And if Tenant in tail make a Lease for years (ut supra) and afterward dies
without issue, the Covenant is gone; and after Judgment was given against the
Plaintiff.

CCLV. Fish, Brown and Sadlers Case, Intrat. Mich. 29 Eliz. Rot. 606. Trin. 31.
Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
AN action upon the Case was brought by Fish and Brown against Sadler, Hill. 29
Eliz. rot. 606. and they declared, Action upon the Case.
That they were proprietaries of certain goods, which were in the possession of
one A. against which A. Sadler one of the Defendants had commenced a feigned
and covenous suit in the Ecclesiastical Court in the Name of one Collison, to
the intent to get the said goods into his possession, of which the Plaintiffs
having notice, and to the intent that the said Plaintiffs should suffer the
Defendant to recover and obtain the said goods by the said suit, the Defendant
did promise to the Plaintiffs to render to them a true account of the said
goods; and showed further, That by the said suit the Defend. did obtain the
said goods by sufferance of the Plaintiff. Tanfeild, It is a good
consideration, the Plaintiffs were not parties or Privies at the beginning of
the suit, and it is not like Onlies Case in 19 Eliz. Dyer 355. Where in an
action upon the Case Only declared, Assumpsit and consideration.
That the Defendant Countess, etc. being a Widow, had diverse suits and
businesses, and that the Plaintiff at her request had bestowed great labor and
travail, and had expended circa the affairs of the said Countess 1500 l.
Whereupon she promised to the Plaintiff to pay all the said expenses, and such
a sum above, for that matter which is the ground of the action, is maintenance,
and malum prohibitum, but such matter is not here; for it is lawful for a man
to use means to get his goods. Gaudy; All covins are abhorred in Law, and here
the Plaintiffs are privies to the wrong, and therefore, it cannot be any
consideration. Wray, Although that the suit at the beginning was wrongful and
covenous, yet when the Plaintiffs who were owners of the said goods do assent
to such proceedings, now the suit is become just and lawful ab initio, Corin.
and so no wrong in the consideration, but all the wrong is purged by the
agreement. If any covin be, the same is between Sadler and him who is sued, to
whom the Plaintiffs are not privies. Clench, If this privity betwixt the
Plaintiffs and Sadler had been before the said suit; then the consideration is
without any fraud. Cooper Sergeant conceived here is not any good
consideration, upon which the Promise of the Defendant may be grounded, for the
Defendant has not any benefit by it, and he cited the case between Smith and
Smith 25 Eliz. Egerton, Here the consideration is good enough, for the
Plaintiffs forbear their own suit, which was a hinderance unto them. Clench was
of opinion, that the Plaintiff should not have Judgment, for that suit was
begun by Sadler in the Name of Collison without his privity, and therefore it
was unlawful, and the same was for the goods of another man, which is unlawful
also, and then when the unlawful act is begun, the illegal agreement afterward
that they shall proceed is unlawful also, and therefore there cannot be any
consideration: and as to the covin, it is not material, for without that the
matter is illegal enough. Also the Declaration is not good in this, because it
is not showed in what Court the suit did depend, so as it might appear unto us,
that they had power to hold plea of it. Gaudy agreed with Clench in the first
point, and also in the last; and by him, in the assumpsit, the Plaintiff
declares, that a suit was depending betwixt the Defendant and another, and
where the Plaintiffs if they were produced might have given strong witness
against the Defendant, the said Defendant in consideration that the Plaintiffs
would not give Testimony against him, promised to give to the Plaintiff 20 l.
the same consideration will not maintain this action; because it is unlawful
for any man to suppress testimony in any cause. 1 Cro. 337.
Wray, Here is a consideration good enough, For where Sadler should lose costs
upon the first suit, now upon this promise upon his account he shall be allowed
the same, the which is a benefit unto him: and as to the showing in what Court
the suit does depend, that needs not by way of Declaration, but the same shall
be showed by way of Evidence, and it is not traversable, and it is but
inducement to the action. And as to the covin, that is not here, for covin is
always to the prejudice of a third person, but so it is not here: But in truth
this suit was unlawful, for Sadler so to sue in the Name of another, and
therefore it cannot be a good consideration. And for that cause, it was
awarded, Quod querens nihil capiat per billam.

CCLIV. How and Conneys Case. Trin. 31 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
Trespass. 1 Cro. 159.
IN an action of Trespass by How against Conney, the case was, That one Smith
was seized of two houses, and leased one of them to his Brother for life, and
afterward by his Will devised, viz. I give to my Executors, All my Lands and
Tenements free and copy, to hold to them, and they to take the profits of them
for ten years, and afterward to sell the said Lands and Tenements; and
afterward died, his Brother died before the quarter of a year after: and it
was found, That the Executors entered into the house undemised, and took the
profits, but not into the other, and that at the end of the said ten years,
they sold the whole. Godfrey, The house only which was in possession, shall
pass by the Will. (To hold unto them) does imply matter of possession, so as
nothing passes but that whereof they may take the profits, the which cannot be
of a bare Reversion; also by this devise, the Executors have not interest in
the thing devised but for ten years, Plow. 66. Shop. 437.
whereas the Brother of the Testator had an estate for life, which by
possibility might continue above twenty years, and to prove that, the meaning
of the devisor to be collected upon the words of the Will ought to direct the
construction of the Will, he cited Chicks case, 19 Eliz. 357 and 23 Eliz. 371.
Dyer. At another day it was argued by Cook, That both the Houses pass, and the
words (take the profit) do not restrain the general words before, ( viz. All my
Lands and Tenements) but rather expounds them, sci. such profits that they
might take of a Reversion, cum acciderit, for it may be that the Brother shall
die within ten years. And he cited the case 34 H. 6. 6. A man seized of diverse
Reversion upon estates for life, devises them by the name of omnium terrarum
and tenementorum, which were in his own hands, and by those parols the
Reversion did pass; and yet the Reversion (to speak properly) was not in his
hands: and if the Brother had died in the life of the devisor, they had clearly
passed, and then his death or life shall not alter the case. And he resembled
the case to the case in 39 E. 3. 21. The King grants to the Abbot of Redding,
That in time of vacation the Prior and Monks shall have the disposition of all
the possessions of the said Abbey ad sustentationem Prioris and Monachorum, 3
Cro. 290.
and if in the time of vacation they shall have the Advowsons, was the
question, for it was said, That advowsons could not be to their sustentation:
But yet by the better opinion the grant of the King did extend to Advowsons,
for it shall be intended such sustentation as Advowsons might give. Godfrey,
Our Case is not like to the case of 34. H. 6. for there the Devisor had not any
thing in possession, and therefore if the Reversion did not pass, the devise
should be utterly void. Gaudy conceived that the house in possession only
passed, for the devise extends to such things only, whereof the Profits might
be taken, but here is not any profit of a Reversion. Clench, and Wray contrary,
The intent of the devise was to perform the Will of his Father, and also of his
own Will; and in case the house in possession was not sufficient to perform
both the Wills, all shall pass, and therefore the devise by favorable
construction is to be taken largely, so as the Wills might be thoroughly
performed; and also the devise is general, and further all his Lands and
Tenements, which are not restrained by the Subsequent words (to take the
profits;) for to have and to hold, and to have and to take the profits is all
one.

CCLV. Slugge and the Bishop of Landaffs Case. Trin. 31 Eliz. In the Kings
Bench.
SLugge libelled against the Bishop of Landaff in the Ecclesiastical Court,
because where he was presented by the Dean and Chapter of Gloucester to the
Church of Penner, the Bishop did refuse to admit him, and now the Bishop sued a
Prohibition, and showed, Prohibition.
Quod non habetur talis Rectoria cum cura animarum in eadem diocesi, sed
perpetua vicaria. And by Popham a Prohibition does not lie, but the matter
ought to be determined in the Ecclesiastical Court, and when he who is
presented to the same Church, whether it be a Church or not, shall be tried in
an action of trespass; and the like matter was ruled, Mich. 14. Eliz. betwixt
Weston and Grendon, who was presented by the Queen, and it was holden, that
because institution and admission do belong to the Ecclesiastical Court, and
not to the Kings Court, that no Prohibition should lie, and therefore he prayed
a Consultation. And note, That the Defendant in the Prohibition did not demur
formally upon the suggestion; for the Judges use, if the suggestion be not
sufficient to maintain the Prohibition, to grant a Consultation without any
formal demurrer upon the Suggestion, if the insufficiency of the Suggestion be
manifest; Trial.
which was granted by the whole Court. Cook, That a Consultation ought not to
be granted, for whether there be such a Rectory or not shall be tried here. So
2 H. 4. 30. Prior or not Prior, 49 E. 3. 17, 18. Wife, or not Wife, but never
accoupled in loyal matrimony by the Bishop, Ante. 53. 54.
44 E. 3. So within or without the Parish, 50 E. 3. 20. So, 45 E. 3. Quare
Impedit, 138. In a Quare Impedit, no such Church within the County. Afterward,
at another day, Popham put the case, Slugge was presented to the vicaridge of
Penner, the Bishop refused to admit him, and admitted one Morgan Bletthen unto
the Parsonage of Penner, at the presentment of the Lord St. John; Slugge sued
the Bishop for contumacy, per duplicem querelem, The Bishop said, Non habetur
talis vicaria, upon which matter he sued a Prohibition, and he conceived, That
the Prohibition did not ly, for a Vicar is but he that gerit vicem Personae, to
supply his place in his absence, so as the same is a spiritual matter which
ought not to be tried here: Also the libel is, to have Admission and
Institution, and the other matter arises by their Plea, sci. Quod Rectoria de
Penner est Ecclesia cum cura animarum, absque hoc quod habetur talis Vicaria,
and so it is but an incident to the principal matter, wherefore it shall be
tried there, and he prayed a Consultation. Cook, We have showed, That in the
time of E. 3. one L. was seized of the Manor of Penner, to which the Church of
Penner is appendant; and we allege presentiments from the time, and we convey
it to the Lord St. John, which now is, and they would now defeat us by this
surmise, That there is no such Church with cure of Souls, which is triable
here. Popham the libel does contain nothing but contumacy in the Bishop, in
that he has not admitted Slugge, and the other matter comes in the
Replication, and afterward by assent of the parties a Consultation was
granted, quoad institutionem of Slugge only, but that they should not proceed
further.

CCLVI. Fennick and Mitfords Case. Pasch. 31 Eliz. Rot. 154. In the Kings Bench.
Mo^e 284. 2 Co. 91.
THe Case was, A man seized of Lands in Fee, levieth a Fine to the use of his
wife for life, the remainder to the use of his eldest son, and the heirs males
of his body, the Remainder to the use of the right heirs of the Conusor, The
Conusor makes a Lease for a thousand years to B. the eldest son dies without
issue male, having issue a daughter, the Conusor dies, the wife afterward
dies, the eldest son enters and leaseth the Lands to the Plaintiff. Atkinson,
That upon this conveyance a Reversion was left in the Conusor, although by the
fine all is conveyed out of the Conusor; and so (as it has been objected) the
use limited to the right heirs of the Conusor, is a new thing: For it is to be
observed, When a man is seized of Lands, he has two things, the Land, or the
Estate, and secondly the use which is the profits; and if he make a Feoffment
without consideration, by that the estate and possession passes, but not the
use, wherefore the use descends after to the Son and Heir. And in our case if
the Wife and Son had died without issue in the life of the Father, all should
be in the Father and his Heirs. And if a man make a Feoffment in Fee, unto the
use of his last Will, it shall be unto the use of the Feoffor and his Heirs,
and in our case, this limitation to the Right Heirs of the Conusor is, as if no
mention had been made of it, and then it should be to the Father, and his
Heirs. And afterward it was adjudged, That it was a Reversion, and no
Remainder, Co. Inst. 22. b. Post. 88.
and by Gaudy, This Limitation, To his Right Heirs, is merely void. Wray, As if
he had made a Feoffment to the use of one for life, without further Limitation.

CCLVII. Holland and Franklins Case. Hill. 31 Eliz. Rot. 723. In the Kings
Bench.
IN a Replevin, Replevin. Owen 138, 1^9. 2 Len. 121. 3 Len. 175.
the Defendant made Conusans as Bailiff to Thomas Lord Howard, and showed, How
that the Prioress of Holliwel was seized o^ the Manor of Prior in her demes^e
as of Fee, etc. and 4 Nov. 19 H. 8. by Deed enrolled sold unto the Lord Audley,
the said Manor, who died having issue a Daughter, who took to Husband Thomas
late Duke of Norfolk, who had issue the said Lord Howard, and that after their
death the said Manor descended, etc. The Plaintiff in bar of the Conusans
showed, That the said Deed was primo deliberatum, 4 Nov. 30 H. 8. And that mean
betwixt the date and the delivery, scil. 12 October, The said Prioress leased
the said Manor to one A. for ninety nine years, and conveyed the Term to the
Plaintiff, absque hoc, that the Prioress bargained and sold the said Manor to
the Lord Audley, ante dimissionem praedict. dicto A. fact. upon which there was
a Demurrer. Cook, Averment.
This Averment of another delivery than the Deed does purport against the Deed
enrolled, shall not be received, no more than a man may aver, That a
Recognizance was acknowledged at another day, etc. for every Record imports a
truth in it, and express averment shall not be received against it, but a man
may confess and avoid; See 7 H. 7. 4. It cannot be assigned for Error, that in
a Redisseisin, the Sheriff non accessit ad tenementa, as he has returned, for
that is against his Retorn which is Recorded, and the date of the Record is the
principal part of it, which see 37 H. 6. 21. by all the Justices, That matter
of Record has always relation to the date, and not to the Delivery, contrary
of a Deed which is not of Record, for the same shall have relation always to
the delivery; and see 39 H. 6. 32. by all the Justices, Relation of Records and
Deeds.
averment against a Deed enrolled that it was not delivered shall not be
received; so in the Case betwixt Ludford and Gretton, 19 Eliz. Plowd. 149. It
is holden by all the Justices, That the Kings Charter has relation to the time
of the date, because that matters of Record carry in them by presumtion of Law
for the Highness of them, truth, and therefore one cannot say, That such a
Charter was made or delivered at another day, than at that at which it bears
date; So of a Recognizance, Statute, etc. but against Letters Patents a man may
say, Non concessit, for perhaps nothing passes thereby, Averment.
and then it is not contrary to the Record. Atkinson contrary, I confess that
the party himself (whose Deed it was) cannot take a direct averment against a
Deed enrolled, but he may confess and avoid it, so as he leave it a Record, as
if a Fine were levied by another in my name of my Land, I am bound by it; but
if the Fine were levied by another in my name I am not bound, for I may confess
and avoid it, and yet leave the Record good; but here the Plaintiff is a
stranger to his Deed enrolled: And some Records shall bind all persons, as
Certificates of Bastardy, etc. for all may give evidence in such case, 2 H. 5.
Estoppel 91. A. makes a Feoffment in Fee, Co. 3 Inst. 230, 231.
and afterward before the Coroner confesses a Felony supposed to done before
the Feoffment, the Feoffee shall have an averment against it. Egerton the
Queens Solicitor, contrary, Matter of Record cannot be gainsaid in the point,
or in matter of implication, and therefore against that he cannot say, Non est
factum, 16 E. 3. Abb. 13. A Deed enrolled in pais, cannot be denied, 24 E. 3.
64. A Deed enrolled is not a Record, but a thing recorded, which cannot be
denied. And here this plea is a violent averment against the Deed, for it
amounts to as much as if he had said, Not his Deed at the time of the
enrollment: but I confess that such a Deed may be avoided by a thing which
stands with the Deed by matter out of the Deed. It has been objected, That
this acknowledging of the Deed ought to be made by Actorn^y, and therefore made
in person it is not any acknowledgment, and so against such acknowledgment, Non
est factum may be pleaded, and a Fine or confession in a Writ of annuity upon
prescription, or in assise shall bind the house, See 16 E. 3. Abb. 13. That a
fine, Recognizance, and Covenant of Record shall bind the House in such case.
And the acknowledgment of the Prioress alone will serve in this Case, for the
Nuns are as dead persons: And posito, that a Master of the Chancery comes into
the Chapter House, and receives such an acknowledgment, I conceive that it is
good enough. It has been objected, That here the Plaintiff is not estopped to
take the averment, because we have not pleaded our matter by way of Estoppel;
certainly the same needs not here, for the Record it self carries the Estoppel
with it, and the truth appears by the Record, and the Court ought to take
hold of it. Godfrey contrary, A Deed enrolled may be avoided by matter, which
is not contrary to the Record, as 19 R. 2. Estoppel 281. in sur cui in vita, a
Release of the Mother of the Demandant with warranty was pleaded in Bar, and
that enrolled, To which the Demandant said, That at the time of the Release
supposed to be made, our mother had a husband one F. and so the Deed was void,
and so avoided the Deed by matter dehors, scil. Coverture; so of enfancy, but
not by a general averment: A man no lettered shall avoid a Deed enrolled by
such special matter; so an obligation made against the Statute of 23 H. 6. and
these special matters shall utterly avoid the Deeds against whom they are
pleaded; but in our case we do confess the Deed to be good to some intent, 1
Len. 84.
scil. after our Lease expired, for which our case is the better case. And at
another day it was objected, That the Deed could not be acknowledged without a
Letter of Attorney, being a Corporation, which consisted upon diverse persons,
as Prioress and Covent, and they are always to be intended to be in their
Chapter House, and cannot come into Court to acknowledge a Deed: To which it
was answered by Cook, That this acknowledgment being generally pleaded, it
shall be intended, that it was done by a Lawful means, and there is no doubt,
but that such a Corporation may levy a Fine, and make a Letter of Attorney to
acknowledge it, and see, 2 Ma. Fulmerstones case 105. It was further objcted, 2
Inst. 674.
That this Deed was enrolled the same day that it bears date, for the
pleading is per factum suum gerens Datum, 2 November. 29 Hen. 8. et iisdem die
and anno irrotulat. And by the Statute such a Deed ought to be enrolled within
six Months next after the date, so as the day of the date is excluded, and so
it is not enrolled within six Months: As to that it was answered by Cook, That
the time of computation does begin presently after the delivery of the Deed, as
in the common Cases of Leases, If a man makes a Lease for years to begin from
the day of the date, the same is exclusive; but if it be To have and to hold
from the date of the Deed, it shall begin presently. And an Ejectment supposed
the same day is good, and then here, this Enrolment is within the six Months;
Dyer 220. b. 1 Cro. 717.
and yet see 5 Eliz. 128. Dyer, Pophams case. It was also objected, That it is
alleged in the conusans, That the Manor was sold to the Lord Audley, and that
the Deed of Bargain and Sale was acknowledged and enrolled in the Chancery, the
said Lord being then Lord Chancellor, and he cannot take an acknowledgment of a
Deed, or enrolment of it to himself, for he is the Sole Judge in the said
Court, so as the Deed is acknowledged before himself, and enrolled before
himself, and that is good enough, for here we are not upon the common Law, but
upon the Statute, and here the words of the Statute are performed. And the
enrolment of the Deed is not the substance of the Deed, but the Deed it self.
Also the acknowledgment of the Deed, after it is enrolled is not material, for
he is estopped to say that it is not acknowledged. And as to the matter it
self, a man shall not have averment against the purport of a Record, but
against the operation of a Record, as not put in view, not comprised, parts ad
finem nihil haberunt, etc. And against Letters Pattens of the King, Non
concessit, is a good plea, which see 18 Eliz. for by such plea it is agreed,
that it is a Record, but that nihil operatur.

CCLVIII. Osborn and Kirtons Case. Hill. 31 Eliz. In the Kings Bench. Rot. 258.
IN Debt upon an Obligation, The Defendant cast a Protection, Debt.
upon which the Plaintiff did demur. Tanfield, The Protection is not good, for
the Defendant is let to Bail, and so is intended always in prison, for so the
Record makes mention, and then the Protection quia moratur in portubus Zeland
is against the Record, Protection.
and the Court ought to give credit to Records especially. Secondly, The words
of the Protection are, That Kirton is employed in Obsequio nostro, which is no
cause of protection, for the usual form (and so is the Law) that such a person
be employed in negotio Regni, for the defense of England, etc. For if the King
will give aid unto another Princes Subjects employed in such service, he shall
not have Protection. And afterward variance was objected betwixt the Bill and
Declaration, and the Protection: for the Bill is against John Kirton of A.
Gentleman, and the Protection is John Kirton only: But the same was holden no
such variance being only in the Addition, for before the Statute 1 H 5.
additions were not necessary in any actions.

CCLIX. Boyton and Andrews Case. Mich. 30 Eliz. Rot. 156. In the Kings Bench.
IN Debt upon an Obligation, the Condition was, Debt. 1 Cro. 135.
to make sufficient assurance of certain Lands to the Obligee before the tenth
day of March 17 Eliz. And if it fortune the said Obligee be unwilling to
receive, or mislike such assurance, but shall make Request to have one hundred
pounds for satisfaction thereof, Then if upon such Request, the Obligor pay one
hundred pounds within five months, That then the Obligation shall be void. And
at the day, the Obligee does refuse the assurance, and afterward 27 Eliz.
request is made to have the hundred pounds, It was the clear opinion of the
whole Court, That the said Request was well enough for the time, and he might
make it at any time during his life, and he is not restrained to make it before
the day in which the Assurance is to be made, and afterward judgment was given
for the Plaintiff.

CCLX. Knight and Savages Case. Mich. 29, and 30 Eliz. Rot. 546. In the Kings
Bench.
A Writ of Error was brought upon a Judgment given in Leicester in Debt:
Tanfield assigned Error, Error. 2 Cro. 206. 2 Cro. 109. 654. Sty. 91. Yel. 164.
165. Post. 302.
because in that Suit there was not any plaint, and in all inferior Courts, the
plaint is as the original at the common Law, and without that no process can
issue forth. And here upon the Record nothing is entered but that the Defendant
summonitus fuit, etc. and therefore the first entry ought to be A. B. queritur
adversus, C, etc.

Clench, A Plaint ought to be entered before process issues, and the summons
which is entered here, is not any plaint, and for that cause the Judgment was
reversed: It was said, That after the Defendant appeared, a Plaint was entered,
but it was said by the Court, That that shall not mend the matter, for there
ought to be a plaint out of which the process shall issue, as in the Courts
above out of the original Writs.

CCLXI. Kirby and Eccles Case. Trin. 31 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
1 Cro. 137.
IN an Action upon the Case the Plaintiff declared, Quod cum quaedam
communicatio fuisset betwixt the Plaintiff, and one Cowper, That Cowper should
mast certain Hogs for the Plaintiff, the Defendant did promise, That in
consideration, that the Plaintiff promised give unto the Defendant three
shillings and four pence, for the fatting of every Hog, That the said Hogs
should be redelivered to him well fatted; to which promise and warranty, the
Plaintiff giving faith, delivered to the said Cowper one hundred and fifty Hogs
to be masted; and that one hundred of them were delivered back, but the residue
were not: It was moved, That here is not any consideration for which the
Defendant should be charged with any promise: but it was argued, on the other
side, That the Promise was the cause of the Contract, and being made at the
time of the Communication and contract, should charge the Defendant; but if the
promise were at another time, it should be otherwise. There was a Case lately
betwixt Smith and Edmunds, Two Merchants, being reciprocally endebted the one
to the other, agreed betwixt themselves to deliver all their Bills and Bonds
into the hands of one Smith, who promised that he would not deliver them to the
parties until all accounts were ended betwixt them; and yet he did deliver
them, and for that an Action brought against him was adjudged maintainable: yet
there was not any consideration, nor was it material, for the action is
grounded upon the Deceit, and so is it here, upon the Warranty: And of that
opinion were Clench and Wray, Justices; but Gaudy was of a contrary opinion.

CCLXII. Woodshaw and Fulmerstones Case. Hill. 30. Eliz. Rot. 699 In the Kings
Bench.
WOodshaw, Executor of Heywood, brought Debt upon a Bond against Richard
Fulmerstone, and the Writ was dated October Mich. 29 and 30 Eliz. and the
Condition of the Bond was, That if Fulmerstone died before his Age of one and
twenty years, and before that he had made a Ioynture to A. his Wife, Daughter
of the Testator Heywood, Then if the said Defendant caused one hundred pounds
to be paid to the said Heywood, within three months after the death of the
said William, that then the Bond should be void; and the said William
Fulmerstone died 30 September 30 Eliz. which matter he is ready, etc. The
Plaintiff does traverse, absque hoc, that the said Heywood died intestate.
Tanfield, It appears of Record that the Plaintiff has not cause of action,
for this one hundred pounds, was to be paid within three Months after the death
of William Fulmerstone, 1 Cro. 271, 325, 565.
as the Defendant has alleged, which is also confessed by the Plaintiff, and
this Action is entered Mich. October 30 Eliz. scil. within a month after the
death of William Fulmerstone, and so before the Plaintiff has cause of action,
and therefore he shall be barred. Gaudy, Where it appears to the Court, that
the Plaintiff has not cause of Action, he shall never have Judgment, as in the
Case betwixt Tilly and Wordy, 7 E. 4. But here it does appear that the
Plaintiff has cause of Action, for where a man is bound in an obligation, the
same is a duty presently, Obligation.
and the condition is but in defeazance of it, which the Defendant may plead in
his discharge.

CCLXIII. Windham and Sir Edward Cleers Case. Trin. 31 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
ROger Windham brought an Action upon the Case against Sir Ed. C. declared that
the said Ed. being a Justice of Peace in the County of N. and where the
Plaintiff was a loyal subject, Action upon the Case of sclander. 1 Cro. 130.
and of good fame all his life time, nor ever touched, or reproched with any
offense of Ro^ery, etc. the Defendant, malitiose and invide machinams ipsum
Rogerum, de bonis, nomine, fama et vita deprivare, directed his warrant to
diverse Baylifs and Constables of the said County to arrest the said Plaintiff:
And it was alleged in the said Warrant, That the Plaintiff was accused before
him of the stealing of the horse of A. B. by reason of which the Plaintiff was
arrested, and so detained until he had entered into a Bond for his appearance,
etc. whereas in truth, he was never accused thereof, nor ever stole such horse;
and whereas the Defendant himself knew that the Plaintiff was guiltless; by
reason of which, he was greatly discredited, etc. And it was found for the
Plaintiff; And it was moved, that upon this matter an Action does not lie, for
a Justice of Peace if he suspect any person of Felony, or other such Offense
may direct his Warrant to arrest him. 14. H. 8. 16 Gaudy and Clench, If a man
be accused to a Justice of Peace for Felony, for which he directs his Warrant
to arrest him, although the accusation be false the Justice of Peace is
excused, but if the party in truth was not accused before the Justice, it is
otherwise: It was a Case lately betwixt the Lord Lumley and Foord, where Foord
in a letter written by him, had written, It is reported, That my Lord Lumley
seeks my life: If it was not Reported, an Action upon the Case lies, but if
reported, no Action lies: So here, if he was accused no Action lies, but if
not, an Action lies: And afterward in the principal Case, Judgment was given
for the Plaintiff.

CCLXIV. Isleys Case. Trin. 31 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
ISley and others were Plaintiffs in an Ejectione firmae, and upon the general
Issue it was found for the Plaintiffs, and 4 days after the verdict given, was
moved in stay of judgment a special ma^ter in Law, whereof the Justices were
not resolved for the law, but took advisement and gave day over; and in the
mean time one of the Plaintiffs died, which matter the Defendant showed to the
Court in further stay of the Judgment: But by Coke, the same is not any cause,
for the Postea came in Quindena Pasch. which was 16 Aprilis, at which day the
Court ought to have given Judgment presently, but took time to be advised, and
the 19 of April, one of the Plaintiffs died; And the favor of the Court ought
not to prejudice us; for the Judgment here shall have Relation to the 16 of
April, at which time he was alive; and it was so of late adjudged in the Case
of Derick James, who died the day after the verdict, and yet Judgment was not
stayed, for the Court after verdict cannot examine surmises, and they have not
a day in Court to plead, and in our case, It was but a day of Grace, and no
entry is made of it; Although no plea can be now pleaded after verdict, yet as
amicus curiae, one may inform us of such matter: And sometimes in such case,
Judgment has been stayed, as 9 Eliz. and sometimes notwithstanding such
Exception, as 2 Eliz. So as I conceive the matter is much in the discretion of
the Justices. And because the same was a hard verdict, and much against the
Evidence, It is good discretion upon this matter to stay Judgment, and such was
the opinion of the Court.

CCLXV. Steed and Courtneys Case. Trin. 31 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
Error. 1 Cro. 116. Owen 93. More. 691. Prescription to levy a fine, not good.
ERror was brought upon a Fine levied upon a Plaint in a writ of Covenant in the
City of Exceter. And two Errors were assigned: First, The Plaint was, quod
teneat convent. de duobus tenementis. Whereas in truth, the word Tenement does
not comprehend any certainty, for in the Word (Tenement) is understood,
Message, Land, Meadow, Pasture, etc. and whatsoever syeth in tenure: And 11 H.
6. 18. by grant of Lands and Tenements, Rent or Common shall pass. And an
Ejectione firmae both not lie of a Tenement, nor a forcible entry supposed in a
Tenement, 11 H. 7. 25. and 38 H. 6. 1. Another error was, because the Fine was
levied in the Court of the City of Exceter: Which see 44 E. 3. 37, 38. Those of
Exceter can prescribe to have the Conusans; but the same ought to be by special
Charter of the King by express words. Egerton the Queens Solicitor, who sat
under the Justices, and was not of Counsel in the case said, 2 Inst. 515. 1
Roll. 489.
That he was of Counsel in a case betwixt Bunbery and Bird, where such a Fine
levied in Chester by prescription was in question, was by a Writ of Error
reversed: And afterward in the principal case the Fine was reversed for the
first Error.

CCLXVI. Trin. 31 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
1 Cro. 96. 97.
THe Case was this, Grandfather, Father and Son: The Grandfather seized of a
house called the Swan in Ipswich, devised the same to his eldest Son for life,
the Remainder to A. Son of his eldest Son, and the heirs males of his body,
Devises.
the Remainder to the right heirs of the Devisor, and to the heirs males of his
body, and died. The Father and Son died without issue male, the Son having
issue a Daughter, who entered and assured the Land unto one Hawes, and
covenanted, That she was seized of the said Message of a certain and sure
estate in Fee-simple. Godfrey, That the Daughter shall take the last Remainder,
as right heir at the time that it ought to be executed, and to the heirs males
of her body, as if it had been devised to her by her proper Name, so she has
but an estate tail, and so the covenant is broken. Cook contrary: At the time
that the devise took effect by the death of the Devisor, the Father was his
Right heir, so as the Remainder vested in him immediately, Antea 182.
and shall not expect in abeyance until the Father and Son dye without heir
male of the Son, for the Father is a person able to take, so that upon the
death of the Devisor, the Father is Tenant for life, the Remainder to the Son,
and the heirs males of his body, the Remainder to the Father in tail ut supra,
the Reversion to the Father in fee, and the Daughter has the same Reversion by
descent after the Entayls spent; all which Wray Justice granted.

CCLXVII Galliard and Archers Case. Mich. 31 and 32 Eliz. In the Common Pleas,
Intrat. Trin. 31 Eliz. Rot. 1529.
GAlliard brought an Action upon the Case against Archer; Trover and Conversion.
The Plaintiff declared, That he himself was possessed of certain goods, which
by trover came to the hands of the Defendant, who has converted them to his
own use: The Defendant pleaded, Postea. ^^^.
That before the Trover supposed, one A. was possessed of the said goods as of
his proper goods, and sold them to the Defendant, and that he had not any
notice that the said goods were the goods of the Plaintiff, upon which the
Plaintiff did demur in Law. And by Anderson the plea is not good, for the
Plaintiff may choose to have his Action against the first finder, or against any
other, which gets the goods after by Sale, Gift, or Trover; And by some,
Postea. 253.
The Defendant having the goods by Sale, might traverse the finding: See Contr.
27 H. 6. 13. a. And see by some, In detinue, where the Plaintiff declares of a
Bailment, The Defendant may say, That he found them, and traverse the Bailment,
39 H. 6. 37. by Moile; and by Windham Justice, The Defendant may traverse the
property of the goods in the Plaintiff, 12 E. 4. 11.

CCLXVIII. Edwards and Tedbuties Case. Mich. 31 and 32 Eliz. In the Common
Pleas.
EDwards of London was endebted unto one A. of the same City, Bailment of goods
to a Carrier.
and Edwards delivered goods to one Tedbury Carrier of Exceter, who went to him
to carry for him certain Wares to be carried to Exceter, to certain Tradesmen
there, the said goods to be delivered to them, etc. And so the said goods,
Wares, and Merchandises, being in the possession of the Defendant Tedbury to be
carried to Exceter, the said A. caused them to be attached in the hands of the
said Carrier, for the Debt of the said Edwards, The said Carrier being then
privileged in the Common Pleas, by reason of an Action there depending. And by
the clear opinion of the whole Court, the said Attachment ought to be
dissolved: Attachment of goods.
For the Carrier for the reason aforesaid is privileged in his parson, and his
goods, and not only in his own goods, whereof the property belongs to him, but
also in such goods in his possession for which he is answerable to others, etc.
And so it was adjudged.

CCLXIX. Cockshal, and the Mayor, etc. of Boaltons Case. Mich. 31 and 32 Eliz.
In the Common Pleas.
HEnry Cockshal brought an Action upon the case against the Mayor, Con^pi^^^^.
Town-Clark, and Goal or of Boalton, in the County of L. and declared, That
where he himself had affirmed a Plaint of Debt in the Court of the said Town,
before the said Mayor, etc. against I.S. and thereupon had caused the said I.S.
to be arrested, The said Defendants did conspire together to delay the
Plaintiff of his said suit, in peril of his Debt, had let the said I. S. go at
large without taking Bail. Periam Justice conceived, That upon that matter, the
Action does not lie, for the not taking of Bail is a judicial act, for which he
shall not be impeached: But all the other Justices were strongly of opinion
against him, for the not taking of Bail is not the cause of the Action, but the
Conspiracy.

CCLXX. Erbery and Lattons Case. Mich. 31 and 32 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
1 And. 234.
IN a Replevin, The Defendant does avow because he is seized of such a Manor
within which there is a Custom, That the greater part of the Tenants at any
Court within the said Manor holden appearing may make Bylaws, for the most
profit and best government of the Tenants of the said Manor, etc. and that such
Bylaws should bind all Tenants, etc. and showed further, That at such a Court
holden within the said Manor the Homage there, being the greater part of
Tenants of the Manor aforesaid, at the Court aforesaid appearing, made this
By-law, scilicet, That no Tenant of the said Manor should put into such a
Common any Steer being a year old or more, upon pain of six pence for every
such Offense, and that it should be lawful to distreyn for the same: And the
Court was Clear of opinion, That the By-law was utterly void, For it is against
Common Right, where a man has Common for all his Cattle Commonable, to
restrain him to one kind of Cattle, etc. But if the By-law had bin, That none
should put in his Cattle before such a day, the same had bin good, for such
By-law does not take away, but order the Inheritance; For the nature of a
By-law is to put Order betwixt the Tenants concerning their affayrs within the
Manor which by law they are not compellable to do: And by Periam, The Avowant
ought to have averred, That this By-law was for the Common profit of the
Tenants: See the Lord Cromwells Case. 15 Eliz. Dyer 322. and afterward in the
Principal Case, Judgment was given against the Avowant.

CCLXXI. Wicks and Dennis Case. Mich. 31 and 32 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
Replevin.
WIcks brought a Replevin of Dennis, who avowed, That one Dennis his Father was
seized of the Manor, etc. and granted out of it to the avowant a Rent of twenty
pounds per annum, and further granted, That if the said Rent be arrear unpaid
six days after the feasts, etc. wherein it ought to be paid, si licite petatur,
That then it should be lawful to distrein; The grantor afterward by Indenture
Covenanted with the Lord Treasurer and others, to stand seized of the same
Manor, unto the use of himself and his heirs, until he or his heirs have made
default in they payment of one hundred pounds per annum, until three thousand
pounds be paid, and after default of payment, to the use of the Queen and her
heirs, until the sum of three thousand pounds should be paid and levied; The
grantor afterward levied a fine to the said Lord Treasurer and others to the
uses aforesaid, the Rent is arrear; default of the payment of the hundred
pounds in made, Office is found, The Queen seized the land, the Avowant during
the possession of the Q. demanded the Rent, and the arrearages thereof, The
Queen granted over the Manor to W. and B. and D. the grantee did distrain for
the rent, and arrearages demanded, ut supra. It was moved by H. Sergeant That
this demand of several sums payable at several days before, is not good; for
every sum ought to be severally demanded when it was first due, scil. si licite
petatur, scil. within the six days; for otherwise without such demand, distress
is not lawful, and he resembled it to the case of Sir Thomas Gresham 23.
Elizabeth Dyer, 372 of several Tenders. Periam conceived that the demand ought
to be several. Anderson, That the demand is good enough. And as to the demand
made during the possession of the Queen, It was holden by the whole Court to be
good enough; for although the possession of the Queen be privileged, as to the
distress, yet the demand is good, Demand of Rent charge during the possession
of the King; good.
without any wrong to her prerogative; for the Rent in right is due, and the
possession of the Queen is in right charged with it, and the Rent, is only
recoverable by Petition, as it was by way of distress; and if the party sueth
to the Queen by Petition for the said Rent, he ought to show in his Petition,
that he has demanded the Rent, for if the possession had bin in a common
person, he could not distreyn before demand, nor by consequence have Assise:
And the Rent, notwithstanding the possession of the Queen, is demandable and
payable for to entitle the party unto Petition against the Queen, and to
distress against the subject when the possession of the Queen is removed. And
see 7 H. 6. 40. disseisee may make continual claym, although the possession of
the Land of which he is disseised be in the King. And 34 H. Br. seisin 48. If
the heir at full Age intrude upon the possession of the King, and pays Rent to
the Lord of his Land holden of a subject, the same is a good seisin, and shall
bind the heir after he has sued his livery 5 E. 4. 4. and see 13 H. 7. 15.
That distress taken upon the possession of the King is not lawful, but seisin
obtained during it, is good. So in 21 H. 7. 2.

CCLXXII. Ashegells and Dennis Case. Mich. 31, and 32 Eliz. In the Com. Pleas.
Int. M. 30 and 31. Rot. 458.
AShegel brought a Quare Impedit against Dennis, Quare Impedit. 1 Cro. 163.
Hob. 304.
and the Plaintiff Counted that the Defendant had disturbed him to present ad
vicariam de D. and showed that the Queen was seized of the Rectory of D. and of
the Advowson of the vicaridge of D. and by her letters Patents gave unto the
Plaintiff Rectoriam praedictam cum pertinentiis, and etiam vicariam Ecclesiae
praedict. And it was holden by the whole Court, That the Advowson of the
vicaridge by these words does not pass; nor so in the Case of a common person,
much less in the Case of the King: But if the Queen had granted Ecclesiam suam
of D. then, by Walmesley Justice, the Advowson of the vicaridge had passed.

CCLXXIII. Collman and Sir Hugh Portmans Case. Mich. 31, and 32 Eliz. In the
Common Pleas.
IN Ejectione firmae by Collman against Sir Hugh Portman it was found by
special verdict, Ejectione firmae
That the lands where were holden by Copy of the Manor of D. whereof Sir H.
Portman, was seized, and that the Plaintiff was Copyholder in Fee, and further
found, That the said Sir H. pretending the said Copyhold lands to be
forfeited, Surrender of Copyholder.
entered into Communication with Collman touching the same, upon which
Communication it was agreed betwixt them, That the said Collman should pay to
the said Sir Hugh five pounds, which was paid accordingly, and that in
consideration thereof, Collman should enjoy the said Customary lands, except
one Wood called Combwood for his life, and also of Alice his wife, durante sua
viduitate, and that Collman should have Election whether the said lands should
be assured unto him and his said wife by Copy, or by Bill, etc. and he chose by
Bill, which was made accordingly; and further found, That the said Sir H. held
and enjoyed in his possession the said Wood, etc. and upon this matter, The
Court was clear in opinion, That here is a good surrender of the said lands,
and that for life only, and that the said Sir Hugh had the Wood discharged of
the customary interest.

CCLXXIV. Thetford and Thetfords Case. Mich. 31, and 32 Eliz. In the Common
Pleas.
Debt.
IN an Action of Debt for Rent, the Plaintiff declared, That Land was given to
him, and to T. his wife, and to the heirs of their bodies, and that his wife
leased the Lands to the Defendant, and that the Donees were dead, and that the
Plaintiff as heir, etc. for rent arrear, etc. and upon Non demiserunt, the Jury
found that the Husband and Wife demiserunt, by Indenture, and afterward the
husband died, and the wife entered, and within the term died: Now upon the
matter it seemed clear to Anderson, that the Jury have found for the Defendant,
scil. Non demiserunt, for it is now no lease ab initio, because the Plaintiff
has not declared upon a Deed. Hutt. 102. Die. 91. 2 Co. 61.
1 Ma. Dyer 91. and also the wife by her disagreement to it, and the occupation
of the Land after the death of her Husband, has made it the Lease of the
Husband only.

CCLXXV. Rockwood and Rockwoods Case. Mich. 31, and 32 Eliz. In the Common
Pleas.
Assumpsit. 1 Cro. 163.
IN an Action upon the case, the case was this. The Father of the Plaintiff and
Defendant being sick, and in danger of death, and incending to make his Will,
In the presence of both his Sons the Plaintiff and Defendant, declared his
meaning to be, To devise to the Plaintiff his younger Son a Rent of 4 l. per
annum, for the term of his life out of his Lands, and the Defendant being the
eldest Son (the intention of his Father being to charge the Land with the said
Rent) offered to his Father and Brother, That if the Father would forbear to
charge the Land with the said Rent, he promised he would pay the 4 l. yearly to
his Brother during the life of his Brother, according to the intention of his
said Father; Whereupon the Father asked the Plaintiff if he would accept of the
offer and promised of his Brother: who answered, he would; whereupon the Father
relying upon the promise of his said eldest Son, forbore to devise the said
Rent, etc. so as the Land descended to the Eldest Son discharged of the Rent:
and the opinion of the whole Court in this case was clear, that upon the whole
matter the action did well lie.

CCLXXVI. Petty and Trivilians Case. Mich. 31, and 32 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
Livery of seisin.
HUmphrey Petty brought Second Deliverance against William Trivilian, and upon
especial verdict the case was, That A. was seized of certain Land, and Leased
the same for years, and afterward made a Deed of Feoffment unto B. and a
Letter of Attorney to the Lessee, C. and D. conjunctim vel divisim in omnia and
singula terras et Tenementa intrate et seisinam inde, etc. secundum formam
Chartae, etc. Lessee for years by himself makes Livery and seisin in one part
of the Land, and C. in another part, and D. by himself in another part; It was
first agreed by the Justices, that by that Livery by Lessee for years his
Interest and Term is not determined, for whatsoever he does, he does it as an
Officer, or Servant to the Lessor. Secondly, It was agreed, That these several
Liveries were good and warranted by the Letter of Attorney, especially by
reason of these words, In omnia and singula, etc. So as all of them, and every
of them might enter and make Livery in any and every part. And so it was
adjudged.

CCLXXVII. Rigden and Palmers Case. Mich. 31 and 32 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
RIgden brought a Replevin against Palmer, who avowed for damage feasant in his
Freehold: The Plaintiff said, Replevin.
That long time before that Palmer had any thing, he himself was seized, until
by A. B. and C disseissed, against whom he brought an Assise, and recovered,
Avowry.
and the estate of the Plaintiff was mean between the Assise, and the recovery
in it: The Defendant said, That long time before the Plaintiff had any thing,
One Griffith was seized, and did enfeoff him; absque hoc, that the said A. B.
and C. vel eorum aliquis aliquid habuere in the Lands, at the time of the
Recovery. Walmsley Justice was of opinion, That the Bar unto the Avowry, was
not good, for that the Plaintiff has not alleged, That A.B. and C.
Ter-Tenants tempore recuperationis, and that ought to be showed in every
recovery, where it is pleaded. And then when the Defendant traverseth that
which is not alleged it is not good. Windham contrary: For the Assise might be
brought against others as well as the Tenants; as against disseisors: But other
real actions ought to be brought against the Ter-Tenants only, and therefore it
needs not to show, that they were Ter-Tenants at the time of the Recovery; and
also the traverse here is well enough: Another Exception was taken, because the
Avowry is, That the place in which, contains an 100 Acres of Land, The
Plaintiff in bar of the Avowry says, that the place in which, etc. conteins 35
Acres, etc. but that Exception was not allowed, for it is but matter of form,
and is helped by the Statute of 27 Eliz. Another Exception was taken, as to the
hundred of Cattle, and does not show in certain, if they were Ewes, Sty. 71.
264.
or Lambs, or how many of each: which also was dissallowed, for the Sheriff
upon Returno habendo may enquire what cattle they were in certain, and so by
such means the Avowry shall be reduced to certainty.

CCLXXVIII. RUssell and Prats Case. Mich. 31 and 32 Eliz. In the Exchequer
Chamber.
RUsell brought an action upon the case against Prat, and declared, That
certain goods of the Testator casually came to the Defendants hands; and upon
matter in Law Judgment was given for the Plaintiff, sed quia nescitur quae
damna, Error.
etc. Ideo a writ of Enquiry of Damages issued, and now Prat brought a Writ of
Error in the Exchequer Chamber upon the Statute of 27 Eliz. cap. 8. But note,
That the Judgment was given before the said Statute, but the Writ of Enquiry of
Damages was returned after the said Statute, Writ of Enquiry of Damages.
and the said Statute does not extend but to Judgments given after the making
of it. And it was moved, That the said Judgment is not to be examined here; but
by the clear opinion of Anderson, Manwood, Windham, Walmesley, Gent, and Clark,
Justices of the Common Pleas, and Barons of the Exchequer, the Writ of Error
lies here by the Statute, 1 Cro. 235.
for in an action of Trespass (as this case is) full judgment is not given,
until the Writ of damages be returned; And if before the Retorn of it any of
the parties dies, the Writ shall abate: and the first Iudg^ent which is given
before Award of the Writ is not properly a Judgment, but rather a Rule, and
order, and so in a Writ of account, where Judgment is given that the Defendant
computet cum querente, he shall not have Error upon that matter, for it is not
a full Judgment. See 21 E. 3. 9. So as to the Judgment in a Writ of Trespass,
scil. That no Writ of Error lies before the second Judgment after the Return
of the Writ of Enquiry of Damages are given: And also it was holden by all the
said Justices and Barons, That an Executor shall have an action upon the case
de bonis testatoris, casually come to the hands and possession of another,
Action, de bonis Testatoris.
and by him converted to his own use in the life of the Testator, and that by
the Equity of the Statute of 4 E. 3. 7. de bonis asportatis in vita Testatoris.

CCLXXVIII. Arrundel and the Bishop of Gloucesters, and Chaffins Case. Mich. 31
and 32 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
Quare Impedit.
SIir John Arrundel brought a Quare Impedit against the Bishop of Gloucester,
and Chaffin, and counted upon a disturbance to present 1 Novembris. Chaffin, as
incumbent pleaded, That 1 Maii next after the said 1 November. he himself was
presented to the Church by the Queen, the presentment to the said Church being
devolved unto her by Lapse. Upon which the Plaintiff did demur in Law: And the
plea was holden insufficient, for the Plaintiff counted upon a Disturbance to
him 1 Novem. and the Defendant entitleth himself to an incumbency 1 May after,
in which case the disturbance set forth in the Count is not answered by
traverse, nor confessed, nor avoided: And of that opinion was the whole Court:
For the disturbance, of which the Plaintiff has declared, is confessed. And
afterward, It was moved by the Queens Sergeants, That the Queen might have a
Writ to the Bishop, Writ to the Bishop.
for the title of the Queen appears to be by Lapse which is confessed, But
the whole Court were clear of opinion against it: For although it appears
that he was lawfully presented to the said Church, and so once lawful
Incumbent, yet it appears also, That the title of the Queen is once executed,
and so gone, and nothing remains in the Queen, and now when the Defendant has
lost his incumbency by ill pleading (as he may) as well as by Resignation or
Deprivation, yet the same shall not turn to the advantage of the Queen, for
where the Queen presents for laps, and her Clark is instituted and inducted,
the Queen has no more to do, but the Incumbent must shift as well as he can
for the holding of it, for by what manner so ever he loses his incumbency the
Queen shall not present again; otherwise it had been, if the Queen be Patron,
and afterward the Plaintiff had a Writ to the Bishop.

CCLXXIX. The Lord Pagets Case, in a Monstrans de Droit. The Case was. Mich. 31
and 32 Eliz. In the Exchequer Chamber.
More 193, 194 1 Co. 154. 1 And. 259.
THomas Lord Paget, Father of William Paget, was seized of the Manor of
Burston, and diverse other Manors in three several Counties in his demesne as
of fee, and so seized by Indenture, between the said Lord of the one part, and
Trentham and others on the other part, and in consideration that the said
Trentham and others, with the profits of the said Manors should pay his debts,
and such sums of money which were contained in such a Schedule, and which he
should appoint by his last Will, covenanted to stand seized of the said Manors
to the use of the said Trentham of one Eusal, etc. for the term of four and
twenty years, and after the Expiration or end of the said Term of twenty four
years, unto the use of the said William Paget, his Son in tail, with diverse
Remainders over: And afterward the said Lord Paget was attainted of high
Treason. It was here holden and agreed by all the Justices, and by the Council
of both sides, That the uses limited to Trentham, and others are void, for here
is not any consideration sufficient to raise an use, for the money which is
appointed for the payment of his debts is to be raised of the profits of the
Lands of the said Lord, Declaration of uses.
which is not any consideration on the part of Trentham and others: But if the
consideration had been, That they with the Profits of their own Lands should
pay the debts, etc. It had been a good Consideration: It was agreed also, That
the term for twenty four years to Eusal is void for want of sufficient
consideration: And then it was moved, If this Lease being void, The use limited
to the said William Paget, Son of the said Lord Paget should being presently
upon the death of the Lord Paget, or should expect until the twenty four years
were encurred after the death of the Lord Paget, or not at all. And it was
argued, That an use to be raised upon an impossibility should never rise, as if
I covenant to stand seized to the use of B. and his Heirs, after the end of the
term for years, which I.S. has in the Manor of D. whereas in truth, I. S.
has not any term in it, the said use shall never rise: so here, Use cannot
rise out of a possibility.
No use to the Son can rise, for the lease for twenty four years shall never
end, for it never can begin for want of sufficient consideration as is
aforesaid; and if the said use in tail should at all rise, it should not rise
before the expiration of the said twenty four years. As if I covenant to stand
seized of certain Lands to your use when my Son and Heir shall come to the age
of one and twenty years, now if my Son dies before such age, The use shall not
begin before the time in which my Son (if he shall live) should attain unto his
said age. Egerton the Queens Solicitor, Uses may be limited to begin at times
certain before which they shall not begin: and so in our case, the use in tail
in limited to begin when the term of twenty four years, is ended, and therefore
until the Term be ended no use shall rise: and the use is limited to rise upon
the end of the time or term of four and twenty years, and not upon the end of
the estate; and so William Paget has begun his Monstrans de Droit before his
time. The Lord Paget had but an estate for life; and if so, Then the Remainders
are not continggent uses, but vest presently: as if a man covenant, That after
his death his Son and Heir shall have his Lands, now the Father has but an
estate for life, and the inheritance is vested in the Son. Cook, I covenant,
That after twenty four years ended, I and my Heirs will stand seized to the use
of my Son, etc. there the use in Fee does vest in my Son presently: So I
covenant, That after my death, I and every one who shall be seized, etc. shall
be seized of the said Land to the use of my Brother, the said use shall rise to
my Brother presently: I devise* That after the death of such a Monk, I.S. shall
have the Land, nothing passes to I.S. till the death of the Monk; but if Land
be devised to a Monk for life, and afterwrds to another in Fee, the Devisee in
Fee shall have the Land presently. Manwood, A devise or use limited to one for
life, the Remainder in tail, the first devisee does disagree. Cook, the
Remainder does vest presently. Manwood, I devise lands unto one until my Son
comes of full age. Cook, The remainder does vest presently. Manw. A use limited
to one to begin at Mich. next, the remainder over, if in the mean time the
Lessee obtain the good will of I.S. which he cannot obtain, the same remainder
is not good. And if one covenant to stand seized to the use of Salisbury plain,
for the life of I. S. and after the remainder to A, it is a plain case, That he
in the remainder shall take presently, 37 H. 6. 36. Cestuy que use willed, That
his Feoffees should make an estate to A. for life, the remainder to C. in fee,
and A. would not take the estate, C. shall have a Subpoena against the Feoffees
after the death of A. See there the case; And if Land deviseable, be devised to
one for life, the Remainder over to another in Fee, and the Devisee for life
does refuse; Quaere, if the Devisee in Remainder shall enter presently, See
Fitz. Subpoena; And also he put the Case, where Land is devised to a Monk for
life, the Remainder over to another in Fee, he in the Remainder shall enter
presently, see the same Case in Perkins 108. for the Monk never took any thing
by the devise, and notwithstanding that there is not any particular estate upon
which a Remainder can depend, yet the intent of the Devisor shall be observed
in as much as it may, and the particular estate limited to the Monk is merely
void, of which every stranger shall take advantage, etc. And it was resembled
to a Case in Baintons Case, where an use in Remainder limited upon good
consideration shall be good in Law, although the particular use be not grounded
upon good consideration, and so fails: And he urged a Case alleged by
Popham in the Case of the Earl of Bedford, that if in Cranmers Case, the estate
for years limited to the Executors, 2 Le^. 5. 6.
had been limited to Administrators, it had been merely void, and the use in
tail limited in tail should begin presently, and that was by reason of the
interval betwixt the death of Cranmer, and the taking of the Letters of
Administration, in which mean time there is not any person capable, and
therefore the Remainder shall vest presently, which is a fit case to prove the
Case at Bar: And he remembered that in the Argument of Cranmers Case, Lovelace
Sergeant, would have an Occupancy in the Case of such a Term limited to
Administrators, quod omnes Justiciarii negaverunt: and in the said Case of
Cranmer, it was holden that the Lease for years being void, the estate in the
Remainder did begin presently, without expecting the effluxion of the years,
etc. And truly, a Term imports in it self an Interest, but if the limitation
had been after the Term of twenty four years, etc. the same implies but a bare
time: And to that purpose he cited the Case 35 H. 8. Br. Exposition, 44. A.
Leaseth to B. for ten years, and it is covenanted betwixt them, that if B. pay
unto A. within the said ten years one hundred pounds, that then he shall be
seized to the use of B. in Fee, B. surrenders his Term to A. and within the
said ten years pays the one hundred pounds to A. here B. shall have Fee, for
the years are certain; contrary, if the Covenant had been, If he pay within the
Term.

Popham Attorney General Contrary, The use shall not go beyond the Contract,
and here the Term does not vest, in that it was Limited for want of sufficient
consideration, of the Lord Paget, and the intent was not that his son should
have possession of the land before the term of 24. years expired.

Use what it is.
A use is a thing in Conscience, according to confidence to be guided by the
intent of the parties: and upon such Case at the Common Law W. Paget should not
have a Subpoena before the years expired, and this word (Term) does not alter
the Case; and there is a great difference betwixt an use raised by Feoffment
and an use raised by Covenant, For in the first case the Feffor does dipossess
himself utterly, and if it takes not effect to one purpose it shall take effect
to another purpose: But in the Case of a Covenant it is otherwise, for the use
rises according to the contract and not otherwise, and here the Contract is,
That W. Paget shall have the Land not immediately after the death of his Father,
but after the 24 years expire.

Owen Sergeant, It has been agreed of both sides, That every use shall go
according to the intent of the parties, and here it appears, That it was the
intent of the Lord Paget, to put all the use out of himself, and I see not any
difference betwixt an use raised by Covenant and a use raised by Feoffment. For
a use limited utrovis modo to Paul's Steeple for the life of A. and after to the
use of B. in Fee, the first use is void, but the second good; and here the
meaning of the Lord Paget plainly appears, for there is a Proviso in the
Indenture, That after the said debts and legacies paid, the use limited for 24
years shall cease, and it is exprestly averred, that they are paid 11. H. 4. A.
leaseth for life, the remainder in tail to himself, the Remainder over to a
stranger in Fee, the mean Remainder limited by A. to himself is void, and the
remainder over shall be immediate to the estate for life. Egerton, The words of
the Indenture, and the intent of the parties are the rules of uses, The first
use is void, For the intent of the Lord Paget was void, because contrary to the
Law, and Eusal, to whom the use for years was limited, could not take
presently, for his estate is limited to begin after the death of the Lord
Paget; and there is a great difference betwixt uses raised by Covenant, and by
Feoffment, For when a use is raised by Feoffment, there all is out of the
Feoffor, the land is gone, the use is gone, the trust is gone, nothing
remains but a bare authority to raise uses out of the possession of the
Feoffees, and being new uses, there although some of them be void, yet the
other shall stand; but where a use is raised by way of Covenant there the
covenantor continues in possession, there the uses limited, if they be
according to Law, shall raise and draw the possession out of him, but if not,
the possession shall remain in him, until a lawful use shall arise, which
before its time shall not rise for any defect in the precedent use. And here is
no Term, therefore no end, for that which has not a beginning has no ending,
And if there be no estate, then no Term, and if there be so, then it is to be
taken for the time of 24. years, which is not as yet expired, and then was
there in the Lord Pawlet an estate descendable for 24 years, which by the
Attainder does accrue unto the Queen. And he cited the Case of 13 Eliz. Dyer.
300. Feoffment to the use of himself for life, and afterward to the use of a
woman which he entendeth to marry, until the issue which he should beget on the
said woman should come unto the age of 21. years, and then to the use of the
woman during her widow-hood; They are married, the Husband dies without issue,
the Wife shall hold the land: But by him, if this use had bin raised by way of
Covenant it should be otherwise. Coke Admit that all the uses be good, yet his
meaning was, That the debts and legacies being paid W. Paget should have his
land, for it is provided by the Indenture, That when the debts and legacies are
paid, the estate for 24. years shall cease. Manwood, The payment of the debts
cannot end that which never was, and as to the two first estates, they were
never out of him, therefore they came unto the Q. by his attainder. Coke, After
debts and legacies paid all other estates but the estate of W. Paget cease,
therefore William Paget shall have the Land. And the rule of Shelly 35 H. 8. 56
is worthy to be received, scil. That learning is honest, and wished to be used,
that every man learned in the Law, do construe Deeds according to the meanings
of the makers. Manwood, A Feoffment to the use of Salisbury Plain for the life
of I. S. the Remainder over, the same use shall come into possession presently,
for there is not any person capable of the particular estate, but where the
first use is limited to a Bastard, the remainder over, there, the Remainder
shall not come into possession presently, for the Bastard is a person capable,
but not by such form of conveyance in consideration of natural affection.
Popham, In the case of Bastard, there was an estate for life executed to the
Father in possession, and then a Remainder to a Bastard, the Remainder to the
Sons lawfully begotten; but here in our Case no estate is created to precede
the estate of William Paget, upon which the Remainder can depend.

At another day, It was argued by Coke, It is to be agreed on both sides, That
the estate for four and twenty years is merely void, and also the first use
limited to Trentham and others, and it is not reason, that the use limited to
William Paget, should expect until the four and twenty years be expired by
effluxion of time, and to that purpose he cited Cranmers Case, where an estate
in use was limited to Cranmer for life, the Remainder to his Executors for one
and twenty years, the Remainder over in tail to his Son and Heir, etc. Cranmer
is attainted of Treason and Heresy, so as he could not make a Will, or
Executors, there it is holden, That the term is void, because no Executors, and
that the Remainder in use should vest presently, and should not expect until
the said number of years expire by effluxion of time. And difference has been
put betwixt the case of Cranmer, and the Case at Bar, because in Cranmers Case
there was a possibility at the beginning that the Term for years might be good,
for the term became void by matter ex post facto, sci. By the attainder of him,
which disabled him to make Executors, but in the Case at Bar, the term for
twenty four years was expressly void ab initio: But that difference is without
reason, for what reason is there, That the Remainder should be father off the
possession when the estate for years is originally void, than when it becomes
void by matter ex post facto? Suppose that the Lord Paget had by Indenture
covenanted as above for the two first uses, (being in truth void in Law) and
afterward by another Indenture, reciting, That whereas he had covenanted, That
in consideration That A. with the profits of his Lands should pay his debts,
etc. to stand seized of the said Lands for his own life: Now he covenants, to
stand seized to the use of William Paget, and his Heirs, should not he
presently be seized to the use of William Paget, and his Heirs, although the
words be, That then and from thenceforth? For I hold it a clear case, that his
estate begins presently, being limited, to begin upon a void estate, althouh
the limitation be by words de futuro. And to this purpose he cited the case 3
E. 6. Br. Lease 62. A man leaseth for years, Habendum post dimissionem inde
fact. to J.S. finitam, where no such demise is made, the same Lease shall begin
presently: If an Indenture be made to a Monk, and another, Habend. to the Monk
for one and twenty years, and after the end of that, to the other for one and
twenty years, the other shall have it presently. And he put a Case 7 E. 3. in
the new Impression 19. and in the old Impression 317. Where one Maud brought a
Formedon in the Remainder, and counted that one Hamond was seized, and gave the
said Tenements to one Robert, etc. in tail, and that for want of such issue,
that the Tenements should return to the said Hamond for life, the Remainder to
the Demandant in Fee, and counted further, That Robert is dead without issue,
and that Hamond is also dead, etc. It was holden, although that the Remainder
reserved to the Donor, be void, yet the Remainder over in Fee is good, etc. And
in that case although that the Remainder in Fee was future, sci. After the
death of Hamond, and the estate reserved to Hamond merely void, and that
originally, and not by matter ex post facto, yet the Remainder in Fee was good,
and should begin presently upon the death of Robert without issue, and should
not expect the death of Hamond. Mr. Attorney has given a Rule, That the intent
of the parties is the Direction of uses, as also of Wills, and therefore I will
put one Case of Wills, 37 H. 6. 17. If a man devise Lands to a Monk for four
and twenty years, and after the same ended to another in Fee, here the Monk
being a dead person cannot take the estate limited to him, and therefore it is
void: but the Fee limited to the other is good, and shall take effect
presently: If it be so in a Will, why not so also in uses? For the intents of
the parties do direct the constructions of both: And our case here is a
stronger case than the case cited 37 H. 6. 36. for there where Land is devised
to a Monk for life, there may be color of an Occupant during the life of the
Monk, who might take it, although the Monk himself cannot take it, and so the
Remainder does not take effect presently as to the possession, but shall stay
till after the death of the Monk; But here is not any color of an Occupancy,
for the estate here is a Lease for years, which cannot admit an Occupant. And
see also 37 H. 6. 36. If a man devise that his Feoffees shall make an estate to
I. S. for life, the Remainder over to C. in Fee, and I. S. will not take his
estate, C. shall have a Sub-poena against the Feoffees to make an estate to
him, leaving out I. S. and see Amy Townsends Case in the Commentaries, where
the Husband seized in the Right of his Wife, makes a Feoffment in Fee to the
use of himself, and his wife for their lives, the Remainder over to another,
the husband dies, the wife refuses the estate limited to her by the Husband,
she brings Sur cui in vita, not against the heir, but against him in the
Remainder, to whom the Land does accrue by the refusal of the wife; not against
the heir of the Feoffor; and I grant, That where an estate in use, or otherwise
is to begin upon a condition precedent which is impossible, or against the Law,
the estate shall never rise or begin. And here the Case of the Lord Borroughs,
35 H. 8. Die. 55. was cited, Where the Father covenanted in consideration of
marriage of his Son, that immediately after his death his eldest Son shall have
the possession or use of all his Lands according to the same course of
inheritance, as then they stood, and that all persons now seized, or to be
seized, should be seized to the said use and intent, and it was holden, That
upon that matter no use is changed: But if the Words had bin Immediately after
his death, they should remain, then although the words of the Limitation be In
futuro, the use of the Fee shall rest in the Son presently; and the words In
futuro ought not to be interpreted, but in benefit of him to whom the use, and
estate is limited, 9 Eliz. Dyer. 261. A. Leaseth for thirty years, and four
years after the beginning of the said term he makes another Lease for years by
these words, Noverint, etc. dictis 30 annis finitis and completis, demisisse
omnia praemissa, to the said, etc. Habendum and tenendum a die confectionis
praesentium, termino praedict finito, usque ad finem 30 annorum. And by the
opinion of all the Justices, This new Lease shall commence in possession at the
end of the former term, and not before, and if it should not be expounded, the
second Lease should be in effect an estate; but for ten years, which was not
the intent of the parties, and every grant shall be expounded most strongly for
the grantee, and to his advantage, to which purpose he said he had vouched this
Case. Also by him there is not any difference, where the use is limited by way
of covenant, or upon a Feoffment: And if a man enfeoffeth B. upon condition
that he shall enfeoff C. now if he offer to enfeoff C. and he refuses, the
Feoffor may re-enter. But if the condition were to give to C. in tail, then
upon such refusal of C. the Feoffor shall not re-enter. See 2 E. 4. 2. 19 H. 6.
34. E. si Equitas sit adhibenda in construction of conditions a multo fortiori
in case of Uses: A Feoffment in Fee upon condition, that the Feoffee shall
grant a Rent charge to J. S. who does it, but J. S. refuses, the Feoffor shall
not re-enter, for that was not the intent of the condition: If in the principal
case, Post. 266.
the limitation of the use had been after the expiration of twenty four years,
then no use should rise before the twenty four years expire, but where, not the
time, but the estate is material, there, if the estate be void, the use shall
go to him in the Remainder presently, and shall not stay the time, 1 Co. 154.
etc.

Egerton Solicitor, first it is to see, if the use limited to William Paget be
good; secondly, if William Paget does not come before his time to show his
Right: If this use limited to William Paget be a Remainder or an estate to
begin upon a contingent, or a present estate, the estates formerly limited
being void; and he conceived, that it is not a Remainder, for there is not any
estate upon which it may depend; And the words are after the estate for twenty
four years ended or expired, that then and from thenceforth to the use of
William Paget, etc. so that no use is limited to him before the particular
estate is ended, therefore no Remainder, for a Remainder ought to begin when
the particular estate begins. Without doubt that was not the intent that
William Paget should have the Land during the life of his Father, and yet the
use limited during the life of his Father, was void, and if the Remainder
should take effect during the said twenty four years against Eusall and his
companions, wherefore should it not also take effect against Trentham and the
others, to whose use it was limited during the life of the Lord Paget: And
here, the use limited to William Paget is to begin upon a collateral
contingent, upon which if it cannot rise, it shall not rise at all; and I
conceive that the use limited to William Paget, shall never rise, or begin, for
it is limited to begin when the term of twenty four years is ended, and that is
never, for that which cannot begin, cannot end, and this Term is merely void,
Ergo, it cannot begin, Ergo, it cannot end, then this thenceforth cannot be,
and so this contingent can never fall. H. 6. and 7. E. 6. A Lease was made for
years upon condition, that if the Lessee do not pay such a sum of money, that
he should lose his Indenture, the meaning and sense of these words is not that
he should lose the Indenture in parchment, but that he should lose his Term:
The Judgment in an Eectjone firmae, is, Quod querens recuperet terminum suum,
that is to be understood, not the time, but his Interest in the Land for the
Term (And Coke secretly said, that in that case there is not any contingent,
for the estates precedent never began.) And as to the Case cited before by
Coke, Br. Leases 62. If the last Lease be made by Indenture, reciting the
former Lease, certainly the second Lessee shall not be concluded to claim the
Land demised presently, but shall tarry until the years of the first Term be
expired by effluction of time. And as to Mawnds Case cited before, there is an
estate upon which a Remainder may depend, scil. the estate tail alleged to
Robert, etc. If such as now is limited to William Paget had been limited at the
Common Law to a younger Son, the eldest Brother should have the Land in the
Interim discharged of any use, and now after the Statute, no use limited to
William Paget, before the contingent; where, therefore, is it in the mean time?
In the Lord Paget, who being attainted, it accrues to the Queen; and out of the
possession of the Queen, this use shall never rise, although that the
contingent be performed, for now the use is locked up; A use does consist in
privity of the estate and confidence of the person, if these be severed, the
use is gone: And here, if the possession be in the Queen, she cannot be seized
to another use. Note by Godfrey, that the opinion in Baintons Case, 8 Eliz.
Dyer 37. is not Law, and so has the Law been taken of late. Popham contrary;
If before the Statute of 27 H. 8. the Father covenant in consideration of
Advancement of his Son to stand seized to the use of I. S. for life, and after
the death of I. S. to the use of my Son in Fee, here the estate of I. S. in the
use is void, and yet the estate in the use limited to my Son, shall not take
effect before the death of I. S. for the estate of my Son is not limited to
take effect till after the death of I.S and therefore the possession of the
Father is not charged with the use during the life of I.S. But if by way of
Feoffment I.S. had refused, the Son should have it presently, and the Father
should not have it, for he by his Livery has put all out of him, and it was
not the intent of the Feoffment, that the Feoffee should have the Land to his
own use. Popham allowed the difference mentioned before out of 2 E. 4 and 19 H.
6. betwixt a Feoffment upon condition to enfeoff a stranger, and to give in
tail to a stranger, and that is grounded upon the intent of the parties. And
Owen Sergeant put the Case cited before 1. 3 Eliz. Dyer 330. A Feoffment is
made by the Husband to the use of himself for life, and afterward to the use
of one Ann, whom he intended to marry, for, during, and until the Son which he
should beget on the body of the said woman had accomplished the age of thirty
one years, and after such time that such Son should come unto such age unto the
use of the said woman, quamdiu she should live sole, they entermarry, the
Husband dies without Issue, the wife enters immediately, and continues sole,
and her Entry was adjudged lawful, and the estate in Remainder good, although
she never had any Son, and thereupon a Writ of Error was brought, and the first
Judgment was affirmed (and note by Tanfield, and others at the Bar, that that
was the most apt case to the purpose in the Law) and the reason of such
Judgment was, because they took it, that Deeds ought to be expounded according
to the meaning of the parties, and estates in possession: I grant there ought
to be a particular estate, upon which a Remainder may depend, but the same is
not necessary where the Conveyance is by way of use: And if I covenant that A.
shall have my Lands to him and his Heirs, to pay my Debts and Legacies, the
same is by way of bargain and sale, and nothing passes without Enrolment. And
here the Attainder does not prevent the use, as it has been objected by Master
Solicitor, for the use does rise before the Attainder, for William Paget had a
Remainder in tail, in the life of his Father, upon the first limitation, etc.
Periam Justice, I lease my Lands to you, to begin after the expiration of a
Lease which I have made thereof to I.S. and in truth he has not any Lease, the
same Lease shall never begin. Manwood chief Baron, I lease my Lands to you, or
grant a Rent to you to begin after the death of Prisoit Sergeant at Law, when
shall that begin? Coke, Presently. Manwood, cujus contrarium est Lex.

CCLXXX. The Queen against the Archbishop of Canterbury, Fane, and Hudson.
Mich. 31 and 32 Eliz. In the Common Pleas. Rot. 1832.
THe Queen brought a Quare Impedit against the Archbishop of Canterbury, the
Bishop of Chichester and Hudson, Quare Impedit. 4 Len. 107. Hob. 303. 175.
Owen. 155.
and counted that John Ashburnham was seized of the advowson of Burwash, and
was outlawed in an action of Debt, during which Out-lawry in force, the Church
voided, for which it belongs to the Queen to present. The Archbishop and
Bishops plead, that they claim nothing but as Metropolitan and Ordinary, Fane
pleaded that King E. 4. Ex gratia sua speciali, etc. and in consideration of
faithful service, etc. did grant to the Lord Hastings the Castle and Barony of
Hastings, and Hundred, etc. Et quod ipse haberet omnia bona and catalla
tenentium, residentium and non residentium, and aliorum residentium
quorumcunque hominum, de and in Castro Baronia, etc. or within the same, pro
munero debit. etc. tam ad sectam Regis, etc. quam, etc. Ut legatorem, and quid
ipse faceret, per se vel per his sufficient Deputies, etc. And from him derived
to the now Earl of Huntington as Heir; and the said Earl so seized, and the
said Ashburnham seized of the advowson as appendant to the Manor of Ashburnham,
holden of the said Barony, the Church aforesaid during the Out-lawry aforesaid,
became void, For which the said Fane, ad dictam Ecclesiam usurpando presentavit
the said Hudson, who was admitted and instituted, etc. with this, That idem
T.C. verificare vult, that the said Church of Burwash is, and at the time of
the grant was, within the Precinct, Liberty, and Franchise aforesaid, and that
the said Manor of Ashburnham, at the time of the grant aforesaid was holden of
the said Barony: and the Incumbent pleaded the same Plea: and if by that grant
of King Edward the fourth, to the Lord Hastings, scil. omnia bona and catalla,
etc. The presentment to the Church should pass or not, was the question.
Shutleworth Sergeant, argued for the Queen, he confessed that the King might
grant such presentment, but it ought to be by special and sufficient words, so
as it may appear by them, that the intent of the King was to grant such a
thing, for the general words (omnia bona and catalla) will not pass such
special Chattel in the Kings grant: And he conceived that by the subsequent
words, no Goods or Chattels shall pass by such Grants, but such which may be
seized, which the avoidance of a Church cannot be, and quod ipse liceret, per
se vel ministros suos ponere se in seisinam, 8 H. 4. 114. 15. the King granted
to the Bishop of London, that he should have Catalla felonum and fugitivor, de
omnibus hominibus and tenentibus de and in terris and feodis praedict. and of
all resiants within the Lands and Fees aforesaid, Ita quod, si praedict.
homines, tenentes and residentes de and in terris and feodis praedict* seu
aliqui eorum, seu aliquis alius infra cadem terra and feodis pro aliqua
transgressione, etc. vid. librum, etc. and by Tirwit, By that Grant the goods
of those who are put to Penance shall not pass; so of the goods of one Felo de
se, vid. 42 E. 3. 5. One being impanelled on the Grand Enquest before the
Justices of Oyer and Terminer, pleaded the charter of the King of exemption
from Enquests, and because in the said charter was not this clause, More. 126.
licet tanget nos and haeredes nostros, upon challenge, it was rejected, and
the party charged and sworn: And if the King grant to me to appropriate an
advowson, which in truth is holden of the King, such a grant is void, if there
be not special words by which it might appear that the King had notice of it,
and that his intent was that the grant should extend unto it, 16 E. 3. Grants
58. and 33 E. 3. Grants 103. So here the Presentment is a special chattel, and
is not usually intended or thought upon, when men speak generally of goods and
chattels. But admit that it be, yet the Plea does not lie in the Defendants to
plead, for they do not derive any Interest under this grant, but are mere
strangers to it, and therefore they shall not take any advantage, by laying
this grant in the Queens way, for the Q. has good title against all persons
but those who claim under the grant, but that is nothing to the Defendants, for
one cannot cross the title of the King, if he do not make a title to himself,
As 39 E. 3. 18. 37 E. 3. 11. If the title of the King be found by a false
Office, the party grieved cannot traverse the Kings title without making title
to himself found by Office, and then the King may choose whether he will
maintain his own title found by Office, or traverse the title of the other.
Walmesley, contrary: This Title of Presentment is a Chattel, Rex habebit omnia
catalla felonum, etc. A Term of years is a Chattel, so the Issues and Profits
of the Lands of men outlawed for Felony, so a right of Action for Goods,
Therefore a Title to present; and if such a Title accrue to the King, by such
general words they shall pass from the King. And as to that which has been
objected, That the Gra^^ of King Edward the fourth does not extend but only to
such Goods and Chattels which may be seized, he cited the Case of 39 H. 6. 35.
b. Where the Grantee of a Rent for Term of years granted omnia bona and catalla
sua, tam viva quam mortua, the Rent does pass, and yet the Grantor cannot put
him in seisin of it, but ought to expect the day of payment of it. And this
Title to present is not a thing in action, for if no disturbance be made, the
party may have the benefit of it without any action. Anderson conceived, That
this Title to present cannot pass by those general words (bona and catalla) for
they do not extend to Rights, or things in Action, for such things only which
are commonly known and understod, shall pass by such words: By grant of Goods,
Chattels real will not pass; for when men speak of Goods, Household-stuff,
money, and such personal things only are understood: So a man cannot be said to
have a Chattel but where he is possessed of it, and here this Interest is but
jus praesentandi. Periam, This Interest is a Chattel, for if the Church become
void, and before presentment the Patron dies, the Executors shall have the
presentment, for it was a Chattel vested in the Testator: It was adjorned.

CCLXXXI. Jones Case. Hill. 31 Eliz. Rot. 1527. In the Common Pleas.
HEn. Jones had stolen the Plate of Trinity College in Oxford, and by
mediation of his friends it was concluded and agreed, that no Evidence should
be given against him at the Suit of the College, and that the College should
be recompensed for the loss, and two of his Friends, Brien and Brice were
bound uto Doctor Underhil, Rector of Lincoln College in Oxford, (but unto the
use of the Master and Scholrs of Trinity College) upon condition that if the
said Obligor paid forty pounds within six months after, the said Hen. Jones
should be acquitted and released of the troubles wherein he now is, with the
safety of his life, that then, etc. In debt upon the Obligation The Defendants
pleaded that he was indicted at the Assizes at Ox. and arraigned upon it, scil.
for the stealing of the said Plate, and found guilty thereof, and had his
Clergy, and was burned in the hand, and he demanded Judgment of this Action,
upon which there was a Demurrer: Wind. If the words had been to pay the money,
after that Henry Jones should be released and acquitted of the troubles in
which he now is without any more, the Defendants had been bounden to pay the
money. Periam, If the words of the condition had been, that after Henry Jones
should be acquitted of the Felony, then no money payable, but here the words are
with safety of his life: but here he conceived, that the intent of the
Obligation was, that no Evidence should be given, and so to save his life from
the Gallows, for which the Defendants might have showed the special matter,
Ante. 73.
and averred that the Obligation was made for the discharge of a Felon, and so
against the Law, etc. but now, they cannot take advantage of it, and afterward
Judgment was given for the Plaintiff.

CCLXXXII. Castle and Oldmans Case. Pasc. 31 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
CAstle brought Debt against Oldman for a pain ^ossessed in a Court Baron,
Debt. 2 Roll. 106. 3 Cro. 79. 2 Inst. 143.
and declared That the Defendant was presented at the Court Baron for such an
offense, and if he did not amend it before the next Court, he should pay such a
pain: And at the next Court it was presented, That the Defendant had not
amended it, and so he had incurred the pain upon which the Action is brought,
and now the Defendant would wage his Law, and it was much doubted whether wager
of Law lay in the Case. Shutleworth, 13. H. 7. 31. Upon a Recovery in a Court
Baron, wager of Law lies not, by Conisby, which Periam denied; And by him upon
an account by another hand, it does not lie, for it is a matter of which the
Country may have Conusance; so here the matter is notorious, which lies in the
knowledge of all the Jurors who presented it: And by him, the pain ought to be
afferred, which Anderson denied. For there is a difference betwixt an
amercement and a pain, which Windham granted. And see for the amerciament in
the Leet, 10 H. 6. 7. 12 R. 2 Ley. 43. But in a Court Baron, because it is not
a Court of Record; so in Debt upon an Arbitrament, the Law lies. And Waler one
of the Secondaries showed unto the Court a President, 6 Eliz. Where debt was
brought by Sir Thomas Tyndal, upon a pain forfeited for the breaking of a
By-law in a Court Baron against Tyler; and the party was received to Wage his
Law.

CCLXXXIII. Thetford and Thetfords Case. Pasch. 31 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
IN Wast the Plaintiff declared, upon the demise of the moiety of the Manor,
whereof part of the Tenants were Copyholders, and part Freeholders, and that
A. was seized of the Manor, and had (...) two Daughters, and dyed seized, the
Daughters entered, and made partition of the Demeans only, but the Services of
the Freeholders and Copyholders did remain in Common; One of the Daughters
took Husband the Husband and the Wife make a Lease of the moiety of the Manor
to the Plaintiff for years by word, rendering Rent, the Lessee entered into the
Demeans allotted to the Wife of the Lessor. Partition.
The Husband died, and the Wife brought an Action of Wast. Anderson, By the
partition the Demeans are now become in gross, and severed from the Manor; And
if partition be made of a Manor, so as the Demeans be allotted to one Sister,
and the Services to the other, now the Manor is dissolved, yet if the other
Sister dies without issue, and her part descends to the other, now it is
become a Manor again, which Windham and Periam granted, 6 Co. 64.
See 12. H. 4. 271. And Anderson was of opinion, that the moiety of the Demeans
did not pass by the words of the moiety of the Manor, as if one seized of a
Manor makes a Feoffment in Fee of part of the Demeans, and afterward
re-purchaseth them, and then makes a Feoffment of the whole Manor, the Demeans
repurchased will not pass thereby, for they were once severed from the Manor,
and not reunited by the purchase. Periam, Although that in truth it is not a
Manor nor any part of a Manor, yet if it has beeen reputed the moiety of the
Manor, it shall pass by such name, which Anderson grant, ed, but it is not like
to our Case. Periam, This is an ancient partition, as appears by the Verdict,
ten years past, and also it has been reputed the moiety of the Manor,
therefore it shall pass. Windham concessit Periam, The intent of the Grantor is
the best Interpreter of these words, without relying strictly upon the words.
Anderson, If we shall take the intents of men for Law, we shall fall into many
confusions in our proceedings, but the Law is to judge of the meanings of men
by their words. Ever in the constructions of Wills, the intent of the Testators
have not had further favor than the words have given leave. As to the other
point: It was argued by Walmsley, that the Lease made by the Husband and Wife
without Deed was void, See 1 Ma. Dyer. 91. And if the Wife after the death of
her Husband accepts the Rent upon such a Lease reserved, it shall not bind her,
for the consent of the Wife ought to be at the beginning of it, which cannot be
without Deed. Anderson conceived that the Lease is not merely void, See 15
Eliz. Smith and Stapletons Case, Plowd. 431. Periam, The matter is clear, for
although the Plaintiff declares generally of a Lease made by the Husband and
Wife, yet the Jury has found, that it was by Indenture, and that is pursuant
enough. And if the Husband and Wife make a Feoffment of the Wives Land, it is
the Feoffment of does of them; which Walmesley granted: It was adjorned.

CCLXXXIV. Smalwood amd others, against the Bishop of Lichfeild and others,
Quare Impedit. Trin. 31 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
HUmphrey Smalwood, Richard Say, and Thomas Say, Executors of William Say,
Quare Impedit. 1 Cro. 241.
brought a Quare Impedit against the Bishop of Coventry and Lichfeild, and M.
Incumbent, quod permittat praesentare ad Archidiaconatum de Derby, which was
void, Et ad praesentationem Testatoris in vita sua, and nunc in retardationem
executionis Testamenti, did belong to the Executors: Exception was taken
because these words (In retardationem executionis Testament) could not be
applied to a disturbance in the life of the Testator. Windham, There is not any
Writ in the Register of Quare Impedit, upon a disturbance made to the Testator.
Anderson, What then? therefore no remedy because no Writ according to his
special matter, 25 E. 3. 25. Goods are taken out of the possession of the
Testator, upon which the Executors brought Trespass, In retardationem
executionis Testamenti, Writ abated, for it ought to be where the Executors
themselves were possessed. Periam, The Advowson it self is valuable, not the
presentment, therefore it cannot be said in retardationem. Periam, Before the
Statute of 4 E. 3. 73. In Case were damages were only to be recovered, the
Action moritur cum persona, but where the thing it self was to be recovered,
there the Action accrued to the Executors. Anderson, 7 H. 4. 73. Ejectione
firmae of an Ejectment made unto the Testator was maintained by the Executors
be equity of the Statute of 4 E. 3 cap. 6. And by the opinion of the whole
Court, the Executors might have a Quare Impedit upon a disturbance made to the
Presentment: It was objected also, that a Quare Impedit does not lie of an
Archdeaconry-ship, for it is not local, nor any Indenture made of it, but is
only a matter of function, but it was not allowed, for ^iii Archdeacon has
Locum in Coro: And by the Statute a Quare Impedit lies of a Chapel, and by
the equity of it, of a Prebend, etc. See the Statute of West. 2. Quare Impedit
of a Chapel, Prebend, etc. It was moved, if the Executors had presented after
the death of the Testator, whether the Archdeacon ought to receive the Clark of
the Testator, or of the Executors, and the opinion of the Court was, That the
Bishop should have election therein: And afterward Judgment was given, that
the Writ should abate, for the disturbance to the Testator cannot be supposed
new matter (In retardationem executionis Testamenti) But yet it was agreed,
that the Executors might have their special Writ upon their Case for the said
disturbance.

Trin. 31 Eliz. In Communi Banco.
IN an Action brought against one as Executor, who pleaded that he refused,
upon which the parties were at Issue: The Bishop did certify, 1 Cro. 81. 3^^.
2 Len. 180.
quod non recusavit, whereas in truth he had refused before the Commissary:
Tenner Sergeant moved to have the advice of the Court upon that matter, and
argued that the Court ought to write to the Commissary: Which was denied by the
whole Court, for he is not the Officer unto the Court to that purpose, but the
Bishop himself is the Officer: And the party cannot aver against the
Certificate of the Bishop, no more than against the Retorn of the Sheriff: The
Court was also of opinion, that the only remedy for the Defendant was by Action
upon the Case against the Bishop for his false Certificate: But it was moved,
That the Issue joined upon the refusal ought to be tried by Jury, and not by
the Certificate of the Bishop, and so was the opinion of Windham and Walmesley.
Periam, Where the Issue is whether the Executor did refuse before such a day,
or after, there the trial shall be by Jury; contrary where the Issue is upon
refusal generally, because the refusal is before him as a Judge, as also is
Resignation.

CCLXXXVII. Sutton and Holloway and Dickons Case. Mich. 31. Eliz. In the Common
Pleas.
IN an Ejectione firmae by Richard Sutton against Robert Holloway, and Thomas
Dickons, S^vil. 99. Owen. 96. Co. 1 Inst. 227. a 3 Cro. 77.
upon not guilty pleaded, the Jury found this special matter, scil. That the
said Thomas Dickins had not any thing in the Lands in question at the time of
the making of the Lease, upon which the Action is brought, scil. Who leased by
Indenture to the Plaintiff for certain years, who entered, and afterward the
said Thomas Dickins, contra Indenturam suam praedictam intravit upon the
Plaintiff, and, If the same should be a good Lease by Estoppel was the
question; the Jury having found the truth of the matter, scil. That the Lessor
had not any thing at the time of the demise; Walmesley objected, That the Jury
ought not to find the Indenture, because it was not pleaded, for the Plaintiff
does not declare upon any Indenture; Hob. 227.
but the Exception was not allowed, but in old time the Law was such, 22 E. 3.
but at this day the Law is otherwise, See Scholastica's Case, 14. Eliz. Plowd.
411. But where a Release or other writing ought to be pleaded, there it ought
to be showed to the Court. VValmesley, In rei veritate, the Lease is void, for
a man cannot let Land in which he has not any thing: but in respect of the
parties themselves, the Lessors and Lessee both are concluded to say, That is
no Lease, for none of them can say to the contrary: But here the Jury which is
a third person, Estoppel.
is not estopped to say the truth, but they may find the special matter and the
truth of the Case, and the Estoppel has not place there; but the truth of the
matter appearing to the Judges, the Judges ought to adjudge upon the same,
scil. If a man may make an effectual lease of Lands, in which he has not any
thing. At another day it was moved by Shu^l. Although that the Jury be not
estopped, yet the parties themselves are estopped, for the Law makes the
Estoppel betwixt the parties, and the Law will not permit a man to say any
thing against his own Deed being indented, nor any matter contained in it.
Periam and Anderson clearly for the Plaintiff, That it is a Lease by Estoppel;
and by Periam, It has been adjudged in the Kings Bench, That the Jury in such
case are compellable upon pain of Attaint to find the Estoppel: VValmesley,
Here the Estoppel is out of Doors, for the truth of the matter disclosed by the
Verdict, not by the parties only makes the Estoppel, and he much replied upon
the case of Littleton, 149. a. A woman seized of Lands in Fee, takes a
Husband, who alieneth to another in Fee, the Alienee leaseth to the Husband and
Wife for their lives, now the Wife is remitted, and seized in Fee as before,
here if the Alienee, i. e. the Lessor, brings an Action of Wast against the
Husband and Wife, the Husband cannot bar the Plaintiff by the truth of the
matter; scil. the Remitter of his Wife; for he is estopped to say against his
own Feoffment, and his retaking of the particular estate to himself and his
Wife: But if in an Action of Wast, the Husband make default at the Grand
Distress, and the Wife prays to the received, she may well show the whole
matter: So here the Jury: Windham, The Plaintiff ought to have demurred upon
the Evidence: Periam, What if the Defendant will not join with the Plaintiff
in the Demurrer? Windham, there the Court ought to overruled them, and if the
parties had demurred upon the Evidence, we should have adjudged upon that
Evidence, that a man cannot lease lands in which he has not any thing: And
here, the Estoppel could not be pleaded, for the Defendant has pleaded the
general Issue, but if he had pleaded Non demisit, then the Estoppel should have
holden place.

CCLXXXVII. Mills and Snowballs Case. Pasch. 31 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
A Jury did surmise at the Bar, that he was a Tenant in Ancient demesne, and
had his Charter in his hand, Privilege of Exemption from Juries. 1 Cro. 142.
and prayed to be exempted from the Jury and discharged, but the Court did not
regard it, but caused him to be sworn. And Windham said, that he might have his
remedy against the Sheriff; and Nelson Prothonotay said, if he had made default
and lost Issues, he might show his Charter in the Exchequer upon the Amercement
estreated, and there he should be discharged: In that Case, it was holden by
the Court, That if a Feoffment be made of a House, and the Deed be delivered in
the House without other circumstance, the same does not amount to a Livery of
seisin, but if he do any act by which the intent of the Feoffor appears that
the Feoffee should have Livery and Seisin; Livery of seisin.
as if the parties go of purpose to the place intended to pass, to the intent
that the Deed may be delivered in that kind, the same does amount to a Livery,
by Anderson, and the whole Court.

CCLXXXVIII. Bradstocks Case. Mich. 32 and 33 Eliz. In Communi Banco.
RObert Bradstock seized in Fee of certain Lands, made a Feoffment in Fee to
the use of himself in tail, Estates.
and for want of such Issue to the use of John Bradstock, his Brother in tail,
and for want of such Issue to the use of Henry Bradstock, another Brother in
tail, Conditions.
Provided always, That if the said John or Henry do go about to avoid any
estate or demise by Copy, made or to be made of the Premises, or any part
thereof, that then his estate should cease. Robert died without Issue, John
entered and levied a Fine, Sur conusans de droit come ceo, etc. of the Land: And
the opinion of the whole Court was, That this Fine was not any offense against
the said Proviso; for these words (made or to be made) do not extend to estates
made or limited by the said Feoffment, but only to estates before made, and to
be made afterward.

CCLXXXIX. Long and Hemmings Case. Mich. 32 and 33 Eliz. In Communi Banco.
IN a Quare Impedit by Long against Hemming and the Bishop of Gloucester, or
the Church of Frombillet, upon the pleading the Issue was, Quare Impedit. 1
Cro. 209.
If Tho. Long Father of the Plaintiff did enfeoff the Plaintiff of the Manor of
From. to which the Advowson of the said church was appendant before he granted
the Advowson to one Strengtham who granted it to the Def. or not. And the Jury
gave a special Verdict, scil. That the Abbot of S. was seized of a capital
Message in Frombillet, and of one hundred Acres of Land there, And that there
was a Tenancy holden of the said capital Message by such Services, and that
the said capital Message had been known time out of mind, by the name of the
Manor of Frombillet, and that the Advowson was appendant to it, and conveyed
the said capital Message and Advowson to the King by the dissolution, and from
the King, to the said Thomas Long, who so seized, without any Deed did enfeoff
the Plaintiff of the said Manor, and made Livery and Seisin upon the Demesnes,
And that the said Thomas Long by his Deed made a grant of the said Advowson, to
the said Strengham, and afterward the Freeholder attorned to the Plaintiff:
And by the clear opinion of the whole Court, here is a sufficient Manor to
which an Advowson may be well appendant, and that in Law the Advowson is
appendant to all the Manor, but most properly to the Demesnes, out of which at
the commencement it was derived, and therefore by the attornment afterward,
within construction of the Law shall have relation to the Livery, the Advowson
did pass included in the Livery: And the grant of the advowson made mesne
between the Livery and the attornment was void; and afterward Judgment was
given, and a Writ to the Bishop granted for the Plaintiff.

CCXC. Mich. 32 and 33 Eliz. In Communi Ban^o.
Debt.
A Made a Bill of Debt to B. for the payment of twenty pounds at four days,
scil. five pounds at every of the said four days, and in the end of the Deed,
covenanted and granted with B. his Executors and Administrators, that if he
make default in the payment of any of the said payments, that then he will pay
the residue that then shall be un-paid; and afterward A. fails in the first
payment, and before the second day B. brought an action of Debt for the whole
twenty pounds, It was moved by Puckering Sergeant, S^y. 31. 32. 1 Cro. 797.
That the Action of Debt did not lie before the last day encurred; And also if
B. will sue A. before the last day, that it ought to be by way of covenant, not
by Debt: But by the whole Court, the action does well lie for the manner, for
if one covenant to pay me one hundred pounds at such a day, an action of Debt
lies, a fortiori, Owen. 42. 1. 2 Roll. 523.
when the words of the Deed are covenant and grant, for the word covenant
sometimes sounds in covenant, sometimes in contract, secundum subjectum
materiae.

CCXCI. Lancasters Case. Mich. 32 and 33 Eliz. In Communi Banco.
Roll. Tit. Covenant pl. 72.
AN Information was against Lancaster for buying of pretended Rights and Titles
upon the Statute of 32 H 8. And upon not guilty pleaded, It was found for the
Plaintiff, and it was moved in arrest of Judgment, because the Informer had not
pursued the Statute, in this, that it is not set forth, that the Defendant nor
any of his Ancestors, or any by whom he claimed, have taken the profits, etc.
and the same was holden a good, and material Exception by the Court: and
although it be laid in the Information, that the Plaint. himself has been in
possession of the Land by twenty years before the buying of the pretended
Title, for that is but matter of argument, and not any express allegation, for
in all penal Stat. the Plaintiff ought to pursue the very words of the Stat.
and therefore by Anderson, It has been adjudged by the Judges of both Benches,
that if an Information be exhibited upon the Stat. of Usury, by which the
Defendant is charged for the taking of twenty pounds for the Loan and
forbearing of one hundred pounds for a year, there the Information is not good,
if it be not alleged in it, that the said twenty pounds was received by any
corrupt or deceitful way or means: And in the principal Case, for the Cause
aforesaid, Judgment was arrested.

CCXCII. Bagshaw and the Earl of Shrewsburies Case. Mich. 32 and 33. Eliz. In
the Common Bench.
BAgshaw brought a Writ of Annuity against the Earl of Shrewsbury, for the
arrerages of an Annuity of twenty Marks per annum, Annuity.
granted by the Defendant to the Plaintiff, Pro Consilio impenso and
impendendo, The Defendant pleaded, that before any arrerages incurred, he
required the Plaintiff to do him Service, and he refused: The Plaintiff by
replication said, that before the refusal, such a day and place the Defendant
discharged the Plaintiff of his Service, etc. And the opinion of the Court was,
that the Plea in Bar was not good, for he ought to have showed for what manner
of Service to do, the Plaintiff was so retained, and for what kind of Service
the Annuity was granted; and then to have showed specially what Service he
required of the Plaintiff, and what Service the Plaintiff refused. Another
matter was moved, If the discharge shall be peremptory, and an absolute
discharge of the Service of the Plaintiff, and of his attendance, so that as
afterward the Defendant cannot require Service of the Plaintiff. And by
Walmesly Justice, it is a peremptory discharge of the Sevice, for otherwise how
can he be retained with another Master; and so he should be out of every
Service. Windham contrary, For here the Plaintiff has an Annuity for his
life, and therefore it is reason that he continue his Service for his life, as
long as the Annuity does continue, if he requirreth: But where one is retained
but for one or two years, then once discharged, is peremptory and absolute.

CCXCIII. Matheson and Trots Case. Mich. 31 and 32. Eliz. In the Common Bench.
BEtwixt Matheson and Trot the Case was, Sir Anthony Denny seized of certain
Lands in and about the Town of Hertford, 2 Len. 190.
holden in Socage, and of diverse Manors, Lands, and Tenements in other places
holden in chief by Knights-service, and having Issue two Sons, Henry and
Edward, by his last Will in writing, devised the Lands holden in Hertford to
Edward Denny his younger Son in Fee, Devises.
and died seized of all the Premises, Henry being then within age: After
Office was found without any mention of the said Devise; the Queen seized the
Body of the Heir, and the possession of all the Lands whereof the said Sir
Anothony died seized, and leased the same to a stranger, during the Minority of
the Heir; by force and color of which Lease the Lessee entered into all the
Premises, and did enjoy them according to the Demise. And the Heir at his full
age sued Livery of the whole, and before any entry of the said Edward in the
Land to him devised, or any entry made by the said Henry, the said Henry at
London, leased the said Lands by Deed indented to I.S. for years, rendering
Rent, by color of which the said I.S. entered, and paid the Rent diverse years
to the said Henry: And afterward by casualty the said Henry walked over the
Grounds demised by him, in the company of the said I. S. without any special
entry or claim there made, I.S. assigned his Interest to I.D. who entered in the
Premises, and paid the Rent to the said Henry, who died, and afterward the
Rent was paid to the Son and Heir of Henry: And after four and twenty years
after the death of the said Sir Anthony, the said Edward entered into the Land
to him devised by the said Devise; and leased the same to the Plaintiff,
Descent, where tokes away entire.
etc. And it was moved here, if this dying seized of Henry of the Lands in
Hertford, and descent to his Heir, should take away the Entry of Edward the
Devisee. And by Anderson clearly, If here upon the whole matter be a descent in
the Case, then the Entry of Edward the Devisee is taken away, although that the
Devisee at the time of the descent had not any Action or other remedy, for it
shall be accounted his folly that he would not enter, and prevent the descent.
But Windham, Periam, and VValmesly Justices, 2 Len. 147. 1 Cro. 920. 3 Cro.
145. Owen. 96.
were of a contrary opinion, For a Devisee by a Devise has but a Title of
Entry, which shall not be bound by any Descent, as Entry for Mortmain, for
Condition broken. And after long deliberation they all agreed that there was
not any Descent in the Case, for by the Devise, and death of the Devisor, the
Frank-tenement in Law, and the Fee was vested in the Devisee Edward: And then
when the Queen seized, and leased the same during the Nonage of Henry, and the
Lessee entered, he did wrong to Edward, and by his Entry had gained a tortions
Estate in fee, although he could not be said properly a Disseisor, nor an
Abator: And afterward when Henry after his full age, when by his Indenture he
leased without any special Entry, ut supra, and by color thereof the Lessee
entered, now he is a wrong-doer to Edward the Devisee and by his Entry had
gained a wrongful Possession in Fee: and then the paying of the Rent to Henry,
nor the walking of Henry upon the Land without any special claim, did not gain
any Seisin to him: and so he was never seized of the Land, and could never dye
seized, and then no Descent; and then the Entry of Edward was lawful, and the
Lease by him made to the Plaintiff was good: And so Judgment was given for the
Plaintiff.

CCXCIV. Greenwood and Weldens Case. Mich. 32 and 33 Eliz. In the Common Bench.
Replevin.
IN a Replevin between Greenwood and VVelden; The Defendant made Conusans as
Bailiff to John Cornwallis, and showed how that seven acres of Land called
Pills, is locus in quo: and at the time of the taking were holden of the said
Cornwallis by certain Rent, and other Services: And for Rent arrear he made
Conusans, as Bailiff to Cornwallis. The Plaintiff pleaded out of the Fee of
Cornwallis, upon which they were at Issue: And it was found that the Plaintiff
is seized of seven acres called Pills, hoden of Cornwallis, ut supra: But the
Jury say, That locus in quo does contain two acres, which is called Pills, and
these two acres are, and then were, holden of Agmondesham of the Middle Temple:
And if upon the whole matter, videbitur Curiae, etc. And by the opinion of the
whole Court, out of his Fee upon that matter is not found, for although it be
found, that the two acres be holden of Agmondesham, yet it may be that they are
within the Fee of Cornwallis, for it may be that Cornwallis is Lord Paramount,
and Agmondesham Mesne, and then within the Fee of Cornwallis: And therefore for
the incertainty of the Verdict, a Venire facias de novo was awarded.

CCXCV. Bishop and Harecourts Case. Mich. 32 and 33. Eliz. In the Common Bench.
Assumpsit. 1 Cro. 210.
IN an Action upon the Case, The Plaintiff declared, that the 5 Junij, 30 Eliz.
the Defend, (in consideration that the Plaintiff the same day and year, sold
and delivered to the Defend* a Horse) did promise to pay the Plaintiff a
hundred pounds in Trinity Term then next ensuing, and showed that the Term
began 7 Junij after: And upon Non assumpsit pleaded, it was found for the
Plaintiff. And it was moved in arrest of Judgment, That it appears upon the
Declaration, that the Plaintiff has not cause of Action, for the Trinity Term
intended is not yet come, for the day of the Assumpsit is the fifth of June,
and the fourth day was the first day of the said Term, scil. the day of
Essoins, and the seventh day 4. die post, and then the promise being made at
the day aforesaid, after the Commencement of the said Term, the same is not the
Term intended, but the Plaintiff must expect the performance of the promise
until a year after: And of that opinion was Anderson, but the three other
Justices were strongly against him to the contrary, for by common intendment
amongst the people, the Term shall not begin until 4. die post, and so it is
set down usually in the Almanac; And afterward Judgment was given for the
Plaintiff.

CCICVI. Mich. 32 and 33. Eliz. In the Common-Bench.
COoper Sergeant came to the Bar, and showed that A. Tenant in tail, the
Remainder over to B. in Fee. Co. 2 Inst. 483. 484. 1 Cro. 323. 471. 567. Hob.
496. 3 Cro. 224.
A. for a great sum of money sold the Land to I. S. and his Heirs, and for
assurance, made a Feoffment in Fee, and levied a Fine to the said I. S. to the
use of the said I. S. and his Heirs: And note that by the Indenture of Bargain
and Sale, A. covenanted to make such further Assurance within seven days, as
the said I. S. or his Heirs, or their Council should devise: And showed, that
before any further assurance was made, the said I. S. died, his Son and Heir
being within age: And now by advise of Council, and of the Friends of the
Infant, it was devised that for such further assurance and cutting off the
Remainder, a common Recovery should be suffered, in which the said Infant
should be Tenant to the Praecipe, and should vouch the Vendor, Common Recovery
suffered by an Infant by his Guardian.
and because that the said Term of seven years is almost expired, and that the
said Recovery is intended to be unto the use of the said Infant and his Heirs,
it was prayed that such a Recovery might be received and allowed. And two
Presidents in such Case were showed in the time of this Queen: one the Case of
the Earl of Shrewsbury, and the other one VVisemans Case: But the Justices were
very doubtful what to do; But at last upon good assurance of people of good
Credit, that it was unto the use of the Infant and upon the appearance of a
good and sufficient Guardian for the Infant in the Recovery, who was of ability
to answer to the Infant if he should be deceived in the passing of that
Recovery; and upon consideration had of the two Presidents, and upon Affidavit
made by two Witnesses, that the said intended Recovery was to the use of the
Infant, the Recovery was received, and allowed.

CCICVII. Cottons Case. Mich. 32 and 33 Eliz. In the Common Bench.
IT was found by special Verdict, that Berwich and Tesdel seized of certain
Lands, conveyed the same to Sir Thomas Cotton for life, Fines levied to use.
Co. 2 Inst. 519. 1 Cro. 219.
the Remainder to VVil. Cotton, and primogenito filio suo, and haeredi masculo,
and sic de primogenito ad primogenitum dict. William, the Remainder to the
right Heirs of the body of Sir Tho. Cotton, and VVil. Cotton lawfully issuing,
the Remainder to the right Heirs of Sir Tho. Cotton: VVil. had Issue a Son born
here in Eng. and went beyond Sea to Antwerp, and there continuing, and his Son
being within age in England, Sir Thomas Cotton levied a Fine of all the Land,
sur conusans de droit come ceo, etc. And afterward by Indenture convenanted to
stand seized to the use of himself for life, and afterward to the use of Rober
Cotton his Son in Fee: William died at Antwerp, his said Son being within age
in England, Sir Tho. Cotton died, Robert entered, and leased the Lands for years
to Sary, and the Infant Son and Heir of William leased the Land to one Chewn at
Will, who entered and ousted Sary, who thereupon brought Ejectione firmae. It
was here holden by the Court, that Sir Tho. Cotton was Tenant for life the,
Estates.
Remainder to William for term of his life, the Remainder to the Heirs of both
their bodies issuing: So as unto one Moiety Sir Thomas Cotton had an Estate
tail dependant upon the said Estates for life; and so the Fine levied by him
was a Bar to the Issue of William for a Moiety. And as to the other Moiety they
held that the said Fine was not any Bar, but that the party interessed at the
same time might avoid the Fine at any time during his Nonage, and five years
after, for Will. his Father was not bound by the Statute of 4 H. 7. because at
the time of the Fine levied, he was beyond the Seas, and although he never
returned but died there, yet by the equity of the Statute his Issue shall have
five years after his death to avoid the Fine, if he were of full age, and if he
were within age, then during his Nonage, and five years after. At another day
the Case was argued and put in this manner, viz. Lands were given to Sir Thomas
Cotton for life, without Impeachment of Wast, the Remainder over to Cheny
Cotton his eldest Son, and primogenito filio and haeredi Masculo, of the said
Cheny, and sic de primogenito filio in primogenitum filium, the Remainder to
the Heirs Males of the body of the said Cheny, and for want of such Issue, the
Remainder to Will. Cotton his second Son, and primogenito filio, in primogenitum
filium, the Remainder over to the said Sir Thomas, and the said William, and
the Heirs Males of their bodies lawfully begotten. Cheny Cotton died without
Issue, William having Issue, went beyond the Sea, Sir Thomas Cotton, 19 Eliz.
levied a Fine with Proclamation, and afterward William the Father died in
Antwerp, his Son being within age, Sir Thomas by Indenture limited the use of
the Fine to himself for life, the Remainder over to Robert Cotton his third Son
in Tail, Sir Thomas died (but it does not appear at what time) William the Son
being yet within age entered (but non constat quando) and 31 Eliz. leased the
Lands to the Defendant at Will. Drue Sergeant argued for William Cotton. And he
conceived, that William the Father had an Estate-tail, and then the entry of
William the Son was congeable for the whole: But admitting that it is not an
Estate-tail in William the Father for the whole, yet he has by the second
Remainder an Estate-tail in the Moiety, and then his Entry good as to one
Moiety; and then Robert being Tenant in Common of the other Moiety, Tails.
his Lessee without an actual Ouster cannot maintain an Ejectionae firmae
against the Lessee of his Companion. And he conceived here is a good
Estate-tail in William Cotton by virtue of the Limitation to William, and
primogenito filio and haeredi Masculo ipsius Guliel. and sic de primogenito
filio in primogenitum filium, etc. for according to the Statute of West. 2.
the will of the Donor ought to be observed, and here it appears that the
intent of the Donor was to create an Estate-tail, although the words of the
Limitation do not amount to so much. And the Estates mentioned in the Statute
aforesaid, are not Rules for Entails, but only Examples, as it is said by True,
33 E. 3 F. Tail 5. and see Robeiges Case, 2 E. 2. 1 Fitz. Tail: and 5 H. 5. 6.
Land given to A. and B. uxori ejus, and haeredibus eorum and aliis haeredibus
dicti A. si dict. haeredes de dictis A. and B. exeuntes obierint sine
haeredibus de se, etc. and that was holden a good Entail; so a gift to one and
his Heirs, si haeredes de carne sua habuerit, and si nullos de carne sua
habuerit revertatur terra, and adjudged a good tail: So 39 E. 3. 20. Land given
to Husband and Wife, and uni haeredi de corpore suo ligitime procreat. and uni
haeredi ipsius haeredis tantum, And that was holden a good Tail; and so he
conceived in this Case, that although the words of the Limitation are not apt
to create an Estate-tail according to the phrase and style of the said Statute
of West 2. yet here the intent of the Donor appears to continue the Land in
his Name and Blood, for William the Son could not take with his Father by his
Limitation, for he was not in rerum natura, and therefore all shall vest in
William the Father, which see 18 E. 3 Fitz. Feoffments and Fait. 60. Now it is
to see, if upon the Limitation to Sir Thomas Cotton and William his Son, by
which the Remainder is limited to Sir Thomas Cotton and William, and the Heirs
Males of their bodies issuing, the said Sir Thomas Cotton and Will. have a joint
Estate-tail; in respect that the Issue of the body of the Son, may be Heir of
the Body of the Father: and so because they might have one Heir which shall be
inheritable to his Land, it shall be one entire Estate-tail in them: But he
conceived that they are several Estates-tail, and that they are Tenants in
Common of an Estate tail, 3 and 4 Phil. and Mar. Dyer 145. Land given to the
Father and Son, and to the Heirs of their two Bodies begotten, the Remainder
over in Fee, the Father dies without other Issue than the Son only, and
afterward the Son dies withou Issue, a stranger abates: Or if the Son has
made a Discontinuance, if he in the Remainder shall have but one or two several
Formedons was the Question. And by Saunders, Brook, and Brown, but one
Formedon, and Quaere left of it; yet admitting that, yet notwithstanding that,
it might be that they had several Estates-tail, 17 E. 3. 51. 78. Land given to
a man and his Sister, and to the Heirs of their two Bodies issuing, they have
several Estates tail, and yet one Formedon. And see 7 H. 4. 85. Land given to a
man and his Mother, or to her Daughter in Tail, here are several Entails And
here in the principal Case, Sir Thomas Cotton has one Moiety in Tail expectant
upon his Estate for life: and therefore as to the Moiety of Sir Thomas Cotton
he is bound by the Fine. And the other Moiety is left in the Son, who may enter
for a Forfeiture upon the alienation made by his Father, as well in the life of
the Father, as afterward. Now after this Fine levied, the entry of William
the Son by virtue of his Remainder is lawful after the death of Sir Thomas,
although that William the Father was beyond the Sea at the time of the Fine
levied, and there afterward died, William the Son being within age. The words
of the Statute of 4 H. 7. are, Other than Women Covert, or out of this Realm,
etc. so that they or their Heirs make their Entry, etc. within five years after
they return into this Land, etc. So that by the bare letter of the Act, Will.
the Son has not remedy, nor relief by this Act against the Fine, because that
William, the Father died beyond the Sea, without any return into England; yet
by the Equity of the Statute he shall have five years to make his Claim,
although his Father never return, for if such literal construction should be
allowed, it should be a great mischief, and it should be a hard Exposition, for
this Statute ought to be taken by Equity, as it appears by diverse Cases, 19
H. 8. 6. My Uncle does disseise my Father, and afterward levies a Fine with
Proclamations; my Father dies, and after within five years my Uncle dies, that
Fine is no Bar to me, yet the Exception does not help me, for I am Heir to him
that levied the Fine, and so privy to it, but my Title to the Land, is not as
Heir to my Uncle but to my Father: So if an Infant after such a Fine levied,
dies before his full age, his Heir may enter within five years after, and yet
that Case is out of the Letter of the Statute. And by Brown and Sanders, If the
Disseisee dies, his Wife enseint with a Son, the Disseisor levieth a Fine, the
Son is born, although this Son is not excepted expressly by the words, because
not in rerum natura at the time of the Fine levied, etc. yet such an Infant is
within the equity and meaning of the said Statute. See the Case betwixt Stowel
and Zouch, Plow. Com. 366. And by him, It was holden, 6. Eliz. that an Infant
brought a Formdon within age, and adjudged maintainable, although the words of
the Statute be, That they shall take their Actions or lawful Entries within
five years after they come of full age: And he also argued, that here, when Sir
Thomas being Tenant for life, levied a Fine, which is a Forfeiture, he in the
Remainder is to have five years after the Fine levied, in respect of the
present forfeiture, and also five years after the death of the Tenant for life:
And that was the case of one Some adjudged accordingly in the Common Pleas: It
has been objected on the other side, That the Defendant entering by color of
the Lease at Will made to him by William who was an Infant, that he was a
Disseisor as well to the Infant as to the Lessor of the Plaintiff, who had the
Moiety as Tenant in common with the Infant, and then when the Lessor of the
Plaintiff entered upon the Defendant, and leased to the Plaintiff, and the
Defendant enentred and ejected the Plaintiff, he is a Disseisor; to which he
answered, That the Defendant when he entered by the Lease at Will, he was no
Disseisor, for such a Lease of an Infant is not void, but only voidable, etc.
and then a sufficient Lease against the Plaintiff, although not against the
Infant. Beaumont Sergeant, to the contrary; By this manner of gift, William the
Son took nothing, but the estate settled only in William the Father, but not an
estate tail, by the words, haeredi masculo, etc. And voluntas Donatoris,
without sufficient words cannot create an estate tail; but where the intent of
the Donor is not according to the Law, the Law shall not be construed according
to his intent: But this intent shall be taken according to the Law. And he held
that Sir Thomas and William had several estates in tail, and several Moyeties,
and not one entire estate, and here, upon all the matter, Sir Thomas is Tenant
for life of the whole, the Remainder of one moiety to him in tail, the
Remainder of the other moiety unto William in tail, and, rebus sic stantibus,
Sir Thomas levying a Fine of the whole, now as to one moiety which the Conusor
had in tail, the Fine is clearly good, and so as to that, Robert the Lessor of
the Plaintiff had a good Title, as to the said moiety; and as to the other
moiety he conceived also, that William is bound, for this Statute shall not be
construed by Equity, but shall bind all who are expressly excepted, and that is
not William the Son, for his Father never returned, and then his Heir is not
releived by the Statute^ Also William had a Right of Entry at the time of the
Fine levied, scil. for the Forfeiture, and because he has surceased the time,
for the said Right of Entry, he shall not have now five years after the death
of Tenant for life, for he is the same person, and the second saving which
provides forfuture Rights, extends to other persons than those who are intended
in the first saving, and he who may take advantage of the first saving, cannot
be releived by the second saving, for no new title does accrue to him in the
Reversion or Remainder, by the death of Tenant for life, for that title accrued
to him by the forfeiture, so as the title which he has by the death of the
Tenant for life, is not the title which first accrued unto him: Also by this
Forfeiture, the estate for life is determined, as if Tenant for life had been
dead; for if Tenant for life makes a Feoffment in Fee, the Lessor may have a
Writ of Entry ad terminum qui praeterijt. Fitz. 201. which proves, that by the
Forfeiture the estate is determined, and then no new title does accrue to him
in the Remainder, by the death of the Tenant for life, but that only which he
had before the alienation, so that his non-claim after the five years shall
bind him. Then, when William the Infant having a Right to a moiety, and Robert
the Lessor of the Plaintiff a Right to the other moiety, and the Infant leaseth
unto the Defendant at Will, who enters, now is he a Disseisor as well to
Robert as to the Infant: Then if the Defendant be Disseisor and has no title
by the Infant, Robert who has Right in a moiety may well enter into the whole,
for he has the possession per my and per tout by his Entry, and then when the
Defendant does eject him, he has good cause of Action. And after at another
day the Case was moved, and it was agreed, That for one moiety the Infant is
bound, for Sir Thomas had an estate tail in a moiety, for he was Issue of the
body of the Comisor: But for the other moiety, the Fine levied by Tenant for
life, William the Father being then Tenant beyond the Sea, It was holden by
Anderson, Windham, and Walmesly, that the Infant was not barred,
notwithstanding the objection abovesaid, That William the Father never returned
into England, and notwithstanding the words of the Statute of 4 H. 7. And by
Walmesley, If an infant make his claim within age it is sufficient to avoid the
Fine, and yet the said Statute seems to appoint to him time within five years
after his full age, so that according to the very words, a claim made before or
after should be vain, yet in Equity, although he be not compelsable to make his
claim until the time allowed by the Statute, yet if he make it before, it is
good enough. And by Anderson, Although that William the Father did not return,
yet if he makes not his claim within five years after the death of his Father
being of full age, and without any impediment, etc. he shall be barred. If in
such case a man has many impediments, he is not compellable to make his claim
when one of the impediments is removed, but when they are all removed. So if
the Ancestor has one of the said impediments, and dies before it be removed,
and his Heir is within age, or has other impediment, he is not bound to make
is claim till five years after his impediment is removed. And Somes case cited
before was holden and agreed to be good Law, for the Forfeiture may not be
known unto him. And as to the objection against the Lease at Will, because it
was made by an Infant, and no Rent reserved upon it, nor the Lease made upon
the Land, and therefore the Lessee should be a Disseisor, To that it was
answered, Be the Defendant a Disseisor, or not, it is not material here, for if
the Plaintiff had not title according to his Declaration, he cannot recover, 1
Cro. 220. 1 Cro. 438.
whether the Defendant has title or not, for it is not like unto Trespass
where the very possession without other title is good, contrary in Actions
against all who gave not title; but in Ejectione firmae, if the title of the
Plaintiff be not good and sufficient, be the title of the Defendant good or
not, he shall not recover: And afterward Judgment was given for the Defendant,
Hill. 33. Eliz.

CCXCVIII. Cheny and Smiths Case. Mich. 32 and 33 Eliz. In Communi Banco.
IN an Ejectione firmae by Cheny and his Wife against Smith: The Plaintiffs
declared upon a Lease made by the Master of the House or College of S. Thomas
of Acons in London to I.S. who assigned it over to Knevit, who by his Will
devised the same to his Wife, whom he made also his Executrix, and dyed, and
afterward she took to Husband one Waters, and died; Waters took Letters of
Administration of the Goods and Chattells of his Wife, and afterward leased to
the Plaintiffs: And upon not guilty they were at Issue. And it was given in
Evidence That the Lease given in Evidence, was not the Lease whereof the
Plaintiffs have declared, for the ori^inal Lease showed in Court, is, Master of
the House, or Hospital, where the Lease specified in the Declaration is, Master
of the House or College, 38 E. 3. 28. And some of the Justices conceived that
there is not any material Variance (but if the parties would, it might be found
by special Verdict) For by them College and Hospital are all one. And
afterward the Court moved the Plaintiffs to prove if the wife were in as
Executrix, or as Legatee, for by Anderson, and Periam, until election be made
he shall not be said to have it as Legatee, especially if it be not alleged in
fact, that all the debts of the Testator are paid: And Anderson doubted,
although that it be alleged, that the debts be paid, If the Executor shall be
said to have the said Lease as a Legacy, before she has made Election, vid.
Weldens Case, and Paramours Case in Plowd. And afterward it was given in
Evidence, That the wife after the death of the Husband had repaired the Banks
of the Land, and produced Witnesses to prove it, as if the same should amount
to claim it as a Legacy; and the Court said, that that matter should de
referred to the Jury: 1 Roll. 620.
And it was further showed in Evidence, that the said Wife Executrix, and her
said Husband Waters formerly made a Lease by Deed, reciting thereby, that where
the Husband was possessed in the right of his said Wife as Executrix of her
first Husband, etc. And by the opinion of the whole Court, the same was an
express claim as Executrix; and then when the Wife died, if the Husband would
have advantage of it, he ought to take Letters of Administration of the Goods
of her first Husband, and not of the Wife; but if she had claimed the Land and
the Term in it as Legatee, and had not been in possession, Administration taken
of the Rights and Debts of the Wife, had been good as to that intent, that his
Wife was not actually possessed of it, but only had a Right unto it, and of
such things in Action, the Husband might be Executor or Administrator to his
Wife, but here they have failed of their title: The Administration being taken
of the goods of the Wife, where it should be of the Goods of the Testator the
first Husband; And for this cause the Plaintiffs were nonsuit, and the Jury
discharged. And it was agreed by all the Justices, that if the Wife before
Election had taken Husband, that the Husband might have made the Election in
the Case aforesaid.

CCXCIX. The Lord Cobham and Browns Case. Mich. 32 and 33 Eliz. In the Common
Bench.
THe Case between the Lord Cobham and Brown, was, that the Abbot of Grace was
seized of the Manor of Gravesend in the County of Kent, which Manor does
extend to the Parishes of Gravesend, and Milton, and that the said Abbot and
all his Predecessors, etc. time out of mind, etc. have had a Water-Court within
the said Manor, which Court had been holden at Gravesend Bridge in the end of
it, and that all the Inhabitants within the said Parishes, which have Boats
either entirely or jointly with others, and have used to transport or carry
passengers from Gravesend to London, and e contra, and have used to fasten
their Boats at the said Bridge of Gravesend, have used to do suit at the said
Court, and there have used to enquire of all mis-orders, and mis-demeanors of
Watermen there, and that the said Abbots, etc. have used to have the Fines and
Amercements of the same Court, and conveyed the said Manor to the Plaintiff,
and that at a Court there holden, The Defendant being sworn with the residue of
the Enquest to enquire of such dis-orders, refused to give his Verdict, for
which for the said contempt, the Defendant, by the then Steward was amerced
twenty shillings, for the which Amercement the Plaintiff brought an Action of
Debt: It was moved by Beaumount Sergeant; That the Action did not lie, for the
Prescription upon which the Action is grounded is not good; first, he claims to
have this Court within his Manor, and as a thing appertaining to it, and yet
he claims suit at his Court of all the Inhabitants of the said two Parishes,
and to have them Suitors at it, being mere strangers to the Manor, and which
do not hold of it, for although it be alleged, that the said Manor does
extend in the said Parishes, yet the same does not prove that every part of the
said Parishes is within the said Manor, and if it be not so, the Prescription
may extend as well to all the County of Kent, as well as to the said two
Parishes, for such a Prescription cannot bind but those which are Tenants of
the said Manor, and cannot extend to strangers, which see 21 H. 7. 40. The Case
of Pound-breach. Secondly, it is not alleged here, that the Steward ought and
had used to assess Amercements, for by the common Law no Steward has authority
to assess Amercements or Fines in a Court Baron, for there the Suitors are
Judges and not the Steward; and that this Water-Court is a Court Baron, it
appears by the Declaration, for there it is said that it is a Court belonging
to such a Manor, and that prima facie shall be meant a Court Baron, if the
contrary be not showed, vi. Fitz. 75. g. Thirdly it is not showed that the
Amercement was affered, which see ib. 75. Harris Sergeant, to the contrary:
This Court upon the whole matter is in nature of a Leet for the reformation of
mis-orders between the Watermen, and the prescription here will warrant such a
Court well enough, And there are many Courts in England which are not Court
Barons, but grounded upon Prescription, 40 E. 3. 17. The Court before the
Chancellor of Oxford, Prescription to have Swan mote, and it is reason that
this Prescription should hold place, for here is quid pro quo, for Watermen
receive their carriage and loading at this Bridge, and also discharge their
loading there, and they use to fasten their Boats there, and therefore in lieu
of that benefit, it is reason that they be attendant at the Court which is upon
the said Bridge, and upon that reason is the Prescription of Toll Traverse, 5
H. 7. 9. And to have a Land Bird, 2 R. 3. 15. And Toll of every Vessel which
passes the River, 21 H. 7. 16. And this Court may be a Court within the Manor,
and yet no Court Baron, but in the nature of a Leet, and the Prescription shall
be good in Law by reason of the recompense to the Suitors, and then, if it be
not a Court Baron, but rather in the nature of a Leet, then it follows, that
the Suitors are not Judges but the Steward; and it behooves not to prescribe for
the Amercement, for that is incident to a Court Leet, for otherwise how can the
Suitors be compelled to do their suit at it, or their defaults, or contempts at
the same be punished? and as to the affering of the Amercement, it needs not
here, for it is a Fine for the open contempt, and despite done unto the Court,
and not an Amercement, and it may well be assessed by the Steward alone, vi. 23
H. 8. Br. Leet, 37. Drill Sergeant, to the contrary: For this Prescription is
not reasonable, to drive strangers to do suit at a Court Baron, for there is
sufficient consideration in the Case of Tenants of the Manor; for it may be at
the beginning, the Tenancies were given upon such consideration to do such
suit: But in the principal case, the Prescription is their ground, and
therefore unreasonable, because without consideration, 22 E. 4. 43. see the
case there, and 21 H. 7. 20. A custom alleged, that if any Tenant distrain
the Beasts of another Damage Feasant, That he ought to bring such Beasts to the
pound of the Lord of the Manor; and if not, That at the next Court he should be
amerced twelve pence, and the same was holden no good custom, because against
common Right and common Law. Puckering Sergeant: If this Court shall be reputed
in Law a Court Baron, then the Prescription, for the manner of it is not good,
for in such case, the Amercement cannot be assessed by the Steward; But he
held, that this Court is in the nature of a Court Leet, and not a Court Baron,
and all Inhabitants within the Precinct of it, are bounden to do their suit at
it by reason of their Resiancy, and their trade there, if they have Boats, or
shares in Boats, and such Court is for the better government of such Watermen,
and the exercise and practice of their trade, and for the redressing of
misdemeanors betwixt them, and so this Court has a reasonable commencement,
being instituted for the public good, and if customs which concern the private
benefit of any be allowable; as the Mayor and Burgesses of a Town prescribe to
have of every Tun which comes in any Ship into their Port, and put upon the
Land 6. d. for Toll. See 21 H. 16. A fortiori, a Custom or Prescription which
concerns the public good, is good: and it is not strange that such Court has
been maintained by Prescription, for the Court of Stanneris is so without any
commencement or erection, but by Custom. And although that Toll cannot be paid
at any Market for things brought to Market, but for things sold, yet by custom
Toll shall be paid for every thing brought to Market, and for the standing of
the Seller there; for the sale of Victuals is for the good of the Commonwealth,
which thing is the ground of the Prescription in the principal Case, and
therefore the Prescription in the manner of it is good: and if the prescription
be good for the Court, then to have a Steward to keep the Court, to assess
Fines for contempts and disorders is good without any special prescription, for
it is incident to it. Periam Justice, If it be a Court Baron then cannot the
Steward impose or assess any Fine: which Windham granted; but he said it is not
a Court Baron, but a Court by prescription. Periam, If the Plaintiff claim it
as belonging to his Manor, it shall be intended a Court Baron, but yet a man
may have a Court within his Manor by prescription, which is not a Court Baron.
Anderson was of opinion that it is not a Court Baron, for although it be
appertaining to the Manor, yet that is not any proof that it is a Court Baron:
For a Leet may be appertaining to a Manor. It was adjourned.

CCC. Green and Edwards Case. Mich. 32 and 33 Eliz. In Communi Banco.
1 Cro. 216. 217.
BEtween Green and Edwards the Case was this, Land is demised to A. for nine
years, if he shall so long live, and if he die within the Term, that B. his
Wife shall have it durante toto residuo termini praedict. The Husband dies
during the Term: If the Wife shall have the residue of the Term was the
Question. And by Periam and Walmesly Justices, by the death of the Husband the
Term is determined, and thereupon nothing can remain, especially by way of
grant, but by way of Devise it might be. See 9 Eliz. 253. A Lease for forty
years to A. if he shall live so long, and if he die within the Term, that E.
his Wife shall have the residue of the years: Where it was holden, that by the
death of A. the Term is determined, and then there is no residue, and so the
Limitation is void, vide 3 and 4 Phil. and Mar. 150. Anderson, If the Husband
and Wife had been parties to the Deed of Demise, then the residue of the Term
should go to the Wife after the death of the Husband: and this word (Terminum)
shall not be taken for the Interest which is given to the Husband, but for the
time, so it is as much as to say, that if the Husband die before forty years
expired, that then his Wife shall have the residue for forty years; and it is
reason to make such construction rather than to construe the said part of the
Deed to be void: For if in the construction of this Grant, the Term shall be
taken for the Interest, then the Limitation shall be void. And in all Grants,
the Deeds shall be taken most beneficially for the Grantee, and most strongly
against the Grantor, especially ut res magis valeat quam pereat: And here are
several Grants and several Terms: But if such matter be limited to the Wife not
named in the Deed, all is void, for it is uncertain when the Term shall begin,
and it cannot vest during the particular Estate, and it is not certain, whether
the Husband shall survive the Term, or not. And by Walmesly and Windham the
said Limitation is merely void: As if a Termer grants all his Term for so many
years as shall be behind after his death, the same is a void Grant, for the
Lessee may over-live all the Term, and then it is uncertain when it shall
begin: And in this Case this word, Term, shall be taken for the Interest, and
not for time, vide 35 H. 8. Br. Conditions 203. vide Co. 1. part, in the Rector
of Chedingtons Case, this Case vouched.

CCCI. Gawton and the Lord Dacres Case. Mich. 32 and 33 Eliz. In the Common
Bench.
IN Debt upon Surplusage of an Account by Gawton, against George Lord Dacres;
It was said by Periam Justice, and not denied by any, that if I make J. S. my
Auditor, generally to take Accounts of all my Bailiffs and Receivors, that he
is not a sufficient Auditor without a Patent; for when a man is made an Auditor
generally, he is an Officer, and an Officer cannot be without a Deed. But if a
Bailiff, or Receiver be accomptable to me, it is as clear on the other side,
that I may appoint one to be my Auditor to take the account of him, pro hac
vice by word; which Anderson granted: But if he afterward takes an account of
any by force or color of the said Warrant without my Commandment, he is not a
sufficient Auditor to such intent, either to take the account, or to assess the
arrerages if the accomptant be found in arrear, or to make allowance if he be
found in Surplusage: And by him. If one become my Bailiff of his own wrong,
without my appointment, he is accomptable to me, but I am not compellable to
make him any allowance for his Expenses about my business. And if I assign to
such Bailiff of his own wrong an Auditor, he cannot make allowance of such
Expenses. Anderson, If my Auditor make allowance to my Bailiff for any
collateral Expenses, which he has expended in my affairs, which do not concern
my Manor, whereof he is Bailiff, such allowance shall not bind me. And note,
that in this Action the Plaintiff declared that he was Bailiff to the Defendant
of certain Manors, Receiver of certain moneys, and so retained, ad diversa
negotia procurandum: And upon account the allowance was made unto him for his
Board-wages, and other Expenses in riding Circa negotia. And by Anderson, 3
Len. 149.
these allowances shall not bind the Defendant; for as Bailiff of a Manor, no
Expenses shall be allowed unto him, but those which the Bailiff has expended
within the Manor: And if I retain one to go about my business he is not
accomptable. Windham, If I retain one to follow my business, and deliver to him
money to disburse in such business, he is accomptable. Anderson, It is so truly,
but it is not in respect of the said Retainer, Devises.
but as he was Receiver, and if he expend more than he has received, he does
it without Warrant and no allowance shall be made unto him. If the Bailiff be
found in Surplusage in the conclusion of the account, the Auditor ought to
enter. Allocatur super determinationem Count. in surplusagiis, so much for such
and such Expenses, allocatis allocandis upon the next account: But in this Case
it appeared upon the Evidence, that the Entry upon the foot of the account was,
And so he is in Surplusage upon the determination of this account twenty six
pounds: But the Auditor being examined, said, that it was not his meaning to
allow unto him so much, but only to find and express the certainty of the whole
account, and so refer the allowance of it to the Defendant to whom he was
Auditor: and upon that the Court said to the Jury, if they believed the
Auditor, that they should find against the Plaintiff, for upon the matter here
is not any account, and so no allowance; for the allowance if it had been
according to Law ought to be entered, before Allocatur, etc. and such allowance
is as a Judgment, but here is not any allowance, for the Auditor did refer the
same to the Defendant: But if the Jury does not give credit to the Auditor,
then the Court moved the Jury to find it specially that the party was Auditor
without Deed, and the finding of the account as it is set down in the
Declaration, and the manner of the conclusion of it. viz. That the Plaintiff
was in Surplusage upon the determination of the account for his Expenses in
riding Circa negotia defendentis, and for his Board-wages twenty six pounds.

CCCII. Chamberlayns Case. Mich. 32, and 33 Eliz. In the Common Bench.
IN this Case it was moved, whether Beasts taken in Withernam, might be used
and worked by the party as his proper Beasts: Owen. Rep. 124. 2 Cro. 148.
And it was said by the Court, that Beasts distrained, as Cows, could not be
milked, nor Horses wrought, but they ought to be put in the Pound open, and
there the Owner might milk them and fodder them. But if Cows be taken in
Withernam, because they are delivered to the party in lieu of his own Cattle,
Cattle taken in Withernam, worked. 3 Leu. 235. 236.
he may milk them, or if they be Oxen, or Horses, reasonably work them,
otherwise he should be at great charges of keeping and pasturing of them, and
no profit, or consideration for it. Anderson, It should be a great
inconvenience to the Commonwealth: For if the Cows are not milked, the milk is
lost, and also the Cows impaired thereby.

CCCIII. Byne and Playnes Case. Mich. 32 and 33 Eliz. In the Common Bench.
Assumpsit. 1 Cro. 218.
IN an action upon the case by Byne against Plain, the Plaintiff declared, that
whereas he himself had recovered against Thomas Ward in the Court of the Queen
in Southwark, holden before Omesley Steward there for the Mayor of London, the
sum of twenty pounds, and had obtained out of the said Court a Levari facias
directed to the Bailiff to do execution upon the Goods of the said Thomas Ward,
which then were in the possession of the said Plaintiff; and where the said
Bailiff by virtue of the said Writ was ready to have done execution of the said
Goods, the Defendant came to the now Plaintiff, and assumed to him, that in
consideration that the said Plaintiff would deliver to the Defendant the said
Goods, that he would in fourteen days after Michaelmas next pay to the
Plaintiff twenty pounds, or otherwise deliver to him the said Goods again, if
in the mean time no other makes Title unto them, and prove them to be his own
Goods. And further, that the Plaintiff shall have free ingress and regress to a
Chamber in the house of the Defendant in the mean time. And upon Non-assumpsit
pleaded, it was found by the Jury, that such a Recovery was in the said Court,
and that the Defendant did assume, etc. But they further say, that before the
said Recovery, the said Thomas Ward was possessed of the said Goods as of his
own proper goods: And, by Deed indented, sold them to his Brother R. W. in
consideration of a certain sum of money, with a Proviso, that the said Tho.
Ward, notwithstanding the said sale should have the possession of them for four
years, which are not yet expired, paying to the said R. Ward twenty shillings
by the year, and if, at the end of the said four years, the said Thomas did
repay the said sum of money to the said R. Ward, that then the said sale should
be void. And they further say, that the said Robert Ward made Title to the
said goods by virtue of the said sale. Exception was taken to the Declaration,
because it was not showed by what Authority or Title the Court was holden; Also
it shows, that the Bailiff was ready to do Execution upon the said Goods, but
does not show where the said goods then were, but the exceptions were not
allowed, for these matters are but inducement and conveyance to the action, and
not the matter, or substance of it. Another exception was taken, because the
request is not sufficiently alleged, Licet saepius requisitus, but that
exception was not allowed, for here the Assumpsit is to pay at a certain day,
and then the request is not material; but where a Request is parcel of the
Assumpsit, Request.
there an express Request ought to be taxed, as if the payment should be upon
Request. As to the matter in Law, here is not any consideration, for the goods
were not subject to execution, for Thomas Ward had but a special property in
them, but the general property was in R. Ward, and so no cause to deliver them
back to the Plaintiff; and here by the Verdict the forain title is proved; for
proof ought to be by Verdict, which see Perk. 154. a. and 7. R. 2. Tit. Bar.
241. For it appears, before the said Recovery, Thomas sold the goods with
promise, ut supra. Owen, Although it be found that R. Ward had the general
property, yet Thomas had the special and present property, and that against R.
Ward himself, so that during the said four years R. Ward could not
entermeddle with the goods; and though that no execution can be had against him
who has such a special property, yet that is not the case here, for here one
who has the possession of certain goods, delivers them to another, and in
consideration thereof, he to whom the delivery is made, promises to re-deliver
them unto the Bailee, or to pay so much money, this is a good consideration,
when a lawful property or title he has who makes the Delivery. And of that
opinion were all the Justices, for it appears, that the Plaintiff had a
possession of the said goods, and that the said Thomas Ward had a special
property, and because of such possession was chargeable to an action of the
said Thomas Ward, be it that the Plaintiff comes to the said goods by baylment
or Trover, for by Periam, if goods come to another by Trover, and he delivers
them over, he is answerable to him who has right unto them: The Delivery of
these goods to the Defendant, is a good consideration, and the Defendant has
benefit by the use of them, and the property of the goods is not to be argued
in this case, but the Delivery to the Defendant is the only matter: And because
the Delivery of the goods to the Defendant, and the Assumpsit upon it, it was
holden, although the goods were not liable to execution, yet the Assumpsit was
good, and afterward Judgment was given for the Plaintiff.

CCCIV. Vandrink and Archers Case. Mich. 32 and 33 Eliz. In Communi Banco.
VAndrink brought an action upon the case against Archer, and declared, Trover
and conversion.
that whereas he himself was possessed of twenty Else of Linen cloth, as of
his own goods, the same came to the hands of the Defendant by Trover, and he
knowing the said goods to be the goods of the Plaintiff, sold them unto persons
unknown, and the money thereof proceeding did convert to his own use: The
Defendant pleaded, that as to twenty four Else of the said Linen cloth, long
time before the losing, one Copland was possessed thereof, ut de bonis suis
proprijs, Ante. 189.
and sold them to the Defendant, who before any notice that they were the goods
of the Plaintiff, and before any request, sold them to persons unknown: And as
to the other three Else, he was always ready to deliver them to the Plaintiff,
and yet is, and upon these Pleas, the Plaintiff did demur in Law. Owen
Sergeant, for the Plaintiff, That both Pleas are insufficient, the first Plea
is not an answer but by argument, for the Plaintiff declares of a commission of
his own goods, and the Defendant answers to a commission of his own goods, 33
H. 8. Br. Action sur le case, 109. In an action upon the case the Plaintiff
declares, that the Defendant found the goods of the Plaintiff, and delivered
them to persons unknown, Non deliberavit modo and forma, is no Plea, but he
ought to plead not guilty; and in an action upon the case, the Plaintiff
declared, that he was possessed of certain goods, ut de bonis suis proprijs,
and the Defendant found them, and converted them to his own use; It is no Plea
for the Defendant to say, that the Plaintiff was not possessed of the said
goods as of his proper goods, but he ought to plead not guilty to the
mis-demeanor, and give in Evidence, that they were not the goods of the
Plaintiff, and 4 E. 6. Br. action upon the case 113. The Plaintiff declared
that he was possessed of certain goods as of his proper goods and lost them,
and the Defendant found them and converted them to his own use; the Defendant
pleaded, that the Plaintiff pawned the said goods to the Defendant for ten
pounds, for which he detained them according to the said pawn, and traversed
the conversion; and by some it was holden, that he ought to plead not guilty,
and give the especial matter aforesaid in Evidence; and 2 and 3. Phil. and Ma.
Dyer 121. The case of the Lord Mountegle, in an action upon the Case, the
Plaintiff declared upon a Trover of a Chain of Gold, and that the Defendant had
sold it to persons unknown, the Defendant pleaded, That ipse non vendidit modo
and forma, and upon that the Plaintiff did demur in Law. And see 27 H. 8. 13.
Where goods come to one by Trover, he shall not be charged in an action, but
for the time he has the possession; But that is to be intended in an Action of
Detinue, and not in an action upon the Case, for such action upon the Case is
not grounded upon the Trover, but upon the mis-demeanor, that is, the
Conversion. And as to the other Plea it is utterly insufficient, for the
Plaintiff declares of a Conversion, and he pleads a possession, that he is
always ready, and so does not answer to the point of the action. Yelverton
Sergeant, to the contrary, and he conceived for the first Plea, that it is a
direct answer, for he has justified his sale to persons unknown, for that he
has bought the goods of one Copland whose goods they were, and because the
Plaintiff has demurred upon the Plea, he has confessed the truth of the
matter contained in it, scil. that the property of the goods was to Copland,
and so in Defendant by the said sale, and then he has good cause to convert
them to his own use by sale or otherwise; And he conceived, that there is a
difference, 27 H. 8. 13. betwixt Baylment, and Trover, for in case of Trover,
the parry is not chargeable but in respect of the possession, which being
removed, the action is gone against the Finder, for he who finds goods is not
bound to keep them, nor to give an account for them. And he put the case
reported by Dyer, 13 and 14 Eliz. 306, 307. R. Fines brought an action upon the
case, and declared, he was possessed of a Hawk, as of his proper goods at W.
and casually lost it at B. and that it afterward casually came to the hands of
the Defendant by Trover, and that he knowing it to be the Plaintiffs Hawk, sold
the same for money to persons unknown; The Defendant pleaded that the Hawk first
after the losing of it came to the hands of one Jeoffryes, who sold it to one
Rowly, who gave it to the Defendant at A. who sold it to Poulton, and the same
was found a sufficient Bar; and it is hard where goods, as Oxen or Horses come
to another by Trover, that he should be charged to keep them and pasture them
until the Owner claims them, and therefore it is not reason but that he
discharge himself by the quitting of the possession of them. And as to the
other Plea, the matter of the Plea is good enough, and the defect is but in the
form, which because the Plaintiff upon his Demurrer has not showed to the
Court according to the Statute, he shall not take advantage of it, but the
matter of the Plea is sufficient, scil. the finding, and the offer to deliver
it to the Plaintiff. Anderson Justice, For the examination of the insufficiency
of this Plea, the nature of the action, and the cause of it is to be
considered; the nature of the action, it is an action upon the case, the cause,
the Trover, and conversion; Then for the latter Plea his readiness, to deliver
it, It cannot be any answer to the Declaration of the Plaintiff: For this
action is not Debt or Detinue, where the thing it self is to be delivered, for
in such case, the Plea had been good, but the Conversion is the special cause
of this Action, which by this is not answered, and for the other Plea, the
Declaration is not answered by it. But here is some matter of justification,
for when a man comes to goods by Trover, there is not any doubt but by the Law
he has liberty to take the possession of them, but he cannot abuse them, kill
them, or convert them to his own use, or make any profit of them, and if he do,
it is great reason that he be answerable for the same, but if he lose such
goods afterward, or they be taken from him, then he shall not be charged, for
he is not bound to keep them, and so he conceived Judgment ought to be for the
Plaintiff. Windham Justice, neither Plea is good; as to the first Plea, he
confesses the conversion, but has not conveyed unto himself a sufficient
title to the goods by which he might justify the Conversion, for the Plaintiff
declares of a conversion of his own goods, and the Defendant justifies, because
the property of the goods was in a stranger who sold them to him, which cannot
be any good title for him without a Traverse, unless he had showed, that he
bought them in an open Market, and then upon such matter he might well have
justified the Conversion. And as to the other Plea, the same is naught also,
for the goods are not in demand, and their the said Plea is not proper to say,
that he is ready to deliver them, for damages only for the conversion are in
demand, and not the goods themselves, and therefore the same is a Plea but by
Argument, scil. He is ready to deliver, Ergo, he has not converted, and yet
the same is not a good argument, for if a man find my Horse, and rides upon
him, or hereby he becomes Lame, or otherwise by excessive travel misuseth him,
so as my Horse is the worse thereby; He may be ready to deliver me my Horse,
and yet this action will ly, for such an abusing of the Horse is a Conversion
to his own use. Periam Justice, Post. 224.
The latter Plea clearly is insufficient, for it amounts but to Not guilty,
but for the first Plea, he doubted of it, for first the property is not
traversable, nor the knowing; but upon the general Issue pleaded, such matter
may be given in Evidence. And he conceived, That where a man buys goods of one
who comes to them by Trover, that he may sell them, and shall not be answerable
for them. And although it may be said, that the said matter may be given in
evidence, yet it is not good to put the same to the people, but to refer the
matter to the Judgment of the Court. Walm. Justice, The latter Plea is clearly
insufficient, but for the first he doubted of it, for he conceived that the
sale of the goods is not a Conversion. Anderson, The first Plea is, ut supra,
and nothing in that is material or traversable, for all the Plea may be true,
and yet the Defendant is guilty, for it may be that the Defendant himself sold
them to the Plaintiff, or to another who sold them to the Plaintiff, and that
afterward the Defendant found them, and here the Conversion is confessed, and
not so voided by sufficient justification, and by him, the sale to persons
unknown is no good Plea, for his sale is his own Act, and it cannot be but he
must have notice of the buyers, and therefore he ought in his Plea to show
their names. Periam, Contrary to that matter as to the naming of the buyers,
for it should be an infinite thing for a Draper to take notice of every on who
buyeth and Ell of Cloth of him. And afterward the same Term Judgment was
given for the Plaintiff upon the insufficiency of the Plea.

CCCV. Walgrave against Ogden. Mich. 32 and 33 Eliz. In Communi Banco.
Trover and Conversion. 1 Cro. 219.
AN action upon the case was brought upon a Trover and conversion of twenty
barrels of Butter, and declared, that by negligent keeping of them, they were
become of little value, upon which there was a Demurrer in Law: And by the
opinion of the whole Court upon this matter, no action lies; For a man who
comes to Goods by Trover, is not bound to keep them so safely, as he who comes
to them by Baylment. Walmesley, If a man find my Garments, and suffers them
to be eaten with Moths by the negligent keeping of them, No Action lies: Ante
223.
but if he wears my Garments it is otherwise, for the wearing is a Conversion.

CCCVI. Alexander and the Lady Greshams Case. Mich. 32 and 33 Eliz. In Communi
Banco.
Debt for arrerages of annuity.
ALice Alexander, Administratrir to her last Husband, brought an Action of Debt
for the arrerages of an Annuity, against the Lady Gresham, Executix of Sir
Thomas Gresham her late Husband, incurred in the lifetime of her late Husband
Sir Thomas Gresham: The Defendant pleaded, that she had fully administered; The
Plaintiff replied, Assets, scil. That the Defendant had diverse Goods in her
hands not administered, which were the goods of the said Sir Thomas at the time
of his death, upon which they were at Issue. And it was found by special
Verdict, that Sir Thomas Gresham being seized of diverse Manors and other Lands
in Fee, devised them by his last Will to his Wife the Defendant, Devises.
to use at her own pleasure: And by his said Will requested his Wife to pay his
Debts and Legacies: and further it was found, that at the Parliament holden 22
Eliz. a private Act was made, 2 Cro. 139. Ante. 87.
by which it was enacted, that the said Lady should take upon her the charge of
all her Husbands Debts, and for the discharge thereof, she shall sell so much
Land as will yield so much money as will serve for the payment of the said
Debts, and if she shall fail therein, that then certain Commissioners shall be
appointed for the sale of so much Land, etc. and for all such Debts as the said
Lady should not acknowledge to be good and true Debts, that then the Creditors
to whom they were due, should repair to the said Commissioners, and they should
determine both of the certainty of the sum of the due Debts, and of the Damages
for the forbearing thereof: and that afterward the said Creditors should have
their remedy against the said Lady for such sums of money so agreed upon by the
said Commissioners: and found the Statute at large, and that the said Lady
Gresham had sold certain Lands parcel of the Possessions of the said Sir
Thomas, by which sale she had received the sum of twenty thousand pounds, which
yet is unadministred for the greatest part of it. And if upon the whole matter
the said sum of twenty thousand pounds be Assets, then they find for the
Plaintiff, but if not, then for the Defendant.

And it was moved by Hammon Sergeant, that here is Assets upon this matter, and
that by the Common Law, for it appears upon the Will, that the Lands were
devised to the Lady, to the intent that she should pay his Debts. And although
the words of the Charge are, that the Testator requests the Lady to pay his
Debts, the same in a Will does amount to a Condition, and so the meaning of the
Devisor appears to be, that the money which is levied by such sale shall be
Assets, etc. 2 H. 4. 21, 22. Assets.
A man makes a Feoffment in Fee to diverse persons, upon condition that they
sell the Land, and the money thereof coming distribute for his Soul; The
Feoffor dies, the Feoffees (who were also Executors of the Feoffor) sell the
Lands, the money thereof coming is adjudged Assets. And see 3 H. 6. 3. And
although it be not Assets by the Common Law, Roll. part 1. 920.
yet it is Assets by the special Statute, which ordains, that he shall be
charged with the Debts, and that the Lands shall be sold. And it was found by
the Verdict, that such Lands were sold, and such money levied upon the sale,
which are administered. And although the said twenty thousand pounds were never
the Goods of the Testator, yet as the Case is, 3 H. 6. 3. If Executors recover
Damages in trespass of Goods taken away in the life of the Testator, such
Damages so recovered are Assets. So if Executors redeem a Pledge with their own
proper Goods, the same is Assets in their hands, by Kingsmill, V^vasour, and
Fisher, 20 H. 7 42. And where the Executors took of one who was indebted to
their Testator in a simple Contract, the same is Assets, 31 E. 3. And see many
Cases of such special Assets, 7 Eliz. in Plowdens Comment. in Chapman and
Daltons case, 292. It has been objected, that the special Assets enacted by
Parliament, do not maintain the general Assets intended in the Issues but he
conceived the same is well enough. As 27 H. 8. 21. In an Action upon the
Statute of 21 H. 8. for that the Defendant has occupied Land to farm against
the Statute. The Defendant pleaded, Non tenuit ad firmam contra formam Statuti:
And gave in Evidence, that he had taken to Farm for the maintenance of his
house, the same is a good Evidence, and shall maintain the Issue, for he did
not occupy against the form of the Statute: for there is a clause in the
Statute to that purpose. Puckering Sergeant to the contrary, That it cannot be
said Assets by the Statute, and that the Plaintiff upon this general Issue
shall not take advantage of the special Assets enacted by Parliament: And here
the Plaintiff has not pursued the Statute, for in case the Defendant will not
confess the Debt, by the Statute the Commissioners ought to determine of it,
and assess damages for the forbearing and then the party is to have her remedy
for all as shall be so determined by the Commissioners by action of Debt: and
because the Plaintiff has not followed the said Statute, those twenty thousand
pounds shall not be Assets as to her, for they are not agreed of the Debt, nor
of the Damages for it; but the Commissioners are to appoint sale of the Lands,
so as the money arising of the sale of any Lands, shall not be Assets but of
such Lands which have been appointed to be sold by the order of the
Commissioners. And as to the Common Law, the same is not Assets; but where
Lands devised to be sold by the Executors for the payment of Debts and
Legacies, in such case the money arising of such sale is Assets. And see 9
Eliz. 264. Dyer, A man devised his Lands to be sold by his Executors, and that
the money thereof coming shall be disposed in payment of Legacies expressed in
his Will, the Land is sold; by Catlin, Dyer and Sanders, the money thereof
coming is Assets: but 4, and 5 Ph. and Mar. Dyer 152. the Law was otherwise
taken. Where a man devised that his Executors should sell his Land, and that
his Daughters should have such portions out of the moneys thereof coming, the
Land is sold accordingly, the Daughters sued the Executors in the Spiritual
Court. In that Case a Prohibition lies, for it is not a Legacy Testamentory,
but out of the Land, etc. And also in the principal case, the Lands are not
devised to be sold; but there is only a Request to his Wife, that she would pay
his Debts without any condition, or express direction, or limitation, 30 H. 8.
Land devised to Executors to sell and the money thereof coming to be divided
between his Children: the money shall not be Assets, and if it be not Assets by
the Common Law, but special Assets by a special Law, the Plaintiff ought to
have showed the same in his Declaration, and then to have maintained against
the Defendant the said special Assets upon the Statute: As if in Debt upon an
Obligation, the Defendant will plead, Non est factum, and give in Evidence the
Statute of 23 H. 6. the same shall not maintain his Plea of Non est factum; but
he ought to have pleaded the special matter in Bar. And see 4 H. 7. 8. So the
Plaintiff here ought to have in her Replication showed the especial matter upon
the Statute. Anderson and Walmesly conceived, that the same is Assets within
the Stat. and that the Defendant is chargable as Executrix, otherwise there is
no remedy, and the Act confirms her to be Executrix, and ordains, that she
shall take upon her the charge of payment of Debts, and that the Goods and all
the Moneys which come by sale of the Lands and Woods shall be Assets. And
because that by the said Act the money coming by sale of Woods and Lands are
joined together with the Goods of the Testator in the same plight, all are in
the same degree, and both equally Assets. Periam did not speak to that; but
Windham held, That these Assets found by the Verdict, are not Assets intended
in the Will, and that the Plaintiff has not pursued the Statute, which makes
such matter Assets. It was adjorned.

CCCVII. The Queen and the Bishop of Yorks Case. Pasch. 33 Eliz. in the Common
Pleas.
Quare Impedit. 1 Cro. 240.
THe Queen brought a Quare Impedit against the Bishop of York, and one Monck;
and counted upon a Presentment made by him, Hen. 8. in the right of his Duchy
of Lancaster, and so conveyed the same to the Queen by descent: The Bishop
pleaded, that he and his Predecessors have collated to the said Church, etc.
and Monck pleaded the same plea, Collation gains not the Patronage of the King.
6 Co. 50. a.
upon which there was a Demurrer. And it was moved by Beaumont Serjant, That
the plea is not good, for a Collation cannot gain any Patronage, and cannot be
an Usurpation against a common Person, much less against the Queen, to whom no
Lapses shall be ascribed; and although the Queen is seized of this Advowson in
the right of her Duchy; yet when the Church becomes void, the Right to present
vests in the Royal person of the Queen: and yet see the old Register 31. Quando
Rex praesentat non in jure Coronae tunc incurrit ei tempus. Hammon Sergeant, By
these Collations the Queen shall be put out of possession, and put to her Writ
of Right of Advowson; but the same ought to be intended not where the Bishop
Collates as Ordinary, but where he Collates as Patron, claiming the Patronage
to himself, for such a Collation does amount to a Presentation; and here are
two or three Collations pleaded, which should put the Queen out of possession,
although she shall not be bound by the first during the life of the first
Incumbent. Vide Br. Quare Impedit 31. upon the abridging of the Case of 47 E.
3. 4. That two Presentiments the one after the other shall put the King out of
possession, and put him to his Writ of Right of Advowson, which Anderson
denied. And it was holden by the whole Court, Here is not any Presentation, and
then no possession gained by the Collations: and although the Bishop does
collate as Patron, and not as Ordinary, yet it is but a Collation. And there is
a great difference betwixt Collation and Presentation, for Collation is a
giving of the Church to the Parson, and Presentation is a giving and offering
of the Parson to the Church, and that makes a Plenarty, but not a Collation.
And although that the Queen has the Advowson by the right of her Duchy, yet
that makes not any matter, for the person of the Queen priviledgeth all her
Capacities: Plenarty no Plea against the sting.
and therefore Plenarty is no plea against the Queen, be she seized of the
Advowson in the Right of her Crown, or of her Duchy; but when she claims by
Lapse, it is otherwise. And afterward Exception was taken to the Writ, because
it is not set forth in the Writ how the Queen claimed the Advowson; as where
the King had Right to present by reason of the Temporalties of the Bishop in
his hands, the Writ shall say, Ratione Archiepiscopatus Cant. nuno Vacant. or
Ratione Custodiae: And so because this Advowson is parcel of her Duchy, the
Writ ought to say so. And Anderson chief Justice was of opinion, that the Writ
was good enough, notwithstanding the want of that clause, Ratione Ducatus, for
both ways it is good and sufficient, generally or specially; as where a man
has an Advowson in the Right of his Wife, and the Husband brings a Quare
Impedit, the Writ shall be general, ad suam special. Donationem, without the
mentioning of his Wife. See the Book of Entries 483. the Writ is general, but
the Count is special. And there is the very case of the Duchy of Lancaster,
and then the Writ is general, but the Count is ratione Ducatus sui Lancastr.
And such an avoidance of a Church, parcel of the Duchy, may be granted under
the Great Seal: And see the case of the Duchy of Lancaster in Plowden to that
purpose; and afterward a President was showed, in An. 32 H. 6. where the Writ
was general, and the Count was Ratione Ducatus.

CCCVIII. Pasch. 33 Eliz. in the Common Pleas.
A Man made a Lease for years to begin at the Feast of our Lady Mary, for one
and twenty years, Lease.
without showing the certainty at which Feasts the Annunciation, Purification,
etc. yet the Lease is good enough, and the Lessee may determine the certainty
of the beginning of the Term by his Entry, at which of the said Feasts the said
Term shall begin, by Anderson chief Justice; but Periam doubted of it.

CCCIX. Blagrave and Woods Case. Pasch. 33 Eliz. in the Common Pleas.
IN an action of Trespass brought by Blagrave against Wood, Surrender to the
Steward out of Court. Co. 4 Rep. 20.
of Lands in Totting in the County of Surrey, concerning a Surrender made to
the use of Sir Thomas Holcroft, by Alice Pagnam, 7 E. 6. before one Forcet then
Steward there: The Issue was, If at the time of the said surrender, the said
Forcet was Steward of the said Manor. And the Jury found a special Verdict,
scil. That the said Forcet circa 9 Aprilis, 7 E. 6. was retained by one
Elizabeth Pagnam, then, before and afterward Lady of the said Manor, to be her
Steward there for the keeping of the Courts of the said Manor; and this
Retainer was only by Word in the Country, and no Fee or Annuity given for the
exercise of the said Office: and that the said Forcet, according to the said
Retainer, had kept Courts there diverse times. And further, that such a day and
year at St. Dunstans in the East, the said Forcet took a Surrender, which was
entered in the Rolls the next Court: and that before that and after he took
diverse Surrenders as well out of Court, as in Court, and had holden diverse
Courts there. And upon this Verdict, it was moved by Snagg Sergeant, That
Forcet upon the matter found by the Verdict is not such a Steward, that may
take Surrenders out of Court, being retained only by word, although to do other
Acts in Court he be a sufficient Steward, for in the Court he is as a Judge,
and no body is to dispute his Authority there. And there is a great difference
betwixt a Steward of a Manor, and a Steward of Courts; and a Steward of one
Manor has not as great an authority as the Steward of another Manor, for a
Steward of a Manor may take Surrenders in any place, otherwise it is where a
Steward is retained to keep Courts, for he has no authority to keep Court, and
all his power is within the Court, Vide Co. 4 part. 30. Dame Holcr^fts Caso.
and not without. See 8 Eliz. Dyer 248. Drew Sergeant to the contrary. Here
Forcet upon this Retainder was Steward at the Will of the Lady of the Manor,
which Will shall not be said to be determined, until the Lady does discharge
him: and the difference which has been taken betwixt Steward of Courts, and a
Steward of a Manor is nothing to the purpose, for there is not any reason in
it: and it is true, an Assise cannot be brought of such an Office, without a
Patent of it, for it cannot pass for life without a Deed; and although a
Steward in the Courts of Copyholders be a Judge, yet he may be appointed
without Deed: as where two submit themselves to the arbitration of others, now
the Arbitrators are Judges as to that intent, and yet they may be appointed
Arbitrators, and discharged without Deed, 19 H 6. 6. 5 E. 4. 3. 21 H. 6. 30.
but they cannot by their award transfer Freehold from one to another, 21 E. 3.
26. 14 H. 4. 18. and 17. by Culpeper and Skreen; and see as to a Steward
retained by word, 8 Eliz. 248. and see 12 H. 7. 25, 26, 27. where a Bailiff of
a Manor may be appointed without Deed, and so of an Undersheriff, and yet he
is a Judge. Owen Serjant contrary, Here Forcet at the time of this Surrender
was not Steward, but the Retainer void. 1. No Fee is allowed unto him for the
exercise of the said Office, 3 H. 6. A Labourer may be retained without promise
of any Sallary in certain, for it is appointed by the Law. 2. He is not
retained by Deed, and although he may be retained without Deed to hold Court,
pro hac vice, yet if the Retainer be for life, or for years, it ought to be by
Deed. 3. He was retained to keep the Court, but not to be Steward, which shall
be intended to hold Court, and then when that is past his authority shall
cease, and then all which he does afterward is void. But if he had been
retained to be Steward of the Manor, then the Surrender taken out of Court had
been well enough. 4. There is not any custom found by the Verdict, to warrant
such a Surrender taken out of Court, and then if the Surrender be not warranted
by their custom it is void. Yelverton to the contrary, In all cases in real
actions which concern Lands, the Suitors are the Judges; but in personal
actions under the sum of forty shillings the Steward is Judge: and although he
be a Judge, yet he may be appointed without Deed. And whereas it has been
objected, that no Fee is appointed for the exercising of the Office, the same
is not material as to the Grant, but the party is not compellable without a Fee
to do the service: and a man may be constituted Bailiff of such a Manor without
Deed, and yet more does appertain to the Office of the Bailiff, than to the
Steward: as if the Lord of a Manor be beyond the Sea, More 1 Rep.
the Writ of Right shall be directed to the Bailiff of the Manor: and see 21 H.
7. 36, 37. Where the Sheriff, or Steward of a Manor may be without Deed: and
here in the principal case, the Retainer is not to keep one Court, but to keep
the Courts of the Lady of the Manor, scil. all her Courts, until he be
discharged. It was adjourned.

CCCX. Ascew and Fuliambs Case. Pasch. 33 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
Andita Querela. 1 Cro. 233.
AScew was bounden by Statute to Fuliamb, and there was not two Seals put to
the Statute, and Execution was sued upon the said Statute, the Conusor brought
an Audita Querela, and they were at Issue, if two Seals were to the said
Statute, and tried for the Plaintiff in an Audita Querela by the Sheriff of the
City of Lincoln; And it was moved by Glanvil Serjant, That the Issue ought to
have been tried by the Certificate of the Mayor of Lincoln, before whom the
acknowledgment was, and not by Jury, which was denied, for the Issue is not
whether any such Statute was acknowledged or not, but whether the Statute in
question has two Seals or not, and that is not recorded by the Mayor, as the
Statute it self is: Another Exception was taken, It appears by the Margent of
the Record, that the Issue was tried by the County of Lincoln, where it ought
to be tried by the County of the City of Linc. for Linc. only is in the
Margent. But to that it was said, that such is the usual form, to which the
Preignothories agreed, and the Book of 18 E. 3. 25. was urged, where execution
of Lands of the Conusor was awarded upon a Statute Merchant, and the Statute
was to pay, etc. 16 E. 3. But the Original Writ which issued to take the body
of the Conusor was 14 E. 3. And upon that Error brought: And the Court agreed
that case, but these two cases do differ, for there the Process was misawarded,
not so here: And although a Writ of Error may lie, yet the same does not prove,
but that an Audita Querela may lie also: And afterward Judgment was given for
the Plaintiff.

CCCXI. Jennings and Gowers Case. Pasch. 31. Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
IN the Case betwixt Jennings and Gower, the words were; 1 Cro. 219.
That if the wife of the Devisor would permit one Wats to enjoy such a Term for
the Term of three years next following, that then she should have all the
residue of his Goods and Chattels as his sole Executrix, etc. Anderson chief
Justice conceived, That she should not be Executrix; For she is to be
Executrix, upon a condition precedent to be performed before that she be
Executrix: And the condition is impossible to be performed, and then she shall
never be Executrix, for where an estate is to be created upon a condition
impossible to be performed, there the estate shall never come in esse, and here
the condition is impossible, for how can she suffer Wats to enjoy the Term for
3. years, next following, and the 3. years ought to be past before she has any
power, either to permit, or resist, for until the three years be encurred, she
cannot be Executrix, nor before the three years expired can she bring any
action as Executrix, for her authority does not begin before the three years be
expired. Walm. Peri. and Wind. contrary; Although a grant upon a condition
precedent does not take effect until the condition be performed, yet such a
construction ought not to be used in this case, so the intent of the Devisor in
this case shall stand: If the condition had been, that if the wife will find
meat and drink to such a person until his death, That then she shall be
Executrix, shall not the Wife be Executrix till after the death of such party?
truly yes, for otherwise she should never be Executrix, which is utterly
against the meaning of the Testator; for it was not his intent that the
Ordinary should commit Administration of his goods in the mean time: And
afterward Anderson changed his opinion, and agreed with the other Justices:
Periam, The subsequent words prove directly, that the meaning of the Testator
was, to make his Wife Executrix immediately, until she were disturbed by the
said Wats, for the words are, that if she refuse to suffer the said Wats to
enjoy, etc. Then his Son shall be his Executor, which words imply, that by a
disturbance made by the Wife her Executor-ship should cease, and that the Son
should have it, which cannot properly be if she was not Executrix from the
beginning. And it is the usual course in the construction of Wills, to consider
all the clauses of the Will, and to judge upon all the words of the Will, and
not upon one part only, and such construction the Judges used in the cases of
Param. and Yardley, and Welden, and Elhing And afterward at another day
Judgment was given for the Wife; That she was Executrix presently, and her
authority should not expect until the three years were expired, if not that any
actual disturbance can be proved to be or have been made by the Wife against
the Will of the Devisor, and the words of the Will, will receive such
construction, that she shall be Executrix until an actual disturbance of Wats.

CCCXII. Palms and the Bishop of Peterboroughs Case. Pasch. 33. Eliz. in the
Common Pleas.
Quare Impedit. 1 Cor. 241.
IN a Quare Impedit by Margaret Palms against the Bishop of Peterborough, who
pleaded, That the Plaintiff did present unto him one I. S. of whom the Bishop
asked if he were within Orders; and if he had his Letters of orders, and
because the Presentee could not show the Bishop his Orders, he refused him: And
commanded him to come another time and show to him his Orders, and that the
Presentee did never do it, nor offered to the said Bishop his said Orders,
without that he did disturb him in other manner. And by Periam and Anderson it
is no Plea, for upon his own showing the Defendant is a disturber: Refusal of
the Bishop. Degg. 75.
For although that the Statute of 13 Eliz. requires that no man shall be
admitted to a Benefice with cure of souls, if he be not a Deacon, yet the
Statute does not extend, to compel the Clark to show his Orders, and therefore
when he for such a frivilous cause does refuse to admit him, the same is a
disturbance; And afterward exception was taken to the Count, because that the
Plaintiff being Tenant for life of the Advowson of the gift of her Husband, Co.
5 Rep. 57.
had not alleged any Presentment in her Husband, or any of his Ancestors, but
only in her self: But that was not allowed, for that point has been lately
overruled in this Court, in the case betwixt Specot and the Bishop of Exeter,
and 8 H. 5. 4. adjudged accordingly, Vi. 9 H. 7. 23. And the clear opinion of
the Court was, that the Count was good notwithstanding that exception: As to
the matter of the Plea the Court doubted of it, for the Plea was, that the
Bishop demanded, of the clerk presented, his Letters of Orders, and Letters
Testimonial, of his good behavior, and his Letters Missive, and he did not
show them but requested of the Bishop the space of a week, to satisfy the
Bishop in those points, which was allowed unto him, but he never returned, for
which cause the Bishop afterward refused, etc. And it was said upon that Plea,
that the Clark who is presented, ought to make proof to the Bishop that he is a
Deacon, and that he has Orders; otherwise by the Statute of 13 Eliz. the
Bishop is not bound to admit such Clark, Degg. 75.
but the Statute does not compel the Clark to show his Orders, for perhaps he
has lost them, but how his Orders should be proved, it was much doubted:
Anderson, The Bishop may examine him upon oath, if he has Orders or not; But
as to the Letters Testimonial of his good behavior and sufficiency, the Bishop
ought to examine the same himself, and if he give day and defer the Admission
because he is not resolved therein, he is a Disturber if the Clark come to him
in a convenient time: And the Bishop cannot refuse a Clark for the want of
Letters Testimonial.

CCCXIII. Linacers Case. Pasch. 33. Eliz. in the Common Pleas.
2 Leon. 96. Co. 5. Rep. 86.
IN an Audita Querela brought by Linacer, It was said by Anderson chief Justice,
That if a man be in execution by his Body and Lands upon a Statute; If the
Sheriff permit the Conusor to go at Liberty, yet the Execution of the Land is
not discharged; But if he go at large by the consent of the Conusee, then the
whole Execution is discharged: And the Conusor shall have his Land again
presently.

CCCXIV. Brownsall and Tylers Case. Pasch. 33 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
THe Case was, that Tenant in tail brought a Writ of Entry, Sur disseisin and
the Writ was general, and it was moved, if the Writ was good, and 21 H. 6. 26.
was vouched, where it is holden, that the Writ ought to be special, scil. to
make mention of the tail: But it was holden by the Court, that the general Writ
is good enough. And then the Count ought to be special. Vi. Fitz. 191.

CCCXV. Ward and Knights Case. Trin. 30. Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
IN an Action upon the case, the Plaintiff declared, Toll. 1 Cro. 227.
That whereas Lostock parcel of the Manor of E. in the County of Suffolk is an
ancient Town, and ancient Demesne of the Crown of England, and that, time out of
mind, etc. all the men, and Tenants of ancient Demesne ought to be quitted of
Toll in all places within the Realm, for them, their Goods and Chattels, etc.
And whereas the Queen by her Letters Patents the tenth of September, the
nineteenth of her Reign, commanded all Mayors, Bailiffs, Constables, etc. to
permit and suffer the men and Tenants of ancient Demesne, to be quit of Toll,
Murage, and other exactions throughout the whole Realm; And whereas the
Plaintiff was an Inhabitant, and Tenant in Lostock aforesaid, and such a day
and year carried his Goods to Yarmouth in the said County, the Defendant not
ignorant thereof, had taken and carried away a Cable of the Plaintiffs goods,
of the value of eight pounds for Toll, to dis damage, etc. The Defendant
pleaded by Protestation, that Lostock was not ancient Demesne, and by
Protestation that the Tenants of ancient Demesne ought not to be quit of Toll,
he said. That the Town of Yarmouth is an ancient Borough, Prescription.
and that they had been incorporated by the name of Bailiff and Burgesses, etc.
And that they have had, time out of mind, etc. an Officer called a Water-Baly,
and that, time out of mind, etc. they and their Predecessors have had and taken
Toll of the Tenants and Inhabitants of Lostock, for any of their goods brought
thither to Merchandise with, and if it be not paid, they have used time out of
mind, to distrain for it by their Water-Bayly: And said, that the Plaintiff
such a day brought to the said Town of Yarmouth, two thousand weight of Cable
Ropes to sell, for which there was due for Toll six pence, for Murage six
pence, for Thronage four pence, and the Defendant being Water-Bayly demanded of
the Plaintiff the said sum which he refused to pay, for which he took the said
Cable, nomine districtionis, for the said Thronage, etc. Golding for the
Plaintiff, the Defendant has not set forth in himself any authority to demand
the duty: For he shows, that they have used to distrain by their Water-Bayly,
but not that they have used to demand it by him, and it may be, that they have
several Officers, one to demand it, and another to distrain for it. And always
when a man demands a thing against common Right, he is to show authority
express in the whole: And as to the matter in Law, scil. The Prescription to
have Toll of the Tenants in ancient Demesne, it cannot have a lawful beginning:
As 21 H. 7. 40. The Lord of a Manor says, that he has had a Pound within his
Manor, time out of mind, etc. And that he has used to have of every one who
breaks his Pound, three pounds, the same is a void custom to bind a stranger,
for it cannot have a lawful beginning, and see 5 H. 7. 9. b. One prescribed,
that if any Cattle be taken in such a place, Damage Feasant, that he might
distrain them and put them in Pound until the Owner had made amends, at the
will of him who distrained them, the same is a void Prescription, for it cannot
have a lawful beginning, and time cannot make such a thing to be good. The King
may grant Tollage, Pontage, etc. but not to the prejudice of another, as 22 E.
3. 58. The King cannot grant to one Thorough-toll to pass by Highways, for it
is an oppression to the people, for every Highway shall be common to every
one, see 16. E. 3. Grants 53. and here the Tenants of ancient Demesne are quit
of Toll by the common Law, and not by Prescription, which see Fitz. 14. and
such Tenants have an Inheritance in such Liberties, which the King by his grant
cannot take away, and then if it cannot have a lawful beginning, it cannot be
good by Prescription: also this Prescription is against the Commonwealth,
therefore it is a void Prescription, and the Commonwealth is much respected in
Law, and things which in themselves are justifiable by reason, are not
justifiable if they be injurious to others, as 21 E. 4. and 8 E. 4. 18. Fishers
may prescribe to dry their Nets upon the Lands of others, and none can
prescribe against such a Prescription; so here, all Lands which are ancient
Demesne, are holden in Socage, so as they were all Husbandmen, who manured their
Lands for the sustentation of the Kings Subjects, to which they had such such
privileges to be the better able to follow their Husbandry, and therefore to
disable such profitable Subjects, and to prescribe against these Liberties and
Privileges, is to take away the name of ancient Demesne, and to make their
Lands at the common Law. Hobart contrary: To show the authority to demand is
not necessary, for our Prescription is not upon demand to distrain: For the
common Officer has authority to demand, for they ought to demand it, who ought
to take the thing demanded, and those are the Bailiffs and Burgesses, and then
when their Water-bayly does it, it is as much as if it had been done by the
corporation, which see 48 E. 3. 17. The Mayor and comminalty of Lincoln,
brought an action of covenant against the Mayor and comminalty of Derby, and
declared, that the Mayor and comminalty of Derby had covenanted with the Mayor
and comminalty of Lin. that they should be quit of Murage, Pontage, Custom and
Toll within the Town of Derby, of all Merchandises of those of the Town of Lin.
and further declared, That I.W. and H.M. two Burgesses of the Town of Derby,
had taken certain Toll of certain Burgesses of the Town of Lin. etc. Exception
was taken to this Declaration, because they had alleged the taking of such
Toll, not by the corporation of Derby, but by I. and H. two of the Burgesses of
it, in which case the Plaintiffs might have an action of Trespass against the
Burgesses, for the act of any of the corporation is not the breaking of the
covenant, made by the comminalty, but it was not allowed; for if the common
Officer of the Town does any thing for their common use, as it is intended such
thing was done by the Officer, it is reason all the Town be answerable for it,
and the whole comminalty by intendment cannot come at one time to take, etc.
and so in our case, for as much as the corporation ought to make the demand,
and their common Officer does it to their use, the same is the act of the whole
corporation. As to the matter in Law, we have pleaded specially; That we took
Toll only of those things which are brought by Sea by Merchants, and not
otherwise, and I conceive that Tenants in ancient Demesne, are not discharged of
Toll, for all things, but only for such which arise out of their Tenements, or
are bought for their Tenements or Families there, and their sustentations,
according to the quantity of their Tenements, 9 H. 6. 25. 19 H. 6. 66. They
shall be quit of Toll, of all things sold and bought coming of their Lands, or
for the manurance of their Lands: And 7 H. 4. 111. Tenants of ancient Demesne,
ought to be quit of Toll for Oxen or Beasts bought and sold for tillage, and
manurance of their Lands, and for their sustenance and maintenance of their
Families, and for putting them to Pasture to make them fat and more vendable,
and so to sell them, etc. And see accordingly, F.N.B. 224. D. See Crook 138.
139. 28 Eliz. A Judgment was given for the said parties, for the Plaintiffs:
but there the Plaintiff declared generally, and the Defendant did demur in Law
generally, wherefore by common intendment, the Cattle were bought for the
tillage and manurance of their Lands: For there it was not showed (as it is
here) that it was to Merchandise: Also we have justified, not only for Toll,
but also for Trouage, and that they have not showed, and therefore as to the
Trouage our justification is good enough, for their privilege shall not be
construed to extend beyond the words of it: As the privilege of the Law is,
That if I leave my horse at a Smiths Forge to be shod, there my horse cannot be
distrained, but if I or my Servant take the Saddle from the Horses back, and
lay it in the Smiths Forge, the Saddle may be distrained. Then here are two
customs meeting together, and to begin together, and the one was not before the
other, then the particular custom shall stand: And I conceive that by the Writ,
de exoneratione sect. Fitz. N. B. 161. b. The Tenants in ancient Demesne, have
not always such privileges, for the Writ says, quod si ita sit, then, etc.
and nisi ipsi, and eorum antecessores tenentes de eodem manerio venire
consueverunt temporibus retroactis, and see the same matter in the Register,
181. And afterward Judgment was given, quod querens nihil capiat par billam,
for the Justices were of opinion, that the Tenants in ancient Demesne should pay
Toll for their Merchandises.

CCCXVI. Lancaster and Lucas Case. Mich. 32, and 33 Eliz. in the Kings Bench.
TRespass was brought for entering into the Parsonage-house of Ringhall, and
diverse Lands appertaining to it: Leas^^.
The Defendant being Farmor of the Parsonage, pleaded, Not guilty; and the Jury
found, that one Tybbin was Parson of the said Church, and that one Ash and
Dorothy his Wife, Wivell and Drausfield were Patrons of the said Church, scil.
Ash and his Wife in the Right of his Wife, Wivell as Tenant by the Courtesy,
the Reversion to his Son, and Drausfield also as Tenant by the Courtesy, but
without Issue by his Wife, etc. so as the Inheritance of the said Parsonage was
in Wivell and Ash; and afterward the Bishop of Chester being Ordinary, the
Parson and Patron, 4 E. 6. joined in a Lease of the Rectory (which Lease was
void as to the Wife of Ash) to S. who assigned it to the Defendant. All the
Lessors dyed: and further found, that Ash and Wivell were Heirs of the
Patronage, and that the Church being void, the Presentment came to the Bishop
by reason of Lapse, and that the Successor of the Bishop had Collated his
Clark. Cook argued, And he conceived that the same now Incumbent should avoid
the Lease in toto; and the case is but this: Three Coparceners Patrons of an
Advowson, or Tenants in Common, the Parson, three Patrons, and the Ordinary
join in a Lease (where the one of them is a Feme-covert, and so her Act void)
If the Successor of the Incumbent being presented by Lapse shall avoid it in
all: And he conceived that he should, for all three have interest in the
Parsonage, and all three ought to agree, but the agreement of the one is worth
nothing: But it has been said, that that is but matter of assent, and that the
assent of the one is as strong as the assent of them all; Atto^nment.
As if many Ioynt-tenants hold by certain Services, and the Lord grants the
Services to a stranger, and one of the Ioynt-tenants attorneth to the Grant,
the same is as sufficient as if they had all attorned, Lit. 128. 566. Otherwise
it is of a Rentcharge, for there all the Ioynt-tenants of the Lands charged
upon the grant of the said Rent ought to attorn to the Grant; for the
Ter-tenant ought to attorn, and one of them is not Ter-tenant: And in case of a
Rentcharge, the Avowry is upon the Lands: but Attornment differs from our
case, for Attornment is but a bare assent, without any interest in him who
attorns, for an Abator may do it; but here is matter of Interest, and in
Attornment, Attornment for one acre is effectual for all, 18 E. 3. Fitz.
variance 63. but otherwise it is in case of Confirmation for one acre, the same
does not extend to the rest, for in such case an Interest passes. So here, the
one of them is not Patron, therefore all of them ought to concur, 31 E. 3.
Grants 61. That such act of the Patron shall not bind but according to the
Estate of the Patron, which see Lit. 112. 528. as if Tenant in Tail confirm,
the same shall not bind the Presentee of the issue, See Fitz. Grants 104 In R.
2. The case was that the Bishop of Covent. and Lichfeild had two Chapters, one
of Coventry, the other of Lichfeild, and he made a conveyance, but one Chapter
only did confirm it, the same does not bind the Successor, for both are but one
Chapter in respect of the Bishop, and see the case abridged by Statham Title
Assize, for if the Bishop is chosen by both Chapters, there a confirmation must
be of them both: The case in Dyer 11 Eliz. 282. Thark, Archbishop of Dublin,
has two Deans and Chapters, the one surrendreth without the assent of the
Bishop, and afterward the other Dean and Chapter confirms a Lease made by
the Bishop, the same is good: I confess that; for the Surrender was by Act of
Parliament, and so one sole Chapter remained: And in our case, the Lease cannot
be good in part, and void for the residue, for all are but one Patron, as 22 H.
6. 47. Two Coparcenes are, they make composition to present by Turns, a Writ of
Annuity is brought against the Incumbent, he shall have aid of both. And see
the Case betwixt Gore and Dawbney in the Exchequer Chamber upon a Writ of
Error, where two are accountable, an Account made by the one is not good, for
both the Accountants shall make but, one account, and therefore the Account of
the one cannot be good: And the Lord Anderson put this Case, two Ioynt-tenants
of a Manor, the one of them does grant a Copy, the same is void, for he is not
Dominus pro tempore: And see as to the assent of them all, etc. 3 Eliz. 190.
Dyer. But it has been objected, That now the Incumbent comes in by the
Ordinary, and not by the Presentment of the Patron, and the Ordinary is bound
by the confirmation of his Predecessor, so that the collation of the Bishop by
Lapse, is in the right and sted of the Patron, and as the Presentee of the Heir
of the Patron shall avoid, etc. so also of the Ordinary: and 20 E. 3. Br.
Presentment 12. The Patron shall have a Writ of Darrein-presentment upon the
present* of the Bishop for Lapse, and 22 H. 6. If a man can recover an
Advowson, and after the Bishop collate for Lapse, the same is an Execution of
the Judgment, and will make a possessio fratris, as Moyle says: And in our
case this confirmation is void in all, because Non sunt concurrentes ii qui in
hac part concurrere debuerant: And it is an entire Act, and cannot be avoided
in part, and stand for the residue, and the Presentee comes in in the right of
the Heir, for which he may avoid it, etc. Popham contrary, it is to be here
considered, if the Ordinary has Interest in the Church by this Lapse, or only
an authority; for if he has an Interest, then it will follow, that every one
of his Successors shall be bound by his Confirmation, and also their
Presentees: It has been objected, that there ought to be a full and entire
Patron who makes such a Lease, otherwise it is void: But that is not so, as if
the Patron be Tenant for life, his Lease or Confirmation shall not be void in
all, but shall be good during his life, which see 31 E. 3. Grants 61. and 19
Eliz. 356. A Parson makes a Lease for forty years, the Bishop being Patron and
Ordinary confirms it, the Patron dies, the Bishop presents, and afterward is
translated, this Lease shall stand during the life of the Bishop, and of the
new Incumbent who found the Church charged, and then such Lease may be good for
part, and void for part. See for the same, 2 E 3. 8. If the Advowson of a
Church be appropriated unto a Prior and his Successors, if afterward the wife
of the Grantor be endowed of it, and present her Clerk, the Church is become
dis-appropriated during the life of the Wife, but afterward shall stand. See
the case cited to the contrary, 29 Eliz. in the case of the Earl of Bedford 7
Co. 8. At the beginning the Patron was not restrained to any time to present
his Clerk, but the six months was appointed at the instance and suit of the
Ordinaries by a Canon, confirmed in the council of Lateran, before which time,
the Ordinaries had not any Lapses, but after the said Canon, they had an
Interest in the Church, and this appears in the Register: And see F.N.B. 37.
f. that after the Ordinary is entitled to Lapses, The Plaintiff in a Quare
Impedit cannot have a Ne admittas, for now the Ordinary has an Interest: And
if the Bishop has Title to present by Lapse, and before Presentment he dies,
so as his temporalties come to the King, the King shall present, which proves
that it is an Interest, and the Civilians call it, Interesse caducum and
conditionale: And in our case the confirmation of the Coparcener shall bind the
other Coparceners; in a Nativo habendo, shall bind them all, and the villain
shall be free for ever. And it was moved also, if an usurper, or the Clerk who
is in by him shall avoid this clause, and by the words of the Statute of West.
2. Si tempus semestre transierit per impedimentum alicujus, ita quod Episcopus
Ecclesiam conferat, and verus Patronus ea vice praesentationem suam amittat,
adjudicentur damna ad valorem Ecclesiae pro duobus annis; Wherefore what the
Patron loses, the Ordinary has the same, therefore it is an Interest, and in
lieu of that loss the Statute gives damages to the Patron, etc. And the case
was adjorned to be further argued at another day, etc.

CCCXVIII. Pet and Baldens Case. Pasch. 33. Eliz. Rot. 392. In the Kings Bench.
IN a prohibition the Plaintiff declared, Prohibition. 1 Cro. 274.
that whereas Michael Pett was seized of diverse Lands, and made his Will, by
which he made the Plaintiff his Son his Executor, and thereby devised unto A.
his Wife one hundred pounds, in consideration and recompense of her Dower of
all his Lands, and dyed, and the said A. took to Husband the Defendant: And
that after betwixt the Plaintiff and Defendant, colloquium quoddam habebatur,
etc. upon which conference and communication, the Defendant in consideration
that the Plaintiff promised to pay to him the said one hundred pounds, promised
to make to him a discharge of the said one hundred pounds, and also of the
Dower of his Wife, and showed further, that notwithstanding that the said Pett
was ready, and offered the said one hundred pounds, and Dower also, yet, etc.
Upon which there was a Demurrer in Law; It was moved by Tan. that here is not
any cause to have a prohibition, for the agreement upon the communication is
not any cause, for it does not appear that it was performed. Coke, A
Prohibition lies, for the Wife cannot have both, money, and Dower, for that
was not the meaning of the Devisor, and therefore it has been holden, that if
a man devises a Term for years to his Wife, in satisfaction and recompense of
her Dower, if she recovereth Dower, she has lost her Term; Also here is modus
and conventio which alters the Law, scil. mutual agreement: So if the Parson
and one of the Parishioners agree betwixt them that for forty shillings per
annum he shall retain his Tithes for three years, etc. as it was in the Case
betwixt Green and Pendleton, etc. it is good.

CCCXIX. Martingdall and Andrews Case. Mich. 32 and 33. Eliz. In Banco Regis.
Action upon the case for Wast
IN an Action upon the Case, the Plaintiff declared, that one Mildmay was seized
of a House in A. and that he and all those whose estate, etc. time out of mind,
etc. have had a way over certain Lands of the Defendants called C. pro
quibusdam averiis suis, and showed, that the said Mildmay enfeoffed him of the
said House, and that the Defendant stopped the said way, to his damage, etc. And
it was found for the Plaintiff, and it was moved in Arrest of Judgment, that
the title to the way is not certainly set forth, i.e. pro quibusdam averiis
suis, quod omnes Justiciarii concesserunt: But Gaudy Justice conceived, that
the same was no cause to stay Judgment: For it appears to us, that the
Plaintiff has cause of Action, although that the matter be incertainly
alleged, and of this incertainty the Defendant has lost the advantage,
having surceased his time by pleading to it, as 20 E. 3. Trespass for taking
and carrying away of Charters, the Defendant pleaded Not guilty, and it was
found for the Plaintiff to the damage, etc. And Error was brought, because the
Plaintiff had not set down in his Declaration, the certainty of the Lands
comprised in the Charters: But non allocatur, for the Defendant ought to have
challenged that before, and also 47 E. 3. 3. In a Writ of Covenant the
Plaintiff declared of a Covenant, by which the Defendant covenanted with the
Plaintiff to assure to him all his Lands and Tenements which he had in the
Counties of Gloucester and Lincoln, and declared, that at a certain day he
required the Defendant to make him assurance of all the Lands, etc. And the
Writ of Covenant was general, quod teneat conventionem de omnibus terris quas
habeat in, etc. And it was objected (as here) that the Writ wanted certainty,
as how many Acres, or such a Manor, but non allocatur, for here the Plaintiff
is not to recover Land, but only Damages, and the Writ was awarded good. Fenner
Justice, the Cases are not like to the Case at Bar, for in the said Cases, the
certainty is not needful, but for the taxing of the Damages; but here, the
certainty of the number of the Cattle is part of the title.

CCCXX. Beale and Tailors Case. Mich. 32, and 33 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
UPon Evidence to a Jury, Leases. 1 Cro. 222.
it was holden by Gaudy and Clench Justices, that if a Lease for years be made,
and the Lessor covenants to repair during the Term; if now the Lessor will not
do it, the Lessee himself may do it, and pay himself by way of Retainer of so
much out of the Rent, which see 12 H. 8. 1. 14 H. 4. 316. Retainer of Rent.
A Lease for years by Indenture, and the Lessor, covenants to repair the
Houses, and afterward the Lessor commands the Lessee to mend the Houses with
the Rent, who does it accordingly, and expends the Rent in the charges, etc. So
11 R. 2. Bar. 242. The Lessor covenants, that the Lessee shall repair the
Tenements when they are ruinous, at the charge of the Lessor: In debt for the
Rent, the Lessee pleaded that matter, and that according to the Covenant he had
repaired the Tenements being then ruinous with the Rent, and demanded Judgment,
if action, Jones 242. Yelv. 43.
etc. and good. Fenner Justice contrary, for each shall have action against the
other, if there be not an express Covenant to do it. Quaere, If the Lessor
covenant to discharge the Land leased, and the Lessee, of all Rent-Charges
issuing out of it. If a Rentcharge be due, if the Lessee may pay it out of his
own Rent to the Lessor, ad quod non fuit responsum.

CCCXXI. Offley and Saltingston, and Pains Case. Mich. 32, and 33 Eliz. In the
Kings Bench.
OFfley and Saltingston, late Sheriffs of London, Escape. 1 Cro. 237.
brought an Action upon the Case against Pain, because that he being in
Execution under their custody for fifty three pounds, in which he was condemned
at the Suit of one Spicer, made an escape, the debt not satisfied, by reason
whereof they were compelled to pay the money; The Defendant confessed all the
matter, but further pleaded, that after the Escape Spicer had acknowledged
satisfaction (being after the Escape) upon Record of the sum recovered, upon
which there was a Demurrer: Owen Sergeant argued, that the acknowleding of
satisfaction, being after the Escape, was not any Plea, for when the Plaintiffs
Sheriffs have paid the money recovered, there was no reason that Spicers
acknowledging satisfaction should stop the Sheriffs of their Remedy against
Pain. It was holden by the Justices, that the Plaintiffs in this Action ought
to show, that they had been impleaded by him who recovered, for they cannot
have this Action before they are sued. For perhaps the Plaintiffs who recovered
must be contented to hold themselves to the Defendant, and to be satisfied by
him. It was said by Glanvil Sergeant, that by the Escape the Debt was cast upon
the Sheriffs, and the Defendant discharged: and that it was the Case of Sir
Gervas Clyfton, who being Sheriff suffered him who was in Execution, and in his
custody, to go and see a Play, and the same was adjudged an Escape, and the
party could not be in Execution again: And then he said, that this
acknowledgment of satisfaction could not be any Bar to the Plaintiffs. At
another day the Case was moved again. And then it was the clear opinion of the
whole Court, that the Action was maintainable, although that the Plaintiff in
the first Action had acknowledged satisfaction: And it has been adjudged here
in this Court, in the Case betwixt Hill and Hill, that notwithstanding such
satisfaction, that the Action lies. See F.N.B. 130. b. for the payment after
does not take away the Action, but mitigate the damages only, for the Act of a
third person shall not take away an Action once vested.

CCCXVII. Greenliff and Bakers Case. Mich. 32, and 33 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
Assumpsit. 1 Cro. 193.
THe Plaintiff declared, that whereas he was bound to the Defendant in an
obligation of forty pounds for the payment of twenty pounds, the Defendant the
second of No. after, in consideration that the Plaintiff at the Request of the
Defendant had paid the said twenty pounds without suit at Law, promised to
deliver to the Plaintiff before such a day an Obligation, by which one A. was
bounden to the Defendant in forty pounds, with a Letter of Attorney to demand
the same of the said A. and to sue for it in the name of the Defendant, which
he had not done, and in that matter the Plaintiff had Judgment, and thereupon
the Defendant brought a Writ of Error; First, here is not any consideration;
for the payment of the money is no more than he ought to do, and which he was
compeliable to do, etc. Secondly, the same is no benefit to the Plaintiff, but
only a matter of charge to sue the said Bond against A. Thirdly, upon the
Venire facias, the Sheriff returned but twenty three Jurors. As to the first
Error it was the opinion of Gaudy and Fenner Justices, that here is not any
consideration, for the Defendant has not any benefit by it, and the Plaintiff
does no more than he ought to do, and the payment was in respect of the Debt,
and not of the Defendants Request. And by Gaudy, upon this promise an action
does not lie, for the Plaintiff is not to have any benefit by it, but travel.
Fenner contrary, and that the Action lies for that; as to the third Error, the
same is helped by the Statute of 32 H. 8. and the Statute of 18 Eliz. of
imperfect and insufficient return of any Sheriff: Fenner, Not only the return
is naught, but also the Panel is insufficient. And it was moved by Tanfield,
that it was adjudged in this Court, Pasch. 25 Eliz. betwixt Cook and Huet, that
where A. was bounden to B. in forty pounds, B. promised to A. that if A. would
pay the money without suit he would deliver him the said Bond, by which he is
bound to the said B. and it was holden a good consideration, Quod fuit
concessum per totam Curiam; but that is not like to the case at Bar, and it was
holden in the same Plea, That if the Obligor pay the duty at the day and place,
that if the Obligee will not deliver the Bond, yet the Obligor shall not have
the Detinue for it.

CCCXII. Guildfords Case. Mich. 32, and 33 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
Indictment upon the Statute of 23 Eliz.
GUilford was Indicted upon the Statute of 23 Eliz. cap. 1. for withdrawing
diverse persons, her Majesty's Subjects, from the Religion established in
England to the Roman Religion, and to promise obedience to the Church of Rome,
and for that he himself was withdrawn from the obedience of the Queen. Coke
took Exception to the Indictment, because that the Indictment was not found
within the year after the offense committed. In the said Act there is a
Proviso, That all offenses against the Act, shall and may be enquired of within
the year and day after the offense committed. Popham Attorney General, This
case is not within that Proviso, but does depend upon other Statutes before,
viz. 1, 5, and 13 Eliz. touching the acknowledging of her Majesty's supreme
Government in causes Ecclesiastical, or other matters touching the service of
God, or coming to Church, or establishing of true Religion within this Realm,
shall and may be enquired as well before the Justices of the Peace, as other
Justices named in the said Statute, within one year and a day after such
offense committed: And he said, these words in the Proviso refer only to such
offenses contained in the said Act, which touches the Supremacy and causes
Ecclesiastical, etc. and such offenses ought to be enquired within the year and
day: But this Indictment here does consist upon other matter, for withdrawing
himself from the obedience of the Queen, which is an offense out of the compass
of the said Proviso, and therefore the enquiry of it not restrained unto any
time; and the Statute of 13 Eliz. extends to Bills, Writings, Instruments, etc.
and not to the words (withdrawing by words) which is supplied by 13 Eliz.
(withdrawing by other means) and the restraint of the Enquiry at the time,
goes to the hearing of Mass, and saying of Mass, and not (repairing to the
Church;) but as to withdrawing, the same is at large, not restrained by that
Statute: And he said, that this Indictment does consist upon many offenses,
some to offenses within the Proviso, and as to those the Indictment is void:
Some to other offenses, as Treason, the offense of withdrawing, the Enquiry of
which is not restrained, and therefore this Indictment shall stand: Also it was
the intent of this Statute, not to restrain this Court, but only the Justices
of Peace, for they are specially named. Coke conceived, that this word
Touching, etc. did not extend to any thing contained in the Statute of 23 Eliz.
but only to offenses within the Acts of 1, 5, and 13 Eliz. which were uncertain
before; also this Proviso is in the Disjunctive, against this or against the
Acts of 1, 5, or 13 Eliz. so as that which follows is to be applied to the last
Disjunctive, and not to the whole sentence; and always when a thing is named
certain, and after general things, the words subsequent shall be referred to
the general words, and not to that which is certain. Also if (Touching, etc.)
does refer to this Statute, the sentence would have begun with it; but here it
begins with the Supremacy, of which nothing is spoken in this Statute, and
therefore it ought to be referred to the Statute which begins it, and that is 1
Eliz. and then it shall be preposterous to come after 23 Eliz. and these words
(shall and may) ought to be so construed, (shall) is restrictive of it self,
and (may) shall be referred to that which was restrained before, as the
proceedings upon the Statute of 1 Eliz. cap. 2. were restrained to the next
Sheriffs; And he conceived, that this Court is as well restrained to Time as
any other Court, for the words are as well before Justices of the Peace, as
before other Justices named in the said Statutes, and in the Statute of 5 Eliz.
this Court is especially named: Wray, This Proviso begins with Justices of the
Peace, therefore it does not extend to offenses which are Treason; and the
meaning of this Statute of 23 Eliz. was to enlarge the Statutes of 1, and 5
Eliz. for where the offense against the Statutes before was to be enquired at
the next Session, and the other within six Months; now by this Statute it may
be enquired at any time within the year and day, but it does not extend to
restrain the proceedings against offenses of Treason, for the words of the
Statute are, That such offenses shall be inquired before Justices of Peace
within a year, etc. But in the next clause, the Justices of Peace may punish
all offenses against this Act, but Treason, by which it appears that no
offenses are restrained to time, but those which the Justices of the Peace have
authority to hear and determine, and that is not Treason: Gaudy to the same
purpose: For all the Proviso is but one sentence, and there the whole shall be
referred to spiritual offenses, as the not coming to Church, etc.

CCCXXIII. Filcocks and Holts Case. Mich. 32, and 33 Eliz. In the Exchequer,
Error.
Assumpsit.
IN an Action by Filcocks against Holt, Administrator of A. the Plaintiff
declared, how that the Husband of the Defendant, who died intestate, was
indebted to the Plaintiff in ten pounds by Bill, and that the Defendant in
consideration, that the Plaintiff would permit the Defendant to take Letters of
Administration, and give to her further day for the payment of the said ten
pounds, promised to pay the said ten pounds to the Plaintiff, at the day: And
upon a Writ of Error brought in the Exchequer, upon a Judgment in the Kings
Bench, in that case, It was assigned for Error, that here is not any
consideration, for by the Law she is to have Administration, being wife of the
Intestate; and as to the giving of further day for the payment of the ten
pounds, the same will not make it good, for it does not appear that she was
Administratrix at the time of the promise made, and then she is not chargeable,
and then, etc. And such was the opinion of the Court. And it was said by Periam
Justice, and Manwood chief Baron: That the Bishop might grant Letters of
Administration to whom he pleased, if he would forfeit the penalty limited by
the Statute: ^atch. 67, 68.
Also it was said, where an Executor or Administrator is charged upon his own
promise, Judgment shall be given de boni^ propriis, for his promise is his own
act.

CCCXXIV. Adams and Bafealds Case. Mich. 33 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
Action upon the Case.
AN Action upon the Case was brought, and the Plaintiff declared, That where
such an one, his Servant, departed his service without cause or license, the
Defendant knowing him to be his Servant, did retain him in his Service, and so
kept him. Tanfeild, The Action does not lie, for if my Servant depart out of my
service, and another does retain him, an Action does not lie at the Common Law,
if he do not procure him to leave my service, and afterward retain him, or
immediately takes him out of my service. And this Action is not grounded upon
any Statute. See 11 H. 4. 176. 47 E. 3. 14. 9 E. 4. 32. Gaudy, The Action
lies, for here is damage and wrong done to the Plaintiff. Fenner contrary, For
the wrong is in the departure, and not in the Retainer; and upon the Statutes
it is a good Plea to say for the Defendant, that the party was vagrant at the
time of the Retainer, and the (sciens) does not alter the matter.

CCCXXV. Nash and Mollins Case. Mich. 32 and 33 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
Prohibition. 1 Cro. 206. Tithes.
NAsh and Usher sued a Prohibition against Mollins, for that the Defendant had
libelled against them in the Spiritual Court, for Tithes of Wood, growing in
Barking Park in Essex; the other did surmise, that the Lands were parcel of the
possessions of the Prior and Covent of Cree Church, and that the said Prior,
and his Successors, time out of mind, etc. had held the said Lands discharged
of Tithes, and held them so at the time of the Dissolution, etc. and the other
part traversed it, whereupon they were at Issue, if the Prior, etc. held the
Land discharged, tempore Dissolutionis, etc. And now on the part of the
Plaintiff in the Prohibition certain old persons were produced, who remembered
the time of the Monasteries, and that they did not pay any Tithes then, or from
thence: Exception was taken to the suggestion by Coke, that here is nothing
else than a Prescription, de non Decimando, for here is not set forth any
discharge, as composition, unity of possession, privilege of order, as
Templarii, Hospitiarii, etc. ^enner Justice: Spiritual persons may prescribe in
non Decimando, for it is not any prejudice to the Church: Wray, Although it is
not set down the special manner of discharge, yet it is well enough, for we
ought to take it that it was by a lawful means, as composition, etc. or
otherwise: For the Statute is, that the King shall hold discharged as the
Abbot, etc. and we ought to take it, that it was a lawful discharge of Tithes
tempore dissolutionis: And afterward the Jury found for the Plaintiffs in the
Prohibition: But no Evidence was given to prove, that the Defendant did
prosecute in the Spiritual Court, contrary to the Prohibition.

CCCXXVI. Sheldons Case. Mich. 32, and 33 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
SHeldon, Talbot, and two other, four persons in all, Indictment upon the
Statute of 23 Eliz.
were Indicted upon the Statute of 23 Eliz. of Recusancy; the words of the
Indictment were, Quod illi nec eorum uterque venerunt to any Parish Church,
etc. It was moved by Atkinson, That the Indictment is not good, for uterque
does refer unto one of them, and not where they are many, as here, and so is an
insensible word, and so upon the matter there is no offense laid to their
charge. And the Justices doubting of it, demanded the opinions of Grammarians,
who delivered their opinions, that this word (uterque) does aptly signify one
of them, Exposition of words.
and in such signification it is used by all Writers: Gaudy, I conceive, that
the opinions of the Grammarians is not to be asked in this case; But I agree,
that when an unusual word in our Law comes in question, for the true
construction of it, then the opinion of Grammarians is necessary: But (uterque)
is no unusual word in our Law, but has had a reasonable Exposition heretofore,
which we ought to adhere unto, which see 28 H. 8. 19. Three bound in an
Obligation: Obligamus nos and utrumque nostrum, and by the whole Court
(uterque) does amount to quilibet: And see 16 Eliz. Dyer 337, 338. Three
Ioyntenants in Fee, and by Indenture Tripartite each of them covenanteth and
grants to the others, and eorum utrique, to make assurance, and there it was
holden that the word (uterque) does amount to quilibet. Wray, Admit it shall be
so taken in a Bond, yet it shall not be so taken in an Indictment: As if a man
make a Lease for years, rendering Rent payable at the day of St. Martin,
although there be two days of St. Martin in the year, yet the reservation is
good, and the Rent shall be taken payable at the most usual day of St. Martin
there in the Country: But in an Indictment, if an offense he laid to be done on
St. Martins day, without showing which in certain, it is not good. Fenner, The
word uterque is matter of surplusage, and therefore shall not hurt the
Indictment.

CCCXXVII. Blunt and Whiteacres Case. Mich. 32 and 33 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
Error.
A Writ of Error was brought upon a Judgment given in the Common Pleas in a
Replevin, where the Defendant did avow as Fermor of the Manor of F. in the
County of Berks, to St. John's College in Oxford, and laid a Prescription there
in him and his Fermors to distrain for all Amercements in the Court of the said
Manor, Amercement.
and showed that the Plaintiff in the Replevin was presented by the Homage for
not repairing of a House, being a customary Tenant of the said Manor, according
to a pain imposed upon him at a former Court, for which he was amerced by the
Steward to ten shillings, and was also presented for not ringing of his Swine,
for which he was amerced three shillings four pence, and for these Amercements
he distrained: And upon Nihil dicit Judgment was given for the Avowant to have
return, upon which a Writ of Error was brought: And Error assigned, in that
there is not any Prescription laid in the Avowry for the Lord to amerce the
Tenants, and of common Right he cannot do it. See 48 E. 3. And such Amercement
is Extortion, for the Lord cannot be his own Judge, and therefore he ought to
enable himself to distrain by Prescription; Another Error, because the Fine is
laid to be assessed by the Steward, 1 Cro. 748. 886.
whereas by the Law it ought to be by the Suitors, for they are Judges, and not
the Steward: Another, because that in the Avowry it is set down, quod
praesentatum fuit, that he had not repaired a certain House; but he does not
say, in facto and categorice, etc. that he had not repaired, for that is matter
traversable. 4. Here is no offense, for a Copyholder is not bound to repair by
the Common Law, if it be not by Prescription, for he cannot have House-boot
upon the Land as a Termor may, if it be not alleged a custom. Fenner, The
Steward may assess Fines for a contempt; but not Amercements if not by
Prescription. Gaudy, The Lord of a Manor cannot assess Amercements for a
Trespass done to himself upon his own Lands; but otherwise it is of a common
Trespass, or a Trespass done in the Land of another; but for the Distress he
ought to prescribe, and the Judgment was reversed.

CCCXXVIII. Page and Fawcets Case. Pasch. 29 Eliz. Rot. 121. In the Kings Bench.
Error. 3 Cro. 227.
ERror was brought upon a Judgment given in Lyn, where by the Record it
appears, that they prescribe to hold Plea every Wednesday, and it appeared
upon the said Record that the Court was holden, 16 Feb. 26 Eliz. which was dies
Dominicus, and that was not assigned for Error in the Record; but after in
Nullo est erratum pleaded, it was assigned at the Bar: And Almanacks were
showed to the Court in proof of it, and it was holden clearly to be Error; but
the doubt was, if it should be tried by Jury, or by the Almanacks, and it was
said, that the Justices might judicially take notice of Almanacks, and be
informed by them, and that was the Case of one Robert in the time of the Lord
Catline, and by Coke; so was the Case betwixt Galery and Bunbury, and
afterward the Judgment was reversed.

CCCXXIX. Geofries and Coites Case. Trin. 33 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
IT was found by special Verdict, 1 Cro. 25^
that one Avice Trivilian was Tenant for life, the Remainder to her Son in
tail, the Remainder over; Tenant for life, and he in the Remainder in tail make
a Lease for life, the Remainder for life rendering Rent; Tenant for life dies,
he in the Remainder dies, and his Son accepts of the Rent of the Tenant for
life in possession, who dies. The Issue in tail enters, he in the Remainder
for life enters, etc. And it was conceived, that this acceptance of the Rent
of the Lessee for life does affirm also the Remainder. See Litt. Sect. 521. and
such was the opinion of Gaudy and Fenner Justices.

CCCXXX. The Lord Mordant and Vaux Case. Pasch. 33 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
THe Lord Mordant brought an Action of Trespass against George Vaux, and
declared of a Trespass done in quodam loco, 1 Inst. 225. 1 Cro. 269.
called N. parcel of the Manor of Hawarden. The Case was, William Lord Vaux was
seized thereof, and thereof levied a Fine to the use of the Lord Vaux, which
now is, for life, and after his decease to the use of Ann and Muriel Daughters
of the Lord Vaux and their Assigns, until Ambrose Vaux should return from the
parts beyond the Seas, and should come to the Age of 21 years, or dye, if they
should so long live: And after the return of Ambrose from beyond the Seas, and
the age of 21 years, or death, whichsoever of the said days or times should
first happen, to the use of the said Ambrose and the Heirs of his body
begotten, with diverse Remainders over. Ambrose returned, Plow. Com. 376. 2.
Ante 18. 76.
and 31 Eliz. before he came of full age (for it is not pleaded that he was of
full age) levied a Fine to the use of George Vaux, the Defendant in tail, with
diverse Remainders over. Afterward the Lord Vaux being Tenant for life,
enfeoffed the Lord Mordant in Fee, upon whom the said George Vaux entered for a
forfeiture, upon which Entry the Lord Mordant brought the Action. Buck argued
for the Plaintiff. Amb. Vaux had nothing in the Lands in question until his
return from beyond the Seas, and his full age, and the estate does not begin
until both be past; and he said, that no use did arise to Ambrose until the
time incurred, for the time of the beginning is uncertain and upon a
Contingent, as 13 Eliz. Dyer 301. A. makes a Feoffment in fee to the use of
himself for life, and after to the use of B. who he intends to marry, until
the Issue which he shall beget on her shall be of the age of 21 years, and
after the Issue shall come of such age, then unto the use of the said B. during
her Widowhood, the Husband dies without Issue, the Wife enters, and her Entry
holden lawful. But Error was brought upon it; And also Calthrops case was cited
to the same purpose, 16 Eliz. Dyer 336. This estate limited to Ambrose does
refer to the estate limited to Muriel and Ann, and not to the time, for ever
the first estate is to be respected, as 23 Eliz. Dyer 371. He in the Remainder
in Fee upon an estate for life devises it to his Wife, yielding and paying
during her natural life yearly 20 shillings, and dies, living Tenant for life,
the Rent shall not begin until the Remainder falls: So as the general words
refer to the beginning of the estate, although the words imply that the Rent
shall be paid presently: And see also such construction, 9 Eliz. 261. A Lease
was made for thirty years, and four years after the Lessor makes another Lease
by these words, Nos dictis 30 annis finitis, dedisse and concessisse, etc.
Habend. and tenend. a die confectionis praesentium, termino praedict. finito,
usque terminum, etc. And although, prima facie, the beginning of this Term
seems uncertain, yet the Justices did respect the former estate, and so the
Lessee has the Interest of the Term from the making of the Deed, but no estate
until the first Term expire: Then Ambrose before his age of 21 years levying a
Fine, the Fine shall not bind the Feoffee, for it enures only by way of
conclusion, and so binds parties and privies, but not a stranger: And the party
needs not to plead against this Fine, quod parts to the Fine Nihil habuerunt,
for that appears upon their own showing. Wiat contrary; The state of Ambr.
accrues and rises when any of the said times come, first full age, return,
death, for the words are, And after the return of Ambrose from beyond the Seas,
and the age of 21 years, or death, etc. This word (or) before (death) disjoyns
all, and makes the sentence in the Disjunctive, and he cited a case lately
judged in the Common Pleas: A Lease was made to Trewpeny and his Wife for one
hundred years, if he and his Wife, or any Child or Children betwixt them
begotten should so long live; the Wife died without Issue, the Husband held the
Land, etc. for the Disjunctive before (Child) made the sentence Disjunctive.
Gaudy Justice, That had been Law if no such word had been in the Case. And Wiat
said, That although the return be uncertain, yet it is certain enough that he
shall come to the age of 21 years, or dye. And also this is by way of use,
which needs not to depend upon any estate, and if the Remainder shall vest
presently upon his return, then it would be doubtful what Remainder it is, if
it be a Remainder depending upon the estate for the life of Ann and Muriel, or
for years, i.e. until Ambrose shall come of the age of 21 years: But be it
uncertain, yet the Fine is good, for here is a Remainder in Ambrose, and both
are but particular estates, and there is not any doubt, but that one may convey
by Fine, or bar by Fine such contingent uses, for which see the Statute of 32
H. 8. All Fines to be levied of any Lands intailed in any wise to him that
levieth the Fine, or to any his Ancestors in possession, reversion, etc. which
word (use) goes to contingent uses, for at the time of the making of that
Statute, there was no other use. Fenner Justice remembered the Case adjudged M.
30 and 31 Eliz. betwixt Johnson and Bellamy, 2 Len. 36.
which ruled this Case. Gaudy Justice, Here is a certainty upon which the
Remainder does depend, i. e. the death of Ambrose; but the Case had been the
more doubtful if no certainty at all had been in the Case. Atkinson contrary;
Here the Lord Vaux is Tenant for life, the Remainder to George in tail; now
when the Lord Vaux levies a Fine, this is a forfeiture, and then the Entry of
George is lawful. It has been objected on the other side, that this Remainder
was future and contingent, and not vested, therefore nothing passed to George
by Ambrose. The words are ( quousque Ambrose shall return.) This word
(quousque) is a word of Limitation, and not of Condition, and then the
Remainder may well rise when the Limitation happens. It has been said, that
this Remainder is contingent, and then the Remainder which is to vest upon a
contingency, cannot be granted or forfeited before that the contingent happens:
And he cited the Case of 14 Eliz. 314. Dyer. A Fine is levied to A. to the use
of B. for life, the Remainder to E. in Tail, the Remainder to B. in fee.
Proviso, That if B. shall have Issue of his Body, that then after such Issue,
and 500 l. paid to, etc. within six months after the birth of such issue, the
use of the said Lands, after the death of the said B. and the said six months
expired, shall be to the said B. and the heirs of his body: And it was holden,
that before the said contingent happens, B. had not any estate tail, for there
it was uncertain if the said contingent would happen; but in our case, the
contingents or some of them will happen, or run out by effluxion of time, and
that makes the Remainder certain in Ambrose. And he also argued, that the
Limitations are several, by reason of the Disjunctive, and the last part of the
sentence, and that the said sentence is in the Disjunctive appears by the
subsequent words (which of the said days or times shall first happen) And then
the return of Ambrose (for that first happened) vests the Remainder in him, and
therefore the Plaintiff ought to be barred. Buckley contrary: The estate of the
Daughters does depend upon a Copulative, i.e. the return of Ambrose and his
full age, and both is but one Limitation; it is clear, that the first
Limitation is upon a contingent, and the remainder cannot vest until both are
performed. And as to that which has been said, that there is a certain
Limitation, i. e. the return of Ambrose, 18 Eliz. the Case was, Lands were
given to Husband and Wife, the Remainder to such of them as should survive the
other, for years, the Husband makes a Lease for years and dies, it was holden,
that although the Limitation was upon a certain estate, yet because it is not
known in which of the parties the estate secondly limited shall begin, the
Lease is void; So here it is not certainly appointed when the estate limited to
Ambrose shall begin, upon the return, full age, or death of Ambrose, and he
said, that here are but two times of Limitation, first return and full age,
second death; return and full age determines the estate of the Daughters, and
also the death, if it shall first happen, and if these three times shall be
construed in the Disjunctive, 2 Len. 2^.
the same would overthrow the estate of the Daughters, which is an estate for
years determinable, upon the death of themselves or Ambrose. The last words of
the Limitation do not distinguish or disjoyn it, but respect the estate
precedent. And by Clench Justice, If the use limited to Ambrose, shall depend
only upon the Limitation of his death, the same should be void, for then he
should not he in esse to take. But the other Justices were of a contrary
opinion, and that the use is good, 7 H. 4. Gaudy, Although that here be three
things, yet but two times; for the words are not (or) at such of the said days
or times, as shall first happen, for that would alter the case: But here these
words ought to be intended as if they were spoken before in the Limitation of
the estate to the Daughters, and cannot divide the former Limitation: and he
said, that if by reason, that the Limitation upon the death, which is certain,
it shall vest in Ambrose presently, then if after the other Limitation shall
fall, then his Remainder which vested in him upon the said certain Limitation
should be divested, and should now accrue to him upon the other Limitation,
which should be absurd and inconvenient, etc. It was adjorned.

CCCXXXI. Thomas and Wards Case. Trin. 32. Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
IN Ejectione firmae, by Thomas against Ward, Ejectione firm. 1 Cro. 102.
upon a Lease made to him of the Manor of Middleton Cheney by one Chambers, the
Defendant pleaded, that long time before the Lessor of the Plaintiff had any
thing, the Bishop of Rochester was seized, and leased the same to the
Defendant: the Plaintiff by Replication said, that the said Lease was upon
condition, viz. The Lessee by the Indenture of the said Lease, did covenant
that he would not put out, or disturb any of the Tenants inhabiting within the
said Manor out of their Tenancies, doing their duties according to the custom
of the said Manor; and showed, that the Defendant had put out one Ann Green a
Tenant dwelling there upon a Tenement parcel of the said Manor, late in the
possession and occupation of the said Ann, and that the Bishop had re-entred
for the condition so broken, and made a lease to the Lessor of the Plaintiff,
upon which Replication, the Defendant has demurred in Law: Tanfeild argued for
the Defendant, that the Bishop had no cause to re-enter, for there is not any
condition in the Case, but only a Covenant, for it comes in only on the part of
the Lessee, and they are words of Covenant only, whereas every condition ought
to be the words of the Lessor, and the Bishop has sufficient remedy by Action
of Covenant: But if the words had been indifferent and absolute without
depending on the Lessor or Lessee, then it had been otherwise, as 3 E. 6. Dyer,
65. Non licebit, to the Lessee, dare, concedere, vel vendere statum vel
terminum, without the License of the Lessor, under pain of forfeiture, the same
is a good condition, but here it is merely a Covenant, and it cannot be both.
Haughton. Although the words sound in Covenant, and be the words of the Lessee,
yet the Lease being made by Indenture, the same is the Deed of both, and every
word in it is spoken by both parties, and although that he may have an Action
of Covenant, yet he cannot thereby overthrow the Lease, as by Entry, by
condition broken, and yet by the words it seems the meaning of the Indenture
was, that by the breach of this Covenant, the estate should be defeated, for so
are the words, sub poena forisfactur. And here by way of Action he cannot have
the benefit of the whole Covenant, and therefore he shall have it by way of
condition: And see the case betwixt Browning and Beston, Plow. 132. If it
happen the Rent to be behind, that then the Lessee Covenants, that although the
Rent be not demanded, that the said Lease should be utterly extinct, void, and
of no effect; and 24 Eliz. there was a case betwixt Hill and Lockham, where by
the Indenture of Lease, the Lessee Covenanted to grind all his Corn at the Mill
of the Lessor, and afterward in the end of the said Indenture, the Lessee
covenanted to perform all the Covenants, sub poe^a sorisfactur. and by the
opinion of the whole Court, the same was a condition: And see 21 H. 6. 51.
where in an Obligation where A was bound to B. the condition is written in this
manner, Praedict. B. vult and concedit, That if the said A. does stand to the
Arbitrament of such a one that then, etc. the same is a good condition,
although they are the words of the Obligee, and the Deed of the Obligor, and so
here is a good condition. And such was the opinion of Wray and Gaudy, and
Fenner did not contradict it: Wherefore Tanfeild said, Admit here it is a
condition, yet here is not any breach of it sufficiently set forth, for the
breach is assigned because he had put out a woman, unam tenentem, and
inhabitantem, out of certain Lands parcel of the said Manor, late in the
possession and occupation of the said woman, and that might be, that she was
but Tenant at Will, and the Covenant does refer only to Copyholders: And it
may be also, that she had disseised one of the Tenants of the Manor, in which
case, the putting out of such a Tenant being in by wrong, is no breach of
condition. Also it is not averred in facto, that Ann was Tenant of any part of
the Manor: Also the Replication is, That the said Defendant had ousted the
said Ann, where she had done her duty, fecit debitum suum, before the Ouster,
and that might be, that she had done her duty once, but not after, and
therefore he ought to have said, that she had done her duty always, before her
putting out, and this word (duly) being single, is too general, for it may be
understood of courtesy, where the words in the Indenture are (Doing their duty
according to the custom of the Manor.) And also it might be, that Ann Green was
Tenant and Inhabitant, but was not put out of the Land which was parcel of the
Manor. And Wray said, that these Exceptions were incurable: And therefore
Judgment was given against the Plaintiff.

CCCXXXII. Harvy and Thomas Case. Mich. 31 and 32 Eliz. Rot. 414. In the Kings
Bench.
THe Case was, Leases. 1 Cro. 216.
Husband and Wife seized of Lands in the Right of the Wife, the Husband alone
makes a Lease by word for years: Afterward the Husband and Wife levy a Fine,
and after the Wife and Husband both dye, It was holden clearly by the whole
Court, that the Conusee should avoid the Lease.

CCCXXXIII. Sly and Mordants Case. Trin. 32. Eliz. Rot. 314 In the Kings Bench.
IN an Action upon the Case the Plaintiff declared, 1 Cro. 191. 2 Len. 103. 3
Len. 174. Die. 250. 1 Cro. 198, 199.
that whereas he was seized of certain Lands, the Defendant had stopped a
Watercourse, by which his Land was drowned, and found for the Plaintiff, It
was moved in arrest of Judgment, that it appears upon the Plaintiffs own
showing, that the Plaintiff has the Freehold, and therefore he ought to have
an Assize, but the same was not allowed, and therefore the Plaintiff had
Judgment.

CCCXXXIV. Kensam and Redings Case. Trin. 33. Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
THe Case was, Grants of the King 1 Cro. 244. Hob. 170.
That the Queen by her Letters Patents granted the Site of the Manor of
Brokeley lying in W. and all the Lands, Pastures, Woods, Underwoods, and
Hereditaments, parcel or appertaining to the said Site, exceptis omnibus
grossis arboribus, boscis and maremio; and further in the said Letters Patents
there was a Proviso, that the Lessee should have sufficient House-boot, and
Hedge-boot, etc. And if, notwithstanding the said Exception, the Lessee should
have the Underwoods, was the question: And it was argued, that the Lessee
should have subbois, i. e. Underwoods, for that is granted by express words,
and the exception extends only grossis arboribus, for this word (grossis) in
the exception extends to all that which follows: Gaudy Justice, If it were in
the case of a common person, it is clear, that upon such matter the Underwoods
are not excepted, 7 E. 6. Dyer, 79. A Lease is made of a Manor except Timber
and great Woods, the Underwoods shall pass. Fenner Justice, The Proviso, that
the Lessee should have House-boot, shows the Queens intent, that the
Underwoods should not pass. Wray, If this word (bois) in the exception should
not extend to Underwoods, it should be vain and signify nothing, which should
be hard in the Case of the Queen.

CCCXXXV. Trin. 33. Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
IN an Action upon the Case the Plaintiff declared of Trover and of a Bag of
money, and the conversion of it, Trover and Conversion. 1 Cro. 97. 201, 555, 693.
The Defendant pleaded, that the Bag of money was delivered to him as a pawn to
keep until A. and B. were agreed, which of them should have it, and pleaded
further, that A. and B. were not yet agreed, who of them should have it, for
which cause he kept it, absque hoc, that he converted it to his own use, upon
which the Plaintiff did demur in Law; It was moved that the Conversion is never
traversable. Wray, Generally Conversion is not traversable, but upon such
special matter as is here: Or if A. lend money to B. and B. delivers a thing
of the value to A. in pawn, now the Conversion is traversable; see the same
case, 4 E. 6. Br. Action upon the Case, 113. so here. Fenner agreed with Wray.

CCCXXXVI. The Bishop of Lincoln and Cowpers Case. Mich. 33. Eliz. In the Kings
Bench.
Prohibition.
THe Bishop of Lincoln sued a Prohibition against Cowper, who had libelled
against him in the Spiritual Court for Tithes out of the Manor of D. Tithes. 1
Cro. 216. Post. 331, 332.
And the Bishop did suggest, that he and all his Predecessors had been seized
of the said Manor, and that as long as it was in their possessions, had been
discharged of Tithes, and showed, that in the time of E. 6. the said Manor was
conveyed to the Duke of Somerset in Fee, and afterward was re-granted to the
Bishop and his Successors; It was moved, That the Prescription was not good,
because de non decimando; And admit that the Prescription be good, that same is
interrupted by the seisin of the Duke of Somerset; and although that the Manor
be re-assured to the Bishop of Lincoln, yet the Prescription is not revived: as
Homage Ancestrel if it be once in a Foreign Seisin, although it be re-assured,
yet it is not revived. But by Wray, Gaudy, and Fenner, The Prescription is good
in the Case of a Spiritual person, but not in the case of a common person. And
they all were clear of opinion, that the Prescription is not gone by this
Interruption, for Tithes are not issuing out of the Lands, neither can Unity of
possession extinguish them, neither are they extinguished, by a release of all
right of Land, etc. See for this Case, Co. 11. part of his Reports in the Case
of Pridle and Napper.

CCCXXXVII. Dethick, King of Arms Case. 33. Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
Indictment. 1 Cro. 224. Yelv. 34. Noy 250. Misnosmer in an Indictment.
WIlliam Dethick, against Garter King of Arms, was indicted upon the Statute of
5 E. 6. for striking in the Churchyard: For that the said Dethick in Paul's
Churchyard in London, struck I.S. It was moved; If Cathedral Churches be
within the meaning of the Statute: The Court was clear of opinion, that they
were. And afterward the Defendant pleaded, that before the Indictment found,
he was created and crowned by the Letters Patents of the Queen which he showed,
chief and principal King of Arms, and it was granted by the said Letters
Patents, that he should be called Garter, and that that name is not in the
Indictment, and demanded Judgment: The Kings Attorney by Replication said, That
by the Law of Arms and Heraldry, every one who is made King of Arms before he
receives his Dignity ought to be led betwixt two Officers of Arms, by the Arms,
before the Earl Marshal of England, or his Deputy, and before him are to go
four Officers of Arms, whereof the one is to bear his Patent, another a Collar
of Esses, the third a Coronet of Brass double guilt, fourthly a Cup of Wine,
and his Patent shall be read before the Earl Marshal; and afterward his
Coronet shall be set upon his Head, and the Collar of Esses about his neck, and
afterward the Wine poured upon his Head: And that the Defendant had not
received these Ceremonies, for which cause he is not King of Arms, nor to be
called upon, to which the Defendant did demur in Law. Broughton argued for the
Defendant, and he took Exception to the Replication, because it is pleaded
there, that secundum legem Heraldorum, Garter upon his Creation ought to
receive, etc. of which Law this Court cannot have Conusance, and therefore the
Replication ought to be, scil. Secundum legem Angliae: If in Appeal the
Defendant wage Battle, although that belongs unto Arms and Heraldry, yet it
shall be pleaded according to the Law of the Land, and shall not speak of the
Law of Arms. So if an Infant be made a Knight, and he be to plead in discharge
of his Wardship, he shall plead according to the Law of the Land, and yet the
degree of a Knight belongs to the Law of Arms, 11 E. 3. Dower against the Earl
of Richmond, who was also Duke of Britain, who pleaded to the Writ, That he was
Duke of Britain, and not so named in the Writ; but the Court did not regard it,
for they cannot have knowledge of it, so not here of the Law of Heraldry: Also
this Court cannot write to the Heralds to certify it, as they may to the
Marshal of the King, or to the Bishop: But we have sufficiently showed our
matter, scil. That we have Letters Patents of the Queen, and that we were sworn
in the said Office, and so we are King of Heralds by matter of Record, against
which is pleaded only matter in defect of ceremony and circumstance, which is
not material. An Earl is created with the ceremonies of putting a Sword
broad-wise about his Body, and a Cap with a Coronet upon his Head. Yet the King
may create an Earl without such ceremonies: And may also create an Earl by
word, if the same be after Recorded; when a Knight is made, Spurs ought to be
put upon his Heels, yet without such ceremony such degree may be conferred to
and upon another, for such ceremonies are or may be used, or not used at the
Kings pleasure. Afterward it was objected, that the same is but a name of
Office, but not a name of Dignity. To which it was answered, that this word
Coronamus always imports Dignity, and this is a Dignity and Office, as Earl,
Marquess, etc. Fenner Justice, The Patent is, Nomen tibi imponimus, and
therefore (Garter) is parcel of his Name: And therefore he ought to be Indicted
by such Name. And it should be hard, to tie Estate and Degrees to ceremonies.
Gaudy was of opinion, That this is but a name of Office, and therefore the
Indictment good, as 1 Mar. Writ of Summons of Parliament issues without these
words (Supreme Head) and the Writ was holden good, for it is not parcel of the
Name, but addition only: So here, Fenner and Wray contrary, for the words are
Creamus, Coronamus, Nomen imponimus, Ergo, part of his Name, which Clench also
granted, and afterward Dethick was discharged.

CCCXXXVIII. Strait and Braggs Case. Pasch. 32 Eliz. Rot. 318. In the Kings
Bench.
IN an Action of Trespass, 2 Len. 1^9
for breaking his Close in H. the Defendant pleaded, that long before the
Trespass, the Dean and Chapter of Paul's were seized of the Manor of C. in the
said County of H. in Fee, in the Right of their Church, and so seized King
Edward the Fourth by his Letters Patents, Dat. An. 1. of his Reign, granted to
them all Fines pro licentia Concordandi, of all their Homagers and Tenants,
Resiants, and Non-resiants within their Fee, and showed, that 29 Eliz. A Fine
was levied in the Common Pleas, betwixt the Plaintiff and one A. of eleven
Acres of Lands, whereof the place where is parcel, and the Post-Fine was
assessed to 15 s. and afterward Scambler the Forain Opposer did allow to them
the said 15 s. because the said Land was within their Fee: And afterward, in
behalf of the said Dean and Chapter, he demanded of the Plaintiff the said
fifteen shillings, who refused to pay it, wherefore he in the Right of the said
Dean, etc. And by their commandment took the Distress as Baily, etc. for the
said 15 s. and afterward sold it, upon which the Plaintiff did demur in Law.
It was moved, that it is not averred that the Land whereof the Fine was levied
was within their Fee; but they say that Scambler allowed it to be within their
Fee, and the same is not a sufficient Averment; which the Court granted. And it
was the opinion of the Court, that the Dean and Chapter cannot distrain for
this matter, but they ought to sue for it in the Exchequer, as it appears 9
H. 6. 27. In the Duchess of Somersets Case. Gaudy, This Grant does not extend
to the Post Fine, for Fine pro licentia Concordandi, is the Queens Silver, and
not the Post Fine. Wray, All shall pass by it, for it is about one and the same
matter, and they were of opinion to give Judgment for the Plaintiff.

CCCXXXIX. Sherewood and Nonnes Case. Trin. 32 Eliz. Rot. 451. In the Kings
Bench.
Covenant.
IN an Action of Covenant, the Plaintiff declared, that Charles Grice and Hester
his Wife were seized of certain Tenements call Withons, with diverse Lands to
the same appertaining, and of another parcel of Land called Dole, containing
eight Acres, to them and the heirs of the body of the said Charks on the body
of the said Hester his wife lawfully begotten, and so seized, 15 Eliz. leased
the same to the Defendant by Indenture for years, by which Indenture the Lessor
covenanted, that the Lessee should have sufficient House-boot, Fencing-wood,
and Hoop-wood upon the Lands during the Term; and that further the Lessee
covenanted for him, his Executors and Assigns, with the Lessor, etc. That it
should be lawful for them to enter upon the Lands during the said Term, and to
have egress and regress there, and to cut down and dispose of all the Wood and
Timber there growing, leaving sufficient House-boot, Fencing-wood and Hoop-wood
to the Lessee, upon the Lands called the Dole, for his expenses at Withons; and
further, that he would not take any Wood or Timber upon the Premises, without
the assent or assigment of the Lessor or his Assigns, otherwise than according
to the Indenture and true meaning thereof. And further declared, That the said
Charles and his Wife so seized, levied a Fine of part of the Land to R. S. and
his heirs, to whom the Defendant attorned, and that the said R.S. afterward
devised the same to I. his Wife, the now Plaintiff for years, the Remainder
over to another, and died, and that the Defendant had felled and carried out of
the Lands called Withons, twenty loads of Wood without the assent and
assignment of the Lessor or his Assigns, for which the Plaintiff as Assignee
brought the Action. The Defendant pleaded, That after the Lease John Grice and
others by assignment of Hester had cut down and carried away fifty loads of
Wood in the said Lands called the Dole, and so they had not left sufficient
Woods for his expenses at Withons according to the Indenture, for which cause
he took the said twenty loads of Wood upon Withons for his expenses, upon which
the Plaintiff did demur in Law. Godfrey, The Plea is not good; This Plea is no
more, but that sufficient Wood was not left upon the Dole for his expenses, and
although there be not, yet the Defendant cannot cut Wood elsewhere, for he has
restrained himself by the Covenant. Also the Covenant of the Lessor is, That
the Lessee shall have sufficient Wood upon the Dole for his expenses at
Withons, but in his satisfaction he does not allege, that he had need of Wood
for to spend at Withons, nor does aver that he has spent it there, for
otherwise he has not cause to take, etc. And the meaning was, that the Lessee
should have sufficient Wood when he had need of it. Hobart for the Defendant,
He would not speak to the Plea in Bar; but he conceived that the Declaration
was not good, for here no breach of Covenant is assigned, for the Covenant is
in the Disjunctive, scil. That the Defendant should not take Wood without the
assent or assignment of the Lessor or his Assigns: And the Plaintiff charge
the Defendant with cutting of Wood without the assent and assignment of the
Lessor, so he would compel us to prove more than we ought, for if he did it
with their assent only, or by their assignment only, it is sufficient; but if
the Covenant had been in the copulative, both was necessary: And for the nature
of Copulatives he cited the Case, where two Churchwardens bring an Action of
Trespass, the Defendant pleads, That the Plaintiffs are not Churchwardens, upon
which they are at Issue. The Jury find, That the one was Churchwarden, and the
other not, and for that the Plaintiffs could not have Judgment, for if the one
of them be not Churchwarden, then the Plaintiffs are not Churchwardens, for the
copulatives ought not to be disjoined: And he cited the case lately ruled in
the Common Pleas betwixt Ognel and Underwood concerning Crucifield Grange, A.
leased unto B. certain Lands for forty years, B. leased part of the same to C.
for ten years. A. grants a Rentcharge out of the Lands in tenura and
occupatione B. It was resolved, That the Lands leased to C. should not be
charged with that Rent, for although it was in tenura B. yet it was not in his
occupation, and both are exquisite because in the copulative: So here, the
Lessee may cut Wood with the assent of the Lessor without any assignment. Also
here, the substance of the covenant cannot charge the Defendant, for although
it be in the Negative, yet it is not absolute in the Negative, but does refer
unto the covenant precedent; for the words are, That the Lessee shall not cut
Woods, aliter quam, according to the intent of the Indenture, where the
covenant precedent is not, that the Lessee shall not cut Woods but in the Dole,
but that the Lessor might cut down any Trees in the Dole leaving sufficient for
the Lessee, which covenant in it self does not restrain the Lessee to cut down
any Trees in any part of the Lands demised, nor abridgeth the power which the
Law gives to him by reason of the demise. Then when this last covenant comes,
i. e. That the Lessee will not cut, aliter, then according to the meaning of
the Indenture without the assent, etc. the same does not restrain him from the
power which the meaning of the Indenture gives, and so no breach of covenant
can be assigned in this. For by virtue of the Lease, the Lessee of common Right
may take necessary Fuel upon any part of the Land leased: Also this first
covenant being in the Affirmative does not abridge any Interest, as 28 H. 8.
19. The Lessor covenants, That the Lessee shall have sufficient Hedge-boot by
assignment of the Baily. It is holden by Baldwin and Shelley, That the Lessee
may take it without assignment, because there are no Negative words, and non
aliter. So 8 E. 3. 10. A Rent of ten pounds was granted to Husband and Wife,
and if the Husband overlive his Wife that he shall have three pounds Rent, and
if the Wife do overlive the Husband, she shall have forty shillings, there it
was holden that the Rent of ten pounds continued, not restrained by the
severance of any of them. And although peradventure it appears here, that the
meaning of the parties was, That the Lessee should not cut down any Wood but in
the Dole, yet forasmuch as such meaning does not stand with the Law, it shall
be rejected, as it was holden to be in the case betwixt Benet and French, where
a man seized of diverse Lands, devised parcel of it called Gages, to the
erecting of a School, and another parcel unto B. in fee, and all his other
Lands unto one French in Fee, The devise of Gages was holden void, because too
general, for no person is named; and it was further holden, that it passed by
the general devise to French, and yet that was not the meaning of the Devisor:
Also the Plaintiff is not Assignee but of parcel of the Reversion, for if the
Reversion is granted to him for years, Owen Rep. 152. 1 Co. 215.
and such Assignee cannot have an Action of Covenant, for a Covenant is a thing
in Action, and annexed to the Reversion, so that if the Reversion does not
continue in its first course as it was at the time of the creation of the
Covenant, but be altered or divided, the Covenant is destroyed, and therefore
it was holden, 32 H. 8. betwixt Wiseman and Warringer, where a Lease for years
was made of one hundred Acres of Lands, rendering ten pound Rent, and afterward
the Lessor granted fifty Acres of it, that the Grantee should not have any part
of the Rent, but all the Rent was destroyed. So in our case here, the Grantee
has but parcel of the estate, a Term for years, and so is not an Assignee
intended, as the case betwixt Randal and Brown in the Court of Wards: ^ Co 96^
^^^.
Randal being seized of certain Lands, covenanted with B. that if he pay unto
him, his Heirs and Assigns, five hundred pounds, that then he and his Heirs
would stand seized to the use of the said B. and his Heirs. Randal devised the
Land to his Wife during the minority of his Son, the Remainder to his Son in
Fee, and died, having made his Wife his Executrix. Brown at the day and place
tendered the money generally, the Wife having but an estate for years in the
Land took the money. It was holden, that the same was not a sufficient tender,
for the Wife is not Assignee, for she has an Interest but for years, and here
the Son is to bear the loss, for by a lawful Tender the Inheritance shall be
divested out of him, and therefore the Tender ought to be made to him and not
to his Wife. Also as the case is here, he is no Assignee, for although Charles
Grice and his Wife has the Reversion, to them and the Heirs of the body of
Charles, and levy a Fine without Proclamations, nothing passes but his own
estate, and then the Conusee has not any estate, Raph. Rep. 91. ^ C^o. 804.
^05.
but during the life of Charles, and then when a man is seized to him and his
Heirs during the life of another, he has not such an estate as he can devise
by the Statute, and then when he devises it to his Wife for years, it is void,
etc. It was adjorned.

CCCXL. Smith and Hitchcocks Case. Trin. 33 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
Assumpsit. ^ C^o. 201.
IN an Action upon the Case the Plaintiff declared, that whereas the Defendant
was indebted to him, 19 Maii 30 Eliz. The Defendant in consideration that the
Plaintiff would forbear to sue him until such a day after, promised at the said
day to pay the debt. The Defendant pleaded, how that 29 Maii 29 Eliz. he was
indebted unto the Plaintiff in the said sum, for assurance of which afterward
he acknowledged a Statute to the Plaintiff, upon which he had Execution, and
had levied the money, absque hoc, that he was indebted to the Plaintiff, antea,
vel post, the said day, aliquo modo, upon which the Plaintiff did demur. It was
argued that the Traverse was not good, for the consideration in Assumpsit is
not traversable, because it is but conveyance, and amounts to the general
Issue, as in debt upon the sale of a Horse, it is no Plea for the Defendant to
say, that no such Horse was sold to him. Patridge, If the conveyance be the
ground of the Suit it is traversable; an Action upon the Case against an
Hostler, it is a good Plea that he is not an Hostler, 2 H. 4 7. See 26 H. 8.
Br. Traverse 341. In an Action upon the Case, the Plaintiff declared, that
whereas the Defendant, habuit ex deliberatione of the Plaintiff certain goods,
the said Defendant in consideration of ten shillings, Assumpsit and eidem
querenti promisit salvo Custodire, etc. Non habuit ex deliberatione, is a good
Plea. Godfrey, The Defendant does not answer the point of our Action, which is
the Assumpsit, but only by way of Argument, 11 E. 4. 4. In Trespass upon the
Statute of 5 R. 2. by the Master of a College and his confreers, the Defendant
does justify by reason of a Lease made by a Predecessor of the Plaintiff, and
his Confreers, by their Deed under their Common Seal, the Plaintiff, Replicando
says, That at the time of the making of the Lease there was no such College,
and it was holden no Plea, for it is no answer but by Argument. Gaudy Justice,
In all cases where the Defendant may wage his Law, there the conveyance is
traversable. Wray, The cause of the Action is the Assumpsit, therefore the
consideration is not traversable, for it is not the point with which the
Plaintiff is charged: And it is common here, that the Declaration in such
Action upon the Case, Traverse.
in consideration of diverse sums of money, without any more certainty is good,
which should not be good if the consideration were traversable, but the
consideration is to be given in Evidence; and it is also common, that in an
Action upon the Case in Trover and Conversion, the Trover is not traversable,
for the Conversion is the point of the Action. Fenner Justice, The debt here is
no cause of the Action, but only the Assumpsit. In debt upon Arbitrament, the
Arbitrament is traversable: So in debt for Rent upon a Demise, the Demise is
traversable, Antea 189.
for the Arbitrament and Demise is the cause and ground of the Action. At
another day it was moved again, and Gaudy, mutata opinione said, that
consideration Executory is traversable; As where one in consideration that he
may marry my Daughter, or of service promises to pay, the same consideration
is traversable, contrary of a Consideration executed. And afterward Judgment
was given for the Plaintiff.

CCCXLI. Estons Case. Trin. 33 Eliz. In the Court of Wards.
ESton was seized of Lands in Fee holden of the King in chief, 1 Cro. 243.
and took a Wife seized of other Lands holden in Socage, they have Inn, and
the Husband dies; and afterward the Wife dies. Owen Sergeant conceived, That
the Queen should not have the Wardship of the Land of the Wife, or the primer
seisin of it: And if the Husband had survived his Wife being Tenant by the
Courtesy, the Queen should not have Primer seisin of it after his decease.
Wray, If the Father be seized of Lands holden in Soccage, and the Mother of
Lands holded in Knights service, and the Husband over-lives his Wife being
Tenant by the Courtesy the King shall have all. Anderson denied that, and he
conceived, That the opinion of Stamford is not Law; and yet see 13 H. 4. 278.
Where the Father is seized of Lands in chief, and the Mother of other; and the
Father dies, and afterward the Mother dies, both shall be in ward. And it
was said, That if there be Grandfather, Father, and Son, and the Father dies
seized of Lands holden in Socage; and afterward the Grandfather dies seized
of Lands in Knights service, the Lands in Socage shall not be in ward. Anderson
held strongly, That the Queen should have Primer seisin of the Lands of the
Mother. Wray contrary. Quaere.

CCCXLII. Ellis Hartops Case. Trin. 33 Eliz. In the Court of Wards.
ELlis Hartop was seized of diverse Lands, whereof part was holden of the King
in Knights service, and devised two parts thereof to W. Denham and his Heirs,
to the use of T. his brother, and his wife, and afterward to the use of the
said T. and his Heirs males. T. died in the life of the Devisor, and afterward
a Son is born; First it was agreed that a Devise might be to the use of
another; Then, when Cesty que use dies in the life of the Devisor, the Devisee
shall take it, and when a Son is born, it shall go to him: But if the use be
void, then the Devisee shall have it to his own use, for every devise does
imply a consideration: Coke was of opinion, That the Son takes by descent, when
Cestuy que use, to whom Land is devised, does refuse the use, the Devisee
cannot take it, for he shall not have it to his own use, for if the use be
void, the devise is also void: And the use is void, for Cestuy que use died in
the life of the Devisor, which see Bret and Rygdens case. A man seized of three
Acres, bargains and sells one of them, without showing which, and that before
the Statute of 27 H. 8. The Bargainee dies before Election, no Election
descends to the Heir, for then he should be a Purchasor: And by Wray, and
Anderson, The devise is void, and it is all one with Brett and Rigdens case.
And by Anderson, a man devises Lands to the use of one, which use by
possibility is good, and by possibility not good; If afterward Cestuy que use
cannot take, the Devise shall be to the use of the Devisor and his Heirs.

CCCLXIII. Weston and Garmons Case. Trin. 33. Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
Assize. 1 Cro. 226.
ASsize was brought of a Rent of fifty pounds per annum, and the Plaintiff made
his plaint to be disseised of his Freehold in H. E. and H.W: And showed, that
John Vaughan and Amy his Wife, who before was the wife of one Weston, and
Mother of Sir Henry Weston, the Plaintiff in the Assize was seized of the said
Manors of H.W. and H.E. lying in Barton and Kinton in Fee. And 18 Eliz. a Fine
was levied betwixt Robert Vaughan, and Miles Whitney Complainants, and the said
John Vaughan and Amy his Wife, and Francis their Son Deforceants of the said
two Manors, inter alia per nomen of the Manors of H.E. and H.W. and of fifty
Messuages, three hundred Acres of Lands, two hundred Acres of Meadow, cum
pertinentiis, in the said Towns, by which Fine the said Deforceants, did
acknowledge the right of the said Manors and Tenements, to be the Right of the
Complainants, come ceo, etc. with warranty, of the said Husband and Wife, for
which the Complainants did render a Rent of fifty pounds, per annum, with
clause of distress, in dictis Manerijs, to the said, John and Amy, and the
Heirs of Amy, and also rendered the Tenements aforesaid, with the Appurtenances
to the said John and Amy for their lives, the Remainder to the said Francis
their Son in tail, the Remainder to the said Amy and her Heirs; and that John
and Amy dyed, by force whereof the said Rent descends to the said Plaintiff,
as Son and Heir of the said Amy, and that the said Francis entered into the said
Manors as in his Remainder, and was seized in tail, and was seized of the said
Rent by the Hands of the said Francis, and afterward thereof did enfeoff the
said Garmons the Defendant, etc. The Tenant pleaded, That the Plaintiff was
never seized so as he could be disseised, and if, etc. Null tor. null disseisin,
which was found for the Plaintiff who had Judgment and Execution, upon which
the Tenant brought a Writ of Error: Stephens assigned Error, First, the Fine is
levied of two Manors, inter alia, so as no other Lands passed by the Fine
besides the Manors, and so the Rent is granted out of the said Lands and
Manors, and no other Lands which passed by the Fine, and then upon the
Plaintiffs own showing it appears, that all the Tenants of the Lands charged
with the Rent in demand, are not named in the Assize: Second Error: This Rent
is granted only out of the Estate tail, for Amy has Fee in both, as well the
Rent as the Land, and then when the Estate tail is determined, the Rent is also
determined, and he has not averred the life of the Tenant in tail, or any of
his Issue, wherefore it shall be intended that he is dead without issue, and
then the Rent is gone, and then he has not any cause to have Assise:
Bourchier, As to the first conceived and argued that it is not Error, for
although these words (inter alia, etc.) yet it shall not be intended that the
Conusor had any other Lands, or that the Rent is issuing out of other Lands
than those two Manors which are expressed, and not inter alia: As to the
second, the continuance of the tail needs not to be averred, for the Tenant in
tail has enfeoffed the Tenant of the Land, by which the estate tail is
discontinued; And although the Tenant in tail be dead without issue, yet the
Rent does remain until Recovery of the Land by Formedon in the Remainder.
Fenner Justice was of opinion, Vaugh. Re^ 175.
That the Per nomen should go unto the Manors only, and should not extend to
the inter alia: For if a man in pleading says, that J.S. was seized of twenty
acres of Land, and thereof (inter alia) did enfeoff him per nomen of
Green-wead, the same shall not have reference to the inter alia, but only to
the twenty acres: And the averment of the continuance of the Tail needs not,
for the Estate-tail is discontinued. Gaudy Justice was of opinion, That the per
nomen should go as well to the inter alia, as to the two Manors, and then all
the Ter-tenants are not named in the Assise, and the same not to be pleaded,
for it appears of the Plaintiffs own showing, and there needs no averment of
the continuance of the Tail for the cause aforesaid. Clench Justice, The per
nomen does refer to all, which see by the Fine, which shows that other Lands
passed by the Fine, than the said two Manors. And as to the second point he
said, There needed no averment. Gaudy, As to the first Error, the same cannot
be saved by any way, but to say, That the Conusor was not seized of any other
Lands than the said two Manors, and then the Fine does not extend unto it, and
then no Rent is granted out of it. Fenner, In the Common Pleas, in the great
case of Fines, it was holden, that in pleading of a Fine, it needs not to say,
That the Conusor was seized, for if the Conusor or Conusee were seized, it is
sufficient: for such pleading is contrary in it self; for a Fine, sur conusance
de droit come ceo, etc. does suppose a precedent Gift: It was also objected,
That here is a confusion in this Fine, for the Rent is rendered to the Husband
and Wife, and to the Heirs of the Wife, and the Land is rendered to the Husband
and Wife for their lives, the Remainder to Francis in Tail, the remainder to
the Wife and her Heirs: And these matters cannot stand together in a Fine, but
the one will confound the other: But as to that, it was said, that the Law
shall Marshall these two renders, so as they both shall stand; And it is not
like unto a Rent-service, for a Rent-service issues out of the whole Estate:
And therefore if a Remainder upon an Estate for life Eschears, the Seigniory is
gone even during the life of the Tenant for life; which see, 3 H. 6. 1.
contrary of a Rentcharge: For if the Grantee of a Rent in Fee purchases the
remainder of the Land out of which it is depending out of an Estate for life,
he shall have the Rent during the life of the Tenant for life. And of that
opinion were all the three Justices, for the Conusors took by several Acts, and
the Estate is charged, for it comes under the Grant. Fenner Justice, There is
a difference betwixt a Rent service and a Rentcharge, or Common, for that
shall charge only the Possession, but a Rentcharge shall charge the whole
Estate: And therefore if he who has a Rent-service releaseth to him in the
Remainder upon an Estate-tail, or for life, the Rent is extinct; which Gaudy
denied: And this Case was put, The Disseisee does release to the Lessee for
years of his Disseisor, nihil operatur: But if the Disseisor and Disseisee join
in a Release to such Lessee, the same is good, for first it shall enure as the
Release of the Disseisor, and then of the Disseisee, etc.

CCCXLIV. Tedcastle and Hallywels Case. Mich. 32 and 33 Eliz. In the Kings
Bench.
Debt. 2 Roll. 594. 1 Cro. 234, 235.
IN Debt upon a Bond, the Defendant pleaded, That the Condition was, That
whereas John Hallywel had put himself to be an Apprentice to the Plaintiff, if
the Defendant John Hallywel during his Apprenticeship, or any other for him, by
his consent or agreement take, or riotously spend any of the Goods of his said
Master the Plaintiff: If then the Defendant within one month after notice
thereof given to him, do pay and satisfy the Plaintiff for all such sums of
Moneys, Wares, etc. so taken or riotously spent by the Defendant, or by any
other by his procurement or consent, the same being sufficiently proved; that
then, etc. The Defendant by protestation; Quod nec ipse, nor any other by his
procurement or consent had taken, or riotously spent the Goods of the
Plaintiff: for Plea says, That the Plaintiff before the Writ brought had not
sufficiently proved, that the said John Hallywel took, or riotously spent any
of the Plaintiffs Goods: Upon which the Plaintiff did demur in Law. It was
argued by Daniel, That the proof is sufficient and good for the time, if it be
tried in the Action upon this Obligation: and the proof intended is proof by
twelve men, for it is not set down before what person it shall be proved, nor
any manner of proof appointed, and therefore it shall be tried according the
Law of the Land: which see 10 E. 4. 11. 7 R. 2. Bar. 241. Godfrey contrary,
This case is not like to the cases before, for here is a further matter. First
warning, and a month after Notice pay, etc. And if the proof shall be made in
this Action, the Defendant shall lose the benefit of the Condition, which gives
time to pay it within a month after, for in all such cases the precedent Act of
the Obligee is traversable, as 10 H. 7. 13. I am bound by Obligation to enfeoff
such a person of such Lands as the Obligee shall appoint. In an Action brought
against me, I shall say-that the Plaintiff has not appointed, etc. And here
ought to be Notice first, and proof ought to precede the Notice by the meaning
of the Condition, and so this differs from the other cases put, for here proof
is not the substance of the whole: Owen Sergeant, It is the folly of the
Defendant to put himself to such an inconvenience, for now he ought to pay the
money without delay of any month: And here the Defendant ought to plead, That he
has not imbezelled any goods of the Plaintiff, and the Plaintiff Replicando
shall say, and show the Special matter that he has given Notice to him
thereof. See 15 E. 4. 25.

CCCXLV. Manning and Andrews Case. 18 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
Devise. 4 Len. 2.
IN Ejectione firmae, the Jury found by special Verdict: That Richard Heart, and
Katharine his Wife, and diverse other persons, 1 H. 8. were seized of the Lands
in question, to the use of Richard and his Heirs, ad per implend. ultimam
volunt. dict. Rich. who the first of August, 8 H. 8. by his Will in writing
devised, That his Feoffees should be from thenceforth seized to the use of his
said Wife for her life, and after to the use of W. H. his Son for his life,
without impeachment of Wast, and after the death of the said Katharine his
Wife, William his Son, and Joan Wife of the said William, his Feoffees should
be seized to the use of the next Heir of the Body of the said William and Joan
lawfully begotten, for the term of the life of the same Heir, and after the
decease of the same Heir, to the use of the next heir, of the same heir
lawfully begotten, and for default of such issue, to the use of the heirs of
the body of the said William and Joan lawfully begotten, for the term of life
or lives of every such heir, or heirs, More Rep. 368.
and for default of such heirs to the use of the heirs of the body of the said
William, and for default, etc. to the right heirs of William. And further he
willed, That if any of the said heirs shall set, alien, say to mortgage, the
right, title and interest which they or any of them shall have in or out of the
same Lands, or by their consent or assent suffer any Recovery to be had against
them, etc. or do any other Act, whereby they or their heirs, or any of them may
or ought to be disinherited; that then the use limited to such heir so doing
shall be void and of no effect during his life: And that his said Feoffees
shall be thenceforth seized to the use of the heir apparent of such Offender,
as though he were dead. Richard Heart died, William had issue by the said Joan
his wife a Son named Thomas, and died, and afterward 31 H. 8. Joan died,
Katharine died, Thomas entered, and had issue Francis and Percival. Thomas by
Deed indented, 1 August 4 Eliz. bargained and sold to Andrews, and levied a
Fine to him with warranty: And afterward 6 Eliz. Francis levied a Fine to the
said Andrews, Sur conusans de droit come ceo: And further by the said Fine
released to him with warranty, at the time of which Fine levied Percival was
heir apparent to the said Francis, Francis after had issue I. and F. who are
now living. The heir of the Survivor of the Feoffees within five years after
the age of Percival, and seven years after the Fine levied, enter to revive the
use limited to Percival, who entered, and leased to the Plaintiff. This case was
argued by the Justices of the Kings Bench, etc. First, It was agreed by the
whole Court, That Richard Heart being seized with seven others, unto the use of
himself and his heirs, might well devise all the use, Use suspended. yet the
Land devised.
although his use was in part suspended, because he was jointly seized with
seven others to his own use, and so the use for the eighth part suspended, for
when this Devise is to take effect, i. e. at the time of his death, all the
possession of the Land by the Survivor passes from the use, and then the use
being withdrawn from the possession shall well pass. And by Wray, A use
suspended may be devised: As if Feoffees to use before the Statute of 27 H. 8.
be disseised, by which disseisin the use is suspended, and afterward during
the disseisin, Cestuy que use, by his Will devises, That his Feoffees shall
re-enter, and then make an estate to I. S. in Fee, the same is a good devise,
for by that disseisin the trust and confidence reposed by Cestuy que use in the
Feoffees, is not suspended: Secondly, It was holden that here a use implied was
limited to Joan the wife of William, although there be not any express devise
of it, according to the Book of 13 H. 7. 17. Thirdly, when a use is limited to
the Heir of the body of William and Joan lawfully begotten for life, and
afterward to the Heir of the body of the same heir for life, etc. Geofry
Justice was of opinion, That here is in effect an estate tail, for the estates
limited are directed to go in course of an estate tail; for he wills, That
every heir of the body of his Son shall have the Land, and the special words
shall not make another estate to pass, but that which the Law wills: As if
Lands be given to one for life, the Remainder after his death to the Heirs of
his body lawfully begotten, notwithstanding that the words of the limitation
imply two several estates, yet because the Law so wills, it is but one estate.
Gaudy Justice said, That every issue begotten betwixt William and Joan should
have an estate for life successive, and a Remainder in tail expectant as right
heir of the body of William, A Contingent shall hinder the execution of an
estate in possession.
and this estate tail shall not be executed in possession by reason of the
mesne Remainder for life limited to the heir of the body of William and Joan,
and although that these mesne Remainders are but upon a contingent, and not in
esse, yet such regard shall be had to them, that they shall hinder the
execution of the estates for life, and in tail in possession: As if an estate
be made to A. for life, the Remainder to the right heirs of B. in tail, the
Remainder in Fee to A. although the estate tail be in abeyance, and not in esse
during the life of B. yet in respect thereof the Freehold and Fee shall not be
conjoined. Southcote Justice, To the same purpose: And he put a case lately
adjudged betwixt Vaughan and Alcock: Vaughan and Alcocks case.
Land was devised to two men, and if any of them dies, his heirs shall
inherit, these devisees are Tenants in common, because in by devise, but
contrary if it were by way of Grant: Lands are devised to A. and B. to be
betwixt them divided, they are Tenants in common. Wray, William and Thomas have
but for life, for they are purchasors by the name (heir) in the singular
number, but when he goes further, and says, for want of such issue to the heirs
of the body of William, in the plural number, now Will. has an Inheritance:
And if a devise be made to one for life, and then to his heir for life, and so
from heir to heir in perpetuum for life, here are two estates for life, and the
other Devisees have Fee, for estates for life cannot be limited by general
words from heir to heir, but by special words they may: And here, Thomas being
next heir of the body of William and Joan, has an estate for life, and also
being heir of the body of the said William, has a Remainder in tail to him
limited, and the mesn remains limited to others, i. e. to the next heir of
the body of Thomas being in abeyance, Co 11. Rep. 80.
because limited by the name heir, his Father being alive, shall not hinder the
execution of these estates, but they shall remain in force according to the
rules of the common Law: Then Thomas so being seized levyeth a Fine against the
Provision of the Will, by which Thomas has forfeited his estate for life, and
so his next heir shall have the Land during his life: And a great reason
wherefore the heirs, ut supra, after the two first limitations shall have tail,
is, because that if every heir should have but for life, they should never have
any Interest in the Lands by these limitations, for by the express words of the
devise, none shall take but the heir of the first heir for ever, i. e. When
Thomas aliens, by which the use vests in Francis, and when afterward Francis
levieth a Fine, then the use vests in Percival H^rt, being next heir of the
said Francis at the time of the Fine levied (notwithstanding that afterward
Francis had a Son which is his next heir) and therefore the use in Percival by
the birth of the said Son in Francis shall not be divested, Estate vested,
shall not be divested.
because it was a thing vested in him before by purchase, 9 H. 7. 25. A
enfeoffs B. upon condition on the part of A. to be performed, 1 Cro. 61.
and dies, having issue a Daughter, the Daughter performs the condition, and
afterward a Son is born, the Daughter shall hold the Lands against the Son: So
5. E. 4 6. A woman has issue a Daughter, and afterward consents to a
Ravisher, the Daughter enters, and afterward a Son is born, yet the Daughter
shall hold the Lands for ever, i. e. And Geofries Justice said, Francis being
in by force of the Forfeiture, shall not be subject to the limitation of the
Will, i. e. to any forfeiture if he alien, for the estate which Francis has
for his life is but an estate gained by the offense of his Father, and the use
was limited to him upon the Will of Richard, and then the said estate is not
subject to the Proviso of the Will, and then has not Francis committed any
forfeiture: And admit Francis shall forfeit, yet Percival shall get nothing
thereby, but the estate which Francis had at the time of the Fine levied, scil.
the Freehold only, for no estate of Inheritance was in him living his Father.
As to the regress of the Feoffees, Geofries was of opinion, That where an use
is limited to a person certain, and thereupon vested in the person to whom it
is limited, That the Entry of the Feoffees in such case is not requisite,
notwithstanding that the first estates be discontinued, but where the use (as
in our case) is not limited to a person certain in esse, but is in abeyance,
not vested in any person upon the limitation of it, some estate ought to be
left in the Feoffees to maintain that use, and to render it according to the
limitation, and in our case, these uses not in esse at the time of the making
of the Statute of 27 H. 8. could not be executed by the said Statute, but now
at the appointed time by the limitation shall be raised and revived by the
Entry of the Feoffees, but here by the Fine and Non-claim, the Feoffees are
bound, and their Entry taken away, and so no use can accrue to Percival Heart by
such Entry. Southcote Justice was of opinion, that the Feoffees cannot enter at
all, because that by the Statute of 27 H. 8. nothing is left in them at the
time of the making of the Statute, which saves the right of every person, etc.
other than the Feoffees, so as no right is saved to them but all is drawn out
of them by the operation of the Statute, and the second saving of the Statute,
saves to the Feoffees all their former Right, so as the Right which the
Feoffees had by the Feoffment to the use is utterly gone. But Percival Heart may
well enter, for he is not bound to the five years after the Fine levied, for he
had not right at the time of the Fine levied, but his right came by the Fine.
Wray chief Justice, The Feoffees are not to enter, for the Statute of 27 H. 8.
has two branches, 1. gives the possession to Cestuy que use in such manner as
he has in the use. 2. takes away all the right out of the Feoffees, and gives
it to Cestuy que use, so as nothing at all remains in the Feoffees; for if an
Act of Parliament will give to me all the Lands, whereof my brother Southcote
is seized, and that I shall be in the Seisin thereof, now is the actual
possession in me without my Entry: so where an use is often executed by the
Statute, Cestuy que use without any Entry has an actual possession. i. As to
the uses contingent, nothing remains in the Feoffees for the settling of them
when they happen, but the whole estate is settled in Cestuy que use, yet subject
to such use, and he shall render the same upon contingency: And if any estate
should remain in the Feoffees, it could be but an estate for life, for the Fee
simple is executed in Cestuy que use, with an estate in possession, and then
the Feoffees should be seized to another use than was given them by the Livery.
Also if a Feoffment be made unto the use of the Feoffor, and his heirs, until
J.S. has paid unto the Feoffor 100 l. from thenceforth the Feoffor and his
heirs shall be seized to the use of the said J.S. and his heirs, if upon such
Feoffment any thing should remain in the Feoffees before the payment by I.S.
the same should be a Fee-simple, and then there should be two Fee-simples of
one and the same Lands, one in the Feoffor, and the other in the Feoffees,
which should be absurd, and therefore the best way to avoid such inconveniences
is to continue the Statute, that it draws the whole estate of the Land, and
also the confidence out of the Feoffees, and reposeth it upon the Lands, the
which by the operation of the Statute, shall render the use to every person in
his time according to the limitation of the parties: And also if any Interest
does remain in the Feoffees, Then if they convey to any person upon
consideration who has not notice of the use, then the said use shall never
rise, which is utterly against the meaning of the said Statute, and the meaning
of the parties, and therefore, to construe the Statute, to leave nothing in the
Feoffees will prevent all such mischief: And if a Feoffment in fee be made to
the use of the Feoffor for life, and afterward to the use of his wife which
shall be for life, and afterward to the use of the right Heirs of the Feoffor;
The Feoffor enfeoffeth a stranger, takes a wife, now cannot the Feoffees enter
during the life of the Feoffor, and after his death they cannot enter, because
they could not enter when the use to the wife was to begin upon the
intermarriage, and then if the Entry of the Feoffees in such case should be
requisite, the use limited to the wife by the Act of the Feoffor should be
destroyed against his own limitation, which is strong against the meaning of
the Act aforesaid, for by the said act, the Land is credited with the said use,
which shall never fail in the performance of it. And such contingent estates in
Remainder may be limited in possession, a Fortiori in use, which see 4. E. 6.
Coithirsts case, 23. And Plesingtons case, 6 R. 2. And it is true, at the
common Law, the Entry of the Feoffees was requisite, because the wrong was done
unto them by reason of the possession which they then had; but now by the
Statute, all is drawn out of them, and then there is no reason that they meddle
with the Lands wherein they have now nothing to do, and the scope of the
Statute is, utterly to disable the Feoffees to do any thing in prejudice of the
uses limited, so as the Feoffees are not to any purpose but as a Pipe to convey
the Lands to others; So as they cannot by their Release or confirmation, etc.
bind the uses which are to grow and arise by the limitation knit unto the
Feoffment made unto them, which see Br. 30. 30 H. 8. Feoffments to uses 50 A.
covenants with B. That when A. shall be enfeoffed by B. of three Acres of Lands
in D. that then the said A. and his Heirs shall be seized of Land of the said
A. in S. to the use of B. and his Heirs, and afterward A. enfeoffeth a
stranger of his Lands in S. And afterward B. enfeoffeth A. of his Lands in D.
now the Feoffee of A. shall be seized to the use of B. notwithstanding that the
said Feoffee had not notice of the use, for Land is bound with the use in whose
hands soever it come: And see the like case, ibid. 1. Ma. 59. Upon the reason
of which cases many assurances have been made, for it is the common manner of
Mortgage, i. e. If the Mortgag or pay such a sum, etc. that then the Mortgagee
and his Heirs shall be seized after such payment, to the use of the Mortgagor
and his Heirs; In that case although that the Mortgagee alien, yet upon the
payment, the use shall rise well enough out of the possession of the Alienee,
and the Lands shall be in the Mortgagor without any Entry: For the Mortgages
could not enter against his own alienation, to revive the use which is to rise
upon the payment, and therefore without any assistance of such Entry, it shall
arise: As at the Common Law, Land is given to A. in tail, the Remainder to the
right heirs of B. A. levies a Fine, makes a Feoffment, suffers a Recovery, etc.
although the same shall bind the Issues, yet if B. dies, and afterward A.
dies without issue, now notwithstanding this Fine, etc. The right Heir of B.
may enter: And always a use shall spring out of the Land at his due
opportunity, and it is a collateral charge which binds the Lands by the first
Liberty, and cannot be discharged, vi. 49. Ass. 8. and 49 E. 3. 16. Isabell
Goodcheapes case: A man devises, that his Executors shall sell his Lands, and
afterward dies without heir, so as the Land escheats to the King, yet the
authority given to the Executors shall bind the Lands in whose hands soever it
comes, etc. And so a title of Entry continues notwithstanding twenty
alienations: But an use is a less thing than a Title of Entry, especially an
use in contingency, and an use as long as it is in contingency cannot be
forfeited: As if the Mortgagor be attainted and pardoned mean betwixt the
Mortgage and the day of Redemption, etc. Then when Thomas levies a Fine,
Francis may well enter; And Thomas before the Fine had an estate tail executed
to his Freehold, and therefore by the Fine he gave an estate of Inheritance to
the Conusee, and then no right of entail remained in Francis, but he took an
estate for life only, and that as a Purchasor by the limitation of the Will,
and then when Francis levied a Fine, his estate was gone (which was but for
life) and then the right of the entail, and all the other estates which are
especially limited are also gone, and so Percival Heart, to whom no estate was
specially limited has not any cause to enter, etc. And it was further said by
Wray: Husband and Wife Tenants in special tail, the Husband levies a Fine with
Proclamations and dies, the Wife enters, the issue in tail is barred, but if
the Wife enter after the death of her Husband, and before the Proclamations
pass, the issue is not bound by the Fine: And if Tenant in Tail grants totum
statum, and after levieth a Fine thereof with Proclamations, come ceo, etc. The
Issue is barred; contrary where the Fine is upon a Release, etc.

CCCXLVI. Henningham and Windhams Case. 18 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
ARthur Henningham brought a Writ of Error against Francis Windham upon a
common Recovery had against Henry his Brother, Error. Owen Rep. 68.
and the Case was, That Land was given in special tail to Thomas Henningham,
Father of the said Henry and the said Arthur, the Remainder in general tail
(the estate tail in possession was to him and the Heirs Mairs of his body)
Thomas had issue the said Henry and three Daughters by one woman, and the said
Arthur and two other Sons by another woman, and dyed seized. Henry entered, and
made a Feoffnent, a common Recovery is had against the Feoffee, in which Henry
is vouched, who vouched over the common Vouchee according to the usual course
of common Recoveries. Henry dyed without issue, Error and Attaint, by him to
whom the Land is to descend.
and Arthur brought a Writ of Error being but of the half blood to Henry: And
it was resolved by the whole Court, That Error and Attaint always descends to
such person to whom the Land should descend: If such Recovery, or false oath
had not been; As if Lands be given to one and the Heirs Females of his body,
etc. and suffers an erroneous Recovery and dies, the Heir female shall have
the Writ of Error: So upon Recovery of Lands in Borough English, for such
Action descends according to the Land, quod fuit concessum per totam Curiam:
But it was objected on the Defendants part: That because that the Feoffee being
Tenant to the Praecipe is to recover in value a Fee-simple, and so Henry is to
yield a Fee-simple which should descend to the heir at the Common Law if this
Recovery had not been, therefore he to whom the same should descend, should
have the Writ of Error, for he has the loss: But the said Exception was not
allowed: And it was said, That Tenant in tail upon such a Recovery, shall
recover but an estate in tail, scil. such estate which he had at the time of
the warranty made, etc. And afterward Judgment was given that the Action was
maintainable: So if a man has Lands of the part of his mother, and loses it
by erroneous Judgment and dies; That the Heir of the part of the Mother shall
have the Writ of Error.

CCCXLVII. Foster and Pitfalls Case. 18 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
IN Ejectione firmae the Case was: 1 Cro. ^.
Brook devised Lands to his Wife in general Tail, the Remainder over to a
stranger in Fee, and dyed, he took another Husband, and had issue a Daughter:
The Husband and Wife levied a Fine to a stranger: The Daughter as next Heir by
11 H. 7. entered: It was agreed by the whole Court, That an estate devised to
the wife, is within the words. but not within the meaning of the Statute:
Secondly, It was resolved, That no estate is within the meaning of the Statute,
unless it be for the Ioynture of the Wife: Thirdly Resolved, That the meaning
of the Statute was, That the wife so preferred by the Husband should not
prejudice the issues or heirs of her Husband; and here nothing is left in the
Issues or heirs of the Husband, so as the Wife could not prejudice them, for
the Remainder is limited over.

CCCLXVIII. Greenes Case. 18 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
Acceptance of Rent. 1 Cro. 3. 3 Co. 64. b.
Green made a Lease for years rendering Rent with clause of Re-entry, and the
Rent due at the Feast of the Annunciation was behind being demanded at the day,
which Rent the Lessor afterward accepted, and afterward entered for the
condition broken, and his Entry holden lawful, Entry. Plow. Com. in Browning
and Bestons Case.
for the Rent was due before the condition broken; but if the Lessor accepts
the next Quarters Rent, then he has lost the benefit of Re-entry, for thereby
he admits the Lessee to be his Tenant. And if the Lessor distrain for Rent due
at the said Feast of the Annunciation after the forfeiture, he cannot
afterward re-enter for the said forfeiture, for by his Distress he has
affirmed the possession of the Lessee: So if he make an Acquittance for the
Rent as a Rent, contrary, if the Acquittance be but for a sum of money, and not
expressly for the Rent, all which tota Curia concessit.

CCCXLIX. 20 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
THe Case was, Lessee for life, the Remainder for life, the Remainder in tail,
the Remainder in fee: The two Tenants for life make a Feoffment in fee. Dyer, A
woman Tenant for life in Ioynture, the Remainder for life, the Remainder in
fee; the Tenants for life join in a Feoffment, Entry for Forfeiture.
the Entry of him in the Remainder in fee is lawful by 11 H. 7. And if Tenant
for life be impleaded, and he in the Remainder for life will not pray to be
received, he in the last Remainder may; and so in our case, inasmuch as he in
the Remainder for life was party to the wrong, he in the Remainder in tail
shall enter: Which Harper and Munson granted, Dyer 339. a.
i. e. Manwood, Although that this Feoffment be not a Disseisin to him in the
Remainder in tail, yet it is a wrong in a high degree; as by Littleton, A
Disseisor leaseth for life to A. who aliens in fee, the Disseisee releaseth to
the Alienee; it is a good Release, and the Disseisor shall not enter although
the Alienation was to his disinheritance, Lit. 111. which Dyer granted: And if
Tenant for life alieneth in fee, and the Alienee enfeoffeth his Father, and
dies, the same descent shall not avail him no more than in case of Disseisin.
Livery of Seism.
It has been objected, that this is the Livery of the first Tenant for life,
and the confirmation of him in the Remainder for life. Dyer was of opinion,
That by this Livery the Remainder for life passes, and this Livery shall be as
well the Livery of him in the Remainder as of the Tenant in possession; and
although where an estate is made lawfully by many, it shall be said the Livery
of him only who lawfully may make Livery: Yet where an estate is wrongfully
made it shall be accounted in Law, the Livery of all who join in it. And in
this, the Remainder for life is extinguished by the Livery in the Feoffee, and
the Livery of him in the Remainder for life shall be holden a void Livery,
especially when he joins with such a person who has not authority to make
Livery; As if the Lord and a Stranger Disseise the Tenant, and make a Feoffment
over, the whole Seigniory is extinct, as if he solely had been seized: so if he
in the Reversion, and a Stranger disseise for life, and make a Feoffment over,
the Seigniory is gone, and yet it is the Livery of the Lessee only. And
although it be but the confirmation of him in the Remainder for life, yet
thereby the Remainder is gone and extinct. And afterward Judgment was given,
that the Entry of him in the Remainder in tail was lawful: And it was said by
the L. Dyer, That if Tenant for life be, the Remainder for life, the Remainder
in fee, Tenant for life in possession alieneth in fee, that he in the Remainder
in fee cannot enter, for it was not to his disinheri^in.

CCCL. 20 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
THe Case was, That a Capias ad Satisfaciend was delivered to the Sheriff, 5
Co. 88, 89.
and after the Sheriff did arrest the party against whom the Capias issued, by
force of a Capias Utlagatum, and then the party in the Capias came to the
Sheriff, and prayed that the party remain in Execution for his debt also, and
notwithstanding that the Sheriff let the Prisoner go at large, and upon both
Writs returned, Non est inventus. It was the opinion of all the Justices, That
the Sheriff was not bound in point of Escape to detain the Prisoner for the
Debt of the Plaintiff; and it is not like where one is in the Fleet in
Execution, there (if other condemnations in other Courts be notified to the
Warden of the Fleet) he shall be chargeable with them all. It was holden also,
per Curiam, That if the Body had been returned by Capias Utlagatum, that the
Court at the prayer of the party would grant that the Prisoner might remain in
Execution for the debt as in case of a Capias pro fine.

CCCLI. The Lord Saint John and the Countess of Kents Case. 19 Eliz. In the
Common Pleas.
IN Evidence given to the Jury in an Action of Debt brought by the Plaintiff
against the Defendant: Grants of Executors of omnia bona sua. 1 Cro. 6.
It was said by Dyer and Manwood Justices, That if Executors grant omnia bona
sua, that the goods which they have as Executors do not pass, which see 10 E.
4. 1. b. by Danby: but the contrary was holden by Wray chief Justice of the
Kings Bench, and by Plowden. in Bracebridges case, P. 18 Eliz. and they denied
the opinion of 10 E. 4. to be Law, for by such Grant made by Executors, the
goods of the Testator do pass.

CCCLII. 19 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
NOte, It was said by Dyer and Manwood, Justices, That if one be condemned in
an Action upon the Case, Abatement of Writ. 3 Len. 68.
or Trespass upon Nihil dicit, or demurrer, etc. And a Writ issues forth to
enquire of the Damages, and before the return of it the Defendant dies, that
the Writ shall not abate, for the awarding of the said Writ is a Judgment. And
it was said by Manwood, Account.
In a Writ of Account the Defendant is awarded to account; if the Defendant
account, and be found in Arrearages and dies, the Writ shall not abate, but
Judgment shall be given that the Plaintiff shall recover, and the Executor
shall be charged with the Arrearages, and yet account does not lie against them.

CCCLIII. 19 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
A. Did recover in Debt against B. whereupon a Fieri facias issued to the
Sheriff of Devon; and the Defendant, seeing the Writ of Execution in the
Sheriffs hands, Attachment of Goods after the Money is in the Sheriffs hand, is
void.
said to him, that he would pay the Debt recovered at Exeter such a day to
satisfy the Execution, at which day the Defendant paid the money accordingly,
and presently came an Officer of the City of Exeter, and attached the money in
the Sheriffs hand, supposing the said A. to be indebted so much to one C. in
whose name he made the Attachment, Antea 29. 1 Cro. 6^
and now on the behalf of the said A. a Certiorare was prayed to remove the
Attachment hither; and it was therefore holden by the whole Court, that the
Attachment was void, and a Certiorare granted: And Wray said, If it can be
proved by Oath, that if the Defendant did procure, or was assenting to the said
Attachment, that Process of Contempt should issue against him; and the Sheriff
demanded of the Court what return he should make, because the moneys were
attached in his hands, and taken from him by force; to which Wray answered,
That the Sheriff ought to answer the moneys to the Plaintiff, which were once
in his hands by force of the Execution, and that it was his folly to suffer the
money to be taken from him by color of the said Attachment, and if the money was
taken by force, the Sheriff had his remedy by an Action of Trespass; for the
Attachment was void, but the Sheriff at the return of the Writ ought to answer
for the Money.

CCCLIV. 19 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
TEnant for life bargained and sold his Lands to A. and his Heirs, and
afterward levied a Fine to the Bargainee, Forfeiture. 4 Len. 124. ^ Len. 60,
65.
Sur conusans de droit come ceo, etc. It was holden by the Court, that it was a
forfeiture committed by the Bargainee, not by the Bargainor, who at the time of
the Fine had nothing to forfeit; and it was said by Manwood Justice, That if
Tenant for life be disseised, and takes a Fine, ut supra, of a Stranger, it is
a forfeiture, and yet he in the Reversion has but a right in Reversion; so
that if Tenant for life be disseised, and the Disseisor commits Wast, he in the
Reversion shall have an Action of Wast against Tenant for life; and if two
Tenants for life be disseised by two, A. and B. and one of the Tenants for life
does release unto A. and the other Tenant for life does re-enter, he has the
Moiety in common with the other to whom the Release was made, and he has
revested the entire Reversion in him, in whom the Reversion was before, etc.

CCCLV. 20 Eliz. In the Common Pleas. Bracebridges Case.
THe Case was, Thomas Bracebridge seized of a Manor in Fee, leased a Message,
parcel of it to one Curtes for 21 years, and afterward 35 H. 8. leased the
same to one Moore for 26 years, to begin after the expiration of the former
Lease; and afterward 5 E. 6. he enfeoffed Griffith and others to the use of
the Feoffees themselves, and their Heirs, upon condition, That if the Feoffees
did not pay to the said Thomas Bracebridge 2000 l. within 15 days after, that
then immediately after the said 15 days, the Feoffees should stand seized of
the said Manor to the use of the said Thomas Bracebridge, and Joyce his wife,
for their lives, without impeachment of Wast, and afterward to the use of T.
B. their second Son in tail, with diverse Remainders over, the Feoffees do not
pay the said money within the said 15 days, afterward Curties attorns to the
Feoffees. It was moved, if the Reversion of the Lands passed to Curties,
passes by the Feoffment of the Manor without attornment, which see Littleton
133, 134. 2. Attornment.
If by the attornment of Curties, after the 15 days the uses can rise to
Bracebridge and his wife, etc. and it was said, That the Case 20 H. 6. Avowry
11, 12. If a Manor be granted for life, the remainder over in Fee; Tenant for
life dies, if the Tenants attorn to him in the Remainder, the same is good;
and if a Reversion be granted to two, and one of them dies, attornment to the
survivor is good; and if a Reversion be granted to Husband and Wife in special
tail, the Wife dies afterward without issue, Attornment to the Husband is
good; and if a Reversion be given in Frank-marriage, and afterward the Husband
and Wife are divorced, and afterward the particular Tenant attorns to the
Wife, the same is good; and by Manwood, If a Man seized of a Manor, the demesns
of which extends into two Counties, and has issue a Son and a Daughter by one
woman, and a Son by another woman, and dies, the eldest Son enters into the
Demesns in one County only, and takes the profit in one County only, and dies
without issue, the Daughter shall have and inherit the Demesns or Services
whereof her Brother was seized, and the Son of the half-blood the rest: And by
Manwood, the attornment of Curties, who was the first Lessee, shall bind Moore
the second Lessee, for he ought to attorn, against whom lies the Quid juris
clamat: And if a Lease for years be made of a Manor, and the Reversion of it be
granted to another in fee, if the Lessee for years attorneth it shall bind the
Tenants of the Manor, 18 E. 2. A man seized of a Manor in the right of his
Wife, leased parcel of it for years without his wife, the Reversion thereof is
not parcel of the Manor; contrary if the Lease had been made by Husband and
Wife. And by Dyer, if Tenant in tail of a Manor leaseth parcel for years, and
afterward makes a Feoffment of the whole Manor, and makes Livery in the
Demesns not leased, the Reversion of the Land leased does not pass; for by the
Feoffment a wrong is done to the Lessor, which the Law shall not further
enlarge than appears by the Deed; contrary in case of Tenant in fee of a
Manor, and that without Deed with Attornment. And it was the Case of one
Kellet, 25 H. 8. Kellet was Cestuy que use before the Statute of 27 H. 8. of
diverse Lands by several Conveyances, the use of some being raised upon
Recovery, of some upon Fine, and of some upon Feoffment, and he made a
Feoffment of all these Lands by Deed, with a Letter of Attorney to make Livery;
the Attorney entered into part of the Land, and made Livery in the name of the
whole, and it was agreed by all the Justices, that the Lands passed,
notwithstanding in others possession, i.e. other Feoffees: And by Dyer, If the
Tenants of a Manor pay their Rents to the Disseisor, they may refuse again to
pay them; and if a Lease be made for years, the Remainder for life, if the
Lessor will grant over his Reversion, the Lessee for years shall Attorn, and
his attornment shall bind him in the remainder for life; and if a Lease be made
to one for years, the remainder over for life, the remainder to the Lessee for
years in Fee. Now if the Lessee for years grant all his interest, etc. there
needs no attornment: and if Grantee of a Rent in fee leaseth for life, and
afterward grants the Reversion to another, the Attornment of the Ter-tenant is
not requisite, but only of the Grantee for life. It was also holden, Relation.
That this Attornment by Curties two years after the Livery was sufficient, for
it shall have relation to the Livery to make it parcel of the Manor, but not to
punish the Lessee for waste done mean between the Livery and the Attornment,
but betwixt the Feoffor and the Feoffee it shall pass ab initio. It was holden
also, That although the uses for it limited are determined by the default of
payment within the 15 days, yet the Feoffees shall take the Reversion by this
Attornment to the second uses; 2 Len. 222.
and if I enfeoff one upon condition to enfeoff J.S. who refuses, now the
Feoffee shall be seized to my use; but if the condition were to give in tail,
contrary: So here is a Limitation beyond the first use, which shall not be
defeated for want of Attornment to the first uses; and here it was not the
meaning of Bracebridge to have the Lands again upon breach of the condition in
his former estate, but according to the second use; and Judgment was given in
the principal case according to the resolutions of the Judges, as aforesaid.
And it was said by Harper Justice, That if a Feoffment in Fee be made to J. S.
upon condition that he shall grant to A. a Rentcharge, who refuses it, J.S.
shall be seized to his own use. Antea 199.


CCCLVI. 20 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
THe Case was this, Lord and Tenant by service to pay every year such a
quantity of Salt; but since 10 H. 7. the Tenant has always paid the money for
Salt. The question was, If the Lord might resort to the first service, Seisin.
and if the money be Seisin of the Salt. And Manwood took this difference, i.e.
where the Lord takes a certain sum of money for the Salt, the same is not any
Seisin, for the service is altered, as at the first, Socage Tenure was a work
done by labor, i.e. Plowing; but now it is changed into certain Rent, and the
Lord cannot resort to have his Plowing; and in Kent diverse Tenants in ancient
time have paid Barley for their Rent, but the same afterward was paid in a
certain sum of money, so as now the Lord of Canterbury, who is Lord of such
Tenements cannot now demand his Barley, etc. but if the sum which has been used
to be paid be uncertain one year so much, according to the price of Salt, then
such a payment of money is a sufficient Seisin of the Salt. Quod fuit concessum
per Curiam.

CCCLVII. 20 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
IN Account, brought by an Heir Copyholder, for the profits of his Copyhold
Lands taken during his Nonage, the Defendant pleaded, That by the Custom of the
said Manor, Account by the Heir of a Copyholder.
the Lord of the Manor might assign one to take the profits of a Copyhold
descended to an Infant, during his Nonage to the use of the Assignee, without
rendering an account, and the same was holden to be a good Custom, as a Rent
granted to one and his Heirs, Custom
to cease during the Nonage of every Heir; but admitting that the Custom were
void, yet this Action does not lie, for the Defendant has not entered and taken
the profits, as Prochein amy, in which Case although he was not Prochein amy,
etc. he is chargeable, O^^^^ Rep. 36, ^3, 84.
as Prochein amy according to his Claim; but here he claims by the Custom and
Grant of the Lord, and not in the right of the Heir; and therefore it was
adjudged in this time of this Quaere, that if one enters into Lands claiming
by Devise, where in truth the Land devised is entailed, he should not be
charged in account, etc.

CCCLVIII. 20 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
NOte, It was holden by the whole Court, Exposition of the Statute, of 32 and
34. Of Wills.
That the Statute of 32 and 34 H. 8. of Wills, did not extend to Lands in
London, but that the devise of the whole is good: And if Houses in London,
parcel of the possessions of Abbeys came to the Crown by Dissolution, and he
grants them over to hold in chief by Knights service, these Lands are
devisable: But it was holden, That the said Statutes as Acts executed, extended
to Lands in London, and shall be good but for two parts: And if a man has
Lands in tail, and in Fee-simple, which are of double the value of the Lands in
tail, and devises all his Lands, all the Land in Fee-simple shall pass. Dyer,
One seized of three Manors, the one in Capite in Fee, and two in Socage in
tail, and devises all his Land in Capite, it is good against the King for all
Capite Land, and he shall be tied to have the Lands in Socage, but it shall not
bind the Heir: And a devise of the third part (where all is devised) is void as
well against the Heir as against the King. And he said, That if a man be seized
of twenty Acres in Socage, and ten Acres in Capite, and devises two parts of
his Lands, it is reasonable to say, That all the Socage Lands shall pass; but
if the devise was of two parts of all his Lands, it is otherwise, for this word
(All) implies, that the two parts shall be per my and per tout, as well Capite
as Socage, i. e. It was argued by Fenner, That the Lands in London are now
devisable as they were before the Statute, for if the Devisee of Lands in
London be disturbed, he shall have Ex gravi Querela, otherwise it is of Lands
at the Common Law; and if an Assize of Mortdancester be brought of Lands in
London, it is a good Plea to say, That the Lands are devisable: But in an
Assise of Mortdancestor of Lands at the Common Law, it is not any Plea: And if
a man gives Lands at the Common Law, i. e. not devisable by the Common Law, he
cannot devise the Reversion, for the Statute shall not do wrong to the person,
i.e. to the Donee, who there shall lose his Acquittal: But of Lands devisable
by custom, it is otherwise; And if Land in a Borough was devisable for life by
the Custom, and afterward came the Statute of 23 H. 8. which made all Lands
devisable, now that Land is devisable for life by the Custom, and the Reversion
by the Statute.

CCCLIX. 20 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
IN an Action of Wast, of Wast assigned in a Wood, Wast.
the Jury viewed the Wood only without entering into it: And it was holden that
the same was sufficient, for otherwise it should be tedious for the Jury to
have had the view of every stub of a Tree which had been felled. Yet Meade
Justice said, That if Wast be assigned in several corners of the Wood, then the
Jury is to have the view of every corner; but contrary where Wast is assigned
in the whole Wood: Vie^.
And if Wast be assigned in every Room of a House, the view of the House
generally is sufficient. And Dyer Justice said, That if Wast be assigned in
several places, and of some of them the Jury had not the view, of that they may
find no Wast done.

CCCLX. Sir Thomas Lees Case. 20 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
IT was holden per Curiam, That whereas Sir Thomae Lee was seized of a Manor,
Election.
and aliened the Manor, except one Close parcel of the said Manor called
Newdick, and there were two Closes parcel of the said Manor called Newdick, the
one containing nine Acres, and the other containing three Acres; That the
Alienee should not choose which of the said Closes he would have; but the
Alienor or Feoffor should have the Election which of the said Closes should
pass.

CCCLXI. 20 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
TEnant in tail, the Remainder in tail, etc. Tenant in tail, in possession,
Fines levied by Tenant in tail in Remainder. 3 Cro. 211.
makes a Lease for three lives, according to the Statute of 32 H. 8. and
afterward dies without issue, he in the Remainder before any Entry levieth a
Fine, the same is good; for by the death of Tenant in tail without issue, the
Freehold is vested in him in the Remainder in tail: And of that opinion was
the whole Court.

CCCLXII. Ferrand and Ramseys Case. 20 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
IN an Ejectione firmae brought of a House in London, the Defendant pleaded,
That long time before the Lessor of the Plaintiff had any thing, etc. One Ann
Ramsey was seized in Fee, and died seized, and that the same descended to
William Ramsey as Son and Heir to the said Ann, who was disseised by Israel
Owen, who leased to the Plaintiff, upon whom the said William Ramsey did
re-enter: The Plaintiff Replicando, That the said Ann did not die seized, said,
That before the Ejectment one Robert Owen was seized, and died seized, and from
him descended the said House to Israel Owen as Son and Heir of the said Robert,
absque hoc, that the said Israel did disseise the said Ann, upon which they
were at issue, and at Nisi prius in London, it was given in Evidence of the
Defendants part: That Crofton and Langhton were seized in Fee of the said
Message, and by Deed indented conveyed it to one John Ramsey, Robert Dakins,
and four others and their Heirs, upon condition that the said Feoffees, their
Heirs or Assigns should pay to the said Ann and her Heirs, six pounds thirteen
shillings and four pence: And also should enfeoff the said Ann, if to the same
they were required by the said Ann in her life, or within four days next
following such Request in Fee unto the use of the said Ann and her Heirs, cum
and quando ad hoc per eandem Annam requisite. fuerint, and if the said Ann died
before such Request, that then the said Feoffees or their Heirs should enfeoff
such issues of the said Ann, or such other persons which the said Ann should
name, cum and quando ad hoc per eandem Annam requisite. fuerint, or within four
days after such Request, the said Feoffees or their Heirs should be seized of
the said House, to the use of the said Ann and her Heirs. Afterward the
seventh of April, 16 Eliz. Ann demanded of William Ramsey, Son and Heir of John
Ramsey, six pounds thirteen shillings and four pence, being due to the said
Ann, ut supra, the which sum the said William Ramsey did refuse to pay, by
force of which, and by the Statute of 27 H. 8. the said Ann Ramsey was thereof
seized, and died seized, and from her descended the said House to William
Ramsey. The Plaintiff confessed the Feoffment to Crofton and Langhton, to John
Ramsey and others, and showed further, That the said Ann required the surviving
Feoffees to enfeoff one Robert Owen of the said House, who three days after
made the Feoffment accordingly, Robert Owen enfeoffed John Owen, who died
thereof seized, and from him the said House descended to Israel Owen. Crafton
died, Langhton having issue two Daughters died; All the Feoffees but one died,
Ann the time aforesaid demanded the said six pounds thirteen shillings and four
pence of the said William Ramsey in another House in London, due at the Feast
of St. Michael last before, who denied to pay it; the second Daughter of
Langhton entered, and thereof enfeoffed the said Israel Owen, Rents. 3 Cro. 210,
211.
who leased the same to the Plaintiff, and upon that Evidence the Defendant did
demur in Law: And first it was resolved by the whole Court, That the said sum
to be paid to the said Ann was not a Rent, but a sum in gross, because reserved
to a stranger, etc. which see Lit. 79. Reversion.
And by Munson Justice, If the words of the reservation had been twenty Nobles
Rent, yet it had been but a sum in gross, but otherwise it had been by devise.
Also there is not any condition for the payment of it, but only a Limitation,
for the word subsequent which limits the future use, takes away all the force
of the words of the Condition, as 27 H. 8. 24. Land given in tail upon
condition that the Donee and his Heirs shall carry the Standard of the Donor
when he goes to battle; and if he fail thereof, then the same to remain to a
stranger, the limiting of the Remainder has taken away the condition, and has
controlled it, and now the Condition is become a Limitation; But where the
words subsequent are against Law, as if upon failer, that then it shall be
lawful for a stranger to enter, Feoffments upon condition.
etc. these words because they are against Law (for a Rent cannot be reserved
to a Stranger, etc.) do not destroy the Condition, by Mead, contrary by Munson,
for the Condition is utterly gone. And by Mead, Feoffment in Fee upon
condition, That if the Feoffor shall do such a thing that he shall re-enter and
retain the Land to the use of a stranger, the use is void, 1 Cro 401, 402:
and the Feoffor shall hold the Land to his own use. A Feoffment in Fee upon
condition, That the Feoffee shall marry my Daughter, and if he refuse to marry
her, that then he shall be seized to the use of I.S. the same is not a
Condition, but a Limitation; and in all cases afterward of a Condition, where
an Interest is limited to a stranger, there it is not a Condition, but a
Limitation. And Mead said, That the said annual sum is not demandable, but the
party ought to pay it at his peril, Lit. 80. But by Munson, it ought to be
demanded, for so this word (Refuse) does imply: Regula.
And when at the Request of Ann the Feoffment is made, by Munson, Mead, and
Windham, the Rent is gone; but Dyer contrary, unless the Feoffment be made to
Ann her self: And afterward Judgment was given for the Plaintiff, Hill. 19
Eliz. Rot. 748. There was a Case betwixt Shaw and Norton. Shaw and Nortons Case
One Green devised his Lands to A. and devised also, the said A. should pay a
Rent to B. and that B. might distrain for it; and if A. fail of the payment of
it, that the Heirs of the Devisor might enter, the same is a good Distress, and
a good Condition. And by Munson, Demand ought to be made of the Rent, for the
words are (Refuse) which cannot be without Demand or Request: And it was
certified, That such a Clerk refused to pay his Tenths, and because it was
expressly set down in the Certificate, that he was requested, etc. for that
cause he was discharged. And it was also holden, That if Request be necessary,
that in this case Request is to be made, That it ought to be made to the
surviving Feoffee, or his heir, and not to the heirs of any of the Feoffees who
are dead.

CCCLXIII. Lacyes Case. Hill. 25. Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
Indictments Co. 13. Rep. 53.
LAcy was indicted of the death of a man upon Scarborough Sands, in the County
of York, between the high water-mark, and the low water-mark, and the same
Indictment was removed into the Kings Bench, and being arraigned upon it, he
showed, that the said Indictment was sued by virtue of a Commission which
issued the first day of May, directed to the Justices of Assize, and other
Justices of Peace in the said County, Commission repealed.
to enquire of all Murders, Felonies, etc. and pleaded further, That the second
day of May aforesaid, issued another Commission directed to the Lord Admiral
and others upon the Statute of 28 H. 8. cap. 15. by force of which the said
Lacy was indicted of the same murder, whereof he was now arraigned, and the
said last Commission was, ad inquirendum, tam super altum mare, quam super
littus maris, and ubicunque locorum infra jurisdictionem nostram maritimam: And
that the said Indictment taken before the Admiral, was taken before this, upon
which he was arraigned, and upon the whole matter prayed to be dismissed: And
the opinion of all the Justices was, that the first Commission was repealed by
the second, and so the Indictment upon which he was arraigned, taken, coram non
Judice, 10 E. 4. 7. If a Commission for the Peace issues into one County and
afterward another Commission issues to a Town within the same County and
parcel of it, the first Commission is repealed, which Gaudy granted, if notice
be given, etc. but Wray denied it; but the whole Court, by this last Commission
to the Lord Admiral, the first Commission, as to the Jurisdiction in locis
maritimis is determined and repealed; for these two Commissions, are in respect
of two several Authorities, the first Commission merely by the Common Law, the
other by the Statute aforesaid, and thereupon the party was discharged against
the Queen, as to that Indictment. Note, that in the Argument of this Case, it
was said by Coke, and agreed by Wray, That if a man be struck upon the high
sea, 2 Co. 93.
whereof he dies in another County afterward. that this murder is
dispunishable, notwithstanding the Statute of 2 Ed. 6.

CCCLXIV. The Queen and Braybrooks Case. Pasch. 25 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
3 Co. 1, 2, etc.
THe Queen brought a Writ of Error against Braybrook, The Case was this, That
King Ed. 4. was seized of the Manor of Marston, and gave the same to Lionel
Lord Norris, and A.M. and the Heirs of the body of the Lord, the Remainder to
H. Norris in Tail, L and A. entermarry, L. suffered a common Recovery against
himself only, without naming the said A. Hen. Norris is attainted of high
Treason by Act of Parliament, and by the same Act all his Lands, Tenements,
Hereditaments, Rights, Conditions, etc. the day of the Treason committed, or
ever after, etc. Hen. Norris is executed, Lionel dies without issue, the Queen
falsified the said Recovery for one moiety by Scire facias, because Anne who
was joint-tenant with Lionel was not named party to the said Recovery: and
afterward the Queen granted to the Lord Norris, Son of the said Hen. Norris,
Manerium suum de Merston, and omnia jura in eodem, and now upon the said
Recovery, the Queen brought a Writ of Error, and it was argued by Egerton the
Queens Solicitor, that this right to a Writ of Error is such a right as is
transferred to the Queen by the Act of Parliament, for the words are, omnia
jura sua quaecunque, and here is a right, although not a present right, yet a
right although in futuro, so it is a right of some quality, as A. Tenant in
Tail, the Remainder in Tail to B.A. makes a Feoffment in Fee, B. is attainted
of high Treason, and by such Act all his Lands, etc. given to the King. A.
dies without issue, the Queen shall have a Formedon in the Remainder; and
although the Queen has granted to the Lord Norris, Manerium suum de Merston,
and omnia jura in eodem, yet by such general words, a Writ of Error does not
pass, which See 32 H. 8. Br. Patents 98. And also this Action rests in privity
of record, and cannot be displaced from thence, but by Act of Parliament, see
Br. Chose in Action 14. 33 H. 8. for when the King will grant a thing in
Action, he ought in his Patent to recite all the circumstances of the matter,
as the Right, and how it became a Right, and because the Queen here does not
make mention of this Right, as of the Entail, the Recovery, and the Attainder,
for that cause the Right does not pass. The Case betwixt Cromer and Cranmer, 8
Eliz. the Disseisee was attainted of Treason, the Queen granted to the Heir of
the Disseisee all the Right which came unto her by the Attainder of his
Ancestor, nothing passed, Causa qua supra: And always where the King grants any
thing, which he cannot grant, but as King, that such a grant without special
words, is to no purpose. Coke contrary, and he agreed the Case put by Egerton,
for at the time of the Attainder, B. had a Right of Remainder; but in our Case
Hen. Norris had not any Right, but a possibility of a Right of Action, i.e. a
Writ of Error; And he said that this Writ of Error is not forfeitable (for it
is an Action which rests in privity) no more than a condition in gross, as a
Feoffment in Fee is made upon condition of the party of the Feoffor who is
attainted ut supra: This word (Right) in the Act of Attainder shall not
transfer this Condition to the Queen, and of the Act of Attainder to Hen.
Norris, it is to be conceived That the makers of the Act did not intend, that
by the word (Right) every right of any manner, or quality whatsoever should
pass to carry a Condition to the Queen, and therefore we ought to conceive,
that the makers of the Act did not intend to touch Rights which rested in
privity: And as to the Grant of the Queen, to the Lord Norris of the Manor of
Merston, Et omnia jura sua in eodem, he conceived, that thereby the Right of
the Writ of Error did pass; for it is not like Cranmers Case, but if in the
said Case, the Land it self had been set down in the Grant, it had been good
enough, as that Cranmer being seized in Fee of the Manor of D. was there of
disseised, and so being disseised was attainted of high Treason: now the Queen
grants to his Heirs totum jus suum in his Manor of D, etc. and so in our Case,
the Queen has granted to the Lord Norris, Manerium suum de Merston and omnia
jura sua in eodem, etc. at another day it was moved by Plowden, that this Right
of Writ of Error was not transferred to the Queen by the Act, but such Right
might be saved to a stranger, etc. the words of the Act are, omnia jura sua,
and this word (sua) is Pronomen possessionis, by which it is to be conceived,
that no Right should pass, but that which was a present Right, as a Right in
possession, but this Right to a Writ of Error, was not in Hen. Norris at the
time of his Attainder, but it was wholly in him against whom the erroneous
Judgment was had: and therefore if in a Praecipe quod reddat, the Tenant vouch
and loses, and Judgment is given, and before Execution, the Tenant is
attainted by Act of Parliament, by words ut supra, and afterward he is
pardoned, the Demandant sueth for Execution against the Tenant, now
notwithstanding this Attainder, the Tenant may sue Execution against the
Vouchee, and afterward Wray chief Justice openly declared in Court, the
opinion of himself and all his companions Justices, and also of all the other
Justices to be, That by this Act of Parliament, by which all Lands, Tenements,
Hereditaments, and all Rights of any manner and quality whatsoever Henry Norris
had, the day of his Attainder, or ever after, Lionel then being alive, and
over-living the said Hen. Norris, that this Writ of Error was not transferred
to the Queen: And that the said Act by the words aforesaid could not convey to
the King this possibility of right, for at the time of the Attainder, the Right
of the Writ of Error was in Lyonel, and Hen. during the estate tail limited to
Lyonell had not to do with the Land, nor any matter concerning it: And Judgment
was given accordingly; And it was holden, That he in the Reversion, or
Remainder upon an Estate tail might have a Writ of Error by the common Law,
upon a Recovery had against Tenant in tail in Reversion.

CCCLXV. Mich. 25, and 26. Eliz. In the common Pleas.
Copyholder.
IN Trespass brought by a Copyholder against the Lord for cutting down and
carrying away his Trees, etc. It was found by special Verdict, That the place
where, etc. was Customary lands of the Plaintiffs, holden of the Defendant, and
that the Trees whereof, etc. were Chery Trees, de magnitudine sufficienti
essendi maremium, and that the place where they growed, was neither Orchard,
nor Garden: It was said by the Court, That by the Custom the Copyholder could
not cut down such Trees, but the Lord might, and that the cutting down of such
Trees which were not Wast, the Copyholder might justify without punishment:
but because by the Verdict it did not appear that the Trees for which the
Action was brought were Timber in facto, but only de magnitudine effendi
maremium, the Plaintiff had Judgment.

CCCLXVI. The Lord Staffords Case. Mich. 25, and 26. Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
Extent.
UPon Recovery in debt against the Lord Stafford, certain Lands of the Lord were
extended by Elegit; The Queen because the Lord Stafford was endebted unto her,
by Prerogative ousted the Tenant by Elegit: Fleetwood Sergeant moved the Court
in the behalf of him who recovered, and surmised to the Court that the Queen
was satisfied, and therefore prayed a Re-extent; but the Court would not grant
it, because they were not certain of the matter, but advised the party to sue a
Scire facia; against the said Lord Stafford, to know and show cause, why a
Re-extent should not issue forth, the Queen being satisfied, etc.

CCCLXVII. Gibbs and Rowlies Case. Mich. 25, and 26. Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
Tithes.
Simon Gibbs Parson of Beddington, Libelled in the Spiritual Court against
Rowlie, for Tithe Milk, Rowlie upon surmise of a Prescription, de modo
Decimandi, obtained a Prohibition, which was against Simon Gibbs, Rectorem
Ecclesiae parochial, de Nether Beddington, and the parties were at Issue upon
the Prescription, Prohibition.
and it was found for Rowlie. Egerton Solicitor moved against the Prohibition,
because the Libel is against Gibbs, Rectorem Ecclesiae paroch. de Beddington,
and the Prohibition was, de Nether Beddington, and it was not averred that
Beddington in the Libel, and Nether Beddington, is unum and idem, and non
diversa; It was said by the Court, That upon the matter there is not any
Prohibition against Rectorem Ecclesiae de Beddington only, and therefore said
to the Plaintiffs Counsel, let the Parson proceed in the Spiritual Court at his
peril.

CCCLXVIII. Russell and Handfords Case. Mich. 25, and 26. Eliz. In the Kings
Bench.
RUssell brought an Action upon the Case against Handford, and declared, Quod
cum quoddam molendinum ab entiquo fuit erectum, upon such a River, Nuisance.
de quo, one Thomas Russell whose Heir the Plaintiff is, was seized in his
Demesne as of Fee, and dyed thereof seized, after whose death the same descended
to the Plaintiff, by force of which the Plaintiff was seized in his Demesne as
of Fee, and so seized, The Defendant upon the same River had levied a new Mill,
per quod cursus aquae praedict. coarctatus est, and upon Not guilty, It was
found for the Plaintiff: It was moved in Arrest of Judgment, That it is not
laid in the Declaration, that his Mill had been a Mill time out of mind, etc.
And then if it be not an ancient Mill time out of mind, Words of Prescription.
etc. it was lawful for the Defendant to erect a new Mill; And it was said,
That these words (ab antiquo) are not fit or significant words to set forth a
Prescription, but the words, A tempore cujus contrarii memoria hominum non
existit, are the usual words for such a purpose: See the Book of Entries 10,
11. See 11 H. 4. 200. If I have a Mill and another levies another Mill there,
and the Miller hinders the Water to run to my Mill, or does any such Nuisance,
Roll. 140.
an Action lies without any Prescription, as it seems by the Book in 22 H. 6.
14. The Plaintiff declared, That he was Lord of such a Town, and that he and
all his Predecessors, Priors of N. Lords of the same Town, have had, within the
same Town, four Mills time out of mind, etc. And that no other person had any
Mill in the said Town, but the Plaintiff and his Predecessors, the said four
Mills, and that all the Tenants of the Plaintiff within the same Town, and all
other Resiants there, etc. ought, and time out of mind, etc. had used to grind
at the said Mills of the Plaintiff, and that the Defendant, one of the Tenants
of the Plaintiff, had erected and set up a Horse Mill within the said Town, and
there the Resiants grinded, etc. And it was holden, That peradventure upon such
matter an Action lies, because the Defendant being one of the Tenants of the
Plaintiff is bound by the Custom and Prescription, so as he has offended
against the privity of the Custom and Prescription. And as to the Case in
question, It was the opinion of all the Justices, Hob. 189. Ante 168. 1 Cro.
415.
That if the Mill whereof the Plaintiff has declared, be not an ancient Mill,
that this Action does not lie upon the matter, eo quod cursus aquae coarctatur:
But yet at last, it was holden by the Court to be good enough, notwithstanding
the Exception. Another Exception was taken to the Declaration, because that
here is set forth the seisin of the Father of the Plaintiff, and the Descent to
the Plaintiff, by force of which he was seized in his Demesne, etc. without
showing that after the death of the Father that he entered into the said Mill,
Seisin in fact; and in Law.
etc. so as no seisin in fact is alleged, but only a seisin in Law, and if
the Plaintiff was not seized in fact, he cannot punish this personal wrong, but
the Exception was disallowed, for such a seisin in Law is sufficient for the
maintenance of this Action. And afterward the Plaintiff had Judgment to
recover his Damages. See for the Action it self contained in the Declaration. 8
Eliz. Dyer 248.

CCCLXIX. Cleypools Case. Mich. 26. Eliz. In the Exchequer.
Informations, upon the Statute of 5 Eliz. of Tillage.
INformation in the Exchequer against Cleypool, upon the Statute of Tillage, 5
Eliz. setting forth, That the Defendant has converted three hundred Acres of
arable Lands of Tillage, to pasture, and the same conversion has continued
from 15 Eliz. unto the two and twentieth of Eliz: The Defendant as to the
Conversion pleaded Not guilty, and as to the Continuance, the general Pardon by
Parliament, 23 Eliz. upon which the Attorney general did demur in Law. It was
argued, That that pardon did not extend to the continuance of the said
Conversion: And first the Barons were clear of opinion, That if A. be seized of
Arable Lands, and converts the same to pasture, and so converted, leaseth it to
B. who continues it in pasture as he found it, he shall be charged by that
Statute: And it is not any good Construction, where the Exception in the pardon
is, excepting the converting of any Land from Tillage to Pasture, made, done,
committed, or permitted, that the Conversion excepted out of the pardon shall
be intended and construed the bare Act of Conversion, but the whole offense, i.
the continuance and practice of it is understood: As if by general pardon all
intrusions are excepted, now by that, the instant Act of Intrusion, i. the bare
Entry is not only excepted, but also the continuance of the Intrusion, and the
perception of the profits: And note, The words of the Statute are (conversion
permitted) and Conversion continued is Conversion permitted: And the said
Statute does not punish the Conversion, but also the continuance of the
Conversion, for the penalty is appointed for each year in which the Conversion
continues: And Egerton Solicitor put this Case, 11 H. 8. It was enacted by 3 H.
7. cap. 11. That upon Recovery in Debt, if the Defendant in delay of Execution
sues a Writ of Error, and the Judgment be affirmed, he shall pay damages, now
the case was, That one in Execution brought such a Writ of Error, and the first
Judgment is affirmed, he shall pay damages, and yet here is not any delay of
the Execution, for the Defendant was in Execution before, but here is an
Interruption of the Execution, and the Statute did intend the Execution it
self, i. the continuance in Execution, ibidem moraturus quousque: It was said
on the other side, That the conversion and continuance thereof are two several
things, each by it self, and so the conversion only being excepted in the
pardon, the continuance thereof remains in the grace of the pardon: And it
appears by the Statute of 2, and 3. Ph. and Ma. That conversion, and
continuance are not the same, but alia, atque diversa, and distinct things in
the consideration of the Law; for there it is enacted, That if any person shall
have any Lands to be holden in Tillage according to the said Statute, but
converted to Pasture by any other person, the Commissioners, etc. have
authority by the said Statute to enjoin such persons to convert such Lands to
Tillage again, etc. And in all cases in the Law, there is a great difference
betwixt the beginning of a wrong, and the continuance of it: As if the Father
levyeth a Nuisance in his own Lands to the offense of another and dies; an
Assize of Nuisance does not lie against the Heir for the continuance of that
wrong, but a Quod permittat, See F.N.B. 124. It was adjorned.

CCCLXX. Powley and Siers Case. Mich. 26 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
POwley brought Debt against Sier Executor of the Will of A: Debt
The Defendant demanded Judgment of the Writ, for he said, That one B. was
Executor of the said A. and that the said B. did constitute the Defendant his
Executor, so the Writ ought to be brought against the Defendant as Executor of
the Executor, and not as immediate Executor to the said A. The Plaintiff by
Reply said, That the said B. before any probate of the Will, or any
Administration dyed, and so maintained his Writ. Wray Justice was against the
Writ, for although here be not any probate of the Will of A. or any other
Administration, yet when B. made his Will, and the Defendant his Executor, the
same is a good acceptance in Law of the Administration and Execution of the
first Will, for the Defendant might have an Action of Debt due to the first
Testator: Gaudy and Ayliff Justices, The Writ is good: See Dyer, 1 Cro. 211.
212.
23 Eliz. 372. against Wray.

CCCLXXI. Pasch. 26 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
THe Case was: A seized of certain Lands, Bargain and sale of Trees.
bargained and sold by Indenture all the Trees there growing, Habendum,
succidendum, and exportandum, within twenty years after the date of the said
Indenture, the twenty years expire; The Bargainee cuts down the Trees, A.
brought an Action of Trespass for cutting down the Trees: And by Wray, Justice,
The mere property of the Trees vests in the Bargainee, Post. 288.
and the Limitation of time which comes after is not to any purpose but to
hasten the cutting of the Trees within a certain time, within which, if the
Vendee does not cut them, he should be punished as a Trespassor as to the Land,
but not as to the Trees: Gaudy contrary; And that upon this Contract, a
conditional property vests in the Vendee, which ought to be pursued according
to the direction of the condition, and because the condition is broken, the
property of the Trees is vested in A.

CCCLXXII. Curriton and Gadbarys Case. Pasch. 26 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
IN in Action upon the Case, the Plaintiff declared, Leases.
That the Defendant in consideration that the Plaintiff should make a lease for
life to the Defendant of certain Lands, Habendum after the death of A. before
the tenth of August next following, promised to pay the Plaintiff ten pounds,
the first day of May next after the promise which was before the tenth of
August: And the truth was, That the said ten pounds was not paid at the day, ut
supra, nor the said Lease made: And now both sides being in default, the
Plaintiff brought an Action; It was said by Wray Justice, If the Plaintiff had
made the Lease according to the consideration, and in performance thereof the
action would have lain, but now his own default had barred him of the Action:
But for another cause, the Declaration was holden insufficient, for here is not
any Consideration, for the promise is, in consideration that the Plaintiff
shall lease to the Defendant for life, Habendum after the death of A. which
cannot be good by way of lease, but ought to enure by way of grant of the
Reversion, so as here is no lease, therefore no consideration, and
notwithstanding that if a Lease be made for life, Habendum after the death of
A. the Habendum is void, and the Lease shall be in possession according to the
Premises, yet the Law will not give such construction to the words of a
Promise, Contract, or Assumpsit, but all the words ought to be wholly respected
according to the Letter, so as because that no Lease can be made according to
the words of the Consideration, no supply thereof shall be by any favorable
construction: And so it was adjudged: But before the same imperfection was
espied, Judgment was entered, and therefore, the Court awarded that there should
be a cesset executio, entered upon the Roll, for it is hard as it was said by
Wray to drive the party to a Writ of Error in Parliament, because Parliaments
are not now so frequently holden as they have used to be holden, and the
Execution was staid accordingly.

CCCLXXIII. Willis and Crosbys Case. Pasch. 26 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
Error.
IN a Writ of Error, It was assigned for Error, That whereas in the first
Action, the parties were at issue, and upon the Venire facias one G^^gory
Tompson was returned; But upon the Habeas Corpora, George T^^^^son was
returned, and the Jury was taken, and found for the Plaintiff^ and Judgment
given accordingly; Amercement.
It was argued on the part of the Plaintiff in the first Action; that the same
is a thing amendable: As 9 E. 4. 14. A Jury was impannelled by the name of I.B.
and in the Habeas Corpora he was named W.B. and by such name sworn, etc. And
upon Examination of the Sheriff, it was found that he was the same person who
was impannelled, and it was amended and made according to the Panel; But the
opinion of the whole Court was, That as this case is it was not amendable, and
it is not like the case of 9 E. 4. For there the Examination was before the
Verdict when the Sheriff was in Court, but here it is after Verdict, and the
Sheriff is out of Court, and cannot be examined, and for these causes the
Judgment was reversed.

CCCLXXIV. Ognell and the Sheriffs of Londons Case. Pasch. 26. Eliz. In the
Exchequer.
OGnell brought Debt upon an Escape by Bill in the Exchequer against the
Sheriffs of London, Escape. 1 Cro. 164.
the Case was, That one Crofts was bound to the now Plaintiff in a
Recognisance, and afterward committed for Felony to the Prison of Newgate, of
which he was attainted and remained in Prison in the custody of the Sheriffs:
Afterward Ognell sued a Sc. fac. upon the said Recognisance against Crofts,
the Sheriffs returned a Cepi, and the especial matter aforesaid, and after
Judgment given against Crofts for Ognell, Crofts got his pardon, and escaped:
It was argued, That notwithstanding this Attainder, Crofts is subject to the
Execution obtained upon the Recognizance: See the case of Escape betwixt
Maunser and Annesley, 16 Eliz. in Bendloes case, 2 E. 4. 1. It is said by
Watman, That a man outlawed for Felony shall answer, but shall not be
answered: See 6 E. 4. 4. One condemned in Redisseisin, was taken by a Capias
pro fine, and committed to Prison, and afterward outlawed of Felony, the King
pardons the Felony, yet he shall remain in Execution for the party, if he will;
But if the party be once in Execution for the party, and then outlawed of
Felony, it seems by 6 E. 4. Fitz. Execution, 13. that the Execution is gone.
And all the Barons were clear of opinion in the principal case for the
Plaintiff. And they also said, That if one who has a Protection from the King
be taken in Execution, and Escape, the Jailer shall answer for the Escape, and
that was one Hales Case. And afterward Judgment was given for the Plaintiff,
Hales Case.
and one of the causes of the Judgment was, because that the Sheriffs had
returned C^pi upon the Process.

CCCLXXV. Bishop and Redmans Case. Hill. 26 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
BIshop, a Doctor of the Civil Law, brought an Action of Covenant against
Redman Archdeacon of Canterbury, and declared upon an Indenture, by which the
Defendant did constitute the Plaintiff Offici^^em suum of his Archdeaconcy for
three years, and gave to him by the said Indenture, Authoritatem admittendi,
and inducendi quoscunque Clericos ad quaecunque beneficia Ecclesiastica infra
Archidiaconatum praedict', and also Probate of Wills; and further granted to
him, omnem and omnim^dam Archidiaconatum Jurisdictionem suam praedict' absque
impetitione, de^^egatione, rest^ictione, etc. after which Doctor Young was
created Bishop of Rochester, which is in the Jurisdiction of the said
Archdeaconry; and the Defendant took upon him to enthronize the said Bishop in
his said Church, and took of him for his Fee twenty Nobles, whereupon the
Plaintiff brought this Action. It was moved for the Defendant, that upon the
matter the Action does lie; for the Office of enthronizing or enstalling of a
Bishop does not pass by the said Indenture, nor is there any word in the
Indenture that does extend unto it, for the Bishop is not a Clark, and the
Plaintiff by the Indenture has not to do but with Clarks, not with Bishops;
and it appears by the Grant of Subsidies, by the Clergy in Parliament, that a
Bishop and a Clark are distinct things. See Instrumentum hereof, Praelatus and
Clericus, etc. Also the Plaintiff has not to do with a Bishopric, but with
Benefices, and a Bishopric is not a Benefice, but a higher thing: And further
the Plaintiff has power to admit and induct, which does not extend to
installing, or inthronization, for that belongs to a Bishop; and the Court was
clear of opinion, That by this Grant there did not pass any power to instal or
inthronize Bishops; and the general words, i.e. omnem and omnimodam
jurisdictionem Archidiaconatum praedictam, Words which amount to Covenant.
did not mend the matter, for the word (Praedictam) does not restrain the
words, Omnem, and omnimodam, etc. but admitting that; It was moved, If upon
this Indenture Covenant lies, for there is not any express Covenant, yet the
words absque impetitione, denegatione, restrictione, do amount to so much, to
make the Defendant subject to his Action, if the matter in it self would have
served for him, and so was the opinion of the Court.

CCCLXXVI. Lady Lodges Case. Hill. 26 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
THe Lady Laxton of London by her Will bequeathed to Matthew Luddington, and
Andrew Luddington, Prohibition. Poph. 11. Dyer 59.
several Legacies in moneys to be paid to them respectively at their several
ages, etc. and made the Lady Lodge her Daughter her Executrix and died, Andrew
died before his full age, Matthew took Letters of Administration of the goods
of Andrew, and sued the Lady Lodge in the Spiritual Court for the Legacy
bequeathed to Andrew; before which Suit begins, the Lady Lodge, with Sir Thomas
her Husband, gave all the goods which she had as Executor of the said Lady
Laxton to Sir William Cordel Master of the Rolls, and to William Lodge Son of
the said Sir Thomas and his Lady, depending which Suit the Lady Lodge died,
after which sentence was given against her being dead, and now a Citation was
out of the Spiritual Court against William Lodge Executor of the said Lady
Lodge, to show cause why the sentence given against the said Lady Lodge should
not be put in Execution against him; and sentence was given against the said
William Lodge, who appealed to the Delegates, and there the sentence was
affirmed. And now came William Lodge into the Kings Bench, and set forth the
grant of the said Lady Lodge, as aforesaid, and that the same was not
examinable in the Spiritual Court, and thereupon prayed a Prohibition: And
Awbrey, Doctor of the Civil Law, came into Court to inform the Justices, what
their Law was in certain points touching the Case in question; and as to the
sentence given against the Lady Lodge, after her death he said, That if the
Defendant died before issue joined, which is called Litis contestationem, the
Suit shall cease, but if he dies after Litis contestationem, it is otherwise,
for in such Case the Suit shall proceed; for after Litis contestationem, the
right of the Suit is so vested in the Proctor, Swinburn 212.
that he is a person suable until the end of the Suit: and also he reported
their Law to be, Bro. Devise 27. 45. Office of Exce. 347. Sh^p. Touchstone etc.
454. Plowd. 345. Orphans Legacy 281. Note, It was adjudged contrary to this,
Mich. An. Dom. 1653. in the Kings Bench. in Do^mlowes Case. Poph. 11.
That if a Legacy be bequeathed to an Infant to be paid when he shall come to
the Age of twenty one years, if such a Legatory dies before such age, yet the
Executor or Administrator of such Legator shall sue for the said Legacy
presently, and shall not expect until the time, in which if the Infant had
continued in life he had attained his full age. And as to the Prohibition it
was argued by Egerton Solicitor General, That the Grant aforesaid is not
triable in the Spiritual Court: As if the said Lady Lodge had suffered a
Recovery to be had against her as Executor by Covin, etc. the same is not
examinable in the Spiritual Court, but belongs to the temporal Conusans, and
therefore he prayed a Prohibition: But on the other side it was said, That if
the Prohibition be allowed, the Legatory has no remedy; but that was denied,
for the party might sue in the Chancery. And after the Prohibition granted, the
Court awarded a special Consultation, quatenus non extendat ultra manus
Executoris, and quatenus non agitur de validitate facti, i. the Grant aforesaid.

CCCLXXVII. Huddy and Fishers Case. Hill. 28 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
Debt.
DEbt was brought upon a Bond, the Condition of which was for the performance of
Covenants, Grants and Agreements in an Indenture: And in the Indenture it was
recited, That in consideration that the said Huddy should build a Mill upon the
Land demised by the Defendant to the Plaintiff by the same Indenture, Attaint.
and a Watercourse by the Land demised, the Defendant leased the said Land to
the Plaintiff, and the Lease was by the words Dedi and concessi. And the
Plaintiff assigned the breach of the said Covenant in Law, in that the
Defendant had stopped the said Watercourse so made by the Plaintiff, upon
which they were at Issue, and it was found for the Plaintiff, upon which the
Defendant brought Attaint, and the false oath was found; and it was moved in
Arrest of Judgment, That here is no Issue, and then by consequence no Verdict,
and then no false Oath, and then no cause of Attaint; for here the Issue is
taken upon the stopping of the Watercourse, which upon the showing of the
party is not any cause of Action, for in the Indenture there is not any express
Covenant, Clause, or Agreement, that the Lessee should enjoy the Watercourse
so to be made, only there is a Covenant in Law rising upon these words Dedi and
concessi, which cannot extend to a thing not in esse at the time of the making
the Indenture. Coke, who argued for the Defendants in the Attaint resembled
this case to the case in 23 E. 3. Garr. 77. Where it is holden, that the
warranty knit to the Manor shall not extend to the Tenancy escheated: And 30 E.
3. 14. The Recovery in value shall not be in larger proportion than the Land
warranted was at the time of the warranty made. So in our case, this Covenant
shall not extend to any thing which was not in esse at the time of the Covenant
made: And see 25 Ass. 2. where the Court shall reject a Verdict, or part of a
Verdict, etc. And because the now Plaintiff might after the Verdict have
alleged the same in arrest of Judgment, which he did not, he shall not be
helped by Attaint, but it shall be accounted his folly that he would not for
his own ease, and to avoid circuity of Action show the matter in stay of
Judgment: As 9 E. 4. 12. by Littleton: If a man be Indicted of Felony, if the
Judgment be insufficient, but he takes not advantage of it, but pleads the
general Issue, and is acquitted, he shall never after have a Writ of
Conspiracy, etc. And for another cause Judgment ought not to be given in this
Case, because it does not appear that Execution has been sued, and then here
is no party grieved: And then this Action being conceived upon the Statute of
23 H. 8. Cap. 3. which gives it to the party grieved does not lie, for a party
grieved cannot be intended without Execution sued. See 21 H. 6. 55. by Paston;
False oath, Judgment, and Execution do entitle the party grieved to Attaint.
And see the Stat. of 23 H. 8. which enacts, That the party shall be restored to
as much as he has lost therefore he ought to lose (by Execution) before he be
a person able (...) bring this Action: But as to that matter, see the Statute
of 1 E. 3. 6. by which it is Enacted, That the Justices shall not leave to take
Attaint for the damages not paid, so as before the said Statute no Attaint lay
before Execution, 33 H. 6. 21. by Prisoit 5 H. 7. 22. t. E. 1. Attaint 70. 8 E.
2. Assize 396. And it was moved, That for another cause the Attaint does not
lie, as it is pursued in Process upon it, for the Plaintiff has not pursued
the Statute, upon which the Attaint is grounded, for the said Statute gives
special Process in this case against the Petit Jury, Grand Jury, and the party,
viz. Summons, Re-summons, and Distress infinite; but in this Case the Plaintiff
has sued otherwise, which is against the direction of the Statute. And that
was taken to be a material Exception by Clench and Gaudy Justices, for the
Verdict does not save the matter of Process in this case by the Statute of 18
Eliz. which does not extend to proceedings in penal Causes; w^^ch see, by the
words of the Statute, by an express Proviso: But Quaere, If it be a penal
Statute, because a lesser punishment is enacted by it, than that which was
before inflicted upon such offenders: And as to the matter of Execution,
Quaere, If the Plaintiff be not pars gravata in hoc only, that he is subject to
the said Judgment, and so liable to Execution.

CCCLXXVIII. Penruddock and Newmans Case. Hill. 28 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
IN an Ejectione firmae, Execution. 2 Len. 49.
the Plaintiff declared upon a Lease made by the Lord Morley, and upon Not
guilty pleaded, this special matter was found, that William Lord Mountegle,
seized of the Manor of D. whereof etc. became bounden in a Statute in such a
sum to A. who died, the Executors of A. sued Execution against the said Lord,
i. upon the Extendi facias, a Liberate issued forth, upon which the said Manor
was delivered to the said Executors, but was not returned. It was further
found, That the said Executors being so possessed of the said Manor, the said
Lord commanded a Court Baron to be holden there, which was holden accordingly
by the sufferance of the Executors, and the said Executors were also present,
at which time the Executors in the presence of the said Lord said these words,
viz. We have nothing to do with this Manor. Return of the Sheriff. 4 Co. 67.
And upon this Verdict two things were moved, If because the Liberate was not
returned, the Execution was good: And as to that diverse Books were cited, 21 H.
6. 8. 18 E. 3. 25. And it was said that there was a difference betwixt a
Liberate, and a Capias ad Satisfaciendum, and a Fieri facias, for these Writs
are conditional, Ita quod Habeas Corpus, etc. Ita, quod habeas denarios hic in
Curia, 3 H. 7. 3. 16 H. 7. 14. But contrary in the Writ of Liberate, Habere
facias seisinam, for in such Writs there is not such clause, and therefore if
such Writs be not returned, the Execution done by virtue of them is good
enough: And see 11 H. 4. 121. If the Sheriff by force of an Elegit delivers to
the party the moiety of the Land of the Defendant, and does not return the
Writ; if now the Plaintiff will bring an Action of Debt de Novo, the Defendant
may plead in Bar the Execution aforesaid, although the Writ of Execution were
not returned, and yet the Execution is not upon the Record. And see the case
there put by Hankford: And it is not like to the case of Partition made by the
Sheriff, the same ought to be returned, because that after the return thereof,
a new and secondary Judgment is to be given, i. Quod partitio praedicta firma
and stabilis maneat in perpetuum, firma and stabilis in perpetuum teneatur, see
the Book of Entries 114. And Egerton Solicitor cited a case lately adjudged
betwixt the Earl of Leicester and the Widow Tanfeild, Earl of Leicester and
Tanfeilds Case.
That such Execution without return was good enough. Another matter was moved;
Admit, that here be a good Execution, if now the Executors being in possession
of the said Manor by force of that Execution, and permitting and suffering the
Conusor to hold a Court there in the Manor-house, and saying in his presence
the words aforesaid, if the same does amount to a Surrender by the Executors to
the said Conusor, Surrender.
or not. And Wray chief Justice said, That here upon this matter is not any
Surrender, for here the words are not addressed to the said Conusor who is
capable of a Surrender, nor to any person certain: And it is not like to the
case of 40 E. 3. 23, 24. Chamberlains Assize, where Tenant for life says to
him in the Reversion, That his will is that he enter, the same is a good
Surrender, for there is a person certain who can take it; but contrary in this
case, for here it is but a general speech. It was adjorned.

CCCLXXIX. Baskervile and the Bishop of Herefords Case. Pasch. 28 Eliz. In the
Common Pleas.
Quare Impedit.
IN a Quare Impedit by Walter Baskervile, against the Bishop of Hereford, etc.
The Plaintiff counted, That Sir Nicholas Arnold was seized of the Advowson as
in gross, and granted the same to the said Baskervile and others, to the use of
himself for life, and afterward to the use of Richard Arnold his Son in tail;
Proviso, That if the said Nicholas die, the said Richard being within age of
twenty three years, that then the Grantees and their Heirs shall be seized to
them and their Heirs until the said Richard has accomplished the said age:
Nicholas dies, Richard being of the age of fourteen years, by force of which
the Grantees were possessed of the said Advowson, and afterward the Church
became void, and so it belonged to them to present: And Exception was taken to
the Count, because the Plaintiff had not averred the life of Richard, upon
whose life the Interest of the Plaintiffs does depend. Averment.
And Gaudy Sergeant, likened it to the Case of the Parson which has been
adjudged, That where the Lessee of a Parson brought an Ejectione firmae, and it
was found for him, and in arrest of Judgment exception was taken to the
Declaration, because that the life of the Parson was not averred, and for that
cause Judgment was stayed. Anderson chief Justice: Upon the dying of Sir
Nicholas Rich, being but of the age of fourteen years, an absolute Interest for
nine years vests determinable upon the death of Richard, or rather, they are
seized in fee determinable upon the coming of Richard to the age of twenty
three years. Rhodes and Windham contrary: That here is an Interest in the
Grantees, determinable upon the death of Richard within the Term, for if
Richard dies without issue within the Term, the Remainder is limited over to a
stranger. And as to the Exception to the Count, Dyer 304. ^. 2 Cro. 622, 637.
10 Co. 59.
it was argued by Puckering Sergeant, that the Count was good enough,; for
although the life of Richard be not expressly averred, yet such averment is
strongly implied, and so supplied: For the Count is, That dictus Nicholas obiit
dicto Ric. being of the age of fourteen years, and non amplius, by force of
which the Plaintiff was possessed of the said Advowson, quo quidem sic
possessionato existente, the Church became void, and possessed he could not be,
if the said Richard had not been then alive, and the same is as strong as an
Averment. See 10 E. 4. 18. In Trespass for breaking his Close, the Defendant
pleads, That A. was seized, and did enfeoff him; to which the Plaintiff said,
That long time before A. had any thing, B. was seized and leased to the said A.
at will, who enfeoffed the Defendant, upon which B. did re-enter, and leased to
the Plaintiff at will, by force of which he was possessed until the Defendant
did the Trespass, and the same was allowed to be a good Replication, without
averring the life of B. who leased to the Plaintiff at will, for that is
implied by the words, i. Virtute cujus; 1 Cro. 766.
the Plaintiff was possessed until the Defendant did the Trespass. And see also
10 H. 7. 12. in an Assize of Common, The Plaintiff makes title, that he was
seized of a Message, and of a Carve of Land, to which he and all those whose
estate, etc. have had Common appendant, etc. And does not say, that he is now
seized of the Message: But this Exception was disallowed by the Court, for
seisin shall be intended to continue until the contrary be showed. It was
adjorned.

CCCLXXX. Caries Case. Pasch. 28 Eliz. In the Exchequer.
IN an Information in the Exchequer, by the Queen against Carry, Tithes. More
Rep. 222.
the Case was this; A man grants situm Rectoriae cum decimis eidem pertinent.
Habend. situm praedict. cum suis pertinentiis, for twenty years, the first
Grantee dies within the Term. If now because the Tithes are not expressly named
in the Habendum, the Grantee shall have them for life only, was the Question.
It was moved by Popham Attorney General, That the Grantee had the Tithes but
for life, and to that purpose he cited a Case adjudged 6 Eliz. in the Common
Pleas: A man grants black Acre and white Acre, Habendum black Acre for life,
nothing of white Acre shall pass but at will; and in the argument of that case,
Anthony Brown put this case; Queen Mary granted to Rochester such several
Offices, and showed them specially, Habendum two of them, and showed which in
certain, for forty years. It was adjudged that the two Offices which were not
mentioned in the Habendum, were to Rochester but for life, and determined by
his death: And so he said in this Case, The Tithes not mentioned in the
Habendum shall be to the Grantee for life, and then he dying, his Executors
taking the Tithes are Intrudors: But as to that, It was said by Manwood chief
Baron, That the cases are not alike, for the Grants in the cases cited are
several, entire, and distinct things, which do not depend the one upon the
other, but are in gross by themselves. But in our Cases, The Tithes are parcel
of the Rectory, and therefore for the nearness betwixt them, i. the Rectory and
the Tithes, the Tithes upon the matter pass together with the site of the
Rectory for the term of twenty years, and Judgment was afterward given
accordingly.

CCCLXXXI. The Lord Darcy and Sharpes Case. Pasch. 26 Eliz. In the Common
Pleas, Mich. 27 and 28 Rot. 2432.
Debt.
THomas Lord Darcy, Executor of John Lord Darcy, brought Debt upon a Bond
against Sharp, who pleaded that the Condition of the Bond was, That if the
said Sharp did perform all the Covenants, etc. contained within a pair of
Indentures, etc. By which Indentures the said John Lord Darcy had sold to the
said Sharp certain Trees growing, etc. And by the same Indentures Sharp had
covenanted to cut down the said Trees before the seventh of August, 1684. and
showed further, That after the sealing and delivery of the said Indenture, the
said Lord Darcy now Plaintiff, Razure of Deeds 11 Co. 27.
caused and procured I. S. to raze the Indenture, quod penes praedict.
Querentem remanebat, and of 1684. to make it 1685. and so the said Indenture
become void: And the opinion of the whole Court was clear against the
Defendant, for the razure is in a place not material, and also the razure
trencheth to the advantage of the Defendant himself who pleads it; and if the
Indenture had become void by the razure, the Obligation had been single and
without Defeasance.

CCCLXXXII. Rollston and Chambers Case. Pasch. 28 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
Costs where Damages are given. 2 Len. 52.
ROllston brought an Action of Trespass upon the Statute of 8 H. 6. of forcible
Entry against Chambers, and upon Issue joined it was found for the Plaintiff,
and Damages assessed by the Jury, and costs of suit also, and costs also de
incremento were adjudged; And all were trebled in the Judgment with this
purclose, quae quidem damna in toto se attingunt ad, etc. and all by the name
of Damages. It was objected against this Judgment, that where damages are
trebled, no costs shall be given, as in Wast, etc. But it was clearly agreed by
the whole Court, That not only the costs assessed by the Jury, but also those
which were adjudged de incremento should be trebled, and so were all the
Presidents, as was affirmed by all the Prothonotaries, and so are many Books,
19 H. 6. 32. 14 H. 6. 13. 22 H. 6. 57. 12 E. 4. 1. And Book of Entries 334. and
Judgment was given accordingly. And in this case it was agreed by all the
Justices, That the party so convicted of the force at the suit of the party
should be fined, notwithstanding that he was fined before upon Indictment for
the same force.

CCCLXXXIII. Jennor and Hardies Case. Hill. 29 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
Intrat. Trin. 27 Eliz. Rot. 1606.
THe Case was, Lands were devised to one Edith for life, upon condition that
she should not marry; and if she died, or married, Devises.
that then the Land should remain to A. in tail, and if A. died without Issue
of his body in the life of Edith, that then the Land should remain to the said
Edith, to dispose thereof at her pleasure: And if the said A. did survive the
said Edith, that then the Lands should be divided betwixt the Sisters of the
Devisor, A. died without Issue living Edith. Shutleworth Sergeant; Edith has
but for life; and yet he granted, That if Lands be devised to one to dispose at
his will and pleasure without more saying, That the Devisee has a Fee-simple;
but otherwise it is when those words are qualified and restrained by special
Limitation: As 15 H. 7. 12. A man devises, that A. Goldsb. 135. Shepherds
Touchstone 439.
shall have his Lands in perpetuum during his life, he has but an estate for
life, for the words (During his life) do abridge the Interest given before. And
22 Eliz. one devises Lands to another for life, to dispose at his will and
pleasure, he has but an estate for life: And these words, (If A. dies without
Issue in the life of Edith, That then the Lands should remain to Edith to
dispose at her pleasure) shall not be construed to give to Edith a Fee-simple,
but to discharge the particular estate of the danger, penalty, and loss, which
after might come by her marriage, so as now it is in her liberty. And also he
said, That by the Limitation of the latter Remainder, i. That the Lands should
be divided betwixt the Daughters of his Sister, the meaning of the Devisor was
not, that Edith should have a Fee-simple, for the Remainder is not limited to
her Heirs, etc. if A. dies in the life of the said Edith; for the Devisor
goes further, That if A. overlives Edith, and afterward dies without Issue,
that the said Land should be divided, etc. Walmesley contrary: And he relied
much upon the words of the Limitation of the Remainder to Edith, Quod integra
remaneat dictae Edithae, and that she might dispose thereof at her pleasure,
Ante 156.
for the said division is limited to be upon a Contingent, i. if A. survive
Edith, but if Edith survive A. then his intent is not that the Lands should be
divided, etc. but that they shall wholly remain to Edith, which was granted by
the whole Court, and the Justices did rely much upon the same reason; and they
were very clear of opinion, That by those words Edith had a Fee-simple: And
Judgment was given accordingly. Anderson conceived, That it was a Condition;
but although that it be a Condition, so as it may be doubted, if a Remainder
might be limited upon a Condition, yet this devise is as good as a new devise
in Reversion upon the precedent Condition, and not as a Remainder, quod Windham
concessit; but Periam was very strong of opinion, That it is a Limitation. Two
Ioyntenants of a Term, A. and B. A. grants his part to B. nothing passes by
it, for (as a Grant) it cannot be good; Owen 102. 1 Cro. 314. 1 Inst. 186.
for as one Ioyntenant cannot enfeost his Companion, no more can he vest any
thing in him by grant, for he cannot grant to him a thing which he has before;
for Ioyntenants are seized and possessed of the whole, all which was granted
per Curiam; and Anderson said, That if Lands be granted to A. and B. and the
Heirs of A. B. cannot surrender to A. for a Surrender is as it were a grant;
And as a Release it cannot enure, for a Release of a Right in Chattels cannot
be without a Deed.

CCCLXXXIV. Hollingshed and Kings Case. Hill. 29 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
Debt.
HOllingshed brought Debt against King, and declared, That King was bounden to
him in a Recognizance of two hundred pounds before the Mayor and Aldermen of
London, in interiori Camera de Guildhall London, upon which Recognizance the
said Hollingshed heretofore brought a Scire facias before the said Mayor, etc.
in exteriori Camera, and there had Judgment to recover, upon which Recovery he
has brought this Action; and upon this Declaration the Defendant did demur in
Law, because that in setting forth of the Recognizance he has not alleged,
That the Mayor of London has Authority by Prescription or Grant to take
Recognizances, and if he has not, then is the Recognizance taken Coram non
Judice, and so void: And as to the Statute of West. 2. cap. 45. It cannot be
taken to extend to Recognizances taken in London, which see by the words, De
his quae recordat. sunt coram Cancellario Domini Regis and ejus Justiciariis
qui Recordum habent, and in Rotulis eorum Irrotulatur, etc. And also at the
time of the making of that Statute, 1 Cro. 186, 187.
London had not any Sheriffs, but Bailiffs; and the said Statute ordains, that
Process shall go to Sheriffs, etc. But the whole Court was clear of a contrary
opinion, for they said, We will know that those of London have a Court of
Record, and every Court of Record has an Authority incident to it to take
Recognizances, for all things which concern the Jurisdiction of the said Court,
and which arise by reason of matters there depending. Another matter was
objected, for that the Recognizance was taken in interiori Camera, but the
Court was holden in exteriori Camera, and therefore not pursuant. But as to
that, it was said by the Lord Anderson, That admit that the Recognizance was
not well taken, yet because that in the Scire facias upon it, the Defendant did
not take advantage then thereof, he shall be bounden by his said admittance of
it, as if one sue forth a Scire facias, as upon a Recognizance, whereas in
truth there is not any Recognizance, and the party pleads admitting such
Record, and thereupon Judgment is given against him, it is nor void, but
voidable. Fleetwood, Recorder of London, alleged many Cases, to prove that the
Courts of the King are bounden to take notice, Privileges of London.
That they of London have a Court of Record, for if a Quo warranto issues to
Justices in Air, it behooves not them of London to claim their Liberties, for
all Courts of the King are to take notice of them. And at last, after many
motions, the opinion of the Court was for the Plaintiff. And it was said by
Anderson, and in manner agreed by the whole Court, That if depending this
Demurrer here, the Judgment in London upon the Scire facias be reversed, yet
the Court here must proceed, and not take notice of the said Reversal.

CCCLXXXV. Bedingfeild and Bedingfeilds Case. Hill. 29 Eliz. In the Common
Pleas.
Dower.
DOwer was brought by Anne Bedingfeild against Thomas Bedingfeild. The Tenant
out of the Chancery purchased a Writ, De circumspecte agatis, setting forth
this matter, That it was found by Office in the County of Norfolk, that the
Husband o^ the Demandant was seized of the Manor of N. in the said County, and
held the same of the Queen by Knights Service in chief, and thereof dyed
seized, the Tenant being his Son and Heir of full age, by reason whereof the
Queen seized as well the said Manor as other Manors, and because the Queen was
to restore the Tenements, tam integre, Primer seisin.
etc. as they came to her hands, it was commanded the Judges to surcease,
Domina regina inconsulta: It was resolved, per Curiam, That although the Queen
be entitled to have Primer seisin of all the Lands, whereof the Husband of the
Demandant dyed seized, yet this Writ did not extend unto any Manors not found
in the Office, for by the Law, the Queen cannot seize more Lands than those
which are contained in the Office: And therefore as to the Land not found by
the Office, the Court gave day to the Tenant to plead in chief: And it was
argued by Sergeant Gaudy for the Tenant, That the Demandant ought to sue in the
Chancery, because that the Queen is entitled to have her Primer Seisin, and
cited the case of 11 R. 2. and 11 H. 4. 193. And after many motions, It was
clearly agreed by the Court, That the Tenant ought to answer over, for the
Statute, De Bigamis Cap. 3. provides that in such case, The Justices shall
proceed notwithstanding such seisin of the King, and where the King grants the
custody of the Tenant himself, 1 H. 7. 18, 19. 4 H. 7. 1. A Multo fortiori
against the Heir himself where he is of full age, notwithstanding the
possession of the King for his Primer seisin: By the Statute of Bigamis after
the Heir was of full age, the Wife could not be endowed in the Chancery: But
now by the Prerogative of the King, such wives may be endowed there, Si viduae
illae voluerint, and after many motions, The Court awarded, That the Tenant
should plead in chief at his peril, for the Demandant might sue at the common
Law if she pleased.

CCCLXXXVI. Hill. 28 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
THe Case was, Exchange.
The Husband was seized of Lands in the right of his Wif, the Husband and his
Wife both joined in exchange of the Lands with a stranger for other Lands,
which exchange was executed, the Husband and the Wife seized of the Lands taken
in exchange, aliened the same by Fine, It was holden by Rhodes and Windham
Justices, That the Wife after the death of her Husband might enter into her own
Lands notwithstanding that Fine; And Rhodes resembled it to the case reported
by my Lord Dyer, 19 Eliz. 358. The Husband after marriage assured to his Wife a
Ioynture, they both levy a Fine, 1 Inst. 36. b.
Sur Conusans de droit come ceo que il ad of the gift of the Husband; that the
same is not any Bar to the Wife of her Dower, for the Election is not given to
the Wife to claim her Ioynture, or her Dower, until after the Death of her
Husband: And so in the principal case Judgment was given for the Wife.

CCCLXXXVII. Le es Case. Pasch. 26. Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
NIcholas Lee by his will devised his Lands to William his second Son; Devise.
1 Cro. 26. 3 Len. 106.
And if he depart this World not having issue; Then I will that my Sons in Law
shall sell my Lands, the Devisor at the time of his devise having sir Sons in
Law, dyed, William had Issue John, and dyed, John dyed without Issue, one of
the Sons in Law of the Devisor dyed, the five surviving Sons in Law sold the
Lands: First it was clearly resolved by the whole Court, That although the
words of the Will are (ut supra) If William my Son depart this world not having
Issue, etc. And that William had Issue who dyed without Issue; here, although
it cannot be literally said, That William did depart this World not having
issue, yet the intent of the Devisor is not to be restrained to the letter,
that such construction shall be made, That whenever William dies, in Law, or
upon the matter without Issue, that the Land shall be subject to sale,
according to the authority committed by the Devisor to his Sons in Law: And now
upon the matter William is dead without Issue: As in a Formedon in Reverter or
Remainder, although that the Donee in tail has issue, yet if after the estate
tail be spent, the Writ shall suppose that the Donee dyed, without Issue, a
fortiori in the Case of a Will, or Devise, such construction shall be made. As
to the other point, concerning the sale of the Lands, Wray asked, If the Sons
in Law were named in the Will, and the Clerks answered, No: See 30 H. 8. Br.
Devise, 31. and 39 Ass. 17. Executors, 117. such a sale good in case of
Executors: See also 23 Eliz. Dyer, 371. and Dyer 4, and 5. Phil. and Mary,
Lands devised in tail, and if the Devisee shall dye without Issue, that then
the Land shall be sold, pro optimo valor, by his Executors, una cum assensu A.
if A. dies before sale, the power of the Executors is determined: And
afterward it was clearly resolved by the whole Court, That the sale for the
manner was good, and Judgment was given accordingly.

CCCLXXXVIII. Sir Gilbert Gerrard and Sherringtons Case. Pasch. 20 Eliz. In the
Kings Bench.
SIr Gilbert Gerrard Master of the Rolls, Libelled in the Spiritual Court,
against Sherrington, and A. his Servant for Tithes parcel of a Rectory, whereof
the said Sir Gilbert was Fermor to the Queen; It was moved by Egerton Solicitor
General, That against the Kings Fermor a Prohibition does not lie: But the
opinion of the whole Court was, That a Prohibition does lie, and so it has
been adjudged before. And afterward, Exception was taken to the surmise,
because the said Sir Gilbert had Libelled against the said Sherrington and his
Servant severally, Owen Rep. 13. Yelv. Rep. 128.
and now in the Kings Bench they both had made a joint surmise, whereas they
ought to have severed in their surmises according to the several Libels: And it
was so adjudged by the Court, and therefore they were driven to make several
surmises: And afterward Exception was taken, because the said Sherrington and
his Servant, had delivered their surmises and suggestions by Attorney, where
they ought to be in proper person: See the Statute of 2 E. 6. cap. 13. The
party shall bring and deliver to the hands of some of the Justices of the same
Court, etc. the true Copy of the Libel, etc. subscribed or marked with the hand
of the Party, etc. and under the Copy shall be written the surmise or
suggestion; And although it was affirmed by the Clerks of the Court, that the
common use and practice for twenty years had been, not to exhibit such surmises
or suggestions by Attorney: Yet it was resolved by the whole Court, that it
ought to be by Attorney.

CCCLXXXIX. Short and Shorts Case. Pasch. 26. Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
IN an Action upon the Case upon Assumpsit to pay money to the Plaintiff upon
Request: It was agreed, Request.
That the Plaintiff by way of Declaration ought to allege an actual Request,
and at what place, and at what day the Request was made: And it is not
sufficient to say, as in an Action of Debt, Licet saepius requisitus, etc. and
so it was adjudged.

CCCXC. Pasch. 26. Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
ONe was Endicted in the County of Linc* upon the Statutes of W^st. Indictment
upon the Statute of news.
1. Cap. 33. and 2 R. 2. Cap. 5. of News, and the words were, That Campian was
not executed for treason, but for Religion, and that he was as honest a man as
Cranmer; the Bill was endorsed, Billa vera, but whether, ista verba prolata
fuerunt, malitlose, seditiose, or e contr. ignoramus: The same Indictment being
removed into the Kings Bench, the party, for the causes aforesaid, was
discharged.

CCCXCI. Cole and Friendships Case. Pasch. 26. Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
IN Ejectione firmae, the Case was, That Fricarroo^ was seized, Leases. 4 Len.
64.
and by Indenture betwixt himself of the one part, and one Friendship, his Wife
and the Children betwixt them begotten at the Assignment of the Husband of the
other part, leased the said Land to the said Husband his Wife and their
Children, at the Assignment of the Husband, for years, they having at the time
of the said Lease but one Child, ^. a Son; Assignment.
afterward they had many Children, the wife dyed, the Husband by his will
assigned his second Son born after the making of the Lease, to have the residue
of the said Term, and by the opinion of the Court nothing can come to the said
Son by that Lease, or by that assignment, for if the Interest does not vest at
the beginning, it shall never vest; And afterward is was moved, In as much as
nothing could vest in any of the Children born after the Lease made, if these
words (At the Assignment of the Husband) should be void, and then the case
should be no more, but that Land is devised to the Father and Mother, and their
Children: At another day, viz. Trin. 26 Eliz. the case was moved again, and as
to the first Point, the Court was of opinion as before, That the Child assigned
after the Lease made, should not take: And then it was moved, That because
Friendship and his Wife at the time of the making of the said Lease had one
Son, that he should take with his Father and Mother; and that the words (at the
Assignment of Friendship) should be void, is matter of surplusage, and the word
Children a good name of purchase: But the whole Court was against that conceit,
for these words in the case, At the Assignment of Friendship are not void, but
show what person should take, if the intent of the party should take effect, i.
he who the Father by Assignment should enable, for no Child shall take but he
who the Father shall assign, that is part of the contract; and although by such
Assignment no title accrues to the Child assigned, yet without Assignment no
Child is capable, for by the Lease the Father has such Liberty that he may
assign what Child he will: And by Wray, If the words of the Lease had been (at
the assignment of the Father within one month) and the Father surcease his
month, Antea 275.
the Interest should not vest in any of the Children: And by Ayliff Justice, If
the words of the Lease had been (to the Husband and wife and their Son John,
where his name is William) nothing should vest: And peradventure in this case
at the Bar, if the Father had assigned his Son then born, and had assigned him
before or at the time of the Lease, i. the delivery of the Lease, it had been
well enough: Note that this Action was brought by Cole Lessee of the Son of the
Husband and Wife born at the time of the Lease made: And afterward Wray, with
the assent of all the rest of the Justices, gave Judgment that the Plaintiff
Nihil capiat per Billam.

CCCXCII. Pasch. 26 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
Execution where joint, where several.
NOte, It was agreed by the whole Court and affirmed by the Clerks: That if Debt
be brought upon an Obligation against two upon a joint Praecipe, and the
Plaintiff has judgment to recover, that a joint Execution ought to be sued
against them both: But if the suit were by one Original and several Praecipes,
execution might be sued against any of them.

CCCXCIII. Trin. 26 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
Replevin.
IN a Replevin, The Defendant does avow for Damage Feasant, and showed that the
Lady Jermingham was seized of such a Manor whereof, etc. and leased the same
to the Defendant for years, etc. The Plaintiff said, That long before King H. 8.
was seized of the said Manor, and that the place where is parcel of the said
Manor demised and demisable by copy, etc. and the said King by his Steward
demised and granted the said parcel to the Ancestor of the Plaintiff whose Heir
he is, by copy in fee, etc. upon which it was demurred, because by this Bar to
the Avowry, the Lease set forth in the Avowry is not answered, for the
Plaintiff in the Bar to the Avowry, ought to have concluded, and so was seized
by the custom, until the Avowant, praetextu of the said Term for years entered:
And so it was adjudged.

CCCXCIV. The Lord Dacres Case. Trin. 26. Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
Ante 227. Stewardship of a Manor: Office of Trust. Grants per Copy, Deputy
Steward.
IN Ejectione firmae, the case was, That the Lord Dacres was seized of the Manor
of Eversham, and that I.S. held the place where of the said Manor by copy for
term of his life, and the said Lord granted the Stewardship of the said Manor
to the now Marquess of Winchester, who appointed one Chedle to be his Deputy to
keep a court, and ad traden dum, the said Lands ( I.S. being now dead) to one
Wilkins by copy for life, afterward, the said Chedle commanded one Hardy his
Servant to keep the said court, and grant the said Land by copy, ut supra,
which was done accordingly, the copy was entered, and the Lord Dacres subsigned
it and confirmed it: It was further found, That Hardy had many times kept the
said court both before and after, and that the custom of the Manor was, that
the Steward of the said Manor for the time being, or his Deputy might take
Surrenders, 1 Co. 48. 49.
and grant estates by copy: And if this estate so granted by Hardy were good or
not, was the question, because by the Servant of the Deputy, whereas the custom
found did not extend further than the Deputy: It was argued that the estate
granted, ut supra, was void, for a Deputy cannot transfer his authority over,
for it is an office of trust: See 39 H. 6. 33, 34. 14 E. 4. 1. and 6 Eliz. it
was adjudged, That the Duke of Somerset had diverse Stewards of his Lands, and
they, in the name of the said Duke made diverse Leases of the Lands of the said
Duke, rendering Rent, and the Duke, afterward assented to the said Leases, and
received the Rents reserved upon them, and yet after the death of the said
Duke, the Earl of Hertford his Son and Heir avoided them: So here, the assent,
and the subsignment of the copy by the Lord Dacres, does not give any strength
to the copy which was void at the beginning; against which it was said, That to
take a Surrender, and to grant an Estate by copy is not any judicial Act, but
merely an Act of service, and no matter of trust is transferred to Hardy, for
trust is reposed in him who may deceive, which cannot be in our Case, for here
is an express commandment, which if Hardy transgress it is absolute void, for
nothing is left to his discretion: And the admitting of a Copyholder is not
any judicial Act, for there need not be any of the Suitors there who are the
Judges: And such a Court may be holden out of the Precinct of the Manor, for no
Pleas are holden, which was concessum per totam Curiam: And by Ayliff Justice,
If the Lord of such a Manor makes a Feoffment of a parcel of his Manor which is
holden by copy for life, and afterward the Copyholder dies, although now the
Lord has not any Court, yet the Feoffee may grant over the Land by copy again.
And the whole Court was clear of opinion, That the grant for the manner of it
was good, especially because the Lord Dacres agreed to it; And Judgment was
given accordingly.

CCCXCV. Burgess and Fosters Case. Trin. 26. Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
IN Ejectione firmae, the case was, 1 Cro. 48, 49.
That the Dean and Chapter of Ely were seized of the Manor of Sutton, whereof
the place where, etc. is parcel, demised and demisable by copy according to the
custom, and by their Deed granted the Stewardship of the said Manor to one
Adams to execute the said office, per se vel legitimum suum Deputatum eis
acceptabilem: Surrenders.
Afterward Adams made a Letter of Deputation to one Mariot, ad capiendum unum
sursum redditionem of one I. W. and I. his Wife, and to examine the said I.
aforesaid, ea intention, that the said I.W. and A. might take back an estate
for their lives, the Remainder over to one John Buck in Fee (Note, the
Surrender ought be, de duobus Messuagiis) Mariot took two several Surrenders
from the said Husband and Wife, the Remainder over to the said John Buck in
Fee, upon condition to pay a certain sum of money, etc. It was moved, That the
Surrender is void, and without warrant, for the warrant was, ad capiendum unum
fursum redditionem, and here are two several Surrenders, and so the warrant is
not pursued, and then the Surrender is void: Another matter was because the
Remainder to John Buck by the words of the Deputation was absolute and without
Condition, and now in the Execution of it, it is conditional, so as this
conditional estate is not warranted by the Deputation: But the whole Court was
clear of a contrary opinion in both the points, and that all the proceedings
were sufficient and well warranted by the Deputation: Another matter was
objected, because that this Surrender and regrant is entered in the Roll of a
Court, dated to be holden the second of Maij, and the Letter of Deputation
bears date the third of June after: But as to that, The Court was clear of
opinion, that the mis-entry of the date of the Court should not prejudice the
party, for this Entry is not matter of Record, but is but an Escape, and if the
parties had been at Issue, upon the time of the Surrender made, or of the Court
holden, the same should not be tried by the Rolls of the Manor, but by the
Country, and the party might give in Evidence the truth of the matter, and
should not be bound by the Roll, and according to this Resolution of the Court,
Judgment was given.

CCCXCVI. Mich. 26, and 27. Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
Fines levied.
THe Case was: Tenant in tail leased for sixty years, and afterward levied a
Fine to Lee and Loveday, Sur Conusans de droit come ceo, etc. with a Render to
him and his Heirs in Fee; And upon a Scire facias against the Conusees,
supposing the Lands to be ancient Demesne, the Defendants made default for which
the Fine was avoided, and now the Issue in tail entered upon the Lessee for
years, and he brought an Ejectione firmae, Seen facias. ^ Len. 117.
and it was found, That the Land was Frank Fee; And all the question was, If by
the Reversal of the Fine by Writ of Disceit, without suing forth a Scire facias
against the Ter-Tenant should bind him, or should be void only against the
Conusee, and not against the Lessee: Atkin. It shall not bind the Lessee for
years: For a Fine may bind in part, and in part not: as bind one of the
Conusees, and not the other, 7 H. 4. 111. A Fine levied of Lands, part ancient
Demesne, and part at the common Law, the same was by Writ of Disceit reversed in
part, as to the Land in ancient Demesne, and stood in force for the residue, 8
H. 4. 136. And there by award of the Court issued forth a Scire facias against
the Ter-Tenants, and the Justices would not adnul the Fine, without a
certificate that the Land was Ancient Demesne, notwithstanding that the
Defendant had acknowledged it to be so, but as to them who were parties to the
Fine, the Fine is become void as to the said parties, and and he who had the
Land before might enter, i. And he said it should be a great inconvenience, if
no Scire facias, or other Process should be awarded against the Ter-tenant, for
he should be dispossessed and disinherited without privity, or notice of it,
where upon a Scire facias he might plead matter of discharge, in Bar of the
Writ of Disceit, as a Release, etc. which see Fitz. N.B. 98. And so although
the Fine be reversed, yet he might retain the Land, and he resembled this case
to the case of 2 H. 4. 16, 17. In a Contra formam collationis against an Abbot,
a Scire facias shall issue forth against the Feoffee, and so by the same reason
here: And for the principal matter he said, That the Fine should be avoided
against the parties, but not against the Lessee: Kingsmill, The Scire facias
brought against the parties only is good enough, for they were parties to the
Disceit, and not the Ter-tenants: It was adjorned.

CCCXCVII. Mich. 26, and 27. Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
Error. Appearance by Attorney. Dyer 135. b.
A Writ of Error was brought upon a Judgment in a Quid juris clamat; It was
assigned for Error, that the Tenant did appear by Attorney, whereas he ought
not but in person, because he is to do an Act in proper person, if it be not in
case of necessity, where the Attorney may be received by the Kings Writ, or
plead matter in Bar of the Attornment, as if he claim Fee, etc. or other
peremptory matter, after which Plea pleaded he may make Attorney, 48 E. 3. 24.
7 H. 6. 69. 2^. E. 3. 48. 1 H. 7. 27. Another Error was, because it is not
showed in the Quid juris clamat, what estate the Tenant has: Another matter
was, If the Grantee of the estate of Tenant in tail after possibility of issue
extinct shall be driven to attorn, ^ Len ^^.
and it was said he should not, for the privilege does pass with the grant:
See 43 E. 3. 1. Tenant in tail after possibility of issue extinct shall not be
driven to attorn, 46 E. 3. 13. 27. Ergo, neither his Grantee: Williams
contrary, As to the appearance of the Tenant by Attorney, because the same is
admitted by the Court, and the Plaintiff, the same is not Error, which see 1 H.
7. 27. by Brian and Conisby, 32 H. 6. 22. And he said, That the Grantee should
be driven to attorn, for no other person can have the estate of the Tenant in
tail after possibility of issue extinct, but the party himself, therefore not
the privilege; and although he himself be dispunishable of Wast, yet his
Grantee shall not have such privilege. As if Tenant in Dower, or by the
courtesy, grant over their estates, the Heir shall have Wast against the
Grantors for Wast done by the Grantee, but if the heir grants over his
Reversion, then Wast shall be brought against the Grantees: See Fitz. N.B. 56.
And it two Coparceners be, and the one takes a Husband and dies the Husband
being Tenant by the courtesy, a Writ of Partition lies against him, but if he
grants over his estate, no Writ of Partition lies against the Grantee, 27 H.
6. Stathams Aid. If the Grantee of Tenant after possibility shall att^rn.
Tenant in tail after possibility of issue extinct shall not have Aid, but his
Grantee shall have Aid. Clark, The Grantee of Tenant in tail shall not be
driven to attorn. If Tenant in tail grant totum statum suum, the Grantee is
dispunishaple of wast; so if his Grantee grant it over his Grantee is also
dispunishable, etc. It was adjorned.

CCCXVIII. Gravenor and Masseys Case. Mich 26, and 27. Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
GRavenor brought a Writ of Error upon a common Recovery against Massey: Error.
And in the said Recovery four Husbands and their Wives were vouched, and now
the Plaintiff brought this Writ of Error as heir to one of the Husbands, and
Exception was taken to his Writ, because the Plaintiff does not make himself
heir to the Survivor of the four Husbands. Egerton, The Writ is good enough,
for there is a difference betwixt a Covenant personal, and a Covenant real, for
if two be bound to warranty, and the one dies, the Survivor and the heir of
the other shall be vouched, and he said each of the four and their heirs are
charged, and then the heir of each of them being chargeable, the heir of any of
them may have a Writ of Error. And afterward the Writ of Error was adjudged
good: Ante 86.
And Error was assigned because the Vouchees appeared the same day that they
were vouched by Attorney, which they ought not to do by Law, but they might
appear gratis the first day without Process in their proper persons, and so at
the sequatur sub suo periculo: See 13 E. 3. Attorn, 74. and 8 E. 2. ib. 101.
Another Error was assigned, Because the Entry of the warrant of Attorney for
one of the Vouchees is po. lo. suo, I.D. against the Tenant, where it should be
against the Demandant, for presently when the Vouchee enters into the
warranty, he is Tenant in Law to the Demandant: Coke, As to the first Error,
Although he cannot appear by Attorney, yet when the Court has admitted his
appearance by Attorney, the same is well enough, and is not Error: As to the
other Error, I confess it to be Error, but we hope that the Court will have
great consideration of this case as to that Error, for there are one hundred
Recoveries erroneous in this point, if it may be called an Error: And then we
hope, to avoid such a general mischief, that the Court will consider and
dispense with the rigor of the Law: As their Predecessors did, 39 H. 6. 30. In
the Writ of Mesne: But I conceive, That the Writ of Error is not well brought,
for the Voucher in the said Recovery is of four Husbands and their Wives, and
when Voucher shall be intended to be in the right of their Wives, which see 20
H. 7. 1. b. 46 E. 3. 28. 29 E. 3. 49. And so by common intendment, the Voucher
shall be construed in respect of the Wife; So also the Plaintiff here ought to
entitle himself to this Writ of Error as heir to the Wife: And for this cause,
The Plaintiff relinquished his Writ of Error; And afterward he brought a new
Writ, and entitled himself as heir to the wife.

CCCXCIX. The Queen, and the Dean of Christchurch Case. Mich. 26 and 27 Eliz.
In the Kings Bench.
Praemunire. 3 Len. 139.
THe Queens Attorney General brought and prosecuted a Praemunire for the Queen
and Parret, against Doctor Matthew Dean of Christchurch in Oxford, and others,
because they did procure the said Parret to be sued in the City of Oxford,
before the Commissary there in an Action of Trespass, by Libel according to the
Ecclesiastical Law, in which suit Parret pleaded, Son Franktenement, and so to
the Jurisdiction of the Court, and yet they did proceed, and Parret was
condemned and imprisoned: And after that suit depended, The Queens Attorney
withdrew the suit for the Queen; And it was moved, If notwithstanding that the
party grieved might proceed: See 7 E. 4. 2. b. The King shall have Praemuire,
and the party grieved his Action: See Br. Praemunire 13. And by Brook none can
have Praemunire but the King: Coke, There is a President in the Book of Entries
427. In a Praemunire, the words are (ad respondendum tam Domino Regi, quam
R.F.) and that upon the Statute of 16 R. 2. and ib. 428, 429. Ad respondendum
tam Domino Regi de contemptu, quam dict. A. B. de damnis: But it was holden by
the whole Court, That if the Kings Attorney will not further prosecute, the
party grieved cannot maintain this suit, for the principal matter in the
Praemunire is, The conviction and the putting of the party out of the
protection of the King, and the damages are but accessory, and then the
principal being released, the damages are gone: And also it was holden by the
Court, That the Presidents in the Book of Entries are not to be regarded, and
there is not any Judgment upon any of the pleadings there, but are good
directions for pleadings, and not otherwise.

CCCC. Mich. 26, and 27. Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
Fines levied. 1 Cro. 35.
THe Case was, A. gave Lands in tail to B. upon condition. That if the Donee or
any of his heirs alien, or discontinue, etc. the Land or any part of it, that
then the Donor do re-enter: The Donee has issue two Daughters and dies: One
of the two Daughters levieth a Fine, Sur Conusans de droit come ceo, Forfeiture.
to her Sister: Heal Sergeant, the Donor may enter, for although the Sisters
to many intents are but one Heir, yet in truth they are several Heirs, and each
of them shall sue Livery, 17 E. 3. If one of the Sisters be discharged by the
Lord, the Lord shall lose the Wardship of her, and yet the Heir is not
discharged: And if every Sister be heir to diverse respects, then the Fine by
the one Sister is a cause of Forfeiture: Harris contrary, For conditions which
go in defeating of estates shall be taken shortly, Conditions.
and here both the Sisters are one Heir, and therefore the discontinuance by
the one, is not the Act of the other: Clench Justice, The words are, Or any of
his heirs, therefore it is a forfeiture, quod fuit concessum per totam Curiam:
And Judgment was given accordingly.

CCCCI. Mich. 26 and 27 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
THe Case was, Assumpsit. Hutt. Rep. 34. Hob. 284.
A Woman seized of a Rentcharge for life took Husband, the Rent was arrear;
the wife died, the Tenant of the Land charged, promised to pay the Rent in
consideration that the Rent was behind, etc, and some were of opinion, Because
that this Rent is due and payable by a Deed, that this Action of the Case upon
Assumpsit will not lie, no more than if the Obligor will promise to the Obligee
to pay the money due by the Obligation, 3 Cro. 5.
an Action does not lie upon the Promise, but upon the Obligation. But it was
holden by the whole Court, That the Action did well lie, for here the Husband
had remedy by the Statute of 32 H. 8. And then the consideration is sufficient,
and so Judgment was given for the Plaintiff.

CCCCII. Williams and Blowers Case. Hill. 27 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
REignold Williams and John Powell brought a Writ of Error against the Bishop
of Hereford and Blower, Error.
upon a Recovery had in a Writ of Disceit by the said Bishop and Blower against
the said Williams and Powell, for that the said Williams had before brought a
Quare Impedit against the said Blower and the Bishop, Dyer 353. b. 354.
and had recovered against them by default, whereupon Williams had a Writ to
the Metropolitan to admit his Clerk, and in the Writ of Disceit Judgment was
given for the Plaintiffs: For it was found, That the Summons was the Friday to
appear the Tuesday after, and so an insufficient Summons, and in that Writ of
Disceit the Defendants, Williams and Powell pleaded, That Blower the Incumbent
was deprived of his Benefice in the Court of Audience, which sentence was
affirmed upon Appeal before the Delegates; and notwithstanding that Plea,
Judgment was given against Williams and Powell Defendants in the said Writ of
Disceit: And upon that Judgment this Writ of Error is brought. Beaumont
assigned four Errors, First, 1 Cro. 65.
because the Bishop and Blower joined in the Writ of Disceit, for their Rights
are several, 12 E. 4. 6. Two cannot join in an Action of Trespass upon a
Battery done at one time to them: So if one distrain at one and the same time,
the several Goods of diverse persons, they according to their several properties
shall have several Replevins, 12 H. 7. 7. By Wood. So if Lands be given to two,
and to the Heirs of one, and they lose by default in a Praecipe brought against
them, they shall have several Writs, the one Quod ei deforceat, Joynder in
Action.
the other a Writ of Right: 46 E. 3. 21. A Fine levied to one for life, the
Remainder to two Husbands and their Wives in tail, they have Issue and die;
Tenant for life dies, the Issues of the Husbands and Wives shall have several
Scire facias's to execute the Fine by reason of their several Rights: Lands in
ancient Demesne holden severally of several Lords are conveyed by Fine, the
Lords cannot join in a Writ of Disceit, but they ought to have several Writs;
so here the Plaintiffs in this Writ of Disceit, and the Bishop claims nothing
but as ordinary, and he loses nothing in the Quare Impedit, and therefore by
the Writ of Disceit he shall be restored to nothing. The second Error was,
Because the Bar of the Defendants in the Writ of Disceit was good, i. the
deprivation, etc. and the Court adjudged it not good, for the Clerk being
deprived, he could not enjoy the Benefice, if the Judgment in the Qu. Impedit
had been reversed, Regul^. Post 330.
and where a man cannot have the effect of his suit, it is in vain to bring any
Action. Lessee for the life of another loses by erroneous Judgment; Cestuy que
use dies, his Writ of Error is gone, for if the Judgment be reversed he cannot
be restored to the Land, for the estate is determined, 31 E. 3. Incumbent 6.
The King brought a Quare Impedit against the Incumbent and the Bishop, the
Bishop claimed nothing but as Ordinary: The Incumbent traversed the title of
the King, against which it was replied for the King, That the Incumbent had
resigned pendant the Writ, so as now he could not plead any thing against the
title of the King, for he had not possession, and so could not counterplead the
possession of the King. And here in our Case, by this deprivation the Incumbent
is disabled to maintain this Action of Disceit, 15 Ass. 8. If the Guardian of a
Chapel be impleaded in a Praecipe for the Lands of his Chapel, and pendant
the Writ he resign, the Successor shall have a Writ of Error, and not he who
resigns, for he is not to be restored to the Lands, having resigned his
Chapel. So in our Case, A deprivation is as strong as a Resignation. The third
Error, because in the Writ of Disceit, it is not set forth that Blower was
Incumbent, for the Writ of Disceit ought to contain all the special matter of
the Case; as an Action upon the Case, 4 E. 3. Disceit 45. The fourth Error,
That upon suggestion made after Verdict, that Blower was Incumbent, and in, of
the presentment of the Lord Stafford, Deprivation.
and that he was removed; and Griffin in by the Recovery in the Quare Impedit
by default, a Writ to the Bishop was awarded without any Scire facias against
Griffin, for he is possessor, and so the Statute of 25 E. 3. calls him, and
gives him authority to plead against the King, 6 Co. 52.
and every Release or Confirmation made to him is good, 18 E. 3. Confirmation
made by the King after Recovery against the Incumbent is good: And 9 H. 7. If a
Recovery be had in a Contra formam collationis, the possessor shall not be
ousted without a Scire facias, so in Audita Querela upon a Statute Staple,
Scire facias.
Scire facias shall go against the Assignee of the Conusee, 15 E. 3. Respon. 1.
See also 16 E. 3. Disceit 35. 21 Ass. 13. A Fine levied of Lands in Ancient
Demesne shall not be reversed without a Scire facias against the Ter-tenant.
Walmesley contrary, The case at the Bar differs from the case put of the other
side, for they are cases put upon original Writs, but our case is upon a
judicial Writ, and here nothing is demanded, but the Defendant is only to
answer to the disceit and falsehood. And in this Case the Issue is contained in
the Writ which is not in any original Writ, and the Judges shall examine the
issue without any plea or appearance of the Tenant, and here the Defendant is
not to plead any thing to excuse himself of the wrong: And here the Judgment is
not to recover any thing in demand, but only to restore the party to his former
estate and possession, and if he has nothing, he shall be restored to nothing;
And he put many cases where persons who have several Rights may join in one
Action, as a Recovery in an Assize against several Tenants, they may join in
one Writ of Error, 18 Ass. Recovery in Assize against Disseisor and Tenant,
they shall both join in Error, why not also in Disceit? 19 E. 3. Recovery
against two Coparceners, the Survivor and the heir of the other shall join in
Error. As to the second Error, Williams and the Sheriff ought not to join in
the Plea, and also the Plea it self is not good, for the Writ of Disceit is,
That Williams answer to the Disceit, and the Sheriff shall certify the
proceedings, and therefore he shall not plead: and also the Plea it self is not
good, for although the interest of the Incumbent be determined in the Church,
yet his Action is not gone; as if in a Praecipe quod reddat, the Tenant
alieneth pendant the Writ, and afterward the Demandant recovereth, yet the
Tenant although his Interest be gone by the Feoffment, yet he shall have a Writ
of Error, and so here; and as to the Scire facias, there needs none here
against the new Incumbent, for he comes in pendant the Writ, and that appears
by the Record; but if it had been in before the Writ brought, then a Scire
facias would lie. See 9 H. 6. It was adjorned.

CCCCIII. Flemmings Case. Mich. 26 and 27 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
FLemming was Indicted upon the Statute of 1 Eliz. because he had given the
Sacrament of Baptism in other form than is prescribed in the said Statute, and
in the Book of Common Prayer, Indictment upon the Statute of 1 Eliz.
and the said Indictment was before the Justices of Assize. Wray and Anderson,
Of such offense done before, and now he is Indicted again; for which it was
awarded, that he suffer Imprisonment for a year; and shall be adjudged ipso
facto, deprived of all his Spiritual promotions: And upon the Indictment
Flemming brought a Writ of Error, and assigned Error, because in the second
Indictment no mention is made of the first Indictment, in which case the second
Indictment does not warrant such a Judgment. Wray Justice, If the first
Indictment be before us, then is a second Judgment well given; contrary, if it
be before other Justices. Clench, The second Indictment ought to recite the
first conviction; and if one be Indicted for a Rogue in the second degree, the
first conviction ought to be contained in such Indictment; in an Indictment the
day and time are not material as to true recovering in facto: And it might be,
that this last Indictment was for the first offense for any thing appears.
Coke, who argued to the same intent, compared it to the Case of 2 R. 2. 9. and
22 E. 4. 12. 12 H. 7. 25. Indictment certified to be taken coram A.B.
Justiciariis Domini Regis ad pacem, etc. without saying, necnon ad diversas
felonias, etc. is void, and if a man has been once convicted, he shall not
have his Clergy if it appears upon Record before the same Justices, that he
had his Clergy before.

CCCCIV. The Mayor of Lynns Case. Hill. 27 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
THe Mayor of Lynn was Indicted, Indictments.
for that he had received twenty four shillings of one A. for giving of
Judgment in an Action of Debt, depending before him against one B. and he was
indicted thereof as of Extortion, In contemptum dictae Dominae Reginae, and
contra formam Statuti. Coke, The Indictment is insufficient, for there is not
any Statute to punish any Judge for such a matter: For the Statute of West. 1.
Cap. 26. is made against Sheriffs, Cap. 27. Clerks of Justices, Cap. 30. The
Marshal and his Servants, Statute 23 H. 6. against Sheriffs, 3 Inst. 145.
and other Statutes against Ordinaries: But no Action lies against a Judge, for
that which a Judge receives is Bribery and not Extortion, Et satis poenae est,
judici quod Deum habeat ultorem, and therefore he said the party indicted ought
to be discharged. Gaudy Justice, If in the Indictment there be words of
Extortion or Bribery, although such an offense in a Judge be not materially
Extortion, if these words, contra pacem, etc. had been in the Indictment, it
had been good, quod Clench concessit: And afterward the party was discharged.

CCCCV. Crisp and Goldings Case. Mich. 28 and 29 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
Assumpsit. 1 Cro. 50. 2 Len. 71.
IN an Action upon the Case by Crisp against Golding, the Case was, That a Feme
sole was Tenant for life, and made a Lease to the Plaintiff for five years, to
begin after the death of Tenant for life, and afterward the 18. of October
made another Lease to the same Plaintiff for 21 years, to begin at Michaelmass
next before; and declaring upon all the said matter, he said, Virtute cujus
dimissionis, i. e. the later Lease, the Plaintiff entered and was possessed
Crast. Fest. S. Mich. which was before the Lease made; and further declared,
that in consideration that the Plaintiff had assigned to the Defendant these
two Leases, the Defendant promised, etc. and upon non Assumpsit it was found
for the Plaintiff, and damages taxed 600 l. Coke argued for the Plaintiff
against the Solicitor General, who had taken diverse exceptions to the
Declaration, i. Where two or many considerations are put in the Declaration,
although that some be void, yet if one be good the Action well lies, and
damages shall be taxed accordingly; and here the consideration that the
Plaintiff should assign totum statum, titulum, and interesse suum quod habet in
terra praedict'. 2. Exception, that the Lease in possession was made after
Michaelmass, i. 18 October, and the Declaration is, Virtute cujus dimissionis,
the Defendant entered Crastino Mich. and then he was a disseisor, and could not
assign his interest and right, which was suspended in the tortious disseisin,
and so it appeared to the Judges; and he said there was not here any disseisin,
although that the Lessee had entered before that the Lease was made; for there
was an agreement and communication before of such purposed and intended Lease,
although it was not as yet effected, and if there were any assent or agreement
that the Lessee should enter, it cannot be any disseisin, and here it appears
that the Lease had his commencement before the making of the Lease, and before
the entry: But put case it be a disseisin, yet he assigned all the Interest
quod ipse tunc habuit, according to the words of the consideration, and he
delivered both the Indentures of the said Demises, and quacunque via data, be
the assignment good or void it is not material as to the Action, for the
consideration is good enough. Egerton Solicitor contrary. In every Action upon
the Case, upon Assumpsit, there ought to be a Consideration, promise, and
breach of promise, and here in our Case the Consideration is the assignment of
a Lease, which is to begin after the death of the Lessor, who was but Tenant
for life, which is merely void, and that appears upon the Record; and as to
the second part of the Consideration, and the assignment of the second Lease,
it appears, that the Plaintiff at the time had but a Right; for by his
untimely entry before the making of the Lease, he was not to be said Lessee,
but was a wrong-doer, etc. in 19 Eliz. in the Kings Bench this difference was
taken by the Justices there, and delivered openly by the Lord Chief Justice, i.
When in an Action upon the Case, upon Assumpsit, two Considerations or more are
laid in the Declaration, but they are not collateral, but pursuant, as A. is
indebted to B. in 100 l. and A. promises to B. that in consideration that he
owes him 100 l. and in consideration that B. shall give to A. 2 s. that he
will pay to him the said 100 l. at such a day, if B. bring an Action upon the
Case upon this Assumpsit, and declares upon these two promises, although the
consideration of the 2 s. be not performed, yet the Action does well lie: But
if they be collateral considerations, which are not pursuant, as if I in
consideration that you are of my Counsel, and shall ride with me to York,
promise to give to you 20 l. in this case all the considerations ought to be
proved, otherwise the Action cannot be maintained: So in our case, the
considerations are collateral, and therefore they ought to be proved; and
afterward Judgment was given for the Plaintiff.

CCCCVI. Fooly and Prestons Case. Hill. 28 and 29 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
IN an Action upon the Case the Plaintiff declared, 1 Cro. 200. 2 Len. 105.
That whereas John Gibbon was bound unto the Plaintiff in quodam scripto
obligatorio, sigillo suo sigillat. and coram, etc. recognito in forma Statuti
Stapul. The Defendant in consideration that the Plaintiff would deliver to him
the said Writing to read over, promised to deliver the same again to the
Plaintiff within six days after, or to pay to him 1000 l. in lieu thereof, upon
which promise the Plaintiff did deliver to the Defendant the said Writing; but
the Defendant had not, nor would not deliver it back to the Plaintiff, to the
great delay of the Execution thereof, and the Defendant did demur in Law upon
the Declaration. It was objected, that here is no sufficient consideration
appearing in the Declaration upon which a promise might be grounded; but it was
the opinion of the whole Court, that the consideration set forth in the
Declaration was good and sufficient; and by Anderson, it is usual and frequent
in the King Bench: If I deliver to you an Obligation to rebail unto me, I shall
have an Action upon the Case without an express Assumpsit; and afterward
Judgment was given for the Plaintiff.

CCCCVII. Wallpool and Kings Case. Hill. 28 and 29 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
WIlliam Wallpool was bound to King by Recognizance in the sum of 400 l. and
King also was bound to Wallpool in a Bond of 100 l. Wallpool according to the
Custom of London, Attachment in London.
affirmed a Plaint of Debt in the Gulldhall London against the said King, upon
the said Bond of 100 l. and attached the debt due by himself to Wallpool in his
own hands, and now King sued Execution against the said Wallpool upon the said
Recognizance, and Wallpool upon the matter of Attachment brought an Audita
querela, and prayed allowance of it; and by Gaudy Sergeant, such a Writ was
allowed in such case, 26 Eliz. Anderson at the first doubted of it; but at last
the Court received the said Writ de been esse, and granted a Supersedeas in
stay of the Execution, and a Scire facias against King; but ea lege, that
Wallpool should find good and sufficient Sureties, that he would sue with
effect, and if the matter be found against him, that he pay the Execution.

CCCCVIII. Hill. 28 and 29 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
A Copyholder with license of the Lord leased for years, Copyholder.
Surrender. Hob. 177. 1 Roll. 294 3 Len. 197.
and afterward surrendered the Reversion with the Rent, to the use of a
stranger, who is admitted accordingly. It was moved, if here need any
Attornment, either to settle the Reversion, or to create a Privity; and Rhodes
and Windham Justices were of opinion, that the surrender and admittance are in
the nature of an Inrolment, and so amount to an Attornment, or at least do
supply the want of it.

CCCCIX. Ruddall and Millers Case. Mich. 28 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
Devise.
IN Trespass, the Case was this, William Ruddall Sergeant at Law, 18 H. 8. made
a Feoffment in Fee to diverse persons to the use of himself and his Heirs, and
21 H. 8. declared his Will, by which he devised his Lands to Charles his
younger Son, and to the Heirs Males of his body, the Remainder to John his
eldest Son in Fee, upon condition, That if Charles or any of his issue should
discontinue or alien, but only for to make a Ioynture for their wives for the
term of their lives, that then, etc. and died; The Statute of 27 H. 8. came,
Charles made a Lease to the Defendants for their lives, according to the
Statute of 33 H. 8. And levied a Fine with Proclamation, Sur Conusans de droit
come ceo, etc. to the use of himself and his wife, and the heirs Males of their
two bodies begotten, the Remainder to himself and the heirs Males of his body,
the Remainder to the right heirs of the Devisor. John the eldest Son entered for
the Condition broken upon the Defendants, who re-entred, upon which Re-entry
the Action was brought. Gaudy, Fleetwood, and Shuttleworth Sergeants for the
Plaintiffs: This Condition to restrain unlawful discontinuance is good,
Conditions.
as a Condition to restrain Wast, or Felony. See 10 H. 7. 11. 13 H. 7. 23. And
before the Statute of Quia Emptores terratum: If A. had enfeoffed B. upon
Condition, That B. nor his heirs should alien, the same was a good Condition by
Fleetwood (which was granted per Curiam.) And this Condition was annexed to
good purpose, or the Sergeant well knew, that Cestuy que use might have levied
a Fine, or suffered a Recovery by the Statutes of 1 R. 3. 4 H. 7. And this
Condition annexed or tied to the use by the Will is now knit to the possession,
which is transferred to the use by the said Statute: Although it may be
objected, that the Condition was annexed to the use, and now the use is extinct
in the possession, and by consequence the Condition annexed unto it, as where a
Seignory is granted upon Condition, and afterward the Tenancy escheats, now
the Seignory is extinct, and so the Condition annexed to it: But as to that it
may be answered, That our Case cannot be resembled to the Cases at Common Law,
but rests upon the Statute of 27 H. 8. scil. Cestuy que use shall stand and be
seized, deemed and adjudged in lawful seisin, estate and possession of and in
such Lands to all intents, constructions and purposes in Law, of an in such
like estates as he had in the use, and that the estate, right, title, and
possession that was in the Feoffee shall be clearly deemed and adjudged to be
in Cestuy que use, after such quality, manner, form and condition as he had in
the use: And therefore in the common assurance by bargain and sale by Deed
enrolled, if such assurance be made upon Condition: As in case of Mortgage, the
possession is not raised by the Bargainee; but by the Bargain an use is raised
to the Bargainee, and the possession executed to it by the Statute, and the
Condition which was annexed to the use only is now conjoined to the possession,
and so it has been adjudged. So if the Feoffees to use before the Statute had
made a Lease for life, the Lessee commits Wast, the Statute comes, now Cestuy
que use which was, shall have an Action to Wast, as it was ajudged in Justice
Southcotes case: Southcotes case.
So a Title of Cessavit in the Feoffees shall be executed by the Statute. So if
the King grants to the Feoffees in use, a Fair, Market, or Warren, these things
shall be executed by the Statute, Clerentius case.
as it was holden in the Case of Clarentius. As to the Condition, they
conceived, That it is broken; for where the Devisor had allowed to the Devisee
to discontinue for life, to make a Ioynture to his Wife, now he has exceeded
his allowance, for he might have made a Ioynture to his wife indefeisable by
Fine upon a Grant upon a Render for life, etc. But this Fine with the
Proclamations is a Bar to the former entail which was created by the Devise,
and has created a new entail, and the former tail was barred by the Fine
against the intent of the Devisor: Also by this Fine he has created a new
Remainder, so as his Issue inheritable to his new entail might alien and be
unpunished, which was against the meaning of the Devisor: And as to the Lease
for lives to the Defendants, the same is not any breach of the Condition, for
that is warranted by the Statute of 32 H. 8. which enables Tenant in tail to
make such a Lease, so as it cannot be said Discontinuance, which Anderson and
Periam granted: But the Fine levied after is a breach of the Condition, and
then the Re-entry upon the Lessees, who have their estates under the Condition
is lawful: As where the wife of the Feoffee upon Condition is endowed, and
afterward the Condition is broken, now by the Re-entry of the Feoffor the
Dower is defeated. And Shutleworth put this case, A Feoffment is made upon
Condition, that the Feoffee shall lease the Lands to A. for life, and
afterward grant the Reversion to B. in Fee, the Feoffor may re-enter, for by
this Conveyance he in the Reversion is immediate Tenant to the Lord, where, by
the intended assurance, the particular Tenant ought to be. Puckering, Fenner,
and Walmesley contrary: And by Walmesley, By this devise the use only passes,
and not the Land it self, for the Statute of 1 R. 3. extends only to Acts
executed in the life of Cestuy que use, and not to devises which are not
executed till after the death of the Devisor, which see 4 Ma. Dyer 143.
Trivilians case. See also 6 E. 6. Dyer 74. The Lord Bourchiers case; but 10 H.
7. Cestuy que use devises, That his Executors shall sell the Land, now by the
sale of the Land in possession, for the same is in a manner an Act in his life,
for the Vendee is in by Cestuy que use, and here is a Condition, and not a
Limitation, for the nature of a Condition is to draw back the estate to the
Feoffor, Donor, or Lessor; but a Limitation carries the estate further. And he
conceived, That the Condition is not broken by this Act, for the intent of the
Devisor is pursued, for his meaning was, That the wife should have a Ioynture
indefeisable against the issue in tail, and that the inheritance should be
preserved; that both should be observed: And he said, that this Fine being
levied by him in the Reversion upon an estate for life is not any
discontinuance, but yet shall bar the estate Tail. And the Justices were clear
of opinion, that the Condition is broken, and also that the intent of the
Condition is broken; for it might be that Charles had issue by a former wife,
which by this Fine should be disinherited, and a new Entail set on foot against
the meaning of the Devisor, etc. and afterward Judgment was given for the
Plaintiff.

CCCCX. Simmes and Wescots Case. Hill. 31 Eliz. Rot. 355. In the Kings Bench.
IN an Action upon the Case, the Plaintiff declared, 1 Cro. 147.
That in consideration, that he would marry the Defendants Daughter, the
Defendant promised to give him 20 l. and also to procure him all the Corn
growing upon such Lands, and to provide necessaries for the wedding dinner; the
Defendant did confess the communication betwixt them, and that he promised to
give the Plaintiff 20 l. so as he would procure a Lease of certain Lands to his
Daughter for her life absque hoc. that he promised modo and forma: The Jury
found the promise of the 20 l. but not any other thing; it was moved in arrest
of Judgment, that the Assumpsit whereof the Plaintiff has declared, although
it consist of diverse things, yet it is entire, and if the whole is not found
nothing is found; and the Case of 21 E. 4. 22. was cited touching variance of
Contract, as where an Action of Debt is brought upon a Contract of a Horse, and
the Jury found a Contract for two Horses, the Plaintiff shall never have
Judgment; On the other side it was said, That the Plaintiff shall recover
damages for the whole that is found, i. for the 20 l. See 32 H. 8. Br. Issue
90. In an Action upon the Case, the Plaintiff declared, that the Defendant did
promise to deliver four Woollen-cloaths; the Defendant pleaded, That he did
promise to deliver four Linnen-cloaths, absque hoc, that he promised, etc. the
Jury found, That the Defendant did promise to deliver two Woollen-cloaths, and
the Plaintiff did recover damages for the two. So in Wast, the Wast is assigned
in succidendo 20 Oaks, upon which they are at Issue, the Jury find but ten
Oaks, the Plaintiff shall have Judgment for so much, and shall be amerced for
the residue. Gaudy Justice, Here are several Assumpstis in Law, as Br. 5. Ma.
Action sur le Case 108. a man in consideration of a Marriage assumes to pay 20
l. per Annum for four years, two years incur, the party brings an Action upon
the Case for the arrearages of the two years. Wray, In an Action upon the Case,
the Plaintiff ought not to vary from his Case, as if a promise be grounded upon
two considerations, Ragula.
and in an action upon it, the Plaintiff declares upon one only, he shall never
have Judgment, and here the Jury have not found the same promise. Clench, If
promise be made to deliver a Horse and a Cow, and the Horse is delivered, but
not the Cow; the party shall have an Action for the Cow, but he shall declare
upon the whole matter and afterward Judgment was given, quod querens nihil
capiat per billam.

CCCCXI. Style and Millers Case. Trin. 31 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
Tithes. 1 Cro. 161, 578. 11 Co 13.
A Parson Leased all his Glebe Lands for years, with all the profits and
commodities, rendering 13 s. 4 d. pro omnibus exaction ibus and demandis, and
afterward libelled in the Spiritual Court against his Lessees for the Tithes
thereof, the Lessee obtained a Prohibition. See 32 H. 8. Br. Dis. 17. 8 E. 2.
Avowry 212. Wray, Tithes are not things issuing out of Lands, nor any secular
duty, but spiritual; and if the Parson does release to his Parishioner all
demands in his Lands, his Tithes thereby are not extinct, and afterward a
Consultation was granted.

CCCCXII. Lee and Curetons Case. Trin. 31 Eliz. Rot. 902. In the Kings Bench.
Debt. 1 Cro. 153.
IN Debt upon an Obligation the Defendant pleaded Non est factum, and it was
found for the Plaintiff, and Judgment given, and afterward the Defendant
brought Error, and assigned for Error, that the Declaration was per scriptum
suum obligat. Error.
without saying, hic in Guria prolat. to which it was answered by Coke, that
the same was but matter of form, for which a Judgment ought not to be reversed,
for that the Clark ought to put in without instruction of the party, and so it
was holden in a case betwixt Barras and King, 1 Cro. 768. 778. 3 Cro. 22.
M. 29 and 30 Eliz. Another Error was assigned, because the Judgment is entered
de fine nihil quia perdonat. where it should be quod capiatur, although the
Plea were pleaded after the General pardon, and for that cause the Judgment was
reversed, for if the pardon be not specially pleaded, the Court cannot take
notice of it, as it was holden in Sergeant Harris Case.

CCCCXIII. Lacy and Fishers Case. Trin. 31 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
IN a Replevin, the taking is supposed in S. which Land is holden of the Manor
of Esthall; the Defendant made Conusans, as Bailiff of the Lord of the Manor
aforesaid, and issue was taken upon the Tenure, Trial.
and it was tried by a Jury, out of the Visne of Esthall only. Tanfield, The
trial is good, for the issue ought not to have been tried by both Visnes, S.
and Esthall, for two things are in issue. If it be holden, or not. 2. If it be
holden of the Manor of Esthall, for which cause the Visne ought to be from both
places; and the opinion of the Court was, That for the manner of it, it was not
good, as if an issue be joined upon common for cause of vicinage, it shall be
tried by both Towns, See 39 H. 6. 31. by Littleton and Danby, and the case in
21 E. 3. 12. was cited in a per quae servitia, the Manor was in one county,
and the Lands holden in another county, the Tenant pleaded, that he did not
hold of the Conusor, and that he was tried by a Jury of the County where the
Land was, See 2 H. 4. Gaudy denied the Book cited of 21 E. 3. to be Law, and
the reason wherefore the Visne shall come from both places, is because it is
most likely, that both the Visnes may better know the truth of the matter, than
the one only. Another Exception was taken, Exposition of Stat. 21. H. 8. cap.
19.
because the Conusans (as it seems) is made according to the Statute of 21 H.
8. 19. and yet the party does not pursue the said Statute through the whole
Conusans: for by the Statute in Avowry or Conusans, the party needs not to name
any person certain to be Tenant to the Land, etc. nor to make Avowty or
Conusans upon any person certain; and now in this Conusans he has not made
Conusance upon any person certain, but yet he has named a person certain to be
Tenant, etc. and in as much as this Conusans is not made, either according to
the Common Law, or according to the Statute, it cannot be good. But that
Exception was dissallowed by the Court, for if the Statute remedieth two
things, it remedieth one, and the Conusance made in form as above, was well
enough by the opinion of the whole Court.

CCCCXIV. Diersly and Nevels Case. Trin. 31 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
IN an Action of Trespass, the Defendant pleaded Not-guilty, 2 Roll. 682.
and if he might give in evidence, That at the time of the Trespass, the
Freehold was to such an one, and he as his servant, and by his Commandment
entered was the question; and it was said by Coke, That the same might so be
well enough, and so it was adjudged in Trivilians Case; for if he by whose
commandment he enters has Right, at the same instant that the Defendant
enters the Right is in the other, by reason whereof he is not guilty, as to
the Defendant, and Judgment was given accordingly.

CCCCXV. Savage and Knights Case. Mich. 29 and 30 Eliz. Rot. 546. In the Kings
Bench.
Error. Ante 185. 1 Cro. 106. 2 Cro. 109. 654. Sty. 91. Yelv. 164. Sty. 115.
A Writ of Error was brought upon a Judgment given in Leicester, in Debt.
Tanfield assigned for Error, because in that suit there was not any Plaint, for
in all inferior Courts, the Plaint is as the Original at the Common Law, and
without that no Process can issue, and here upon this Record nothing is entered,
but only that the Defendant summonitus fuit, etc. and the first Entry ought to
be, A. B. queritur versus C, etc. Clench Justice, a Plaint ought to be entered
before Process issues forth, and this Summons which is entered here, is not any
Plaint, and for that Cause the Judgment was reversed.

CCCCXVI. Rawlins Case. Trin. 31. Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
IN Trespass for breaking his Close by Rawlins, with a continuando, It was
moved by Coke, that the Plaintiff needed not to show a Regress to have Damages
for the continuance of the first Entry, scil. for the mean profits, and that
appears by common experience at this day. Gaudy Justice, whatsoever the
experience be, I well know that our books are contrary, and that without an
Entry he shall not have damages for the continuance, if not in case where the
Term or estate of the Plaintiff in the Land be determined, and to such opinion
of Gaudy, the whole Court did incline, but they did not resolve the point,
because a Regress was proved, See 20 H. 6. 15. 38 H. 6. 27.

CCCCXVII. Harris and Bakers Case. Trin. 31. Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
Account. Damages. 3 Len. 192. Collet and Andrews Case. 2 Len. 118. 3 Len 149.
IN an account damages were given by the Jury, and it was moved that damages
ought not to have been given by way of damages, but the damages of the
Plaintiff shall be considered by way of Arrearages, but see the Case, H. 29
Eliz. in the Common Pleas, betwixt Collet and Andrews, and see 10 H. 6, 18. In
Account the Plaintiff shall count to his damage, but shall not recover damages,
vide 2. H. 7. 13. 21 H. 6. 26. The Plaintiff shall not recover damages
expressly, but the Court shall ad^ quoddam incromentum to the Arrearages. Coke,
It has been adjudged, that the Plaintiff shall recover damages ratione
implicationis, non Retentionis.

CCCCXVIII. Mich. 26. Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
THe words of the Statute 32 H. 8. cap. 37. of Rents are, that the Executor of
a Grantee of a Rentcharge may distrain for the arrearages of the said Rent
incurred in the life of the Testator, so long as the Land charged does continue
in the Seisin or possession of the Tenant in Demesne, who ought immediately to
have paid the said Rent so behind to the Testator in his life, or in the Seisin
or possession of any other person or persons claiming the said Lands only by
and from the said Tenant, by Purchase, Gift, or Descent, in like manner as the
Testator might or ought to have done in his life time. And now it was moved to
the Court. If A. grant a Rentcharge to B. the Rent is behind, B. dies A.
infeoffeth C. of the Lands in Fee, who diverse years after infeoffeth D. who
diverse years after infeoffeth E. It was holden by Walmesey, Periam, and Windham
Justice, against Anderson Lord chief Justice, that E. should be chargeable with
the said arrearages to the Executors of A. But they all agreed, That the Lord
by Escheat, Tenant in Dower, or by the courtesy, should not be charged, for
they do not claim in by the party only, but also by the Law.

CCCCXIX. Wigot and Clarks Case. Hill. 32 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
IN a Writ of Right by Wigot against Clark for the Manor of D. in the County
of Gloucester, the four Knights gladiis cincti did appear, Writ of Right.
and took their corporal Oath, that they would choose 12, etc. ad faciendum
magnam Assisam, and by direction of the court they withdrew themselves into the
Exchequer chamber, and there did return in Parchment the names of the
Recognitors, and also their own names, and at the day of the return of the
Panel by them made, the 4 Knights and 12 others were sworn to try the issue,
and it was ordered by the Court, That both the parties, scil. the Demandant and
the Tenant, or their Attorneys, attend the said 4 Knights in the Exchequer
chamber, and to be present at the making of the Panel, so as each of them
might have their challenges, for after the return of the Panel, no challenge
lies, and thereupon the said 4 Knights went from the Bar, and within a short
time after, sitting the Court, they returned the Panel written in Parchment,
in this form, Nomina Recognitorum, etc. inter A. petentem, and B. tenentem, and
so set down their names, six other Knights, ten Esquires, and four Gentlemen,
and the Justices did commend them for their good and sufficient Panel, and
thereupon a Venire facias was awarded against the said parties.

CCCCXX. Pory and Allens Case. Trin. 30 Eliz. Rot. 611. In the Common Pleas.
THe case was, That Lessee for 30 years, leased for 19 years, 1 Cro. 173. Owen
97. Post. 322, 323. Surrender. 1 Cro. 302.
and then the first Lessee, and one B. by Articles in writing made betwixt
them, did conclude and agree, That the Lessee for 19 years should have a Lease
for three years in the said Lands and others, and that the same should not be
any surrender of his first Term, to which Articles the said Lessee for 19 years
did after agree and assent unto, and it was the opinion of all the Justices of
the Court, that the same was not any surrender, and they also were of opinion,
That one Termor could not surrender to another Termor.

CCCCXXI. Glanvil ane Mallarys Case. Trin. 31 Eliz. Rot. 321. In the Common
Pleas.
GLanvil was Plaintiff in Audita Querela, Audita Quer^la. 1 Cro. 2^8,
against Mallary upon a Statute Staple, for that the conusor was within age at
the time of the acknowledging of it, it was moved for the Defendant, that the
Court ought not to hold Plea of this matter, because there was no Record of the
Statute remaining here, and therefore by Law he was not compellable to answer
it, etc. and a President was disallowed 5 H. 8. where such a pleading was
allowed, and judgment given, that the Defendant eat sine die, Loves Case.
Dudley and Skinners Case.
vide 16 Eliz. Dier 332. But on the other side diverse presidents were showed,
that diverse such Writs had been showed in the Common Pleas, as 30 Eliz. Loves
case, and the Lord Dudley and Skinners case, and thereupon it was adjudged that
the Action did well lie in this Court.

CCCCXXII. Pet and Callys Case. Mich. 32 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
Debt.
IN Debt upon a Bond for performance of covenants, the case was, I. S. by
Indenture covenanted with I.D. that such a woman, viz. R.S. at all times at the
request and charges of I.D. should make, execute, and suffer such reasonable
assurances of such Lands to the said I.D. or his heirs as the said I. D. or his
heirs should reasonably devise or require. I.D. devised a Fine to be levied by
the said Woman, and required her to come before the Justices of Assise to
acknowledge it, and the woman came before the said Justices to that intent, and
because the said woman at that time was not compos mentis the said Justices did
refuse to take the Conusans of the said Fine, and this was averred in the
pleading in an Action brought upon the said Bond for performance of Covenants,
where the breach was assigned in not acknowledging of the said Fine, and upon
the special matter the party did demur in Law, and the opinion of the whole
Court was, that the condition was not broken, for the words are general to make
such reasonable assurances which, etc. but if the words had been special to
acknowledge a Fine, there if the Justice does refuse to take such
acknowledgment, the Bond is forfeited, for the party has taken upon him that
it should be done.

Wangford and Sextons Case. Mich. 22 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
1 Cro. 174. Kel. 87. a.
THe Plaintiff had recovered against the Defendant in an Action of Debt and had
execution: The Defendant after the day of the Test of the Fierifacias, and
before the Sheriff had meddled with the execution of the Writ, bona fide for
money sold certain goods and chattels, and delivered them to the buyers; it was
holden by the Court, that notwithstanding the said Sale, that the Sheriff might
do execution of those goods in the hands of the buyers; Executions*
for that they are liable to the execution, and execution once granted or made
shall have relation to the Test. of the Writ.

CCCCXXIV. Wilmer and Oldfields Case. Trin. 29 Eliz. Rot. 2715. In the Common
Pleas.
Award.
IN Debt upon a Bond, the Condition was to perform the Award of I.S, Antea 140.
etc. the Arbitrators make Award, That the Defendant before such a day shall
pay to the Plaintiff 1000 l. or otherwise procure one A. being a stranger to
the Bond to be bound to the Obligee for the payment of 12 l. per annum to the
Plaintiff for his life, the Defendant pleaded the performance of the Award
generally, the Plaintiff assigned the breach of the Award in this, That the
said A. had not paid the said 100 l. without speaking of the cause of the award
of the 12 l. per annum, upon which the Defendant did demur in Law; it was
holden by the whole Court, that the Replication was good, for the Award, as to
the second point was merely void, as if no such Award at all had been, because
A. was a stranger to the Award and the submission; 1 Cro. 4.
but as to the point of the 100 l. the same is good, and shall bind the
parties, and the Plaintiff had Judgment to recover, vide 21 E. 475. 18 E. 4.
22, 23.

CCCCXXV. Fabian and Windsors Case. Mich. 31, and 32. Eliz. Rot. 814. In the
Common Pleas.
IN Trespass for entering into his house or Inn at Uxbridge, Leases. 1 Cro. 209.
it was found by special verdict, That the Plaintiff leased to the Defendant
the said house for seven years, rendering Rent at the Feasts of the Annunciation
of our Lady and Saint Michael, etc. with condition, that if the said Rent shall
be behind by the space of ten days, etc. that it shall be lawful to the Lessor
to re-enter: And afterward at the Feast of the Annunciation, 31 Eliz. the Rent
was behind, and the tenth day after the Lessor came to the said House a quarter
of an hour before the sun setting and demanded the rent in these words, I
demand three pound ten shillings for a half years rent of this House now due,
and there continued till the Sun was set, but no Rent was paid: But note, that
the Issue was, If he came to the House half an hour before Sun set, and there
continued demanding the half years Rent of the Premises due at the Feast of the
Annunciation of our Lady then last past. It was moved by Fenner, That upon this
Verdict the Issue is not found for the Plaintiff, i. the Issue was upon the
half hour, and the quarter part of the hour was found, 2. the Issue was, If the
demand were of the Rent due at the Feast of the Annunciation passed, and the
Verdict is for Rent due at the time of the demand, etc. And it was the opinion
of Anderson, Periam, and Walmesley, Demand of Rent.
That as to the first point the Verdict was good enough for the Plaintiff:
Windham contrary. But it was agreed by them all, That if in demand of Rent (ut
supra) the Lessor, or any on his part does demand one penny more or less than
is due, or in his demand does not show the certainty of the Rent, and the day
of payment of it, and when it was due, the demand is not good, Conditions taken
strictly.
for a condition which goes in defeazance of an estate is odious in Law, and no
re-entry in such Case shall be given, unless the demand be precisely and
strictly followed.

CCCCXXV. Elmes and Meldcalfes Case. Mich. 32. Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
IT was holden for Law by the whole Court, 1 Cro. 189.
That if one of the witnesses after the Jury are departed from the Bar, does
repeat unto the Jury the same Evidence which he gave before and no more, That
that does make the Verdict to be void.

CCCCXXVII. Carter and Claycoles Case. Mich. 32 and 33 Eliz. In the Common
Pleas.
Leases More 593. 4 Co 76.
IN Ejectione firmae by Carter against Claycole, the Plaintiff declared upon a
Lease made by the Wardens and Fellows of All Souls College, 1. July, 10 Eliz.
And it was found by special Verdict, That Overden Warden of the said College,
and the Fellows, etc. leased unto the Plaintiff, To have and to hold from the
Feast of the Annunciation next following, to the end of twenty years, and made
a letter of Attorney to one to enter into the said Manor, and to seal and
deliver the Deed of the said Lease in their names to the Plaintiff, who by
force thereof entered into part of the demised Premises, and there did seal and
deliver the same, etc. But it was not found that any rent was reserved
thereupon; And if this Lease were goo^, Then the Jury found for the Plaintiff;
but if not, then for the Defendant: Cooper Sergeant, It has been objected,
That this Lease being but for twenty years, is not warranted by the Statute of
13 Eliz. Cap. 10. For the words of the Statute are, Other than for the term of
21 years; 5 Cr. 6.
as to that, It was not the intent of the Statute, but only to abridge the
great and long Leases heretofore made by Colleges, and to limit such Leases to
a certain measure of time, ut supra, for twenty one years or three lives, and
non ultra, but on this side as much as they would, which was granted by the
whole Court: Another matter was because it is not found, That the due rent was
reserved upon the said Lease (accustomed yearly rent or more) and yet the same
is good enough, 1 Cro. 707. 708. Post. 333.
for if the other party will take advantage of such defect he ought to show the
same, otherwise it shall be intended, because it is found that such Lease was
made, that it was made according to the Statute: For if a man is to make title
to himself by a conditional Lease, he is not to plead the condition, but only
the Lease; and if the other party will defeat the Lease by the Condition, he
shall show the same. And in this Case, The Defendant also ought to have showed
the Statute: by which such defective Leases are made void: Also it has been
objected, That by the Statute of 18 Eliz. the third part of the Rent ought to
be reserved in Corn, and here is not found any Corn; as to that, It is to be
considered, that the said Statute is not a general Law, Special Statutes ought
to be pleaded.
whereof the Judges are bounden to take notice, but it ought to be pleaded, for
it extends but to four places, viz. Cambridge Oxford, Winchester, and Eaton,
and therefore such a Statute ought to be pleaded, or given in Evidence, and
found by Verdict: As where a man pleads a general pardon, in which diverse
persons are excepted, he ought to plead it specially, and show, that he is not
any of the persons excepted, 8 E. 4. 7. 28 H. 7. So special customs ought to be
pleaded, Gavelkind, Borough-English, 21 E. 4. 55. 36. The King grants to the
Citizens of Norwich, etc. And afterward by Act of Parliament, all their
Liberties, etc. are confirmed by a general confirmation to all Cities and
Boroughs, this is a special Act, and ought to be pleaded; by Brian, 59, 13 E.
4. 8. The Lord Says case, an Act of Parliament, That all Corporations made by
the King H. 6. shall be void, is a special Act, and ought to be pleaded: And
see 28 H. 8. 27. and 28. Dyer. If the Statute of 21 H. 8. cap. 13. Of Lands
taken to Form by Ecclesiastical persons be a special Law: Yelverton contrary;
The Statute of 13 Eliz. is a special Law and ought to be pleaded, but the
Statute of 13 Eliz. is now a general Law, which see Hollands case, 39 Eliz. and
Damports case, 45 Eliz. And this Act of 13 Eliz. is general in respect of time,
for it extends to all time after (from henceforth) and to all persons to whom
such Leases shall be made, the words the Statute are, scil. To any person or
persons, in respect of persons who shall lease, all spiritual persons: General
in respect of the end, which is the maintenance of learning, which extends to
the common profit, etc. Drew Sergeant, That this act of 13 Eliz. is general in
respect of restraint only, and extends only to spiritual persons, and therefore
ought to be pleaded, for otherwise the Court shall not take notice of it; As
the Statute of 23 H. 6. of Sheriffs ought to be pleaded, which see in the Case
of Dive and Manningham, Plowden, 64, 65. Co. 1 Inst. 45.
And although the Statute ought to be pleaded, Yet this Lease is not void
against the Warden who made it, but against his Successor, although no rent be
reserved upon it, notwithstanding that the perclose of the Statute be (utterly
void and of none effect, to all intents, constructions, and purposes) So upon
the Statute of 1 Eliz. concerning Leases made by Bishops, the Law had been so
taken in the case of the Bishop of Coventry and Lichfeild upon a Grant of the
next Avoidance, That although it does not bind the Successors, yet it shall
bind the Grantor himself. So here this Lease being made by the present Warden
and Fellows of the College aforesaid, although it be not sufficient to bind
the Successor, yet it shall bind the Warden who made the Lease. Puckering
contrary; And as to the case of 13 E. 4. 8. the reason there is, because there
is an Exception in the said Statute of diverse Grants made by King H. 6. and
therefore the said Act ought to be specially pleaded: And see 34 H. 6. 34. by
Prisoit: But in this Act of 13 Eliz. there is not any Exception, and although
it be a general Act with a Restraint, yet such an Act ought not to be pleaded,
and therefore 27 H. 8. 23. in an Action upon the Statute of 21 H. 8. for taking
of Lands to Ferm by spiritual persons, he need not make mention of the Statute:
And afterward, the Justices did advise upon this point, whether the Lease be
so void, that it be void against a stranger: So as the Defendant who does not
claim under the College, and who has no title to the Land may avoid it. And
Periam Justice denied the Case put by Puckering: A. morgages Lands to B. upon a
usurious contract for one hundred pounds, and before the day of payment B. is
ousted by C. against whom B. brings an Action, C. cannot plead the Statute of
Usury, for he has no title: For the estate is void against the Mortgagor.
Another Exception was taken to the Declaration, because the Plaintiff had
declared, upon a Lease by the Warden and Fellows, without naming any name of
the Warden, 13 E. 4. 8. 18 E. 4. 8. In Trespass the Defendant does justify,
because that the Freehold was in the Dean and Chapter, and he as Servant, and
by their commandment entered; And Exception was taken to that Plea, because he
has not showed the name of the Dean, scil. the proper name: So if a Lease be
made by Dean and Chapter in these words, Nos Decan. and Capituli, the same
Lease is void, which was granted by the Court: and 12 H. 4251. A Provost
granted an Annuity by the name of Provost of such a College, without any name
of Baptism, and afterward the Grantee brought a Writ of Annuity against the
Successor of the said Provost; and by Hull, The Writ is well enough, but the
Christian name ought to be set down in the Writ: So here, because that the name
of Baptism of the Warden is not in the Declaration, the same is not good: But
the opinion of the whole Court was, That the Declaration is good enough, and
they did rely especially upon the Book of 21 E 4. 15, 16. Where Debt is brought
by the Dean and Chapter without any Christian name, and the Writ holden good:
Anderson: It stands with reason, That for as much as the College was
incorporated by the name of Warden and Fellows, and not by any Christian name
that they may purchase and lease by such name without any Christian name, and
may be impleaded, and implead others by such name, and as the Fellows in such
case need not to be named by their Christian names, no more ought the Warden:
But of a Parson, Vicar, Chauntry Priest, it is otherwise, for in such case the
name of Baptism ought to be added: It was also objected, That because the
Letter of Attorney was to enter in the Manor, and all the Lands and Tenements
of the College in such a Town, and to seal the Indenture of Lease in the name
of the Lessors, and to deliver it to the Plaintiff as their Deed; now the
Attorney in executing of this Warrant has not pursued it, for he has only
entered into the Lands, but it is not found that he entered into the Manor, and
so the Lease is void. And it was said by Puckering, That if I lease two Acres
in two several Counties, rendering for the one Acre 10 s. and for the other Acre
10 s. and make a Letter of Attorney to make Livery in both; if the Attorney
enters into one Acre and makes Livery, the same is void, for the Attorney has
not pursued his authority, for peradventure I would not have leased the Acre
whereof Livery is made for such rent of 10 s. being perhaps of greater value,
but with the other Acre which was of lesser value, and so the mis-executing of
my warrant shall prejudice me. Windham, Perhaps if one entire Rent had been
reserved out of both Acres, it may be that by the Livery in one Acre all is
void: But by Puckering, one entire Rent cannot be reserved upon such a Lease of
two Acres in several Counties. Walmesley denied the Case put by Puckering, for
the authority is executed well enough, for it does not appear upon the Verdict,
but that the College was in possession at the time of the Lease made, and then
there needed not any such Entry, but the bare sealing and delivery of the
Attorney is good enough. And also it does not appear by Verdict, That the
College has any Manor, and therefore it shall be so intended; and then the
Case is no other but that, A man leaseth a Manor, and certain Lands in D. and
makes a Letter of Attorney to make Livery of them, where he has nothing in the
Manor, and the Attorney makes Livery of the Land without meddling with the
Manor, the same is a good Livery, and the authority duly executed: But if it
had been expressly found, that the College had such a Manor there, then the
Entry in the Land only, without meddling with the Manor, and the Livery made
accordingly, should not be good: But yet afterward he seemed to be of other
opinion. And as to that which has been objected, That the Lease is void to all
intents and purposes, according to the words of the Statute (for by some it
cannot be resembled to the case cited before, of the Bishop of Coventry and
Lichfeild, that such a Grant should bind him and not his Successors;) for if
this Grant in our Case shall not be void presently, it shall never be void; for
the College never dies no more than Dean and Chapter, Mayor and Commonalty.
To that it was answered by Drew, That although there be some difference betwixt
such Corporations, and that the words of the Statute are general (void to all
intents, constructions, and purposes,) yet they shall construed according to
the meaning of the makers of the Act, whose scope was to provide for the
Successors, and not for the present Incumbent, and to the utter impoverishing
of all Successors, without any respect to the party himself, as it appears by
the preamble of the said Statute; where it is observed, That by long and
unreasonable Leases, the decay of Spiritual Livings is procured; for the
remedying and preventing of which long Leases this Act was made, and that the
Successors should not be bound thereby. And these Leases are not void,
simpliciter sed secundum quid, i. e. as to the Successors: As upon the Statute
of 11 H. 7. cap. 20. Discontinuances made by Women, etc. shall be void and of
none effect; yet such a Discontinuance made is good against the Woman her self:
So upon the Statute of 1 Eliz. concerning Bishops. See now Coke, Lincoln
College Case, 37 Eliz. in the third Reports 60. A Lease made by Dean and
Chapter not warranted by the said Statute, shall not be void until after the
death of the Dean, who was party to the Lease. So upon the Statute of 13 Eliz.
of fraudulent Conveyances, such fraudulent Conveyance is not void against the
Grantor, but against those who are provided for by the said Statute, and that
the Lease in the principal case is not void, but voidable, all the Justices
agreed to be avoided by the College, or any other who claim by it; and by
Anderson, If such a Lease should be void, then great mischief would fall to the
College, for whose benefit this Statute was made, for if such Lease be made
rendering a small Rent, then if before the defect be found or espied the Rent
was arrear, the College could not have remedy for the said Rent. Also by
Periam, Such a Lessee might have an Action of Trespass against a stranger, who
enters upon the Land, which proves that the Lease is not void, but voidable;
and afterward notwithstanding all the Objections, Judgment was given for the
Plaintiff, and the chief Authority which moved Periam Justice to be of such
opinion was Lemans case, cited before 28 H. 8. Dyer 27. where a Lease was made
to a Spiritual person against the Statute of 21 H. 8. and a Bond or Obligation
for performance of covenants, and thereupon an Action was brought, and the
Plaintiff therein had Judgment and recovered, which could not have been if the
Lease were utterly void against the Lessor and Lessee, as the very words of the
Statute are, and although it is not alleged in the Book, that that was any
cause of the Judgment, yet in his opinion it was the greatest cause of the
Judgment in that case.

CCCCXXVIII. Bighton and Sawles Case. Pasch. 35 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
IN an Action upon the case, it ws agreed by the whole Court, 1 Cro. 235.
That where Judgment is given, that the Plaintiff shall recover, and because it
is not known what damages, therefore a Writ issues to enquire of the damages,
That the same is not a perfect Judgment before the damages returned and
adjudged, and therefore they also agreed, that after such award, and before the
damages adjudged, that any matter might be showed in Court in arrest of the
Judgment; and by Periam Justice, the difference is, where damages are the
principal thing to be recovered, and where not; for if damages be the
principal, then the full Judgment is not given until they be returned; but in
Debt where a certain sum is demanded it is otherwise.

CCCCXXIX. Maidwell and Andrews Case. Pasch. 33 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
MAidwell brought an Action of Covenant against Andrews, Covenant.
and the Case was this, That R. was seized of Lands, and leased the same for
life, rendering Rent; and afterward devised the Reversion to his wife for life,
and died. Andrews the Defendant took to wife the wife of the Devisor, the
Devisee of the Reversion; afterward Andrews bargained and sold the said
Reversion to one Marland and his heirs during his own life, and afterward
granted the Rent to the Plaintiff, and covenanted that the Plaintiff should
enjoy the said Rent during his Term, absque aliquo legitimo impedimento of the
said Andrews, his Heirs or Assigns, or any other person, claiming from the said
Marland. Marland died seized, and the same descended to B. his heir, and the
breach of the Covenant was assigned, in this, i. in the heir of Marland, who
has the Rent by reason of the Grant of the Reversion to Marland, ut supra, the
Defendant pleaded the Grant of the Reversion to Marland, per scriptum (without
saying, Sigillo suo sigillat. and hic in Curia prolat.) absque hoc, that the
said Reversion and Rent descended to B. and thereupon the Plaintiff did demur
in Law, and the causes of the Demurrer was assigned by Yelverton Sergeant. 1.
The Grant of the Reversion is pleaded per sciptum, and he does not say
(sigillat.) for a Reversion cannot pass without Deed, although it be granted
but for years; and a bare writing is not a Deed without sealing of it, and
therefore the pleading ought to be per scriptum suum sigillat. or per factum
suum; for factum suum implies the ensealing and delivery. 2. It ought to be
pleaded hic in Cur. prolat. for the Court is to see such Deed, to the end they
may know if it be a lawful Deed, Traverse. 1 Cro. 278.
without razure, interlining, or other defects. 3. The Defendant has traversed
the descent, where he ought to have traversed the dying seized; for of every
thing descendable the dying seized is the substance, and the descent is but the
effect: And although the Grant of the Reversion was but for the life of the
Grantor, yet the estate granted is descendable, as 27 E. 3. 31. Tenant by the
Courtesy leaseth his estate to one and his heirs, the Grantor dies, his Heir
enters, and a good Bar against him in the Reversion; and see 14 E. 3. Action
56. Annuity granted to one and his Heirs for the term of another man's life, the
Grantor dies, living Cestuy que vie, the Heir of the Grantor brings a writ of
Annuity, and it was holden maintainable; and he said, that were the dying
seized is confessed and avoided by the other side, there the Descent is
traversable, and not the dying seized, and that was the Case betwixt Vernon and
Gray. Vernon and Grays Case.
In an Avowry Vernon conveyed the Lands from the Lord Powes to him, as next
Heir to him, because the Lord Powes died seized in his Demesne as of Fee without
issue, and the Plaintiff conveyed from the said Lord Powes by Devise, and
traversed the Descent to the Avowant, for the dying seized was confessed and
avoided by the Devise, 22 Eliz. Dyer 366. See 21 H. 7. 31. In Trespass the
Defendant says, That T. was seized, and died seized, and that the Lands
descended to him as Son and Heir, and that he entered; the Plaintiff said, That
T. was seized, and took to wife K. and they had issue the Plaintiff, and died
seized, and the Land descended to him, and teaversed the descent to the
Defendant; and see Sir William Merings Case, 14 H. 8. 22, 23. But if the
parties do not claim by one and the same person, or the dying seized be not
confessed and avoided, there the dying seized shall be traversed, and not the
descent. Glanvil Sergeant, Be the Bar insufficient or not, if the Declaration
be not sufficient, the Plaintiff shall not have Judgment, and here is not any
breach of Covenant, viz. that the Plaintiff shall enjoy it without any lawful
impediment of the Defendant, his Heirs or Assigns, or any claiming by Marland,
and then if the Heir of Marland cannot make any lawful claim, then there is not
any breach of Covenant assigned; and he said, because it is not showed that the
Land is not holden in Socage, the Devise is not good, for it may be that the
Land is holden in Capite: but admit the Devise good, that when Andrews bargains
and sells unto Marland, and the Tenant never attorns, then nothing passes, and
then the Heir of Marland cannot make any lawful claim or lawful impediment.
Periam Justice, Here Marland was assignee of Andrews, and if he or his heirs
make claim, although that the assignment be not sufficient in Law, yet because
he has color by this assignment his claim is lawful, and so there is a breach
of the Covenant; and although it is not alleged, that the Land devised is
holden in Socage, yet the Devise is good for two parts of the Land. Anderson
Justice, If it be good but for two parts, then is the Reversion apportioned,
and the Rent destroyed, and so Marland has not any Rent by his purchase of the
Reversion, and so he cannot lawfully disturb the Plaintiff. The Law does create
his apportionment, which grows by the Devise, and therefore the Rent shall not
be destroyed; but if it had been done by the Act of the party, it had been
otherwise; and I would willingly hear, if the Heir of Marland be assignee of
Andrews, for otherwise he is not within the words of the Covenant, for Marland
has an estate to him and his heirs for the life of another: Now after the
death of Marland, his heir is a special occupant, and vide H. 26 Eliz. Rot.
560. in the Common Pleas, such an Heir shall not have his age.

CCCCXXX. Oglethorpe and Hides Case. Pasch. 33 liz. In the Common Pleas.
IN Debt upon a Bond for the performance of Covenants, Debt.
it was holden by the whole Court, That if the Defendant pleaded generally the
performance of the Covenants, and the Plaintiff does demur generally upon it
without showing cause of Demurrer: Judgment shall be given according to the
truth of the cause, for that default in pleading is but matter of form, and is
aided by the Statute of 27 Eliz. But if any of the Covenants be in the
disjunctive, so as it is in the Election of the Covenantor to do the one or the
other, then it ought to be specially pleaded, and the performance of it, for
otherwise the Court cannot know what part has been performed.

CCCCXXXI. Tracy and Ivies Case. Mich. 32 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
IN Dower by Margaret Tracy against Ivy, the Case was, Dower.
That John Finch was seized, and enfeoffed Shipton and others of two parts of
the Lands to the use of himself and the Defendant his then wife, and their
heirs for ever, with Condition, That if his said wife did survive him, Co. 4.
Vernons Case.
she should pay such sums of money not exceeding two hundred pounds, to such
persons which the Feoffor by his last Will should appoint; and afterward he
declared his Will, and thereby appointed certain sums of money to be paid to
diverse persons, amounting in the whole to the sum of one hundred and fifty one
pounds, and by his said Will devised the residue of his Lands to diverse of his
Kindred, having no issue, and died; The wife married Tracy, and they brought
Dower against the Devisees, who pleaded the Feoffment aforesaid, and averred
the same was made for the Ioynture of the Demandant. And because that no other
matter or circumstance was proved to verify the Averment, the Court incited
the Jury to find for the Demandant, which they did accordingly.

CCCCXXXII. Bond and Richardsons Case. Mich. 32 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
IN Debt upon a Bond, Debt. 1 Cro. 142.
the Condition was to pay a lesser sum such a day, and at such a place the
Defendant pleaded payment according to the Condition, upon which they were at
issue. And it was found by Verdict, That the lesser sum was paid such a day
before the day contained in the Condition of the Bond, and then received; and
upon this Verdict Judgment was given for the Plaintiff, for the day is not
material, nor the place, but the payment is the substance.

CCCCXXXIII. Marshes Case. Trin. 32 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
Trover had Conversion.
GOods came to a Feme covert by Trover, and she and her Husband did convert them
to their own use. It was holden per Curiam, That the Action upon the Case shall
be brought against the Husband and Wife, and not against the Husband only, for
the Action does sound in Trespass, and it is not like unto Detinue; for upon a
Detainer by the Wife, the Action lies against the Husband only.

CCCCXXXIV. Corbets Case. Trin. 32 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
Debt. 2 Len. 60.
AN Action of Debt was brought by Original Writ against an Administrator in
another County than where the Administrator was commorant, and before notice of
the Suit he paid diverse Debts of the Intestate due by specialty, and so he had
not Assets to pay the Debt in demand, having Assets at the day of the Test of
the Original. And now, Plainment Administered. 1 Cro. 793.
the Defendant appearing, pleaded this special matter, and concluded, so he had
nothing remaining in his hands. And it was holden per Curiam, to be a good
Plea. See 2 H. 4. 21, 22.

CCCCXXXV. Gillam and Lovelaces Case. Mich. 32 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
Administration.
KAtharine Gillam, Administratrix of John Gillam, brought Ejectione firmae
against Leonard Lovelace, and upon not guilty pleaded, it was found for the
Plaintiff. It was moved for the Defendant in arrest of Judgment, That the
Declaration was not good, because the granting of Letters of Administration is
set forth in this manner, viz. Administratio commissa fuit Querenti per
Willielmum Lewen Vicarium generalem in spiritualibus Epi. Roff. without
averring, that at the time of the granting of the Letters of Administration,
the Bishop was in remotis agendis, for a Bishop present in England cannot have
Vicarium: But as to that, it was said by the whole Court, That the Vicar
general in Spiritualibus, amounts to a Chancellor, for in truth the Chancellor
is Vicar general to the Bishop. Another Exception was, because the Declaration
is not Epi. Roff. loci illius Ordinarii; but that was not allowed, for all the
presidents and course of the Court is, That by way of Declaration such
allegation needs not, but by way of Bar it is necessary. Another Exception was
taken, because the Plaintiff has declared of an Ejectment, and also quod bona
and catalla ibidem invent. cepit, etc. And here, in the Verdict the damages, as
well for the Ejectment as for the Goods and Chattels, are entirely taxed. It
was adjorned.

CCCCXXXVI. Greeves Case. Mich. 32 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
IN a Replevin, Replevin.
the Defendant made Conusans as Bailiff to one Greeves and Rockwood, etc. and
said, That A. was seized of the Lands, and 6 Eliz. enfeoffed certain persons in
fee to the use of his last Will, by which he willed, that his Feoffees should
stand seized of the said Lands, Devises. Poph. 188.
until the said Greeves had levied of the profits of the said Lands the sum of
one hundred pounds. It was objected against this Conusans, that here is no
devise, for A. at the time of the devise had not any Feoffees; but the
Exception was disallowed by the Court: And they cited the case of 15 Eliz. Dyer
323. Lingens case, A. made a Feoffment in fee to his use, and afterward
devised that his Feoffees should be seized to the use of his Daughter, that the
same was a good devise of the Land. See 29 H. 8. Br. Devises 48.

CCCCXXXVII. Kempton and Coopers Case. Mich. 31 and 32 Eliz. In the Common
Pleas.
IN Trespass for breaking of his Close, the Defendant pleaded, Bar. 3 Len. 194.
that before this he had brought an Ejectione firmae against the now Plaintiff
and recovered, and had Execution, etc. Judgment, if Action, etc. And by Periam,
Windham and Anderson Justices, the same is a good Bar, and the conclusion of
the Plea is also good. Judgment, if Action, without relying upon the Estoppel.

CCCCXXXVIII. Leigh and Okeley and Christmas Case. Mich. 32 Eliz. In the Kings
Bench.
OLiphe Leigh Fermor of the Queen of a Wood called Meerherst Wood in Warplesden
in the County of Surrey, brought an Action of Trespass against Henry Okeley and
Robert Christmas for breaking of the said Wood, and therein entering and
cutting down of two hundred loads of Wood, and carrying away the same, etc. The
Defendants pleaded, That before the time in which the Trespass was supposed,
etc. That King H. 8. was seized of the Manor of Warplesden, Custom.
whereof the said Wood was parcel, of which Manor a Close called Withybod
containing eleven Acres, eidem bosco adjacent. was parcel, and that the said
Wood is, and time out of mind, etc. was closed and separated with Hedges and
Ditches from the said eleven Acres, which said Hedges and Ditches, per totum
tempus praedict. fuerunt and adhuc sunt praedict. bosco spectant. and
pertinent. And that the said eleven Acres are, and time out of mind we^^
customary Lands, parcel of the Manor aforesaid, and demised and demisable in
Fee-simple: And that the said King H. 8. at a Court holden 38 H. 8. by his
Steward demised the said eleven Acres by copy, to John Goring and his Heirs,
and that within the said Manor there is this Custom, That every Copyholder,
Tenant of the said eleven Acres, etc. has used and accustomed, per se vel
servientes suos per eorum praecept. succidere, capere, and asportare subboscum
in praedict. bosco in quo, etc. pro reparatione praedictarum sepium and
defensionum inter praedict. boscum in quo, etc. and the said eleven Acres, etc.
quandocunque eaedem sepes and defensiones in decasu extiterint; and showed
further, That at the time of the Trespass, etc. the said Hedges and Fences were
in decay, and so justified: Upon which the Plaintiff did demur in Law. It was
argued by Godfrey, That the Prescription is not good; for it appears, that
this customary Land is contigue adjacens to the said Wood, i. where the
Trespass was done: And of common Right, the making of the Hedge does appertain
to the Owner of the Wood: And the Prescription is no more, but to take Wood in
the Lands of another adjoining to my Land, to make the Hedges of the same Land
in which the Wood grows, which cannot be a good Prescription, for it sounds
in charge, and not to the profit of him who Prescribes: Which see 22 E. 3.
Prescription 40. Trespass against an Abbot, because where the Plaintiff was
Farmor of the King of his Hundred of D. and by reason thereof he might make
Attachment, and distrain for the Debts of the King within the said Hundred, and
where for a certain debt of the King he distrained the Beasts of one A. and the
Abbot made Rescous; to which the Abbot said, That he was Lord of the Manor of
D. within which Manor there was this custom, etc. That if any Distress be taken
within the said Manor, that the same should be put into the Pound of the said
Abbot of the same Manor, and not driven out of the Manor, and there ought the
Distress to remain three days, so that if the party would agree within the
three days, that then he should have his Beasts; and he said, That the
Plaintiff would have driven the said Beasts out of the said Manor, and that he
would not suffer him, upon which there was a demurrer, because it is not any
profit to the Abbot, but a charge to keep the Beasts of another. Also he said,
That the King shall not be bound by such a custom as another person shall,
whereupon Judgment was given for the Plaintiff: So here in the principal case,
There shall be no damage to the Defendant if the Wood be not fenced; for if his
Cattle escape into the Wood he may justify it, because it is in default of the
Plaintiffs enclosure: And if the Beasts of the Plaintiff escape into the Lands
of the Defendant, he may take them Damage Feasant for the cause aforesaid, 21
H. 7. 20. A Custom is pleaded, That if any Tenants of the Manor shall take the
Cattle of any one Damage Feasant, and shall therefore distrain them, that then
the Tenant so distraining them ought to bring them to the Lords Pound, which if
he shall not do, at the next Court he shall be amerced in a certain sum to the
Lord of a Manor to be paid, and that was holden no good custom, because it is
against common Right, and the common Law; for by the common Law and common
Reason, every one finding Cattle in his own Land Damage Feasant may impound
them in his own Land, and the Lord is not damnified thereby: So it is of a
By-law, That every one who holds so many Acres of Lands in such a Town, shall
yearly pay a certain sum of money to the Church of the same Town, and shall
forfeit for every default of payment thereof twenty pounds, such By-law,
although it has continued time out of mind, yet it is not of any validity,
because for not payment of the said sum to the Church, the Lord of the Manor is
not damnified, and therefore he shall not have any gain; contrary if the
penalty had been limited to the Churchwardens, because they are bound to
repair the Church. Another Exception was taken to the form of the Prescription
(Quandocunque eaedem sepes and defensiones in decasu extiterint) and that is
too general, for so they might be in decay by his own default, as if he himself
wrongfully pull up the Hedges, in which case there is no reason but that he
should repair them at his own costs and charges, and therefore he ought to have
pleaded cum in de casu extiterint in the default of the Tenant of the Wood.
Another Exception was taken, because that here this custom is pleaded
particularly, and appropriated to the eleven Acres only, and is not extended to
the whole Manor; and to that purpose the case of 40 E. 3. 27. was cited, where
a custom is applied to one part of a Town, as to say that such a House within
such a Town is of the nature of Gavelkind, and the rest of the Town is
guildable. See 21 Eliz. Dyer 363. It was adjorned, etc.

CCCCXXXIX. Hare and Okelies Case. Hill. 20 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
MIchael Hare, and others, Trespass.
brought an Action of Trespass against Okelie for breaking of their close, and
carrying away their corn; And upon Not guilty, it was found by special Verdict,
That the said Michael Hare was sole seized of the said Close, where, etc. and
so seized, exposuit ad culturam, Anglice, did put forth to Tillage the said
Land to the other Plaintiffs in form following, viz. That the said Michael
should find one half of the Corn sowed, and the other Plaintiffs the other
half, and that the said Land should be ploughed and tilled, and the Corn
thereof coming should be reaped and cut at the charges of the other Plaintiffs,
and so cut should be divided by the Shock, and the said Michael to have the one
half, and the other Plaintiffs the other half, etc. And it was the opinion of
the whole Court, That notwithstanding these words (exposuit ad culturam) that
no estate in the soil passed to the other Plaintiffs, Exposition of words.
but the said Michael did remain sole seized as before; but by Anderson, upon
the severance of the Corn, peradventure a property in the said Corn might be in
all the Plaintiffs: But because it appears, that Michael was sole seized, and
the other Plaintiffs had not any thing in the Land: Therefore it was adjudged,
that they could not join in the Action of Trespass for breaking of the Close;
and therefore it was awarded by the Court, that the Plaintiffs nihil Cap. per
breve.

CCCCXL. Bears Case. Trin. 30 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
IN a Formedon by Bear, Formedon.
the Defendant pleaded in Bar a warranty with Assets: And upon the Issue
nothing by descent, it was found, That the Ancestor of the Defendant whose
warranty was pleaded in Bar, was seized of Land in the nature of Gavelkind, Bar.
and by his Will devised the same to his two Sons (whereof the Defendant was
the Eldest) and their heirs equally between them to be divided; and it was
adjudged no Assets, wherefore the Defendant had Judgment to have seisin of the
Land.

CCCCXLI. Austin and Smiths Case. Pasch. 30 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
THe Case was, Copyholder of Grants.
That Austin being a Copyholder by License of the Lord leased his Copyhold to
Smith for years, rendering rent, and afterward by Deed granted the rent to
another, to have during the Term, etc. to which Grant the Lessee did attorn,
Rents. 1 Cro. 637. 651. 895. 1 Roll. 598. 1 Inst. 317. a. Litt. 151. b. 152. a.
and paid the Rent to the Grantee: It was holden by Gaudy Justice, That the
Grant was good, but now it is but a Rent-seck: And it was said by some, That
the Lessor cannot surrender such a Rent, unless he surrender the Reversion
also. Quaere, if the Grantee may have an Action of Debt for it. It was
conceived he could not, for he is not party nor privy to the Contract, nor has
the Reversion.

CCCCXLII. Underhill and Savages Case. Pasch. 31 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
SAvage was presented to a Benefice, and afterward was presented to another,
Pluralities.
and then purchased a Dispensation (which was too late) and then was qualified,
and afterward accepted the Archdeaconry of Gloucester: And Underhill who had
the Archdeaconry libelled in the Spiritual Court against the said Savage, where
it is holden that all Ecclesiastical Promotions in such cases are void, and now
Savage sued a Prohibition. Prohibition.
It was argued by Atkinson, That the Prohibition did lie, for the Patron has
his remedy by our Law, by a Writ of Right of Advowson. See 29 E. 3. 44. If
Avoidance be by Cession or Deprivation, and the next Presentment come in
question, it shall be determined by the Kings Court; and here when he accepts
of another Benefice, it is cession by the Common Law, but there ought to be a
Sentence; but now there needs not any Sentence, for by the Statute of 21 H. 8.
Archdeaconry.
13. the Church is ipso facto void. But it was objected, An Archdeaconry is not
within the Statute, for it is not any Cure with Souls: also an Archdeaconry is
a late Promotion, and therefore it cannot be void by the Statute. Lewknor
contra. The Patronage here does not come in debate; but if the Defendant in the
Spiritual Court will plead, That the Plaintiff is not Patron, but such an one,
then a Prohibition lies: withal the Justices granted, and it was said by Wray,
That a Doctor of the civil Law had been with him, and affirmed to him that
their Law is, That if one having a Benefice with cure of Souls accepts an
Archdeaconry, the Archdeaconry is void; but he said, That he conceived that
upon the Statute of 21 H. 8. the Law is qualified by reason of a Proviso there,
scil. Provided that no Deanery, Archdeaconry, etc. be taken or comprehended
under the name of a Benefice, having Cure of Souls, in any Article above
specified.

CCCCXLIII. Pasch. 30 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
A^i^d
ONe was bounden to stand to the award of two Arbitrators, who award that the
party shall pay unto a stranger or his assigns 200 l. before such a day, the
stranger before the day dies, and B. takes Letters of Administration; and if
the Obligor shall pay the money to the Administrator, or that the Obligor should
be discharged was the Question; and it was the opinion of the whole Court, that
the money should be paid to the Administrator, for he is Assignee: and by Gaudy
Justice, If the word Assignee had been left out, yet the payment ought to be
made to the Administrator, quod Coke affirmavit.

CCCCXLIV. Pasch. 30 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
ONe sued in the Kings Bench for Costs given upon a Suit depending in the
Hundred Court, and the sum of the Costs was under 40 s. and the Plaintiff
declared, Steward.
That at the Court holden before the Steward, secundum consuetudinem Manerii
praedict. It was objected, that the Steward is not Judge in such Court, but the
Suitors; to which it was answered by the Justices, That by a Custom in a
Hundred Court a Steward may be Judge, and so it has been holden; and here the
Plaintiff has declared upon the Custom, for the Declaration is secund.
consuetudinem Manerii, also the Subject may sue here in the Kings Bench for a
lesser sum than 40 s. as if 10 s. Costs be given in any Suit here, Suit to such
costs lies here in this Court.

CCCCXLV. Pigot and Harringtons Case. Mich. 30 and 31. Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
PIgot brought a Writ of Error upon a Fine levied by him within age, Error. 1
Cro. 11.
the Case was, That the Husband and Wife were Tenants for life, the Remainder
to the Infant in Fee, and they three levied a Fine, and the Infant only brought
the Writ of Error. It was objected by Tanfield, that they all three ought to
join in this Writ, and the Husband and Wife ought to be summoned and severed.
Atkinson contrary, for here the Husband and Wife have not any cause of action,
but the Infant only is grieved by the Fine, 35 H. 6. 19, 20, 21, etc. In
conspiracy against many, it was found for the Plaintiff, and one of the
Defendants brought Attaint, and assigned the false oath in omnibus quae
dixerunt, but afterward abridged the assignment of the false oath, as to the
damages, and so the attaint well lies. Two women are Ioynt-tenants, they take
Husbands, the Husbands and their Wives make a Feoffment in Fee, Attaint.
the Husbands dye, the Wives shall have several Cui in vita's, for the
coverture of the one was not the coverture of the other, 7 H. 4. 112. In Appeal
against four, they were outlawed, and two of them brought Error upon it, and
good, 29 E. 3. 14. In Assize against three Coparceners, they plead by Bailiff,
null tenent de Franktenement, etc. and found that two of them were disseisors
and Tenants, and that the third had nothing, and afterward the three
Coparceners brought attaint, and after appearance, the third Sister, who was
acquit, was nonsuit, and afterward by Award the Writ did abate. Tanfield,
Although that the cause be several, yet the erroneous act was joint, and the
receiving of the Fine, and that Record being entire, ought to be pursued
accordingly, and then the Husband and Wife shall be summoned and severed, and
it is not like to the case of 29 E. 3. cited before, for there the third
coparcener had not any cause of attaint, for no verdict passed against her.
Wray, As the Error is here assigned, the Writ is well brought, for the Error is
not assigned in the Record, but without it in the person of the Infant, Fine
upon an Infant reversed.
and that is the cause of the Action by him and for no other. Two Infants levy
a Fine, although they join in Error, yet they ought to assign Errors severally,
and they may sue several Writs of Error; and afterward it was holden by the
Court that the Writ was good, and the Fine reversed as to the Infant only.

CCCCXLVI. Scovell and Cavels Case. Mich. 30 and 31. Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
IN Ejectione firmae by Scovell against Cavel, Leases. 1 Cro. 89
the Declaration was general upon a Lease made by William Pain, and it was
found by special verdict, That William Leversedge was seized of the Lands, etc.
and leased the same to Stephen Cavel, John Cavel, and William Pain, habend. to
them for their lives and for the life of the survivor of them, Provided always,
and it was covenanted, granted and agreed betwixt the parties, that the said
John Cavel, and William Pain, should not take any benefit, profit or commodity
of the Land, during the life of Stephen Cavel, and further that the said
William Pain should not take any benefit, etc. during the life of John Cavel,
etc. Stephen Cavel died, John Cavel entered, and afterward William Pain entered,
and made the Lease to the Plaintiff, upon whom the Defendant entered; and if the
Entry of William Pain were lawful was the Question. Gaudy Serjant, his Entry is
not lawful. It will be agreed, That if a man lease to three for their lives,
they are Ioynt-tenants, but if by the habendum the estate be limited to them by
way of Remainder, the joint estate in the Premises is gone, and the Land
demised shall go in Remainder; and I agree that in deeds Poll, the words shall
be taken strong against the grantor, contrary in the Case of Indentures, the
words there shall be taken according to the intent of the parties, for there
the words are the words of both: See Browning and Beestons Case 2. and 3. Ma.
Plowd. 132. where by Indenture the Lessee covenanted to render and pay for the
Land Leased such a Rent, the same is a good reservation, although it be not by
apt words, and here in our Case, this Proviso and Covenant, Grant and Agreement
does amount to such a limitation by way of Remainder, especially when such a
clause follows immediately after the Habendum. Coke contrary: The Office of
the Habendum is to limit and explain the estate contained in the premises, and
here the Habendum has done its Office, and made it a joint estate, and
therefore the Clause afterward comes too late, and in truth is repugnant and
utterly void, as to such purpose; but perhaps an action of Covenant lies upon
it. Wray, It has been by me adjudged, if a Lease be made to three Habendum
successive, the same is a void word, and the Lessees are joynt-tenants;
contrary of Copyhold by reason of Custom; and here the proviso and the clause
following, is contrary to the Habendum, and repugnant, and so void, as to the
dividing of the estate by way of Remainder, which Gaudy Justice granted. Heal
Sergeant, this case has been adjudged, 16 Eliz. A Lease to three Habendum to
the use of the first for life, and after to the use of the second for life, and
after to the use of the third for life, the same is good. Clench Justice, this
proviso follows the Habendum, and is a sentence to explain the sentence. Wray,
and Shute, it is another sentence, although it immediately follows the
Habendum. Clench, if the words had been provided, that although it be limited,
(ut supra) in the Habendum, scil. the first named shall have the Lands to
himself for life, etc. it had been good by way of Remainder. Wray, Our case at
Bar, is not that any person shall take the Remainder, but that any of them
shall not take the profits during the life of the other. Tanfield took
exception to the verdict, because the life of Pain is not found in the verdict.
Coke, this is a verdict and no pleading, and the opinion of the Court was, that
the verdict was good, notwithstanding the said Exception, and afterward
Judgment was given for the Plaintiff.

CCCCXLVII. Hudson and Leighs Case. Mich. 30 and 31. Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
Appeal of Maheim. 4 Co. 43.
RObert Hudson brought an appeal of Mayhem against Robert Leigh for maiming his
right hand, and for cutting of his veins and sinews, which by that means are
become dry, so as thereby he has lost the use of his fingers. To which the
Defendant pleaded, that heretofore the Plaintiff had brought against him an
Action of Assault and Battery, and wounding, and therein had Judgment to
recover, and Execution was sued forth by Scire facias, and satisfaction
acknowledged upon Record, Damages.
of 200 Marks assisted by the Jury for the damages, and 11 l. 10 s. de
incremento by the Court, with averment of all identities. Cooper Sergeant, the
same is a good Bar, and although that an Appeal, and an Action of Trespass are
diverse Actions in nature, and in many circumstances, yet as to the recovery of
Damages, the one shall bind the other, See 38 E. 3. 17. a good case. In
Trespass for breaking of his Close and Battery, the Defendant pleaded, that
before that the Plaintiff by Bill in the Marshalsey has recovered his Damages
for the same Trespass, etc. and vouched the Record, and the Record was sent,
the which was varying from the Record pleaded; for the Record vouched, was only
of Battery without any thing of breaking of the Close: and also the Battery is
taxed at another day, etc. and with averment; yet as to the Battery it was
holden good enough with averment, and as to the breaking of the Close the
Plaintiff had Judgment, See 41 E. 3. brev. 548. 12 R. 2. Coronae 110. and the
Case betwixt Rider Plaintiff and Cobham Defendant, Pasch. 19 Eliz. Rot. 74. it
was clearly holden and adjudged, that after a Recovery in Trespass an Appeal of
Maheim does not lie; and the Book which deceives the Plaintiff is 22 E. 3. 82.
where it is said by Thorp, That notwithstanding Recovery in Appeal of Maheim,
yet he may after recover in Trespass, but Non dicite contra. Popham contrary,
the Plea in Bar is not good, for the Averment is, that the stroke and the
wounding supposed in the Writ of Trespass, and in his Appeal of Maheim are all
one, but it is not averred that any damages were given for the Maheim, or that
the Maheim was given in Evidence; for it might be, that there was not any
Maheim when the Trespass was brought, but that after by the drying of the wound
it became a Maheim, and then the Action did rise; as if a man upon a Contract
promises to pay me 10 l. at Michaelmas, and other 10 l. at Christmas, if he
does not pay the 10 l. at Michaelmas, I may have an Action upon the promise for
the not payment of that 10 l. and afterward I may have another Action and
recover damages for the not payment of the 10 l. at Christmas, but if I do not
begin any Action before Christmas, I cannot recover damages but once, for the
whole promise, and damages shall be given in Evidence; and if I be disseised, I
may recover damages for the first Entry, and notwithstanding that I shall have
an Assise, and if I do reenter, I shall have Trespass and recover damages for
the mean profits, Ante 302.
and the damages recovered for the first Entry shall be recouped; and the Book
cited before Fitz. Coronae 110, does not make for the Defendant, but rather for
the Plaintiff, for there it is averred, that the Maheim was given in Evidence,
in the Action of Trespass, which it is not in our Case. Egerton Solicitor, we
have showed, That succisio venarum, in this appeal specified is eadem succisio
and vulneratio mentioned in the Trespass. Coke, Although the identity of the
wounding and cutting of the veins are averred, yet it is not averred, that the
damages recovered in the Trespass were given for this Maheim. Wray chief
Justice, The Jurors are to take consideration of the wound in an action of
Trespass, and to give damages according to the hurt, and we ought to think that
they have done accordingly, and if they have not so done, the party may pray
that the Court by inspection would adjudge upon it, and so increase the
damages: But now when the Jury has given great damages, scil. 200 Marks, with
which the party has been contented, it should be hard to give the Plaintiff
another Action, and if there be any such special matter, that it was not become
a Maheim at the time of the Action of Trespass brought, but it is become a
Maheim of later time by drying, the Plaintiff ought to have showed the same to
the Court, and so have helped himself, for otherwise it shall not be so
intended, but that the averment made by the Defendant, is good enough to oust
the Plaintiff of this Action; and the Judgment cited 19 Eliz. before, was given
by me, after I was constituted chief Justice, and this Bar as I conceive was
drawn out of the pleading in 19 Eliz. and afterward Judgment was given against
the Plaintiff.

CCCCXLVIII. Crosman and Reads Case. Mich. 30 and 31 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
Intermarriage 1 Cro. 114.
THe Case was, that I.S. made his wife his Excutrix and dyed, I. D. being then
endebted to the Testator in sixty pounds upon a simple Contract, the Wife
Executrix took to Husband the said I.D. I.D. made his Executor and dyed, a
Creditor of I.S. brought an Action of Debt against the Wife Executrix of I.S.
and upon the pleading, the matter in question was, Debt by Executors.
If by the entermarriage of the wife with the Debtor of the Testator, the same
was a Devastavit or not: And if the said Debt of sixty pounds due by I.D.
should be Assets in her hands: And per Curiam, It is no Devastavit, nor Assets,
as is supposed: For the woman may have an Action against the Executor of I.D.
And it was agreed by the Court, that if a man makes his Debtor and a stranger
his Executors, and the Debtor dies, the surviving Executor may have an Action
of debt against the Executor of the Debtor; and so it was adjudged in the
principal case.

CCCCXLIX. Wollman and Fies Case. Mich. 31 and 32 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
Assumpsit. 1 Cro. 179.
IN an Action upon the Case upon Assumpsit that the Plaintiff should enjoy such
Lands for so many years: The Defendant pleaded the Statute of 13 and 14 Eliz.
because the Land is the Glebe Land of such a Parsonage, and in truth the
Defendant did mis-recite the Statute: For the Statute is, No Lease after the
fifteenth day of May: And (the pleading is hereafter to be made) Secondly, the
Statute is of any Benefice with cure (the pleading is of any Benefice:)
Thirdly, The Statute is, without absence above eighty, and the pleading is
(without absence by the space of eighty) days: And for these Causes the
Plaintiff had Judgment.

CCCCL. Frond and Batts Case. Trin. 31 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
Debt. Payment to the wife not good.
IN debt upon a Bond upon condition to stand to the Award of I.S. The Defendant
pleaded, That the said I.S. had Arbitrated, that the Defendant should pay to
the Plaintiff ten pounds, and he said he had paid it to the Plaintiffs wife who
received it, upon which the Plaintiff did demur: And Judgment was given for the
Plaintiff.

CCCCLI. Trin. 31 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
Grants of the King of the Office of Marshal of the Kings Bench.
THe Queen granted to George Earl of Shrewsbury, An. 15. of her reign, the
Office of Earl Marshal of England, and now came the said Earl and prayed, that
I. S. one of his Servants, to whom he had granted the Office of Marshal of the
Kings Bench might be to it, because the same is an Office incident to his
Office, and in his power to grant, and that Knowles, to whom the Queen had
granted the said Office of Marshal of the Kings Bench by the Attainder of
North. be removed: And a President was showed 14 and 15 Eliz. Betwixt Gaudy and
Verney, where it was agreed, That the said office was a several office from the
said great office, and not incident to it; And as to the Case of 39 H. 6. 33,
34. the truth is, the said office of Marshal of the Kings Bench was granted
expressly by the Duke by express words, and so he had it not as incident to his
office of Marshal of England: On the other side, there were three Presidents
showed, first in the time of E. 2. That the office of the Marshal of the Kings
Bench was appendant to the said office of Marshal of England: Secondly, 8 R. 2.
When the said great office was in the King, he granted the said office of
Marshal of the Kings Bench: But 20 R. 2. both offices were rejoyned as they
were before in ancient time, and there were also showed Latters Patents of 4 E.
4. and 19 H. 8. by which it appeared, That the said inferior office had time
out of mind been part of the great office; And it was moved, That when the said
great office is in the Kings hands, and the King grants the said under office,
if now this office be not severed from the great office for ever. Wray, It is
no severance, for the chief office is an office of Dignity, which may remain in
the King, but this under office is an office of necessity, and the King himself
cannot execute it, by which of necessity he ought to grant it. Another matter
was moved, If the Grant of the King unto the Earl of Shrewsbury were good,
because in it the Grant to Verney of the said under office, is not recited
according to the Statute of 6 H. 8. 9. As 26 E. 3. 60. The King seized of the
Honor of Pickring, to which a Forest was appendant, the Bayliwick of which
Forest he granted in fee rendering rent, and afterward he granted the Honor
with Appurtenances, and afterward the Bailiff committed a Forfeiture, and that
was found in Air, the Grantee of the Honor shall seize it, yet the King shall
have the Rent: And here the Earl of Shrewsbury shall have this office in his
power to grant; And so much the rather because it was granted but for life.

CCCCLII. Michill and Hores Case. Trin. 31 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
MIchil did affirm a Plaint in the Court of the City of Exeter against Hoar for
twenty pounds, and upon Nihil returned, Attachment of goods by custom of Exeter.
it was surmised; That Trosse had certain moneys in his hands due to Hoar, and
according to the custom of Exeter the said moneys were attached in the hands of
Trosse, who appeared upon the Attachment, and pleaded, That he owed nothing to
Hoar, upon which there was a Demurrer, Error.
and Judgment given against Trosse because that Trosse ought to have pleaded,
not only that he owed him nothing, but further that he had not any goods of
Hores in his hands: And thereupon Trosse brought a Writ of Error, and assigned
the Error in the principal matter, upon which it was demurred, and Judgment
given against the Plaintiff, because that the Plea of Trosse (that he owed him
nothing) is good enough, for if there be not a Debt, it is not attachable upon
such Attachment: And it is a good Plea to a common intent, and altogether in
use in London, were such custom is: Another Error was assingned, for that
Michill had recovered Costs against Trosse, where it ought not to be: And also
Judgment is not given, that Trosse should be discharged against Hoar; And
afterward the Judgment given in Exeter was reversed.

CCCCLIII. Dennis and Saint John's Case. Mich. 30 and 31 Eliz. In the Common
Pleas.
Debt. 1 Cro. 494.
IN Debt upon an Obligation, against Oliver Saint John, and Alice his wife, as
heir of her Father: The Defendants pleaded, Non est factum of the Father: And
it was found by special Verdict, That the Obligation was made by the Father of
the Wife to the Plaintiff and another, whereas in truth, The Plaintiff has
declared upon an Obligation made to himself only without speaking of any other
joint Obligee, Non est factum.
and that the Plaintiff as Survivor has brought the Action, and if upon the
matter it shall be said the Deed of the Defendant in manner as the Plaintiff
has declared, the Jury refer unto the Court: And the case, 14 E. 4. 1. b. If
three enfeoff me, and I plead, That two did enfeoff me and the same be
traversed, it shall be found against me, for the Feoffment is a joint act by
them all: But if a man enfeoffeth me and two others, and they dye, so as I have
all by Survivor, in pleading I may show the Feoffment was made to me alone: So
46 E. 3. 17. a. Three Joynt-tenants in Fee make a Lease for life, and
afterward two of the Ioynt-tenants release to the third, who brings an Action
of Wast against the Lessee, and the Writ was, That he held of his Lease only,
and the Writ was awarded good. Walmesley, This Plea, Non est factum, upon this
matter is no good Plea, for he has not pleaded it Respective as to the
Obligation, but generally, Non est factum suum, which refers to the Obligor
only, and the Issue is not whether he made the Deed to the Plaintiff or not,
but generally whether he made it at all: For there is a difference, Nihil
debet, for that refers to te Plaintiff, and where he pleads Non est factum:
Which that refers to the Plaintiff, and where he pleads Non est factum: Which
Shutteleworth granted: See 1 Eliz. Dyer, 167. Tawes Case, this Plea Non est
factum, has not any respect to the Obligee be a Monk, and there is another who
bears the name of the Obligee, yet in those Cases, the Obligor cannot safely
plead Non est factum; but where one is sued who bears the name of the Obligor,
there Non est factum is a good Plea: And see 10 Eliy. Dyer, 279. W.S. was bound
in an Obligation to one H. by the name of I.S. and upon that Obligation an
Action was brought against him by the name of W.S. and he pleaded Non est
factum, and the special matter was found, and it was ruled, that upon that
Verdict the Plaintiff should not recover, but the best way for the Plaintiff
was, to sue the Defendant by the name by which he is bound, and then if he
appear and plead (ut supra) he shall be concluded by the Obligation: And the
Court was clear of opinion, That the Plaintiff ought to have declared upon the
special matter.

CCCCLIV. Willis and Whitewoods Case. Hill. 31. Eliz. Rot. 1428 In the Common
Pleas.
Leases. Ow. ^5. 56. Hutt. 105. Ant. 158. Surrenders.
THe case was, That A. was seized of certain Lands holden in Socage, and leased
the same to I.S. for many years, and dyed, his heir within the age of fourteen
years, the wife of A. being Guardian in Socage leased the same Land by
Indenture to the same I.S. for years, if the first Lease was surrendered, or
determined was the Question: Anderson, Surrendered it cannot be, for the
Guardian has not any Reversion capable of a Surrender, but only an Authority
given to her by the Law to take the profits to the use of the Heir: But yet
perhaps it is determined by consequence and operation of Law: As if A. lease to
B. for one hundred years, and afterward grants the Reversion to C. for two
years, who leaseth to B. for two years, who accepts the Lease, the same is not
any Surrender, Ante. 303.
for a term of one hundred years cannot be drowned in a Reversion for two
years, yet the first Lease is determined, which Periam granted: And by Windham,
If a Lease be made to begin at Michaelmas, and before that time, the Lessor
makes a new Lease to the same Lessee to begin presently, the same is not any
Surrender, and yet thereby the first Lease is determined, and so in the
principal case, which Anderson granted, but Periam doubted of it; and he said,
Guardian in Socage has such an estate in the Reversion that he may enter for a
condition broken: Anderson, The same is not in respect of any estate that he
has, but in the name and right of the heir, and not by reason of any Reversion.

CCCCLV. Norwood and Dennis Case. Trin. 31 Eliz. In the common Pleas.
IN a Quare Impedit by Norwood against Dennis, the Issue was, Quare Impedit.
If the Advowson was appendant to the Manor of D. or in gross, and the Jury
^^und that it was appendant, and further found, that the Queen had right, and
title to present, for she had presented at the two last Avoidances. Anderson
and Periam Justices, If it appears unto the Court upon the pleading, that the
King has title to present. The Court shall award a Writ to the Bishop for the
King, but here appears no title for the the Queen upon the pleading, but only
upon the Verdict, so as the one part or the other may answer to it: And because
the Jury have found for the Plaintiff, the title found for the Queen shall not
be respected, but as a mere Nugation and Surplusage, for the same was out of
their Issue, and their Charge, and it is no more then if one comes into the
Court, and informs us of any title for the Queen, there the Court ought not to
regard it.

CCCCLVI. Green and the Hundred of Buccle-churches Case. Trin. 31 Eliz. In the
Common Pleas.
IN an Action upon the Statute of Huy and Cry, the Case was, Action upon the
Statute of Huy and Cry. 1 Cro. 14.
That Green did deliver a certain sum of money to a Carryer, who put the ^ame
(amongst other things) in his Cart, and sent a boy of the age of twelve years
with the Cart before, and he himself stayed a short time in the Inn, and
afterward went his way, and before he could get to the Cart, the Cart was
robbed and the money carried away. The boy made Huy and Cry, and came unto a
Justice of Peace, and prayed he would examine him, but he would not, but the
Carryer himself would not go to be examined, wherefore Green himself wen to a
Justice of Peace to be examined, and so was, and afterward brought this
Action: And it was holden by the Court; that here the Plaintiff had failed of
his Action for want of sufficient examination, for the Servant who was robbed
ought to be examined, and the examination of the Master or Owner of the goods
who was not present at the Robbery is not at any purpose to enable the
Plaintiff to this Action, for the party robbed ought to be examined: And it was
said by some, That where an Action does not lie upon the new Statute of 27
Eliz. the party may have an Action upon the old Statute, but others were
against it, for the Statute of 27 Eliz. is in the Negative, so as if the Action
does not lie upon it, no Action lies at all: And it was moved by Periam and
Anderson, That the Plaintiff might have an Action upon his Case framed upon the
said. Statute of 27 Eliz. against the Justice of Peace who refused to examine
the boy: But Windham doubted of it, because the Justice of Peace is a Judge of
Record, and for such thing as he does as Judge, no Action lies: To which it
was answered by Periam and Anderson, That the Examination in such case is not
made by him as Judge or Justice of Peace, but as a Minister appointed for the
examination by the Statute, etc.

CCCCLVII. Stevinson Case. Trin. 31 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
Debt.
IN Debt upon a Bond, the Condition was, That whereas the Plaintiff had
covenanted with the Defendant, that it should be lawful for the Defendant to
cut down good for Fire-boot and Hedge-boot without making any wast, or cutting
more than necessary: And the Plaintiff assigned the breach in that Covenant
(which is in truth the Covenant of the Plaintiff) that the Defendant had
committed wast in felling wood, etc. And the Condition was to perform all
Covenants and Agreements: And Exception was taken because that the Condition
ought to extend but unto Covenants to be performed on the part of the Lessee;
but the Exception was not allowed, for it is the Agreement of the Lessee,
although it be the Covenant of the Lessor, the Plaintiff.

CCCCLVIII. Foster and Wilson against Mapes. Trin. 31 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
Covenant. Ow. 100. 1 Cro. 212.
FOster and Wilson brought an action of Covenant against Mapes, and declared,
That by certain Indentures of Articles, it was agreed betwixt the Plaintiffs
and the Defendant, whereof one part was sealed with the seal of the Defendant,
and the other with the seals of the Plaintiffs, that whereas the Defendant had
leased to the Plaintiffs the Parsonage of B, he covenanted, That he would keep
the Plaintiffs harmless concerning the same against one N.B: And declared
further, That the said N.B. had entered upon them; And that at the time of the
making of the Indentures, he was Parson of B. The Defendant had pleaded Non est
factum, and it was found by special Verdict, That the Defendant sealed one part
of the Indentures, and that one of the Plaintiffs only sealed the other part:
Exception was taken to the Declaration because there is not set forth in it any
sufficient breach, for when the Defendant Covenants to save the Plaintiffs
harmless against B. the same is to be intended of a lawful Eviction: As in
Puttenhams Case, 13 Eliz. Dyer, 306. But if the Covenant had been, That the
Lessee should peaceably enjoy the Term, sine ejectione and interruptione
alicujus personae, upon an unlawful entry of a wrong doer, an action lies: See
16 Eliz. Dyer, 328. And here the finding of N.B. to be Parson at the time is to
no purpose: And there is not laid any express title in N.B. but only by
implication, for it might be that the Parson had leased to the Defendant
rendering Rent with clause of re-entry, and the Parson had entered for the
Condition broken, and the Plaintiffs ought to have showed, and not generally,
that he had entered, and that he was Parson: Also it is laid, That N. B. was
Parson at the time of the Entry, but it is not showed, what Entry, which may be
taken, that he was Parson at the time the Plaintiffs entered by virtue of their
Lease, and not when the said N. B. entered upon the Plaintiffs: Also the
Plaintiffs have not declared, That they had entered by force of the Lease
aforesaid, and if not, then they cannot be ejected, etc. and then no breach of
Covenant. Pudsey contrary, We have declared, that the Parsonage was demised to
us, and that N. B. being Parson has entered; and the Record was read. i. That
where the Defendant had demised to the Plaintiffs the Parsonage of B. It was
agreed, That the Defendant always should keep harmless the Plaintiffs and the
Premises against N.B. for and concerning omnibus pertinentiis, etc. Tanfield,
The breach is well laid, and the words of the Covenants amount to as much, as
if he had said, that he would keep them from all interruption; and the
difference is, when the Covenant is general, i. keep harmless, etc. the same
does not extend but to a lawful interruption; but when it is special against
such as one, there is extends to any interruption whatsoever. Gaudy Justice
conceived, That the breach of Covenant is well laid, i. that N. B. has entered
upon them, and removed them, 1 Inst. 384.
and be it by wrong or by right, the same is a breach, for he has not kept
harmless the Plaintiffs for the premises and profits of them, against N.B. 2.
E. 4. 15. A Bond was endorsed upon condition, That the Obligor should defend to
the Obligee for such a time, such Land whereof he had before enfeoffed him; It
was holden, That if a stranger ousteth the Obligee, without any Title, the Bond
is forfeited by reason of the word (Defend,) And although the Plaintiffs have
not laid in their Declaration, that they have entered, the same is not material;
for it is not the point of the Action. Fenner Justice conceived, That the
difference put at the Bar betwixt general Covenant and special, is good Law,
and that in case of such a special Covenant interruption without Title gives an
Action: but he conceived, that because it is not alleged that the Plaintiffs
had entered, that there was no breach of Covenant. See 9 Eliz. Dyer 257. Wray,
The words of the Covenant do amount to peaceable enjoying during the Term, and
so to an interruption without Title. Fenner, 18 E. 4. 27. A. is bound to B. to
save B. harmless from an Obligation made by the Plaintiff to one R. if R.
affirm a plaint of Debt against the said Plaintiff upon the said Bond, the Bond
of A. is forfeit; but here the Plaintiffs cannot be harmed, for they have not
entered. Gaudy, The conclusion of the Declaration is, That N.B. entered upon the
profits and removed them, so as they could not take the profits thereof; so it
is implied, that the Plaintiffs had entered, and afterward Judgment was given
for the Plaintiff.

CCCLIX. Marshes Case. Trin. 31 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
MArsh, Executor of one Nicholson, Error by Executors to reverse an Attainder
of the Testator. Owen Rep. 147. 1 Cro. 22.
brought a Writ of Error to reverse an Outlawry in Felony had against his
Testator; the Error assigned was plain; but it was moved, that this Writ of
Error would not lie. Gaudy, The Action will well lie, for by this Suit the
Plaintiff intends to reverse, and so undo the Outlawry, for which cause this
matter ought not to be objected against him, for the Executor may have this
Action as well as the Heir. Fenner Justice, Where the principal reverseth the
Attainder, the same shall extend to the Accessory. In Assise against Tenant and
disseisor, each of them may have a Writ of Error, and the reversal by the one
shall make void the Record as to both, and he needs not any Garnishment, for by
intendment the King is to have all his goods, and the King is always presumed
present in this Court, quod tota Curia concessit; and therefore there needs not
any Garnishment by Scire facias; but Wray said, we use in such cases to call
the Attorney General of the King to know if he can say any thing wherefore the
Outlawry should not be reversed. The Error assigned was, That the Exigent
issued forth into London and the Sheriff returned, that he had proclaimed the
party de Com. in Com. quousque, etc. where he ought say, de Hustingo in
Hustingum, and that was holden by the Court clearly to be Error; and afterward
at another day it was moved by Coke, That a man attainted of Felony could not
make Executors, for he is dead in Law, and as Bracton says, solus Deus facit
Haeredes and homo nominat Executores, and therefore the Heir only shall have a
Writ of Error: also an Executor cannot have a Writ of Error, but only upon a
Judgment given in a personal Action; but this Attainder is a thing of a higher
nature: as where a Woman poysoneth her Husband, the Heir shall not have an
Appeal, for Murder is changed into Treason, and that offense is a thing of a
higher nature; so this Attainder is of a higher nature than in the personalty.
Also it may be mischievous to the Heir, for the Executor may forthwith bring
and pursue his Writ of Error, by which the Judgment shall be affirmed, and so
the right of the Heir shall be bound; also when Error is brought to reverse an
Outlawry of Felony, a Scire facias ought to be sued against the Lords mediate
and immediate, which cannot be here at the Suit of the Executors: also it was
found by Enquest of the Coroner, that the Testator fugam fecit, so that thereby
if he had been acquitted, he shall lose his goods, and then the Executors have
not any reason to bring this Writ of Error; but see 11 H. 4. Error 51. That
Executors shall have a Writ of Error of an Outlawry pronounced against their
Testator, and if it be reversed they shall have restitution of the goods of the
Testator; but it does not appear there that it was upon an Indictment of
Felony. Altham, As well the Executor as the Heir is a person able for to sue a
Writ of Error in such case, as 13 E. 4. where a false oath is given against one
in Assise and dies, the Heir shall have an Attaint for the Land, and the
Executor in respect of the damages. Popham Attorney General, This Outlawry is a
real Judgment, therefore the Executor cannot have Error upon it. Wray, It is
good that this case be considered, for it may be mischievous, for thereby the
Executor shall avoid the Attainder against the King and the Lords. Fenner, That
cannot be without a Scire facias. Gaudy, The Executors shall have this Action;
and as to that which has been objected, that the party attainted cannot make
Executors, the same is no reason, for the Executors do pretend that their
Testator was not lawfully outlawed, and so by this Suit they do endeavor to
take away that disability, and therefore it ought not to be objected against
the Executor; and if the Case here be, That the Testator had not lands, but
only goods, there is no reason but that the Executors should have a Writ of
Error, otherwise the goods of the Testator should be lost; and it was clearly
holden by Wray chief Justice, That the Executor might have and pursue this Writ
of Error, the Outlawry of the Testator notwithstanding; and afterward the
Outlawry was reversed accordingly.

CCCCLX. Trussels Case. Trin. 31 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
Habeas corpus. Owen Rep. 69. ^ Cro. 213, 516. Co. 3 Inst. 213, 215.
TRussel was removed out of the Counter of London by Habeas corpus into the
Kings Bench. Egerton, The Queens Solicitor moved the Court, that Trussel was a
person attainted of Felony, and so had not any lands or goods to satisfy, etc.
and also his life was not his own; and upon the Return of the Habeas corpus it
appeared, that Trussel was detained in Prison for an Execution, and for diverse
Actions; and it was the opinion of the Court, Executions. Post 329, 330.
that as to the Execution he ought not to be discharged, for then the party
should lose his debt for ever; but as to the other actions, it was the opinion
of all the Justices, that Trussel ought to be discharged of them; for a man so
attainted ought not to be put to answer, nor taken in Execution, and so are all
our Books; And they said that they had conferred with the Justices of the
Common Pleas, and with the Barons of the Exchequer; which were of a contrary
opinion in this case upon the very matter, and not upon the manner of the
pleading; but yet we will discharge our Consciences as we have done, for there
is not any Book against us, Egerton stetit super semitas antiquas, and at last
it was awarded, That Trussel should be discharged of all Actions brought
against him.

CCCCLXI. Sovers Case. Trin. 31 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
SOver and others were Indicted upon the Statute of 8 H. 6. Indictments upon
the Statute of 8 H. 6.
of forcible Entry, because they had expulsed one A. out of his Land, and
disseised the Mayor and Commonalty of London, who were in Reversion, and the
same being removed hither, Restitution was prayed thereupon, and White for the
City, who was in Reversion; and the Lessor prayed that no Restitution might be,
for they had let the House to another, Restitution. Yelv. 81. Die. 141, 142.
and that he who had procured this Indictment claimed in by a Custom of London,
That the Executor of the last Termor should not be put out, if he shall give as
much for it as any other will, whereas in truth there is not any such Custom,
and for that cause the Restitution was stayed; and it was said by the Court,
that Restitution shall be always made to him in the Reversion, and not to the
Lessee for years, for he who is disseised shall be restored, and then the
Lessee may re-enter.

CCCCLXII. Beal and Carters Case. Trin. 31 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
IN an Action of false Imprisonment, False Imprisonment. Owen Rep. 98, 287.
the Defendant justified because the Plaintiff brought a Child of the age of
six years, and not above, into the Parish Church of W. and eundem ibidem
relinquere voluisset, and intendisset, without keeping or nourishment, to the
danger and destruction of the Child, and contra pacem, for which the Defendant
being Constable of the said Parish arrested the Plaintiff, and put him in
prison until he did agree and promise to carry the Child from whence it came,
upon which the Plaintiff did demur in Law. It was moved, that the Justification
was good, for every Subject might do it, a fortiori a Constable; and if in this
case the Child, being so exposed, should be famished for want of nourishment it
had been murder, as it was holden at Winchester before the Lord chief Baron, 20
Eliz. Another Exception was taken to the Plea, because he says (quendam
infantem) without naming him, and he ought to say Quendam infantem ignotum;
Antea 56.
but that Exception was not allowed. Another Exception (ibidem relinquere
intendisset) but he does not say, that he did depart from it, and then his
meaning is not traversable, or issuable, or to be tried by Jurors. See 22 E. 4.
45. Gaudy Justice, It was a great offense in the Plaintiff, but the same ought
to be punished according to Law; but the Constable cannot imprison a Subject at
his pleasure, but according to Law, i. to stay him and bring him before a
Justice of the Peace to be there examined. Wray, If the Defendant had pleaded,
that he stayed the Plaintiff upon that matter, to have brought him before a
Justice of Peace, it had been a good Plea. Fennor, The justification had been
good, if the Defendant had pleaded, that the Plaintiff refused to carry away
the Child, so all the Justices were of opinion against the Plea; but they would
not give Judgment by reason of the ill Example, but they left the parties to
compound the matter.

CCCCLXIII. Cole and Walls Case. Pasch. 33 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
Ejectione Custodiae lies not upon a Copyhold Estate. 1 Cro. 224.
IN an Ejectione Custodiae the Plaintiff declared, that A. was seized of the
Manor of D. within which Manor are diverse Copyholds of Inheritance; and that
the Custom of the Manor is, that if any Copyholder of Inheritance of the said
Manor dies, his heir within the age of 14 years, that then the Lord of the
Manor might grant the custody of his Body and Lands to whom he pleased; and
showed, that one Clevertie a Copyholder of Inheritance of the said Manor died,
his son and heir within the age of 14 years, Hob. 215. Dyer 302, 303.
upon which the Lord of the Manor committed the custody of his Body and Lands
to the Plaintiff, and the Defendant did eject him, and upon Not guilty it was
found for the Plaintiff. It was moved in arrest of Judgment, That this Action
would not lie upon a Copyhold estate, Quod tota Curia concessit; and yet it was
said, that an Ejectione firmae lies upon a demise of Copyhold Land, by Lease
of a Copyholder himself, but not upon a demise by the Lord of the Copyhold,
Quod fuit concessum; and afterward the Case was moved on the Plaintiffs side,
and it was said, That this was but an Action upon the Case, in the nature of an
Ejectione firmae, and this interest is not granted by Copy, but entered only
into the Court Roll: so it is not an interest by Copy, but by the Common Law,
for the words are, Quod Dominus commisit custodiam, etc. and does not say in
Curia; and afterward Judgment was given for the Plaintiff.

CCCCLXIV. Bond and Bailes Case. Trin. 33 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
Judgment upon a Bond where satisfied before a Statute. ^ Len. 37^. Roll. 926.
BOnd brought a Scire facias against Bailes, Administrator of one T. B. upon a
Recovery had against the Intestate in Action of Debt. The Defendant pleaded,
That before the said Judgment given, the Testator did acknowledge a Statute
Staple to one C. and that the Son was not paid in the life of the Testator nor
after, and that they have not in their hands any goods of the Intestate beyond
what will satisfy the said Statute; upon which there was a demurrer in Law.
And Coke argued, That the Bar is not good, for here is not pleaded any
Execution upon the Statute, and then the Judgment, the Statute being of things
of as high nature; that of which Execution is sued shall be first served; and
if this Action had been brought upon a Bond the Plea had not been good: for
although that Brian says, 21 E. 4. That Recognizances shall be paid by
Executors before Bonds, yet that it is to be intended when a Scire facias is to
be sued upon it, otherwise not: And 4 H. 6. 8. in a Scire facias upon a
Judgment fully administered at the day of the Writ brought is a good Plea; by
which it appears, That if the Executors had paid the Debt upon the Obligation
before the Writ brought, it had been good. See 12 E. 3. Executors 73. in a
Scire facias upon a Judgment in Debt given against the Testator, Enquiry shall
be what goods the Executors had the day of the Scire facias: and he said, it
was moved by Anderson, 20 Eliz. in this Court. In Debt upon a Bond against
Executors; the Defendant pleaded, that the Testator was indebted by Judgment to
A. and that they had not more than to satisfy the same, and it was holden no
plea, if not that he pleaded further, that a Scire facias was sued upon it.
Wray said, The same is not Law, and there is a difference when the Judgment is
given against the Testator himself, and where against the Executors; for where
Judgments are given against Executors, the Judgment which was given before
shall be first executed; but if two Judgments be given against the Testator, he
who first sues Execution against the Executors shall be first satisfied,
because they are things of equal nature, and before Suit it is in the election
of the Executor which of them he will pay. See 9 E. 4. 12. As if two men have
Tallies out of the Exchequer, he which first offers his Tally to the Officer
shall be first paid; but before that, it is in the choice of the Officer which
of them shall be first satisfied; and therefore 19 H. 6. If the Lease enrolled
be lost, the Enrolment is not of any effect, and Pasch. 20 Eliz. our very case
was moved in the Common Pleas, in a Scire facias upon a Judgment given against
the Testator; the Executor pleaded, That the Testator had acknowledged a
Statute before not satisfied, Ultra quae, etc. and it was holden no Plea, for a
Statute is but a private and pocket Record, as they called it; and 32 Eliz.
betwixt Conny and Barham the same Plea was pleaded, and holden no Plea. Also if
this Plea should be allowed, Conny and Barhams Case.
great mischiefs would follow: for then no Debts should be satisfied by the
Executors, for it might be that the Statute was made for performance of
Covenants, which Covenants perhaps shall never be broken: and afterward
Judgment was given for the Plaintiff.

CCCCLXV. Crew and Bails Case. Trin. 32 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
A Writ of Error was brought upon a Judgment given in the Common Pleas, Error.
1 Cro. 216.
in a Bill of privilege brought by an Attorney of the said Court upon an
Obligation; and upon the said Judgment issued forth process of Execution, upon
which the Defendant was Outlawed; and the Error was assigned in this, That upon
that Judgment process of Outlawry does not lie, for Capias is not in the
original Action; Privilege.
and so was the opinion of the whole Court, being upon a Bill of privilege,
and the Outlawry was reversed, and the Error was assigned in the first
Judgment, because there were not fifteen days betwixt the Test of the Venire
facias and the return of it; but that was not allowed, for it is helped by the
Statute of 18 Eliz. cap. 14.

CCCCLXVI. Wade and Presthalls Case. Trin. 30 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
WIlliam Wade brought an Action of Debt against Presthall; the Defendant
pleaded, That he was attainted of Treason, Debt. Ante 326.
not restored, nor pardoned, and demanded Judgment if he should be put to
answer, upon which the Plaintiff did demur. It was argued for the Plaintiff,
that the Plea is not good, for the Defendant shall not take benefit of his own
wrong: A person attainted gives his goods, Plea in disability of himself not
a^lo^ed.
he shall not avoid it; A Woman takes a Husband, thereby she has abated her
own Writ. It is true, That a person attainted is a dead man, it is so as to
himself, but not as to others, 33 H. 6. a person attainted is murdered, his
Wife shall have an Appeal, so as to all respects he is not dead, and although
as yet the Plaintiff cannot have any Execution against the Defendant, yet here
is a possibility to have Execution, if the Defendant get his pardon: As a man
shall have Warrantia Chartae although he be not impleaded, and yet cannot have
Execution, but there is a possibility to have Execution, 22 E. 3. 19. A Rent
granted to one in Fee upon condition, that if the Grantee die, his heir within
age, that the Rent shall cease during the nonage, the Grantee dies, his heir
within age, his Wife brought Dower presently and recovered, and yet she cannot
have Execution, but yet there is a possibility to have Execution, viz. upon the
full age of the heir. Coke contr. By his Attainder he has lost his Goods,
Lands, Life, Degree, for he is now become Terrae filius, and he cannot draw
blood from his Father, nor afford blood to his Son or his posterity, so as he
has neither Ancestor nor Heir; and as to the possibility the same is very
remote, for the Law does not intend that he shall be pardoned; and see 6 H. 4
64. A man committed a Felony, and afterward committed another Felony, and
after is attainted of one of them, he shall not be put to answer to the other;
but if he obtain his Charter of pardon, he shall answer to the other. See also
10 H. 4. 227. tit. Coronae. Popham Attorney General; The Defendant ought to
answer, for none shall have advantage of his own wrong: The Plaintiff is made a
Knight pendant the Writ, it shall abate because his own Act; but here Treasons
are so heinous, that none shall have ease, benefit, or discharge thereby: And
if the Defendant shall not be put to answer until he has his pardon, then the
Action is now suspended, and an Action personal once suspended is gone for
ever; and he cited 29 E. 3. 61. in the Book of Assizes, where it is said by
Sharp, Execution upon a Statute may be sued against a man attainted; and he
said, Execution against a person Attainted.
That if the Enemy of the King comes into England, and becomes bounden to a
Subject in twenty pounds he shall be put to answer, notwithstanding that
interest that the King has in him. Harris Sergeant to the same intent, he
conceived by 33 H. 6. 1. That Traitors are to answer; for if Traitors break the
Goal, the Jailer shall answer for their escape, for the Jailer has remedy
against them, contrary of the Kings Enemies; Burchets Case.
and he cited the case of one Burchet, who being attainted of Treason struck
another in the Tower, for which notwithstanding his Attainder he was put to
answer. Egerton Solicitor General: And he said, That the Action is not
suspended; but in as much as every Action is used to recover a thing detained,
or to satisfy a wrong, if it can appear that the party cannot be satisfied
according to his case he shall not proceed: And in this case the Plaintiff, if
he should obtain Judgment could not have Execution by the Common Law, Ante 213.
for he has no Goods, nor by the Statute of Westminster. 2. by Elegit, for he has
no Lands, nor by the Statute of 25 E. 3. by his body, for it is at the Kings
pleasure, and then to what purpose shall the Plaintiff sue; and it is a general
Rule, Regula.
That in all Actions where the thing demanded cannot be had, or the person
against whom the thing is demanded cannot yield the thing, that the Writ shall
abate: As in a Writ of Annuity by Grantee of an Annuity for years the term
expireth, the Writ shall abate; Abatement of Writ.
Tenant in special tail brings Wast, and pendant the Writ his issue dies, the
Writ shall abate, etc. 2 E. 4. 1. A man Outlawed of Felony pleaded in
dis-affirmance of the Outlawry, and yet he was not put to answer until he had
his pardon, and then he shall answer: And as to the Case of 33 H. 6. 1. It does
not appear that the Traitors were attainted, and then there is good remedy
enough: And Burchets Case cannot be resembled to our Case, for although that by
the Attainder the body of the party might be at the Kings pleasure, yet his
body may be punished for another offense, for the example of others. And as to
Tressels Case, who in such case was put to answer, I grant it, for he concluded
Judgment if Action, and so admitted him a person able to answer, and then it
could not be a good plea in Bar. And in Ognels Case, the Retorn of the Sheriff
shall bind them, for upon Process against a person attainted they returned
Cepi, where they ought to have returned the special matter without a Cepi; but
now this general Return shall bind them, and by that he shall be concluded to
say, that the party was not in Execution: And this Plea is not any disabling of
the Defendant; but he informs the Judges, that he is not a person able to
answer to the Plaintiff. As in a Praecipe quod reddat the party pleads
Non-tenure, the same is no disabling of his person, but a showing to the Court
that he cannot yield to the party his demand: A man shall not take advantage of
his own wrong, i. in the same thing in which the wrong is supposed, or against
him against whom the wrong is supposed to be done; but in other Cases he shall
take advantage of his own wrong, as Littleton, If a Lease for life be made, the
Remainder over in Fee, and he in the Remainder enters upon Tenant for life,
and disseiseth him, the same is a good Seisin, Cases where a man shall take
advantage of his own wrong. Marbery and Worrals Case.
upon which he may have a Writ of Right, Littleton 112. 35 E. 3. Droit 30. And
yet this Seisin was by wrong. And there was a Case betwixt Marbery and Worral
in the Exchequer, The Lessor entered upon his Lessee for life, made a Feoffment
in Fee with clause of Re-entry, the Lessee re-entred, the Lessor at the day
came upon the Land and demanded the Rent which was not paid; it was holden the
same is a good demand of the Rent, and yet he is a Trespassor to the Lessee.
And in another Case, A man shall take advantage of his own wrong, Fitz. N.B.
35. N. An Infant has an Advowson by descent, the Church becomes void, he who
has Right paramount usurps, and presents to the Church, and the 6 months pass;
now by this tortious usurpation he is remitted, and the Infant out of
possession, and without remedy: And he cited the Case 16 H. 7. 10. A Scire
facias out of a Fine was brought against an Abbot, by which Fine the
Predecessor of the Abbot granted to find a Priest to sing Mass in such a
Chapel, etc. and the Abbot pleaded, That the said Chapel was become ruinous
and decayed, so as no Priest could sing Mass there; and it was prayed on the
part of the Plaintiff, that forasmuch as the Covenant is confessed, that
Judgment be given, but that Execution should cease until the Chapel be
rebuilt; but it was not allowed, for this is a good Bar for the time, and no
Judgment shall be given, for it shall be in vain, for it cannot be executed
because there is no Chapel, and it may be the Chapel shall never be built
again: And so in the principal Case, etc. It was adjorned.

CCCCLXVII. Knightley and Spencers Case. Trin. 33 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
IN a Prohibition betwixt Knightley and Spencer, The Case was, Prohibition.
More Rep. 528. 2 Co. 47, 48. 2 Cro. 452.
That Ph. Abbot of Evesham, and all his Predecessors time out of mind, etc.
were seized as well of the Rectory impropriate of B. in the County of N. and
also of the Manor of B. in the same Parish, etc. until the dissolution of his
House; and that by reason thereof the said Abbot and all the Predecessors had
holden the said Manor discharged of payment of Tithes until the dissolution,
etc. and showed the branch of the Statute of 31 H. 8. And that the said Abbot
did surrender the Possessions of the said House to the King, and that the King
held the same discharged of the payment of Tithes; and that afterward the King
granted unto the Ancestor of Knightley the said Manor, and to the Ancestor of
Spencer the said Rectory, and although the Plaintiff ought de jure to hold the
said Manor discharged of Tithes, yet the Defendant sued him in the Spiritual
Court, etc. To which the Defendant confessing the Impropriation, pleaded, That
the said Abbot was seized, ut supra; but that before the making of the said
Statute of 31 H. 8. the said Abbot demised Decimas Rectoriae praedict. to one
Spencer for 70 years, who made the Defendant his Executor, and died, and that
at the time of the said Demise, and dissolution of the said Abbey, one Goodman
and others were possessed of the said Manor until the year 1585. which was the
year before the Suit began in the Spiritual Court, and that at the time of the
dissolution he paid Tithes for it, and now the Plaintiff refuses to pay, etc.
absque hoc, That the Abbot and his Predecessors held the said Manor quit of the
payment of Tithes time out of mind, etc. upon which the Plaintiff did demur in
Law. Coke, for the Plaintiff, That this Unity of possession is a discharge
within the Statute of 31 H 8. the words of which are, Unity of possession a
discharge of Tithes.
That the King and his assigns shall have and enjoy the Lands discharged and
acquitted of Tithes, as freely as the said Abbot held the same at the day of
the dissolution: And see before, whereas diverse Abbots were acquitted and
discharged of, and for the payment of Tithes; for the Statute does not intend a
real discharge, as by composition or such manner, which is not here, but only a
suspension, which is not any discharge in Law; and yet in speaking of discharge
ordinarily, an actual discharge is understood, As if I be bound by Obligation
to discharge one of such a Bond, it is not enough to pay the money, but I ought
to procure an actual Discharge where it is put generally, but where it is put
secundum quid, as it is here referred to the Dissolution, a suspension is a
Discharge intended in the said Statute; but where the Statute is indefinite
there an actual Discharge is understood, but restrained to a time a suspension
suffices, and truly it is a discharge within the intent of the Statute; for if
the Statute shall be intended of an absolute discharge, and a Discharge in Law
only, the Statute had been superfluous, for the Law said so much before; for
without such provision the King and his Assigns held discharged from payment of
Tithes. But the makers of the Statute knew well enough, that the Abbot might
have such discharge by diverse means, and it should be infinite for the party
interessed to enquire of them all; and therefore they did enact briefly, That
if at the time of the dissolution they were in any manner freed of payment of
Tithes the same should be sufficient, and so here is not any wrong unto any,
for the Parson had all as he had before, and the same is like to the case
betwixt Wharton and Morley, 7 Eliz. in the Exchequer, the Report of which Mr.
Plowden communicated unto me, and it was upon the Statute of 1 E. 6. cap. 14.
of Monasteries, That all Grants made to the King by any Provost, Wharton and
Marleys Case.
Governor, etc. of any Manor, etc. shall be good, etc. and the Case was, That
a Prebend of the Church of York surrendered to the King, but the Surrender was
never enrolled, and yet adjudged good upon the Statute; for if it was a lawful
Surrender the same had been good of it self, without any aid of the Statute,
which was made to supply insufficient assurances, and so in our Case for the
cause aforesaid, and it should be injurious to drive the Jury to enquire of the
manner of the Discharge, if it were by composition upon the foundation, or by
dispensation of the Pope, as Cistere. Templarii: And here the Plaintiff has
declared of an Impropriation before time of memory; and so before the Council
of Lateran, which was within those 400 years; and 25 Eliz. there was a Sussex
Case, where the Plaintiff declared as here, but they would not proceed; and see
Dyer 10 Eliz. 277, 278. The Prior of St. John has privilege from Rome, that
he shall not pay Tithes for any Land quas propriis manibus aut sumptibu^
excolant, but their Farmers have paid Tithes; and it was holden, that in the
hands of the Farmers Tithes should be paid, but after the Term ended the
Patentee should hold discharged, so as the Statute has a favorable
construction upon this point. Now it is (...) if the Lease of the Rectory by
which the Defendants claim be good or not, and then admitting that Tithes are
due in this Case, yet if his Lease be void he shall not have a Consultation,
especially if it appears upon his own showing, as it was holden in a
Hampshire Case betwixt Sutton and Dowze, Sutton and Dowzes Case. 2 Len. 55. 3
Len. 155, 164.
which see Mich. 25 and 26 Eliz. and in that case the Lease is void, for it was
made within a year after the Statute of 31 H. 8. the January before, and the
Statute in April after, for he has not averred, that the usual Rent is
reserved, nor that the Land was usually let to farm, for which Leases otherwise
made within the year are absolutely void by the said Statute: But it will be
objected, Ante 306. 1 Cro. 707, 708. Heydons Case.
That this matter shall come in of our part, and it is sufficient for them to
plead the Case; but it is not so, as it was lately agreed in Heydons Case in
the Exchequer, where the Case was, That the Warden and Canons of the College
of Otery leased certain Lands to Heydon for years, and he in pleading of his
Lease did not show that the ancient Rent was reserved, and therefore naught;
and so was the opinion of the Justices of the Common Pleas, Lord Cromwell and
All Souls Case.
in the Case betwixt the Lord Cromwell and All Souls College, upon the Statute
of 18 Eliz. cap. 6. upon a branch of it, by which it was provided, that the
third part of the Rent reserved upon any Lease should be paid in Corn, etc. and
the Leases made to the contrary should be void; and in an Ejectione firmae
brought upon such Lease, because it was not showed in the Declaration, that the
Corn was reserved according to the Statute, Judgment was arrested, and we need
not to plead the Statute; for although the Statute be particular, yet because
the King has interest in it, it shall be holden in Law a general Act, and the
Judges shall take notice of it, although it be not alleged by the party, as it
was ruled in the Lord Barcklays Case, 4 Eliz. Plow. 231. but if such Rent was
reserved, yet the Lease cannot be good, for the King cannot have his Rent,
because it is not incident to the Reversion, nor passes by the Grant of the
Reversion; for it is not a Rent, but rather a sum due by reason of contract,
which see 30 Ass. 6. A man leaseth a Hundred, rendering Rent, or grants a Rent
out of a Hundred, the same is not a good Rent, but merely void; for a Hundred
is not Manorable, nor can be put in view, nor any Assize lies of such Rent.
See 9 Ass. 24. and in 20 Eliz. in the Case betwixt Corbet and Clear, 7 Co. 5.
Corbet and Cleers Case.
the Dean and Chapter of Norwich leased a Parsonage and common of Pasture,
rendering Rent, 1 E. 6. they surrendered their possessions to the King, and
afterward the King granted the Parsonage without speaking of the common of
Pasture. It was holden, that the Patentee of the Parsonage should have all the
Rent, and no apportionment should be in respect of the Common; for all the Rent
issues out of the Parsonage, and nothing out of the Common: So here, 2 Co. 48.
for Tithes are not an Hereditament, which cannot support a Rent within this
Statute, for which cause the Lease is void: Also he said, that the traverse of
the Defendant was not well taken, for the Plaintiff has said, That time out of
mind, etc. the Abbot and his Predecessors were seized of the Rectory and Manor
aforesaid, simul and semel, and ratione inde, was discharged, etc. at the time
of the dissolution; the Defendant traverseth absque hoc, that the Abbot and his
Predecessors held discharged of Tithes time out of mind, etc. which is not
good, for he has traversed our conclusion; for our plea is an argument,
wheresoever is unity time out of mind, etc. there is a discharge of Tithes, but
in the Abbot was such an Unity, ergo he held discharged of Tithes, as 21 E. 3.
22. In a Praecipe quod reddat, the Tenant says, that the Land in demand is
parcel of the Manor of D. which is ancient Demesne, and, etc. to which the
Plaintiff says. That it is Frank-fee, and the same was not good, for he denies
the conclusion; but he ought to plead to the nature of the Manor, that it is
not ancient Demesne, or that the Land in demand is not parcel of it. Another
matter was, because it is pleaded fuit in tenura and occupatione of Goodman and
others; but he did not show by what Title, Disseisin or Lease, or other Title,
etc. Buckley contrary, And he said, This unity of possession is not any
discharge of Tithes by the said Statute; and as to the Case cited before, of 3
H. 7. 12. where Tenant in tail of a Rent enters upon the Tenant of the Land,
now is the Rent suspended, and then after when he makes a Feoffment in fee, by
that Feoffment the Rent is extinguished, which was but suspended at the time of
the Feoffment; and therefore some have holden, that if after such Entry he
makes a Lease for life of the Land, that his Rent or Seigniory is utterly gone
in perpetuum, for by the Livery all passes out of him, which he said cannot be
Law; and so it seemed to Gaudy Justice, Then upon such Feoffment with warranty
he could not vouch as of Land discharged of the Rent generally, but as of Land
discharged at the time of the Feoffment, which proves that the suspension is
not a discharge, for it was suspended before the Feoffment, and discharged by
the Feoffment, and so suspension is not a discharge, a fortiori in the Case of
Tithes, for in the case of Common, and Rent, although they are suspended so as
they cannot be actually taken, yet they are to some intent in esse: As where
Lands holden of other Lords are in the hands of the King for Primer seisin by
reason of Prerogative, and during such seisin of the King the Lord gets seisin,
the same is a good seisin notwithstanding that it was suspended so as he could
not distrain: And also in Assize of Land, damages as to the Rent out of the
Land shall be recouped, therefore the rent in some sort is in esse, and a multo
fortiori, this Tithe (which is a thing of common Right) shall be in esse, but
goes with the Land, A Rent in esse to some purposes, and suspended to other.
and therefore by unity of possession shall not be suspended, 35 H. 6. He who
has liberty of Warren in the Lands of another enters into the Land, the
Warren is not suspended, nor by Feoffment of the Land is extinct; and in this
Case upon the matter, during the unity of possession the Tithes were paid,
although not in specie: Also the Abbot had the Tithes as Parson of B. and the
Land as Abbot, and therefore no suspension, for the Tithes were always in esse,
although not taken in the manner, as Tithes commonly are, but by way of
Retainer, 22 E. 4. 44. A Writ of Annuity is brought against a Prior, and it
appeared, That the Prior and his Successors have used to pay the Annuity as
Parson of D. and not as Priors, which Parsonage was appointed to the said
Priory time out of mind, and in the Writ the Defendant was named Prior only,
and not Parson, and therefore the Writ was abated. See 14 E. 4. 4. 10 H. 7. 5.
In an Action of Wast: So Bracebridges Case, 14 Eliz. Plowd. 420. The Case put
by Catiline, If the Parson, Patron and Ordinary make a Lease for years, and
afterward the Lessee becomes there Incumbent, the Term is not extinct, for he
has the Term in his own Right, and the inheritance in the Right of his Church,
which see 30 H. 8. Dyer 43. A Parson purchases, and after leaseth his
Parsonage, he himself shall pay Tithes notwithstanding this Unity; and as to
the reason of the other side, That if such discharge of Tithes be not intended
by the Statute, but only a Discharge in Law, the Statute should be in vain, the
same is not so; for if the Abbot had been discharged by way of Release of
Composition, for the Monastery being dissolved the Appropriation had been good,
if it had not been supported by the Statute, and then the Release and
Composition of no force, and the King should not take advantage of it but by
this Statute; and as to Whartons Case before cited, the same cannot be Law, for
it has been holden upon the Statute of 18 Eliz. of Confirmations, That if an
Infant makes a Lease to the King, the same is not made good by the Statute,
for the said Statute extends to imperfections in circumstances, and not in
substance. And although the Lease be not good, yet because the matter of the
surmise is naught, although our Bar be naught, a Consultation ought to be
granted, also our Lease is well pleaded, and if such defect be in it, as has
been objected, the same ought to come in by Plea on the other side; and it is
not like Heydons Case, for there it was found by special Verdict, not to
Cromwells Case, where such defect was in the Declaration, and so no ground of
Action; as to the Traverse it is good enough, as if special Bastardy be pleaded
against one born before the marriage, and so Bastard, the other party shall
traverse generally the Bastardy, and not the special matter, but for the
principal matter, i. this unity of possession, diverse rules have been. 5 Eliz.
in the Common Pleas, the Case was, An Abbot had a Manor within the Parish of D.
and a Composition was made betwixt the Parson of D. and the said Abbot, that
the Parson should have yearly certain Loads of Wood, out of thirty Acres of the
said Manor, for, and in recompense of all the Tithes of Wood there, afterward
the Parsonage was appropriated to the said Abbot, and afterward the house was
dissolved, and the Manor granted to one, and the Rectory to another, and it was
holden, That the portion of the Tithes was removed, for he had them, scil. The
Manor and the Tithes in several Rights. And Manwood Chief Baron, and Periam
Justice, to whom a Case depending in the Chancery was referred concerning the
discharge of Tithes by unity of possession, delivered their opinions, That such
an Unity is not any discharge within the said Statute. It was adjorned.

CCCCLXVIII. Hoskins and Stupers Case. Mich. 32 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
IN an Action upon the Case, the Plaintiff declared, Assumpsit.
That whereas the Plaintiff had sold to the Defendant 1000 couple of Newland
Fishes to the use of the Defendant, and in consideration that he should ship,
and should bring and carry the adventure of them from Bristol, in portum of
Saint Lucar and should carry back again the value of the said Fish to London or
Bristoll secundum usum Mercatorum, The Defendant did promise, that upon the
arrival of the said Fish, in portum of St. Lucar, he would give to the
Plaintiff 112 l. and said, that he arrived with the said Fish, ad portum of St.
Lucar, and that afterward he arrived with goods of the value of the said Fish,
ad portum of London, secundum usum Mercatorum. It was holden by all the Judges,
that in portum, and ad portum is all one, Exposition of words.
as the Statute of Wast is, Quod vicecomes accedat ad locum vastatum, yet he
ought to enter into the Land: So the Writ of accedas ad Curiam, and in plena
Curia recordari facias, etc. Another Exception was, because he declared, That
he returned with goods to the value, and does not say, whose goods they were;
but the Exception was not allowed, for these words secundum usum mercatorum
imply that they were the goods of the Defendant, Quod fuit concessum per
Curiam, and afterward Judgment was given for the Plaintiff.

CCCCLXIX. Walgrave and Agurs Case. Trin. 32 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
SIr William Walgrave brought an Action upon the Case against Agur upon these
words spoken by the Defendant to a servant of the Plaintiff, Action for
scandalous words. 1 Cro. 191.
It is well known, that I am a true subject, but thou ( innuendo the said
servant) servest no true subject, and thine own conscience may accuse thee
thereof. It was moved in arrest of Judgment, That these words are not
actionable, for no slander comes to the Plaintiff thereby, for perhaps the
Party served no man, but the Queen, and if the words may receive such sense,
S^vage and Cooks Case.
which is no pregnant proof of infamy, they are not actionable, as in the Case
betwixt Savage and Cook, These words; Thou art not the Queens friend, are not
actionable, for it might be they were spoken in respect of some ordinary
misdemeanors, as in not payment of Subsidies, or the like: Also it is not
averred, that the party to whom the words were spoken, was the Plaintiffs
servant. Coke, Where a man is touched in the duty of his Office, or in the
course of life, an Action lies, although that otherwise the words are not
actionable, and here is set forth in the Declaration, That the Plaintiff at the
time of the speaking of the said words, was a Justice of Peace, and Sheriff of
Suffolk, and Captain of a Troop of 120 Horse to attend the Preservation of the
Queens person: So in respect of place and dignity in the Commonwealth, as 2 H.
8. The Bishop of Winchester brought an action upon the Statute of Scandal.
Magnatum, upon these words, My Lord of Winchester sent for me, and imprisoned
me, until I made a Release to J. S. and in respect of his Place and Dignity the
words were holden actionable: and 9 Eliz. Dyer, In an action upon the Case by
the Lord Aburgaveney against Wheeler, My Lord of Aburgaveney sent for us, and
put some of us into the Coal-house, and some into the Stocks, and me into a
place in his house called Little Ease, and the words were holden actionable:
Kinseys Case.
So in our Case, Jews said, It was the Case of one Kinsey; one said to a
Bailiff of a Franchise, Thou did execute false Warrants, without saying, they
were falsified by him, adjudged an Action did not lie. Wray Chief Justice,
These words in themselves are not actionable, for the Plaintiff might be untrue
in small things, which gave no discredit, but the quality of the person of whom
they were spoken, may add weight to them, as to call one Bankrupt generally, no
action lies upon it, but to call a Merchant so is actionable. So to call o^e
Papist, no action lies for it; But if one call the Archbishop of Canterbury
so, an action will lie, for he is Governor of the Church. Thou art an untrue
man to the Queen, gives not an action to an ordinary Subject, but such words
spoken of one of the Privy Council, are actionable. Corrupt man, in themselves
are not actionable, but being spoken of a Judge, an action lies. It was
Birchleys Case, an Attorney of this Court, Thou art a corrupt man, and dealest
corruptly, and it was adjudged per Curiam, that the words were actionable, for
that refers to his calling. Gaudy was of opinion, that the words were
actionable of themselves, without respect had to the Quality of the person of
whom they were spoken, for the words are particular enough; and to touch him in
the duty of a Subject, which is to be faithful to his natural Prince, is a
great Reproach and Slander. Fenner conceived, that the words were not
actionable. Wray, as before, Of themselves they are not actionable, for they
are in general, for if he be indicted of Trespass, he is not a good Subject.

THE TABLE OF THE MATTERS IN THIS BOOK.
A.
ABatement of Writ, 56, 57, 138, 157, 210, 216, 352, 445, 466 Action, 216 Of
Assault and Battery, 63 De bonis Testatoris, 277
Action upon the Case, 199, 234, 249, 263, 321 For taking Toll, 315 For
stopping a Way, 319 A Watercourse, 334
Action upon the Case for Words, 111, 131, 173, 179, 263, 469 Against a Justice
of Peace, for not examining, 456 Action upon Statutes, Of 27 Eliz. of Huy and
Cry, 456 Of Winchester, of Huy and Cry, 72 Of 5 Eliz. cap. 9. 166 Of 5 Ed. 6.
for Striking, 337 Of 8 H. 6. 382
Acceptance, 176 Of Rent, 348
Account, 17, 109, 301 By the Heir of a Copyholder, 357
Adjornment, 184 Advantage of his own wrong, 466 Admiralty, 144 Administration,
435 Advowson, 84, 272, 283, 289 Alienation, 6, 50 Alien, 61 Amercements, 145,
299, 327 Amendment, 102, 30 Annuity. 292 Appropriations, 49, 316 Appeal, 67,
447 Of Mayhem, does not lie after a Re-Recovery in Trespass, 447
Apportionment, 33, 429 Appearance, 114 By Attorney, 397
Arbitrament, 37, 95, 97, 137 Archdeaconry, 442 Not a Cure of Souls, ib.
Assize, 30, 69, 343 Assets, 107, 153, 154, 215, 448, 306, 363, 440
Assignments, 391 Assault and Battery, 63, 64, 143, 169, 191 Attachment upon
Prohibition, 151 Attachment upon the Custom of London, 35, 67, 268, 278 Of
Goods, 278, 353, 452
Attainder, 27, 221, 279, 466 Where it shall lose Dower, and e contr. 7 What
forfeited by it, 27
Attaint, 377, 445 Attornment, 11, 75, 316, 355, 397, 408 Attorney, 427 Ought
to pursue his Authority, 427
Assumpsit, 23, 55, 121, 156, 80, 159, 167, 168, 180, 214, 217, 222, 238, 240,
241, 261, 303, 317, 323, 340, 401, 405, 410 Consideration in it, where good,
where not, 23, 55, 80, 121, 134, 156, 241, 253, 261, 340 Upon Mutuatus, 214
Averment, 18, 21, 23, 85, 102, 167, 285, 334, 338, 379, 447 Not traversable,
18 Superfluous, 21 Not against a Fine or Record, 102 157 Not against
Certificate of the Bishop, 285 Of a Feoffment not proved shall not avoid Dower,
431
Avowry, 16, 18, 56, 103, 277 Auditor, 301 Audita Querela, 98, 195, 196, 310
313, 421 Award, 95, 47, 137, 194, 238, 424 443 Ancient demesne, 315
B.
BAil, 74 Bailment of Goods to a Carrier, 278 Bargain and Sale, 34, 79, 120,
223, 237 Not so strong as a Livery, 10 Where void, and e contra, 17 To the
Queen, 40 Of Trees. 321 Bar, 24, 30, 92, 161, 170, 240, 277, 429, 437, 440
Where good in Assize, and e contra, 30 Recovery pleaded where no Bar, 70 Ought
to be traversed, confessed and avoided, 102 Where a Fine is no Bar, 297
Baron and Feme, 386 Bill, 32
C.
CHarge, 11, 418 Covenant, 21, 82, 120, 158, 160, 170, 186, 188, 211, 252, 290,
339, 429, 446, 458 Shall not bind Executors, 3 Not supply the defects of words
in a Grant. 4 Quod non maritaret, 67 To stand seized to uses, 279
Conspiracy, 146, 269 Confirmation, 61, 316 Certiorare and certificate, 12, 28,
69 114, 285 Collation gains not the Patronage from the King, 307 Challenge, 9,
68, 112 Commission repealed, 363 Common, 56, 100 Claim, 429 Conditions, 47, 97,
233, 242, 311, 331, 400, 409 Where not bind an Administrator, 6 Not to alien,
not bind Administrator, 6, 409 Where to the Land, and e contra, 6 Shall not
avoid an Interest vested, 11 Void, because against Law, 99 Annexed to an use
executed to the possession, 409 Request amounts to a Condition, 306 Not to
discontinue, 409 Taken strictly, 425
Consultation, 13, 27, 29, 123, 127, 177, 255, 411 Conusans, 33, 64, 294
Conspiracy, 269 Construction of Deeds, 101 Commissioners of Bankrupts, 35
Churchwardens, 248 Copiholds and Copiholders, 1, 19, 46, 70, 124, 126, 128,
133, 139, 237, 243, 244, 365, 408 Admittance, 244, 408 Of an Enfant, 128
Forfeited for Felony, 1 Seized for breaking the Lords Decree, 2 Is an estate,
8, 128 Shall maintain Ejectione firmae, 8 Dower of it, and e contra, 19
Grantable by the Lord, 70 Within what Statutes, 126 Forfeiture of them, 128
Surrenders of them, 226, 250, 273, 408, 409 In extremis, 128, 133, 243 By one
in Prison, 45 Out of Court, 309
Corporations, 36, 228 Costs. 142, 177, 444 Where Damages are given, 382
Covin, 253
Counts, 53, 146, 212, 240, 241, 453 Writ general, count special, 307 314, 329
Courts Baron, and Leet, 33, 299 Cui in vita, 210 Customs, 143, 178, 277, 315,
438 Taken strictly, 3 Of granting Copy-holds, 70 To take Recognizances, 178 To
make Bylaws, 270 Of London, 357, 358 To make Reparations, 438 Applied to part
of a Town, 438 Ad pasturandum, non ad colendum, 19

D.
DAmages, 41, 71, 190, 197, 207, 238, 247 Damages, not given in an account, 412
No damages for the continuance of a Trespass without an Entry, 416 Debt 20, 21,
34, 37, 41, 59, 73, 88, 92, 95, 114, 153, 186, 206, 215, 229, 262, 281, 306,
274, 282, 290, 259, 381, 384, 422, 432, 434, 448, 453 Upon Recognizance, 67,
178 Upon Arbitrament, 97 For Nomine poenae, 149 Upon an Escape, 5
Deeds, 164, 171, 211, 237, 453 Construed according to the meaning of the
parties, 10, 101 Of Dedi and Concessi, 75
Enrolled, avoided by Averment, 257 Demurrer, 190 Upon Evidences, 286
Demand of Rent, 425 Departure, 39, 120 Deprivation, 402 Devastavit, 448
Devises, 16, 42, 73, 120, 154, 155, 176, 187, 205, 219, 230, 242, 266, 293,
306, 362, 383, 387, 409, 436 Construction of them, 16, 42 To Executors to sell,
38, 42, 78, 254 To an use, 342
Diminution, 28 Distress, 16, 64, 78, 315, 338 Discontinuance of suit, 142
Discontinuance of Lands and Estate, 150, 157, 172 Distent, 154, 163 Where it
takes away Entry, 293 Disseisin, 163
Dower, 48, 71, 118, 119, 187, 233, 383 Of Gavelkind, 83, 182, 431
Duchy Lands, 307 The Kings prerogative in them, 15

E.
EJectione firmae, 331 Not of a Tenement, 265
Ejectione Custodiae lies not of a Copihold estate. 463 Elegit. 65, 247
Election, 36, 52, 67, 92, 289, 342, 360 Enrolment, 10 Endowment, 13 Enfant,
156, 297 Entry, 46, 66, 79, 163, 165, 427, 446 For forfeiture, 345
Enquiry of damages, 197, 278 Escape, 165, 145, 203, 321, 274 Estates, 150,
219, 221, 297, 288, 311 Vested, shall not be divested, 345
Essoin, 184 Estoppell, 122, 220, 224, 286, 437 Error, 12, 28, 52, 71, 137,
207, 228, 238, 245, 246, 260, 452 By Executors to reverse an Attainder of their
Testator, 452, 278, 317, 327, 328, 343, 346, 363, 397, 402, 412, 415, 445, 365
By Journeys accounts, 28 Upon Outlawry, 37 Upon Recovery in Assize, 69 In
assessing damages, 71 For want of Averment, 121 Upon a common Recovery, 181 To
reverse a Fine by an Enfant, 445
Evidence, 70, 192, 215, 414 Exchange, 386 Executors, 78, 311, 459 Where they
shall have Error or other Actions, 459 Where charged of their own goods 87,
121, 153 Renunciation of them, 185 Have action, de bonis testatoris, 278
Execution, 65, 202, 247, 460, 200, 313, 378 Where joint, where several, 392
Against a person attainted, where not, 466 Exception, 158, 160, 79
Extortion, 114, 327 Extent, 366 Extinguishment, 15, 135, 250, 56 Exposition of
words and sentences, 240, 326, 439, 468 Of the word (De) and vocat: 22^ Of the
word (Term) 306 Of the word (Uterque) 326 Of the Statute of 32 and 33 H. 8. 358
Of the Statute of 21 H. cap. 19. 413
Examination, who is to be examined upon the Statute of 27 Eliz. of Huy and
Cry, 456
F.
FAlse imprisonment, 462 Feoffments and faits, 31, 171, 172, 204, 256, 288 Per
nomen, 343 Upon condition, 361 Feme covert, 166 Fine upon Jurors, 181 For
Alienation without License, 11 50, 113 Not paid by Non compos mentis, 11 Not
payable upon settlement by Parliament, 113 Post Fines, 338
Fines levied, 51, 66, 81, 85, 102, 187, 188, 297, 330 Where shall not bind a
Feme covert, 386 Reversed 157, 445 Where shall be a breach of Condition, 409
Levied by Prescription, 265 By Tenant in tail in Remainder, 361
Formedon, 105, 154 Forgery of false Deeds, 192 Forfeiture, 51, 66, 84, 139,
171, 297, 254, 400 Founder and Foundation, 49 Fresh Suits, 72 Fugitives, 12
G.
GUardian in socage, 454 Gavelkind, 154, 450 Grants, 205, 433, 380 Of Executors
of omnia bona sua, 351
Grants of the King, 12, 33, 36, 49, 162, 179, 237, 280, 334, 338, 451, 467
Grants insufficient in point of Limitation, shall not be supplied with
subsequent words, 14
H.
HAbendum, 13, 73, 446 Habeas Corpus, 93, 94, 460
I.
INtrusion, 12, 46, 49, 223 Indictments, 9, 146, 337, 363, 404 Upon the Statute
of 8 H. 6. 461 Upon the Statute of 23. of Recusancy, 321, 326, 322 Upon the
Statute of News, 390 Informations, 162 Upon Statute 1 Eliz. 405 Upon Statute of
23 Eliz. cap. 6. 60 Upon the Statute of Usury, 125, 161 Upon the Statute of
Maintenance, 231 291 Upon the Statute of 5 Eliz. for Tillage, 319
Jointure, 44, 205 Joynder in Action, 402, 439, 445 Issue, 89, 169, 192, 241
Judgment, 89, 428 In the Kings Court not defeated by particular customs. 35
Where satisfied before a Statute, 464
Jurors receiving money, does not make the Verdict void, 21 Fined for eating,
181 Justification, 462

K.
KIng not bound to demand Rent, 16
L.
LEases, 44, 46, 165, 198, 205, 239, 274, 286, 308, 316, 320, 332, 391, 425,
446, 454 By Bishops, 77 By Guardian of a College, 183 Within the Statute of 13
Eliz. 427 Leet, 33
Letter of Attorney, 427 Livery of Seisin, 10, 48, 276, 287, 349, 427 Does
prevent Enrolment, 10 Libel in spiritual Court, 13, 127, 151, 174, 175

M.
MArriage, 67, 235 In right, and possession, 67 Manor, 33, 289 Misnosmer, 25,
49, 183, 204, 298 In Indictments, 337 Where material, where not, 228
Mittimus, 200 Monstrans de droit, 279 Monstrans de faits, 427
N.
NOn-residency, 129 Nonsuit, 142 Notice, 39, 139, 141 Nuisance, 234, 318
O.
OBligation, 129, 132, 164, 192, 214, 281 Office of Marshal of the King, 451 Of
Herald, 337 Of Marshal of the Kings Bench, 451 Office Trove, 27, 50, 85, 223
Outlawry, 84, 280, 108, 148, 190 Lies not upon a Judgment upon a Bill of
Privilege, 465
P.
PArtition, 33, 68, 136, 283 Payment, where not good to the Wife, 450 Post
Fines, 338 Plaint, 415 Plenarty, no Plea against the King, 307 Pleadings, 21,
84, 102, 167, 169, 176, 186, 211, 274, 339, 407, 430, 449 Non cepit, where
good, 47 Null tiel Record, 85, 114 Where Recovery is no Bar, 90 Wherein Pleading
must make a Title, 58 Non damnificatus, 95 General and particular, ib. Good to
common intent, 102 Of a Fine, ib. Amounts to the general Issue, 251 Of Nonest
factum, 257, 453 Out of his Fee, 294 Fully administered, 434 In disability,
where not allowed, 466
Property, 54 Primer seisin, 85, 341 Protection, 93, 258 Privilege, 365 Of
Exceptions from Juries, 287 Of London, 384 Plurality, 442 Prerogative, 11, 15
Prescription, 14, 100, 102, 143, 147, 199, 249, 299, 315, 336 Words of it, 318
In a Stranger, not Tenant, 14 To erect Herdels, 14, 147 Where it shall not bind
the King, 438 For Common, 100 To be a Justice of Peace, 143 To levy a Fine not
good, 265 To distrain for Amerciaments, 327 To Repair, 438 by taking Wood in
the Lands of another Man, ib.
Presentation, 50, 58, 84, 207 Repealed by the King, 218 Passes not by a Grant
of Bona and Catalla, 28 By the Bishop who Collates, shall not put the King out
of possession, 307
Praemunire, 399 Proof, 349 Process, 65 Prohibition, 123, 127, 174, 175, 176,
177, 208, 255, 325, 336, 376, 367, 318, 325, 388, 411, 442, 467
Q.
QUare Impedit, 39, 50, 58, 84, 85, 190, 277, 213, 232, 278, 280, 284, 307,
312, 284, 289, 455 Causes of Refusal, when good, etc. contr. 39, 312

R.
RAzure of Deeds, 381 Ravishment of Ward, 152 Refusal of the Bishop, 312
Remitter, 40, 48, 85, 118, 172 Remainder, 134, 256, 266, 336 Upon a Contingent,
330 Remitter 48 Redisseisin, 90 Receipt, 105 Retainer, 153, 320 Return of the
Sheriff, 65, 200, 201, 202, 312, 459 Relation, 11, 355 Of matter of Record, 257
Of a Judgment, 264 Of an Execution, 423 Rents, 187, 198, 209, 280, 362, 441
Reserved upon a Lease of Duchy Lands, 15 To be paid without demand, ib.
Charge, parcel of a Manor, 18 Cannot issue out of a Right, 205 Charge, out of
Copyholds, 8 Suspended by Entry, 110, 240 How to be demanded, and when
severally, 271, 425 In esse to some purposes, and suspended to others, 467
Reputation, 18, 33, 49 Replication, 56, 102, 194 Reversion, 362 Cannot pass
without Deed, 429
Reservation, 25, 446 Restitution, 461 Request, 167, 303, 389 Repleader, 102,
114 Replevin, 33, 54, 56, 64, 294 Revocation, 113 Recovery, 30 In Assise, where
a Bar, 30 Vouchee must appear in person, 101 Common Recovery by an Infant, 296

S.
SAles, 225 Seals, 12, 310 Seisin, 271, 356 In Fact, and in Law, 318
Seizure, 12, 84, 119 Scire facias, 58, 84, 187, 402 Where for the King, and e
contr. 84 Against Executors, 84 Upon Audita Querela, 195
Summons and Severance, 445 Stewards of Manors and Courts, 309, 294, 444
Statutes, Construction of them, 44 Where they ought to be pleaded, where not,
427
Supersedeas, 189 Sur cui in vita, 210 Surrenders, 378, 385, 420, 226, 454 By
the Steward out of Court, 309 Vide Copyholds. Amounts to an Attornment, 408 Of
one Termor to another, not good, 420 By Attorney, not good, 45

T.
TAil, 297 Tenant by the Courtesy, 233 Tender, 88, 95 Upon a Mortgage, 43 Upon
an Award, 55 Where it is no Revocation of uses, 113
Toll, 315 Traverse, 12, 49, 53, 56, 58, 64, 68, 102, 207, 213, 277, 304, 331,
340, 429, 467 Where the descent, where the dying seized, 429
Trespass Vi and armis, 110 Trover and Conversion, 304, 305, 335 Not against a
Feme Covert, 433
Tithes, 13, 25, 122, 174, 175, 177, 208, 325, 336, 367, 380, 411, 467 In
London, 25 Become Lay Chattels, 29 Jurisdiction of them, 76 Claimed by
Prescription, ib. Discharged by Unity, 467
Trial, 67, 116, 148, 203, 206, 255, 285, 310, 413
V.
VAriance, 175, 228, 33^^ Verdict, 86, 118, 181, 426 View, 30, 106, 59
Usurpation, 58, 84, 307 Uses, 188, 288, 330 What it is, 279 And Declaration of
them, ib. Not rise out of an Use, 10 Not out of a Possibility, 279 Contingent
raised, 31 Void for want of Consideration, 279 Limitation of them, ib. Raised
by Covenant and by Feoffment do differ, ib. Suspended, yet the Land devised,
345 Contingent shall bind the Execution of an Estate in possession, 345
Executed to the Possession, 409

W.
WAger of Law, 119, 229, 282 Wardship, 347 Warning, 82 Wills, 155, 311
VVither^^m, 302 VVarrant of Attorney, 246 VVarranty, 252 VVast, 62, 79, 86,
220, 282, 359 By Cestuy que use, 409
Writ, To the Bishop, 84, 85, 278, 289 Of right 212, 236, the manner of
proceeding in it, 419 Of Enquiry of damages, 278

FINIS.

