GODS SABBATH Before the LAW Under the LAW and Under the GOSPEL.


Briefly vindicated from novell and heterodox assertions: By HAMON L' ESTRANGE,
Gent.

Nemo nostrum dicat jam se invenisse veritatem, sic eam quaeramus quasi ab
utrisque nesciatur,

Aug. cont. Epist. Manichaei. CAMBRIDGE, Printed by Roger Daniel, Printer to
the Universitie, 1641. And are to be sold at the Angel in Lumbardstreet.

20. Maii 1641.
At a Committee appointed by the Honorable House of Commons, for the
examination of the licensing and suppressing of books, etc.

It is ordered that this Treatise be published in print at Cambridge, unless
the Vice Chancellor do show just cause to the contrary, within convenient
time.

EDWARD DERING.

I have read over this Treatise, and am so far from pretending any thing
against the printing of it, that I must needs profess it to be a work both
Learned and Orthodox, and highly meriting both the best care of the Printer
now, and the best attendance of any Reader afterward.

RICH. HOLDSWORTH Procan.

To the most Honorable The Court Paramount within this Realm, The High Court
of Parliament, or Assembly of the three Estates.
August Senate, Mighty Sovereigne of Courts,
WHen I call to mind that of Aristides, That the Gods are to be honored with
the consecration of Temples, but eminent men with the dedication of Books; I
could not represent to my consideration a fitter Patron for these my weak
labors, then the glorious Assembly and bright Constellation of the chief and
prime lights of the kingdom.

I invoke not your aid to boulster out mischievous doctrine (the main scope of
too many late Dedications) but to vindicate the Truth, to maintain that Truth,
which contrary to the Proverb has fled to corners, has lived in blind
recesse, (and like a needy bankrupt) dares not yet walk confidently abroad
without a Parliament Protection.

But you being now (the Lord be praised) upon the great work of Reformation,
your wisdoms will (I doubt not) make narrow inquiry not only into State but
Church-Monopolists, those Gnostics I mean, which seemed to have ingrost all
knowledge to themselves, and under that pretense have in stead of Truth
obtruded upon us their own pernicious errors.

Amongst those truths which these Projectours have labored to suppress, none
have been more furiously persued then those which relate to the Lords Day; and
(which makes the prodigy) none have stickled therein more then they who have
with so much clamor cried up Tithes and the Episcopacy (things innocent, yea,
commendable enough: only I wish with the Athenian in Gellius they had been
defended by other men. Lib. 18. c. 3.
) Whence we may collect that if this unhappy day could any thing have promoved
their greedy or ambitious desires, it had surely escaped the late indignities
which these men's liberal malice has profusely shed upon it; it had still
continued in the esteem of a day Divinely instituted, immutable, and totally to
be sanctified; three essential properties thereof, which they have much
endeavored to evert, I in this my work as much to uphold.

At the first instant of its manumission, it has a strong ambition, (great
Council) to live under the influence of your favor; a boldness on which it
durst never have adventured had it not been assured, the Truth which it
professes will gain it some measure of acceptance with so professed a Patriot of
Truth.

The God of Truth prosper you, and in you, us; he direct all your
consultations, that their issue may be his glory, in the peace and safety both
of this Church and State: with all true English Christians so fervently prays,

Illustrious Assembly, In the highest degree of the lowest obedience Your L'
ESTRANGE.

To the right worshipful, his highly honored Father, Sr. HAMON l' ESTRANGE
knight, of Hunstanton in Norfolk.
Most honored Sr.
TO this worthless Tract, having meditated a double dedication (not then
purposing to prefix both, or that I thought one not enough) which of these two
should preponderate my equal inclination to either, I could not though with
long debate determine; at length therefore that I might dwell no longer in this
suspense, I resolved to issue out both, and the rather because their errands
were so difform, so diverse: for

This Treatise is the first fruits of my studies, therefore of common right
sacred to God; and the rather because the main subject thereof is His Day: His,
by institution; His, by denomination, and (it being the first fruits of days,
Hexam.
as Saint Basil elegantly calls it) of right his. Now seeing all offerings
were according to Gods prescript; First, to be brought to the high Priest, who
was to examine them whether they were such as God would accept, and then to
present them before the Lord. To whom sooner then to your self, Sir, should I
bring this my petty oblation? It is said that Cain and Abel brought their
offerings, that is, (as most learned men conceive) to Adam their Father, that
he might present them; why then may not I mine to you? If he was their Priest,
why may not you be mine? Fathers of Families (you know) were anciently all
such: And though Consecration and Ordination has somewhat dimmed their wonted
splendor, yet I hold for certain that their Priestly office neither is, nor
shall be utterly extinguished. To you therefore, Sir, I hope not impertinently,
I bring this my poor oblation; I know too well how strong frailty is in me, to
say it is without blemish, or not lame; yet if your judgment shall conceive it
a work acceptable to God, and beneficial to his Church, I most humbly crave
you would be pleased to present it to him for me. And this is the first cause
of this address to you; The other, this:

Phocylides.
Sir, you are my Parent, second in honor to God; so the wisdom of the Ancients
styleth you: and certainly if any Parent may challenge honor from a Son, you
may from me. To which honor you have a double title: One, wherein all Fathers
intercommon by Generation; the other, almost peculiar to your self by
Education, I had almost said, Regeneration; perhaps not altogether unfitly, for
good nurture is a kind of moral Regeneration, and usually a preparative to the
Spiritual. I call the Education you have bestowed upon me almost peculiar to
your self, because that whereas most Parents are either sordid in their
allowance, or negligent in instructing, or become lewd patterns to their
children; you have in breeding me failed neither in purse, nor in precept, nor
in example. I write not this to flatter you, but to manifest that I set a due
and just value upon this your Fatherly care, and that though there were no
Divine Law to constrain me to it, yet this alone were sufficient reason for me
to honor you.

And if every the meanest part of my education obliges me to this
acknowledgement, sure your training me up to letters much more, especially in
this age, when to know even Fundamentalls and necessary Truths, is accounted at
least pedanticall, if not as (Saint Paul said of preaching) foolishness. I do
not hereby arrogate to my self the name of a Scholar; for my delight in
learning has been more then my proficiencie, which God knows is very
slender, so slender as these my simple labors dare not approach you from any
assurance of their own worth, but because they are the products of those
studies, which derive their original from your extraordinary both charge and
care, they think themselves of right to belong to you, and so their motion
toward you is not more voluntary then natural.

Be pleased, Sir, to entertain them as testimonials of my filial gratitude,
which is the chief end of this their second resort to you; for they exceed
their Commission, if they speak so much what they are themselves (though that
is mere weakness) as what I am, that is,

Sir, Your most honoring and Most obedient son, HAMON L'ESTRANGE.

The Preface.
COncerning the publishing of this Treatise, I expect to meet with two
Interrogatories: First, why so late, considering the Antisabbatarians have
possessed the stage without control so many years? Secondly, why at all, in
regard there have of late issued out Tracts homogeneall, wherein the Truth has
been evidently enough demonstrated, Error convinced? To both these I hold it
requisite to give my answer, and (if I can) satisfaction: To the first then I
say, I was retarded upon these reasons especially.

First, though my studies have been most conversant in Eristick Theology, yet
I delight therein more as a stander by and spectatour of others digladiations,
then out of an itch to enter the lists my self, which of all things (through a
desire to suppress from public notice my private infirmities) my Genius most
declineth. Secondly, being conscious of mine own failings, I was loath to betray
so good a cause by so mean a champion as my self, and so -- ipsique onerique
timebam.

Lastly, being of a Lay condition, I held it discreet and good manners to leave
the work to be performed by others who had both greater abilities, and a
calling more suitable to it.

To the second my answer is, That this Tract was not only commenced; but (as I
then At Christmas la^^.
thought) finished before intelligence arrived at me of any books extant of the
same subject: And when I first heard thereof, I forthwith destined my pains as
a sacrifice to eternal oblivion; but having after compared our labors
together, it manifestly appeared that we varied much in frame, every of us
having somethings proper and peculiar to our selves, verifying that, Unus alio
plura invemre potest, nemo omni^, Ausonius.
One man may find out more then another, no man all things, for which reason,
alone some learned friends, to whom I had communicated it, animated me (with
the advice of some additions) to publish it.

Let no man therefore fore-judge me so obliquely, as if I thought the labors
of those worthy men either imperfect or impertinent, to any whereof whosoever
resorteth shall there find Antidote enough against the Anti-Sabbatarian
infection; a disease which has prevailed rather through a secret disposition
of natural corruption to embrace it (as any thing which rellisheth of liberty)
then from predominancy of arguments, though backed with the authority of men
eminent for their knowledge in letters; three B. While, Dr. Pride. Mr. Brerewood.

Si cui displiceo, non ^tatun (...) opponat, Tu solus sapis, etc. Per asinam
enim quandoque locutus est D^us quod Prophetam c^lavit, and Samu^li puero
ostendit quod ^li sacerdoti non rev^l^v^^, Tom. 1 Res^l. super Propos. Lipsie
(...). conclus. 1.


of them especially, to whom though I willingly afford all titles of honor
which learning meriteth, yet I boldly affirm, had they left us no other
demonstrations of their excellency that way then their Sabbatary Tracts, they
should never have attained so high a repute amongst us. But let them without
envy possess the laurel they have deserved; yet if any shall therefore wonder
(as I doubt not some will) that such a Sciolus as my self have dared to oppose
them, I must reply what Luther did before in the like case, God once spoke that
by an Ass, which he concealed from the Prophet; and revealed to the child
Samuel what he hid from Eli the Priest. They then that upbraid me with
personal frailty (be what they say as great and evident truth as they desire)
must know they quite mistake the question, which is not whether I be
illiterate, ignorant, weak, or what else they please to call me, but whether it
be truth which I have here delivered; and if any man will yield me the last
(yea whether he will or not) I will freely grant him the first. De me existima
ut libet, tantum de ipsa veritate cave quid sentias, Aug. cont. M^nich. lib.
unus.
But to him who misliketh Truth, and shunneth her because he meets her in my
apparel, let me give Augustines check, Think of me your pleasure, but beware
what opinion you have of Truth.

This short advertisement being premised, I address my self to the ensuing
discourse.

Errata.
Page 11. l. 13. the matter, read this matter. p. 15. l. 2. r. arguments and
opinions. p. 20. l. 18. view, r. vive. p. 43. l. 8. their, r. others. p. 66. l.
8. ceremony, r. caremoni^. p. 97. l. 9. prosekenique, r. pro-selenique.

Gods Sabbath before the Law.
I Begin a work whose hardest work is to begin; a work of the Sabbath: and the
beginning of the Sabbath, which (like Fame) -- caput inter nubila condit,
Virgil.
must begin this Tract. A task intricate and obnoxious to many precipices;
David's curse I am sure to meet with, A way dark and slippery. I could indeed
solace my self in this, that I walk not alone, and that on which side soever I
fall, I shall have learned associates. But to err for company, or for
singularity, are to me alike odious. Truth I serve, and so far as (that
Primary light) Holy writ shall enlighten me Truth will follow, not at all
disanimated though the spark which should direct me to her seems to burn
somewhat dim, as being a portion of one of those three first chapters of
Genesis, which were for their obscurity (with the Canticles, and some part of
Ezechiel) by the Hebrews interdicted to be read of any under thirty years of
age Orig. Pr^oem. H^. in Cant. Hieron. ^pist. ad Paul. in bibl. Hier. Naz.
orat. 7.
, and which has set eminent Doctors, as well ancient as modern, at odds. For
whereas it is said, Genesis 2.3. God blessed the seventh day and sanctified it,
because that in it he rested from all his works which God created and made, it
is by some supposed, that Moses regarded not the time whereof, but wherein he
wrote, by a Prolepsis, and that it was only an intimation of the reason, why
God imposed upon the Jews the sanctification of the seventh rather then of any
other day; the subsequent of which gloss is the assertion, That the Sabbath
was not, or commanded or observed, until Moses his days; for the sustaining
whereof they produce reasons specious, and authority venerable.

1. Reason. B. White, page 46.
First, There is (say they) no other means for us to understand what Gods will
and act was Genesis 2.3. but only divine revelation. But the holy Scripture
neither makes mention of any command of God given to Adam concerning resting
upon the Sabbath day, neither makes any historical narration of Adams, or any
other the Patriarchs observation of the Sabbath day: now in cases of this
nature Athanasius his rule is, Because the Scripture is altogether silent in
this matter, we may be assured there was no such thing done.

2. Reason. Brerew p. 65.
The Hebrew word (...) signifies as well a preparation and destination, as
actual application to holiness; as Exodus 19.10 Josh. 3.5. and 7.3. Jerem. 1.5.

3. Reason. B. White, ubi supra.
If God at that time whereof Moses wrote did give any command to Adam to
sanctify the Sabbath, it must of necessity follow that the Sabbath was
instituted in Paradise. But in Paradise there was no need of a Sabbath, where
there should have been no toil; no necessity of sanctifying any day to Gods
worship, where every day should have been a day of rest, and the hole life a
continual Sabbath.

God would not then impose the Sabbath as a law when he himself brake it, 4.
Reason. D. Heilen. p. 9.
for (according to Hierome and Catharinus) he formed Eve upon the seventh day,
and so wrought upon it.

God imposed upon Adam in Paradise no other positive Law, 5. Reason. B. White,
ubi supra.
then that of abstinence from the fruit of the tree of Knowledge.

It is probable that Jacob whilst he kept Labans sheep, 6. Reason.
the Israelites while they were under the bondage of Pharaoh and his merciless
taskmasters kept no Sabbath; but if it had been commanded sure it had been kept.

Lastly, it is said Nehem. 9. verse. 13, 14. 7. Reason.
Thou came down also upon mount Sinai, etc. and made known unto them thy
holy Sabbath.

The authorities they allege are especially emergent from the Primitive Church.

Justin Martyr leads the way; Before Moses, Dialog. cum Tryphone.
none of the Righteous observed the Sabbath.

Let them show that the ancient Patriarchs did Sabbatize, is Tertullians adv.
Judaeos
challenge to the Jews.

All the Patriarchs before Moses were justified without the Sabbath, says l.
4. c. 30.
Ireneus

There was no observation of the Sabbath among the Patriarchs, as also none
amongst us, so Hist. Eccles. l. 1. c. 4.
Eusebius.

When there was no Scripture nor Law divinely inspired the Sabbath was not
consecrated to God, Fid. Orth. l 4. c. 24.
Damascen.

Of late Adherers to this opinion the most eminent are Tostatus, Musculus and
Gomarus.

In this array the arguments and authorities upholding the Prolepsis are
marshalled, yet is it not universally entertained: many there have been and are
(and those of no mean note neither) who have applied themselves to the genuine
and proper sense of the words, and from thence deduced the institution of the
Sabbath, from that very article of time whereof Moses wrote. And this
interpretation I conceive most agreeable to the mind of Moses, for many reasons
which shall exhibit themselves in their due place; for first I bend my self to
encounter the objections formerly made, and to lay open where they are crazy or
invalid.

Solut. of the 1. Reas.
Divine revelation is indeed the best means to understand Gods will and act: and
though the Scripture does not mention Gods express command to Adam, though we
read it not said to him as after it was in the Law, Remember thou sanctify
the Sabbath day, yet a command we find; and there being then at that time
whereof Moses wrote none on earth capable of a command but Adam and Eve, it
necessarily follows that they received the command. For what is meant by Gods
sanctifying of the seventh day, but the application of it to divine worship?
Those things are said to be sanctified in the Law, which are applied to sacred
worship, says 2 2 ae. qu. 22^ a^t. 4. ^^la dicuntur in Lege sanctificari quae
divino cultui applicantur.
Aquinas: now if it was then applied to sacred worship, sure it was by command.

Nor is the argument of force, The Scripture mentions it not, Ergo It was
not: many things were to the first Patriarchs commanded, which are not
recorded. It is by far the major part of learned men Athanas. de Sabb. and
circum. Genebrard. Chronol. l. 1. Zanch. de Ser. Bell. de v. Dei l. 4. c. 4.
Pa^aeus Com. in Genesis 4. v. 3. Mercer. praelect. in Genesis Rawly Hist. l. 2. c. 4.
S. 8.
affirmed that God dictated and prescribed to Adam all circumstances of his
worship, which by tradition past to his posterity, and were in every several
family until Moses observed; and it is in part evidently and infallibly
confirmed by Scripture it self, for we read that Cain sinned: but (...), Romans
4.15. Where there is no law, there can be no transgression: for (...), Sin is
the transgression of the Law, 1. John 3.4. yet of this, or any other command
concerning religious duties, holy text has not one syllable. Perhaps the
command was not so solemn as afterward, not viva voce, in an audible voice,
there being not the same reason; and yet a command there might be internal
though not external. God might by his guiding spirit direct Adam to sanctify
the seventh day, as he did both him and other Patriarchs to other observances,
if Aquinas 1.2 ae. q 103. act. 1. Musculus in Genesis c. 4. v. 3.
has aimed right. It is credible, says he, that the Patriarchs by divine
instinct, as by an hidden and tacit law, were induced to worship God in a set
and determinate form agreeable to the inward worship and signification of
mysteries to be fulfilled in Christ.

The want of an Historical narration of the praxis of those times, is also as
weakly urged. You know Ab autoritate negative nihil concluditur ex argumentis,
Arguments drawn from silent authority conclude nothing. An axiom never firmer
then when applied to the history of the world, from the Creation to the Law,
the period of this discourse. There is no mention of Adams penitence after his
fall, none of his sacrificing, of his performing any other pious exercises
during his hole abode upon earth, none. What then shall we say? that he lived
like an Atheist? never invoked, never praised God? We read of no Parents that
Melchisedech had: what shall we hold with the letter of S. Paul that he was
(...) and (...), really whithout father or mother? ^ Heb. 7.23. He that in so
compendious a story as th^s of Moses looks for a full relation of every small
circumstance, is like to lose his longing, and may as wisely seek Paul's steeple
in Hondius his map of the world. Abbridgements of stories are nets of a larger
mash which only enclose great fishes, (...), things worth mentioning; smaller
fry, things of less consequence, escape them.

De Incarn. Verbi.
Athanasius his rule is right enough it self, if it be not bowed by violence.
Comparing the miracles of Christ with those of the Prophets, he demonstrateth
the odds to be this; Christ was born of a Virgin, so none of them; Christ made
the lame to walk, the deaf to hear, the dumb to speak, the blind to see, so
did not they: For then (says he) the Scripture would not have omitted it.
Therefore because the Scripture is altogether silent in the matter, it is sure
there was no such thing done. The Father speaks of miracles, but I hope the
observation of the Sabbath was none, and therefore Athanasius stands you in
little stead. My margent directs to the place omitted by the Bishop.

Solut. of the 2. Reason.
The word (...) little also avails them: for be it granted that it signifies a
preparation to holiness; does this preparation exclude application thereunto?
Nay does not preparation imply application, are they not coordinate and
coincident together? Examine the places quoted, and see if they will not
confess as much. Exodus 19.10.
Moses was commanded to sanctify the Israelites the third day, that is, to
prepare them, as you say: To prepare them? how? nothing but to have them in a
readiness, that they lasily wait the time or so? no there is more in it yet:
application to holiness you shall meet with positive, Let them wash their
clothes, verse. 10. negative, Come not at your wives, verse. 15. A thing so clear
as the very Heathen were enlightened with it, and not only in the general
decorum of it, which they couched under their Ite, missa est, or Procul o
procul este profani, Hence all profane, before their sacrifices; but some
glimpse they had even of those external Mosaicall ceremonies I now mentioned:
Preparatory lotions they had before they durst approach their sacred mysteries.
Virg. Aen. 2.
Aeneas would not so much as touch his Tutelary Gods, till he might rinse
himself in fountain water. Abstinence also from the Nuptial bed was at least
for one night interdicted: -- Discedite ab aris
Queis tulit hesterna gaudia nocte Venus, Tibul. l. 2^ El. 1.

Casta placent superis.


And though we read in this Text only of external preparatory rites
enjoined, yet must we know that they were but as significant Emblemes of that
spiritual preparation, which should truly dispose the soul in a sanctified
frame for the approaching near that God which is clothed in majesty and honor.
Apply that which I have now said for illustration of this portion of Exodus to
those parallel places of Joshua, and there will only remain that of Jeremie
unanswered, where the Prophet is said to be sanctified in his mothers womb;
cap. 1. v. 5.
which I confess could no otherwise be then in the preordination of God. But
what? because the word signifies Destination in Jeremy, must it needs infer
as much in Genesis? I see no such law imposed upon Interpreters: That of Jeremy
could not without extreme violence be wrested to any other sense then that of
Destination, which out of Genesis 2. is neither necessarily nor probably emergent.

Solut. of the 3. Reas.
I see no necessity that the Institution, Genesis 2. must suppose it to be in
Paradise, and before the fall, for it is not improbable (I determine nothing)
that Adam sinned and was expelled out of Paradise the very day he was formed,
as the Fathers almost universally have thought, from whose full consent in this
point proceeded that Greek saying, (...), The same day he was created he fell.

Neither was Paradise (in my opinion) compounded of any such ingredients as
would in no wise incorporate with a Sabbath: it was indeed a place exempted
from the works both of toil and sin, and therefore no otium to refresh the
body, no Sabbath to sanctify the soul, in respect either of the one or the
other, necessary. And though the whole tract of time spent in that innocent
condition might worthily seem a continued Sabbath, yet some parts and portion
even of that time should (I conceive) have been allotted to a more solemn
worship then others. For God imposed upon man a calling of husbandry: should he
so incessantly have intended his tillage, as never to intermit, never to give
over? should he have spared no time to exercise himself in the contemplation of
his Creator, the truest object of perfect beatitude? or could he simul and
semel at one instant, intend both his vocation and Gods worship? God created in
him the natural appetite of food and sleep: Is it likely that Adam would have
applied himself either to repast or repose, without some more then ordinary
thanksgiving. It is by all confessed that in Adams heart the Law of nature was
most perfectly implanted and imprinted; and as unanimously agreed, that to
consecrate some time to the worship of God was and is a member of that Law; nay
more then so it must be certum aliquod tempus, some certain and determinate
time, Tossed. in Exodus 20. qu. 11.
as the very Atlas of the Prolepsis Tostatus assures us: which being granted
it follows that the state of innocence was no bar or obstacle to the
seposing times, not only occasional, and pro renata, but set and constant, to
the service of God.

That God framed Eve upon the seventh day, is a most horrible and gross
untruth, Solut. of the 4. Reas.
and gives the lie to Moses, or rather to the holy Ghost, who says, Thus the
heavens and the earth were finished, Genesis 2.1.
and all the host of them, that is, all things visible and invisible, according
to the Nicene Creed; and this was before Gods rest on the seventh day: and
evident it is that the hole second Chapter of Genesis, from the fourth verse to
the twenty fifth, is but a larger narration by way of (...), or postscript, of
what was most remarkable in the third and sixth days work, and was for brevity
sake omitted in the first chapter, but upon weighty cause mentioned in the
second. For, as S. Hexaem. Hom. 11.
Basil excellently, If Moses had only said that God made man, thou might
have thought that he made him after the same manner that he created brutes,
plants, and herbs; therefore to denote to thee that thou ought to have
nothing common with unreasonable creatures, the Scripture has mentioned a
peculiar and distinct work of God in framing thee.

Besides, it is most evident out of Genesis 1.27. that Adam and Eve were both
created on the sixth day; Male and female created he them, not by Prolepsis (as
they fancy) but really and truly upon that very day

That wherewith they would palliate this error, is the second verse of Genesis
2. On the seventh day God ended his work: whence they collect that he wrought
upon part of it (which meaning a learned Commentatour Mercer. in loc.
acknowledges the Text will bear) and because Eve is the last work of creation
whereof the Scripture makes mention, they infer that she must have been
formed on the seventh day. But to uncase this foul error, and to show it in
its proper deformities, is no hard task. What meaning the Text will bear, is
many times not so considerable as what the Context Ex antecedentibus and
consequentibus colligitur verus Scripturae sensus, Aug. De doct. Christ. c. 31.
: (...) or contradiction is for the Spirit of Truth no companion; nor will he
own that sense which makes him speak things repugnant. If in the end of the
sixth day God beheld all that he had made, c. 1.31. and had finished the
heavens and the earth, and all the host of them, c. 2.1. what could be left for
him to finish and actually to perfect on the seventh day? Well; but then there
is an interfering, a jarring betwixt Scripture and Scripture, how shall they be
reconciled? I answer, It is not amiss to acquaint you, that whereas the Hebrew
reads it, And on the seventh day God ended his work, the Septuagint and
Samaritanes Seld. Marm. Arundell.
render it, On the sixth day God ended his work: perhaps those copies which
they followed expressed it so, or else their aim was to suppress the seeming
discord, which they knew not otherwise how to salve. A discord indeed I
confess there is, yet such an one as disturbeth not the sacred harmony; yea,
rather a discord elegantly graceful. For you must know that in no operation
the end is attained whilst the operation is in progression and until it
cease In motu continuo quamdiu aliquid potest mover^ ulterius non dicitur
motus perfectus, Aquin. p. 1. qu. 73 art. 1.
; rest being Perficientis perfectio and perfecti Scal. Exerc.
, The perfection of the perficient and of the thing perfected. Now because rest
demonstrateth the motion consummated, therefore God is said most properly to
have perfected his work on the seventh day whereon he rested; so that the
finishing and perfecting mentioned in this verse or period is no actual
operation, but a mere desisting a motu creationis. And indeed Moses gives the
honor of the perfection of the world to both the sixth and the seventh day,
not without great and weighty cause: to the sixth, to exclude all thought that
God wrought upon the seventh; to the seventh, to assure us that he did not rest
and give over on the sixth: For the end of the sixth day gave end to the work
of creation and denihilation, and the beginning of the seventh gave beginning
to Gods rest. Therefore it is said that On the seventh day God perfected the
work which he had made, viz. on the six days before; whence it is that Junius
and Mercer In loc.
render it in the preterpluperfect tense, Cum absolvisset Deus, When God had
now perfected his work, meaning that as soon as the seventh day arrived, it
might be truly said, God had now perfected his work Ubi primum dies septimus
advenisset, verum erat de Deo dicere, quod jam complesset opus suam, Merc. in
loc.
: And perfected it was undoubtedly on the sixth day; God did not abruptly break
off till he had thoroughly perfected all. I confess the Jews tell us a pretty
story Rabbi Abraham. author libri Zeror Hammor (vel fasciculus myrrhae apud
Buxdors.) in Genesis
, How that God about the end of the sixth day was making Faunes, Satyrs, and
such imperfect creatures, and that the evening of the Sabbath overtook him so
fast, that he was fain to leave them but half made up: and therefore on the
Sabbath days these creatures usually hide themselves in their kennels, not
daring to look out. A perfect Jewish fable, and by Mercer suspected to be
rather derived from Tradition and hearsay, then from any Hebrew Author
extant, because he could never in all his reading light upon him: for the
satisfying of the like doubt in others, I have troubled my margin with the
Authors name as I find him cited by De Praestigiis lib. 1. c. 6. Sol. of the
5. Reason.
Wierus.

That God gave but one positive law to Adam in Paradise, is neither in it self
likely, nor in respect of repugnant Scripture credible: for is it not said that
God put Adam into the garden to dress it? was not this a command? Augustine De
Genesis ad lit. l. 8. c. 8.
holds clear it was so: if a command, then a law; for Lex dicitur a ligando,
A law is called a law because it binds Aqu. 1.2 ae. qu. 90.
, and every command is, so far as it binds, a law. If then it was a law, it
must be either merely natural, or positive; if merely natural, then
immutable, still in force, and we must all, tag and rag, turn gardiners or
plowmen: if it was positive, then their Prolepsis halteth on that foot.
Consider the Law it self, and you shall see the positive accrue to the natural
by way of superfoetation; Man must be always busy, always in action, there
is the natural; his employment is limited to tilling of the garden, there is
the positive law. But if Adams apostasy and fall was the same day he was
formed, as many have thought, and is still disputable, this argument might well
have been spared, because the command concerning sanctifying the Sabbath might
have been given in his corrupt and vitiated estate.

If we should yield them, Solut. of the 6. Reas.
what they fain would have, viz. that Jacob and the Israelites observed no
Sabbath during their thraldom, yet shall they never be able to infer from
thence, that they had no command concerning it. For did they always observe
whatsoever was commanded them? Moses said to Pharaoh in the person of God,
Exodus 5. v. 1.
Let my people go that they may hold a Feast to me in the wilderness. Was not
this Feast some solemn time consecrated and commanded of God to be observed? no
doubt it was; for will worship is to God abominable: Did they keep this Feast?
Certainly no. It is resolved by all Divines, ancient and modern, the Patriarchs
before the Law were by God appointed to offer sacrifice: Did the Israelites
under Pharaoh keep this commandment? the Scripture answers, No. God strictly
enjoined that every male child eight days old should be circumcised: was this
performed by the Israelites in the wilderness? the Scripture answers, No:
there was not one circumcised all that while, and yet they abode there forty
years. Now if they had upon such occasions a dispensation for not observing of
other feasts, for not sacrificing, for not circumcising, might they not have
one for the weekly Sabbath also?

Solut. of the last Reason.
To their last argument from Nehemiah, I say, The Sabbath was at the time of the
law given made known to them, yet not then first, but in a more solemn manner
then before. We have a saying, none more frequent: when the Sun has
dispelled a cloud or mist, and shows it self in its brightness, we then say
the Sun shines, and yet no man is so simple but knows it shined before,
even while it was most befogged, though not with equal splendor: So the
Sabbath is said to be made known to the Israelites upon mount Sinai, because it
was then as it were revived, and proclai^^d in more state and pomp then before.
And if you restrain it strictly to mount Sinai, as the letter seems to
import, you must of necessity offer violence to Exodus 16, where at the fall of
Manna it is clear the Sabbath was made known before the Law pronounced on mount
Sinai: And so the Prolepsis fails in this her last refuge as in the former.

Having thus disarmed them of those Reasons wherewith they esteemed themselves
sufficiently fortified, I now apply my self to their Authority, the Authority
of men, many of them, singular both for learning and piety: But shall we
without more ado yield to bare Authority? Does the end of dispute depend
merely upon what they have said? May we not examine the matter yet a little
further? May we not question whether these men spoke as they meant, whether
their arguments jumped together? for did they always so? No, if Hierome be of
any credit; Veteres interdum coguntur loqui, non quod sentiunt, sed quod
necesse esse ducunt adversus ea quae dicunt Gentiles.
The Ancients are sometimes enforced to speak, not so much what themselves
think, as what they conceive may most nonplus the Gentiles. This was their
policy against the Heathen, might not they use it also against the Jews, with
whom they were in continual conflict? If they spoke as they thought, might not
vehemence of dispute transport them to inconsiderate speeches in their heat,
and through too eager opposition to one error to incur the contrary: The
Ancients, Veteres dum unum errorem, omnium virium conatu, destruere adnituntur,
saepe in alterum deciderunt.
whilst might and main they endeavor to beat down one error, many times fall
into another. So Praefat. l. 3. Bibliothec.
Sixtus Senensis. A thing too infallibly true; witness three of the foresaid
Fathers, Justin, Ireneus, and Tertullian, who in their fierce bickerings with
the Valentinians, Marcionites and Manichees, violently bare down their
Chrysippean fate, and inevitable necessity, but upon the ruins of that error
laid the foundation of the doctrine of Freewill, which afterward was so
augmented by the superstruction of Pelagius, and his Ape Arminius. If they writ
in cool blood, did they thoroughly scanne and sift the point, did they ruminate
upon what they delivered, or did it rather carelessly escape from them in
passage? Quivis, vel doctissimus vir, aliter habendus est cum salurat
quaestionem, and perstringit leviter; aliter cum in manus sumit, atque excu^it,
Winton. Opusc. posth. de usuris.
Every man though never so learned is one way to be esteemed when he only
glanceth upon the question, otherwise when he undertaketh to examine and
discuss it thoroughly, says our great Prelate. Lastly, it must be inquired,
whether the question was started before they delivered themselves thus; for if
it was not, they are not so much to be regarded: For they often delivered
things somewhat negligently, not doubting but what they writ was orthodox
enough, because it had past once for current till it came to the touch.
Augustine has no other shift to salve the Fathers aforesaid from Pelagianisme
in the point of Original sin, and Freewill. Many things indeed go a while
for granted, and without control, which in tract of time are discovered to be
of dangerous consequence, and then justly exploded; for men are wont, till they
foresee the mischief which may ensue, to deliver things (as they took them) by
way of frolic one from another, and so, in a plodding carelessness, Tacitus.
Quo plures eunt, omnes sequuntur. Humanum est errare.
which way most go all follow.

But all these exceptions laid aside, one there is from which no appeal will be
admitted, It is natural to man to err. Men they were and might err, yea and
did (every one) in other things, why might they not in this? I speak not this
to avile them, or abate any thing of the reverence we owe them; and if it be
suspected that I bear them no good will, Of my self, (they were Epist. l. 2.
Epist. ad Bez. Demeloquor deque meo ingenio, A communi Patrum consensu, nulla
cogente necessitate, dissentire mihi summa est religio.
Zanchy's words once, but shall now be mine) and mine own Genius I speak it,
From the unanimous consent of the Fathers, where necessity compels not, I
am very scrupulous to differ. No, my only scope and intention is to tell you
what Saint Augustine Epist. 19.
has told me, That humane authority, though never so learned, never so holy,
is not to be trusted, unless it produces Canonical Scripture to prove, or
probable reason to demonstrate, what it says. How far the Fathers slipped in
other things, is not cognoscible in this place; whether in the point in
question they did yea or nay, is now to be debated: and that they did, I think
it probable at least if not evident. For is it not said, God blessed the
seventh day and sanctified it? What is this Blessing, but the dispensing a
peculiar favor toward it? what this Sanctifying, but a separation and
consecration of it to holy worship? If yea, what then shall hinder but that we
think the Sabbath instituted in that very article of time whereof Moses wrote?
shall this prodigious Prolepsis? Nihil facilius est quam dicere, Tropus est,
Figura est, Modus quidam dicendi est, Aug. de Doctr. Christ. l. 3. c. 10. o
Nothing is easier then to cry out, O that is a Trope, a Figure, a peculiar
manner of expression. A strange wantonness in Expositours, to apply Tropes
devised upon necessity to places clear as the midday. That (according to
Augustines Oration figurata est, quae proptie intellecta, nec ad fidem, nec ad
dilectionem, nec ad ullam aedificationem accommodari potest, ibid.
rule) is a figurative speech, which being properly understood, can neither be
applied to Faith, Charity, nor Edification. Somewhat fuller is that of
Bellarmine; Oportet Scripturam intelligere secund^m verbor^m proptietatem, ubi
non cogimur evidenti absurdo, De Bapt. l. 1. c. 4.
The Scripture ought to be understood according to the true propriety of the
words, where we are not diverted by some manifest absurdity: and this he
calls, Commune axioma Theologorum, the universal tenet of all Divines; which
I take to be granted on all parts, the rather because neither Chamier, Amesius
nor any other (as far as I have examined) has accriminated the Jesuit for
it. Now lest we should misconstrue the word Absurd, he explaineth himself in
another place thus, Nisi cogamur ab aliqua alia Scriptura, vel ab aliquo
articulo fidei, aut certe a communi totius Ecclesiae explicatione, De Euch.
lib. 1. c. 9.
Unless we be enforced by some other portion of Scripture, or other article of
Faith, or the universal interpretation of the Church: Let this rule then judge
us: I for my part compromise to be tried by it. God blessed the seventh day,
and sanctified it, there is the Text: God did honor the seventh day, and
consecrated it to his worship, there is the genuine and proper sense: and
because in the tissure and series of divine story Moses has inserted this
sanctification of the Sabbath immediately next after the six days creation;
why should we not conclude that it was sanctified then, and in the same order
of time whereof he wrote? why should we not take Moses his meaning as we find
his words? Is there any portion of Scripture, any article of Faith, the
general explication of the hole Church repugnant to it? Is there any absurdity
compels us to think otherwise? Ostendant, let them show it; which till they
do, let them give us leave to hold our first opinion, to which the absurdity
of the Prolepsis has compelled us.

1. Absurdity.
Absurd it is: for it is clear the Patriarchs had a Sabbath; and that they
observed the seventh day Sabbath is evident from the reasons thereof common to
both times.

They had a Sabbath: For the Law of Nature instilleth this notion, Habet
venerationem ^ justam quicquid excellit, Cic. De Not. Deor. l. 1.
That (as every thing else which excels, so especially) God Paramount and
superlative in excellency is to be worshipped; as also, That to the performance
of this worship, certain times are to be Aqu. 2.2 ae. q. 122. art. 4.
deputed. Is it likely that the Patriarchs failed in so necessary a duty? was
Gods Church then so supinely governed, or indeed so not governed at all, that
no time was set apart for solemn assemblies? There was a consecration of
Materials for sacrifices, Genesis 7.^.
whereof (beasts therefore distinguished by clean and unclean) a consecration
of Persons, who; a consecration of Places, where: was there none of Times,
when? assuredly yes; and therefore S. De Civ. Dei. l. 15. c. 7.
Augustine has put the Quando, as one of those circumstances wherein Cain
might have been deficient: So a Sabbath they had.

The seventh day Sabbath they had. Look into the Essence, the body and soul of
that Sabbath (as Part. 2. p. 67.
Brerewood calls them) what are they but Vacation or Rest from bodily labor,
and the Sanctification of that rest by dedicating the soul to Gods worship?
Were the bodies both of man and beast before the Law of a more brassie and
adamantine durablenesse then after? were they not conditioned, not attempered
alike? was not the sweet repose of lucid intervalls equally necessary and
welcome to both? Did not devout sequestration to pious exercises as well suit
and become the souls of them as of these? Look especially into the end peculiar
to it, as the seventh from the Creation; what is it but to eternize the honor
of the Creation in indeleble memory, and that whilst man is amused with
admiration of so miraculous a structure he may be excited to a grateful
recognition of the goodness of God, who created all these things for man, and
only man for himself? Is not this benefit of Creation common and universal?
do not all participate of it, but the elect especially and inexplicably? Had
not the Church before Moses as ample a share in the blessings which result from
it, as that since? and ought it not then as freely, as frequently to celebrate
its sacred Festival? If then before and since the Law there were the same
reasons, sure there was also the same thing observed, yea and the same
commanded; for from the Reason to the Law, from the Cause to the Effect, from
the End to the Means, is a solid argument, and never fails but when that end
may be acquired by a better means; and impossible it is to demonstrate how the
tired bodies both of man and beast could have been more charitably provided
for, Gods solemn worship in a more sweet decorum performed, and the memory of
the Creation better preserved from the immerging deluge of time, and
profaneness, by any day other then the weekly Sabbath, the day which God
indigitated for the same purposes by his own example; an example equivalent to
a Law: For though there had been no vocal, no verbal institution of the
Sabbath, yet Adam and the succeeding Patriarchs (who had a view and clear
notion of all Gods works, their orderly existencies, and exact consummation;
but especially who were manuducted and guided by an inerring spirit) could not
but collect from Gods example Omnis actio Dei nobis pietatis and virtutis est
regula, Basil. Ascet.
the analogicall equity for man to employ six days in the works of his
calling, and to interferiate the seventh, consecrating that to religious
duties. And therefore that main Argument from the want of a solemn Institution,
is but like a ruffled arrow, that makes a great noise in the air, but falls
short of the mark: For the controversy is not de Modo, neither of the command,
whether Internal or External, nor of the observation, whether voluntary or
imposed by precept; but de Re, whether it was or observed or commanded yea or
nay: that it was observed, the equity thereof common and agreeable to both
times evinceth; and observed it could not be otherwise then in obedience to
command, either prolated or tacitly inspired by the holy Ghost: for impute we
must not to those sanctified men superstitious and will worship. If then the
Sabbath was both observed and commanded before the Law, why might not the
command arise out of Gods blessing and sanctifying the seventh day, mentioned
Genesis 2.3? why should we not rather embrace the proper and grammatical sense of
the words, then resort to a peerlesse and senseless Prolepsis that has
neither fellow to associate, nor reason to strengthen it?

It has not its match in the hole sacred volume, 2. Absurdity.
which is another note of its absurdity: There is not one Prolepsis (of such an
Institution, Medul Theol. lib. 2. cap. 15.
says Amesius) of any Institution at all (so I, and yet I doubt not to find
many seconds.) One place there is, I grant, which at the first blush seems to
persuade the contrary: but upon more mature consideration it exhibiteth nothing
less. The text is, Exodus 16.32. The words these, This is that which the Lord
commands, fill an Omer thereof (viz. of the Manna) to be kept for your
generations, etc. And as the Lord commanded Moses, so Aaron laid it up before
the Testimony to be kept. D. Heilen, part. 1. cap, 1. p. 10.
Lo here (say they) an Institution of the Lords related by anticipation, as the
former was: for how could Aaron lay up a pot of Manna to be kept before the
Testimony, when as yet there was neither Ark nor Tabernacle, and so no
Testimony before which to keep it.

An Institution indeed I see here, but no Anticipation, nor can I without your
spectacles: I say, no Anticipation of the Institution. For might not (I pray)
this command, this Institution, be dictated to Moses at the same time whereof
he wrote? might not the precept be given now, though the execution of the
precept was adjourned? nay, is it not most likely it was so? for where in the
hole bible meet you with any injunction concerning it but here: touching the
building of the Tabernacle, and the ordering every thing else appertaining to
it, God did exactly lesson Moses on the mount, but of the filling the pot of
Manna, and placing it before the Testimony, no hint at all was given there, nor
any where else but here only. And though we should grant that this command was
given after the Tabernacle finished, yet cannot the mentioning of it here be
properly said to be by Prolepsis. This narration taken hole and together is (I
confess) mentioned by Prolepsis; not so the parts of it: Hole and Part have
not things so common betwixt them, that what belongs to the hole, Quicquid
totius est, idem and partis.
belongs also to the part. A total Prolepsis of an entire story before
another there may be, and yet no partial of one part of that story before
another: the parts may be marshalled in their due order, though the hole be
antedated. All that series of Divine story, from Genesis to Job, may be said to
be related by Prolepsis; for it is the current opinion that Job was
comtemporary with Jacob and Joseph: but improper it were to say that the fall
of Manna, the giving of the Law, the building of Solomon's Temple, and such
particulars, are, in respect of the history of Job, set down by way of
Prolepsis. Prolepsis only aims at what is next her; she beholds not things
remote: So it is in this text; the verses from the 27 to the end of the chapter
constitute a narration distinct, and in a canton by it self. For Moses having,
in the former 26 verses, reported so much of the history of Manna, as was
peculiar to that time whereof he wrote, thought it not amiss to superadde what
else concerned it (though he delayed a while the ensuing occurrents, which
should have been precedents to it) because it being not much he had to say, and
that so homogeneal with what went before, he was resolved to take now an
ultimum vale of it: therefore he tells you of an after ordinance of God,
concerning the filling an urn with Manna, the disposing of it before the
Testimony, the execution of that command by Aaron, and lastly the duration of
the use thereof by the Israelites fourty-yeare; which last is supposed to be
the supplement of Joshua or Eleazar. If now you consider this digression,
abstracted from the ensuing story, you will find the hole preposterously
related, and yet the parts not at all inordinate; and if you look wistly upon
Calvines In Exodus
words, you shall find him not repugnant to what I have here delivered.

Lastly, it is absurd: Last Absurdity.
for there can no solid reason be given why Moses should by a Prolepsis of
about 2670 years insert this Institution. Brerew. p. 66.
It could not be to instruct the Israelites, that Gods resting from his works
on the seventh day was the reason why he had selected and appointed by his
commandment given to them that day rather then any other to be sanctified for
his Sabbath. Indeed if the fourth commandment had only mentioned the seventh
day to be the Sabbath, without more ado, and had suppressed the reason, Moses had
had fit occasion to give them here this observation: But seeing that Reason was
fully and with indeleble characters engraven in the Decalogue, it had been mere
supervacaneous and impertinent tautologie to recite it here; especially
considering it is the most received opinion, that Moses compiled the history of
Genesis after the Law was promulgated on mount Sinai, and so this reason was no
news to them.

If any, notwithstanding these gross and palpable absurdities, seems
desperately enamoured of this forlorn and despicable Prolepsis, enjoy her he
shall without me his rival, I envy him not.

Come we now to survey that little which the Divine remembrancer has afforded
us of the actual observation of the Sabbath before the Law; whereof two only
examples are extant, the one for the observation notable, the other for the
violation.

For the observation, we read, Exodus 16.22. when the Israelites had on the
sixth day gathered twice as much Manna as on any other day before, the Rulers
of the Congregation came and told Moses, and he said to them, This is that
which the Lord has said, To morrow is the rest of the holy Sabbath unto the
Lord: We do not find here that the Israelites were amused at the word Sabbath,
that they expostulated with themselves (as before concerning Manna) what it
should be; no, they knew well enough what it was, with the Rest of the holy
Sabbath unto the Lord they had been long acquainted, it was no novelty to them;
the new attendance, and long train of strict observances that now waited on it
were the things so puzzled, so possessed them with wonder of a How is it changed
from what it was? Quantum mutatus ab illo?
Their old wont was to dress their necessary viands upon the Sabbath, and
being now interrupted, now disturbed in their accustomed practice, by an
uncouth innovation of Bake that which you will bake to day, and seethe that
which you will seethe, and that which remains over lay up to be kept until
the morning, well might they be in a study, well demand a reason of this
change. And whereas it is by some stiffly affirmed, that the Jews did bake
their Manna on the Sabbath day, an opinion ascribed to Theophilus Brabourn,
Heilen, p. 1. page 108.
the first (as my Author tells me) that looked so near into Moses his
meaning; he must know, that in Optics, amongst other requisites to perfect
discerning, justa distantia, Bacon. Persp. Did. 8.
a fit distance, is one; and Mr Brabourn might perhaps by looking too near see
to little: where the fault was, whether in this, or in some defect of the
organe (his understanding) or through what other cause, I not dispute; sure I
am that an hallucination, an error of the sight there was, and that a gross
one. The paraphrase they give of this Text, Bake that which you will bake to
day, etc. is this, As much as you conceive will be sufficient for this present
day, that bake or boil as you use to do, and for the rest lay it up to be baked
or boiled to morrow: and to this interpretation they the rather betake them,
because the Israelites laid it up as Moses bad, and it did not stink; now (say
they) it had been no wonder at all, that it did neither breed worm, nor stink,
had it been baked the day before: Things of that nature, so preserved, are
far enough from putrefying in so short a space.

Not to dwell long in discussing this point: They have mistaken both Gods
miracle and Moses his meaning. Gods miracle; for the baking or boiling
excludes not the miracle of its not putrefying: things so dressed are indeed
the less disposed to corrupt; therefore the putrefaction which Manna
contracted by procrastination on other days, notwithstanding the same order
taken for preservation of it by baking and boiling, was the greater miracle:
and because it tainted against nature, and miraculously reserved upon other
days, Gods ceasing to work the same miracle upon the Sabbath might it self
seem a miracle. The mind of Moses they have not reached, whose words resolve
themselves into this construction, What you mean to bake, bake to day, what to
seethe, seethe to day, and what remains (not unbaked or unboyled but) of that
which you have baked, or boiled, more then sufficient for this days food, lay
up for you to eat to morrow: and therefore Hierome has rendered it, Quodcunque
operandum est facite, Whatsoever belongs to the dressing of the Manna,
dispatch it now. But to put it out of all doubt, that this error may never
readvance, God himself, verse. 5. commanded Moses that the people should Prepare
that which they bring in, and it should be twice as much as they gathered
daily: what was this Preparing but dressing, but cooking of it? so the English
will bear; and by a word of the same energy and signification it is rendered in,
I am sure, most Translations; so the Septuagint, so Hierome, so the Spanish, so
the French: a thing so manifest, as the very Friday was thence denominated
(...), the Preparation to the Sabbath.

For the violation of the Sabbath, we have it recorded verse. 27. that there
went out some of the people on the seventh day to gather, and they found none:
this I conceive most likely to have reference to the chap. 18. v. 12.

Now, because it is held by some that the primum esse and first dawning of the
Sabbath began at this fall of Manna, though I hope I have already sufficiently
proved the contrary, I would further know, why it should begin then, and but
then: was it to chalk out to the Israelites the precise seventh day from the
Creation, whereof they were at that time ignorant? It could not be; for of the
seventh day whereon God rested they were not, they could not be ignorant: in
some profane and irreligious houses it might perhaps have been lost, but in
others more piously affected it was certainly preserved. For it is most
undeniable, and irrefragably true what Sr. Walter Raleigh Hist. lib. 1. p. 1.
c. 8. s. 6.
has delivered (and it is in substance affirmed by many others) That if the
story of the Creation had not been written by divine inspiration, yet it is
manifest, that the knowledge thereof might by Tradition (then used) be
delivered unto Moses, by a more certain presumption, then any or all the
testimonies which profane Antiquity had preserved, and left to their
successors. And this he proves by the light which Moses might have, either by
Cabala or letters: For that the most notable occurrents of every several age
were transmitted downwards by tradition and hearsay, is without all
controversy Basil Schol. in Psalm. 77.2.
; and for letters, it is so clear they had the benefit of them, as some have
not set down content to believe that the prophecy of Enoch, mentioned by S.
Jude, was written; and that what Josephus relates of the Pillars errected by
the posterity of Seth, is true; but they conceive also that Adam and all the
succeeding Patriarchs compiled the histories of their own times. But how Moses
attained his knowledge, I leave to the disquisition of them who affect
curiosities: yet this give me leave to note as received amongst the best
Divines, That the holy Ghost was not so much an intelligencer, as a directer
and guide to Moses in the framing the history of Genesis. For the omniscient
Wisdom, foreseeing that it would not be always safe to make Tradition the
perpetual depositary of so rare and choice a jewel as the story of his
Primitive Church, which might either through carelessness loose part of what
was betrusted to her, or under color of sole possessing the Truth, vend
counterfeit and sophisticate stuff, thought it necessary for the good of his
Church, that a set and certain story of the first times should be compiled: to
which purpose he selected Moses as his Amanuensis and Register, aiding him
extraordinarily with his holy Spirit, by whose assistance he was enabled to
distinguish truth from fables, which had by surreption intruded; exactly to
describe many minute circumstances of time, place, persons, names, etc. which
memory was not able to comprehend, and to digest it into that perfect order
wherein we now see it. So that one way or other, either by tradition or
letters, or both, the precise seventh day could not at that time have been lost
or forgot, and consequently that no cause for the Sabbath to begin at the fall
of Manna. And was there any other? what? To be a preamble and preparation to
the subsequent Sabbath? this would be proved. A preparation to the after
strictness of the Sabbath it was, that I confess; not to the Sabbath it self,
this I deny: an introduction it might be to the solemnity of the Sabbath, which
began after, not so to the Sabbath it self, which was long before. For though
it was but in its minority, but magni nominis umbra, a very shadow of the after
celebrity, yet a Sabbath it was, and the seventh day Sabbath too; and this not
my singular assertion, but the consent of the most profound Doctors, as well
ancient as modern. So the Fathers.

Origin, Quae in Lege post hac praecepta sunt de sabbato, haec nimirum
anticipans Job, and ipse implevit, and filios implere docuit, Hom. sup. Job. c.
1. v. 5
What was afterward commanded in the Law concerning the Sabbath, the same Job
both observed himself, and taught his children to do the like.

Cyprian Septenarius hic numerus a condition mundi autoritatem obtinuit, etc.
De Spiritu sancto.
, This septenary number gained Authority from the creation of the world,
because the first works of God were made in six days, and the seventh was
dedicated to rest as sacred; it being honored with the solemnity of a command,
and entitled to the sanctifying Spirit.

Basil Per^ectae qu^e^s and remissioni^ peccatorum signum est septimus a
primo^ciis generationis dies, Hexaem.
, The Sabbath, which was the seventh day from the first creation, is a type of
our perfect Rest in the remission of our sins.

Nazianzen Creatio principium a die Dominico accepit; ideo liquet, quod
septimus ab ea dies Sabbatum efficitur, nimirum cessationem ab operibus ferens,
In Nov. Dom.
, The Creation began on the Lords day as is evident, because the seventh from
it is made the Sabbath bringing rest from labors.

Athanasius Quamdiu prior aetas and cr^atio vim su^m and efficaciam obtinebat,
tam diu Sabbata suam observationem habuere, De Sabb. and Circum.
, As long as the first age or Creation was enforce, so long the Sabbath was
observed.

Epiphanius Contra Ebionaos, p. 73. To (...).
mentions a twofold Sabbath under the old Law: the Natural or Weekly, which
was defined from the Creation; the Legal or Ceremonial, which was enjoined by
the law of Moses.

At the heels of the Fathers follow the Schoolmen, who busying themselves about
nicer subtilties have left us little of their opinions concerning the Sabbath.

Alexander Halensis, Part. 3. quaest. 32. memb. 3. art. 1.
the irrefragable Doctor, though he thinks the Sabbath was not observed by
virtue of any precept before the Law, yet he grants that it was inspired as a
thing meet and fit to be observed.

All these before Ambrose Catharine; Com. in (...)
he then not the first that understood Moses according to the letter, nor yet
the last, no not of his own Party.

Genebrard, In Paradiso fuit Sabbati sanctificatio, quod and observatum toto
Legis naturae tempore tradunt Hebraei and Lyranus in Genesis 7. Chron. ad annum
Mundi. 1.
The Sabbath was sanctified in Paradise, which was also observed all the time
till the Law promulgated, as the Hebrews and Lyranus upon Genesis 7. deliver. And
in another place he tells us out of Rabbi Abraham that Job did observe it.

Cornelius a lapide, Patet Sabbatum institutum fuisse and sancitum primitus non
a Mose, Exodus 20. sed long anter^us, pu^a ab origin mundi.
It is manifest that the Sabbath was instituted and established, not first by
Moses, Exodus 20. but long before, to wit, from the beginning of the world.
Salianus also in his Ecclesiastical Annals, does at large refute the Prolepsis
as absurd.

As for Protestant writers, whether they be Lutheranes, Calvinists, or our own
English, we dare vie it with the Anticiparians, and give them odds, two for
one at least, and bate the preciser sort too.

Luther Sabbatum ab initio mundi destinatum est ad cultum Dei, Com. in Genesis
himself shall lead the van, The Sabbath was destined from the beginning of the
world to religious worship. Baldwin, Sabbatum ab initio mundi observatum est,
Cas. Conscien. circa Fest. l. 2 c. 13. Cas. 2.
The Sabbath was observed from the Creation. Calvin in Exodus apud Praelect. de
Sabb.
Prideaux.

Gualter, Non dubiu^ quin Patres ante legem diligenter observarint Sabbatum, in
Matthew.
Doubtless the Fathers before the Law diligently observed the Sabbath.

P. Martyr, In Genesis 2.
That people rest from labor one day in the week, did not only appertain to
Moses Law, but had beginning from Genesis 2.

Zanchy, Ego quidem non dubito, etc.

De Creatione Hominis, l. 1.


I doubt not (mine own I relate without prejudice to others opinions) I doubt
not, I say, but the Son of God in humane shape was all this seventh day
busied in most holy colloquies with Adam; but he fully revealed himself to him
and Eve, showed him how and in what order he created all things, wished him to
meditate upon these works, and in them to praise and acknowledge the True God
his Creator, and taught him that after his example every seventh day, all
labor set aside, he should spend in this exercise of Piety, etc. What could
modesty her self more modestly assever? he does not imperiously obtrude for
truth what he says, he only tells you his own conceit; and it has ever
been permitted for men in such cases as this, both to think what they will, and
speak what they think, as the Historian says. Can any therefore but wonder
that the bare delivery of a private opinion, so soberly without incrochment
upon others liberties, should gain the Author no better esteem then to be
reckoned amongst lying Legendaries and fabulous Rabbines? What Zanchy was, his
works speak him: a learned and good man, in that repute he lived, in that he
died. I never heard him defamed for a Palephatus or Tale-coyner till now, and I
hope never shall again.

Catech. Part. 3.
Ursin, The Sabbath was commanded from the beginning of the world by God unto
all men.

Decad. 3. Sermon. 5. le Sabbat. este observe, etc.
Bullinger, The Sabbath was observed from the beginning of the world by a law
natural and divine.

These. 33. art. 2. Praeceptum Sabbati sancitum fuit in ipsa mundi creatione,
etiam ante hominis Lapsum.
Beza, The Precept of the Sabbath was established in the very Creation of the
world, even before man's fall; and elsewhere he says that Job did sanctify at
least every seventh day. A saucy fellow to control Justin Martyr his better;
and therefore is taught manners by my Author: D. Heilen. p. 1. page 58.
Hence forward he must know his distance. Comparisons (Gentle Sir) the Proverb
says are odious; therefore this excursion might (no disparagement to your
discretion) have been spared. Yet has your luxuriancy erred not more in
civilitie then morality: you impute this opinion to Beza as a device of his
own, which were it true, yet your presumption exceeds your knowledge: for
how, I pray, is it possible for you to be assured of this, unless Beza had
either mediately or immediately revealed it to you? and if he did not, you were
very rash, very ill advised, to father it on him, when as I have proved he
might probably enough have derived the opinion from Origin, or R. Abraham, if
not from others.

Junius, Deus institutum Sabbati exemplo suo ac cessatione, etc. Anal. in Genesis
2.
God gave Testimony of the Institution of the Sabbath by his own exemplary
Rest, and by Instituting it in the Church, that Adam and Eve (then living)
might acknowledge that day to be holy by the Ordinance of God.

Pareus, Deus in prima creatione Sabbati sanctificationem sanxit, and haud
dubie in familiis sanctorum Patrum sedulo observata fuit, Com. in Genesis
God sanctified the Sabbath in the very prime Creation, and doubtless that
sanctification was observed in the Patriarchall families.

I could tire both the Reader and my self, should I amasse all foreiners, whose
suffrage has been given for this Patriarchall Sabbath; if any desires further
authorities, I transmit him to Rivet or Waleus, who can furnish him completely.

To come home and encounter Tostatus with one of our own, in dignity of Order
a Bishop, in that his Match, and for learning so beyond him, as (if I might use
your liberty of comparison) I might say he is but another Didymus, a mere
scribbler to this man. The beginning of the Sabbath, says he, Winton.
Catechist. Doct. in 4. praecept.
was in Paradise before there was any sin, and so before there needed any
Savior, and so before there was any ceremony or figure of a Savior.

I could produce Perkins, Willet, Babington, Amesius, etc. all famous lights of
our Church, and that most incomparable piece, the Practice of Piety; but
because it will perhaps be thought that their affection was better then their
judgment, I forbear them, and the rather because also our most Rational
adversaries begin to reel toward us: Brerewood confesses it to be instituted
in Paradise, p. 63.
which is as much as any ever affirmed; for according to the Canonists, Leges
instituuntur cum promulgantur, Did. 4. can. In istis temporalibus.
Laws are then instituted when they are promulgated: and though he explaineth
himself afterward, denying the commandment to be then instituted, yet this he
acknowledges that Gods resting from Creation (his Sabbath) and resting in
himself (the sanctification of it) might be exemplary, though not obligatory to
men to observe the Sabbath then. Nor does Praelect. de Sabbato.
Prideaux vary much from him: which is enough, for if it be granted that Adam
or the Patriarchs observed it, we shall soon discover a command.

Having thus laid down the Arguments which support the Prolepsis, and to every
one fitted the proper solution, having also set before you those reasons which
most seem to advantage the Grammatical sense, and having with Authority
encountered Authority, I desire now nothing more then a neutrall Judge, and
that this difference may have the same decision which Aristippus Diog. Laert.
in vit. Arist.
advised in another case, Mitte ambas ad ignotos; Let disinteressed
Arbitratours end it. And thus I have finished my first stage.

Gods Sabbath under the Law.
THe precedent discourse was spent in the discovery of a Sabbath before the
Law; a time (for so much as concerns Gods external worship) nearest allied
to Varro's (...) or uncertain time before the Ogygian flood. Apud Censorinum.
Our next station must be under the Law, a time more enlightened with the ray of
divine Story then the former: yet is not the light, even of this time, so
uniform, so evenly diffused, but that some opake parts are therein discerned.
For though we are not now (as before) at a loss for a Sabbath, yet does not
the Sabbath we discern show it self in so perfect lineaments and just
proportion, as excludes all diversity of opinion concerning it. The questions
indeed which relate to it are neither very numerous, nor absolutely necessary
to be discussed; yet as they are by accident subservient to my ensuing tract,
an elucidation I must and will afford them, according to that order wherein
method disposes them, which I take to be this.

Some result from the precept, some again from the practice: from the precept,
Quis, Quibus, Quid.

Quis, Who gave the precept? Who promulgated it? And this question is not
peculiar to the fourth precept distinctly taken, but only as it is a member of
the decalogue, whereof the question is especially made: for controverted it is,
whether the ten Commandments were on mount Sinai promulgated by Gods immediate
voice, or the ministry of his Angels, or one or more. And not unworthily: for
Moses seems to attribute it to God himself; but Stephen, Acts 7. verse. 38.53.
and Paul, Gal. 3.19. and Heb. 2.2. to the Angels: in regard of which specious
opposition, eminent and famous men have been diversely inclined: some to Moses
are propense, for these reasons.

First it is said, Dixit Jehova Elohim, God spoke these words, not an Angel
create: and though the word Elohim is once (and but once) applied to the Angels
in the plural, but never in the singular number, as Psalm 8. yet here it can
have no such signification: for the verb is Dixit, and the pronoun Ego, both
singular.

Secondly, the person speaking says, I am the Lord thy God which brought thee
out of the land of Egypt; but an Angel create did not deliver them out of Egypt.

Lastly, Saint Paul himself says, that it was the voice of Christ which shook
the earth, Heb. 12, 26. Therefore where it is said, Acts 7.38. that Moses was
with the Angel in the wilderness, the word Angel must not be understood of an
Angel create, but of Christ, who is often called both an Angel and God in
similary places, as Genesis 31. verse. 11, 13. and 48.15. Exodus 3.2. in all which
places the word Angel can mean no other person then Christ. Thus far Zanch.
de tribus Elohim. l. 2. c. 3.
Zanchy; but short still of the full solution. For though Acts 7.38. the word
is Angel in the singular number, yet in the other place it is Angels in the
plural, excluding utterly the application of it to Christ, or any single
person. Where Zanchy brake off, the explication is continued and supplied by
the thrice-excellent Parallel. l. 1.
Junius, who resolves it thus, At the delivering of the Law on Mount Sinai,
God was attended with many Millions of Angels, (so both the state and service
of their Lord, and the great business in hand required) and from amidst this
glorious host he spoke unto the people, (...), inter Angelos, amidst the Mixtis
pene hominibus atque Angelis, Sab. De Gub. Del, l. 1.
Angels; all the Angels being witnesses to the Covenant, God proclaimed the
Law: so he interprets it; a gloss rather new then absurd.

Others incline to Stephen and Paul, and conceive that God did not utter the
Law himself, but by delegation of his Angels: to which they are the rather
disposed, because in some places of Scripture the Angels use such a form of
speech, as though God himself spoke, and yet it is manifest that themselves
were the immediate utterers of those words as, Numb. 23.32.

If it be now demanded which interpretation I favor; I answer, neither: The
Scripture salved by both I see, but the mind of the holy Ghost is (I take it)
atteined by neither. That which has misled the whole stream of Expositours, is
a conceit that Stephen and Paul spoke of the pronouncing of the Law in Mount
Sinai, whereas indeed their words only aim at the delivering of the Tables of
stone, called the Law also by a Metonymia subjecti, the containing by the name
of the contained; these being put into the hands of Moses by the Ministry of
his Angels, as is evident, Gal. 3.19. For where is it said that the Angels
pronounced the Law? that God did, we read often. As Scripture says not they
did; so reason, that they did not: For how could the vocal prolation by many
Angels but generate confusion of sound? or if God by extraordinary guidance of
their voice might make them speak not only one and the same thing but in one
and the same articulate sound; yet seeing frustra fit per plura, it might full
as well have been uttered by one, why should he employ so many? No, out of all
question (if duly considered) it is that God did himself, (...), in his own
person, as Philo says, speak the Law; and not only for those reasons (yet
solid enough) mentioned by Zanchy, but especially because it is agreed by all
the Ancients, not one (S. Augustine only excepted) impugning. That God (the
second person) did himself often appear to the Patriarchs, and bespake them
viva voce, so Justin Dial. cum Tryph.
Martyr, D. Trinit.
Tertullian, Contr. Arium sermon. 4.
Athanasius, Hist. l. 1. c. 2.
Eusebius and In Gal. 3.
Hierome affirm; and that he did so expressly on Mount Sinai or Horeb, l. 4 c.
31.
Ireneus, Orat. 7.
Nazianzen, Sermon. de Jejun.
Basil and diverse others have affirmed. That immovable pillar of sound doctrine
(as an Eastern (...), Jo. Euchait. Aet. editus.
Bishop calls him) qu. in Deuteronomy.
Theodoret shall speak for all, treating of the narration of Moses. And
further, says he, he recounteth how the Word, the God of all things, exhibited
himself openly to the Israelites, appearing through the fire, but not in any
visible shape. And throughout the whole systeme or body of the old Testament,
there are not so evident marks of Gods immediate presence, as in this Text: For
first there is thunder, the voice of God, Psalm 29.8. and the concomitant of
it, John 12.20. Secondly, the words are very direct, very express, where Moses
tells the Israelites, The Lord spoke unto you, Deuteronomy. 4.12 out of the midst of
the fire; ye heard the voice of the words, but saw no similitude, only ye
heard a voice. Now take it for a (...), an infallible token, of Gods immediate
presence, wheresoever in the Scripture he is said to speak (except in vision or
so) and no visible shape is seen. Lastly, there are degrees of distance
enjoined, the people not to approach nearer then the foot of the Mount; Aaron
and Nadab, Abihu and the seventie Elders, up to the Mount; but Moses only into
the Cloud: from hence also note another certain argument of Gods immediate
presence; which is always concomitant with such procession-bounds, as Exodus
3.5. Josh. 5.14.

For the full clearing then of this seeming repugnancy, I say, Acts 7.38. with
Zanchy, The word Angel denotes no Angel create, but the Angel Creator,
Christ, the second Person in the Trinity. For Stephen alluded to that of
Malachy 4.1. where our Savior is called Angelus Foederis, The Angel of the
Covenant, viz. with whom the covenant was made, Exodus 24.7, 8. and Deuteronomy. 5.2.
as also to that of the Prophet, or rather Evangelist, Hieron. Praefat. in
Isaiam.
Isaiah 63.9. where he is called the Angel of Gods presence. In the 53 verse. of
the same chapter, the word Law intends not the Law promulgated, but engraven
in the Aug. contr. F. Man. l. 15.
diptykes or tables, which could not be delivered to Moses by God himself,
seeing he assumed no sensible shape, nor was Moses admitted to so near an
approach to God, as to receive them from him: therefore S. Paul says, It was
delivered by Angels into the hand of a Mediator, that is, not Christ, as
Calvine and some others suppose, but Moses (as Basil De Spir. S. cap. 4.
) who was the internuncius betwixt God and the Israelites, Deuteronomy. 5.7. Lastly,
Vide sis Cl. vir. D Heinsi^, Ex. Sacr. in loc.
that place of Heb. 2.2. is merely mistaken: for neither in the text or context
is there any, either express or implicit, mention of the law. And so much for
the Quis.

The next is, Quibus. Disputed it is, whether the Law considered as delivered
in Mount Sinai, and abstracted from the ratification which it derived from
Christ and his Apostles, was only given to the Jews, and so only obliged
them; or under them to the Gentiles also, who were to become the Church and
people of God. Zanchie In Decalog.
, Dominicus a Soto Lib. 2. De justitia and jure, qu. 5. art 4.
, and some others are of opinion it was peculiar to the Jews only, from these
reasons.

1. Reason.
First, laws only bind them, to whom they are only given: But the Decalogue
was given only to the Jews, as is manifest by the preface: Ergo, it only
binds them.

Answer.
The Decalogue was indeed given to the Jews; but was it as Jews, or a Nation
distinct by themselves? No; rather as Covenantees, and the then select people
of God, so that whosoever were after implanted in the Covenant, and enrolled
Gods people, to them, as post nati, did and does the Decalogue belong. Nor was
the Preface prefixed to invest the Israelites with a sole propriety therein: for
God, being now to give them (as they were then his holy and chosen Church,
which is always formally though not materially the same) his moral and
immutable laws, had here just reason to apply himself first to them, as Jews,
and to rowze their attention by inculcating into their memory the recent and
signal blessing lately conferred upon them, thereby to excite their more
strict observance of what he was now to give them in charge. So that this
introduction might, I confess, be proper to the Jews only, and yet the
Decalogue it self have a larger province and extent, and be spoken Irenaeus, l.
4. c. 31.
omnibus similiter, to all alike. Though, should I deny what I partly grant, I
could vouch men of no mean note to rescue me from error. In hac praefatione
ita Deus Israelem compellat speciatim ut in eo tamen omnes Gentes comprehendar,
These. 29. art. 5.
In this preface God bespeaketh the Israelites more especially, but yet so as
under them he comprehends all the Gentiles. So Beza. And for the Roman
party, De Justif. l. 4. c. 6.
Bellarmine.

Secondly, if the Law as given on Sinai obliged the Gentiles, then were they at
that time, before, and now are since Christ, bound to observe the Sabbath: But
they neither were, nor now are astricted to that observation: Ergo, etc.

That some Gentiles were thereto bound, the pellucid fountain of verity shows
plainly; Answ. Isai. 56.3.
Let not the son of the stranger that has joined himself to the Lord speak,
saying, God has utterly separated me from his people. If you say, that these
were Israelites by covenant though not by seed; then why may not the Christian
Gentiles, who are covenantees as well as the Jews, who are also the seed of
Abraham, Gal. 3.28, 29.
and heirs according to the promise, and united in Christ Jesus, why may not
they observe it also? will you say, because the day is abrogated and annulled?
and can you demonstratively prove it so? The Jewish Sabbath was questionless
indeed abolished, but was the Sabbath of the fourth commandment so? If you say,
Yea, for they were both one; I reply, it is with greater facility said then
proved. And now we arive at the last circumstance considerable in the precept,
Quid.

Of this it is controverted, what day the precept enjoyneth, whether the Jewish
Sabbath, the Saturday, or any other particular and express day? Most hold the
Jewish seventh from the creation to be the day directly prescribed there; but I
think it no hard task to beat them, or from that hold or in it. For first I
would gladly know where in express terms the Saturday-Sabbath or seventh from
the creation is commanded in this precept; examine and dissect it thoroughly:
Remember thou sanctify the Sabbath day; The Sabbath day it is you see, not the
seventh from the creation. Therefore in 4. Praecept. p. 657.
Zanchie has set a nota been upon it, That God (not without cause) said not,
Remember thou sanctify the seventh day, but, the day of rest; that is, says
he, Di^m quieti consecratum a Deo ipso v^l im^^edi te p^r ^e, v^l med^te^per
Ecclesi^m a Spiritu s^ncto (...), quisquis ille sit.
The day consecrated to rest by God, either immediately by himself or mediately
by the Church directed by the holy Ghost, whatsoever day it be. Thus he; more
circumspectly then what he delivered three columns before: where he says that
the word Sabbath here comprehends all the Jewish festivalls. What has moved
him and other learned men to this fantasy, it much amuseth me: God tells us
distinctly what Sabbath he here means, the weekly; of any other there is
altum silentium, not a word. He says, Sanctify the Sabbath, in the singular,
not Sabbaths in the plural number: Non festorum observatio ibi praecipitur,
sed unius festi dies, Jun. animaedv. in Bell. cont. 7. p. 1^79.
The observation, not of many festivals, but of one only is there enjoined.
And what necessity of bringing these feasts within the compass and obligation
of this precept, which have commands proper and peculiar to themselves? As
therefore ancient Canons Conc. Nicenum Ancir. etc.
said to pragmaticall Bishops, which invaded their jurisdiction, so I to these
Jewish feasts, Let them keep their own home, their own stations, they have
nothing to do here.

Well, the Sabbath must be sanctified, but what day that should be is not yet
explained: in the subsequent words indeed there is some hint of it, six days
shall thou labor; there is one character by which we may know it: Six days
are at our own dispose, but we must not hold over our term; The seventh is the
Sabbath, it is as Philosophers say Terminus minimus quod sic, the least
proposition of time we must allow God: in a narrower limitation his worship
will not subsist, a seventh day he will have. The seventh is the Sabbath: The
seventh? what seventh? he says not, the seventh from the creation, he names
no day; if he had, it would have restrained the Law to that day: but because he
meant the day should change, and yet the Law continue, he says only the
seventh, that is, the seventh after six, or one in a week Jun. Pol. Moses c. 8.
. For Suarez, De dieb. festis, c. 1 Deputa^e septimum diem in hebdomade, est
formaliter deputare septimum diem, licet materialiter non idem dies semper
fuerit deputatu^, Episcopus Brech. in Epist. dedic. praefix. artic. Per^h.
To depute one day in a week, is formally to depute the seventh day, though
materially one and the same day be not always deputed. Well; but will one in a
week serve the turn? is there nothing else required? is the determination of
this one in seven in our power? No, there is a proviso for that; it must be the
Sabbath of the Lord thy God, that is, which he has already, or should declare
to his Church to be his Sabbath: and this is another character of the Sabbath,
It must be of Gods own choice. But still not one word of the Jewish Sabbath, no
discovery of it yet; but we have not done with the precept, perhaps we shall
find it in what remains: It follows then, For in six days the Lord made
Heaven and Earth, and all that therein is, and rested the seventh day,
wherefore the Lord blessed the seventh day and hallowed it: Here, I confess,
the precept seems very apposite, very full, so full as we are accused for no
less then high treason against the holy Ghost, in daring to affirm the
contrary. (...)
These Dogmatists, says one, are not afraid to make the holy Ghost a liar,
who teaches in most clear and express terms, That God Almighty blessed the
very seventh day on which himself rested. An heavy charge, did we not plead,
not guilty. That God blessed the very seventh day whereon he rested, we not
deny; but whether he did expressly command the observation of that day by this
or any other member of the fourth precept, that is the thing whereof we demand
clear demonstration. Nor yet should we call this into dispute, had we not just
cause to appeal from the old Translation, which has herein embraced a strange
singularity; for where it reads, God blessed the seventh day, the Geneva,
Spanish, that of Hierome, all that I have perused (the Septuagint only
excepted) render it, God blessed the Sabbath day, as our most correct and new
translation has it: indeed the very fountain it self, the Hebrew gives it so;
which being true, can what we have said deserve so loud an outcry as has been
made? let any neutrally affected judge.

Secondly, the defect of direct and express command is not the only, the
principal motive it is, I grant, which allureth us to think the Jewish Sabbath
in especial manner not enjoined here: another argument there is accessory to
it. For if God had here expressly commanded the observation of the seventh from
the Creation, or Jewish Sabbath, the fourth precept would have been in relation
to that particular ceremonial, and by consequent changeable: but I think it
was and is in all parts entirely moral, and perpetual; and my opinion is
founded upon two not very defeasable reasons.

First, it is marshalled in the Decalogue amongst the moral and immutable
laws, which were notably distinguished from the ceremonial by many
circumstances; The Moral uttered by God himself, (proved page 39.) in the
presence of the whole multitude, written by Gods own finger, given without
restraint to time, how long; or place, where: Contrariwise the Ceremonial
given to Moses only, and by him declared to the people, called Ceremonies,
Judgments, Ordinances, and limited only to the land of H^oker. Eccl. Pol. l.
3*. 11.
Jury: Now it could not be agreeable to the wisdom of the God of Order to
shuffle and misplace a Ceremonial amongst his Moral laws.

Secondly, if you cast your eye upon the Sabbath of the fourth precept, you
shall behold it quite deplumed and stripped of all legal observances: for those
things which are all urged as ceremonial, and several of the Jews, touching
the Sabbath, are all, every one, Postscripts and Bylaws, not one emergent from
the fourth precept. It was a sign betwixt God and his people, Exodus 31.17.
Ezech. 20.20. It was enjoined with extreme rigor, No meat to be dressed, Exodus
17.5. no fire to be kindled, Exodus 35.3. These were all peculiar to the Jews:
if the commandment of the Sabbath was so too, how comes it to pass they are
thus discriminated, thus severed? Very suspicious it is then that they were not
uniform precepts, not all of a piece.

Object.
But you will say that Deuteronomy. 5.15. the observation of the Sabbath is inserted in
the fourth precept, as peculiar to the Jews, in regard it was a commemorative
of their strange deliverance out of Egypt.

Answ.
I answer, True: But there is a great diversity betwixt the Decalogue given on
Mount Sinai, and that described in Deuteronomie; That appertaining to Gods
Church indefinitely taken, this to the Jews only: And this is evident from the
due consideration of Deuteronomy: for though there be many things in it which
may of common right belong to the hole Church, yet certain it is that book was
especially penned for the Jews, it being (...), an explanation of that Law
(whether Moral, Ceremonial, or Judicial) which Moses received on the Mount,
and application of it to the particular state and condition of that people: So
that this objection does not only not evert but establish my assertion, it
being a manifest argument that the Sabbath of the Decalogue engraven in the
Tables was of larger extent then that mentioned in Deuteronomie: for else why
should the reason of one be universal, viz. as a monument of the creation; of
the other, particular, as a memorial of the redemption out of Egypt: and
consequently it may persuade that the Sabbath of the one was Moral, of the
other Ceremonial. U^rum praeceptum de sanctificatione Sabbat^, convenienter
trad^tur inter praecepta Decalogi?
And therefore when Aquinas had framed this question, Whether the commandment
concerning sanctifying the Sabbath was fitly delivered in the Decalogue? he
found no evasion but this; Ponitur inter praecepta Decalogi in quantum
praeceptum morale, non in quantum est caeremoniale, 2. 2 ae. q. 122. art. 4.
It is placed, says he, in the Decalogue as it was a Moral precept, not as
Ceremonial. Which is in effect but one and the same thing with what I
maintain: For I distinguish betwixt those precepts of the Sabbath which occur
elsewhere, and the fourth Commandment, and therefore I apply what is
Ceremonial in the Sabbath to them, what is Moral I restrain to this. So much
for the Quid, and indeed for the precept.

Survey we now the practice and observation thereof, wherein the circumstances
which offer themselves to our consideration are these, Quando, Quomodo.

By the Quando I understand the Terminus a quo and beginning of the Sabbath,
which some derive from the evening preceding the artificial day, and deduce it
from Levit. 23.22. Others Perkins, Cas. consc. l. 2. c. 15. q. 3.
again suppose it commenced in the morning; and are induced thereto by the two
Evangelists, Matthew. 28.1. In the end of the Sabbath as it began to dawn toward
the first day of the week; Mark 16.1, 2. When the Sabbath was past, very early
in the morning, the first day of the week: and therefore the Leviticall Law
they conceived only concerned the Passover, and such solemn feasts.

But I rather embrace the more received opinion, that the Sabbath began at eve,
and suppose Beza, Casaub. and al^i.
that the Evangelists respected the manner of the Gentiles, whose day commenced
from midnight: For me thinks the restriction of that ordinance in Leviticus to
the solemn feasts only, is more nice then solid; and the contrary is very
probably indigitated in both the old and new Covenant. In the old, Nehemiah
says, that when the gates of Jerusalem began to be dark before the Sabbath, c.
13. v. 19.
he commanded they should be shut, and not be opened till after the Sabbath:
whence I infer that the Sabbath began at twilight; for else why should the
gates be shut up so soon? In the new Testament also Luke says, that the women
when they had bought their spices rested the Sabbath according to the
commandment; c. 23 v. 56.
which seems to insinuate that the Sabbath presently succeeded the buying of
those spices. And (though it be (...)) give me leave to note to you that by
Saint Luke here it is evident the spices were bought on friday toward evening,
not on monday morning, not penitus exacto Sabbato, as Exerc. 16. c. 113.
Casaubon affirms. Saint Mark Cap 16 v. 1
indeed, whom he cites, seems to relate it otherwise: But I say first with
judicious Calvine, that Marcus duas res divers^s eodem contextu referens
tempora minus accurate quam Lucas distinguit; nam quod prius actum ^rat una cum
profectione miscet, Calv. H^^m Evang.
Mark relating two diverse things in one and the same context, did not so
exactly distinguish their times as Saint Luke; for what was acted before (viz.
the buying of the spices) he mingleth with the setting out and going forth of
the women. And in truth S. Mark minded more the substance then circumstance of
the story (a thing so familiar in Scripture as it has begot a proverb, Non est
prius and posterius in Scriptura sacia.
There is not always an orderly disposition of first and last in holy
Scripture:) Nor does it reflect at all to the debasing and disparagement of the
divine History, for a small diversity touching circumstance is nothing ad
summam narrationis, to the substance of the narration, as the same Casaubon
has well observed. Secondly, Annot. in loc.
it is very probable what Beza has applied by way of salve to this of Mark
(though it relisheth not well (and perhaps the worse because Beza's) with the
learned Heinsius) that there is a dislocation of the words by some unwary
Scribe, Exercit. in loc.
who has put them out of joint: for the latter part of this verse ought, as he
conceives, to conclude the preceding chapter: as though the words had been
thus ordered, And Mary Magdalene, and Mary the mother of Jesus beheld where he
was laid, and bought spices that they might come and anoint him; and that
which makes it seem still to him more probable is an ancient copy, reading it,
(...), i. e. They went and bought spices, without repeating the name of any
woman.

The Quando I have briefly dispatched; and the dispatch of that gives me
access to the Quomodo, the manner of observing the Sabbath, that is, what holy
duties were performed that day. And from this arise two questions: First
whether the Law was read publicly every Sabbath, or only in the year of
release at the feast of Tabernacles; and this question is limited too, to the
period from the Law given to the captivity. The other quaere is, what Law,
whether the hole Pentateuch, or Deuteronomie only, was read in that year of
Release.

As concerning the First; they which hold the negative ground their opinion on
these reasons:

B. White, p 144.
First, that there should be any public or solemn reading of the Law upon
Sabbath days, is not expressly required and commanded in the Pentateuch.

Secondly, It appears not by any relation of sacred History, that before the
Babylonish captivity there was any weekly reading or expounding the Law upon
the Sabbath.

Lastly, it is a thing to be admired, that if the reading of the Law had been
in continual use among the Jews every Sabbath day, there should be found in
the days of King Josiah one copy only or book of the Law, and that Hilkiah
should present this book to the King, as a great raritie, 2. King. 22.8, 9.

But the unsoundnesse of the foundation argues the assertion erroneous: for,

First, will nothing but express Text satisfy you? suppose we find it not
(...), not verbatim commanded thus, Read the Law publicly every Sabbath day;
is not, I pray you, necessary and inevitable deduction out of Text Scripture
with you? if yea, then we need not travel far for a command, no farther then
the fourth precept, and not far into that, but to Remember thou keep holy or
sanctify the Sabbath day. I told you before that things are then said to be
sanctified, when they are applied to holy worship; now holy worship is the
exhibiting to God his due and just honor: and that is performed two ways,
either by reverent attention to what he offers us in his word, or an humble
presentment of what we prefer to him in our prayers. For Hearing of the word
and Adoration are the two hands of religion; the one we extend to receive what
God communicates to us, the other to represent what in mercy he accepts from
us: so as they are indeed the proper instruments of mutual commerce betwixt
him and us; and though I allow them a parity of honor, yet has the one a
precedence of order before the other, and this belongs to hearing of the
word: For the first of religious offices wherewith we publicly honor God on
earth (says that worthy Eccl. pol. l. 5. 18.
Hooker) is the receiving that knowledge which he imparteth to us in his word.
The reason is evident; for, prius est nosse Deum, consequens Lactant. Inst. l.
4.
colere: or rather according to that golden chain, How Romans 10 14.
shall men invoke him in whom they have not believed, how shall they believe in
him of whom they have not heard, and how shall they hear without a preacher?
Hence it is that the Primitive Church had ever the Sermon before the Service,
to intimate that none ought to be admitted to pray with the Church, before they
have been enlightened in saving doctrine: All, tag and rag had free access to
the Sermon; to the service only the faithful, and Catechumeni. Episcopus
nullum prohi^eat i^gredi ad Ecclesiam and audire verbum Dei, sive Gentilem,
sive Haereticum, sive Judaeum, usque ad missam Catechumenotum, Council. 4. Can.
85.
Let the Bishop interdict none, neither Gentile, nor Heretic, nor Jew, to
enter into the Church and hear the word of God, until the Service of the
Catechumeni, says the Council of Carthage. For the clear understanding of
which Canon, you must know that Missa Catechumenorum signifies here not the
dismission of the Catechumeni, but the service so called; which began at the
introitus, and ended at the offertory. If then the sanctification of the
Sabbath be the application of it to Gods worship, the consequence must and will
be, That all sacred actions tending to this worship as parts thereof (but the
hearing of the Law read most especially, it being of the essence of that
worship) were commanded in and under the word sanctify.

B. White, page 146.
But you will say that many Doctors of note maintain that the letter of the fourth
commandment imposed upon the Jews no other external form of sanctifying the
weekly Sabbath, but resting from bodily labor.

I answer, The literal sense of the fourth Commandment imposed upon the Jews
the sanctification of the Sabbath, viz. by all such religious actions as are
proper to holy worship; the specialties whereof it not determines, least it
should be thought to exclude any. It also imposed rest and cessation from
secular business; but that it commanded it as any at all, much less the only
external form of sanctifying the Sabbath, pardon me, I cannot believe. For
what honor could accrue to God through an idle and lazy rest? what worship
could man perform waking more then a sleep? How could the day be less
sanctified by beasts then men? Rest was enjoined as necessary indeed
necessitate medii, as a fit means; but not necessitate causae, as a necessary
cause constituting sacred worship. Against these Doctors of note, I will
oppose a Doctor of note too, and of such note as his Dictates never any of the
Primitive Church durst call into question Hieron. apud Aquin. page 1. qu. 61.
art. 3.
, Athanasius the Great, who in refutation of this Jewish fancy has amongst
others this invincible argument, Si otium sanctificet, ergo sequitur ut
negotium contaminet, De Sabb. and Circumcis.
If rest sanctifies, then by consequence labor polluteth: for, Contrariorum
eadem est ratio: yea, the Father makes the knowledge of God to be the chief
end of the Sabbath, Because knowledge is more necessary then rest Quia cognitio
magis est necessaria quam otium, Idem, ibid.
. And therefore the beam of truth has extorted from them this confession, That
some other religious actions were intended by God as the end of the precept,
but no other were formally commanded B. White, p. 146.
. What I pray, did God intend those religious actions as the end of the
precept? how come you to know Gods intention? has he any where revealed it? if
yea, then tell me, is not that overture, that declaration of his intendment
equipollent to a command? Besides, when and where did God open this his mind?
in this precept, and at the giving of the Law? If now, and here, then these
religious actions and rest were coordinate together, both imposed at one and
the same time, the thing you deny: If after, then God imposed, and man observed
rest to no end and purpose all that while, until the manifestation of his
intentions concerning the end of that rest came forth. But God and nature do
nothing in vain Aristot. de Coelo. lib. 1. cap. 4.
; even Philosophy could tell you so, and sure Divinity much more.

Their second Argument is upon the old haunt still, The want of express
narration; which were it true, yet is it no (...), no demonstration of what
they affirm, as I have proved before, page 5. Besides, the contrary may be
probably collected without detorting Scripture against reason: For first, when
the Shunamite desired to go to the Prophet Elisha to acquaint him with the
death of her son, and to see if he could afford her any comfort, her husband
expostulated with her, saying, Why will thou go to day? it is neither New Mood,
nor Sabbath day: which had been an impertinent question, if they had not
accustomed to resort to the Prophets on those days, to hear the word
expounded. That this was their practice scarce any Expositour upon the place
but assures us.

Though here is only mention of the New Mood and Sabbath, yet as we need not
doubt but that they practiced the same upon other festivalls also, so I
conceive it to be employed in both or either words, which are often in Scripture
taken in a general notion, not denoting any certain or particular but an
indefinite feast. The word Sabbath especially, this so frequently as no meanly
lettered man is such a novice to whom it is a novelty: The New Mood more
sparingly, yet when mated with Sabbath seldom retains it any other
signification. Examples whereof are first this text of the Kings, then that of
Isaiah 66.23. From one New Mood to another, and from one Sabbath to another,
shall all flesh come to worship before me, says the Lord. Again, that of
Ezech. 46.3. The people of the land shall worship at the door of this gate
before the Lord in the Sabbaths and in the New Mons. Lastly, that of Amos,
8.5. When will the New Mood be gone that we may sell our corn? and the Sabbath
that we may set forth wheat? In all these portions of Scriture Sabbaths and
New Mons, by the figure (...), that is, when one thing is expressed by two
words, are only put for solemn feasts generally not particularly accepted. Nor
is the word New Mood taken thus only when linked with the Sabbath, but
somewhile also when single and alone, as 1. Kings 12.33. For where in our
translation (as in I am sure most, if not all others) it is said that Jeroboam
ordained a feast in the eighth month, the Hebrew word for that feast is (...),
which signifies the New Mood; Seld. Marm. Arundel. page 134.
but to speak properly the New Mood it could not be, for the Moon was then in
her full, it being the 15 day: and the feast is thought by learned men to be
devised by Jeroboam in imitation (indeed to suppress it in oblivion) of the
feast of Tabernacles which was to be on the 15 of the seventh month. Hospin.
de origin Fest. page 24.


But not to expatiate too far in collateral transcursions; the reading of
the Law may (not absurdly) be expiscated out of Acts 15.21. where James giving
definitive sentence in the Council of Jerusalem, says, Moses of old time has
in every city them that preach him, being read in the Synagogues every Sabbath
day. But against this place they except, viz. that (...) is used in Scripture
of many things not very ancient, as Matthew. 5.21, 27, 33. Acts 15.7. But this
objection is easily repelled: the question is not what sense the like phrase
has, Matthew. 5.21, etc. but what it means here; and that it is to be taken in
the construction we make of it, an eminent Bishop Winto^. Sermon. Pentec. 1.
witnesses, The sound of the Spirit (viz. preaching) all the Law-long sounded
in them, by whom Moses was preached every Sabbath day. So he upon this very
text. But in defense of the contrary interpretation, it may be objected, That
the text speaks of Synagogues, which came not into use until the captivity.
To which I say, that the most and best Divines Hosp. de orig. Templi e C.
Bertramo
hold it probable that Synagogues had their beginning from the plantation of
the land of Canaan, when the priestly and prophetical offices ceased in the
firstborn, and masters of families, but were supplied, the first, by the
Leviticall priests; the second, by the seventy Elders, as some suppose
Genebrard. Chron. p. 102.
, but more certainly by the Prophets, whose ordinary calling was to read and
expound the Law. The numerous provision of which sacred preachers makes it
incredible that they were destitute of places (no matter how, or Colleges, or
Synagogues, or otherwise denominated) destinate to that and such like
holy-duties.

Their last argument is not compounded of much better stuff. For first the
finding of the book of the Law by Hilkiah, and presenting of it to Josiah, is
no infallible sign, Quod alioqui nulli ejus essent alii codices, That there
were besides no other books thereof, not to Genebrard Chron. in ann. 3526.
I am sure: and it may well be controverted. For if in times of harder
pressures, when the Temple and the authentic books in it were burnt, when
utter havoc was made of all, and the people of God led captives into Babylon;
even in the extremity of that desolation, if some copies were no doubt
preserved in private men's hands, as Daniels, Ezechiels, Bell. de verb. Dei, l.
2. c. 1. and Jun. anim. adv. in eum.
Jeremies, etc. (For how otherwise could Esdras restore the Sacred volume to
its first integrity, then by comparing diverse exemplaries then extant together,
and so reforming what errors had been committed by negligent penmen) if I say,
some copies escaped the fire at that time, probable it is that all perished not
before Josiahs reign. But be it granted that all were lost, not one to be found
before Hilkiah chanced to light upon that, yet are you short still; your
argument is not ad idem: for the question is of a duty, part of Gods public
and solemn worship, and your instance is of a time under persecution, when the
ensign of the Church was the Cross, when there was no solemn worship of the
true God publicly tolerated; and you may as well upon this instance infer
that there was no Sabbath observed, as deny the observation of it by this duty
of Reading and Hearing the Law. No man (for ought I know) contendeth that the
solemn reading of the Law always every Sabbath, and that in times of
distress, was practiced: and that it was at other times, even Cajetan Cajet.
in locum.
himself (who holds that that book which Hilkiah found was of all other the
only remnant) acknowledges: Tanto tempore neglecta erant divina tempore
Manassis, ut liber Legis tanquam res noviter inventa scribatur.
Holy exercises (as reading and expounding the Law) during Manasses his wicked
reign were so long neglected; (and neglect I hope insinuates a duty formerly
practiced) that the book of the Law is related as a thing new discovered. So
he. True it is, he mentions not the Sabbath day, as whereon these neglecta
divina ought to have been performed; but seeing the words seem to refer to
duties which ought to have been publicly performed, their public performance
ought to have regard to both times and places destinate thereto. This point I
prosecute no further: enough I hope (if not too much) has been said to
persuade that the Law was read on the weekly Sabbath, as well as on the annual
of Tabernacles in the septennuall of Release.

I pass then to the last question. In this as brief I shall be, as in the
former I was tedious.

At the end of every seven years, in the solemnity of the year of Release, in
the feast of Tabernacles, thou shall read the Law before Israel in their
hearing, says the text: Upon which words Tostatus thus, Accipitur specialiter
LEX pro Deuteronomio, Tostat. in Matthew. 5. q. 91.
The Law, says he, is meant especially of Deuteronomy. And B. White D. Heilen.
others since have embraced the same opinion, but none have thought us worthy
to be privy to the reasons inducing that opinion, nor indeed can any be devised.

For who knows not that the word Law imports the whole Pentateuch of Moses:
of (I believe) an hundred of instances, I will produce but one; and that (of
any) the likeliest to make for their purpose.

Deuteronomy. 17. v. 17.
God injoyneth the future King should write him a copy of this Law in a book:
Now I pray, tell me, is Deuteronomy only understood by this Law? No, it is
not: all Expositours take it for the hole five books; and yet for this there
may be some color, because the 70. render it (...), Hierome, Deuteronomium
legis hujus. But to return to the first text of Moses; we need no other
Expositour then himself: what Law he appointed then to be re^d, he tells us
in the immediate precedent verse, it was that Law which he delivered to the
Levites; Cap. 31.9, and 26.
that Law which he commanded them to put in the side of the Ark. Now if they
can prove that only Deuteronomy was delivered to the Levites and laid up
there, they shall gain my subscription.

Having thus proceeded as far as my first intendment bounded me, lest this
discourse should jut too far into that ensuing, of the Sabbath under the
Gospel, now no more.

Gods Sabbath under the Gospel.
WE have at last shaked off those remora's which retarded our arrival at the
Christian Sabbath, at Gods Sabbath under the Gospel. For a Sabbath God has
still, but not the Jewish, not the seventh from the creation: No; Finitur
septimus, Dominus sepultus; reditur ad primum, Dominus resuscitatus, Aug. de
verbis Apost. Sermon. 15.
The seventh day is vanished, our Lord is buried; the first now dawneth, our
Lord is risen, and his Resurrection has consecrated to us a new Sabbath: for a
Sabbath God must have by the immutable Law of the fourth precept, Remember thou
sanctify the Sabbath day, that is, that day which for the time being God has
marked out and appointed for his own, (...). For if this Commandment injoyneth
now no particular and set time under the Gospel, then is the Law an Ennealogue,
not a Decalogue, and so God has lost one of his ten words; but he pays no
tithe out of his Commandments, his full Denary he must and will have.

Object.
If you say the Moral equity, viz. to yield God a competent and convenient
time for his worship remains still, and so the Commandment is not lost.

Solut.
I answer, This Fundamental Law is tacitly employed in this precept, but so it
was also in the institution of all other ceremonial festivals, the Passover,
Pentecost, etc. to which we may as well resort as to the fourth precept for it.
And if this moral or natural Law be the only relics of that Commandment: I
would fain learn what was in the Sabbath extraordinary more then in other
Feasts, which might entitle it to a room amongst the moral Laws of the
Decalogue, when as the other Feasts were excluded. Besides, if this moral law
of Festos dies coals makes a distinct precept by it self, I see no reason but
there should be another for going to Church, another for allowing God a
convenient portion of our substance (for these are also moral equities) and so
there will be an even dozen. Lastly, how comes this moral equity to be a
peculiar of the Gospel only? God had from the Creation to the Law, from the
Law to Christ, a day appropriated (and that by himself) to his worship: what?
has he less reason to require it under the Gospel? has he left the Christian
Church to that liberty that every man may serve him as the toy takes him, and
so God stand to our courtesy to be worshipped when we list? B. White p. 121.
You will say Nay; we are not left at that liberty: The observation of the
Holy days appointed by the Church, is reduced to the fourth Commandment, as a
special to a general: viz. Gods people must observe holy times, because the
equity of the fourth Commandment obliges thereunto: But Easter and
Christmasse day, and Sunday, etc. are holy days lawfully appointed by the
Governors of the Church, and subordinate to the equity of the fourth
Commandment; therefore Christian people are bound to observe these Holy days,
in obedience to the equity of the fourth Commandment.

I answer, The Church has a power indeed to ordain festivals; but is the
observation of her constitutions concerning them, a fulfilling; the
disobedience, a breach of the fourth Commandment? How can this be? First, what
needs an Obligation be derived from the last precept of the first Table, when
the first of the latter is alsufficient? Secondly, is it not a mere non
sequitur? The fourth Commandment binds us to yield God a convenient time for
his worship: Ergo It obliges us to observe the festivals of the Church? Where
learned you this Logic? Suppose I pray, the Church should enjoin but one day
in a month, does he I pray who observes her order that one day, and not once
more in the interim serve God perform his duty which God in this Commandment
requires? or does he who plieth God with frequent addresses, who strictly
observes canonical hours, yet only perhaps fails that one day which the
Church injoyneth; does he, I say, violate the moral law of this precept, which
says not, Set apart such times for pious exercises as thy Governors
prescribe, but, such as thou thy self think meet. In short, to make this
more evident, Every Law positive is built upon some moral, as upon a
foundation; now it is manifest that the foundation may stand, and yet the
superstructure fall, as may be demonstrated in an example familiar to us: The
equity of State requires that particular persons be not enriched any way
which reflecteth to the damage of a community; upon this sociable equity,
there is a positive, a Statute law 5. Ed. 6. c. 14.
inacted, that None shall buy or contract for any victuals or wares before
they come to the Market, Fair, or Port. But in some parts of this Realm,
especially in Norfolk, such plenty of corn there is growing in most Towns, as
makes every of them a kind of Market, so as few men need go out of their own
Villages to be supplied with materials either for bread or beer; yea the
superfluity is such, as many Towns vend a thousand quarters of grain, over and
besides what supplieth their families and lands; by reason of which great
plenty little or none is sold in many Markets: and the usual practice has
been, and is, for Merchants to buy, not in open Market, but at the Barn door
great quantity thereof, and export it into other parts of the kingdom where
scarcity is. This act of theirs some Merchants have by smart experience lately
found to be illegal, but yet no violation of the foresaid equity: for who
complains that they are damnified thereby? Not the Norfolcians, they are
eased; not the Shires deficient, they are relieved: either part desires it:
one, ut impleatur, that it may be stored; the other, ut depleatur, that it may
be disburthened.

Nor does the fourth Commandment only infer out of these words, Remember
thou sanctify the Sabbath, that God must have a Sabbath in a special manner;
but it declares also his will concerning the quotient and limitation thereof,
Six days shall thou labor and do all that thou have to do, but the Seventh is
the Sabbath, so that one in a week he must have.

If you say, the limitation of one in a week was ceremonial, Object.
and so abrogated.

I answer, prove you it ceremonial, Solut.
and I will yield it abrogated: but there has not yet been any argument or
reason shown us whereby we might be persuaded to conceive it ceremonial, nor
has it so much as one Character of a ceremony in it.

For first, it was not typical; it did not prenote any thing to ensue or be
accomplished under the Gospel. If that fancy of the Jewish Cabala be true, that
the world shall continue but six thousand years, and then the day of judgment
shall follow, it might prefigure that, and yet no ceremony proved; for that
time is not yet elapsed, and the type must continue till the thing typified be
fulfilled: so that this rather evinceth the duration then abrogation of this
limitation.

Secondly, it had no particular relation to the land of Canaan, the proper
place of ceremonies; nor yet to the Jews, upon whom it was not imposed as Jews,
as a mark of difference to distinguish them from the Gentiles. If you object,
Exodus 31.13. and 17. Ezech. 20.12, and 20. where the Sabbath is called a sign
betwixt God and them; I say, the Sabbath was at that time a mark of difference
and separation betwixt the Jews and Gentiles, that is confessed; but was it so as
a seventh day? No; that which caused the distinction was the sanctification of
them on that day, not any thing in the number of seven. Gods seposing of a
certain time for their, and only their (for, God worthily neglected those of
whom he was not worshipped Eos a quibus non coleb^tur merito neglexit, August.
De Civ. Dei, l. 2. c. 14.
) Sanctification was an argument that he had an especial care of them above
others, and that they were his only people.

It was not imposed as an heavy burden upon the Exodus 23.12.
And indeed in the explanation of the law, or rather application of it to the
state of the Jews, it is rather recited as an ordinance of comfort, and
refreshing, as of mercy and and favor, then of rigor, or severity, then of
depression and of servitude.

not have more abrogated then was ceremonial, will you?

If you say, it was and must be ceremonial: Object.
for moral it was not, and therefore positive; and because positive,
ceremonial.

I answer, Sol.
denying that positive either necessarily implies ceremonial, or excludes
moral. Nay more: disputable it is whether positive may be admitted here or no.
Sure I am a great Prelate In divinis non datur jus Positivum, Winton. Op.
posth. Determ de decimis.
has resolved it, In Divine constitutions Positive law has no place; and so
Aqu. 1.2 ae. qu. 99. art. 3.
Schoolmen and Civilians use to speak: but in regard the propriety of the word
signifies the imposing of what before was in its nature arbitrary, whether the
imposition be Divine or Humane, it constituteth (in my opinion) a Law positive
denominated accordingly. Be it then Positive: is it therefore ceremonial, or
not moral? Let the definition of either word end the strife. Moral is derived
from mores or mos, and may be defined as Lirinensis Contr. Haer. cap. 3.
does Catholic, Quod ubique, quod semper, quod ab omnibus, That which has
been observed every where, always, and of all men. And though in its remotest
latitude of signification it is synonymall with what Civilians call Jus
Gentium, or the Law of Nations, yet may it not unfitly be restrained to lesser
societies, as to Gods Church; and so what has been always observed in his
Church, may not unfitly be called moral; and then the observation of a weekly
day will become so too; yet with this restriction and difference, that one is
moral by Natural infusion, the other by external Imposition Halens. 3. qu.
32. memb. 5.
.

But suppose it granted that Positive were a privative of Moral, yet can you
never prove that it must inevitably infer ceremonial: for ceremonies are in
their very nature changeable, to last but a while; their etymology gives them
that definition, (...) (therefore they who write ceremony do ill deduce it
from Ceres) whereas Positive laws may be, and are some of them, immutable. The
prohibition of incestuous matches within certain degrees, decimation and
tithing, were Positive; and yet I hope you will yield unchangeable: The last, I
am sure, you demand by virtue of the first injunction. Nor does the tenth
content you, you are (you think) defrauded of your right, unless we allow it
as due jure Divino, the truth whereof is here not to be discussed; and though I
as yet rather incline to the affirmative, yet this for undeniable verity I
dare and do aver, that to evince a jus Divinum, there is far, infinitely
far clearer evidence and demonstration in the Scripture for the Lords day
then for Tithes. But I digress. All Laws Divine derive their firmness or
mutability two ways: either from that which gives them their first
constitution, Reason; ( Qualis Ratio Praecepti tale Praeceptum, as the Reason
is permanent or moveable, so is the Law; for the form of all laws is the
reason, as that which diversifieth all things is the form) or from the subject,
or matter about which they are conversant; for if that be constant, the law
must also be the same. For those Laws Divine, which belong, whether naturally
or supernaturally, to men as men, or to men as they live in Politic society,
or to men as they are of that politic society which is the Church, without any
further respect had to any such variable accident as the state of men, and of
societies of men, and of the Church it self is subject to in this world; all
Laws that so belong unto men, they belong for ever, although they be positive
laws, unless being positive, God himself that made them alters them, says
Hooker. Eccl. Pol. l. 1.. 15.


Now no man will deny the reason of commanding a weekly day in memory of the
creation to be immutable; therefore the Law it self for that cause also, though
at first positive, must be so. And that it was imposed on Gods Church, without
respect had to any particular Place, People, Time, or the like variable
occasion, is so clear as none can solidly refute: and for this cause also it
must continue so long as that society the Church, for which it was first given,
shall abide. Therefore we may conclude this point with Leo, Cessantibus
significationibus and peractis figuris, etc. De Jejunio decimi mensis, sermon. 6
The shadows being dispelled by the presence of the verity, those things which
tending either to morality or the pure worship of God for piety sake were
instituted, do still continue in the same form with us wherein they were at
first framed, and what was agreeable to both Testaments, is by no change
altered.

They Heilen. p. 2. page 184.
to whom positive-immulable seems so prodigious a thing, may now spare their
wonder at Amesius, and bestow it upon their own ignorance: what he taught in
this point he might and did learn (no doubt) in England, and not only of the
Puritanes. For what say you

To Whitgift? Defen. of the Answ. to the Adm. p. 553.
No man doubts the meaning of these words, Six days shall thou labor, etc.
to be this, That seeing God has permitted to us six days to do our own works
in, we ought in the seventh wholly to serve him.

To Hooker Eccl. Pol. lib. 5.. 70.
? We are to account the sanctification of one day in a week, a duty which Gods
immutable Law does exact for ever.

To Done Epist to S. H. Goodier.
? God seposed a seventh of our time for his exterior worship.

To Andrews Sermon. ^. of the P. treas. vide etiam Catech. doct. page 237.
? The numbers of seven and ten are not without their weight: the seventh the
Sabbath, the tenth Gods part; the Sabbath and Tenth both sacred to God.

To Bacon Adv. of Learn. p. 309
? God demands a tenth of our substance, and which is more strict a seventh of
our time.

What say you to these? But what if Amesius had been born and lived an alien to
this Kingdom, had he then escaped the contagion of this error? Is England in
this assertion divided from the continent of other Christian Churches?
assuredly no. Those two lights of the reforming age, Bucer and his Achates P.
Martyr, as in other things their judgments concurred with a rare and happy
identity Bucer. Epist. P. Martyr. de Euch.
, so in this they differed not.

Our God has sanctified one day in seven for the promoving of our faith, and
consequently of eternal life, Bucer Deus noster e septem diebus unum
instaur^ndae fidei nostrae atque adeo vitae aeternae sanctificavit, De re^n.
Christ lib. 1. c 11.
.

That someone day in a week men attend Divine worship is no humane device,
Martyr Ut aliq^o die in heb^omade homines cult^^ divino v^^ent non est humanum
commentum, Loc. com. c 7.
.

It is a moral precept as it bids us dedicate one day in a week for the
external service of God, so Zanchie. Morale est quatenus (...) diebus ut^^m
consecremus externo ^ultui divino, in 4 praecept.
.

God therefore sanctified the seventh day, that man might know that in the
weekly circuit one day is to be bestowed upon the public worship of God,
Pareus Ideo Deus diem septimum sanctificavit, ut homo sciret in circulo
hebdomadico diem unum esse di^ino cultui publico tribuendum, Com. in Ge^. c. 2.
verse. 3.


It is a natural law that every seventh day be sacred to God, Junius Natural
est, diem septimumquemque D^o s^crum esse, In Genesis
.

That enemy of God, K. J. declar. adv. Vorst.
Arminius, Morale est ut ex septem diebus unus cultui divino consecretur, Disp.
77.. 10.
It is moral to set apart one day of seven for Gods service.

The Lutherane Churches dissent not: Conradus Dietericus, as my Author Heilen.
p. 2 page
informs me.

Baldwin, Morale est sanctificare unum ex septem diebus, Cas. consc. circa
Fesla, l. 2. c. 13. Cas. ^.
It is moral to sanctify one day of seven.

And to make up the harmony complete, the Papists themselves are in this
reconciled with us.

God would have at least one day in a week to be allowed him, says Fenus
Voluit deus ad minus unum diem in hebdomade sibi impendi, in Genesis
.

To depute every seventh day in a week, is formally to depute the seventh day,
though materially the same day be not always deputed, so Suarez Deputare
septimum quemque diem in hebdomade, est deputare septimum diem, licet idem dies
non semper fuerit deputatus, De diebus F^stis, c 1.
.

The Divine Law required that one day in a week should be sequestered for holy
worship, so Bellarmine Jus divinum requirebat ut unus dies in hebdomade
dicaretur cultui divino, De cultu sanct. l. 3. c. 11.
. Nor is the opinion an upstart: I appeal to Chrysostom Hom. 5 in Math.
, who calls it (...), an immovable Law, (...), to sepose one day in a week
for religious actions.

And thus I have proved that one day in seven he must have by the perpetual
ordinance of the fourth Commandment.

Nor will the allowance of one in seven satisfy him, unless he have the
designation and determination of that one. Di^^ quieti consecratus a Deo ipso,
vel immediate per se, vel mediate per Ecclesiam a Spi^itu sancto gubernatam,
quisquis ille sit.
It must be the day consecrated by God, either immediately by himself, or
mediately by his Church directed by the holy Ghost, whatsoever the Day be, as I
told you before out of Zanchy; so that the Day must be of Divine Institution.

And this is evident: First de Jure; Christ calls himself Lord of the
Sabbath: his dominion was not only over the old Sabbath, to abrogate that; but
over the new also, to surrogate that as succenturiate to the other. Secondly,
de Facto; For Gods own act is the best interpreter of his will, and if he had
meant the Church should have had her liberty, her Conge d' Eslier, leave to
choose, he would not have anticipated her with his own act of instituting the
Evangelicall Sabbath, whereof (as well as of the Legal) he was not only the
efficient but the exemplary cause, by finishing the work of our redemption on
that day.

Object.
But here it is demanded, B^erewood, p. 3^.
Is the old Sabbath translated into the Lords day? If yea; by whom? By any
commandment of Christ, where is it? Produce one precept or one word of God out
of the old Testament, that it should be translated, or out of the new
commanding it to be translated, or intimating that by Christ's commandment it
was translated.

Solution.
Take both, or which you will, either the old or new Covenant, and withal the
best and ancientest Interpreters thereof, and then I dare presume you will soon
discry a Translation. For the first, it was adumbrated in their Circumcision on
the eight day, It was a type of that eight day whereon our Lord rose again for
our justification. So says Cyprian Sacramentum hoc fuit diei illius octavi,
quo Dominus resurrexit ad justificationem nostram, Cypr. Epist. ad Fidum. l. 3.
c. 10.
; and with him Augustine, Sanctos Patres plenos Spiritu Propherico non lateret
Dominicus dies, nam PRO OCTAVO Psalmus inscribitur, and octavo die
circumcidebantur Infantes, Aug. de Celebratione Paschae.
The Lords day could not but be known to the holy Prophets, for there is a
Psalm entitled FOR THE EIGHT DAY, and on the Eight day Children were
circumcised, and the like elsewhere.

It was Prophesied in the title of the Psalms, the sixth and eleventh, In
finem pro octavo. So Ignatius Ep. ad Magn.
, Nazianzene De Nov. Domin.
, and Augustine. Prophesied in the It is the 102 in our Translation.
101. Psalm, Scribatur illa in generationem novam, This shall be written for
the Generation to come, verse. 18. so Athanasius. In the In our Translation,
110. v. 3.
109. for so Basil understands diem virtutis, the day of Power: but above all
prophesied in the 118. verse. 24. This is the day which the Lord has made. So
all the Fathers who have saluted and cited that place.

For the second or new Covenant, we need search no higher then to the practice
of our Savior, and his Apostles from the Resurrection downwards, to warrant
and assure us of this Translation; I say, from the Resurrection: for this their
practice did not, as some suppose, begin in long wast of time. There was no
interregnum, no vacancy at all, no cessation of a Sabbath; No, not the first
week: No sooner was the old Sabbath abolished then the new established and
installed. The Jewish Sabbath, that slept (we all know) its last in the grave
with our Savior: Its ghost (according to Country dialect) or the shadow of
that shadow walked indeed a while after, but it self, the old Sabbath, expired
then, and immediately entered the Lords day. Immediately, when Christ himself
was but newly up, from that very day whereon he arose, does S. Augustine Epist.
ad Jan. 119. c. 13.
derive the primum esse of the Lords day. The Lords Day was by the Resurrection
of Christ declared to be the Christians Day, Christi Resurrectione declaratus
est, and ex illo coepit habe^e festivitatem suam.
and from that very time (of Christ's Resurrection) it began to be celebrated as
the Christian man's Festival. So has a profound Winton Opusc de Sp. c. Trask.
Bishop rendered him; and truly, unless ex illo relates to Christ, which I
believe you will difficultly grant, though it be less monstrous then to marry
it with Resurrectione, in despite of Priscian. Nor is Augustines opinion
utterly of truth abandoned. For (though we read not of any Sabbath-duties
expressly performed on that very day of Christ's Resurrection by the Apostles,
yet) this we find, that when Christ appeared to them on that day, they were
(...), Assembled on that day; and the place is thought by learned men to be the
coenaculum, John 20.19. Meade Churches, p. 9.
in which Christ celebrated the last Passover, and from thence derived a
perpetual consecration: nor is it likely that he would inspire them in an
ordinary place. If then they were assembled, and in a Church, we may safely
collect they were busied in sacred exercises. The first day of our Saviors
appearing to his Disciples, this, and the first Christian Sabbath he honored
with his beatificall presence. The next was the next: (...), says S. John.
What? on some indefinite time after eight days, as you Heilen, p. 2. page 13.
would have it? A word with you, Sir. Saint Mark tells us that our Savior
should cap. 8.31.
(...), will you therefore have our Lords Resurrection to be on some one day
after three expired? you will not sure, nay (though I think you dare as much as
another, yet this) you dare not. No, by after eight days is meant the eighth
day after, which was the next Sunday. So the Aug. ad Cas. Epist. 86. Chrysostom.
ser. 5 De Resurr.
Fathers agree: It is necessary that that day should be the Lords day, says
Cyrill Dominicum diem esse necesse est, In John l. 12. c. 58.
, and he thence deriveth the equity of Assemblies upon that day. Nay more, this
very day is so far honored by Nazianzene Orat. 43.
as he made an Homily on purpose for it, as he has entitled it, (...), Nova
Dominica, because the first Lords day solemnized in the weekly revolution after
the Resurrection, or rather because it was the encenium of the Resurrection:
for betwixt the day of the Resurrection and this he thus distinguishes; That
was, says he, salutifera, this, salutis natale, That the day that brought
forth salvation into the world, this the commemorative Festival of that day.

Though this be the last first day mentioned in holy writ, which our Savior
hallowed in his assembling with the Apostles, yet probable it is that he
practiced the same even till his Apoge and Ascension. But conjecturall
arguments we will not urge, when demonstrative are so hardly obtained.

Well; our Savior is ascended: Let us now behold what honor the Spirit of
Comfort (which in his late valediction he promised to send his Apostles) has
conferred on this Day. Our Savior is ascended, and the holy Ghost descends;
but on what day? the first of the week? Not expressly, yet consequently and by
deduction, yes: for it was when Pentecost was arrived, and this fell that year
on the Sunday. Acts 2.
The Allwise God so disposing that the Gospel should every way parallel the
Law: The one given on mount Sinai, on the day of Pentecost, the then Legal
Sabbath; the other on mount Sion, on the day of Pentecost, the then
Evangelicall Sabbath. Heilen p. 1. page 14.
But some are of opinion the Lords day need not brag of this honor, it being
more then was meant it; for it was, say they, a casual thing that Pentecost
should fall on the Sunday: which I confess seems to me a prodigy in
Divinity. For those things only are casual, which happen, praeter
intentionem operantis, contrary to the expectation of the agent: But here God
was the agent, whose omniscience nothing could escape, who is privy to all
events as the disposer of them. True it is, that necessarium and contingens
necessary and contingent are terms which Theology can endure well enough, when
they are spoken with regard to intermediate and second causes (For those
Effects which are the emanations of such Causes as can in nature produce no
other, are said to be necessary; and those which proceed from such as are in
their own nature not determined to certain and definite effects, are called
contingent) but when they are referred to the supreme and paramount Cause of
all, they are then, and must be called, Necessary. Nor could the falling of
Pentecost on the Sunday be a contingent thing in respect of the second Causes,
which were all (no doubt thereof is made) necessary. For Scaliger has informed
you right, that the Pentecost's terminus a quo was (...), or the morrow after
the Passover: so ever; no contingency there: and the Passover it self ever as
certain, always upon the fifteenth day, or the full Moon following upon or
next after the vernall Aequinox: and so none there.

There were certainly other reasons which induced the holy Ghost to make choice
of this day and time; yet seeing all Antiquity has accounted his descent upon
the Apostles amongst those titles of honor which have been dispensed upon this
day, I see no reason why it should be now denied it. And though no glory at all
(the thing by some over eagerly desired) should accrue to it thereby, yet this
is most legible, that on this day the Apostles were solemnly though closely
assembled in prayer and holy duties. But so, you will say, they were on other
days; which I grant, with this distinction of aeque and aequaliter: for some
days amongst them were doubtless dignified with a more solemn observancy then
others, in respect whereof they were especially reputed, if not denominated,
Holy Days. For how else can our Church Hom. of time and place of Prayer.
Similiter Brer. page 37.
be understood, where she says that The Christian people, immediately after
the Ascension, began to choose them a standing day of the week to come together
in: so that both the preferring one day before another, and the time of that
choice, viz. immediately after the Ascension, she indigitateth to us.

The next mention of Apostolical observation of this day occurreth, Acts 20.
verse. 7. The first day of the week, the Disciples being come together to break
bread, Paul preached unto them.

Against this Text two exceptions lie: First that by Breaking of bread is only
meant their ordinary repast, Heilen, p. 2. p. 23.
no sacred Duties or celebration of the Eucharist; and this they seem to make
good by Saint Chrysostom and Lyra, as also by the English Bible, which
paralleleth this place with Acts 2. verse 46.

I answer, some have indeed interpreted this Text of bodily repast; yet the
major part take it for the mystical breaking of bread in the Communion: And
for our Church, So. contra Tr.
B. Andrews out of this very place affirms positively that the Apostles were
assembled, (...), to preach, to pray, to break bread on this day; page 211.
and B. White averreth as much. And as to that Text of Acts 2. verse. 46.
whether the margent of our English Testament transmitteth us, I say, that it is
not inevitably, not evidently to be understood of common food. For Ecce verax
Evangelista testatur sub Apostolis fideles quotidie oras^e, and panem fregisse:
Et vos, qui e^tis, qui dicitis duobus tantum diebus hebdomadae Missam fieri
debere perfectam? contra lib. Nicet. ap. Cassand. liturg. cap. 30.
Humbertus takes it for the Eucharist, Behold the true Evangelist testifies
that the faithful in the Apostolical times assembled every day in Prayer and
breaking of bread: what are you then who say that full Mass (that is, the
celebrating of the Eucharist) ought to be performed only twice a week? And
though the words (...) may seem to boulster out the contrary opinion, yet if
you take them, as they are both by the Syriack and Arabic, and our own margent
rendered, for At home, the meaning may very consonant to truth be (as my
learned Mead. Churches* page 13.
Tutour conceives) That when they had performed their daily devotions in the
Temple, at the accustomed times of Prayer there, they used to resort to this
Coenaculum immediately, and there having celebrated the mystical banquet of
the holy Eucharist, afterward took their ordinary repast with gladness and
singleness of heart. In which interpretation there is enough to reconcile both
parts, something for illustration being super-added. For the holy Ghost does
here (so I take it) regard the practice of the Christians in their Love Feasts
Chrysostom. in 1. Cor. 11. Hom. 27.
(and happily from hence they took their commencement) which consisting of
diverse viands provided by a common purse and collation, their fashion was to
take so much thereof as they thought sufficient for the Communicants, and so to
celebrate the Lords Supper together; which done they presently fell to their
spare and slender cheer, entertaining and solacing themselves with spiritual
and divine colloquies. So that the fraction of bread here might have reference
to their mystical repast in the blessed Eucharist, which was the first course
or part of their Agape; and the latter part of the verse might look at the
other part thereof, viz. corporal refection.

Their next cavil is, that this (...) denotes not the first, but some one day
of the week, wherein as they are become Separatists from our Church in her most
absolute Translation, so them and her I leave to end the quarrel.

We meet with it also, 1. Cor. 16.1. and there an ordinance of the Apostles,
that their oblations should be upon that day. Now I would gladly learn why this
day rather then any other should be appointed for an Almes-day, had it not been
observed Holy in those times.

Lastly, we meet with it Apoc. 1.10. but not now as formerly styled the First
day of the week, but apparelled in a Christian name, and called the Lord's Day;
which certainly the holy Ghost would not have done, had it not passed for
current amongst Christians by that name: and how could it obtain that name, had
it not been destined then to religious actions as a weekly holy day?

Laying all these premised evidences of Apostolic practice together, do they
not clearly demonstrate the translation of the Sabbath into the Lords day? For
why should the Christian Church, even in those times when every day was
sanctified with devout exercises and seemed an holy Sabbath, select any one
distinct and peculiar day to be kept holy? and why one in a week, rather then
in a month or year? and why not in the weekly circuit, the old Sabbath rather
then the Lords day, had not God some way made known his will to them, that he
would still have a Sabbath exempted from the common condition of other days,
and that Sabbath to be weekly, and that weekly, not the old Jewish, but the new
Christian, to be the first of the week, as dignified by the Resurrection of our
Savior, Baptismo flaminis die Pentecost.
and the Anabaptisme of the Apostles. Vtrumque mysterium nostrum, utrumque
utilitas nostrae, as Hierome Sermon. de Not. Dom. T. 2.
in another case: Dispensers both of inestimable benefits upon his Church; the
one of her justification, the other of her sanctification: and so this day a
fit memorial of both.

But here it will be demanded, By whom this translation was made? and to clear
this doubt, Hic labor, hoc opus est.

Athanasius the great has resolutely affirmed that Christ was the author
thereof; Homil. de Semente.
(...), The Lord translated the Sabbath into the Lords day. But some have found
(as they think) an evasion for this, Heilen. p. ^. page 9.
viz. That Christ was not the author by any mandate of his, but only the
occasion of the translation: which unparalleled gloss suggests to my memory
that of Augustine, Facile est cuiquam videri respondisse qui tacere noluerit,
De Civit. Dei, lib. 5. cap. 27.
It is easy with every man to reply who can not hold his tongue. But let us
look upon the color or fucus wherewith this interpretation (as false as new)
is dawbed over, and see if it will not with great facility wash off. If Christ
himself translated it, then the Father thwarteth what he said before De Sabb.
and Circumcis.
, where he tells us that the Lords day was taken up as a voluntary usage,
(...), we honor the Lords day; he mentions no command, whereas of the Sabbath
he says, (...), he commanded it to be kept. This indeed were something to
decline our objection out of the Father, if we were not assured otherwise of
his mind; for apparent it is that the Father neither regarded in his (...)
voluntary usage, nor in his (...) imposed command; for do we not meet in him
the same in effect counter-changed? Does he not elsewhere say as much of the
Sabbath, as here of the Lords day? That when God had finished the prime
creation he rested, and therefore men did OBSERVE the Sabbath in those days
while the first creation was especially in force Sabbatum in die illo
OBSERVABANT homines istius generationis.
. He mentions here no command; was therefore their observation of the Sabbath a
voluntary usage? Nay, says he not as much of the Lords day, as of the Sabbath?
Cum creaturam intra sex dies conditam renovatione interpolasset, ideo diem
illam huic instaurationi consecratam voluit, quam in Psalmo Spiritus
praenunciat, Haec est dies quam fecit Dominus.
When God had renewed and restored man by finishing the work of redemption, he
willed that the same day should be dedicated to that Restoration which the
holy Ghost foreshewed by the Prophet, saying, This is the day which the Lord
has made. And again, Deus Dominicum diem certum decla^a^umque esse veluit, ut
finem praeteriti sentites.
Gods will was that the Lords day should be manifest and declared, that thou
may know the end of the first generation to be accomplished. What say you
now, Sir? will your ingenuity descend to recant, or your pregnant invention
afford you another refuge.

Now there be many ways by which Christ may be said to be the Translatour of
the Sabbath: Either by immediate institution, and example, as Junius In Genesis 2.
; or by ratifying and approving the Translation already made by the Apostles,
as Maldonate In John cap. 28. v. 24.
; or by giving them direct and express commission to do it; or lastly, by
revealing his will to them by the holy Ghost after his Ascension. To render
mine own opinion, and beyond opinion I will not adventure, Furiosares est in
tenebris impetus, it is madness to run too boldly in the dark; where the
Scripture is silent, it is never safe dogmatically to determine any thing: to
render (I say) mine own opinion, the first way seems to me the more probable,
considering our Saviors apparition, the assembling of the Apostles upon that
day, whilst he abode with them, and the testimony of Athanasius, Nazianzene,
and Augustine; but especially, because Clemens a contemporary of the Apostles,
in his genuine epistle to the Corinthians, says, Dominus oblationes and
Liturgias non t^me^e, vel inordinate voluit fieri, sed statutis temporibus,
Page 52.
Our Saviors pleasure was that oblations and public service of the Church
should not be inordinately and uncertainly performed but at times appointed.
Which if it were true, we need not then doubt but that Christ himself made the
Lords day a weekly holyday, it being the principal day we read of, destined
to sacred duties in the Apostolical age. But the matter is not much, by which,
so we be able to prove that at least by one of these ways he did it. And this
is a thing very feasible. For (to take a short and speeding course) the most
embraced and popular opinion is, that the Apostles instituted and translated
the Sabbath into the Lord's Day: this is agreed upon by all, ancient and modern.

Augustine, Dominicum diem Apostoli and Apostolici viri religiosa solemnitate
habendum sanxerunt, De Temp. sermon. 251.
The Apostles and Apostolic men ordained the Lords day to be celebrated with
religious solemnity.

The Author De Spir. S. cap. 27.
of that Tract (or at least of that Chapter) falsely ascribed to Basil,
affirms the station and custom of standing upon the Lords day to be an
Apostolical Tradition; if so, then the day it self much more.

Isichius Nos illorum (Apostolorum) sequentes Traditionem, Dominicum diem
divinis conventibus sequestram u^ in Levit. c. 9.
, We following the Tradition of them (that is, the Apostles) sequestre the
Lords day for holy meetings.

Epiphanius De Fide Cath. l. 11. c. 22.
says that the Apostles ordained the Synaxes to be held (...), on the
Wednesday, Friday, and Lords day. I keep the original word Synaxes, because of
the diverse sense whereof it is capable Casaub. Exerc. p. 537.
.

The same is affirmed by Zanchy, in quartum praeceptum, page 669. Melancth.
tom. 2. fol. 363. Bucer, Ratio Can. Examine. Mercer, in Genesis Beza, in Apoc.
Pareus also ascribes the Translation of the day, Apostolicae Ecclesiae, to the
Apostolic Church; only of the time when they translated it he leaves, as he
finds, doubtful: Quando autem facta sit haec mutatio in sacris literis non
apparet. And so (...) his words in two several editions I have perused, that
in quarto, and the other in folio: which I note the rather to whisper to you D.
Heilens fidelity, who in his also two several editions has by a new
transsubstantiation converted Quando into Quomodo; Heilen, p. 2. Cap. 6.. 7.
and to make it apparent he did it de industria, he descants on it and renders
it, How, by what authority. Ursin, Catech. p. 3. in Decalogum, is of the same
mind: and so Junius in Genesis Baldwin Cas. page 474. Alsted. catech. in praecept.
4. Bellarm. De cultu Sanctor. l. 3. c. 11. and infinite others: indeed what
needs more? it is confessed by our very Antagonists themselves, Brerewood Page 44.
, B. White Page 189.
, Heilen Part. 2 p. 32
, who all (...), with one mind acknowledge the Apostles to be the instituters
of the Lords day.

This foundation of Apostolical institution being thus laid, I advance forward
to enquire whether this act of the Apostles did flow only from the general
authority delegated to them by Christ, or some definite and express command to
that effect; or rather (in clear terms) I proceed to discuss that great
question, Whether the Lords day be established Jure Divino. Great I call it,
not for any abstruse and perplexed intricacy in it, no; Learned and eminent
maintainers it has got, and therefore great: but it is not her great Patronage
shall advantage error, Magna est veritas and praevalebit, Truth is great and
will prevail: yea, but that is the question, whose Truth is. It is so, and come
then for the decision of this question, Rationem veritatis, quae nec mea nec
tua est, sed utrique nostrum ad contemplandum proposita, sine pervicaciae
caligine, serenatis mentibus attendamus, Aug. contra Man. l. un.
To that truth which is neither mine nor thine but the equal object of us both
let us give attention, our clear and (...) judgments not beclouded with
peevish stubbornness.

To entitle a command Divine, it is not only required, says (that thus far
judiciously learned) Brerewood, Brerew. p. 2. page 63.
that the Authority be so whereby it is originally warranted (for there may be
Divine authority for humane decrees) but that the Author also by whom it is
established be Divine. Because Divine commandments are not so much evidences of
Gods authority, as they are declarations of his will and pleasure. Which being
without controversy true, that which we are to make good is, That this Act of
the Apostles was but the execution of a particular and several command to that
purpose; which can no sooner render it self manifest, then by surveying the
Apostolical both Mission and Commission. As for their Mission, it was with all
the grace and honor that might be, nothing wanting that might any way enhance
it; As my Father sent me, so send I you, John 20.21. He that hears you,
hears me, Luke 10.16. where our Savior makes them a kind of letter of
Attorney, to receive what obedience himself might claim. And having dignified
their embassage with these previous expressions, Go, says he, Matthew. 28.19.
there is their Mission and Legation; and teach, there is their Commission. But
what? to teach what themselves think fit? no, there is a limitation, a
restriction, Verse. 20.
it must be only the observation of what thin^s I have commanded you; and lest
through frailty of their memories any thing should perish which was essential
to their message, Christ himself will have an eye to them, I am with you always
even to the end of the world, says he. With them? how? Matthew. ult.
in corporeal presence? that could not be, for he was now ready to leave them.
No, he was with them in Spirit by the Comforter, whom he promised to send them,
John 15.26. And this Comforter had his Commission too, To bring all things to
their remembrance, whatsoever Christ had formerly said to them, John 14.^6. And
though this Comforter is called the Spirit of Truth, and so impossible it is
that he should inspire any thing less then truth; yet when Christ tells his
Apostles that this Comforter should guide them into all truth, he presently
says withal, That he shall not speak of himself, but whatsoever he shall
hear that he shall speak: He shall receive of mine, and show it to you: which
denotes to us that the doctrine of the Gospel is in a more especial manner to
be ascribed to Christ, then to the holy Ghost, who was but our Saviors
delegate and Committee; therefore S. Paul says that Christ spoke in him, 2.
Cor. 13.3.

It being then indisputably clear, that the Apostles were inspired by the holy
Ghost, and that that Divine enthusiasme was but the revelation of Christ's will,
there is nothing else now desiderable, but only to prove, that in this very
act of instituting the Lords day or Sabbath of the new Covenant, they were
(...), or prompted by that guiding Spirit; a thing little less visible then
the former: for shall we say that the Spirit seized upon them only at certain
tides and fits? That he assisted them in their office, both of writing and
preaching the Gospel is most certain: but did he only then? was every act of
their superintendency a spell to drive him away? did he only wait upon them in
the publication of the Gospel, and abandon them in the moderation of the
Church? was the doctrine they taught inspired from above, and were their
constitutions Ecclesiastical an humane device? Certainly no; the voice of
truth it self sounds the contrary. For in their first council we read of a
Visum est Spiritui sancto and nobis, It seemed good to the holy Ghost and to
us. But that was a business of great weight, and so might require a more then
ordinary assistance: let us behold more trivial and petty matters. 1 Cor. 7^
S. Paul was to give his resolution concerning a question, which (amongst
others) the Corinthians put to him of Digamy, whether it was lawful for a
widow to marry again after the death of her first husband, and he determines
affirmatively, yes; but rather commends her containing her self in her
widowhood. Did S. Paul deliver herein his own opinion? certainly no. (...), 1.
Cor. 7.40.
I think I have the Spirit of God, evinceth the contrary: and I hope no man
will affirm this to be a business of importance comparable to the instituting
of the Lords day. To dispatch without more ado; there is a question (the first
hint whereof Aerius the heretic is supposed to have given, and Hierome is not
altogether dissenting from him) whether the Episcopacy be jure Divino. Much
has been said either way, yet not enough to end the bickering; and though the
conflict be still on foot, yet both the one and the other side grant the hole
controversy to move upon Apostolical Institution: that which the one to
prove, the other to disprove, do equally eagerly labor, is only Apostolical
Institution, the decision whereof ends the dispute. King James ascends no
higher, That Bishops ought to be in the Church, Epist. Praemon. Winton. Opusc.
Posth. Athanas. ad Dracont. De diversis grad Eccl. cap. 23.
I ever maintained as an Apostolical Institution, and so the Ordinance of God.
Beza for the other part yields as much, If I could (says he) be assured that
this superiority of a Bishop over the rest of his Clergy has proceeded from
the Apostles, I would not doubt to attribute it holly to divine Institution.
Now if Episcopacy can contract Jus divinum, divine Right, from Apostolical
Institution, why may not also the Lords Day (which I am sure can show as good
cards for her descent) do so too? and then with what face can it be gainsaid
by any that either is or would be a Bishop? yet so it has come to pass that
they, who have most cried down the paritie of Clergy, have most cried up the
paritie of days. But let any (be he what he will) that maligneth the honor of
this glorious day, mutter his pleasure; yet nor he, nor all the learning of the
world, shall be able to produce one solid argument, sufficient to withstand
this inevitable inference of divine Right from Apostolical Institution. It
being by all learned men agreed upon, that whatsoever the Apostles (as Apostles
and in their Apostolical function) or did, or spoke, or writ, is simply
without modification Juris divini; the Reason being evident, because they were
not sui Juris, Cantuar. c. Fish. p. 81. Junius animadv. in Bell. c. 1. l. 3.
not (...), they had no power of themselves to speak, or act any thing either
in teaching or governing the Church, but all was suggested by the spirit, who
could embreath nothing not divi^e.

With this Argument our adversaries are hard beset, something they fain would
retort, knew they what; and at last to show their courage, and that -- Nec
victi possunt absistere ferro, they will not yield though overcome, forth steps
one, Ironside, p. 172.
and assaults us with two distinctions; of Apostolical inspirations one, of
Apostolical traditions the other. Concerning the first he says, The Apostles
are to be considered, either as Apostles by extraordinary mission sent to plant
the Gospel, or as Pastors to govern the Church already planted. As Apostles
they were infallibly inspired with all truths, upon all occasions. As Pastors,
their inspirations were only such irradiations, influences and concurrences of
the Spirit, as are afforded at this day to Pastors of the Church, unless by
some personal miscariages they procure unto themselves spiritual derelictions.

I Answer, Utrumque abs te fine ulla dubitatione cognoscere debui, sed non sum
avarus, unum horum doce, Aug. contr. Epist. Manich. lib. un.
It is your duty to prove indubitately both these to me, but I am not
covetous, make good but one and I am satisfied. And first, tell me, good Sir,
(if to awaken you out of this dream I be not over-rude) where find you the
Pastoral and Apostolical Office, in the same persons, distinct? where read
you of a double Commission, one to plant the Church, the other to govern the
Church already planted? were not both these parts of the Apostolical function?
were they not Apostles, i. e. sent to do the one as well as the other? Instance
in any one act of their Pastoral office, which was not in the latitude of
their Apostolical patent.

Secondly, admit them for several functions: where I pray learn you that they
had a distinct inspiration, according to those several functions? If those
irradiations you talk of, which were shed upon them as Pastors, were no other
then what God now dispenses to ordinary Ministers, then (I say) the beams or
species intentionall of such irradiations must needs have a tincture of the
Medium (natural corruption) through which they passed; and every thing, which
as Pastors they did, not only may but must have a relish of sin or error,
which ever did, and ever shall, more or less, distain the best action of the
justest man (infected with original corruption, and not extraordinarily and
infallibly inspired) living upon earth. If then the Apostles as Pastors were
but ordinarily inspired, and that ordinary inspiration did not exempt their
Pastoral works from sin and error, it were a worthy labor to put the New
Testament into Purgatory, to weed out all those passages which relate to the
Pastoral office of the Apostles, and to bind them up with the old Apocrypha; I
see also no necessity why Children should be baptized, why women, nay why any
of the Laity should be admitted to the Eucharist, which are Apostolical
devices, whereof express command from our Savior to them we find none: and to
speak to the point in question, I see no necessity of celebrating the Lords
day, but of observing the Jewish Sabbath I see a necessity; for I see Gods
command to observe it, and I see no countermand to abolish it. If the Apostles
abrogated it without express warrant from God, they did it as Pastors; and
their Pastoral constitutions by your rule ought not oblige the Church for ever.

But let us take view of the proofs which confirm this your distinction. Idem.
174.
First you say the Apostles considered as Pastors, were subject to mistake,
Gal. 2.1^.
as appears by Saint Peter; who living at Antioch as a Pastor, was justly
reproved by Saint Paul, for not walking as behoved a Pastor. And Paul and
Barnabas dissented from one another, and that in such heat, as it makes it
apparent they were not both, if either, directed by the Spirit.

I answer, That Peter and the other two Apostles were too blame, I not deny;
but were they in Cathedra, or doing any Pastoral work? assuredly No. He
offended about the choice of meat, these about the choice of a companion; which
are not things relating to the Pastoral office. And for ought I see, you may
as well argue, Such a Minister is a temporizer; Such and such a Pastor were
choleric one with another; Ergo they preach false doctrine, and so transfer
the faults of the Person, to the office or calling.

Secondly, you instance in places of Scripture, where you bring in the Apostle
speaking some things of himself, not as dictates of Gods Spirit. 1. Cor. 7.
I speak this by permission, not of commandment, verse. 6. To the rest speak I,
not the Lord, verse. 12. And, I have no commandment of the Lord, verse. 25. And,
I give my judgment, verse. 40.

I answer, Your first is nothing ad oppositum: for the Apostle there
distinguishes not his permissive counsel from Christ's command. In the
following Text, where S. Paul is said to speak, and not the Lord, it is only
meant, that Christ did not expressly determine the doubt, whilst he conversed
on earth, it being not then on foot: and this is the solution of the 25. verse
also. Where it is said, verse 40. I give my judgment, we must not think it to
proceed from his own head, but dictated by the Spirit; and so by way of
precaution he tells us, I think I have the Spirit of God. Nor do these words,
I think, imply, as though the Apostle were not confident of it, but by way of
Irony seem to gird those who boasted of extraordinary illumination: and this is
the constant interpretation of all learned Expositours.

Let us now see how you distinguish Apostolical Traditions: These (you say)
are either such as they received immediately from Christ, or such as were
suggested to them by the Spirit; the first (you say) they delivered as
Apostles, and they are therefore Divine; the other as Pastors, and may be
dispensed with. I did expect you would have derived this distinction from the
Primitive Fathers, or some reformed Writers, men of some credit with us; but I
see you are put to hard shifts, and are glad to appeal to them whom we renounce
as incompetent judges, Canus, loc. l. 3. cap. 5.
the Papists. But you say, according to this sense you find the Fathers speak
of Traditions. Your talk of Fathers at first affrighted me, till I saw your
instance only attain a bare singular number. But what find you in Cyprian,
your Fathers, or universal particular? when Stephen accused his Anabaptisme
for novelty, and repugnant to the ancient Tradition, Cypr. Epist. ad Pomp. 74.
True, says Cyprian, but whence is this Tradition? from Christ in the Gospel,
or from the Apostles in their Epistles? For what is written must be observed.
There (you say) we have the first kind. Cyp. Ep. 68.
But elsewhere Saint Cyprian says, that the choice of Bishops and Ministers in
the presence and with the approbation of the people, was of Divine and
Apostolical Tradition. Now who sees not that here Saint Cyprian speaks of
those other Traditions, delivered and practiced by the Apostles as the Churches
Pastors, which are no longer in force then the Church (you forget your self,
you mean the Pope, for so your Canus sings) shall like.

I answer, what you see I know not; this I dare affirm, that whosoever shall
behold directly and with equal angles this passage of Cyprian, will clearly
discern these two things: First, Diligenter de Traditione Divina and Apostolica
observandum est and tenendum.
that he couples Divine and Apostolical Traditions together. Secondly, that he
annexeth to Apostolical Tradition an observandum and tenendum est, it must be
observed, which implies their perpetual Obligation: and by both these,
Cyprian will be discovered to differ from your assertion, secundum terminos
oppositos, as wide as may be. And whereas you would enforce your interpretation
upon us, as agreeable to the mind of this Father, from an assurance that such a
choice of Bishops and Ministers is neither delivered in the Gospel, the Acts,
or the Epistles; the thing is not so evident as you persuade: yea the contrary
is the more probable, for Acts 14. verse. 23. where it is said, they had
ordained them Elders in every Church, the word is, (...), which most properly
implies that the suffrage of the Laity was used therein. Mistake me not, I say
not the Popular vote made, but only confirmed the Election: to choose is one
thing, to ratify the choice made another; therefore to commentatours and
others, who render the word (...), To elect by Popular suffrage, I cannot
subscribe. Animadv. in Bell. contr. 5. l. 1. c. 7. a 59.
The energy of the word may best be collected from Junius his description
thereof: Chirotony (says he) is a signification of suffrage by the hand, the
people being entreated thereto by the common crier in this form, (...), Let him
that approves not of this lift up his hand. And in like manner I have observed
Xenophon (...).
bespeaking his Soldiers, (...). This description with some small elucidation
will give you a plenary notion of the Athenian Chirotony. For further
illustration therefore you must know, that regularly in whatsoever thing this
Popular suffrage was required, the matter it self was first debated and
resolved upon by the Nomothetes or Legislatours in their counsel-house, and
after such consultation it was then posted up in the most remarkable place of
the City some few days, to the end the people might have time to consider of
it; which time elapsed, the common crier in open Market propounded it to the
people: next an Oration Hence came that scomme of Anacharsis, Sapientes in
concionibus sententiam dicere apud Graecos, stultos vero dijudicare, Alex. ab
Alexand. genesis dierum, l. 4.
was made to them, wherein the convenience and necessity of the thing offered
was laid open: that Oration ended, the people were last demanded by the public
crier their vote, ut supra, according to whose suffrage the business in
agitation or stood or fell. Conformable, to this custom Apostolical practice,
in the ordaining Ministers, most probably was, viz. That they first chose the
men, and then presented them to the people, who if they had any thing to oppose
against them were then required to declare it. And this is the rather likely,
because the Primitive Church, curious in imitating Apostolic usage, did
universally Alexander Severus observed the same (according to the Christian
practice) in his ordaining of Magistrates, ar governors of Provinces: Nomina
eorum proponebat, hortans populum, ut si quis quid haberet criminis probaret
manifestis rebus; dicebatque grave esse, non fieri in provinci^rum rectoribus,
cum id Christiani and Ju^ae^ facerent in praedicandis sacerdotibus, qui
ordinandi sunt, Lampridius in vita ejus.
observe the same order; which is still retained also in our Church, as
appears by the Rubric of her book of Ordination of B. P. and Deacons In the
ordaining Deacons and Presbyters.
: So that your assurance, as sure as you take yourself to be, may in this, for
ought I see, deceive you. But be it as you would, that such an election is not
to be found expressly written, yet will it neither follow, that it being an
unwritten Tradition Apostolical, it is not Divine; or that Cyprian in that
place thought so. What his opinion there was, I have already told you; and sure
I am, his words as well agree with your newfangled distinction, as if he and
you had been at cross purposes. As for Traditions Apostolical, the greatest
Papists hold them for divine. So Bellarmine De verbo Dei non scripto. cap. 2.
: and his reason is, Quod non sine spiritu Dei eas Apostoli instituerint,
Because the Apostles did not institute them without the direction of the holy
Ghost: And for the same cause Roffensis Defens. Reg. Assert. co^tr. Capt. Bab.
Luth.
calls Consecration (by which Transubstantiation is effected) a divine
Tradition, Licet nullis possit Scripturis comprobari, Though it cannot be
proved by any written Word. But none more home then Gerson, Non est in
potestate papae, aut Concilii, aut Ecclesiae, immutate Traditiones datas ab
Evangelistis, vel a Paulo, ut quidam del^rant, De vita Spir. Animae.
It is not in the power of the Pope, Counsel or Church to alter Traditions,
delivered either by the Evangelists or Saint Paul, as some blunderers think.
Thus you see your self deserted by them whom you took to be the greatest
fautours of your opinion. Let me advise you, Sir, if you have any more
distinctions of the same stuff with those former, -- habitent tecum and sint
pectore in isto, suppress them, for they will never credit you.

Though I have by main force of this invincible argument of Apostolical
Institution and Tradition reinvested the Lords Day into a possession of Jus
divinum, assured and confirmed enough against all machinations of her greatest
oppugners, yet wants she not other (should need so require) auxiliary to her.

For that Evangelicall day, which was prophesied of, and prefigured in and
under the old Law, could not certainly be an humane device: But the Lords Day
was shadowed under Circumcision on the eighth day, prophesied in many Psalms
(both proved by sufficient Testimony of the Fathers) Ergo the Lords Day is no
humane ordinance.

Lastly, as the Eucharist is called the Lords Supper, because he instituted it;
for the same reason is the Sunday denominated the Lords Day. For these two, the
Day, and the Supper, have the epithete of (...) in Scripture, Opusc. sp. cont.
Traske.
to show that Dominicum is alike to be taken in both, says B. Andrews.

Before I take cognizance of other questions pertinent to the Lords Day, lest I
be thought over partial to mine own assertion, painting it as Apelles did
one-eyed Antigonus, who presented him half faced; and lest our adversaries
should upbraid us, that they have not been allowed to object, the negative
arguments shall have audience, and, as they lie in order, their refutation.

Whatsoever is of Divine Institution is to be found either in the natural or
positive Law of God: Object. 1. Ironside, p. 159.
But that the First day of the week should be the Christian man's Sabbath, is
not so found: Ergo, the Lords Day no divine Ordinance.

It is found in the positive Law of God delivered by his Apostles, Solut.
and founded upon the morality of the fourth Commandment, as I formerly showed.

But says one, You only showed what the Apostles observed themselves; Object.
Heilen. p. 2. page 188.
that they imposed the keeping of the Lords Day as necessary upon the
conscience of Gods people by any law or precept whatsoever, that we read not;
and so it will become a Tradition, which (though Apostolical) is no
Commandment.

Is not this fine stuff? assuredly an argument rather that they have not left
speech, Solut.
then that they are returned to their right senses: for (to omit Augustine's
sanxerunt, Bucer, Junius, Beza, and others, who make it the Institution of the
Apostles) does not Brerewood himself confess it to be the ordinance of the
Apostles, and B. White page 192.
the same also? what I pray is an Ordinance but a Law? and was this a Law that
bound themselves only, and not at all the succeeding Church? is it like they
would constitute a Law to expire with themselves? And whereas we are now taught
a distinction betwixt Tradition and Command, we will for quiet sake (though it
bids defiance to all antiquity) admit it in the same sense you impose upon
it, and accept it for a mere leaving of the observation of this day to the
Church, without any express command to observe it; yet, I say, you shall find
Command so implicitly complicated with Apostolical Tradition, as all your
waters of separation, all your chymicall extracts of School-distinctions, shall
never be able to sever them. For are you able to unmake Tradition? to make that
no Tradition which is Tradition? If you be not, so long as it is Tradition, it
has express command affixt to it, Tenete Traditiones, Hold the Traditions, 2 Thessalonians. 2.15. So that if Tradition were it self no command, yet has it here
command annexed to it. And though I grant that our Expositours understand this
place especially of the written word, yet extend they it to Traditions
unwritten also, such as are clearly held to be Apostolical, and have, if not
mention, yet foundation in Scripture: amongst which the observation of the
Lords Day is worthily accounted. Habet approbationem Scripturarum itaque inter
Non-scriptas Traditiones haud possit collocari, De Iudice ac Norma fidei.
It has the approbation of the Scriptures, and therefore cannot be numbered
amongst unwritten Traditions, says the Reverend Salisbury with others Zanch.
de Tradit. Pareus in 1. Cor. 11. Whitakerus, Controv. quaest. 6. c. 12.
. And for the Church succeeding the Apostles, it is most evident she held her
self obliged to the same observation: For even in times of persecution, before
any either imperial Edict, or Canon of Council enjoned it, the observation of
this Day was so taken notice of by the Heathen, that it became a constant
Interrogatory to the Christians in their examining, Dominicum servasti? Have
you kept the Lords Day? To which their answer was ever ready, Intermittere non
possum, quia Christianus sum, and Lex Dei de eo agendo admonet, apud Baron.
30^. Number. 5^.
I cannot intermit it, for I am a Christian, and the Law of God prompteth me to
it. Here we see these holy Saints had a Law for the celebrating of this day;
and have we none? Perhaps you will say, It may be questioned whether Dominicum
here signifies the Lords Day, because Baronius Ubi supra, n. 39.
and Bellarmine De Carem. Missae sub tit. Collecta.
apply it to the Mass, and it may also well be understood of the Eucharist,
which is often in antiquity called Dominicum. I answer, It cannot properly and
distinctly be understood of either: Not of the Mass; for though Papists inform
their disciples of I know not what pro-sekenique antiquity it has, yet sure
we are that (as now stated) it was not in being above a thousand years after
our Savior, and so it could not be meant in this place. Besides, the question
was propounded as well to the Lay as Clergy-Christians, of whom it had been
absurd to expostulate, Number Dominicum egissent? whether they had said Mass?
which is only done by the Priest. Nor can it respect the Eucharist otherwise
then by implication, as it was then an usual work of that day; because it is
said that they might not intermittere, which especially relates to time (as
interpose to place) and infers the not doing of a duty in its proper
quando: which cannot be well interpreted of the celebration of the Eucharist,
it being not restrained by any positive Law of God to a certain time. And
indeed it was more proper to examine them whether they held their Christian
assembly, whether they met on the Lords Day, considering it consequently
inferred the performance of all sacred duties, then to inquire whether they had
celebrated the Eucharist, which according to the custom of those times was
often performed at home, being reserved for the same purpose.

If Christ had either here on earth, Object. 2. Brerewood, page 7^.
or after by revelation from Heaven, given his Apostles any such charge of
Instituting a new Sabbath, sure Christ's Apostles would not have concealed
Christ's command. Ironside, p. 161.
Besides, the Apostles holding their first Synod would doubtless have expressed
as much to the Gentiles.

Solut.
First, Christ's Apostles did not conceal Christ's command: for what if perhaps it
be not extant in their writings? They were indeed our Saviors executours,
performers of his will; but was his hole will exemplified in Scripture?
certainly no: Some part thereof was declared in ima Cera, (as Civilians say)
and by Tradition. For Tradition, which is clearly known to be Apostolical, is
as perfect evidence of Christ's will as the Canonical Scripture it self. For
the Scripture before it was Scripture was but a part of Tradition, and became
Scripture that it might be of more ready use and better preserved from
perishing, but mainly because it was the fundamental Canon of our Religion.

Secondly, The Apostles in their Synodicall Epistle had only respect to the
Judaicall, not to Evangelicall observances. Moreover, the solemnity of the
Lords Day was made known to them by former practice (equivalent with precept)
at least, if not by precept it self: for according to our Church, Hom. of the
place and time of prayer.
The Christian people immediately after the Ascension began to choose them a
standing day of the week to come together in. My learned Author bids us
here observe, that the day was chosen by Christian people; and if chosen by
them, H^ilen. p. 2. page 175.
then not enjoined by the Apostles. I see a man may learn something every day;
for I profess ingeniously, till this instant I took the Apostles to be
Christians. Lastly, the precept was in the negative, not in the affirmative. If
you say, True, and hence we may infer that the first Christians were tied to
no affirmatives, but such as were expressly commanded by Evangelicall precept. I
answer, then it must follow that women did not communicate, children were not
baptized, Ministers not ordained, incorrigible persons not excommunicated,
these being not expressly commanded by any Evangelicall Law.

Whatsoever is of divine Institution, Object. 3. Ironside, c. 8. p. 162.
and by necessity of precept laid upon the whole Church, is a necessary duty,
without which (if it may possibly be observed) no salvation can be had: But no
man will affirm so of the Lords Day: Ergo, etc.

The major is false; Solut.
for positive precepts omitted do not inevitably damn any man, but where there
is a malicious contempt, or wilful neglect of the ordinance. The Sacrament of
Baptism shall be mine instance. It was in the Primitive Church procrastinated,
by some many years; by most in their usual practice some months; and is even
in our own Church some days. In all this delay, no inevitable impossibility
debarreth the competent or person to be baptized from this Sacrament: will you
then say that Heaven gates are precluded against all those whom hasty death
cutteth off in this delay? Hear the most uncharitable of all the Ancients in
this point Impletur invisibiliter, cum mysterium baptismi, non contemptus
religionis, sed articulus necessitatis, excludit.

De Bapt. c. Donat. l. 4. c. 22.


S. Augustine, The Sacrament of Baptism is invisibly accomplished as long as
the fault proceeds from absolute necessity, not from contempt of the
ordinance.

The Gospel commands only such observations Object. 4.
which are either means of grace, Ironside, c. 8. p. 162.
as the Word and Sacraments; or wherein the exercise and use of grace does
consist, as the duties of love toward God and Man: But the observation of the
Lords Day is neither a means of grace, nor exercise of grace: Ergo, etc.

Solut.
That which is a part of divine worship is a means of grace: But the observation
of the Lords Day is so: Ergo, etc.

The minor I prove thus, That is a part of divine worship, whose Institution is
divine: But the Institution of the Lords Day is divine, as I have made evident:
Ergo, etc.

If you say that Junius, Medull. l. 2. c. 14.
Amesius and others, who hold the Day to be Jure divino, make it yet only an
adjunct to not a part of divine worship. I answer, that as it is a time set
apart for holy worship, it is an adjunct to it; but as it is a time determined
by God himself, the very observation thereof is a part of divine worship, which
is nothing but a religious observance of the true God according to the
prescript of his own will. Besides, it is a means to stir up our souls to the
exercise of grace in pious meditations, when we consider it in all its
prerogatives superlative above other days; as that which was the (...), and in
all probability shall be the (...) of days, and therefore aptly dedicated to
him who calls himself (...) and (...); as the day of our Saviors
resurrection, by which we are justified; as the day of the holy spirits
descension, by whom we are sanctified; Aug. d. Civ. Dei l. 22. c. 30
as the day which mystically prefigureth our eternal rest, when we shall be
glorified. And therefore it is worthily and truly called by Ad Magnes.
Ignatius, The sublimest and primate of all days.

That day which cannot be kept universally throughout the whole world, Object.
5. Ironside, ubi supra.
was never commanded the whole Church of Christ by an Evangelicall Law: (For
the Gospel is given to all Nations) But the Lords day cannot thus be
universally observed, considering the diversity of meridians, and unequal
rising and setting of the sun in diverse Regions, in some whereof time is not
distinguished into weeks or days, by morning and evening, as in Groinland,
Finmark, Lapland, etc.

The positive Laws of God do not always imply a possibility in them upon whom
they are imposed. Solut.
The Jews were enjoined many observances of sacrifices, feasts, etc. which
could not always be performed by them, as in case of captivity or durance. So
the Christians are commanded the celebration of the Eucharist, and yet the
condition of some Countries is such as they have not bread As the Indians,
Test Arriano, l. 8. de Reb^s Ind. and the Venetians, ut habet ^e Treas. Polit.
* of others, as they have not wine As the Norwegians.
. The truth is, Gods commandment may impose, but never oblige unto, things
sometimes impossible: where there is an utter impossibility of observation (as
in this or the like case) that impossibility is a necessity with which the Law
dispenses. And this is the reason (to speak to the point in question) why the
Sabbath being given to Adam, and in him to all mankind, Genesis 2. was not
described as the other six days by evening and morning; as also why the
Sabbath of the fourth Commandment, of like latitude with the former, is not set
out by express bounds of from Eve to Eve, Levit. 23.32.
as that in the Leviticall Law, which only concerned the Jews: to intimate
that the journall or daily round of the Sun, should be no precise rule or
character of his Sabbath in such places where time is not so distinguished, but
that there his people are to give him a seventh of their time, as it is with
them distinguished.

And though the Regions abovesaid have not natural days described by the
circulation of the Sun from East to West, yet times they have holding so near
correspondence with such natural days, that in some parts they are
denominated days; and for Island (if my intelligence misleadeth me not) their
days are homonymall with ours in England (an argument of their not different
either Planters or Conquerours) as derived from the same idols in Planetary
computation, Le Tresor. Polit. l. 3.
whereof the learned Seldom and Verstegan can inform you.

Object. 6. Ironside, ubi supra.
There is the same reason of keeping a determinate set Sabbath under the
Gospel, that there is of preaching, praying, administering the Sacraments, etc.
But these are not determined how often they shall be done: Ergo, It is not
limited what time shall be a set Sabbath.

Solut.
Every of these, though they be not absolutely restrained, yet their proper time
is this very Sabbath, Dominum nostra Dominica semper manna de Coelo pluere,
Hom. in Exodus 7.

Omni modo orationibus insistendum, ut si quid negligentiae per s^x dies
agitur, per diem resurrectionis Dominicae precibus expietur, Greg. M. li. 11.
Epist 3.


whereof those duties were a final cause: to speak in particular, It is a Day
of Preaching, and so ever was in the Primitive Church. Origin alluding to the
first fall of Manna in the wilderness says, The Lord ever raineth down Manna
from Heaven on our Lords day: and so in the Apostolical age, Acts 20.7. It is
a Day of Prayer. We must by all means intend our Prayers on the Lords Day, that
by them on that Day we may expiate for all our negligences and escapes in the
week-dayes. So Acts 2.1. the Christians were assembled (...), with one accord,
on this Day: and how they were wont then to be employed, the Historian tells
you c. 1. v. 14. it was (...), in Prayer. It is a Chrysostom. S. 5. de Resurrect.
Athanas. Apol. 2.
Day proper for the Eucharist, and therefore anciently called Dies panis, and
in some places (as in Alexandria) the only Day and Time for it. So Acts 20.
verse. 7. the Disciples came together to break bread, that is, to communicate of
the Eucharist. It is a day proper for the Sacrament of Baptism, and therefore
anciently called Dies lucis, the Day of illumination. Chrysostom. ubi supra.
This Sacrament not usually being conferred unless in case of eminent
necessity, but upon this Day. So Acts 2.41. (the most notorious president
extant) no less then (...), very near three thousand were this Day baptized.
Lastly, it was a day of alms: Apol. 2.
Pro arbitrio quisque suo quod visum est contribuunt, and quod ita colligitur
apud praepositum deponitur, says Justin Martyr. And so 1. Cor. 16.1. Saint
Paul ordained it should (the First of the week) be a day of collection for the
poor.

That which is expressly against Christian liberty was never commanded by
Christ or his Apostles: Object. 7. Ironside, ubi supra.
But to have the Conscience burdened with any outward observations, putting
religion in them, as being parts of Gods worship, is directly against Christian
liberty: for how is he free that is thus bound to times and days?

What you understand by Christian liberty I know not; Solut.
sure I am that Christ only delivered us from the observation of the old
ceremonial Laws, and from the sting of punishment due to the breach of the
Moral; but that he exempted us from all outward observations whatsoever, is a
fancy of your own, without warrant from the Scripture. For would he then have
imposed the outward observation of Sacraments, if we had not been obliged to
them? and you are in this implunged in error beyond the Anabaptists: for they
cry up Christian liberty to free them from the constitutions of men only, but
you will have it reach to the very ordinations of God.

Object. 8. Ironside, ubi supra.
There is no duty essential in Religion ordained by Christ or his Apostles,
of which we find not either exhortations in respect of performance, or
reprehensions in regard of their neglect, either in the Gospel, Epistles, or
Acts: But the keeping of the first Day of the week Sabbath, is no where pressed
or exhorted unto, the neglect thereof no where reproved in all the new
Testament: Ergo, etc.

Paedobaptisme, the communicating of women, is I hope essential in Religion,
Solut.
secundum esse perfectum; but where do you find any exhortation to the
observation, any reproof for the neglect of these duties? Besides, I see
nothing to the contrary but it may be included in Saint Paul's admonition of
Tenete Traditiones, whereof before.

Had the observation of the Lords Day been of Divine Institution, Object. 9.
Ironside, ubi supra.
it is very probable that the Apostle reproving the Corinthians for going to
law, would not have omitted the advantage of this circumstance: 1. Cor. 6.
For plain it is that their pleadings were ordinarily upon the Lords Day: But
he omitteth, etc.

Solut.
That which you make so probable, was, I affirm, (considering the Spirit which
always assisted him) utterly impossible in the Apostle: for how could he (who
knew his Lord and Master had often determined the contrary in very like cases,
opposing Pharisaicall strictness) how could he, nay how durst he prevaricate
or swerve from Christ's rule? he knew it lawful to cure a crazie body, and was
it sin to consolidate a cracked estate upon the Sabbath? it was justifiable to
drag a beast out of the ditch, why not also land out of the oppressors claws
on that day when it could not be done on another?

If Christ had appointed this day as the day of his Resurrection, Object. 10
Idem. ibid.
then the Eastern Churches which followed S. John transgressed this ordinance
of Christ when they kept their Easter on another day: But they sinned not in
it. Ergo, etc.

Christ nor his Apostles (for ought we know) gave no commandment concerning
Easter, Solut.
neither is it necessary that the anniversary and weekly memorial of one and
the same benefit should always jump together. Gods own precept, in almost the
same case, we know was otherwise: The Jewish Sabbath and Passover were both
commemoratives of their redemption out of Egypt, yet one was fixed to the day
of the week, the other to the full of the moon, so as they seldom met together.

Had it been a Divine Institution, Object. 11 Idem.
doubtless those Fathers and Synods which have spoken so much in praise of the
Day, displaying the prerogatives thereof, would never have omitted this which
is the greatest of all: But none ever affirmed a Divine Institution: Ergo, etc.

They do not indeed mention it sub terminis, because it was not questioned in
their days; but if they make it instituted by Christ (as some) or by his
Apostles (as almost all) and if they tell us, Non minus ratum est quod dictante
Spiritu sancto Apostoli tradiderunt, quam quod ipse Christus tradidit, Cypr. de
Abl. ^edum.
Whatsoever the Apostles delivered by the dictate of the holy Ghost is as firm
and indefeasable as what Christ himself, then I hope by necessary consequence
they make it of Divine Institution.

That which the orthodox condemn for popery should not be consented to by us:
Object. 12. Id. ibid.
But that the Lords day is a part of Gods worship, and more holy then other
days (as from Divine authority) is condemned by Reformists in the Papists:
Therefore we ought not to symbolize with them.

Solut.
No reformed Writers condemn this in the Papists, because they hold the Lords
Day more holy then others, but only such, and those very few, as think the Day
to be of Ecclesiastical not of Divine Institution. The orthodox Thesis is
this, Dies festiab hominibus non possunt fieri aliis sanctiores, Tom. 2. de
diebus Fest. c. 10.
Festival days cannot by humane constitution be made more holy then others,
as Amesius, to whom you appeal, could have informed you.

Object. 13. Id. ibid.
Lastly, Socrates affirms that the Apostles never intended to establish laws
concerning Holidays; S. Augustine also makes it will worship or idolatry to
observe any day as commanded of God. Soc. l 5. c. 2. Aug. cont. Adam Manich. c.
16. Hieronym. in Gal. c. 4.
S. Hierome likewise says, we have no days having any holiness in them and
necessity from Divine institution. The book of Homilies affirms that
Christian men of themselves without any Divine precepts did take upon them the
observation of the Lords Day. All reformed Churches consent with us; and many
Martyrs in the Marian days, as Tindall, Frith, Barnes: Lastly, Master Perkins
speaks doubtfully herein, yet he was one of the first that took up this
tenet.

Socrates must have a candid Reader, Solut.
or be argued of overbold singularity against all Antiquity, who affirmed the
contrary. Augustine says that the Christians in his time did not observe so
much the festivals themselves as what was signified by them; and therefore he
says that the Apostle did blame the Galatians in this, because they did
observe appointed times servilely, Serviliter, non intelligentes ad quarum
rerum significationem pertinerent.
not knowing the mystery to which they tended: he speaks nothing of their
institution, not one word. Hierome indeed, I grant, was inclining to your
opinion, but his single judgment is not equivalent to the many reasons and
authorities urged on the contrary. The book of Homilies affirms no such thing
as you say: these words, of themselves without any Divine precept, are yours
not the Churches; not expressly, not interpretatively, so not hers as she is
positive in the direct contrary. For there being two things wherein the Divine
right of the Lords Day is founded, upon legal Institution in the fourth
Commandment, and Evangelicall by either Christ or his Apostles, for the first
she says that God expressly in that precept commands the observation of the
Sabbath which is our Sunday; and not only commands it, but also by his own
example does stir and provoke us to diligent keeping of the same. For the
second, having a while after declared it to be Gods Will and Commandment to
have a solemn time and standing day in the week consecrated to him, she
presently adds, This example and Commandment of God the godly Christian
people began to follow immediately after the ascension of our Lord Christ, and
began to choose them a standing day in the week to come together in. Now where
she speaks of Godly Christian people, she doubtless means the Apostles
(for who else durst at that time take upon them to begin such a custom) and so
as touching the Institution of the day as a weekly day, she reduces it to the
fourth precept, and as the first of the week, she foundeth it upon Apostolic
practice.

What some other reformed Churches think in this point of the Lords Day, may
plausibly enough against us be urged on your parts, I confess, and it is your
Drusian, your keenest objection; and yet we can oppose many things to turn the
edge of it. For first, they are only positive in setting down their own
opinions, but the reasons inducing them thereto they suppress; and seeing they
are not (...), we must not be governed by their bare Thesis. Secondly, those
confessions are not general, but particular to some Churches. Thirdly, were
they the Canons of a general Council, yet must they not predominate over
Truth: Ipsa concilia quae per singulas Regiones vel Provincias fiunt,
plenariorum Conciliorum autoritati, quae fiunt ex universo orb Christiano,
sine ullis ambagibus cedere, ipsaque plenaria, saepe priora posterioribus,
emendari, cum aliquo experimento verum aperitur quod clausum erat, and
cognoscitur quod latebat, August. de Bapt. c. Don. l. 2. c. 3.
National and Provincial councels ought to give place to the authority of
Universal and Oecumenicall; and these have been oftentimes amended, when
experience has cleared some truth which before lay hid, says Augustine.

Lastly, (though some will think it Hieronym. Ep. ad Dam. Pap. in 4. Evang.
periculosa praesumptio judicare de caeteris, ipsum ab omnibus judicandum) to
speak the truth, yet to speak it with all terms of venerable regard to those
famous Churches, I dare pronounce they are not right in this point, not so full
reformed but they stand yet in need of further reformation. Nor ought we to
wonder at their mistake herein: For first the precept of the Lords Day is not
so legible in sacred Scripture as the rest which concern matters of faith,
thereby to instruct us to put a difference betwixt fundamentalls and
ceremonies; it is written in a finer character, in a smaller Print, and
therefore might well escape the eyes of those Churches at the first break of
day of Reformation, when the light shone somewhat dim. Secondly, the question
was never on foot in their times, and so the evidences demonstrating Divine
Right were never laid open to them; and having inquiries concerning sacrifice
of the Altar, Adoration, etc. more proper for those times, to employ them, they
were not like to inform themselves better upon accident.

What I have said concerning the Reformed Churches, may also be applied to
those holy and blessed Martyrs you cite, and partly to master Perkins, who had
he lived now would (I dare say) have been as positive and resolute as any
other. And whereas you make him the prime inventer of this tenet, though what I
have urged out of the book of Homilies is your sufficient confutation, yet will
I produce one Testimony more, and that no less then Royal, and as Reformation
it self ancient. Injunct. of H. 8. anno 1636. apud Fox Martyr.
The Sabbath Day was used and ordained but for man's use, and therefore ought to
give place to the necessity and behoof of the same whenever that shall occur;
much rather any other holy day instituted by man. What say you now, Sir? if
Perkins was the first that took up this tenet, who I pray laid it down? and
down it was laid for certain, if he took it up; for up it was you see in Henry
the eighths time.

Having thus waded through all the objections, and discovered their frame to
consist of very loose and defeasable stuff, wherein truth is no ingredient, I
step forward to other questions incident and pertinent to this discourse.

And first, it is to be examined (the Lords day being an Apostolical
Tradition) whether it be immutable, whether the Church has power to alter the
day, and substitute another in liew thereof.

I answer, Nay, the Church has not such a power, the sphere of her activitie
extends not so far, she cannot null and rescind the act of God. If the
Sunday be established (and established so I have proved it) Jure divino, it is
without all dispute unchangeable; for Immutable is one ingredient into the
definition of Jus divinum, as the Canonists compound it, who make it, which is
comprehended in the Law and Gospel, and remains perpetual Quod in Lege and
Evangelio continetur, atque immutabile semper permanet, L^ncelot. Inst. Juris
Canon. lib. 1. Tit. 2.
. True it is, I grant, that many positive divine Laws are changeable by the
same authority which first imposed them, but that a divine Law can be
abrogated, yea or displaced, by humane authority, that no sober man will yield
to: And I hope (though many have of late set her on her tip-toes, and advanced
her to a tickle point) the Churches power and authority reaches not Divine.
Besides, there is an especial and peculiar reason of the inalterability of the
Lords Day more then is usual in other constitutions though Divine; for God
has a propriety therein. Six days in the week he has bestowed upon us, but
the seventh he reserved for himself, wherein he has as good, nay better
freehold estate, then any man in his possessions; and then the rule of the Law
is, Quod nostrum est, sine assensu nostro, ad alium transferri non potest, Reg.
Juri^, lex 11.
What is ours without our assent cannot be transferred to another. So that the
Church has no power to make that a workday, which God himself has consecrated
to his holy worship. Nor mattereth it whether this designation were performed
by Christ immediately, or by the mediation of his Spirit assisting and
infallibly directing the Apostles, and so it becomes an Apostolical
Tradition; for even this (though the lowest degree of Divine appointment) does
confer exemption enough upon this day, to secure it from any jurisdiction the
Church can claim over it.

I will not dissemble it, some learned men have I confess ascribed to the
Church an authority over this day, so as she may if it please her transfer
it to another: But you must know withal, that not one of these do repute it as
an Apostolical Tradition, which is the hinge upon which the hole question
moves; nor if they did, are we to give absolute credit to their dictates. Men
they were of excellent endowments, great both for their piety and learning, and
amongst them I honor none more then that famous Bishop P. Paraus, de vit. and
ob. Patris.
of Geneva Mr Calvin; yet in some things (as this for one) I may say of him as
Augustine of Cyprian, Sicut multa erant quae doctus Calvinus doceret, sic erat
and aliquid, quod Calvinus docibilis disceret, contr. Donat. l. 5. c. 26.
As there were many things which learned Calvin taught others, so were there
some things which he might learn of others. If you can, produce any one who
has affirmed it to be an Apostolical institution or tradition, and withal an
alterable ordinance, and I will promise you to affoard you two at least for him
who have resolved the contrary.

Object.
But here perhaps you will demand, What? are all Apostolical Traditions
immutable? That restriction from eating blood, or things offered to idols?
that of collections for the poor every Lords Day? etc.

Solut.
I answer, let it be first agreed what Apostolical Traditions are, under which
name many upstart and recent customs intruded themselves into the Church.
Unaquaeque Provincia praecepta Majorum leges Apostolicas arbitratur, Hieron.
Epist. ad Lucinum.
Every Province accounts the constitutions of its Forefathers Apostolic
Traditions, says Hierome. Apostolical Traditions then I say were of two
sorts, the one particular, the other general. Particular were such, as were
framed by the Apostles either jointly or severally, but restrained to some
especial circumstance of time, place, persons, or the like; and so having
only reference and regard to such circumstance, the removal of that
circumstance made the observation of the Law to cease: Such are those
Traditions above named in the objection, such are supposed to be the different
rites of the East and West, Azor. Inst. Moral. l. 8. c. 4.
one observing both the Sabbath and Lords Day, the other the Lords Day only,
and fasting on the Sabbath; one celebrating the Festival of Easter on the
fourteenth day of the Moon, the other upon the Sunday after.

General were such as neither regarding any circumstance of time, place etc.
nor any moveable occasion were universally agreed upon to be received, and so
prescribed to the Christian Church by all the Apostles: such were the Creed,
the books of the Canonical Scripture, the observation of the Lords Day,
Paedobaptisme, etc. whereof that golden rule of S. Augustine Quod universa
tenet Ecclesia, nec conciliis institutum, sed semper retentum est, non nisi
autoritate Apostolica traditum, rectissime credimus, Cont. Donat. de Bapt. l.
4. c. 23.
is a character. What the Catholic and Universal Church holds, not decreed
by Councels but ever observed, we may safely believe it proceeded from no less
then Apostolic authority. Now these general Traditions I aver to be
immutable, and such as must ever be observed in the Church, not only because
they have or mention, or foundation in the Scripture (for so the particular
have also, and they which have not are not by us owned for Traditions
Apostolical) but because they were at first made without limitation and
restriction; and herein I have the suffrage of Zanchy De Tradition.
, Pareus Com. in 1. Cor. 11.
, and other learned men.

As for particular Traditions, they being at first framed for special
occasions, are now (those occasions being ceased) but as laws dormant, until
the emergency of the like occasion awakeneth them again. Dormant I said, not
dead. Life, vigor, and force they have still, and should the same occasion
arise again, God would expect from the Church the same observation: For they
being Apostolical, and so evidences of the Divine will upon several
occasions, we must not think that one and the same cause can operate in the
Immutable Essence a diverse will, seeing in Philosophy, The same agent, Idem,
qua idem, semper facit idem.
whilst he is the same, effects the same thing: Dead therefore they cannot
be, so long as there remains a possibility for the same occasion to set them
on work again; and so that School-rule may fit them well, Obligant semper, sed
non ad semper, Bonavent. Diet. salutis.
They oblige always, but not upon all occasions.

Well, be the Lords Day Divine, be it Immutable, what then? are we obliged to
observe it with that severe and rigid vacation, which the Jewish Sabbath
required?

I answer, Yes, Qui in dominium alterius succedit jure ejus uti debet, Reg.
Juris Lex 138*
He which succedeth into another jurisdiction, is invested in his
predecessors right. The same strictness of observation belongs to the Lords
Day, that anciently did to the Sabbath; I say by the fourth Commandment: for
that Commandment has not lost under the Gospel the least scruple or atome of
obligation, which it enjoyed during the Law, but binds still without
abbreviation of time, or alleviation of restraint during that time. As for the
duration of time, though I cannot discern such distinct abbuttalls thereof in
this Commandment as some seem to persuade, yet am I of opinion that the word
Day comprehends (...) a hole natural Day. And as touching restraint from
negotiation and toil on that Day, the words are very direct, Thou shall do no
manner of work. What, not quench an house of fire? not water a beast? not
provide necessary food? yes, works of necessity, works of mercy, thou may
do: the precept only interdicteth servile work, ordinary work of our vocation
(All Doctors whatsoever so understand it:) which being granted, the fourth
precept for ought I see little exceeds in rigor touching the Sabbath, the
Canon and Statute Law of this land, concerning the meanest holy Day. Differ I
do herein from my sacred mother the Church of England, it cannot be denied; she
has expressed her self otherwise, Hom of the Time and Place of Prayer, Hom. 1.
viz. That this Commandment of God does not bind Christian people, so straightly
to observe the utter ceremonies of the Sabbath Day, as touching the forbearing
of work and labor in times of great necessity. But seeing in the substance,
viz. That we are not bound to observe the Lords Day with that extreme severitie
which once belonged to the Jewish Sabbath, we consent, I hope a difference in
the manner of expression is at most but a peccadillo, but a venial fault; our
dissent is only this: That strictness which she reduces to the fourth
Commandment, I rather lodge and settle in those accessory and occasional laws,
which are quite of another parish, and have nothing to do here.

If it be here objected, That this precept binds not to the observation of
the Lords Day, and therefore no matter what it injoyneth.

I answer, it does oblige to the observation of this day; for no other day can
properly be called Gods Sabbath then this, because no other day is weekly
solemnized in the Church, and thereto destined by Divine appointment, which are
the certain characters of the Sabbath of that Commandment.

Besides, all Expositours interpret this precept of this day especially, and
some of none other; and above all, our Church it self is so full as nothing can
be desired more apposite to our purpose, then what she has delivered. Hom. of
the Place and Time of Prayer.
Like as it appears by this Commandment, says she, that no man in the six
days ought to be slothful and idle, but diligently labor in that estate
wherein God has set him; even so God has given express charge to all men,
that upon the Sabbath Day (which is now our Sunday) they should cease from all
weekly and work-day labor, and give themselves wholly to divine exercises of
Gods true Religion and Service. And a few lines after she says, That to keep
the Christian Sabbath (which is the Sunday) is Gods express commandment. These
are loud and clear demonstrations of what our Church then thought; wherein two
things are remarkable: First, that she reduces the observation of the Lords
Day to the fourth Commandment: and secondly, that without any scruple she very
broadly calls it our Sabbath, See before, p. 109. Injunct. of H. 8.
yea and The Sabbath. A word whereat much offense has lately been taken, and
all that use it are checked by our great Schoolman; who (good man) in a tender
care of us, Ironside, p. 120.
advises that we follow the language of the holy Ghost, as also of the
Primitive Church, that we vary not from other reformed Churches, that we
gratify not the Jews in their obstinacy against Christ, that we offend not our
weak brethren, and lastly that we use that name which does most edify, viz.
the LORDS DAY. As concerning the style Lords Day, we quarrel not at it, we are
no enemies of it, we use it for ought I know more frequently then Sabbath; yet
were it truly sensed, and according to right sense duly observed, it would
contract not only the title but nature of a Sabbath; for what is our Lords Day
but the Evangelicall Sabbath? as the Legal Sabbath was the Jewish Lords Day.
Be the Lords Day thus stated, call it then by that name ever if you please, it
not at all offends us; but when it becomes from the Sabbath an ordinary holy
day, or rather playday; from the Lords Day, the Churches Day, we have then just
cause to rouse the world by shrill expressions, and loud manifestations, that
it is both the Sabbath of the fourth Commandment, and also the Lords Day, that
is, of his Institution. But to pursue this not without wonder, behold the
strange condition of these men who inveigh so bitterly against the word
Sabbath, which has notwithstanding warrant both from our book of Homilies, the
Canons Ecclesiastical, and Edicts of our Princes, behold their perversitie:
The words Altar, Priest, Sacrifice, Holy of Holies, will down with them so
easily, as now they begin to relish nothing else. It is rare, very rare, a
great novelty to hear the course and homely terms of Table, Minister, Lords
Supper, or Chancel in their mouths. Now I say, and aver, the word Sabbath has
not in it any semblance of danger to Gods Church, comparable to that of Altar,
Priest, etc. For first the Lords Day is a Sabbath, and The Sabbath (...),
properly and directly; whereas these words Altar, Priest, etc. are used (...),
but figuratively and symbolically. Besides the word Sabbath gives no offense,
for if any incline to Judaisme it is in the strictness, not now in the day.
But the other words stumble many, especially in these times wherein we have
cause, and just cause, to fear they are meant and intended of things other then
metaphorical: And are not our fears just? when Transsubstantiation begins
not to be instilled in some subtle and Paracelsian spirit of School
distinction, but according to the Galenists to be exhibited in the gross mass
of corporeal presence in a corporeal sense; so as the most unprepared and
unbelieving receiver eats his part thereof as well as the faithful. But
admit this to be the tenet of some few extravagants; yet are not our fears
just? when that uncouth and apish bowing toward, if not to the Altar is not
only warranted and defended, but commended to our observation by the chief of
our Church: which whosoever shall dive into it, and search antiquity, will
find it one of the Parents (Elevation or Ostension being the other) which begot
adoration of the Host, which begot Impanation or Transsubstantiation. Let not
any think here that by Antiquity I understand the very Primitive Church, with
whom we challenge so near alliance in matters of Doctrine; for certain it is,
that the first Church was utterly ignorant of this novel device: you shall
indeed many times, very often find in the Fathers Just. M. q. ad Orth. 118.
Tertul. Apol. c. 16 Orig. in Number. Hom. 5. Clem. Alex. strom. 7. Athan q. 37.
Basil. de Sp. S. c. 27.
that they bowed or worshipped toward the East, and this they did only at
their entrance into the Church according to the Poet, Vt Templi tetigere gradus
procumbit uterque
Ovid. Met. l. 1.
Pronus humi.


But of bowing (for what some urge of Nazianzen's Gorgonia was geniculation,
not genuflection, as will appear to any that duly peruseth the place) toward
the Altar as you call it, or ducking as often as they approached unto, or
departed from it, you shall not find mention any where till you arrive at
Chrysostom's Liturgy, which requires (...), adorations to be made, (...),
toward the holy Table; and this we all know is a piece of yesterday, the
Author whereof was in being not full six hundred years past, which we are also
as certain was the very time about which the Incarnation of Bread or
Transsubstantiation began first to be whispered. I should not have dwelt so
long upon this, but that I find it pressed as a necessary duty, yea a duty of
necessity adequate to the observation of the Lords Day, a Tenet which deserves
rather to be hist at then answered.

But to return from whence I have digressed: Let whatsoever is positive in the
fourth Commandment stand for a cipher, is the Lords Day to be observed one jot
the more remiss? does not Apostolical Institution imply an equal Obligation
both concerning the continuance of time and restraint from labor? what did
they ordain? what institute? was it not, That the first day of the week should
be consecrated to God and spiritual negotiations? you cannot yield us less.
If then it was the first day, of what is it meant? of a natural day from sun
to sun, or of an artificial from the sunrise to his set? I answer, of the
first, for these reasons. If all the other days of the week contained both
night and day, why should not the Lords Day have as large a proportion of time
as the rest? do not all the days in the week hold by Gavelkind? and if it
contained only daylight, then there was a night to spare, whereof I would
gladly know what should become: Should the Saturday have it all? If so, then
this would by sesquialter proportion exceed all the rest: should it pass by
way of dividend amongst the other six, then there would be two hours in every
day more then the suns revolution makes. Moreover, when God requires any
thing dedicated to him, his constant caveat and proviso is that it be (...),
not defective and without blemish, not lame, Deuteronomy. 15.21.
or imperfect. Now that which wants one minute of its full time cannot
properly be called a day: regularly I say, and de jure, of right, it cannot,
where the day is seposed by divine designation. Neque ideo jussisse ut a
vespera ad vesperam Sabbata sua celebrarent, ut diei initi um and finem
designaret, sed ut integrum diem naturalem sibi vendicaret,

Dr Garnons Determ. M. S. de Die Dom. Cant. Junii ultimo, 1632.


And this is the more evident by observing what God required under the law, it
being no less then a full and complete natural day from eve to eve; which
was, not (as a learned Doctor conceives, and I think aright) to set out the
beginning and end, the boundaries of a natural day, but to declare his own
claim of a natural day to be dedicated to him which should begin at evening.
If then the day must be understood of a natural day of 24 hours, it will then
necessarily follow that vacation from labor during that time must be
concomitant with it: For vacation from worldly affairs, which may impeach the
worship of God, is so inseparable from times consecrated to that worship, as it
is by Brerewood rightly accounted part of the morality and substance of the
fourth Commandment, page 62.
and so in the Christian Church perpetually to be observed.

Object.
If any shall now object that this vacation is only necessary and required
during the time of public assembling in the Church, and that no more is
exacted of us then that we attend such assemblies.

Solut.
I answer, that God will admit no sharer in any thing consecrated to him; and
though the cardinal and chief end of the Sabbath is, that God be publicly
honored, yet does he not leave the remainder thereof so at our dispose, that
we may dispend it either in carnal pleasures, or terrene negotiations

Those oratories which, from their dedication to the Lord, are in English
denominated Churches, do from their destination to public and solemn address
contract the name and repute of sacred: and though they be superlatively and
above all venerable while employed to their destinate end, yet always, even at
times of Cultustitium (as I may so say) or vacation from public worship there
remains in them an indeleble impression of awful regard, which ought to
preserve them from all profanation inviolable. Mistake me not, I place no
inherent sanctity, I immure not God in them, I approve not of their decoring,
even to effeminate curiosity, nor allow them an honor as some of late (too
close followers of Nazianzene De funere Patris.
) even to ridiculousnesse superstititious; yet this I hold, Gods houses they
are, places where his honor dwells, for which cause such a relative
veneration is due to them as always dignifieth and ennobleth them above any
other house whatsoever, and secureth them from common use: and in this men both
learned and moderate have led me the way, as Zanchy In Decalog.
, Hospinian De orig. Templ.
, etc. Now Eadem religione sanctificanda sunt Domino loca and tempora eju^
nomini dicata,

Bucer. Cens. Angl. ord. p. 460. Levit. 26.2.


Places and Times consecrated to Gods name are to be sanctified with equal
religion; and so the Rituall of the old Testament coupleth them together, Ye
shall keep my Sabbaths and reverence my Sanctuaries: And then I say, that the
Lords house may as well be impropriated to a warehouse, as his day to a
work-day, when the congregation is dismissed. And this privilege it as well
deriveth from Evangelicall, as Legal institution: Therefore Leo Novell. Leon.
c. 54.
, when he made that edict of general restraint on the Lords day, pleads
conformity with the evangelicall constitution, Statuimus quod Spiritui sancto
ab ip^oque institutis placuit, etc.
We ordain as it seemed good to the holy Spirit and to them whom he instructed.

But it will be here opposed, that neither the Apostles themselves, nor the
Primitive Church, observed this day with any such strictness until
Constantine's decree; and therefore it is like they enjoined it not.

I answer, as touching the practice of the Apostles, there is, I confess,
nothing either the one way or other clearly evident, nor much of that of the
Primitive Church during the time limited: Only Justin Martyr Apol. 2.
(if I be not mistaken) has something reflecting that way; for in his
description of the custom of public assembling in those times upon the Lords
day, after he has insisted awhile upon the duties performed in the Church, he
sets down what the Christians did postea, after their dismission, as their
visiting and relieving the poor, their consorting together, and their
repeating to one another what they had learned that day in the Church. Of the
remainder of time, the solemn assembly being ended, I understand this postea
probably enough, yet will not warrant it with over much pertinacitie; if any
other construction can vouch better reason in its defense, let that obtain. But
though we should find no evidence of the Primitive practice of cessation from
labor on this day, yet will it not follow that they did not forbear it if
possibly they could: for we meet with exhortation to it by Origin, Die Sabbati
Christiani nihil ex omnibus mundi actibus oportet operari; si ergo desinas ab
omnibus secularibus operibus, and nihil mundanum geras, sed spiritualibus
operibus vaces, haec est observatio Sabbati Christiani, Hom. 23. in Number.
On the Christian Sabbath day we ought not to do any worldly business; if
therefore thou do surcease from all secular affairs, and do nothing but
employ thy self in spiritual negotiations, this is the right observation of
the Christian Sabbath. Is it now likely that the doctrine of so eminent a
Teacher as Origin should persuade none to conformity with what he here
delivered? But suppose the worst, and that you were able to afford us an
example or two of labor on this day, must it therefore follow that there was
no decree of restraint made by the Apostles, and that we are at liberty to
plow and cart on this day, notwithstanding any divine Law to the contrary?
Nothing less: for as his late Majesty Conference at Hampton Court, p. 16.
judiciously said, It is not sound reasoning from things done before a Church
be settled and grounded, unto those which are to be performed in a Church
estalibshed and flourishing. There might be, and was, weighty cause to dispense
with so strict a vacancie from worldly business, as the state of the Church
then stood. Heavy were their pressures, many thousands were the slaves of
miscreant masters, who in likelihood would not forbear their servants work an
hole day in a week, but exact it from them under the penalty of many stripes;
so that should any of that servile condition have refused his masters work on
that day, nothing could he expect but severe if not inhumane usage: and should
the Christian Church have engaged herself in the vindication and justification
of such contempt, it had been the highway to have made both her Religion and
self (even to eradication) odious, as the incendiaries of disobedience and
maintainers of Anarchie. And therefore very discreetly the fathers of the
Laodicean Council, wary of giving offense, yet willing to show how they stood
affected, decreed in the twenty ninth canon of that Council, that Christians
should rest from labor on the Lords day, (...), if they could, that is, if
their Pagane masters would not constrain them to work; and so it is by
Brerewood understood.

But here it will be excepted, If the Law of God commanded their rest and
cessation upon the Lords Day, the law of man enjoining the contrary was not to
be weighed: for in such cases, Nullus subjicitur legi inferioris contra
superiorem, Aquin. 1.2 a q 96.5. ad 3.
No man is subject to a law of an inferior repugnant to another of a
superior. or It is better to obey God then man, Acts c. 5. v. 29.

I answer, Better it is indeed to obey God then man, when they command things
repugnant; but it must be with this proviso, that the Law of God be
fundamental and paramount, from which there is no appeal to an higher: For if
it be a positive or ceremonial law, a law of lesser caract, then Aquinas his
rule must be retorted with the loss but of one letter, No man is obliged by an
inferior law against a superior. Nullus subjicitur legi inferiori contra
superiorem.
All positive laws whatsoever are subordinate, and when they stand in
competition with moralls and fundamentalls they must strike sail. Because the
point is tickle, and may perhaps give offense to weaker apprehensions, I will
illustrate it with two examples taken out of Holy writ, where God dispensed
with ceremonial laws for a while, that the moral might be preserved
inviolate. The ceremonial law of God enjoined the Israelites to offer such and
such sacrifices, at such and such times, in such and such places; directly
cross to which, Pharaoh their King imposed upon them such a task, as would not
afford them any leisure to perform those sacred duties: Now the fundamental
law of God enjoined them (as it does all men) to obey their superiors in all
things either simply good, or not simply evil; and betwixt this fundamental
and the other ceremonial laws stood the contest. But what was the issue? Did
God with the Israelites in this case (as Popes in their fury, by a Nos
Sanctorum, Gratian D^e. p. 2. q. 7. causa 15. Exodus 1.
with the subjects of an heretic Prince) absolve them from their obedience?
The Israelites were more and mightier then their adversaries; did he instigate
and spur them on to rebel, or by assassination to make away their King? No,
he sent to Pharaoh and commanded him to let his people go; he knew the fault
and impediment to be in him alone, the Israelites were blameless: and as
Augustine says in a similarie case, Reum Regem fecit iniquitas imperandi,
innocentem subditum ordo serviendi, Cont. F. Man. l. 22. c. 75.
The obliquitie of the command made the King blameworthy, the ordinance of
obeying made the subject innocent. Nay, to pursue this example a little
further: when Pharaoh condescended to let the people go to sacrifice, provided
they went not far, Moses refused the leave upon such conditions as were like
to bring them in peril of their lives. It is not meet so to do: shall we
sacrifice the abomination of the Egyptians before their eyes, and will they
not stone us? Exodus 8.26. A true confirmation of Gods impresse, I will have
mercy and not sacrifice, Hos. 6.6. Both he will have, where both may be had;
but if he must part with one, mercy he will have, let the other go. Paraeus in
loc.
Upon this text a learned Commentatour thus, Deus caeremonialia primae Tabulae
moralibus secundae tabulae post ponit.
God prefers the moralls of the second Table before ceremonialls of the
first. And the same is the opinion of diverse others Zanch. in loc. Jun. Parall.
l. 1. c. 22.
.

The second dispensation was in the wilderness, and that from observation of a
sacramental law: for we read Joshua 5.5. that circumcision was omitted all
that time, and the Israelites abode there 40 years. The most probable cause of
this omission was, because they were every minute to watch the motion of the
convoy-cloud, and to march with it; but circumcision would either retard their
expedition, or hazard the lives of the infants: therefore God in mercy had
rather respect to the safety of those innocents, then to his ordinance of
circumcision.

I could also instance in Gods dispensation during the persecution under
Manasses and other idolatrous Kings, as also under the Captivity of Babylon;
in all which several times, doubtless, there was a fail in many ceremonial
duties otherwise observable. The truth is, all ceremonial laws have respect to
the latitude of Jury, and the land of Canaan, as well in a moral as a literal
sense; viz. they are framed only for the Church, whilst she enjoys a
visible and open profession of her religion, whilst her peace remains
indisturbed: for when the fury of persecution hunteth her like a partridge on
the mountains, when times of tribulation and calamity seize upon her, God then
accepts what service she can with her own safety afford him; he stands not
upon shadows, the substance is that he only then looks after. Ceremonies are
but the outward dress of religion, only made to decore her in public
profession, and therefore not absolutely of the essence of a Church; and so but
respectively necessary: The very Sacraments themselves are but so, as the glory
of our Church Perkins, case consc. l. 2. c. 8. q. 1.
has rightly observed upon that fail of circumcision in the wilderness; yet
Sacraments (I take it) are the highest stair and degree of ceremonies.

Now these premises considered, nothing discern I to the contrary, but a
constitution of the Apostles concerning labor to be omitted on this day there
might be, though not to take a full effect until the Church should attain her
land of Canaan, a settled and flourishing peace. And the event seems to prove
the ordinance: for no sooner did Constantine (a second Joshuah or Josiah) sit
sure in his throne, then Gods external worship began to be magnificently
solemnized, and (as an especial badge thereof) his day superlatively honored
both by Imperial edict and example; and that with strict vacation from all
worldly avocations: ab omni opere, from all work, so his Histriographer
Eusebius, de vita Constable. l. 4. c. 18.
reports. Elsewhere (I grant) there occurreth a constitution of this
Religious Emperor tolerating labor on this day, but it was in country
villages only, and that too but in case of necessity, Ne occasion momenti
pereat commoditas coelesti provisione concessa. Cod. l. ^. Tit. 12. l. 3.
lest pretermitting the opportunity offered by the divine providence it might
not occur again. o This dispensation is much urged by the Anti-sabbatarians,
but it has no great force with us. For first, it may be well controverted,
whether Constantine ever made any such indulgence or no; because if he had, is
it credible it could have escaped Eusebius, who was not only contemporary but
in a manner companion with this Emperor; who took special notice of all his
actions, having in design the compiling of the History of his life, and who
over lived him; yet this Bishop has not one word of it. But be it
Constantine's; sure we are it was after rescinded by Leo with a We ordain that
all men cease from labor on the Lords day, Statuimus ut omnes a labor vacent,
neque agricolae neque quiquam in eo (die Dominico scil) illicitum opus
aggrediantur.
that neither husbandmen nor any other take in handwork unlawful on that day.
And before Leo, diverse of the Fathers in their popular tracts or sermons
pressed this vacation upon the people: On the festival day all handiwork is
prohibited to the end that men may more entirely exercise themselves in sacred
matters. So Cyril Prohibetur die f^sto opus quod manu exercetur, ut integrius
rebus divinis exercere vos possitis, In Joan. l. 8. c. 1.
. Chrysostom Hom. 5. in Matthew.
calls it (...), an immovable law, (...), that this first day of the week be
holly set apart for sacred exerc^s^s. But there are also fathers, you will say,
that seem to incline to the contrary. First Hierome: he relates of a religious
woman, governesse of the Nuns at Bethlehem, how she every Lords day resorted
to the Church, and after service she and her company fell to their ordinary
work of making garments for themselves or others. To this I answer, consider
Paula as a subject, and then tell me how can you acquit her of the breach (I
will not say of the fourth but) of the fifth precept, if Bethlehem was within
the latitude of Constantine's decree; and certainly it was: for that reached
Omnes Romano Imperio parents, all men subject to the Roman Empire. And if
this Lady was not within the verge of the dispensation, for that was for
husbandmen only, was not then this her act a disobedience to her Princes law,
and therefore her example no rule of those times, it being it self irregular.
Besides, S. Hierome tells us of religious persons of the other sex, Monks,
that they did orationi tantum, and lectionibus vacare, busy themselves in
prayer and reading on the Lords day. Now consider Paula and her Nuns as
women, and compare their practice with that of these Monks, and then if the
masculine practice be not more worthy then the feminine, let Grammar scholars
judge.

Out of Gregory they tell us, that he gives it as one cognizance of
Antichrist, L. 11. ep. 3. Diem Dominicum and Sabbatum ab omni opere faciet
custodiri.
That he shall enjoin the Lords Day and the Sabbath to be o^served with
abstinence from all work. To which I answer, There are two things which
Gregory here reproves in the observation of the Dominicall Day: first a
Jewish not a moderate and sober restraint; and this is certain, for in the very
same epistle he says, Dominico die a labor cessandum est, and omni modo
orationibus vacandum.
On the Lords day we must cease from labor, and by all means attend our
prayers; secondly, the celebrating it together with the Sabbath, for it is Diem
Dominicum and Sabbatum, the Lords Day and Sabbath both, which was the error of
the Ebionites. And therefore Gregory, for ought I see, stands their friend
no more then Hierome. This Gregory was a man of the sixth Centurie, an age
wherein themselves acknowledge this restraint took deep root, and so it
continued successively downward, even to the times of Reformation; nor did the
first Reformers, those of our Church especially, exercise themselves in varying
any thing at all in this point from the received practice, as may appear both
in the statute and canon laws both of this and other countries.

But hitherto I have only insisted upon restraint from labor and servile
work, there is yet another question concerning restraint, not from work, but
play, and from recreations, viz. Whether recreations (such as are at other
times lawful) are tolerable and lawful on the Lords day.

To this I answer in short, All recreations at other times lawful are
interdicted on this day, but such whereby the mind is better disposed toward
the sanctification of the day, or such as are no impediments to that
sanctification. For the day is appointed to be sanctified, that is to be an
holy, not a playday: and it is a rule in the decalogue and all other divine
laws, that where any thing is commanded to be done, all things subservient to
the performance of it are consequently enjoined, as also all lets and
hindrances prohibited. Synod. Antisiodor. Can. 9.
Besides, Gods house has been ever thought profaned and polluted by sports and
meetings of good fellowship, why also not his day? Nor is it enough that these
recreations be not an hindrance to public exercises in the Church, but they
must not disturb even private duties at home, as meditation, prayer, holy
conference, etc. For God commands not the sanctification of some few hours,
but of a day, that is an hole day, allowing sufficient time for repose and
repast to the body. And so our Church Hom. ubi supra.
interprets the command: Gods obedient people, says she, should use the
Sunday holily, and rest from their common and daily business, and give
themselves wholly to heavenly exercises. And consonant to her, her sister the
Church Art. 56.
of Ireland, The Lords Day is wholly to be dedicated to the service of God. If
holly to Gods service, where have recreations a room? These articles are it
seems called in; for what reason I not dispute: sure I am the nulling of them
was very acceptable to the disciples and followers of Arminius ( Men too bold
and frequent in these Dominions K. J. cont. Vorst. p. 18.
) whose accursed tenets were there damned.

As an appendix to this discourse of recreations, if now my opinion be demanded
concerning his Majesty's book, I shall say of that only this, His Princely
intentions were therein (I doubt not) pious enough; not so, I fear, theirs who
first suggested the convenience and fitness of that liberty unto him. But in
regard the foundation thereof seems especially to be the preserving in
observation Encaenia or Church dedications, of them I shall say somewhat,
perhaps not known to all. Of their first Institution (innocent enough) I will
not speak nor trouble my self and you in showing by what gradations they ceased
to be what they ought, and became what they ought not; of their corrupt and
degenerate estate I purpose only to give you some small hint, collected from
what I have read, and partly from what I have seen.

First therefore you must understand, there were in the late times of
superstition and blindness in our Church (in our Church I say, for in other
Countries I confess they were united) two feasts, Maenechmi, very near
resembling one the other; one called the Feast of Dedication, the other, the
Feast of the Patron or Church Holiday: the impious and profane fooleries were
almost the same and common to both, only the Feast of the Patron had this
peculiar to it, The idol or image of the Patron richly decked and dressed was set
forth upon a table near the Church door, to the view of the People, -- quod
quia mutum est,
Naogeorgus, de Dedicat.
Aut nondum populi linguam or aque barbara novit,
Assidet interpres quidam; clamansque rogansque
Intrantes, atque ingredientes munera praestent
Patrono, and nummis redimant indulta Paparum,
-- which because 't is dumb
And kennes not yet the Peoples Idiome
Its spokesman's by, who begs of all that come
Toll for his Patron, and sits there to sell
Pardons for sins, but men must pay him well.


But the first spark of light which shone in the beginning of Reformation soon
quitted the world of this gross abuse: King Henry the eighth, anno 1536
amongst other things, enjoining that this Feast of the Patron of every Church,
commonly called the Church Holiday, should be no more observed within the
Realm. The Feasts of Dedication indeed continued still, yet much eclipsed in
their former wicked and abominable solemnity; for whereas before the custom
was for diverse vicine Parishes to assemble themselves together there where the
Feast of Dedication was to be held, to feast and riot in the very Churches, to
erect stalls for pedlars in the Churchyard, to spend the hole day in swinish
swill, lascivious wantonness, in cudgellplay-matches, and in the true service
of Satan; and because every Parochial Church had its proper Sunday whereon the
Feast was kept, and it was rare by reason thereof to have a Lords Day observed
(especially in summer time, wherein these Feasts are most frequent) with any
tolerable devotion and exercise of Piety, it was therefore by the same Prince
strictly enjoined, Anno praedicto.
That the Feasts of Dedication of Churches should in all places of the Realm be
celebrated upon the first Sunday in October for ever, and upon none other day.
The scope of this King was doubtless to restrain the disordered
licentiousness of the people on this day, being occasioned by their joint
resort to other Parishes where these Feasts were observed; and in this I cannot
but commend that Declaration of his sacred Majesty, which restrained and
prohibited that disorder so far as in it lay. Had there been due inquiry made
into the violation of his Majesty's will in this, and punishment inflicted upon
the offenders, great I dare say had been the good it would have produced: but
through general impunity, and the perverse corruption of humane nature,
choosing in every thing that which serves its own (though never so inordinate)
ends, and neglecting the rest, his Majesty's godly purpose was (I know) much
abused, and Gods sacred Day not less dishonored. And for proof thereof, I
will give you a Relation of mine own autopsie, of what these eyes saw. It was
some few years since my fortune to visit a kinsman (seated in a country where
these Feasts are frequent) upon a saturday, and though I purposed to depart
that day, yet he importuned and prevailed with me to repose my self with him
the ensuing Lords Day. I did so, and as duty required, in the morning I
accompanied him to Church: A full assembly there was; service being read, the
preacher, a man of no mean note or degree, Ne tantum nefas non rire fieret,
Eccles. 2.24.
makes a sermon, lest such profanation should want its due ceremony, upon this
Text, There is nothing better for a man then that he should eat and drink, and
that he should make his soul to enjoy good in his labor: he insisted his hole
time upon the lawfulness of Feasting, and of Christian liberty in the use of
the creatures; and to give him his due, nothing did he deliver amiss:
something I grant he might, nay ought to have added, as in setting down the
properties of a Christian Feast, and in opening to the people his Majesty's
will and pleasure concerning these Feasts, which certainly gave them not so
free a scope as they took. Well, the sermon ended and congregation dismissed,
in our return home I inquired of my kinsman the occasion of that Text; he told
me it was the Feast of dedication of their Church. Home we went, took a
moderate repast, and scarce had we dined before the bells summoned us to
Church, whither with all convenient speed we hasted; and being come, behold the
congregation, which in the morning amounted to about nine or ten score, could
not (except the family we brought with us) make up now so many single persons:
as the congregation was thin, so was the service suitable, being posted over
in great haste. After this service, I was much requested by my kinsman to
accompany him to the place of rendez-vous where the Feast was kept; many
denials had I given him, as fearing to be a spectatour of Gods dishonor, and
did partly express as much, but he assured me I should find nothing but honest
and innocent disport: at length, I confess not without much inward conflict, I
yielded to him (and the rather out of a desire to inform my self of the manner
of those Feasts, whereof I had heard much talk) So I accompanied him to the
green which was the scene of their pastime, where lo we beheld a multitude of
people, the muster whereof could not be less then a thousand. The main
pretense of that assembly was to give testimony of their manhood by wrestling,
cudgel-play, etc. (there being to that end a confederacy, league and siding of
the neighbor towns, so many against so many) which exercises employed the
body, and greater part of that multitude: but they who listed not to be either
spectacles or spectatours wanted not wherewith to entertain themselves, there
being an alehouse by. The disorders of that meeting by drunkenness, swearing,
malicious reviling one the other, which may easily be conceived, I purpose not
to relate; that which I offer to consideration is, whether there was not by
this assembly a great affront to his Majesty's royal Declaration, which
prohibited all concourse of people out of their own parish, yea or in their own
parish until Evening Prayer were ended, when as I dare say there were near a
thousand of this meeting, which were not of the parish wherein it was held, and
of those not forty (I verily believe) had been present at Evening service;
for how could they in regard some of them came four or five, most two or
three, and all at least a mile off? which abuse of our Princes pleasure is I
think condignly meritorious of severe punishment, the execution whereof I leave
to those whom it concerns.

Having thus stated the Dominicall Day, having proved it to be a Day divinely
instituted, a Day immutable, a Day holly to be appropriated to sacred duties, I
have finished my last part, and in that (my imperfect way) perfected what I
first intended. Which done, my earnest suit is that my Christian perusers would
fervently pray that this work undertaken for the honor of my Lord and blessed
Saviors Day may through his merits So much (to speak with devout Salvian)
avail the Author with God, Tantum apud Deum scriptori suo profit, quantum eum
prodesse ipse omnibus cupit, Epist. Salonio Episcopo.

Jud. ult.


as he seriously desires it may profit all men. To which only wise God our
Savior be glory and majesty, dominion and power, now and for ever, Amen.

FINIS.

