JOSEPH REVIVED OR The Twelve last Chapters of Genesis Metaphrazed. Containing
the LIFE and DEATH Of Holy JOSEPH.

By GEORGE LESLY Minister of Wittering in Northamptonshier.

And we know that all things work together for good to them that love God,

Romans 8.28. LONDON, Printed for the Author, and are to be sold by Charles Smith
at the Angel near the Inner Temple gate, Fleetstreet. 1676.

IMPRIMATUR

Gul. Jane S.T.B. Reverend. in Christo Pa^ti Dno Henrico Episc. Land. a Sacris
Domesticis.
Jan. 17. 1675.
To the Right Worshipful WILL. WYMONDESOLD, ESQUIRE, Mr. EDMUND, Mr. RICHARD,
Mr. MATTHEW, and Mr. THOMAS his Brethren; with their truly Virtuous Mother and
Sisters.
Worthy Sirs and Ladies,
BEING about to throw my Mite into the Public Treasury, to plant a tender VINE
in the Lords VINEYARD, I thought you fittest to fence it with Your favorable
Aspects, who are not only almost equal in Number but Virtues, to those Sacred
Patriarchs, whose History I have metaphrazed. The Meeter is like my Self, dull
and despicable, but the Matter is of Divine Inspiration, which requires Your
acceptance by Heavens Authority, while as the other only lets the World know,
that I am,

YOURS, Extraordinary obliged, GEO. LESLY.
Wittering, Jan. 7. 1675/6.
TO THE READER.
IF Heaven be pleased to dart his glorious Rays
Into my Soul, let others take the Bays,
Who climb Parnassus and Mount Helicon
For airy Notions, while I at the Throne
Of Mercy beg an understanding Heart
To measure out what Moses did impart
To the World, concerning Jacob and his Seed,
Mong whom a Dream did great dissension breed.
Though God inspired the Prophet from above,
And he (poor Heart) revealed all in love,
Whose harmless Vision counted was a crime,
And so (perhaps) may this my humble Rhyme:
Yet if in friendly manner you disclose
My oversights, I Will mend, or write in Prose.
G. L.
To my Worthy Friend Mr. GEORGE LESLY, upon his Poem called JOSEPH Revived.
WITH Fiction while the airy Poet does
Abuse the Text, thou tell the naked truth;
Thou stuff'st thy Verse with Sense, and every Rhyme
Complete speaks thee a Poet without crime.
He who in Sacred Phrase was once forlorn,
And piecemeal shown, like to his Garment, torn,
Thou offer'st whole; snips and shred's thy Theme,
Thou draw'st his Story up without a Seam.
O happy Art! thrice Joseph rides in State,
In Pharaoh's Second Char'ot first, then date
His second Trophy with Divine Records,
His Honor last commenceth with thy words.
Bid Brethren all his Glory'n Egypt tell;
He needs not now, thy Pen has don't so well,
That all the British Orb of it may ring,
And we of thee, while thou of him do sing.
Tho. Woolsey D.D.
JOSEPH REVIVED.
OF Rachel's longed for darling since I sing,
And thy beloved, help me Jacob's King.
My Bark is crazie, and my stock is small,
Yet if thou Wind and Sea command, I shall
Safe to the Harbor this my Pinnace bring,
Then of my self and it make offering.
At Padan-aram had this worthy breath,
Not long before the beauteous Rachels death,
Yet Hebron was the place of his abode,
At seventeen years beloved of man and God:
Where with his Brethren, Dan and Napthali,
Asher and Gad, he on the downs did lie,
Feeding the Flocks with them, their ill report
Grieved the Lad, for which he did resort
Unto his aged Father, and declared
Those passages that he had seen and heard.
These actions, Boy, to them will fatal prove,
Though I can never take from thee that love
I unto Rachel (while she lived) did bear.
For proof whereof this Livery take and wear.
This, with his tidings did exasperate
His Brethrens spirits, so that him they hate,
Which heaven soon perceives, and his fame
Raises, by dreams to be fulfilled on them;
The which when he (awake) begins to tell,
Their eyes inflame and hearts with anger swell
Against the harmless Youth, who ne'rtheless
In friendly manner did it thus express:
This night, said he, as we all binding were
Sheaves in the field, mine did it self uprear
In King-like posture, and yours round did stand,
Making obeisance, waiting its command.
To which his Brethren hastily replied,
Shall thou reign over us? Shall it e're be said
That thou shall have dominion? No, thy grave
Is just reward, for these thy Dreams to have.
Yet where Jehovah works no man can let,
He dreams again of their succeeding fate,
Which he once more does unto them reveal,
And said, this other I will not conceal.
And thus it was, Behold! the Sun and Moon,
With Stars eleven, to me have homage done.
Of this he did not only certify
His Brethren, but his Father, who did cry,
Fie Son! what mean these uncouth thoughts? be sure
Such wild presages I shall never endure;
Think thou, that I, my Wife and Children too
Shall crouch and bow, and fall before such as you?
No child, be wise, forbear thus to divine,
Lest all the rest against thee do combine.
This storm is ceased, and the young men gone
Their flocks to feed, in Sechem every one,
For whose long absence, neither night nor day
Can Jacob rest, till Joseph's sent away,
Who said, Go down and see if all be right,
I Have suffered much for my ten Sons this night*
Your will, said he, is unto me a Law,
I Will go to Sechem, though I never saw
The place: no sooner does he undertake
his journey, than the way he does forsake,
And wanders too and fro in open field,
Till one drew nigh and pitied the child,
Saying, What seek'st thou Stripling, it is my grief
To see thee straying here without relief?
My Brethren, Sir, said he, pray tell me whither
They Have driven their flocks to feed, I must go thither.
Boy, answered he, I think I heard them say,
Rise up, and let us to Dothan straight away:
And there they are, for any thing I know,
The grass is good, because the ground is low.
My thanks I give you, Sir, and if I find
Them there, I Will say you were exceeding kind.
This said, he runs thither joyfully,
Not dreaming once of any danger nigh.
But 'twas a dream, for he is no sooner spied
By his malicious Brethren, than they cried,
Behold! our Dreamer comes, prophetic Mome;
Come, let us slay him, he shall never go home,
And cast him in some Pit, then we will say
Some evil Beast has taken his life away.
And then it is hoped that we shall quickly see
A final end both of his Dreams and he.
But Reuben who was judged least to respect
God or his Father, does the Lad protect;
Sa'ing, Let Us not kill him, for some time or other
It will come out, remember he is our Brother;
If his Blood cry, let us not think to thrive:
We'll rather put him in this Pit alive.
This course he was the willinger to take,
Because thereby he thought to get him back
Safe to his Father. All this time the Lad
Thought of no ill, nor yet suspicion had,
But rushed among them, ravished with joy,
Wishing them health; who answer, Foolish Boy
Have not more Dreams to tell? we must now see
If this fine Coat does make thee prophecy.
Are we not Brethren? Oh! be not so rude,
Said he, I mean to you nothing but good.
No, Stripling no, thy Sighs, thy Pra'rs, thy Tears
With us must take no place, thy tender years
Which pity crave, must taste our cruelty;
In this dry Pit thou art designed to lie.
To It, fling him down, it is Noon we'll take repast:
But hold, who is this draws toward us so fast?
Ishma'lites surely, come from Gilead
Load'n with Spice, Balm, Myrrh, Egyptian Trade.
By this time Judah's heart began to melt,
Whose words declare that he great trouble felt.
What profit's in our Brothers blood, said he,
Though we conceal't, yet murderers we be.
Give o'r; I Have found a way that is better far:
We see these Camels richly laden are,
Let Us with their Masters this our Dreamer truck;
And being gone, we'll pray for his good luck.
This, this will clear us from the Calumny
Of Fratricide that would upon us lie.
Ho, Chapmen tarry, want ye not a Lad
To drive your Horses and promote your Trade?
Here Is one, we'll sell him cheap. A pretty Youth,
Replied the Merchants, he will serve us both.
How prize ye him? Speak, if ye mean that we
Should buy him of you, rate him not too high.
At one word, twenty Pieces is our price.
Hold, here is your Money, he is worth it twice:
And so we hope he will give, the Boy likes well.
The Wares are always good that Merchants sell.
We'll carry him to Egypt, for his Age
And Feature fitteth him to be a Page
To some great Lady; if that will not do,
My Lord he can serve in his Chamber too.
And if the Rules of Phisiognomie
Deceive us not, such Graces hidden lie
Under his flaxen hair, and downie chin,
As hitherto in any scarce has bin.
Come, let us go hence; I Will now unto the Pit,
Says Reu. to see if Joseph be in it,
But missing of him, whom he thought to find,
He instantly returns with heavy mind
Unto his Brethren, crying out, Alas!
The Boy is taken out of yonder place:
Whither shall I go? not home to my dear Father,
Seeing he will require of me; no, I Will rather
Breath out the rest of my unhappy years
In some dark Cell, and expiate with tears
My double crime. No Brother, cry the rest,
We have a project (if ye think it best)
Will with our Father clear both us and you:
Look, here is his Coat, and there are Goats enough,
Let Us with their blood besprinkle it, and then
Go cheerfully to Hebron back again,
And ask our Father if this garb he knows,
Since at first view it like to Joseph's shows.
On this they all conclude, and home return
With joyful faces, though they would cause to mourn;
And with these tidings Jacob did salute,
At which surpised, he is suddenly struck mute,
And beats his Breast, his Eyes great floods let out
Of Tears, and said, Poor Joseph without doubt
Is torn in pieces by some evil Beast,
Who first devours, and after makes his feast.
This said, he rent his clothes, sackcloth put on,
And many days mourned for him alone,
Without all comfort, till at last his Sons
And Daughters all come unto him at once,
Saying, O Father why does this your grief
Transport you so, as not to take relief;
We think you might be joyful, when you see
Of your own Loins this goodly company.
No, said old Jacob, though I love you well,
Yet this Lad's death will make me go to Hell
Mourning: poor heart! in him alone I lived,
And now being dead, how can I be but grieved?
Yet all this sorrow can nothing retard
The sturdy Pedlars, who by driving hard
Have got to Egypt, where by quick retaile
They mean their Spice to vend, and Joseph's sale
Expect; both which accordingly fell out,
Buyers (like Bees) to them flock round about;
And Potiphar himself beholds their Trade,
Where suddenly he spies the lovely Lad;
Likes, buys and pays, carries him to his house,
That Proverb's false, Mountains bring forth a Mouse.
At home when he good notice taken had,
Of all things were performed by the Lad,
And of the Blessings he from God received,
Name and Religion, then of him he craved;
Which known, from slavery he did set him free,
Saying, Of my House thou now shall Ruler be.
The pious Youth no sooner is preferred,
Then the others Pra'er for thrift is answered;
For God did then the Egyptians house so bless,
That all things prosp'red, whether more or less.
This made the Captain trust him with his store
Of all that he had cared for, nor knew no more
Then what he eat; But, ah! the goodly face
Of Joseph tempted Jempsar to embrace
The holy Youth with her surrounding Arms,
And glance her amorous eyes, adul'trous Charms.
These made him blush with shame and fear together,
And answer, No, you're Sacred as my Mother.
Does not my Master trust his State with me?
And has withheld nothing at all but thee.
This wickedness is great, I dare not do it;
Pardon me Mistress, and leave off your suit.
Say, if I grant all that which you desire,
Can you keep off God's Wrath and Husbands Ire?
Nay, he will be offended, and my Lord
Will never after take an Hebrews word.
Yet this enflamed Wanton gives not o'r
To speak him kindly every day and hour;
Adding forced Caresses, but in vain,
From day to day, till she had drunk the bane
That either must her Lust or Fury end
Upon her Servant and her Husbands Friend:
Both which are grown to that prodigious height,
That though the Sun shines, yet she counts it night,
Saying within her self, he is here I guess
Alone in the house about his business;
This is the last exploit I mind to try,
To which the Fool must either yield or die;
And then laid hold upon his Coat and swore,
I Will have all I desire of thee before
Thou go, there is none can see or hear the noise;
But he as frighted at her lustful voice,
Flees out and leaves his Garment in her hand.
Where God forbids to fight, he dares not stand.
Now Hell and she must act another part,
Viz. mourning face put on, dissembling heart,
The sugared words she used but of late
For baits, turns Choler, this to cruel hate;
Calling aloud to all, for Heavens sake help,
I am abused by this Hebrew Whelp.
See here the Relicts of his villainy:
My cries it made him leave, and from me flee.
And now would God my Potiphar were come,
For I shall never rest till he is at home,
And have related unto him what fare
Must be expected in the house where Hebrews are.
He Is at the door, run and let in my Lord.
How now my Girl? What? neither smile nor word?
Smile, No: how can I? since your very slave
Emboldened is, thine, not my Love to crave:
He has attempt'd that Fort was never besieged
By more than thee, to whom I am obliged.
Horrid! Nay, it is no Jest, this Coat but see,
And then my wrong revenge, or love not me.
To which the furious Husband answer made,
Enough my Jempsar, it shall never be said
That you (my Love) can any thing demand
That I Will deny, wherefore I pray you stand
To see the Prologue of his torturing pains,
He shall imprisoned be and bound with chains,
Go, cursed Rogue, I Will never trust the face
That Is beautiful, it is seldom lined with grace.
This heard, the courteous Lad made humble bow,
Saying, My Lord, I never wronged you;
Time trying all things, you shall plainly see
The fault was hers, and there was none in me:
Wherefore, I hope, that God whom I do serve
Will grant such favor, that I may not starve
In this dark Prison --
Thy words are bootless, Jailer keep him sure
While I have studied what he shall endure.
Which, when Jehovah from's Imperial Throne
Heard, wills a winged Herald to be gone
Down to his Footstool-Earth, and there to tell
The Turn-key, he must use the Prisoner well.
This made our guiltless Youth much favor find
With him, that unto others was unkind:
For, what in prison was among them done,
Joseph was doer of it; he alone
Without control ruled all, because the Lord
Him prosper'd, according to the Word.
Yet all this time our Joseph never thought
How he from prison should at last be brought,
Till he that all for good makes work together,
Sent Pharaoh's Butler and his Baker thither
For misdemeanour, who were put in ward
With Potiphar the Captain of the Guard,
Whom Joseph served; at last each dreamed a dream,
Viz. Butler, Baker on a several Theme,
Which so perplexed both of them next morrow,
That he it spied, and said, Sirs, what sorrow
Tormenteth you, ye lowr and are so sad?
There is some cause, if your night-sleep was bad.
Boy, that is not all, but we have dreaming been,
And none can tell us what the same does mean.
Hear me, my Masters, do not you yet know
That their Interpretations from below
Come not, it is only such, events can read
As are with Sp'ritual Mantles overspread.
Then do but tell me what was each man's Theme,
Not doubting I shall quickly read your Dream.
A Vine, said Butler, I saw me before,
And in the same three Branches and no more,
Which budded, shooting forth its Blossom-flow'rs,
Whose clusters all brought forth such Grapes as ours;
The Cup of Pharaoh being in my hand,
I took, and pressed them in at his command;
Who afterward both took and did it drink.
This is the sum of what I dreamed I think.
Is this the thing you have a mind to know?
Come, rouse your Spirit, it needs not be so low;
The Branches three, as many days portend,
Before the end of which the King will send
For you, and to your wonted place restore,
His Cup to bear, as you was wont before.
When this Prediction is fulfilled on thee,
Be sure to put the King in mind of me:
And tell him, though he have Magicians store,
Yet there is an Hebrew Lad that knows more
Than all of them; and this a mean will be
From Bonds and Prison for to set me free;
For I indeed an Hebrew stolen was,
And hither brought, I know not for what cause;
Where now again, without a crime I lie
In this dark Cell, and may do till I die.
I like this young man, said the Baker, well,
And will adventure mine also to tell.
Three Baskets white I had upon my head,
In which were several sorts of meat and Bread
Which I to Pharaoh brought; but ever I came
Birds flockt about my head, and eat the same.
This Dream of yours will prove but bad I fear,
And therefore, Sir, I beg you would forbear
To urge from me what it does signify;
Take this for all, that you must quickly die.
I fear not that, say on, I will approve
Of that my Friend reveals to me in love.
My life I will resign most willingly,
If of my Service Pharaoh weary be.
If It must be so, The Baskets that you wore,
Predict, that ever three days be over
You shall be hanged, and Birds your flesh shall eat.
This is the vision of your baked meat.
Make sure of Heaven, thy part on Earth is done.
Now by this time rose third days sparkling Sun;
Where God ordaining, Pharaoh made a Feast
Upon his Birthday, unto all the rest
Of them that were his Servants; by and by
In frolic humonr he aloud did cry,
Go, bring the Baker and the Butler up,
This man is fittest to give me the Cup:
As for the other, his last doom shall be
To be lift up, and hanged on a Tree.
The honor which the Princes favor lends
May he called in, and then in shame it ends.
Good turns are soon forgot, a Proverb sure,
For guiltless Joseph must as yet endure.
Courtiers use not always to keep word,
Although they make their Vows unto the Lord,
Whose time's the best to set our Captive free;
Though two full years he must in Prison be,
Till Pharaoh dreams that he by Water side
Stands, and Seven Fat well-favourd Kine espied
Come up from thence, as also seven lean,
And joined to the other; those when he had seen
Stood horror-struck, and what the event might be,
Wait, 'twas not long before that he did see
Those scurvey lean-flesh'd Beasts the other eat,
And yet still looking poor, and wanting meat.
So Pharaoh 'woke, till slumber had his eyes
Closed, and then the second time he spies
Seven Ears of Corn come up both good and rank,
Seven others also that were poor and lank;
And as the other Lean, did Fat devour,
These eat the Rank likewise that very hour.
This doubled Phantasme so perplexed the heart
Of Egypt's King, that he must both impart
To his Magicians, willing them to see
If they could tell what either signify.
We are confounded, cry the Sophi's, Lord
Of these thy dreams we cannot tell one word.
This unexpected answer so roused up
The memory of him that bore the Cup,
Who thus expressed himself unto the King;
My Lord, I Have sinned in this very thing:
Pharaoh well knows that he with me was wrath,
And with the Baker also sent me forth
Unto the Prison, where we both did lie,
Till our sad Dreams an Hebrew did epsy;
Who told me of it, as it since has proved,
Saying, the Butler needs not to be moved,
For he shall be restored; but Baker he
Shall by the King condemned and hanged be.
These tidings pleased the King beyond all measure,
Who prized the meaning of his dreams 'bove treasure.
Call in the young man, for he is wiser far
Than all the Sophies that in Egypt are.
Run quickly unto Potyphar, and say,
Pharaoh must see his Prisoner to day.
Where Kings command, the message is obeyed.
The Seer's called to come in haste, who said,
What, is your haste so great? may I not stay
Till I be shaved and unto Heaven pray,
And change my Garments also, since you see
I am not fit before your King to be?
He comes -- Sweet Youth, said Pharaoh, but declare
What these my Dreams mean, and Garland wear.
My Butler tells me, if thou hear the Theme
Thou can interpret every anxious Dream.
My Lord, said he, that Grace is not in me,
But God whom I do serve can let you see
A true interpretation from my Mouth;
Look well upon me, and despise not youth,
For what my Maker does to me reveal,
That, and no more will I to Pharaoh tell.
Say on, my Lord, what was your dream? Why I,
Said Pharaoh, stood great Nilus River by,
And there, behold, seven Fat-wel-favour'd Kine
Feed in a Mead, and said, These Beasts are mine:
But suddenly again to me appeared
Seven other Lean ill-shap'd and hanging eared,
Such as the Land of Egypt never bred;
For on the first Sev'n Fat when they had fed,
Their Bellies clung unto their Backs, and were
Ill-favored, lean as ever they were before.
Thus I awoke, but when my drousie eye
Was closed again with sleep, I did epsy
Seven Ears of Corn upon one stalk that grew
So full and good, as yet I never knew.
After them came up Seven more was thin
And withered, as they would Thunder-blasted bin,
Which suddenly the better did devour.
And I again waked, calling over and over
On those that studious Magicians were,
The truth of these my Dreams for to declare;
But all of them together answered,
It Is God that caused your Dreams, he must 'em read.
Now, he that would by this thy favor merit,
Elisha-like must have Elia's Spirit.
Say Hebrew then, the smoothness of thy brow
Tells me, this task will be too hard for you.
My youth bespeaks me ignorant I know,
Great Sir, yet since the knowledge from below
Comes not, that must your doubled dream unfold,
That which is young by Nature, Grace makes old;
By which, I tell you, that your dreams are one,
And signify, what Heaven will have done.
In Egypt Land the Seven good Ears and Kine
Such years portend, this he bids me divine.
The ill fleshed ones, and blasted Ears of Corn
Foretells a Famine will make Egypt mourn
For seven more. See, Nile cannot contain
The Waters sent for nourishment of Grain;
And all things else needs moisture for that space,
After which time it will dry up. Alas!
What I must do, I know not, pray be kind,
And as of that, of this, Sir, speak your mind:
You must seek out in all the Land discreet
And wise men, who may strictly oversee't.
Them bid a fifth part of its fruit to gather;
These hard times will require a Nursing Father.
In all thy Cities let it stored be,
That when the Famine comes they may to thee
Repair, and buy it at thy Stewards hand;
Else this great Scarseness will undo the Land.
This thing when Pharaoh and his Servants heard,
They thanked Joseph, and his God they feared,
Saying, where shall we such another find
In whom the Spirit is, and knows his mind.
And since thy God, even thine has showed thee this,
None either wiser or discreeter is
In all the Kingdom; therefore thou shall be
My House and Servants Ruler, God to me:
To show I am in earnest, take this Ring,
And be hereafter next unto the King:
These clothes put on, and Chains about thy neck,
And let my Subjects pay thee all respect;
Ride in my second Chariot, then to thee
Shall all my Vassals humbly bow the knee.
While I am Pharaoh, it shall be a Law,
That all my Kingdom of thee stand in aw.
No foot or hand in it shall moved be,
Till first they have direction from thee.
And since thou can reveal my secrets all
Zaphanath pa'neah I will ever call
Thy name, and thou shall surely be the Son.
Of Potipherah, who is Priest of On.
Thus you have seen our Joseph in the Den,
Sold and imprisoned and restored again.
Now what his future happiness may be,
Launch out again with me, and you shall see
The Scene is altered, and his celeb life
Changed for the blessing of a virtuous Wife,
Who bore before the Famine unto him
Two hopeful Males, Manas. and Ephraim.
The first was named so, because he had
Forgot his Fathers house and former Trade.
And when the other God did to him send,
He said, I Will call him Ephraim, for an end
Is put to my affliction, and my store
Increased is, and Honor more and more.
The Plentie's ended, and the Famine come:
Said Pharaoh, Joseph, let us now go home.
The truth of all that thou have said I see,
By the hungry peoples crying unto me
For maintenance, I know not what to say
To still their clamor, only that they may
Repair to thee for answer, and receive
What thou thinks meet, I know it is bread they crave.
The Famine now grown over all the Earth,
And every Creature suffering under dearth,
The Storehouses were opened, and meat
The moneyed Egyptians did eat.
Yet though he sold to many of the store
The Famine waxed daily more and more;
Neither did Egypt only Victuals want,
But in all other Countries Food was scant.
Yea, even in Cana'n, which was wont to be
For plenteousness the Worlds Granary.
The Famine placed it self in every Face,
Which Jacob seeing, cried out, Alas!
What shall we do? we'd better never been born
Then die for hunger; yet I hear there is Corn
In Egypt, up then, get you down and try
If of the Ruler you can any buy.
Go thither therefore all of you, save one,
Aim leave with me, I cannot be alone.
Father, said they, our lives we owe to you,
Can we refuse then what you bid us do?
No, Benjamin shall stay till we are come
With all our Asses fully laden home.
Your blessing, Sir, ever we our Journey take,
We are all ready, only that we lack.
That God's and mine your Journey prosper may,
Till ye return I Will never cease to pray.
Your Money make full weight, entreat the man,
Tell him the Famine's great in Canaan;
And that with others you are come to buy
Egyptian Corn, your wants that may supply.
Now unto Zoan Jacob's Sons are come,
Saying, is the Lord, the Governor at home?
We come from far, O let us obtain the grace
To speak, and show him our disast'rous case.
Lo, I am here, said he, your business:
At this they bowed to the Earth and could express
Nothing; his Glory and their present grief
Ties up their Tongues, they cannot ask relief.
The Prince again, who all their Faces knew,
Stranged himself from them, and angry grew,
Saying, whence come you? surely you are Spies;
The countenance often the heart betrays.
This rough expression so increased their fear,
That trembling they reply, No, Sir, this year
Our Syrian Land was parched and nothing bore,
Mere want made us come unto thee for store.
Go, go, you lie, I know your whispering
Persuades me that there is no such thing;
But Villains come the nakedness to view
Of this our Land, and then himself withdrew.
Nay, Good my Lord, said they, our Story hear,
We all Sons unto one, and true men are;
Mark what we say, and if we tell you Lies,
Then, and not else conclude that we are Spies
Tush, this is nothing, every man will say
As much, if so by that he cleared may
Be, but if you give not a better reason
Of your down coming, I will swear there is Treason
Intended. Then we are twelve, replied the other,
Brethren, of whom you see ten, and another
At home, his Fathers joy, and one is not.
Ha, now, that you be Spies I surely wot;
And so for all your words, I shall you prove,
If you bring not to me your Fathers Love.
Choose out among you one, and for him send,
Till then our Controversy cannot end,
Nor you be clear, if you do not, I swear
By Pharaoh's Life, that you vile Vagrants are.
Go, bring the Lad, his Face when I do see,
I Will say all is true that ye have said to me.
Resolve, this Prison must be your abode
Till all agree, this do, live, I fear God;
If ye be true men, then let one of you
Be bound in Prison, where you all are now,
And let the rest take Corn that may supply
Your wants at home, lest they for hunger die
In this great Famine, only bring the Boy:
It Is truth, I seek to prove, not to destroy
Your lives; to which they'gree, and say to each other,
We guilty are concerning our dear Brother,
Who to his anguish't Soul so hardened were,
That when he prayed his plaint we would not hear;
For which, in Justice our Almighty God
Does lay on us this his afflicting Rod.
Then Reuben unto them replied, and said,
Did I not tell you so, when fast you laid
Your hands upon the Boy, but did no good;
Therefore of us required is his blood.
This they among themselves in Hebrew spoke,
Thinking that Joseph could no notice take;
For seeing one who (as his part required)
Interpreted what they of him desired,
And unto them what his Lords answer was;
They spoke their minds aloud about the cause
Of their distresses, which when Egypt's Lord
Had heard, he turned from them without a word.
His sympathizing Soul swelled so high,
That he must either quickly burst or cry.
See, where Gods Spirit dwells no hatred lives,
He turns again, communes, in heart forgives
Their ancient Crime, yet seemingly unkind
He from them Simeon takes, and him does bind,
And then commands his Servants for to fill
Their Sacks with Corn, not leaving off until
They said they had enough; the money he
Bids put into their Sacks mouths most secretly.
Provision for their way bids also take,
Saying, here is enough, I would not have you lack,
Nor yet diminish ought that ye have bought;
It Is pity you should come so far for naught.
Their Asses now when they all loaded had,
From Egypt soon they their departure made,
Traveling hard till it was time to bait
Their Asses, and themselves, had need to eat
Their Dinner over, Beasts now to be proven'd,
One his Sack opens, and cries out, I Am cosen'd,
Did you not all see me my money pay,
And yet it is here in my Sacks mouth this day?
This quickly made their joyful Faces lowr,
And curse the day and the unhappy hour,
When they their Brother sold. It surely is
For vengence, said they, that our God does this;
Up, and let us load again, till we our place
In Canaan see, and our old Fathers face,
That from his wise and long experience
May gathered be, what can proceed from hence.
Now they are returned home and do relate
To Jacob, how the Steward did them hate,
All which we might well by his car'age gather;
But, Ah! said they, this was not all dear Father,
For he would not convinced be, but we
Must needs be spies, come Egypt for to see;
And though we spoke the truth, all this he urged
May come from Subt'le Rogues, and so be forged;
But if you will prove true, said he, leave one
Till ye have brought me Jacob's little Son.
This we were forced to do, Simeon is there,
And must, till Ben our Brother does repair
Thither with us, when we go next to buy,
Whose sight will work poor Sim's delivery,
And our free Traffic throughout all the Land;
Of this we have the Rulers Word and Hand.
But pray let us see your Corn if it be right,
Said Jacob, sure your Money was full weight.
You shall, Dear Father; bring the Asses nigh,
That we may empty't in the Granary.
Lift up this Sack, it is of unusual weight,
Pray God there be not here another slight;
Look, here is my Money, mine, and mine, and mine,
And all of ours, as sure as thou had thine.
At this Adventure all of them are sad,
Saying, what shall we do, our case is bad?
But most of all old Jacob, whose gray Head
Shakes with a Palsy, and falls down half dead,
Wringing his feeble hands, his sighs declare
What his sad thoughts of this Adventure were.
They Will count you Thieves, said he, O how I grieve!
Moreover now, who can my Son relieve?
Of Joseph and of Simeon I Am bereaved,
And now poor Ben. is also from me craved.
But hold, before this his request I Will grant
Simeon I Will lose, and die my self of want.
Not so, Dear Father, said the eldest Son,
Your will in all things else I will have done:
But he must go, whom if I bring not back,
Then here I leave two Sons, them you shall take
And slay: Dear Sir, the charge lay upon me;
A good event, I hope, you will quickly see.
Son, hold thy peace, my darling being dead,
Would you his Brother also from me lead?
No, he must not go down, for if he do,
My days are done, and I must leave you too:
That sorrow my gray hairs will bring to grave,
Leave off this suit, and any thing else crave
I will it grant --
As greatest Stocks, that always are impaired,
Without supply, diminish, so it fared
With Jacob and his Sons, who now begin
To feel their flesh (for want) waste, and their skin
A withered complexion put on,
While through the same, they might discern the bone
The very last of their Egyptian store
Eat up, the old man called out once more
Unto his Sons, and said, Go down again
To Egypt, and bring Simeon with our grain.
Whence Judah took occasion to express
Himself at large about the business
In hand; The man, said he, made protestation,
That neither we nor any other Nation
Should any thing receive, or see his face,
Unless that Been. came down in Simeon's place.
If thou will send our Brother, then we may
Go down and buy more food, else cease I pray,
We dare not. Unto which he did reply,
Why was ye so unwise as to descry
My Boy, or give him such a strict account
Of me, and to what number mine did mount?
It was not in our power that to conceal,
Said they, the man was strict and made us deal
Thus plainly; for he said, Have you a Father
Alive or Brother, nay, or Brethren rather?
This made us speak the Truth, but never thought
That he would say, let Benjamin be brought,
Or that he would have proved so unkind
As to take Simeon from us, and him bind.
Father, continued Judah, if with me
You send the Lad, we'll go, I Will surety be,
And of my hand you shall again require
Him, dearest Father, grant me my desire;
This will not only prove us to be true,
But purchase food, and Simeon home to you.
Fear not, good Sir, if I do not restore
Him safe again, I Will bear the blame therefore
For ever; had we not thus lingered,
We had returned the second time with Bread.
Well, well my Sons, then if it must be so,
Said he, my Counsel take before ye go.
Of all our best fruits you shall quickly gather
Some, and present them unto Egypts Father.
A little Balm, and Myrrh, and Honey take,
With Spice and Almonds, Nuts, a Present make;
With double money also in your hand,
And that you carried last into the Land
Restore, perchance it was an oversight.
Then take my Son your Brother, do what is right,
And let Jehovah give you mercy when
You come before the man that does retain
Your Brother, and let Benjamin come back.
At this his Blood boiled, and these words he spoke;
I see there is no probability
But of my Boys I must bereaved be.
However, get you hence, I trust my God
Will give me strength to bear this heavy load.
This was the Farewell which old Jacob took
Of all his Sons when Cana'n they forsook,
And unto Egypt with the Present went,
The double Money which their Father sent.
Benjamin also with the rest went down
To see the Ruler and view Memphis Town,
Who are no sooner 'lighted then descried
By Joseph, who, when Benjamin he spied,
Called unto Ramses hastily, and said,
Dispatch with Dinner, is the Cloth yet laid?
Prepare more Victuals than was wont to be,
For these 11 men at Noon must dine with me.
It Is done my Lord. Gentlemen, follow me
Into the Hall, the Prince desires that ye
Such entertainment as the House affords
Receive with welcome, as does Egypt's Lords.
This unexpected carriage so amazed
The new-made-Guests, that each on other gazed,
And said, we may now easily perceive
The entertainment we are like to have.
This is the Rulers House where now we be,
Death or vile slavery is our destiny.
That pithie Sentence is not seldom true,
Love quickly turns to hate that is but new.
We know the drift, it is for our moneys sake
Was in our Sacks, that he this course does take.
It Is like the Steward knows for what end
We are brought in, try, if he be our Friend
He Will give us some account; he that is forearm'd,
As Proverb says, is also partly warned.
Let Us commune with him, and excuse our selves,
For this our Money, there is no way else
That can betaken, this we will relate,
Which done, he will either show his love or hate.
Sir, at the first when we came to buy food,
We paid money for it, that was good.
Full weight it was, but shortly after how
It came into our Sacks, we know not now.
Our ignorance we hope will be excused:
Here is our Money, we have not refused
It to repay, and other Money too
At this time brought to buy more food of you.
Pray rest contented and be not afraid,
Said Ramses, seeing Jacob's God has laid
Treasure into your Sacks; what I did crave
I had, and Simeon is no more a Slave.
Lo, here is Water, please you wash your Feet,
And I my self will give your Asses meat.
By this assurance they so cheared are,
That in his absence they their Gift prepare
Against the Lords incoming, seeing they
Should see his face, and dine with him that day.
Now the Clock strikes, Servants begin to run
Each to his Office, waiting the return
Of Zaphnapaa'neah, who came in and stood
Like glorious Phoebus, when from under cloud;
Whose sparkling splendour dazzled the eyes
Of all, but most his Brethren, whom he spies
With piercing aspect; this his love exerts
To them, whom conscious of their own deserts,
Bowed to the Earth their Heads, and said, My Lord,
Accept such things as Cana'n does afford.
Who smiled and took the Present, saying, How
Does your old Father, and your selves all now?
Is he yet living? Does his Silver Threads
Yet shine? They answer, Yes, with bowed heads.
At last the Ruler spieth out his Brother,
Even Benjamin, the Son of his own Mother;
And said, My Friends, is this the youngest Lad,
When you were here, you said your Father had?
I guess it is, his countenance speaks no less.
You Are as my Son, whom God Almighty bless.
This he pronounced with such vehemence,
That Tears appeared in his melting Eye,
Though Power and Policy bid him refrain,
His face is washed, and he returns again,
And bids them set on Bread, it is quickly done,
For all the rest together, him alone;
And for the Egyptians by themselves, whose meat
Was not the same with that which Joseph eat,
Being unto them a great abomination
To feed on such things as the Hebrew Nation.
Now all is ready, Chaplain say the Grace,
And let each Stranger set as is his place:
He that is eldest bid him first go in,
And let the rest assede, then Benjamin.
Judge you if Joseph did not give them cause
To think that he once their Domestic was,
He can so well their Birth and Age discern,
They marvel at it, yet does nothing learn.
Come, Trenchers here: Carver cut up this Dish,
And reach me hither that same boiled Fish.
Sir, take this Mess, and you, and you, and you;
You're welcome all: they thank him with a Bow.
But, Oh! methinks that young man is not served,
In a Cooks Shop I would have no man starved.
Here, Ramses, reach the last man this from me;
This seen, the rest did wonder why't should be:
That of him he should take such special care,
And furnish with more than a five-fold share,
As Meat of all sorts, so the Drink was free,
For Joseph said, with you I Will merry be.
The Grace-Cup's over, now let us go on
To sing of all the Rulers kindness shown.
Their Sacks he first commands to fill, and then
Their money to be put in them again.
Next take my Cup, my Silver Cup, said he,
And in Ben's Sack's mouth let it hidden be,
With his Corn-money when he has it paid.
All is performed, My Lord, as you have said.
The joyful Brethren, ever it was light day,
That Morning with their Loads are sent away;
Though they have scarcely past the City Walls,
When Hue and Cry's sent out; Constable calls:
Stand thankless Wretches: tell me what is the cause
That ye have thus even broken Natures Laws,
And all the Rules of Hospitality.
You said, we are true men, but ye robbers be;
My Lords, both drinking and divining Cup,
(Deny it not) you, you have taken up.
Was this requital for your Noble Feast?
Restor't again, may be ye took't in Jest:
Nay, but you Jest, said they, we hope your Lord
Has sent you unto us with no such word;
For though we here be Strangers, yet the chief
At home we are, we need not play the thief.
Did we not with us treble Money bring?
Why then should we have stolen this petty thing?
If you among us do the Goblet find,
Hang him that took it, and the rest Slaves bind.
You Have said enough, yet it must not be so,
But he that took it Servant back shall go,
And you be blameless, for it were too much
That one should die, and the rest be kept for such
A crime: then to it, said Reuben, to the rest,
Pull down your Sacks, and open them in haste.
Let this unthought-of search with me begin,
And so go on to Brother Benjamin.
When all of them had narrowly been tried,
Except the last, then was the Cup descried,
Which brought upon them such a sudden fear,
That some their cloths rent, some their hair did tear.
To see these mourning Brethren 'twas great pity,
Loading their Asses, turning to the City.
When Judah and his Brethren too were come
To Joseph's House, expecting their last doom,
He bowed and said, What shall we say unto
My Lord? What shall we speak? What shall we do
To prove us guiltless? sure God has found out
Our hidden fault, for which without all doubt
He does us punish; wherefore we are thine,
Because the Cup is found with Benjamin.
The Fact is too apparent, yet our God
Who searches Hearts, knows our intended load
Was Gorn, not Plate; but since it must be so,
His will be done, and we no further go.
This when the man had heard, he answer made,
I never yet on any burdens laid
More than I thought was just, then God forbid
That I should any keep, but him who did
Convey away my Cup, it is only he
That I adjudge my Servant for to be;
As for the rest, let them go home in peace,
I Will use him well although he live by Grace.
Then Judah, with a look that spoke his fears,
Said, Good my Lord, graciously deign your ears
Unto a few things that I must express
About my Brother Ben. his business.
Did thou not strictly of us all enquire
If we had yet a Brother more, or Sire?
We answered, Yes: a comely aged man,
Called Israel, and dwells in Canaan,
Who keeps at home with him our youngest Brother,
His Darling being dead, who was another;
Which two fair Rachel to our Father bore.
This makes him love the living Lad the more.
And thee require of us more earnestly
His coming down, that thou might set thine Eye
Upon him; but we all with one accord
Said, this can scarce be granted to my Lord,
For if his Father part with him, we fear
He will not live with us another year.
At this thou (vexed) from us turned thy Face,
Say'ng, bring him down, or else my wonted Grace
I will withdraw; which, when we did go home,
We told our ancient Father all in sum,
But had no answer, till at last he said,
Rise, get you down to Egypt for more aid;
But we remembering this thy threatening word,
Said, none of us dare speak unto the Lord,
Or see his Face unless our Brother go
To Egypt with us* Surely it was so.
Which when our Father heard, he sighed and said,
I thought the Corn had been already paid.
Must I the pledge of Rachel's love forsake,
Or else want Corn which I do so much lack?
Certainly this is hard, I am right loath,
Seeing one is not, now to part with both.
Poor Joseph's death torments me yet with grief,
Only this Boy, he gives me some relief;
If ye then seek me of him to deprive
I must breath out my last, and ye never thrive.
This, Sir, said he, if any truth there be
In man, was said by him, and more to me.
You being Judge, can any thing be worse
Than for a Child to have the Fathers curse?
But if I could dispense with that, what can
I say to him when come to Canaan?
His life being bound with his, of this I Am sure,
Without the one the other cannot endure.
Besides, to him for this I surety came,
Saying, if he come not, let me bear the blame
For ever. Now let me the favor find
To stay in place of him; pray, Sir, be kind,
And send the Boy unto his Father back
With joy, that he in him may pleasure take.
Great Sir, if you old Age admire, relief
Grant, be not Author of our Fathers grief.
This dext'rous Plea with Joseph took such place,
As it was soon known by his changed Face,
Whose frowns do vanish, and his threats are gone;
Love makes him cry, Go out, leave me alone.
He who of late spoke rough and threatened all,
Now weepeth loud, and on their necks does fall.
What means our Ruler? Is not this a wonder,
That he who to the Egyptians speaks like Thunder,
Should be so much transported as to cry,
And none but these eleven Strangers by!
Dear Hearts, I Am Joseph, does my Father live?
Said he; to which they could no answer give:
His unexpected Greatness and their fault
Daunts them as vanquished sould'ers new assault,
Till he cries Quarter, and bids shake off fear,
Saying, I am Joseph whom ye sold, and here
Was brought by Merchants; Come, be not afraid,
It was not you, but God that for your aid
Had ordered all things, and for preservation
Of life has given unworthy me this Station.
Two years already has the Famine been
In Egypt Land, and five yet is not seen,
In which 'twill be in vain to plow the Land,
Because the Mower shall not fill his hand;
Wherefore your God and mine sent me before,
That I for you and for your houses store
Should make provision; he whom I do serve
Me hither sent that I might life preserve,
And thought me fittest all the Corn to gather
That was in Egpypt, and be Pharaohs Father.
Haste then, go up to the Old Man and say,
Thus says thy Son that was not, I this day
Am Lord of Egypt, so made by my God,
Who wills that thou come down and make abode
With me, and Goshen for thy dwelling place
Accept, it is near, there thou may see my face.
Thy Children, Flocks, and all shall nourisht be;
Nothing that is thine shall taste of poverty
In these five years of Famine. Cast your eye
And view my Limbs and Features, it is I;
And let my Brother Benjamin the Youth
Look well upon me; Is it not my mouth
That speaks these things? pray also declare
Unto my Father what my Glories are
In Egypt, and persuade him to make haste
To come, and quickly of my Favors taste.
Then turned he unto Benjamin, and said,
Joy of my Heart, how well am I now paid
For all my wishes and my prayers for thee!
Who am admitted once again to see
My fathers image and my mothers face
In thine, dear Brother; God give thee his grace.
This said, in token of his true respect,
He weeps and kisses, falls upon his neck;
And he again, as far as modesty
Permitted, wept and kissed most ardently.
Which though in secret done cannot be hid;
The Court takes notice what the Ruler did:
And that his Brethren come they Pharaoh tell,
Who said, I Am glad. Servants, they like it well.
Come in, said Pharaoh, Zaph; I mean to see,
Whether thy father Jacob be like thee.
Send for him into Egypt, where his store
Shall be so much, that he shall wish no more.
This is my will, I hope you will not neglect
To pay your father all the true respect
You owe: and for their better commodation
Choose out of Wagons best in all the nation
For them; the little ones, and all their stores,
Being persuaded that the land is yours.
As one who is willing to obey his Lord,
And serve his Father, Joseph does accord.
Horses and Chariots quickly are prepared
By him, who for provision nothing spared.
For each of ten had from him change of clothes,
But to his brother Ben. gave five of those.
Three hundred pieces as a token he
Unto him gave 'bove what his cost should be:
His Fathers Present it is greater far,
For unto him ten Asses loaded are
With finest Gold, that might supply his need,
And other ten laden with Corn and Bread,
That might sustain his Father in the way;
All which he does with small or no delay:
And then commands that they should thence depart,
With seeming joy, yet grieved at the heart,
Lest they his Brother Benjamin molest,
At parting from them, thus himself expressed;
Brethren, I hope ye will all cordial be,
Till ye to Jacob bring good news of me,
Telling him I do live and wish him health,
And hope that he will see me and my wealth.
This do, and so I hope God will you bring
Unto the old man, who is languishing
For your long stay. These are the whole commands
Wherewith I wish you kiss my Fathers hands.
At home with bowed knees they all salute
Their aged Father, who for Joy stood mute,
When he had heard that Joseph was alive,
Ruler in Egypt, and therein did thrive;
For sometimes he believed, and sometimes not,
Because they would told him that the Lad was not.
But to confirm the truth they all declare
What with the Ruler their adventures were,
And how he served them ever he let them know
Whose Son he was, or what he did them ow;
And also show him all the Wagons trim
That should to's Son in Egypt carry him.
These seen, his fainting Spirit did revive,
Say'ng, Well, it is enough if Joseph be alive.
Help Lord, for now my Son I must go see
In Egypt land; I this done, then let me die.
No sooner had the next Aurora bright
With blushing Skies succeeded gloomy Night,
Then Father Israel to his Char'ot hies,
And rests not till Beersheba he descries,
Where resting, he commands to erect
An Altar, whence he might his Pra'rs direct
And Sacrifices to the God of Heaven,
Because his odd Sons were again made even.
That he a prosperous success might have,
Of Isaac's God he does protection crave
In's Journey, and for length of days implores,
Till he had seen young Joseph and his Stores.
He had not fully ended his devotion,
When Suns departure, and the Starry motion
Invited him to leave and to take rest.
No, no, says Jacob, there is no such haste,
I once again will of my God enquire,
If he my going Egypt-ward desire;
If he be willing, I will not be slack,
But if he be not, then I will turn back.
This said, from Heaven he heard a sudden voice
Say'ng, Jacob, Jacob, fear not, but rejoice;
Since I have been thy fathers and thy God,
Well be, go there, and settle thy abode,
The truth to show of this my promise made,
I Will make thy seed as sand on Seashore laid.
This mighty Nation shall victorious be,
After four hundred years, when my decree
Shall be fulfilled: then fear not down to go,
I Will guide thee there, and bring thee up also.
No comfort will I from thee keep, thou sees
Thy son who was not, he shall close thine eyes.
Good Jacob ravished with those hea'vnly news
Rose up in haste, and to his sons all shows,
And then commands, with speed that they prepare
All things which needful for there journey were.
The Coaches ready, some their father heave,
Some stand within him ready to receive;
Their wifes and children have their proper place
Into the same: and Coachmen drive apace.
Their cattle also, which were numerous,
Gold, Silver, Jewels, Treasures ponderous
Purchased in Canaan, these they did transport.
To Egypt, whither then they did resort.
Thus Jacob leaves Canaan, and his seed
Do follow him, because they wanted bread:
His Sons, his Daughters, and his Nephews all,
Are now descended at the Dreamers call:
Whose exact number then was but three score
And ten, of which three had been there before,
Joseph the father, and his children two,
Manass. and Ephra'm, then he had no mo.
When they the Egyptian borders did descry,
Jacob to's fourth son Judah loud did cry,
Go down to Joseph, bid him tell me where
He will me place, I am a stranger there:
Tell him at Goshen I will tarry while
He come or send, and show me what is his will:
And howsoever he dispose of me,
His word or work to me a law shall be.
As soon as Judah did his brother greet
With these glad tidings, he prepares to meet
His aged father, and before him stands,
Bows, begs his blessing with uplifted hands.
And he again (for joy his son to see)
Falls on his neck, kissing it ardently,
Weeps and embraces; so that all admire
The strong affections of his aged Sire,
Who cried aloud, O Joseph, Jeseph, now,
My darling Joseph, I am sure that thou
Do live; then this I of my God will crave,
That he my spirit may in haste receive,
Since I am wholly eased of the woe
Has me perplexed these twenty years and two.
Then Joseph, who had all this time been stopped
By tears, which from his Princely eyes had dropped,
Said, Father, welcome. Now I must go home
And tell the King that all of you are come,
Who (I am sure) at this will much rejoice,
And give command that I of you dispose
Where best convenience may for you be had;
For this to me he has already said.
And I will tell (if he to know desire)
That you are Shepherds, and you aim no higher.
When therefore he shall ask of you this thing,
You shall confirm my words by answering,
We and our Father Keepers are of Sheep;
Which he will no sooner hear then is promise keep,
And give you Goshen, where you safely shall
Your tender Flocks grase, and your Cattle all;
Your dwellings also he will set apart:
For Shepherds grieve Egyptians at the heart.
Now Joseph leaves his Father in that place,
Returns and speaks with Pharaoh Face to Face,
Saying, my Father and his Family
Are (with their Substance) come to visit thee.
Joseph, said Pharaoh, of this take my hand,
I Am glad to see thy Father in my Land.
Call some of them, and let them see my Face,
Assure thy self they shall with me find grace.
I will, said Joseph, then he quickly takes
Five of his Brethren, and a Present makes
To Pharaoh, who did instantly enquire
What is your Trade, or what will you desire?
We Are Shepherds and Sojourners in this Land,
Whose greatest errand is to kiss thy hand;
The next to see our Brother, and have place
Our Flocks to feed; in Canaan there is no grass:
The piercing Drought so scorched has the land,
That there is nothing to be seen but Sand:
If therefore we shall of thee favor find,
Grant's Goshen Pastures, and for this we'll bind
Our selves to be thy Subjects, and our Seed
Of thee and thine shall stand in Kingly dread.
Then Pharaoh unto Joseph did reply;
Since they are come down, what will I them deny?
My Crown but spare, and ask what ever they please;
I Will give all things conducing to their ease.
My Land's before them: as for their request,
In Goshen for them Dwellings make in haste.
And for a greater proof of love to thee,
Choose out among them some will active be,
And put my Cattle all into their hands;
Their hire from me let it be Gold and Lands.
But pray thee Joseph, where is thy aged Sire,
His face to see I have a great desire.
Greatest of Kings you shall, lo, here he is.
This said, old Israel does great Pharaoh bless,
Saying, my Lord the King of Kings protect
Your Sacred Person; and since you respect
Me and my Sons, I Will never cease to pray
For you with hands to Heaven lift night and day.
My thanks, said Pharaoh, now I must be bold
To ask one question, I would know how old
Thou art? Good Jacob soon this answer made;
An hundred thirty summers I have had;
As many winters have I also been
In pilgrimage, unsettled I mean:
Yet few and evil, if you will deign to look
Upon a Line in this my Table Book,
Where is inserted faithful Abraham's age,
An hundred and seventy five his stage
Completes, my father Isaac lived five more;
Though all this time their grievances were sore.
This said, the old man looking round about,
Blesses the King, takes leave, and walks out.
Now come (said he) Son, since you know I have
Your Kings good will, a fitting place I crave,
Where I and all my Children safe may be
From all Sedition and Conspiracy.
Then Joseph beckn'd to his Sire, and said,
Rameses is the best that can be had;
There take possession, this my Lord commands.
These are your Writings signed with our hands.
The famine's great, yet Joseph wills that he
Since come to Egypt have no scarcity
Of bread, tho'in Canaan'd Egypt there was want,
In so much that the most began to faint
For hunger, but that Egypts Nursing Father
Its current money into stores did gather.
And such as from Canaan was brought to buy
Corn, he does put into th'Treasury.
Now Egypts money does begin to waste,
Which made the Natives run to him in haste,
And say, Sir, you must grant us fresh supply
Of bread and corn, or else for want we die.
There Is none but you can grant us any aid.
Who answered, You Have got as much as paid:
But this my counsel is, which if you take,
To bring your cattle you will not be slack,
And them for corn and bread exchange with me.
What profit they if you of famine die?
The hunger-starved Egyptians at this
Do much rejoice, yea and with blessing bless
The Ruler, and with cheerful hearts do bring
Their Horses, Cattle, Flocks, and every thing,
Except their Land, all is laid at Joseph's feet,
Who willingly received, and gave them meat.
Poor creatures, they had good cause to fear,
For this provision ended with that year,
Was but the sixth since that great want began,
When it was ended they to Joseph ran
Again for more, lay'ng out their wretched case,
And saying to him, We must die alas!
Our Money gone, our Cattle you did crave,
We brought them, now our Land is all we have;
Come buy this also: let us not starved be,
And we our selves will serve our King and thee.
Let us have Seed that we again may try
Whether our Land as yet will fructify.
At this his tender heart is filled with grief,
And eyes with tears, which way for their relief
Procures, for he to Pharaoh makes it over,
Making him Landlord who was King before.
Their ancient Livings he bids them forsake,
And for the future other Dwellings take,
For which they should to Pharaoh Egypts King,
As to the owner yearly Rent in bring.
But to the Priests there was more kindness show'n,
Who parted with no Land that was their own;
For they on that which was to them allowed,
Lived all that while as when the Land was plowed.
Then Joseph said, Behold! I have you bought,
Your Land and all; I Am sure there is not ought
Which is not Pharaohs, wherefore take you Seed
And sow in haste, I know you will not need
To fear the Famine, this is the last year
Of Egypt's drought, you know has cost you dear;
Its former increase you again shall have,
Of which a Fifth Part I will yearly crave
For Pharaoh's use, the Four that is behind
Dispose of that according to your mind,
For Seed, for Food, for you and for your Store;
Fear not, it will be fruitful as before.
With bowed heads and cheerful countenance
They thus reply, Since we our sustenance
These barren years had from our Lord and thee
Be gracious to us, we your Servants be.
It is enough we live to serve our King,
What he commands, that will we to him bring.
Only the Priests did this great Tax escape,
For all they sowed, all to themselves they reap.
Behold, the kindness of an Heathen King,
To those who did but hellish Sophismes sing.
Yet all this while Joseph has not forgot
To settle on Jacob the most happy Lot
In all the Land of Goshen, where he might
Dwell happily, and have thereof full right.
Now that Gods Promise might fulfilled be,
He multiplies and grows exceedingly.
When he in Egypt 17 years had been
Most prosperous, and his Sons glory seen
Of Age a 147, then he
Prepares himself Deaths Captive for to be;
For calling Joseph's Father and his Child,
And looking with a countenance most mild,
Dear Son, said he, Age makes me now believe
That I must Egypt and my Children leave.
This heard, the Ruler's heart is filled with grief,
And Eyes with tears. No Son there is no relief,
Said Jacob, Seventeen years I Have lived in thee,
Now it is enough, my God I must go see.
Yet while I live one thing I must implore,
Grant it my Child, as thou have done much more;
Which is, when dead, that then in, Canaan I
May buried be, and with my Fathers lie.
This granted, he comm^^ds him for to swear
That he his Corpse to Macpelah will bear;
And then in token of his thankfulness
He leans on's Bed, and does his Maker bless.
Sad tidings soon sounds in the Rulers ear
After's departure, that his Father dear
Was ill at ease, and willed him in haste
To pay'm a Visit ever his life was past:
Who willed quickly that his Children two
Should ready be, for they must with him go
To see their Grandsire, it is his command;
Obeying, they in traveling posture stand:
Scarce had they entered into the Town
When one to Jacob hastily runs down,
And tells him that his Sons and his two O'es
Were come to see his end, and to dispose
Of him: this heard, he once again revives,
And to set up upon his bed he strives;
Saying to Joseph, God appeared to me,
When I from Esau's fury down did flee
To Padan Aram, and at Luz me gave
The Promise that I should Canaan have,
And blessed me, saying, that of my Blood
Should there be born even a huge multitude,
It to possess until Times fullness shall
Come, when they for their Sins shall from it fall.
Then sine I Am sure that all the Land is mine,
I Will give a share unto these two of thine,
Were born in Egypt ever I hither came,
As Reuben, Simeon, these shall bear my name;
But all the rest are since by thee begot,
They shall be thine, and have of thee their Lot
Among their Brethren, yet they must not be
Called Heads or Tribes of their posterity.
But whose are these two Youths that stand me by?
If they be thine, then let them both draw nigh
That I may bless them, being glad to see
Thy self once more, and thy posterity.
Now having kissed them, he said, Once I thought
Never to have seen thee, nor be hither brought;
But blessed be that God who spared me
Joseph, Manass. and Ephra'm for to see.
This done, he takes them from between his Feet,
Making them stand before him as was meet:
Manass. on's left, and Ephra'm on's right, stand,
That on them both at once he might lay hand;
But he inspired of God looks not to years,
Nor yet for Doteage the firstborn forbears:
For on the younger he lays on his right,
In him it seems God had the most delight,
Minding to make him Head of all the Tribe,
Without respect of person, age, or bribe.
Then to his Son he said, now I will crave
That you all Blessings of that God may have,
With whom my Sire and Grandsire both did walk,
And with him often face to face did talk,
Who from Canaan led me out this way,
And has me fed at all times as this day.
The Angel Great, which does my Soul redeem,
Bless both the Lads, and have them in esteem:
And let them have mine and my fathers name;
Make thou them great, do thou enlarge their fame,
Increase their seed for number as the sand
On the Seashore in their Grandfathers Land.
But Joseph wroth to see the form invert,
Says to his father grieved at the heart,
Not so (dear Sir,) this is the eldest boy;
Put here your right, he is the only joy
Of me his father. No, says Jacob, no;
Though what you say be true I right well know;
Yet fear not, for he shall be very great,
But this much more, neither by strength nor fate,
But by that power that laid the Earths foundations
He shall become a multitude of Nations.
Such blessings that day he to Joseph gave,
As greater after Israel should not crave.
If any can but Ephra'ms bliss obtain,
It will be ever counted greatest gain.
Then Jacob said, Behold, I die; but God
Shall visit you, and while you have abode
In Egypt, he will ever be a Watch,
Lest by these Heathens any harm ye catch,
And bring you up into your fathers land;
He, he will do it by's Almighty hand.
Moreover thou from me have got a portion,
Which I never purchased by craft or extortion
From the Amorites, but by my sword and bow;
This on thy self and thine I do bestow.
Now Jacob finding 's last glass almost out,
Calls for his sons, who compass him about,
Listening for what he thither did them call;
Who said, Sons, hear what will to you befall
In the last days, when your old father's gone,
Strengthen your selves, your trouble comes anon.
Reuben my eldest, pray do thou draw near
To me thy Parent, and thy verdict hear:
In dignity thou did excel and power
Thy brethren all, until that fatal hour
When to thy fathers bed thou did advance;
This made me rob thee of The Inheritance.
Because as water thou unstable wast,
Thy Eminence and Dignity is past.
This said, from him he turns his face about
To Sim. and Levi, whose sentence goes out:
You brethren are by consanguinity,
And no less allied in your cruelty.
Your habitations they are full of blood,
And might you grieve if rightly understood;
For in your anger you the Sech'mites slew,
Robbing the Town of riches not a few;
The City also razed unto the ground;
Such horrid Facts, I think, has not been found.
Cursed be your anger, I will you divide
Among other Tribes as strangers to abide.
As for thee, Judah, thou shall praised be
By all thy Brethren and Posterity;
Thy Foes thou shall subdue, and they adore
Shall thee with princely Homage, nay, and more,
As Lion fierce is terrible, so thou
Shall be to all, and all thou shall subdue.
Yea, for a greater Blessing thou shall hold
Thy kingly Scepter till Predictions old
Shall come to pass, and the Messiah shall
Come from thy Loins, and rid men out of thrall;
And all thy Land be filled with best of Wine,
Thy Grapes shall yield great store of Liquor fine;
So that thou may, as in a mighty flood
Thy Garments wash into the grapie blood.
Zebulun, thou shall still a dweller be
In pleasant places situate by the Sea,
So that by Shipping thou may have commerce
With other Nations who of Ware are scarce:
Thy Borders also I will so extend,
That they in length shall come to Zidon's end.
Son Issachar, I know thine inclination
Is such, that thou desir'st a quiet station,
Free from command, and still will bowing be
Thy back to all the burdens laid on thee.
Dan, as an Adder or a Serpent sly
Thou to thine Enemies evermore shall be,
And subt'ly shall all of them overthrow,
If not their Head, I Am sure thou wilt sting below,
And now, O Lord, since well I know this Boy
Shall enemies have that will him much annoy,
Do thou assist him in's extremity,
That at the last he may victo'rous be.
Gad, much affliction does on thee attend,
Yet all those Troops thou wilt conquer in the end.
Asher, Earths fullness shall be thy Lot,
Affording Royal Dainties and what not.
Naphthali, on both parts thou dextrous are,
Lover of Peace, and yet can follow War.
Joseph, thou as a fruitful Bough shall be,
Set by a Wall, thy Grapes shall multiply,
And Branches by the Suns reflections shall
Grow to such height as shall surmount a Wall.
Though Brethren, Jempsar, Potiphar, all three
Thy life did seek, and Arrows shot at thee,
Yet God, thy God thy Bow kept in such strength,
That spite of all, thou did o'rcome at length,
And made the Shepherd to his Isra'l-flock
So that thou was to them both Staff and Rock.
From God, thy Fathers God thou shall receive
All things soever thou desir'st to have.
Is It pleasant Seasons? this the mighty hand
Will grant to thee, do but the same demand.
Is It liquid Fountains? Fowls that flying be,
Or Fishes? Call, it is he commands the Sea.
Is It food or clothing? Beasts on every hill
Are his; I know thou wilt have them at thy will.
Or is it Children? Do but them desire,
He Will grant so many shall make thee admire:
Thy Grandsires blessing, Isaac's, mine, all three
While hills endure shall ever bide with thee;
And on his head they ever shall remain,
Whom cruel brethren thought once to have slain.
Benjamin, thou shall still a Warrior be,
And ever have thy sword upon thy thigh,
To kill and rob, and to divide the spoil,
Thou shall be bent, and think of it no toil.
Here have you Jacobs sons all numbered;
Here have ye all that he unto them said.
Here all the blessings he before his death
In his last Legacy did to them bequeath;
Here is the charge that he unto them gave
Concerning's burial in the Hittite's Cave,
Which Abra'm bought in Ephrons field to be
A burial-place for his posterity.
Here was he buried and his Sarah dear:
Rebecca 'nd Isaac were interred here.
Here Leah also laid into this field,
For which Abra'm, did five score pieces yield
Unto the sons of Heth, who were right loath
It to receive, till he had sworn an Oath,
That of them he would not take it for naught,
They do agree, the Cave is sold and bought.
Ah! I have spoke too long, my Spirits fail,
Said Jacob, see my Face and Hands grow pale.
This scarce was uttered when his Heart had lost
Its faculties, and he gives up the Ghost.
When Joseph saw the death of's aged Sire,
His filial love the Brethren all admire,
Who said, you are gone, and I am left alone,
Oh! thou art gone, I cannot choose but moan.
Oh! thou art gone, my only Father dear.
Oh! thou being gone, what comfort have I here?
At this the tears so rushed from his Eyes,
That no by-stander could withhold their cries;
For he his pale Face kissed and cried aloud
To the Physicians who about him stood,
Come take this Body, take it out from me,
Embalme it well, let nothing wanting be.
This his command they willingly embrace,
Taking his Father from before his Face,
And sweetest smelling Spices do prepare,
For this last Rite, he had enough to spare.
They never rested for six Weeks a day
His Corpse to dress ever he was taken away.
Is this all? No, a Winder greater far,
The Outlaw Heathen for him Mourners are
Nine Weeks of Days; which ended, Joseph takes
His Fellow-Rulers by, and to them speaks,
You know in Egypt it is a strict Decree
That none in Mourning may with Pharao be,
Nor any conference in this posture have
With him, for which I earnestly do crave
That you would go and make the King acquaint
That my old Father, while his pulse was faint,
Commanded me to swear a solemn Oath
(Should I it break, I think he will be loath.)
That I should bury 'm in his Fathers Grave,
Pray bid him grant it, this is all I crave.
And if he fear that I will not come back,
He may my Sons of me for Pledges take.
Thus leaving Joseph, all of them depart,
Who waits their return with grieved heart.
No sooner had they told the King his case,
Than he with sighing answered, Alas!
Is Jacob dead, my Father-Rulers Father?
And shall I hinder? Nay, I Will further rather.
Make all the haste he can, then come to me,
Till his return I shall not quiet be.
When Joseph heard the Kings benevolence,
He thanked the Rulers and departed thence.
Then called all his Servants and his Kindred,
Who come unto him, none of them is hindered:
The Kings own Servants and the Rulers be
In readiness the Corpse to 'companie.
Then Joseph does this Funeral Journey take
With more than Thousands armed at his back.
Ever Titan rose from out his watery Bed,
Or with his spangled Traces overspread
The spacious Azure, Chariots make a noise,
At which the prancing Horses all rejoice;
Coach-men drive hard, so that ever it was nigh
Sunsetting next, Canaan they espy.
To It yet, said Joseph, here we will not rest,
But will to Atad, where we shall have best
Accommodation for our numerous Train;
I know the place, it is a spacious Plain
Well hedged in; there we may safely lie
Until the rest we for the Funeral buy.
This was concluded, and o'r Jordan they
Came, to the place of their appointed stay;
Where 'lighting down, their Mourners so cry'dout
For full seven days, that all were round about
Came running for to see what it might be
Made all these strangers weep so bitterly,
Whose sympathy admired the place they call
Abel-mizraim unto Ages all.
This Ceremony ended, they the Vow
Perform, made to their Father while below,
And buried him in his Grand-sires Cave;
This was the last thing he did of them crave.
Now Joseph to his Pharaoh does return,
Who for his absence never ceased to mourn.
You Are welcome Joseph, said the Egyptian King,
What news do thou to me from Canaan bring?
All good my Lord, with which he made a bow;
But, Ah! I fear I Have stayed too long from you.
No, no, I Am glad again to see thy face,
Said he, for still thou shall with we find grace.
By this time's Brethrens hearts began to burn,
Thinking that he soon after his return
Would them afflict for their long covered crime,
Which to prevent, a Messenger in time
They send to Joseph, who this message bore;
Our, and thy Father who is now in glore,
Commanded us thy Pardon for to crave,
Though we deserved other things to have
For our outrageous spite and cruelty,
Which we contrived against thee, guiltless thee,
By seeking of thy spotless blood to spill,
Whilst thou our good foretold, and not our ill.
The hearing this his tender soul did smart,
Whose watery Eyes it witnessed in part:
What? What? said he, and do they me mistrust
As soon as I my Father in the dust
Have laid? No, no, Dear Hearts, they need not fear,
I will to them a great affection bear;
Were I vindictive, yet that would not do,
That God is strong who still preserves you.
You willed indeed revenge upon my blood,
Yet all your malice turned to my good.
'Twas not your aim when you poor Joseph sold,
That he among Egypts Worthies should be rolled:
No, no, among Slaves; in this ye all combined,
But my good God had better things designed,
Your preservation, though ye made a prey
Of me to Merchants, as you see this day,
Wherefore take courage, I will you preserve,
Your guilt I Will pardon, and with food I Will serve
You and your Flocks according to your mind,
Am I not Joseph, can I be but kind?
Haste, haste my Muse, now thou must make an end,
That Pearl of price whom God did hither send,
Has now ten Winters and 100 seen,
As many Summers, of which he has been
Fourscore and sev'n in the Egyptian Land,
Alway's upholden by the Almighties hand.
And now he sees of his own procreation
In his last days a treble generation.
Then finding's vital Spirits begin to fail,
And Death ensuing, who would take no Bail,
He calls his Brethren as his Father did,
And then unfolds a Mystery lay hid
Concerning their departure to the place
Promised to Abram and his following race,
And does desire that all of them might swear
That they to Canaan shall his Body bear
When dead, and lay him in his Fathers Grave,
Which they might find into the Hittits cave.
Here Joseph dies, being of a good old Age.
Here Joseph dies a chaste and holy Sage.
Here Joseph leaves his Pharaoh and departs,
Here Joseph leaves his Friends with grieved hearts,
Here with him dies all Jacobs Offsprings glory,
In Egypt, and the Period of his Story.
FINIS.
THE AUTHORS WISH.
ALL beings Being, all of nothing Maker
Grant me to be of Devine Grace partaker;
That living Joseph's Life I may his Death
Die, and to thee that Legacy bequeath
Which thou created, and redeemed with Blood
When Self, with Satan and my Sin withstood.
Grant Lord when I of thee these things implore,
That I be mindful to give thee the glore
Due to thy Name from all Eternity:
Hear, hear my God, I humbly beg of thee.
LAUS DEO.

