DIVINE DIALOGUES.

VIZ. Dives's Doom. Sodom's Flames. and Abraham's Faith.


CONTAINING The Histories of Dives and Lazarus, The Destruction of Sodom, And
Abraham's Sacrificing his Son.

To which is Added Joseph Revived, OR, The History of his Life and Death.

By George Lesly, Minister of the Gospel.

Herbert's Church Porch. A Verse may find him, who a Sermon flies,
And turn delight into a Sacrifice.
LONDON, ^^inted for Charles Smith, at the Angel near (...) the Inner Temple
gate, Fleet Street. 1678.

To the Right Honorable Charles Earl of Westmoreland. etc.
Right Honorable,
THough the Author's obscurity, and unworthiness of the ensuing Poem, may in
Justice forbid either your Lordships Patronage; yet the swift-wing'd fame of
your Honor's goodness, giving life to my harmless ambition, has emboldened me
(though with trembling Heart and Hand) to make this poor address. Not that I
have, or dare have, confidence to think it worth your Lordship's acceptance,
being the frozen conception of one born in a cold Climate; but that the
enlivening Beams of your Honor's Patronage, may screen it from that contempt
and obloquie it might otherwise meet with in a hotter region: On this and no
other score is poor Aeschine's gift presented to your Lordship. Favor
therefore noble Sir, my beggar with a Serene Aspect. And if your Honor think
him worthy, grant him the regard of being one of the meanest of your Lordship's
Closet inhabitants; and for his fidelity, take the word of a Priest, he will
neither steal nor flatter. His beginning is divine and so I hope is his rise,
though he be not adorned with so much Eloquent bravery as this Golden-tongu'd
age boasts of; yet I dare say, he will stammer out so much truth as may
inform the Reader, that the Kernel not Shel, the substance not show of
Christian Religion and Piety is to be minded. I might I confess have drawn the
Matter to a longer Thread, had I not feared that it would neither please your
Honors Eye, nor become the Hand of,

Your Lordships, most Obedient. George Lesly.
Wittring, June 14. 1676.
To the READER.
HAving in a small essay declared my self a Lover of the Muses, I have now
ventured upon the Stage, not ignorant of the fate that attends pious Poems;
that of the Poet being ^o less true than common. Pro captu lectoris ha^ent sua
fata libelli. I discern a Cloud (I might say (...) crowd) of Carpers, for they
will be of all sorts. The Learned whom I honor, and would be glad ^o imitate,
may think my Style antic, Matter ^aw, Plots ill-laid and worse managed, and no
^arty well humoured: To them I grant all, because they could better have
answered wise men's expectations in such an enterprise. Yet I hope that the
expression is neither so rude, nor the mat^er so indigested, (though that be
not so tumid, ^or this so taking as the Genius of the present Age ^equires) but
that they may outlive the rigor ^f a sober censurer, and prove beneficial to
some. The Lady that wears a Ruff with a loose Gown; ^he Gentleman with the
high Crowned Hat, and Wooden heel'd Shoes, may call it plain old Eng^ish, and
good Morality at least.

I know there are Courteous as well as Critical heads, these may let my
Pamphlet alone; it is intended for the other. If the Stage-Poet frown, all I
shall say to him is, Though my Muse be not tuned to his Key, yet my mind
transcends his Apollo.

Majora Cano.

But if all men put a fair construction on what they find here, and read, with
the same intention I wrote it, not only to divert idle hours, but to deter them
from sin, who will not trouble themselves with an impartial Scrutinity of Holy
Wri^ for an Antidote; and to promote Divine Faith and Charity among Mortals in
this faithless and frozen Age. If this I say be done, my time (I hope) in
Writing, nor theirs in Reading, will be misspent.

Farewell.
The Persons.
Dives, a wicked Rich man. Pride. Gluttony.
his Friends. Huntsman. Servants. Lazarus, a Beggar. Poverty. Sickness.
his Attendants. Death. Sexton. Chirurgions, Masons, Carvers. Mourners. Angels,
good and bad. Abraham. Threnophilus, one who writes his Epitaph.
The Prologue.
THese humble Lines to all men cry aloud,
Bidding them shun Hells horror Styg'an flood
In Heavens Language, every Neophite,
Must learn to say, mercy Lord, I Am not meet
To tread thy Courts; nor cast a hoping Eye
Upon a promise, till I do espy,
My Sins transferred on a Savior.
And then, O then! begins that happy hour.
When dismal Clouds of wrath shall disappear,
And Sunshine mercy overspread the Sphere
Of thy poor weather-beaten Soul, and then,
Thy Tongue shall bless God; thank the trembling pen
Of him who raised thee out of deepest sleep,
E're death succeeded; wishing thee to keep,
The wholesome Laws of him who can destroy
Thy Soul, or give it everlasting Joy.
These are the ends I have proposed, and do
Wish they may prove effectual to you.
If sense, not swelling words have leave to speak,
Know, it is you, not yours that I do seek.
^^ DIVES'S DOOM, OR, The Rich Man's Misery.
Dives, Pride, Servants. Div. WHat Monster's this li'th at my noble Gate,
Bedawb'd with leprous spots? what cruel fate
Attends the caitife? What unhappy Star
Ruled at his birth: that such his mis'ries are?
While happy I, who scorn the Divine Powers
Am glorious, by Nature's help and yours.
Does not the World behold my heaps of Gold
With cov'tous eyes?

Pr. Yes, it was always bold.

Div. This stately Fabric that is by me made,
Do not all men admire?

Pr. Yes, most have said:
You're he, and only he, dare boldly say,
The life of Man is constant holy day.
The earth with all its fullness smiles on you,
And we its dearest Minions, serve you too.
Rise from your rich, embroidered Bed, I see
This petty light would emulator be,
Of those resplendant Rubies that hang round
Your Couch: and those, wherewith your Head is crowned.
See! how the numerous Atoms dance and touch
Your lofty Brow, as if they did think much
That their own Brats should have so near approach
To your admired worth; they but encroach.
Rise up, and let your Purple Red, and White,
Exceed the Sun in beauty and delight:
Call, call your Waiting-men, that they may dress
And fit you, for your golden Business.

Div. Who Is there?

Pr. What! Slaves, do not you hear my Lord?
Good Servants always answer at first word.

Serve. We come, what is your Honor's will?

Div. That ye Perform your Offices, I Will dressed be.

Serve. What Clothes to day, Great Sir, the Heavens frown?

Div. What! Purple and fine Linne, worse I scorn.

Pr. Good, good immortal Sir! why should you be
Served with the Emblems of Mortality?
With Russet, Flaxen, or the courser Stuff,
Since your rich Wardrobe can afford enough,
To speak you Non-such, bring the Crimson Suit,
(You may at pleasure have a new recruit.)
Finest Silk Stockings, Shoes of golden Cloth.
With best of Beavers (never touched by moth;)
The largest Chain of Gold, and Diamond Rings,
Never as yet put on; all other things
Are ready. Barber, are your Razors good?
Come, shave your Master, but beware of blood.
Powder, Perfume, Pomatum, and the Glass,
Bring. Let my Lord see his admired face.
Haste with the golden Basin, silver Ure,
In place of water, Wine put in that is pure;
This will not only wash, but strengthen all
The Members of my Lord both great and small:
The Scarlet Cloak forget not, Cuffs and Band
Of Lace, see! how the Fools amazed stand:
Groom of the Chambers call to make a fire,
Perfuming first the Room at my desire;
Thus is my business done. Now I retire.

Gluttony, Dives, Lazarus, Huntsman, Pride, Poverty, Sickness. Glut. Hail,
glory of the world, and more than Man!
Since Brother Pride has served you what he can:
I think it is time for you to take advice
From me; Drink first your Mornings-draught with Spice.
Here Sir, accept the Quintessence of Blood,
Distilled from the Oppressed, taste, it is good;
And here the widows house, a greater Dose;
The next's a Cordial from the Church's Clothes:
These (I presume) may serve you till you dine,
Ever then what you expect, I will design.

Div. Thanks dearest friend, O how this Spirit pleases!
Sure'tis Nepenthes, cure for all Diseases;
It is Ambrosia or Nectarian Juice,
The Gods (themselves) no better drink can wish:
I certainly enliv'ned am all over,
My Soul it self is greater than before.

Pr. I Am sure your eyes shine brighter than the Sun,
Now Thunder speaks, make Earthquakes, I have done
So all that is called Man, thy threatening voice
Shall fear, and we your Vassals must-rejoyce.

Glut. Sir, if your greater business permit:
I have one word to speak (if you think fit)
This Beauty-broker minds not that the Clock
Says, It is time, your Stomach to unlock.
His trimming without food can never please;
You know Dogs only hunger bear for ease.
Come Sir, your Table's richly furnished.
Pray give you over and let my Master feed.
Here Is Manna instead of Bread, here is sprightly Wine,
Here Is flesh of all sorts, delicate and fine;
With Sweetmeats store, and all may gratify
And please my Lord his Palate and his Eye.

Div. Was ever Man so happy in his friends,
As I in mine? their kindness never ends;
For which on them my Substance I Will bestow,
(If that be not sufficient, Soul too.)
Open the Casement, pray let in the Air;
Hark, hark, what voice does to my Ears repair.

Laz. One crumb for God's sake to a hungry Soul.

Div. Go, ask the Huntsman why the Dogs do houl.

Laz. One crumb for Heavens sake to the hunger-starved.

Hunt. It Is not the Dogs, a Beggar would be served.

Div. Prodigious boldness! dare that meazled whelp
Approach my Parlor-window to seek help;
Must he, a very mass of loathsomness
Name God or Heaven? (these do disturb my bless)
No, Huntsman, whip him while his life does last,
And say, the rich man sent that for's repast.

Hunts. Come Leprous Rascal, here is a wyred cord
With which I Will scourge you, you have disturbed my Lord:
Thou know that Heaven and Earth can never agree,
How then should our great Dives suffer thee,
Who, what he ever expects enjoys here,
Though such as Fools are, think there is more elsewhere.
Come, I must whip thee dead, it is his command;

Laz. First, let me tell you on what ground you stand,
Though his great favors smile on you this day,
To morrow's frowns may call them all away:
And then the lash may be bestowed on you:
Which heard, the Huntsman (making humble bow)
Said, Sir, what are you?

Laz. Do not plainly se^
Me, one (to look on) fraught with misery,
View me all over, if any part be free,
I Will not desire compassion from thee.
If otherwise, take heed thou do not wrong
My Lord and Master, who will be too strong:
For thee, and thine. Though he may from me take
This painful life, he whom I serve, can make
It up, with interest a hundred fold.
(Yet pardon me, if I have been too bold)

Hunts. Make but these words clear to my duller brain,
And then I will forbear; if I be slain
In place of thee? What do thou say to this?

Laz. My answer's short, thou art not far from bliss,
Could thou but see all unto me belongs,
Thou would conclude that all corporeal wrongs
Are Skin-deep only, while my better part
Rejoices always, when my wounds do smart,
Knowing that without tribulation
I never can possess that station
Bought with the blood of an eternal Son:
Ponder this well, and then God's will be done.

Dives. What mean'th the cursed Block-head to delay
His torture thus.

Hunts. I Am charmed, and what to say
I know not, for he says, he has a Soul
Impassible: if so, I dare not foul
My hands with blood, for which I answer must
Before the Judgment seat of him that is Just.

Div. Whip him, or die, Rogue, if that will not do,
My Dogs are keen, I Will make them eat him too.

Hunts. Sir, I must do it, you must your shoulders bare
I will strike easy, though I dare not spare.

Laz. Will not Heaven woo thee? Is thy Masters word
Sharper then hellish Torments? Flaming Sword,
Mark them about me stand: who will defend
Thy worst of bloody blows, and then will send
Thee to the place prepared for cruelty,
Where Dives also shall a sharer be.

Hunts. A Vision! I dare not touch this man,
Who has an Angel for his Guardian.

Div. A Fool, an Angel, you flew high last night,
Your brain is dry, eyes dim, there no such sight;
Old Nurses only scare their Babes with such,
Believe nothing, but what ye see or touch.
Call out the Dogs, Rockwood, Old Lady, Ring,
And you shall see that they mind no such thing;
Baw, aw, aw.

Laz. Peace, gentle Hounds, forbear to do me harm.

Hunts. My Lord, he can the Beagles also charm.
Sir, do but see, how they lie at his feet,

Dev. Then call them in; hang him, it is not meet
That Wizards (such as he) should have relief
From him, who never was sensible of grief.

Laz. Hang me, why so? you see I have no spell,
But that may keep such as your self from hell.

Div. He makes me tremble, fill the other cup,
When Dinner's over, I Will see him hanged up.
Come eat and drink, if this must be my doom,
I Will lose no time (I swear) before it come.
Hell! I have that within me, there is no other
Which I resolve to drown. Come, fill another,
A third, a fourth, fifth, and then as many more,
I Am sure the Beggar's God has no such store
In his Elysium --

Laz. There pretty Dogs, lick on your healthful tongues,
Make satisfaction for your Master's wrongs;
But Good my Lord, one morsel to the poor,

Div. Peace wretch, you shall be hanged at my door.

Laz. For God's sake, Sir, bestow the crumbs that fall
From your full Table on him, who does call
For Christ and Pitie's sake to be relieved,
My suit is honest, Pray Sir, be not grieved.

Div. What tell thou me either of Christ, or Pity?
This is my House. I'xpect no other City.

Laz. But to relieve the Poor's the way to bliss,

Div. Give over, you Rascal, there is no Heaven but this.
Here Is all that I can wish for, or desire.

Laz. No, Herer's no screen to keep thee from Hellfire;
Nor is here any fence against powerful Death,
Thou, thou, proud Dives, must resign thy breath.

Div. Ha! ha! this canting Rogue would terrify
Me also with that Mormo, I must die.

Pr. I wonder, Sir, you have the patience
To speak, or look on such, bid drive him hence.

Laz. I wonder more that he should dote on thee,
A pinted Devil, Soul's great Enemy;
While the Almightie's Power upholds the house;
Thou fawn'st and flatter'st; but if he let loose
His Instruments, Want, Sickness, Pain or Age,
Thou fleest, then men must Act, or leave the Stage,
Without thy aid, Angel's and Adam's foe
Cease thy delusions, let great Dives go.

Pr. Sir, do not ye hear this malicious wretch,
It Is want of Bread that makes him use this fetch
To draw you in for this his wants supply.

Pov. No, you are mistaken, if he still deny
Or give to Lazar, either cannot hinder
The wholesome Precepts he shall to him tender;
For having learned content in all Estates,
He can endure cold Frosts, and Summers heats.
Let him be pinched with want, abound with wealth,
All Is welcome. Sickness is to him as health:
His needy Belly, and these noisome Sores,
Are called by him Harbingers to stores
Of endless Joy, the thoughts of which does raise
His Soul above the World's Envy or Praise.

Sick. True, true, dear friend, for when men are brought low
By me, they study only Heaven to know,
Although my various pains disrobe their faces
Of earthly glories, they augment their graces.
The true accountant of his days did say,
Before affliction, I went astray.
But being touched by my Morbifick hand,
His eyes were opened, and he saw a Land:
So full of glory (though a King before)
He Will there throw down his Crown, and keep the Door,
Where Sunbeam-Beauty sat upon his brow
So bright, so long, that Meshech, Kedar now
Are black and ugly, Heaven alone can please,
Such are the effects of this good man's disease.

Pr. Great Sir, this drift you easily may 'spie,
They would have Friendship broke 'twixt you and I;
Old friends are always sure, beware of new,
There are Religious Cheaters, not a few;
Is any one so mad to think that heaven,
When balanced with Gold, can carry even;
No Sir, leave these to such far-hoping fools,
They may be hurt, who meddle with edged tools.

Div. Their words are vain, thou art to me most dear,
I hate their persons, and give over to hear
Their savourless discourse. Come, let me drink,
This babbling makes me melanchol' I think,

Pr. Cheer up, great Sir, shall your courageous Soul
Be daunted with the whooping of an Owl;
Shall croaking flesh-crow-sounds disturb your breast,

Glut. Here Is Lethe water will make you forget,
That eyer Lazarus was heard as yet.

Div. O! but my head aches, and my spirit's dull.

Pr. In haste, of Cordial, bring a brimmer full.

Glut. Be of good cheer, this draught is for your good.

Div. Oh! oh! oh! oh! Now, now I feel my blood
Returning to its Center; and my eye,
The greatest Object doubled does epsy.
Oh, hold me, all my limbs begin to shake;
Hold me, O hold, or else my poor heart will break.
Who Is there? O who is there! O what friends have I
To leave me thus in my extremity.
Who Is there? oh! who is there?

Laz. All your friends are gone.

Div. Can thou not help?

Laz. Yes, but I^ll let alone,
To see if your beloved Fraternity,
Dare show their heads to promise certainty
Of a reprieve.

Div. Dear Pride where art thou now?

Pr. At hand; but cannot help, I Have made a Vow,
Never to own, or speak to dying men.

Div. Delitious Gluttony, where art thou then?

Glut. Here Sir, but all in vain, your passage stops.

Div. May be for Meat, yet bring the gold'n drops,
My Essences of all sorts, now bring out.
A friend (be damned) he never stirs a foot.

Glut. Why should I, Sir, though I was sworn to be
Yours unto death; now you must pard'n me.

Div. Ah wretches! who would trust you. Lazarus, where art thou?

Laz. who would be abused thus?
What think you now of your forenoons discourse?

Div. Good Lazarus forbear, that makes me worse.

Laz. Then you must die, as once before I said,
Though you, and yours then nothing of it made.

Div. Nothing so true. Oh! oh! what sight is here,
A Sceleton brings in an empty Beer.

Death. Dives. Death. Sir, I arrest you at the Almighties suit.

Div. I know him not. What man on Earth dare do it?

Death. Do not your outcries speak you prisoner.
Now better words become you, do not err.

Div. I scorn to please a Bailiff What Is my charge?
That I will pay; and thee thy fees at large.
How'er it is strange that any should me sue.
I never borrower was, nor lender knew.

Death. The last is true, the first a horrid Lie;
All that thou haft is borrowed; for which I
Do execute this Warrant without Bail.

Div. -- Stay, first set my goods to sale.

Death. Goods, thou have none, a judgment past long since.

Div. Judgment, you Rogue, I never owed two pence.

Death. But you're a Bankrupt and must defray
All now.

Div. What are the Bills that I must pay.

Death. I have a many, whose total's transgression.

Div. Then bailed I may be by your own confession;
And I can have the best in all the Land.

Death. No mortal dare your action take in hand.
To Goal you must.

Div. I Will pay before I go.

Death. You lived blindly, and you will die so.
Do not you hear? what?

Dea. your own Conscience
Cry, guilty, guilty.

Div. Yes, I must go hence.
Treasur's farewell, Pride, Gluttony and Pleasure,
This is the last, Death giv's me no more leisure;
Else I would question you of treachery;
For crying, Hail, and yet to Crucify
Your Noble Master.

Death. Such things said before
Might have done good, but now you must give over;
Time's Glass is almost out, Eternit' enters;
The worst of men sometimes are late repenters;
Which can in no case mitigate Hell's flame,

Death. Hast'any more to say, I strike the stroke.

Div. No, no, you need not, my heart-veins are broke:
Augh -- augh -- augh -- g-o-l-d-dead.

Death. Lazarus. Death. You smile, and yet you must my Captive be
Laz. Most joyful news (dear friend) then I shall see
An end to all my lingering days; in grief,
Is any thing more welcome than relief
To weather-beaten Seamen, when the Waves
Of boystrous Neptun clasps his open Jaws
About their Vessel, forced by Wind and Tide.
Or to the Sould'er when he has espied
The Enemy triumphing on his ground,
With flaming Steel and conquering Trumpet sound.
Unto the hungry Soul what gives more life,
Then sight of Butler's liberal hand, and knife,
Ready to cut that may his app'tite stay;
Or to the weary Pilgrim on his way,
What Is greater joy, than when he sees, and when
His friends receive him safe returned again.
Such straits had I in all my life, yet still
I sought to be submissive to the will
Of my good God, and shall I quest'on now
That Strength and Goodness, which I ever knew?
No, thou art welcome as the Harbinger,
To call me hence, where my affections were,
All this sad time that I have lived on earth;
No man's more willing to resign his breath.

Death. You Are not afraid of death as Dives was?

Laz. No Sir, you see that I have no such cause.

Death. You are a debtor too, and't must be paid.

Laz. Yes unto nature. What my sins have made
Me liable to th'Law when Christ did bleed,
He said, that from the same I should be freed;
Whose Cross my Crown, and Blood my Treasure is;
This being so, pardon I cannot miss.

Death. Then thou art ready.

Laz. Yes, through Heavens Grace,
And hope e're long to see his blessed face.
^n Glory. Who is that behind you stands?

Death. It is an Angel into whose blessed hands,
You must resign your Soul. Now I must see
The Rich Man's Funeral Solemnity.

Pride, Sexton, Chyrurgions, Masons, Carvers. Pr. This loathsome, pale-faced
Death, made me retire
from my deceased Lord, whose last desire
Was, That you Sexton ring his passing Bell;
And you Embalmers dress his Body well;
And that you Masons out of Marble Rock,
^ig for his Statue a substantial Block,
(...) length sev'n foot, breadth four and somewhat more,
^or's just dimension (as he was before)
^ou'r wished likewise who Mallet use and Tool,
^o cut the Effigies while his wandering Soul
^oth miriads of years 'bout Lethe Streams
^ange, drink and sleep, until his newer Dreams
Remove him to the fair Elysium,
Where none but such as my dear Dives come.

Sext. Master, I went about your just Commands,
But flaming Spirits flood and held my hands,
Saying, That since you, you had damned his Soul,
He was no better if the Bell did towl:
Though then at Prayer, these unexpected words
With stranger Faces and prodigious Swords,
Repelled my spirits so, as I seemed to be,
As fit for my last Funeral Rite as he.

Pr. Well, it is no matter, I and Gluttony,
In spite of Heaven and Hell will Ringers be.
Chyrurg 'ons view the Corpse, and spare no cost;
We do too little when we do the most:
For our dead Father Dives, by whose breath,
All men received either life or death.
Though we 'bove all, as Trustees, must our skill
Use, till we have performed his last Will.
An't shall be done, Artists, what say you to it?

Chyr. Sir, Art avails not, we cannot do it;
The sparkling Glowworm yesterday shined bright
Melts into Rottenness: A horrid sight!

Pr. Where is the leaden Coffin? put him in.

Chyr. Nor this Sir, can we do, he has no skin.
His flesh and bones consume, nothing remains:
So save your Gold, good Sir, as we our pains.

Pr. Is It usual for dead men to do so.

Chyr. No, no, it only speaks where he is to go.

Pr. Why? He Is already in the Elizian Groves.

Chyr. Be not deceived, Heaven no corrupt'on love

Pr. And do you truly think his state is bad.

Chyr. We do so truly, and think yours as sad
Without Repentance.

Pr. Now I know ye rave.

Chyr. We knew what we should have, no more we crave.

Pr. Masons, where is the Stone that I bespoke
For's Statue?

Mas. Coming hither it was broke.

Pr. I think we shall be crossed in each design.

Mas. We never were so till now, it is a bad sign.

Pr. I never heard so much of these till now.

Mas. Such om 'nous things may make a proud man bow.

Pr. Bow! with a Pox! then what must the most do.

Mas. We answer soon, learn to be humble too.

Pr. Be gone, ye Rogues, about your business.

Mas. From such as you, we never expected less.

Pr. Carvers, have you no such already made?

Car. Yes; but we must take pains about the head;
which we with artificial hairs must cover,
And in his hands put bags of Gold however.
Now Sir, it is done according to your mind.

Pr. Come take your Money, I Will have that is behind.

Mourners. Thrice cursed be the day and Fate,
That did our bliss obliterate;
Our golden Mine is now shut up;
Its owner drinks of Styg'an Cup;
While we his Votaries do groan,
Being deprived of him, alone,
From whom we all our living had,
All but his Flatter'rs wanted bread:
His Friends (though few) he loved well;
Since for them he would go to Hell;
Where we must leave him, and repent,
E're our last glass of time be spent;
Or else we must expect that Doom,
To which he is too surely come,
For his neglect of Piety,
Of which he would no lover be:
Our Tears are vain; then let us give over,
And take possession of his store;
It is sufficient that his Glory,
Will live as long as Sacred Story;
And name of Dives will be sweet,
To every earthly Proselyte,
Who make their God of gilded clay,
Till Heaven, as him, sweep them away:
There needs no Tomb, most Rich Men's Purses,
Wrap him, as Children, by their Nurses.

Death, Angel, Lazarus. Death. Friend Lazarus, how like you my return^

Laz. Well, though your absence gave me cause to mourn.
Had not the glor'ous Light you left behind,
Made my past mis'ries vanish from my mind.

Death. Does not the Doom of the Rich Man affright
Thy feeble flesh.

Laz. Never while I see this Light;
Which I am sure is earnest of that bliss
I shall receive when come where Jesus is.
Keep me no longer here, I am most willing;
Thou can not hurt me having lost thy Sting.
Speaks to the Angel. And you, if sent from God, to be my Guide,
Hold fast, dark night, rough way, may make me slide.

Ang. Joy of thy Lord, I Am come for that same end,
To bring thee safe to Heaven, he did me send:
Whose will I always cheerfully obey:
Yet e're we take our wing, pray let us stay,
And talk of your Adventur's here below:
This I desire.

Laz. I Will tell you what I know.
What entertainment had you all this time
On earth?

Laz. As Cynthia* now Full, now Prime.
Or as bright Phoebus, whose resplendant Rays,
Give heat and light to the renewed days,
And yet are sometimes wrapped in Clouds and Mist,
That if he shine or not, it is not guest;
Or when pale Luna overshades his face,
So various was my state, while in this place.

Ang. Is there not then among Mortals difference?

Laz. Yes, that is one cause, for which I would go hence.
Some swim in pleasure, some are drowned in want,
Though this last happens where true Grace is scant.
The Rich oppress the Poor, the fat devour
The lean, and yet this lasts not an hour,
Being compared with Eternity.

Ang. Do not some say, that they shall never die?

Laz. Yes, so said the Rich Man but yesterday.
Now I am almost weary of my stay;
For though I Am glad to see your glorious light,
I long to see my God, who shines more bright;
Into whose presence I desire to be.

Ang. I have yet one word more to say to thee.
What were thy thoughts of Heaven when thy distress
And sores were grievous?

Laz. You may easily guess.
I never yet despaired of Shaddai's help,
Though men looked on me as a leprous whelp.

Ang. And think thou that such Misers come to bliss?

Laz. The Scripture says, To such God's Promise is.

Ang. Trust me thou dare then with thy happy Soul.

Laz. Why should I fear? Since you dare not control
Your Makers Mandat; who desires that ye
Ne^r leave my better part, till placed it be
In Abram's bosom, where I shall inherit
More than Elisha's or Elia's spirit.

Ang. This pleases well. What thy last words may be,
I Will hear of Mankinds treple Enemy.
And so go hence: The Flesh, the World, and Hell,
Are those I mean; b'ing such since Adam fell.

Laz. The Devil a Liar is, whom I defy,
And ever did, you are my witness, by
His black suggests, that did my Maker rob
Of's Glory; I despised, and shared with Job,
In's dunghill scabs, and rather than commit
A wilful trespass, I would to the pit
Have gone alive, he has a murdering mind,
Although he flatter, let him get behind.
As for the alluring world, the Almighty knows,
It never received ought of me, it owes
Me many common favors, fare it well;
'Twas better want them, then have gone to Hell.
Poor flesh, I am a debtor unto thee;
Wait but a while, my Lord will satisfy
With Interest, what ever I took on score,
Enough for all; thou shall revive: Nay more,
Thou shall be glorified with Christ thy Head,
At Day of Judgment, when he 'wakes the dead.

Ang. This true Confession, makes the glorious
Earth is not worthy of thee, come with us:
Death strike him gently, he is the adopted Son
Of Abram, where I leave him, and have done.

Abraham. Lazarus. Dives. Abr. Welcome dear Child, now I am filld with joy,
To see thee trample all did thee annoy.
It Is Faith, and Hope, and Love that helped thee hither:
Two of which cease, the last shall never wither.
It Is Summer always here, here is no Hail-showers,
To stock the fruit once set, or blast the Flowers.
Of bliss eteanal. Pray look upon me,
My faithful Son, whom I have longed to see;
Here take this Crown, this Royal Diadem,
Adron that head, which formerly with shame
Lay on the Dunghill. Let thy spotted skin
Henceforth be glorious, as thy Soul within.
Prepare thine ears for the uncessant noise
Of Saints and Angels, who do all rejoice
At thy admission to this Sacred Quire,
Where all their Hymn's are fraught with Divine fire;
And none do sing of any thing but love.
That Is our eternal business now above.

Laz. All praise to the Almighty, through whose Grace,
I fought the good fight and have won the race.

Abr. Raise thy Immortal Voice another Key.
Thou must sing Halelujahs night and day
For ever -- La. Halelujah --

Devil. Did my dark chains and torments fierce permit,
I should rejoice to see Great Dives sit
Here pined with anguish thirst, and cold,
While my dear Friends consume his ill got Gold.
How fare you Sir? How like ye your remove?
The Scene is altered, since you were above.

Div. Ah me! What ruful sights? what squalid shapes,
Of Bears, and Wolves, and Tigers, ugly Apes,
Devouring Vulturs; and that which is worse,
Damned Furies foaming under Heavens curse.
Fire, fire, O fire! dreadful, sulphurous.

Devil. Such entertainment you must have with us.

Dives. I freeze, I fry, and cannot get way.

Devil. Stay, first for Purple, and fine Linen pay.
You took on trust; your quintessence of blood
Must be exchanged for the Styg'an flood.
The pleasure you have had for some few years,
Is ended, after which eternal tears
Must have succession.

Div. O! what glorious light
Do I see, shining through the gloomy night;
And place, with fairest Diamonds and Pearls
Beset and floored, fit for none but Earls,
Or such as I once was. What Sun-like Sage
Is that? his face bespeaks him of great age.
And who is that li'th in his glor'ous arms?
Sure, it is some Cupid, who fond nature charms.

Devil. Nothing but Nature yet, I thought this load
Of chains might have assured there was a God,
Whose habitation is the place you see.

Dives. Then cursed be they, who have deceived me.

Devil. That ancien's Abr'am, and that glorious youth
In's happy arms is Lazarus, whose mouth
You once forbid to show his wretched case,
Or give the least relief Div. Alas! alas!
Will neither of them help me, if I cry.

Devil. 'Twill but augment your torment, you may try.

Dives. Father, dear Father Abram, ease your Son,
Who li'th in torment, else he is undon.
My misery's so great, I cannot tell:
But ah! too sure it is the fire of Hell,
Which heretofore none could make me believe;
Yet dearest Father (if you can) relieve
Me from this torment, reach thy helping hand;
If not, send Lazarus; who thy Command
is ready to obey, and let him dip
In cooling water, but his fingers tip,
Which he upon my scorched tongue may drain,
To quench this flame, which I cannot sustain.

Abr. Son be content, time was thou would not see,
(Without disdain) this poor man's misery.
Nor would give the crumbs fell from thy Table,
To satisfy his Soul; when thou wast able,
His fortunes to have raised, to such a pitch,
That none but Dives might have been more rich:
Then thou thy portion had while wretched he,
Lay in distress; unpitied by thee.
Do not remember these things?

Div. Yes, O Yes!
Is this the cause I am deprived of bliss?

Abr. And good cause too, wherefore give over to grieve,
There Is none in Heaven or Earth can thee relieve.
A fixed Gulf, betwixt us ever shall
Unmoved stand; God's Justice, brazen wall;
So that no heir of Heaven can come to thee,
Nor thou to them, for ease of misery.

Dives. Then pray you send him to my Father's house,
I have five Brethren there, are very loose;
They Are also feeding fat for this sad slaughter.

Abr. Tush, News from Heaven, will only make their laughter.
For they who drowned are in earthly pleasure;
Have this hard fate, ne^re to repent at leisure;
Or mend that is amiss, but spend their day,
In eating, drinking, rising up to play,
Till they are fallen asleep: Their golden Dreams,
^re never well interpreted, till Streams
Of fire and brimstone from the higher powers,
Rain on their heads for ever.

Div. O, these Showers
Would I were turned to some Marble Rock,
Or had at first been made a senseless Block.
Oh! that great hills and mountains might us swallow;
Or that (like Bruits) I might for ever wallow
On Earth, and have no other 'count to make.

Abr. Give over, give over, and these your torments take,
A^ from a just, and sin-revenging God,
Who willed you once to bear a lighter load.

Div. O! but my Brethren, Sir, know not my Doom.

Abr. They Will know it (I doubt) too soon, when they are come
To that same place of torment where you are.

Div. Then send, O send, Sir, e're they go too far.
Is not the gate of Heaven ope' while they live?
They may repent, and God their sins forgive.

Abr. It Is but in vain to send one from the dead,
Se'ing he can say no more, than may be read
In Moses, Isai'* weeping Jeremie,
And all the rest whose Inspirations be
Divine. Then cursed wretch, thou must give over
To cry, bidding Adieu for evermore
To Heaven, where Lazarus must now remain
With me, and thou in Hell's tormenting pain.

The Rich Man's EPITAPH, FOR The EPILOGUE.
HEre li'th the Man, who never did
Good while he liv^d, nor Vice forbid:
Here li'th the Man, who to his Wealth,
Trusted his Souls and Bodies health:
Here li'th the Man, who out of measure,
Glutted himself with beastly pleasure;
For which his hungry Soul and dry,
Is doomed eternally to fry
In Hell. A warning unto those,
Who in base Earth their trust repose.
His Sentence past; let such give over,
God's just still, as he was before.
Avertat Deus hoc malum a nobis.

FINIS.
FIRE And Brimstone; OR, THE DESTRUCTION OF Sodom.

Except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish. Luke 13.3. The Persons.
Prologus. Angel. God. Angels of God. Abraham. Sarah. Sodomites. Lot. Lot's
Sons. Devil. Lot's Wife. Chorus.
Prologus.
IF any think my Buskin is too much,
Like to Satyr; know, it is not a touch:
If the Physician can a Gangrene kill,
He must use Corrosives as well as skill;
Else putrid matter will infest the part
That Is sound, till it has seized on the heart:
This is too often seen to be disapproved;
Let not the courteous Reader then be moved,
If I have laid the Axe to the Tree's root,
Thinking to fell it. O! that I could do it.
If Lot's Wife, who was led by Angel's hand,
Escaped not God's Judgment, but does Pillar stand
Of Salt. And seeing Justice does begin
With House of God, must we not all fear sin?
That Adam out of Paradise did cast;
And after him, drowned the old World at last;
That slaved Israel four hundred years;
And costs each Heaven-born Child much briny tears:
What say I, tears? for it the Son of God
Sweat drops of blood, and bore a heavy load
Of wood, for's Cross, and then resigned his breath,
That who believes might not taste second death.
For it is Sodom burnt, our present Theme;
We must beware of Sin, or bear the blame.
If we give way, this Circe will bewitch
The best. The fire's hot made of wood and pitch
But hotter far, that is kindled by the breath
Of Sin-revenging God, eternal death.
FIRE and BRIMSTONE; OR, The Destruction of Sodom.
Angel, God, Abraham, Sarah, Angels. BEhold, how Sodom swaggers in its Pride,
And Lust, and Gluttony! none is espied,
That thoughts of Heaven have; or bow a knee:
But one poor Stranger, who adoreth me.
My Servant Lot: whose holy Soul they vex;
Because there is no distinction made of Sex
Nor age, But all promiscuously do go,
Like Goats and Leopards that all they may know
Each other. Come, we will go down and see,
Those horrid facts; whose cry has come to me.
I am the Holy One who sit above,
My purer Eye cannot such things approve.
The Soul that sins, it shall surely die.
Awake my Just revenge; I Will down and try:
If they my handy work who are but clay,
Dare quarrel with their Potter and say nay:
But we will do it. Who can us control?
What profits Religion, since the Soul
Is mortal as our flesh and cannot rise?
Let Us heap up sin on sin, and heaven despise.
Put on your walking habits: Let us go
And view the place, to see if it be so.
Yet there is a trusty Friend lives in our way
By Mamre Grove: there we must make some stay.
See, Yonder is the place where Sun does shine,
Gilding the Oaks whose tops seem to incline:
To bid us welcome --

Angels. Eternal Son, true Day Star from on high,
It is our honor that we may draw nigh
So great a Light, and be employed by thee;
To execute thy Will we ready be.

Ab. Sarah, Sa: My Lord.

Ab. Do not see strangers come?

Sa. I do, I do, it is well you were at home.

Ab. Their gate bespeaks them great: I Will run and see,
Walking on foot perhaps they weary be.
Al-hail my Lord, if I have favor found
With thee: pass not from off thy servant's ground,
Until a little water fetched be
To wash your Feet, and you under this Tree
Rest for a while, it being almost noon;
You shall go on as soon as Dinner's done:
For therefore to your servant are ye come --

Ang. It Is true! go quickly, do as thou have said.

Ab. Up my dear Sarah now I lack thine aid,
Of Meal three measures thou shall dress: and knead,
Cakes on the hearth make of it, we want bread;
And I my self will bring a fatted Calf:
Out of the herd; young man dress you its half.
Bring Milk and Butter hither unto me:
With Veal both roast and boiled; my Lord you see
Your homely dinner, Let your Friends take place.
Where the Almighty eats, there needs no grace.
Accept such things as you are pleased to send
To your poor Servant who will you attend.

Ang. These Favors I will certainly requite
Upon thee and thy Wife who is out of sight.
Where is thy Sarah? Is she not at home?

Ab. Yes, in the Tent.

Ang. Then why did she not come?
For I intend, about this time next year
To come again, and she shall surely bear
A Son: though Abraham be old, and she
Have no forerunner of a pregnancie.

Sar. Ha, ha, Is not this likely to be true?
Have I been thus long Married to you,
Without Conception? shall my nutted Breast;
And barren Womb procure a cleansing Feast?
No, I shall sooner far expect my grave:
Than that such Pleasure you and I should have.

Ang. Hark; Sarah laughs, good Abra'm tell me why?
She cannot be thy Wife; if she deny
That the Almighty can all Natur's laws
Reverse, dilate, contract as he see's cause.
Or thinks she that any thing on Earth
Can be too hard for him; who gave all breath?
Once more I say I will return, and she,
This time next Year, shall Joyful Mother be.

Sar. Alas! What shall I do? he did me spy
Laughing, yet Woman-like I will deny,
I did not laugh.

Ang. Nay, but thou did, forbear:
He cannot be deceived who is Eye and Ear.
Arise, Let us go hence: a fearful stink
Comes to my nostrils, from that filthy sink,
Whose crying sins do hasten its decay.

Ab. Pray let your Servant bring you on your way.

Ang. Well Abraham, since thou have served me
So faithfully, nothing shall hidden be,
Of all that I am now about to do,
Here I will all relate before I go.
For thou shall surely a great Nation be:
And all the World shall blessed be in thee,
The Sin of Sodom's great, its dreadful Cry
Has long since sounded in my Ears, now I
Am come to see: armed an angry Judge,
Without repentance there is no refuge:
But Fire and Brimstone from the Lord shall fall;
And shall consume those cursed Cities all.

Ab. Will thou not then the righteous in it spare?

Ang. Thou know long since that great my Mercies are.

Ab. If there be Fifty righteous in the place,
Shall not thy Justice run a slower pace?
Art thou not of the World the holy Judge?
If thou do otherwise 'twill make men grudge:
We do confess you are infinite in Might:
Yet let the Judge of all the World do right.

Ang. It Fifty in it be I will return:
And for their sakes, I Will not at this time burn
The Cities --

Ab. Since thou a gracious Ear do to me lend,
Who am but dust and ashes, I Will yet spend
Some of the breath thou giv'st me, and desire,
That if there want five, yet that dreadful fire
May not be kindled.

Ang. If but five there lack
Of fifty, I Will not burn it for their sake.

Ab. What if but forty, Lord, what will thou do?

Ang. For fourtie's sake I Will spare the Cities too.

Ab. I plead for mercy, let not anger burn:
If thirty there be found, will thou return?

Ang. Yes.

Ab. But if twenty
Justi,Just Persons.
Just, do there remain?

Ang. For twentie's sake, I also will refrain.

Ab. Let not my Lord be angry, this once more
I Will speak, What if you find but half a score?
Speak Lord, a grac'ous answer let me hear.

Ang. Even for Ten's sake I also will forbear.
Now get thee home, I Will make no more delay,
The Angels at Lot's house do for me stay.

Chorus. Mamre from henceforth let thy grove
Renowned be, because Jehove
Daigned to rest in thy cool shade,
And with our Master Dinner had.
Cake, Milk and Butter: sav'ry meat,
Two Angels with their Lord did eat.
Which done, Jehovah did requite
Old Abram 's kindness: whose delight
Is to refresh the weary Stranger,
And to relieve the weak from danger.
The fear of God he always keeps
Sure, when he either wakes or sleeps.
El-Shaddai in his faithful Eye,
Is all-sufficient Treasury.
He with the Lord a Covenant made,
And he with him, Jehovah said:
Walk me before and perfect be,
Then I no good will hold from thee.
Of Children thou complains, thy Wife,
According to the time of life:
At my return a Son shall bear,
To usher in the next new Year.
Our Mistress needs not doubt the thing,
That Is promised by Salem's King.
Let her laugh on, but not distrust,
What Heaven says fulfilled must
Be, see how on her Marble face,
A rich Vermilion takes place;
The Rose and Lilie are at strife,
Who shall have most in Abram's Wife:
Her shaking hands and feeble knees,
Put on their youthful Liveries.
And is not Abram altered,
Since the other day the Angels fed
At's Table? Does not every feature
In's Face, declare a God of Nature?
Quick eye, quick ears, and nimble feet,
Strong legs and arms, do not ye see it?
It Is said that Eggles only do
Renew their age^^^ Abra'm too.
Go happy Couple; let your new
Raised vigor unto the World show
A resurrection from the dead,
In both of you by promised seed.
Isma'l thou must give over to hope,
That thou shall be our Fam'lies prop:
Thy Mother Hagar must forbear,
Over Abra'ms Wife to domineer.
It is not fit that hand-maid-drudges,
Should be of Mistress actions Judges.
If she intends to live in ease,
She must her grieved Mistress please:
And thou thy unborn Brother serve,
Or be cast out of the house and starve;
For we are sure to have an Heir;
Of whose Flesh God will take a share:
And in it die that we may live,
To whom, Let Us ever praises give.

Angels, Lot, Lot's Wife. Ang. Father pray tell us what is this Town's name?

Lot. It Is sinful Sodom, too well known by fame,
That has already flown over earth to heaven.

Ang. Pray what a clock?

Lot. My Lords it is almost Even.

Ang. Can strangers any entertainment find?

Lot. Yes Sir with me (if you to stay have mind)

Ang. Is there no house in Town but yours that is civil?

Lot. None, none My Lords, all imitate the Devil.

Ang. Then what of this bad City will become?

Lot. If God be Just 'twil have a sudden doom.

Ang. What Judgment's fittest think thou for their Sin?

Lot. Brimstone and fire suits best those burned within:
With lust unnat'ral,

Ang. If it should be so,
What will thou do? think thou to perish too?

Lot. No Sir, I do not, he whom I do serve,
Will send his holy Angels to preserve
Me; as from sin, so from the punishment,
That from the Heavens on Sodom will be sent.
My Lords come in, we'll talk more in the house,
For when night comes our streets are very loose.
You shall this once take harbor here with me,
Nor shall you leave my Cottage till you see
Next morning Sun. Here Is water, wash your feet,
My Wife and Daughters shall take care for meat.

Ang. Sir your good nature merits well of us:
Yet will the Street be better than the house,
There we will stay.

Lot. My Lords that must not be:
You shall have welcome, pray turn in with me,
The ends I have upon you are but civil,
Then if I urge, you must not take it evil.
This is a cursed Town, and if you be
Wronged in the street, the blame will lie on me.
Wife try thy skill, see if thou can persuade
These men; we never yet such Lodgers had.
If God in likeness of a man may be,
The man that speaks most must needs be he.

Lot's Wife. Husband were I such as the Town affords,
I might invite them with such Sugared words,
As neither I nor they I think approve;
Flattery I hate, if they become in Love,
They will not pass our Door; come good my Lords,
My civil actions shall confirm my words.

Ang. Your courteous invitations take a place
With us.

Lot. My Lords I Am glad I have found grace,
To Lodge such persons as you seem to be,
And that you will eat such victuals as you see.

Chorus. Our hearts are grieved to see
Those Men in Jeopardy:
Who Lodge with Father Lot,
On him will lie a blot,
Who does them entertain:
If they shall now sustain
Any harm in the night,
By the Sodomits might.
The Town already knows,
And have made bitter vows:
That before the Sun rise
They will secure the prize;
If Heaven come to their aid,
They will not be afraid.
Where Lust does rage and swell,
There is no thought of Hell.
No Monsters liker unto Devils be,
Than men given up to filthy Sodomie.

Sodomites, Lots Sons, Lot, Angels. Sod. A prize, a prize! run, call the Town
together,
The beauties of World are now come hither:
Come let us not lose this opportunity,
At Lot the stranger's House, the Gallants lie.
How can thou tell? I saw them enter in;

Sons. Such persons to defile 'twill be a Sin:
Besides the old man has persuaded them
To stay, if this be done; he will bear the blame,
Forbear.

Sod. You punies, you will be Godly too,
Is this the way you do his daughters woo?

Son. And we would have you so, could we persuade.

Sod. Ha, see how like they grow to their old Dad;
Go get you hence, we'll make no more delay.
Give over to plead, or you shall dearly pay
For your sobriety; come out ye Rogue,
Bring forth these strangers, do not time prorogue:
We hear they are beauties, it is but what they owe,
Being within our Town, we must them know.
See how he shuckes, old Rascal do not dally
With us, nor time; see not the City rally
About thy House? it is but in vain to think,
That thou shall eat our Bread or drink our Drink,
And not submit thy self unto our Will.

Lot. All your requests (if just) I will fulfill.
I hope these boyst' rous words are all but Jests.

Sod. Confounded Dog, bring forth thy handsome Guests,
Or by our great God Priapus we swear,
That we thy Body will in pieces tear.

Lot. My Lords, this rudeness is not strange to me,
Be not dismayed, I will go out and see
It my grave presence can make them give over,
However after me I Will shut the Door.
Brethren I do not understand your humor,
What is the cause that ye make such a rumor
In The street at this time, and about my Door?
Neighbors be ruled, this wickedness give over.
And if your Beastly lust cannot refrain,
But that these strangers you with sin would stain;
See here two Maids of mine who Virgins be,
Use them at pleasure, and let these go free.

Sod. Rogue, runagate, slave, think not that thou must,
Make such exchanges to restrain our Lust.
Who made the'a Judge? If we be ruled by thee,
Then must we bid adieu to Buggary.
But hold, stand back, or we will break the Door.

Lot. Help, help, O help, these Villains press me sore.

Sod. Hark, this mad fellow thinks to have Rescue,
Whence must it be? from Heaven I warrant you
Heaven! help, indeed of that we are not afraid,
Though it and Hell combine; their feeble aid
Cannot reprieve the Prisoners within,
We are not scared with punishment of sin.
There Bald-pate God-adoring Rascal, take yo^ that;
strikes him How pretily he looks in's dimpl'd Hat?
Now open to us. --
strikes again.
Ang. Beloved of Heaven, we see thy willingness,
To curb these wretches, and our grief redress;
Come in to us, and we'll secure the Door;
Blindness shall make these Brands of Hell give over.

Sod. He is a Devil, he'th bewitched me,
And me, and me, and me, and me, and me.
I Am blind, I Am blind, and cannot find the Door,
By Heaven nor I, I fear we must give over.
We see their God can help them in a strait,
And cool our courage; let us leave his Gate,
Begging him pardon; for if we stand still,
He that has struck us blind can also kill.
Not I, for though I see not, I can fell;
And if I catch the old knave, I will deal
Worse with him than before: In spite of Heaven,
We may in time with him also be even;
For if he does not open our Eyes again,
He and all his to morrow shall be slain.

Ang. Besides thy Family, do any pity,
Daughters, or Sons-in-Law, within this City?
^f any; call them, those we'll not anoy:
But all the City else we will destroy,
Because the cry is wax'n great, we must
Reduce all Living in it into dust.

Lot. Sons now take warning, get you from this place
Quickly, the Sun shall not twice run his race
From East, to West, before destruction shall,
(Reward of lust) on wicked Sodom fall.
God says it, and I Am sure it will be done,
Sons if ye love your lives get ready soon,
To go with me --

Sons. Sir, this you told all of us long ago,
And yet nothing is come to pass you know;
You old and fearful are, your brain is dry,
Before that it be so, we shall espy,
Unusual signs from Heaven if any be,
Such things we may believe, but never thee.

Ang. Lot, God give thee good morrow, do not spy.
The Sun in this Horizon mounting high?
Have, get thee hence, with Daughters, Sons and Wife,
Nothing that stays behind shall keep in life.
You must out of the City speedily,
Lest for its sin you all consumed be.
Come there is no time to stay or look about,
He that would not be burnt must get him out.
Why do you linger? pray give me your hand.
Yours Madam, pray give me, we cannot stand;
Your God is merciful and full of pity,
And has sent us to bring you out of the City.

Ang. Deus. Escape for thy life, shake off all Worldly cares,
When God afflicts, all such things are but snares;
Trust not to humane help, it is I who fight,
And nothing's able to resist my might.
Go look straight forward, if thou turn thy back,
Or any that is thine, then I will make
Thee feel the smart of my afflicting Rod.
Fly to the Mountains, lest Almighty God
Consume thee with the City.

Lot. Not so Lord,
Since I believe according to thy word,
And have found grace in saving of my Life,
As likewise have these two poor Girls and Wife.
Into the Mountains Lord, I cannot fly,
^est there some evil take me, and I dye;
Add to thy former favors out of pity,
Leave for to fly unto the neighboring City;
It Is but a little one, my Lord it give
Into thy Servant, and his Soul shall Live.

Ang. Dear friend, to show thee what respect I bear,
^o thee and all thy Servants, this I hear,
and grant what thou desire; fly in have
^o thy entreated shelter: while you are past
^he City Wall, my powerful hands are bound
With cords of Love, while thou art on this ground
Although my Just revenge does burn and chafe
^can do nothing, till thou art come safe
^o Zoar. --

Chorus. Cursed be the day when we,
This stranger first did see.
Cursed be the mouth that spoke
To us, that we should take
This wretch within our Walls,
Who Studieth our falls.
And has with Heav^n conspired,
That Sodom may be fired:
There is no remedy,
We must destroyed be.
Come, yet let us endeavor,
To get the Rogues favor.
If he will but once pray,
We Are sure Heaven will stay
His hand, and will revoke
This sad and fatal stroke.
Rise, let us to his Gate,
(Perhaps it is not too late)
And give his guests good words,
The best Sodom affords:
If these do not take place,
Then there will be no space
Between us and the fire:
Taugh! I must now retire,
Here Is such a loathsome smell,
That nothing (if not Hell)
Can the same parallel.

Angel-God, Sodomits, Devil, Lot, Lot's Wife. Ang. The Sun shines bright, and
Lot almost at home
In Zoar, now must Sodom have its doom;
Gomorah also Admah and Zeboim,
The fifth, I will reserve as yet for him.
Awake my Justice, and let dreadful streams,
Of Fre and Brimstone darken the Sunbeams;
Once more let Heavens Windows opened be,
That Lot may fire (as Noah water) see.
Shut up those bowels full of mercy are,
And neither young nor old i'th'Cities spare.
Raise thickest Smoke, and make a sulfurous smell,
That living, they may know the pains of Hell.
Perhaps 't may warn all those that come behind,
To know, and walk according to my mind;
If not, while I am just they must be sure,
Those, or such dreadful torments to endure.
He that sheds blood, with blood must punished be,
For lust and anger fire's the destiny.
I Will stamp my curse on all things for their sake,
This fruitful plain shall be a stinking Lake.
If any fruit for ever after grow,
It shall not be for Food, but only show.

Sod. Oh Heavens! I Am choack'd with Smoke,
I Am burned with fire,
O Brimston, Brimston! Where shall we retire?
We dye, we dye, O may this be the last
Of Heavens dreadful Sentence on us past!
We Are burned and damned, there is no remedy;
We would not hear Lot, when he bid us fly
From wrath to come. O how our Limbs do crack
With fire! Our Conscience is upon the rack
For bypast Crimes; our beastly Lusts Torment
Us, as the precious time that we have spent.
O wretched Nature, whither have thou brought
Us Fools, and made us sell our Souls for naught?
Luxurious Eyes, why were ye so unkind,
To dote on objects, who have made you blind?
And you Tenacious hands, why did you grasp
The Poison of the Spider? Why from Wasp
Did you seek Honey? did not Heaven bestow,
As upon Lot, so also upon you,
The Lawful helps, and remedies for lust?
Was not all this enough? but that you must
In spite of Heaven, lay hold on all that came,
Although they man his members had or name.
Could not a lawful Wedlock satisfy
Thy burning flame, proud flesh? No, thou must cry
Bring out thy handsome Guests, them we must know,
Not knowing that they were not from below*
Whose Just revenge does make us miserable,
To bear these scorching flames we are not able.
And yet alas! our woe does but begin,
The vengeance is Eternal that is for sin.
O that Lots God would grant us a reprieve
But for one hour, that wretched we might live,
To wail our bypast sins; and beg his aid,
Who never yet to humble sinner said,
I scorn your plaints, but always graciously
Prepared a bottle for a melting Eye.
And piecemeal Prayers made whole with his own merit,
Sa'ing be comforted, it is you must inherit
My endless Joy; which sentence now does pierce
Our Souls so much, that we cannot rehearse
Our woes, though Oh! alas! it is too late,
We must expect naught but Almighties hate.
See how the Devils laugh, whom we have served:
O cursed Spirits it't this we have deserved
From you, for all those things that we have done
At your Command?

-- Devil. Give over, blame not me;
You know I did but only gratify
Your own desires, I never could command,
Or force your wills; this the Almighties hand
Was only able to effect, but ye
With your unbounded wishes wearied me.
You made the Tinder, then from me begged fire;
Half what ye did, was never my desire.
You sought the newest ways to damn your Souls,
For which we Devils do account you Fools.
Your state might have been happy when at worst,
If you had not me, and your Natures forced.
If we Apostates had such promises,
And helps as you; No sinful false surmises
Of feigned fruition (of I know not what)
Should e're have made us spirits forfeit that,
You were assured of by Heavens word;

Viz. Whosoever turned unto the Lord,
Should have their crimson sins made white as Snow;
Their Scarlet ones like Wool; and what they ow
Cancelled out of Gods omniscience Book,
Even all sins trumpery, that they ever took
On trust: and after death should all receive,
Glory in Heaven, as much as they could crave.
Did not your consciences many times
Speak, when you acted these unheard of Crimes?
Then why did ye not say Tempter forbear?
This, this ye did not, being voy'd of fear,
Of either Heavens anger, or of Hell,
Till scorching flames of a Sulphurous smell,
Forced you on former actions to reflect,
Which heretofore you ever did neglect.
This you will find a good Apology,
When you to Heavens Tribunal called be;
Then you shall hear what I already said,
That if you had implored The Almighty's aid,
He would at all points, so have armed you,
As all my fiery Darts should ever bow
And never pierce, But since your free election
Was sin, you must not grudge at your rejection.
You are my Prisoners, and Hell your place,
Where you shall never see the blessed Face
Of God in mercy, but for ever must,
Burn with his wrath, for your unnat'ral Lust.

Lot. Come Wife, why do thou tarry so behind?

Wife. I am a Woman, can I be unkind?
Have we not dwelt in Sodom several years?
Can I behold its flames, and not shed Tears?

Lot. When Heaven is angry, we must be so too,

Wife. Ah Husband! flesh and blood this cannot do.

Lot. But flesh and blood shall not inherit bliss,
This truth we fully see confirmed in this
Sad fire.

Wife. O Husband, Husband! see the smoke,
The Town is fired.

Lot. No, it will provoke
My God, who has his mercy magnified,
To grieve, that I'ave not with the City died.

Wife. I must look back, let come of it what will,
What God has promised he will fulfill.
I shall not dye.

Lot. Fond Woman say not so,
Thou must perform conditions, if thou go
Alive to Zoar.

Wife. O! I Am senseless struck.

Lot. Who break God's precepts never have better luck.

Wife. Help Husband e're I dye, I fixed stand,
My mouth is full of Salt.

Lot. It is God's hand
That strikes; his blessed will I Will not control,
However, Lord have mercy on her Soul.

Chorus. Beware of Sin, for God abhors
Impenitents, and all their scores,
With pen of Iron graves in stone,
Which he will produce when time is done.
Of vengeance if you would be free,
Beware of Lust and Gluttony.
This drowns the Soul, that does it kill,
Though Christ for it his blood did spill.
The man that does attempt the Crown,
Deserv's not to have kindness shown.
Christ's honor is his Crown, yet we
From time to time attempters be;
Though he be patient and forbears,
As witness his Jerus'lem Tears;
Yet at the last, when he does come
With all his Angels; then our doom
(With Majesty) he shall repeat,
When we can neither Bribe nor Cheat
The Judge, nor Jury; but submit
To those that hurry to the Pit;
Where we must be deprived of bliss,
If we make Sin our business.
Then let us look on Sodom's flames, and say,
From Sodom's sins, deliver Lord we pray.

FINIS.
Abraham's FAITH.

(...). Mark. 9.23. The Persons.
Prologus. Hagar, Abraham's Handmaid. Ismael, Hagar's Son. Abraham. Sarah.
Isaac. Angel. Midwife. Devil. Faith. Flesh. Despair. Abraham's Servants.
Chorus. Epilogue.
Prologus.
FRet not to see a Tragi-Comedy,
Written by one, who thinks no shame to be
All things to all men, Pedant, Player, Fool,
Provided he may gain a Sin-sick Soul;
And bring him back to his first Love and Lord,
Using no other Spel than Heavens word.
The Atheist I do first Court and say,
Sir, you're invited to our homely Play;
Where, if you look with Abraham's faithful eye,
You mercy in a Mystery may spy.
The disobedient Child, I do invite
To come, and view with me this happy sight.
Young Isaac, who submits to the knife
Of Abraham, from whom he first had life.
The tender Mother may also draw near,
And hear or read these Lines and never fear,
Abra'm by God must only tried be,
The Boy by him, and then delivery
From Heaven will come, or if the World's worthies,
Will daign a look, or stoop to catch such flies
As I have brought; or can spare any time,
From greater matters to read humble Rhyme,
They Are welcome. Sick men also from their beds
May come, and have a Pillow for their heads.
He that is fit to hang himself may come,
Here is a Ram already in his Room.
In fine, of all sorts, comers welcome be,
To see Heavens Wisdom, Pow'er, Philanthropy.
Abraham's Faith,
Hagar, Ismael, Abraham, Sarah, Midwife. Hag. ALas poor Boy, our comfort now is
over!
I never knew what 'twas to grieve before.
How often have I solac'd in the Arms
Of thy dear Father? Oh! but now the charms,
Printed by Heaven upon my Mistress face
Are irresistible, alas! alas!

Ism. Why Mother, why? was it not always so?
Hag, No Child, you are ignorant, thou do not know;
It is not long since Old Age and despair
Of Issue, made her self account me fair,
And recommend me to my dearest Lord;
Though now her piercing looks, as sharpest Sword
Cut what they see. We, we are both undone,
She must enjoy old Abraham alone.

Ism. But Mother, Sarah has no Children yet.

Hag. I know she has not, but the time is set
For her deliv'ry; and 'twill be a Boy,
To dis-inherit thee, the only joy
Of me thy Mother.

Ism. Dis-inherit me
He cannot, unless Law perverted be:
The Primo-geniture I Am sure is mine,
Which no man shall persuade me to resign,

Hag. I Am but the Handmaid, Sarah is the wife;
These very words may breed an endless strife
In The Family: and Mistress without doubt,
Will study means whereby to cast us out.

Sar. My Lord can you the glories of my face
Behold and not admire? Can there be place
In your grave Breast, for any other flame
Beside that kindled from my Eyes? then tame
Your strange desires; and let your lawful Bed
Bound your caresses. Know that you are Wed
To Sarah now, who cease to be dead
And barren as before: View her from head
To foot, her features and her limbs mark well,
And if these please not, see her Belly swell.
One Child from Heaven may balanced be with two,
That come by Natures law, and mine is so.

Abr. Dearest of Wives, this new thought on discourse,
Seems to rise from some malicious source.
What is thy will? or what do thou desire?
Would you have fuel added to the fire
That Heaven has kindled? Dear what do require?

Sar, That you shake off your Handmaids, and Love me,
Is all I crave; I will not Rivall'd be.
Kind Husbands when their Wives in my condition
Be, (for the most part) do with full submission
Hearken to them, fearing untimely birth.

Abr. Well Sarah, well, you are disposed for mirth.

Sar. It Is mirth to you, but I must feel the sorrow,
I think I shall be brought to Bed to morrow.
Go, call the Midwife, I am very bad;
I never yet such Griping torture had,

Abr. Cheer up my dearest, when thou see the Boy,
'Twill banish grief, and ravish thee with joy.
When Males are born the trouble is forgot,
And thine will be a Boy I question not.

Sar. Pray for me Husband, this is a sharp bout.

Abr. He who has promised, he will help thee out.
Midwife what news?

Mid. You have a lovely Child,
Thank Heaven your expectation's not beguiled.

Sar. Take him my Lord, this Boy will make you glad.

Abr. It is the best that e're my dearest had,
Here, take ye him, it is time that he were fed.

Mid. Nay hold as yet my Lord, you have forfeited.

Abr. Forfeited, what?

Mid. Good Sir, a Midwives fee.

Abr. Here take the Child, and I will give it thee.
Here.

Mid. Sir I thank you, when I women lay
Of their first born, I see I'ave double pay;
The next my Lady has, my Lord will hold
His hand, and will not part with so much Gold.

Abr. I am no Niggard if that time do come,
I promise thee to give a bigger sum.

Mid. My Lord I Am but in Jest, yet may you have
A numerous issue, if you nothing gave.

Sar. Husband you know I laughed heretofore,
Have not I reason now, as many more;
Then from my laughter let him have his name.

Abr. I'ave called him Isaac, is not that the same?

Sar. My Lovely Babe, come let me suckle thee.
There is no Mortal can more joyful be.

Chorus. Heavens mind's fulfilled,
And Sarah still^d.
O how she longed,
And said I Am wronged.
No Wife like me,
Who Abra'ms be:
All have their Joys,
Their Babies-toys.
I Am only she,
Who barren be.
New, now her Breasts
Are made two Nests,
For harboring
The loved Offspring,
Of her dear Lord,
At Heavens word.
And more she may
Have that same way.
Gods promises
To us are bliss.
No Art avails,
When Heaven fails.
His blessings he
Bestowed, then she
Got blown Saills.
If any after Children want, they may
For remedy, with her to Heaven pray.

Abraham, Sarah, Isaac, Angel. Ab. Dear heart methinks this Boy has sucked
too long.

Sar. What? and has neither Feet nor Tongue
E're he be weaned he must a Footman be,
To run and prattle up and down with thee.
Now do your pleasure.

Ab. Call our friends together,
He must not be a burden to his Mother.

Isa. Mam if I lose my pap the Child will cry.

Sar. Yes pretty thing thou must, or Mam will dye:
O! how it snugs and sleeps upon my Breast;
Poor rogue, I Am sure of all he loves me best.
Here, thou shall have thy bubby one month longer,
E're that be over my Chicken may be stronger:
And if that will not do, He give'm another,
No Love is like to that of a dear Mother.
Come dry Nurse, take the Child and use him well,
Thy care of him, shall make thee ever dwell
With me in plenty. Abram see the scorn
Of Hagar's Brat, that in my house was born;
If you deceive not Heaven which counts you just,
You must him and his Mother both, out thrust;
Because the Rog^e in years has got the start,
He strives with Isaac for an equal part
In thy estate, but it must not be so;
If me and mine you Love, pray let them go.

Ab. What change of humors all you Women have!
It is not long since you the handmaid gave,
And said, of her you shall raise seed to me;
I thought this was enough to make her free
In The house, but now I see it is otherways,
Favors of this kind, have sudden decays.
However your desire I will fulfill;
Hagar be gone, it is thy Mistress will.

Ang. Well said my friend, for I desire the same,
Thy Family must from Isaac have its name,
And blessing too. Ab. Thy will I shall obey;
Come Sirs, get up and make no more delay:
The Lord commands, whose laws are all to me
Just, though contrary they to nature be.
This Bread and Water take, and so go hence,
You have abused your Mistress patience;
Though I know nothing, I must not control,
This peevish humor grieves my very Soul.

Chorus. Each day has its succeeding night,
Clouds sometimes darken the Suns light.
The Flowers that florid are to day,
Tomorrow Frost nips quite away.
Youth like a shadow flies, and age
Says, it is my turn to tread the Stage.
Life must give place to grim-fac'd Death,
There Is nothing fixed made of Earth.
But all dance round and Circle make,
While one another place does take.
The passions likewise have their turns,
One Breast with Love and Hatred burns.
One's sad, and merry, Melancholy,
And all sometimes, are counted folly.
Honors and pleasures are so brittle,
That most wise men esteem them little.
In fine there is naught but thoughts of Heaven,
That brings Wages home at Even.

Angel, Abraham, Devil, Faith, Flesh, Despair. Ang. Abra'm my faithful Servant,
do thou hear?
I must give thee a visit once a year;
I^ave found thee perfect always hitherto,
And now I am come, to try if thou will do
What I command thee, without stay or grudge;
Remember, once thou called me righteous Judge.

Ab. I Am here, speak Lord, thy Servant hears and will
Count all thy precepts Just, and them fulfill.

Ang. What could thou freely part withal for me?

Ab. What could I not? since I have all from thee.

Ang. Then thou must take thy Son, thine only Son,
And sacrifice him; so my will is done.
The Mount Moriah's fittest for thy turn,
There thou shall lead young Isaac, and him burn;
This action, Abraham, will please me well.

Ab. My Lord if you command, I Will go to Hell.

Devil. Fond fool give over, Religion makes thee mad,
Heavens Minions never yet rejoicing had
Without a damp; their sweet is mixed with sour,
It is not possible for humane power,
To act what he commands, being as strict
As those, who bid men without straw make brick.

Faith. Give over thou murdering Sp'rit, do not delude,
The friend of God, all whose commands are good,
If he should fear or fret at his desire,
Thou can not keep him from a fiercer fire
Than he is bid to kindle for his Son,
That Is Brimston, and will last when this is done;
And yet will be no pleasing Sacrifice
To God nor him, do Abraham and be wise.

Flesh. What Father ever yet so cruel was,
To Murder his own Child without a cause?
View but these Limbs and features of his face,
His sparkling Eyes, then there will be no space
Left in thy hardened heart, for cruelty;
A faithful man will never Butcher be
Of humane Bodies --

Faith. Faint flesh, those Eyes and Features are but toys,
That fade with time and age, there is greater Joys
Laid up for Isaac, immortality;
What needs thou care then if he burned be?
Besides, have thou not heard how Phaenix rare,
Burned to ashes, does her self repair
Out of the same, being first a little Worm?
If thou believe, thou need'st not fear this storm.

Despair. Thou can not be beloved of God, since he
Bids thee perform such monstrous cruelty:
They say he is merciful, if it be so,
Thou may lie still and never think to go
To Mount Moriah, whom he loves, he loves;
But this command, rather his hatred proves.

Faith. This is an old tone, and bespeaks thee fool;
Know, that he has given every man his Soul,
Which, if he back again from him requires,
By Famine, Sword, or Pestilence, or Fires;
It Is never to destroy that he does this,
But for removal to Eternal bliss.

Ab. Give over, give over, now it is almost day,
I will no more dispute. Believe and pray
I will, for success on my loved host,
I spend but time, my God is at the cost;
He gave me Isaac, and desires that he
In fire and flames should from the Altar be,
Sent whence he came --

Sarah, Abraham, Servants. Sar. My Lord I fear you have a troubled head,
For I could scarcely hold you in your Bed:
Tell me your Dream, it fearful is I Am sure,
For I have Dreamed too, and cannot endure
Now when awake, no not to think of it:
I saw a Bow from Heaven, bent and hit
My darling.

Ab. Sarah then our Dreams are one,
God bids me go and burn my little Son.

Sar. Burn him? alas! I see I laughed too soon,
Then must my hopes and comforts all be gone.

Ab. Peace Sarah, it is God requires the Lad,
And he shall have him, if I twenty had.
Can I bestow them better, than to give
My Maker all? in whom I move and live.

Sar. My Lord it is but a Dream, as yet forbear,
Such things require a double Messenger.

Ab. Dearest thou know my Dreams are always true,
Though such a Dream as this I never knew.
However, honey, let us with submission
Part with the Lad, obeying Heavens commission;
His pow'er is great, so is his mercy too,
Thou know not what he is about to do:
For I may safely with the Boy return;
And if I do not, there is no cause to mourn,
We are but as were, and he another
May give, whom thou may call Isaack's Brother.
The promiser is all-sufficient,
We can have no just cause then to repent
Our Piety, which always promise has,
Of grace and freedom from Eternal Death.

Sar. My Lord he is your own, and God your Friend,
Obey him, mean while I will Prayers send
For him to Heaven, as soon as you are gone,
And beg he may not give me cause to moan,
Who laughed before. --

Ab. Go Sadle me my Ass, and two of you
Must go with me, where yet I do not know.
Call my Boy softly, tell him he must rise,
To see his Father offer Sacrifice.
Go to the Log-pile, and choose out some wood,
Cleave none for use, but that is exceeding good.

Ser. Sir all is ready.

Ab. Sarah fare thee well,
Still hope in God, the Lad may live and dwell
Again with thee his Mother, till he come
To man's 'state: or another in his room.

Sar. My doubts are over, may the Lord direct
You in your Journey, for if he protect,
Or kill the Boy, I shall leave to complain;
Perhaps he does intend a greater gain,
Than either you or I as yet expect;
Kiss me dear Child, and thou my God effect
The present work, my Husband is but clay,
And may stretch out his hand another way
Than is thy will; again kiss me my Son,
Then go with courage, Heavens will be done.

Ab. Behold my Servants, do not you espy,
Above the rest, a hill stands very high?
I and my little man must yonder go,
Mean while abide ye here.

Ser. My Lord why so?
May we not bear our Master company?

Ab. No, If ye did perhaps ye'd hinder me,
From acting the highest piece of Piety,
That ever yet was heard, or seen with Eye.

Ser. Have we not seen the Sacrifice before?

Ab. It Is true, and yet in this will be much more
Faith, Resolution, needful, than when I
For smaller matters Sacrifice or pray.

Ser. Good my Lord, let us go to see the sight.

Ab. No, no, I cannot, it will you affright.

Ser. We must contented be and you obey,
Hoping you will not from us make long stay.

Ab. I will return as soon as I have done,
'Twill be no pleasure to stay there alone.

Ser. Alone you cannot be, this little Boy
Can make a Wilderness a place of joy.

Ab. But I must leave him there my God commands.

Ser. First dearest Master tie your Servants hands;
For we will sooner far resolve to dye,
Than see you actor of such cruelty.
This is in jest.

Ab. No, I must Sacrifice
The Boy, Heaven bids me, who I Am sure is wife;
If I do freely act what he commands,
He either will approve, or hold my hands.
Tnink you that I can any other thing
Value above my All-sufficient King?
No no, it is his mind and't shall be mine,
In spite of all who against it do combine.
I think his Mother has the greatest cause,
Who willingly submits to Heavens Laws;
Bidding me act what my good God has said,
For proof thereof, she him encouraged,
To suffer valiantly --

Ser. Sir, We are not to quest'on your intent,
Being our Master; but a good event
We will implore.

Ab. Come, come my pretty boy,
This cloudy day may end in Sunshine Joy.
Take up the Wood my Son, I'ave knife and fire,
We must fulfillers be of Heavens desire.

Chorus. Eternal Wisdom, when he made
Sun, Moon and Stars, to each he said,
Take you your turns; you must the day
Govern, and you your Scepter sway
In The night, when men are gone to rest,
And think to sleep with quiet Breast.
This is Heavens Laws, and yet we see,
That men then most unquiet be.
Abram from Heaven hears a voice,
Which quickly marred his new made joys.
It bids him go and burn his Son,
Which is no sooner said than done,
And Sarah who in all men's thought,
Would have Abraham counted naught,
For harboring such cruelty
In's Breast, as he should Butcher be
To his own Child; contents and says,
Husband we may have happy days
When Isaac 's gone, then why should we,
Strive Abrams hinderers to be?
Go on Sir, let your high desire,
Be hallowed with Heavens fire.

Isaac, Abraham, Angel, Epilogue. Isa. O Father, Father, one thing yet we lack,
(...) Lamb for offering you'ave forgot to take.
shall I run back and make a quick return?

Ab. No, no, you need not, that which I must burn
God will provide; come let us go together,
^e find a Lamb, my Boy, when I come thither.

Isa. Does any clean Beast pasture on that hill?

Ab. That work which God begins he will fufill.
^ut hark my Child, do thou not fear my God;

Isa. Why doubt you that?

Ab. Then this thy load of Wood
Must thee consume. --

Isa. But Father, does your God such Sacrifice equire?

Ab. It seems so now.

Isa. Father be wise,
The Devilish can change into a Saint of light,
May be 'twas he that called you in the night.

Ab. No Child, God's promise goes far with me,
Who faith, that none shall ever tempted be
Above what they are able; I do not fear,
Nor need thou to shed a guiltless tear.

Isa. My tender limbs will never endure the heat.

Ab. He Will send his Angels to wipe off the sweat.

Isa. My dearest Father, is your heart so hard?
Can nothing this your enterprise retard?

Ab. Nothing my Child, though I be full of love,
And grieve to kill thee, yet since my Jehove
Commands; My faith does overcome my sense,
And makes me with humanity dispense.
Boy thou must dye.

Isa. I Am glad it is for God.

Ab. None other should have made me lay this load
On Isaacks tender shoulders. Now my Child
We Are at the place where I must Altar build.
Dig up the Turf, and let us raise the Earth.

Isa. Ah Father I Am already out of Breath.
The thoughts of Death, with the Sun's melting heat
O'recometh me, Oh see how I do sweat!
Is It done enough?

Abra. Not yet, it must b^ higher,
That all the ashes may fall from the fire.
Now it is enough, come Child, bring me the Woo^

Isa. It Is here my Father.

Ab. It is very good
All Is done so far, my Boy thou must be bound.

Is. Your will be done: O that I may not swoun!
But with undaunted courage yield my breath,
To him who power has of life and death.
^t is my Maker's will and I submit,
^oping by him to be kept from the pit
^^fernal: He will raise me up again,
With Saints and Angels ever to remain.
^ehold my hands! I Will fold them for your ease.

Ab. Son, knew I any way my God to please,
(...) would not touch thee.

Isa. I am now grown strong,
and valiant too, I count this death no wrong.

Abr. Thou must get up before I bind thy feet.

Isa. Sir, that your will I should perform is meet.
^ow bind not hard, I will not struggle much,
^ut dearest Father, kill me at first touch,
^he knife is sharp enough and you are strong.

Ab. Dear Child I tremble, and may strike thee wrong.

Isa. Hold Father but a little, let me pray
(...) Heaven, and first Lord teach me what to say.
^y God look on me with a tender Eye,
and pardon all my sins of Infancy;
^^en my Eyes before the knife come down,
that while I live, I may leap at the Crown
^epar'd for Martyrs. Lord let me inherit,
^e blessings promised by thy holy Spirit.
^all, call thy Angels to receive that Soul,
^ho never as yet did willingly control
Thy will. Sir, now strike on, for I have done.

Ab. No, I must pray too, e're I can go on.
O All-sufficient whose purer Eye,
Look'th with abhorrence on all cruelty;
Accept this Sacrifice, make strong my arm,
Since thou best know that I intend no harm
To my dear Child, but that I may the name,
Receive (when done) of faithful Abraham.
Lord I believe, raise feeble hand and heart
To give the blow --
Now Child I strike. Here. O! who holds m^ Arm?

Ang. Stay Abram, stay, and do not any harm
Unto thy Son, I minded but to try,
If I could in thy faith a flaw espy.
Look but behind thee, there is the Sacrifice,
Lay hold of it, and let young Isaac rise;
I Am sure thou love me 'bove each Earthly thing
Since thou wast willing to make offering
Of thy own flesh: Touch not the hopeful Boy,
But let him to his Mother go with Joy.
This Ram thou shall instead of him up offer,
I never did intend that he should suffer.

Ab. The best of news that ever yet were hear
For though I did believe, I greatly feared.
But blessed be God, and let him ever be,
As Abraham's so also God to thee;
Let no distrust for ever Lodge within
Thy Breast, you are Type of him who must for
Be offered really; is it not best
To go unto the Servants?

Isa. There Is no haste.
Before approaching death I prayed, and now
Restored again, I Will at the Altar bow.
He that is freed from danger ought with speed,
To bless the hand that helped him in his need.

Ab. Do happy Child, and I will second thee;
^oynt Prayers welcome unto Heaven be.

Isa. Lord let me ever with all thankfulness
Adore thy name, since thou did not oppress,
With grief my Mother, but have saved me,
That I to her may greatest comfort be
^n old age, when my Fathers hoary head,
^hew's to the World that he is almost dead.
^id me thy will perform, I Will never grudge,
Being persuaded you are a righteous Judge.

Ab. Lord I can say no more than I have said,
Who thee implores shall never want timely aid.
Thy Arm is strong, Eyes quick and always ready,
^o ease his Burden, who does carry steady;
(...) have endeavored, and my weak intention,
Has met with mercy, Heavens condescension.

FINIS.
EPILOGUE.
IF any thing in these few sheets be found,
May burn the thorn, or prick the stony ground.
If any thing the way-side-corn does gather,
To Sow't in good, then, then my Heavenly Father,
The Meat is right, if not spoiled by the Cook;
If so, the squeamish may forbear to look
Upon it. If any hunger starved be,
Eat heartily, it will not surfeit thee.
If any Gentleman or Lady find,
Ought in this Poem fitteth not their mind;
They may repair unto some fatter Soil,
Where they may have their lukewarm hearts mad boil
With love and valor, (Imps of flesh and blood)
I'ave no such ware, but here is that is as good.
And love, and valor too, yet such as will
Not hurt the lover, nor the valiant kill.
They love and fight, and yet both victors be.
Abra'm and God. This Tragi-Comedy,
Pleased my self, when I it undertook,
And pleased my friends, when they on it did look;
But if it please not others, let them cast
It out of Doors, perhaps 't may be the last,
That they shall see of mine in such a style,
For this I Will neither Plaudite, beg, nor smile.
FINIS.
JOSEPH REVIVED. OR, The Twelve last Chapters of Genesis Metaphrazed.

Containing the LIFE and DEATH Of Holy JOSEPH.

By GEORGE LESLY, Minister of Wittering in Northamptonshire.

And we know that all things work together for good to them that Love God, Romans
8.28. LONDON, ^rinted for the Author, and are to be sold by Charles Smith at
the Angel near the Inner Temple gate, Fleet Street. 1678.

Imprimatur,

Gul. Jane S.T.B. Reverend. in Christo Patri Dno. Henrico Episc. Land. a Sacris
Domesticis.
Jan. 17. 1675.
To the Right Worshipful WILL. WYMONDESOLD, ESQUIRE, Mr. EDMUND, Mr. RICHARD,
Mr. MATTHEW, and Mr. THOMAS his Brethren; with their truly Virtuous Mother and
Sisters.
Worthy Sirs and Ladies,
BEING about to throw my Mite into the Public Treasury, to plant a tender VINE
in the Lords VINEYARD, I thought you fittest to fence it with Your favorable
Aspects, who are not only almost equal in Number but Virtues, to those Sacred
Patriarchs, whose History I have metaphrazed. The Meeter is like my Self, dull
and despicable, but the Matter is of Divine Inspiration, which juires Your
acceptance by Heavens Authority, while as the other only lets the World know,
that I am,

YOURS, Extraordinary obliged, GEO. LESLY.
Wittering, Jan. 7. 1675/6.
TO THE READER.
IF Heaven be pleased to dart his glorious Rays
Into my Soul, let others take the Bays,
Who climb Parnassus and Mount Helicon
For airy Notions, while I at the Throne
Of Mercy beg an understanding Heart
To measure out what Moses did impart
To the World, concerning Jacob and his Seed,
Among whom a Dream did great dissension breed.
Though God inspired the Prophet from above,
And he (poor Heart) revealed all in love,
Whose harmless Vision counted was a crime,
And so (perhaps) may this my humble Rhyme:
Yet if in friendly manner you disclose
My oversights, I Will mend, or write in Prose.
G. L.

To my Worthy Friend Mr. GEORGE LESLY, upon his Poem called JOSEPH Revived.
WITH Fiction while the airy Poet does
Abuse the Text, thou tell the naked truth;
Thou stuff'st thy Verse with Sense, and every Rhyme
Complete speaks thee a Poet without crime.
He who in Sacred Phrase was once forlorn,
And piecemeal shown, like to his Garment, torn,
Thou offer'st whole; snips and shred's they Theme,
Thou draw'st his Story up without a Seam.
O happy Art! thrice Joseph rides in State,
In Pharaoh's Second Char'ot first, then date
His second Trophy with Divine Records,
His Honor last commenceth with thy words.
Bid Brethren all his Glory'n Egypt tell;
He needs not now, thy Pen has don't so well,
That all the British Orb of it may ring,
And we of thee, while thou of him do sing.
Tho. Woolsey D. D.

JOSEPH REVIVED.
OF Rachel's longed for darling since I sing,
And thy beloved, help me Jacob's King.
My Bark is crazie, and my stock is small,
Yet if thou Wind and Sea command, I shall
Safe to the Harbor this my Pinnace bring,
Then of my self and it make offering.
At Padan-aram had this worthy breath,
Not long before the beauteous Rachels death,
Yet Hebron was the place of his abode,
At seventeen years beloved of man and God:
Where with his Brethren, Dan and Napthali,
Asher and Gad, he on the downs did lie,
Feeding the Flocks with them, their ill report
Grieved the Lad, for which he did resort
Unto his aged Father, and declared
Those passages that he had seen and heard.
These actions, Boy, to them will fatal prove,
Though I can never take from thee that love
I unto Rachel (while she lived) did bear.
For proof whereof this Livery take and wear.
This, with his tidings did exasperate
His Brethrens spirits, so that him they hate,
Which heaven soon perceives, and his fame
Raises, by dreams to be fulfilled on them;
The which when he (awake) begins to tell,
Their eyes inflame and hearts with anger swell
Against the harmless Youth, who ne'rtheless
In friendly manner did it thus express:
This night, said he, as we all binding were
Sheaves in the field, mine did it self uprear
In King-like posture, and yours round did stand,
Making obeisance, waiting its command.
To which his Brethren hastily replied,
Shall thou reign over us? Shall it e're be said
That thou shall have dominion? No, thy grave
Is just reward, for these thy Dreams to have.
Yet where Jehovah works no man can let,
He dreams again of their succeeding fate,
Which he once more does unto them reveal,
And said, this other I will not conceal.
And thus it was, Behold! the Sun and Moon,
With Stars eleven, to me have homage done.
Of this he did not only certify
His Brethren, but his Father, who did cry,
Fie Son! what mean these uncouth thoughts? be sure
Such wild presages I shall never endure;
Think thou, that I, my Wife and Children too
Shall crouch and bow, and fall fore such as you?
No child, be wise, forbear thus to divine,
Lest all the rest against thee do combine.
This storm is ceased, and the young men gone
Their flocks to feed, in Sechem every one,
For whose long absence, neither night nor day
Can Jacob rest, till Joseph's sent away,
Who said, Go down and see if all be right,
I Have suffered much for my ten Sons this night.
Your will, said he, is unto me a Law,
I Will go to Sechem, though I never saw
The place: no sooner does he undertake
his journey, than the way he does forsake,
And wanders too and fro in open field,
Till one drew nigh and pitied the child,
Saying, What seek'st thou Stripling, it is my grief
To see thee straying here without relief?
My Brethren, Sir, said he, pray tell me whither
They Have driven their flocks to feed, I must go thither.
Boy, answered he, I think I heard them say,
Rise up, and let us to Dothan straight away:
And there they are, for any thing I know,
The grass is good, because the ground is low.
My thanks I give you, Sir, and if I find
Them there, I Will say you were exceeding kind.
This said, he runs thither joyfully,
Not dreaming once of any danger nigh.
But 'twas a dream, for he is no sooner spied
By his malicious Brethren, than they cried,
Behold! our Dreamer comes, prophetic Mome;
Come, let us slay him, he shall never go home,
And cast him in some Pit, then we will say
Some evil Beast has taken his life away.
And then it is hoped that we shall quickly see
A final end both of his Dreams and he.
But Reuben who was judged least to respect
God or his Father, does the Lad protect;
Sa'ing, Let Us not kill him, for some time or other
It will come out, remember he is our Brother;
If his Blood cry, let us not think to thrive:
We'll rather put him in this Pit alive.
This course he was the willinger to take,
Because thereby he thought to get him back
Safe to his Father. All this time the Lad
Thought of no ill, nor yet suspicion had,
But rushed among them, ravished with joy,
Wishing them health; who answer, Foolish Boy
Have not more Dreams to tell? we must now see
If this fine Coat does make thee prophecy.
Are we not Brethren? Oh! be not so rude,
Said he, I mean to you nothing but good.
No, Stripling no, thy Sighs, thy Pra'rs, thy Tears
With us must take no place, thy tender years
Which pity crave, must taste our cruelty;
In this dry Pit thou art designed to lie.
To It, fling him down, it is Noon we'll take repast:
But hold, who is this draws toward us so fast?
Ishma'lites surely, come from Gilead
Load'n with Spice, Balm, Myrrh, Egyptian Trade.
By this time Judah's heart began to melt,
Whose words declare that he great trouble felt.
What profit's in our Brothers blood, said he,
Though we conceal't, yet murderers we be.
Give o'r; I Have found a way that is better far:
We see these Camels richly laden are,
Let Us with their Masters this our Dreamer truck;
And being gone, we'll pray for his good luck.
This, this will clear us from the Calumny
Of Fratricide that would upon us lie.
Ho, Chapmen tarry, want ye not a Lad
To drive your Horses and promote your Trade?
Here Is one, we'll sell him cheap. A pretty Youth,
Replied the Merchants, he will serve us both.
How prize ye him? Speak, if ye mean that we
Should buy him of you, rate him not too high.
At one word, twenty Pieces is our price.
Hold, here is your Money, he is worth it twice:
And so we hope he will give, the Boy likes well.
The Wares are always good that Merchants sell.
We'll carry him to Egypt, for his Age
And Feature fitteth him to be a Page
To some great Lady; if that will not do,
My Lord he can serve in his Chamber too.
And if the Rules of Phisiognomie
Deceive us not, such Graces hidden lie
Under his flaxen hair, and downie chin,
As hitherto in any scarce has bin.
Come, let us go hence; I Will now unto the Pit,
Says Reu. to see if Joseph be in it,
But missing of him, whom he thought to find,
He instantly returns with heavy mind
Unto his Brethren, crying out, Alas!
The Boy is taken out of yonder place:
Whither shall I go? not home to my dear Father,
Seeing he will require of me; no, I Will rather
Breath out the rest of my unhappy years
In some dark Cell, and expiate with tears
My double crime. No Brother, cry the rest,
We have a project (if ye think it best)
Will with our Father clear both us and you:
Look, here is his Coat, and there are Coats enough,
Let Us with their blood besprinkle it, and then
Go cheerfully to Hebron back again,
And ask our Father if this garb he knows,
Since at first view it like to Joseph's shows.
On this they all conclude, and home return
With joyful faces, though they would cause to mourn;
And with these tidings Jacob did salute,
At which surpised, he is suddenly struck mute,
And beats his Breast, his Eyes great floods let out
Of Tears, and said, Poor Joseph without doubt
Is torn in pieces by some evil Beast,
Who first devours, and after makes his feast.
This said, he rent his clothes, sackcloth put on,
And many days mourned for him alone,
Without all comfort, till at last his Sons
And Daughters all come unto him at once,
Saying, O Father why does this your grief
Transport you so, as not to take relief;
We think you might be joyful, when you see
Of your own Loins this goodly company.
No, said old Jacob, though I love you well,
Yet this Lad's death will make me go to Hell
Mourning: poor heart! in him alone I lived,
And now being dead, how can I be but grieved?
Yet all this sorrow can nothing retard
The sturdy Pedlars, who by driving hard
Have got to Egypt, where by quick retaile
They mean their Spice to vend, and Joseph's sale
Expect; both which accordingly fell out,
Buyers (like Bees) to them flock round about;
And Potiphar himself beholds their Trade,
Where suddenly he spies the lovely Lad;
Likes, buys and pays, carries him to his house,
That Proverb's false, Mountains bring forth a Mouse.
At home when he good notice taken had,
Of all things were performed by the Lad,
And of the Blessings he from God received,
Name and Religion, then of him he craved;
Which known, from slavery he did set him free,
Saying, Of my House thou now shall Ruler be.
The pious Youth no sooner is preferred,
Then the others Pra'er for thrift is answered;
For God did then the Egyptians house so bless,
That all things prosp'red, whether more or less.
This made the Captain trust him with his store
Of all that he had cared for, nor knew no more
Then what he eat; But, ah! the goodly face
Of Joseph tempted Jempsar to embrace
The holy Youth with her surrounding Arms,
And glance her amorous eyes, adul'trous Charms.
These made him blush with shame and fear together,
And answer, No, you're Sacred as my Mother.
Does not my Master trust his State with me?
And has withheld nothing at all but thee.
This wickedness is great, I dare not do it;
Pardon me Mistress, and leave off your suit.
Say, if I grant all that which you desire,
Can you keep off God's Wrath and Husbands Ire?
Nay, he will be offended, and my Lord
Will never after take an Hebrews word.
Yet this enflamed Wanton gives not o'r
To speak him kindly every day and hour;
Adding forced Caresses, but in vain,
From day to day, till she had drunk the bane
That either must her Lust or Fury end
Upon her Servant and her Husbands Friend:
Both which are grown to that prodigious height,
That though the Sun shines, yet she counts it night,
Saying within her self, he is here I guess
Alone in the house about his business;
This is the last exploit I mind to try,
To which the Fool must either yield or die;
And then laid hold upon his Coat and swore,
I Will have all I desire of thee before
Thou go, there is none can see or hear the noise;
But he as frighted at her lustful voice,
Flees out and leaves his Garment in her hand.
Where God forbids to fight, he dares not stand.
Now Hell and she must act another part,
Viz. mourning face put on, dissembling heart,
The sugared words she used but of late
For baits, turns Choler, this to cruel hate;
Calling aloud to all, for Heavens sake help,
I am abused by this Hebrew Whelp.
See here the Relicts of his villainy:
My cries it made him leave, and from me flee.
And now would God my Potiphar were come,
For I shall never rest till he is at home,
And have related unto him what fare
Must be expected in the house where Hebrews are.
He Is at the door, run and let in my Lord.
How now my Girl? What? neither smile nor word?
Smile, No: how can I? since your very slave
Emboldened is, thine, not my Love to crave:
He has attempt'd that Fort was never besieged
By more than thee, to whom I am obliged.
Horrid! Nay, it is no Jest, this Coat but see,
And then my wrong revenge, or love not me.
To which the furious Husband answer made,
Enough my Jempsar, it shall never be said
That you (my Love) can any thing demand
That I Will deny, wherefore I pray you stand
To see the Prologue of his torturing pains,
He shall imprisoned be and bound with chains.
Go, cursed Rogue, I Will never trust the face
That Is beautiful, it is seldom lined with grace.
This heard, the courteous Lad made humble bow,
Saying, My Lord, I never wronged you;
Time trying all things, you shall plainly see
The fault was hers, and there was none in me:
Wherefore, I hope, that God whom I do serve
Will grant such favor, that I may not starve
In this dark Prison --
Thy words are bootless, Jailer keep him sure
While I have studied what he shall endure.
Which, when Jehovah from's Imperial Throne
Heard, wills a winged Herald to be gone
Down to his Footstool-Earth, and there to tell
The Turn-key, he must use the Prisoner well.
This made our guiltless Youth much favor find
With him, that unto others was unkind:
For, what in prison was among them done,
Joseph was doer of it; he alone
Without control ruled all, because the Lord
Him prosper'd, according to the World.
Yet all this time our Joseph never thought
How he from prison should at last be brought,
Till he that all for good makes work together,
Sent Pharaoh's Butler and his Baker thither
For misdemeanour, who were put in ward
With Potiphar the Captain of the Guard,
Whom Joseph served; at last each dreamed a dream,
Viz. Butler, Baker on a several Theme,
Which so perplexed both of them next morrow,
That he it spied, and said, Sirs, what sorrow
Tormenteth you, ye lowr and are so sad?
There is some cause, if your night-sleep was bad.
Boy, that is not all, but we have dreaming been,
And none can tell us what the same does mean.
Hear me, my Masters, do not you yet know
That their Interpretations from below
Come not, it is only such, events can read
As are with Sp'ritual Mantles overspread.
Then do but tell me what was each man's Theme,
Not doubting I shall quickly read your Dream.
A Vine, said Butler, I saw me before,
And in the same three Branches and no more,
Which budded, shooting forth its Blossom-flow'rs,
Whose clusters all brought forth such Grapes as ours;
The Cup of Pharaoh being in my hand,
I took, and pressed them in at his command;
Who afterward both took and did it drink.
This is the sum of what I dreamed I think.
is this the thing you have a mind to know?
Come, rouse your Spirit, it needs not be so low;
The Branches three, as many days portend,
Before the end of which the King will send
For you, and to your wonted place restore,
His Cup to bear, as you was wont before.
When this Prediction is fulfilled on thee,
Be sure to put the King in mind of me:
And tell him, though he have Magicians store,
Yet there is an Hebrew Lad that knows more
Than all of them; and this a mean will be
From Bonds and Prison for to set me free;
For I indeed an Hebrew stolen was,
And hither brought, I know not for what cause;
Where now again, without a crime I lie
In this dark Cell, and may do till I die.
In this young man, said the Baker, well,
And will adventure mine also to tell.
Three Baskets white I had upon my head,
In which were several sorts of meat and Bread
Which I to Pharaoh brought; but ever I came
Birds flockt about my head, and eat the same.
This Dream of yours will prove but bad I fear,
And therefore, Sir, I beg you would forbear
To urge from me what it does signify;
Take this for all, that you must quickly die.
I fear not that, say on, I will approve
Of that my Friend reveals to me in love.
My life I will resign most willingly,
If of my Service Pharaoh weary be.
If It must be so, The Baskets that you wore,
Predict, that ever three days be over
You shall be hanged, and Birds your flesh shall eat.
This is the vision of your baked meat.
Make sure of Heaven, thy part on Earth is done.
Now by this time rose third days sparkling Sun;
Where God ordaining, Pharaoh made a Feast
Upon his Birthday, unto all the rest
Of them that were his Servants; by and by
In frolic humonr he aloud did cry,
Go, bring the Baker and the Butler up,
This man is fittest to give me the Cup:
As for the other, his last doom shall be
To be lift up, and hanged on a Tree.
The honor which the Princes favor lends
May be called in, and then in shame it ends.
Good turns are soon forgot, a Proverb sure,
For guiltless Joseph must as yet endure.
Courtiers use not always to keep word,
Although the make their Vows unto the Lord,
Whose time's the best to set our Captive free;
Though two full years he must in Prison be,
Till Pharaoh dreams that he by Water side
Stands, and Seven Fat well-favourd Kine espied
Come up from thence, as also seven lean,
And joined to the other; those when he had seen
Stood horror-struck, and what the event might be,
Wait, 'twas not long before that he did see
Those scurvey lean-flesh'd Beasts the other eat,
And yet still looking poor, and wanting meat.
So Pharaoh 'woke, till slumber had his eyes
Closed, and then the second time he spies
Seven Ears of Corn come up both good and rank,
Seven others also that were poor and lank;
And as the other Lean, did Fat devour,
These eat the Rank likewise that very hour.
This doubled Phantasme so perplexed the heart
Of Egypt's King, that he must both impart
To his Magicians, willing them to see
If they could tell what either signify.
We are confounded, cry the Sophi's, Lord
Of these thy dreams we cannot tell one word.
This unexpected answer so roused up
The memory of him that bore the Cup,
Who thus expressed himself unto the King;
My Lord, I Have sinned in this very thing:
Pharaoh well knows that he with me was wrath,
And with the Baker also sent me forth
Unto the Prison, where we both did lie,
Till our sad Dreams an Hebrew did epsy;
Who told me of it, as it since has proved,
Saying, the Butler needs not to be moved,
For he shall be restored; but Baker he
Shall by the King condemned and hanged be.
These tidings pleased the King beyond all measure,
Who prized the meaning of his dreams 'bove treasure.
Call in the young man, for he is wiser far
Than all the Sophies that in Egypt are.
Run quickly unto Potyphar, and say,
Pharaoh must see his Prisoner to day.
Where Kings command, the message is obeyed.
The Seer's called to come in haste, who said,
What, is your haste so great? may I not stay
Till I be shaved and unto Heaven pray,
And change my Garments also, since you see
I am not fit before your King to be?
He comes -- Sweet Youth, said Pharaoh, but declare
What these my Dreams mean, and Garland wear.
My Butler tells me, if thou hear the Theme
Thou can interpret every anxious Dream.
My Lord, said he, that Grace is not in me,
But God whom I do serve can let you see
A true interpretation from my Mouth;
Look well upon me, and despise not youth,
For what my Maker does to me reveal,
That, and no more will I to Pharaoh tell.
Say on, my Lord, what was your dream? Why I.
Said Pharaoh, stood great Nilus River by,
And there, behold, seven Fat-wel-favour'd Kine
Feed in a Mead, and said, These Beasts are mine:
But suddenly again to me appeared
Seven other Lean ill-shap'd and hanging eared,
Such as the Land of Egypt never bred;
For on the first Sev'n Fat when they had fed,
Their Bellies clung unto their Backs, and were
Ill-favored, lean as ever they were before.
Thus I awoke, but when my drousie eye
Was closed again with sleep, I did epsy
Seven Ears of Corn upon one stalk that grew
So full and good, as yet I never knew.
After them came up Seven more was thin
And withered, as they would Thunder-blasted bin,
Which suddenly the better did devour.
And I again waked, calling over and over
On those that studious Magicians were,
The truth of these my Dreams for to declare;
But all of them together answered,
It Is God that caused your Dreams, he must 'em read.
Now, he that would by this thy favor merit,
Elisha-like must have Elia's Spirit.
Say Hebrew then, the smoothness of thy brow
Tells me, this task will be too hard for you.
My youth bespeaks me ignorant I know,
Great Sir, yet since the knowledge from below
Comes not, that must your doubled dream unfold,
That which is young by Nature, Grace makes old;
By which, I tell you, that your dreams are one,
And signify, what Heaven will have done.
In Egypt Land the Seven good Ears and Kine
Such years portend, this he bids me divine.
The ill fleshed ones, and blasted Ears of Corn
Foretells a Famine will make Egypt mourn
For seven more. See, Nile cannot contain
The Waters sent for nourishment of Grain;
And all things else needs moisture for that space,
After which time it will dry up. Alas!
What I must do, I know not, pray be kind,
And as of that, of this, Sir, speak your mind.
You must seek out in all the Land discreet
And wise men, who may strictly oversee't.
Them bid a fifth part of its fruit to gather;
These hard times will require a Nursing Father.
In all thy Cities let it stored be,
That when the Famine comes they may to thee
Repair, and buy it at thy Stewards hand;
Else this great Scarseness will undo the Land.
This thing when Pharaoh and his Servants heard,
They thanked Joseph, and his God they feared,
Saying, where shall we such another find
In whom the Spirit is, and knows his mind.
And since thy God, even thine has showed thee this,
None either wiser or discreeter is
In all the Kingdom; wherefore thou shall be
My House and Servants Ruler, God to me:
To show I am in earnest, take this Ring,
And be hereafter next unto the King:
These clothes put on, and Chains about thy neck,
And let my Subjects pay thee all respect;
Ride in my second Chariot, then to thee
Shall all my Vassals humbly bow the knee.
While I am Pharaoh, it shall be a Law,
That all my Kingdom of thee stand in aw.
No foot or hand in it shall moved be,
Till first they have direction from thee.
And since thou can reveal my secrets all
Zaphanath pa'neah I will ever call
Thy name, and thou shall surely be the Son.
Of Potipherah, who is Priest of On.
Thus you have seen our Joseph in the Den,
Sold and imprisoned and restored again.
Now what his future happiness may be,
Launch out again with me, and you shall see
The Scene is altered, and his celeb life
Changed for the blessing of a virtuous Wife,
Who bore before the Famine unto him
Two hopeful Males, Manas. and Ephraim.
The first was named so, because he had
Forgot his Fathers house and former Trade.
And when the other God did to him send,
He said, I Will call him Ephraim, for an end
Is put to my affliction, and my store
Increased is, and Honor more and more.
The Plentie's ended, and the Famine come:
Said Pharaoh, Joseph, let us now go home.
The truth of all that thou have said I see,
By the hungry peoples crying unto me
For maintenance, I know not what to say
To still their clamor, only that they may
Repair to thee for answer, and receive
What thou thinks meet, I know it is bread they crave.
The Famine now grown over all the Earth,
And every Creature suffering under dearth,
The Storehouses were opened, and meat
The moneyed Egyptians did eat.
Yet though he sold to many of the store
The Famine waxed daily more and more;
Neither did Egypt only Victuals want,
But in all other Countries Food was scant.
Yea, even in Cana'n, which was wont to be
For plenteousness the Worlds Granary.
The Famine placed it self in every Face,
Which Jacob seeing, cried out, Alas!
What shall we do? we'd better never been born
Then die for hunger; yet I hear there is Corn
In Egypt, up then, get you down and try
If of the Ruler you can any buy.
Go thither therefore all of you, save one,
Him leave with me, I cannot be alone.
Father, said they, our lives we owe to you,
Can we refuse then what you bid us do?
No, Benjamin shall stay till we are come
With all our Asses fully laden home.
Your blessing, Sir, ever we our Journey take,
We are all ready, only that we lack.
That God's and mine your Journey prosper may,
Till ye return I Will never cease to pray.
Your Money make full weight, entreat the man,
Tell him the Famine's great in Canaan;
And that with others you are come to buy
Egyptian Corn, your wants that may supply.
Now unto Zoan Jacob's Sons are come,
Saying, is the Lord, the Governor at home?
We come from far, O let us obtain the grace
To speak, and show him our disast'rous case.
Lo, I am here, said he, your business:
At this they bowed to the Earth and could express
Nothing; his Glory and their present grief
Ties up their Tongues, they cannot ask relief.
The Prince again, who all their Faces knew,
Stranged himself from them, and angry grew,
Saying, whence come you? surely you are Spies;
The countenance often the heart betrays.
This rough expression so increased their fear,
That trembling they reply, No, Sir, this year
Our Syrian Land was parched and nothing bore,
Mere want made us come unto thee for store.
Go, go, you lie, I know your whispering
Persuades me that there is no such thing;
But Villains come the nakedness to view
Of this our Land, and then himself withdrew.
Nay, Good my Lord, said they, our Story hear,
We all Sons unto one, and true men are;
Mark what we say, and if we tell you Lies,
Then, and not else conclude that we are Spies.
Tush, this is nothing, every man will say
As much, if so by that he cleared may
Be, but if you give not a better reason
Of your down coming, I will swear there is Treason
Intended. Then we are twelve, replied the other,
Brethren, of whom you see ten, and another
At home, his Fathers joy, and one is not.
Ha, now, that you be Spies I surely wot;
And so for all your words, I shall you prove,
If you bring not to me your Fathers Love.
Choose out among you one, and for him send,
Till then our Controversy cannot end,
Nor you be clear, if you do not, I swear
By Pharaoh's Life, that you vile Vagrants are.
Go, bring the Lad, his Face when I do see,
I Will say all is true that ye have said to me.
Resolve, this Prison must be your abode
Till all agree, this do, live, I fear God;
If ye be true men, then let one of you
Be bound in Prison, where you all are now,
And let the rest take Corn that may supply
Your wants at home, lest they for hunger die
In this great Famine, only bring the Boy:
It Is truth, I seek to prove, not to destroy
Your lives; to which they 'gree, and say to each other,
We guilty are concerning our dear Brother,
Who to his anguish't Soul so hardened were,
That when he prayed his plaint we would not hear;
For which, in Justice our Almighty God
Does lay on us this his afflicting Rod.
Then Reuben unto them replied, and said,
Did I not tell you so, when fast you laid
Your hands upon the Boy, but did no good;
Therefore of us required is his blood.
This they among themselves in Hebrew spoke,
Thinking that Joseph could no notice take;
For seeing one who (as his part required)
Interpreted what they of him desired,
And unto them what his Lords answer was;
They spoke their minds aloud about the cause
Of their distresses, which when Egypt's Lord
Had heard, he turned from them without a word.
His sympathizing Soul swelled so high,
That he must either quickly burst or cry.
See, where Gods Spirit dwells no hatred lives,
He turns again, communes, in heart forgives
Their ancient Crime, yet seemingly unkind
He from them Simeon takes, and him does bind,
And then commands his Servants for to fill
Their Sacks with Corn, not leaving off until
They said they had enough; the money he
Bids put into their Sacks mouths most secretly.
Provision for their way bids also take,
Saying, here is enough, I would not have you lack,
Nor yet diminish ought that ye have bought;
It Is pity you should come so far for naught.
Their Asses now when they all loaded had,
From Egypt soon they their departure made,
Traveling hard till it was time to bait
Their Asses, and themselves had need to eat
Their Dinner over, Beasts now to be proven'd,
One his Sack opens, and cries out, I Am cosen'd,
Did you not all see me my money pay,
And yet it is here in my Sacks mouth this day?
This quickly made their joyful Faces lowr,
And curse the day and the unhappy hour,
When they their Brother sold. It surely is
For vengence, said they, that our God does this;
Up, and let us load again, till we our place
In Canaan see, and our old Fathers face,
That from his wise and long experience
May gathered be, what can proceed from hence.
Now they are returned home and do relate
To Jacob, how the Steward did them hate,
All which we might well by his car'age gather;
But, Ah! said they, this was not all dear Father,
For he would not convinced be, but we
Must needs be spies, come Egypt for to see;
And though we spoke the truth, all this he urged
May come from Subtle Rogues, and so be forged;
But if you will prove true, said he, leave one
Till ye have brought me Jacob's little Son.
This we were forced to do, Simeon is there,
And must, till Ben our Brother does repair
Thither with us, when we go next to buy,
Whose sight will work poor Sim's delivery,
And our free Traffic throughout all the Land;
Of this we have the Rulers Word and Hand.
But pray let us see your Corn if it be right,
Said Jacob, sure your Money was full weight.
You shall, Dear Father; bring the Asses nigh,
That we may empty't in the Granary.
Lift up this Sack, it is of unusual weight,
Pray God there be not here another slight;
Look, here is my Money, mine, and mine, and mine.
And all of ours, as sure as thou had thine.
At this Adventure all of them are sad,
Saying, what shall we do, our case is bad?
But most of all old Jacob, whose gray Head
Shakes with a Palsy, and falls down half dead,
Wringing his feeble hands, his sighs declare
What his sad thoughts of this Adventure were.
They Will count you Thieves, said he, O how I grieve!
Moreover now, who can my Son relieve?
Of Joseph and of Simeon I Am bereaved,
And now poor Ben. is also from me craved.
But hold, before this his request I Will grant
Simeon I Will lose, and die my self of want.
Not so, Dear Father, said the eldest Son,
Your will in all things else I will have done:
But he must go, whom if I bring not back,
Then here I leave two Sons, them you shall take
And slay: Dear Sir, the charge lay upon me;
A good event, I hope, you will quickly see.
Son, hold thy peace, my darling being dead,
Would you his Brother also from me lead?
No, he must not go down, for if he do,
My days are done, and I must leave you too:
That sorrow my gray hairs will bring to grave,
Leave off this suit, and any thing else crave
I will it grant --
As greatest Stocks, that always are impaired,
Without supply, diminish, so it fared
With Jacob and his Sons, who now begin
To feel their flesh (for want) waste, and their skin
A withered complexion put on,
While through the same, they might discern the bone
The very last of their Egyptian store
Eat up, the old man called out once more
Unto his Sons, and said, Go down again
To Egypt, and bring Simeon with our grain.
Whence Judah took occasion to express
Himself at large about the business
In hand; The man, said he, made protestation,
That neither we nor any other Nation
Should any thing receive, or see his face,
Unless that Been. came down in Simeon's place.
If thou will send our Brother, then we may
Go down and buy more food, else cease I pray,
We dare not. Unto which he did reply,
Why was ye so unwise as to descry
My Boy, or give him such a strict account
Of me, and to what number mine did mount?
It was not in our power that to conceal,
Said they, the man was strict and made us deal
Thus plainly; for he said, Have you a Father
Alive or Brother, nay, or Brethren rather?
This made us speak the Truth, but never thought
That he would say, let Benjamin be brought,
Or that he would have proved so unkind
As to take Simeon from us, and him bind.
Father, continued Judah, if with me
You send the Lad, we'll go, I Will surety be,
And of my hand you shall again require
Him, dearest Father, grant me my desire;
This will not only prove us to be true,
But purchase food, and Simeon home to you.
Fear not, good Sir, if I do not restore
Him safe again, I Will bear the blame therefore
For ever; had we not thus lingered,
We had returned the second time with Bread.
Well, well my Sons, then if it must be so,
Said he, my Counsel take before ye go.
Of all our best fruits you shall quickly gather
Some, and present them unto Egypts Father.
A little Balm, and Myrrh, and Honey take,
With Spice and Almonds, Nuts, a Present make;
With double money also in your hand,
And that you carried last into the Land
Restore, perchance it was an oversight.
Then take my Son your Brother, do what is right,
And let Jehovah give you mercy when
You come before the man that does retain
Your Brother, and let Benjamin come back.
At this his Blood boiled, and these words he spoke;
I see there is no probability
But of my Boys I must bereaved be.
However, get you hence, I trust my God
Will give me strength to bear this heavy load.
This was the Farewell which old Jacob took
Of all his Sons when Cana'n they forsook,
And unto Egypt with the Present went,
The double Money which their Father sent.
Benjamin also with the rest went down
To see the Ruler and view Memphis Town,
Who are no sooner 'lighted then descried
By Joseph, who, when Benjamin he spied,
Called unto Ramses hastily, and said,
Dispatch with Dinner, is the Cloth yet laid?
Prepare more Victuals than was wont to be,
For these 11 men at Noon must dine with me.
It Is done my Lord. Gentlemen, follow me
Into the Hall, the Prince desires that ye
Such entertainment as the House affords
Receive with welcome, as does Egypt's Lords.
This unexpected carriage so amazed
The new-made-Guests, that each on other gazed,
And said, we may now easily perceive
The entertainment we are like to have.
This is the Rulers House where now we be,
Death or vile slavery is our destiny.
That pithie Sentence is not seldom true,
Love quickly turns to hate that is but new.
We know the drift, it is for our moneys sake
Was in our Sacks, that he this course does take.
It Is like the Steward knows for what end
We are brought in, try, if he be our Friend
He Will give us some account; he that is forearm'd,
As Proverb says, is also partly warned.
Let Us commune with him, and excuse our selves
For this our Money, there is no way else
That can be taken, this we will relate,
Which done, he will either show his love or hate.
Sir, at the first when we came to buy food,
We paid money for it, that was good.
Full weight it was, but shortly after how
It came into our Sacks, we know not now.
Our ignorance we hope will be excused:
Here is our Money, we have not refused
It to repay, and other Money too
At this time brought to buy more food of you.
Pray rest contented and be not afraid,
Said Ramses, seeing Jacob's God has laid
Treasure into your Sacks; what I did crave
I had, and Simeon is no more a Slave.
Lo, here is Water, please you wash your Feet,
And I my self will give your Asses meat.
By this assurance they so cheared are,
That in his absence they their Gift prepare
Against the Lords incoming, seeing they
Should see his face, and dine with him that day.
Now the Clock strikes, Servants begin to run
Each to his Office, waiting the return
Of Zaphnapaa'neah, who came in and stood
Like glorious Phoebus, when from under cloud;
Whose sparkling splendour dazzled the eyes
Of all, but most his Brethren, whom he spies
With piercing aspect; this his love exerts
To them, whom conscious of their own deserts,
Bowed to the Earth their Heads, and said, My Lord,
Accept such things as Cana'n does afford.
Who smiled and took the Present, saying, How
Does your old Father, and your selves all now?
Is he yet living? Does his Silver Threads
Yet shine? They answer, Yes, with bowed heads.
At last the Ruler spieth out his Brother,
Even Benjamin, the Son of his own Mother;
And said, My Friends, is this the youngest Lad,
When you were here, you said your Father had?
I guess it is, his count' nance speaks no less.
You Are as my Son, whom God Almighty bless.
This he pronounced with such vehemence,
That Tears appeared in his melting Eye,
Though Power and Policy bid him refrain,
His face is washed, and he returns again,
And bids them set on Bread, it is quickly done,
For all the rest together, him alone;
And for the Egyptians by themselves, whose meat
Was not the same with that which Joseph eat,
Being unto them a great abomination
To feed on such things as the Hebrew Nation.
Now all is ready, Chaplain say the Grace,
And let each Stranger set as is his place:
He that is eldest bid him first go in,
And let the rest assede, then Benjamin.
Judge you if Joseph did not give them cause
To think that he once their Domestic was,
He can so well their Birth and Age discern,
They marvel at it, yet does nothing learn.
Come, Trenchers here: Carver cut up this Dish,
And reach me hither that same boiled Fish.
Sir, take this Mess, and you, and you, and you;
You're welcome all: they thank him with a Bow.
But, Oh! methinks that young man is not served,
In a Cooks Shop I would have no man starved.
Here, Ramses, reach the last man this from me;
This seen, the rest did wonder why't should be:
That of him he should take such special care,
And furnish with more than a five-fold share.
As Meat of all sorts, so the Drink was free,
For Joseph said, with you I Will merry be.
The Grace-Cup's over, now let us go on
To sing of all the Rulers kindness shown.
Their Sacks he first commands to fill, and then
Their money to be put in them again.
Next take my Cup, my Silver Cup, said he,
And in Ben's Sack's mouth let it hidden be,
With his Corn-money when he has it paid.
All is performed, My Lord, as you have said.
The joyful Brethren, ever it was light day,
That Morning with their Loads are sent away;
Though they have scarcely past the City Walls,
When Hue and Cry's sent out; Constable calls:
Stand thankless Wretches: tell me what is the cause
That ye have thus even broken Natures Laws,
And all the Rules of Hospitality.
You said, we are true men, but ye robbers be;
My Lords, both drinking and divining Cup,
(Deny it not) you, you have taken up.
Was this requital for your Noble Feast?
Restor't again, may be ye took't in Jest:
Nay, but you Jest, said they, we hope your Lord
Has sent you unto us with no such word;
For though we here be Strangers, yet the chief
At home we are, we need not play the thief.
Did we not with us treble Money bring?
Why then should we have stolen this petty thing?
If you among us do the Goblet find,
Hang him that took it, and the rest Slaves bind.
You Have said enough, yet it must not be so,
But he that took it Servant back shall go,
And you be blameless, for it were too much
That one should die, and the rest be kept for such
A crime: then to it, said Reuben, to the rest,
Pull down your Sacks, and open them in haste.
Let this unthought-of search with me begin,
And so go on to Brother Benjamin.
When all of them had narrowly been tried,
Except the last, then was the Cup descried,
Which brought upon them such a sudden fear,
That some their cloths rent, some their hair did tear.
To see these mourning Brethren 'twas great pity,
Loading their Asses, turning to the City.
When Judah and his Brethren too were come
To Joseph's House, expecting their last doom,
He bowed and said, What shall we say unto
My Lord? What shall we speak? What shall we do
To prove us guiltless? sure God has found out
Our hidden fault, for which without all doubt
He does us punish; wherefore we are thine,
Because the Cup is found with Benjamin.
The Fact is too apparent, yet our God
Who searches Hearts, knows our intended load
Was Corn, not Plate; but since it must be so,
His will be done, and we no further go.
This when the man had heard, he answer made,
I never yet on any burdens laid
More than I thought was just, then God forbid
That I should any keep, but him who did
Convey away my Cup, it is only he
That I adjudge my Servant for to be;
As for the rest, let them go home in peace,
I Will use him well although he live by Grace.
Then Judah, with a look that spoke his fears,
Said, Good my Lord, graciously deign your ears
Unto a few things that I must express
About my Brother Ben. his business.
Did thou not strictly of us all enquire
If we had yet a Brother more, or Sire?
We answered, Yes: a comely aged man,
Called Israel, and dwells in Canaan,
Who keeps at home with him our youngest Brother,
His Darling being dead, who was another;
Which two fair Rachel to our Father bore.
This makes him love the living Lad the more.
And thee require of us more earnestly
His coming down, that thou might set thine Eye
Upon him; but we all with one accord
Said, this can scarce be granted to my Lord,
For if his Father part with him, we fear
He will not live with us another year.
At this thou (vexed) from us turned thy Face,
Say'ng, bring him down, or else my wonted Grace
I will withdraw; which, when we did go home,
We told our ancient Father all in sum,
But had no answer, till at last he said,
Rise, get you down to Egypt for more aid;
But we remembering this thy threatening word,
Said, none of us dare speak unto the Lord,
Or see his Face unless our Brother go
To Egypt with us. Surely it was so.
Which when our Father heard, he sighed and said,
I thought the Corn had been already paid.
Must I the pledge of Rachel's love forsake,
Or else want Corn which I do so much lack?
Certainly this is hard, I am right loath,
Seeing one is not, now to part with both.
Poor Joseph's death torments me yet with grief,
Only this Boy, he gives me some relief;
If ye then seek me of him to deprive
I must breath out my last, and ye never thrive.
This, Sir, said he, if any truth there be
In man, was said by him, and more to me.
You being Judge, can any thing be worse
Than for a Child to have the Fathers curse?
But if I could dispense with that, what can
I say to him when come to Canaan?
His life being bound with his, of this I Am sure,
Without the one the other cannot endure.
Besides, to him for this I surety came,
Saying, if he come not, let me bear the blame
For ever. Now let me the favor find
To stay in place of him; pray, Sir, be kind,
And send the Boy unto his Father back
With joy, that he in him may pleasure take.
Great Sir, if you old Age admire, relief
Grant, be not Author of our Fathers grief.
This dext' rous Plea with Joseph took such place.
As it was soon known by his changed Face,
Whose frowns do vanish, and his threats are gone;
Love makes him cry, Go out, leave me alone.
He who of late spoke rough and threatened all,
Now weepeth loud, and on their necks does fall.
What means our Ruler? Is not this a wonder,
That he who to The Egyptians speaks like Thunder,
Should be so much transported as to cry,
And none but these eleven Strangers by!
Dear Hearts, I Am Joseph, does my Father live?
Said he; to which they could no answer give:
His unexpected Greatness and their fault
Daunts them as vanquished sould'ers new assault,
Till he cries Quarter, and bids shake off fear,
Saying, I am Joseph whom ye sold, and here
Was brought by Merchants; Come, be not afraid,
It was not you, but God that for your aid
Had ordered all things, and for preservation
Of life has given unworthy me this Station.
Two years already has the Famine been
In Egypt Land, and five yet is not seen,
In which 'twill be in vain to plow the Land,
Because the Mower shall not fill his hand;
Wherefore your God and mine sent me before,
That I for you and for your houses store
Should make provision; he whom I do serve
Me hither sent that I might life preserve,
And thought me fittest all the Corn to gather
That was in Egpypt, and be Pharaohs Father.
Haste then, go up to the Old Man and say,
Thus says thy Son that was not, I this day
Am Lord of Egypt, so made by my God,
Who wills that thou come down and make abode
With me, and Goshen for thy dwelling place
Accept, it is near, there thou may see my face.
Thy Children, Flocks, and all shall nourisht be;
Nothing that is thine shall taste of poverty
In these five years of Famine. Cast your eye
And view my Limbs and Features, it is I;
And let my Brother Benjamin the Youth
Look well upon me; Is it not my mouth
That speaks these things? pray also declare
Unto my Father what my Glories are
In Egypt, and persuade him to make haste
To come, and quickly of my Favors taste.
Then turned he unto Benjamin, and said,
Joy of my Heart, how well am I now paid
For all my wishes and my prayers for thee!
Who am admitted once again to see
My fathers image and my mothers face
In thine, dear Brother; God give thee his grace.
This said, in token of his true respect,
He weeps and kisses, falls upon his neck;
And he again, as far as modesty
Permitted, wept and kissed most ardently.
Which though in secret done cannot be hid;
The Court takes notice what the Ruler did:
And that his Brethren come they Pharaoh tell,
Who said, I Am glad. Servants, they like it well.
Come in, said Pharaoh, Zaph; I mean to see,
Whether thy father Jacob be like thee.
Send for him into Egypt, where his store
Shall be so much, that he shall wish no more.
This is my will, I hope you will not neglect
To pay your father all the true respect
You owe: and for their better commodation
Choose out of Wagons best in all the nation
For them; the little ones, and all their stores,
Being persuaded that the land is yours.
As one who is willing to obey his Lord,
And serve his Father, Joseph does accord.
Horses and Chariots quickly are prepared
By him, who for provision nothing spared.
For each of ten had from him change of clothes,
But to his brother Ben. gave five of those.
Three hundred pieces as a token he
Unto him gave 'bove what his cost should be:
His Fathers Present it is greater far,
For unto him ten Asses loaded are
With finest Gold, that might supply his need,
And other ten laden with Corn and Bread,
That might sustain his Father in the way;
All which he does with small or no delay:
And then commands that they should thence depart,
With seeming joy, yet grieved at the heart,
Lest they his Brother Benjamin molest,
At parting from them, thus himself expressed;
Brethren, I hope ye will all cordial be,
Till ye to Jacob bring good news of me,
Telling him I do live and wish him health,
And hope that he will see me and my wealth.
This do, and so I hope God will you bring
Unto the old man, who is languishing
For your long stay. These are the whole commands
Wherewith I wish you kiss my Fathers hands.
At home with bowed knees they all salute
Their aged Father, who for Joy stood mute,
When he had heard that Joseph was alive,
Ruler in Egypt, and therein did thrive;
For sometimes he believed, and sometimes not,
Because they would told him that the Lad was not.
But to confirm the truth they all declare
What with the Ruler their adventures were,
And how he served them ever he let them know
Whose Son he was, or what he did them ow;
And also show him all the Wagons trim
That should to's Son in Egypt carry him.
These seen, his fainting Spirit did revive,
Say'ng, Well, it is enough if Joseph be alive.
Help Lord, for now my Son I must go see
In Egypt land; this done, then let me die.
No sooner had the next Aurora bright
With blushing Skies succeeded gloomy Night,
Then Father Israel to his Char'ot hies,
And rests not till Beersheba he descries,
Where resting, he commands to erect
An Altar, whence he might his Pra'rs direct
And Sacrifices to the God of Heaven,
Because his odd Sons were again made even.
That he a prosperous success might have,
Of Isaac's God he does protection crave
In's Journey, and for length of days implores,
Till he had seen young Joseph and his Stores.
He had not fully ended his devotion,
When Suns departure, and the Starry motion
Invited him to leave and to take rest.
No, no, says Jacob, there is no such haste,
I once again will of my God enquire,
If he my going Egypt-ward desire;
If he be willing, I will not be slack,
But if he be not, then I will turn back.
This said, from Heaven he heard a sudden voice
Say'ng, Jacob, Jacob, fear not, but rejoice;
Since I have been thy fathers and thy God,
Well be, go there, and settle thy abode,
The truth to show of this my promise made,
I Will make thy seed as sand on Seashore laid.
This mighty Nation shall victorious be,
After four hundred years, when my decree
Shall be fulfilled: then fear not down to go,
I Will guide thee there, and bring thee up also.
No comfort will I from thee keep, thou sees
Thy son who was not, he shall close thine eyes.
Good Jacob ravished with those hea'vnly news
Rose up in haste, and to his sons all shows,
And then commands, with speed that they prepare
All things which needful for there journey were.
The Coaches ready, some their father heave,
Some stand within him ready to receive;
Their wifes and children have their proper place
Into the same: and Coachmen drive apace.
Their cattle also, which were numerous,
Gold, Silver, Jewels, Treasures ponderous
Purchased in Canaan, these they did transport
To Egypt, whither then they did resort.
Thus Jacob leaves Canaan, and his seed
Do follow him, because they wanted bread:
His Sons, his Daughters, and his Nephews all,
Are now descended at the Dreamers call:
Whose exact number then was but three score
And ten, of which three had been there before,
Joseph the father, and his children two,
Manass. and Ephra'm, then he had no mo.
When they the Egyptian borders did descry,
Jacob to's fourth son Judah loud did cry,
Go down to Joseph, bid him tell me where
He will me place, I am a stranger there:
Tell him at Goshen I will tarry while
He come or send, and show me what is his will:
And howsoever he dispose of me,
His word or work to me a law shall be.
As soon as Judah did his brother greet
With these glad tidings, he prepares to meet
His aged father, and before him stands,
Bows, begs his blessing with uplifted hands.
And he again (for joy his son to see)
Falls on his neck, kissing it ardently,
Weeps and embraces; so that all admire
The strong affections of his aged Sire,
Who cried aloud, O Joseph, Jeseph, now,
My darling Joseph, I am sure that thou
Do live; then this I of my God will crave,
That he my spirit may in haste receive,
Since I am wholly eased of the woe
Has me perplexed these twenty years and two.
Then Joseph, who had all this time been stop
By tears, which from his Princely eyes had dropped,
Said, Father, welcome. Now I must go home
And tell the King that all of you are come,
Who (I am sure) at this will much rejoice,
And give command that I of you dispose
Where best convenience may for you be had;
For this to me he has already said.
And I will tell (if he to know desire)
That you are Shepherds, and you aim no higher.
When therefore he shall ask of you this thing,
You shall confirm my words by answering,
We and our Father Keepers are of Sheep;
Which he will no sooner hear then is promise keep,
And give you Goshen, where you safely shall
Your tender Flocks grase, and your Cattle all;
Your dwellings also he will set apart:
For Shepherds grieve Egyptians at the heart.
Now Joseph leaves his Father in that place,
Returns and speaks with Pharaoh Face to Face,
Saying, my Father and his Family
Are (with their Substance) come to visit thee.
Joseph, said Pharaoh, of this take my hand,
I Am glad to see thy Father in my Land.
Call some of them, and let them see my Face,
Assure thy self they shall with me find grace.
I will, said Joseph, then he quickly takes
Five of his Brethren, and a Present makes
To Pharaoh, who did instantly enquire
What is your Trade, or what will you desire?
We Are Shepherds and Sojourners in this Land,
Whose greatest errand is to kiss thy hand;
The next to see our Brother, and have place
Our Flocks to feed; in Canaan there is no grass:
The piercing Drought so scorched has the land,
That there is nothing to be seen but Sand:
If therefore we shall of thee favor find,
Grant's Goshen Pastures, and for this we'll bind
Our selves to be thy Subjects, and our Seed
Of thee and thine shall stand in Kingly dread.
Then Pharaoh unto Joseph did reply;
Since they are come down, what will I them deny?
My Crown but spare, and ask what ever they please;
I Will give all things conducing to their ease.
My Land's before them: as for their request,
In Goshen for them Dwellings make in haste.
And for a greater proof of love to thee,
Choose out among them some will active be,
And put my Cattle all into their hands;
Their hire from me let it be Gold and Lands.
But pray thee Joseph, where is thy aged Sire,
His face to see I have a great desire.
Greatest of Kings you shall, lo, here he is.
This said, old Israel does great Pharaoh bless,
Saying, my Lord the King of Kings protect
Your Sacred Person; and since you respect
Me and my Sons, I Will never cease to pray
For you with hands to Heaven lift night and day.
My thanks, said Pharaoh, now I must be bold
To ask one question, I would know how old
Thou art? Good Jacob soon this answer made;
An hundred thirty summers I have had;
As many winters have I also been
In pilgrimage, unsettled I mean:
Yet few and evil, if you will deign to look
Upon a Line in this my Table Book,
Where is inserted faithful Abraham's age,
An hundred and seventy five his stage
Completes, my father Isaac lived five more;
Though all this time their grievances were sore.
This said, the old man looking round about,
Blesses the King, takes leave, and walks out.
Now come (said he) Son, since you know I have
Your Kings good will, a fitting place I crave,
Where I and all my Children safe may be
From all Sedition and Conspiracy.
Then Joseph beckn'd to his Sire, and said,
Rameses is the best that can be had;
There take possession, this my Lord commands.
These are your Writings signed with our hands.
The famine's great, yet Joseph wills that he
Since come to Egypt have no scarcity
Of bread, tho'in Canaan'd Egypt there was want,
In so much that the most began to faint
For hunger, but that Egypts Nursing Father
Its current money into stores did gather.
And such as from Canaan was brought to buy
Corn, he does put into the Treasury.
Now Egypts money does begin to waste,
Which made the Natives run to him in haste,
And say, Sir, you must grant us fresh supply
Of bread and corn, or else for want we die.
There Is none but you can grant us any aid.
Who answered, You Have got as much as paid:
But this my counsel is, which if you take,
To bring your cattle you will not be slack,
And them for corn and bread exchange with me.
What profit they if you of famine die?
The hunger-starved Egyptians at this
Do much rejoice, yea and with blessing bless
The Ruler, and with cheerful hearts do bring
Their Horses, Cattle, Flocks, and every thing,
Except their Land, all is laid at Joseph's feet,
Who willingly received, and gave them meat.
Poor creatures, they had good cause to fear,
For this provision ended with that year,
Was but the fixth since that great want began,
When it was ended they to Joseph ran
Again for more, lay'ng out their wretched case,
And saying to him, We must die alas!
Our Money gone, our Cattle you did crave,
We brought them, now our Land is all we have;
Come buy this also: let us not starved be,
And we our selves will serve our King and thee.
Let us have Seed that we again may try
Whether our Land as yet will fructify.
At this his tender heart is filled with grief,
And eyes with tears, which way for their relief
Procures, for he to Pharaoh makes it over,
Making him Landlord who was King before.
Their ancient Livings he bids them forsake,
And for the future other Dwellings take,
For which they should to Pharaoh Egypts King,
As to the owner yearly Rent in bring.
But to the Priests there was more kindness show'n,
Who parted with no Land that was their own;
For they on that which was to them allowed,
Lived all that while as when the Land was plowed.
Then Joseph said, Behold! I have you buught,
Your land and all; I Am sure there is not ought
Which is not Pharaohs, wherefore take you Seed
And sow in haste, I know you will not need
To fear the Famine, this is the last year
Of Egypt's drought, you know has cost you dear;
Its former increase you again shall have,
Of which a Fifth Part I will yearly crave
For Pharaoh's use, the Four that is behind
Dispose of that according to your mind,
For Seed, for Food, for you and for your Store;
Fear not, it will be fruitful as before.
With bowed heads and cheerful countenance
They thus reply, Since we our sustenance
These barren years had from our Lord and thee
Be gracious to us, we your Servants be.
It is enough we live to serve our King,
What he commands, that will we to him bring.
Only the Priests did this great Tax escape,
For all they sowed, all to themselves they reap.
Behold, the kindness of an Heathen King,
To those who did but hellish Sophismes sing.
Yet all this while Joseph has not forgot
To settle on Jacob the most happy Lot
In all the Land of Goshen, where he might
Dwell happily, and have thereof full right.
Now that Gods Promise might fulfilled be,
He multiplies and grows exceedingly.
When he in Egypt 17 years had been
Most prosperous, and his Sons glory seen
Of Age a 147, then he
Prepares himself Deaths Captive for to be;
For calling Joseph's Father and his Child,
And looking with a countenance most mild,
Dear Son, said he, Age makes me now believe
That I must Egypt and my Children leave.
This heard, the Ruler's heart is filled with grief,
And Eyes with tears. No Son there is no relief,
Said Jacob, Seventeen years I Have lived in thee,
Now it is enough, my God I must go see.
Yet while I live one thing I must implore,
Grant it my Child, as thou have done much more;
Which is, when dead, that then in Canaan I
May buried be, and with my Fathers lie.
This granted, he commands him for to swear
That he his Corpse to Macpelah will bear;
And then in token of his thankfulness
He leans on's Bed, and does his Maker bless.
Sad tidings soon sounds in the Rulers ear
After's departure, that his Father dear
Was ill at ease, and willed him in haste
To pay'm a Visit ever his life was past:
Who willed quickly that his Children two
Should ready be, for they must with him go
To see their Grandsire, it is his command;
Obeying, they in traveling posture stand:
Scarce had they entered into the Town
When one to Jacob hastily runs down,
And tells him that his Sons and his two O'es
Were come to see his end, and to dispose
Of him: this heard, he once again revives,
And to set up upon his bed he strives;
Saying to Joseph, God appeared to me,
When I from Esau's fury down did flee
To Padan Aram, and at Luz me gave
The Promise that I should Canaan have,
And blessed me, saying, that of my Blood
Should there be born even a huge multitude,
It to possess until Times fullness shall
Come, when they for their Sins shall from it fall.
Then since I Am sure that all the Land is mine,
I Will give a share unto these two of thine,
Were born in Egypt ever I hither came,
As Reuben, Simeon, these shall bear my name;
But all the rest are since by thee begot,
They shall be thine, and have of thee their Lot
Among their Brethren, yet they must not be
Called Heads or Tribes of their posterity.
But whose are these two Youths that stand me by?
If they be thine, then let them both draw nigh
That I may bless them, being glad to see
Thy self once more, and thy posterity.
Now having kissed them, he said, Once I thought
Never to have seen thee, nor be hither brought;
But blessed be that God who spared me
Joseph, Manass. and Ephra'm for to see.
This done, he takes them from between his Feet,
Making them stand before him as was meet:
Manass. on's left, and Ephra'm on's right stand,
That on them both at once he might lay hand;
But he inspired of God looks not to years,
Nor yet for Doteage the firstborn forbears:
For on the younger he lays on his right,
In him it seems God had the most delight,
Minding to make him Head of all the Tribe,
Without respect of person, age, or bribe.
Then to his Son he said, now I will crave
That you all Blessings of that God may have,
With whom my Sire and Grandsire both did walk,
And with him often face to face did talk,
Who from Canaan led me out this way,
And has me fed at all times as this day.
The Angel Great, which does my Soul redeem,
Bless both the Lads, and have them in esteem:
And let them have mine and my fathers name;
Make thou them great, do thou enlarge their fame,
Increase their seed for number as the sand
On the Seashore in their Grandfathers Land.
But Joseph wroth to see the form invert,
Says to his father grieved at the heart,
Not so (dear Sir,) this is the eldest boy;
Put here your right, he is the only joy
Of me his father. No, says Jacob, no;
Though what you say be true I rightwell know;
Yet fear not, for he shall be very great,
But this much more, neither by strength nor fate,
But by that power that laid the Earths foundations
He shall become a multitude of Nations.
Such blessings that day he to Joseph gave,
As greater after Israel should not crave.
If any can but Ephra'ms bliss obtain,
It will be ever counted greatest gain.
Then Jacob said, Behold, I die; but God
Shall visit you, and while you have abode
In Egypt, he will ever be a Watch,
Lest by these Heathens any harm ye catch,
And bring you up into your fathers land;
He, he will do it by's Almighty hand.
Moreover thou from me have got a portion,
Which I never purchased by craft or extortion
From the Amorites, but by my sword and bow;
This on thy self and thine I do bestow.
Now Jacob finding 's last glass almost out,
Calls for his sons, who compass him about,
Listening for what he thither did them call;
Who said, Sons, hear what will to you befall
In the last days, when your old father's gone,
Strengthen your selves, your trouble comes anon.
Reuben my eldest, pray do thou draw near
To me thy Parent, and thy verdict hear:
In dignity thou did excel and power
Thy brethren all, until that fatal hour
When to thy fathers bed thou did advance;
This made me rob thee of the Inheritance.
Because as water thou unstable wast,
Thy Eminence and Dignity is past.
This said, from him he turns his face about
To Sim. and Levi, whose sentence goes out:
You brethren are by consanguinity,
And no less allied in your cruelty.
Your habitations they are full of blood,
And might you grieve if rightly understood;
For in your anger you the Sech'mites slew,
Robbing the Town of riches not a few;
The City also razed unto the ground;
Such horrid Facts, I think, has not been found.
Cursed be your anger, I will you divide
Among other Tribes as strangers to abide.
As for thee, Judah, thou shall praised be
By all thy Brethren and Posterity;
Thy Foes thou shall subdue, and they adore
Shall thee with princely Homage, nay, and more,
As Lion fierce is terrible, so thou
Shall be to all, and all thou shall subdue.
Yea, for a greater Blessing thou shall hold
Thy kingly Scepter till Predictions old
Shall come to pass, and the Messiah shall
Come from thy Loins, and rid men out of thrall;
And all thy Land be filled with best of Wine,
Thy Grapes shall yield great store of Liquor fine;
So that thou may, as in a mighty flood
Thy Garments wash into the grapie blood.
Zebulun, thou shall still a dweller be
In pleasant places situate by the Sea,
So that by Shipping thou may have commerce
With other Nations who of Ware are scarce:
Thy Borders also I will so extend,
That they in length shall come to Zidon's end.
Son Issachar, I know thine inclination
Is such, that thou desir'st a quiet station,
Free from command, and still will bowing be
Thy back to all the burdens laid on thee.
Dan, as an Adder or a Serpent sly
Thou to thine Enemies evermore shall be,
And subt'ly shall all of them overthrow,
If not their Head, I Am sure thou wilt sting below,
And now, O Lord, since well I know this Boy
Shall enemies have that will him much annoy,
Do thou assist him in's extremity,
That at the last he may victo'rous be.
Gad, much affliction does on thee attend,
Yet all those Troops thou wilt conquer in the end.
Asher, Earths fullness shall be thy Lot,
Affording Royal Dainties and what not.
Naphthali, on both parts thou dextrous are,
Lover of Peace, and yet can follow War.
Joseph, thou as a fruitful Bough shall be,
Set by a Wall, thy Grapes shall multiply,
And Branches by the Suns reflections shall
Grow to such height as shall surmount a Wall.
Though Brethren, Jempsar, Potiphar, all three
Thy life did seek, and Arrows shot at thee,
Yet God, thy God thy Bow kept in such strength,
That spite of all, thou did o'rcome at length,
And made the Shepherd to his Isra'l-flock
So that thou was to them both Staff and Rock.
From God, thy Fathers God thou shall receive
All things soever thou desir'st to have.
Is It pleasant Seasons? this the mighty hand
Will grant to thee, do but the same demand.
Is It liquid Fountains? Fowls that flying be,
Or Fishes? Call, it is he commands the Sea.
Is It food or clothing? Beasts on every hill
Are his; I know thou wilt have them at thy will.
Or is it Children? Do but them desire,
He Will grant so many shall make thee admire:
Thy Grandsires blessing, Isaac's, mine, all three
While hills endure shall ever bide with thee;
And on his head they ever shall remain,
Whom cruel brethren thought once to have slain.
Benjamin, thou shall still a Warrior be,
And ever have thy sword upon thy thigh,
To kill and rob, and to divide the spoil,
Thou shall be bent, and think of it no toil.
Here have you Jacobs sons all numbered;
Here have ye all that he unto them said.
Here all the blessings he before his death
In his last Legacy did to them bequeath;
Here is the charge that he unto them gave
Concerning's burial in the Hittite's Cave,
Which Abra'm bought in Ephrons field to be
A burial-place for his posterity.
Here was he buried and his Sarah dear:
Rebecea 'nd Isaac were interred here.
Here Leah also laid into this field,
For which Abra'm did five score pieces yield
Unto the sons of Heth, who were right loath
It to receive, till he had sworn an Oath,
That of them he would not take it for naught,
They do agree, the Cave is sold and bought.
Ah! I have spoke too long, my Spirits fail,
Said Jacob, see my Face and Hands grow pale.
This scarce was uttered when his Heart had lost
Its faculties, and he gives up the Ghost.
When Joseph saw the death of's aged Sire,
His filial love the Brethren all admire,
Who said, you are gone, and I am left alone,
Oh! thou art gone, I cannot choose but moan.
Oh! thou art gone, my only Father dear.
Oh! thou being gone, what comfort have I here?
At this the tears so rushed from his Eyes,
That no by-stander could withhold their cries;
For he his pale Face kissed and cried aloud
To the Physicians who about him stood,
Come take this Body, take it out from me,
Embalme it well, let nothing wanting be.
This his command they willingly embrace,
Taking his Father from before his Face,
And sweetest smelling Spices do prepare,
For this last Rite, he had enough to spare.
They never rested for six Weeks a day
His Corpse to dress ever he was taken away.
Is this all? No, a Winder greater far,
The Outlaw Heathen for him Mourners are
Nine Weeks of Days; which ended, Joseph takes
His Fellow-Rulers by, and to them speaks,
You know in Egypt it is a strict Decree
That none in Mourning may with Phara^ be,
Nor any conference in this posture have
With him, for which I earnestly do crave
That you would go and make the King acquaint
That my old Father, while his pulse was faint,
Commanded me to swear a solemn Oath
(Should I it break, I think he will be loath.)
That I should bury 'm in his Fathers Grave,
Pray bid him grant it, this is all I crave.
And if he fear that I will not come back,
He may my Sons of me for Pledges take.
Thus leaving Joseph, all of them depart,
Who waits their return with grieved heart.
No sooner had they told the King his case,
Than he with sighing answered, Alas!
Is Jacob dead, my Father-Rulers Father?
And shall I hinder? Nay, I Will further rather.
Make all the haste he can, then come to me,
Till his return I shall not quiet be.
When Joseph heard the Kings benevolence,
He thanked the Rulers and departed thence.
Then called all his Servants and his Kindred,
Who come unto him, none of them is hindered:
The Kings own Servants and the Rulers be
In readiness the Corpse to company.
Then Joseph does this Funeral Journey take
With more than Thousands armed at his back.
Ever Titan rose from out his watery Bed,
Or with his spangled Traces overspread
The spacious Azure, Chariots make a noise,
At which the prancing Horses all rejoice;
Coach-men drive hard, so that ever it was nigh
Sunsetting next, Canaan they espy.
To It yet, said Joseph, here we will not rest,
But will to Atad, where we shall have best
Accommodation for our numerous Train;
I know the place, it is a spacious Plain
Well hedged in; there we may safely lie
Until the rest we for the Funeral buy.
This was concluded, and o'r Jordan they
Came, to the place of their appointed stay;
Where 'lighting down, their Mourners so cried out
For full seven days, that all were round about
Came running for to see what it might be
Made all these strangers weep so bitterly,
Whose sympathy admired the place they call
Abel-mizraim unto Ages all.
This Ceremony ended, they the Vow
Perform, made to their Father while below,
And buried him in his Grand-sires Cave;
This was the last thing he did of them crave.
Now Joseph to his Pharaoh does return,
Who for his absence never ceased to mourn.
You Are welcome Joseph, said the Egyptian King,
What news do thou to me from Canaan bring?
All good my Lord, with which he made a bow;
But, Ah! I fear I Have stayed too long from you.
No, no, I Am glad again to see thy face,
Said he, for still thou shall with me find grace.
By this time's Brethrens hearts began to burn,
Thinking that he soon after his return
Would them afflict for their long covered crime,
Which to prevent, a Messenger in time
They send to Joseph, who this message bore;
Our, and thy Father who is now in glore,
Commanded us thy Pardon for to crave,
Though we deserved other things to have
For our outrageous spite and cruelty,
Which we contrived against thee, guiltless thee,
By seeking of thy spotless blood to spill,
Whilst thou our good foretold, and not our ill.
The hearing this his tender soul did smart,
Whose watery Eyes it witnessed in part:
What? What? said he, and do they me mistrust
As soon as I my Father in the dust
Have laid? No, no, Dear Hearts, they need not fea^
I will to them a great affection bear;
Were I vindictive, yet that would not do,
That God is strong who still preferveth you.
You willed indeed revenge upon my blood,
Yet all your malice turned to my good.
'Twas not your aim when you poor Joseph sold,
That he among Egypts Worthies should be rolled
No, no, among Slaves; in this ye all combined,
But my good God had better things designed,
Your preservation, though ye made a prey
Of me to Merchants, as you see this day,
Wherefore take courage, I will you preserve,
Your guilt I Will pardon, and with food I Will serve
You and your Flocks according to your mind,
Am I not Joseph, can I be but kind?
Haste, haste my Muse, now thou must make an end,
That Pearl of price whom God did hither send,
Has now ten Winters and 100 seen,
As many Summers, of which he has been
Fourscore and sev'n in the Egyptian Land,
Alway's upholden by the Almighties hand.
And now he sees of his own procreation
In his last days a treble generation.
Then finding's vital Spirits begin to fail,
And Death ensuing, who would take no Bail,
He calls his Brethren as his Father did,
And then unfolds a Mystery lay hid
Concerning their departure to the place
Promised to Abram and his following race,
And does desire that all of them might swear
That they to Canaan shall his Body bear
When dead, and lay him in his Fathers Grave,
Which they might find into the Hittits cave.
Here Joseph dies, being of a good old Age.
Here Joseph dies a chaste and holy Sage.
Here Joseph leaves his Pharaoh and departs,
Here Joseph leaves his Friends with grieved hearts
Here with him dies all Jacobs Offsprings glory,
In Egypt, and the Period of his Story.
FINIS.

