THE REIGN OF King CHARLES: An HISTORY Faithfully and Impartially delivered and
disposed into ANNALS.



LONDON, Printed by E. C. for Edward Dod, and Henry Seile the younger, and are
to be sold at the Gun in Ivie-lane, and over against St. Dunstans Church in
Fleet Street, 1655.

The Preface.
WHat oblique Descants will come traverse upon this honest Narrative, I already
preiudicate. The fate of those who write of Times within ken, Times better for
the History then for the Historian; for while they render Truth more
resplendent, they usually bring the Relater under a cloud. Whence the bane of
all faithful Tradition, that an Historian is rarely found, until the Truth be
lost And what is History without, its Idiome; Truth, but a mere Romance? And if
so, what pen will undertake the History of a King? Kings in their Functions so
near resemble the Divine Nature, as God himself has styled them Gods. And as
in many respects they represent it, so also in that of Cyprian, though Epist.
not in his sense, De Deo etiam periculosum est dicere verum. Though as Men
they are within the incidence of frailty, (for as that Emperor Antoninus Pius
apud Iul. Capitolinum.
said, Imperium non tollit affectus. Sovereignty does not proscribe humane
affections) yet their very failings have been in former times accounted, like
their Persons, so sacred that to touch them, though never so tenderly, has
been esteemed Petty-Treason. But in King Charles (the grand concernment of
these Annals) the Danger is counter changed, to exhibit in him any thing of
merit, or importing less then a Nero or Domitian, many will not endure. And
these two extremes make my passage through this History like that of Ionathans
to the Philistims, A sharp rock on the one 1 Samuel 14. 4.
side, and a sharp rock on the other side. Which consideration has moved me
to decline many things, otherwise remarkable, and not commonly known, and to
content my self with saving-truths. Nor should I have adventured to have
interposed a modest vindication of this King in some particulars, not
reflecting upon the fatal proceedings against him, had not the ingenuity of
some eminently disaffected to him, led me the way.

But if in relation to these perils, I am studious to bear my self erect, yet
in other concernments, some will censure me for too strong a Biass.

Some will say I seem no friend to the Clergy; and left my silence should make
this an Accusation, which is but a mere calumny; I answer, Church men I honor,
(no man more) and this I do for their Sacred Orders sake. But if their Order be
Sacred, it does not (I wish it did) make all such who are initiated in that
Order; too many of that holy profession are, ever were, and will be Sacred in
another and worse sense. The unsanctifyed lives of some Officiating at the
Sacred Altar, have been the complaint of all ages. Read we not to their shame
of the Sons of Ely, whose impiety made men abhor 1 Samuel 2. 17.
the offerings of the Lord? Does not Chrysostom tell us of some his
contemporaries, who (...). Chrysostom. de Sacerdot. l. 3.
(had Canonical Discipline been punctually observed) should not have been
permitted, so much as to step over the threshold of Gods house, were
notwithstanding advanced to the highest grison of Church Dignities? And if this
Narrative presents some Ecclesiastics too blame, the inference is fallacious,
that therefore our times are worse then former, or that the accrimination
overspreadeth all. No, what St. Augustine said upon the like occasion of some
enormitans of his time, is no less true of ours, That though our Church Et si
contristamur de aliquibus purgamentis, tamen consolamur de pluribus ernamentis.
Aug. Epist. 137.
had cause to grieve for the blemishes of some, yet might she glory in the
Ornaments of more. So few being then concerned in the little which may distaste,
their disgust will be easier digested, especially considering that it can be
nothing else but necessary truth which offends them, and so it must if I, or
any other, will do the devoir of an Historian. For Truth to be Parent of
ill will is no novelty, no not where no ill will is the Parent of that Truth,
as in this work of mine; for of those whom it will have the unhappiness to
displease, not a single unite can challenge me for any personal malice against
him; or justly say, I have made History do the drudgery of mine own despite.

Nor perhaps will the Presbyterians esteem me altogether well-affected to them.
A crime the less, because almost epidemical and contracted from their so
principally occasioning our late sad distractions, yet have I so much charity
for them, as heartily to wish they may read their error in their punishment.
For they who were so instrumental toward the ruin of their Superior Order,
have lived to feel the reverberation of divine indignation by a configuration
of chastisement upon their own Calling. So even and equal a decorum does the
wisdom of God observe in the Economy, and dispensation of his judgment.

Nor will all objections reflect upon my inclination, some will also upon my
Narrative, and fault its Orthography, which consists in the true
representation, not of Words, but Things. I have constantly conversed in the
vale of rural recesse, far from the Court (the prospect and vantage ground of
observation) and upon that very account, this poor infant, even before it can
speak, before it comes to the birth of edition, while it is yet in the womb of
the Press, is already by some reprobated for errors foreseen. The best is this
Objection was not earlier contrived, then my Answer framed. Ocular observation
of the Author is not absolutely necessary to the credibility of a story; for
that were all at once, not to eclipse, but totally to extingush the light of
all Histories (Sacred only excepted) whatsoever, the greatest part whereof were
Postscript an age at least to the things recorded: and they who wrote the
memorials of their own times, as Thucydides, Xenophon, Herodian and others, who
are the most accurate Reporters, ingenuously confess, they as well derive some
things (...), upon trust from others, as other things they deliver upon their
own credit. To speak therefore ad idem, close, and pertinent to mine own
vindication, to satisfy the impertinent curiosity of these enquirers, I shall
descend to these overtures. As to what things are matters of Record, I confess
I have not consulted the very originals, but have conformed to Copies, but of
so near extraction, as they are but once removed from the fountain it self. In
other affairs, my information has constantly resulted from Persons, not only
present, but eminently, and some in Chief commanding in the actions, or
principal instruments in the Transactions. And as the greatest part of this
information did flow from one single hand, so (for the credit of my labor) may
I give this account of him, that he had as certain and as full intelligence of
all emergencies both forain and domestique, as any one in this Nation: and as
he was too judicious to receive, so was he too honest to transmit a vain
report; whereby, confident I am, I stand secure against any substantial
falsehoods, and I hope against circumstantial also, especially in point of I
emporalities, in assigning all both Things and Actions their proper times, no
one of which I will be bold to say is so in these Annals mislaid, as to
super-annuate, and not many to vary from the very day of their prime existence.
But if I be detected to have mis-reported any thing, light the error where it
will, my solace it is, Nemo Historicus non aliquod mentitus, and habiturus
Flavius Vopiscus.
sum mendaciorum comites, quos Historicae eloquentiae miramur Authors; the
best Historiographers have done the like. And as I had in this work no design
beyond Truth, so he that can form a truer Relation, let him.

THE REIGN OF KING CHARLES
KIng Charles was born November the 19th. Anno Dom. 1600. at Dun fermling in
Scotland, not K. Charles his Birth.
next in call to the Diadem. But the hand of God countermanded natures dispose,
and by taking away Henry his incomparable Brother, presented Charles, not only
the succeeding, but the only Male-stud of Sovereignty. The gallantry of Henry's
heroique spirit tended somewhat to the disadvantage and extenuation of Charles
his glory, who arriving at his years, and wanting nothing of his Princely
institution, came yet short of him in the acquist of reputation with the
People. Henry of a forward, and enterprising; Charles of a studious, and
retired spirit: whereof the blame may in part be imputed to some organicall
impotences in his body. For in his state of increment and growth, he was
exceeding feeble in his lower parts, his legs growing not erect, but repandous
and embowed, whereby he was unapt for exercises of activity. Again, he was none
of the gracefullest Orators, for his words came difficultly from him, which
rendered him indisposed to speak much. But in the flux of time, and when he
began to look man in the face, those tender limbs began so to consolidate and
knit together, as the most eminently famed for exercises of honor, were forced
to yield him up the garland. And though his vocal impediment accompanied him
till the fatal stroke, yet was it to wise men an index of his wisdom:
therefore Obloquy never played the fool so much, as in imputing folly to him,
since there was never, or very rarely, known a fool that stammered. And for his
intellectuals, he gave in the Spanish Court (where was his first initiation
into renown) a very satisfactory account. Ann. Christi 1625


His design thither (it is well known) was to seek a service, and make address
unto the Lady Infanta in the quality of a Wooer; a business which had
complicated with it the hopes, that under the His journey into Spain.
conduct, and into the bargain of that Match, his Brother (the Palsgrave)
should be postlimineated and restored to his inheritance of the Palatinate,
(then detained from him by the Emperor and Duke of Bavaria) and Count
Gondamore the Spanish Ambassador had partly promised as much. His reception
into the Spanish Court, was with all possible ceremonies of honor, and
specious comply-ments: but he had rather have seen good faith in ^uerpo, then
falsehood in the mantlings of those fair respects. For the crafty Spaniard would
not admit the restitution of the Palatinate into the fabric of the
Capitulation, no not by way of Parenthesis, but said it should be as a reserve
of gratuity to confer upon the King of Great Britain after the Nuptials
consummated. And besides, he spun out and protracted the procedure of the
affair to a length, tedious to the Prince, and (as it happened) destructive to
the whole design. For the transaction being completed to the very signing of
the Articles on both parts, and the obtaining a Dispensation from his Holiness,
and all things fit for Contract and Espousals, in the very nick of time (a
strange traverse of Providence) dies Pope Gregory, whose death put all to a
stand; for his Dispensation being now as null as himself, a necessity there was
of soliciting Pope Urban for another, which negotiated to the best improvement
of expedition, could not be obtained on the sudden. And (as if the rescue had
been by conspiracy) at that very time Dispatches came from King James, to
summon the Prince speedily home; who, glad of the occasion, communicates to
Philip his Fathers call, and pressed the necessity of his obedience so close,
as his Catholic Majesty could not in civility deny him. Matters being in this
wavering posture, the lazy Spaniard bestirs him, and importunately moves on the
other side; that, since he might not disoblige his Highness from obeying his
Fathers order, and that this unhappy remora could only amount to the loss of
some few days, and seeing there remained still the same inclination of
alliance on both parts, according to the tenor of the Articles, he would be
pleased to assign in his absence some Proxy to contract with the Infanta after
a new Dispensation had from Rome. To whom the Prince returned answer: That he
would empower the Earl of Bristol to give his Majesty all satisfaction in that
particular; which accordingly he did. Nothing was now left to impede his
Highness return, but to ceremoniate his dismission agreeable to his reception.
And (whatever the linings were) certain it is, there was such a fair outside of
love, such a seeming serenity of affairs, such dear accollado's interchanged
between Philip and his Highness, at their valediction and parting, as eye
scarce ever beheld the like. There goes a report that the Spaniard had a design
to have staid him, but that he outstript the Post; which I leave, as I find it,
dubious. But certain it is, the Prince began to nauseate the match, and to
meditate all honorable evasions, and no sooner was he aboard the vessel of
his reduction, but he disparched a clandestine Agent to the Earl of Bristoll
with an express order, not to yield up his Proxy, till further instructed
from England. And so he hoisted up sail for his beloved Ithaca, and home; upon
whose prosperous arrival, being October. the 5. the Kingdom fell into so
general a conflagration with bone-fires, as if the people had meant to make an
holocaust of it, such an universal and epidemicall joy there was, not only that
Charles was returned safe, but that also without his lading: In truth they were
so co-incident, as the loyal hearted English could not distinguish between the
Spanish match and Charles his ruin. Upon his first access to his Fathers
Court, after many dear and cordial welcomes, he represented to his Majesty the
state of his Negotiation, who perceiving upon the hole sum, that the sly
Spaniard practiced to make an after game of the Palatinate, and observing a
general disgust in the hole Kingdom, by advice of his Privy Council,
dispatcheth Letters to the Earl of Bristoll, enjoining him positively to demand
restitution of the Palatinate, and that till he had absolute satisfaction
therein, the Proxy should not be delivered, nor any further progress made in
the Treaty. This unexpected proposal put his Catholic majesty into such a
dazzling demur, as it was no difficult matter to presage a final rupture would
ensue, which (after the Treaty had lain languishing about five months)
happened by the solicitation of the Parliament, March, 24. 1623. The estimation
his Highness got in this expedition of a solid and serious Prince, was more
then could be expected from his puisne years of 23.

Nor was this the only service that adventure did him, it gave Overtures of the
French Alliance.
him also a transitory view of that excellent Lady, whom the supreme Moderator
of all things had reserved for him. For Paris being obvious to him, and in his
way to Spain, he delaid there one day, where fortune entertained him with a
sight of the Princess Henretta Maria at a Court Masque; this view he stole
undiscovered, through the benefit of a false hair: I will not say this casualty
was causal to the first design of soliciting that alliance; yet possible it is,
that first ocular acquaintance with her person, might create something of
affection in him beyond neutrality; what occasion it was first started that
Treaty, I know not, but for certain there never was such an harmony of
universal votes in any affair of that quality, between the two Crowns, as in
this. For King James recommending it to the consideration of his Privy
Council, they extol both the relation and accommodations of the match,
assuring his Majesty the project would take passing well in an Assembly of the
three Estates; whose convention his Majesty having before meditated in order to
the recovery of the Palatinate, he now falls upon resolution, and issues
summons for the Parliament to assemble: which being met, and the business
propounded, it was entertained with an unanimous consent, and a motion made,
that an Ambassador should be sent over to negotiate the Treaty. The King
finding the Parliament so great zelots in this design, he presently issues out
a Commission to the Earl of Holland to that intent. Who being a most commodious
and proper instrument for such an employment, speedily imbarques for France,
where upon the prime overture of his message at the French Court, he found so
ready and fluent an inclination in King Jews, as he was able to divine the
issue before capitulation, whereof he early transmitted advertisement to his
Master, who upon notice of it (for the greater honor of the correspondence,
and to express the exuberancy of his devotion to the match) superinducted the
Earl of Carlisle as an additionall Ambassador to the Earl of Holland. And from
France, Jews (who disdained to be wanting in any dues of compli-ment)
dispatcheth the Marquess D' Effait for England. These noble instruments of
State plied their instructions with that diligence and fidelity, as the accord
was full formed, November. the 10. 1624. and Articles signed on both sides, so as
France and England seemed now as one Continent, and all of a piece. True it is
there wanted a dispensation from the Bishop of Rome, whereof his Majesty of
France was then in pursuit.

But in the interim of that delay, King James (as if the consummation of that
match had been his consummatum est) brake King James his Death.
up his ruinous house of clay, surrendering up at Theobalds his soul to God, and
his three Kingdoms to his Son, March 27. 1625.

It will not be amiss nor ablude from the usual ceremony ordained to the
bodies of extinct Princes, if I here represent in brief the pourtraicture of
this famous Monarch, which I will do freely, sincerely, and with a spirit which
equally disdaines to libel or to flatter him.

In the style of the Court he went for Great Britain's Solomon; nor is it any
excursion beyond the precincts of verity to say, His Character.
that neither Britain nor any other Kingdom whatsoever, could ever, since
Solomon's days, glory in a King, (for recondite learning, and abstruse
knowledge) so near a match to Solomon, as He. And though he was an universal
Scholar, yet did he make other sciences (their most proper employment) but
drudges and serviteurs to Divinity, wherein he became so transcendently
eminent, as he notoriously foiled the greatest Clerks of the Roman See. Nor did
his Theological abilities more advantage the cause of Religion abroad, then at
home, they keeping the nowfangled-Clergie aloof, and at distance, as not daring
to infuse into so solid a judgment their upstart and erroneous fancies, no nor
disquiet the Churches peace with heterodox opinions. A stout adversary he was
to the Arminians and Semi-Pelagians, whom he called, as Prosper before him, the
enemies of Gods grace. And as slender a friend to the Presbytery, of whose
tyrannical and Antimonarchical principles he had had from his cradle smart
experience. He was an excellent speaker, the scheme of his Oratory being more
stately, then pedantique, and the expressions argued him both a King and
Scholar. In his apparel and civil garb he seemed naturally to affect a
majestique carelessness, which was so hectique, so habitual in him, as even in
religious exercises, where the extern demeanor is a grand part of that sacred
homage, he was somewhat too incurious and irreverent. He was indulgent a little
to his palate, and had a smack of the Epicure. In pecuniary dispensations to his
Favorites he was excessive liberal, yea though the exigence of his own wants
pleaded retention. Studious he was of Peace, somewhat overmuch for a King,
which many imputed to Pusillanimity; and for certain the thought of war was
very terrible to him: whereof there needs no further demonstration then his
manage of the cause of the Palatinate: for had he had the least scintillation
of animosity, or majestic indignation, would he have so long endured his Son
in law exterminated from his Patrimony, while the Austrian faction (to his
great dishonor) cajoled and kept him in delusory chat with specious fallacies?
Would he in those several negotiations of Carlisle, Bristow, Belfast, and
Weston, have trifled away so vast sums, the moity whereof, had they been
disposed in military levies, would have modelled an Army able (when
Heidelburgh, Manheim, and Frankindale defended themselves) to have totally
dissipated all the forces of the usurpers, to have mastered the imperious
Eagle, enforcing her to forgo her quarry, and re-estated the Paltzgrave? Would
he so shamefully have courted the alliance of Spain to the very great regret of
his subjects, whom his Predecessor had so often baffled, and whom England ever
found a worse friend, then enemy? What stronger evidence can be given in of a
wonderful defect of courage? As this lipothymie, this faint-heartednesse lost
him the reputation and respects of his people, so his heavy pressures upon
them, and undue levies by Privy-seals and the like, alienated their affections,
especially considering how those moneys were mis-imployed, indeed rather thrown
away, partly in the two dishonorable treaties of Spain and Germany, and the
consequential entertainments, and partly in largesses upon his Minion
Buckingham. Between this disaffection and contempt in his people, there was
generated a general disposition to turbulent and boystrous darings, and
expostulations even against his darling Prerogative; And though those dismal
calamities which befell his son, were doubtless ampliated by a superfetation of
causes, yet was their first and main existency derivative from those
seminalities; Let Court-pens extol the calmnesse of his Halcyonian reign with
all artifice of Rhetorique, yet can they never deny but that admired serenity
had its set in a cloud, and that he left to his successor both an empty Purse
and Crown of thorns.

The death of this famous Monarch caused no other Interregnum then of Joy, his
Son Charles being immediately by Sir Edward Charles proclaimed King.
Zouch (then Knight Marshall) proclaimed at the Court gate, King of Great
Britain, France, and Ireland. His first act of Regality was to dispatch Aviso's
of his Fathers decease to foreign Princes, and States his correspondents, with
whom he was in amity. Next he took into care the becoming obsequies of the
Royal Corpse, which removed from Theobalds to Denmark house in London, April the
23. was thence the 4. of May conveyed to Westminster, and there in-hum'd, with
the greatest solemnities and most stately ritualities could be devised.

Though grief had taken up the principal lodgings of K. Charles French Alliance
concluded.
his heart, yet did it not quite turn love out of doors, but he had still an
eye to France, and held himself concerned to let his Agents know he was
mindful of the stock he had going there; and to rear a firm assurance of his
serious intentions, he sent over letters of procuration for the Duke of
Chevereux to espouse the Lady Henrietta Maria: only he added this especial
pre-caution, that those Letters should not be resigned up until May the 8.
when the celebrities of his Fathers Funeral would be over; for he would not
that Grief and Joy (things incompatible) should justle. These instructions were
precisely observed, and on May 11. the Espousals solemnized in the Church of
Nostre-Dame at Paris; the Queen being given by her two Brothers, the King and
Monsieur. The Nuptials past, his Majesty thought long till he was personally,
as well as virtually, united to his beloved moiety, and therefore dispatcheth
over the Duke of Buckingham, and the Earl of Montgomery, with other personages
of quality, both to accelerate her transfretation, and wait upon her with the
greater splendor. May the 24. they arrived at Paris, and June the 2. the Queen
(after the iteration of most affectionate adieus, reciprocated and interchanged
between the King and her self) set forward for Amiens, where being attended
with a most princely retinue, she was under the restraint of a magnificent
entertainment, till the 16. of that months; thence she dislodged for Bulloign,
where she was to imbarque for England, (the contagion being then much at
Calais) there she found ready to receive her, one and twenty tall Ships sent
from her Dearest, with a gallant Convoy of the Duchess of Buckingham and
other Ladies of honor and eminence to serve her. June 22. she set sail for
England, and landed safe at Dover after a turbulent and tempestuous passage.
His Majesty lay that night at Canterbury, and next morning with joy incredible
greeted his royal Consort, and conducted her to Canterbury, where the marriage
was finally completed; the Duke of Chevereux, his Majesty's former
Representative, consigning up his precious charge to the King. From Canterbury
his now dual Majesty took coach for White Hall, where the third day after their
arrival, presenting themselves in their Royal Thrones before the Nobles of the
Realm, their Marriage was declared with great exultations and rejoycings: but
soon after they were warned to depart; for London being then visited and
empested with a fierce and furious contagion, it began to enlarge its quarters
so far, as at length it seized even White Hall it self, which necessitated the
King and Queen to remove to Hampton Court.

It does, I know, render King Charles obnoxious to untoward and sinister
descants, that he commenced his reign with so inauspicious A Reflex upon the
Pestilence;
an omen, as that prodigious pestilence; yet, setting aside that mortality had
now taken forth a larger Commission, what can be imputed more to him, then that
he did Patrize? Would the suggestors of that oblique construction search
counter, little more then a score of years, they might learn that King James
(who enjoyed the longest term of peace of any British King since the Conquest)
initiated his government with, and under the same calamity. Nay it is farther
remarkable, that these two plagues, that of the Father, this of the Son, were
natives both of one Parish (White Chapel) yea under the same roof, and issued
forth on the same day of the month; such correspondence was there in their
entrance, who were so diversified in their exits.

To the former paragraph, and short discourse upon the grand Infection, give me
leave to add another, (and both within Historical And upon the Alliance.
toleration) by way of speculation upon the French Alliance. I have heard some
great pretenders to State-aetiology, and who undertake to mate all events with
their proper causes, passionately ascribe Englands calamities to those
internuptials, and fetch that ireful stroke of divine Justice upon his late
Majesty from his marrying a Lady of mis-belief. Grant I do that both Englands
and his Majesty's sufferings may in some sort be reductive to the causality of
that match, but that there was any intrinsique noxiousnesse in it, either as
French, or Popish, I am not yet convinced. As French, it could not morally
operate any thing considerably destructive to us, in regard our correspondence
and commerce with that nation was rarely less then during that alliance.
Again, certain it is, and I have partly proved it before, that the self same
spirit of contest (the main cause of our divisions) between regal Prerogative
and popular Liberty (I had almost said Licentiousness) was emergent long
before that marriage. Nor dare I affix direct and absolute culpability to it,
upon the bare account of its being Popish merely, which I can more easily
dislike, then justly blame. It is, I know, with much confidence urged what S.
Paul interdicted the Corinthians: Be not unequally yoked. But that prohibition
being determined explicitly to Infidels, and persons of another Religion, is
improperly applied to Papists, who hold the same fundamentals (the Creed
Apostolical) with us, and are in truth of the same Religion, Christian, with
us; to thousands of whom we dare not think the advenue's of eternal
blessedness precluded; for though there be many errors in the Church of Rome,
which will not admit of reconciliation; yet are there many thousand members
thereof whose incuriosity contented with ordinary and saving truths, neglect
the acquaintance of those noxious mysteries, and are in the safest plight by
reason of their plain and simple belief. It cannot be denied, but unity and
individuation of Caeteram turbam credendi simplicitas tutissimam facit. Aug.
Ep. Fundam. cap. 4.
persuasion in all points of sacred truths, were to be wished between married
couples; yet notwithstanding it is not of such absolute necessity to
Matrimonial bonds, but (where other accommodations of congruity respond not) we
are probably indulged the choice of one of dissenting belief. And this was at
this time King Charles his case, for such was the paucity of Protestant
Princes, as the hole tribe of Reformation was not able to furnish and supply
him with one single match of agreeable birth and fortune. But be the sin as
great as malice it self can wish it; yet can it not be truly styled his; who,
though he was most concerned, was least conversant in the transaction of the
business; For, as I have already manifested, (before his adeption of the
crown) the affair had clearly proceeded beyond an honorable retreat, being not
only commenced, but fully and finally made up by his Father with the unanim
vote of Parliament. So that to the obligation of his filial obedience, there
was superinducted a decent complacence with the three Estates; the Principality
of the crime (if a crime it must be) being theirs, theirs was also the greater
condignity of the Block. But Divine vengeance issuing out no signal attachment
against them, convinces this idle suggestion of ill contrivance, since nothing
is more preposterous then to punish the accessory, and discharge the prime
offender.

The same time while his Majesty was thus buried in his amorous negotiation
abroad, he plied as well his interest at home, and while he wooed his Royal
Mistress there, he made love to his people here by summoning a Parliament:
that league being not A Parliament called.
more important to him as Man, then this as King; for as man is without a
female consort, so is a King without his supreme Council, an half-form'd,
steril thing; the natural extracts of the one procreated without a wife, are
not more spurious then the politic descendants of the other without the
coition of a Representative. The solemnity of this grand match was commenced at
Westminster, June the 18. At the first interview it appeared under the scheme
and fashion of a money Wedding, and in truth the public affairs did then
implore no less. Upon the opening of the And Assembled.
Parliament, the King imparted his mind to the Lords and Commons to this effect.

My Lords and Gentlemen,
YOu are not ignorant, that at your earnest The Kings Speech.
entreaty, March, 23. 1623. my Father (of happy memory) first took up arms for
the recovery of the Palatinate, for which purpose by your assistance, he began
to form a considerable Army, and to prepare a goodly Armado and Navie-Royall.
But death intervening between him and the achievement, the war with the Crown
is devolved upon Me. To the prosecution whereof as I am obliged both in Nature
and Honor, so I question not but the same necessity continuing, you will
cherish the action with the like affection, and further it with aready
contribution. True it is, you furnished my Father with affectionate supply's,
but they held no symmetry or proportion with the charge of so great an
enterprise. For those your donatives are all disburst to a penny, and I am
enforced to summon you hither to tell you, that neither can the Army advance,
nor the Fleet set forth without further aid. Consider, I pray you, the eyes of
all Europe are defixt upon me, to whom I shall appear ridiculous, as though I
were unable to outgoe muster and ostentation, if you now desert me. Consider it
is my first attempt, wherein if I sustain a foyl, it will blemish all my future
honor. If mine cannot, let your own reputation move you, deliver and expedite
me fairly out of this war, wherewith you have encombred, let it never be said,
whereinto you have betrayed me. I desire therefore your speedy supply; speedy I
call it, for else it will prove no supply. The Sun you know is entering into his
declining point, so it will be soon too late to set forth, when it will be
rather not too soon to return. Again, I must mind you of the mortality now
regnant in this City, which should it (as so it may, and no breach of
privilege neither) arrest any one Member of either house, it would soon put a
period both to consultation and session, so that your own periclitation
necessitates an early resolution. In sum, Three of the best Rhetoritians,
Honor, Opportunity, and Safety, are all of a plot, and plead, you see, for
expedition. Perhaps it may be expected I should say something in way of account
of my Religion, as alsoof the temper and tenor of my future Government. But as
I hope I have not been guilty of any thing which may justly start the least
question in either, so I desire you would repose in this assurance, that I will
in neither vary from those principles wherein I have been instituted at the
feet of that eminent Gamaliel my late Father.


His Speech being ended, the King veiled his Crown, a thing rare in any of his
Predecessors.

Though denied it could not be, but this Speech was elemented of very rational
materials, and ponderous arguments, yet did it not cause such a precipitation
of resolution, but that the Parliament did descend to consideration of it by
degrees. That which retarded the debate was this. They had in store by them two
Petitions, one for Religion, the other against Grievances; to which, having
been modeled in King James his time, and preferred to him at the close of the
last Session of the last Parliament, they as yet never received answer. They
said it was the ancient, and as they The Parliaments Answer.
conceived, a most prudentiall practice, to present Petitions at the
Commencement of Parliaments, or so long before their dissolution, as the King
might have time to return a full and deliberate answer; That the same course
they were resolved strictly to pursue, and give priority of dispatch to those
Petitions, before any other business whatsoever; which accordingly they did.
To the several heads against grievances his Majesty gave a distinct and
satisfactory answer, and promised largely to the Petition for Religion: and the
better to draw on supplies, he did audit to them the several disbursments,
both relating to the Army and Navy, that all jealousies of mis-imployment
might be removed; which produced so good effects, as the Laity gave him, freely
and without coudition, two Subsidies from Protestants, and four from Papists,
as a mulct of the House upon their Recusancy, and the Clergy three.

In this Session of Parliament was Mr. Mountague questioned Mr. Mountague
questioned?
for publishing certain Books prejudicial to the Protestant cause, for which
he was ordered to be brought to the bar, to whom the Speaker declared the
pleasure of the House, That they would refer his censure to their next
meeting, and in the interim in respect of his notorious contempt, he should
stand cnmmitted to the Sergeants Ward, entering Bail for his then appearance.

But Mr. Mountague had by the artifice of his Court friends cunningly crept
into the Kings service undiscerned, and the King signified to the Parliament
two days after, That he thought his servants (whereof Mountague was one) might
have as much protection as the servant of an ordinary Burgess. Nevertheless
his bond of two thousand pound whereupon he was tailed, continued uncancelled.

This Session was also enacted a Law for punishing of diverse abuses committed
on the Lord's Day called Sunday.

A Law enabling the Kings Majesty to make Leases of Lands parcel of his
Highness Duchy of Cornwall, or annexed to the same.

A Law for the ease in obtaining of Licenses of Alienation, and in the pleading
of Alienations with License, or of Pardon of Alienation without License, in the
Court of Exchequer or elsewhere.

A Law for the further restraint of tippling in Innes, Alehouses and other
Victualling houses.

An Act that this Session of Parliament shall not determine by his Majesty's
royal assent to these Acts.

There passed also in the House of Commons a Bill of Tunnage and Poundage, but
because it was limited to a year, whereas former grants to his Majesty's
predecessors were for term of life, it was foundred in the Lords House, and
went no further; the cause of this restraint was,

In the Parliament 18. of King James, the Kings Council culled out of that Act
reasons for pretermitted Customs, and other impositions, which were then
charged upon, and grievances to the Subject. Again, there had been lately set
an immoderate rate upon those Customs, and therefore they had in design to
reduce them to the rate settled in Queen Mary's days, but they had not time
enough at present to make the Reformation.

August the first the Parliament met again at Oxford, the Divinity School was
appointed for the House of Commons, The Parliament assembled at Oxford.
and the Galleries above for the House of Lords. The fourth of the same month
both Houses were called together to Christ-Church-hall by the King, where he
laid open to them his wants for setting forth the Fleet. But the Parliament
before they would return his Majesty any answer, presented him with a Petition
against Recusants to this effect.

Most Gracious Sovereign,
IT being infallibly true that nothing can more establish your Throne, and
assure the peace and prosperity of your People, then the unity and sincerity of
Religion; We your Majesty's most humble and loyal Subjects and Commons in this
present Parliament assembled, observing that of late there is an apparent
mischievous increase of Papists within your Dominions, hold our selves bound in
conscience and duty to present the same unto your sacred Majesty, together with
the dangerous consequences, and what we conceive to be the most principal
causes, and what may be the remedies thereof.

1. Their desperate ends, being the subversion both of Church and State, and
the restlesnesse of their spirits to attain those ends. The Doctrine of their
Teachers and Leaders persuading them, that therein they shall do God good
service.

2. Their evident and strict dependence upon such forain Princes, as no way
affect the good of your Majesty and this State.

3. An opening a way of Popularity to the ambition of any who shall adventure
to make himself head of so great a party.


The principal causes of the increase of Papists.
1. The want of due execution of the Laws against Jesuits, seminary Priests
and Papists Recusants, occasioned partly by connivence of the State, partly by
many abuses of Officers. 2. The interposing of forain Princes by their
Ambassadors and Agents in favor of them. 3. Their great concourse to the City,
and their frequent conventicles and conferences there. 4. The education of
their children in Houses and Seminaries of their Religion in forain parts,
which of late have been greatly multiplied and enlarged, for the entertainment
of the English. 5. That in many places of this your Realm, your people are not
sufficiently instructed in the knowledge of true Religion. 6. The licentious
publishing of Popish and seditious Books. 7. The employment of men ill affected
in Religion in places of Government, who countenance the Popish party.
The Remedies be these:

1. That there be great care taken in choice, and admitting Schoolmasters, and
that the Ordinaries make diligent inquiries of their demeanours, and proceed to
the removing of such as shall be faulty.

2. That the ancient Discipline of the University be restored, being the famous
nursery of literature.

3. That for the propagation of the Gospel, such able Ministers, as have been
formerly silenced, may by fair entreaty of the Bishops be reduced to the
service of the Church, and that Non-residency, Pluralities, and Commendums may
be moderated.

4. That a straight provision may be made against transporting of English
children to Popish Seminaries beyond Seas, and for recalling such as are there
already.

5. That no Popish Recusant be permitted to come within the Court, unless upon
special occasion, agreeable to the Statute 3o Iacobi.

6. That all Jesuits, Priests, and others having taken Orders from the Sea of
Rome, may be banished by Proclamation, and in case of disobedience may be
proceeded against according to the Laws of the Land.

7. That none by any authority derived from the Sea of Rome be permitted to
confer Orders, or exercise any Ecclesiastical function within your Majesty's
Dominions.

8. That all former grants of Recusants lands made to the use and interest of
such Recusants, may by the advice of your Majesty's Council be voided.

9. That all Recusants may be excommunicated, and not absolved but upon
conformity.

10. That all Recusants be removed from places of authority and government.

11. That all Recusants be disarmed according to the provision of the Law.

12. That they may be all confined to remain at their Country habitations, and
not to travel above five miles from thence.

13. That none of your Majesty's natural born subjects be suffered to repair
to the hearing of Masses, or other superstitious service at the Chapels or
houses of forain Ambassadors or elsewhere.

14. That all such insolences as any Popishly affected have lately committed
to the dishonor of our Religion, be exemplarily punished.

15. That the penalty of 12 d. every Sunday for default of coming to Divine
Service in the Church, without lawful excuse, may be put in execution.

Lastly, that your Majesty would be pleased to order that the like courses may
be taken in Ireland, for the establishing of true Religion there.

To all these several branches the King returned August 7. an The Kings Answer.
answer so plausible and satisfactory, as nothing could be desired more.

One good turn requires another, and as the King had given the Parliament ample
content by this answer: so he hoped they would be as cheerful in supplying him
with moneys, for which he earnestly importuned them, and especially for his
great Naval preparation. Whereupon ensued a great debate in the House, some
were very prompt to give, some would give, but in convenient time, not then:
Some would give, but they complained that the design was managed by Young and
Single Council, that Sir Robert Mansel a man of judgment and experience, had
declared against the Plot, and had tendered the Council of War a project of
greater advantage and less expense, which was approved by the Lord of
Chichester; To which the Solicitor replied in the Dukes behalf, that the
Council of War, for the generality, much disliked the project of Sir Robert,
and concluded upon what was then intended. But the greater part agreed not to
give, and to make an humble Remonstrance, declaring the causes and reasons of
their not giving. Most of the voters of this Remonstrance, flew high and
impetuously pressed in upon the Duke, some would divest him of his offices, the
Admiralty especially; others of his Revenue, by resuming what he possessed of the
Crown demeanes, others demanded an account of what public moneys he had been
entrusted with. This being signified to the King, he soon prognosticated of
what quality the Remonstrance would prove, therefore in distaste he determined
to dissolve the Parliament. The House of Commons were resolved into a Grand
Committee, when the Usher came from the Lords house with that message, and
before they would permit the Solicitor, then in the chair, to leave his seat,
they agreed upon a Protestation, which Mr. Glanvile stood up and declared to
this effect:

First, To give his Majesty thanks for his gracious answer to our Petition for
Religion.

Next, For his Care of our healths, in giving us leave to depart this dangerous
time.

Lastly, A dutiful declaration of our affection, and loyalty, and purpose to
supply his Majesty in a Parliamentary way, in a fitting and convenient time.

This being done the Speaker took the Chair, and admitting the The Parliament
dissolved.
Usher he delivered his message from the Lords concerning the dissolution of
the Parliament.

The dissolution of the Parliament gave the King an otium for his Summers
pastime, and, that his own progress might not impede That of his affairs, his
Council were his Synodites, and went along with him; by whose general advice
two things were most considerably resolved upon: First, that the Fleet should
Treaty with the united Provinces.
speedily put out to sea. Secondly, that a more straight amity should be entered
into with with the States of the united Provinces: who resorting to the King in
September by their Ambassadors, prayed his conjunction with them in a league
Offensive and Defensive against their common enemies, the Emperor and King of
Spain; and not only so, but that he would also assist them in soliciting other
Princes to associate with them in a confederation of equal latitude. To which
our King freely condescended (upon agreement that the States should bear a
fourth part of the charge of the Fleet) and in pursuance thereof sent in
October next the Duke of Buckingham and the Earl of Holland over to the Hague,
both to confer with the Ambassadors of other Princes about it, and to put his
disconsolate sister in some hopes of her restitution to the Palatinate. But
these two being arrived in Holland, found the Agents of France and Denmark not
empowered to so large a concession, alleging that their Masters condition was
indisposed to so ample a compliance; whereupon for the better satisfaction of,
and accommodation to all parties, the League was concluded in these words, For
the restoring the Liberties of Germany.

This negotiation having taken up somewhat more then a month, home returns the
Duke and Earl, where they abode not long, before The ill success of Gades
Voyage.
they were saluted with the current news of the misfortune of Vicount
Wimbletons Fleet at Gades.

October the eight the Admiral put forth to Sea, and on the twelfth was
encountered with so furious a storm, that in conflict and skirmish with it, all
his long-boats and the Long-Robert of Ipswich, a Ship wherein were a hundred
seventy five persons perished, and the rest were so dissipated and scattered,
that for seven days, fifty of the English Navy, being in all but eighty, were
missing. Again, when they met together in the height of the Southern Cape, and
had a desire to make some local onset, a Council of war being called to resolve
where the account should be first made (their Commission leaving them at that
liberty) the debate was so long, as in the interim their discovery alarmed the
next coast to a posture of defense. At length the Council determined an
assault upon the Ships in the Bay of Gades, a design much urged by the Earl of
Essex Vice Admiral, who eagerly desired there to play over his game of honor
again, double or quit with the Spaniards. But that Fleet lay in a harbor
inaccessible, unless the Fort belonging to Puntal Castle could be cleared;
therefore order was given, That twenty English and five Dutch Ships should
advance for that service. But the slender reputation the Admiral had amongst
the Mariners (as one ignorant in Sea affairs, and a deep disgust they took that
he should be obtruded and thrust upon them in stead of Sir Robert Mansel, a
gentleman peculiarly qualifyed for and long traded in Sea exploits, and who had
an unquestionable right to the chief conduct of this enterprise upon the Dukes
default) so lessened the influence of the authority, that the five Dutch only
attended their duty, not a man of the other twenty stirring: which caused the
Admiral from ship to ship personally to reinforce his command, until with
much ado he obtained their advance and engagement against the Castle; which,
contrary to expectation, entertained the shock with so sturdy a defiance, as
near two thousand great shot put it not to the detriment of one stone.
Whereupon the Admiral concluding it that way impregnable, decreed to try it by
a Landforce; to which end Sir John Buroughs (a Gentleman of eminent gallantry
in Martial feats) was sent with a Regiment of Foot to manage that design; He
going upon the service, met with some Horse and Foot of the enemies intending
to impede his march, but he welcomed them with such a storm of courage, that
the Captain Governor of the Castle viewing the tergiversation and flight of
his party, began to dislike the situation of his strength, and hang out a white
flag, whereupon a parley ensued, and a resignation upon that Parley. The Fort
with fifteen barrels of Powder, and eight pieces of Ordinance being now ours,
the ships were consequently in the general expectation adjudged us: therefore
instructions were issued out for the firing of them, and Sir Samuel Argall was
appointed to be the incendiary. And in the interim the Field-men were directed
to land for their recreation, to take in fresh water, to forage the Country,
and to keep the stronger guard: but no sooner were they on shore, then they
discovered the cellars plentifully stock't with wine, whereof they caroused so
liberally (every one being his own Vintner) in despite of more sober commands
to the contrary, as put them upon the hazard of a dismal reckoning; for had
the Spaniard known his advantage, he might have made a lamentable butchery
amongst them, being worse fitted for flight then resistance, and the more
disabled from running who were not able to stand. The Admiral finding the
soldiers thus insufferably disordered, and perceiving that to stay longer were
bootlesse, resolved to put to Sea again, and the rather by reason the
Plate-Fleet from the West Indies was now expected every day. But first he sent
to Sir Samuel Argal to know what execution he had done, who returned answer,
that their purpose was defeated by the enemies drawing up their best ships to
Por* Royal, and sinking others in the Channel, thereby to obstruct the advenue.
Matters succeeding thus ill, the Admiral re-imbarques all and hoysing up sail
plies for the Southward Cape, there intending to wait twenty days for the
Plate-Fleet, hoping to atchieve something against it, which might be adaequate
to, and make even with the general expectation at home: but he was in no
capacity to perform any thing considerable against an enemy, unless by
communication of his own calamity, for the contagion so reigned in his Navy,
that there were not hail men enough to handle the sails; and to make the
affliction more sociable, there being a hundred and fifty sick in the S.
George, the Council ordered (an odd method of cure) that every ship should
take to nurse a couple of the sick, and subsortitiously, by lot, to supply
their places with as many sound. This course so propagated the infection, that
it soon swept thousands overboard. This calamity took away the Admirals
stomach to the Plate-fleet (which passed by within four days after) and
enforced him to ply home with all the speed he could; but his motion was so
retarded, that the newe^ of his miscarriage much outwent him, and while every
man stood gaping after the issue of the expedition, fame flew into his mouth
and filled it with the report of what a bad market of reputation the English
came to.

Several were the Descants of such as pretended to judicious Descants upon it.
censure, as fancy or affection swayed the balance; some blamed the Parliament
for not supplying the Kings necessities, whereby the Fleet put forth too late,
October being always accounted with us a month formidable to Navigation, in
regard of the usual tempestuousnesse of the season, known under the notion of
Micha elmas flaw. Some reflected sinisterly upon the Duke, saying, It never
either was, or will be well with England, while the Sea is under the command of
an Admiral so young, and withal so inexperienced. Others also made deductions
from this miscarriage in reference to the King, that because commencements do
often forspeak the qualification of future contingencies in the series and row
of succeeding affairs, they much feared this was but the earnest of some
inauspiclousnesse which would attend the residue of his reign. Nor amongst the
rest was Captain Brets conjecture vain, who-told the Duke, That the Fleet was
never like to speed better, wherein there went along, Bag without money, Cook
without meat, and Love without charity; so were the three Captains named; and a
great default there was, doubtless, of sufficient pay, of wholesome meat, and
unanimity.

The result of this undertaking (for action I cannot call it) affording no
better income of honor to us, I have abbreviated to as narrow a scantling as I
could; for Iournals must not intrude into History, but where every day
exhibiteth something remarkable, whose concealment may seem injurious to the
narrative, or fraudulent to the merit of the exploit.

The Michaelmas Term was, by reason of the infection at London, Term adjourned
to Redding.
translated to Redding, from whence the King, according to his late answer in
Parliament, issued out in November, a Commission to the Judges to see the Laws
against Recusants put in execution.

November the eleventh, his Majesty minding what he promised Proclamation
against Recusants.
at Oxford, ordered a Commission to be sent out under the Great Seal, for
putting in execution Laws enacted against Recusants. This Commission was
read^in all the Courts of Judicature at Redding, and withal a Letter was
directed to the Archbishop of Canterbury, enjoining him to take special care
within his Province for the discovery of Jesuits, Seminary Priests and other
Recusants, offenders against the Laws. It was in truth high time for severe
proceedings against them, they having contracted so much insolence, presuming
protection by reason of the late match, that at The Papists insolent.
Winchester, and many other places, they frequently passed through the Churches
in time of Divine Service, houting and ho-lo-ing, not only to the disturbance
of that duty, but scorn of our Religion; yea and one Popish Lord when the King
was at Chapel, was heard to prate on purpose louder in a Gallery adjoining,
then the Chaplain prayed, whereat the King was so moved, that he sent this
message to him, Either let him come and do as we do, or else I will make him
prate further off.

In the beginning of the next year mighty preparation was made both here and in
Scotland, for the re-inforcing of Navall strength. Nor was the Land-Militia
left unregarded, but because the Country Captains of the Train-bands were (for
the generality) very unskilful and rude in the use of their Arms, an hundred
and fifty Veteran Soldiers were sent for out of the Low Countries to drill and
discipline them.

The malignancy of the air, having lain under the correction of a ripping and
frosty winter, began to contract a more salubrious temper, whereby the plague
decreasing, the King secure of safety, began to meditate magnificence, and
matters of public concernment. And the first thing resolved upon was, his
solemn initiation into Regality, and setting the Crown upon his head: a thing
practiced by the wisest Monarchs, as wherein they cannot be idle to better
purpose. For though it conferreth no one dram of solid and real grandeur to
the throne; yet ceremoniated, as it is, with such formalities, it represents
it self a serious vanity. For as the King enters recognizance and stipulateth
with the people to govern according to Law, so they unanimously acclaim him
their King, all suitable to the ancient mode of conveying Sovereignty.

The day appointed for this ceremony was Feb. the 2d. The King, whether more
provident for his person (which so great a The King Crowned.
concourse might endanger) or purse, uncertain, rode not to Westminster through
the City after the ancient fashion, but went privately by water: this design
was a frugall one, and saved him sixty thousand pound which should otherwise
have been disbursed in Scarlet for his train; and little was the day less
glorious for the No-rubrique of solemnity, considering it wanted it not in the
Calendar. Two things were of singular remarque in the order of this celebrity.
First, that whereas it did peculiarly belong, ex officio, to the Dean of
Westminster, to power the sacred oil upon the Kings head, Dr. Williams that
Dean, and Bishop of Lincoln, was put by, and Dr. Laud, Bishop of Bath and
Wells, ordered to officiate in his stead. Secondly, That some words in a
Prayer, which had been omitted ever since Henry the 6. his time, were resumed
and used to this effect; Let him obtain favor for this people like Aaron in
the Tabernacle, Elisha in the waters, Zacharias Obtineat gratiam huic Populo
sicut Aaron in Tabernaculo, Elizeus in fluvio, Zacharias in Templo. Sit Petrus
in clave, Paulus in dogmate.
in the Temple, give him Peter's key of Discipline, Paul's Doctrine. Other
variation then this, there was none; nor was this variation the solitary act of
Laud alone, but of a Committee: this I positively assert, as minding the
reformation of a vulgar error thrown abroad in loose pamphlets, that Bishop
Laud altered the Coronation Oath; whereas the Oath itself was precisely the
same with former precedents.

The Coronation being past, the King prepares for a Parliament now
approaching. The last was somewhat (he thought) A Parliament called.
uncivil toward the Duke, and the (so thought) Delinquents must be made
examples; upon this account the Lord Keeper Williams Williams L. Keeper
displaced.
fell, and his place was disposed of to Sir Thomas Coventry: his mischief was
not great, his cancellier, his fall being only from The first lost; for though
he parted from the Great Seal, he kept the Lawn Sleeves; and though he left the
Purse behind him, he went away with the Money: having feathered his nest
pretty well, and apprehending his condition to be some what tottering, he made
all the means he could to re-ingratiate himself with the Duke, but nothing
could prevail, nor would the Duke be exorated, no not by the intercession of
the Countess his Mother, who loved the Bishop (if same belies her not) better
then was fit; but it was not enough to pluck his feathers, unless his nails
were pared also. For being a Bishop, and consequently a Member of the House of
Peers, he was still able to appear an eminent opposer of the Dukes, and to do
him some considerable mischief, therefore the best expedient for the Dukes
security, was to interdict him with the Earls of Somerset, Middlesex, Bristow,
(all of an inclination, though not all of a plume) the Parliament House.

On the 6 of this February the Parliament met, the Commons began The Parliament
meet.
their work where they last broke off at Oxford, making Religion their first,
which was their superlative care, and recollecting what a full and satisfactory
answer the King gave to their Petition against Recusants, and his Commission
issued out in pursuance of that answer, appointed a Committee for Religion,
impow'ring them strictly to examine what abuses of his Majesty's Grace had
occurred since that time, who were the authors and abetters of those abuses.

Mean while the Lords had formed an address to the King concerning a grievance
to their own Order, represented A Petition from the Lords.
thus:

To the Kings most Excellent Majesty.
In all humility,
Shows unto your most Excellent Majesty your ever loyal subjects the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal now in Parliament assembled;

That, whereas the Peers and Nobility of this your Kingdom of England have
heretofore in civility yielded, as to strangers, precedence according to their
several degrees unto such Nobles of Scotland and Ireland, as being in titles
above them, have resorted hither.

Now diverse of the naturall-born subjects of this Kingdom, resident here with
their Families, and having their chief Estates among us; do by reason of some
late created dignities, in those Kingdoms of Scotland and Ireland, claim
precedence of the Peers of this Realm, which tends both to the dis-service of
your Majesty and these Realms, and to the great disparagement of the English
Nobility, as by these reasons may appear.

1. It is a novelty without precedent, that men should inherit honors where
they possess nothing else.

2. It is injurious to those Countries from whence their Titles are derived,
that any should have Vote in Parliament, where they have not a foot of land.

3. It is a grievance to the Country where they inhabit, that men possessing
very large fortunes and Estates, should by reason of forain titles, be exempted
from those services of trust and charge, which through their default, become
greater pressures upon others who bear the burden.

4. It is a shame to Nobility, that persons dignified with the Titles of
Barons, Vicounts, etc. should be obnoxious and exposed to arrest, they being in
the view of the Law no more then mere Plebeians.

We therefore humbly beseech your Majesty, that you will be pleased, according
to the example of the best Princes, and Times, upon consideration of these
inconveniences represented to your Majesty by the nearest body of Honor to
your Majesty, that some course may be taken, and an Order timely settled therein
by your Princely wisdom, so as the inconvenience to your Majesty may be
prevented, and the prejudice and disparagement of the Peers and Nobility of
this Kingdom may be redressed.


Soon after the presenting of this Petition (to which the King replied, He
would take order therein) the Earl of Arundel was committed The Earl of Arundel
confined.
to the Tower. The cause was a marriage consummate between his son the Lord
Maltravers, and the eldest daughter of the late Duke of Lenox, whom the King
(being Guardian to them both) had so far designed to, as he had concluded the
match with the Earl of Argiles Heir, the Lord of Lorn, (who was brought up in
England in the Protestant Religion) meditating thereby a reconciliation of
those two families, who had for many years been at deadly feud. The Earl asked
his Majesty's pardon, protesting himself no way privy to the plot, and that it
was acted between the Duchess of Lenox and his own Countess in a clandestine
way.

But this commitment of the Earl presently moved the house of Peers to exhibit
another Petition, representing therein to the King that it is their undoubted
right [That no Peer, sitting in Parliament, is to be imprisoned without order
from the House of Peers, unless it be for Treason, Felony, or refusing to give
security for the Peace.] They had the more reason to urge their privilege at
this time, because the Earl had deputed to him six Proxies, which would be of
no validity during his restraint. Upon this Petition a great debate arose
between the King and Lords about the Privilege of their House, which lasted
from March 14. until June the 8.

During these things the House of Commons acted little, being in expectation of
some discovery from their Committee, from whom Mr. Pim at length made a report
of a letter written to the Lord Mayor of York, for reprieving some Jesuits,
Priests, and other Recusants. This Letter being under the Signet, a
Sub-Committee was ordered to search the Signet Office, and compare it with the
Original.

These proceedings inwardly much displeased the King, The King demands supply.
yet he smothered the indignity for a time, though he after inventory'd it to
them amongst his other regrets. And plying his more important affairs with a
most stedy temper, he sent a message to them by Sir Richard Weston to this
effect.

That his Fleet is returned, and their victuals spent, the men must of
necessity be discharged and their wages paid them, or else mutiny will follow,
which may be of dangerous consequence.

That he has in readiness about forty ships to be set forth upon a second
service, which want a present supply of moneys.

That the Armies quartered on the coasts, want victuals and clothes, and they
will disband if not furnished.

The Companies of Ireland lately sent, must speedily be provided for, else they
may be subject to rebel.

Lastly, the season for providing healthful victual will be past, if this
month of March be suffered negligently to elapse.

And therefore he desired to know, without more ado, what present supply he
must depend upon from them, that accordingly he might shape his course.

In stead of a supply to his message Mr. Clement Coke (son to Mr. Coke and Dr.
Turner their bold Speech.
Sir Edward Coke) a Member of the House of Commons, let fly this reply. It is
better to dye by a foreign enemy, then to be destroyed at home. And as if the
Prerogative had not been sufficiently alarmed by that expression, one Turner a
Doctor of Physic, reassaults it in these six Queries.

1. Whether the King has not lost the Regality of the narrow Seas, since the
Duke became Admiral? 2. Whether his not going as Admiral in this last Fleet,
was not the cause of the ill success? 3. Whether the Kings revenue has not
been impaired through his immense liberality? 4. Whether he has not engrossed
all Offices, and preferred his kindred to unfit places? 5. Whether he has not
made sale of places of Judicature? 6. Whether Recusants have not dependence
upon his Mother and Father-in-law?
This was uncouth language to a Princes ears, but who can expect that in so
vast a body, and mass of men, all parcels should The King requires
satisfaction,
take salt alike, and that no part should have rancidity in it? And perhaps
this clamor and noise might be the rudeness of some few new admitted into that
great School of wisdom, the greater part continuing (it is possible) sincere,
and loyal; therefore the King sends Sir Richard Weston to them requiring
satisfaction. But the House was slower in the work, then was agreeable to his
Majesty's mind, so intent upon some severe proceedings against them: upon this
he called the Lords and them together, and by the Lord Keeper, his proper
Speaker, thus conveyes his displeasure to them. By the Lord Keeper.


My Lords and you the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of the House of Commons,
His Majesty's His Speech.
command has summoned you hither, and the same command has put me upon the
service of signifying his will to you. His will was that both Ann. Christi 1626.
Houses should be called together; you, my Lords, as witnesses of the justice
of his resolutions, and of this address to the House of Commons.

His Majesty would have you know, there never was King who better loved his
people, or was more sincerely affected toward the right use of Parliaments, or
more ready to redress what shall be represented unto him in the quality of
grievance, provided it be in a regular and decent way, then Himself: but he
would also have you know, that, as he loves his People, so he regards his
Honor; and if he be sensible of his Subjects grievances, of his own he is much
more, especially when they flow from offenses of such a nature, as not only
blast his reputation, but impede the progress of his weighty affairs. To come
to particulars.

His Majesty says, that, whereas Mr. Coke spoke very seditious words in your
house, he was so far from being questioned or censured for them by you, as
Doctor Turner (animated with the same spirit) made them his introduction to
certain Articles of inquiry of as unsavory a condition, pretended against the
Duke, but in truth libelling his Majesty's Government. And though his Majesty
did not only by Sir Richard Weston, but in his own person declare his just
displeasure, and demanded justice against those exorbitants, yet have you not
only halted in your obedience to him, but have followed the very steps of
Doctor Turner, and upon false-bottom'd suggestions endeavored to distain his
Own and Fathers honor.

He also complains that you have taken upon you to search his Signet Office,
and to examine the Letters of his Secretary of State, leaving him nothing free
from their discovery: a thing not formerly practiced.

As concerning the Duke, whom you seem to persecute with such asperity of
disgust, I am also commanded to tell you, that his Majesty knows (none better)
he acted nothing of public employment, without his special Warrant; that he
has discharged his trust with abundant both care and fidelity; that he merited
that trust both from his now Majesty and his late Father, by his personal
hazard both at home and abroad; And that since his return from Spain, he has
been sedulous in promoving the service and contentment of your House. It is
therefore his express command, that you absolutely desist from such
unparliamentary disquisitions, and resign the reformation of what is amiss to
his Majesty's care, wisdom, and justice.

I am also to speak about the business of supply; you have been made
acquainted with the posture of his Majesty's affairs both forain and
domestique, and with his necessitous condition; the charge of all martial
preparations, both by sea and land, has been calculated to you, and you
promised a supply both speedy and suitable to his occasions; but his Majesty
complains, that as yet, you have performed neither, failing both in the
measure and in the manner. In the measure, by granting only three subsidies,
and three fifteens, a proportion vastly short of what is requisite. In the
manner, being both dilatory and dishonorable to the King, as arguing a
distrust of him; for you have ordered the Bill not to be brought into the House
until your grievances be both heard and answered: which is such a tacit
condition, as his Majesty will not admit of.

Therefore his Majesty commands you to take it into your speedy consideration,
and to return your final answer by Saturday next, what further addition you
will make; and if your supplies commensurate and equal the demands of the
cause, he promises to continue this Session to your just content, else he must
and will entertain thoughts of your dismission.

Lastly, I am commanded to tell you, that his Majesty does not charge these
distempers upon the hole body, and assembly of the House; but as he is
confident the greater number are persons of a more quiet dispose, so he hops
their influence, and this his Majesty's admonition will prevent the like for
the time to come.

The Lord Keeper having ended, the King said,

I must withal put you in mind of The Kings Speech.
times past; you may remember my Father moved by your counsel, and won by your
persuasions brake the Treaties; in these persuasions I was your instrument
toward him, and I was glad to be instrumental in any thing which might please
the whole body of the Realm: nor was there any then in greater favor with you
then this man, whom you now so traduce. And now when you find me so sure
entangled in war, as I have no honorable and safe retreat, you make my
necessity your privilege, and set what rate you please upon your supplies: a
practice not very obliging toward Kings. Mr. Coke told you, it was better to
dye by a forain enemy, then to be destroyed at home. Indeed I think it is more
honorable for a King to be invaded and almost destroyed by a forain enemy,
then to be despised at home.

The Commons nothing mortified with these tart and vinacre expressions, kept
close to their proper stations, and by way of Remonstrance replied,

That with extreme joy and comfort they acknowledge The Commons Reply.
the favor of his Majesty' s most gracious expressions of affection to his
people, and this present Parliament.

That concerning Mr. Coke, true it is, he let fall some few words which might
admit an ill construction, and that the House was displeased therewith, as they
declared by a general check; and though Mr. Coke' s explanation of his mind
more clearly, did somewhat abate the offense of the House, yet were they
resolved to take it into further consideration, and so have done, the effect
whereof had appeared ere this, had they not been interrupted by this his
Majesty's: message and the like interruption befell them also in the business
of Doctor Turner.

As concerning the examination of the Letters of his Secretary of State, as
also of his Majesty' s own, and searching the Signet Office and other Records;
they had done nothing therein, not warranted by the precedents of former
Parliaments upon the like occasions.

That concerning the Duke, they did humbly beseech his Majesty to be informed,
that it has been the constant and undoubted usage of Parliaments, to question
and complain of any person of what degree soever; and what they should do in
relation to him, they little doubted but it should redound to the honor of the
Crown, and safety of the Kingdom.

Lastly, As to the matter of supply; That if addition may be made of other
things importing his service then in consultation amongst them, they were
resolved so to supply him, as might evidence the truth of their intentions,
might make him safe at home, and formidable abroad.

To the Remonstrance the King answered briefly, That he would have them in the
first place consult about matters of the greatest importance, and that they
should have time enough for other things afterward.

But the Parliament accounted nothing of so great importance as a legal
proceeding against the Duke: in order to which all encouragement is given by
both Houses, to any who would inform against him. Upon this the Earl of
Bristow, being secluded by the Kings command from the House of Peers,
petitioned that House, that he might be admitted to prefer an accusation
against the Duke. This request, as most equitable, the Lords readily granted,
and Bristowes design coming to the Dukes ear, he plots amain (and high time) to
encounter him. Many good men were passing jocund at the contest; between men at
odds there never seemed an evener match; Bristow had, it is true, the better
head, (yet some thought it was ill set on) but the Duke the better back; nor
seemed the question in the sense of many, which was the Traitor, but which the
most. And first the Duke (with a boldness becoming the clearest innocence)
begins the onset, by whose persuasion the King commands the Atturny General to
summon the Earl to the Lords Bar as a Delinquent, May the 1. Bristow appearing,
the Attorney told the Peers, that he came thither to accuse the Earl of High
Treason: with that the Earl, My Lords I am a Freeman and a Peer of the Realm
unattainted, I have somewhat to say of high consequence for his Majesty's
service, I beseech your Lordships give me leave to speak. The Lords bidding him
go on, then said he, I accuse that man, the Duke of Buckingham, of High
Treason, and will prove it. The The Earl of Bristow accuses the D.
Articles of his charge were as follows:

1. That the Duke did secretly conspire with the Conde of Gondamar Ambassador
of Spain before the said Ambassadors last return into Spain, 1622. to carry his
Majesty then Prince into Spain, to the end he might be enforced, and instanced
in the Romish Religion, and thereby have perverted the Prince, and subverted
the true Religion established in England.

2. That Mr. Porter was made acquainted therewith, and sent into Spain, and
such message framed at his return as might serve for a ground to set on foot
the conspiracy: which was donw accordingly, and thereby both King and Prince
highly abused.

3. The Duke at his arrival in Spain, nourished the Spanish Ministers not only
in the belief of his own being Popishly given, by absenting himself from all
exercises of our Religion (then constantly used in the Earl of Bristow's house)
and conforming himself to please the Spaniard by kneeling to, and adoring their
Sacraments, but gave them hope also of the Princes conversion; which caused
them to propound worse conditions for Religion, then had been formerly settled
and signed by the Earl of Bristow and Sir Walter Aston.

4. That the Duke did many times in the presence of the Earl of Bristow, move
his Majesty at the instance of the Conde of Gondamar, to write a Letter to the
Pope, which the Earl utterly dissuaded; and that although during the Earls
abode in England he hindered the writing any such letter, yet the Duke after the
Earls return procured it wrote.

5. That the Pope being informed of the Dukes inclination in point of Religion,
sent him a particular Bull in Parchment, therein persuading him to pervert his
Majesty.

6. That the Duke in Spain did abuse the King of Spain and his Ministers so, as
they would not admit of a Reconciliation with him; whereupon seeing the match
would be to his disadvantage, he endeavored to break it, not for any service to
this Kingdom, nor dislike of it in it self, nor for that he found, (as since
he has pretended) that the Spaniard did not really intend it, but out of his
particular end and indignation.

7. That he intending to cross the match, made use of Letters of his Majesty
then private to his own ends, and not to what they were intended, as also
concealed many things of great importance from his late Majesty, thereby
overthrowing his Majesty's purposes, and advancing his own ends.

8. That, for the foresaid ends, he has abused both Houses of Parliament by a
sinister relation of the carriage of affairs, as shall be made appear in every
particular of that relation.

9. That he employed his power with the King of Spain for the procurement of
favors and Offices, which he bestowed upon unworthy persons, for the
recompense and hire of his lust: which is a great infamy and dishonor to our
Nation; that a Duke, a privy Counselor and Ambassador, eminent in his
Majesty's favor, and solely entrusted with the person of the Prince, should
leave behind him in a foreign Court, so much scandal by his ill behavior.

10. That he has been a great part the cause of the ruin of the Prince
Palatine, and his estate; in so much as those affairs concern this Kingdom.

11. That he has in his relation to both Houses of Parliament, wronged the
Earl of Bristow in his honor, by many sinister aspersions.

12. Lastly, that the Earl of Bristow did reveal to his late Majesty, both by
word and letter, in what sort the Duke had mis-demeaned himself, and abused his
trust: and the King by several ways sent him word he should rest assured that
he would hear the said Earl in due time; and that four days before his
sickness, he signified to the Earl, that he would hear him against the Duke as
well as he had heard the Duke against him. And not long after the King died,
having been much vexed and pressed with the said Duke.

When the Earl had ended his Charge, up starts no upstart Lord Spencer.
Lord, (the more the pity) and unbeseeming his noble extraction, and ancient
fame, Is this all (said he) you have to say against the Duke? The Earl replied,
Yes my Lord, and I am sorry it is so much. Then, quoth the Lord Spencer, if
this be all, Ridiculus Mus! and so sat down again. Upon this a crotchet took
the Lord Cromwell in the crown, and out he goes to Mr. Richard Spencer a
younger son of the Lord, and a great zelot in the lower House against the Duke:
Dick, said he, what is done in your House to day against the Duke? My Lord
(said he) he is charged with no less then High Treason. Tush Dick, quoth the
Lord, High Treason! if this be all, Ridiculus Mus!

Shortly after, the Commons having digested their Impeachment The Commons
impeachment against the Duke.
against this great man into thirteen heads, on the eighth of the same month
presented it to the Lords. This weighty cause was managed by six Gentlemen, Mr.
Glanvel, Mr. Herbert, Mr. Seldom, Mr. Pim, Mr. Wansford, Mr. Sherland, to whom
was added Sir Dudley Diggs, as Foreman and Prolocutor, and Sir John Elliot to
bring up the rear.

Sir Dudly Diggs his Prologue, for the extraordinary elegancy of the frame, and
concinnesse of his metaphors, I shall crave leave to insert, as it was
delivered to the Lords, before the Gentlemen of the house of Commons did
present the thirteen grievances, expressly this.

My Lords,
There are so many things of great importance to be said in very little time
this day, that I conceive it will not be unacceptable to your Lordships, if
(setting by all Rhetorical affectations) I only in plain country language,
humbly pray your Lordships favor to include many excuses, necessary to my
manifold infirmities, in this one word, I am COMMANDED by the Knights, Citizens
and Burgesses of the Commons House, to present unto your Lordships their most
affectionate thanks for your ready condescending to this conference, which out
of confidence in your great wisdoms, and approved Justice for the service of
his Majesty, and the welfare of this Realm they desired upon this occasion.

The House of Commons, by a fatal and universal concurrence of complaints from
all the sea-bordering parts of this Kingdom, did find a great and grievous
interruption and stop of Trade and Traffic. The base Pirates of Sally
ignominiously infesting our coasts, taking our ships and goods, and leading
away the subjects of this Kingdom into barbarous captivity; while, to our
shame, and hinderance of commerce, our enemies did (as it were) besiege our
Ports, and block up our best Rivers mouths; our Friends on slight pretenses
made embargoes of our Merchants goods, and every nation upon the least occasion
was ready to contemn and slight us: So great was the apparent diminution of the
ancient honor of this Crown, and once strong reputation of our Nation.
Wherewith the Commons were more troubled, calling to remembrance how, formerly
in France, in Spain, in Holland, and every where by sea and land, the valors
of this Kingdom had been better valued, and even in later times within
remembrance, when we had no alliance with France, none in Denmark, none in
Germany: no Friend in Italy; Scotland, to say no more, ununited; Ireland not
settled in peace, and much less security at home; when Spain as was ambitious
at it is now, under a King (Philip the second) they called their wisest, the
house of Austria as great and potent, and both strengthened with a malicious
league in France, of persons ill-affected, when the Low Countries had no being;
yet by constant counsels and old English ways, even then that Spanish pride
was cooled, that greatness of the house of Austria, so formidable to us now,
was well resisted, and to the united Provinces of the Low Countries, such a
beginning, growth, and strength was given, as gave us honor over all the
Christian world. The Commons therefore wondering at the evils which they
suffered, debating of the causes of them, found they were many, drawn like one
Line to one Circumference of decay of Trade, and strength of Honor, and of
Reputation in this Kingdom; which, as in one center, met in one great man, the
cause of all, whom I am here to name, the Duke of Buckingham.

Here Sir Dudly Diggs made a stand, as wondering to see the Duke present. Yet he
took the Roll, and read the Preamble to the Charge, with the Dukes long Titles:
and then went on.

My Lords,
This lofty Title of this mighty Man, me thinks, does raise my spirits to speak
with a Paulo majora canamus; and let it not displease your Lordships, if, for
foundation, I compare the beautiful structure and fair composition of this
Monarchy, wherein we live, to the great work of God, the World it self; in
which the solid body of incorporated Earth and Sea, as I conceive, in regard of
our husbandry, manufactures and commerce by Land and Sea, may well resemble us
the Commons. And, as it is encompassed with Air, and Fire, and Spheres
celestial, of Planets, and a Firmament of fixed Sarres; all which receive their
heat, light, and life from one great glorious Sun, even like the King our
Sovereign: So that Firmament of fixed Stars I take to be your Lordships; Those
Planets, the great Officers of the Kingdom; That pure element of Fire, the
most religious, zealous, and pious Clergy; And the reverend Judges,
Magistrates, and Ministers of Law, and Justice, the Air wherein we breath. All
which encompasse round with cherishing comfort this Body of the Commons, who
truly labor for them all, and though they be the footstool and the lowest, yet
may well be said to be the settled center of the State.

Now (my good Lords) if that glorious Sun by his powerful beams of grace and
favor shall draw from the bowels of this Earth, an Exhalation that shall take
fire, and burn and shine out like a Star, it needs not be marvelled at, if the
poor Commons gaze and wonder at the Comet, and when they feel the effects,
impute all to the corruptible matter of it. But if such an imperfect mixture
appear, like that in the last age, in the Chair of Cassiopea among the fixed
Stars themselves, where Aristotle, and the old Philosophers conceived there
was no place for such corruption; then, as the learned Mathematicians were
troubled to observe the irregular motions, the prodigious magnitude, and the
ominous Prognostics of that Meteor: so the Commons when they see such a
Blazing-star in course so exorbitant, in the affairs of this Commonwealth,
cannot but look up upon it, and for want of Perspectives commend the nearer
examination to your Lordships, who may behold it at a better distance. Such a
prodigious Comet the Commons take this Duke of Buckingham to be, against whom
and his irregular ways there are by learned Gentlemen; legal Articles of
Charge to be delivered to your Lordships, which I am generally first commanded
to lay open.

First, the Offices of this Kingdom, that are the eyes, the ears, and the
hands of this Commonwealth, these have been engrossed, bought and sold, and
many of the greatest of them, holden even in this Dukes own hands, which
severally gave in former ages sufficient content to greatest Favorites, and
were work enough for the wisest Counselors: by means whereof, what strange
abuses, what infinite neglects have followed? The Seas have been unguarded,
Trade disturbed, Merchants oppressed, their Ships, and even one of the
Royal-Navie, by cunning practice delivered over into forain hands, and contrary
to our good Kings intention employed to the prejudice (almost to the ruin) of
friends of our own Religion.

Next, Honors (those most precious jewels of the Crown) a treasure inestimable,
wherewith your noble Ancestors (my Lords) were well rewarded for eminent and
public service in the Commonwealth at home, for brave exploits abroad; when
covered all with dust and blood, they sweat in service for the honor of this
Crown. What Backwaies, what By-waies have been by this Duke found out, is too
well known to your Lordships; whereas anciently it was the honor of England,
(as among the Romans) the way to the Temple of Honor was through the Temple of
Virtue. But I am commanded to press this no further then to let your Lordships
know, one instance may perhaps be given of some one Lord compelled to purchase
Honor.

Thirdly, as diverse of the Duke's poor kindred have been raised to great
Honors, which have been and are likely to be more chargeable and burdensome to
the Crown; so the Lands and Revenues, and the Treasuries of his Majesty have
been intercepted and exhausted by this Duke and his friends, and strangely
mis-imployed with strange confusion of the Accounts, and overthrow of the well
established ancient orders of his Majesty's Exchequer.

The last of the Charges which are prepared, will be an injury offered to the
person of the late King of blessed memory, who is with God; of which (as your
Lordships may have heard heretofore) you shall anon have farther information.
Now upon this occasion, I am commanded by the Commons to take care of the Honor
of the King our Sovereign that lives, (long may he live to our comfort, and the
good of the Christian world) and also of his blessed Father, who is dead; on
whom to the grief of the Commons, and their great distaste, the Lord Duke did,
they conceive, unworthily cast some ill ordure of his own foul ways. Whereas
servants were anciently wont to bear (as in truth they ought) their Masters
faults, and not cast their own on them undeservedly. It is well known the King,
who is with God, had the same power, and the same wisdom before he knew this
Duke, yea and the same affections too, through which (as a good and gracious
Master) he advanced and raised some stars of your Lordships Firmament, in whose
hands this exorbitancy of will, this transcendency of power, such placing and
displacing of Officers, such irregular running into all by-courses of the
Planets, such sole and single managing of the great affairs of State, was never
heard of. And therefore only to the Lord Duke and his procurement by
mis-informations these faults complained of by the Commons are to be imputed.
And for our most gracious Sovereign that lives, whose name has been used, and
may perhaps now be, for the Dukes justification. The Commons know well, that
among his Majesty's most royal virtues, his piety unto his Father has made
him a pious nourisher of his affections ever to this Lord Duke, on whom, out of
that consideration, his Majesty has wrought a kind of wonder, making Favor
hereditary. But the abuse thereof must be the Lord Dukes own. And if there have
been any Commands, such as were or may be pretended, his mis-informations have
procured them; whereas the Laws of England teach us, that Kings cannot
command ill or unlawful things when ever they speak, though by their Letters
Patents or their Seals; if the thing be evil, these Letters Patents are void,
and whatsoever ill event succeeds, the executioners of such commands must ever
answer for them.

Thus my Lords, in performance of my duty, my weakness has been troublesome
unto your Lordships. It is now high time humbly to entreat your pardon, and
give way to a learned Gentleman to begin a more particular Charge.


Sir Dudly Diggs having ended his Prologue, the Impeachment it self of the
Commons was read, summarily as follows.

The Commons Impeachment and Declaration against the Duke of Buckingham.
FOr the speedy redress of the great evils and mischiefs, and of the chief
causes of those evils and mischiefs, which this Kingdom of England now
grievously suffers, and of late years has suffered, and to the honor and
safety of our Sovereign Lord the King, and of his Crown and dignities, and to
the good and vvelfare of his people; the Commons in this present Parliament, by
the authority of our said Sovereign Lord the King assembled, do by this their
Bill show, and declare against George, Duke, Marquess, and Earl of
Buckingham, Earl of Coventry, Viscount Villers, Baron of Whaddon; great
Admiral of the Kingdoms of England and Ireland, and of the principality of
Wales, and of the Dominions and Islands of the same, of the town of Calais, and
of the Marches of the same, and of Normandy, Gascoigne, and Guyen; General
Governor of the Seas and Ships of the said Kingdoms; Lieutenant General,
Admiral, Captain General and Governor of his Majesty's Royal Fleet and Army,
lately set forth; Master of the Horses of our Sovereign Lord the King; Lord
Warden, Chancellor and Admiral of the Cinque Ports, and of the Members thereof;
Constable of Dover Castle; Justice in Air of all Forests and Chaces on this
side of the River of Trent; Constable of the Castle of Windsor; Lieutenant of
Middlesex and Buckingham-shire; Steward and Bailiffe of Westminster; Gentleman
of his Majesty's Bedchamber, and one of his Majesty's honorable Privy Council
in his Realms both of England Scotland, and Ireland, and Knight of the most
noble order of the Garter.

The misdemeanors, misprisions, offenses, crimes, and othermatters comprised in
the Articles hereafter following: And him the said Duke do accuse, impeach of
the said misdemeanors, misprisions, offenses, and crimes.

First, That he the said Duke, being young and The Articles. 1. His engrossing
great Offices.
unexperienced, has of late years with exorbitant ambition, and for his own
advantage procured and engrossed into his own hands, several great Offices both
to the danger of the State, and prejudice of that service which would have been
performed in them, and to the discouragement of others, who are thereby
precluded from such hopes as their virtues, abilities, and public employments
might otherwise have obtained.

2. That in the sixteenth year of the reign of the late King, he did give and
pay to the then By buying the place of Admiralty.
Earl of Nottingham, for the Office of Great Admiral of England and Ireland,
and of the Principality of Wales, and General Governor of the Seas, and Ships
of the said Kingdoms, and for the surrendor of the said Offices, to the intent
the said Duke might obtain them to his own use, the sum of three thousand
pounds, and did also procure for the said surrendor from the late King, an
annuity of One thousand pounds per annum, payable to the said Earl, for which
considerations the said Earl surrendered the said Office with his Letters
Patents, unto the late King, who granted them to the said Duke for his life:
which is an Offense contrary to the laws and statutes of this Realm, those
Offices so highly concerning the administration and execution of Justice.

3. That he the said Duke, in the 22. year of the And Lord Warden of the Cinque
Ports:
late King, did give and pay unto Edward Lord Zouch, for the Offices of Lord
Warden of the Cinque Ports and of Constable of Dover Castle, the sum of One
thousand pounds, and granted also an annuity of five hundred pounds per annum
during his life, and that for the consideration aforesaid, the said Lord Zouch
did surrender his Offices and Letters Patents, to the late King, who granted
them to the said Duke for his life: which Offices (so highly concerning the
administration of Justice) the Duke has ever since held against the Laws of
the land.

4. That he has neglected the just execution of Not guarding the Seas.
those his Offices, and violated the trust reposed in, and committed to him by
them; in so much, as through his neglect the trade of this Kingdom has been
of late much decayed, and the seas ignominiously infested with Pirates and
enemies, to the great loss of both Ships and goods, and imminent danger of
this Kingdom.

That, whereas about Michaelmas last, a Ship called Stay of the S. Peter of
New Haven.
the St. Peter of New Haven, laden with diverse Merchandises, Jewels, and
commodities to the value of Forty thousand pounds, or thereabout, for the
properaccount of Monsieur de Villowes then Governor of New Haven, was taken by
the Ships of his Majesty's late Fleet, and brought into the Port of Plymouth,
as a prize, upon probability that the said Ship or Goods belonged to the
subjects of the King of Spain; whereupon there was an arrest of two English
Ships at New Haven in the Kingdom of France: after which, intimation was given
to the Advocate in the chief Court of Admiralty from his Majesty by secretary
Coke, for the freeing and discharge of the said ship, and goods, and thereupon
by Commission under seal the said ship and goods were released. The said Duke
notwithstanding any such Order, and Decree, detained still to his own use, the
Gold, Silver, Pearl, Jewels, and other commodities so taken out of the said
ship, and unjustly caused the said ship to be arrested again, in contempt of
the laws of this land, and to the prejudice of Trade.

6. That the East India Merchants in the 21 of And of the East India Fleet.
the late Kings reign, preparing to set forth Four great ships richly laden in
their usual course of Trade, the Duke moved the Lords then assembled in
Parliament to know whether he should make stay of those ships for the service
of the State: which motion being approved by the Lords, the Duke accordingly
did stay those ships; and after procured a joint Action to be entered in the
Court of Admiralty in the name of the late King, and himself, as Lord Admiral,
against Fifteen thousand pounds pretended to be Piratically taken by some
Captains of the said Merchants ships, and in the hands of the said Captains:
and accordingly, an Attachment was served upon the said Merchants. Whereupon
the said Merchants being urged to bring in the Fifteen thousand pounds, or to
go to prison, made now suit to the Duke for the release of their ships; who
pretending that the Parliament must be moved therein, the Merchants much
perplexed, and considering that they should lose much by unlading their ships,
and the loss of their voyage; resolved to tender to the Duke Ten thousand
pounds for his unjust demand, who by color of his office extorted and exacted
from them the said Ten thousand pounds; and upon receipt thereof, and not
before, released the said ships.

7. That the Duke, being Great Admiral of England, Lending of the Vant-guard to
the French:
did by color of the said Office procure one of the principal ships of the
Navie-Royal, called the Vant-guard, and six other Merchants ships of great
burden, to be conveyed over with all their Ordnance, Ammunition, and Apparel,
into the Kingdom of France; and did compel the said Masters and Owners of the
said ships, to deliver the said ships into the possession and command of the
French King, and his Ministers, without either sufficient security for their
re-delivery, or necessary caution in that behalf, contrary to the duty of his
Office, and to the apparent weakening of the Naval strength of this Kingdom.

8. That the Duke, knowing the said ships were intended to be employed against
the Rochellers and To be employed against Rochel.
the Protestants elsewhere, did compel them as aforesaid to be delivered unto
the said French King and his Ministers, to the end that they might be employed
against those of the reformed Religion, as accordingly they were; to the
prejudice of the said Religion, contrary to the intention of our Sovereign Lord
the King, and to his former promise at Oxford; and to the great scandal of our
Nation.

9. That he has enforced some who were rich Selling of Honors:
(though unwilling) to purchase honors: as the Lord Roberts, Baron of Truro,
who was by menaces wrought to pay the sum of Ten thousand pounds to the said
Duke, and to his use for his said Barony.

10. That in the 18 year of the late King, he And Offices.
did procure of the late King the Office of High Treasurer of England to the
Vicount Mandevil, now Earl of Manchester, for which Office he received of the
said Vicount, to his own use, the sum of Twenty thousand pounds of money, and
also did procure in the 20 year of the late King, the Office of Master of the
Wards and Liveries for Sir Lionel Cranfeild, afterward Earl of Middlesex, and
as a reward for the said procurement, he had to his own use, of the said Sir
Lionel Cranfeild, the sum of Six thousand pounds, contrary to the dignity of
his late Majesty.

11. That he has procured diverse honors for Procuring Honors for his Kindred.
his Kindred and allies, to the prejudice of the ancient Nobility, and
disabling the Crown from rewarding extraordinary virtues in future times.

12. That he procured and obtained of the late Diminishing the Revenues of the
Crown.
King diverse Manors, parcels of the Revenues of the Crown, to an exceeding
great value, and has received, and to his own use disbursed great sums of
money, that did properly belong unto the late King: and the better to color
his doings, has obtained several privy Seals from his late Majesty, and his
Majesty that now is, warranting the payment of great sums of money by him, as
if such sums were directed for secret service of the State, when as they were
disposed of to his own use; and has gotten into his hands, great sums which
were intended by the late King for the furnishing and victualling of the
Navie-Royall, to the exceeding diminution of the Revenues of the Crown, to the
deceiving and abusing of his late and now Majesty, and detriment of the hole
Kingdom.

13. Lastly, that he being a sworn servant of the His applying Physic to King
James.
late King, did cause and provide certain plasters and potions for his late
Majesty in his last sickness, without the privity of his Majesty's Physicians;
and that although those plasters and potions formerly applied produced such
ill effects, as many of his sworn Physicians did disallow as prejudicial to
his Majesty's health, yet nevertheless did the Duke apply them again to his
Majesty; whereupon great distempers and dangerous symptoms appeared in him,
which the Physicians imputed to those administrations of the Duke, whereof his
late Majesty also complained: which was an offense and misdemeanor of so high a
nature, as may be called an act of transcendent presumption. And the said
Commons by protestation, saving to themselves the liberties of exhibiting
hereafter any other accusation or impeachment against the Duke, and also of
replying unto what the Duke shall answer unto the said Article, Do pray that
the said Duke may be put to answer all and every the premises, and that such
proceedings, examinations, trials, and judgments, may be upon every of them
had, as is agreeable to law and justice.

The Commons having presented this Accusation, presently after sent a message
to the Lords, desiring that the Duke might be committed, declaring that it did
mis-beseem their House to permit a man so deeply impeacht to sit in Council
with them: And Sir Dudly Diggs and Sir John Eliot committed to the Tower.
at that very time, Sir Dudly Diggs and Sir John Eliot were sent for out of the
House, by two messengers of the Chamber, who upon their coming forth, showed
them warrants for their Commitment to the Tower; but it was resolved by the
Judges, that by their restraint, (no reason being given to the House for it)
the hole house was arrested, and Remonstrance was made to the King of their
privilege, whereupon they were released.

The Commons having sped so well, the House of Peers began The Earl of Arundel
discharged of his imprisonment.
to claim their immunity, making an order that nothing should be transacted in
their House, until the Earl of Arundel were restored: upon which instantly
ensued the Earls postlimination and readmittance.

Popular disgust began now to break in upon the Duke with such a running and
sweeping tide, as drew along with it by way of concomitancy the Peerage; nor
could his new dependents and Allies keep the Balance horizontal and even, much
less sway it; and because his fate must result from them, and not by weight,
but tale, the old trick of the Council of Trent was thought upon, and a new
summons of persons, firm confidents of the Duke (as the Lords Mandevil,
Grandison, and Carlton) into the row of Nobles. But this project would not
take, for the House of Lords found an ancient Order, That no Lords created
sedente Parliamento, shall have voices during that Session, but only shall have
privilege of sitting among the rest: upon which their suffrage was excluded.
This gave the Duke a taste (a bitter one) of their inclinations, so that
finding small favor to trust to, he magnanimously, some thought impudently,
stood upon his Justification. And as the ill opinion of his Peers deprest him,
so their affection to the Earl of Bristow elevated him: who received the
Atturneys charge with such an undaunted spirit, and returned so home an answer,
as the House was amply satisfied with it. On the other side, the Duke was as
intent upon his Defense, and having molded it to his contentment, upon the 8.
of June presented it to the Lords, who upon receipt thereof, sequestered him The
Duke sequestered from the House of Lords.
from sitting any more as a Peer of the House, until his cause was determined;
upon which he went away much dejected. The substance of his answer was as
follows.

1. To the charge concerning his plurality of Offices, he answers, That his
late Majesty did of his The Duke's Answer.
own Royal motion bestow them upon him, and he hops and conceives he may
without blame receive, what his bountiful Master conferred upon him, if the
Commonwealth does not suffer thereby. Nor is it without precedents, that men
eminent in the esteem of their Sovereign, have held as great and many offices
as himself. But if it shall be proved that he falsely, or corruptly has
executed those Offices, he is, and will be ready to resign them with his life
and fortunes to his Majesty's dispose.

2. To the second, he answers, That the Earl of Nottingham then Lord Admiral,
being grown much in years, and finding himself not so fit nor able to perform
what appertained to his place, as formerly; became an earnest suitor to his late
Majesty to permit him to surrender up his Office, who at length being overcome
by the Earls many solicitations condescended thereunto; and his late Majesty at
the entreaty of others, without the Dukes privity, was also persuaded to confer
it upon the Duke, much against his will, he being no way experienced in those
affairs: so that the Earl did freely surrender, and the Duke accept the grant
of the said Office, without any the least contract or proviso. But true it is,
that his late Majesty out of his Royal bounty did grant to the said Earl a
Pension of One thousand pounds per annum, as a recompense for his former
service to the Crown; and also the Duke himself did freely and voluntarily with
his late Majesty's approbation, as an argument of his honorable respects to so
Noble a Predecessor, send the Earl Three thousand pounds, which he hops is
not blameworthy in him.

3. To the third, he answers, That the Lord Zouch being grown in years, and
unfit to manage the Office of the Warden of the Cinque Ports and Constable of
Dover Castle, which are indeed both but one, discovered a willingness to
surrender it, and made several offers thereof to the Duke of Richmond, who at
last contracted with the said Lord Zouch for his surrender, for the
consideration of One thousand pound in money, and Five hundred pounds per
annum; and the said Duke of Richmond being prevented by death, his late Majesty
directed the Duke of Buckingham to go through with the Lord Zouch for it, upon
the same terms; which he was the willinger to do, by reason he had found by
experience, that the King's service suffered much through the emulation,
disaffection, and contention arising between those two Officers; and he hops
this act of his in acquiring this Office, accompanied with such circumstances,
the King also being both privy and directing it, will receive a favorable
construction, especially considering he was altogether unacquainted with any
law to the contrary.

4. To the fourth, he answers, That the loss happening to the Kings subjects
by Pirates and enemies has not proceeded through the Dukes default, as is
suggested, but because those Pirates ships are built of a mould as fit for
flight as fight; being far too nimble for the Kings Ships. To prevent which
inconvenience, for the time to come, there is present order taken for the
building of Ships of the same shape with those of Dunkirk, and for the Pirates
of Sally; that provision is taken either to restrain by treaty, or to repress
them by force, as will give good satisfaction; and this will clearly appear
upon proof.

5. To the fifth, he answers, That complaint being made on the behalf of some
French men at the Council Table concerning the St. Peter and some other Ships;
His Majesty then present did order that she and all other should be released as
were found to belong to any Prince or State in amity with him; provided they
were not fraudulently colored. And accordingly this Ship was by sentence in
the Admiralty discharged. But within few days after new information came to
the Lord Admiral, that this Ship was laden by the subjects of the King of Spain
in Spain, that the Amirantesio wafted her beyond the North Cape, and that
witnesses were ready to attest as much: upon which the Duke acquainted his
Majesty therewith, and by his command made stay of this Ship, as he was assured
(by the opinion of the King and five other advocates) he might do, and command
was given to the Kings Advocate to hasten the examination of witnesses, in
pursuance of the new information. But the French Merchants impatient of delays
which the producing many witnesses would occasion, complained again to the
Councel-board, and obtained an order from thence for the delivery of the said
Ship and goods, upon security; which security was once offered, but after
retracted; yet upon consideration of the testimonies produced the Kings
Advocate informing the Duke that the proof came short for that Ship, the Duke
did instantly give order for her final discharge, and that all her goods
should be re-imbarqued to the Owners; which was done accordingly.

6. To the sixth, he answers, That the motion in Parliament about the stay of
the East India Ships was only upon apprehension that they might be serviceable
for the defense of the Realm. That the action entered in the Court of Admiralty
against the East India Company, was not after, (as is suggested) but diverse
months before that motion in Parliament, yea, before the Parliament began.
That the composition (mentioned in this Article) was not moved by the Duke, but
made by the late King, and that the Company without any menaces or compulsion
agreed to the composition, as willing to give so much, rather then to abide the
hazard of the suit. That of the said sum, all but Two hundred pounds, was
employed by his late Majesty's officers for the benefit of the Navy; and
lastly, that those Ships were not discharged upon payment of the said sum of
Ten thousand pounds, but upon an accommodation allowed that they should prepare
other ships for his Majesty's service, whilst they went on their voyage; which
accordingly they did.

7. To the seventh, he answers, That those Ships were lent to the French King
without his privity; that when he knew thereof, he did what appertained to his
office. That he did not by menace, or any undue practice by himself, or any
other, deliver those Ships into the hands of the French: that what error has
since happened, was not in the intention any way injurious to the State, nor
prejudicial to the interest of any private man.

8. To the eighth, he answers, That understanding a discovery that those
Ships should be employed against Rochel, he endeavored to divert the course of
such employment: and whereas it is alleged that he promised at Oxford, that
those Ships should not be so employed, he under favor says, he was
misunderstood, for he only said, that the event would show it, being confident
in the promises of the French King, and that he would have really performed
what was agreed upon.

9. To the ninth, he answers, denying any such compulsion of the Lord Roberts
to buy his honor, and that he can prove, that as the said Lord did then obtain
it by the solicitation of others, so was he willing formerly to have given a
great sum for it.

10. To the tenth, he answers, That he had not, nor did receive any penny of
the said sums to his own use, that the Lord Mandevil was made Lord Treasurer by
his late Majesty without any contract for it, and though his Majesty did after
borrow of the said Lord Twenty thousand pounds, yet was it upon proviso of
repayment, for which the Duke at first past his word, and after entered him
security by land, which stood engaged until his late Majesty during the Dukes
being in Spain, gave the Lord satisfaction by land in Fee-farm of a
considerable value, whereupon the Dukes security was returned back. And that
the Six thousand pounds disbursed by the Earl of Middlesex, was bestowed upon
Sir Henry Mildmay by his late Majesty (without the Dukes privity) who had and
enjoyed it all entire.

11. To the eleventh, he answers, That he believes he were rather worthily
to be condemned in the opinion of all generous minds, if being in such favor
with his Majesty, he had minded only his own advancement, and had neglected
those whom the law of nature had obliged him to hold most dear.

12. To the twelfth, he answers, That he does humbly, and with all
thankfulness, acknowledge his late Majesty's bountiful hand to him, and shall
be ready to render back into the hands of his now Majesty whatsoever he has
received, together with his life, to do him service: But for the value
suggested in the charge, he says there is a great mistake in the calculation,
as he shall make evident in a Schedule annexed, to which he refers himself.
Nor did he obtain the same by any undue solicitation or practice, nor yet a
release for any sums so received. But having several times, and upon several
occasions disposed diverse sums of his late and now Majesty, by their private
directions, he has releases thereof for his discharge, which was honorable in
them to grant, and not unfit for him to desire and accept for his future
indemnity.

13. To the last he answers, That his late Majesty being sick of an Ague, a
disease out of which the Duke recovered not long before, asked the Duke what he
found most advantageous to his health; the Duke replied a Plaster and
Posset Drink administered to him by the Earl of Warwick's Physician; whereupon
the King much desired the Plaster and Posset Drink to be sent for. And the
Duke delaying it, he commanded a servant of the Dukes to go for it against the
Dukes earnest request, he humbly craving his Majesty not to make use of it
without the advice of his own Physicians, and experiment upon others; which the
King said he would do, and in confidence thereof, the Duke left him, and went
to London. And in the mean time, he being absent the said Plaster and
Posset Drink were brought, and at the Dukes return, his Majesty commanded the
Duke to give him the Posset Drink; which he did, the Physicians then present
not seeming to mislike it. Afterward the Kings health declining, and the Duke
hearing a rumor as if his Physic had done his Majesty hurt, and that he had
administered physic without advice, the Duke acquainted the King therewith, who
in much discontent replied, They are worse then Devils that say so.

This being the plain, clear, and evident truth of all those things which are
contained in that Charge, He humbly refers it to the judgments of your
Lordships, how full of danger and prejudice it is, to give too ready an ear,
and too easy a belief unto a Report or Testimony without Oath, which are not
of weight enough to condemn any.

Also he humbly acknowledges, how easy it was for him in his young years and
unexperienced, to fall into thousands of errors in those ten years, wherein he
had the honor to serve so great and so open an hearted a Sovereign Master.

But the fear of Almighty God, his sincerity in the true Religion established
in the Church of England, (though accompanied with many weaknesses and
imperfections, which he is not ashamed humbly and heartily to confess) his
awfulnesse not willing to offend so good and gracious a Master, and his love
and duty to his Country, have restrained and preserved him (he hops) from
running into any heinous misdemeanors and crimes.

But whatsoever upon examination and mature deliberation, they shall appear to
be, least in any thing unwittingly, within the compass of so many years, he
shall have offended;

He humbly prays your Lordships, not only in those, but to all the said
misdemeanors, misprisions, offenses and crimes wherewith he stands charged
before your Lordships, to allow unto him the benefit of the free and general
Pardon granted by his late Majesty in Parliament in the one and twentieth year
of his Reign, out of which he is not excepted. And also of the gracious Pardon
of his now Majesty granted to the said Duke, and vouchsafed in like manner to
all his Subjects at the time of his most happy Inauguration and Coronation;
which said Pardon under the Great Seal of England, and granted to the said
Duke, bears date the tenth day of February now last past, and so here showed
forth unto your Lordships on which he does humbly rely.

And yet he hops, that your Lordships in your Justice and Honor (upon which
confidence he puts himself) will acquit him of, and from those
misdemeanors, offenses, misprisions and crimes wherewith he has been charged.

And he hops, and will daily pray that for the future, he shall by Gods grace
so watch all his actions, both public and private, that he shall not give any
just offense to any.

This answer of the Duke to his impeachment, was a kind of new grievance to his
Adversaries; for it being contrived, and so inlay'd with modesty and humility,
it was like to have a powerful influence toward the conversion of many who
expected a defense of another and more disdainful spirit. Again it seemed to
state him in impunity, and the Commons having charged him, as they thought,
through and through, loath they were to fall short of victory; and having
pursued him with such vehemence, thought themselves worsted, should he now at
last make a saving game of it, therefore resolved they were to ply him with a
speedy reply: but while they were hammering of it, the King sent them a Letter,
demanding without further delay the speedy producing their Bill of Subsidy to
be passed; to which, to prevent their dissolution, they conformed. But first
they had drawn up a Declaration, of the same make and mind with their former
impeachment, of the miserable state of this Kingdom, and not without some high
contest, it was allowed by the House before the Bill of Subsidy. Whereupon his
Majesty was so exceedingly The Parliament dissolved.
incensed, as on the very next day being June the fifteenth he dissolved the
Assembly, though the Lords sent four of their House unto him, beseeching him
earnestly he would permit them to sit but two days longer, but he answered,
Not a minute.

The same afternoon the Earl of Bristow, the Dukes grand Arundel and Bristow
confined.
persecutor, was committed to the Tower, and the Earl of Arundel confined to
his own house. There came also forth from his Majesty a Proclamation for
burning of all Copies of the Commons Declaration made before the Parliaments
dissolution.

This Rupture of the Parliament being supposed to issue The King charged with
imprudence.
from the Kings great affection to the Duke, I find him charged with Deep
imprudence and high oversight to hazard the love of millions for him only.
Loath I am to leave him as I find him, and hope this suggested imprudence will
either totally disappear, or seem much less, if we well weigh those high
obligations all Princes have, and what The Charge Answered.
he had more then many others, to uphold their Favorites. It is, and ever was
the perpetual lot of those who are of choicest admission into Princes favors,
to feel as strong reverberations of envy and ill will from beneath, as they do
irradiations of grace and favor from above; whereby they suffer a kind of
persecution, it being the main business of those who malign them, to be
narrow inquisitors into all their actions, ready to aggravate the worst, and to
traduce the best; nor escape they so, but over and besides their proper
failings, they usually bear the blame and odium of their Masters faults; upon
which Consideration Princes are in some sort tied in equity to support them,
thereby to compensate and make them some amends for what despite they endure
upon the skore of their affection to them. Again, should a King desert and
abandon a servant of such choice esteem upon every slight suggestion, what can
he expect but a general tergiversation, a backsliding of affection and
fidelity from him, and an utter declining of his service ever after? These are
motives of general concernment, over and besides which King Charles had others
of more peculiar relation. He did not discern any thing in the accriminations
of so horrid import as might blemish his owning him. His accumulated Offices
and Honors, he reputed so far from an offense, as he could scarce think them
an error, and he believed hardly one of a million would have declined, or
resisted the temptation of those Royal tenders, had they been in the Dukes
case. And for his study to advance his near relations, he might most worthily
have been counted a Monster, and an extravagancy in Nature, had he cast off all
regard of those to whom he was by consanguinity so near annexed. Lastly, his
Majesty took notice, that in all those thirteen Articles of Impeachment, there
was not any thing of value, but what was acted and happened in the Reign of his
late Father, and consequently not legally cogniscible in his time; nor did he
think it sorted with his honor to admit an accusation against a person so dear
both to his Father of blessed memory, and him self, after so many years
elapsed, especially considering that since the time of his pretended
delinquency, he was honored by many of his now accusers with the acclamation
of the Preserver of his Country, and that in open Parliament; so odd a turn of
passion is there in the minds of men. These were the inducements which fixed the
King so much in the Dukes protection, which are here delivered out of a desire
to expunge that blemish of imprudence thrown upon his Majesty, not as a
concession of his dissolving the Parliament upon the account of that Protection
only; for the King had other provocations which stimulated him also to it.
Those Queries of Dr. Turner, and that expression of Mr. Coke, the King resented
as insolent, and so represented them to the Parliament; very hot they were of
the spice, and had more peper then salt in them. In subconsulary Rome, Athens
or Sparta they might have been tolerated, but in a state founded upon the
administration of Monarchy, those small strictures and sparks of animosity, had
fire enough in them to kindle and inflame the anger of a mild Prince: for
nothing irritateth and causes the wrath of Kings more then dis-respect, as
nothing gives them splendour and brightness but Authority, whereof if
Sovereignty be once dismantled, once stripped, she is soon trampled upon, scorned
and contemned: And though those speeches did not take their aim directly at
his Majesty, yet did they by glance and obliquely deeply wound him. They that
make Princes minions the But or mark of their accusations, had need have a very
steady hand, for it is very difficult to asperse persons so near the Throne,
but some drops will sprinkle upon Majesty it self. Nor had those disordered
heats power enough of themselves to operate so sad an effect, had they not been
seconded by a Declaration of the hole House of the same meal and leavened with
language of equal disgust to the King.

On the Monday before this doleful dysaster, there happened a A strange
spectacle upon the Thames.
terrible and prodigious spectacle upon the Thames. The water near
Lambeth-Marsh began about three of the clock in the afternoon to be very
turbulent, and after a while rising like a mist it appeared in a circular form
of about ten yards diameter, and about ten foot elevated from the River. This
Catarract or spout of waters was carried impetuously cross the River, and made
a very furious assault upon the Garden wales of York-house (where the Duke was
then building his new water stairs) at length, after a fierce attempt, it brake
asunder, sending up a fuliginous and dusky smoke, like that issuing out of a
Brewers chimny, which ascended as high, as was well discernible, and so
vanished. And at that very instant there was in the City of London, so dreadful
a storm of rain and hail, with thunder and lightening, as a great part of the
Churchyard walls of St. Andrews Church in Holborne, fell down, and diverse
graves being thereby discovered many coffins tumbled into the middle of the
channel.

It will not be amiss now to cross the seas, and to take a Difference between
England and France.
view of our Kings affairs, which began to be sullen, of an uniforme and not
much differing complexion from those at home, many indications and overtures of
discontent emerging between himself and his chief confederate and Brother Lewis
of France, whereby the former amity notwithstanding many Lenitives applied was
enforced at length to yield to direct hostility. In the provocation, Lewis was
the first, Charles in the quarrel. The leading occasion, this.

During the late Treaty of marriage between England and Seven English ships
lent to the French.
France, Jews pretending a martial design against Italy and the Valtoline,
entreated and obtained of King James the loan of the Vantguard, a parcel of the
Navie-Royal, and (with the owners consent) of six Merchants ships more. But it
being rumored that Jews intended these ships against Rochel, then revolted
from him, King James (who resolved to preserve himself neuter in that
business, liking the Rochellers Religion too well to offend them, and their
cause too ill to protect them) put in express caution that those ships should
not be employed against the Rochellers. But before their ships put forth to sea
(soon after King James died) Jews and the Rochellers (at the instance of King
Charles by his two Ambassadors, the Earl of Holland and Sir Dudly Carlton) came
to an accord. This pacification gave Jews advantage of enterprising upon the
Valtoline with greater, both power and expedition, and invited Charles to
dispatch the English ships for France: but no sooner arrived they at their
Port, then that nest of wasps at Rochel began to infest King Jews again, for
Subize following his old trade, took the opportunity of the advance of the
French Army for Italy, and a l'improviste, before they were aware, surprised
the Isle of The, then incuriously guarded (so in-secure did overmuch security
make them) seized many ships in the harbor, and bad fair for the taking of
Fort-Lewes, had not the Duke of Vendosme posted thither with relief. Jews
finding them of the Revolt, lapsed into their wonted insolency, began to rouse
amain, put to sea all the ships he could procure, sends to the Dutch for Naval
aid, and demanded of Captain Pennington the delivery of the English ships
agreeable to his Masters promise: The Captain replied, he took no notice of any
such promise, nor of any other agreement with the King his Master, then of
taking in a chief Commander, and a competent number of Soldiers, not superior
to the English, and to go upon such employment as his Christian Majesty should
direct, which, he said, he was ready to do: but to deliver up the ships without
express order from his Master, were a presumptuous, yea, a treasonable act in
him. The King of Frence perceiving the Captain so incompliant, courted and
tempted him with ample promises of advancement, and the proffer of large sums
of ready money; and finding him still intractable, he proceeded to protest
against him as a Traitor to his King; which protest so irritated and urged the
English Seamen, then under his command, as they stantly in a fury weighed
anchor, and set sail for the Downs: from whence the Captain sending to our King
for a further signification of his pleasure, his Majesty rather willing to
submit to the hazard of Jews his breach of Faith, then to the blame of
receding his own from pollicitation, returned answer, that His will was that he
should Misapplyed to the offense at Rochel.
consign up his own and the six Merchant ships to the service of his Brother.
This order soon elicited obedience in Captain Penington, and the residue, so as
they all rendered up their charge to the French. With the conjunction of these
seven English, and a squadron of twenty Dutch, under the command of Admiral
Halstein, with his own Navy conducted by Montmorency, Jews brake furiously in
upon Subize the Stasiarch, the chief Rebel, forces him from his strength,
reprizeth many ships formerly taken by him, and so impetuously chaseth him, as
he with much difficulty escaped to the Isle of Oleron. Our King having advice
of this misemployment of his Ships repugnant to their prime destination by
compromise and mutual contract, sent an expostulatory message to his Brother,
demanding the cause of this violation of his Royal parole, and withal
requiring the restitution of his Ships. To the breach of Promise the French
King returned answer that the Rochellers had first temerated and slighted their
Faith with him, and that necessity enforced him to use all means to impede the
progress of so great disloyalty, which he could not well do without the aid
of the English Ships, his own Fleet being upon other service: As to the
restitution of the Ships, he replied, That his Subjects, by whom they were
manned, held them contrary to his mind, and therefore wished his Brother would
come by them as he could. King Charles would have none of this answer, and
while he pressed for a better, he occasioned it, by the seizure of the
New-haven-ship; which Jews took for sufficient ground not only to keep his
hold of those seven ships, but also to arrest our Merchants goods in France to
the value of three hundred thousand pounds; yet at length, either upon our
Kings re-imbarquing to the French owners their goods, or reason of State (new
commotions then arising in France) so persuading, Jews in the beginning of May,
1626. released all our both ships and goods. Upon this all was calm as could be
between them again; But this lucid interval lasted not long, there being a
fresh eruption of discontent upon an unhappy dysaster, which befell in our
Queens Court, and it was as follows.

July the 1. of this year, toward the evening, the King waited on An unhappy
accident in the Queens Court concerning her Domestics.
by the Duke of Buckingham, the Earls of Holland and Carlisle, and other
principal Officers, came to Somerset house, whither all the Queens servants
were commanded by a message sent the same day soon after dinner to repair, and
delivered his mind to them, to this effect.

Gentlemen and Ladies,
I am driven to that extremity, as I am personally come to acquaint you, that I
very earnestly desire your return into France. True it is, the deportment of
some amongst you has been very inoffensive to me; But others again have so
dallyed with my patience, and so highly affronted me, as I cannot, I will no
longer endure it.

This accusation, though not determined to any particulars, yet while the blame
hovered over all, every single was concerned to keep it aloof; so that one by
one, they began profession of their several innocencies. The Bishop of Mende
answered, Sir, If this accrimination be levelled at me, let me, I beseech you,
know my fault, while I am here to make defense. And Madam S. George seconding
him; Sir, I make no question but the Queen will give of me a fair testimonial
to your Majesty. But the King departed with this Reparti, this short reply
only, I name none. The Queen, whose tenerity of years, and frailty of sex had
not yet annealed and fixed her for such an encounter, upon the first knowledge
of it overwhelmed with the billows of passion, grew exceeding impetuous against
his Majesty, imputing it to him as the outside and extremity of unkindness,
that having so slender a set and suit of her Native friends and servants to
attend her, they must now be in an instant all casheir'd, in whose lieu she
must now expect not a train of Honor, but a guard of disaffected strangers, not
to wait so much upon her commands, as to watch her actions, and to be treated
liker a Prisoner then a Princess. That it was an high indignity to the
daughter of France, and Queen of England, that she could not retain a menial
servant without a Conge d'eslier, and precarious address. His Majesty
observing her thus transported, labored by all gentle persuasions to pacify
her; but finding the torrent too ferocient and furious for reason to deal with,
resolved he was (hoping that her choler would at length quench it self with its
own ebullitions and over-seethings) to ride out the storm, and persisted
inflexible from his former purpose. Whereupon in the beginning of the next
month they were constrained They are warned out of the Realm.
to quit the Realm. A very sad doom it was certainly to the French, if we look
upon the punishment abstracted and singled from the fault; for many of them had
made sale of all was theirs in France for the purchase of those places of
attendance, to whom proscription and banishment was equivalent to utter ruin.
But as the animadversion was extreme severe; so their offenses Their several
offenses.
were adequately and in like degree heinous: and suffer they might an uniform
chastisement, for misdemeanors of several makes. The Ecclesiastic, stood
charged for putting intolerable scorn upon, and making Religion it self do
Penance by enjoining her Majesty under the notion of Penance, to go barefoot,
to spin, to wait upon her Family servants at their ordinary repasts, to trash
on foot in the mire on a rainy morning from Somerset house to Saint Iameses,
her Confessor mean while like Lucifer him self riding by her in his Coach; but,
which is worst of all, to make a Progress to Tyburn, there to present, her
devotions. A most impious piaculary, whereof the King said acutely, that, The
Action can have no greater invective then the Relation. Again the Bishop of
Mende was blamed for contesting over eagerly with the Earl of Holland about the
Stewardship of those Manors, which were settled upon the Queen for her Dower,
that Office being conferred on the Earl by the King, and the Bishop claiming a
grant from her Majesty. The other sex were accused of crimes of another nature,
whereof Madam S. George was, as in dignity of Office, so in guilt, the
principal; culpable she was in many particulars, but her most notorious and
impardonable fault was, her being an accursed instrument of some unkindness
between the King and Queen through a causeless taking distaste at his Majesty,
for a repulse from riding in the Coach with both their Majesty's, Ladies of
greater eminency worthily claiming preferment. This seeming disrespect she
resented with so deep disgust, as she ever after meditated all possible means
not only to create an odium and disdain in the Queen against the English
Ladies, but also to procure a disaffection to the King himself. And in tract of
time her insinuations into the Queens credulity were so potent, that what Madam
S. George suggested, was more credential with her, then what her husband could
allege in contradiction. So that the King perceiving Majesty thus trampled
under foot, and the sacred ties of Wedlock, making such approaches to a kind
of nullity, through the instigation of hers and such mischievous spirits, the
result of his reason could be rationally supposed no other, then to evacuate
and discharge the Kingdom of them. And the event did highly commend the
counsel, for these incendiaries once casheired, the Queen who formerly showed
so much waspish protervity and way wardnesse, soon fell into such a mode of
loving complacence and compliance, as evidently verified, her former deportment
was rather the product of malicious spirits, then the effects of any
crosse-grained inclination of nature; nor did the world ever afford a couple
more mutually endeared each to other, then that Pare-Royal became after that.
But though this Renvoy of her Majesty's servants imported domestique peace, yet
was it attended with an ill aspect from France, though our King (studying to
preserve fair correspondence with his Brother) sent over the Lord Carleton with
instructions to represent a true account of the action, with all the motives to
it, but his reception was very course, being never admitted to audience. For
Jews his cars were so wide open to the complaints of the proscribed French, as
in the crowd of many truths, malice had power to convey in portentous lies, one
whereof is especially filed upon the Record of History, by some French
Narrators, viz. That they were casheir'd without Mercury Francois, and Du
Chesne.
their wages and appointment; whereas they had not only their full Debentures
paid them, but (as in draught) large rewards over and besides, the total
amounting to twenty two thousand seven hundred thirty two pound, the several
parcels whereof I am able to ascertain, and for the verity of this I appeal to
Sir Henry Vane then Cofferer to the King. But Jews dispatched Monsieur the
Marshall de Bassompierre as extraordinary Ambassador to our King, to demand
the restitution and postlimineation of the Queens Domestiques; who laboring
some months in vain for their re-establishment, was compelled at length to
return home a mal-content. Nor was it very difficult to presage what the issue
of his Negotiation would prove in England, considering how the Lord Carleton
was slighted in France, and how that disrespect was seconded by an affront of a
worse quality upon our Ships at Bourdeaux, at An Embargo of our ships at
Bourdeaux.
that very instant of Bassompiers employment here. For our Merchants laden with
Wine at Bourdeaux, in their return home, being to take in their Ordinance at
Blay a Castle upon the Gironde, where (according to an ancient custom of
diffidence in the French toward us English they were unladen) they were all
arrested in the beginning of November by order from the Parliament of Rouen,
upon pretense of some injurious depredation by the English. This indignity King
Charles stomacht with such vehemence of spirit, as he resolved upon hostility
with France, as shall appear in the Narrative of the ensuing year.

Before I remove from hence, let me here offer at an Aphorism and
State-syllogism, that is, from those premised and fore-recited differences to
infer, that Confederations and alliances between Princes are rarely long-lived;
the reason (I conceive) is, because they are not souldered by any magnetique of
Love, but by occult interest of State, and therefore pendulous upon the variety
and mutation of affairs. And for the most part they are occasioned by a Fear,
either mutual of each others, or in conjunction of a third power, (so that such
Leagues may more properly be called Leagues of meticulosity and fear, then of
amity) whereby it comes to pass, that if the balance of power be not
equilibrated, very evenly poysed, that Prince who has the odds of inclination
either in reality or supposition, will soon find and excogitate for his own
advantage matter of pretext to retire from his Faith, and to temerate the Laws
of Alliance; nor can any verbal formality in the frame of the Treaties secure,
nor the Oaths (the strongest ligaments of humane society) by which they are
ratified, be defensatives sufficient against any, who has a genius and mind
to violate his fidelity, especially when the difference is like to receive no
other decision then what the sword yields. And if such Alliances have the hap
to be entertained with a serious and cordial disposition on both parts, yet
many traverses and untoward accidents fortuitously and by chance occur, which
either not managed to the best behoof of correspondence, or seconded by
counsels of an ill temper, carry along with them fatal consequences, and
generate a Rupture. So it fell out in this quarrel between us and France,
wherein whether either merited the total of the blame generally imputed to
them, may occasion further disquisition.

That the imbarque and stay of our ships at Blay by Jews his command was an
infringement of the League, it is conceded, no evasion can be devised for it.
But that he brake his Faith (as is generally suggested and urged against him)
in using the seven ships against Rochel, changing thereby the property of their
prime destination, I under favor supersede my assent. My reason is;

All promises whatsoever, carry always about them, tacit Salvo's and savings
of general and implied conditions; whereof one is, That affairs keep their
station, and vary not from what they were at the moment of pollicitation: for
words cannot oblige beyond the mind, and it would be destructive to humane
society, should a man be bound up by the strictness of his parole, to the
performance of what (upon rational principles) neither himself would have
granted, nor another have required of him at the first instant of the contract.
And this was Jews his case: for when he first past that promise, he had at
home a considerable Armado, the greatest part whereof he might, and would have
reserved to engage against Rochel, and consequently have disposed the English
ships agreeable to his first purpose. But that Navy being now abroad, and too
remote to bring timely aid, not to use all imaginable means in order to his own
safety for (...). Thucyd. lib. 1. Jupiter ipse sancivit ut omnia quae re^pub.
salutaria essent, justa and legitima haberentur. Cic. Philip. 2.
the crushing of those Revolters, had been to betray himself to inevitable
ruin. For in periclitations and dangers of so eminent a degree, it is to none
denied to us^ all the wits they have: therefore even amongst the Romans, the
most steady and punctual observers of Faith, there was a law, and they tell us
enacted by Jupiter himself, which justified all actions whereby the
Commonwealth might be preserved; therefore though parodox it may seem, and out
of the rode of common belief, yet seeing none can convince it for heterodox,
and repugnant to truth, in this particular we may pronounce that Jews did
break rather his word, then his Faith.

King Charles is taxed for violating the Matrimonial Pact by the Renvoy and
discarding of the Queens Domestiques. An accusation, which if it has somewhat
of truth, it has I am sure more of partiality; for why should he be singled
out in the accrimination, who was not single in the crime? not only other
Princes, but Jews himself having been guilty of a similary practice upon the
Spanish retinue of his own Queen. But Precedents are no Standards, nor can they
legitimate illegal actions; this therefore no just vindication of our King,
whose honor will (if I mistake not) find better relief from the Agreement it
self, then from example.

The Article urged against him is the fourteenth, by which it was contracted,
That all the Domestique servants which the Queen should bring over into
England, should be natural French and Catholics, chosen by the most Christian
King. And in case of death, she to choose others Catholics of France, provided
the King of Great Britain should assent. Hereby it appears that her first set
was to be of her Brothers Election, and so they were. But how long they should
continue their attendance, and that ejectment (in case of misdemeanour) might
not create a vacancy as well as death, nothing is expressly limited to the
contrary: and indeed it cannot in reason be conceived, that the Articles should
give them a longer term, then during an obedience suitable to their Offices, or
state them in such an indefeisable tenure, as might tempt them to all kind of
insolence against their Superiors. So then their condition being pendulous
upon their good behavior, which no doubt, (as is evident by their Oath
clientelary, and of Fidelity formed in the fifteenth Article) was equally
relative to either Majesty, I cannot but totally acquit King Charles of blame
in proscribing such as refractarily offended. To proceed.

Whilst these two Kings were thus picking quarrels one with the other, very
sad news came hither from Germany, That the King of Denmark, notwithstanding
the late aid sent from England of six thousand men under the conduct of Sir
Charles Morgan, had on the 17. of August received a total overthrow by Tilly,
and was reduced to such distress, that if present succor came not he was
ruined for ever. That the Sound was like to be lost; the English Garrison at
Stoade straightly besieged; our Eastland Trade and staple at Hamborough, where
our clothes are vented, almost given up for gone.

Though these storms appeared as Land-skaps and aloof, yet the King foresaw
that as the wind lay, their impression was like soon to visit him at home, and
at home he was in no good plight to bear up against them, matters going there
with him correspondently ill.

For having sent out a Fleet of thirty sail, all men of War, in A Navy prepared
for Rochel.
the beginning of October, under the command of the Lord Willoughby, and Earl
of Denbigh, an hideous storm so ruffled them, as they had much ado to gain safe
harbor; and well they escaped so, for they were of so slight and insufficient
a structure, as had they been but an hundred leagues farther off, very few, if
any, had recovered land.

But it is an ill wind blows none to good, and this boystrons gust was a
friendly contrivance of providence for the Earl of Denbighs advantage, there
falling out an unhappy accident in his absence, which called and speedily too,
for all was man in him.

The Marquess Hamilton had been long, and earnestly solicited Marquess
Hamilton departs in displeasure.
by the Duke to marry his Niece, this Earls daughter. The Marquess had a
mind as high as (some thought above) his extraction, and did account that
Earls daughter, who was (though well derived) but yesterday Sir William
Fielding, impar congressus, and no fit match: at length the King interposeth
his desire, and Princes desires are equiparate to commands; so in the end the
Marquess consents, and weds her, but with a serious resolution never to bed
her: all fair and gentle means were used both by the King and Duke to persuade
him to become her bedfellow, and that failing they steered a course quite
contrary, and divested him of his place in the Spicery, worth two thousand five
hundred pound per annum. Upon this the Marquess mal-content, a week before the
Earls return, departs for Scotland, bidding the Court (as it was supposed) an
eternal valediction. The Earl no sooner landed, then he was saluted with the
news of his son in laws departure; whereupon he takes post amain after him, and
after many denyals, at last with earnest importunity reduced him to the Court;
yet all the art and Royal power could not induce him to bed her, until two
years after, and not then without some seeming reluctation.

The King being thus on every side on the losing hand, he was The King in want.
much distressed in mind what course to take to discharge himself of those
impendent calamities; should he call a Parliament, the time (whose every moment
was precious to him) would not permit to stay for their convention; and when
met, should they prove (as it was odds they would) as dilatory and disgustful
as the former, he were in a worse condition then before. In this perplexed
difficulty, at length his Council agreed to set that great engine his
Prerogative on work, many projects were hammered on that Forge, but they came
all to small effect. First they moved for a contribution by way of Benevolence,
but this was soon dashed; then a resolution was taken to enhance the value of
Coin two shillings in the pound, but this also was soon argued down by Sir
Robert Cotton, but that Raises moneys by Loan.
which the Council stuck closest to, was the issuing of a Commission, dated the
13. of October, for raising of almost two hundred thousand pounds by way of
Loan; and the more to expedite and facilitate this levy, the Commissioners were
instructed to represent to the subject the deplorable estate of Rochel, then
closely beleager'd by the Duke of Guise, and if not speedily relieved, would
fall irrecoverably into the hands of the enemies of the Protestant Religion.

These were plausible insinuations. For Rochel though situated in another
Country, yet was looked upon as in the same parallel of belief with us. And
what will not men suffer for others of the same persuasion; especially when
fame reports them sufferers, because of the same persuasion?

But all would not smooth the asperity of this illegal Tax; Rochel and all
other forain considerations must stand by, when homebred liberty is disputed;
so thought the almost mo^ty of the Kingdom, who opposed it to Durance. Upon
this account of refusal, Many refuse.
prisoners, some of the Nobility, and most of the prime Gentry were daily
brought in by scores, I might almost say by Counties, so that the Council Table
had almost as much work to provide Prisons as to supply the Kings necessities.

This year learning lost two luminaries of the greatest magnitude that ever
this Nation enjoyed.

First, that stupendiously profound Prelate Dr. Andrews Bishop Dr. Andrews B.
of Winchester dies.
of Winchester, an excellent disputant, in the oriental tongues surpassing
knowing, so studiously devoted to the Doctrine of the ancient Fathers as his
extant works breath nothing but their faith, nor can we now read the Fathers in
his writings more then we could have done in his very aspect, gesture and
actions, so venerable in his presence, so grave in his motions, so pious in his
conversation, so primitive in all. Briefly, in him was, what was desirable in a
Bishop, and that to admiration.

Secondly, the then, and last Lord Chancellor Sir Francis Bacon Vicount St.
Albans, for humane learning his ages miracle, but And the Vicount St. Albans.
withal the mirror of humane frailty; and as most eminent in intellectual
abilities, so too much in his prudential failings, occasioned by his August and
Noble soul, which disdaining all drossie and terrene consideration, never
descended to know the value of money, until he wanted it; and his want was so
great, as when he yielded to the Law of Nature, he left not of his own enough
to defray the charge of his Funeral rites.

He lies interred in the Church of St. Michael at St. Albans in Hartfordshire,
and has there a fair statuary monument erected for him of white Marble at the
cost of Sir Thomas Meautis, his ancient servant, who was not nearer to him
living then dead: for this Sir Thomas ending his life about a score of years
after, it was his lot to be inhumed so nigh his Lords Sepulcher, that in the
forming of his grave, part of the Vicounts body was exposed to view; which
being spyed by a Doctor of Physic, he demanded the head to be given him, and
did most shamefully disport himself with that shell which was some-while the
continent of so vast treasures of Ann. Christi 1627.
knowledge.

The Commission of Loan not answering in its product his Majesty's expectation,
the Papists began now to plot their own advantage from the Kings wants, and
under pretense of Loyalty, they of Ireland propounded to him that upon
consideration of a Toleration of their Religion, they would at their own charge
furnish him with a constant Army of five thousand foot and five hundred horse.
But this project to their great regret proved dowbaked, the Protestants
countermining them, for in the next Spring Doctor Downham Bishop of
Londonderry, preaching before the Lord Deputy and the whole State, April the
22. taking for his text Luke 1. 74. That we being delivered from the hands of
our enemies, might serve him without fear; In the midst of his Sermon, he
openly read this Protestation subscribed by the Archbishops and all the Bishops
of that Kingdom.

1. The Religion of the Papists is superstitious and Idolatrous. 2. Their Faith
and Doctrine Erroneous and Heretical. 3. Their Church in respect of both
Apostatical.
To give them therefore a Toleration, is to make our selves accessory to their
abominations, and to the perdition of their souls.

But to sell them a Toleration, is to set Religion to sale, and with that their
souls which Christ has redeemed with his precious blood.

The Bishop having ended this protestation, added, And let all the people say
Amen, which they did, so as the Church almost shook with the noise. The Deputy
required of the Bishop a copy of both his Sermon and Protestation, who
answered, He would most willingly justify it before his Majesty, and feared
not who read it.

And about the same time the like offer was made here in England, Sir John
Savils project against the English Papists.
to set forth ships and men for the safeguard of the narrow Seas; But old Sir
John Savil found a trick worth two of that, he had a project would bring in
double that money, saying, a Commission to proceed against Recusants for their
thirds due to his Majesty by Law would do it, to which the King in part
condescended, granting him and some others a Commission for the parts beyond
Trent.

But though moneys came in but slowly, yet was the Naval force completed for
expedition about Midsummer; whereof the Duke appeared Admiral; as ambitious by
some meritorious service to earn a better gust, or correct the universal, odium
against him.

June the 27. he set sail from Portsmouth with about six thousand The action of
The.
Horse and Foot, and July the 21. he published this Manifesto, declaring the
impulsive causes of his Majesty's present arming.

What part the Kings of Great Britain have always taken in the affairs of the
reformed Churches of this Kingdom, and with what care and zeal they have
labored for the good of them, is manifest to all, and the examples of it are
also as ordinary as the occasions have been. The now King my most honored Lord
and Master, comes nothing short of his Predecessors therein, if his good and
laudable designs for their good had not been perverted to their ruin, by those
who had the most interest for their accomplishment. What advantages has he
refused? what parties has he not sought unto? that by his alliance with France
he might work more profitably and powerfully the restitution of those Churches
into their ancient liberty and splendour. And what could be best hoped by so
strict an alliance, and from so many reiterated promises, by the mouth of a
great Prince, but effects truly Roial and sorting with his Geatnesse? But so
far fails it therein, that his Majesty in so many promises and so strait
obligation of friendship, has found means to obtain liberty and surety for the
Churches, and to restore peace to France by the reconciliation of those whose
breath utters nothing else but all manner of obedience to their King under the
liberty of the edicts; that contrariwise they have prevailed by the interest
which he had in those of the Religion to deceive them, and by this means not
only to untie him from them, but also to make him (if not odious unto them) at
the least suspected, in perverting the means which he had ordained for good,
to a quite contrary end. Witness the English ships not designed for the
extirpation of these of the Religion (but, to the contrary, express promise
was made, that they should not be used against them) which notwithstanding were
brought before Rochel and were employed against them in the last Sea Fight;
what then may be expected from so puissant a King, as the King my Master so
openly eluded, but a through feeling equal and proportioned to the injuries
received? but his patience has gone beyond patience, and as long as he had
hope that he could benefit the Churches by any other means, he had no recourse
by way of arms; so far, that having been made an instrument and worker of the
late Peace, upon conditions disadvantagious enough, and which would never have
been accepted without his Majesty's intervention, who interposed his credit and
interest to the Churches to receive them (even with threatenings) to the end to
shelter the honor of the most Christian King, under assurance of his part, not
only for the accomplishment, but also for the bettering of the said conditions,
for which he sends caution to the Churches.

But what has been the issue of all this, but only an abuse of his goodness?
and that which his Majesty thought a sovereign remedy for all their sores, has
it not brought almost the last blow to the ruin of the Churches? It wanted but
little by continuing the Fort before Rochel, (the demolishing whereof was
promised) by the violence of the Soldiers, and Garrisons of the said Fort and
Isles, as well upon the inhabitants of the said Town, as strangers; in lieu
whereas they should wholly have retired, have daily been augmented, and other
Forts built, and by the stay of Commissioners in the said Town beyond the term
agreed on, to the end to make broiles, and by the means of the division which
they made to open the gates to the neighboring Troops, and by other
withstandings and infractions of Peace, little, I say, failed it that the said
Town, and in it all the Churches had not drawn their last breath. And in the
mean while his Majesty has yet continued, and not opposed so many injuries, so
many faith-breakings, but by plaints and treatings, until he had received
certain advice (confirmed by intercepted Letters) of the great preparation that
the most Christian King made to shower upon Rochel. And then what could his
Majesty do less but to vindicate his honor by a quick arming against those who
had made him a party in their deceit, and to give testimony of his integrity
and zeal, which he has always had for the re-establishing of the Churches,
which shall be dear and precious to him above any other thing?

The first design of this Fleet was intended against Fort-Lewes, upon the
continent near Rochel. But we were diverted by a stratagem of the Duke d'
Angoulesm, who (coming with three thousand Foot, and two hundred Horse, for the
security of the Fort, and annoyance of Rochel) ordered his Quarter Masters to
take up as much accommodation in the Villages for quarters, as would suffice
for fifteen thousand men; and they of the Religion supposing the power to be
agreeable to this area or content of ground possessed by them, sent speedy
advice thereof to the Duke and Subize, who instantly directed their course
toward the Isle of The.

July the 30. the English early in the morning showed themselves upon the
Islands of Oleron to the number of about twenty fail: upon their first
discovery from land they were supposed to be Dunkerks waiting the motion of the
Hollanders then in the road, but when it was perceived that they made nearer
approches toward the shore of the Isle of The, and withal grew more numerous,
and the Hollanders taking no alarm, they were then suspected to be English. The
next day they sent in twelve ships to guard the entry of Port-Breten, falling
down with the rest to a Fort of the Isle of The, called de la Pree, against
which they played with their Canon, until they made their approaches within
Musket shot of the shore, which made Sieur de Toiras Governor of the Citadel
of St. Martin think they had intentions of landing there; to impede which he
made out all the strength he could, but we kept the French at that distance
with our Ordinance, as gave us liberty to land about twelve hundred men. The
enemy being about one thousand Horse and Foot besides Volunteers, made a very
gallant impression upon us, but coming counter and travers of our Canon, they
received the greater loss; the total of those who fell on both sides was
estimated at about nine hundred, whereof the enemy bare the greater share. Men
of note slain of our party were Sir William Heyden, and Sieur de Blancard, a
French man, Agent from the Duke of Rhoan, and the Protestants. Of the French
the Governors brother, the Baron of Chuntal, and about half a score more.

In this skirmish it was hard to distinguish which side won the field, seeing
neither kept it, both retreating to their holds, we to our ships, they to their
Garrison, where for three days all was so hust, so calm on both sides, as if
they had sworn a Truce, or had spent their hole stock of valor. At length the
Duke perceiving the French had as little stomach as himself, went on shore
again, intrenching himself, until he had debarqued all his Horse: then he
dispatched Subize, and Sir William Beecher to Rochel for a recruite; who
returning with five hundred Foot, they forthwith marched directly toward St.
Martins Fort, (disdaining to attempt La Pre, which a slender assault would have
subdued, and might have proved an handsome and safe place of retreat in their
future necessity.) The Islanders upon his approach to their town fled into the
Castle, and left the Town to his dispose, who thought it was an earnest of the
Citadel it self, though the sense of their Council of War, especially of Sir
John Buroughs, was clearly otherwise; and that a strength so manned and
fortified, and in an Enemies Country, was almost inexpugnable. But
notwithstanding all disswasions of his Council, the Duke falls to
circumvallation and entrenchment, rearing many batteries, from whence he pelted
the Fort for the space of two months together, though to little purpose; all
the prejudice the enemy that way received, being not equivalent to ours in the
loss of that gallant Gentleman Sir John Buroughs, Sir John Buroughs slain.
who was slain with a Musket shot from the Citadel, while he was viewing the
English Works, and after nobly and honorably interred at Westminster. It is
said, that during this siege, there was taken by the English perdu, a French
man with a poniard of an odd fashion, wherewith (as he confessed) he was sent
by Toyras to have stabbed the Duke, which moved the Duke to poison their fresh
Springs; whereby, and for want of other supplies they were at once reduced
almost to the point of yielding; when in the very joint and nick of necessity,
Mounsieur Balin at an high flood, in the dead of night conveyed in twelve
Pinnaces laden with such provision, as bare up their drooping spirits until
fresh relief arrived, which came successively in smaller parcels, until the
Marshall of Schomberg, October 29. about three of the clock in the morning, the
English taking no Alarm, under the favor of the Fort de la Pree landed four
thousand foot and two hundred horse, wherewith about daybreak he marched up to
the view of the Fort and of the English. The Duke much startled at this so
strange apparition, and finding it a formidable power, being loath to endure an
engagement front and rear, resolved to rise and be gone; to which end he sent
three hundred to guard the Bridge over which his Army was to pass unto the
Isle of Loose; but before he could be ready to march away, the enemy were
drawing out of the little Fort, whereupon command was given to hasten away with
all expedition. But before the English were out of the Town, the enemy followed
their Rear with their swords drawn, hollowing to us in a bravado, whereupon
being got Musket shot from the Town, we were all drawn into battalia, thinking
the Enemy would charge, but they would advance no nearer: then we marched in
Military order again, and coming through a Village, we placed our Musketeers
behind the walls in Ambuscado, which giving fire upon their Enemies Horse as
they were coming that way, enforced them to retreat. Having marched about three
miles further we came to many little hills, which we ascended, and underneath
set our men again in Battalia, staying there almost an hour before we marched
away. In the interim the enemy, which were before a mile and half distant from
us, came almost up to us, and facing us from the tops of the hills, observed in
what posture we marched. Then were drawn forth some Musketeers of the Forlorn,
to shoot at those upon the hills, and to play upon their Horses. But as we
marched away they still approached nearer to us, until we came to a passage
which was so narrow, having salt pits on either side, as we could only march
six a breast. The French now spying his opportunity, powered forth a great volee
The English routed.
of shot against us, then we began to march as fast as possible. But as our
Rear began to march, their Horse presently charged the Lord Montjoyes Troops,
who turning tail rode in amongst our ranks, and routed us, (which Sir Charles
Rich perceiving, cried, as it is reported, Kill him, kill him, though he be my
brother) so that the greatest part began to shift for themselves, and
confusedly ran away, many casting away their arms, others leaping into the
water were cut off. The other divisions of the Horse fell upon Sir William
Coninghams Troops; but they most bravely fought it out unto the last man; had
the Lord Montjoy done the like, there had not a quarter so many perished. In
this time we could not charge the Enemy because our Horse interposed betwixt us
and them, and we could not annoy the Enemy, but we must more endanger our own
fellows. By this means all those Regiments in the Rear were cut off, and some
of those in the Battle; the Enemy charging us even to the Bridge, where some
of our Commanders made a stand to receive them, and being not seconded by the
soldiers who leapt into the water, were most of them slain; and had not Sir
Edward Conways who led the Van marched back to the Bridge, and gallantly
repelled the Enemy, who were newly passed over the Bridge, we had been all
slain. Now the enemy being driven on the other side, we left a select company
of Musketeers to guard that Pass until night, when we burnt the Bridge,
lodged that night in the Loose, and the next day went on board. The black Bill
of this days mortality was about fifty Officers, of common soldiers few less
then two thousand, Prisoners The sum of their loss.
of note thirty five, colors taken forty four, hung up as Anthemes at Paris,
in the Church of Nostre Dame. Honor lost, all we got at Agincourt. The
Prisoners Jews graciously dismissed home, as an affectionate offertory to his
Sister the Queen of England: which made up another victory superadded to the
former, and a conquest over us as well in the exercise of civilities, as in
feat of Arms. Only the Lord Montjoy was ransomed, for which he offering to the
French King a round sum. No my Lord, it is said the King replied, your
redemption shall be only two couple of Hounds from England. Some interpreted
this a slender value of that Lord to be exchanged for a couple of Dogs, but it
was only in the King a modest estimate of his courtesy.

Thus were we I know not whether more, or chaced out or destroyed in this
fatal Isle, an Isle so inconsiderable as had we lost there neither blood nor
honor, and gained it in to the bargain, it would have ill rewarded our
preparation and charge of the expedition.

Great enterprises are fit entertainments for heroique spirits, and the
ambition of them is noble. But as the achievement of them is glorious, so the
failing shameful, and the both glory and discredit commensurate with the
interest of the Agent, and consequently Adventurers in chief have the greatest
show both in the honor and disgrace; so it fared with the Duke, whom this
misfortune made principally obnoxious to the lash of wanton tongues, for upon
his first weighing anchor and setting sail homeward, the French said in a jeer,
Though the Duke could not take the Citadel of St. Martins, yet it was odds but
he would take the Tower of London. Nor did his own Country spare him at home,
for immediately upon his return Doctor Moore a Prebend of Winchester, a man of
an acute but aculeated wit, took occasion to cite in his Sermon that of
Augustus in Tacitus, Quintili Vare read Legiones, which says the Historian
perished propter inscitian and temeritatem Ducis, giving him a quaint wipe with
the amphibology the double-mindednesse of the word Dux: In this he was
exceeding that in the face of Majesty he found all serene, only the King told
him what Sir Sackvile Crow had written to him of a far greater loss then he
acknowledged.

During this expedition, George Abbot Archbishop of Canterbury was compelled to
a re-cesse not inglorious to his fame, and of infinite contentment to his mind,
which secluded from the drudgery of temporal cares might holely intend those
which concerned eternity. Being sequestered from his function, and a Commission
dated October 9. granted by the King to five Bishops, Bishop Laud being of the
Quorum to execute Episcopal jurisdiction within his Province. The declared
impulsive to it was a supposed irregularity in him by reason of an homicide
committed by him per infortunium upon the Keeper of his game (about six years
before) by the unhappy glance of an Arrow levelled at a Deer; upon which sad
mischance a former Commission was awarded by King James to enquire whether he
was thereby rendered incapable of officiating as Archbishop, yea, or nay. And
although no arguments were pretermitted which the wit of potent malignity could
device or suggest against him, yet was he by the hole court (acquiescing in the
opinion of those two learned men, Bishop Andrews, and Sir Henry Martin who both
strenuously vindicated him) pronounced Regular.

Next Michaelmas Term there was an high debate concerning the Loan Recusants,
they Petitioning the Kings Bench for an Habeas Corpus, the Attorney General
alleging they were not bailable, and their Council affirming they were, by
reason the cause of their Commitment was not declared in the Warrant; but
notwithstanding their Council pleaded with great applause, yet were they
constrained to bide by it.

In this same term the Lady Purbech was tried in the High The Lady Purbech
censured in the Statchamber.
Commission for incontinence, or to speak more explicitly, for Adultery with
Sir Robert Howard, and being found guilty was censured to do Penance in the
Savoy, to pay the Court five hundred Marks, and to be imprisoned during the
pleasure of the Court. But being in the Christmas after pursued by the Officers
to do her penance, she was rescued by the Savoy Ambassador, her next
neighbor, and so escaped their clutches.

Penance and restraint were indeed somewhat unseasonable at a time of such
Jovial festivity and indulged freedom. And the liberty of that time minds me
of what then occurred joco-seriously, between jest and earnest, past at the
interview of two great Princes.

That Christmas the Temple Sparks had enstalled a Lieutenant, A fray in
Fleetstreet.
a thing we Country folk call a Lord of Misrule: This Lieutenant had on Twelfth
Eve late in the night sent out to collect his rents in Ramme-Alley, and
Fleetstreet, limiting five shillings to every house. At every door they winded
their Temple-horn, and if it procured not entrance at the second blast or
summons, the word of command was then, Give fire, Gunner. This Gunner was a
robustious Vulcan, and his engine a mighty Smiths hammer. The next morning the
Lord Mayor of London was made acquainted therewith, and promised to be with
them the next night, commanding all that Ward, and also the Watch to attend him
with their Halberds. At the hour prefixed the Lord Mayor with his train marched
up in Martial equipage to Ramme-Alley: Out came the Lieutenant with his suit of
Gallants, all armed in cuerpo. One of the Halberdiers bad the Lieutenant come
to my Lord Mayor; No, said the Lieutenant, Let the Lord Mayor come to me. But
this controversy was soon ended, they advancing each to other till they met
half way, then one of the Halberdiers reproved the Lieutenant for standing
covered before the Lord Mayor; the Lieutenant gave so cross an answer, as it
begat as cross a blow, which the Gentlemen not brooking, began to lay about
them: but in fine, the Lieutenant was knocked down, and sore wound ed, and the
Halberdiers had the better of the swords. The Lord Mayor being thus master of
the field, took the Lieutenant, and haled, rather then led him to the Counter,
and with indignation thrust him in at the prison gate, where he lay till the
Attorney General mediated for his enlargement, which the Lord Mayor granted
upon condition he should submit and acknowledge his fault. The Lieutenant
readily embraced the motion, and the next day performing the condition, so
ended this Christmas Game.

In January, the Duke finding the poor remains of his late Army Soldiers
billet in the country.
somewhat boistrous for want of pay, to prevent a mutiny, billeted them by
small parcels in the country Villages, which made the Country people have
cold cheer, though hot fires; being not more burdened, then frighted with
those guests, who being most strangers, Irish, and Scots, were none of the
civillest, and such Hybernal stations having never been heard of before in
England in time of peace, the jealousies of subsequent calamities doubled the
sense of the present, and so swelled up their terrors still higher. At the
same conjuncture of time Sir William Balfore a Scot, and eminent Commander of
Horse in the Netherlands, was employed thither by the King with bills of
exchange of thirty thousand pounds to buy and transport a thousand. Horse into
England for the service of his Majesty; and Dalbier a Dutch man, sometimes
belonging to Count Mansfield, was joined in Commission with him: so that the
common man began to mutter, as if there were some Turkish tyranny in design.

On the other side the King was infinitely perplexed, and distracted with
restless thoughts, these discontents of the Subject were not still-born, but
cried so loud as reached to his sacred ears; he studied all means to disabuse
them and remove their jealousies, declaring he disdained to harbor any such
unkingly thoughts, and that he had a greater love for them then so, and desired
he might at least ease their minds, seeing he could not (as matters stood with
him at present) their purses.

And in truth his exigents were passing great, the King of Denmark being
reduced almost to a despondence, and quitting of his Kingdom, our Garrison
governed by Colonel Morgan exceedingly straightned, and the Rochellers crying
amain for help.

For the Duke being returned from the Isle of The, the King of France resolved
upon a serious and formidable siege against Rochel, and agreeable to the
ancient advice of Montlue, An. 1573. prosecuted all ways to subdue the Town by
Famine, ordered an entire circumvallation toward the Continent, builded three
Forts with many redoubts upon the entrenchment, whose life was three leagues in
circumference, and distant from the town somewhat more then Musket shot; all
this to preclude and hinder relief on that side. But what would a
Land-obstruction advantage while the Sea advenues were open? therefore the
Cardinal of Richelieu, who was chief in the manage of that affair, attempted
the making of a mighty Barricado, and Travers cross the Channel, in length
about fourteen hundred yards, leaving a space in the middle for the flux and
reflux of the Sea.

The Rochellers perceived by the scantling and grandeur of this The Rochellers
crave the Kings aid.
preparation, the natural issue could be no other then their ruin, unless
they should render it abortive by some counter-plot: this their distress
hurrieth and ferrieth over again Subize and their Deputies to England, to
solicit our King for fresh supplies before the prodigious work should be
completed; who (good Prince) affected with their miseries, and desirous rather
to protect them from being slaves, then to enable them to be Masters,
condescended to assure them of what assistance he could make. But alas! what
could his assistance signify, who was necessitous as themselves? Did they want
Men, Ammunition, Ships? so did he, seeing he wanted that which was all these,
Money. And how, where shall that be had? His last borrowing Commissions, was a
course so displeasing to the subject, as would not admit of re-petition, and it
would prove an odd payment of that Loans arrears to demand another. But the
King was now the Subject of a greater Potentate then himself, Necessity; and
this necessity put him upon several projects. First he borrows of the Common
Council of London one hundred and twenty thousand pounds, for which and other
debts he assures unto them twenty one thousand pounds per annum of his own
lands, and of the East India Company thirty thousand pounds, and yet he wants:
Next privy Seals are sent out by hundreds, and a new way of Levy by Excise,
resolved upon to be executed by Commission, dated the 3. of February, and yet
he wants. But the best and most taking project of all, was a Parliament;
whereby he hoped not only to supply his necessities, but also to give some
better repose to his troubled spirit; for he felt no inward contentment,
whilst he the Head, and his Subjects the Body, were at distance, or like
intersects and flies, tack't together by a mathematical line and imaginary
thread; therefore he seriously resolved for his part to frame and dispose
himself to such obliging complacence and compliance, as might re-consolidate
them by continuity of affection: This Parliament was summoned to meet upon the
17. of March, and the writs being A Parliament called.
issued our, the Loan-Recusants appeared the only men in the peoples
affections; none thought worthy of a Patriots title, but they who were under
restraint upon that account; so that the far greater number of the Parliament
was formed of them, and as their sufferings had made them of eminent remark for
noble courage, so did they for external respects appear the gallantest assembly
that ever those walls immured, they having estates, modestly estimated, able to
buy the House of Peers, (the King excepted) though one hundred and eighteen,
thrice over. Thus were all things strangely turned in a trice topside to other
way, they who lately were confined as prisoners, are now not only free, but
petty Lords and Masters, yea and petty Kings.

Some few days before the Session, a notable discovery was A notable nest of
Jesuits discovered.
made of a College of Jesuits at Clerkenwell. The first information was given
by one Cross, a messenger to Secretary Coke, who sent a Warrant to Justice
Long dwelling near, enjoining him to take some Constables and other aid with
him; and forthwith to beset the house and apprehend the Jesuits: Entering the
first door, they found at a stairs foot, a man and woman standing, who told
them, My Masters, take heed you go not up the stairs, for there are above many
resolute and valiant men, who are well provided with swords and pistols, and
will lose their lives rather then yield, therefore if you love your lives be
gone. The Constables took their counsel, and like cowardly Buzzards went their
way, and told Secretary Coke the danger: whereupon the Secretary sent the
Sheriff to attach them, who coming with a formidable power found all the holy
Foxes retired, and sneakt away; but after long search their place of security
was found out, it being a lobby behind a new brick wall wainscotted over,
which being demolisht, they were presently unkennell'd to the number of ten.
They found also diverse letters from the Pope to them, empowering them to erect
this College under the name of Domus Probationis (but it proved Reprobationis)
Sancti Ignatii; and their books of accounts, whereby it appeared they had five
hundred pounds per annum contribution from their Benefactors, and had purchased
four hundred and fifty pounds per annum; they had a Chapel, Library, and other
rooms of necessary accommodation with household utensils and implements marked
with S. What became of those Jesuits will fall in afterward, and what would
have become of the Secretary for his double diligence in their prosecution, you
should have heard, had not the Duke been cut off, by an end untimely to
himself, timely to the popular gust.

The Parliament being met, the King began thus to them;

My Lords and Gentlemen,
These times are for Action, for Action I say, not for Words, therefore I shall
use but a The Kings speech.
few; and (as Kings are said to be exemplary to their Subjects, so) I wish you
would imitate me in this, and use as few, falling upon speedy consultation. No
man is I conceive such a stranger to the Common necessity as to expostulate the
cause of this meeting, and not to think supply to be the end of it; and as this
necessity is the product and consequent of your advice, so the true Religion,
the Laws and Liberties of this State, and just defense of our Friends and
Allies, being so considerably concerned, will be I hope arguments enough to
persuade supply; for if it be, as most true it is, both my duty and yours to
preserve this Church and Commonwealth, this exigent time of certainly requires
it.

In this time of common danger, I have taken the most ancient, speedy, and best
way for supply, by calling you together. If (which God forbid) in not
contributing what may answer the quality of my occasions, you do not your
duties, it shall suffice I have done mine, in the conscience whereof I shall
rest content, and take some other course, for which God has empowered me, to
save that which the folly of particular men might hazard to lose.

Take not this as a menace (for I scorn to threaten my inferiors) but as an
admonition from him who is tied, both by nature and duty, to provide for your
preservations; and I hope, though I thus speak, your demeanors will be such, as
shall oblige me in thankfulness to meet you oftener, then which nothing shall be
more pleasing to me.

Remembering the distractions of our last meeting, you may suppose I have no
confidence of good success at this time, but be assured, I shall freely forget
and forgive what is past, hoping you will follow that sacred advice lately
inculcated, to maintain the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace.

The Parliament seemed at first exceeding prompt to close with the Kings
desires, and as complyingly disposed as could be wished. 1628.
But they had not forgot the many pressures which made the the subject groan:
something they must do for them who sent, as well as for him who called them
thither: and to anticipate all dispute in point of precedence between the
Subjects grievances and the Kings supplies, they made an Order that both should
proceed pari passu, cheek by joul. Upon full consideration of the Kings wants,
they presently and cheerfully agreed to give him The Parliament grant liberally.
five Subsidies: whereof Secretary Coke was the first Evangelist, and bearer of
that good news to the King; who received it with wondrous joy, and asked the
Secretary by how many voices it was carried; Sir John replied, but by one; at
which perceiving the Kings countenance to change, Sir, said he, your Majesty
has the greater cause to rejoice, for the House was so unanimous therein, as
they made but one voice; whereupon the King wept, and bad the Secretary tell
them, he would deny them nothing of their liberties, which any of his
predecessors had granted.

The stream of affairs running thus smoothly without the least wrinkle of
discontent on either side, the House of Commons first Ann. Christi 1628
insisted upon the personal freedom of the people, and resolved for Law, That
no free man ought to be imprisoned either by the King or Council, without a
legal cause alleged; this opinion The subjects liberty under debate.
of the House was reported to the Lords at a conference by Sir Edward Coke, Sir
Dudly Diggs, Mr. Seldom, and Mr. Littleton, Sir Dudly Diggs citing Acts 25.
ver. 27. It seems an unreasonable thing, to send a prisoner, and not withal
to signify the crimes laid against him.

This business stuck very much in the Lords House, who were The Lords nice in
the business.
willing that the nails should be pared, not the hands tied of the Prerogative;
several and great debates there were about it, the Attorney pleading eagerly,
though impertinently for the King; and the ancient Records were so direct for
the people, and so strongly enforced, as the Attorney had no more to say, but,
I refer my self to the judgment of the Lords. And when these Lords were to
give judgment concerning it, the Ducal or Royal party (for they were both one)
were so prevalent, as they who leaned the other way, durst not abide the trial
by vote, but calling the Lord Keeper down, molded the House into a Committee,
until the Lord Say made a motion, That they who stood for the Liberties,
(being effective about fifty) might make their protestation, and that to be
upon record, and that the other opposite party should also, with subscription
of their names, enter their reasons to remain upon Record, that posterity might
not be to seek, who they were, who so ignobly betrayed the freedom of our
nation, and that this done, they should proceed to vote. At which the
Court-party were so daunted, as they durst not mutter a syllable against it.

Personal liberty being thus settled, next they fall upon the liberty of goods,
the unbilleting of Soldiers and nulling of Martial Law in times of peace, and
finding Magna Charta and six other Statutes explanatory of it, to be expressly
on their side, they petition the King to graut them the benefit of them;
whereupon he declared himself by the Lord Keeper to them, That he did hold the
statutes of Magna Charta and the six other insisted upon for the subjects
liberty to be all in force, and assured them that he would maintain all his
subjects in the just freedom of their persons, and safety of estates. And that
he would govern according to the Laws and Statutes of the Realm; and that his
people should find as much security in his royal word and promise, as in any
laws they could made. So that hereafter they should have no cause to complain,
and therefore he desired no doubt nor distrust might possess any man, but that
they would proceed speedily and unanimously on with their business.

This Message begat a new question, Whether, or no, his Majesty should be
trusted upon his word. Some thought it needless, because his Oath at the
Coronation binding him to maintain the Laws of the Land, that Oath was as
strong as any royal word could be; Others were of opinion, that should it be
put to vote, and carried in the negative, it would be infinitely dishonorable
to him in foreign parts, who would be ready to say, The People of England would
not trust the King. At length in the height of this dispute stands up Sir
Edward Coke, and thus informed the House, We sit now in Parliament, and
therefore must take his Majesty's word no otherwise then in a Parliamentary
way, that is, the King sitting on his Throne in his Robes, his Crown on his
Head, his Scepter in his hand, in full Parliament, that is, both Houses being
present; all these circumstances observed, and his assert being entered upon
record, make his royal word the word of a King in Parliament, and not a word
delivered in a chamber, or at second hand by the mouth of a Secretary, or Lord
Keeper. Therefore his motion was, That the House should (more Majorum)
according to the custom of their Predecessors, draw a Petition (de Droict) of
Right to his Majesty, which being confirmed by both Houses and assented to by
the King, would be as firm an Act as any.

This judgment of so great a Father in the Law, at this time The Petition of
Right.
ruled all the House, and accordingly a Petition was framed, and at a
conference presented to the Lords, the substance whereof after the recital of
several Statutes relating to the privilege of the subject, was reduced to
these four Heads:

1. They do pray your most excellent Majesty, that no man hereafter be
compelled to make or yield any Gift, Loan, Benevolence, Tax or such like
charge, without common consent by Act of Parliament; and that none be called to
make answer, or to take such oath, or to give attendance, or be confined, or
otherwise molested, or disquieted concerning the same, or for refusal thereof.

2. And that no freeman be taken, and imprisoned, or be disseised of his
freehold or liberty, or his free customs, or be outlawed or exiled, but by
the lawful judgment of his Peers, or by the law of the Land.

3. And that your Majesty would be pleased to remove the Soldiers and Mariners
now Billetted in diverse Counties, and that your people may not be so burdened
in time to come.

4. That the late Commissions for proceeding by Marshal-law may be revoked and
annulled, and that hereafter no Commission of like nature may issue forth to
any person or persons whatsoever to be executed, test by color of them any of
your Majesty's subjects be destroyed, and put to death contrary to law and the
franchises of the land.

All which they most humbly pray of your most excellent Majesty, as their
rights and liberties according to the Laws and Statutes of this Realm, And
that your Majesty would also vouchsafe to declare, that all awards, doings, or
proceedings to the prejudice of your People, shall not be drawn hereafter into
consequence and example.

The pass of this Petition was a great while disputed earnestly between the
Lords and Commons; the Lords had a more concerning interest in the Prerogative,
as that which gave them their first existence, and present subsistence; and
this Petition they thought would detrunck too much, and some thought strike at
the very root of that Prerogative, so that they suspended their assent; yet
because they would seem not altogether to abandon the Public, they modeled an
Addition of Saving (as they called it) and desired the Commons it might be
adnexed to the Petition; the addition was, We present this our humble Petition
to your Majesty, not only with care to preserve our own liberties, but with
regard to leave entire that Sovereign Power, wherewith your Majesty is trusted
for the protection, safety, and happiness of your people.

This addition would not down with the Commons, who imagined it would make the
Petition so much Royalist, as it would signify nothing, as to the subjects
benefit, and would prove felo de se, self-destructive. A conference was had
with the Lords, and Mr. Noy sent to signify the reasons and resolutions of the
lower House, but the Peers received little satisfaction; thereupon a second was
desired, and being managed by Sir Henry Martin, and Sergeant Glanvile; at
length the Lords were persuaded to comply: then it was presented to the King
without any such saving label. His Majesty desired time to consider of it, yet
did not long delay them; for as his own gracious inclination disposed him to
give much, so he thought it expedient in that conjunction of time, to give more
for expedition in reference to his necessary supplies, and within five days
after gave them this ensuing answer.

The King wills that right be done according to the Laws and Customs of the
Realm, The Kings first Answer.
and that the Statutes be put in due execution, that his Subjects may have no
cause to complain of any wrong or oppressions contrary to their just Right and
Liberties, to the preservation whereof he holds himself in conscience as well
obliged as of his Prerogative.

The King was confident this Answer would have pleased to purpose, for as he
was far from any mental reservation or equivocation, so was he studious it
should be worded adequate to their desires, and was astonished to hear it was
not satisfactory; but it seems it was too elaborate, and that the King had put
too much cost into it; for the sense was not, it seems, the essence; and though
the matter was sans exception, yet because not agreeable to the usual mode,
disliked, for formality was the formal part of it; therefore the Parliament
agreed to petition for a new Answer of the old model, but before that Petition
was framed, his Majesty unexpectedly surprised them with this Speech.

The Answer I have already given you was His second Answer.
made with so good deliberation, and approved by the judgment of so many wise
men, that I could not have imagined but that it should have given you full
satisfaction; but to avoid all ambiguous interpretations, and to show you there
is no doubleness in my meaning, I am willing to please you in words as well as
in substance. Read your Petition, and you shall have an Answer that I am sure
will please you.

The Petition being read, his Majesty answered,

Le droict soit faict comme il est desire. This I am sure is full, yet no more
then I granted you in my first answer; you see now, how ready I have showed my
self to satisfy your demands, so that I have done my part, wherefore if this
Parliament has not an happy conclusion, the sin is yours, I am free.

The King having ended, the Houses testified their joy with a mighty shout, and
presently the Bells rung and Bone-fires were kindled all the city over; nor was
the true cause so distinctly known; for many apprehended at first, that the
King had delivered the Duke up to them to be sent to the Tower, upon which
misprision some said the Scaffold on Tower Hill was instantly pulled down, the
people saying, His Grace should have a new one.

It was also said, that the House of Lords made suite to the King upon this
happy accord, that he would be pleased to receive into Grace those Lords who
were in former disfavour, which he readily yielded to, and admitted the Lord
Archbishop of Canterbury, Bishop of Lincoln, the Earls of Essex, Lincoln,
Warwick, Bristow, and the Lord Say to kiss his hand.

The Petition thus granted, the Commissions of Loan and Excise were instantly
outlawed, and at the entreaty of the House of Peers cancelled in the Kings
presence. Having thus secured the Faults, they removed to the Faulty; and
resolved upon a large Remonstrance to the King, ripping up both the grievances
themselves and the authors of them. This Remonstrance consisted of six
branches, in sum these:

1. The danger of Innovation and alteration in Religion. The Parliaments
Remonstrance.
This occasioned by, 1. The great esteem and favors many professors of the
Romish Religion receive at Court. 2. Their public resort to Mass at Denmark
House, contrary to his Majesty's answer to the Parliaments Petition at Oxford.
3. The Letters for stay of proceedings against them. Lastly, the daily growth
of the Arminian faction favored and protected by Nele Bishop of Winchester,
and Laud Bishop of Bathe and Wels, whilst the Orthodox party are silenced or
discountenanced.

2. The danger of Innovation, and alteration in Government occasioned by the
Billeting of Soldiers, by the Commission for procuring one thousand German
Horse and Riders, as for the defense of the Kingdom, by a standing Commission
granted to the Duke to be General at land in times of peace.

3. Dysasters of our Designs, as the expedition to the Isle of The, and that
lately to Rochel, wherein the English have purchased their dishonor with the
waste of a million of treasure.

4. The want of Ammunition occasioned by the late selling away of thirty six
Last of Powder.

5. The decay of Trade by the loss of three hundred ships taken by the
Dunkyrkers and Pirates within these three last years.

6. The not guarding the narrow Seas, whereby his Majesty has almost lost the
Regality.

Of all which evils and dangers the principal cause is the Duke of Buckingham
his excessive power, and abuse of that power. And therefore they humbly submit
it to his Majesty's wisdom, whether it can be safe for himself, or his
Kingdom, that so great power both by Sea and Land as rests in him, should be
trusted in the hands of any one Subject whatsoever.

This Remonstrance being finished on Tuesday, June 17. they presented it, as an
appendix, with the Bill of Subsidies to the King in the Banqueting house, who
having heard it out, told them he little expected such a Remonstrance, after he
had so graciously passed the Petition of Right; as for their grievances he
would consider of them as they should deserve. Some say that at his passage
out, the King gave the Duke his hand to kiss, which others only suppose was no
more then the Dukes low congie to his Majesty's hand.

It is also reported, that the King being informed that Mr. Denzil Hollis had
an hand in this Remonstrance, he replied in the words of Julius Caesar, Et tu
Brute! I wonder at it, for we two were fellow Revellers in a Masque together.

Some unkindnesse also happened between the Lords and Commons concerning the
Bill of Subsidies, in the grant whereof the Commons had either industriously
excluded, or incuriously omitted these words, The Lords, Spiritual and
Temporal; and the Lords expostulating with indignation the cause of their
omission, answer was returned, That some Acts had heretofore passed so, yet
nevertheless, if their Lordships would return the Bill, their names should, if
they pleased, be inserted: whereat the Lords in some anger said, And are not we
as able to put them in our selves, as they were to leave us out?

Three days before this, Dr. Manwaring was questioned for some seditious
passages in two Sermons preached, one before the King, the Dr. Manwaring
questioned;
other at his own Parochial Church, wherein he asserted,

1. That the Kings Royal command in imposing without common consent in
Parliament Taxes and Loanes, does so far bind the conscience of the Subjects of
this Kingdom, that they cannot refuse the payment of them, without peril of
eternal damnation.

2. That Authority of Parliament is not necessary for the raising aides and
Subsidies.

These things being too evident to be denied, and too gross to admit of
qualification, his sentence was; And censured.


1. Inprisonment during the pleasure of the House. 2. Fine one thousand pound
to the King. 3. To make such submission and acknowledgment of his offenses as
shall be set down by a Committee in writing, both at the Bar of the Lords
House, and at the House of Commons. 4. To be suspended for three years from the
exercise of the Ministry. 5. To be disabled from ever preaching at Court
hereafter. 6. To be disabled for ever from having any Ecclesiastical dignity or
secular Office. 7. That as his Book is worthy to be burnt, so his Majesty may
be moved to grant a Proclamation for the calling it in, as also for the burning
of it.
According to the third member of which sentence two days after he made his
submission on his knees.

Whilst the Parliament was busy about this Doctor, the King was as busy about
their late Remonstrance, to which he formed a formal answer, traversing and
denying all their charge, wherewith the Commons, being somewhat irritated, (for
it was a smart one) fell downright upon another Remonstrance against Tonnage
and Poundage. But the King was unwilling to hear of any more Remonstrances of
that nature, therefore resolved to frustrate it by Proroguing of the Parliament
unto October the 20. June the 26. being the last of this Session, his Majesty
calling both houses together, before his Royal assent to the Bills, delivered
his mind as follows.

My Lords and Gentlemen,
IT may seem strange that I come so suddenly to end this Session, therefore
before I give my assent to the Bills, I will tell you the cause, though I must
avow I ow an account of my actions to none but God alone. It is known to every
one that a while ago the House of Commons gave me a Remonstrance, how
acceptable every man may judge, and for the merit of it I will not call that in
question, for I am sure no wise man can justify it.

Now since I am certainly informed that a second Remonstrance is preparing for
me, to take away my profit of Tonnage and Poundage (one of the chief
maintenances of the Crown) by alleging that I have given away my right
thereof, by my Answer to your Petition.

This is so prejudicial to me, as I am forced to end this Session some few
hours before I meant it, being willing not to receive any more Remonstrances,
to which I must give an harsh Answer.

And since I see that even the House of Commons begins already to make false
constructions of what I granted in your Petition, lest it be worse interpreted
in the Country, I will now make a Declaration concerning the true intent
thereof.

The Profession of both Houses, in the time of hammering this Petition, was no
ways to trench upon my Prerogative, saying, They had neither intention, nor
power to hurt it.

Therefore it must needs be conceived that I have granted no new, but only
confirmed the ancient Liberties of my Subjects. Yet to show the clearness of
my intentions, that I neither repent nor mean to re-cede from any thing I have
promised you, I do here declare, That those things which have been done,
whereby men had cause to suspect the Liberty of the Subject to be trencht upon
(which indeed was the true and first ground of the Petition) shall not
hereafter be drawn into example for your prejudice; And in time to come (in the
word of a King) you shall not have the like cause to complain.

But as for Tonnage and Poundage, it is a thing I cannot want, and was never
intended by you to ask, never meant (I am sure) by me to grant.

To conclude, I command you all that are here, to take notice of what I have
spoken at this time, to be the true intent and meaning of what I granted you in
your Petition; But especially you my Lords the Judges, for to you only under me
belongs the interpretation of the Laws, for none of the Houses of Parliament
joint, or separate (what new doctrine soever may be raised) have any power,
either to make, or declare a Law without my consent.

The Parliament being thus prorogued, the Commons were exceedingly
malcontent, for they desired only a Recesse, and Adjournment, whereby all
matters then depending, might be found in the same station and condition at
their next meeting, wherein they at that present left them.

This Session were enacted these Laws:

1. For further reformation of diverse abuses committed on the Lord's Day,
commonly called Sunday.

2. To restrain the passing or sending of any to be Popishly bred beyond the
Seas.

3. For the better suppressing of unlicensed Alehouse keepers.

4. For continuance and Repeal of diverse Statutes.

5. For the establishing of the Estates of the Tenants of Brumfield and Yale in
the County of Denbigh, and of the Tenures, Rents and services thereupon
reserved, according to a late composition made for the same with the King then
Prince of Wales.

6. For the confirmation of the Subsidies granted by the Clergy.

7. For the grant of five entire Subsidies, granted by the Temporality.

But above all famous to all posterity is this Session, for his Majesty's
gracious answer to that gallant Standard of common Liberty, the Petition of
Right. Never did Arbitrary power since Monarchy first founded, so submittere
fasces, so vail its Scepter; never did the Prerogative descend so much from
perch to popular lure, as by that concession, a Concession able to give
satisfaction, even to supererogation, for what was amiss in all the Kings
bypast Government.

During this Session many things occurred worthy to be recorded, which because
foreign to the Parliament affairs I reserved as a Postscript: being loath to make
a simultaneous meddly of various actions, shuffled together without dependence
upon either antecedent or subsequent narrations.

May the 8. the Earl of Denbigh as Admiral set sail from Plymouth, The relief
of Rochel attempted, but in vain.
with about fifty sail of tall ships, for the relief of Rochel, and being
scanted in Mariners he was enforced to take in two thousand two hundred land
men, who should be amphibious, serving partly for seamen, and partly for
land-souldiers: with this power he made an attempt toward the relief of the
Town, but was repelled much to our loss, but more to our dishonor; so as he
presently betook himself to a speedy return, arriving at Plymouth the 26. of
the same month. The supposed author of this dysaster was one Clark a Bedchamber
man, and a chief Commissioner in all our former improsperous expeditions: who,
because a supposed Papist, was conceived to have industriously betrayed us to
this and former miscarriages.

The same month, but with greater honor was Stoadt our English Garrison, some
twenty miles from Hamborough on the other side of the Elbe, given up to the
Imperialists, Sir Charles Morgan having bravely and stoutly defended it: the
conditions were, that the Garrison Stoadt surrendered.
soldiers should never bear arms against the Emperor, but at the command of
their own King.

June the 13. Doctor Lamb suffered for the testimony of a lewd Dr. Lamb his
exemplary death.
conversation. Having been at a Playhouse, at his return some boys began to
affront him, and call him the Dukes Devil, whereupon he hired some to guard him
home, and taking in at a Cooks shop where he supt, the people watched his coming
out, but he was so strongly guarded as they durst not venture on him; then he
went to the windmill Tavern in Lothbury, and at length coming forth, the
tumult being much increased, gave the onset, and assaulted him, so as he was
forced to take refuge in the next house, but the enraged multitude threatened to
pull down the house unless Lamb were speedily delivered to them. The Master of
the house was a Lawyer, and fearing some sad comsequence of this uproar,
discreetly sends for four Constables to guard him out. But the furious
multitude flew at him, in the midst of his auxiliaries, struck him down, and
malled him with a vengeance, so as they beat out one of his eyes, and left him
half dead upon the place. In this plight he was carried into the Counter in the
Poultery, no other house being willing to receive him, where the next morning
he changed this life either for a better or for a worse.

A most infamous and graceless wretch he was, twice had he been arraigned,
once for a witch, and practicing his hellish art upon the Lord Windsor, another
time for a rape at the Kingsbench-barre at Westminster, where to the
astonishment of all then present, he proceeded to such prodigious insolence as
to say in the audience of the hole Court, I wonder any should think I would
commit such an act upon so despicable a creature as this (meaning his accuser)
when had I been so disposed, I could have had my choice of the handsomest
Ladies in the Court. Some considerable circumstances must not be forgot, by
reason of their synapsis, their coherence with this relation.

It is certain, that not full a year before, he foretold, that he should perish
in the streets by the fury of the people. Some say, that when the multitude
were belabouring him with stones, and cudgels, they said, that were his master
the Duke there, they would give him as much.

Some things also were of ominous observation in reference to the Duke; for on
the same day that Lamb was slain, the Dukes picture fell down in the high
Commission Chamber at Lambeth. But that which was most notable, was, that when
these and the like accidents were spoke of as foreboding something of present
fatality to the Duke in the Lady Davis her hearing; she, for certain, replied,
No, his time is not come till August. This added to her former prediction
concerning this Parliament, and both verified in the event, reared the Lady up
the fame of a great Prophetess: and yet this could be in the very Devil
himself, but a nude conjecture; for though he had found the minds of men very
susceptible of, and disposed to receive a temptation to such a fact, which he
was resolved to suggest at that time; yet that the act itself should be
executed precisely then, guess he might, prognosticate he could not; for in
things determined in their natural causalities to certain and definite
effects, not only Devils but wise men, where miracle interposeth not, may
infallibly divine the products: but in things contingent upon free and
voluntary agents, all the Devils in hell can but blunder.

On the Monday after the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of the City were sent for to
appear at the Council Table, and to give an account of the uproar about Lamb,
and were threatened, that unless they discovered and rendered up the
Malefactors, they should sorfeit their Charter, and in the upshot were fined,
as was reported, Six thousand pounds.

This Session ended, the King finding as he thought so malevolent a gloss
started from his late Act of Grace, conceived it stood him in hand to stand
upon his guard, and to make the best improvement of the small remnant of
Prerogative which he had left; to which purpose instruments of working and
active brains were sought out, and finding the Earl of Marlborough the Earl of
Marlborough removed.
then Lord Treasurer too dull and phlegmatic for his employment, he removed
him and lifted up the late Lorded Sir Richard Weston into his place, a man of
most accomplished qualifications Sir Richard Weston preferred.
for his design, and about the same time dignified Sir Thomas Wentworth of
Yorkshire with a Barony, though one of the late Committee in forming the
unpleasing Remonstrance, and a stickler against the Prerogative, but this beam
of Majesty as it did heat, so did it soften the temper of the man, so as he
became thence forward most flexible to his service.

In the beginning of August came forth a Proclamation against Papists, but
especially against Jesuits and Priests, a sort of men in the state of England,
like the Mathematicians, and Astrologers under Genus hominum quod in ci vitate
nostra and vetabitur semper and retinebiter, Taeit. Hist. 1.
the Roman Empire, always, as the Historian says, banished, yet always staid
behind.

But the great business of this vacation was the setting forth a third Fleet
for Rochel, then which there never appeared a more galla^t Armado formed by our
Nation, and because so noble a preparation must be sutably commanded, the Duke
resolved to give the venture once more.

But whilst he was in pursuit of this enterprise, he was rapp'd and hurried
into another world by an abrupt and untimely death.

For on the Vigil, the Eve of St. Bartholomew, the 23 of August, being at
breakfast at Portsmouth with Soubize, and others The Duke murdered.
of principal quality, one John Felton (sometimes a Lieutenant to a Foot
Company in the Regiment of Sir John Ramsey) who had but about a week before
meditated the act, but had not yet contrived the means, sneaks into the
chamber, vigilant to observe every opportunity serviceable for his purpose, and
finding the Duke ready to rise from the table, he withdrawes into an entry,
through which the Duke was to pass, who coming by with Sir Thomas Friar (to
whom he declined his ear in the posture of attention) in the very instant of
Sir Thomas his retiring from the Duke, Felton, with a back-blow, stabbed him on
the left side into the very heart, leaving the knife, a ten penny coutel, in
his body. The Earl of Cleveland and some others who were in the hearing of the
thump, reported, that the most religious murderer, in the very act of striking,
said, Lord have mercy on thy Soul; a speech, which the Duke had scarce ability
to say for himself, for pulling the knife out, presently, the orifice being
wide, there streamed such an effusion of blood, and consequently such an
emission of spirits, as he only was heard to say (some report with an oath) The
villain has killed me, and then expired. All this while the assasinate passed
undiscovered (a fair advantage had he been studious of escape) and the general
voice passing current up and down, that he was a Frenchman, Felton like an
ingenuous villain, with an undaunted courage, avowed himself the author of it.
Many are said to be his instigations to this execrable act. He had long and in
vain attended for his arrears of pay due for former service. Again, he was
twice repulsed upon his Petition for a Captains place, and others
super-inducted over his head. It was thought these extimulated and whetted him
on to rancour, and it is like he had prejudicated some such construction would
be made of it, and conceiving the supposition of private revenge would infame
and blemish the glory of the exploit, presuming he should encounter inevitable
destruction, he stitched a paper to the lining of his hat, wherein he declared,
his only motive to the fact was, the late Remonstrance of the Commons against
the Duke, and that he could not sacrifice his life in a nobler cause, then by
delivering his Country from so great an enemy.

Two things, as especially, and almost singularly observable after his fall may
not be omitted.

First, no sooner had he expired his last, and his body shifted into Things
memorable after his fall.
another room, but the Corpse was totally abandoned, not a living soul was to be
seen a great while in either chamber, that where he dyed, or that whereinto he
was removed; either because they durst not trust fancy with a spectacle so
horrid, or because they feared some further assasination. The like fate, if
History be truly informed, attended the Body of our first Norman King.

Secondly, that the first news thereof finding his Majesty (then about four
miles distant) at his public devotions, he received it without the least
emotion of spirit or discomposure of countenance: which equanimity some imputed
to his steady intention upon that sacred duty: others thought that though he
disliked the mode and way of his dispatch, yet with the thing he was well
enough pleased, as if providence had thereby rid him of the Subject of his so
great perplexity, whom he could not preserve with safety, nor desert with
honor. But these were soon convinced of their error, when they observed his
Majesty treat his relations with so intense respect.

But whatsoever satisfaction the King received thereby, certain The Commons
rejoice.
it is, it pleased the Common man too well; for though Christianity and the Law
found the act murder, yet in vulgar sense it rather past for an execution of a
Malefactor, and an administration of that justice dispensed from heaven, which
they thought was denied on earth. And because all those storms at public
miscarriages generated in the lower Region of the Parliament, had of late been
terminated in him, as their grand efficient, every man would now be wise and
fore-speak fair weather, and harmony between the King and Subject, how truly a
few months will discover.

His leaving a Will behind him, imports he did somewhat His Will.
premeditate death. Therein he bequeathed to his Duchess the fourth part of
his Lands for her Jointure. His debts amounted to sixty one thousand pounds,
his Jewels (most belonging to the late Queen) were prized at three hundred
thousand pounds.

His Funeral was nothing solemn, his body being interred His Funeral.
clandestinely the 25 of September, attended with about an hundred mourners.
The Heralds were indeed sent for by the Lord Treasurer a week before to project
a sumptuous funeral for him, and according to order they brought in large
proportions, it was thought exceeding those in the Obsequies of King James. But
at length, upon second thoughts, the Treasurer told the King, Such pomp would
prove but an hours show, and that it were more for his glory to erect him a
stately Monument which he might do for half the cost. The King liked the motion
well, and after the Dukes Burial, put the Treasurer in mind of what he had
contrived, wishing him to see it done; then the Treasurer replied, Sir, I would
be loath to tell your Majesty, what the World would say both here, and abroad,
if you should raise a Monument for the Duke, before you erect one for your
Father. Whether this clearly and cunning diversion flowed from the Treasurer
his no singular good will to the Duke, or from a provident regard to his
Masters purse, let others determine.

Thus fell this miracle of grandeur in the 36 year of his age, His Character.
a race he might, in the ordinary rode of nature, have doubled. A Gentleman he
was of that choice and curious make for exterior shape, as if Nature had not
in his hole frame drawn one line amiss; nor was his fabrique raised by soft
and limber stud, but sturdy and virile. His intellectuals gained him rather the
opinion of a wise man, then of a wit. His skill in letters very mean, for
finding nature more indulgent to him in the ornaments of the body, then of the
mind, the tendency of his youthful genius, was rather to improve these
excellencies, wherein his choice felicity consisted, then to addict himself to
morose and sullen bookishnesse, therefore his chief exercises were, Dancing,
Fencing, Vaulting, and the like, as indications of strenuous agility: yet could
he have foreseen where all the climacteries and motions of his advance should
have terminated, that from no more then a mere Gentleman, it should be his luck
to vault into the Dignity of a Duke, and trust of a privy Counselor, we may
presume his early studies would not have cast so much neglect upon a thing so
important to him as a Statesman, though not very fashionable as a Courtier. The
temperature of his mind was, as to moral habits, rather disposed to good then
bad; his deportment was most affable and debonair, a rare example in one raised
so high, and so speedily: to his relations liberal, firm to his friend,
formidable to his enemy. From venereal excursions I cannot totally acquit him,
He was a Courtier and young man, a Profession and Age, prone to such desires,
as when they tend to the shedding of no man's blood, to the ruin of no Family,
humanity sometimes connives at though she never approves. Of his Religion, they
who write most in favor of him speak little, whereof if he was too incurious,
His condition the more deplorable, when surprised by so sudden a death as
afforded him not the respiration of auricular contrition. But seeing God is
accostable by inorganicall and inaudible ejaculations, and no time is too short
to exclude such an infinite mercy, charity wills we hope the best.

This Tragique accident of the Dukes did so little impede the The last attempt
toward Rochels relief.
motion of the Fleet, as it is a question whether or no it did at all retard
it: for the King did with such personal assiduity, such diligence hasten the
furnishing of it with all necessaries both of provision and munition, as he
dispatched more of concernment to it in ten or twelve days then the Duke did in
so many months before, so that on the eighth of September following departed
from Portsmouth the Earl of Lindsey, (a Gentleman full of gallantry and
courage) commanding in chief: but before his coming the Cardinal had fiaisht
his prodigious Boorn and Barricado, through which it was impossible to break.
Many and brave attempts (though some of his Captains flincht, either in
resolution, or obedience) he had made, and the last began to promise hopes of
good success, for the foremost sh^ps came up to the very mouth of the bar, and
when they were ready to enter the pass, the wind at that very moment whisled
about into an opposite point, and drove them dangerously foul one upon another.
This the Rochel rendered.
Rochellers observing from the walls, gave all for lost, and presently set open
their gates; sending out their principal men, not as Commissioners to treat,
but as submissive Missives humbly to implore the Kings mercy: which Jews most
compassionately granted them, and entered the City, October. the 18 in so civil a
discipline, as not the least outrage was committed: indeed famine, and other
martial calamities had made havoc enough before, four thousand being only the
remains of twenty two thousand souls. The mighty works of fortification were
instantly slighted, and the Town suffering a metastrophe, change of name as
well as nature, was ordered to be called from the Queen Mother Borgo Maria.

Rochel thus surrendered, set our Fleet at liberty, so having nothing more to
do, the Earl plies him home.

During this last expedition news came to our King of some damage we had
sustained, and as bad news could not be welcome to him, so was he loath to hear
it from his Parliament, and from them he questioned not but to hear what ever
untowardly befell, should they sit according to their first intention;
therefore hoping the event would render them more pleasing discourse, he
adjourned the meeting till January the 20. In the interim there were several
emergences and occurrences which would give them their hands full. For the
generality of the Merchants both of the Turkey and the East India Company
refused to pay a penny, under the notion of Tonnage and Poundage, which caused
a mighty contest betwixt the King and them, he urging the practice of his
Predecessors in taking, they the validity of the Petition of Right in denying,
so that diverse of their goods were seized.

November 18 about four in the morning a lamentable fire seized Wimbleton house
burnt.
upon the Lord Wimbletons house in the Strand, it being then the lodging of the
States Lieger Ambassador, which consumed and demolisht it with all the rich
furniture and utensils to the ground; so ferocient and impetuous it was, as the
Ambassador, his wife and children hardly, though half naked, escaped; all
their other apparel, Jewels, money, etc. yea even the Commission it self
perished in the combustion. Who was the incendiary, or how this calamity was
occasioned no man could tell, most thought it was an effect of the Dutch
disorders the night before, who were notably tippled with feasting and
jollities for a great prize taken by their Masters from the Spaniards near the
Bay of Matansa, worth a million and a half of treasure. This accident was the
more remarkable, because that very night that very Lords Country house in
Surrey was a great part blown up by a Candle-spark falling into a barrel of
gunpowder, which a maid mistook for Soap.

November. the 29. Felton having been arraigned, and found guilty Felton executed.
at the Kings Bench, suffered at Tiburn. His confession was as sincere, and
full of remorse as could be wished; the fact he much detested, and renounced
his former error in conceiving it would be his glory to sacrifice himself for
his Countries good: and whereas other motives were suggested by report, he
protested upon his salvation, that he had no other inducement then the
Parliaments Remonstrance. His body was from thence transmitted to Portsmouth,
and there hung in chains, but soon stolen and conveyed away Gibbet and all, by
some either well affected to him, or ill inclined toward the Duke.

The Parliament was now approaching, and something must be done to please them,
and what could better please them then the gracing of their great confident the
Archbishop of Canterbury? therefore he was sent for to the Court about
Christmas, and from out of his barge received by the Archbishop of York, and
Earl of Dorset, by them accompanied to the King, who giving him his hand to
kiss enjoined him not to fail the Council Table twice a week. After this
Mountagues Book called Appello Caesarem, was called in by Proclamation, and a
Declaration prefixed to the thirty nine Articles restraining all dispute on
either side concerning the five points controverted.

There was then also published another Proclamation for the A Proclamation
against Papists.
apprehending of Richard Smith the titular Bishop of Chalcedon. This
Proclamation, says Mr. Pryn, was procured at the earnest solicitation of the
Regular Priests in England and Ireland, who violently opposed Dr. Smiths
Episcopal Jurisdiction; but Mr. Pryn was much mistaken, for that prosecution
was not till the year 1630. as shall be evidenced hereafter. And the impulsive
to this proceeding against him, was his endeavor to have perverted some poor
silly people in Lancashire; where the holy man appeared in his Pontificalibus,
(as horned Mitre and Crosier) amongst a company of Geese.

January the 16. the Lord Doncaster son to the Earl of Carlisle, brought very
sad news to Court from the Hague, which put the King and all his train into
mourning, viz. That Frederique Henry, eldest son to the Palzgrave, was
unfortunately drowned in Frederique Elector son to the Prince Elector drowned.
the mere of Harlem, his Father the Paltzgrave very narrowly escaping: they
were going from the Hague to Amsterdam, out of a desire to see the great Prizes
brought in, and entering into an Hoy on Harlem mere, they were benighted, when
suddenly rose a violent storm which drove a greater vessel, then riding in the
mere, so forcibly upon them, as stemmed them; of about twenty persons there
were but three saved, all the rest perished; his Father was dragged out of the
mere with an iron hook. The Prince clasped his arms about the mast, cried out
for help, and boats were sent out to relieve him, but the night was dark and
the weather so impetuous as they could not find him until morning, when they
discovered him clinging about the mast, but stark dead; the Princess his
mother was newly brought to bed, when this doleful accident befell her, the news
whereof drove her into a most vehement passion.

January the 20. the Parliament sat, who soon found they were The Parliament
meet.
like to have work enough: for complaints came thronging in, especially against
the Customers for taking and distraining Merchants goods for Tonnage and
Poundage, which the King taking notice of called them to the Banqueting house,
and told them;

The occasion of that meeting was a complaint made in the lower House for
staying of some men's goods, for denying Tonnage and Poundage, which difference
might be soon decided, were his words and actions rightly understood. For if he
did not take those duties as appendixes of his Hereditary Prerogative, and had
declared he challenged them not of right, and only desired to enjoy them by the
gift of his people, why did they not pass the Bill, as they promised to him to
clear his bypast actions and future proceedings, especially in this his time
of so great necessity?

Therefore he did now expect they should make good what they promised, and put
an end to all questions emergent from their delay.

The House of Commons said, that Religion is above policy, God above the King;
and that they intended to reform Religion before they engage in any other
consideration; nor was it agreeable to the liberty of consultation to have
their transactions prescribed, so that they would for the present lay aside the
Bill of Tonnage and Poundage till they thought convenient. And they were as
good as their words, for the first thing resolved upon was the appointment of
Committees, (which the Courtiers called an Inquisition) Committees appointed.
One for Religion, another for Civil affairs, and these to represent the abuses
in both.

The Committee for Religion declared, that upon due inspection they found it in
a very tottering and declining condition. The dangers which most threatened it
were Arminianism and Popery. Religion in danger.


For Arminianism, informations were very pregnant, That, notwithstanding the
resolution of the Archbishop of Canterbury, and other reverend Bishops and
Divines assembled at Lambeth, Anno 1595. on purpose to deliver and declare
their opinions concerning the sense of the 39. Articles in those particulars,
unto which resolution the Archbishop of York, and all his Province did then
conform in their belief. That notwithstanding those Articles of Lambeth were so
well approved of by King James, as he first sent them over to the Synod of
Dort, as the Doctrine of our Church, where they were asserted by the suffrage
of our British Divines, and after that commended them to the Convocation held
in Ireland to be inserted amongst the Articles of Religion, established An.
1615. and accordingly they were.

That notwithstanding formerly many several Recantations enjoined and Censures
inflicted upon the spreaders of those errors, those very men so censured in
open Parliament, as Mountague, Cozens, Manwaring, and Sibthorpe, had by the
procurement and solicitation of Nele Bishop of Winchester, and the Earl of
Dorset obtained their pardons under the great Seal, and were not only sheltered
under the Lee of Royal favor, but through the prevalency of the Bishops of
Winchester and London, advanced to great preferment, whilst the Orthodox party
were depressed, and under inglorious disdain, and the truth they served, was
scarce able to protect them to impunity.

The hazard conceived from Rome, and the fear lest Tibur should drown the
Thames, flows from partly the uncontrolled preaching of several points
tending and warping that way, by Mountague, Goodman, Cozens and others; and
from the audacious obtruding of diverse superstitious ceremonies by the
Prelates, as erecting of fixed Altars, the dopping and cringing toward them,
standing up at Gloria Patri. But these were but part-boyled Popery, but Popery
oblique, the greatest danger was from Popery direct.

And from this the danger appeared very great; informations came daily in of
the mighty progress and increase of it within these few years, the contest
whereof was proved by these particulars: That (for Ireland) in the City of
Dublin, there were lately erected thirteen houses for Priests and Friars to
officiate in, more in number then the Pariochial Churches for the Protestants.
For Scotland that the Papists have been of late very insolent and turbulent
there. For England, that in some Counties they are multiplied to the product of
some thousands of families, more then there were in Queen Elizabeth her time;
That of those ten who were apprehended at Clarkenwell at the Sessions 3. of
December last, three of Treason, and the rest of Praemunire, and direct Treason
proved against three of them at the Session, Mr. Seldom being then present and
testifying as much, yet by the artifice of the two chief Lord Justices, Hide,
and Richardson, in suppressing Justice Longs evidence, nothing was done against
them, save that one was condemned, and the day before Execution was reprieved,
by warrant from the Chief Justice, who pretended he did it by the Kings
command. Lastly, the excessive resort of Romish Catholics to Mass at
Somerset house, being so frequent, yet so connived at, and the penalty of
Statutes through his Majesty's overmuch indulgence so dispensed with, little
differing from a Toleration.

The Committee appointed for inspection into Civil affairs reported, That upon
search they find the Petition of Right printed Abuses in the Civil State.
with the Kings first Answer, which gave the Parliament no satisfaction, for
which the printer being questioned he confessed upon examination, that during
the first Session of this Parliament one thousand five hundred copies were
printed authentic, and without that addition, and that since that Session he
had order from the Attorney General to reprint it with that addition. That many
Merchants have had their goods seized, and informations preferred against them
in the Starchamber, for refusing to pay the customs of Tonnage and Poundage;
Impositions against the tenor of the Petition of Right, and against the
privilege of Parliament, one of these Merchants, viz. Mr. Rolls being a
Member of the House of Commons: for which misdemeanors Sir John Worsham, the
Patentee of the Customs, Mr. Dawes, and Mr. Carmarthen, sharers with him, were
called to account. The King finding these men under the lash, steps in to bear
off or to bear the blows; tells the Parliament, that what they did was but as
men addicted to his command, nor did he Commission them to take it as of right
A great difference between the King and Parliament.
belonging to him, but out of a firm presumption that the House of Commons,
suitable to their large professions, would grant i^ him by Bill; which he now
exceedingly desired they would dispatch, and so put an end to this dispute.

To this the Parliament replied, that the Customers had no Warrant from his
Majesty for all they did, as he did mis-understand, for they have diligently
read his Majesty's Warrant to the Customers, and it only impowereth them to
levy and collect the moneys, but not to seize the Merchants goods, and are
censurable for extravagants from their Commission. And as to the passing the
Bill, they craved his Majesty's pardon for a while, both because they were at
present intent upon matters of Religion, and they hoped he would not be
offended if they served God in the first place, and also because at present,
his Majesty had put them out of capacity to do it; for in his Warrant,
formerly mentioned, Tonnage and Poundage are declared to be a Principal revenue
of his Crown; if so, he had no cause to demand, nor they to grant what was his
own already; therefore unless that expression may be rectified, or cancelled
the Record, and his Majesty will be content that the Bill may expressly and
positively set forth his no right to it, but by the gift of his subject, they
cannot rational grant it. The King perceiving their intention still was to
sever the Customers act from his command, thereby to make them the more exposed
to censure for Delinquency, and judging it highly concerned his honor to
indemnifie them, iterated his desires again to them in a message sent by
Secretary Coke, that they would desist from further molesting these men,
intimating withal that what they did was by his especial direction; the House
in much distaste at this message instantly cried Adjourn, Adjourn, and so they
did, until the Wednesday The Parliament adjourned.
following, on which day the King also by the advice of his Privy Council
Adjourned them until the 2. of March: hoping thereby that giving them the more
time to cool of themselves, it would soften their temper. But having certain
intelligence from his correspondents in the lower House, that the heat did
rather intend then relax, he resolved to Adjourn again until the 10. of March.
And again.
But the House being met on the 2. of March, up rises Sir John Eliot in the
morning, and makes a tart and stinging speech against the Lord Treasurer,
fixing all the ills both of Church and State upon him, and in particular
charging him with a design of transferring the English trade to Forianers. What
he then delivered was in part prognosticated by the King, who knew it even an
Embryo, and in the first conception; for it rarely happens, that what many
know, none will discover, be it a secret of never so great importance,
especially where men are, as these were, of a free and open spirit. Sir John's
invective being ended, the Speaker declared a message from the King commanding
an Adjournment until the 10. of that instant, wherewith the House being
discontented told him, it was not within the verge of his Office to deliver
such a Message, that Adjournment properly belonged to themselves, and that in
time convenient they would satisfy the Kings pleasure: then again upriseth Sir
John with a Remonstrance, which he presented to the reading, but both the
Speaker and Clerk refused it, and being restored to him he read it himself, the
substance being to this effect.

That they had taken into consideration the forming of a Bill for Tonnage and
Poundage, but were so overlaid with the pressures of other business, and found
that affair it self a matter so perplexed with several difficulties, which would
require much leisure to discharge, that at that time accomplish it they could
not, this present Session moving (as they conjectured) apace to determination.
And lest his Majesty should hereafter (as formerly he did) incline to the
advice of servile spirits, or be abused into a persuasion that he might legally
and justly receive those subsidies of Tonnage and Poundage, they humbly declare
to him, that the laying any such Imposition upon the Subject is contrary to the
fundamental law of the Kingdom, and to his Majesty's late Answer to the
Petition of Right. And therefore they lowly crave his Majesty would for the
future forbear such taxes, and not to take ill the refusal of his people, to
what is demanded by Arbitrary and unwarrantable power.

This Remonstrance being read, the Speaker was moved to put it to the vote,
whether it should be presented to the King, yea, or nay. But he craved pardon,
alleging that the King expressly ordered him to leave the House, and
attempting to rise from his chair, he was by force and strong hand stayed, (Mr.
Hollis swearing, (so my information has it) a deep Oath, that he should sit
still as long as they pleased; and when neither threats nor reproaches could
prevail, Sir Peter Hayman moved Mr. Hollis to read these ensuing Articles as
the Protestation of the House.

1. Whosoever shall bring in Innovation of Religion, The Protestation of the
Commons.
or by favor seek to introduce Popery or Arminianism, or other Opinions
disagreeing from the true and Orthodox Church, shall be reputed a Capital Enemy
to this Kingdom and Commonwealth.

2. Whosoever shall counsel, or advise the taking and levying of the Subsidies
of Tonnage and Poundage, not being granted by Parliament, or shall be an actor
or instrument therein, shall be likewise reputed a Capital Enemy to this
Commonwealth.

3. If any man shall voluntarily yield, or pay the said Subsidies of Tonnage or
Poundage, not being granted by Parliament, he shall be reputed a betrayer of
the Liberties of England, and an Enemy to this Commonwealth.

These he pronouncing with a loud voice, the House ga^e their Epiphonema and
applause at every close and period.

These distempers continued so long, and with so quick and high a pulse, as the
King had early notice of them, who forthwith sent for the Serjant of the Mace,
but the House would not permit him to depart, but taking the Key of the door
from him, gave it to Sir Miles Hobart a Member of the House to keep. The King
deeply incensed at these exceedings of contempt, sent Maxwell Usher of the
Black Rod to dissolve the Parliament; but neither he nor his message would be
admitted, whereupon the King much enraged sent for the Captain of the
Pensioners, and the guard to force an entrance. But this Passion, that shut out
the King, yet let so much reason in, as perswaded^ them it was good sleeping in
an hole skin, and understanding the Kings intention, they suddenly voided the
House.

Soon after this, that very morning, the King came into the Lords house and
bespake them thus,

My Lords,
I never came here upon so unpleasant an occasion, The Kings speech at the
dissolution of the Parliament.
it being the dissolution of a Parliament; Therefore men may have some cause to
wonder, why I should not rather choose to do this by Commission, it being a
general Maxim of Kings, to leave harsh commands to their Ministers, themselves
only executing pleasing things. Yet considering that Justice as well consists
in reward and praise of virtue, as punishing of vice, I thought it necessary to
come here to day to declare to you, and all the World, that it was merely the
undutifull and seditious carriage of the lower House, that has made the
dissolution of this Parliament. And you my Lords are so far from being causes
of it, that I take as much comfort in your dutiful demeanours, as I am justly
distasted with their proceedings. Yet to avoid mistakings, let me tell you,
that it is so far from me to adjudge all that House guilty, that I know there
are many there as dutiful Subjects as any in the world, it being but some few
Vipers amongst them, that did cast this mist of undutifulnesse over most of
their eyes; yet to say truth, there was a good number there, that could not be
infected with this contagion, in so much that some did express their duties in
speaking, which was the general fault of the House the last day. To conclude as
these Vipers must look for their reward of punishment, so you my Lords must
justly expect from me that favor and protection, that a good King owes to his
loving and dutiful Nobility.

And now my Lord Keeper do what I commanded you.
The King having thus dissolved the Parliament, or rather The King sets forth a
Declaration.
broke up School, thought those whom he now called Vipers had not in the house
of Commons spit up all their malignity, but reserved some to disperse and
dispose of in the Country, whereby an ill odor might be cast upon his
Government, and the hearts of his people alienated from him: as an antidote
therefore against that poison, and to anticipate all misunderstanding he
speedeth out a Declaration, setting forth to all his Subjects the motives
persuading him to dissolve the Parliament, and a breviate of all the
transactions in this, and the former Session; withal minding them in the close
of all, that the Duke of Buckingham was decry'd, while he lived, as the
solitary cause of all bad events of former Parliaaments, that he is dead, and
yet the distempers not in the least abased, which he takes as an argument that
they were mistaken in the cause, and that it was resident in some few members
of the Parliament.

Kings love to be treated with the most obliging caresses and debonair
comportment that may be. And usually they derive asperity, not so much from
innate and inbred proclivity, as from the protervity and incomplyingnesse of
their people, an humor able to sour and change the best dispositions. They
who shall cast a reflex upon those woeful miseries which were the consequences
of this unhappy disunion, may perhaps find cause to think, they could not have
been worse, possibly better, had the Parliament been more complacent. But it is
no wonder to find failings in the concrete mass, when in solutis principiis,
and taken asunder every unite exhibites and shows no less. True it is, in
assemblies so august, so majestique, all things should be managed with the
greatest repose of passion, the Senators should be like their Laws, void of
anger. But men will be ever men whatsoever they be, be they Christians;
wheresoever they be, be they convened in Parliament, their frailties, their
passions, yea and their interests too, they still carry along with them, which
made Gregory Nazianzen Naz. Epist.
complain of Councels, That he never saw any one end well; and what he said of
Councels, King Charles might with as much verity, have pronounced (as to his
content) of Parliaments, not any one he summoned having had any termination
other then disgustfull to him.

The King having as he hoped dis-abused the Subject by his Many Members
questioned.
late Declaration, next intended to proceed severely against those who had
offended him, and whose punishment, he said, he re-served to a due time. Upon
this account the 18. of this Month, he sent for ten of the late members to
appear at the Council Table, viz. Mr. Hollis, Sir Miles Hobart, Sir John
Eliot, Sir Peter Hayman, Mr. Seldom, Mr. Stroud, Mr. Coriton, Mr. Valentine,
Mr. Long, Mr. Kirton. Those appearing, Mr. Hollis was interrogated, wherefore
(contrary to his former use) he did, the morning the Parliament was dissolved,
place himself by the Chair, above diverse of the Privy Counselors.

He answered,

That he had some other times as well as then, seated himself in that place.
And as for his sitting above the Privy Counselors, he took it to be his due
in any place whatsoever (unless at the Counsel-board) And, for his part, he
came into the House with as much zeal to do his Majesty service as any one
whatsoever; And yet nevertheless, finding his Majesty was offended with him,
he humbly desired that he might rather be the subject of his mercy then of his
pewer.

To which the Lord Treasurer answered, You mean rather of his Majesty's mercy,
then of his justice.

Mr. Hollis replied, I say of his Majesty's power my Lord.

Sir John Eliot next called in, was questioned for words he spoke in the
Lower House of Parliament, and for producing the last Remonstrance.

To this he answered,

That whatsoever was said or done by him in that place, and at that time, was
performed by him as a public man, and a member of that House, and that he was,
and ever will be ready to give an account of his sayings and doings in that
place whenever he should be called unto it by that House, where (as he takes
it) he is only to be questioned, and in the mean time being now but a private
man he would not now trouble himself to remember what he said or did in that
place as a public man.

Sir Miles Hobart was also questioned for locking the Parliament House door,
and putting the key in his pocket: to which he pleaded the command of the House.

The other Gentlemen were questioned for reproving the Speaker, and not
permitting him to do what the King commanded him, who all alleged in their
defense the Privilege of the House.

After this they were committed, some to the Tower, some to the Gate House, and
some to the Fleet, and May the 1. the Attorney sent a process out against them
to appear in the Starchamber, and to answer an information to be entered there
against them: but they refused; as denying the Jurisdiction of that Court over
offenses done in Parliament: which created the greatest and longest
controversy in Law that had been started of many years.

About the later end of March, the Marquess Huntly (with Stirs in Scotland
about the Marquess Huntly.
the Earls of Arol, Athol, Nidsdale, and Abercorn, of the Scottish Nobility)
came running away to the Court of England, as fast as his old legs cold carry
him, being seventy two years aged; his cold Country being grown too hot for
him: the occasion this.

The Marquess was hereditary Sheriff of a great part of Scotland, where his
Lands lay. At Aberden, the Papists posted up a treacherous libel: not long
after which, the Priests and Jesuits said Mass openly. This coming to the
Councels hearing, they wrote to the Marquess, as high Sheriff, to cause with
all speed those Priests and their abertors to be apprehended, and safely sent
to Edinburgh, yet not prescribing any certain day. The Marquess took the
Letters, neglected the service, and gave no account to the Council: whereupon
they wrote a second letter, commanding him that the service be done by a
precise day, and that himself appear also before them to answer the contempt.
Notwithstanding all this, the Marquess still neglected, and in stead of
apprehending them, gave them notice to escape; but sent in the interim to the
Council, craving a longer day. The Council would not grant it, but instantly
caused the Herald in his coat of Arms to wind the Horn thrice, and at every
time to summon the Marquess and the Earls. None of which appearing, the Herald
proclaimed them Rebels to the King and Kingdom. And while the Council was
plotting to apprehend them, they took their flight for England.

The next month returned Sir Henry Fane from the Hague, his errand thither was
to make a tender to the Lady Elizabeth from the Emperor of thirty thousand
pounds per annum, for her maintenance, and a place of habitation within the
Palatinate, upon condition, Ann. Christi 1629.
she should send her eldest son to be educated in the Emperors Court, and to
marry one of his Daughters: whereunto she (mistaking the message to be the
Kings desire, which was but his bare proposal) magnanimously replied; I do
honor my Brother of England, as becomes me, yet he is but a man, and may fail
me; God never forsook me yet, and I am confident never will. And rather then I
would suffer my child to be bred in Idolatry, I would cut his throat with mine
own hand. So erect a mind had she in her lowest state.

This Spring the Queen (some say frighted with some boysteroulnesse of a
mastiff toward her little dogs in the Presence chamber) not completing her
proper time of gestation:, aborted of a son; yet having life in him, her
Priests were wondrous earnest to baptize him, but the King stepping in
prevented them, and charged Dr. Web to officiate, and name him Charles, he
lived about an hour, and then expired.

About the same time also, the Seigniory of Venice by her Ambassadors Peace
between France and England.
was industrious to procure amity between the Crowns of England and France, and
Jews being in his Trans-Alpine expedition at Susa for the relief of Casal,
they procured it modeled into these ensuing Articles.

1. That the two Kings shall accord to renew the former Alliance between the
two Crowns, and to preserve it inviolable with free commerce. And in reference
to the said commerce liberty is given that such things be proposed, as either
part shall judge convenient either to add or diminish.

2. That considering it is very difficult to make restitution of what has been
taken as prize, as well on one side as the other, during the late wars; it is
agreed between the two Crowns, that for what is past no satisfaction shall be
demanded on either side.

3. As to the Articles and contract of marriage of the Queen of Great Britain,
they shall be confirmed, and for what concerns her Dom stiques it shall be
lawful to propose what shall be thought expedient to be either added or
diminished.

4. All former Alliances shall stand good between the two Crowns, saving
wherein they shall be changed by this present Treaty.

5. The two Kings being by this present Treaty remitted to the affection they
formerly had, shall respectively employ this correspondence toward the
assistance of their Allies (so far as the constitution of affairs, and the
general good will permit) for the procuring the repose of the troubles of
Christendom.

6. The promises being established on both sides, Persons of eminency shall be
reciprocally dispatched as Ambassadors on either part for ratification of the
accord, and for nomination of Agents ordinarily resident at either Court, for
the better preserving this union.

7. And because many ships are now at Sea, with letters of Marque, who cannot
suddenly take cognizance of this Peace, it is agreed that what shall occur in
the nature of hostility for the space of two months on either side, shall not
prejudice nor derogate from this agreement. Provided notwithstanding, that what
shall be made prize of within that space of two months after signature, shall
be restored on either side.

8. Lastly, the two Kings shall respectively sign the present Articles, the 14
of this present month of April, and at the same time they shall be consigned
into the hands of the Lords Ambassadors of Venice, to deliver reciprocally to
the two Kings at a day prefixed. And from the day of signing all acts of
hostility shall cease, to which end Proclamation shall be issued out in both
Kingdoms the 20. day of May.

Nothing was wanting now to the perfecting of this League, but the ultime and
completing act, the solemn confirmation by Oath. To which intent Ambassadors
were sent on both sides the September following. From England Sir Thomas
Edmunds Controller of the Kings house. From France the Marquess of
Chasteau-neuf, who had both of them reception agreeable to the merit of the
design.

The King had all the reason in the world to bid peace welcome, for Martial
affairs be they conducted by never so mature advice, or carried on with never
so gallant resolution, have yet a great dependence upon the arbitrament of
Fortune; and Fortune the King had sadly felt, in the dispensation of victory
ever looked another way. Again he was sinew-shrunk, and wanted money the sinews
of war, his Exchequer being profoundly dry, and one of the noblest and
beneficial springs not obstructed but cut off. This his condition was observed
abroad as well as at home; and by his enemies as well as friends, and his
felicity it was that those enemies which observed it were in no capacity to
make any other advantage of it then overtures of peace. And this was now
Overtures of a Peace with Spain.
the grand ambition of that ambitious Monarch, the King of Spain, who was by
many late considerable misfortunes brought ridiculously (I had almost said
pitifully) low. So low, as Pasquin posted him up in Rome in a Friars habit,
asking Marforius, whose picture that was? Marforius replied, The King of
Spains. Pasquin demands the reason; Because, said Marforius, he had lately
taken three vows upon him, One of Poverty, ever since the Hollanders took the
West India Fleet. The other of Obedience, since the French with words and
gestures only, made him quit Casal, and all Montferrat. And lastly of
Chastity, when his grand Pimp the Conde de Olivares shall give him leave.

To solicit this Peace, Peter Reuben the famous rich Painter of Antwerp,
Secretary and Gentleman of the Chamber to the Archduchesse, Peter Reuhen the
Spanish Agent.
as Agent was transmitted hither, and bad very fair for it, tendering the
restitution of the lower Palatinate, then which nothing was more magnetique and
attractive, had the Spanish faith been as good as his gold: but that was
reprobated all over the Western World; so as Marquess Spinola being told of
this prodigious offer, said, The King of Spain may gild his design with what
promises he please; but, sure I am, he means nothing less then the
restitution of the Palatinate. Antecedent experience of the juggling practices
of the Spaniard, did much retard the progress of the League, and Reuben was
not p'enipotentiary enough to accomplish that work, but it was reserved for a
Don of more illustrious grandeur, and he was not yet arrived.

In Trinity Term the Judges were much urged to declare their opinions
concerning the demurrer of the Gentlemen Prisoners about the power of the
Star Chamber; but that was a tender point, loath they were to displease the
King, and as loath to blemish their reputation with prevaricating from the law,
so that they feigned many an excuse and put off; at length the King being at
Greenwich, sent for them all twelve; Mr. Attorney was turn-key, pro tempore,
and let them in single at one door, and they went away at another. As they
entered, one by one, the King commanded them to declare boldly without respect
to fear or favor under their hands what they thought; seven of them, by name
Richardson, Yelverton, Hutton, Harvey, Crook, the Lord Chief Baron and Baron
Denham, these offered to subscribe their opnions, That the Star Chamber had no
jurisdiction over Parliament offenses; the other five dissented, but refused to
subscribe, whereat the King was exceeding wroth; and chid them soundly, as the
betrayers of him to the belief of what was repugnant to the law.

Soon after the Term July the 10 toward night there hap A fray in Fleetstreet.
pened a scurvy fray in Fleetstreet. For one Captain Bellingham, late at the
Isle of The, being that afternoon arrested, some Gentlemen of the Temple made
an attempt toward his rescue so far, as some were hurt and carried to prison:
thereupon the Gentlemen of the Temple assembled, made a Barricado about St.
Dunstans Church, which the Lord Mayor being informed of, he had the Sheriffs
with a band of Train men, came down and made Proclamation, that upon pain of
Rebellion the hole assembly should dissolve: but the Gentlemen prepared for
resistance, and being armed with swords and pistols to the number of five or
six hundred, they gave fire upon the Lord Mayors militia, killed outright five,
and wounded near an hundred: the King was so highly incensed at the news of
this uproar, as he presently sent for the Lord Chief Justice up to London,
resolving to have a Session extraordinary for the arraignment of the
malefactors; at which being held in Guild Hall about a Fortnight after, two
Captains, Ashurst, and Stamford, (the Dukes servant and famous wrastler) were
found guilty, condemned and executed at Tyburn. Stamfords Relatives made great
means to the King for his life; but he said, no, He murdered a Watchman before
at Duke Humphries, for which he was pardoned, and having committed another, I
will take order to prevent the third.

In the beginning of November the Earls of Bedford, Somerset, and The Earls of
Bedford and Somerset confined.
Clare, Sir Robert Cotton, Mr. Seldom, Mr. Saint-Iohn and others were
committed, and an information entered in the Star Chamber against them, for
dispersing copies of a Discourse, being a Rhapsody of Projects, tending to the
augmentation of the Kings revenue, and to discover an impertinence in
Parliaments: It was pretended to have been penned for the instruction of the
King, but it was a false suggestion, and discovered by Sir David Fowls upon
Oath, that it was contrived about 1613. by Sir Robert Dudly at Florence, so
that the Bill fell to the ground.

January the 1. Don Carlos de Colomas, now twice Ambassador from Spain to
England arrived, and had audience six days after at the Banqueting house; his
deportment and mean was more debonair then usual, and therefore promised better
of his Negotiation.

The pitcher that goes often to the water, at length returns home cracked; and in
Hillary term the Gentlemen Prisoners arguing their Plea by their Council at the
Kings-Bench-Bar against the power of that Court to question any thing done in
Parliament, the Judges of the Kings Bench delivered their opinions positively,
that their crimes were within the cognizance of the Court; For else, said they,
should a Parliament man commit murder in time of Parliament, he cannot be tried
nor arrained until a new Parliament; and for confirmation of their opinions
they quoted many Precedents, especially that of Plowden in Queen Mary's time;
who was fined in the Kings Bench for words spoke in Parliament against the
Dignity of the Queen. Hereupon the Gentlemen had a time prefixed them to bring
in their answer; but they making several defalts, sentence was pronounced
against them, they being deeply fined, and confined until they should enter
bond for their good behavior; which some of them would never yield to, and
ended their days in prison.

April the 10. dyed William Earl of Pembroke and Lord High 1630. William Earl
of Pembroke dyed.
Steward of England of an Apoplexy; the night before he supped with the
Countess of Bedford at Devonshire house without Bishops gate, very jocund he
was at supper, especially rejoicing that the day before, being his Birth day,
he had attained the age of fifty years, hoping now he should reach his Fathers
account, who lived till sixty four, and to see many happy days. After supper he
retired to Baynards Castle his house, where he sat up till midnight, and was
very well: but after he had been a while in bed (his Lady by him) he fetched a
most profound groan, whereat she not being able to wake him, shrieked out for
Company, who coming in, found him speechless, in which condition he remained
till 8. next morning, and then dyed. It was said that Mr. Allen a Mathematician
at Oxford, had calculated his Nativity many years before, and could not give
any hopes of his life beyond his 50. year. He dyed intestate, and left of debts
to pay eighty thousand pounds. He was scarce cold before the Earl of Arundel
begged the custody of his Countess, upon pretense that she was not mentis
compos, and cracked in her brain; and because his son the Lord Maltravers was
her next heir in right of his mother, sister and coheir with her and the
Countess of Kent, all three being the inheretrices of the Earl of Shrewsbury's
Estate. But her affection stood more inclined to her Brother the Earl of
Mountgomery, and therefore the King granted him the disposition of her.

He was the very picture and vive effigies of Nobility; His His Character.
person rather Majestique, then elegant; his presence whether quiet, or in
motion, full of stately gravity; his mind generous and purely heroique, often
stout, but never disloyal; so vehement an opponent of the Spaniard, as when
that Match fell under confideration, he would sometimes rouse to the
trepidation of King James, yet kept in favor still; for that King knew plain
dealing as a jewel in all men, so was in a Privy Counselor an Ornamental duty;
and the same true heartedness commended him to King Charles, with whom he kept
a most admirable correspondence, and yet stood the firm Confident of the
Commonalty, and not by a sneaking cunning, but by an erect and generous
prudence, such as rendered him unsuspected of ambition on the one side, as of
faction on the other. This universality of affection made his loss most
deplorable. But men are lost when all turns to forgotten dust. That affection
would not that he should be non-plust so, but kept his Noble fame emergent and
aloft: and if this History shall help to bear it up, I shall think it not more
his felicity then mine own.

This Spring the Royal stem germinated and put forth another gemme, the Queen
being delivered May the 29, of her second Son, not living only, but lively;
surpassing exultation there was thereat, and all the Court kept Jubilee; all the
great ones both Lords and Ladies went now on Maying to St. Iameses to see the
Royal blessing and hope of England. June the 27. he was in most refulgent pomp
carried to the sacred Font, and named Charles. Godfathers and Witnesses were
the King of France, and the Prince Elector, represented by the Duke of Lennox,
and Marquess Hamilton: of the other sex the Queen Mother of France, whose
substitute was the Duchess of Richmond.

In the mean time the King was in contemplation with his brother An Ambassador
sent into Germany.
the Paltzgrave's pressures, and how to relieve him; and because he gave but
slender credit to the Spanish promises, and had intelligence of a Diet and
general Assembly to be kept at Ratisbone this Summer, he sent over Sir Robert
Anstruther in the quality of an Ambassador, who arriving there, and being
admitted to audience before the Emperor and Estates of Germany, he delivered
his message to this effect.

That nothing did affect his Master the King of Great Britain more, then the
consideration of the daily calamities undergone by his Brother the Prince
Elector, his Wife and Children; that he deemed no place more expedient where to
treat of their reconciliation, and re-establishment then in this Diet;
therefore he made it his most ardent request to his Imperial Majesty, that
having regard to the many intercessions of his late Father, and other Kings and
Princes, he would remit the displeasure conceived against his Brother, and
recall the proscription issued out against him. True it is, his Brother had
offended, and was inexcusably guilty, (unless the rashness and precipitation
of youth may somewhat plead for him): but others had been as culpable as he,
whom yet his Imperial Majesty received into grace and favor, and would he be
pleased to extend to him the same clemency, it would oblige his Master to
dimonstrations of deepest gratitude, and raise a glorious emulation in others
to imitate so Majestique a pattern. That the Paltzgrave would eutertain this
favor with an heart so firmly devoted to his service, as all the intention of
his Spirit should be disposed to compensation and reparation of his bypast
miscarriages: That his Master held nothing so dear, as the affection of his
Imperial Majesty, and establishment of a durable peace between them. And as
upon all occasions he has been forward to represent himself solicitous of it,
so at this time he is ready to give more ample Testimony, if his Imperial
Majesty be pleased to incline to a Treaty.

The Emperor and Estates gave Sir Robert fair respect, but as to his message
returned answer, that the present affairs of Germany, which called them
thither, were of that important concernment, as they would not admit of any
forain debate; but when leisure served, the King his Master should have such
satisfaction as would be agreeable to their honor, and they hoped to his
content. Thus the Ambassador returned reinfecta.

Leighton a fiery Scot this year was met with, his Sions Plea brought him to
stand in need of the Balm of Gilead. That wild Ann. Christi 1630
Pamphlet was wrote during the late Parliament, and to them dedicated; in that
he excited the Parliament and people to kill all the Bishops, and to smite them
under the fifth rib; he inveighed against Leighton a Sco^ censured.
the Queen, calling her the Daughter of Heth, a Canaanite, and Idolatresse. For
these and other seditious passages, he was sentenced in the Star Chamber to
have his ears cropped, his nose slit, his forehead stigmatized, and to be
whipped. But between sentence and execution, he made an escape out of the
Fleet, but by good hap to the Warden, was re-taken in Bedfordshire and
underwent the punishment.

Now began we and Spain to cement again, the peace being Peace between England
and Spain.
driven to the head, and fully completed, the Articles were precisely the same
with those concluded formerly between King James and Philip the third, and for
the Palatinate, no further engagement, but only, that the King of Spain should
dispose of all his interest in the Emperor toward the restitution of his
Brother the Prince Elector. But it was a Peace, and though not in all points
fully adequate to the Kings content, yet readily embraced because he was not
then in state to better it. But though the Peace was none of the best, yet was
the solemnity in publication thereof none of the least, yea not inferior to
others of much higher availes.

On Sunday, November the 27. it was by the hole College of Heralds mounted on
horseback, in their rich Surcoats, proclaimed both at White Hall Gate, and in
Paul's Churchyard, and at Cheapside Cross, the Lord Mayor with his
confraternity of Aldermen also mounted, and in their Scarlets. On Tuesday the
King and the Spanish Ambassador descended into the Chapel, continuing in
their traverses until an Anthymne was sung. Then the Bishop of London (Laud)
as Dean of the Chapel, attended by three other Bishops, all in their Copes,
ascended up to the Altar with a Latin Bible in his hand. Then the King and
Ambassador issuing out of the Traverses, the King laid his hand on the Book,
whilst Secretary Coke read the Oath; and that done, he kissed it, signing
withal the Articles of the Peace, which he delivered up to the Spanish
Ambassador. After this they all went up to the Banqueting house, where a most
princely and sumptuous dinner was provided for them.

But the Subject paid the reckning. For his Majesty being stimulated with want
and disgusting Parliaments was enforced to call in the aid of his Prerogative.

There was, it seems, an old skulking statute long since out of The Tax of
Knighthood.
use, though not out of force, which enjoined all subjects, who had not some
special privilege, to appear at the Coronation of every King, ad arma gerenda,
to bear arms (not to be made Knights, as was vulgarly supposed) that is, to
present themselves before the Lord High Chamberlain, who (if the Kings service
so required) was to deliver to every man a Belt and Sur-coat out of the Kings
Wardrobe; and if, upon four days attendance, they were not employed, they
might depart to their several homes. But they who were guilty of default and
made no appearance, were to submit to fine. This was now the case of the almost
whole Kingdom; whereupon November last, Commissions were issued to all the
Sheriffs throughout England to return the names of all such persons who had
estates liable to make fine. And upon this account was brought into the
Exchequer, an entrado of at least One hundred thousand pounds.

This peace between England and Spain begat a war in England and Ireland
between Spain and France, I mean between the The Jesuits and secular Priests
at odds.
Jesuits, who are the professed clientelaries and vassals of the Catholic
King, and the secular Priests, men more addicted to the King of France: the
radix and ground of this contest was this.

The Papacy having in England and Ireland her emissaries for the planting of a
Gospel which Christ nor his Apostles never dreamt of, expedient it was thought
both for the ordaining of Priests, and confirmation of persons baptized, that a
Bishop should be sent amongst them; to which purpose Pope Gregory the 15
delegated one William Bishop, entitled the Bishop of Chalcedon. Anno 1624
Bishop died, after him succeeded by mission from Urban the 8, anno 1625,
Richard Smith with the same title; Smith was a busy fellow, and took upon him
more then Bishop, for he arrogated to himself the approbation of such regular
Priests as were to be standing Confessors; which the Jesuits thought an
usurpation upon their Jurisdiction, whereupon a conspiracy is entered to
dispatch him hence, a Declaration is contrived under the name of the most Noble
and eminent Catholics against his pretended authority, withal asserting all
sufficient power in the Regulars to all those intents, and the no necessity of
having any Bishop at all. This Declaration in the nick of his departure hence,
for Spain, to prevent more satisfactory informations, was offered to the
Spanish Ambassador Don Carlos de Coloma. And the Bishop so persecuted by the
Jesuits, as finding himself in no capacity of standing an open contest by
reason of his skulking condition, caused through the Kings Proclamation against
him, he was enforced to seek his safety abroad, and escaped into France. Smith
thus frighted away from his charge, one Kellison Rector of the College of
Doway, in a Tract vindicates the authority and divine right of Episcopacy; but
Knott, Vice-provincial of the English Jesuits, and Flood, another Jesuit of
St. Omers, undertook Kellisons confutation, and their Books were no sooner
extant, but being d^scust by the College of Sorbon, were by the Faculty of
Paris censured and condemned. But the Controversy slept not so, but was
reciprocated and bandied from one side to another in infinitum, as you may read
at large in Aurelius.

Nor was this bickering the only product of our peace, but the Romish
Catholics began to rant it in Ireland, and to exercise their fancies called
Religion so publicly, as if they had gained a Toleration. For whilst the
Lords Justices were at Church in Dublin, they were celebrating Mass, which the
Lords Justices taking notice of, they sent the Archbishop of Dublin, the
Mayor, Sheriffs, and Recorder of the town to apprehend them; which they did,
taking away the Crucifixes, Chalices, and Paraments of the Altar, the Soldiers
hewing down the Image of St. Francis. The Priests and Friars were delivered
into the hands of the Pursevants, at whom the people threw stones and rescued
them. The Lords Justices informed of this, sent a guard and delivered them, and
clapped eight Popish Aldermen by the heels for not attending their Mayor. Upon
the account of this presumption, fifteen houses were seized to the Kings use,
and the Friars and Priests so persecuted, as two hanged themselves in their own
defense.

This winter the Marquess Hamilton was very active in mustering up his Forces
for the King of Swedens assistance against the next Spring, and the King
hastened him to dispatch his levy with all the speed he could, in regard he had
fresh and certain intelligence of a very great victory that King had lately
obtained against the Imperialists; Tilly, it seems, conducted a numerous Army
of Thirty three thousand Foot, and seven hundred Horse for the relief of
Rostock, then besieged by the King of Sweden: the King alarmed at his coming,
drew out of his trenches Seventeen thousand Foot and Six hundred Horse to
entertain him. The first encounter was sharp, and cost the King above a
thousand men; whereat the King fired with gallant courage, came undauntedly up
to the Count, and gave him so terrible a shock, as made his Vantguard to
brandle, disordered both Battle and Rere, routed all the Imperial Army, slew
Three thousand on the place, took Sixteen Pieces of Ordinance, Thirty Ensigns,
Thirty two Cornets of Horse; and immediately stormed the Town and carried it.

For the encouragement of the Marquess in this expedition, the King gave him
the impost upon the Wines in Scotland, which would amount to Twenty thousand
pounds per annum; and as a great part of their maintenance was to be derived
from Scotland, so were the Auxiliaries themselves to consist for the most part
of that Nation. For the King of Sweden had by experience found them not unlike
his Fin-landers, both stout and hardy: while these forces were raising, a Scot,
then in the Swedish service asked the King how his Contrymen should be
maintained. How are the Emperors Soldiers, said he, maintained? With money,
answered the Scot. If then, quoth the King, your Steel be better then theirs,
their money will be yours, if it be not better, why will your Contrymen
cross the Seas to be beaten in Germany?

Now I am abroad, before I recall my discourse home, permit a Amboyna massacre
in part revenged.
short transition to the enemies quarters, and there to take in an odd
accident which soon after befell, and is relative to the affairs of England.
Eighteen Hollanders (whereof three had been actours in the English Tragedy at
Amboyna) supping at Frankfort, as they were passing to Strasburgh, boasted in
their cups, what they had done to our nation in that Island, which one in their
company observing, related it to two English Captains of horse then in service
of the Emperor, and two of whose kindred suffered there. These two Captains
having notice which way the Hollanders were to pass, waylaid them in a wood
with a Troop of Horse, and having met them, bad them stand; that done, willed
them to prepare for death, for dye they must: the Hollanders replied, they
hoped not so, for all their money was at their dispose. We seek not your money,
said the two Captains, but your lives, and will now be revenged for those
barbarous torments three of this your company put our Contrymen and allies
to at Amboina; and had we leisure, we would serve you so too. First, they hung
up Johnson the chief of the Amboinists, and made the other seventeen cast the
dice which of them should escape to carry intelligence into Holland. The
fifteen guiltless persons thought this hard measure, and hoped they would not
punish them for others faults: but the Gentlemen pleaded, legem talionis, and
that they might as well hang them, as their Countrymen were butchered at
Amboyna without cause. So without further endictment they hanged up sixteen,
and sent the odd man home. Some satisfaction, but, though almost two for one,
not equiparate to the merit of that nations cruelty: these seventeen had a
merciful and quick dispatch; our ten at Amboyna, the ingenious Devils did so
exquisitely torture, as the poor Patients had nothing but clear consciences to
make them believe they felt not hell above ground.

In March Mr. Mountague was sent over to negotiate the payment of the moiety of
the Queens Portion (being Four hundred thousand Crowns) behind, and to require
satisfaction for two rich Ships taken from us by the French, since the last
peace concluded; and with him, as the better Accountant, was sent the great
Merchant Philip Burlamachi. The King of France returned this answer, Let my
Brother of England render up the Fort of Kebeck, and then he shall have
satisfaction to his content. Kebeck is a Fort upon the river of Canada in the
North part of America, and was taken by Captain Kirk two years before, and
garrisoned with English under the Command of his Brother; it is the prime
staple for Beavers and Otters in the hole world, and worth usually at least
thirty thousand pound a year. But our King preferred fair amity before
litigious emolument, and yielding up the Fort, had his full and just demands.

About 18. years since the Earl of Essex was separated (by a most just sentence
of Nullity executed by Commission under the great Seal of England) from the
Lady Frances Howard. True it is, that Countess was of a very lewd report, and
full of fire, as the Earl of ice, nor will I undertake to vindicate from
indirect and unjustifiable practices, the scrutiny of her Virginity. But
judgment must proceed according to the tenor of allegations and proofs, and as
the Jurv of Midwifes declared her to be an untouched Virgin, so did the Earl
himself confess that (though he had often attempted it) he never could, and
believed never should carnally know her. Whereupon the Commissioners pronounced
a Divorce between them. Upon this definitive sentence of the Bishops, a late
compiler of Great Britains History, abetting popular error, has cast some
odious glances, not knowing that Geneva her self had done the like before in
the case of the Marquess of Vice and others. But that Author was this Earls
creature, and pleading his Masters cause, assumed the greater liberty. The Earl
and his Countess thus parted, to shun the shame of impotency at home over he
goes to the Low Countries, disciplines himself there in Martial exercises,
behaves himself both there and in the Palatinate with gallant resolution, and
became of high renown for feats of Arms. Having given these undeniable proofs
of his manhood, he was ambitious to give some of his virility, and having The
Earl of Essex his second marriage.
been a while in England, solicited the affection of Mris. Elizabeth Paulet,
(daughter of Sir William Paulet of Wiltshire, and extracted from the Noble line
of the Marquess of Winchester) obtained it, and on March the 11. of this
present year, consummated Nuptials with her at Netly, the Earl of Hartfords
house. With this Lady he did a while cohabit, and it was but a while, becoming
soon unhappy in his second, as in his first choice; for he could as little
digest her over much familiarity with Mr. Udal, as his former Ladies with the
Earl of Somerset. But happy it had been (in all probability) not less for King
Charles then this Earl, had either his Ladies found fewer, or he more friends
at Court, and that his dishonor had been there resented agreeable to his
extraction: for though (as some suppose) he labored of an immedicable and
invincible impotency as to conjugal concernments, yet to others he had
animosity enough, and when we shall afterward behold in the head of a numerous
Army, giving this King Ann. Christi 1631.
battle in a pitched field, it may well be conjectured, that his then
engagement was in part upon the score of these indignities, which he charged
upon former account.

I am now entered upon the year 1631. remarkable for the trial The Lord Audley
arraigned.
of Mervin Lord Audley, Earl of Castle-haven, which I could for the honor of
Christianity, for the honor of Nobility, for the honor of our Nation, yea for
the honor of our Nature, even manhood it self, that the story of so much filth
might be swept into the channel of Oblivion. But offenses so prodigiously high,
as his, we may not so stride over; contract they do a penality too vital for
one Scaffold to determine, History must erect another for him, wherein he may
ever suffer in what is extant of him, his posthume Fame, the souls most
considerable relict on earth, in whose Proxy she is happy or miserable to all
posterity.

This Earl married to his second wife, the daughter of the old Countess of
Derby, and widow of the Lord Shandos, by whom she had a daughter married to the
Lord Audley the Earls son. He was committed in December last, upon an
accusation of such a racemation and cluster of abominations, as were never
heard of before. First, for causing one Skipwith his Ganymede, (son to a maker
of Usque bath in Ireland) and advanced by the Earls villainy, (for it were a
shame to call it bounty) to an estate of near a thousand pounds per annum, to
ravish the Countess, himself assisting: next, for procuring the same Skipwith
and others to cuckold his son, by lying with his Lady in the presence of the
Earl. Lastly, for acting Sodomy both upon Skipwith and others. After all these
hellish deeds, some Lords expostulating with him in prison his motives to them,
with an impudence suitable to his lewdness, he told them: As others had their
several delights, some in one thing, some in another, so his hole delight was
in damning souls, by enticing men to such acts as might surely effect it: For
these offenses he was endited at Salisbury, and there found guilty by the Grand
Enquest, whereupon he was transmitted to the Kings-bench-Bar.

His Arraignment there was April the 25. of this present year. Thomas Lord
Coventry (being for that day constituted Lord High Steward of England) brought
the Commission into the Court, where after an O yes made by the Serjant at
Arms, he gave it to Sir Thomas Fanshaw Clerk of the Crown to read, who read it,
and then the huisher of the Black rod kneeling down to the Lord High Steward,
presented him with a white rod, the staff of his Office. His seat was a chair
of State, and underneath him sat the Peers, in number twenty six, viz. the
Lord Treasurer, the Lord Privy Seal, the Earls of Arundel, Pembroke, Kent,
Worcester, Bedford, Essex, Dorset, Salisbury, Leicester, Warwick, Carlisle,
Holland, Barkshire, Denbigh; the Vicounts, Wimbleton, Conway, Dorchester,
Wentworth; the Barons, Percy, Strange, Clifford, Peter's, North, Goring. And
beneath the Nobility sat the Judges assistants. The Commission read, and Oyes
made, the Lord High Steward gave leave to the Peers to be covered, and then
they were called over by their names, to which every one gave a particular
answer. Then the Lieutenant of the Tower brought the Prisoner forth to the Bar,
to whom the Lord High Steward declared the cause of his being brought thither.
His endictment was read by Sir Thomas Fanshaw, who asked him whether he were
guilty, or not guilty. The Lord Audley replied, Not guilty. Sir Thomas then
demanded, How will thou be tried? the Lord Audley replied, By God and my Peers.
Then the Lord High Steward, addressing himself to the Peers, said;

The Prisoner is endicted of Rape and Sodomy, to which he has pleaded not
guilty; My duty it is to charge you with the Trial of him, yours to judge. The
cause may move in some pity, in others detestation, neither of which ought to
be put in the scale, for a grain on either side may sway the Balance. But
Reason must rule your affections, and your heads, your hearts. You are to give
attentive heed, and weigh equally, that the scale may incline the right way.
The Judges will assist you in points of Law, whereof if doubts arise, you are
to propound them to me, and I to them: Thus your Lordships are to proceed
without Corporal Oath, for the Law supposes you of such integrity, as you will
do that for Justice, that others are compelled to by their Oaths. And so God
direct you in it.

After the Lord High Steward had ended, the Attorney General spoke vehemently
in aggravation of the crimes whereof the Prisoner was impeacht; then the
witnesses were produced, and the Evidence upon Examination was found summarily
this;

That the first or second night after marriage, the Lord and Lady being in bed
together, he told her, That her body now was his, and that if she lay with any
by his consent, the fault would be his, not hers. That Broadway by his command
forcibly lay with her, whilst the Lord assisted him in holding her. This was
proved by the testimony of the Lady her self the Defendant, and Broadway the
assailant. The Sodomy was proved by Broadway and Fits Patrick on whom it was
acted. These were the main and capital offenses; of less heinous nature in the
eye of the Law, was his often persuading Shipnith to act villainy with the young
Lady, whom he kept so short of maintenance, as she had no means but what
Shipnith gave her, and that during Shipniths lewdness with her, he called up
diverse servants to behold them, he himself much delighting therein. This was
proved by the testimony of the young Lady herself, Shipnith, and four or five
more.

To these the Earl pleaded, that his wife had been bad before, and so no
competent witness against him. Then the Lord High Steward asked the Judges
whether one may ravish a woman of ill fame? Who replied, An Whore may be
ravished, and it is felony to do it.

Then the Lords withdrew to consider of the evidence, and being Found guilty,
returned, the Lord High Steward demanded their several suffrages, who all, one
by one pronounced him guilty of the Rape, and fifteen of Sodomy: which verdict
being brought in, the Lord High Steward delivered sentence of death against him
in these words;

For as much as thou Mervin Lord Audley; have And condemned.
been endicted of diverse felonious crimes, for which thou did desire to be
tried by God and thy Peers, which Trial thou have had, and they have found the
guilty of them: Thy sentence is therefore, that thou return from hence to the
place from whence thou came, and from thence to the place of Execution, and
there to hang by the neck till thou be dead. And the Lord have mercy on thy
soul.

This doom being past upon him, the Court arose, and the His execution.
Lord was remanded to the Tower, where he continued close prisoner till May 14.
being the day of his Execution, when being brought to Tower Hill, he ascended
the Scaffold, (waited on by his two Chaplains, Dr. Winiff Dean of Paul's, and
Dr. Wickham) and made a short Cenfession, declaring himself many ways worthy of
death, but solemnly protesting his innocence in those two faults whereof he
stood condemned. His confession ended, he resorted to his prayers, after which
bidding farewell to all the Spectators, and forgiving the Executioner, he
yielded his head to decussation, to the striking off, which was performed
dexterously, and at one blow.

One thing I offer as observable, and from mine autopsie, my self beholding,
that having preserved his countenance all the while before in one constant
tenor, he no sooner did address himself for the stroke of death, but his hands
and face were in a moment overshadowed with such a swarthy metamorphosis, as
near resembled smoke-dryed Bacon. The like befell (as I was credibly informed)
to one of noble eminency, whom Justice pursued to the like end, for a different
offense, during these civil wars, as shall (God willing) take place in the
sequel of this Narration.

Thus dyed this titular piece of Nobility, like a bad Actor hist off the stage,
of few lamented, for of few beloved.

Now we have done with the Malefactor, we will next arraign A remarque upon his
offense.
the Fact it self, I mean that transcendent one the Rape; it being of so horrid
and hideous a quality. For, whereas all other sins are the dictates of sensual
pleasure or profit, and have their seminalities within the bed of natural
corruption, this was a sin which even depraved nature would not own, as having
no incentives to it, a sin whereunto the Devil himself seemed not accessory, a
sin without temptation, a Rape without concupiscence, an abomination whose
every grison and step should we climb, we shall not be able in the hole
Repertory of Fame to find its parallel. Some have made rude sallies upon
female chastity, but it has been to sat and allay the boiling extimulations
of their own, rarely of others lusts. Possibly some, with whom to serve has
been to subsist, have been adjutants to their Masters in actions of like
detestation, but who ever heard the practice counterchanged, or a Master
voluntarily to officiate to his servant in a deed so execrable? Had it been
acted upon a stranger it had been bad sufficiently, upon an acquaintance much
worse, upon an ally worse still, (as super-inducting Incest with Rape) but to
perpetrate it upon her, whom the sacred ties of Wedlock had consigned up to him
in the highest notion of dearnesse, for a man to commit a Rape upon himself,
(for so she was in truth) certainly there never was a sin of so odd and
impartial a genius. Nor did the person on whom it was acted render the impiety
more odious, then the mode and way of doing it: for whereas nature it self, in
acts of such uncleanness, (even between married couples, who have the highest
dispensations) declineth insolation and open view, this villainy was acted as
upon a common Theater, as if all the delight had been in the Spectacle, and all
the pleasure in the Ostentation. So that in short (all circumstances spelled
together) I may safely say it was a sin without Precedent of former ages, and
which I hope posterity will never copy out.

June the 27 following, Mr. Broadway and Fitz Patrick, servants Broadway and
Fitz Patrick arraigned.
to, and concriminaries with the Lord Audley, were produced to trial at the
King's Bench Bar, and partly upon the evidence formerly given in by the
Countess, and re-avowed then by her, and partly upon their own confessions,
were found guilty, the one of Rape, the other of Sodomy, and had sentence of
death pronounced against them, and were executed at Tiburn July 6.

Fitz Patrick in his last speech at the Gallows reflected invectively upon the
Earl of Dorset as the beguiler of him into his destruction; because, upon his
examination before the Lords, the Earl promised in the name of the whole board,
that whatsoever he gave in evidence against his Lord, should no ways prejudice
himself, which moved him to declare his Lord guilty of Sodomy, and that the
testimony he then gave against his Lord, was now the main cause of his own
condemnation. As to the matter of fact for which the Lord suffered, he much
lamented his Lord should dye in protestation of his innocence, for he professed
the Lord was guilty of both those crimes for which he dyed. Much time he spent
in addresses to the Virgin Mary and the Saints, and ended his life in the
Romish persuasion.

Mr. Broadwaies confession was very ingenuous, Christian, and sincere; much
blame he laid upon the Countess as a woman of infamous conversation, and much
upon himself for his dissoluteness, for which in the most significant gestures
of contrition he craved pardon from God, and dyed in much assurance of it.

In the same month of May wherein this Monster-Lord was Sir Giles Allington
censured in the High Commission.
sentenced, Sir Giles Allington fell also under censure for a sin of grand,
though under-graduate abomination. This Knight (in other things a Gentleman of
much honor) had against the advice of the Archbishop and other venerable
Divines, married his own Niece, the daughter of Mr. Dalton, for which
incestuous match he was questioned in the High Commission, with whom he tugged
hard, and being a man of great estate, resolved he was to spare no cost which
might be serviceable to quit him. First, his Advocates pleaded it was not
within the Levitical interdict, where the marriage of the Nephew with the Aunt
is forbidden, but not of the Uncle with the Niece; and when the same parity of
reason was urged, Bellarmines No was produced, because, says he, The first
everteth the natural subjection due from a Nephew to his Aunt, who must be his
underling by the duty of a wife; whereas if a Niece does marry her Uncle the
natural subjection is rather doubled, then destroyed. But these arguments were
rather delatory pastimes, then just evasions. Sir Giles his best refuge was to
the Common Pleas, from whence he obtained two Rules; one, requiring the High
Commissioners to show cause why a Prohibition should not be granted. The other
intimating, that if in the interim they proceed further, a Prohibition should
be granted: which so incensed the High Commissioners, as they sent instantly to
acquaint the King therewith, who gave present order to the Lord Keeper to let
the Judges know he did much distaste such proceedings, whereupon the Common
Pleas desisted from further interruption; and it was well they did, for the
Bishop of London grew so high in passion, as he said he would move the Lord of
Canterbury to excommunicate all the Judges within his Province who should dare
to act in such a Prohibition, and in case the Archbishop would not, he was
resolved to do it in his Diocese, and denounce it himself in St. Paul's and
other Churches.

Sir Giles thus stripped of all Common Law protection, became the full But to
receive the keen arrows of a provoked Court, eight Bishops, and four other
Commissioners were his Judges, and his sentence; Fine to the King Twelve
thousand pounds to stand obliged in the penalty of Twenty thousand pounds never
to co-habit or to come into private company with his Niece any more: to be
committed to prison, or put in sufficient bail till both he and his Niece or
Lady shall have done penance at Paul's Cross, and at Great St. Mary's in
Cambridge at a day enjoined by the Court. Never was Delinquent censured there
by a more solemn and venerable Consistory. Many spoke excellent well; but Sir
Henry Martin, whose custom it was before to outgo others, did then surpass
himself.

The Court afforded little remarkable this year, save only that the Queen Nov.
the 4. was delivered of her eldest Daughter, the Lady Mary.

The Kings thoughts were most abroad; and employment those thoughts could not
want, whilst his brother the Palizgrave wanted his patrimony; and though he
was almost at the point of desperation, as to prevailing with the Emperor by
precarious applications, yet did he resolve once more to re-enforce his former
instances: to which effect he dispatht Sir Robert Anstruther again as
Ambassador to him. But the Emperor being not high enough to deny, nor low
enough to grant, kept his old posture of procrastination: whereof our King
having advice from his Ambassador, intending patiently to wait until new
emergences should occasion new counsels, gave him order still to attend and
pursue his former instructions, until he should receive others.

In the mean time Gustavus King of Sweden, in the way of whose conquest nothing
could stand, with a victorious sword made a furious inrode into Germany; the
restoration of whose liberties he made the design of that hostile incursion.
And as the Prince Elector bare the greatest share in the oppression, so had he
the fairest hopes of tasting the fruit of those conquests, especially
considering both that now that King began to be master of the field even in the
Palatinate, the late and ancient patrimony of that Prince; and also how
solicitous a zealot his Brother our King was in his concernment; for as in
promotion of that great enterprise he had this summer sent over an aid of Six
thousand Foot with Three hundred thousand Dollars to the King of Sweden under
the conduct of the Marquess Hamilton, so did he also in the spring of the next
year dispatch an Ambassador to 1632.
him, praying the Restoration of the Paliz-grave. But the King Ann. Christi
1632.
of Sweden, (whether because he had prospered to an autocracy a
self-subsistence, and so needed no participants either in the hazard, or glory
of the archievement; or upon what other account, uncertain) neither
entertained, nor employed the Scots with that respect as was expected, most of
them never encountering any enemy but those two fierce ones, Plague and Famine.
Again, he set at first so high a rate upon what was sued for, as rendered it not
worth acceptance upon such harsh terms: For he demanded from the Prince,

First, That he should enter Recognizance, of holding his Country 1.
as a Donative of that King, and consequently should repute himself as his
Beneficiary and Vassal.

Secondly, That he should make no Martial Levies without his 2.
liking.

Thirdly, That he should, during those Wars, furnish him with so many thousands
upon his own pay; more indeed then his desolate country 3.
could maintain.

Fourthly, That two of his Head Towns should be left to the 4.
King as Cautionaries for performing of Covenants, which should be made
presidiary and Garrisons to be maintained by the contribution of the Country.

Fifthly, That he should make no League nor Article with any other Prince, his
consent not first had. 5.


These proposals were looked upon by the Prince, rather as conditions tendered by
a Conqueror to a vanquished Foe, then acts of Grace to a distressed friend, nor
did they answer that ambitious title of the LIBERATOR and DELIVERER of GERMANY,
to which that King pretended, with so intense a passion.

The Palizgrave therefore loath to change his Lord only, and retain his old
servitude, rejected these terms as dishonorable, which being also resented as
such by the Agents of France, and the united Provinces, and so represented to
the King, he condescended to others of a more lenitive temper. But Heaven was
no party The King of Sweden slain at Luizen.
to those transactions, for when all things were even upon the point of
signing, the supreme Disposer of all things signed a fatal countermand, giving
a sudden stop to that brave Hero in the full carreer of all his triumphs, by a
death, natural to him as a Soldier, though violent as a Man: This dysaster
happened at that memorable battle at Lutzen, November. 6. where the King being
too adventurously engaged in the thickest of his Troops, was slain by an hand,
yea by a party, (whether his own or the enemies) uncertain. But that blow was
not more fatal to himself, then to his adversaries, for no sooner did the noise
of the fall overspread his Army, but they redoubled their Martial fury, and
consequently their blows, hewing down their stiff opponents with so gallant
courage, as they went off Victors with a vengeance, leaving dead on the place
six thousand men.

This was the end of that renowned King, for sprightly metal the Caesar, for
success the Alexander of this Age, to whom we may apply what the Historian
said of that Macedonian Prince. Eo clarior quod adolescens in incremento rerum
nondum alteram fortunam expertus decessit. Live. 8. c 77. The Prince Elector
dies.
He was the more famous, because he was cut off in his youth, and in the growth
of his prosperity, before fortune had ever forsaken him, or showed him her
averse.

Gustavus being thus taken away, the Prince Elector his Participant in his best
Fortune would needs also be concomitant in his worst, and was at the same time
I may say (not improperly) slain, he receiving his deaths wound thence, though
not there. He had some few days before taken the infection at Mentz, being
newly returned from visiting his Ally the Duke of Deux-Ponts; and was in an
hopeful way of recovery, when news was brought him of the King of Swedens
death, which he re-sented with so intense a passion, as he dyed the 29. of the
same month. Nor could the restitution of Franckendal (the fairest flower of
his Garland) bear up his Spirit from desponding and overwhelming with grief.
For that Town having been so long, and so cl^se begirt by the Swedes, as it was
reduced to a necessity of yielding. And the Emperor and the King of Spain
(aiming to convert that necessity into a favor, and to pick a thank from
England, whose Ambassadors still plied his instances at the Imperial Court)
rendered it up into the hands of the English Officers the 21. of that instant,
being eight days before the Prince expired, so that he lived to know himself in
part restored, though sorrow had so imbittered all relish of earthly joy, as
his spirit was not susceptible of any other then doleful impressions.

The same year our King also dispatched the Earl of Leicester to The Earl of
Leicester Ambassador into Denmark.
the King of Denmark his Uncle; the most considerable design of his Embassy
was to condole the late decease of his Grandmother the Lady Sophia Queen
Dowager of Denmark; and to demand the dividend of a sixth part of what she left
as due to him, and the Lady Elizabeth in right of Queen Anne their Mother; for
by the Fundamental Law of that Kingdom all children, of whatsoever sex,
inherit equal shares, allotting only to the eldest a double portion. The part
due to our King and his Sister amounted to an hundred and fifty thousand
pounds, which that King promised to satisfy as soon as moneys came in, but
withal intimated that he desired to re-minde his Nephew of England of what he
was in arrear of the thirty thousand pounds per mensem, which was due to him
from the Crown of England, upon the contract made 1625. toward the support of
his Army, so that the Earl finding the intrado of his Negotiation like to come
to nothing, having condoled, that is, after the Danish mode, made merry with
that King, returned home.

This year the Protestants and English Plantators in Ireland, began to grow
into some discontent: The Papists, especially the Romish Clergy, increased
excessively, to near double the number of Reformed Believers, and became so
insolent as openly to erect Discontents in Ireland.
an University in Dublin, in emulation, or rather in defiance of the Kings
College there: so that they had reason to fear sad effects of their potency.
Again, the King finding the Romish Catholics in that Kingdom so numerous, so
ignorant, and withal so poor, he thought fit for a while to dispense with the
penalty of the statute of twelve pence per Sunday for absence from the Church,
especially being somewhat irritated by what was suggested to him (though
untruly) that writs were issued out for levying those sines, before the
quarterly contribution of five thousand pounds granted by the Country for
maintenance of the Army was expired, which (had it been so) might have proved
of dangerous consequence. This act of Grace as it elevated the pride of the
Recusants, so it found amongst the Protestants a most unpleasing resentment:
which was not a little ampliated by their great oppression, by an odious Papist
Undersheriff his unequal levying the last Contribution. These distempers made
for, and in a manner made the Lord Vicount Wentworth; for whereas the Politic
administration of that Kingdom was then entrusted to many, under the notion of
Lords Justices with their Council, the King was persuaded that those humors
would better settle and repose under a single Governor; and if so, no man more
proper, none of more dexterous prudence, none of more assured fidelity then
that Lord: of whom his Majesty had full experience in his Presidence of the
North, which he discharged with so great wisdom, such fair integrity, as
argued him worthy of the highest promotion: so that the King agreeable to the
value he had for him, not more favoring, then righting him, invested him with
the sole power of that Kingdom (in subordination to himself alone) under the
title of Lord Deputy.

December the 2. the King fell sick of the Small-Pocks, but the malignity was
very remiss, and gentle, so as, by Gods blessing, he soon recovered.

The same month also he sent the Earl of Arundel to the Hague to his Sister,
both to comfort her, and solicit her and her childrens journey into England:
but she returned answer, that she craved her Brothers excuse for that time,
having no disposition to so long a journey.

The same year St. Paul's Church prayed reparation for the damage A contribution
for repairing of Saint Paul's.
she had sustained by the sacrilegious hand of time. A gallanter exercise for
Royal magnificence there could not be; and never King had a greater mind to
the work, then King Charles; had he been stockt for it: but poverty (that grand
oppressor of virtuous spirits) kept him short. But the good word of a great Man
is worth gold, and though he was unfurnished himself, yet he commended her
condition to such as were able; issuing forth a Commission to diverse Lords and
Gentlemen of note, willing them to exhort their adjacent neighbors to a large
contribution, whereby though the sum raised by that Benevolence looked big
in gross, yet did it much fail the expectation of the Bishop, and for his sake
(it was supposed) suffered no small diminution; for many had no fancy to the
work, merely because he was the promoter of it, (so ill are even the best
actions relisht of men lapsed into common disdain) nor did some forbear to cry,
What needs this waste to decore a superstitious relic? Nevertheless the work
went on, and her excoriated carcass began to skin again, but with so slow a
motion, as at length the distempers of the State marred the temper of the
mortar, and made the Artists knock off abruptly, leaving that famous structure
half ruined, half polite.

February the 11. there happened a terrible fire upon London Bridge, which
consumed very many houses, whereof the still extant gap and chasment is a
visible demonstration.

Sorely vexed was Bishop Laud to see his Cathedral so tedious in trimming,
especially at such a time, as he did behold under his nose, so vigorous a
construction of a little City, not super-edified upon an old bottom, but
upstart and new-emergent from the ground.

For the King having granted leave to the Earl of Bedford to edify at pleasure
upon the Convent Garden, it being of a very ample and spacious Area and
Content; the Earl plied his design with such celerity and quick dispatch, as he
soon reared such numerous rows of stately and ambitious buildings, as made old
London envy the magnificence of her Sub-urbicary sister.

But some thought this gallant structure of greater state, then safety, and
that this Kings Father, upon better reason of state, restrained such erections.
For Cities are the great rendezvous of People, and where there is the greatest
confluence of men, there will be the greatest power. And as all power is a
kind of grievance to them who obey, so no Power is more Tyrannical then that
of a City, witness Athens, Sparta, and Rome. And if the excessive Grandeur of
Cities be intolerable in a Popular State, it is much more under a single
Sovereignty. For there is nothing more adverse and opposite to Regality then a
Re-publique, and as all Incorporations are in their Politic constitution
elemented according to a popular Scheme, so are their Members usually
principled agreeable to such intents, and only attend until an opinion of
their formidable numbers, or some other serviceable emergency shall invite them
to daring against Regal power. A truth which may be exemplified in the late
deportment Ann. Christi 1633.
of this Metropolis, whose Inhabitants this King sadly found the considerable
Artificers of his ruin. A caveat to posterity, (whether, or not, to His, I
leave to him whose ways are past finding out) not to permit them to grow to a
luxuriancy disproportionable from the interest of subjection.

The King you have heard before was in the 1. year of his Reign The Kings
progress into Scotland.
inaugurated King of England; of England I say, not of Great Britain; wherein
as Scotland challenged one moity, so had she a Crown to confer as well as
England, and that Crown that Nation thought was worth the fetching, and so did
the King also, at least seemingly, having it in such an anniversary
consideration as every year (since his first) the time was prefixed, and his
foot almost in the stirrup for a Progress thither. But some thing or other
came ever travers and thwart in the very nick of time, and put him by, so that
his often preparations for Scotland resembled those of Tiberius for visiting
Provinces remote, (which Suetonius.
gave him the by-name of Callipedes) who was ever going, yet never went. And
the Scots themselves, none of the most candid interpreters of this Kings
actions, looked upon it no otherwise, then as a mere mockery. The truth is, the
King had no great stomach to the journey. For as the place had nothing of
amenity or delight, so the Nation and race of men were not fashioned to the
mode of Englands civilities, but under the scheme of an honest animosity and
specious plain-dealing, most perfidious. But things safe preponderate and
outweigh the pleasing, and it grew high time now not to delay and super-annuate
longer this expectation. He had lately requested a great Person of that Nation,
to whom the custody of the Crown was entrusted, to bring it into England, that
he might be crowned here, and save a tedious Journey: whereto that Lord
replied, He durst not be so false to his trust, but if his Majesty would be
pleased to accept thereof in Scotland, he should find those his People ready
to yield him the highest honor, but should he long defer that duty, they might
perhaps be inclined to make choice of another King. And a while after the
Marquess Huntly, having obtained a Toleration for the exercise of the Popish
Religion in Scotland, That Council stoutly told him, When his Majesty shall be
pleased to come and be crowned amongst us, He will, we doubt not, be sworn to
our Laws, mean while seeing he has entrusted us with them, we will look they
shall be observed: These speeches the King took as bold hints of his
necessitated Progress, so that finding that in reason of State, go he must,
resolved he was to appear there like himself, in a most Princely equipage. The
suite and train of English Nobility he took along were the Earls of
Northumberland, Arundel, Pembroke, Southampton, Salisbury, Carlisle, Holland,
Monmouth and New Castle; the Bishop of London, Lora Treasurer, Secretary Coke,
Vice-chamberlain, with many Gentlemen of quality.

May the 13. thus attended he set forward from London. His gests and motions
were much fore-slowed by his making so many halts to receive the Noble
treatments provided for him, by persons of Honor all along the rode; every
hours repast being no less then a sumptuous feast. But the entertainment most
of all august and Royal was that of the Earl of New Castle at Welbeck, which
was estimated to stand the Earl in at least six thousand pounds.

June the 10. he came to Edinburgh, the 18. was designed for His Coronation.
the day of his Inauguration. Great Britain never saw any thing more solemn,
never a more refulgent parade, and show of bravery then that celebrity: nor
does she afford a City more agreeably disposed by Nature to represent such a
triumph to the best advantage of beholders, then that of Edinburgh. For it
being but one entire street, very spacious, seated on the prone and descending
part of an hill, pro-tended in a right line from the Castle to Holy-rood-house
(the Kings Palace) at least a mile in length, and the King setting forth from
the Castle with his suit of Nobles, rode in a most refulgent state through the
City to the Palace, (where he was to be crowned) so as the Spectators eyes had
a full pursuit of all that glorious pomp, from the first to the last.

Thus was King Charles inaugurated King of Scotland, though The Scots
illaffected to him.
not King of Scots; not all his most gracious and debonair mine toward them,
could vest him in that Nations affection. His revocation (though most legal and
innocent) of such things as had been depredated and scrambled away from the
Crown in his Fathers minority, with a Commission of Surrenders of Superiorities
and Tithes, by which the Ministers and Land-owners were bought out and redeemed
from the Clientele and Vassallage of the Nobility and Laique Patrons, they
could not concoct: these were the real causes of their disaffection to him; and
because that disaffection durst not look abroad under such an odious
extraction, therefore they were sedulous to faign another of better acceptance.
Soon after the Coronation followed an Assembly of Parliament, therein an Act of
Ratification of all Acts formerly made, and then in force, rather for matter of
form and course, then for necessity, was propounded: yet did it find such
obstruction, as with much difficulty it passed: for those irritated spirits,
whom nothing could content, but what afforded matter of discontent, would not
assent; suggesting though in a clandestine way, that the design of this Act
was, but to maintain Episcopacy (which they thought but a great chip of the old
block Popery) and what hopes of Reformation, what of planting the Gospel, what
of erecting the Discipline of Jesus Christ so long as Episcopacy is
established? But notwithstanding all these clancular, these close insinuations
by these turbulent malevolents, the Act passed, and the King had so
considerable and so many friends in that Kingdom, as they durst not then
attempt any thing which might discompose the public quiet.

Having thus dispatched the serious part of his errand into Scotland, his
Majesty gave himself the satisfaction of visiting Falkland, Sterling, and some
other the most eminent places of pleasure, but in his return and passage from
Brunt Island over the Forth to Edinburgh, he escaped a great danger, the wind
being boisterous, and the channel insecure. This done he hasted home, that is,
unto the embraces of his dear Consort, where he ended his progress July the 20.

Not long after his return from Scotland, aged and self sear George Abbot the
Titular Archbishop of Canterbury went to his everlasting home, August the 4. A
very learned man he was, his Erudition all of the old stamp, stiffly principled
in the Doctrine of St. Augustine; which they who understand it not, call
Calvinisme, therefore dis-relisht by them who inclined to the Massilian and
Arminian Tenets. Pious, grave, and exemplary in his conversation. But some
think a better Man then Archbishop, and that he was better qualified with merit
for the Dignity, then with a spirit answering the function, in the exercise
whereof he was conceived too facile and yielding; his extraordinary remissness
in not exacting strict conformity to the prescribed Orders of the Church in
point of ceremony, seemed to resolve those legal determinations to their first
principle of indifferency, and led in such an habit of inconformity, as the
future reduction of those tender conscienced men to long dis-continued
obedience was interpreted an Innovation. This was the height of what I dare
report his failings reached to: That he was a Ringleader of that Sect which
lately appeared desperate proselytes, loath I am with a late Author to affirm,
warrant I have none to leave so ill a savor upon his same, nor can it be
infallibly inferred from these men their being then in favor with him. Their
principles perhaps were entertained since his death, or if before, not then
declared, and until such secrets be discovered, men may be mistaken in those
they favor, the greatest sufferer of these times was so.

Next this Archbishop succeeded William Land Bishop of London, and was
translated September the 19. Higher he could not be advanced in England, in
Rome he might, and Rome was so studious to adopt him hers as supposing his
ambition was not terminated so, before he was translated, she seriously made
him a ridiculous tender of a Cardinals Cap to which he returned answer negative
until Rome were other then it is. Implying that the Church had errors to which
he could no ways conform, and had she been as Orthodox as ever, he who was
Primate here thought it not sorted with his honor to be second to any
elsewhere.

The King having observed at his last being in Scotland that God Almighty was
very negligently and as he thought undecently worshipped there, took the
Reformation of Sacred worship into his Princely care; and because innovations
must be (though never so necessary) led in by degrees, he first began with his
own Chapel at Holy-Rood House, and this October issued forth several Articles
or Orders to be there observed by the Dean of his Chapel.

First, That prayers be said twice a day according to the English form.

Secondly, That a Communion be held every month, and all Communicants to
receive the blessed Eucharist on their knees.

Thirdly, That on Sundaies and Holi-daies he who officiates should constantly
perform his duty in his Whites or Surplice. But these Directions, though backed
with a Letter requiring exact obedience, and though only relating to the Kings
private Chapel, yet were very slowly observed, the Bishop of Dunblane then
Dean of his Majesty's Chapel, pleading now one thing, then another in his
excuse, when in truth he knew well he should thereby displease the people; and
what the consequence might be of displeasing a Nation so combustible, and whose
fury would assume the greater liberty in the absence of his Majesty, as he did
easily foresee, so did he think it concerned him to prevent.

In the year 1618. King James published a Command or Declaration tolerating
sports on the Lords Day called Sunday. This Declaration then caused so many
impetuous clamours against it, as it was soon after called in. And was this
October revived and ratified by King Charles. The express design of this was
to restore the Feasts of Dedication of Churches commonly called Wakes to their
ancient solemnity, and to allow the use of lawful pastimes in the lower row
upon that day. It was also argued in favor of it, That there was in the
Kingdom a potent tendency in many to Judaisme, occasioned by the dangerous
Doctrine and Positions of several Puritans, especially of one Theophilus
Brabourn an obscure and ignorant Schoolmaster, asserting the perpetual and
indispensable morality of the Sabbath of the fourth Commandment. Again in
other no small inclination to Popery, occasioned by the rigor and strictness
of Sabbatarian Ministers, in denying People recreations on Ann. Christi 1634.
the Sunday. But all these plausible insinuations operated little to a welcome
entertainment. Nor was there any one Royal Edict, during all King Charles his
reign, resented with equal regret. The fault was least his Majesty's, and not
only ill Counsel, but ill custom was to blame: For the King might say of this
his Day, as Jacob did once of God's House, Surely the Genesis 28. 16.
Lord was in this Day, and I knew it not. For, too true it is, the Divinity of
the Lord's Day, was then new Divinity at Court, where the publ^que Assemblies
once over, the indulgence of secular Employment and of Recreations, was thought
so little disservice to God, as (time sans memory) not only civil affairs were
usually debated at the Council Table, but also representations of Masks were
rarely on other then Sabbath nights; and all this fomented by the both doctrine
and practice of men, very eminent in the Church: which seemed the greater
prodigy, that men who so eagerly cried up their own Orders, and revenues for
Divine, should so much de-cry the Lord's Day for being such, when they had no
other Existence, then in relation to this; But of this elsewhere.

November the 6. the young Prince Elector, by the Proxy of the Earl of Dover,
and the Duke of Lenox, received at Windsor the honor of Garter.

The 14. of the same month, the Queen was delivered of another Son, who was
baptized the 24. by the name of James, and was after styled Duke of York.

February the 2d. (you may if you please call it Candlemas night) had been time
out of mind celebrated at Court with somewhat more then ordinary solemnity:
and never was any more glorious then that of this year: the four Innes of Court
presenting both their Majesty's at Whitehall, with a gallant Masque as a
Symbol of their joint affections. An exact account of this radiant show, would
make a bad show in so grave a History, nor shall I need say more, then that for
curiosity of fancy, for excellency of performance, for luster and dazzling
splendour, this age, though passionately addicted to the glory of such
inventions, never before or since within this I Will afforded the like. So brave a
spectacle it was, as it not only delighted the Court, but set the London Dames
on longing to behold such gaiety within their City walls; upon this account some
ten days after both their Majesty's, with their train of Court Grandees and
Gentlemen Revellers, were solemnly invited to a most sumptuous banquet at
Guild Hall, where that resplendent show was iterated, and re-exhibited, so as
not only this year, but this month may be said to have had two Candlemas
nights. This entertainment was very costly to the City, so dear was then, I say
not this King, but their own vanity to them, and that their vanity was dearer
to them then their King is evident, because some few years after, when they
flourished, and he wanted most to repress the Scotish-darings, he could not
obtain from them any the least pittance of supply.

The next spring his Majesty fell upon David's design, but not upon David's sin,
of numbering the People, the ground whereof was this.

Foreign Princes and States with whom he was in amity, were earnest suitors to
him, that by his leave they might make some military levies within his
Dominions. Willing he was to comply with those desires, but would first provide
against his own prejudice; that he might therefore take the better notice of
what was supernumerary to his own preservation, he caused a general muster to
be made of all persons (under the degree of Esquires) fit to bear arms from the
age of sixteen to sixty, and after the return of the Roll he condescended to
their requests.

This summer the King, following the Counsel of Themistocles, began to apply
himself to the mastery of the British seas, to which he had most potent
provocations: for his coasts were not only infected with Pickroons, Turks, and
Dunkirk-Pirats to the great damage of traffic, but his very Dominion in the
narrow seas actually usurped by the Holland-Fishers, and the right it self in
good earnest disputed, by a late Tract of learned Grotius called More liberum:
These were craving occasions and concernments not of honor only, but of safety
also. And how these could be provided for was the grand difficulty, for the
charge of the enterprise would be excessive, and his Exchequer empty, how that
vacuity should be filled up was a Question, and that Question King Charles his
infelicity; for without all question the most natural and proper resort had
been to his Subjects in Parliament, but his and their late so unfriendly, so
unkind parting, gave him slender assurance of relief from them, and made him
loath to give himself the trouble of their denial. And for such Subjects, to
deny such a King, upon such an occasion was (he thought) a deplorable case. Had
he wasted and decocted his Treasure in luxury and riot, had he been profuse in
bounty to his Favorites, and had contracted want that way; had he pressed upon
his Peoples liberties above the mode of his progenitors, and so alienated their
affections; had not his people been in state to supply him, all these had been
considerable and every one something. But never King was more frugal, never
King more retentive in his largesses, never King had made more obliging
concessions to his Subjects.

This disinclination of the Parliament to assist the King, and his impendent
necessity, had power, I will not say cause, enough to urge in another King a
repetition of Privy Seals, Loans, and such disgustfull impositions. But to King
Charles it was sufficient they were illegal, resolved he was no extremity, no
not an invincible, and fatal one, should provoke him to temerate, to violate
those Laws; yet if any thing did happily escape (as he hoped there did) the
curiosity of the late restraint upon him by the Petition of Right, or was left
at the dispose of his Prerogative, he doubted not but he might without scruple
of conscience to himself, or offense to the public, take benefit thereof.
Therefore for a cunning man (the cunning'st at such a Project of any within his
three Dominions) he sends, that is, for his Attorney general Noy, tells him
what he had in contemplation, bids him contrive the mode (but a legal one) for
defraying the expense. Away goes the subtle engineer, and at length from old
records progs and bolts out an ancient Precedent of raising a Tax upon the hole
Kingdom, for setting forth a Navy in case of danger. The King glad of the
discovery, as of Treasure trouve, presently issued out writs to all Countries
within the Realm, declaring that the safety of the Kingdom was in danger (and
so it was indeed) and that therefore every County should for the defense of the
Kingdom, against a day prefixed, provide ships of so many Tun, with Guns,
Gunpowder, Tackle, and all other things necessary. But before these ships could
be fitted to flote upon the main, they were dry-foundred at land. For the Tax
being a burden, every man began to study how to decline the weight. The Clergy
pleaded immunity from all secular and civil charges. But the Judges argued
against them that there is Trinoda necessitas, a threefold necessity which
binds all, as well Clergy as Laity; viz. Aid in War, (such as this) the
building of Bridges, and making of Forts; nevertheless the King upon the
Archbishops entreaty granted them exemption. Again the Mediterraneans the
Highlanders muttered at the Imposition, alleging that it being a Naval Tax, it
ought in reason and equity to be born by the Par-alious, the Maritime parts.
But the objection paramount, and above all was, that it was charged out of
Parliament, and so contrary to the Petition of right. The several processes
and motions of this Difference, and how at length it reposed, are not now in
season, but will more tempestively occur in the ensuing series of this
narration. For

Next to the birth of the Project, succeeds the death of the Projector. That
Atturny General ending this life August the ninth. His decease following his
invention of Shipmony so close at the heels, seemed to the people as an
overture of some benignity from heaven, and almost persuaded them that God was
interested in what they accounted their oppression. He was a man passing
humorous, of a Cynical rusticity, a most indefatigable plodder, and searcher of
ancient Records, whereby he became an eminent instrument both of good and ill
(and of which most is a great question) to the Kings prerogative. For during
the time that Parliaments were frequent, he appeared a stout Patriot of the
Comminalty, and in the last was an active opponent in the difference concerning
Tonnage and Poundage. But when the Dissolution of that was, in most men's
apprehensions, the end of all; No sooner did the King show him the lure of
advancement, but quitting all his former inclinations, he wheeled about to the
Prerogative, and made amends with his future service, for all his former
dis-obligations.

About the same time Axel Oxenstiern, the grand Chancellor, and general
Director of the Swedish affairs, sent over his son (a Gentleman of singular
Gallantry and accomplishments) in the quality of an Ambassador to our King,
who treated him very nobly suitable to his both merit and extraction; but in
regard he came without credential Letters from the Queen of Sweden, and the
King was ignorant of the latitude and extent of his Fathers power as to
constituting Ambassadors, he denied him Audience, whereupon he returned in
some disgust.

This year there was a Parliament called in Ireland at the motion of the Lord
Deputy, founded upon very considerable reasons. In the time of Edward the
third, that Kingdom did yield to the Crown ultra reprisas, all charges born,
thirty thousand pound per annum. But now his Majestics Revenue fell short of
defraying the yearly charge twenty thousand pound per annum, which was supplied
by way of contribution from the Subject, and the Crown had contracted a debt of
eighty thousand pounds. This contribution was to determine the next year, and
renewed it could not legally be but by Parliament, and if that Parliament would
but grant three Subsidies, they would advance enough to maintain the Army, and
providently ordered to discharge his Majesty's debt; and that the Parliament
should be inclined thereto, the King had many reasons to hope. First, they had
granted but one Subsidy since the initiation of King James his reign. Secondly,
the Kingdom was now grown-rich, peace begetting plenty. Lastly his Majesty had
lately obliged them by settling all Estates where there had been twenty years
continued prossession; nor did his expectation mis-carry, the Lord Deputy
proceeding with that prudence, that he obtained his ends.

The same time also there was in that Kingdom a Synod assembled, wherein the
System, the Body of Articles formed by that Church Anno 1615. were repealed,
and in their place were substituted the 39. Articles of the Church of England;
intending to create an uniformity of belief between both Churches. Many were
not very well pleased at this alteration, in regard the former Articles
contained expressly the nine Articles of Lambeth, framed in opposition to the
Arminian Tenets; and were inserted there by especial direction and order from
King James. Again there was another Article of the same edition, wherein the
Sanctification of the Lord's Day was asserted as a duty of Divine Right, for
default of which, in those of the English model, men were left at liberty to
opine what they pleased concerning its sacred institution, and by consequence a
wide door opened to its profanation by licentious libertines.

I must not leave Ireland before I have vindicated the innocence of the Lord
Deputy from an accusation, or rather a calumny of Mr. Pryn, who extracts from
Sir Thomas Duttons letter, a relation of a great mutiny of Papists in Dublin,
which he fixes upon this year, and delivers it as the effect of the Lord
Deputy his connivence, and fomenting that faction: in both which the man is
grossly mistaken, for that mutiny he mentions anteceded this Lords Deputation
two years, as this Narrative has placed it. And for the Popish Recusants
certain it is, they never were kept within stricter duty, nor held closer to
loyal obedience then during the time he governed them.

The Scottish discontents I mentioned in the last Annal, which The Scots begin
to plot against the King.
the King left behind him boiling upon a soft and gentle fire, began now to
contract a little more confidence in his absence, and to tempt his patience by
a most mal^tious plot against his fame, as preambulatory to another against his
Person. The peoples minds were not yet made susceptible enough of, not
sufficiently infected with, their mischievous impressions; and because the
first work and operation in the method of sedition, is to leaven that mass,
first they whispered and instilled into them close intelligence of some
terrible plot against their liberties; then they sent abroad a venomous Libel,
wherein they endeavored to infame the Kings proceedings in the last Parliament,
as indirect, to charge him with the suborning of, and corrupting the then
suffrages, and suggested formidable fictions of his tendency to the Romish
Belief.

This virulent paper passing through many hands, fell at length into some of
disaffected inclinations, who presently as duty dictated, informed the Lords of
the Privy Council thereof; upon which ensued a strict and narrow search into
the authors and abetters thereof; the contrivet was discovered to be one Hagge
then escaped, and the chief of the abetters was the Lord Balmerino.

This Lords Father was a creature of King James, and by him The Lord Balmerino
arraigned.
advanced to be his chief Secretary of State; a seeming Protestant, but inside
Romanist. Being a Minister of so near admission to the King, he had been often
tampering with him to send a letter of compliment (contrived by himself) to
Pope Clement, which the King as often refused not without indignation at the
motion. Whereupon Balmerino taking advantage of the Kings haste when he was
going on hunting he being to sign several other dispatches, he cunningly
shuffled in that Letter amongst the rest, so as the King signed it unawares.
Some years after Cardinal Bellarmine mentioning that Letter to the Matthew. Tort
ad Apolog. Anglic. Responsio.
Kings dis-advantage, and the King taking notice thereof questioned his
Secretary for it, who upon his trial confessed the whole truth, for which he
was by his Peers found guilty, and suitable to his merit adjudged to be hanged,
drawn and quartered, and his estate confiscated to the Crown. But that King was
mild beyond measure, some thought beyond policy, and all this notwithstanding
would not spill his blood, which was a clemency most transcendent, had his
mercy ended there; but that pardon which was too much mercy for so high an
offender, was, he thought, too little for so great a King, therefore in tract
of time he shined upon him with such grace, as restored him both in blood and
estate. This Lord being heir ex ass (even to his very perfidiousnesse) of what
was his Fathers, being thus lapsed into a similary crime, underwent similary
proceedings of trial and arraignment, was also by his Peers found guilty, and
sentence of death ready to be pronounced against him. True it is, the verdict
of his Peers past amongst those who wished well both to him and that Libel, as
over severe. But the malefactor finding himself convicted, and by consequence
his life at the dispose of his Majesty, had the wit his Father taught him, to
resort to the Kings mercy, which (that the parallel might still proceed) was a
graciously dispensed to him. This Princely favor the Lord received (as well it
merited) in the lowest posture of a suppliant on his knees, with highest
recognizance of his Majesty's goodness, and deepest vows of future loyalty
that an obligation so high could deserve. But long he held not to the
conscience of those protestations, so ingratefully relapsing some few years
after, as if he had only craved leave to offend again.

During these proceedings against this Lord, the Earl of Kenoul Lord Chancellor
of that Kingdom dyed, next whom succeeded the Archbishop of St. Andrews, a
thing not known in that Kingdom for the space of three hundred years before,
for a Clergy man to bear that office.

In England fell two great Favorites of different parties, of the Comminalties
one, of the Kings another: of the Comminalties, Sir Edward Coke, who dyed about
the latter end of this Sir Edward Coke dies.
Summer. Full of days he dyed, most whereof he had spent in eminent place and
honor. His abilities in the Common Law, whereof he passed for the great
Oracle, raising him to the dignity first of Attorney General to Queen
Elizabeth, then of Lord Chief Justice of the Kings Bench under King James. His
advancement he lost the same way he got it, by his tongue. So rare is it for a
man very eloquent, not to be over loquent. Long lived he in that retirement to
which Court indignation had remitted him, yet was not his re-cesse in-glorious;
for at improving a disgrace to the best advantage, he was so excellent, as King
James said of him, He was like a Cat, throw her which way you will, she will
light upon her feet. And finding a cloud at the Court, he made sure of fair
weather in the Country; applying himself so devoutly to popular interest, as
in succeeding Parliaments, the Prerogative felt him, as her ablest, so her most
active opponent. Upon which account he was once made High Sheriff of
Buckinghamshire, on purpose to exclude him the ensuing Parliament, there being
an especial Nolumus and clause in his Commission prohibiting his election;
notwithstanding which elected he was in Norfolk, and those words of Restraint,
upon debate of the Question in the House of Commons voted void.

On the Kings, the Great Lord Treasurer Sir Richard Weston Lord Treasurer dies.
Weston Earl of Portland, this year and he almost expiring together, he ending
this life March the thirteenth. A sad loss to the King, and the sadder because
he thought it irreparable. The truth is, he was a person very able for the
office, and the Exchequer was in the mending hand, while he enjoyed that place,
for he had a singular artifice both in improving the incomes, and in a frugal
moderation of his Masters expenses: But the Kings sorrow was not so extreme for
him, but the peoples joy was full as great. For there was now grown so sad an
antipathy between his Majesty and his Subjects, that like those two Emperors
Antonine and Geta, they Xiphiline.
were always of contrary senses and minds, rarely agreeing in any one
particular. The deportment whereby he so disobliged the Comminalty was his
promoting Monopolies, and other advantages of Regality. The Archbishop and he
were usually at great odds, yet both in high favor with the King. His vacant
place was for the present entrusted to Commissioners until the King should
otherwise dispose thereof.

The Archbishop was now grown as great as power could make him, and active in
the exercise of that power beyond the practice of his Predecessor, whereby he
set many tongues about his ears: Men beginning now to rant it in their
petulancy to Libel and reproaching; and more then men, women also, amongst
these the Lady Purbeck meditating a piece of petty revenge for his so severe
censure of her in the high Commission, vented words of deep disgrace against
him, for which by the Archbishops procurement she was committed March the 24.

The Parenthesis of the Kings private loss in the Lord Treasurer did not
create in him a neglect of his public charge, but he had still his thoughts
fixed upon the general affairs, especially upon his Naval p^eparation, which now
began to promise fair toward the design. For besides a squadron of twenty ships
then fitting for the conduct of the Earl of Essex, he had completed a fleet of
forty more gallantly appointed, which dis-ancred May the 4. and were commanded
by the Earl of Northumberland as Admiral. But all the service they performed
this summer was inconsiderable in regard they never came to engagement, only
their formidable appearance secured the seas from those petty-larcenies and
piracies, wherewith they were formerly so molested.

September. the 29. the Earl of Arundel brought up to London out Robert Parr an
aged man.
of Shropshire, one Robert Parr as the wonder of our times for annosity and
long life, this Macrobius having attained to the age of near 160. and probably
he might have continued longer, had not so tedious a journey, and over-violent
agitation of his aged body accelerated his end, so that it may be said, he
sacrificed some years to others curiosity.

In November, Charles Prince Elector came over into England, to tender dues of
honor and respect to his uncle our King, and partly The Prince Elector arrived.
to solicit toward his restoration. His passage was very turbulent, being
after his embarque, twice driven back by tempest, and when at last he came upon
the English Coast, and was to be received by Sir John Pennington into the
Vant-guard, which welcomed him with a volee of great shot, it fortuned an
unhappy boy gave fire without order to a piece of Ordinance, whose ball entered
the Ship where his Highness was abord, and killed two men not far distant from
him, at which he was much affrighted. His reception at Court was with all
possible ceremonies and caresses of compliment, to whom the Prince of Wales
resigned up his lodging at White Hall.

December the 28. the Queen was delivered of another Daughter, who was
Christened Elizabeth, January the 2.

Soon after arrived at London Prince Rupertus, second brother to his Electoral
Highness the Prince Palatine.

And at the heels of him followed an Ambassador from Holland, sent to
congratulate with their Majesty's, the happy birth of their An Ambassador from
Holland.
second Daughter, and because compli-ments are valued according to the cost is
in them, they perfumed this respect with presenting to them a massive piece of
Ambre Gris, two huge Basins of China-earth, a noble clock, the manufacture, the
workmanship of Rodolphus the Emperor, and four rare Tables of Painture.

Affairs of the Treasury being managed by Commissioners, Bishop Iuxon made Lord
Treasurer.
many hot disputes were generated amongst them, especially between the
Archbishop and the Lord Cottington; so as the Kings discretion was called in to
part the fray, by committing the staff of that office into the hands of
William Iuxon Lord Bishop of London, March 6. who though he was none of the
greatest Scholars, yet was withal none of the worst Bishops. Men of the most
re-searched nations are not usually the best qualified for Government, either
Ecclesiastical, or Political, to know, and to be wise, are two. And as his
moderate and equal temper in Church affairs gained love, so in those of the
State he preserved it by the same constant calmnesse, and withal exhibited
therein clear demonstration of his intemerate integrity, qualities meritorious
of good esteem.

About this time began great commotions and stirs in the Church concerning
ceremonies.

The Bishops of late years supinely, either careless, or indulgent, Commotions
about ceremonies of the Church.
had not required within their Diocesses that strict obedience to
Ecclesiastical constitutions, which the law expected: Upon this the Leiturgy
began to be in a manner totally laid aside, and in conformity the uniforme
practice of the Church. The now Archbishop was of another mind and metal; that
the external worship of God should follow the fashion of every private fancy,
he did not like; and what he did not like in that subject, as he was in state,
so he thought it was his duty to reform. Therefore keeping this year his
Metropoliticall visitation, he calls upon all both Clergy and Laity to observe
the Rules of the Church. Can it give just offense to say that, thus far, he did
but what sorted with the office of so great a Prelate? Where there is not a
legal settlem^nt for the upholding uniformity, Schism will flow in apace; and
the Church has experimentally found, Schism in things adiophorous, is as
fatal to her well being, as Heresy in points Dogmatical. And better no laws
at all, then that notwithstanding such establishments, men be permitted in
practice to go less. But his zeal to order, that carried him thus far,
transported him a little too far. The Communion Table which formerly stood in
the midst of the Church or Chancel, he enjoined to be placed at the East end,
upon a graduated advance of ground, with the ends inverted, and a wooden
traverse of railes before it, to keep Profanation off, to which Railes all
Communicants were to resort. These things were decent and comely in
contemplation, and had been so in practice, had they been within the rule of
the Church directions, but being anomalous, innovations, and so severely urged,
many became thereupon precise, and separated themselves into factious fidings;
nor was this a Schism of an ordinary assise, but grew to that process, to
that degree, as, to speak in the primitive mode, Altar was erected against
Altar, that is, one Bishop impugned and opposed another; for the Bishop of
Lincoln (being affronted by one Titly Vicar of Grantham) published a Tract
under a conceiled name, positively asserting therein, That the holytable
anciently did in the Primitive times, and ought so in ours, according Ann.
Christi 1636.
to the Dictates of our Church, stand in gremio, and have of the quire. And as
the Archbishop whilst he so vehemently pursued order, did a little out run
authority; so was he unhappy in those he did employ as instruments and
subordinates under him, some whereof endeavored to superinduct many things as
will worship of their own, and which came within a Mathematical line of Popery;
nor were they blameless in their lives, some being vicious even to scandal,
nor of so meek and humble behavior as was to be wished, but insolent at a rate
so intolerable, as one was bold to say, be hoped to live to see the day, when a
Minister should be as good a man, as any Jack Gentleman in England: to such an
height of infatuation, had a petty blaze of mistaken honor elevated this high
Flyer; who in lieu of those frolique days he looked to see, lived to see that
very Hierarchy extirpated, and lived to see himself de-plumed of all his Pomp.
These exorbitances of those sons of Eli, from the rules of Ethics, created a
very great disgust against them, and many well enough affected to their Empire,
did exceedingly blame their imperiosity. The Presbyterians were gainers by all
this, being men for the generality free of any moral scandal, saving that they
were thought Philargyrous, and over solicitous of filthy lucre, and pretended
to a most demure formality and supple mildness, plausible insinuations into
vulgar esteem, whereby they daily prevailed upon the affections of such, who
little thought such outside lambs, had claws and asperities (so cunningly did
they conceal them) far more sharp and terrible then the Prelates, whereof they
gave shortly after sensible demonstration.

The next Summer the Royal Fleet now completed to sixty sail of tall ships, set
sail from the Downs for the North, to scour that Sea as of Pirates, so of the
Flemish Busses; which they did to so good effect, as they were soon reduced to
a precarious condition, and to entreat the favor of fishing by his Majesty's
commission: a veniality the King was most ready to indulge them; For first, in
that preparation he had no design paramount to the preservation of his
Regalities in the British Ocean; this gained, he sought no more. Again, he knew
well that nothing was more pettinent to the Prince Electors interest then the
correspondence of those States, nor was any assistance more like to mean and
procure his Restoration then theirs, and therefore it was good policy to
oblige them with all fair shows of amity. For the Kings passion for his Nephews
restoration did not at all languish, but rather contracted new vigor from his
presence at the English Court. And because there was indicted an Imperial Diet
at Ratisbone, September. the 16. of this year, for the Election of an Emperor, he
was resolved once more to solicit his cause, hoping the change of the person
might dispose to a change of mind. The instrument he made choice of for this
affair, was the Earl of Arundel, Lord Marshal of England, in most gallant
equipage he went attended with a noble train, and coming to the Imperial Court,
he presented his Masters request to the Emperor; who replied that it was
probable that Prince might be Earl of Arun del sent Ambassador into Germany.
readmitted to enjoy the lower Palatinate, but as to the higher it was not
likely that the Duke of Bavaria, who then possessed himself of it, would listen
to any proposition destructive to his present interest therein. A very sharp
and fierce encounter there was between the Ambassador and the Deputies of the
Emperor upon this subject, so as they could hardly temper themselves from
offensive contumelies. Some of the Electors in the Diet were very inclinable to
the restitution, conceiving that it would be very difficult to found a stedy
peace without it, but the Duke of Bavaria said peremptorily he would neither
part with the territories, nor Dignity Electoral, while he was able by the
sword to hold them: whereupon the Lord Ambassador much incensed that he so
long attended to so little purpose, without deigning any the honor of an a
Dieu, made haste away: and though the Emperor did send the Spanish and Pologn
Ambassadors after to appease him, and to request his patience but a month
longer, yet would he not be exorated or be prevailed with, but came directly
home, having first dispatched Letters of advice to his Master, concerning the
state of his Negotiation; whereby the King discontented at the small regard his
Ambassador found at the Imperial Diet, was prompted to return an equal slight
upon an Agent employed soon after by the Emperor hither about the same affair.

This breach between our King and the Emperor, did not Overtures of a match
between the King of Poland and the Lady Elizabeth.
at this time more seem to frown upon, then another occasion to flatter that
Princes fortunes; for now the King of Poland sent Prince Ratzevill to treat
with our King of a marriage between that King and the Lady Elizabeth, sister of
the Prince Elector; which was prosecuted to a very near point of conclusion.
Certain it is, that King was seriously inclined to the match, but he being an
Elective Prince, was in such an affair to submit to the Diet of that Kingdom,
and in that it found so fair acceptance, as two of the three Estates had once
accorded to it. But the Clergy making a pawse in their consent, upon a seeming
suggestion, that the business was of too high importance to be so
precipitated, in the interim interveneth a proposition from the Emperor and
King of Spain, of Cecilia Arch-Dutchesse, and second sister of the Emperor.
This overture so soon wrought upon that Nation, as renouncing all further
treaty with England, or any other State, the match was instantly concluded with
that Austrian Lady, and the Prince Elector remitted to his former state of
diffidence, if not of despair.

The Archbishop of Canterbury having in his Provincial visitation the last year
settled Church affairs in most places to his mind, though thereby he had
unsettled and discomposed the minds of others, began now to cast a narrow eye
upon the University of Cambridge. Some spies had informed him, that not only
Divine Service was performed, but also Sacraments administered in several
Chapels there, as in those of Emanuel and Sidney-Suffex College, which had
not yet been consecrated. This he thought an high indignity to Religion, and
such as created a necessity of his visitation. But the University hearing of
what he purposed, pretended an exemption from his Jurisdiction, that they had
the Power he challenged within the Charter of their own Foundation; and that
saving themselves, none had right to visit them, unless it were his Majesty,
whom they agnised as their Founder. Whereupon so hot a contest arose between
the Archbishop and the University, that it came to an hearing before the King
and his Privy Council at Hampton Court, where it was overruled for the
Archbishop.

In Michaelmas term was canvassed and debated that grand The great debate
about Ship Money.
controversy between the King and Subject about Shipmoney: for the Ship-writs
having been issued out August the 11. 1635. to diverse Counties, many
Inhabitants, and amongst the rest Mr. Hambden of Buckinghamshire, assessed by
the Sheriff, made default of payment, whereupon the King (so steady a respect
did he defer to justice) equally hating to be either flattered into, or
frighted from the belief of its legality, wrote a letter to the Judges,
demanding their opinions upon the case stated, the Letter was,

To our trusty and well-beloved Sir John Bramston, Knight, Chief Justice of Our
Bench, Sir John Finch, Knight, Chief Justice of Our Court of Common Pleas, Sir
Humphry Davenport, Knight, Chief Baron of Our Court of Exchequer, and to the
rest of the Judges of Our Courts of Kings Bench, Common Pleas, and the Barons
of our Court of Exchequer,
Charles Rex.

Trusty and well-beloved, we greet you well, taking into Our Princely
consideration, that the Honor and safety of this Our Realm of England, the
preservation whereof is only entrusted to Our care, was, and is, more dearly
concerned then in late former times; as well by diverse counsels and attempts to
take from Us the Dominion of the Seas, of which We are sole Lord, and rightful
Owner, or Propriator, and the loss whereof would be of greatest danger, and
peril to this Kingdom, and other Our I ominions, and many other ways: We, for
the avoiding of these and the like dangers, well weighing with Our self that
where the good and safety of the Kingdom in general is concerned, and the
whole Kingdom in danger, there the charge and defense ought to be born by all
the Realm in general: did, for the preventing so public a mischief, resolve
with Our self to have a Royal Navy prepared, that might be of force and power
(with Almighty Gods blessing and assistance) to protect and defend this Our
Realm, and Our Subjects therein from all such perils and dangers, and for that
purpose We issued forth writs under Our Great Seal of England, directed to all
Our Sheriffs of Our several Counties of England and Wales, Commanding thereby
all Our said Subjects, in every City, Town, and Village, to provide such a
number of Ships, well furnished, as might serve for this Royal purpose, and
which might be done with the greatest equality that could be. In performance
whereof, though generally throughout all the Counties of this Our Realm, We
have found in Our Subjects great cheerfulness and alacrity, which We
graciously interpret as a testimony, as well of their dutiful affection to us,
and our service, as of the respect they have to the Public, which well
becomes every good Subject; Nevertheless finding that some few, happily out
of ignorance what the Laws and Customs of this Realm are, or out of a desire
to be eased in their particulars, how general soever the chargebe, or ought to
be, have not yet paid and contributed to the several Rates and Assessements
that were set upon them. And foreseeing in Our Princely wisdom, that from
thence diverse Suites and Actions are not unlikely to be commenced, and
prosecuted in our several Courts at Westminster; We, desirous to avoid such
inconveniences, and out of Our Princely love and affection to all Our People,
being willing to prevent such errors as any of Our loving Subjects may happen
to run into, have thought fit in a case of this nature to advise with you Our
Judges, who We doubt not are well studied and informed in the Rights of Our
Sovereignty. And because the trials in Our several Courts, by the formalities
in pleading, will require a long protraction, We have thought fit by this
Letter directed to you all, to require your Judgments in the Case, as it is set
down in the enclosed Paper, which will not only gain time, but also be of more
Authority to overruled any prejudicate opinions of others in the Point. Given
under Our Signet at Our Court of White Hall, the 2. day of February in the
twelfth year of Our Reign, 1636.

Charles Rex.


Charles Rex.

When the good and safety of the Kingdom in general is concerned, and the
whole Kingdom in danger; whether may not the King by Writ under the Great Seal
of England, command all the Subjects in his Kingdom at their charge to provide
and furnish such number of Ships with men, victuals, and Munition, and for such
time as he shall think fit for the defense and safeguard of the Kingdom from
such danger and peril, and by Law compel the doing thereof in case of refusal
or refractorinesse: and whether in such case is not the King the sole Judge
both of the danger, and when, and how the same is to be prevented and avoided?


To which the Judges delivered their opinions as follows.

May it please your most excellent Majesty, we have according to your Majesty's
command, severally, and every man by himself, and all of us together, taken
into serious consideration the case and questions signed by your Majesty, and
enclosed in your Letter. And we are of opinion, that, when the good and safety
of the Kingdom in general is concerned, and the hole Kingdom in danger, your
Majesty may by Writ, under your Great Seal of England, command all the Subjects
of this your Kingdom, at their charge to provide and furnish such number of
Ships with men, victual, munition, and for such time as your Majesty shall
think fit, for the defense and safeguard of the Kingdom from such peril and
danger. And, that by Law your Majesty may compel the doing thereof in case of
refusal or refractorinesse. And we are also of opinion, that in such ^ase your
Majesty is the sole judge both of the danger, and when, and how the same is to
be prevented, and avoided.

John Bramston. John Finch. Humphrey Davenport. John Denham. Richard Hutton.
William Jones. George Crook. Thomas Trever. George Vernon. Robert Barkly.
Francis Crauly. Richard Weston.



These opinions being subscribed by all the Judges, and enrolled in all the
Courts of Westminster Hall, the King thought he had now warrant sufficient to
proceed against all defaulters, and especially against Mr. Hambden, who being
summoned by process, appeared and required Oyer of the Ship-writs, which being
read he demurred in Law, and demanded the opinion of all the Judges upon the
legal sufficiency of those Writs.

This great case coming to be argued in the Exchequer, the major part of the
Judges delivered their opinions in favor of the Writs, and accordingly the
Barons gave judgment against Mr. Hambden; yet did not the question altogether
so repose, but Mr. Hambden observing some Judges, viz. Crook and Hutton of a
contrary sense, held up the contest still, though all in vain, all his
inquietude not gaining him the least acquittall until an higher power
interposed.

March the 17. the Queen bare to the King a second daughter the Lady Princess
Anne.

June the 14. a Triumvirate of Libellers, Mr. Prin a Barrester of Lincolns
Inn, Dr. Bastwick, a Physician, and Mr. Burton a Divine, Ann. Christi 1637.
sometimes Tutor to the King, received a severe censure in the Star Chamber.
The crimes, whereof the information against them consisted, were homogeneous,
and all of a suit, though the men of different Professions. Mr. Prynne was
sentenced for publishing some pamphlets scandalous both to Episcopal Government
it self, and also to the Bishops; Dr. Bastwick for a Latin Apology ad
Praesules Anglicanos, and a Litany very virulent against them; Mr. Burton for
two pamphlets of similary nature, and argument, and of as tart a style. For
these offenses the Court awarded them a smart punishment; Mr. Prynne felt the
heaviest stroke, because he had been censured there formerly, and an additional
offense deserved, they thought, an additional castigation. He was fined five
thousand pounds to the King, to lose the remainder of his ears in the Pillory,
to be stigmatized, or if you will sigmatized, on both checks with the letter S
for a Schismatic, and to be perpetually imprisoned in Carnarvan Castle in
Wales. Dr. Bastwick and Mr. Burton were sentenced each five thousand pounds
fine to the King, to lose their ears in the Pillory, and to be imprisoned, the
first in Lanceston Castle in Cornwall, and the other in Lancaster Castle.

June the 26. the Prince Elector beginning to languish in his hopes of succor
from his Uncle, departed with his Brother Prince Rupert for Holland.

The next month presents us with the recidivation, a second Bishop Williams
sentenced in the Star Chamber.
fall of the insolent Prelate Williams Bishop of Lincoln. His first was
mentioned in the first year of this Kings Reign, which though but from one
stage, yet because a fall, that is, a constrained and no spontaneous descent,
he stomacht with most high indignation. That by the munificence of Royal
Majesty he exchanged his wooden for a silver mace, that from a Country
Pedant, he became in a double relation a Peer of the Realm, that the in-trados
and in-comes of his promotions, enabled him to accumulate vast sums of money,
and to make acquist of large revenues, and that of his dignities he still
retained the greater part, these things he little minded (so powerful is with
worthless spirits, one seeming discurtesie, to dis-oblige from the
recognisance of antecedent favors, though never so, either great or many.)
Thus malevolently inclined, he thought he could not gratify beloved revenge
better, then to endeavor the supplanting of his Sovereign, to which end finding
him declining in the affection of his People, he made his apostrophe and
applications to them, fomenting popular discourses tending to the Kings
dishonor, so long, until at length the incontinence of his tongue betrayed him
into speeches which trespast upon Loyalty. For which words, they having taken a
vent, he was questioned by a Bill in the Star Chamber, 4. Car. But the
information being somewhat lame, as being taken up upon refracted and second
hand report, the Accusation took a nap till about 8. Car. when it was revived
again. And the Bishops purgation depending principally upon the testimony of
one Prideon, it happened that the February after, one Elizabeth Hodson was
delivered of a base child, and laid it to this Prideon. The Bishop finding his
great witness charged with such a load of filth and infamy, conceived it would
in-validate all his testimony, and that once rendered in-valid, the Bishop could
easily prognosticate his own ruin, therefore he bestirs himself a main, and
though by order of the Justices at the Public Session at Lincoln, Prideon was
charged as the reputed father, the Bishop by his two agents, Powel and Owen,
procured that Order suppressed, and by subornation and menacing of, and
tampering with witnesses, at length in May 10. Car. procured the child
fathered upon one Boon, and Prideon acquit. These lewd practices, for the
supportation of his favorites credit, cost the Bishop, as he confessed to Sir
John Munson and others, twelve hundred pounds, so much directly, and by
conquence much more. For being accriminated in the Star Chamber for this
corrupting of witness, and being convicted (I will not not say convinced) by
evident and full proof, July the 11. of this year, he received a most condign
censure of ten thousand pounds fine to the King, imprisonment in the Tower
during his Majesty's pleasure, suspension ab Officiis and Beneficiis, and to be
referred to the High Commission for the rest. In this state I leave him, until
the series of a few years shall render him in a better.

Nor must I leave him only, but even England her self almost, for now began
Scotland to be the great scene of action, and thither must my discourse make
its next transition. Of this and the next years commotions there, a true
account I shall give you, though not an exact one, as to descend to every
particular; that is done already as by a Royal hand, so stylo Imperatorio, in a
full body, and Historical systeme: from whence I shall extract such occurrences
as are of prime remarque, and as contractedly as may be, having regard to the
symmetry of the other parts of this Narration. And because the precognition of
their first extraction will be necessary to the relation of those occurrences,
themselves, I shall there commence.

The King observing his Father had it once in design to settle Original of the
Scottish troubles.
in Scotland a Liturgy, in order to uniformity, like that of England, but was
taken away before he could accomplish it; thought himself concerned to pursue
his Fathers purpose: to which end he gave directions to the Archbishop of
Canterbury, the Bishop of Ely, and to diverse Bishops of that Kingdom, to
revise, correct, alter and change, as they pleased, the Liturgy compiled in
his Fathers t^me. This Service Book so altered, and very little differing (as
he was unhappily persuaded by them) from the English, he sent to his Council of
that Kingdom, ordering them to proclaim the reading of it upon the next Easter
day, 1637. who upon better consideration respited it until July the 23. but
gave public notice of it the Sunday before.

July the 23. being Sunday, the Dean of Edinburgh began to Stirs about the
Liturgy.
read the Book in St. Giles Church (the chief of that City) but he no sooner
began, then the inferior multitude began in a tumultuous manner to fill the
Church with uproar; whereupon the Bishop of Edinburgh, stepped into the pulpit,
and hoping to appease them by minding them of the sanctity of the place, they
were the more enraged, throwing at him cudgels, stools, and what was in the
way of fury, unto the very endangering of his life: upon this the Archbishop of
St. Andrews, Lord Chancellor, was enforced to call down from the Gallery the
Provost, Bailiffs, and other Magistrates of the City (then sitting there) to
their assistance, who with much ado at length thrust that unruly rabble out of
the Church, and made fast the doors: This done, the The Bishops affronted.
Dean proceeded in reading the Book, the multitude in the mean while rapping at
the doors, pelting the windows with stones, and endeavoring what in them lay
to disturb that Sacred exercise; but notwithstanding all their clamor, the
Service was ended, but not the peoples rage, who waiting the Bishops retiring
to his lodging, so assaulted him, as had he not been rescued by a strong hand,
he had probably perished by their violence. Nor was St. Giles Church only thus
pestered, and profaned, but in other Churches also, (though not in so high a
measure) the peoples disorders were unison and agreeable. The morning thus
past, the Lord Chancellor and Council assembled to prevent the like darings in
the afternoon, which they so effected, as the Liturgy was read without any
disturbance: only the Bishop of Edinburgh was in his return to his lodging
rudely treated by the people, both by execrations and other ways, though in
the Earl of Roxboroughs Coach.

All this time, the Magistrates of the City seemed so utterly to abhor those
tumultuous proceedings, as some they apprehended, and were industrious to
enquire out others actors therein: and whereas the Ministers of that City
craved dispensation from reading of the Book until security were given for the
safeguard of their persons; the Magistrates and Council of Edinburgh draw up an
obligatory Act, both for indemnity of their persons, and also for their settled
maintenance.

Now the long vacation and Harvest began to come on, and sedition being the
business of idle men, the distempers began a while to slumber; but their corn
being inned, and chief employments over. Edinburgh began to swarm again to a
formidable number, and the City to relax so far in their former earnestness
for the Service Book, as many of them presented a Petition to the Lords of the
Council, craving the Book might be no further pressed upon them, until the King
should signify his further pleasure. The Council Proclamations against those
tumults.
upon this observing so great a confluence, and the City so dis affected, and
fearing some dangerous consequence, issued out October. the 17. three
Proclamations, the first to notify the dissolving their meeting in relation to
Church matters, and that every man forthwith repair home to their own
dwellings, (except such who shall show just cause of their stay to the Lords)
upon pain of Rebellion. The second for removing of the Session (the Term) from
Edinburgh to Lithgow. And the third, for calling in and burning a seditious
Book, entitled A Dispute against the English Popish-Ceremonies, obtruded upon
the Kirk of Scotland. These Proclamations were not water, but rather fuel to
the flame. For the next day the Bishop of Galloway being to sit with the Lord
Chief Justice upon some especial business in the Council house, he was persued
all along the street with bitter raylings to the very Council door, and being
drawn in from the rage of the people, they immediately beset the house,
demanding the delivery of him, threatening his destruction. The Earl of Traquair
being advertised of the Bishops danger came presently to his relief; and, with
much ado, forced an entrance through the press of the Mutineers. But being got
in, he was in no better plight then the Bishop, the clamor increasing still
more and more, and encompassing the Council house with terrible menaces.
Hereupon the Lord Provost and City Council was called upon to raise the siege;
but they returned answer, that their condition was the same, for they were
surrounded with the like multitude, who had enforced them, for fear of their
lives, to sign a Paper importing, First, That they should adhere to them in
opposition to the Service Book. Secondly, Restore to their places Mr. Ramsey,
and Mr. Rollock, two silenced Ministers, and one Henderson, a silenced Reader.
No better answer being returned, the Lord Treasurer with the Earl of Wigton,
went in Person to the Town Council house, where they found the heat of the fury
somewhat abated, because the Magistrates had signed the Paper, and returned
with some hope that the Magistrates would calm the disorders about the Council
house, so as the Bishop might be preserved, but they no sooner presented
themselves to the great street, then they were most boisterously assaulted, the
throng being so furious, as they pulled down the Lord Treasurer, took away his
hat, cloak, and whitewand, Earl of Traquair assaulted.
and so haled him to the Council house. The Lords seeing themselves in so great
hazard, at length pitched upon the best expedient for their safety, and sent to
some of the Noblemen and Gentry, who were disaffected to the Service Book, to
come to their aid. These Lords and Gentlemen came, as was desired, and offered
both their persons and power to protect them; which the Lords in the Council
house readily embraced, and so were quietly guarded to Haly-rood house, and the
Bishop to his lodging.

The Lords of the Council now thinking themselves secure, that very afternoon
commanded a Proclamation to be made at Another Proclamation.
the Cross of Edinburgh, for the repressing such disorders for the time to
come; but slender obedience was yielded thereunto, for the Citizens sent
Commissio^^rs to the Council Table demanding the restoration of their
Ministers, and performance of what was promised before their Pacification: and
not long after the Council was boorded with a Petition, not of a rude
multitude, but of Noblemen, Barons, Ministers, Burgesses and Commons against
the Liturgy and Canons. This Petition was The Scots Petition against the
Liturgy.
sent to the King, who, displeased with the contents thereof, gave instructions
for adjourning the Term to Sterling, twenty four miles from Edinburgh, that so
the former confluence might be precluded, and also for publishing a
Proclamation interdicting, upon the highest penalty, such tumultuous resorts.
Upon the very day, being February. 19. and immediately after the reading of
this Proclamation at Edinburgh, the Earl of Hume, and the Lord Lindsey, with
some others, caused their Protestation against it to be read; and agreeable to
their Protestation, in despite of the Kings Proclamation, erected Four Tables,
one of the Nobility, another of the Gentry, a third of the Buroughs, a fourth
of the Ministers; these four were to prepare and digest what was to be
propounded at the General Table, formed of several Commissioners chosen from
the rest.

The firstborn and eldest-brat of this General Table, was a renewing 1638.
Enter into a Solemn Covenant.
the ancient Confession of Faith of that Kirk, (for the Devil himself, is never
himself but when he becomes a seeming Saint) and entering a general Covenant
pretended to preserve their Religion there professed, and the Kings Person, but
aiming in truth at the destruction of both. The Council, upon the first
publication of this combination, sent a dispatch to the King by Sir John
Hamilton, to advertise him thereof; the King animadverted every prevarication
from the ancient mode, and wondered at their unparalled impudence, to prefix a
title so self-destructive; for they had contrived it thus,

The Confession of Faith subscribed at first, by the Kings Majesty and his
Household in the year of God 1580. Thereafter by persons of all ranks in the
year 1581. Ann. Christi 1638.
by Ordinance of the Lords of the Secret Council, and Acts of the General
Assembly. Subscribed again, by all sorts of persons in the year 1590. by a new
Ordinance of Council at the desire of the General Assembly; with a General Band
for the maintenance of the true Religion and the Kings Person; And now
subscribed in the year 1638. by us Noblemen, Barons, Gentlemen, Burgesses,
Ministers, and Commons, under subscribing.

From hence the King observed, that in the three first subscriptions, either
his Fathers own act is expressed, or an Ordinance of the Lords of the secret
Council, which is equivalent to Regal authority, was obtained, and at the
desire of the General Assembly; whereas in the last, neither was his Own, nor
his delegated Authority to his Council implored, nor was there any General
Assembly to entreat it. So that the exacting of a Public Oath, which could
not legally be done without the highest authority, was actually done without
the least shadow of it.

Again, in the frame of the Covenant he noted a difference of Differing from
former precedents.
dangerous consequence, from former precedents; for whereas preceding Bands
annexed to Confessions, were formed in Defense of Himself, his Authority and
Person, this new edition has a Combination against all persons whatsoever, not
Himself excepted.

The King nothing pleased with these affronts, yet studious to Marquess
Hammilton sent Commissioner into Scotland,
compose these surges of discontent, sent the Marquess of Hammilton down in
the quality of an high Commissioner, impowering him with a Commission to use
the utmost of his Interest and Power for the settling of peace.

June the 6. his Commission was read and accepted by him at Is slighted.
Dalkeith, where though he abode many days, and it was but four miles distant
from Edinburgh, yet would not the Covenanters take any notice of his being
there, nor make any address to him: and the better to color their slight,
they pretended there was a dangerous plot to blow them up with Gunpowder, which
with some small quantity of ammunition, intended for the service of the Castle
of Edinburgh, had been there dis-embarqued a few days before.

Not long after the Marquess at the earnest solicitation Comes to Edinburgh.
and supplication of the City of Edinburgh, and upon assurance of that Cities
good behavior, and quiet deportment, removed form Dalkeith to Holy-rood house,
where he fell presently into Communication with the Covenanters. First, what
they expected from the King in satisfaction to their grievances. Next, what
assurance they would give of their returning to due obedience, The Covenanters
demand a general Assembly and Parliament.
and renunciation of the Covenant. To the first they replied, that nothing but
a General Assembly and a Parliament could give them satisfaction. To the second
they answered, that they disavowed any retreat from their Loyalty, and
therefore needed no return toward it. And for the Covenant, That they would
sooner renounce their Baptism then it, And that this was a proposition they
would never endure to hear a second time: which they took speedy care to
prevent, for they resented it with so much wrath, as they doubled their Guards
both upon the Castle and City: Double their guards.
whereupon, the Marquess in order to his safety returned to Dalkeith, and sent
to the King for new instructions; to which his Majesty's answer was, that he
would have him forthwith publish by Proclamation his Declaration, wherein he
assured that Kingdom of his constancy in the Protestant Religion; that he
would The King yields to their desires.
never further press nor urge the practice of the Canons and Service Book, but
in a fair and legal way, and had given Order for the discharge of all Acts of
Council concerning them; And that he had taken into consideration the indicting
of a General Assembly and Parliament, wherein might be agitated what should
most concern the peace and welfare of the Kirk and Kingdom. Whereupon he
expected that those his subjects, sensible of his gracious favor, would give
testimonial of their future loyalty, and no further provoke him to make use of
that power which God had given him, for the reclaiming disobedient people.

This Proclamation was no sooner ended, but the Covenanters The Covenanters
obstinate.
were ready with a traversing Protest against it, wherein they seemed highly to
distaste to have their actions branded with the notion of disobedience, and
declared, that they would never abandon their Covenant upon such suggestions,
and that they would not wait the Kings convenience for calling of an Assembly;
but if he did not approve of their proceedings, they would call a General
Assembly themselves.

The Marquess finding them still thus obstinate, told them that The Marquess
returns into England.
the stock of his instructions was spent, and that he must resort to England
for a fresh supply, thereupon they acquainted him, that they expected his
Majesty's answer, and his return upon the 5. of August next at the furthest,
they promising in the interim to continue in a peaceable condition, nor to act
any thing until his return.

The Marquess coming into England, and making known to the King the state of
his affairs in Scotland, he dispatched him away with new orders, so as he might
be there at the time prefixed.

The Marquess upon his return, found a strange rumor spread abroad, as if he
were well satisfied with, and did approve of their Covenant, so as to vindicate
his own reputation, he was compelled to call in aid of the Lords of the
Council, and others of the Nobility to be his compurgators. This aspersion
being And again into Scotland.
as he thought sufficiently wiped off, he presently falls upon conference with
the Covenanters about the indicting of the Assembly, demanding first to know of
what members it should be constituted, and of what matters it should treat:
whereat they flew out into an extreme rage, giving out that these Propositions
were destructive to their liberties, and a prelimitation of that Assembly,
which ought to be free, and told the Marquess, that the Assembly it self
should be Judge both of their own Members, and of the matters whereof it should
take cognizance.

These things put the Commissioner to a plunge, and made him Proposals
concerning the Assembly.
explicitly declare his instructions, which were to indict an Assembly, but
upon concession of these ten Articles.

1. That all Ministers deposed or suspended by Presbyteries since the first of
February last, without warrant of the Ordinary, should be restored till they
were legally convicted.

2. That all Moderators of Presbyteries deposed, since that time without such
warrant, be restored, and all others chosen in their stead to desist from
acting as Moderators.

3. That no Minister, admitted since that time, without such warrant, shall
exercise the Function of the Ministry.

4. That all Parishioners repair to their own Church, and that Elders assist
the Ministers in the Discipline of the Church.

5. That all Bishops and Ministers have their rents and stipends duly paid them.

6. That all Ministers attend their own Churches, and none come to the
Assembly, but such as shall be chosen Commissioners from the Presbyteries.

7. That every Moderator be appointed to be a Commissioner from that
Presbytery whereof he is a Moderator, according to the Act of the Assembly
1606.

8. That Bishops, and others, who shall attend the Assembly, be secured in
their persons from all trouble.

9. That no Lay person meddle in the choice of Commissioners from Presbyteries.

10. That all Convocations and meetings be dissolved, and that the Country be
reduced to a peaceable posture.

These Articles would no way be condescended to, and the main answer to them
was, an appeal to the General Assembly, where they were properly to be decided.
Upon this refusal the Commissioner entertained a resolution of another journey,
which the Covenanters understanding, they bruited abroad amongst their
adherents, that he neither had power from the King, nor any inclination in
himself to give the people any satisfaction: which seemingly so incensed him,
that he contracted all his former Propositions into these two,

1. If the Lords and the rest will undertake for Contracted into two.
themselves, and the rest, that no Laiques shall have votes in choosing the
Ministers to be sent from the several Presbyteries to the General Assembly, nor
none else but the Ministers of the same Presbytery:

2. If they will undertake that the Assembly shall not go about to determine
of things established by Act of Parliament, otherwise then by remonstrance to
the Parliament, leaving the determining of things Ecclesiastical to the general
Assembly; and things settled by Acts of Parliament to the Parliament:

Then I will presently indict a General Assembly, and promise, upon mine
Honor, immediately after to call a Parliament.

These propositions put the Covenanters into such a fit of choler, as they
presently gave order for a General Assembly, but when the fit was off, and they
began to cool, upon second thoughts they conceived it meet to forbeat, until
the Commissioner should return from the King, with a more pleasing answer, for
which they limited him to the 21. of September next; promising, in the interim,
not to proceed to election.

The Commissioner posting to the King found him at Oatlands, Hammilton goes for
England.
where entering into consultation of the matter with his Privy Counselors then
present, and persuing the advice of his Council in Scotland, resolved, as he
thought, upon a way which would not leave any remnants of discontent, and sent
back the Marquess with ample instructions agreeable to it, who returned within
his time limited, but found the Covenanters had given order for an Election to
be on the 22. of September, the very next day after that prefixed; this the
Commissioner interpreted to be a kind of equivocation, but would take no
notice of it, but according to his instruction on that 22. of September,
assembling the Council, delivered them a letter from the King, acquainting them
with what course he meant to pursue for the benefit of that Kirk and State.
Then he appointed the Kings Declaration to be read; The Kings gracious
Declaration,
wherein he nulled the Service Book, the Book of Canons, the High Commission,
discharged the pressing of the five Articles of Perth, Ordered that all persons
whatsoever, Ecclesiastical or Civil, should be liable to censure of
Parliament, and General Assembly. That no other Oath be administered to
Ministers at their entry, but what was contained in the Act of Parliament. That
the ancient Confession of Faith, and Band thereunto annexed, should be
suscribed and renewed, as it was in his Fathers time. That a General Assembly
be holden at Glasgew, November the 21. 1638. and a Parliament at Edinburgh the
15. of May, 1639. Wherein he pardoned all bygone offenses, and indicted a
General Fast.

Immediately after this Declaration published, the Confession of Faith was
read, and subscribed by the Marquess, and the Lords of the Council. Then a
Proclamation for the General Assembly, next another for the Parliament. And
lastly were proclaimed an Act of the Lords of the Council, requiring a general
subscription of the Confession of Faith, and a Commission directed to diverse
for taking the subscription.

These Acts of Regal authority being past; the Covenanters, after Protested
against.
their usual mode, brought up the rear with a Protest, wherein they moved the
people to consider with whom they were to deal, and mightily de-cry'd the new
subscription to the confession of Faith, excepted against the Archbishops and
Bishops, as not to have any votes in the Assembly.

This done, they proceeded to Election of Commissioners for the Assembly, and
first issued Orders from their Table, That every Parish should send to the
Presbytery of their limit one Lay man, whom they called an Ruling Elder, who
should have equal vote with the Minister in the Presbytery. Then they stepped on,
and moved the Commissioner, that he would grant out Warrants of citation
against the Archbishops and Bishops to appeir at the Assembly, as Rei, or
guilty persons; which he refusing, they presently framed a Bill of complaint
against them, charging them with many mis-demeanors. This Bill was presented to
the Presbytery of Edinburgh, which October the 24. thereupon warned them all to
compeer, at the next General Assembly to be holden at Glasgow, November the 21.

The day of the Assembly being come, the Marquess his Commission Bishops
Protest against the Assembly.
was read in the afternoon, and nothing else done considerably that day. The
next day a Declinator and Protestation was presented to the Commissioner, in
the name of the Archbishops and Bishops, against the Assembly, and containing a
Nullity of it. But it was denied to be read, whereupon the Commissioner entered
a Protestation against the refusal of it, and took instruments thereupon. The
main cause of this refusal, was pretended to be, because nothing could be done,
until the Moderator were chosen, which was their next work: but when he was
elected, and the Commissioner offered again the Declinator to be read, then
they replied, that the Assembly must first be fully constituted. After this
they proceeded to debate of the Elections, which they did with so cautelous a
scrutiny, as they left no man standing in the quality of a Commissioner, who
was not clearly agreeable to their mind. Though the admission of Lay Elders
past not without some high contest. Many places (even the Presbytery of Glasgow
for one) protesting against the legality of their Session; which was also the
deeper resented by the Commissioner, because the King having nominated six
Lords of his Privy Council to be Assessors to his Commissioner in that
Assembly, they absolutely refused to entertain them, or allow their suffrage,
affirming withal, that were the King himself present, he should have but one
vote, and that no negative one neither.

The Commissioner concluding from these premises, that no good was like to be
done by continuing the Assembly longer, November the 28. consulted with the
Council about its dissolution, and it being agreed in the affirmative, he went
to the Assembly, and told them,

You are now about to settle the lawfulness of this Judicature, and the
competency of it against Bishops, neither of which I can allow; I am glad I
have seen this Assembly met, a thing which was supposed his Majesty never
intended, and for the further clearing the integrity of his intentions, let
this Paper which I deliver to the Clerk to be read hear witness.

The paper being read by the Clerk, was a Declaration the same in every
substantial point with the Proclamation, discharging the Service Book, Book of
Canons, etc. This Declaration soon after the reading, was signed by the
Commissioner, and required to be entered into the Books of the Assembly;
Provided that this Act of Registring this Declaration, should be no approbation
of the lawfulness of this Assembly, to the dissolution whereof he was next to
The general Assembly dissolved.
proceed, and therefore protested, that whatsoever should be done or said in
it, should not be obligatory, or be reputed an Act of a General Assembly. The
very night of the dissolution of this Assembly, the Commissioner assembled the
Council to draw up a Proclamation for dissolving it, which being resolved upon,
was subscribed by Argile declares for the Covenanters.
all, but the Earl of Argile, who began now to show himself for the Covenanters.

The Proclamation being formed, and published, Nov. 29 was encountered with a
Protestation of the Covenanters, That it is lawful for them to sit still, and
continue the Assembly, and that they would still adhere to all their former
Protestations; and accordingly pursuing the tenor of their Protestation;
presently declared six former General Assemblies, (which they thought would
dis-serve them) to be null, deprived all the Bishops, and some they
excommunicated, and soon after abolished Episcopacy it self as inconsistent
with the laws of that Church. And the Commissioner being returned in discontent
for England, began might and main to levy Covenanters begin to arm.
Soldiers, to impose taxes, to raise fortifications, to block up some and
seize others of the Kings Castles, and to prepare for War.

Now because this War was the Epoche, the Nativity day from whence all the
series of this Kings troubles are to be computed, and all for the advancement
of Presbytery, it may perhaps give satisfaction to some if I deliver the first
rise, the motions, the processes thereof, and how it contracted such power
within this Isle.

It was this year an exact Century since Calvin first set his The rise and
growth of Presbytery.
foot into Geneva, where the Bishop being expelled, necessary it was some other
Government should be succenturiated in stead of the former. Calvin being of
high esteem there, the contrivance thereof was committed to his care. He
observing the Town Democratical in the Civil, thought an Ecclesiastical state
elemented of respondent principles, would sure best: upon which consideration
he formed a Consistory of Elders, whereof a great part were Lay. And these were
to manage all Ecclesiastical concernments. Famous was he for this new-model, no
less then Columbus for his America, nor was it enough it was reputed a prudent
institution, it must also be entitled to Divine, and Sacred Scripture tortured
to declare as much. Most kind reception it found with the Gallican, and
Belgique Churches. Where planted and settled, the next design was to dispatch it
over into Great Britain; to which effect Beza writes a complying Epistle
Commendatory to Queen Elizabeth, presenting this Geneva Platform, as the only
desideratum wanting to Englands Reformation. The Queen was loath to proscribe
so long a standard as Episcopacy, to entertain such an upstart in-mate as
Presbytery, therefore gave Beza his saying, but not his desire; this was Anno
1560. And shortly after not only She, but the hole Parliament (whereof some
members began now to incline to the Disciplinarian Sect) were summoned again by
Libels, called, An Admonition to the Parliament, and Defense of that
Admonition, to the Abolition of Episcopacy, as Antichristian. But all this
notwithstanding both She and her Pan-Anglium, or great Council, stood fixed and
inexorable, so that all the efforts and attempts of the other party, could not
produce any considerable unsettlement of that ancient discipline. In Scotland
true it is, the new projected model prospered better; for the Earl of Murray,
or rather the Prior of St. Andrews (base brother to the Queen) with his
accomplices, Knox, Buchannan and others in their first Reformation, about Anno
1560. gave so terrible a shock to Popery, as made every thing, and by
consequence Episcopacy, which stood near it, to reel. Which nevertheless held
them tug a skore of years, nor could they supplant it all at once, but gained
upon it by degrees. First an Assembly at Dundee, Anno 1580. Ordered all Bishops
upon pain of Excommunication, to resign up their Offices; and about three years
after prevailed with the Parliament (the King being then in Minority) to annex
their Temporalities to the Crown. Though this was acted in Scotland, yet was it
not without instigation from England, and from some of her prime Nobility,
animated by some Ministers who began to be now so pragmatical and busy, as to
preserve Ecclesiastical unity, the then Archbishop Whitgift by command from the
Queen that very year contrived those three eminent Articles in the late Canons,
whereto all who desired to enter into sacred Orders were strictly enjoined
subscription. The first acknowledging the Queens Supremacy. The second,
professing conformity to the Book of Commonprayer, and approbation of the book
of ordering of Bishops, Priests, and Deacons. And the third assenting to the
thirty nine Articles of the Church of England. Nor was the Hierarchy thus quite
outed in Scotland, but somewhat revived again by the Parliament, ratifying the
Clergy as the third Estate, Anno 1584. But the other party being resolved never
to acquiesce, until they obtained their minds, grew so impetuous as they, I
cannot say persuaded, but even forced that State Anno 1592. to ratify their
Discipline. Thus did Episcopacy and Presbytery play Leve-le-queve, and take
their turns of Government for about 30 years; but in the year 1598. King James,
the Queen of England now declining, hoping his wardship to these hot spirits
began now to exspire, took up resolutions of animosity, and caused the Prelates
to be restored to their ancient vote in Parliament, and published his Book
called Basilicon Doron, expressing therein no great good will to the
Consistorian Sect. And though Anno 1603. upon his first accession to the
English Crown, he was saluted here with a Petition, pretended of a thousand
Ministers, that they might appear the more formidable, yet did he slight their
boldness, and in Scotland by several Acts of a Pirliament rescinded what had
formerly been introduced to the prejudce of Episcopacy, so that from 1589.
until this present, the Presbyters durst never appear in opposition.

October the last Mary de Medicis the Queen Mother of France The Queen Mother
of France comes into England.
came to London, and so to St. Iameses. The people were generally malcontent
at her coming, and wished her farther off. For they did not like her train, and
followers, which had often been observed to be the Sword, or Pestilence, so
that she was beheld as some meteor of ill signification. Nor was one of these
calamities thought more the effect of her fortune, then inclination, for her
restless and uncessant spirit was prone to imbroyl all wheresoever she came.
Her impetuous banding and combining with Mounsier the Duke of Orleans, and the
improsperity of that enterprise made France too hot for her, and drove her in
the year 1631. to Bruxels, where the Cardinal D' Infanta treated her a while
with most honorable caresses and respects, but Flanders which at first seemed
her place of Refuge, became afterward her greatest danger, she being (as her
own Manifesto sets forth) so hunted and pursued with continual imprecations and
curses there, as she began to fear some violence to her Person, so that
quitting that Country, she betook herself to the protection of the Prince of
Orange, 1637. long she staid not there, but having received an invitation from
the Queen her daughter she resorted hither.

The King perceiving the Scots meditated nothing but war, The King raises an
Army.
thought it slender policy to strain courtesy with them, and to yield them the
start, therefore by the advice of the Archbishop hastened the levies both of men
and moneys with all possible expedition, and because it was the Bishops war, he
thought it requisite they should contribute largely toward the preservation of
their own Hierarchy, and accordingly orders were issued from the Lords of the
Council to the Archbishops of Canterbury and York, commanding them to send
forth directions to all the Bishops within their Provinces, to convene the
Clergy of their Dioceses, and to invite them to a liberal aid. What the precise
product of the Clergy offerings was is not material to insert, nor could my
information reach it, only it is presumable it was very ample, so as with that
and the spontaneous contributions of diverse of Ann. Christi 1639
the Nobility and Gentry, the King had amast together a considerable power;
whereof the Earl of Arundel had the chief conduct: with this strength the King,
March the 27. the day of his Inauguration, Goes against the Scots.
marched against the Scots, and May the 28. encamped within two miles of
Barwick, and within view of the Enemy who were ready to receive him. But all
the preparation both of one side and the other, proved only an interview of
two. Armies, nothing being acted considerable in way of engagement; for after
some few days attendance each upon other in that quiet posture, an Overture
came from the Scots of their supplication, that the King would appoint
Commissioners to treat about a Pacification. The King most cheerfully embraced
the motion, and nominated the Earls of Pembroke, Salisbury, Holland, and
Barkshire, Sir Henry Vane, and Secretary Coke: to these were joined on the
Covenanters part, the Earls of Rothes, of Dunfermlin, the Lord London, the
Lord Douglas, Alexander Henderson, and Archibald Iohnstoun. These having had
many several debates, at length June the 17. concluded upon a Pacification
distributed into these Articles,

On the Kings part,
1. His Majesty to confirm what his Commissioner A Pacification.
promised in his Name. 2. That a General Assembly be indicted, to be kept at
Edinburgh, August the 6.
That command be given for a Parliament to be holden at Edinburgh, August the
20.

That he recall all his Forces by Land or Sea, and restore all ships and goods
arrested and detained, since the pretended Assembly at Glasgow, upon the
Covenanters disarming, and disbanding of their Forces, dissolving their Tables,
and restoring to the King all his Castles, Forts, and Ammunition, and releasing
all the persons, lands and goods then under restraint or detained since the
pretended Assembly of Glasgow. This his Majesty to do by Declaration.

On the Covenanters part,

1. The Forces of Scotland to be disbanded within forty eight hours after
publication of the Kings Declaration.

2. They to render up, after the said Publication, all Castles, Forts,
Ammunition of all sorts, so soon as the King shall send to receive them.

3. They to hold no meetings, treatings, nor consultations, but such as are
warranted by Act of Parliament.

4. They to desist from all Fortifications, and those to be remitted to the
Kings pleasure.

5. They to restore to all the Kings Subjects, their liberties, lands, houses,
goods, and means taken or detained from them, since the 1. of February last.

June the 18. the King signed his Declaration, and the Covenanters their
Articles: This pacification did at first generally excite exceeding great
tokens of joy, wherein none had more reason to be sincere then poor Aberden;
for the Earl of Montross, General of the Covenanters, was that very time
marching toward that University, with a Commission to consume it by fire to
ashes, upon suggestion that the Inhabitants had falsified their Oaths.

The Declaration and Articles being signed, and affairs carrying so calm a
front of peace, the King had intentions of being present at the General
Assembly; but this lucid interval proved but a weather-breeder, and the
apprehensions of a Pacification, were soon transformed into an opinion that
they were but dreams, inward hostility appearing through the diaphanous body of
all the Scots actions.

For the Declaration was no sooner published, but at that very The Covenanters
still refractary.
hour the Covenanters produced a Protestation. First, of adhering to their late
General Assembly at Glasgow, as a full and free Assembly of their Kirk, and to
all the proceedings there, especially to the sentences of deprivation and
excommunication of the, sometimes pretended, Bishops of that Kingdom. Secondly,
of adhering to their solemn Covenant, and Declaration of the Assembly, whereby
the Office of Bishops is abjured. Thirdly, that no members of the College of
Justice shall attend the Session, (or Term) and if they do, all their Acts and
sentences shall be void and ineffectual.

Nor did they punctually perform any one Article: For they still kept their
Officers in constant pay; they did not slight their Fortification at Leith,
distant a mile from Edinburgh; they still continued their meetings and
consultations; they still disquieted, molested, and frighted all of different
inclinations. And which was worst of all, they dispersed a scandalous libel,
entitled, Some conditions of his Majesty's Treaty with his Subjects of
Scotland, before the English Nobility, are set down here for remembrance: what
these conditions were, I never could learn, but they being delivered into the
hands of the English Nobility, whereof some had been Commissioners, they
dis-avowed any such consent of his Majesty in their hearing, and by an Act of
Council the papers were appointed to be burnt by the Hangman.

Matters being in this doubtful posture, the King had little mind to see
himself affronted, and thought these distempered disorders would be better born
at a distance; therefore toward the latter end of July, he plyes him home to
England. August The general assembly meet.
the 6. according to the Kings indiction, the Assembly met and sat at
Edinburgh, and continued until the 24. The great transactions of this Assembly
was the abolishing of Episcopacy, the five Episcopacy abolished.
Articles of Perth, the High Commission, the Liturgy, and Book of Canons, all
these assented to by the Commissioner, the Earl of Traquir.

The Assembly now risen, the Parliament being prorogued to The Parliament
assemble.
August the last convened. The first four days produced an high debate about
choosing the Lords of the Articles; in regard Episcopacy was abolished. The
ancient usage was constantly this. The King first named eight Bishops; then
those Bishops chose eight Noblemen; those Noblemen chose so many Barons; and
these the like number of Burgesses: these thirty two, with eight Officers of
the Crown, made up a complete Committee of forty, who were to consider upon
such Articles as were to be voted in Parliament, and this Committee were called
Lords of the Articles. Now the Kings Commissioner demanded, that seeing the
King anciently had the nomination of eight Bishops, his Majesty might not be
prejudiced in his right by their expulsion, but that he might have the choice
of the eight Noblemen: which the Parliament yielded to for this once, but voted
for the future every State should choose their own Commissioners.

Then they entered into consideration of constituting the Third Incroach upon
the Prerogative.
Estate, and what succenturiation, what supplement should be resolved upon in
the lieu of Bishops; the King urged the having of fourteen laics, of such as
were called Abbats and Priors, to represent the third Estate; but the
Parliament voted, That Estate should be completed by small Barons, who
represented the Comminalty. Next they fell upon forming an Act Rescissory,
whereby former Acts concerning the Judicatory of the Exchequer; concerning
Prexies, and concerning confirmation of Ward-lands should be nulled.

The King finding such pertinacity of endeavors, not to reform Is prorogued.
abuses, but to new-model a Government, and totally to eclipse his Regal power,
gave speedy Order to his Commissioner, the Earl of Traquair, to prorogate the
Parliament until the 2. of June next: which command being signified by the
Commissioner to the Parliament, they presently entered into a Declaration,
wherein they positively affirmed, that this Prorogation was in-effectual in
Law, and of no force, it being made without consent of Parliament; that they
might justify their sitting still, yet out of their reverend regard to his
Majesty, they were resolved for the present only to make remonstrance to him,
of the reasons of their propositions, and proceedings in this Parliament, and
that if it should happen, that after their Romonstrance, their Enemies should
prevail by false suggestions against their Informations, that then it should
not be to them an imputation, that they were constrained to take such course as
might best secure the Kirk and Kingdom, from the extremity of confusion and
misery.

After, and as a consequent of this Declaration, they sent their Deputies the
Earl of Dunfermlin, and the Lord London, to present their Remonstrance. When
the Commissioner came to the Court to make report of the proceedings of that
Parliament, and the King appointed a select Committee of his Council, to heat
both the one and the other; many very fierce and fiery recriminations there
were counter-changed between the Commissioner and Deputies. But the Deputies
insisted not at all upon qualification, but direct justification of all the
Assemblies and Parliaments transactions, so far as they desired ratification of
their constitutions; which the Committee thought could not be granted without
lessening the Sovereign Authority, and then concluded that the Covenanters were
no way reducible but by force. Thus stood matters between the King and them
about the beginning of December.

And now it is high time for me to change my quarters, and for a while to visit
England, and to survey the most noble parcels of occurrences there.

About the later end of July, the Prince Elector arrived here, The Prince
Elector his ill success.
into whose ensuing misfortunes I shall introduce you by the narrative of a
late bypast adventure hitherto suppressed, through the interposition of the
Scot'sh troubles. The Prince, with his Brother Rupert, had the last year
gathered together in Holland a considerable beginning of an Army, with these
they advanced into Westphalia, and sat down before Lemgea; whereof Hatzfield
General of the Imperialists, having notice, came speedily upon them, enforced
them both to rise, and fight, and in the encounter slew two thousand of the
Paltzgraves party, took Prince Rupert and the Lord Craven Prisoners, the Prince
Elector very narrowly escaping. The Prince thus despoyled even of his very
hopes, indulged himself for the present a total repose of all designs tending
toward his restoration. Now it fortuning that the last month Duke Barnard
(that Heroique Commander) dyed, the Prince of Orange advised this Prince to
resort to his Uncle the King of England for his assistance, and therewith to
enter upon the head of Duke Barnards Army. But the King told him his home
affairs were in that doubtful condition, as he feared they might require all
the force he could command, but in regard the French Ambassador was then here,
he promised to use the utmost of his interest with that King for his
re-investing, and accordingly told the Ambassador, that he advised his Nephew
to apply himself to his Master, and to join in League with him, and assured him
what assistance he could spare. The Ambassador seemed to be very well pleased
with the offer, and persuaded his Majesty, that the Cardinal Richelieu, who was
the grand directer of all the French Councels, would be glad to serve his
Majesty or his Nephew, and presently dispatched letters of intimation to the
Cardinal. But in the interim of this Treaty, in November the Prince was most
unadvisedly advised to pass through France in a disguise, and so to come
clandestinely to the Swedish Army: But the plot was not so closely carried, but
he was more then once discovered; for when he passed by the Kings Fleet at the
Downs, he was saluted with a volee of shot, and the ship which landed him at
Boullen discharged all her Ordinance; from Boullen he went to Paris, and so to
Lions, where meeting with the Gentleman who was sent from the Ambassador, he
was discovered, and he denying himself, arrested. This the King of France took
as an argument of no fair intentions toward him, and as a most perfidious part
in a time of Treaty, so that he was kept a great while in the nature of a
Prisoner, with a strict guard both of Horse and Foot about him.

But the grand business of this Summer, was a terrible encounter between the
two Fleets of Spain and Holland in the Downs. The relation whereof from Sir
John Pennington was as follows.

The Spanish Fleet consisting of near seventy sail, bound and Engagement
between the Spaniards and the Hollanders in the Downs.
designed for Dunkirk in Flanders, with a recrute both of men and money, met
with the Vice Admiral of the Holland Fleet, having in his company seventeen
tall ships, September the 7. and entered a very fierce dispute between them,
until the Hollander perceiving himself too weak, got to the wind-ward, sailing
along with them toward Dunkirk, continually fiering their Ordinance to give
warning to their Admiral, who lay before Dunkirk with the residue of the Fleet;
in this encounter the Hollander had two ships sunk: the next morning by two of
the clock, the Admiral came up, and joining with the Vice Admiral, between
Dover and Calais, they set upon the Spanyard, and continued a very sharp fight
till past noon, wherein they had much the better, having taken two Gallions,
sunk another, and much shaltered the rest, though they were but twenty five
sail, to the Spaniards sixty and upwards, and at length forced them upon the
English coast near Dover; where they left them, and ba^e off for the coast of
France, not willing to attempt any thing against them within the King of
Englands liberties.

The Spaniards being now got, as they thought, under the lee of Englands
protection, began to plot how to get rid of their bad neighbors. And the
Spanish Resident importuned the King, that he would keep the Hollander in
subjection two tides, that in the interim they might have the opportunity of
shipping away for Spain; but the King being in amity with them both, was
resolved to stand neuter, and whereas the Spaniards had hired some English
ships to transport their soldiers to Dunkirk, the King upon complaint of the
Dutch Ambassador, strictly commanded that none should take in any Spaniards,
nor pass beyond Gravesend without License; but the Spaniards and the
Hollanders, plotting a great while counter the one to the other, the Spaniard
at length somewhat outwitted his Enemy, and by a stratagem in the night
conveyed away fourteen Dunkirk ships, and in them four thousand men.

In the beginning of October, the King sent the Earl of Arundel to the Admiral
of Spain, Don Antonio D' Oquendo, desiring him to retreat upon the first fair
wind, because he would not they should engage within his Seas; but the wind
continued Eastwardly so long (a thing not usual at that season) as the
Hollanders had daily fresh supply from Zealand, so that at length their Armado
was completed to an hundred ships, wherewith they encompassed their Enemies
within pistol shot for some days. But that which was so long an enterview of
these two great Fleets, at last turned to an engagement.

For the 11. of the same month Van Trump the Dutch Admiral, charged the
Spaniards with Canon and fireships so furiously, as made them all cut their
cables, and being fifty three in number, twenty three ran on shore, and
stranded in the Downs, whereof three were burnt, two sunk, and two perished on
the shore: one of these was a great Gallion the Vice Admiral of Gallatia, Don
Andrea de Castro, and had fifty two brass pieces of Ordinance: the remainder
of the twenty three deserted by the Spaniards, who went to land, were manned by
the English to save them from the Dutch. The other thirty Spanish ships under
the command of the Admiral's Don Antonio d' Oquendo, and Lopus of Portugal,
went to Sea, and kept in close order, until a great fogge fell upon them, when
the Dutch taking his advantage, interposed betwixt the Admirals and their
Fleet, and fought them valiantly till the fogge cleared up, when the Admiral of
Portugal began to flame being fired with two Holland fire ships, which D'
Oquendo perceiving, he presently took his course toward Dunkirk, with the
Admiral of that place and some few ships more, for most of the rest were taken;
of these thirty, eleven were sent prisoners into Holland, three perished upon
the coast of France, one near Dover, five sunk in the fight, and only ten
escaped. This Narration was sent from Van Trump himself to Ioachimi the then
Dutch Agent here.

The first apparition of this Armado upon our Coast, was beheld by Country
people as a representation of that Invincible. One in 88. and that the main
design of this, was like that, an Invasion. They thought the imbarquing of
twenty five thousand Land-Souldiers, besides Mariners, were too many for a
recrute. They thought the Admiral of Naples his refusal to show his Commission,
though required by the King, was but of ill signification; they wondered that
the Town of Dunkirk, should so much dispute the reception of the four thousand
which were conveyed thither, till the Cardinal Infanta sent express order, had
those Forces been designed for their recrute. And this persuasion is so
implanted in many, as it is still very difficult to make them unbelieve it: or
not knowing, or not considering, that those Soldiers were unarmed, very few
Officers amongst them, and the hole Fleet so poorly accommodated for invasion,
as they had not powder enough for their own defensive offense, so that when
they lay at anchor in the Downs, London was their choice Magazine, from whence
they had their constant and daily supply.

These two potent Enemies, being both friends to England, the British Seas
ought by rule of State to have been an harbor of retreat to secure the weaker
from the stronger, not the scene of their hostile engagement; and had this
presumptuous attempt of the Hollander met with a King, or in Times of another
temper, it would not, it is like, have been so silently connived at, and their
victory might have cost them the loss of Englands correspondence. But
Self-denial is a Christian, not a Martial virtue, and who is able to resist the
temptation of an advantage, whereby he may destroy his foe, upon the nicety of
exceeding his just limits? Besides the King, the Dutch well knew, was of a
genius, as not querulous, so if provoked, very placable; and the disposition of
his affairs, as well as of his mind, dissuaded from expostulating the matter
with them.

About the beginning of January dyed Sir Thomas Coventry, Sir Thomas Coventry
dies.
Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England, a Dignity he had fifteen years
enjoyed, if it be not more proper to say, That Dignity had enjoyed him so long,
this later age affording not one of every way more apt qualifications for the
place. His front and presence bespake a venerable regard, not inferior to that
of any of his Antecessors. His train and suit of followers was disposed
agreeably to shun both envy and contempt; not like that of the Vicount St.
Albans, or the Bishop of Lincoln, whom he succeeded, ambitious, and vain; his
Port was state, theirs ostentation. They were indeed the more knowing men, but
their learning was extravagant to their Office: Of what concerned his place he
knew enough, and which is the main, acted conformable to his knowledge; for in
the administration of justice, he was so erect, so in-corrupt, as captious
malice stands mute in the blemish of his fame: a miracle, the greater when we
consider that he was also a Privy Counselor. A trust wherein he served his
Master the King most faithfully, and the more faithfully, because of all those
Councels which did dis-serve his Majesty, he was an earnest disswader, and did
much dis-affect those sticklers who labored to make the Prerogative rather
tall, then great, as knowing that such men loved the King better then Charles
Stewart. So that although he was a Courtier, and had for his Master a passion
most intense, yet had he also always of passion some reserve for the public
welfare. An argument of a free, noble, and right principled mind. For what
both Court and Country have always held as in-compossible and in-consistent,
is in truth erroneous. And no man can be truly Loyal, who is not also a good
Patriot, nor any a good Patriot, who is not truly Loyal. To this worthy
Gentleman succeeded Sir John Finch formerly Lord Chief Justice of the Common
Pleas.

The Scot'sh Revolters in the state I left them, were not like to meliorate nor
to go less in animosity, but every day administered recent matter of
discontent, and of somentation to the differences: and every event, of any
considerable assise, must be interpreted as configurating and complying with
the great cause.

It fortuned that November the 19. being the Anniversary night Edinburgh
Castle-wals fall down.
of the Kings birthday, a great part of the walls of the Castle of Edinburgh
fell to the ground, with the Canons mounted: which caused such a consternation,
such an Alarm in the Castle, as if they had been undermined and surprised; but
that was not all, for this casualty upon a time of so much remarque, could then
receive no other construction from the Grammar of Superstition, then an ominous
presage of the ruin of the Kings design; especially considering that at that
very same night the Scotch Commissioners returned from England to Edinburgh, so
that the dilapidation seemed to import an humble prostration to the idolized
Covenant.

But the craftiest (I say not the wisest) of the Combination, would not trust
to such fallacious conjectures; but willing to apprehend, and lay hold of any
thing which offered its service to their enterprise, made a politic use
thereof, and the King having appointed the Lord Estrich, Colonel Ruthen, and
Governor Their reparation hindered by the Covenanters.
of the Castle, to take order for the re-edification of what was lapsed, they
refused to permit any materials to be carried in for reparation: which so
incensed the King, as he concluded the indignity intolerable, and presently
entered into deliberation how to relieve himself by force under this oppression;
but with whom he should consult, there lay the difficulty, the transactions of
his Council must be more closely carried then heretofore, for fear of
correspondency with the Covenanters; to this end a private Iuncto for the
Scot'sh affairs, are selected from his Council, and great care taken, that
those hunting Lords (as the Archbishop called them) Pembroke, Salisbury,
Holland, etc. who were Commissioners at the Pacification, be excluded, though
Hammilton was retained, more dangerous, and fallacious then all. At this close
and secret Council, December. 5. it was agreed his Majesty should call a
Parliament, to assemble April the 13. The King told them he exceeding well
approved of that Council, but withal he said, My Lords, the Parliament cannot
suddenly convene, and the subsidies they grant will be so long in levying, as
in the interim I may be ruined; therefore some speedy course must be thought
upon for supplies. Whereupon the Lords told him they would engage their own
credits, and the Lord Deputy of Ireland, giving the onset, subscribed for
twenty thousand pounds; the other Lords had, some the same loyal zeal, and
others the modesty not to refuse. The Lords of the Council did in this example
implicitly give a law to the other Nobles, who generally conformed most
cheerfully, saving some few whom singularity, or somewhat more portentous,
restrained. Nor staid the project there, but every man must be in the mode. All
the Judges, both of the Common and Civil Law, with all the Officers and
appendants of their Courts, were sent for not to lend, as they were
spontaneously inclined, but to contribute what others had assessed them. But
the greatest non-Recusants, were the Recusants, who did strive with the
forwardest, as ambitious to be reputed the Kings most loyal Subjects, and some
Preachers were so bold, and withal so in-discreet, to style them so; the truth
is, the Queen who could not be but equally concerned in the Kings interest,
finding they both now had all at stakes, bestir'd herself as eagerly with those
her correspondents in religious persuasion, and employed Sir Kenelm Digby and
Mr. Montague to negotiate with the Romish Catholics for a contribution, who
yielded it in a proportion agreeable to their abilities.

The King thus busy in providing against the Scots, (who began now to be
bruited all over England for Rebels) they were as industrious to form their
deportment in so supple a posture, as might de-marque and deface all tokens of
so horrid an imputation. They resorted to the King, humbly craving leave to
represent the state of all their transactions to his Majesty; the King said, he
was accostable by any subject he had, and sure he would not deny that congeable
access to an hole Kingdom, which he was ready to yield to any private man:
therefore bad them come with confidence of impartial hearing. This answer
being returned, Commissioners sent to the King from the Covenanters.
the Covenanters sent up their Commissioners, the Earl of Dumfermlin, the Lord
London, Sir William Douglas, and Mr. Barkly; these being admitted, and their
Commission examined, it was evident, that the two last was not named in, nor
empowered by it, and that the other two were only authorized to assert the
integrity of their actions, without making any real demonstration thereof, and
had not the least order to propound such things as might accommodate the
differences, or give the King any satisfaction at all. Yet the King was willing
to allow them all the fair respect he in honor could, hoping to gain upon them
by the sweetness of his carriage, but all would not do: for at that very
moment of their addresses to him, in the specious mode of suppliants, their
actions spoke very articulate, very express somewhat of a quite other
signification. For many of the prime Nobility and Gentry of that Nation, who
stood firm in their inclinations to they King, the secured, that is,
imprisoned: They invited and procured to their service many Commanders from
Holland, who still kept their places there, though such Officers as betook
themselves to the Kings employment, were instantly casheired; they reared works
of Fortification in all places agreeable to their designs. But the daring
paramount, and above all others, was their imploring aid from the French King
in a particular address to him as follows,

SIR,
Your Majesty being the refuge and Sanctuary Their Letter to the King of France.
of afflicted Princes and States, we have found it necessary to send this
Gentleman Mr. Colvil, to represent to your Majesty the Candor and Ingenuitie,
as well of our Actions and Proceedings, as of our Intentions, which we desire
to be engraved and written to the whole World, with the beam of the Sun, as
well as to your Majesty. We therefore most humbly beseek you Sir to give faith
and credit to him, and to all that he shall say on our part, touching us, and
our affairs, being most assured, Sir, of an assistance equal to your wonted
clemency heretofore, and so often showed to this Nation, which will not yield
the glory to any other whatsoever to be eternally

SIR, Your Majesty's most humble, most obedient, and most affectionate servants
Rothes, Montrose, Lesly, Mar, Mongomery, Lowdon, Forrester.



Though this was a Conclave secret, communicated to a very few, and kept under
a most strict guard, yet did it at length evade from that close captivity, and
was by some false Brother discovered to the King. His Majesty having had
consultation with those about him concerning the character, it was at length
assured him, that it must be the cheirography of the Lord Lowden, whereupon he
was committed to the Tower, and kept there in close confinement.

Though the Presbyerian party stand charged in vulgar account as the principal
and most notorious authors of these troubles, yet were they not the only men in
the conspiracy, nor must it be thought but others were (though invisibly)
accessory fomenters of them: For in case of general disturbance, nothing is
more familiar then for several Factions, of several, and sometimes of contrary
inclinations and interests, to protrude and drive on one and the same design,
to several intents and purposes. And a foul blemish it would have been to the
Mercurialists, to the Society of Jesus, should they have sat out in a work so
proper to their employment (the incitation of Kingdoms and States to turbulent
commotions) as these Scot'sh broyls. No, (good men) they slept not all this
while, but were as diligent in their machinations as possibly they could be,
the external glory of the enterprise their ambition did not reach, but they
willingly rendered it up to the Presbyters: hoping in the interim to be the
greatest gainers in the product and fruits of their labors.

How far they were of combination in this plot, though in a more subtle,
secret and scarce discovered way, (their usual mode) the ensuing Narrative
shall set forth; which I insert, not upon the account of Mr. Prynns faith, who
first made it extant, but because I am further assured of the truth of it, by a
more credible person, and one of principal relation to Sir William Boswell; and
because it may serve to illustrate some former passages of this History.

The first discoverer of this Plot was one Andreas ab Habernfield, A plot of
the Papists discovered against the King and Archbishop.
a Nobleman of Bohemia, and Physician to the Lady Elizabeth the Paltzgraves
relict. This Gentleman by a Confident of his first made it known to Sir William
Boswell, and by his means addressed himself to the Archbishop of Canterbury as
follows.

Most Illustrious and Reverend Lord,

We have willingly and cordially perceived that our offers have been acceptable
both to his Royal Majesty, and likewise to your Grace. This is the only index
to us, that the blessing of God goes along with you, whereby we are the more
extimulated, cheerfully and freely to declare and discover those things,
whereby the hazard of both your lives, the subversion of the Realms both of
England and Scotland, the tumbling down of his Excellent Majesty from his
Throne is projected. Now lest the discourse should be enlarged with superfluous
circumstances, we will only premise some things which are merely necessary to
the matter.

First, be it known to them, that this good man, the Informer of the ensuing
discoveries, was born and bred in the Pontificial Religion, and spent many
years in Ecclesiastical Functions. At length being judged a fit person for
carrying on the present design, by the advice and command of the Lord Cardinal
Barbarino, he was made co-adjutor to Con, (the then Popes Nuncio) to whom he
appeared so diligent, and sedulous in his office, that hope of great preserment
was given to him; But he guided by a better inspiration, was not wun by those
sugar baits, and conscious to himself of the vanities of that Religion,
(whereof he had sometimes been a strenuous Defender) having also observed the
malice of the Romish party, found his Conscience much oppressed; for ease
whereof he resorted in his belief to the Orthodox Religion. And thought it his
best way to reveal a plot, tending to the destruction of so many innocent
souls, conceiving his mind would better repose, should he vent what he knew
into the bosom of some confiding friend. This done, he was seriously
admonished by that friend, to give manifest tokens of his Conversion, and to
deliver from imminent danger so many innocent souls. To this counsel he
willingly consigned himself, and delivered the subsequent matters to writing,
whereby the Articles lately presented to your Grace may be clearly explicated
and demonstrated.

1. That the main of the business may be known, it is to be considered, that
all these factions which this day make Christianity reel, have their rise from
the Iesuitical offspring of Cham, which branch it self into four Orders.

The first are Ecclesiastics; these take into care the promotions of Religious
affairs.

The second are Politicians; their office is to take care for the raising of
civil combustions in, and reforming of Kingdoms.

The third are Seculars, who are properly designed for to intrude into offices
of near relation to the persons of Princes, to infinuate themselves into civil
affairs of the Court, as bargains, and sales.

The fourth are men of a lower orb, Intelligencers, and spies; then to creep
into the services of eminent persons, Princes, Earls, Barons, or the like, and
endeavor to pervert or cheat them.

A society of so many Orders the Kingdom of England nourishes; for scarce all
Spain, France, and Italy, can yield so great a multitude of Jesuits as London
alone, where are found more then fifty Scotch Jesuits; there the said Society
has elected for it self a seat of iniquity, and has conspired against the
King and his greatest confidents, especially against the Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury, and likewise against both Kingdoms.

For it is most certain, that the said Society has resolved upon an Universal
Reformation in the Kingdoms of England and Scotland. And the determination of
the end, necessarily infers a determination of the means.

For promotion therefore of the undertaken villainy, this Society is dubbed with
the title of The Congregation for the propagation of the Faith, which
acknowledges the Pope of Rome for their Principal, and Cardinal Barbarino for
his Substitute and Deputy.

The chief Patron of this Society is the Popes Legate, who has special care of
the business; into his bosom this rabble of Traitors weekly deposite their
Intelligences. The Residence of this Legation was obtained at London, in the
name of the Pope, by whose mediation it might be lawful for Cardinal Barbarino
to work so much the more easily and safely upon the King and Kingdom. For none
could so easily circumvent the King as he, who should be palliated with the
Popes Authority.

Seignior Con was at that time the Popes Legate, the Universal Minister of that
conjured Society, and a vehement promoter of the plot, whose secrets, as
likewise those of all other intelligencers, the present informer of all these
things, did receive and dispatch as the business required.

Con tampered with the chief men of the Kingdom, and left nothing unattempted
by which he might corrupt them all, and incline them to the Romish party: he
enticed with many various baits, the very King himself, he sought to delude
with gifts of Pictures, Antiquities, Idols, and such like trumperies, brought
from Rome, which yet prevailed nothing with the King.

Thus familiarly entertained by the King often at Hampton Court, and at London,
he was entreated to undertake the cause of the Prince Palatine, that he would
interpose his authority, and by intercession persuade the Legate of Colen, that
the Palatine (in the next Diet for the treating about Peace) might be inserted
into the conditions; which he promised, but performed the contrary. He
intimated indeed, that he had been solicited by the King to such an effect, but
did not advise any such consent, left peradventure the Spaniard should say that
the Pope of Rome did patronize an heretical Prince.

In the interim Con, smelling from the Archbishop, (the Kings most Confident)
that the Kings mind was altogether pendulous, and doubtful, resolved to move
every stone, and bend all his strength to gain him to his side; being confident
he had prepared the means. For he had a command to make offer of a Cardinals
Cap to the Lord Archbishop in the name of the Pope of Rome, and that he should
allure him also with higher promises, that he might corrupt his sincere mind.
Yet a fitting occasion was never offered whereby he might insinuate himself
into the Lord Archbishop, to whom free access was to be impetrated by the Earl
and Countess of Arundel, as also by Secretary Windebank, all whose
intercessions he neglected, and did shun (as it were the Plague) the company or
familiarity of Con. He was also solicited by others of no mean rank, well known
to him, and yet he continued immovable.

Trial also was made of another, Secretary Cook, who impeded access to the
detestable design; an utter enemy he was to the Jesuits, whose access to the
King he obstructed. He treated many of them as they deserved, he searched into
their factions, by which means every incitement breathing an attractive power
to the Romish Catholics was ineffectual with him; for nothing was so dear to
him as his own innocence: whence being rendered odious to the conspirators, he
was in perpetual hazard of losing his Place, which being labored for three
years, was at length obtained.

But for all this the King had left him a knotty piece, for the Lord Archbishop
by his constancy opposed himself as an immovable rock.

Con and his party finding the Lord Archbishop so impregnable, and that they
labored in vain, began to boil with malice, and to plot how the Lord
Archbishop together with the King should be taken.

Sentence also is passed against the King (who was the main concernment in the
Plot) because nothing is hoped from him which might seem to promote the Popish
Religion, but especially when he had once declared himself that he was of the
mind, that any good and pious man may be saved in his own Religion.

To act the Treason undertaken, the criminal execution at Westminster, caused
by some Puritanical writing, gave the first spark; a thing so much exasperated
and exaggerated by the Papists and Puritans, that if it went unrevenged it
would be thought a blemish to their Religion, the flames of which fire the
subsequent Liturgy increased.

In this heat a certain Scottish Earl, one Maxwel, if I mistake not, was
dispatched to the Scots by the Popish party, with whom two other Scottish Earls
were correspondents, he was to excite the people to commotion: He was to raise
commotions, to reinforce the sense of every injury, and to spur on the people
to rebellion, whereby the great disturber of the Scot'sh liberty might be
destroyed.

There by one labor snares are laid for the King, for which purpose the affair
was so ordered, that very many English should adhere to the Scots. That the
King should be inferior to them in Arms, whereby he might be enforced to
crave aid from the Papists, which yet should be denied him, unless he would
descend to conditions, by which he should permit a general toleration of the
Romish Religion, which was the thing the Papists did aim at. And should he be
difficultly brought to such terms, there was a remedy hoped for.

For the young Prince (who from his Cradle was educated in advantage to the
Romish persuasion) growing on fast in his youthful age, the Kings death was
contrived by an Indian Nut, stuffed with a most fierce poison, kept in the
Society, (which Con then showed me in a boasting manner) and prepared for him,
as there was another for his Father.

During the Scot'sh troubles, the Marquess of Hammilton was often employed by
the King as Commissioner to compose disorders there, and pacific the
discontented party, but returned as often without fruit. His Chaplain repaired
at that time to us, and had secret conference with Con. of whom I demanded in
jest, Whether also the Jews agreed with the Samaritans; To which Con answered,
I would to God all Ministers were like him; you may conjecture of this as you
please.

Things standing thus there came to London from Cardinal Richelieu, Mr. Thomas
Chamberlain his Chaplain and Almner, a Scot by Nation, who was to assist the
College of confederacy to advance the business, and to attempt all ways of
exasperating the first heat: for this service a Bishopric was promised him.
Four months space he co-habited with the Society, nor was he permitted to
depart, until matters succeeding as he wished, he might return with good news.

Sir Toby Matthew a Jesuited Priest of the Order of Politicians, the most
vigilant of the chief Heads, (who never went to bed, but got a nap of an hour
or two in a chair) day and night plotted mischief. A man principally noxious,
and the very Plague both of King and Kingdom, a man most impudent, hunting all
feasts called or not called, never quiet, always in action and perpetual
motion. Intruding into the company of all his betters, pressing discourses
whereby to fish out men's inclinations; whatsoever he sucketh from thence either
of advantage, or noxious to the conspiracy, he imparteth to the Pope's Legate,
reserving the most secret intelligence for the Pope himself, or the Cardinal
Barbarino. In short, he associates himself with any, not a word can be spoken
but he lays hold of it, and accommodates it to his turn. In the interim all
his observations he reduces into a Catalogue, and every Summer carries it to
the general Consistory of the Jesuits Politiques, which privately meet in the
Province of Wales, where he is a welcome guest. There are Councels closely
hammered which are fittest for the ruining of the Ecclesiastique and Politic
state of both Kingdoms.

Captain Read a Scot, dwelling in Long-Acre street near the Angel Tavern, a
Secular Jesuit, who for his detestable service performed (in perverting of a
certain Minister of the Church, with secret inticements, to the Popish
Religion, with all his Family, taking his daughter to wife) obtained as a
reward an impost upon butter paid by the Country people, procured for him from
the King by some chief men of the Society, who never want a spur whereby he may
be constantly detained in his Office. In his house the whole plot is contrived,
where the Society, which has conspired against the King, the Lord Archbishop,
and both Kingdoms, convene: but on the day of the Post's dispatch they meet in
greater numbers; for then all their informers assemble, and confer their notes
together; and that they may be the less suspected, convey all their secrets by
Toby Matthew, or Read himself to the Popes Legate, who transmits the packet of
Intelligence to Rome.

With the same Read are entrusted the Letters brought from Rome, under forged
titles and names, and by him delivered to whom they belong; for all their names
are known to him.

Upon the same occasion Letters are also brought over under the covert of
Father Philip (though he be ignorant of the plot) who distributeth them to the
Conspirators.

In that very house there is a public Chapel, wherein an Ordinary Jesuit
consecrates, and dwells. In this Chapel Masses are daily said by the
Jesuits, and the children of some of the Domestiques, and some Conspirators
are baptized.

They who meet there come often in Coaches, or a horseback in Laymens habit,
and with a great train, wherewith they are disguised from notice, yet are
Jesuits and Members of the Conspiracy.

All the Papists of England contribute to this Assembly, lest any thing should
be wanting to promote the enterprise, upon whose treasury a Widow owner of the
Houses where now Secretary Windebank dwells, and dead above three years
since, conferred forty thousand pounds, and for the driving on of the business
others contribute as they are able.

Besides the foresaid Houses, there are also other close Conventicles kept, but
very distrustful of themselves, lest they should be discovered. First every of
them (one not knowing of the other) are directed to certain Innes, and thence
led by spies to the place of meeting, being otherwise ignorant of the place for
fear of surprise.

The Countess of Arundel, a strenuous she-Champion of the Romish Faith, bends
all her powers for this Universal Reformation, nothing is done secretly, or
openly at Court, but she imparts it to the Legate, with whom she meets thrice a
day, sometimes at Arundels house, now at Court, or at Tari-Hall.

The Earl himself being called about three years since, this year must go to
Rome, without doubt to consult there of matters pertinent to the design.

At Greenwich, at the Earls cost, a feminine School is erected, which is but a
Monastery of Nuns; for the young Girls therein are sent forth, hither, and
thither, into forain Monasteries beyond the Seas.

Master Porter of the Kings Bedchamber, most addicted to the Popish Religion,
is an utter enemy of the Kings, revealing all his secrets to the Legate by his
Wife; for he rarely meets with him himself. In all his actions he is nothing
inferior to Toby Matthew, it is unexpressible how diligently he intends this
business.

His sons are secretly principled in the Romish Belief, but open Professors of
the Reformed: the eldest is now to receive his Fathers place under the future
King: A Cardinals hat is provided for the other, if the plot takes.

Three years since, Mr. Porter was to be sent away by the King to Morocco: But
was prohibited by the Society, lest the business should suffer delay.

He is a Patron of the Jesuits, providing Chapels for them to exercise their
Religion in, both at home and abroad.

Secretary Windebank a fierce Papist, is the greatest Traitor to the King of
all. He not only reveals the Kings greatest secrets, but also communicates
counsels by which the design may be best advanced. He at least thrice every
week converseth with the Legate in the Nocturnal Conventicles, and reveals
what is fit to be known: to which end he hireth an house near to the Popes
Legate, to whom he often resorts through the Garden door; for by this vicinity
the meeting is facilitated. He is bribed with gifts to be a partner in the
Conspiracy, by whom he is sustained, that he may more sedulously attend his
charge; His son is sent expressly to Rome, on purpose to insinuate himself into
his Holiness.

Digby and Winter, Knights, Mr. Mountague, who has been at Rome, the Lord
Sterlin, a Kinsman of the Earl of Arundel, a Knight, the Countess of New-port,
the Duchess of Buckingham, and many others, who have sworn to this
Conspiracy, are all most vigilant in the plot: Some are enticed with hope of
Court, others of Political Offices; others attend to the sixteen Cardinals caps
vacant, which are detained, so to feed with vain hopes those who expect them.

The President of the said Society was the Lord Gage, a Jesuited Priest, dead
some three years since. He had a Palace adorned with wanton pictures as
pretending to profaneness, but palliating thereby a Monastery, wherein forty
Nuns were maintained, concealed in so spacious a Palace. It is situated in
Queens street. The Jesuits have bought all this street, and have reduced it to
a quadrangle, where a Jesuitical College is tacitly built, with this hope,
that it might be openly finished as soon as the General Reformation was
accomplished.

The Popes Legate uses a threefold Character, one common to all Nuncio's.
Another peculiar to himself and Cardinal Barbarino. A third wherewith he covers
some greater secrets to be imparted. Whatsoever things he receives from the
Society, or spies, he packeth up in one bundle, with this address, To Monsieur
Stravio Archdeacon of Cambrai; from whom they are sent to Rome.

These particulars considered, it will be evident to all,

1. That the Conspiracy against the King and Lord Archbishop is detected, and
the means threatening ruin to them both is demonstrated.

2. The imminent dangers to both Kingdoms is declared.

3. The rise and progress of the Scot'sh fire is related.

4. Means are suggested whereby their troubles may be appeased; for after the
Scots shall see by whom, and to what intents their spirits are provoked, they
will speedily look to themselves, neither will they suffer the Forces of both
Kingdoms to be subdued, lest a middle party interpose, which seek the ruin of
both.

5. With what sword the Kings Throat is assaulted, even when these stirs shall
be ended, Cons confession and visible demonstration shows.

6. The place of Assembly in Captain Reads house is named.

7. The eight days dispatch by Read, and the Legate is described.

8. How the names of the Conspirators may be known.

9. Where this hole Congregation may be circumvented.

10. Some of the principal unfaithful ones of the Kings party are notified by
name; and many, whose names occur not yet, their habitations being known, their
names may be easily extorted from Read.

If these things be warily proceeded in, the strength of the hole business
will be brought to light, so the arrow being foreseen, the danger shall be
avoided, which that it may prosperously succeed, the Almighty Creator grant.

They who will diligently compare this Information with what An objection
answered relating to the discovery.
has conformably occurred in the preceding part of these Annals, and shall
withal well consider the practices both ancient and modern of these
pragmaticall spirits, will find cause enough to think there was in it somewhat
more then fiction, and that it may make some impression upon faith, without
setting it upon the rack. Only one objection I shall rid out of the way, which
may seem to discredit the truth thereof. And it is this.

The Archbishop of Canterbury stands aspersed in common fame, as a great friend
at least, and Patron of the Romish Catholics, if he were not of the same
belief. And it were a policy mis-becoming such subtle Serpents, causelessly to
plot the death of their so eminent well-wisher. To which I answer, by
concession; True it is, he had too much and long favored the Romish Faction,
but as upon what account it was he favored them is uncertain, so was it but
the Romish Faction, not the Romish Faith he favored. He tampered indeed to
introduce some ceremonies bordering upon superstition, disused by us, and
abused by them: from whence the Romanists collected such a disposition in him
to their Tenets, as they began, not only to hope, but in good earnest to cry
him up for their Proselyte. Upon this hypothesis, this supposition, they grew
excessive proud and insolent, as well they might (knowing how grand a Confident
and Trustee he was of the Kings) had not their persuasion misled them; But the
Archbishop finding that his tacit reservednesse in point of opinion, and
former compliance with the Papists, was no longer expedient for his designs,
and did begin to create ill-boading jealousies in another party, resolved to
speak out, and un beguile them both. And first in the year 1637. openly at the
Council Table, he passionately complained to the King of their audacious resort
to Denmark house, using some expressions of vehemence more particularly against
the haughty deportment of Mr. Walter Mountague, and Sir Ioby Matthew. But that
which most despighted them, was his publishing the next year the Relation of
his conference with the Jesuit. Fisher, wherein he declared himself so little
theirs, as he has for ever dis-abled them from being so much their own as they
were before; it being the exactest, the master piece of Polemique Divinity of
all extant. Pity it is his thoughts which were in other affairs a thought too
high, had so fatal a diversion from his studies. But what one is excellent in
every thing? Now the Archbishop thus professedly owning the Protestant cause,
and having so potent an influence upon the King, it was no wonder if he became
as formidable to the Romanists, as Hannibal was to Ubi Hannibal est, ibi caput
atque arx hujus Belli. Live.
the Romans; (and where Hannibal was, there his enemies judged the life and
soul of the Carthaginian strength to reside) and by consequence his destruction
the main concernment of their interest.

April the 13. the Parliament sat according to preappointment, 1640. The
Parliament assembled.
when the Earl of Strafford was led into the upper House by two Noblemen to
give them account what feats he had wrought in Ireland, having there obtained
the grant of four Subsidies for the maintenance of ten thousand Foot, and
fifteen hundred Horse: implicitly hinting agreeable to what scheme England
should proportion their supplies. Some few days after a report was made to the
Lords, by the Lord Cottington (who with Secretary Windebank and the Attorney
General were sent by the King to the Lord Lowdon to examine him, concerning the
Letter before mentioned) that the Lord did Ann. Christi 1640.
acknowledge the handwriting to be his, that it was framed before the
Pacification at Barwick, and was never sent to that King, but only prepared in
a readiness, should need require, and that it was suppressed upon that
Pacification; nevertheless it was thought fit he should continue in the same
state until clearer evidence should be given, either for, or against him.

Soon after the the King sent a message to the lower house about supplies
representing to them the intolerable indignities and injuries wherewith the
Scots had treated him, and withal declared to them, that if they would assist
him suitable to the exigency of his sad occasion, he would for ever quit his
claim of Ship-mony, and into the bargain give them full content in all their
just demands. But they replied they expected first security from his Majesty in
these three particulars. First, for clearing the Subjects property; Secondly,
for establishment of Religion; Thirdly, for the privilege of Parliament. Many
conferences there were had between the Lords and Commons about this old contest
which should precede, the Kings supply, or the Subjects grievances. The Lords
after a stong division among themselves at length voted for the King, and the
Commons for the Subjects. But it was not long before this unhappy difference
was most unhappily decided. For Secretary Vane who was employed to declare the
particulars of the Kings desires, required twelve Subsidies, whereas it was said,
his express order was for only six. Some there are suspect this mistake to
have been not involuntary but industrious in him; but leaving that
indetermined, the House of Commons was raised by this Proposition to such
animosity, as the King advising with his Iuncto, their compliance was
represented to him so desperate, as May the 5. he ordered the Dissolution of
the Parliament.

Thus expired this short-lived, or rather thus ended this stil-born Parliament;
a Parliament I know not whether more unfortunate, in beginning so late, or
ending so soon. A Parliament which had power, and probably will enough to
impede the torrent of the late civil War: for the breaches between the King
and People were grown so high, as one might already discern all the lineaments
of an insurrection in Embryo, but the head, whose Abortion nothing could cause
but an happy union in Parliament, a thing not very difficult, much less
impossible at this time. Had the King yielded to a detrenching some luxuriances
of his Prerogative, to the reducing Episcopacy to its primitive institution,
that is to the frame by Divine Right (a root which had not sap enough to
maintain so spreading and flourishing a top as was contended for) to a more
frequent and sociable communication of Councels with the grand Representative;
in short to such fluent and spontaneous concessions, as eing resolved upon too
late, were (in reference to his personal safety) lost and thrown away in the
ensuing Parliament, in all likelihood he had much quieted the distempers of his
subjects, much calmed their animosities, why not totally gained their
affections? and in order to all this his Majesty had now already modelled all
his passions, all his inclinations. And as the King was disposed toward this
blessed conjunction, so was there not so intense an opposition to the Kings
satisfaction in the mind of the generality of the members of this Parliament,
as was like to obstruct it. So that to counsel the dissolution of an Assembly
so importing to the Kings and Kingdoms welfare must be the advice of men who
understood not so well as they meant, whereof many laid the blame upon the
Archbishop of Canterbury, a learned, pious and morally a good man, but too full
of fire. As affairs of the Church then stood, Bishops might in reference to
Ecclesiastical concernments be serviceable assessors in Privy Council, but in
civil matters perhaps it had been better, had they been less active, according
to the example of this Archbishops predecessor, penultime, and last but one
Archbishop Whitgift, who being a Privy Counselor, it was his constant mode to
attend the Table early in the morning, and after the usual apprecation of a
good morrow to the Lords, he always requested to know if there were any Church
business to be debated that forenoon; if the answer returned was, yea, he
stayed; if negative, he craved leave to be dispensed withal, saying, Then my
Lords there is no need of me, and so departed. A most laudable and prudentiall
practice.

This convention was not more unhappily dissolved then another was continued,
that is, as a witty Gentleman said well, A new Synod made of an old
Convocation, which by new Commission from the King, were empowered to sit
still: the impulsives to it are easily collected from what resulted from it.

The Scottish fires had already in that Kingdom consumed and burnt up to
nothing Episcopacy both root and branch, and just cause The Convocation sits.
there was to fear the like proceedings here in England, where many began not
only to sit upon the Bishops skirts, that is, to controvert the motes and
bounds of their authority, but to claim a co-parcenery, and equal share in the
main possession, asserting, in good earnest, that though the Bishops had long
Lorded over them through temporal indulgence, yet in the sacred Dialect they
were as good men as themselves, Bishops and Presbyters in Scripture phrase
being of equivalent import, and denoted the self same persons, without the
least distinction, they whom Holy Text calls Bishops, having an Identity, a
same-nesse of Name, of Ordination, of Office, of all qualifications necessary
to that office, with Presbyters. The Prelates finding their dear Palladium so
deeply concerned, and heaved at, were as eager to conserve it, the Press
swarmed with Books setting forth the Right upon which Episcopacy was founded,
but all advantaged them little, for such a prejudice there was against them,
and the Truth contended for lay then so deep, as few had perspicacity enough to
discern it, so it did them little service, therefore the Bishops observing
these levelling principles growing into such request took measure from their
professed adversaries the general Assembly of Scotland, with whom they so
interfered. For as that Assembly having formed a Covenant for the destruction
of Episcopacy, severely urged subscription to it: so did this Synod for the
support of their Hitrarchy frame as an Anti-covenant this Oath following.

I A. B. do swear, That I do approve the Doctrine and Discipline of Government
established in the Church of They impose a new Oath.
England as containing all things necessary to salvation. And that I will not
endeavor by my self or any other, directly or indirectly, to bring in any
Popish Doctrine contrary to that which is so established. Nor will I ever give
my consent to alter the Government of this Church by Archbishops, Bishops,
Deans and Archdeacons, etc. as it stands now established, and as by right it
ought to stand, nor yet ever to subject it to the usurpaons and superstitions
of the Sea of Rome. And all these things I do plainly and sincerely acknowledge
and swear according to the plain and common sense and understanding of the same
words, without any equivocation or mental evasion, or secret reservation
whatsoever. And this I do heartily, willingly, and truly upon the Faith of a
Christian. So help me God in Jesus Christ.

Many things were exceedingly blamed in the contrivance of this Oath;

First, that seeing a clear notion of the thing sworn to (which the Prophet
Jeremy comprehends under the word Judgment) is a necessary qualification to
the legality of an Oath, this [etc.] was of so mysterious import as the very
Imposers, much less the Jurours, were not able to decypher what it meant.

Secondly, some things were expressly to be sworn to, which were never thought
to have any show or color of sacred Right, but were conceived arbitrary, and
at the disposition of the State, and to exact an Oath of dissent from civil
establishments in such things of indifferency, was an affront to the very
fundamentals of Government.

Lastly, because the Juror therein declared he swear willingly, to which he was
constrained under the highest penalties, that is, as that noble Lord said,
Under the loss of both Heaven and Earth, of Heaven, by excommunication; and of
Earth, by deprivation.

Again, they ran parallel with the Covenanters in another constitution, for as
the Scots condemned the Arminian tenets without defining what those Tenets
were, which King Charles noted as a strange proceeding in them, so did these
the Socinians not declaring wherein they were culpable.

There was also framed by this Synod a Canon wherein the situation of the
Communion Table should be at the East end severed with Railes to preserve it
from profanation, and for permitting the practice or omission of bowing toward
the East as men never persuaded within themselves, concerning the lawfulness
and decency thereof.

And that his Majesty's ratification of these Rules might as well Great
Benevolence to the King.
be thought an act of gratitude as grace, they granted him a most ample
Benevolence of four shillings in the pound assest upon all the Clergy for six
years toward his expedition against the Scots, which was beheld as an act of
very high presumption and an usurpation upon the preeminence of Parliament; no
Convocation having power to grant any Subsidies, or aid without confirmation
from the Lay-Senate.

This Synod ended May the 29. and the first offender who became obnoxious to
the animadversion of their new Law, was one of its late members, Godfrey
Goodman Bishop of Gloucester, who refused subscription to the Canons, and was
thereupon suspended. This Bishop had been long suspected as addicted to the
Romish belief.

The Scots having sped so well in their adventures against Sovereignty, England
began now to be bewitched with their Principles, and to learn their Discipline
of daring. Liberty is so sweet as few are of a temper too sober not to attempt
it, especially when success has opened the advenues of achievement, and
rendered it seemingly attainable. Nor did we derive from them only the
rudiments, but the method also of revolt. Our first probationary tumult
commencing in a rude assault upon this Archbishop, as theirs upon the
Archbishop of St. Andrews. Specious pretenses they wanted not to honest, to
justify the enterprise. That Parliament from which the hole Kingdom expected
a Reformation of all enormities both in Church and Commonwealth, a total
dissipation of all foggie jealousies between the King and People, an
accommodation of all differences between England and Scotland; that Parliament
had an immature, miserable, deplorable dissolution; and who bare the odium of
that unfortunate advise comparably to Canterbury? Upon this score a Paper was
posted upon the Old Exchange, May the 9. Exhorting Prentices to rise and sack
his House at Lambeth the Monday following; whereof the Archbishop having
notice, prepared for his defense; and it was well he did so, for the Monday
following, The Archbishops Palace beset by prentices.
in the dead of night, about five hundred beset his Palace, and made many
attempts to force an entrance, but all in vain, such provision had the
Archbishop made for his security; but though he escaped the violence of their
hands, yet did he not the virulence of their tongues, which did most
impetuously rage against him, now with menaces, now with imprecations. The next
day many of these riotous delinquents upon narrow inquiry were apprehended, and
imprisoned in the White-lion, but within three days after some of their either
accomplices, or adherents came in the day time, brake open the Prison, and
enlarged them. Nevertheless one of their Captains was re-taken, condemned at
Southwa^ke, and May the 21. for example sake, hanged and quartered.

The Parliament being blown away without affording any thing in nature of
supply to the Kings wants, all the wheels of the Prerogative are put into
motion to carry on the War: First, the City of London were invited to a Loan,
then all Knights and Gentlemen who held Lands in Capite of the King were
summoned to send men, horses, and Arms agreeable to their abilities.

The City was sullen, would not give down their milk, and pleaded want of Trade
and poverty: a very poor plea as her condition then stood, for how could want
flow in upon a Nation from a Peace of forty years duration? And where Kingdoms
thrive, the Mother Cities, which usually grasp and gripe all they can from the
body, will be sure to secure themselves against necessity. No, she was
luxuriant in wealth never more, and pampered with ease, so as her high
repletion brought her into a Cachexy, an ill habit of body, this set her on
longing and lusting after strange gods. She began now to be disciplined by
Presbyterian emissaries, and resolved to fashion herself to the Scot'sh
designs. Again, the Prerogative had lately, as she thought, treated her
somewhat roughly. Her Plantation of Londonderry in Ireland, was for some
alleged misdemeanors, not long before questioned in the Star Chamber, and
there declared forfeited to the King, and fines imposed upon the Planters; This
was of no pleasing re-sentment, and operated not a little toward their denial.

But the Gentry for the generality exhibited inclinations more prompt, and
afforded their help to relieve the King. By this and other forementioned aids
the Royal Army began to Rendevous, whereof the Earl of Northumberland was
appointed Generalissimo, and the Earl of Strafford Lieutenant General, but the
first fell presently into a great sickness, so as his conduct was dispensed
withal, and the second was not of so perfect health as to undertake the chief
command; whereby, the King resolved to assume it himself, and having staid the
Queens safe delivery of her son Henry in July, August the 20. he set forward
toward the North, his Army The King goes against the Scots.
having preceded him many days before, being informed that the Scots were
entered England; but he made not such have thither, but before he could come to
see it verified, he heard it in the sad effects The Scots enter England.
thereof. For having reached as far as Northallerton toward New Castle, he was
welcomed thither by the Lord Conway with the unwelcome news of a great defeat,
his Army had received that day being Aug. 28. at Newburn upon Tine, the
substance of which action was as follows.

August the 27. the Lord Conway then Commander in chief, The engagement at
Newburn.
had drawn all his Cavallery, being about twelve hundred Horse, and about three
thousand Foot, to secure the pass upon the River of Tine near Newburn, the
Foot he had lodged behind a breastwork, thereby to infest the ^nemy in their
passage. That night Lord General Lesly came to the other side of the River,
and before morning had planted nine pieces of Ordnance, having blinded them
with bushes from the English observation. The next morning he sent to the Lord
Conway, desiring his leave to pass toward his Majesty with their Petition;
the Lord answered that he would permit a few, but not an Army to pass;
whereupon Lesly commanded three hundred Horse to advance into the River, whom
the Musketeers from behind the Brest-works so galled, as they were enforced to
retire, which Lesly perceiving, played upon that blind with his Canon so
furiously, as made them abandon The English routed.
their post, cast away their Arms and fly: then the Scot'sh Cavallery
re-advanced, who were gallantly charged by Mr. Wilmot Commissary General of the
Horse, but they were so annoyed with the Scot'sh Canon, and withal so
over-numbred, all the burden of the encounter being born by the Gentlemen, as
they were compelled to retire in disorder. In this hostile aggression the
English received far the greater loss, three hundred being slain and taken.
The Lord Conway perceiving the Cavallery thus routed, and the Infantry run all
away, hasted his retreat to the King, and for the same reason Sir Jacob Astley
then Governor of New Castle, deserted it, having first sunk the Ordinance in
the River, being well assured it New Castle deserted.
was not tenable, as having nothing in it tending to Fortification.

The English Army retreating now from New Castle, was taken into the command of
the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, who brought up the Rear, and being come back to
York, where the King then was, he charged the principal miscarriage of the
action upon the Lord Conway, who with as stout an animosity vindicated his own
reputation.

Though the Covenanters prospered in England, yet an odd The Earl of
Haddingtons mischance at Dunse.
accident in Scotland discolored their affairs into a melancholic complexion.
For General Lesly having left some pieces of Canon at Dunse, which he thought
more then necessary for his service; the Garrison of Barwick issued out to
fetch them from Dunse, and possessed themselves of them; upon this an Alarm was
given to the Earl of Haddington, then commanding in Louthian and the Merse. The
Earl with two thousand Horse and Foot persues the English, and after a short
skirmish rescued the Canon, which he carried to Dunglasse. And being there at
Dinner the next day with about fourteen or fifteen Knights and Gentlemen of
note and near alliance to him, very frolique and merry, in a moment the
Magazine of powder which was in a Vault under the room where they dined, took
fire and blew up himself with all his guests. Whether this was an accident or
some industrious plot, was not known.

September the Lords Mandevil and Edward Howard, delivered A petition presented
to the King by the Lords.
to the King at York this Petition.

To the Kings most Excellent Majesty.

The humble Petition of your Majesty's most loyal and most obedient Subjects,
whose names are under written in behalf of themselves and diverse others.

Most Gracious Sovereign,
The zeal of that duty, and service, which we owe to your Sacred Majesty, and
our earnest affection to the good and welfare of this your Realm of England,
have moved us, in all humility, to beseek your Royal Majesty, to give us leave
to offer to your Princely wisdom, the apprehension, which we and others your
faithful Subjects have conceived, of the great distempers and dangers now
threatening the Church and State, and your Royal Person, and of the fittest
means by which they may be removed and prevented.

The evils and dangers whereof your Majesty may be pleased to take notice, are
these.

1. That your Majesty's Sacred Person is exposed to hazard, and danger in the
present expedition against the Scottish Army; and by occasion of this War your
Majesty's revenue is much wasted, your Subjects burdened with Coat and conduct
Money, billetting of Soldiers, and other Military charges, and diverse rapines
and disorders committed in several parts of this your Realm, by the Soldiers
raised for that service, and your hole Kingdom become full of fears and
discontents.

2. The sundry innovations in matters of Religion, the Oath and Canons lately
imposed upon the Clergy, and other your Majesty's Subjects.

3. The great increase of Popery, and the em ploying of Popish Recusants, and
others ill-affected to the Religion, by laws established, in places of power
and trust, especially in commanding of Men, and Arms, both in the Field, and
sundry Counties of this your Realm, whereas by law they are not permitted to
have any Arms in their own houses.

4. The great mischiefs which may fall upon this Kingdom, if the intentions
which have been credibly reported of bringing in Irish and forain Forces,
should take effect.

5. The urging of ship money, and prosecution of some Sheriffs in the
Star Chamber for not levying of it.

6. The heavy charge upon Merchandise, to the discouragement of Trade, the
multitude of Monopolies, and other Patents, whereby the Commodities and
Manufactures of the Kingdom are much burdened, to the great and universal
grievance of your People.

7. The great grief of your Subjects, by long intermission of Parliaments, and
the late and former dissolving of such, as have been called, without the happy
effects which otherwise they might have produced.

For remedy whereof, and prevention of the dangers that may arise to your
Royal Person, and to the hole State; they do in all humility and
faithfulness beseek your most Excellent Majesty, that you would be pleased to
summon a Parliament within some convenient time, whereby the causes of these,
and other great grievances which your People lie under, may be taken away, and
the Authors and Counselors of them may be there brought to such legal trial,
and condign punishment, as the nature of their several offenses shall require.
And that the present War may be composed by your Majesty's wisdom without
blood, in such manner as may conduce to the Honor and safety of your Majesty's
Person, the comfort of your People, and the uniting of both your Realms against
the common Enemy of the Reformed Religion. And your Majesty's Petitioners
shall ever pray, etc.

Concluded the 28. of August, 1640. Francis Bedford Robert Essex Mulgrave Say
and Seal Edward Howard William Hartford Warwick Bullingbrook Mandevil Brook
Paget.



The Kings Answer.
Before the receipt of your Petition, his Majesty well foresaw the danger that
threatens himself and Crown; and therefore resolved the 24. of this month to
summon all the Peers, and with them to consult, what in this case is fittest to
be done, for his own Honor, and safety of the Kingdom, where they with the
rest may offer any thing that may conduce to these ends.

According to this resolution, the Lord Keeper had directions from the King to
issue out writs of Summons for their appearance at York on the 24. day of
September, which he punctually persued.

Soon after the presenting of this Petition from the Lords, came another from
the Scots, the substance whereof was a desire, that his Majesty would call a
Parliament, for settling a firm peace between the two Nations.

To this Petition the King replied, with signification of what he had ordered
before in reference to the welfare of himself and both Kingdoms.

And it was high time for an accommodation to be effected, for Lesly now began
to rant it in New Castle, and the parts adjacent, The Scot'sh oppressions in
Northumberland.
as Brennus did at Rome, with a Vae victis: he imposed a tax of three hundred
and fifty pounds per diem upon the Bishopric of Durham, and three hundred
pound upon Northumberland, upon pain of plundering, and yet permitted soldiers
to rifle houses, break up shops, and act what insolences they pleased, seized
upon four great English ships laden with corn, as lawful Prize, they not
knowing in whose possession the Town was, till they entered the Haven.

The first day of the Lords assembling at York, it was resolved that a
Parliament should be summoned to convene November A treaty between the English
and Scotch.
the 3. Then a message was sent to the Scots, desiring a speedy Treaty at York.
The Scots replied they held that no place of security for their Commissioners,
considering that he (the Lieutenant of Ireland) who commanded his Majesty's
Army, was one who had proclaimed them Traitors in Ireland, before the King had
done the same in England, and who had threatened to destroy their Nation both
root and branch. And against whom, as a chief Incendiary of the late troubles,
they intended to complain. Hereupon it was concluded that the Treaty should be
held at Rippon. The place being agreed upon, the next stage of resolutions was
to the nomination of persons thought fit to treat, which being determined, and
assented to on both sides, and the Commissioners met to fall upon consultation,
the Scots took exceptions at the Earl of Traquairs being present at their
debates, he being not nominated either by the King or Parliament of Scotland as
a Commissioner; whereof the King being advertised, and advising with his
Counsel, this answer resulted from them, That though the Earl was not
authorized to treat as a Commissioner, nor to Vote in the debates; yet was it
very reasonable he should be present, in regard all things which require
debate, as the Laws and Customs of the Kingdom of Scotland, and all Passages
of the Assembly and Parliament (to which the English Commissioners are
strangers) are best known to him. This answer being returned, the Scots
superseded from further opposition in that subject, so that the Commissioners
fell directly upon their employment.

The first thing propounded by the English, was a Cessation of Arms: but the
Scots said many other things were to be of anteriour consideration. As their
affairs stood, until they had obtained what they came for, home they must not
return; and forward they durst not advance, his Majesty having commanded the
contrary, so that there was an urgent necessity of their continuing their
present quarters, which they were unable to do, unlessesome way were stated for
their subsistence: Again, some particulars were to be predetermined of
necessary relation to the Treaty; therefore October the 2. they presented the
English Lords with these subsequent Demands.

1. We desire your Lordships to take into your considerations, The Scots
demands.
how our Army shall be maintained until the Treaty be ended, and our peace
secured.

2. If a greater number of Commissioners be required, that a convoy begranted
for their safe arrival.

3. A safe convoy for all letters from us to the Parliament, and from them to
us.

4. That for the benefit of both Kingdoms, there may be a free commerce; and
that the common trade of New Castle be not hindered, but especially for
victuals.

The first of these demands seemed very harsh to the English, who thought it
most unreasonable to maintain the Scotts at such a time when the Kings Army was
in more distress: but the sword often gives law to reason; so when accosted by
sturdy beggars, our fear is more liberal then our charity, and to deny the
Scots any thing, considering their armed posture, was interpreted the way to
give them all, upon which apprehension our Commissioners applied themselves
very sedulously to such results, as did both comply with their demands and were
serviceable to the ease and quiet of the oppressed Countries; these were formed
into thirteen Articles and agreed upon the 16. of October.

These previous obstructions being thus removed, the Commissioners next
proceeded to the Treaty of Cessation, which after several debates produced,
October. 26. these ensuing Articles, and were after signed by his Majesty.

1. That there be a Cessation of Arms, both by Sea and Land, from this present.

2. That all acts of hostility do henceforth cease.

3. That both parties shall peaceably return, during the Treaty, whatsoever
they possess at the time of the cessation.

4. That all such persons who lived in any of his Majesty's Forts beyond the
River of Tees, shall not exempt their lands which lie within the Counties of
Northumberland and the Bishopric, from such contributions, as shall be laid
upon them for the payment of eight hundred and fifty pounds per diem.

5. That none of the Kings Forces upon the other side of Tees, shall give any
impediment to such contributions, as are already allowed for the competency of
the Scotch Army, and shall fetch no victuals, nor forage out of their bounds,
except that which the Inhabitants and owners thereof shall bring voluntarily
unto them, and that any restraints or detention of Victuals, Cattle, or Forage
which shall be made by the Scots within those bounds for their maintenance,
shall be no breach.

6. That no recrute shall be brought into either Armies, from the time of
cessation, and during the Treaty.

7. That the contribution of eight hundred and fifty pounds per diem, shall be
only raised out of the Counties of Northumberland, Bishopric, Town of
New Castle, Cumberland, and Westmerland: and that the nor payment thereof,
shall be no breach of the Treaty, but the Countries and Towns shall be left to
the Scots power to raise the same, but not to exceed the sum agreed upon,
unless it be for charges of driving, to be set by a priser of the forage.

8. That the River of Tees shall be the bounds of both Armies, (excepting
always the Town and Castle of Stockton, and the Village of Egystiff) and the
Countries of Northumberland and Bishopric be the limits, within which the
Scot'sh Army is to reside, having liberty for them to send such convoyes as
shall be necessary for the gathering up only of the contribution, which shall
be unpaid by the Counties of Northumberland and Cumberland.

9. That if any person commit any private insolence, it shall be no breach of
our Treaty, if, upon complaint made by either parties, reparation and
punishment be granted.

10. If victuals be desired upon the price which shall be agreed upon, and
ready money offered for the same, and refused, it shall be no breach of the
Cessation to take such victuals paying such prices.

11. No new fortifications to be made, during the Treaty, against either
parties.

12. That the Subjects of both Kingdoms may in their Trade of commerce freely
pass to and fro, without any stay at all; but it is particularly provided,
that no member of either Army, pass without a formal Pass, under the hands of
the General, or of him that commands in chief.

This Treaty at Rippon was but the Parasceue, the preparation to another of
higher import, for the time being far spent and the Scots chief demands to be
considered of, the Lords by consent of the Scots became humble suitors to his
Majesty, that the general Treaty should be transferred to London, to which the
King agreed. Hostility being thus sopited, thus laid to sleep, between us and
Scotland, the King and Lords posted to London.

One thing very remarkable may here have a commodious situation. The Earl of
Montrose declines from the Covenanters.
James Earl of Montrose having long and faithfully adhered to the Covenanters,
began at length, as he thought, to smell out the rancidity, and ill favor of
their intentions, and that they really minded nothing less then what they so
solemnly professed, The Honor of his Majesty, and preservation of Religion; no
sooner did this apprehension seize upon him, then he meditated dis-engagement,
but finding the work would require his best artifice, he dissembled his intent
a good while, seemed as active as before, was the first man of that Army, who
in this last expedition set foot on English ground; thus studying to appear
faithful and forward in petty things; that when time served, he might betray
them to better purpose; but the Scots marching over the Tine less disturbed
then he expected, he was much disappointed, of that opportunity he so longingly
attended, yet kept the same loyal inclinations toward the King, which taking
advantage of the Treaty, he found means to notify to his Majesty by letters,
wherein he professed his fidelity and most ready obedience to him; these
letters were by some of the Kings Bedchamber-men, the supposed The Kings
pockets rifled.
instruments of Hamilton, secretly taken out of his Majesty's pocket in the
night, copyed out, and communicated to the Covenanters at New Castle, who
concealing their information, did not withal conceal their malignity against
the Earl, but labored all they could to render him odious to the people, and
thereby unserviceable to his Majesty. This rifling of his Majesty's pockets
(worse then of his Coffers) was not the first experiment made upon him in that
kind, but of too familiar practice, to the betraying of his most secret
Councels, so that the Archbishop of Canterbury writing to the King concerning
the plot against him discovered by Andreas ab Habernfield puts in this caution,
concerning those letters. Sir I beseech you trust not your own Pockets with
them. Tacitly hinting what Legerdemain had been formerly exercised upon the
Kings Pockets.

The Parliament was approaching, whose convening was attended by this Kingdom
with so much longing, such impatience of desires, as every moment which
retarded it was interpreted a kind of grievance to the subject: for we began
now to think nothing could make us happy but a Parliament, and that no
Parliament could make us miserable: this was the sense of the greater part of
this Nation, and if this Parliament succeeded not adequate to some men's vote,
perhaps the miscarriage of their hopes may be somewhat imputed to this sense.
Overruling Providence delights often to order the operations of Agents, both
free and natural, counter to man's expectation; to teach us the vanity of that
Faith, which is founded upon causes subaltern.

Tuesday November the 3. being the day prefixed, and the Parliament The
Parliament sit.
assembled, his Majesty spoke.

My Lords,
The knowledge that I have of the Scott^sh The Kings speech.
Subjects, was the cause of my calling of the last Assembly of Parliament,
wherein if I had been believed, I do most sincerely think that things had not
fallen as we now see; but it is no wonder that men are so slow to believe that so
great a sedition should be raised upon so little ground. But now (my Lords and
Gentlemen) the honor and safety of this Kingdom lying so heavily at stake, I
am resolved to put my self freely upon the love and affections of my English
Subjects, as those of my Lords that waited on me at York very well remember I
there declared.

Therefore (my Lords) I shall not mention mine own interest, or that support I
might justly expect from you till the common safety be secured: though I must
tell you, I am not ashamed to say, those charges I have been at, have been
merely for the securing and good of this Kingdom; though the success has not
been answerable to my desires. Therefore I shall only desire you to consider
the best way both for the safety and security of this Kingdom, wherein there
are two things chiefly considerable. First, the chasing out of the Rebels. And
secondly, that other, in satisfying your just grievances, wherein I shall
promise you to concur so heartily and clearly with you, that all the world may
see my intentions have ever been, and shall be to make this a glorious and
flourishing Kingdom. There are only two things more that I shall mention to
you. The one is to tell you, that the Loan of money which I lately had from the
City of London, wherein the Lords who waited on me at York assisted me, will
only maintain my Army for two months from the beginning of that time it was
granted. Now (my Lords and Gentlemen) I leave it to your consideration, what
dishonor and mischief it might be, in case for want of money my Army be
disbanded, before the Rebels be put out of this Kingdom. Secondly, the
securing of the calamities the Northern people endure at this time, and so long
as the Treaty is on foot. And in this I may say not only they, but all this
Kingdom will suffer the harm, therefore I leave this also to your
consideration. For the ordering of the great affairs whereof you are to Treat
at this time; I am so confident of your love to me, and that your care is such
for the honor and safety of the Kingdom, that I shall freely leave to you
where to begin: only this, that you may the better know the state of all
affairs, I have commanded my Lord Keeper to give you a short and free account
of those things that have happened in this interim, with this Protestation,
that if his account be not satisfactory, as it ought to be, I shall whenever
you desire it, give you a full and perfect account of every particular. One
thing more I desire of you, as one of the greatest means to make this an happy
Parliament, that you on your parts, as I on mine, lay aside suspicion one of
another, as I promised my Lords at York, it shall not be my fault if this be
not an happy and good Parliament.


The King having ended, the Lord Keeper, in persuance of his Majesty's
commands, gave them a summary relation of all things relating to the Scottish
Invasion, I dare not say Rebellion, for that the King represented them under
that disgustfull character, was very ill resented by some considerable persons,
whereof his Majesty having notice, told the Parliament two days after, He must
needs call them Rebels, so long as they have an Army that do invade England.

The remainder of that week was spent partly in settling Committees for general
Grievances, and partly in set speeches of Rhetorically declaiming against, and
dissecting them.

Monday being the 9. of November. Petitions came thronging Several Petitions
against Grievances.
in from all Countries of the Kingdom, craving redress of the late general
exorbitances both in Church and State, as also from particular persons who had
smarted under the lash of the Star Chamber, Councel-Table, and High Commission
Court. November. the 10. these Petitions were delivered to Grand Committees, and
diverse ordered to be enlarged out of Prisons, to make their defenses,
especially Prynn, Bastwick, and Burton.

In the House of Lords, November. the 10. there was a complaint Privileges of
the Lords House violated.
made that their privileges had been temerated and infringed, by the search of
the Earl of Warwicks and the Lord Brooks studies, Cabinets and Pockets, upon
the dissolution of the last Parliament, and Sir William Beecher the instrument
employed in that action, was sent for to give account by what authority he
proceeded, who alleged he had a warrant therefore from the two Secretaries of
State, whereupon he was committed to the Fleet.

The next day Mr. Pym was sent from the Commons to the The Lieutenant of
Ireland impeached of Treason.
Lords with a message of Impeachment of High Treason, charged upon the
Lieutenant of Ireland, whereupon he was requested from the Parliament house,
and committed to the Usher of the Black Rod, and in order to his further
accusation, Sir George Ratcliff a great confident of the Lieutenants, and a
supposed concriminary with him, was two days after sent for out of Ireland by
a Serjant at Arms.

The two Armies in the North lay heavy upon these Countries The Northern Armies
in want.
where they quartered, and their pressures were like to increase unless some
supply were speedily dispatched to them; therefore November. the 12. the House
resolved upon an 100^00 l. for their present pay, and until the moneys could
be levied by way of Subsidy, they were borrowed of the City of London upon
interest; diverse members of the Parliament engaging for them

Monday the 16. the Lord Bishop of Lincoln was set free of Bishop of Lin coln
enlarged.
his imprisonment in the Tower, upon the suit of the House of Peers to his
Majesty, and the next day (being a day of Humiliation) he was brought into the
Abbey Church by six Bishops, and officiated there as Dean of Westminster before
the Lords. The House of Commons assembling according to their ancient mode in
St. Margarets Church, while the second-service was reading at the Communion
Table (suitable to the late and ancient practice,) it was disturbed by a Psalm
begun, at which many were amazed.

The Earl of Strafford entering now into his state of trans-figuration, from the
high pitch of honor, to the condition of durance, found his friends active and
awake to serve him with their best endeavors, in all things relating either to
his reputation, or safety. In order to which it was the 19. day precariously
moved, 1. That he might be bailed, diverse Lords freely tendering themselves to
that end; But the Lord Paget declared it was against the laws of the Land, and
privilege of the House, in which opinion the major part of the Peers
acquiesced. Then it was prayed he might have Council assigned him, and a
Solicitor, in regard he was under so strict a restraint. Both which were
condescended to.

The 21. one John James, son of Sir Henry James of Feversham Justice Howard
assaulted by a Papist.
in Kent, a Romish Catholic, stabbed Mr. Howard (a Justice of Peace for
Westminster) in Westminster Hall, to the great hazard of his life. The
impulsive to this savage assault, was supposed to be because Mr. Howard had
framed a list with the names of such Recusants, as were within the liberties of
Westminster, which he was to deliver up to the Committee for Religion. Mr.
James was committed to the Gatehouse, and the King sent an express to the
Commons that they should proceed severely against him.

The 28. Mr. Prynne and Mr. Burton were brought into London Pryn and Burton
enter London in triumph.
in great pomp and state, being conducted with many thousands of horse and
foot, having sprigs of Rosmarine in their hands, to the great dishonor and
defying of those Courts, which had passed sentence against them, and December.
the 3. were admitted into the house of Commons, to present their Petitions
against the Prosecutors.

The Parliament began now to appear so formidable to all who Secretary
Windebank flies.
labored of any bad character, as the very terror was a kind of proscription
and exile; upon this very skore Sir Francis Windebanck, Secretary of State,
having been questioned for reprieving Priests, and suspected guilty of worse
matters, December. 5. slily slipped aside into France.

The 7. it was unanimously voted by the Commons,

1. That the charge imposed upon the subject for the providing and furnishing
of Ships, and the Assessements for raising of money for Votes against Shipmoney.
that purpose (commonly called Shipmoney) are against the Laws of the Realm,
the Subjects right and property, contrary to former resolutions in Parliament,
and the Petition of Right.

2. That the extra-judicial opinion of the Judges published in the
Star Chamber, and enrolled in the Courts of Westminster, are in the whole and
in every part of them against the Laws of the Realm, etc. ut prius.

3. That the Writs (commonly called the Shipwrits) are against the Laws of the
Realm, etc. ut prius.

4. That the Judgment in the Exchequer in Mr. Hambdens case, is as to the
matter and substance thereof, against the Laws of the Realm, etc. ut prius.

From the damning of the Tax, to the censure of the contrivers of it, the
motion is natural, as to a proper consectary of it; and this consideration led
the Parliament first to fix upon the (so thought) leading man therein, the Lord
Keeper Finch, and the rest of the Judges; and accordingly the next day a
Committee was appointed to draw up a charge of high Treason against them.

December. the 11. Alderman Penington with some hundreds at his heels came to
the House of Commons, and presented a The London Petition against Bishops.
Petition from the Citizens (not from the City) of London, subscribed by 15000.
lamentably complaining against the Ecclesiastical Discipline and many
ceremonies of the Church of England; which raising too much debate for a speedy
determination, was transmitted to another time.

Their next advance in the work of reformation, was an inspection The late
Canons damned.
into the illegality of the late Convocation, and Canons thereof; and upon full
hearing of all arguments urged on both sides, the House resolved December. the
15. That the Clergy in a Synod or Convocation has no power to make Canons,
Constitutions or Laws to bind either Laity or Clergy, without a Parliament;
and the next day voted, That the Canons are against the fundamental Laws of
this Realm, against the Kings Prerogative, Property of the Subject, the right
of Parliaments, and do tend to faction and sedition.

Dependent upon this Declaration next follows the appointment of a Committee to
prepare a charge against the Archbishop of Canterbury, as one of prime
re-marque in forming of these Canons, and for other supposed Delinquences: the
Scots having complicated him with the Earl of Strafford in their grand
accusation against him (presented to the House of Lords by the Lord Paget,
December. the 17.) under the character of an incendiary in this national
difference, and the 18. was voted guilty of high Treason, and committed to the
Usher of the black Rod.

The same day there was also a select Committee nominated, to inquire into the
branches of the privileges of Parliament, by the commitment of several members
4. Caroli, as Sir Marmaduke Langdale, Mr. Crow, etc.

The Lord Keeper Finch observed himself to stand upon a Lord Keeper Finch
defends his innocence.
very tickle point, and taking notice of what was preparing against him,
thought it the best way to mollify the tumors of discontent against him, if
his Defense did anticipate the Commons charge, in Order to which the 21. he
made an elegant and quaint Oration tending to the Vindication of himself in
every particular, but notwithstanding all his incantations of Rhetorique, the
Commons stood fixed and immovable, and that very day voted him a Traitor upon
these considerations. 1. For refusing to read the Remonstrance against the Lord
Is voted Traitor.
Treasurer Weston 4o Caroli when the Parliament desired it.

2. For soliciting, persuading and threatening the Judges to deliver their
opinions for levying of Shipmoney.

3. For several illegal actions in Forest matters.

4. For ill offices done in moving the King to dissolve the last Parliament,
and causing his Majesty's Declaration thereupon to be put forth.



The next day he was accused before the Lords, but he was Flies.
early up, and before day gave justice the slip, withdrawing to a more
habitable Region.

The dys-crasie, the distempers of our state both Ecclesiastical and Political,
were eminently derived from the long dis-use of Parliaments, which are in truth
the strongest ligaments of the relation Paramount betwixt King and People: for
where a correspondency necessary to their joint interest, is overlong
dis-continued, there must needs be generated from that disacquaintance, many
mis-understandings between, much diffidence of each other; and passions severed
and not determined to public concernments. To encounter which inconvenience,
the Parliament were now modelling a Bill for a Triennial Parliament, and at the
same time Petitions came thronging one upon the neck of another from several
Counties, and one subscribed by 700. Presbyters, against the Hierarchy of
Bishops; which finding a reception in the House dis-agreeable to his Majesty's
sense, he called both Houses together, Ian. 23. at which time he first minded
them of their slow proceedings, and the inconveniences emerging therefrom.

As first the maintaining two Armies in the Kingdom at a charge so excessive.

Next the weak condition of his Navy and Forts whereby his enemies are much
encouraged, and his friends dis-heartned.

After which, he said;

I Cannot but take notice of some very The Kings Speech for Bishops.
strange Petitions, given in the name of several Counties, against the present
established Government of the Church, and of the great threats that Bishops
shall be no better then Ciphers, if not clear done away. Now I must tell you
that I make a difference between Reformation and Alteration of Government:
though I am for the first, I cannot give way to the latter. I will not say but
that the Bishops may have over-stretched their power, and encroached upon the
Temporal, which if you will correct, and reform the abuse, according to the
wisdom of former times, so far I am with you. Nay further, if upon serious
debate you shall show me that Bishops have some temporal authority inconvenient
to the State, and not so necessary to the Church for the support of Episcopacy,
I shall not be unwilling to persuade them to lay it down. Yet by this you must
not understand that I can consent to the taking away their voice in Parliament,
which they have so anciently enjoyed under so many my Ancestors, even before
the Conquest, and ever since, and which I conceive I am bound to maintain, as
one of the fundamental institutions of this Kingdom.

There is another Rock I desire you to eschew, and that not in substance but in
form, yet that form is so essential, that except it be reformed it will mar
the substance. There is a Bill given in for frequent Parliaments, the thing I
like well, that is to say, to have often Parliaments; but to give power to
Sheriffs, and Constables, and I know not whom to do my Office, that I cannot
yield unto; but to show you that I am desirous to please you in forms which
destroy not the substance, I am content you shall have an Act for this purpose,
but so reformed that it shall never trench upon mine honor, nor on that
inseparable Right of my Crown concerning Parliaments. To which purpose I have
commanded my learned Counsel to wait on you, my Lords, with such Propositions
as I hope will give you content. For I ingenuously confess, that frequent
Parliaments are the best means to perform a right understanding beeween me and
my Subjects.

To conclude, I have now showed you the state of my clear intentions, and the
Rocks I wish you to eschew, in all which you may perceive the desire I have to
give you content, as you shall find also by those Ministers I have and do
intend to employ in my affairs, for the pursuance of my good intentions, which
I doubt not will bring peace and happiness to my Subjects, to the contentment
of us all.

The same day one Goodman a Jesuit being condemned at the Goodman a Priest
reprieved.
Sessions at London, was reprieved by the King; whereupon Mr. Glyn was sent
with a message to the Nobles, to request their conjunction with them in a
Petition to his Majesty, to be informed who should dare to be instrumental in
the retarding of Justice in the face of a Parliament: which being assented to
by the Lords, the King by the Lord Privy Seal, Ian. 25. signified the cause to
be, in regard he was found guilty, as being a Priest, upon which score only,
neither his Father, nor Q. Elizabeth ever exercised the rigor of the Law. This
answer gave slender satisfaction to the Commons, so that another conference
Ian. 27. was had with the Lords, from which resulted a Remonstrance to his
Majesty to this effect.

That, considering the state and condition of this Remonstrance against Goodman
the Priest.
present time, they conceive the Law to be more necessary to be put in strict
execution, then at any time before.

First, because by diverse Petitions from several parts of this Kingdom,
complaints are made of the great increase of Popery and Superstition, and the
People call earnestly to have the Laws against Recusants put in execution.

Secondly, Priests and Jesuits swarm in great number in the Kingdom, and
appear here with such boldness and confidence, as if there were no Laws
against them.

Thirdly, it appears to the House that of late years, about the City of
London Priests and Jesuits have been discharged out of Prison, many of them
being condemned of high Treason.

Fourthly, the Parliament is credibly informed that at this present the Pope
has a Nuncio, or Agent resident in the City, and they have just cause to
believe it to be true.

Fifthly, the Papists as publicly, and with as much confidence and
importunity resort to Mass at Denmark house, St. James, and the Ambassadors
Chapel, as others do to their Parochial Churches.

Sixthly, there is found already so bad consequence of this Priest John Goodman
his reprieve, that the City of London being solicited by the Parliament for
their assistance in the advancement of money for the supply of his Majesty's
Army, have absolutely denied the same, for that very reason, which may become
an ill Precedent in the levying of the Subsidies.

Lastly, It is found that this Goodman has been twice before committed, and
discharged, and was somewhile a Minister in the Church of England.

Therefore they humbly desire the said John Goodman may be left to the Justice
of the Law.

To this Remonstrance the King Feb. 3. replied.

That it was against his mind that Popery The Kings Answer.
or Superstition should any way increase within this Kingdom, that he will
restrain the same by causing the Laws to be put in execution.

That he is resolved to provide against Jesuits and Papists by setting forth a
Proclamation speedily, commanding them to depart the Kingdom within one month,
of which if they fail, or shall return, then they shall be proceeded against
according to Law.

Concerning the Popes Nuncio (Rosetti) he has no Commission, but only to
retain correspondency between the Queen and the Pope, in things requisite for
the exercise of her Religion, which is warranted to her by the Articles of
marriage, which gave her a full liberty of conscience; yet he has persuaded
her, that since the misunderstanding of that Persons condition gives offense,
she will within a time convenient remove him.

Moreover, he will take special care to restrain his Subjects from resorting to
Mass at Denmark house, St. James's, and the Chapels of Ambassadors.

Lastly, concerning Goodman, because he will avoid the inconvenience of giving
so great discontent to his People, as his mercy may produce, therefore he does
remit his particular case to both Houses. But he desired them to take into
their considerations, the inconveniences that may upon this occasion fall upon
his Subjects, and other Protestants abroad, especially since it may seem to
other States to be a severity.

The Scots Army having possessed such ample and five months quarters in this
Kingdom, it may seem a wonder that all this while their affairs have not been
assigned agreeable quarters in this Narration, especially perpending and
considering the grand complication of interests, and how relative our highest
concernments were to their present posture. A preterition, an omission,
studiously and deliberatively resolved upon; a compartment distinct and by it
self, best sorting with such transactions, where the series of the story is not
enterlined nor disturbed with matters independent, and of a different kind. I
shall therefore summarily collect all those several parcels of bypast
occurrences, which had reference to them, not forgetting the true temporalities
wherein they did emerge.

What passed at the Treaty at Rippon has been already mentioned, which only
produced a respite, a cessation of Hostility; a plenary Pacification it could
not effect: this was reserved for a Treaty at London to form; in order to whith
the King Nov. the 23. issued forth a Commission to the former Lords, the Earls
of Bedford, Hartford, Essex, Salisbury, Warwick, Bristow, Holland and
Berkshire; to the Lords Wharton, Paget, Kimbolton, Brook, Paulet, Howard of
Estrick, Savil and Dunsmore, to any ten or more of them, to treat with the
Scottish Commissioners, or any seven of them being the Earls of Rothes, and
Dunfermling, John Lord Lowden, Sir Patrick Hepburn, Sir William Douglas,
William Drummond, John Smith Bailiff of Edinburgh, Alexander Wedderburn, Hugh
Kennedy, Alexander Henderson, and Archibald Iohnston to take into consideration
their Demands and compose all differences arising thereupon, in persuance of
which Commission these particulars were demanded and assented to.

The Scottish Commissioners demanded,

First, that his Majesty would be graciously pleased to command, that the Acts
of the late Parliament may be published in 1. Demand.
his Highness name, as our Sovereign Lord, with consent of the Estates of
Parliament convened by his Majesty's authority.

To this it is answered, and agreed 30. Decembris 1640. That forasmuch as the
Kings Majesty at the humble desire of his Answer.
Subjects, did call and convene a Parliament to be holden at Edinburgh, the 2.
of June 1640. wherein certain Acts were made, and agreed upon, which Acts his
Majesty is pleased to publish in his own name with the consent of the Estates,
and therefore commands that the said Acts bearing date the 2. day of June 1640.
be published with the Acts to be made in the next Session of the same
Parliament, and that all the said Acts, as well of the precedent, as of the
next Session to be holden, have in all time coming the strength of Laws, and
to be obeyed by all the Subjects of the Kingdom of Scotland.

Secondly, that the Castle of Edinburgh, and other strengths 2. Demand.
of the Kingdom should with the advice of the Estates of Parliament, according
to their first foundation, be furnished and used for defense and security of
the Kingdom.

It is agreed unto. Answer.


Thirdly, that Scotishmen within his Majesty's Dominions of 3. Demand.
England and Ireland, may be freed from censure for subscribing the Covenant,
and be no more pressed with Oaths and subscriptions unwarranted by their
Laws, and contrary to their National Oath, and Covenant approved by his
Majesty.

It is agreed December. the 8. 1640. that all those, who in his Majesty's
Dominions of England and Ireland have been imprisoned Answer.
or censured any way for subscribing of the Covenant, or for refusing to take
any other Oath contrary to the same, shall be freed of these censures and shall
be fully restored to their Liberties, Estates and Possessions; And for time
coming that the Subjects of Scotland, as Subjects of Scotland, shall not be
constrained to any Oath contrary to the Laws of that Kingdom, and the
Religion there established; But such of the Kingdom of Scotland as shall
transport themselves into the Kingdom of England or Ireland, and there be
settled Inhabitants, either by way of having inheritance or freehold, or by way
of settled Trades, shall be subject to the Laws of England or Ireland, and to
the Oaths established by the Laws and Acts of Parliament in the said
Kingdoms respectively, wherein they live. And the English and Irish shall have
the like privilege in Scotland.

Fourthly, that his Majesty would be pleased to declare, that whosoever shall
be found, upon Trial and Examination by the Estates 4. Demand,
of either of the two Parliaments, (they judging against the persons subject to
their own authority) to have been the Authors and Causers of the late and
present Troubles, and Combustions, whether by laboring to make and foment
Division betwixt the King and his People, or betwixt the two Nations, or any
other way; shall be liable to Censure of the said Parliaments respectively.

It is answered December. the 11. 1640. That his Majesty believes he has none
such about him; therefore, concerning that point, he can make no other
Declaration then that he is just, and that all his Courts of Justice are to be
free and open to all men. Our Answer.
Parliament in this Kingdom is now sitting, and the current Parliament of
Scotland, near approaching the time of their meeting; In either of which
Respective, he does not prohibit the Estates to proceed in trying and judging
of whatsoever his Subjects.

And whereas it was further demanded that none after the sentence of the
Parliament should have access to his Majesty, or be maintained or enjoy
places, or offices, and have credit or authority to inform or advise his
Majesty.

It is declared in his Majesty's name, December. the 30. 1640. That he will not
employ any Person or Persons in Office or Place, that shall be judged incapable
by sentence of Parliament. Nor will he make use of their service without the
consent of Parliament, nor grant them access to his Person.

Fifthly, that their Ships, and Goods, and all damages thereof may be restored.
5. Demand.


It is agreed Ian. the 7. 1640. That all ships taken and stayed should be
reciprocally restored on both sides. And that Answer.
the Scottish Commissioners having informed that about eighty ships of Scotland
are yet stayed in the Ports, and are like to suffer much loss if they shall
not be delivered into some hands who may have care of them. It is agreed that
warrants shall be presently granted for delivery of all their Ships. And that
four thousand pounds be presently advanced, for Cauking, Sails, Cordage and
other necessaries, for helping the present setting forth of the said Ships.

Sixthly, they desire from the justice and the kindness of the Kingdom of
England, Reparation concerning the losses which 6. Demand.
the Kingdom of Scotland has sustained, and the vast charges they have been
put unto by occasion of the late troubles.

In this Demand some did note in the Scots a tincture of oblivion, if not of
ingratitude, for the service England did them in what they call their first
Reformation, toward which work our Nation was so auxiliary, so assistant, yet
at the end brought them in no Bill of Charges. It was also noted that they
entitled these demands to Justice, which some interpreted to imply that they
came hither upon the invitation of eminent persons of this Nation; it was
supposed, and very like, of Pym, and Hambden. And though these Demands were not
definitive nor terminated in any particular sum, yet did they compute their
Losses and expenses to 514000. l. a formidable and prodigious sum, more then
ever was granted by the Subject to any King at once. This Demand took up long
debate in the House of Commons, and at last Feb. the 3 this answer was returned.

That this House thinks fit that a friendly assistance, and relief shall be
given toward supply of the losses of the Scots, and Answer.
that the Parliament did declare that they did conceive that the sum of three
hundred thousand pounds is a fit proportion for the friendly assistance and
relief formerly thought fit to be given toward supply of the losses and
necessities of their BRETHREN of Scotland, and that the House would in due time
take into consideration the manner how, and the time when, the same shall be
raised.

Seventhly, that as his Majesty has approved the Acts of the late Parliament,
wherein all such Declarations, Proclamations, Books, 7. Demand.
Libels and Pamphlets that have been made, written and published against his
Loyal and dutiful Subjects of Scotland, are recalled, and ordered to be
suppressed: So his Majesty may be pleased to give order that the same may be
suppressed, recalled and forbidden in England and Ireland; and that the
Loyalty, integrity and faithfulness of his Majesty's subjects of Scotland,
toward his Majesty's royal Person and Government may at the closing of this
treaty of Peace, and at the time of Public Thanksgiving for the same, be
made known in all places and all Parish Churches of his Majesty's Dominions.

It is agreed upon the 10. of February 1640. That all Declaratons,
Proclamations, Acts, Books, Libels and Pamphlets Answer.
that have been made and published against the Loyalty and durifulnesse of his
Majesty's Subjects of Scotland, shall be recalled, suppressed and forbidden in
England and Ireland. And that this be reciprocal in Scotland, if any such have
been made or published there in prejudice of his Majesty's honor. And this
upon diligent enquiry to be done by the Authority of Parliament next sitting in
Scotland, of which the Commissioners of Scotland do promise to have an especial
care. And we do also agree, that when it shall please Almighty God to grant an
happy close of this Treaty of Peace, the Loyalty of his Majesty's Subjects of
Scotland shall be made known at the time of public Thanksgiving, in all
places, and particularly in the Parish Churches of his Majesty's Dominions.

That all Monuments, Tokens and shows of Hostility upon the borders of the two
Kingdoms may be taken away. That not only the Garrisons of Barwick and Carlisle
may be removed, but that the works may be slighted and the Places dismantled.
8. Demand.


To this Demand, being offered but the 12. of this month, no answer was as yet
returned.

Unhappy Counsels have of late put the King out of possession of his Subjects
affections, resolved he was no opportunity should Suggestions.
escape him which might promove his re-endeerement with them; upon which
inducement being lately solicited by the Dutch Ambassadors for a match between
William the young Prince of Orange and the Lady Mary his daughter, and he
inclined to entertain it, yet A match propounded betwixt the Lady Mary and
Prince of Orange.
would he not make any conclusion therein, until he had assumed the Parliament
as Partners in his consultations, whereupon Feb. 10. he thus imparted his mind
to the Lords.

My Lords,
That freedom and confidence which I The Kings Speech to the Lords about it.
expressed at the beginning of this Parliament, to have of your love and
fidelity toward my Person and Estate, has made me at this time come hither to
acquaint you with that Alliance and Confederacy which I intend to make with the
Prince of Orange, and the States, which before this time I did not think
expedient to do, because that part which I do desire your advice and assistance
upon, was not ready to be treated on. I will not trouble you with a long
digression, by showing the steps of this Treaty, but leave you to be satisfied
in that by those who under me do manage that affair. Only I shall show you the
reasons which have induced me to it, and in which I expect your assistance and
counsel. The Considerations that have induced me to it are these.

First, the matter of Religion, here needs no dispensation, no fear that my
Daughters conscience may be any way perverted.

Secondly, I do esteem that a strict Alliance and Confederacy with the States
will be as useful to this Kingdom, as that with any of my Neighbors,
especially considering their affinity, neighborhood and way of their strength.

And lastly, (which I must never forget in these occasions) the use I may make
of this Alliance toward the establishing of my Sister and Nephews.

Now to show you in what I desire your assistance, you must know that the
Articles of Marriage are in a manner concluded, but not to be totally ratified
until that of Alliance be ended, and agreed, which before I demanded your
assistance, I did not think fit to enter upon. And that I may not leave you too
much at large how to begin that Council, I present you here the Propositions
which are offered by me to the States Ambassadors for that intent. And so my
Lords I shall only desire you to make as much expedition in your Councels, as
so great a business shall require, and shall leave your Lordships to your own
free debate.

No one proposition of his Majesty, since the first sitting of this Parliament,
was so generally passant in both Houses as this, none received with greater
alacrity, none embraced with so clear a vote, and which was a wonder, in a
moment of so many jealousies, no fear of a plot upon either our Liberties or
Religion: but the truth is, those fears now resulted from another party, the
Romish Catholics, and by rumors of their plots, the Kingdom was almost
perpetually alarmed, so as

The next day four Members of the House of Commons Plots of the papists.
were sent up to the Lords with a message, importing the discovery of a great
design in hand by the Papists, as an Army of 15000. in Lancashire, and 8000.
in Ireland, with many thousands in other places well armed, and in pay, raised
by the Earl of Strafford, Earl of Worcester and others.

Feb. 13. Sir Robert Berkly was accused by a motion of the Commons Judge Berkly
impeacht of high Treason.
of high Treason, and by the Usher of the black Rod taken the next day from his
seat in the Kings Bench, and carried away under the notion of his prisoner.

The Bill for the Triennial Parliaments having past both Houses was animated
with the Royal assent Feb. the 16. his Majesty The King passes the Bill for
the Trie^nial Parliament.
minding the Parliament of the grandeur of this Grace, and what he expected in
way of gratitude from them, in these words.

My Lords,
And you the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the House of Commons; you His
Speech concerning it.
may remember when both Houses were with me at the Banqueting house at
Whitehall, I did declare unto you two Rocks I wished you to shun, this is the
one of them, and of that consequence that I think never Bill passed here in
this House of more favor to the Subject then this is: And if the other Rock be
as happily past over, as this shall be at this time; I do not know what you can
ask, for ought I can see at this time, that I can make any question to yield
unto. Therefore I mention this to show unto you the sense I have of this Bill,
and the Obligation, as I may say, that you have to me for it; for hitherto (to
speak freely) I had no great encouragement to do it.

If I should look to the outward face of your actions, or proceedings, and not
to the inward intentions of your hearts, I might make question of doing it.

Hitherto you have gone on in that which concerns your selves to amend, and
not in those things that merely concern the strength of this Kingdom, neither
for the State nor mine own particular.

This I mention, not to reproach you, but to show you the state of things as
they are, you have taken the Government all in pieces, and I may say it is
almost off the Hinges. A skillful Watch-maker to cleanse his Watch will take it
a sunder, and when it is put together it will go better, so that he leaves not
out one pin of it.

Now as I have done all this on my part, you know what to do on yours; and I
hope you shall see clearly that I have performed really what I expressed to you
at the beginning of this Parliament, of the great trust I have of your
affections to me; and this is the great expression of trust, that before you do
any thing for me, I do put such a confidence in you.

At the same time he signed also the Bill of Subsidies, both which Acts were so
pleasing to the Parliament, that upon a conference between both Houses it was
unanimously agreed to wait upon his Majesty at White Hall, and by the Lord
Keeper (Sir Edward Littleton) to return him their humble thanks. And that night
Bonefires and other tokens of joy were made in the City by order of the
Parliament.

February the 26. the Archbishops charge compounded of 14. The Archbishop
accused of high Treson.
Articles was preferred in the Lords House by Mr. Pym, whereupon he was ordered
to the Tower, but upon his humble suit to the Lords, his Commitment thither was
respited until March the first.

But these proceedings against him did not give plenary satisfaction to all,
most cried aloud for a Reformation in the Hierarchy it self, many would
detrench from them their secular power, and votes in Parliament, nay some were
malcontent unless the hole order were eradicated; and this was now
vehemently pressed by the City Petition, now under consideration of the
Committee: a mighty debate there was about this time in the House of Commons
upon this Subject, and no arguments omitted which might officiate to either
end; amongst the rest Episcopacy had not a faster friend, nor the City Petition
a stouter Antagonist, then the Lord Digby, who spoke for the one and against
the other no man to better purpose, and summarily thus.

That he looked not upon that Petition, as a Petition The Lord Digbie^ Speech
for Episcopacy.
from the City of London, but from he knew not what 15000. Londoners all that
could be got to subscribe. That therein he discovered a mixture of things
Contemptible, Irrational, and Presumptuous.

Contemptible. Did ever any man think that the fables of Ovid, or Tom Coriats
news, should by 15000. have been presented to a Parliament as a motive for the
extirpation of Bishops; For the scandal of the Rocket, the Lawn-sleeves, the
four-cornered Cap, the Cope, the Surplice, the Hood, the Canonical Coat, etc.
may pass pass as arguments of the same weight. He did not know whether it
were more preposterous to infer the extirpation of Bishops from such weak
arguments, or to attribute, as they do, to Church Government all the civil
grievances. Not a Patent, not a Monopoly, not the price of a Commodity raised,
but these men make Bishops the cause of it.

Irrational. A Petition ought to be like a kind of syllogism, the Conclusion,
the Prayer, ought to hold proportion with the Premises, that is, with the
Complaints, and to be deduced from them: but in this Petition there was a
multitude of Allegations, of Instances, of Abuses, and depravations in Church
Government; and what is thence inferred? Let the use be utterly abolished for
the abuses sake. For the movables sake to take away the solid good of a thing;
is just as reasonable, as to root up a good tree, because there is a Canker in
the Branches.

Presumptuous. What greater boldness can there be then for Petitioners to
prescribe to a Parliament what and how it should do? for a multitude to teach a
Parliament what is, and what is not, the Government according to Gods word?
Again, it is high presumption to Petition point blank against a Government in
force by Law: the honor of former Acts must be upheld, because all the
reverence we expect from future times to our own Acts, depends upon our
supporting the dignity of former Parliaments.

He said, We all agree that a reformation of Church Government is most
necessary: But to strike at the root he can never give his vote before three
things were cleared to him.

First, That no rule, no boundaries can be set to Bishops able to restrain them
from such exorbitances.

Secondly, Such a frame of Government must be laid before us, as no time, no
corruption, can make liable to inconveniences proportionable with those we
abolish.

Thirdly, Whether the new model is practicable in the State and consistent with
Monarchy.

For the first, he was confident a Triennial Parliament would be a curb
sufficient to order them.

For the second, he was also confident that if we did listen to those who would
extirpate Episcopacy, we should in state of every Bishop we put down in a
Diocese, set up a Pope in every Parish.

For the last, he was of opinion that it would be unsafe for Monarchy, for if
the Presbyterian Assemblies should succeed, they would assume a power to
excommunicate Kings, as well as other men. And if Kings came once to be
excommunicated, men are not like to care much what becomes of them.

In conclusion, though Episcopacy kept her essentials still, yet was she much
mutilated in her former glory. The House of Commons voting March the 10. That
no Bishop shall have any vote in Parliament, nor any judicial power in the
Star Chamber, nor bear any sway in Temporal affairs, and that no Clergy man
shall be in Commission of the Peace.

I am now tending apace to the Earl of Straffords Trial, in order and relative
to which, it will be necessary to premise what antecedently occurred.

The Commons having preferred their Accusation against him, as I said before, a
formal charge disposed into Articles was The Charge against the Earl of
Strafford is given in.
next of course to follow. These at first they digested into 7. heads, which
consisting only of generals, were after distributed into 28. particulars; and
Ian. the 30. presented by Mr. Pym to the Peers, as their complete charge
against the Earl: who being immediately sent for, and having heard it read, he
desired three months day to answer; the reason of this desire was after
signified to the Commons to be, in regard some of the Treasons were of 14.
years standing, and could not on the sudden be answered: Again as his Charge
was long, so his Answer must be commensurate, the rough draught whereof being
200. sheets of paper, it could not be engrossed so soon as was desired.
Nevertheless the Commons plied the Lords with such incessant applications, as
he was enforced to finish, and exhibit it to the Lords Feb. the 24. when it was
read in the Kings audience; and in the House of Commons the next day after.

The Earls Answer being given in, there ensued several questions, And his
Answer.
which were the subjects of great debate between the Lords and Commons.

First, Concerning the allowance of Council. The Commons alleging that in
cases of high Treason Council cannot regularly be allowed; which the Lords said
was true in pleading matters of fact, not in matters of Law. This was in some
sort granted at length by the lower House.

Secondly, Concerning the place of Trial, the Lords desiring it might be in
their own House, but the Commons opposed it, because they intended to manage
their accusation by members of their own House in the presence of their whole
House; to which purpose the Lords House was thought too little, whereupon
Westminster Hall was agreed upon.

Lastly, The Commons were moved to declare in what quality they would sit,
whether as a full House with their Speaker, or as a Committee only; to which
they replied, that they intended to come in the body of their House, which the
Lords not assenting to, they at last yielded to come as a Committee.

As Westminster Hall was the place, so Monday the 22. of Westminster Hall
appointed for his Trial.
March was the first day prefixed of the Earls compearing. Never was there in
this Isle a scene of Justice more magnificent reared for any Subject, yea when
even Majesty her self received a like sentence from that place, her Trial was
nothing so majestique. Scaffolds were erected on either side of the Hall, there
the Commons sat uncovered, and in the midst of the lower ascent the Peers;
behind, but raised above them, there was placed a Chair and Cloth of State for
the King, on either side whereof was a close Gallery for the King, Queen and
Prince to be private, suitable to the ancient mode.

The Bishops were excluded by ancient Canon Laws of the Council. Tol^^. 4. c.
30. and undecim. c. 6.
Councels of Toledo to be assistant in causes of Blood or Death, as
dis-agreeable to their function, who officiate so much toward the unbloudy
sacrifice, as also to balance the strictness of their Hoc agit in Ecclesia
Excommunicatio quod Interfectio. Aug.
own interdict, which prohibs Laymen a vote with them in the Act of
Excommunication; this being a Spiritual slaughter, as the other a Corporal.
Upon which consideration they absented themselves.

The Earl of Arundel was Lord High Steward, and the Earl of Lindsey Lord High
Constable. The Earl of Strafford being brought to the Bar, the Lord High
Steward declared to him, that he was called thither to answer to the
impeachment of High Treason preferred against him by the Commons of England and
Ireland. Then his Accusation was read, and next his Answer to it, in which most
part of that day being spent, the Court arose.

The next day he being brought again to the Bar, the House of Commons began
with the first 7. General Articles, declaring how he had subverted the
Fundamental Laws of England and Ireland; this particular was managed by Mr.
Pym; next there was a Paper produced sealed, which being opened and read,
appeared to be sent from the Parliament in Ireland, declaring that the Commons
there had voted the Earl guilty of High Treason, whereat the Earl much
astonished and transported with passion said, There was a Conspiracy against him
to take away his life. The words were no sooner out of his mouth, then the
House of Commons (who stood diligent Sentinels to watch every syllable he
spoke) required Justice against him, because he standing impeacht of High
Treason, accused the Parliaments of two Kingdoms of a conspiracy against him;
whereupon he humbly craved pardon for the inconsiderateness of the expression,
protesting seriously he did not thereby intend either Parliament, but some
particular persons.

Then Mr. Pym moved that whereas there was a discovery made of three Articles
more to be annexed to his charge, he might presently be commanded to reply to
them; to which the Lieutenant answered, that the Process being closed, he
hoped he should not be ordered to answer any adventitious and unexpected charge
without more convenient time assigned. But upon consideration of the Articles,
the Lords finding them to be of no great importance, he was urged to a present
reply. The Articles were;

First, That he had withdrawn 24000. l. (some copies have 40000. l.) sterling
from the Exchequer in New Articles against the Earl.
Ireland, and converted to his own use.

Secondly, That in the beginning of his Government the Garrisons of Ireland had
been maintained by the English Treasury.

Thirdly, That he had advanced Popish and Infamous persons, as the Bishop of
Waterford, and others to the prime Rooms in the Church of Ireland.

To the first he said, That England was indebted The Earls Answer.
to Ireland that sum, and that he took up the money upon his own Credit, and
paid it in again, and that he had the Kings authority for the same, producing
his Majesty's Letter.

To the second, That the Garrisons had been burdensome to England in former
Deputies times; that he so found them, but that he had so improved the Kings
Revenues there, as they were not onerous at all to England.

To the last, That he never preferred any but such whom he conceived to be
conscientious and honest men; that he could not prophecy of men's future
conditions; and for the Bishop of Waterford he has satisfied the Law.

This days encounter between the Parliament and Earl seemed a dispute only at
wasters, these generals being not impregned with any deadly quality.

The next day March the 24. they fell to sharp, that is to enforce the
Particular Articles, in order as they were disposed, which in regard they were
the formal principles of the Earls Tragique end, I reserved for this place,
wherein I shall so represent them, as the Reader may (as in the same Table) at
once behold the Commons Charge and the Earls Defense run lateral and in pale
each with other, omitting such as not being urged, signified nothing.

The further Impeachment of Thomas Earl of Strafford by the Commons assembled
in PARLIAMENT.
The First Article was not insisted upon.
II.
That shortly after the obtaining of a Commission dated the 21. of March, in
the 8. year of his now Majesty's reign (to wit) the last day of August then
next following, he the said Earl (to bring his Majesty's liege people into a
dislike of his Majesty and of his Government, and to terrify the Justices of
the Peace from executing of the Laws; he, the said Earl, being then President
of the Kings Council in the Northern parts of England, and a Justice of Peace)
did publicly at the Assizes held for the County of York in the City of York,
in and upon the said last day of August, declare and publish before the people
there attending for the administration of Justice according to the Law, and in
the presence of the Justices sitting, that some of the Justices were all for
Law, but they should find that the Kings little finger should be heavier then
the loins of the Law.

Testified by Sir David Fowls and others.

The Earls Reply.
That Sir David Fowls was his professed enemy, that his words were clearly
inverted, that his expression was, That the little finger of the Law (if not
moderated by the Kings gracious clemency) was heavier then the Kings loins.
That these were his words, he verified; First, by the occasion of them, they
being spoken to some whom the Kings favor had then enlarged from Imprisonment
at York, as a motive to their thankfulness to his Majesty. Secondly, by Sir
William Penniman a Member of the House, who was then present, and heard the
words. Which Sir William declaring to be true: the House of Commons required
Justice of the Lords against him, because he had voted the Articles as a Member
of the House; whereupon Sir William wept.

III.
That the Realm of Ireland having been time out of mind March 25. 1641.
annexed to the Imperial Crown of this his Majesty's Realm of England, and
governed by the same Laws: the said Earl being Lord Deputy of that Realm, to
bring his Majesty's liege people of that Kingdom likewise into dislike of his
Majesty's government, and intending the subversion of the fundamental Laws and
settled Government of that Realm, and the distraction of his Majesty's liege
people, there did upon the 30. day of September, in the ninth year of his now
Majesty's reign, in the City of Dublin (the chief City of that Kingdom, where
his Majesty's Privy Counsel, and Courts of Justice do ordinarily reside, and
whither the Nobility and Gentry of that Realm do usually resort for Justice) in
a public Speech before diverse of the Nobility and Gentry, and before the
Mayor, Aldermen, and Recorder, and many Citizens of Dublin, and other his
Majesty's liege people, declare and publish, that Ireland was a conquered
Nation, and that the King might do with them what he pleased; and speaking of
the Charters of the former Kings of England made to that City, he further said,
that their Charters were nothing worth, and did bind the King no further then
he pleased.

Testified by the Earl of Cork and two other Lords.

The Earls Reply.
That if he had been over liberal of his tongue for want of discretion, yet
could not his Ann. Christi 1641.
words amount to Treason, unless they had been revealed within 14. days as he
was informed. As to the Charge he said, True it is, he said Ireland was a
conquered Nation, which no man can deny; and that the King is the Lawgiver, in
matters not determined by Acts of Parliament, he conceived all Loyal Subjects
would grant.

IV.
That Richard Earl of Cork having sued out process in course of Law for
recovery of his possessions, from which he was put by color of an order made
by the said Earl of Strafford, and the Council Table of the said Realm of
Ireland. The said Earl of Strafford upon a paper Petition without legal
proceedings, did the 20, day of February, in the 11. year of his now Majesty's
reign, threaten the said Earl of Cork (being then a Peer of the said Realm) to
imprison him, unless he would surcease his suit, and said, That he would have
neither Law nor Lawyers dispute or question any of his orders. And the 20. day
of March, in the said 11. year the said Earl of Strafford speaking of an order
of the said Council Table of that Realm, made in the time of King James, which
concerned a Lease which the said Earl of Cork claimed in certain Rectories or
tithes which the said Earl of Cork alleged to be of no force, said, That he
would make the said Earl and all Ireland know, so long as he had the Government
there, any act of State, there made, or to be made, should be as binding to the
subjects of that Kingdom, as an Act of Parliament: And did question the said
Earl of Cork in the Castle Chamber, upon pretense of breach of the said order
of Council table, and did sundry other times, and upon sundry other occasions,
by his words and speeches arrogate to himself a power above the fundamental
Laws, and established government of that Kingdom, and scorned the said Laws
and established Government.

The Earls Reply.
It were hard measure for a March 27.
man to lose his honor, and his life, for an hasty word, or because he is no
wiser then God has made him. As for the words, he confessed them to be true,
and thought he said no more then what became him, considering how much his
Masters honor was concerned in him, that if a proportionable obedience was not
as well due to Acts of State, as to Acts of Parliament, in vain did Councels
sit. And that he had done no more then what former Deputies had done, and then
what was agreeable to his Instructions for the Council Table, which he
produced. And that if those words were Treason, they should have been revealed
within 14. days.

V.
That according to such his Declarations and Speeches, the said Earl of
Strafford did use and exercise a power above, and against, and to the
subversion of the fundamental Laws, and stablished Government of the said
Realm of Ireland, extending such his power to the goods, free-holds,
inheritances, liberties and lives of his Majesty's Subjects of the said Realm,
viz. The said Earl of Strafford the 12. day of December. Anno Dom. 1635. in the
time of full peace, did in the said Realm of Ireland, give and procure to be
given against the Lord Mount-Norris (then and yet a Peer of Ireland, and then
Vice-treasurer and receiver general of the Realm of Ireland, and one of the
principal Secretaries of State, and Keeper of the Privy Signet of the said
Kingdom) a sentence of death by a Council of War called together by the said
Earl of Strafford, without any warrant or authority of Law, or offense
deserving any such punishment. And he the said Earl did also at Dublin within
the said Realm of Ireland, in the month of March in the 14. year of his
Majesty's Reign, without any legal or due proceedings or trial, give or cause
to be given, a sentence of death against one other of his Majesty's subjects,
whose name is yet unknown, and caused him to be put to death in execution of
the said sentence.

The Earls reply.
That there was then a standing March 28.
Army in Ireland, and Armies cannot be governed but by Martial Law: that it
has been put in constant practice with former Deputies, that had the sentence
been unjustly given by him, the crime could amount but to Felony at most, for
which he hoped he might as well expect pardon from his Majesty as the Lord
Conway and Sir Jacob Astley had for doing the like in the late Northern Army.

That he neither gave sentence, nor procured it against the Lord Mount-Norris,
but only desired justice against the Lord for some affront done to him as he
was Deputy of Ireland.

That the said Lord was judged by a Council of War, wherein he sat bare all
the time, and gave no suffrage against him; that also to evidence himself a
party, he caused his brother Sir George Wentworth, in regard of the neerenesse
of blood, to decline all acting in the process.

Lastly, though the Lord Mount-Norris justly deserved to die, yet he obtained
his pardon from the King.

VI.
That the said Earl of Strafford without any legal proceedings, March 30.
and upon a paper Petition of Richard Rolstone, did cause the said Lord
Mount-Norris to be disseised and put out of possession of his freehold and
inheritance of his Manor and Tymore in the County of Armagh, in the Kingdom
of Ireland, the said Lord Mount-Norris having been two years before in quiet
possession thereof.

The Earls Reply.
That he conceived the Lord Mount-Norris was legally divested of his
possessions, there being a suite long depending in Chancery, and the Plaintiff
complaining of delay, he upon the Complainants Petition called unto him the
Master of the Rolls, Lord Chancellor, and Lord Chief Justice of the Common
pleas, and upon proofs in Chancery decreed for the Plaintiff. Wherein he said
he did no more, then what other Deputies had done before him.

VII.
That the said Earl of Strafford, in the Term of Holy Trinity, in the 13. year
of his now Majesty's reign, did cause a case commonly called the case of
Tenures upon defective titles, to be made and drawn up without any jury or
trial, or other legal process, and without the consent of parties, and did
then procure the Judges of the said Realm of Ireland to deliver their opinions
and resolutions to that case, and by color of such opinions, did without any
legal proceeding, cause Thomas Lord Dillon, a Peer of the said Realm of
Ireland, to be put out of po^ession of diverse Lands and Tenements, being his
freehold in the County of Mago and Rosecomen, in the said Kingdom, and diverse
others of his Majesty's subjects to be also put out of possession, and diseised
of their freehold by color of the same resolution, without legal proceedings,
whereby many hundreds of his Majesty's subjects were undone, and their families
uterly ruined.

The Earls Reply.
That the Lord Dillon with others producing his Patent according to a
Proclamation on the behalf of his Majesty, the said Patent was questionable,
upon which a case was drawn and argued by Council, and the Judges delivered
their opinions. But the Lord Dillon or any other, was not bound thereby, nor
put out of their possessions, but might have traverst the office, or otherwise
have legally proceeded, notwithstanding the said opinion.

VIII.
That the said Earl of Strafford upon a Petition exhibited in October, 1635. by
Thomas Hibbots against dame Mary Hibbots widow, to him the said Earl of
Strafford, recommended the said Petition to the Council Table of Ireland, where
the most part of the Council gave their vote and opinion for the said Lady, but
the said Earl finding fault herewith, caused an order to be entered against the
said Lady, and threatened her, that if she refused to submit thereunto, he would
imprison her, and fine her five hundred pound; that if she continued obstinate,
he would continue her imprisonment, and double her fine every month by month,
whereof she was enforced to relinquish her estate in the Land questioned in the
said Petition, which shortly was conveyed to Sir Robert Meredeth, to the use of
the said Earl of Strafford.

And the said Earl in like manner did imprison diverse others of his Majesty's
subjects upon pretense of disobedience to his orders and decrees, and other
illegal commands by him made for pretended debts, titles of Lands, and other
causes in an arbitrary and extrajudicial course, upon Paper Petitions to him
preferred, and no other cause legally depending.

The Earls Reply.
That true it is he had voted March 31.
against the Lady Hibbots, and thought he had reason so to do, the said Lady
being discovered, by fraud and circumvention, to have bargained for Lands of a
great value, for a small sum. And he denied that the said Lands were after sold
to his use, or that the major part of the Council Board voted for the Lady; the
contrary appearing by the sentence under the hand of the Clerk of the Council:
which being true, he might well threaten her with Co^mitment in case she
disobeyed the said order. Lastly, were it true that he were criminal therein,
yet were the offense but a misdemeanour, no treason.

IX.
That the said Earl of Strafford the 16. day of Feb. in the 12. April 1.
year of his now Majesty's reign, assuming to himself a power above and against
Law, took upon him by a general Warrant under his hand, to give power to the
Lord Bishop of Down, and Connor his Chancellor, or Chancellors, and their
several Officers thereto to be appointed, to attatch and Arrest the Bodies of
all such of the meaner and poorer sort, who after citation should either refuse
to appear before them, or appearing should omit, or deny to perform, or
undergo all lawful decrees, sentences, and orders issued, imposed or given out
against them, and them to commit and keep in the next Jail until they should
either perform such sentences, or put in sufficient Bail to show some reason
before the Council Table, of such their contempt and neglect, and the said
Earl, the day and year last mentioned, signed and issued a Warrant to that
effect, and made the like Warrant to send all other Bishops and their
Chancellors in the said Realm of Ireland to the same effect.

The Earls Reply.
That such Writs had been usually granted by former Deputies to Bishops in
Ireland; nevertheless, being not fully satisfied with the convenience thereof,
he was sparing in granting of them, until being informed that diverse in the
Diocese of Down were somewhat refractary, he granted Warrants to that Bishop,
and hearing of some disorders in the execution, he called them in again.

X.
That the said Earl of Strafford being Lord Lieutenant, or Deputy April 2.
of Ireland, procured the Customs of the Merchandise exported out, and
imported into that Realm to be farmed to his own use.

And in the ninth year of his now Majesty's Reign, he having then interest in
the said Customs (to advance his own gain and lucre) did cause and procure the
native commodities of Ireland, to be rated in the book of Rates for the
Customs (according to which the Customs were usually gathered) at far greater
values and prices, then in truth they were worth; (that is to say) every hide
at 20. shillings, which in truth was worth but five shillings, every stone of
Wool at thirteen shillings fourpence, though the same ordinarily were worth
but five shillings, at the utmost but nine shillings; by which means the
Custom which before was but a twentyeth part of the true value of the
commodity, was inhanced sometimes to a fifth part, and sometimes to a fourth,
sometimes to a third part of the true value, to the great oppression of the
subjects, and decay of Merchandise.

The Earls reply.
That his Interest in the Customs of Ireland accrued to him by the assignation
of a Lease from the Duchess of Buckingham: that the book of Rates, by which
the Customs were gathered, was the same which was established by the Lord
Deputy Faulkland, Anno 1628. some years before he was employed thither. That as
he has been just and faithful to his Master the King, by increasing his
Revenue; so has he also much bettered the Trade, and shipping of that Kingdom.

XI.
That the said Earl, in the ninth year of his now Majesty's Reign, did by his
own will and pleasure, and for his own lucre restrain the exportation of the
commodities of that Kingdom without his license, as namely Pipe-staves, and
other commodities, and then raised great sums of money for licensing of
exportation of those commodities, and dispensation of the said restraints
imposed on them, by which means the Pipe-staves were raised from four pound ten
shillings, or five pound per thousand, to ten pound, and sometimes eleven pound
per thousand: and other commodities were inhanced in the like proportion, and
by the same means by him the said Earl.

The Earls Reply.
That Pipe-staves were prohited in King James his time, and not exported but by
license, paying 6 s. 8 d. a thousand, and that he had not raised so much
thereby to himself, as his predecessors had done for such licenses.

XII.
That the said Earl being Lord Deputy of Ireland, on the ninth day of Ian. in
the thirteenth year of his Majesty's Reign, did then under color to regulate
the importation of Tobacco into the said Realm of Ireland, issue a Proclamation
in his Majesty's name, prohibiting the importation of Tobacco without license
of him and the Council, therefrom and after the first day of May, Anno Dom.
1638. After which restraint, the said Earl, notwithstanding the said restraint,
caused diverse great quantities of Tobacco to be imported to his own use, and
fraighted diverse ships with Tobacco, which he imported to his own use: and that
if any ship brought Tobacco into any Port there, the said Earl and his Agents
used to buy the same to his own use, at their own price. And if that the owners
refused to let him have the same at under values, then they were not permitted
to vent the same; by which undue means the said Earl having gotten the whole
Trade of Tobacco into his own hands, he sold it at great and excessive prices,
such as he list to impose for his own profit.

And the more to assure the said Monopoly of Tobacco, he the said Earl on the
23. day of Feb. in the 13. year aforesaid, did issue another Proclamation;
commanding that none should put to sale any Tobacco by wholesale, from and
after the last day of May, then next following, but what should be made up into
Rols, and the same sealed with two seals by himself appointed, one at each end
of the Roll. And such as was not sealed to be seized, appointing six pence the
pound for a reward to such persons as should seize the same: and the persons in
whose custody the unsealed Tobacco should be found to be committed to Jail:
which last Proclamation was covered by a pretense of the restraining of the
sale of unwholesome Tobacco, but it was truly to advance the said Monopoly.

Which Proclamation the said Earl did rigorously put in execution, by seizing
the goods, fining, imprisoning, whipping, and putting the offenders against the
same Proclamation on the pillory, as namely, Barnaby Hubbard, Edward Covena,
John Tumen, and diverse others: and made the Officers of State, and Justices of
Peace, and other Officers to serve him in compassing and executing these unjust
and undue courses. By which cruelties and unjust Monopolies, the said Earl
raised 100000. pounds per annum gain to himself. And yet the said Earl, though
he inhanced the Customs, where it concerned the Merchants in general, yet drew
down the impost formerly taken on Tobacco, from six pence the pound to three
pence the pound, it being for his own profit so to do. And the said Earl, by
the same, and other rigorous and undue means raised several other Monopolies
and unlawful exactions for his own gain, viz. on Starch, Iron pots, Glasses,
Tobacco pipes, and several other commodities.

The Earls Reply.
That before his time the King had but 10. or 20. l. per annum for that
Custom, which now yielded 20000. l. For the Proclamation, it was not set out
by his means principally, or for his private benefit, but by consent of the
whole Council. The prices of Tobacco not exceeding two shillings the pound.
And this he conceives cannot be made treason, were all the Article granted, but
only a Monopoly, for which he was to be fined.

XIII.
That Flax being one of the principal and native Commodities April 3.
of that Kingdom of Ireland, the said Earl having gotten great quantities
thereof into his hands, and growing on his own Lands, did issue out several
Proclamations, viz. one dated the one and twentieth day of May, in the eleventh
of his Majesty's reign, and the other dated the one and thirtieth of January,
in the same year, thereby prescribing and enjoining the working of Flax into
Yarne and Thread, and the ordering of the same in such ways, wherein the
Natives of that Kingdom were unpractised and unskilful: which Proclamations so
issued, were, by his Commands and Warrants to his Majesty's Justices of Peace,
and other Officers, and by other rigorous means, put in execution, and the Flax
wrought or ordered in other manner then as the said Proclamation prescribed,
was seized and employed to the use of him and his agents, and thereby the said
Earl endeavored to gain, and did gain in effect the sole sale of that native
commodity.

The XIV. Article was not urged.

The Earls reply.
That he did endeavor to advance the manufacture of linen, rather then of
woollen, because the last would be the greater detriment to England. That the
Primate of Ireland, the Archbishop of Dublin, Chancellor Lofius, and the Lord
Mount-Norris, al of the Council, and subscribers of the Proclamation, were as
liable to the charge as himself. That the reducing of that Nation by orders of
the Council Board to the English Customs from their more savage usages, as
drawing horses by their tails, etc. had been of former practice: that the
project was of so il avail to him as he was the worse for the manufacture
thirty thousand pounds at least, by the loome he had set up at his own charge.

XV.
That the said Earl of Strafford traitorously and wickedly devised and
contrived by force of Arms in a warlike manner to subdue the Subjects of the
said Realm of Ireland, to bring them under his tyrannical power and will, and
in pursuance of his wicked and traiterous purposes aforesaid, the said Earl of
Strafford in the eighth year of his Majesty's reign, did by his own authority,
without any warrant or color of Law, tax and impose great sums of money upon
the Towns of Baltemore, Baudenbridge, Talowe, and diverse other Towns and
places in the said Realm of Ireland, and did cause the same to be levied upon
the Inhabitants of those Towns by troops of Soldiers, with force and arms,
in a warlike manner. And on the ninth day of March, in the twelfth year of his
now Majesty's reign, traitorously did give authority unto Robert Savill a
Sergeant at arms, and to the Captains of the companies of soldiers, in
several parts of that Realm, to send such numbers of Soldiers to l^e on the
Lands and Houses of such as would not conform to his orders, until they
should render obedience to his said orders and warrants, and after such
submission (and not before) the said Soldiers to return to their Garrisons.
And did also issue the like warrants unto diverse others, which warrants were in
warlike manner, with force and Arms put in execution accordingly, and by such
warlike means did force diverse of his Majesty's subjects of that Realm to
submit themselves to his unlawful commands.

And in the said twelfth year of his Majesty's reign, the said Earl of
Strafford did traitorously cause certain troops of horse and foot, armed in
warlike manner, and in warlike array, with force and arms, to expel Richard
Butler from the possession of Castle-cumber, in the Territory of Idough, in the
said realm of Ireland, and did likewise and in like warlike manner, expel
diverse of his Majesty's Subjects from their houses, families, and possessions,
as namely Edward Brenman, Owen Oberman, Patrick Oberman, Sir Cyprian Horsfield,
and diverse others, to the number of about a hundred families, and took and
imprisoned them and their wives, and carried them prisoners to Dublin, and
there detained them until they did yield up, surrender, or release their
respective estates and rights.

And the said Earl, in like warlike manner, has, during his government of the
said Kingdom of Ireland, subdued diverse others of his Majesty's Subjects ease
to his will, and thereby and by the means aforesaid, has levied War within the
said Realm, against his Majesty and his liege people of that Kingdom.

Testified by Serjant Savil.

The Earls Reply.
That nothing has been more ordinary in Ireland, then for the Governors to
put all manner of sentences in execution by the help of soldiers, that
Grandison, Falkland, Chichester, and other Deputies frequently did it. [Sir
Arthur Teningham to this point deposed, that in Falklands time he knew 20.
Soudiers assessed upon one man, for refusing to pay sixteen shillings] That his
instructions for executing his Commission, were the same with those formerly
given to the Lord Falkland, and that in both there is express warrant for it.
That no testimony produced against him does evidently prove he gave any warrant
to that effect, and that Serjant Savill showed only the Copy of a warrant, not
the Original it self, which he conceived could not make faith in case of life
and death in that high Court, especially it being not averred upon Oath to
agree with the Original, which should be upon record. That he conceived he was
for an Irish custom to be tried by the Peers of that Kingdom.

This Article pincht the Earl so close, as notwithstanding his Answer, the
Commons thought the evidence so strong against him, and were so confident that
the fact was Treason, as they were very desirous to proceed to vote upon that
very point; but the Lords withdrawing, returned answer that they could not
agree to it, but desired them to go on to the remaining Articles.

XVI.
That the said Earl of Strafford, the two and twentieth of February, in the
seventh year of his now Majesty's reign, intending to oppress the said
Subjects of Ireland, did make a proposition, and obtained from his Majesty an
allowance, that no complaint of injustice or oppression done in Ireland, should
be received in England against any, unless it first appeared that the party
made first his address to him the said Earl: and the said Earl having by such
usurped tyrannical and exorbitant power, expressed in the former Articles,
destroyed the Peers and other subjects of that Kingdom of Ireland, in their
lives, consciences, land, liberties, and estates, the said Earl to the intent
the better to maintain and strengthen his power, and to bring the people into a
disafection of his Majesty as aforesaid, did use his Majesty's name in the
execution of his said power. And to prevent the subjects of that Realm of all
means of complaints to his Majesty, and of redress against him and his agents,
did issue a Proclamation bearing date the seventeenth day of September, in the
eleventh year of his Majesty's reign, thereby commanding all the Nobility,
undertakers and others, who held estates and offices in the said Kingdom
(except such as were employed in his Majesty's service, or attending in England
by his special command) to make their personal residence in the said Kingdom
of Ireland, and not to depart thence without license of himself. And the said
Earl has since issued other Proclamations to the same purpose, by means
whereof the subjects of the said Realm are restrained from seeking relief
against the oppressions of the said Earl without his license: which
Proclamation the said Earl has by several rigorous ways, as by fine,
imprisonment, and otherwise, put in execution on his Majesty's subjects, as
namely, one -- Parry, and others, who came over only to complain of the
exorbitances and oppressions of the said Earl.

Testified by the Earl of Desmond, the Lord Roch, Marcatte^, and Parry.

The XVII. and XVIII. Articles were not insisted upon.

The Earls Reply.
That the Deputy Falkland April 5.
had set out the same Proclamation. That the same restraint was contained in
the Statute of 25. of Hen. 6. upon which the Proclamation was founded. That he
had the Kings express warrant for the Proclamation. That he had also power to
do it by the Commission granted him, and that the Lords of the Council and
three Justices not only yielded, but pressed him unto it. That it was done upon
just cause, for, had the Ports been open, diverse would have taken liberty to go
to Spain, to Doway, Rhemes, or St. Omers, which might have proved of
mischievous consequence to the State. That the Earl of D' Esmond stood, at the
time of his restraint, charged with Treason before the Council of Ireland, for
practicing against the life of one Sir Valentine Coke. That the Lord Roch was
then a prisoner for debt in the Castle of Dublin, and therefore incapable of a
license. That Parry was not fined for coming over without license, but for
several contempts against the Councel-board in Ireland, and that in his
sentence he had but only a casting voice, as the Lord Keeper in the
Star Chamber.

XIX.
That the said Earl having taxed and levied the said impositions, and raised
the said Monopolies, and committed the said oppressions in his Majesty's name,
and as by his Majesty's Royal command, he the said Earl in May the fifteenth
year of his Majesty's reign, did of his own authority contrive and frame a new
and unusual oath, by the purport whereof, among many other things, the party
taking the said oath, was to swear that he should not protest against any of
his Majesty's Royal commands, but submit themselves in all obedience thereunto.
Which oath he so contrived to enforce the same on the subjects of the Scottish
Nation inhabiting in Ireland, and out of a hatred to the said Nation, and to
put them to a discontent with his Majesty and his government there, and
compelled diverse of his Majesty's said subjects there to take the said oath;
some he grievously fined and imprisoned, and others he destroyed and exiled,
and namely, the 10. of October, Ann. Dom. 1639. he fined Henry Steward and his
wife, who refused to take the said oath, five thousand pounds a piece, and
their two daughters and James Gray three thousand pounds a piece, and
imprisoned them for not paying the said fines. The said Henry Stewards wife and
daughters, and James Gray, being the Kings liege people of the Scottish Nation,
and diverse others he used in the like manner; and the said Earl upon that
occasion did declare, that the said oath did not only oblige them in point of
allegiance to his Majesty, and acknowledgement of his supremacy only, but to
the Ceremonies and Government of the Church established, or to be established
by his Majesty's royal Authority; and said, that the refusers to obey, he would
prosecute to the blood.

The Earls Reply.
That the Oath was not violently enjoined by him upon the Irish Scots, but
framed in compliance with their own express Petition, which Petition is owned
in the Proclamation, as the main impulsive to it. That the same Oath not long
after was prescribed by the Council of England. That he had a letter under his
Majesty's own hand, ordering it to be prescribed as a touchstone of their
fidelity. As to the greatness of the fine imposed upon Steward, and others, he
conceived it was not more then the heinousness of their offense deserved; yet
had they petitioned, and submitted the next day, that would wholly have been
remitted.

XX.
That the said Earl in the 15. and 16. years of his Majesty's reign, and diverse
years past, labored and endeavored to beget in his Majesty an ill opinion of
his Subjects, namely those of the Scottish Nation, and diverse and sundry times,
and especially since the pacificat on made by his Majesty with his said
subjects of Scotland in summer, in the 15. year of his Majesty's reign; he the
said Earl did labor and endeavor to persuade, incite, and provoke his Majesty
to an offensive war against his said subjects of the Scottish Nation: and the
said Earl, by his counsel, actions, and endeavors, has been and is a chief
incendiary of the war and discord between his Majesty and his Subjects of
England, and the said Subjects of Scotland, and has declared, and advised his
Majesty, that the demand made by the Scots in this Parliament were a sufficient
cause of war against them The said Earl having formerly expressed the height
and rancor of his mind toward his subjects of the Scottish Nation, viz. the
tenth day of October, in the fifteenth year of his Majesty's reign, he said
that the Nation of the Scots were Rebels, and Traitors; and he being then about
to come to England, he then further said, that if it pleased his Master
(meaning his Ma jesty) to send him back again, he would root out of the said
Kingdom (meaning the Kingdom of Ireland) the Scottish Nation both root and
branch: Some Lords, and others who had taken the said oath in the precedent
Article only excepted. And the said Earl has caused diverse of the said Ships
and goods of the Scots to be stayed, seized, and molested, to the intent to set
on the said War.

The XXI. and XXII. Articles were not urged.

The Earls Reply.
That he called all the Scottish Nation Traitors and Rebels, no one proof is
produced, and though he is hasty in speech, yet was he never so defective of
reason, as to speak so like a mad man: for he knew well his Majesty was a
native of that Kingdom, and was confident many of that Nation were of as
heroique Spirits, and as faithful and loyal subjects as any the King had. As to
the other words of rooting out the Scots both Root and Branch, he conceives a
short reply may serve, they being proved by a single testimony only, which can
make no sufficient faith in case of life. Again, the witness was very much
mistaken, if not worse, for he deposes that these words were spoken the tenth
day of October in Ireland, whereas he was able to evidence, he was at that time
in England, and had been so near a month before.

XXIII.
That upon the thirteenth day of April last, the Parliament of England met, and
the Commons House (then being the representative Body of all the Commons in the
Kingdom) did according to the trust reposed in them, enter into debate and
consideration of the great grievances of this Kingdom, both in respect of
Religion, and the public Liberty of the Kingdom; and his Majesty referring
chiefly to the said Earl of Strafford, and the Archbishop of Canterbury, the
ordering and disposing of all matters concerning the Parliament: He the said
Earl of Strafford, with the assistance of the said Archbishop did procure his
Majesty, by sundry speeches and messages, to urge the said Commons house to
enter into some resolution for his Majestics supply, for maintenance of his war
against his Subjects of Scotland, before any course was taken for the relief of
the great and pressing grievances, wherewith this Kingdom was then afflicted.
Whereupon, a demand was then made from his Majesty, of twelve Subsidies, for
the release of Ship Money only; and while the said Commons then assembled (with
expressions of great affection to his Majesty and his service) were in debate
and consideration of some supply, before resolution by them made, He the said
Earl of Strafford, with the help and assistance of the said Archbishop, did
procure his Majesty to dissolve the last Parliament, upon the fifth day of May
last: and upon the same day, the said Earl of Strafford did treacherously,
falsely, and maliciously endeavor to incense his Majesty against his loving and
faithful Subjects, who had been members of the said House of Commons, by
telling his Majesty, they had denied to supply him. And afterward upon the
same, did treacherously and wickedly counsel and advise his Majesty to this
effect, viz. That having tried the affections of his people, he was loose and
absolved from all Rules of government, and was to do every thing that power
would admit, and that his Majesty had tried all ways, and was refused, and
should be acquitted both of God and man, and that he had an Army in Ireland
(meaning the Army above mentioned, consisting of Papists, his dependents, as is
aforesaid) which he might employ to reduce this Kingdom to obedience.

The XIV. Article not urged.

The Earls Reply.
That he was not the principal cause of dissolving the last Parliament, for
before he came to the Council Table, it was voted by the Lords to demand 12.
Subsidies, and that Sir Henry Vane was ordered to demand no less; but he
coming in the in terim, he persuaded the Lords to vote it again, declaring to
his Majesty (then present) and them the danger of the breach of the Parliament:
whereupon it was again voted, that if the Parliament would not grant twelve
Subsidies, Sir Henry should descend to eight, and rather then fail, to six. But
Sir Henry not observing his instructions, demanded twelve only, without
abatement, or going lower; that the height of this demand, urged the Parliament
to deny, and their denial moved his Majesty to dissolve the Parliament, so that
the chief occasion of the breach thereof, was, as he conceived, Sir Henry Vane.
He confesses that at the Council Table he advised the King to an offensive war
against the Scots; But it was not until all fair means to prevent a war had
been first attempted. Again, others were as much for a defensive war, and it
might be as free to vote one, as the other. Lastly, votes at a Councel-board
are but bare opinions; and opinions, if pertinaciously maintained, may make an
Heretic, but never can a Traitor.

XV.
That not long after the dissolution of the said last Parliament (viz. In the
months of May and June) he the said Earl of Strafford did advise the King to go
on rigorously in levying of the Ship Money, and did procure the Sheriffs of
several Counties to be sent for, for not levying the Ship Money, diverse of
which were threatened by him to be sued in the Star Chamber; and afterward by
his advice were sued in the Star Chamber, for not levying the same; and diverse
of his Majesty's loving subjects were sent for and imprisoned by his advice,
about that and other illegal payments.

And a great loan of a hundred thousand pounds was demanded of the City of
London, and the Lord Mayor and the Aldermen and the Sheriffs of the said City,
were often sent for by his advice to the Council Table, to give an account of
their proceedings in raising of Ship Money, and furthering of that loan, and
were required to certify the names of such Inhabitants of the said City as
were fit to lend, which they with much humility refusing to do, he the said
Earl of Strafford did use these or the like speeches: viz. That they deserved
to be put to Fine and Ransom, and that no good would be done with them, till an
example were made of them, and that they were laid by the heels, and some of
the Aldermen hanged up.

The Earls reply.
That there was a present necessity for money, that all the Councel-board had
voted with, yea before, him. That there was then a sentence in the Star Chamber
upon the opinion of all the Judges, for the legality of the Tax of Shipmoney,
and he thought he might advise the King to take, what the Judges had declared
was by law his own. He confessed that upon refusal of so just a service, the
better to quicken the Citizens to the payment of Shipmoney, he said, they
deserved to be fined. Which words might perhaps be incircumspectly delivered,
but he conceives cannot amount to treason, especially when no ill consequence
followed upon them; and it would render men in a sad condition, if for every
hasty word, or opinion given in Council, they should be sentenced as Traitors.
But that he said it were well for the Kings service, if some of the Aldermen
were hanged up, he utterly denies. Nor is it proved by any, but Alderman
Garway, who is at best but a single testimony, and therefore no sufficient
evidence in case of life.

XXVI.
That the said Earl of Strafford by his wicked counsel having brought his
Majesty into excessive charges without any just cause, he did in the month of
July last (for the support of the said great charges) counsel and approve two
dangerous and wicked Projects: viz.

To seize upon the Bullion and the Money in the Mint.

And to imbase his Majesty's Coin with the mixtures of Brass.

And accordingly he procured one hundred and thirty thousand pounds, which was
then in the Mint, and belonging to diverse Merchants, strangers and others, to
be seized on and stayed to his Majesty's use. And when diverse Merchants of
London, owners of the said Bullion, came to his house to let him understand the
great mischief that course would produce here, and in other parts, what
prejudice it would be to the Kingdom, by discrediting the Mint, and hindering
the importation of Bullion: he the said Earl told them, that the City of London
dealt undutifully and unthankfully with his Majesty, and that they were more
ready to help the Rebel, then to help his Majesty: and that if any hurt came to
them, they might thank themselves: and that it was the course of other Princes,
to make use of such moneys to serve their occasions.

And when in the same month of July the Officers of his Majesty's Mint came to
him, and gave him diverse reasons against the imbasing of the said money, he
told them that the French King did use to send Commissaries of Horse with
Commission to search into men's estates, and to peruse their accounts, that so
they may know what to levy of them by force, which they did accordingly levy:
and turning to the Lord Cottington then present, said, That this was a point
worthy his Lordships consideration.

The Earls reply.
That he expected some proofs to evidence the two first particulars, but hears
of none. For the following words, he confessed, probably they might escape the
door of his lips. Nor did he think it much amiss, considering their present
posture, to call that faction Rebels. As for the last words objected against
him in that Article, he said that being in conference with some of the
Londoners, there came to his hands at that instant a letter from the Earl of
Leicester, then at Paris, wherein were the Gazets enclosed, relating that the
Cardinal had given order to levy money by Soldiers. This he only told the
Lord Cottington standing by, but made not the least application thereof to the
English affairs.

XXVII.
That in or about the month of August last he was made Lieutenant general of
all his Majesty's forces in the Northern parts against the Scots, and being at
York did in the month of September by his own authority, and without any
lawful warrant, imposed a Tax on his Majesty's subjects in the County of York,
of 8. d. per diem, for maintenance of every Soldier of the Trained-bands of
that County, which sums of money he caused to be levied by force. And to the
end to compel his Majesty's subjects out of fear and terror to yield to the
payment of the same. He did declare that he would commit them that refused the
payment thereof, and the Soldiers should be satisfied out of their estates;
and they that refused it, were in very little better condition then of high
Treason.

The Earls Reply.
That his Majesty coming to York, it was thought necessary, in regard the enemy
was upon the borders, to keep the Trainedbands on foot for defense of the
County: and therefore the King directed him to write to the Freeholders in
Yorkshire, to declare what they would do for their own defense; that they
freely offered a months pay, nor did any man grudge against it. Again it was
twice propounded to the great Council of Peers at York, that the King approved
it as a just and necessary Act, and none of the Counsel contradicted it, which
he conceived seemed a tacit allowance of it. That though his Majesty had not
given him special order therein, nor the Gentry had desired it, yet he
conceived he had power enough to impose that Tax by virtue of his Commission.
But he never said that the refusers should be guilty of little less then high
Treason, which being proved by Sir William Ingram, he was but a single
testimony, and one who had formerly mistaken himself in what he had deposed.

XXVIII.
That in the months of September and October last, he the said Earl of
Strafford being certified of the Scottish Army coming into the Kingdom, and he
the said Earl of Strafford being Lieutenant general of his Majesty's Army, did
not provide for the defense of the Town of Newcastle as he ought to have done,
but suffered the same to be lost, that so he might the more incense the English
against the Scots. And for the same wicked purpose, and out of a malicious
desire to engage the Kingdoms of England and Scotland in a National and bloody
war, he did write to the Lord Conway the General of the horse, and under the
said Earls command, that he should fight with the Scottish Army at the passage
over the Tyne, whatsoever should follow, notwithstanding that the said Lord
Conway had formerly by Letters informed him the said Earl, that his Majesty's
Army then under his command, was not of force sufficient to encounter the
Scots, by which advice of his, he did contrary to the duty of his place betray
his Majesty's Army then under his command, to apparent danger and loss.

The Earls Reply.
That he admired how in the third Article he being charged as an incendiary
against the Scots, is now in this Article made their confederate, by betraying
New castle into their hands. But to answer more particularly he said, that
there was at New Castle the 24. of August 10 or 12000. foot, and two thousand
horse, under the command of the Lord Conway, and Sir Jacob Astly, and that Sir
Jacob had written to him concerning the Town of New Castle, that it was
fortifyed, which also was never under his particular care, and for the passage
over the River of Tyne, his Majesty sent special directions to the Lord Conway
to secure it, and therefore that Lord is more (as he conceives) responsable for
that miscarriage then himself.

The Earl having thus answered every particular Article against him, it was
moved by the house of Commons, that if he had any thing to say further in his
Defense, he should do it presently, whereupon he desired time until the next
morning, which was though difficultly granted him. The next morning the Houses
met, but the Lieutenant of the Tower appeared without his prisoner, certifying
that the Earl was taken with a terrible fit of the Stone that night, and
continued still so ill, as he could not stir abroad without danger of his life.
The Commons thought this excuse but counterfeit, merely to protract the time,
but the Lords were more inclinable to credit the relation, yet an order was
agreed upon between them both, that if the Earl came not the next day, they
should proceed notwithstanding his dis-appearance, and that in the interim,
some of the Upper House should resort to the Tower to see in what condition he
was. These Lords coming in the afternoon, found nature and medicamental
applications had so far prevailed over his disease, as gave assurance of his
ability to adventure forth next day without prejudice to his health; and what
else should dismay him? for to every Article of his accusation he had given, as
he hoped, so apposite, so full an answer, as confident he should not be found
culpable within the sphere of Treason, and offenses of a lower orb were beneath
his trepidation. But (whether it was that his hope elevated to the highest
pitch, might minister the more to the grandeur of his fall, or for some other
cause unknown, the Commons had kept dormant, and in reserve, their evidence of
most fatal and pernicious qualification, which the next day April the 10. the
Earl appearing at the Bar, they desired liberty to produce. Then the Earl
craved New proofs offered against the Earl.
the same freedom for himself, concerning some testimonies not yet exhibited
on his behalf. Upon this ensued a hot contest betwixt the two Houses, the Lords
conceiving that by the common dispensation of equity, the accused should have
equal allowance to superinduct new proofs, as well as the accusers, or else
that all further testimony should be waved on both sides. This sense of the
Lords was so vastly differing from the mind of the Commons, as up they rose in
much discontent, not so much as appointing the day of their next meeting there.
So that Monday the 12. the Nobles and Commons sat in their distinct and proper
Houses. In the Lower Mr. Pym produced a Copy of some notes taken by Secretary
Vane, of certain opinions delivered at the Council Table, May the 5. 1640.
being the day of the last Parliaments dissolution, the discovery said to be
thus.

Secretary Vane, upon some occasion, delivered to his son Sir Henry Vane the
Key of a Cabinet, to fetch some papers laid Secretary Vanes notes how
discovered.
therein. In this Cabinet young Sir Henry Vane finds a key of another Cabinet,
which he opens, and there accidentally lights upon these notes, who presently
gives thereof an account to Mr. Pym.

This produced a conference that afternoon with the Lords, at which Mr. Pym
re-minds the Peers of the Commons request on Saturday last, concerning some
supplemental proofs they desired to offer in the Earl of Straffords cause; he
acquainted them that the proofs related to the 23. Article, and were founded
upon the Notes which he then produced, and that the Commons moved their
Lordships to order that the Earl might be sent for the next day, to make his
defense at the Bar at Westminster Hall. Which being condescended to by the
Nobles, and April the 13. the Earl appearing, the Notes were brought forth and
read, the Title whereof was;

No danger of a War with Scotland, if Offensive, not Defensive.

Then followed the Opinions interlocutory and by way of Dialogue.

K. C. H. How can we undertake Offensive War, if we have no more money?


L. L. IR. Borrow of the City 100000. l. Go on rigorously to leavie Shipmoney.
Your Majesty having tried the affection of your people, you are absolved and
loose from all rule of Government, and to do what Power will admit: Your
Majesty have tried all ways, and being refused shall be acquitted before God
and Man; And you have an Army in Ireland that you may employ to reduce THIS
Kingdom to obedience, for I am confident the Scots cannot hold out five months.


L. ARCH. You have tried all ways, and have always been denied, it is now
lawful to take it by force.


L. COTT. Leagues abroad there may be made for the defense of the Kingdom. The
lower House are weary of the King and Church. All ways shall be just to raise
money by in this inevitable necessity, and are to be used being lawful.


L. ARCH. For an Offensive, not any Defensive War.


L. L. IR. The Town is full of Lords, put the Commission of Array on foot, and
if any of them stir, we will make them smart.


The Earls Reply.
That being a Privy Counselor, he thought he might have The Notes themselves.
as free a vote as another, that his opinion was no other then what he thought
the present exigent required, that it were hard measure for opinions or
discourses resulting from such occasions, and at such debates, to be prosecuted
under the notion of Treason. And whereas the main dint of this accusation
received derivation from his suggested saying, The King had an Army in Ireland
which he might employ here to reduce This Kingdom; He answers,

First, That it is proved by the solitary testimony of one man (Secretary Vane)
which is not of validity enough in Law to create faith in a matter of Debt,
much less in point of life and death.

Secondly, That the Secretaries Deposition was exceeding dubious; upon two
examinations he could not remember any such words, and the third time his
testimony was not positive, but that I spoke those words, or the like, and
words may be very like in sound, yet differ much in sense, as in the words of
my charge, here for there, and that for this, puts an end to the controversy.

Thirdly, there were present at this debate but eight Privy Counselors in
all, two whereof (the Archbishop of Canterbury, and Secretary Windebank) are
not to be produced; Sir Henry affirms the words, I deny them: then there
remain four still to give in evidence, viz. The Marquess Hamilton, the Earl of
Northumberland, the Lord Treasurer, and the Lord Cottington; who have all
declared upon their Honors, that they never heard me speak those words, nay
nor the like.

Lastly, suppose (though I grant it not) that I spoke those words, yet cannot
the word This rationally imply England, because the debate was concerning
Scotland, as is yielded on all hands, because England was not out of the way of
obedience, as the Earl of Clare well observed, and because there never was any
the least intention of landing the Irish Army in England, as the foresaid Lords
of the Privy Council are able to attest.

The Earl having delivered his Answer to this Additional Proof, the Lord
Steward told him, that, if he had any thing to say further in his own Defense,
he should proceed, because the Court desired to prepare matters for speedy
Judgment, whereupon he made a summary repetition of the several parcels of his
former Defense, which ended he continued his Speech thus.

My Lords, THere remains another kind of Treason that I should be guilty of,
for endeavoring to subvert The conclusion of the Earls Defense.
the Fundamental Laws of the Land. That this should be Treason together, that
is not treason in one part; a Treason accumulative, that when all will not do
it alone, being weaved up with others, it should do it, seems very strange.
Under favor my Lords, I conceive there is neither Statute nor Common Law,
which does declare this endeavoring to subvert the Fundamental Laws of the
Land to be high Treason; for I have been diligent in the inquiry, as you know
it deeply concerns me, and could never discover it. It is hard to be
questioned for life and honor upon a Law, that cannot be shown; for it is a
rule in Sir Edward Coke, De non apparentibus and non existentibus eadem est
ratio. Ihesu! Where has this fire lain hid so many hundreds of years, without
smoke, to discover it, till it thus burst forth to consume me and my children?
That punishment should precede promulgation of a law, to be punished by a law
subsequent to the Fact, is extreme hard; what man can be safe if this be
admitted? My Lords, it is hard in another respect, that there should be no
token set by which we should know this Offense, no admonition by which we
should avoid it. If a man pass the Thames in a boat, and split himself upon an
Anchor, and no Buoy be floting to discover it, he who owes the Anchor shall
make satisfaction, but if a Buoy be set there, every man passes upon his own
peril Now where is this mark, where the token upon this Crime to declare it to
be high Treason? My Lords, be pleased to give that regard to the Peerage of
England, as never to expose your selves to such moot-points, such constructive
interpretations of Laws. If there must be a trial of wits, let the subject
matter be of somewhat else, then the lives and honors of Peers. It will be
wisdom for your selves, for your posterity, and for the whole Kingdom to cast
into the fire these bloody and mysterious volumes of constructive and arbitrary
Treason, as the Primitive Christians did their Books of curious Arts, and
betake your selves to the plain letten of the Law and Statute, that tells us
what is, and what is not Treason, without being more ambitious to be more
learned in the art of Killing then our forefathers. It is now full 240. years,
since any man was touched for this alleged Crime to this height before my self,
let us not awaken these sleeping lions to our destructions, by raking up a few
musty Records, that have lain by the walls so many ages, forgotten or neglected.
May your Lordships please not to add this to my other misfortunes; for my other
fins be-slave me, not for Treason; let not a president be desired from me, so
disadvantageous as this will be in the consequence to the whole Kingdom; do
not through me wound the interest of the Commonwealth. And howsoever these
Gentlemen say they speak for the Commonwealth, yet in this particular I indeed
speak for it, and show the inconveniences and mischifes which will fall upon
it. For, as it is said in the Statute 1. of Henry 4. No man will know what to
do, or say, for fear of such penalties. Do not put, my Lords, such difficulties
upon Ministers of State, that men of Wisdom, of Honor, of Fortune, may not
with cheerfulness and safety be employed for the public; if you weigh and
measure them by grains and scruples, the public affairs of the Kingdom will
lie waste, no man will meddle with them who has any thing to lose. My Lords, I
have troubled you longer then I should have done, were it not for the interest
of these dear pledges a Saint in heaven has left me [At this he stopped a while
offering up some tears to her ashes] What I forfeit my self is nothing, but
that my in-discretion should extend to my posterity it wounds me to the very
soul. You will pardon my infirmity, something I should have added, but am not
able; therefore let it pass And now my Lords for my self I have been by the
blessing of almighty God taught, that the afflictions of this present life, are
not to be compared to the eternal weight of glory which shall be revealed
hereafter. And so my Lords, even so, with all tranquillity of mind, I freely
submit my self to your judgment; and whether that judgment be of life, or
death,

-- Te Deum laudamus.
The Earl had no sooner ended then Mr. Glyn, and after him Mr. Pym undertakes
him, endeavoring to render his offenses as odious as possibly they could; but
their replications being fuller stuffed with Rhetorical Declamations, then
Logical conclusions, signified little as to judicial proceedings.

Matters of Fact being transacted, the Commons were next The Commons justify
their Charge by Law.
engaged to just fie their charge by Law, which was a point very intricate and
difficult; for his crimes were not as yet discovered to be specifically
comprehended under the letter of any Statute declaratory of Treason; nor did
that Statute of 25. of Edward the third (which is the Index to all matters of
Treason) directly charge him. But that Statute had a Salvo adnext to it,
whereby it was provided that, because all particular Treasons could not be then
defined, therefore what the Parliament should declare to be Treason in time to
come, should be punished as Treason: and within the compass of this Salvo they
doubted not to bring him, and to cut him off by Bill of Attainder. Hereupon the
Earl moved that he might be allowed to plead by his Council, which the Nobles
thought they could not in justice deny, but the Commons being of another
persuasion, would not, till after three days conference with the Lords about
it, assent thereunto. But at length the 16. the Peers prevailed, and it was
agreed that the Earl with his Council should have liberty to come next day, and
they to plead such particulars only, to which they should be restrained:

Saturday, April the 17. the Earl with his Council appeared The Earl answers
by Council.
at the Bar, being Mr. Lane the Princes Attorney, Mr. Gardener Recorder of
London, Mr. Lo, Mr. Lightfoot. Mr. Lane spoke first, and insisted upon the
Statute 25. of Edw. 3. saying it was a Declarative Law, and such are not to be
interpreted by way of consequence, equity, or construction, but by the express
letter only. Again it was a penal Law, and such can admit of no constructions
or inferences, for penalties are to enforce the keeping of known, not of
conjectural and dubious Laws. Then he came to the Salvo, and affirmed that in
the sixth year of Henry the 4. a Petition was preferred in Parliament by the
Nobility to have all Treason limited by Statute, that in that Parliament Chap.
10. an Act was made upon that Petition that, That Salvo should be holden
repealed in all times to come, and that nothing should be esteemed Treason but
what was literally contained within the Statute 25. of Edw. 3. The Recorder
said, he could add no more then what the former Council had spoken for matter
of Law, but if their Lordships would state unto him some further Questions, he
was ready to give his resolution according to his best ability. Upon which
motion the Lords and Commons adjourned, not profixing any time for their next
meeting.

Nor was it of much import, for the Commons were resolved that day should set a
total period to the Earls defense, and next to speed their Bill of Attainder,
which was debated the 19 and the Earl voted guilty of high Treason upon the
evidence of Sir Henry Vane and his notes, but the final and decretory vote past
not against him, till the 21 upon the reading the Bill engrost, He is voted by
the Commons guilty of high Treason.
at which time they went to the Poll, and took the names of the dissenters, the
total amounting to 59, whereof the Lord Digby appeared most eminent, having
spoke much to the displeasure of the House in that particular. The Bill being
passed the Lower House, long they would not let it rest there, but that
afternoon transmitted it to the Lords, who being slower paced in that
concernment, were reminded of it the 24. with a desire they would nominate a
time certain for the reading thereof, who returned answer, that on Monday and
Tuesday next they would not fail to do ^t. And they were as good as their
words, but it seemed to them so perplexed a business, and started so many
scruples, as they were enforced to request a conference with the Commons to
resolve them; whereupon the Lower House promised that Mr. St. John the Kings
Solicitor should Thursday the 29. justify the Bill by Law and give their
Lordships an account of the reasons impelling them to that mode of proceeding;
ordering also that the Earl of Strafford should then be present.

While these things were in agitation, the Parliament had addressed themselves to
his Majesty in way of Petition for three things.

First, For removing of all Papists from Court. The Commons Petition against
Papists.


Secondly, For dis-arming of them generally throughout the Kingdom.

Thirdly, For dis-banding the Irish Army.

To all which the King the 28 delivered answer contractly thus:

For the first, they all knew what legal trust The Kings Answer.
the Crown has in that particular, therefore he shall not need to say any
thing to give them assurance that he shall use it so, as there shall be no just
cause of scandal.

For the second, he is content it shall be done according to Law.

For the last, he had entered into consultation about it, and found many
difficulties therein, and he does so wish the dis-banding of all Armies, as he
did conjure them speedily, and heartily to join with him in dis-banding those
two in England.

The next day the Earl being brought to the Bar, the Bill of Attainder was
read, and Mr. St. John opened the several branches thereof, affirming it to be
legal, by many Presidents, and Acts of Parliaments, which he quoted. What
effects the Solicitors arguments wrought, either in rendering the Earls Treasons
more luminous and discernible, or in removing the former dysopsy and dimnesse
of the Peers understanding, I am not able to say; but infallibly certain it is,
they thenceforward showed greater propensity toward the Earls condemnation,
and clearly discovered it in their House the next day, whereof the King having
notice thought it high time for him to interpose (lest silence should make him
accessory to a fact so much condemned by his own conscience) and calling both
Houses together May the 1. said,

My Lords and Gentlemen,
I had no intention to have spoken to you of this business to day, which is
the great business The Kings Speech in defense of the Earl of Strafford.
of the Earl of Strafford, because I would do nothing which might hinder your
occasions. But now it comes to pass that I must of necessity have past in the
judgment, I think it most necessary to declare my conscience therein.

I am sure you know I have been present at the hearing of this great cause,
from one end to the other; and I must tell you that in my conscience I cannot
condemn him of high Treason.

It is not fit for me to argue this business, I am sure you will not expect
it, a positive Doctrine best becomes the mouth of a Prince, yet must I tell you
three truths, which I am sure no man can tell so well as my self.

First, That I had never any intention of bringing over the Irish Army into
England, nor ever was advised by any body so to do.

Secondly, That there was never any debate before me, either in public
Council, or private Committee, of the disloyalty of my English subjects, nor
ever had I any suspicion of them.

Thirdly, That I was never counseled by any to alter the least of any of the
Laws of England, much less to alter all the Laws. Nay I tell you this, I
think no body durst ever be so impudent as to move me to it. For if they bad,
I should have made them such an example, and put such a mark upon them, that
all posterity should know my intentions by it, they being ever to govern by the
Law, and no otherwise.

I desire rightly to be understood, for though I tell you in my conscience I
cannot condemn him of high Treason, yet cannot I clear him of misdemeanors;
therefore I hope you may find out a way to satisfy justice, and your own
fears, and not oppress my conscience.

My Lords, I hope you know what a tender conscience is, and I must declare unto
you, that to satisfy my people I would do great matters; but in this of
conscience, neither fear, nor any other respect whatsoever, shall ever make me
go against it.

Certainly I have not deserved so ill of this Parliament at this time, that
they should press me in this tender point, therefore I cannot suspect you will
go about it. Nay I must confess for mis-demeanours I am so clear in them,
that, though I will not chalk out the way, yet I will show you, that I think my
Lord of Strafford is not fit hereafter to serve me, or the Commonwealth, in any
place of trust, no not so much as a Constable Therefore I leave it to you, my
Lords, to find out some such way as to bring me out of this straight, and keep
your selves and the Kingdom from such inconveniences.

This Speech of his Majesty, as any other not formed of ingredients
deleterious, was ill relisht by both Houses, so that they went away in much
discontent.

The next day May the 2. being Sunday, was the marriage The Prince of Orange
martieth the Lady Mary.
solemnized between the Prince of Orange (who came to London April the 20.) and
the Lady Mary at White Hall, with agreeable triumph.

The late disgust taken at the Kings last Speech, was not immanent, it stayed
not in the Parliament, but became transient and passed to the lower Row; and
when the feculent part of the body politic is once stirred, it soon flies up
to the disturbance of the whole: so it fared with some tumultuous citizens May
the 3. who malcontent at what the King had said, came down that morning A
Tumult in Westminster, crying for Justice against the Earl.
to Westminster, to the number of five or six thousand, most armed with Swords,
demanding justice of the Lords against the Earl of Strafford, complaining also
that their trade was decayed, and they like to perish for want of bread,
because justice was delaied. Their special application was to the Lord
Chamberlain, who went out of his Coach, and with much ado and large promises
appeased their fury; nevertheless to strike the greater terror into all such
as did not adhere to their party, they posted upon the gate of Westminster, a
Catalogue of those whose suffrages were for the Earls acquital, under the
Title of Straffordians.

That day intimation was given to the House of Commons of some practices in the
North to distract the English Army, and A Protestation framed by the Commons.
to render the Parliament displeasing to them; to en-counter, and as a
defensative against which they fell presently upon consideration of a
Protestation: for maintenance of the true reformed Protestant Religion,
expressed in the doctrine of the Church of England; The power and privileges of
Parliament, and liberty of the Subject.

This Protestation being formed, was the next day read in the Lower House, and
generally taken by all the members; then was it sent up to the Lords, who took
it also, and an order was made for the printing and dispersing it over all
England.

May the 5. there was an offer made in the House of Commons A Bil propounded
for the continuation of the Parliament.
by one of the Knights of Lancashire, that he would procure his Majesty the
loan of 650000. l. until such time as the subsidies should be raised, if his
Majesty would be pleased to pass a Bill that the Parliament might not be
adjourned, prorogued or dissolved, without the consent of both Houses, until
the general grievances of this Kingdom were redrest. This motion occasioned a
great debate, and seemed to be of that importance, as presently order was given
for a bill to be drawn up in persuance of it.

That evening the Lords sent a message to the Commons certifying that they had
considered, and consulted upon the Bill of Attainder, but found it the safest
course to lay the same aside, because it brought the King in as Judge,
wherefore they agreed to fall upon the several Articles of his Accusation, and
would the next day send them their final resolution.

The next morning May the 6. 26. Lords of 45. then present, being directed by
the opinion of the Judges, voted the Earl of Strafford guilty of high Treason,
upon two Articles; the 15. for levying of moneys in Ireland by force in a
warlike manner, and upon the 19. for imposing an Oath upon the Subjects in The
Earl voted by the Lords guilty of high Treason.
Ireland, and gave thereof speedy information to the House of Commons, who were
then exceeding busy about the Bill for the continuation of the Parliament,
which the next day being completely voted, was sent to the Lords for their
conjunction with them, withal requesting they would hasten it with all
convenient speed, in regard they desired that and the Bill of Attainder might
by si^ned together.

In this concernment the Lords needed no great stimulation of resolves, the
design was plausible, no criticismes of law to be discust, no difficulties to
be contended with, so that May the 8. they were in state to acquaint the
Commons that they fully concurred with them in these votes also; whereupon a
conference ensued, at which it was resolved that some Lords should be
dispatched with those Bills to his Majesty, and to request his The two Bills
tendered to the King.
Answer: which was accordingly done, and the King told them they should receive
his Answer on Monday following.

The Sunday intervening was no Sabbath, no day of rest to Heis much per plext
what answer to return.
the King, who never found the Royal office to press, yea so oppress him as
at this instant; infinitely was he distracted between a People and a
Conscience, both malcontent, both equally clamorous, one for mercy, the other
for justice; his passion was most intense for both, please both he could not,
and to displease either, pierced his very soul. In this anxiety, in this
perplexity The Bishops advise him to pass the Bills.
of thoughts, he consults with four Bishops, desires them as Casuists to advise
him what course to steer between these two great Rocks. The major part urged
the opinion of the Judges, the votes of Parliament, that he was but one Man,
that no other expedient could be found to appease the people, that the
consequences of an enraged multitude would be very terrible. Upon these
considerations they advised, yea partly persuaded his Majesty, though not yet
fully convinced, to pass the Bill.

But the motive Paramount and superior to all was a letter he received that
very day from the Earl himself, wherein he thus concludes.

SIR,
(To set your Majesty's conscience at liberty) And the Earl himself desires it.
I do most humbly beseech you, for the preventing of such mischiefs as may
happen by your refusal, to pass the Bill. By this means to remove, praised be
God, I cannot say this accursed, but I confess this unfortunate Thing forth of
the way toward that blessed agreement which God (I trust) shall for ever
establish betwixt you and your Subjects. Sir, my consent herein shall more
acquit you to God then all the world can do besides: To a willing man there is
no injury done. And as by Gods grace I forgive all the world with a calmnesse
and meekness of infinite contentment to my dis-lodging soul; so, Sir, I can
give up the life of this world with all cheerfulness imaginable, in the just
acknowledgement of your exceeding favors, and only beg, that in your goodness
you would vouchsafe to cast your gracious regard upon my poor Son and his three
Sisters, less or more, and no otherwise then their unfortunate Father shall
appear more or less guilty of this death. God preserve your Majesty.

Your Majesty's most humble and faithful Subject and Servant Strafford.


Monday May the 10. in the morning his Majesty signed a He yields most
unwillingly.
Commission to the Earl of Arundel, the Lord Privy Seal, the Lord Chamberlain
and others for the passing of the two Bills, one for the continuation of the
Parliament during the pleasure of the two Houses. The other was the Bill of
Attainder against the Earl of Strafford; but this with an Utinam nescirem
literas. Never any act past from him with greater reluctance at the present, or
which he bewailed afterward with greater re-morse of conscience, then the
frailty of that concession. True it is, he had all the outward motives to it
that could be wished, the vehement importunity of his Nobles, of his venerable
Bishops, the opinion of the grave Judges, a pretended urgent necessity in order
to the satisfaction of his people, yea and the Earls Petition; but what were
all these while his conscience remained unsatisfyed? Princes may, and ought to
hold intelligence, to keep correspondence with their subjects, but be their
advice as sound as may be, yet still must it be still Le Roy, not Le Peuple
veult; the Council may be theirs, the Command must be the Sovereigns. Minatory
affronts must not subdue, nor compliance with their subjects persuade them to
concessions repugnant to the dictates of their own consciences. It was
excellently said by another Man, not by another King, That it is a bad exchange
to wound a man's own conscience, thereby to salve State-sores; a maxim so
infallibly true, that the first experiment we have in sacred writ of the
contrary being acted by the first of Isreal's Kings, cost him no less then the
loss of his Kingdom, and all upon that solitary account, because, He feared
the people, and obeyed 1 Samuel 15.
their voice. So fatal is it for a Prince sometimes to resign a complacence to
popular lust.

As his Majesty's reflexes upon this concession, were never Censures upon his
passing the Bill for the Parliaments continuation.
without great regret, so many behold his passing the concomitant Bill, not a
little destructive to his Regal interest, and consequently to his person, as
without which the Parliament could not have been in state, and capacity to act
what they did against him. On the other side it was argued by others; That his
Majesty was not worsted, but rather a gainer by that grant. That it raised in
the Subject still further assurance of his clear intentions to the common-good;
that it precluded the entertainment of sinister thoughts against him; that it
empowered the Parliament only to sit during pleasure. That his denial would
have generated ill boding jealousies and turbulent animosities. That had it
come to the pinch, and had his Majesty endeavored to dissolve the Assembly,
probably the Parliament would have disputed his power, and have asserted it as
incident to the office of so great Trustees of the the Kingdom, still to
continue session in times menacing the ruin of the Kingdom. Did not the late
Parliament of Scotland positively declare as much, in the concernment of that
Kingdom? And Scotland it is well known gave the rule to England in most of her
late actions.

The Kings compliance with his people, and acting yesterday to the extremity of
justice, could not alter his more natural disposition to Mercy, he had still a
passion most vehement for her, and was resolved upon all occasions to act in
favor of it; hereupon he this day May the 11. wrote to the Lords this Letter,
the bearer whereof was no meaner person then the Prince of Wales.

My Lords,
I did yesterday satisfy the Justice of the The Kings Letter in behalf of the
Earl.
Kingdom by passing the Bill of Attainder against the Earl of Strafford. But
Mercy being as inherent and inseparable to a King, as Justice, I desire in some
measure to show that likewise, by suffering that unfortunate man to fulfill the
natural course of his life in close imprisonment; yet so, that if he ever make
the least offer to escape; or offer directly or indirectly to meddle in any
sort of public business, especially with me, either by message or Letter, it
shall cost him his life without further process. This if it may be done
without the coffeehouse of my people, will be an unspeakable contentment to
me.

To which end, as in the first place, I by this Letter do earnestly desire your
approbation, and to endear it the more, have chosen him to carry it, who is of
all your House most dear unto me: So I desire that by conference you will
endeavor to give the House of Commons contentment likewise, assuring you that
the exercise of Mercy is no more pleasing to me, then to see both Houses of
Parliament consent, for my sake, that I should moderate the severity of the Law
in so important a Case.

I will not say that your complying with me in this my intended mercy, shall
make me more willing, but certainly it will make me more cheerful in granting
your just grievances. But if no less then his life can satisfy my people, I
must say Fiat Iustitia. Thus again recommending the consideration of my
intentions to you, I rest

Your unalterable And affectionate friend, Charles R.
If he must die, it were charity to reprieve him till Saturday.

Upon the receipt of this from his Majesty, the Lords expressed themselves the
same day as follows.

May the 11. 1641.
THis Letter all written with the Kings own The Lords expression consequent to
this Letter.
hand, we the Peers this day received in Parliament, delivered by the hands of
the Prince. It was twice read in the House, and after serious, but sad
consideration, the House resolved presently to send twelve of the Peers,
messengers to the King, humbly to signify that neither of the two intentions
expressed in the Letter could with duty in us, or without danger to his consort
the Queen, and all the young Princes their children, be possibly admitted.
Which being accomplished, and more expressions offered, His Majesty suffered no
more words to come from us, but out of the fullness of his heart to the
observance of Justice, and for the contentment of his people, told us, that
what he intended by his Letter was with an If, If it may be done without
coffeehouse to his people. If it cannot be, I say again the same that I
wrote, Fiat Iustitia.

My other intention proceeding out of Charity for a few days respight, was
upon certain information that his Estate was so distracted that it necessarily
required some few days respite for settlement thereof.


Whereunto the Lords answered, their purpose was to be suitors to his Majesty
for favor to be showed to his innocent Children, And if himself had made any
provision for them, that the same might hold. This was well pleasing to his
Majesty, who hereupon departed from the Lords. At his Majesty's departure, we
offered up into his hands the Letter it self which he had sent. But he pleased
to say, What I have written to you, I shall be content it be registered by you
in your House. In it you see my mind, I hope you will use it to mine honor.

This upon return of the Lords from the King, was presently reported to the
House by the Lord Privy Seal.

Wednesday May the 12. was appointed to give the fatal period The Earl brought
to the Scaffold.
to the Life of this most unhappy Earl. He was conveyed from the Tower by a
Court of Guard, formed of the Trained bands. Before him went the Marshals men,
next the Sheriffs Officers with halber^s, then the Wardens of the Tower, then
the Earls Gentleman Usher bare headed, and next him the Earl himself
accompanied with the Primate of Armagh and others. Upon his first coming forth
being to pass near the Archbishops lodging (who stood at the window waiting
for his approach) he lifted up his eyes and espying the Archbishop, made low
obeisance toward him, saying withal, My Lord your prayers and your blessing.
The Archbishop had scarce ability to lift up his hands and heart in the
apprecation, so soon did extremity of passion; strike him into a leipothymie
and swounding fit. This was thought by some an argument of too much
pusillanimity in so grave a Christian; but the Archbishop said he doubted not
but when his own turn came, God would so strengthen him that he should taste
that bitter cup with a most Christian courage.

The Earl proceeding further, and the passage more thronged with people, he
heard a great noise amongst the crowd, demanding, Which is he? with that, his
countenance all composed to meekness, off he puts his hat, and said, I am the
man good people, not showing the least emotion of mind at the Question.

Being brought to the Scaffold he addressed his Speech to the Lords summarily to
this effect;

My Lords,
I am come hither by the good will and His last Speech.
pleasure of the Almighty, to pay that last debt I owe to sin. And to submit to
that judgment which has past against me. I do it with a very contented and
quiet mind; I thank God, I do freely forgive all the world. I thank God I can
say it, and truly too, my conscience bearing me witness, that in all my
employment, since I had the honor to serve his Majesty, I never had any thing
in the purpose of my heart, but what tended to the joint and individual
prosperity of King and People, although it has been my ill fortune to be
misconstrued.

There is one thing I desire to free my self of, and I am confident I shall
obtain your Christian charity in the belief of it. I was so far from being
against Parliaments, That I did always think the Parliaments of England, were
the most happy constitutions that any Kingdom or Nation lived under, and the
best means, under God, to make the King and People happy.

For my death I here acquit all the world, and beseech the God of Heaven
heartily to forgive them that contrived it, though in the intentions and
purposes of my heart I am not guilty of what I die for. And it is a great
comfort for me, that his Majesty conceives me not meriting so heavy a
punishment as this.

I wish this Kingdom all prosperity and happiness, and desire every one who
hears me to consider seriously, whether the reformation of a Kingdom should be
written in letters of blood. Let me never be so unhappy, as that the least drop
of my blood should rise up in judgment against any of you But I fear you are
in the wrong way.

I profess that I die a true and obedient son of the Church of England wherein
I was born, and in which I was bred. Peace and prosperity be ever to it.


This said, he desired all present to assist him in his prayers, wherein he
continued near a quarter of an hour, then rising up, he bad all his friends
farewell, especially by name his brother Sir George Wentworth, by whom he sent
his love to his wife and blessing to his children, willing him to charge his
son, never to meddle with the Patrimony of the Church.

Then he addressed himself to the block, and having prayed awhile, he gave the
Executioner the token of his preparedness, whereat the Heads-man doing his
office, severed his head from his body at the first stroke. Thus died this
unhappy Earl. And to die thus, by the stroke of Justice, cannot but consign him
up to posterity under some more horrid Character, yet lest that blemish should
orespread all his fame (drawing aside the traverse) I shall (and I hope without
just offense to any) represent such excellences as were in him impaled with,
and which might seem if not to balance, yet somewhat alleviate his other
failings.

A Gentleman he was of rare, choice and singular endowments, His Character.
I mean of such as modelled, fashioned, and accomplished him for State
concernments; of a searching and penetrating judgment, nimble apprehension,
ready and fluent in all results of counsel. Most happy in the vein of speech,
which was always round, perspicuous and express; much to the advantage of his
sense, and so full stockt with reason, that he might be rather said to
demonstrate, then to argue. As these abilities raised him to State
administration, so his addressing, his applying those abilities so faithfully
in promotion of the Royal interest, soon rendered him a Favorite of the first
admission. So that never King had a more intelligent, and withal a firmer
servant then he was to his Master. But these qualities which rendered him so
amiable to his Majesty, represented him formidable to the Scots, so that some
who were not well persuaded of the justness of his sentence, thought he
suffered not so much for what he had done already, as for what he was like to
have done, had he lived, to the dis-service of that Nation; and that he was not
sacrificed so much to the Scots revenge, as to their fear. And certainly his
fall was, as the first, so the most fatal wound the Kings interest ever
received. His three Kingdoms not affording another Strafford, that is, one man
his peer in parts and fidelity to his Majesty. He had a singular passion for
the Government, and Patrimony of the Church, both which he was studious to
preserve safe and sound, either opining them to be of sacred extraction, or at
least prudent constitutions relating to holy performances. And had he wanted
these positive graces, yet in so great a person, it may be commendable, that he
was eminent for privative and negative excellencies, being not taxable with any
vice, wl either it was that those petty pleasures are beneath the satisfaction
of a soul such as his, and of so large a stature; or that grace had put a
restraint upon his appetite. In short, he was a Man who might have passed under
a better notion had he lived in other times, or had he in these not played his
byas another way.

Cetera defiderantur.

Errata sic Corrige.
Page 9. lin. 1. read bufied. ibid. l. ult. r. committed. p. 12. l. 6. r.
baited. p. 17. l. 6. r. attempt. p. 28. l. 7. r. mollifyed. p. 30. l. 1. r.
informed. p. 33. l. penult. r. was as ambitious as. p. 41. l. 10. r. Villeur.
p. 54. l. 37. r. cognoscible. p. 57. l. 4. r. from his own. p. 67. l. 15. r.
stands. p. 71. l. 22. r. share. ibid. l. 34. r. exceeding happy. p. 79. l. 13.
r. assent. p. 80. l. 21. r. detrench. p. 92. l. 4. r. cleanly. p. 93. l. 13. r.
whisked. p. 96. l. 41. r. constat. p. 97. l. 4. r. three were accused of. p.
101. l. 34. r. abated. p. 109. l. 6. r of his Brothers. p. 115. l. 1. r. behold
him. p. 130. l. 21. r. infested. p. 135. l. 41. r. reproach him. p. 155. l. 14.
r. the next. p. 165. l. 27. r. chief. p. 183. l. 19. r. strong. p. 199. l. 13.
del. of. ibid. l. 35. r. was sequestered. p. 202 l. 9. r. Mr. Crew. p. 233. 6.
l. 8. r. Teringham. p. 245. l. 42. r. confident he was he, etc. p. 254. l. 1.
r. part. p. 259. l. 7. del. still.

A Table of all the Remarkable passages in the Book.
A.
ABot Archbishop is sequestered. Page 72. Dies. 127. His character. ibid. St.
Albans Vicount his death. 64. And Character. ibid. Sir Giles Allington censured
in the High commission for incest. 119 Amboyna massacre in part revenged in
Germany. 113 Andrews Bishop of Ely his death and character. 64 Sir Robert
Anstruther Ambassador into Germany. 109, and 120. Argile Earl declares
himself for the Covenanters. 156 Arundel Earl is imprisoned. 22. is discharged,
45. and confined again, 53. sent Ambassador into Cermany. 139 Assembly General
in Scotland indicted. 152. their 10. Proposals, ibid. contracted into two, 153.
it is dissolved by the King, 156. yet still continues. 161 Lord Audly
arraigned, 115. found guilty, 117. condemned and executed, ibid. Remarke upon
his crimes. 118.
B.
LOrd Balmerino arraigned in Scotland, 133. Condemned and after pardoned. 134
Earl of Bedford and others consined, 107. he builds Coven Garden. 124 Sir
Robert Berkly impecht of high Treason. 214. Bishops affronted in Scotland, 147.
They protest against the General Assembly. 155 Bristow Earl accuses the Duke
of Buckingham of high treason, 29. is committed to the Tower. 53 Broadway
arraigned and executed. 119 Duke of Buckingham accused of high Treason by the
E. of Bristow, 29. and by the Commons, 38. is sequestered from the house of
Peers, 45. His answer to the Impeachment, ibid. is designed Admiral for relief
of Rochel, 89. is murdered, 90. Things remarkable after his fall, 91. His
Will, Funeral and Character. Ibid. Sir John Burrowes slain at the Isle of The.
69
C.
DOn Carlos de Colomas Ambassador from Spain, 107 A prodigious Cataract upon
the Thames 55 Ceremonies of the Church, stirs about them. 137 King Charles his
birth; p. 1. his journey into Spain, 2. and return, 3. is Proclaimed King, 6.
his Speech in Parliament, 9. is Crowned, 20. Demands supply in the second Parl.
23. Requires satisfaction concerning Dr. Turner and Mr. Coke, 24. charged with
imprudence, 53. vindicated, 54. and again, 61. is in want 63. raises money by
Loan, ibid. His Speech in the third Parliament, 76. His several answers to the
Petition of Right, 81. His Speech concerning Tonnage and Poundage, 85. and at
the dissolution of the Parliament, 100. his Declaration thereupon, 101. His
progress into Scotland, 125. is Crowned there, 126. His letter to the Judges
about Shipmoney, 140. Yields to the Covenanters in Scotland, 151. his gracious
Declaration to the Scots, 154. raises an Army, 158 goes against the Scots,
159, and 188. His Speech in the beginning of the last Parliament, 196. His
Speech for Bishops, 203. His answer concerning Goodman, 206. His Speech
concerning the Lady Mary, 212. and concerning a Triennial Parliament, 214. His
answer to the Commons Petition against Papists, 252. His Speech in defense of
the E. of Strafford, 253. Troubled about the Bill of Attainder, 257. passes
it, 258. writes to the Lords about it, 260. and again, 262 Charles Prince of
Wales born. 108 Sir Edward Coke' s death. 134 Mr. Clement Coke' s bold speech
in Parliament. 24 The House of Commons answer to the King concerning Dr. Turner
and Mr. Coke, 28. They impeach the D. of Buckingham of high Treason, 38. grant
five Subsidies to the King, 77. Debate the Subjects Liberty, 78. Remonstrance
against the Duke and others, 83. Their Protestation 99. a tumult in their House
about it, 100. Diverse Members questioned therefore, 102, and committed, 103. A
bill preferred against them in the Star Chamber, ibid. Great debates about
them, 107. Petition against grievances, 199. Impeach the Lord Lieutenant of
Ireland of high Treason, ibid. they justify their charge by Law, 251. Petition
against Papists, 252. their Protestation. The Convocation, Ann. 1640. sits
after the Parliament, 184. impose a new Oath, 185. grant a Benevolence, 186.
their Canons voted illegal in Parliament. 201 Coventry Lord Keeper dies, 165
Customers questioned in Parliament, 99
D.
EArl of Denbigh Admiral for Relief of Rochel returns re ^^fecta. 87 Sir
Dudly Diggs his Prologue against the Duke, 32. is committed, 45 Lord Digby his
Speech for Episcopacy. 216
E.
Edinburgh Castle falls down, 166. the repair whereof is hindered, 167 The Prince
Electors son drowned, 95 Sir John Eliot committed, 45 Overtures of a match
between the King of Polonia and the Lady Elizabeth, 139 English Ships seven,
lent to France, 56 Episcopacy abolished in Scotland, 161 Earl of Essex marryeth
again, 114
F.
FElto^n kills the Duke of Buckingham, 90. is arraigned and executed. 94
Finch Lord Keeper vindicates his innocence, 202. is voted a Traitor, flies,
ibid. A fray in Fleetstreet, 72. and 106. Overtures of the French alliance, 3.
it is concladed, 6. a reflex upon it, 7 The French and English differ, 61.
Conclude a Peace, 104
G.
GAdes Voyage, 16. Descants upon its ill success, 17 Goodman a Priest
reprieved, 205. Remonstranced against, ibid.
H.
HAdington Earl blown up at Dunce, 189 Mr. Hamilton leaves the Court in
discontent, 63. raises men for Germany, 112. is sent Commissioner into
Scotland, 150. is there slighted, ibid. comes to Edinburgh, ibid. returns into
England, 151. and again into Scotland, 152. returns into England, 153. and
again into Scotland, 154 Fight between the Hollander and Spaniard in the
Downs, 163. an ac count of that action, 164 Justice Howard assaulted by a
Papist, 200 Stirs in Scotland about the Marquess Huntly, 103.
I.
KIng James his death and character, 4. Jesuits their nest discovered, 75. at
odds with the Seculars, 111. insolent in Ireland, 112 Innes of Court Mask, 129
Discontents in Ireland, 123. A Parliament and Synod there, 132 Judges their
opinion about Shipmoney, 144 Juxon B. of London made Lord Treasurer, 136
K.
THe Lord Keepers Speech concerning Dr. Turner and Mr. Coke, 24. Kenoul L.
Chancellor of Scotland dies, 134 Knighthood tax, 110
L.
DOctor Lamb slain, 88 Doctor Laud made Archbishop of Canterbury, 128.
vindicated, 182. His Palace beset with Prentices, 187. Voted guilty of high
Treason, 202. Is impeacht by the Commons, 216 Earl of Leicester sent
Ambassador into Denmark, 122 Leighton a Scot censured in the Starchamber, 110
Scot'sh Leiturgy stirs about it, 147 Loan money refused, 64 City of London
fined for the tumult about Dr. Lamb, 89. Petition against Bishops, 201 The
House of Lords Petition in the first Parliament, 21. Differ with the Commons
about the Petition of Right, 80. and about the bill of Subsidies, 84. their
Privileges violated, 199 The English Lords petition the King at York, 181 Lord
Lowden committed to the Tower, 166 Earl of Lindsey goes Admiral for the relief
of Rochel, 92
M.
DR. Manwaring questioned in Parliament, 84. and censured, ibid. Earl of
Marlbrough displaced, 89 Lady Mary marries the Prince of Orange, 255 Earl of
Montros deserts the Covenanters, 195 Bishop Mountague questioned in Parliament,
11
N.
THe Navy sent to relief Rochel, 62 Noy the Attorney General dies, 131
O.
THe Prince of Orange marries the Lady Mary, 255
P.
THe Pacification between England and Scotland, 159 The Palsgrave dies, 122.
the young Prince arriveth in England, 136. His ill suocesse in Germany, 162. is
kept a Prisoner in France, 163 Robert Parre aged 160. years brought to London,
130 Parliament 1o Caroli, 9. is adjourned to Oxford, 12. Petition against
Recusants, 13. is dissolved, 16 Parliament 2o Caroli, 21. dissolved, 52
Parliament 3o Caroli, 74. prorogued, 85. meet again, 95. is adjourned, 98.
dissolved, 101 Parliament 16o Caroli, 182. is dissolved, 183. the last
summoned, 192 Bill for a Triennial Parliament passed, 214 Bill for continuation
of the last Parliament, 256 A Parliament in Scotland, 161. is prorogued, 162
Contribution toward the repairing of St. Paul's, 124 Peace between England and
Spain, 110 Earl of Pembroke dies, 107. his character, 108 A great Pestilence
and reflex upon it, 7 The Petition of Right, 79. great debate about it, 80
Popish Plots discovered, 170. and 214 Presbytery the rise and growth of it, 156
Proclamation in Scotland against tumults, 148, 149 Prynn and others censured in
the Star Chamber, 145, released, ride in triumph into London, 200 The Lady
Purbeck censured for incontinence, 72
Q.
THe Queens servants dismissed, 57 The Queen Mother of France comes into England,
158
R.
THE Action, 65. The English routed there, 70. the sum of our loss, 71
Proclamation against Recusants, 19, 94. their insolence, 19 Reflex upon the
difference between the King and Parliament, 53 Religion in danger, 96 Peter
Reuben the Spanish Agent, 104 Rochellers implore aid from England. 74 Relief is
sent to it, 92. is rendered, 93
S.
SIr John Savils project against the Papists, 65 Scots ill affected to the
King, 126. Plots against him, 133. the beginning of those troubles, 146. They
Petition against the Leiturgy, 149. enter into a solemn Covenant, ibid. The
Scottish Covenanters demand a general Assembly and Parliament, 151. double their
guards, ibid. Protest against the Kings Declaration, 155. begin to arm, 156.
Falsify their Pacification, 160. send Commissioners to the King, 168. send a
Letter to the King of France, ibid. enter England, 188. rout the English, ibid.
Oppress Northumberland, 192. Treat with the English Lords, 193. their demands,
ibid. and 208. with the English Commissioners answers. English Ships stayed at
Bourdeaux, 60 Shipmoney projected by Noy, 131. the debate about it, 140. is
voted against in Parliament, 201 Soldiers billetted in the Country, 73 The
Spaniards beaten by the Hollander in the Downs, 164 The Lord Spenser his smart
reply to the Earl of Bristow, 32. Book of Sports on the Sabbath, 128 Stoadt
surrendered, 88 Strafford, vide Wentworth. King of Sweden his harsh demand from
the Palisgrave, 121. is slain, ibid.
T.
THe Term adjourned to Redding, 19 Tonnage and Foundage great debate about
them, 84 Traquair Earl assaulted in Scotland, 149 A Tumult crying for justice
against the Earl of Strafford, 256
U.
SIr Henry Vane Secretary: the cause of dissolving the short Parliament, 183
His Notes of the Council Table, 246
W.
LOrd Wentworth Deputy of Ireland, 123. vindicated, 133. imimpeached, 199. His
place of trial, ibid. Articles against him with his reply, 222, etc. New proofs
against him, 246. is voted guilty by the Commons, 252. and by the Lords, 258.
is brought to the Scaffold, 263. his speech there, ibid. Death and Character,
264 Weston made Lord Treasurer, 89. His handsome put off concerning the Dukes
funeral, 91. his Death, 135 Williams Lord Keeper displaced, 20. Sentenced in
the Star Chamber, 145. is enlarged, 200 Lord Wimbletons house burnt, 93.
Secretary Windebank flies, 200
Y.
JAmes Duke of York borne, 129.
The end of the Table.

