THE DRUDGE:

OR The Jealous Extravagant.

A PIECE OF Gallantry.

Ne Hercules quidem contra Duas.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Herringman, at the Blew Anchor in the Lower Walk of
the New Exchange. 1673.

TO THE Right Honorable THE Lord BUCKHURST.
Sir,
THe scribbling Gentlemen of this impertinent Generation, in despite of all the
damning Critics of the age, that very much oblige the Dramatick Tribe with
continual matter for their Prologues, are come to that impudence as to write
still on, and usher in a bad Treatise with a worse Dedication. This is grown so
familiar to the fine Men of the Town, that for all can be said, will still be
most damnably opinionate, that the poor fool, that must needs trouble himself
with the turning of this foolery, was resolved out of mere complaisance to do
as the rest did, and then out-rival his fellows too both in nonsense and
Impudence, which your Lordship must needs avow he has most egregiously
performed, when he assumed the vanity to make your Honor a present of such a
trifle. That incomparable Judgment, and Ingenuity that your Lordship is even
to a miracle endowed withal, will very much advance the vanity of the proud
Translator; the most accomplished wit of the age may have just cause to tremble
when he exposes his most absolute and perfect pieces to the censure of your
Lordship, (this is a truth that the whole Kingdom is conscious of, and the
Turner of this Gallantry was not ignorant of if) as he may justly defy all the
world, when he has once acquired your Lordships approbation of it, but since my
French Author was my president, and had so good an esteem for this piece, at to
judge it worth the acceptance of their Royal Highnesses of Savoy, I suddenly
resolved to pursue my Translation, and transcribe his pride of well Gallantry,
and that I might assume some liberty to my self, have made it something the
more nonsensical (it is posible it may please the better) by prefixing an
Epistle to an Epistle, and Dedicating a Dedication. Your Lordship will be
graciously pleased to excuse this gay nonsense, and pardon so extravagant an
address, which you can only impute to your Noble self, whose very name is so
charming and attractive, that I was hurried on by an Entheusiasme of mad Zeal,
to Court and Embrace (as I would Health and Happiness, or what else is dearer
to me in the world) this blessed occasion to subscribe my self.

Your Lordshps most obedient Servant. J. B.

TO THE READER.
Reader,
I Should do the Monsieur, thee, and my self a most damned injury, should I
honor this trifle with the title of a Translation; that word that sounds so
gloriously in this pretty Frenchyfi'd Generation; and I should be as vain as a
Poet is in his Prefaces, his Esjays, his Prologues, his Epilogues, and their
Apologies, should I say it is my own, and a whole Shoal of English Monsieurs,
with a Morbleu, Diantre, etc. would swear it was the Zelotide, and easily
detect the Fallacy; what shall I do then with this Monster of a Pamphlet, this
Mongrel piece of Gallantry, that has lost every thing that might make it lovely
and agreeable? it has lost the snuffling Idium, that great accomplishment in a
Gentleman, and is infected with some of the English customs too; but faith,
pardon it, for I Will assure you it is very fashionable: Here Is Kissing and
Dancing, etc. here are Treatments and the Fidles; here are gay, brisk, and Airy
Girls too, and the Jilts have such a charming wildness, that it must needs take
you, it is not possible to be avoided. And if all these Ornaments of a
fashionable Treatise, are not enough to set off this poor something, what Name
or Title soever you shall please to give it; I know very little in the world.
But if all this cannot recommend it to your Charity, and silence the damning
Critics of the age, I Am very confident I have* that will mightily please the
fine Gentlemen of the Town: here is no damned, dull, out of fashion Matrimony in
the conclusion, to spoil all that went before. Our Gallant, if he be in Love,
it is in a very Honorable way, he still preserves his Liberty, and his Love,
that is, he is yet unmarried, for after that ugly thing is once arrived, that
has destroyed so many beautiful Affections, and pretty passions in the world,
you shall scarce find ought or either. In a word, it is at your Mercy, name it,
and censure it, damn it as you please, if you can have the heart to damn any
thing that is originally French, and when it is made English, is as mad as the
best of you.

Farewell.
TO Their Royal Highness's THE DUKE and DUCHESS OF SAVOY.
A Sonnet.
SWeet pair of Royal Lovers that in spite
Of damned, dull Matrimony, still are so,
That in chaste Kisses can still take delight,
Nor do those lawful sweets insipid grow.
You from the plagues of Marriage still are free
And after the first month your life commend,
Your Kisses smack as well as formerly,
Nor can his Love, nor can her charms have end.
How from so brave a source can choose but spring
Or Kings, or something greater then a King?
What Blessings for your People coining are:
Could but my pretty fretful Zelotide
Advance your Joys, and reinforce their Tide,
How I Would applaud the Jilt, and dote o^
Le Pays.

THE DRUDGE.
TO His Royal Highness THE DUKE OF SAVOY.
Sir,
I should be an enemy to my own glory, should I not endeavor to acquaint all
France with the happy destiny my fooleries have found in Piedmont. I heard from
Turin, that they had the honor to arrive at your Royal Highnesse's hands, and
the happiness to divert you; and that you were pleased to think my Picture
worthy to take up a place in your Cabinet: What an infinite Honor, Sir, must
it needs be to one of my capacity to have diverted a Prince, that nothing, that
was not uncommon and extraordinary ever yet could, and to find room in a
Cabinet, where nothing but precious things are admitted; ought I after so
signal a favor vouchsafed by your Royal Highness, still to give my Prose and
Verse no better all treatment then that of Fopperies? ought I after all this,
to despise the productions of my young Muse. No, Sir, I dare not pursue that my
cruelty. And I should believe I injured the soundness of your jundgement,
should I preserve my contempt of that, which has merited your esteem. Thus am I
now enforced to desert all my modesty at once, and grow as proud as so
illustrious an approbation, as your Royal Highness an possibly make me.

And really, Sir, who dare condemn this pride in me, when they shall consider
whence it took its original? and who dare assume the rashness, to be of a
different opinion from your Royal Highness? if any Critic durst now condemn
any thing of mine, I would appeal to your Royal Highness as a Sovereign Judge
in matters of this nature, and this Sovereignty is not less considerable, Sir,
than that which your Royal Ancestors have possessed, and left you invested in,
as their worthy Successor: It is more glorious ^o have a Sovereignty over the
Wits, than the Rabble. Heaven indeed has blessed you with a considerable
advantage in conserving a Crown and your Life together upon you, but it speaks
you her particular Favorite in endowing your Highness with all those Royal
qualities, which the management of that Crown with Glory required; and one of
these Qualities, Sir, and that not the least considerable, is your incomparable
Ingenuity.

Those Princes that Reign no other way then by their Authority, have no other
advantage, than that of being feared of their Subjects, but those that Reign
with Mildness, with Magnanimity, and the Troop of Virtues they are adorned
with, have the happiness to see themselves beloved, respected, and adored by
their People. And it is this, Sir, that gets you the Love, the Respect, and
Adoration of your Subjects; when ever they speak of your Royal Highness, it is
with sentiments of Veneration, and with transports of Zeal for your Service and
Honor, which plainly show, how agreeable your Empire is to them, and with what
sincerity they bless Heaven for the sweetness of your Reign over them. Your
Birth has made you their Prince, but if your Royal Blood had not set the Crown
on your Head, had it been in their power, you would have received it from their
free E^ection.

We being their near neighbors, have often Commerce with them, and in their
conversa^ion, whereof their Sovereign makes the most charming and agreeable
part of it, we see them very often open their hearts to us, and speak their
thoughts with freedom, in which pleasant conversation, Sir, they have so well
expressed that zealous respect, which they preserved for your Royal Highness,
that they have communicated it to me. I could not choose but have as great a
passion as the best of them for a Prince so truly amiable, and one beloved by
all the world with so much justice, and were I not a Subject of the greatest
King in the world, I should wish your Royal Highness for my Sovereign.

But, Sir, I should abuse my self, should I make that wish; is it not a
happiness I already enjoy? and am not I your Subject* and are not you my
Sovereign, although neither Piedmont, Savoy, nor any other of your Dominions be
my Country. You enjoy a Sovereignty, that extends it self farther then the
bounds of your Provinces, which procures you Subjects in all the reasonable
parts of the world, and makes your Dominions as large as that of the Muses.
This Empire, Sir, those nine immortal Ladies have established you in all places
where they have any interest, to testify their acknowledgement of those many
Favors your Royal Highness has made them receive. The good entertainment you
oblige them with, is an infallible sign, that you are not ignorant of their
Beauties, and that you have a perfect knowledge of their Merits.

We ought not to wonder when we see them but little esteemed in a great part of
the world; none can esteem them but those that know them, and that is an
advantage that Heaven does not commonly bestow; your Royal Highness is master
of this precious advantage, and I am very certain that you possess it in a very
eminent degree; that quick, subtle, and delicate Wit of yours, is skilled even
to admiration, in all the polite, and pretty things in the world, and pierces
into all the secrets of our Parnassus.

This is that Divine Quality, Sir, that gives a Luster to all your Heroic
ones, and crowns you King of all the Wits of the age: Your Valor, Justice, and
Generosity are great Virtues I must confess; That sweetness and obliging
entertainment, with that agreeable Air which accompanies all your Actions, and
Charms all those that have the Honor to approach your Royal Person; that
Galantry which is so natural to you, which gets you the inclinations of the
Ladies, and renders your Court, and all your divertisements so Noble and
Magnificent, are glorious advantages, I must avow it. But all these
considerable virtues and glorious advantages, would, it is possible, be
confined to your own Dominions, and Strangers, and Posterity would never so
much as hear of them, were they not attended by that our Love of the Muses. Had
it not been for this Honorable inclination, Augustus never had received so
many Elogies as he did, and his Glory, it may be, had never reached our Ears.
It is this that makes your Virtues commended and talked of beyond the limits of
your Provinces, and shall do too, far beyond that short course of your life,
that you spend so gloriously, and that merited Eternity; it is this that
invests you with a Sovereignty over all the Vertuosi in the world, and to which
I am obliged for the happiness I enjoy, to style my self your Subject. It is
possible it is an excess of vanity in me to reckon my self among the Wits; but
when one has once obtained the happiness to please your Royal Highness, he may
without arrogance assume that glorious Title with all its appendages, and in
that condition to which your Royal Highness has been pleased to advance me; I
should offend your judgment, should I have a bad opinion of any thing that I
call mine. I have so highly esteemed my parts, since I was informed your Royal
Highness did not despise them, I judged them capable of conferring something,
to your Royal pleasure.

Since my first works have taken the boldness to pass over the Alps without my
Commission, and yet had the happiness to please all your Court, though I durst
not hope it; I imagined, that those I should my self send over thither, and
which had no other design but that of your Royal Highnesses Divertisement,
would not be so unhappy, as to come off worse then the former.

It is a great design without question, that I engage upon, and I should say
even a rash and inconsiderate one, if a person had not advised me to it, that I
am confident is too prudent to counsel me to any such undertakings: it is, Sir,
a Gentleman of your Dominions that has the honor both to be known and beloved
of his Prince, that has been pleased to give himself the trouble to bring my
Muse into your Court, and that has wrote me word of the good entertainment it
received from your Royal Highness. This generous friend of mine could not
possibly procure me a more glorious, advantage nor one that I more vehemently
desired; but that which has exceeded all my hopes, and created in me the most
pleasant surprise imaginable, is that incomparable goodness that he was pleased
to have for me in communicating a Letter of your Royal Highness to me, in which
you graciously vouchsafed to witness, that you esteemed my works, and that you
should be very well satisfied to see me make some more of them for your
divertisement. This Letter was a Sovereign and indisputable Order for me, but
it was no unpleasant one, and I can safely swear, I received it with as great a
joy as submission.

It is this, Sir, that obliged me to the writing of this piece of Gallantry,
the gayety whereof it is not impossible may not displease you. It may be too,
it may dissipate for some moments those troublesome thoughts, that your
Politic affairs commonly leave behind them, and some of those cares which the
conduct of great Estates almost always plague us with.

If I can compass so noble a design as this, I shall get my self reputation,
and shall persuade my self, that your Subjects are something engaged to me into
the bargain. It is not to be questioned but they know, that when one diverted
Caesar, he obliged the Republic, and I am very certain, that Caesar had not more
noble qualities then your Royal Highness; and that the Romans had not a more
tender affection, or profound respect for him, then those of Piedmont and Savoy
have for their Sovereign.

These are truths, Sir, that your Royal Highness may easily be satisfied of,
from a foreign Country. If they were told you by your Subjects, you might
suspect, they said so for their own interest, or to flatter you, and so receive
their praises as a common homage, which people seldom refuse their Sovereigns;
but when an Elogie proceeds to you from a Province not subject to your Royal
Highness, you may assure your self, Sir, that he who gave you these
commendations, was confident of the truth of them. It is from strangers that a
Prince may learn infallibly, what Sentiments the world has of him, and what
their judgment is of his Qualities and his Conduct.

And since it is so, Sir, your Royal Highness ought to be entirely satisfied;
those strangers which are not interessed in your Highness, praise and bless
you; and I, Sir, that have made some voyages into foreign Countries, can
witness the truth of it: Wherever they speak of your Royal Highness, they
compare you to those great Princes from whence you drew your being. As all the
world is very well satisfied that no danger can surprise you, and that your
courage either acknowledges no dangers, or makes them immediately cease to be
so, they compare you to the Illustrious Amedees, which all the dreadful power
of the Turks could never terrify, and that preserved Rhodes with so much glory
against all the force of the Ottoman Emperor. They count you too, as good as
that Louis, that was so much beloved of his Subjects, for his sweetness and
clemency, as wise as that Charles, surnamed the Warrier, that was as well the
most prudent as accomplished Prince of his Age; as knowing, as that other
Charles* surnamed the Good, who so dearly loved Scholars, and Learning; and as
quick and active as the great Emanuel Philibert, that showed so incomparable an
address in all his bodily exercises.

I have often heard your Royal Highness compared too, to all your famous
Ancestors, but most commonly they do it with your Illustrious Grandfather, to
that great Prince whose name you own, and whose Virtues you are master of. In
the time he lived in, he was esteemed a Man that had the most glorious
reputation in the world. Urban the VIII, our Henry the Great, and James the
VIII. King of Great Britain, gave him commendations, that posterity should
never be unmindful of; and the great Cardinal of Richielieu, which knew as well
as any man, all these Virtues that are necessary for a Prince; said of him, of
whom I am a speaking, that he never knew a more strong, active, and universal
Wit in his life; the most eloquent Muses of his time have sung of his Merit.
That Tasso that he loved with so much tenderness, the Ciabrera, the Marines,
and Cassines, thought they should render themselves immortal, by inserting such
a Princes Commendations in their Works, whose name and memory ought to be
immortal. If all those great Men were still alive, I am confident, they would
conspire to tell you, that the Charles Emanuel of our age, is a Son worthy that
Charles Emanuel, that was so justly praised by all those great Princes, and so
bravely sung of by all those illustrious Poets. Why have not I the Wit and
Eloquence of the last, which I would wholly employ with all my soul to make an
Elogie for your Royal Highness. I Would tell the future ages of those Virtues,
whereof ours is so strongly persuaded; your great Spirit, I mean your
Gcnerosity, your Bounty, your Wisdom, and all your other Qualities; at least as
far as my Wit would permit me, that you have received them with the blood of
that incomparable Conqueror Amedees, your August Father.

Since these great qualities, which before were only seen afar off, were in
your voyage to Lions more nearly considered by all our Court; our great Monarch
has conceived Sentiments of Love and Esteem for your Royal Highness, and those
too are spread through his whose Kingdom. And would not the French be injust,
should they not dote upon such a Prince, which always expresses so great a love
for France; a Prince, that no sooner saw, that his troublesome destiny had
broke those ties that engaged him to our Crown, but he sought out for new ones
with all the vehemence in the world: how infinitely reasonable was this
vehemence, since its Object was a Princess so accomplished? a Princess whose
charms deserve so much Love, Respect, and Devotion, that in the greatness of
her Soul, is the accurate Portraicture of your Illustrious Mother, and that by
her Virtues would revive her memory, if it was possible, that it ever could be
extinguished.

What a joy it was to your Subjects, Sir, to see your Royal Highness bound in
an Eternal knot to that incomparable Princess? and what a glory it would be for
me, if my Story were pleasant enough to divert two Persons of so high a Rank,
and so sublime Ingenuity. I dare avow, Sir, that in spite of my accustomed
insufficiency, I conceived very great hopes of it. When one has a design to
please you, it is very difficult to think of any thing that is low and
contemptible; the Soul raises it self in the undertaking so great an
enterprise: and as for my particular, I believe that mine has excelled it self,
ever since the very instant that I intended to make my Image of Zelotyde,
because I had a design to send it to your Royal Highness, to present you with
all the Lineaments of her Jealousy, and gave all your Court a sufficient
occasion to laugh at her suspicious, and ridiculous apprehensions.

Hitherto, Sir, the Comedians have handled the jealous Gentlemen, with all the
cruelty imaginable, and have commonly spared the jealous Ladies. But for all
that, there are some of the delicate Sex as subject to this passion, as the
most whining Romantic Lover among Men, and it will be convenient to acquaint
them in this History, how prejudicious this pretty Frenzy is to their repose,
how extravagant it renders them, and how they deserve to be hated by all their
Gallants, for this rascally method of making Love.

May it please therefore your Royal Highness, to cast an Eye on my pretty
jealous Creature's extravagant adventures, which your goodness makes me assume
the liberty to make the recital of, and which I shall do with all the Gayety
that my Subject requires, and with all the Respect I owe your Royal Highness.

Zelotide.

A general Peace was now concluded, to the extreme displeasure of the Gascoins,
and this affliction had very much augmented that other, that the prohibition of
Duels had caused them a little before: all their Villages were full of Reformed
Officers, and the most noble and brave among them, had no other employment then
plaguing all they met with, with an impertinent recital of their Braveries, at
God knows what River, and God knows what time. When the King issued out his
Orders for the placing a Regiment of old Soldiers in one of the most pleasing
Towns of France; my intelligence could not inform me, whither this agreeable
place we speak of, were on this side, or beyond the Loire, but I dare assure
you, it lies between Calice and Bayonne.

The greatest part of the Officers of this Regiment were not very well skilled
in any other Virtues, then their Military ones, and Wine and Tobacco, the Pot
and Pipe was their chief employment: but all of them were not so scandalously
inclined: some few of them were more Gentile and Courtly, and preferred a
handsome obliging Lady, before all the Pots in Christendom.

Our Lycidas was one of these civil Gentlemen, and without all question, Sir,
he might pass for one of the prettiest fellows in the Regiment; he was young
and wity, and as well made as the best of them; and to advance all these
accomplishments, his Clothes were as fine, and Al-a-mode, as they could
possibly be out of Paris; his variety of Garnitures, and his good large plume
of Feathers, that quite covered his little empty Noddle, made him presently be
taken notice of; all the Ladies mightily admired him, and doing as they use to
do in the like occasions were infinitely taken with him, and there was not one
Lady in all the Town, that was not hatching some amorous design, how to
imprison this our handsome stranger.

As he was always a professed Servant of the Ladies, and he longed to see all
the Beauties of the place, in as short a time as he could; he, to forward his
design, got acquaintance with a Cavalier of the Town, that had formerly been a
Soldier too, and now at present.

This talkative ill-natured Cavalier, I forgot to tell you what he was before,
would not for all the world but have brought Lycidas to Mass, that is the
amorous rendezvous of the Town; and it is very likely had not Lycidas been
acquainted, that he should find good store of Beauties there, he would have
been more gentile, and less scandalous than to go to that place of Devotion.
Here it was a Man might see at once all that thought themselves handsome; and
it was here that our Courtly Soldier learned all the names of the Ladies, for
he was better bred then to cast an Eye, or speak a Syllable of any thing else,
while there was something like a Woman in the company. This is very fair you
will say, for the first bout; but our Gallant goes further, and learns what
Love intrigue this and that Lady has with that and the other Gentleman, and in
as short a time as can be imagined, his precious intelligence made him a
perfect relation of their Loves, with all the drolling and railery his ill
nature could supply him with: so that Lycidas, thanks to his talkative Buffoon
was immediately acquainted with all the Bed-stratagems of the Town. After so
hopeful a beginning, you may swear he would not leave off, he went continually
to Mass, and that out of pure Love too, I dare assure you, he came always
dressed as fine as hands could make him; all covered over with Ribons and
Feathers, and placed himself in a fit Post to have his finery taken notice of,
and there, sometime standing on one Leg, and then on the other, he played the
prettiest tricks, and set his Face in so agreeable a posture, you would not
think it; and lest all this pains might be lost, he took a particular care he
might be taken notice of.

His Eyes stood always Sentinel to spy
The amorous looks of all the Ladies nigh.
Now on this he darts a glance,
And then on that he looks, as 'twere by chance,
Still taking special care,
To put the blushing Lady out of the Prayer;
And if in his survey
Some pretty Creature chanced to cast array,
He with a gracious Air returned the glance,
He smiled, and then stepped back, and then advanced.
And to confirm their good intelligence
He strait retired;
Not to desert the Beauty he admired
But thank her with an humble reverence.
In a word, Sir, he was the most civil obliging person that breathed, Nay,
faith, Sir, there are some will tell you, that his very civility grew trouble
some and impertinent, he had so much of it; but for all this, take him all
together, he was a very extraordinary person, at least people thought him so,
for he grew to be the only talk in all company; the Ladies remembered all his
shape, his Clothes, and above all, his Carriage; and the pleasant Gentleman did
not forget that neither, especially his profound cringes, and his reverences
Al-a-mode: the young ones grew so taken with him, that they must needs try to
count them, and because it is likely that one could never do it, there were many
of them about it; two or three were to reckon up all he made with his right
Leg, and as many more to count those of his left.

But for all these puny fools plagued him with their damned dull railery, the
most accomplished Ladies of the Town would not miss the Mass for a Treat and
the ^iddles; the Church was never empty, and all this, because, our obliging
Soldier was a constant Churchman. When they were come home again from their
Devotions, all the Femals fell a thinking that she was more looked upon then
another, and that the brisk Gallant had made her three or four salutes more
then the rest; whence gathering (as those pretty Sophisters easily deceive
themselves) that she was preferred before the rest, she grew confident, that
she should effect the conquest of the Gallant, that all the Ladies desired.
Among the rest, that never failed to come to Mass, Zelotyde was one of the
first, and most eager: She was a stately proper person, young, and something
yellow-hair'd, and her Air and Mein had something in them extremely taking.

When in the Church she did appear;
How her fair Eyes of Eyes attractive were,
And like the Sun no Star was seen but her?
From her sweet violence
Altars proved no defense,
Her sacrilegious charms pulled captives thence.
In a word, where ever she was, none could be seen or looked upon, but her; and
all this, she termed the effects of her Beauty, and persuaded herself, that she
really merited a greater esteem then the rest. She, as well as the rest had
some ill design on our new Cavalier (but, In Faith, I think I Am out there, and a
Captain of the Infantry cannot be well called so) and having resolved upon it,
she dressed her self with more care then ordinary, and forgot not any of those
helps, that Art could furnish her with, to set off those advantages that nature
had made her receive.

The Lady being such as I have described her, your Royal Highness may easily
imagine, that she had enough of Lycidas's humble reverences; wherever she met
him, and that at Church, he particularly obliged her by his amorous glances;
and I vow, it is well he did so, for the poor Creature, had he not given her
that esteem she thought she deserved, would not have easily been comforted for
her misfortunes; she had indeed as quick a wit, as any Lady in the Town, but
she had a very strange kind of humor though. Her jealousy was so excessive,
that she grew jealous of all the world, nay, of those persons she never knew,
nor heard of, neither Friends nor Enemies could escape her; I have heard a
hundred pretty stories of her Jealousy, of one of her acquaintance, and
they are all extremely pleasant and extraordinary. She was so damned jealous.

If some kind doting Husband chanced to kiss,
What now he call, d his Wife, before his Miss;
And Zelotide but chanced to spy,
The mutual charming Language of their Eye;
She dams, she curses their chaste Fire,
And longs to see their purer Flames expire.
Who ever does caress, what e're it is,
Be It Wife or Miss,
She frets, she pines, she sighs,
To see the conquest of another's Eyes,
That any Face but hers, could make such victories.
If the fond Lacquey chanced to kiss the Maid,
Or by some pretty sign his Love betrayed,
She the poor Innocent
Did miserably torment,
And Rival-like, still thwarted her intent,
But yet, Sir, she did not do all this out of any aversion she had to love, but
the covetous Creature would have had all the world dote upon her; she would be
the only Beauty, and the only Mistress of all that could conceive that noble
passion. She went indeed sometimes to see a Play and sometimes she would read
Romances; but all this only augmented her calamity, and these pretty
divertisements were the greatest plagues in nature to her. At a Play she would
fain get Celadon from Florimel, or Dauphire from the Collegiate Ladies, and
could not endure to hear Romeo compliment his Juliet. And then in Romances she
was confounded, mad to see Pyrocles so passionate for his Pamela; she could
with all her soul have strangled the fair Cassandra, to get her Oroondates: All
the actions of those fabulous Heroes, that they performed with so much Courage
and Generosity to express their Love, and do things worthy of it, were so many
fatal blows that stabbed her contentment; and in that transport of fury, that
their amorous declarations had put her; she threw away the Romance, nay, and
sometimes threw it into the fire too, to revenge her self for that injury, that
she fancied had been put upon her: but yet she had some wit with her madness,
at least, so much as to conceal her extravagance from the eyes of the world, so
that you could not possibly discover it in her, without a long and a familiar
acquaintance.

Having now learned her Character, your Royal Highness may easily imagine, what
an intolerable trouble she was condemned to every day at Mass, where Lycidas
never failed to meet her. For though she had the greatest share of his amorous
Glances, his Reverences, and all those petty pieces of Gallantry, she grew
stark mad, and all this would not content her.

If the fair stranger chanced to cast an Eye
On any pretty Creature nigh;
She raged, she stormed, and swore they both must die.
Thus every thing she saw conferred,
To heighten the misfortunes, she endured,
If the next Lady did without design
Receive a glance or two,
As any pretty thing from Lycidas might do,
She stormed, and would his Eyes to her confine.
His glances, his salutes are all her own,
And she robs her, that does receive even one.
Nevertheless her jealous Ladyship was fain to conceal her resentments for ten
or twelve days, for Lycidas was so long without visiting the Ladies at their
several Houses, and our Gallant did not this without all the reason in the
world, for he knew very well (though my intelligence did not inform me, how he
came to know it) how much a man exposes himself in company, when he is ignorant
of their Intrigues, which make the greatest part of the discourse, and for this
reason he resolved to be fully acquainted with the story of the Town, before he
engaged in company. And truly, that Gentleman Historian, that ill-natured
Satyrist, I mean, that I told you of before, was as good a Master to instruct
him, as he could wish, and one that proved very necessary to him in that
conjuncture, and upon this consideration (for faith I know nothing else could
induce him to it) he was scarce ever out of his company.

In a fair day they both went a walking together, to enjoy the sweetness of the
Air, and see how the Spring had with her natural Artifice, (that you will say
now is a strange one I hope) painted all the Trees and Meadows with her
invisible Pencil, beyond the happy curiosity of all the Italian Angelos; they
went, if I am not mistaken, to a certain Garden not far out of Town, and when
they came to the Gate of it, they saw two Coaches there, which made them
suspect there was company in the Garden whereupon they inquired of the Coachman,
who told them that a kinsman of our Cavaliers, had Coach'd some seven or eight
Ladies thither: Now who would not pity this poor Gentleman among such a company
of Women, were he nine times a Man, that is about fourscore times more than a
Tailor, he could never be enough for them: Why, a hundred Mouths would be
little enough to answer them and kiss them, and a thousand hands would not
suffice to clip them, hug them, and hand them; but I leave the Gentleman to the
mercy of the Ladies, and must see what the other are a doing. They had no
sooner learned of the Coachman, what I told you of, but they both agreed very
prudently to go seek out some other solitary place, that would be more fit and
proper for their purpose, and without more ado, were marching back again, when
the Master of the Feast chanced to spy them, and running to them to stop them,
he made use of that civil piece of violence, we commonly do in such cases, to
engage them to come into this company. The Femals that thought one man to seven
of them, was most intolerable, were not very much displeased at the arrival of
these two Gentlemen; Zelotide, that was one of the company, and knew the
Cavalier, went to meet him, pretending some business she had to tell him of,
but it was for nothing else but to lay hold of Lycidas first of all; her
project took, the stranger fell to her share, and he, being a very pretty
fellow, and one that spoke the finest things in the world, and having a very
happy faculty to love when he would, or, what was all one, to make people
believe so.

He then resolved his parts should not be hid,
And if he did not love, you would swear he did.
And really, Sir, this first enterview, while the treatment was providing,
Zelotide had reason to be satisfied with him. They walked a great many turns of
the Allie together, and Lycidas being no scrupulous person in making his
Love-Declaration.

Swore presently ten thousand Oaths
Besides his pretty Faiths and Troths,
That from the moment he first saw,
Her charms, her charms, kept all his soul in aw,
And gently forced him to accept their Law.
That though she scorned his passion
And did his torments with contempt look on.
Yet she, yet only she,
Should be the Empress of his liberty.
He had not quite finished his protestations, when Dinner was served up, and
they were called to sit down. It was then, if ever, that Lycidas made a good
use of his wit, and spoke a thousand the pleasantest things that ever were
heard, so that the company was extremely pleased with him; and Zelotide
conceived all the joy imaginable, to see a person that she had some good will
for, appear so amiable to all the world besides. But then her damned humor
made her reflect, and think with her self, that if this stranger took her so
infinitely, her companions too might be more taken with him, then she desired.

And though she loved those charms she did descry,
Both in his Lips and Eye
And all his beauteous harmony,
She wished those charms away
That might some other Lady make their prey.
Lest he should love elsewhere, or else be loved,
What cruel miseries her poor heart proved.
Her trouble was still augmented, and his actions, as she imagined, justified
her suspicions; for the Gentleman did not, as she expected, only choose out the
choice bits to present her with them, but took as much care too to pleasure the
rest, and did it with a pretty grace, that charmed the company, and made poor
Zelotide run desperate; and this was the reason why they sat not long at
Table, for our jealous Lady being one of the most considerable among them, rose
up first, and obliged all the rest to follow her. They walked for some small
time in the Garden, and then all the company retired. Lycidas manned Zelotide
home, and by the way, begged of her most vehemently, the permission to wait upon
her Ladyship sometimes, which she most courteously obliged him with.

They both parted very well satisfied with one another, and thought every hour
an age till they met again. Zelotide was over joyed at her Conquest, and
persuaded her self, that now she had triumphed over the rest of the Ladies; and
Lycidas was no less pleased to have begun his Female-acquaintance, with the
most handsome and considerable Lady of the Town, and being yet ignorant of
Zelotides ill humor, and believing she was no cruel Lady, he assured himself,
that her Husband being now at Paris upon some important business, his Love
would find no opposition.

He thought he now might own his Love,
And that the charming Dame
Could not so cruel or inhumane prove
As to condemn his Flame.
Her Virtue and her Honor were
The only enemies his Love could fear,
For her sweet Air, proclaimed her not severe.
He thought those foolish Opposites, his Love
Might well without a Miracle remove,
In a word, Sir, he promised himself all the pleasure imaginable from his new
Gallantry, and never dreamed of those troubles it would engage him in; on the
morrow he put on the most proper and becoming Clothes he had, and expected with
impatience, the hour when he might see the Ladies; Well, at last it came,
though to his thinking, most cursed slowly; and the Gallant goes to my Lady
Zelotides, where he found her, in his judgment, a thousand times more handsome
then ever she was before, either at Church or the Garden; and she truly had
done all she could to set her self off.

There were two Cousins of hers with her at that time, of which the name of the
one was Melite, and the other Cleonia: both of them young, both handsome, and
both of the most pleasant and gay humor, that ever you met with. These three
amiable persons were very familiar, and scarce ever out of one another
company. Lycidas that had naturally a very brisk wit, and made the best use of
it he could in all Ladies company he came into, and a pretty kind of
insinuation, was immediately received into this handsome Troop, and judged a
very fit person for their amorous commerce, and one that they might talk too
without ceremony; so that Zelotide would not any longer conceal her self, but
spoke to him in the name of the whole company, either this, or much like it.

IF we may credit all your protestations, Sir, we may well persuade our selves,
that our company is not disagreeable to you, and that whilst you stay in Town,
we shall something oblige you in admitting of those visits you make us. It is
our pleasure therefore to oblige you thus, and we receive you into our society,
if you think your self capable to perform some certain conditions, without
which, you shall never come among us. It is not improbable, Sir, that in that
little time you have seen us, you have made a very advantageous judgment of
the merits of my Cousins, and I dare assume the vanity to tell you, that no
Ladies in Town ought to be preferred to us, so that the Law we prescribe you,
cannot justly seem too rigid and intolerable; to see no Lady, and admire or
love any thing out of Breeches, but us; you have got a very inconstant mind
with you, and I shrowdly suspect you for a fickle person, and one fit to abuse
all the Women you meet with: your amorous lies and pretty perjuries, In Faith
Sir, I must tell you our resolution; either renounce this humor, or our
society, for they are incompatible; there are indeed in Town, some things in
Petticoats that will admit of your Courtly wenching actions, but faith Sir, we
shall not; we are too conscious of our own worth and excellence, to come in
sharers with persons so much below us, and we must have you wholly ours, or not
at all. Go, Sir, examine your self, and see whither you can endure to keep us
company upon these conditions; and I dare assure you, that if you can, you will
not repent of it.

Lycidas did not forget one word of this Harangue, and though it had been
longer, his attention would not have been the less. So strange a surprise, as
this discourse must needs put him into, made him stand mute and immovable, and
he was astonished to hear them make him such a Declaration at the first visit.
But however, when he saw Zelotide had ended her harangue, I made her an answer
agreeable to her wishes; and though he had never been reduced to such hard
terms before, as to see but three Ladies in a whole Town, he swore the
Conditions were too reasonable and obliging to be refused; and though they had
not engaged him to them, he should have followed them out of his own
inclination: And to confirm all this, he vowed and protested, that they, though
but three of them, were worth all he had ever seen before, and that any one of
them were enough to make a most constant* Lover of the most fickle Man in
Nature.

Zelotide was very well satisfied with his protestations, and infinitely
pleased for some few days, to see him most regularly observe his promises. And
Lycidas had really not yet seen any Lady, but these three fair ones. But
Zelotyde for all this Excess of fidelity in him, was not yet contented, for
seeing he visited her Cousins almost as often as her, she was extremely vexed
that she had not bin more precise in her Declaration, and she became as jealous
of her Cousins, as the rest of the Ladies; but she could not now civilly forbid
him her Cousins Lodgings; for being bound to them in a very strict kind of
friendship, she very often went to see them, and was glad to see her Lycidas
there. Besides too, had he only visited her, i^ would be taken notice of* and
her reputation might perhaps be blemished by it; she concluded therefore, that
it was an inconvenience she could not possibly avoid; and that she was engaged
upon all considerations, to let the stranger visit Milite and Cleonia; but
observing that the former of them had some affection for him, and was very well
disposed to rob her of her Gallant, and so deprive her of the Honor of her
Conquest.

She feared her Eyes, as conquering as they were,
Might to her terror seem less fair,
When her hard rigors taught him to despair.
Lycidas was for favors still,
Obliging Favors still enslaved his Will.
Goodness to Merits still he would prefer,
And the kind Lady was his Conqueror.
Being hurried on by this fear of hers, which was but too well grounded, she
resolved to prevent her Cousins Favors, and make sure of her Lover, that
seemed yet in suspense what to fix upon; so that having very happily found an
opportunity to speak to him in private, she discovered her thoughts to him,
with all the freedom that she could; Lycidas promised her most faithfully his
eternal Fidelity, and for some time afterward, they lived in a very good
Intelligence one of another; he often visited the two Cousins, but with such
caution, that the jealous was out of the world to see it. All was very well for
some days among them, but Lycidas must have his swing again, and you might
confine Fire with less difficulty, then his wandering Inconstancy; he had not so
narrow a Soul as to bound his happiness, and he is just of such a humor as I
shall tell you now.

Not all the Beauties in the world could tie
His Soul to make it keep a twelve hours constancy
Free as the Mountain-winds he roves,
Both when he is loved, and when he loves.
Though Ladies cruel are
He still loves one without despair,
Nay sometimes he
Quits Favors for their petty cruelty,
And rather had be scorned, then lose his Liberty.
Though Zelotide was indoubtedly the hand somest Lady of the three, and perhaps
of all the Town too; Melite begun to please him better then she did; her Soul
was more mild and obliging, and he imagined he should endure a more easy
slavery under her, then the former, so that he resolved to turn unfaithful to
Zelotide; and feeing that it was very difficult for him to be so, both because
the two Ladies were almost always together, and because Zelotide was very happy
at discoveries, he resolved to make use of Artifice, and cheat her for all her
jealousy to her face; that is, to be her servant in appearance, but to devote
himself really to the young and pretty Melite. He found his loving fair one of
such a disposition, as very much advanced the plot* and this good Good Cousin
of Zelotide made no conscience to cheat her. In such concerns of Gallantry as
these are, I can assure your Royal Highness, that there are not many Women in
France that stickle for their faithfulness.

She that would count it a damned Sin,
To steal a Ribbon, nay a Pin
From a mere stranger, would not make
A scruple to partake
Of her fair Sisters dearest victories,
And make her Sisters share her prize.
And truly Melite was no more scrupulous then another, and she was overjoyed
that she could rob her Cousin so neatly, she never refused Lycidas, and after
by a thousand amorous Oaths, that the Courtly Gallant was never sparing of, he
had persuaded her, that she was the only person in the world that he most
dearly affected, she very frankly confessed to him, that she had something of
Love for him too.

And by a certain pretty method did
Discover, though she seemed to wish it hid,
Her unfain'd Love with such a sweet address,
And such a sprightly wit
That none could doubt of it.
You Would swear 'twas true, nor than she made it less.
Now they are both in a perfect union, and both agreed to manage the business
with all the Art they can; but to what purpose pray? as if any thing could be
hid from the eyes of Jealousy. Though Lycidas visited Zelotyde daily, and
personated the Lover as well as could be; for all his Artifice, she smelt out
his Infidelity, both by the coolness of his Addresses, and that want of care he
took to please her: whereupon, she searched out the cause of it, and was not
long before she lighted on it; she turned spy over all their actions.

She read it in their Words and Eyes
And still confirmed her Jealousies
By something in it self indifferent,
Which she still wrested to a bad intent,
She made it amorous what e're 'twas meant.
Her eye still track'd 'em out
(Too faithful Scout)
And in two days so much of 'em did see,
She grew more certain then she wished to be.
Immediately hereupon, she resolves to break with her Cousin, what ever stir
might come of it; but upon better consideration, she judged it better to
dissemble her resentments, and endeavor to retrieve her Lycidas, by telling
him of his Ingratitude, and the injustice of his change.

One evening, when she was walking alone with him in a Garden* where all the
beauties spend some part of the night in the Spring time, she thought she had
now a good opportunity to tell him of his falsehood; Lycidas, who thought he
could always abuse her into any opinion he would, began to cajol her as he use
to do, and to assure her of his Love and Passion, a hundred manner of ways: but
Zelotyde answered all his protestations with raillery, why all this to me, Sir,
said she, you mistake your self sure, and think you are with Melite; have you
forgot who I am, and dare you be thus prodigal of your kindnesses in the
absence of your Mistress; I vow, Sir, should she come to know of this, I am
confident she would severely punish you. You surprise me Madam, answered Lycidas,
and I cannot tell what to make of this, what the Devil do you mean it for,
serious, or raillery? You cannot without injustice suspect me of any
Intelligence with Melite. It Is true, she is very amiable, but it is also
infallibly true, that since I had the happiness to love you, I never so much as
thought to be unfaithful: I have seen your Kinswoman, I avow it, and have made
her some visits, but you may bepleased to remember, that I did all this by your
order; and I dare safely swear upon a Book, that were it not for the pleasure I
took in obeying your Commands, I should never have endured to keep one company,
that I so little care for, and which, it is very probable, cares as little for
me.

If you had heard him swear,
You Would swear he faithful were,
For still he talked of Love and Faithfulness,
He talked of nothing more, and thought of nothing less.
And did all this with such a sweet address,
That none e're yet used more sincerity,
To clear a Truth, then he to prove a Lie.
But for all this, all his Rhetoric could not persuade Zelotide, for when he
still persisted to excuse himself, because she had commanded him to visit her
Kinswomen, she interrupted him with a great transport of fury; what ungrateful
Man, did I Command you to betray me, and turn unfaithful? and did you in
pursuance of my command hecome a Servant, to that young brisk Jade, and leave
me for a person in all respects inferior to me? and do you take me for so easy
a fool as to believe all this? no, base Man, I do not, I shall never believe
it; what did you two when you were alone together, if you must needs show your
Love before me: That affected coldness which you seem to have for one another,
and then some cunning kind of looks that escape you in spite of all your
affectation; your words of two meanings, that are only understood by you and
your Chronie, and then that care you always take to have your Garnitures of the
same color, to have all the new Plays and Romances continually from Paris to
pleasure your Lady, your hugging the hornify'd Gentleman, and your insinuating
your selves into his Love and Favor; your leaving Money after Play, upon the
Board, to get the Servants your Creatures, your bringing always Sugar-plums in
your pocket for the Paraqueto, and above all, your petty quarrels when people
are by, and secret signs with your Feet, when you think no body takes notice of
them; These Mr. Infidel, and a hundred things more, which I am ashamed to speak
of, will not permit me to doubt of your perfidiousness. Go, for an ungrateful
Man, as you are, that do not deserve to be spoke to, though in reproaches and
raillery, nor be honored with a reproof, I should, continued she, have
revenged my self on my unfaithful Cousin; Did I not persuade my self, that you
would save me trouble of doing it, and she would no longer keep you faithful
then I have done; I too well am acquainted with your inconstancy, and it was my
unhappiness I knew it not sooner, and was kept too long in ignorance, that
Favors and Obligations displease you, and that they are the ready means to
destroy your affections.

Then was a great deal of rage in all this Harangue of Zelotide's, but her last
words had something more of sweetness then fury, so that they might well have
touched with pity, a harder heart than Lycidas's, and he was truly very
sensible of her reproaches.

He grew at her complaint compassionate,
And his inconstancy begun to hate.
But his good soul, to give the Devil his due,
With such compassion had not long to do.
Yet he still did all he could to prove, that her suspicions were injust and
groundless, and that she ought not to rest satify'd with appearances. But
seeing hit obstinate denials the more enraged her, he at last, avowed his
infidelity, and begged his pardon in the most moving words imaginable; he
forgot not Oaths, to assure her, that he would never again visit Melite, and
promised her most faithfully, to live exactly according to her prescriptions;
Though Zelotide had no reason to believe his oaths any longer, she desired the
truth of them so much, that she must abuse her self into an opinion of his
fidelity once again.

His wit could now supply no just excuse
To justify his damned abuse.
But they that do the guilty person love,
The worst excuse do willingly approve.
And so she pardoned them, Sir, and they went out of the Garden in very good
terms again. But the unfortunate Zelotide, that thought she had wrought
miracles by her discourse, and obliged Lycidas to a perpetual fidelity, had
unwittingly given subject for an Intrigue, that since has plagued her
sufficiently.

The Cavalier, Lycidas's friend, and first acquaintance, was one that had no
great business to employ himself in, and therefore he made it his business to
seek it out; he was continually running from place to place, and where ever he
came, setting all he met with together by the ears; He was in a word, one of
those Creatures we call Fopps, Busybodies, contriving-Asses, etc. Fools that
neither love themselves nor any body else; Confounded Coxcombs that would
willingly undo themselves, might they bury another in their ruins.

This virtuous Gentleman was very often with a company of Ladies, that could
not endure our Zelotide, of which, the most considerable, was Cephisa, some
important. Case at Law, or some contest at a meeting about their preeminence
(for truly I was not certainly informed of it) had raised an enmity between
their Families, whence this mortal hatred was transmitted to our two fair ones.
The quarrel had been decided for some months before by their Friends, and
Kindred, and something like a reconciliation was made between them; but for all
their peaceable friends could do in it, something of the old grudge remained
yet, which all the Town was very sensible of* Our Cavalier therefore, that was
mighty great with this Troop of Ladies was by chance in the Garden, when
Lycidas led in Zelotide, and seeing them alone by themselves, was infinitely
overjoyed at so happy an occasion, to search out what intelligence was betwixt
them, which he shrowdly suspected: To which purpose he hid himself among the
Trees of a blind Ally, not far from that in which our Gallant entertained his
Zelotide, whence without being perceived, he heard the greatest part of the
Ladies complaints, and discovered, as faith he well might, that she was
passionately in love with Lycidas, and that more then all this, she was
divelish jealous of him. Never was any person more satisfied at the best news
in the world, then he at this. He was already framing ten thousand malicious
designs against the loving pair, and promised himself as much divertisement,
as he could wish from so pleasant an adventure. He was not long, e're he
discovered it to Cephisa, and if my intelligence deceive me not, it was on the
very next morning. The unlucky Lady is as hugely pleased with it, and hoped, as
well as the Cavalier, to draw no small advantage from so welcome a discovery.

Having laughed their Bellies full, together, and consulted what they ought to
do in this conjuncture; they at last concluded, that if Zelotide was so jealous
of her own Cousin, she would be abominably jealous of another Lady, especially
if that Lady were her enemy; and that therefore, if they could persuade Lycidas
to visit their company, Zelotide would even die with despite, but before her
departure, she would be guilty of some pretty extravagancies, which would give
them matter enough to laugh at it.

After these grave determinations, the Cavalier engaged to bring Lycidas to
give her a visit, and she on her part very confidently promised mised him, that
supposing he brought him thither, he should be made to come again.

Thus were they plotting, Sir, against the poor Zelotide, that never dreamed of
those miseries they designed her, whilst she poor Lady enjoyed all the
happiness she could wish for, for Lycidas forbore to see Melite, and had
performed all he was bound to, at least, in her opinion he had. But faith, Sir,
to tell you the plain truth, he was half a weary of Zelotides Tyranny, and
without question, he had not remained faithful so long as he did, had not Fear
more then Love persuaded him to it, for now he was no longer ignorant of her
Fury and Jealousy, and feared them too, no less, then he loved and admired her
Beauty.

The sweets of Love
He still desired to prove,
But then those sweets of Love to him would be Insipid, when for them he lost
his liberty.

He of the humor he then was, had rather enjoy the liberty to gaze on all the
Ladies in the world, without any other advantage, then that of subscribing
himself their servant, then to be reduced to those hard terms of seeing but
one, though she loved and favored him, as if Heaven and Earth would come
together. And it was this inclination of his, that rendered Zelotide's Empire so
odious to him, but he could not well disingage himself; and faith, though he
was a Soldier, I dare swear he durst not: He knew Madam Zelotide and her
confounded humor well enough, to know what treatment he must expect of her if
he forsook her; and it was not improbable, that her kindred that were very
considerable in the Town, would very much resent his ill usage of the Lady,
should the secret ever be discovered, as she was like enough to do it. So that
he was engaged to visit no other Lady in the Town, and almost resolved too, and
that as seriously as one of his humor could, never to give her any more reason
to be jealous of him, But, faith, it was no hard matter to destroy his
resolutions; and truly our Cavalier, though no incomparable Orator, had not
much to do to persuade him to go see the fair Cephisa,

Lycidas knew very well the present state of the Town, and by consequence could
not be ignorant of that aversion Zelotide had for her, nor what his Mis's
sentiment would be of this visit; and truly this consideration made him for
some few minutes, resist the temptation, when the Gentleman persuaded him, but
when he was something urged to it, both because he was her neighbor, and
thereupon at least engaged to visit her, and for some other petty reasons, as
inconsiderable as the first, he consented to it, hoping that Zelotide might
never know of it,

Being now fully persuaded, the Cavalier leads him to see Cephisa; she was a
pretty young gay Creature, so that any one of her many rare Qualities would be
sufficient to have engaged a hardder heart then Lycidas's; and telling you
this, I need not tell you that our Gallant grew desperately in love with her,
that is, as desperately in love as he could be. He presently forgot his jealous
Lady, and doing as he used to do, had not the patience to delay his amorous
Declaration until the next visit.

He had still ready made.
His vows his oaths, and all his amorous Trade,
(Those pretty Engines to deceive a Maid)
Just as some quacking cheat
Does still the same to a syllable repeat,
And with hard words ten thousand times said over,
Still cheats the Rabble as he did before.
His Declaration was still the same
To all he ever came
From the brisk Courtier to the City Dame
And alt'ring but a word or two
It still will do
Nor need he a new Speech indite.
Still, still the same to the black, to the brown and white.
Cephisa now had got him at the point she wished, and therefore to keep him
there, she received his addresses most obligingly, and answered his
Declaration, with all the civility imaginable; so that when he left her, he was
engaged as much as she could wish him, and was now fully resolved to visit her
as often as possibly he could.

As soon as he was got home, he fell a considering what a horrid trouble he
should be brought into, if Zelotide, should chance to discover his new
engagement; but being very willing to flatter himself, he thought, though he
had but little reason to do so; that Cephisa living in a by-corner of the Town,
and never speaking to Zelotide, the business might very well be concealed from
his troublesome jealous Lady.

And to effect his design, he parted his visits betwixt his two Mistresses,
with all the care imaginable; and truly his diligence was very successful. For
Cephisa and the ill-natured Cavalier, would not have his new passion talked of,
till it was out of possibility to be destroyed; and that Zelotide might be the
more enraged, when she knew how long Lycidas had been unfaithful to her. Our
pretty jealous Creature therefore knew nothing of his visits for a week or two,
but she had observed something however, that began to disquiet her; and that
she might look to it in time, she resolved to speak to Lycidas of it, when next
she saw him.

On that very day that she had taken this resolution, he failed not to wait
upon her, and their discourse very happily chancing to be about fidelity, he
commended his, own to her with all the vehemence imaginable, and swore that
strict obedience he had rendered her, since she was pleased to forbid him the
company of Melite, was so uncommon, and admirable, that she was very much
obliged to him for it: Yes, Sir, answered she, I must confess I cannot blame
you for visiting my Cousin, but for Heavens sake take heed you give me not a
more just occasion to complain of you upon some other account. I have perceived
something* that makes me very much suspect your unfaithfulness; for Gods sake
do not justify my suspicions and let it not be true, that Lycidas affects
Cephisa You know I hate her most mortally, and that I had rather you should
wait on all the Ladies in the Town, then that enemy of our Family. And know,
Sir, it is not without reason I tell you of her.

On Sunday you saluted her at Church with greater respect then I could have
wished, and she returned your reverence with an obliging Air, and a look so
passionate, that it plainly witnessed some intelligence betwixt you.

On Monday I saw your Man and her Maid together, in so familiar a conference,
that I fear the Master and Mistress were concerned in it.

On Tuesday I was informed, though not from you, Sir, you changed your Lodging
near Cephisa's, and that your Landlady had sometimes served her, and was still
very often with her. This Neighborhood, this Landlady, and this Familiarity
between them, you must needs grant is suspicious.

On Wednesday you pardoned a Soldier that fled his Colors, at the Request of
the Husband of my Enemy, though you had refused before to pardon him, when all
the Town entreated you.

On Thursday when her Coach was over-turned, you broke through the crowd to
help her, though I am confident you were not ignorant, that you would have very
much obliged me, had you let her die there.

And yesterday, I was told that you took her Tailor and Shoemaker; and faith,
Sir* I must tell you, people think very strangely of these Tailors and
Shoomakers, that work both for Men as well as Women; there are those will swear
they meddle with something else besides their Trade; and making Shoes and
Clothes is not all they are employed in: the Tailor especially, those gentile
Mechanics, that can with such a dress, join Breeches and Peticoats.

So that there is not one day all this week, that I have not had just reason to
suspect you. For to complete the week, this morning I am very credibly
informed, that in company where you were, you commended Cephisa before all the
Ladies in the Town. And now, sweet Sir, let me assume the confidence to demand
of you, whither one can praise a Lady so extremely, without knowing her, or
know her without offending me; since I hate her unmercifully, and it is the
most sensible affront I can receive of any friend of mine, to visit her.

When Zelotide had ended her Bill of Grievances, Lycidas did all he could to
pacify her. He proved to her that all her suspicions were very slightly
grounded, and at last made no conscience to swear to her most Religiously,
that, he never went to see that Lady, nor never would while he breathed.
Zelotide was willing to believe him, but all his Rhetoric could not absolutely
persuade her, and undoubtedly your Royal Highness will not blame her
incredulity, which was at present most reasonable. The poor jealous Lady after
a troublesome night, gave order next morning to her Lacquey, to go take a fit
post in a blind Allie before Cephisas Gate, to see without being discovered,
whether Lycidas entered there or no.

The little fool might then have cured
Those tortures she endured
And by an inn'cent lie
Her rest, her peace procured
And silenced her distracting jealousy.
Thus disobedience might his faith express;
He Would served her better had he obeyed her less.
She was now assur'dly her too zealous Lackquey, that she was abused, and-that
her Lover visited her Enemy; she longed to see him again-to punish him for his
misdemeanors. But Lycidas not coming all next day to wait upon her, seeing it
was fair, and fit for a walk, she resolyed toward the evening to turn scout
her self, and go watch the unfaithful Lycidas; upon this design she takes
only her Lacquey with her, and under pretense of going to see a Woman, that
nursed a Child of hers, and that lived in the Suburbs; where she knew that
Cephisa and all her company commonly walked, she stood Sentinel in the House to
see whether Lycidas were among them. But all her trouble, that she gave her
self, was to no purpose, for Cephisa being something indisposed, went not out
that evening, and Zelotide was now benighted, when she returned homewards. As
she was going through the street where Cephisa lived, and was got hard by the
Gate, she heard Lycidas his voice not above six yards from her; whereupon she
stopped to hearken what he said, and was not long e're she heard him speak to
the Cavalier, and promised him to stay for him at Cephisa's. Being now an
Ear-witness of his unfaithfulness, she thought on nothing, but following the
dictates of her Anger and Jealousy, she Commanded her Lacquey to retire, and
making use of the favor of the night, she entered the Gate without discovery,
and so got upon the Staircase where she resolved to expect Lycidas; Lycidas
having left the Cavalier, entered very briskly, and never dreaming of the
Ambuscado that was laid for him.

Spurred on by Love, away he run,
And up the Stairs he got as soon
In spite of night, as if he would seen the Sun.
Desire, sweet sweet desire led on the way
Who could to seek a Mistress, go astray?
But your Royal Highness may very well imagine how surprised he was, when he
felt himself stopped, and perceived he was in the Arms of a Woman; he thought
at first it had been Cephisa, who came out of roguery to frighten him (for he
never so much as thought of Zelotide) and hereupon cried out; Fair Cephisa, you
thought to frighten me, and thought I should not know you; but your bright Eyes
have betrayed you, and their light Madam, has spoiled your plot to keep your
self undiscovered: and now faith, Madam, I must have satisfaction for this
malicious design upon me, and the place is so fit and proper for my revenge,
that I never deserve* the happineiss, if I let slip so fair an opportunity.

Had the cross Lady but consented to it,
He would have soon performed what ever she pleased;
Had but the jealous Creature let him do it,
He had her Anger and her Rage,
Most manfully asswag'd.
Spite of her self, he had her self appeased.
But he was strangely astonished, when in stead of that Courtesy, he expected,
the unknown Lady caressed him with all her natural weapons,; Tooth and Nail she
was at it, and her Feet were not idle neither. For anger had so transported
Zelotide, that at first she had lost the use of her Speech, but faith Sir, she
retained the natural faculty of biting, scratching, and kicking. Lycidas was
never so handsomely entertained before, and in the midst of his surprise, he
could not imagine whence proceeded all this obliging Treatment; but at last he
came to be informed of it, by those reproaches that Zelotide, after she had got
her speech again, most bitterly porsued him with; Ungrateful Man, said she,
perfidious wretch, do thou thus observe thy Oaths, thy Vows, and Promises;
yea, you swore to me with all the impudence in the world, that you would never
visit Cephisa, and yet I catch you here my self in the night time, and in such
a condition too, that shows you are in no bad terms with her.

And still pursuing her fierce rage,
Which the poor Gentleman could never assuage,
Her Feet, her Nail, her Teeth again
Began to storm amain,
She bit, she scratched, she flung,
While still her Tongue
Such a damned peal rung,
That for its violence the storm could never be long
O had she had a Poniard in her hand
How she would a stabbed the faithless Gentleman;
He from her rage must needs have found his death,
Though she for grief next minute lost her breath.
All that ever the poor Lycidas could do in this conjuncture, was to make use
of all the strength he had, to carry her away in his Arms, and bear her by
plain force into the street; for he very wisely considered, that Cephisa's
Staircase was no very convenient place to make his reconciliation in with
Zelotide, and that if this adventure came to be known, then might, God knows
what come of it. But he could not carry her away so suddenly, but Cephisa
heard the noise, though she knew not exactly what the matter was, and the noise
ceasing on the sudden, she believed that some of the Household had been playing
the fool together.

At last Lycidas having got Zelotide into the street, and given her his hand to
lead her home, he began to show how imprudently she had behaved her self; how
that if her extravagance had been known, she would have given a very ample
subject for Cephisa and the malicious Cavalier to laugh at, nay, and all the
Town too, and that hence-forward she ought to take a greater care of her Honor
and Reputation. Take thou then a greater care of it, replied the poor Lady
weeping; Cruel Man! since thou know to what transports thy Love carries me,
ought thou to expose me to all occasions of them? and ought* not you out of
gratitude and acknowledgement, to cease to visit that Woman, that I hate above
all the world, and which you ought to hate too, had you any love or respect for
Zelotide?

Thus to fierce rage succeeds soft tenderness,
And a wise Lover can make use of this.
And so did our Lycidas, who feeing his Zelotide something pacified, hoped he
might wholly pacify her; so that having walked along for some time, and now
brought her almost home, he desired her to wipe away her Tears, and to put her
self in order as well as she could lest the House might take notice; And then
he promised her, that as soon as she was got home, he would justify himself
better then she thought 'twas possible he could; nay, he engaged he would bring
her such reasons, as should absolutely satisfy her; and as soon as they were
got into the house, both of them seating themselves on a Couch together, and
out of all hearing, Lycidas spoke either this, or something like it.

I Must confess, Madam, I promised you never to visit Cephisa, nor was I
ignorant of your aversion for that Lady, nor how much I should disingage you,
should I admit of any engagement with your enemy; yet after all this my frank
confession of those faults you charge me with, be pleased but to consider how I
committed the crime, and you will be enforced to confess it was not so great as
you would please to make it. The first visit I made Cephisa, I was absolutely
necessitated to. You remember, Madam, that day the Coach was overturned, I
happened to be so nigh the place, that civility engaged me to succor the Lady;
and then it was, Madam, that I was constrained to lead her home; on the morrow
she sent her Husband to return me thanks for my civility, so that I should have
been the meerest Clown in nature, had I not waited upon her. About two or three
days after, I went to acquit my self of this obligation, and there I met a
company at Cards, where they would needs make me a Gamester; and then having
lost all my Money, not to abuse you, Madam, it was that only consideration
drew me thither, as Gamesters most commonly do all they can to save themselves.
It is true, Madam, I never made you acquainted with it, and I was fearful it
might displease you, should you come to know of it; and I cannot deny neither,
since you will know all, that sometimes when I was at Cephisa's, I never played
neither, but be pleased to know then, it was because I found no convenient
company; and you know very will, Madam, since your Husbands return to Town, I
cannot have the liberty to wait upon you so often as I could wish, so that not
knowing whither to go, I have sometimes gone thither; this House of Cephisa's
is not far from my Lodging, so that I have spent some hours there, more for
custom or convenience, then for any inclination: I have been there sometimes
after dinner, but faith; Madam, it was because I knew not how to spend my time
elsewhere, and sometimes a cross humor of mine has kept me there, only out of
design to vex the Lady and the Cavalier, for I saw my presence gave restraint
to their company, so that, Madam, did you but know how I carry my self there,
hating Caphisa as much as you can for the hear of you; you would be very well
satisfied at those visits I render her: sometimes I compliment her, but it is
after so mad a strain, that neither she, nor I my self understand a word of it:
and after all these obliging fooleries for divertisement, I pick a quarrel with
her, and rip up all her faults to her face; in a word, Madam, I treat her like
a person that you hate.

I believe, Sir, these excuses will not seem very plausible, and it is
possible, too long too, to be spoke to an impatient Lady without interruption:
but Zelotide I can assure you, heard them most attentively, and highly approved
them* for the fear she conceived of losing Lycidas, and the joy she resented to
see him excuse himself, with so much submission, after such an adventure, when
she might reasonably expect he would have broke with her, appeased her
instantly, nay and made her repent too of her rash proceedings: she promised
therefore Lycidas to love him as much as ever, upon condition he would no more
see Cephisa. Lycidas told her, he could not so soon leave off seeing her, lest
it might occasion some strange reports in the Town, and make people suspect
them; but he assured her, the next time he played there, he would raise some
quarrel, that he might have some pretense for his retreat thence. Zelotide was
very well satisfied with his design.

So the two Lovers marched along,
And over and over
They vowed and swore
They never more
Would their true Love and sweet contentment wrong.
The peace thus formally concluded was,
When Zelotide and Lycidas
The more to strengthen it, thought good
To Sign the Treaty with their Blood.
They now redoubled all their kindnesses,
And their true love more firmly to express;
Did with true Flesh and Blood,
What lusty Lovers do, and whiners wish they could.
When Lycidas promised Zelotide to disingage himself from Cephisa, he really
intended it. But he no sooner saw that lovely Lady, but he grew conscious of
his disability to perform his promises.

For when he saw the pretty Dame again,
His Faith recoiled,
His Loyalty was basely foiled,
Nor could he any more his word maintain,
And if he saw her once, he must again.
And besides all this, he had not yet obtained the fruition of his wishes, and
a kiss, and the like, had been all he had yet received of her, so that
resolving not to lose all that trouble he had already engaged in, he pursued
his visits; the jealous Lady was very well acquainted with them, but when ever
she spoke of them to Lycidas, he told her he was just upon the point to leave
her, and that he had not yet found any occasion to start a quarrel, as he told
her he would.

That plotting Fop the Cavalier did not yet know a word of what had past upon
the Staircase, so that he suffered a very considerable loss in it, for had he
come to know so pleasant an adventure, that malice of his that was so natural
to him, had drawn very fine advantages thence, and that talkative humor of
his, would have been extremely gratified in publishing the secret with all the
expedition imaginable. But though he missed of this, he hit upon one far
better, and he was continually hammering something to disturb the best friends
he had in the world, he lighted on a most cursed Intrigue that plagued Lycidas
and Zelotide no less, then it satisfied the Author and Cephisa.

One evening, that was one of the most serene and pleasant that ever had been
seen, and that invited all the Town to walk Abroad in so sweet a season; all
the handsome Creatures in the Town, went abroad to take the Air in the Garden I
told you of before. Lycidas led Zelotide thither too, where they had not taken
above three or four turns, before the Cavalier and Cephisa discovered them, and
thinking they had a most happy opportunity to practice a divelish project of
theirs, that they had been plotting for some time before, they resolved to put
it in practice. The Gentleman projector would needs manage it himself, who
meeting a Lacquey of a Friend of his, gave him inductions what he had to do,
and to encourage him to perform his part with the greater willingness, gave him
something: the Lacquey was very willing to serve him, and took the Letter that
the Cavalier had provided before hand, and following the orders had been given
him, he went to seek out Lycidas, and having found him without any great
difficulty, he delivered him the Letter in Zelotide's company, and told him a
Lady that he knew not, had commanded him to give him it. The young Rogue staid
not long enough to be asked many questions, but immediately disappeared (if I
can properly say one disappears in the night, when there is almost no
appearing) The Letter produced most effectually what it was designed for. For
Zelotide considering how it was delivered; suspected some new engagement, and
thought Lycidas was got again at his infidelity.

Now for some Treason Lycidas
Suspected was.
On the least subject she
Revived her Jealousy.
Whilst her cursed humor did her soul inspire,
From the least spark, she would strait advance a fire.
Her rage must still oppose what ever withstood,
And what you would not have her see, she would.
It was for this reason that she presently snatched the Letter out of Lycidas's
hands, and was fully resolved to read it: the two spies that followed them at
some distance, and were a preparing themselves to laugh their guts out, were
not at all deceived in their expectation. They heard Zelotide very urgent with
Lycidas to go out of the Garden, to see for a Light to read the Letter, while
that poor Lover was dissuading her to no purpose. For though he was wholly
ignorant whence the Billet came, he was fearful there might be something in it,
that her jealousy might make some ill interpretation of, and for this reason
he did all he could to keep her in the Garden, and used all the wit he was
master of to get the Letter from her. But his endeavors proved successless, and
Zelotide spying a Light in the Gardeners, she forced Lycidas thither with her.
The poor Gentleman so hung an Arse, you might easily perceive, with what regret
he went forward, and the jealous Lady trooped along with such precipitation,
that by her pace you might see her impatience. Cephisa and the Cavalier
followed them undiscovered, and took a very convenient post under a little
blind window of a ground-Chamber, whence they might easily see without
discovery, and hear through the Glass all that passed between the Lovers. The
impatient Creature was no sooner got nigh a Lamp, that gave light to all the
little house, but she examined the Seal of the Letter, but not knowing it she
at last opened it, but faith, drew as little satisfaction from that, as she had
from the Seal before; she found nothing there but strange conjuring kind of
Characters, that she understood not one tittle of; and it is very probable no
body else. It is impossible to tell you what an excess of grief and despite,
she resented at so strange a rencounter. She was presently persuaded that these
were some Ciphers or other that Lycidas understood, and that without question,
this Billet invited him to some Assignation with some new Mistress of his.
Hereupon she begs of him, she threatens him, she persecutes him to discover
this Mystery. But the Devil was in him if he did, for he understood no more of
it, then she did, and all he could do, was to swear he could not devise the
meaning of it, that without doubt the Lacquey and mistaken him for some body
else, and delivered the Letter to a false person. All this was true, he told
her, for the Cavalier had scribled over the Paper with those Arabian Pothooks,
only to distract the poor Zelotide, and expose her ridiculous jealousy and
extravagance: But Lycydas might swear long enough before she believed him; she
still rested persuaded she was betrayed again by the unfaithful Lycidas, and
took this Letter for an undoubted proof of it. Being grown now almost
desperate, and never hoping to get the secret out of Lycidas, she makes use of
her last effects of Goodness, of Rage, and all the Eloquence they had inspired
her with.

Nay my dear Lycidas I prithee tell.
In Faith you must, and all shall strait be well,
I Will gently pardon my dear Infidel.
Nay I Will commend thee for thy secrecy,
Excusing what I did not see.
Come with that fear dispense
And make me one of your Intelligence.
And since my weaker Beauty could not be
Powerful enough to chain your liberty
Come, come, this pretty victress pray let us see.
Though I the torments of a Rival prove,
Yet I Will be sworn, lle not disturb your Love.
I Will think some handsomer
You did to me prefer,
I Will think her charms might well your Loyalty,
Destroy, and make my servant false to me.
But seeing she would prevailed nothing by her entreaties she descended to her Rage
and Fury again, which it will be extremely difficult to express, to your Royal
Highness.

Cruel inhumane Man* she said,
And will thou still conceal thy guilty Love?
That guilty Love that has thy faith betrayed,
And makes poor Zelotide such pains to prove?
She stopped awhile, and then her rage displaid.
Yes, I will know that wicked Jilt
I will, base Man, and when I shall
Have found her out, she in thy sight shall fall,
And expiate both thine and her own guilt.
My Rival by this hand shall die,
Yes, Sir, it is Justice, and not Cruelty.
Nor care I what the graver world may cry.
Let 'em condemn my Rage, or justify;
Credit's a thing remote, when injured Love is by.
If your Royal Highness could possibly be surprised at any thing, it would
without doubt, to see a Woman make Verses thus extempore; But if that opinion
be true that tells us, that Poetry has something of Enthusiasme and Fury in
it, you must needs confess, Sir, that Zelotide was in a most incomparable vein
Poetical.

Lycidas was now infinitely troubled with her Prayers and her Menaces; But it
was out of his power to satisfy her, and unfold a mystery, that he himself was
utterly ignorant of. And now Zelotide seeing neither her p^ay'rs nor her
threats could force the secret from him, very happily thought upon a stratagem,
that must of necessity convince him. She was confident, that he had received
more Letters then this one, from his new Mistress, and that if she searched him
immediately upon the spot, she should find some other tokens of his perfidie
about him. Having abused her self into this opinion, she must search his
pockets, where she found a great company of Letters that he received from his
friends and kindred; she had the patience to open all, one after another, and
finding there some few of 'em of a Woman's hand, she read them over and over,
and unhappily meeting with something in them that she did not well understand,
she presently concluded they came from her unknown Rival; for though Lycidas
was Treated as a Cousin or Brother in them, she said, that was only out of
confederacy to hide their deceit. In fine, having read over five or six of
them, and discovered nothing considerable, she went to open another; but
Lycidas seeing by the Superscription, that it came from his Sister, about some
business that concerned his Family, which for many considerations he was
engaged to conceal; he pulled it from her, and told her that he could not
possibly let her read that, and immediately tore it in pieces. Your Royal
Highness may easily imagine that there needed no more to persuade her that this
Letter came from her Rival, and might have discovered all the secret to her.

Seeing him tear the Letter, up she flew,
She tore his Face and Hair,
Or by his Hair along the Lover drew,
Such were the dictates of her fell despair.
And could her Nails have reached his Heart,
(Where her fair eyes had often played their part.
And stamped her Image with so sweet an Art)
She would his Heart have torn in pieces too,
And pulled her Image thence,
She with that loss could easily dispense,
Could she but give the faithless Man his due,
And he that first the fierce Megera drew
Might very well have took her Image hence.
But the good honest Gardener, which had never read of Megera, nor perhaps
heard of her, took her for some Woman bit by a mad Dog, and thereupon armed
himself with all his Utensils, his Bill and his Knife, etc. that he might upon
occasion turn Spaniard, and fight with Sword and Dagger, and I cannot tell what
besides, lest she should do him a mischief. Cephisa and the Cavalier were not
altogether so fearful; all the pain they were in, at least the most
considerable, was to forbear laughing out, lest they should be discovered.

All that the poor Gallant, (I think I may justly call him so in this
adventure) could do after his mad Treatment, to fly his mad Mistress, (and
faith I believe he did it as heartily as ever he sought her before,) and save
his Honor in the sight of the Gardener and his Wife, who as he thought, were
the only spectators of the Tragedy, was to answer her fury with railery, and
get out of her hands as soon as he could; so that spying some Kinsmen of
Zelotide's a walking in the Garden, and as good fortune would have it,
something near the Gardeners, he went out very briskly, having first taken the
Letters from the pretty fretful Lady, and entreated them to accompany Zelotide
home, for he was engaged to leave her there, to quell some disorder that had
happened among the Soldiers of his Company. He was glad he got off so, and was
now fully resolved never more to expose himself to her capricious
extravagancies.

Zelotyde hearing how handsomely he had made out the story to her friends, had
some comfort to see with what prudence and discretion he had excused her, and
made use of the same pretense, as he had done. Her credulous Kinsmen were
easily abused thus, but Cephisa and her Gentleman, that had seen what had past
at the full length, knew the truth of all but too well for her repose and
reputation. They laughed to some purpose, you need not doubt it, but the
unconscionable Creatures were not content to laugh among themselves, they must
needs publish it too, and communicate the success of their Intrigue. And your
R. H. need not wonder at it.

For stifled Joy does to a torment turn,
And what was made too warm, begins to burn.
Its force is sprightly, quick, and vigorous,
And if you keep it in, more active grows,
But then its force one Heart can never contain;
Disperse thy Joy, and 'twill return with gain.
This pretty contradiction pleasures have,
For still their Joys increased, the more they gave
And it seems the Cavalier was very certain of this, for he had rather have
lost the better half of Blood, then the pleasure to publish so pleasant a
story; on the morrow therefore (so that it seems, the Cavalier was something
mannerly not to call up his friends out of Bed at that time of night to tell it
them) it was Town-talk, and many a dull Droll had bin past upon it. And now the
Cavalier was as happy as he could wish to be; oh how he hugged himself, and it
is very probable took himself for the greatest wit of the Age, after so brave
an Intrigue, so gallantly managed? so that you may easily imagine he told it to
all he met with, what interest he had in it, how it was he that wrote the
Letter, and took care to see it delivered. He spoke besides this, all the
finest things he could upon that subject, and rallyed upon it after a horrible
rate, where ever he could find any that had the patience to hear him. Lycidas
was told of it that very day, and seeing what bad effects this raillery might
produce, that it was too bitter for a friend; and besides, he was engaged in
Honor to testify by some gallant action, that he had not spread the report
about, but some body else, he sought out the Cavalier, and desiring to be
informed of the flying report that came from him, he could get no other
satisfaction from him, but some new abuses; so that bidding him draw
immediately, before they could be parted, he wounded him in the Arm in two
several places.

And thus our petty Satyrists came off
After the pleasure of a scoff,
When on their heads their Railleries still fall,
And as they tal'kd, so now they suffer all:
They find themselves undone,
Because they laughed too soon:
They damn their Drollery
And now too late they see,
When all the danger's past
It Is then the happiness to laugh at last.
The combat happening to be in a public place, it could not be of any long
continuance. The Combatants were presently parted, but the news of their
quarrel being suddenly dispersed, their friends immediately made thither, and
ranked themselves on one side and the other. The Cavalier had many very
considerable Kinsmen in Town. But Lycidas was in the head of a Regiment, so
that they could not easily make assault upon him. Their common friends seeing
that the Cavaliers wounds were not dangerous, and the stir that the quarrel had
raised among the people, might break out into some disorders, resolved to take
order betimes about it. Cephisas Gentleman, the Man I mean that she called
Husband, was one of the most active among them, to bring the Combatants to some
agreement; for having learned that his Lady was concerned in the scandalous
report, he judged himself engaged to silence it, with all the expedition he
could. To which purpose he went with some friends of his to the principal
Officers of the Regiment, who were very glad to see themselves prevented in
treating for a pacification; and to requite his civility, they agreed that the
peace should be concluded at his House. The two fighters were led thither, and
there they embraced one another, after some petty satisfactions adjudged to
Lycidas, which my Intelligence did not acquaint me with, and which, it is no
matter whither your Royal Highness know or no, since they are not material to
the story.

Zelotide presently heard of the quarrel, but was not acquainted with the cause
of it, for no body was so imprudent and uncivil as to acquaint her or her
Husband with that raillery that had past all the Town through upon the
Garden-adventure. So that the jealous Creature not knowing what Lycidas and the
Cavalier fought about, guessed at the cause of the quarrel, as a jealous Lady
should do, She believed that the Cavalier that had served Cephisa a long time
before, could not endure her engagement with Lycidas.

For Rivals, if they once but chance to meet
With odd caresses do each other greet,
Honor and Love Command them to fight on,
He for the Girl the Honor has to dye,
And he lives still the fair one to enjoy,
For one can never be well, till the other's gone.
This opinion of hers very much augmented her jealousy, if it was any longer
capable of degrees; and the poor Lady for five or six days, was plagued worse
then ever. For since the adventure of the Letter, Lycidas had never waited on
her, so that she could not have the pleasure to tell him of his infidelity, nor
the satisfaction she desired, to know the certainty of her suspicions* she was
now thoroughly persuaded, that Lycidas had quite deserted her, to visit Cephisa
with the greater convenience, that her Rival triumphed over her and her Beauty,
and that it was probable they were diverting themselves with her extravagance.

These thoughts of hers so distracted her,
That when her fury grew less violent,
She of her jealousy would often repent,
And thinking on those miseries,
Those briny Tears and bitter Sighs,
Her humor did so fruitfully create.
Her Rage, her Fury, she her self would hate.
But then considering
With what high reason she had jealous been,
What reason then she had
To Storm, to Rage, to bid her Soul run mad;
Her jealousy she justified,
And swore she would still be jealous, though she died
Of her repentance she repented too,
All was unjust but what her Fury prompted to.
She had an hundred different resolutions in an instant, and some of them
absolutely destructive of all the rest, but at last having consulted her own
soul, she resolved to do her uttermost to retrieve her Lycidas.

She hoped he still might think her fair,
Her Eyes were still as charming as they were,
When they first conquered him,
And did so lovely seem.
And if she must despair,
Her former Conquests ever to repair,
She judged it better still
To see him, though an Infidel,
Then never to see the Man she loved so well.
This resolution seemed so plausible to her, that she preserved it for some
days, and while she was in this mind, she very happily met an Officer of the
Regiment, that she had some little knowledge of, and that was a very intimate
friend of our Lycidas's, and if I am not very much mistaken, she met him as she
was coming out of the Church one day. The Officer, being very obliging to the
Ladies, as all Lycidas's his Chronies must needs be, offered her his service to
hand her to her Coach, which she very willingly accepted, because she imagined,
she might learn of him the ground of the quarrel; and truly, though my Author
mentions it hot, I can easily be persuaded, it was as well to get a new
servant, as to enquire after the old one. The Officer was extremely surprised
to see her ignorant of what all the Town talked of, and wherein she had so
particular a concern, and could not believe but that it was only a piece of her
Countenance, to endeavor to persuade him that she was not the cause of it. But
she spoke to him so seriously, and so earnestly entreated him to inform her,
that at last he was persuaded to it, both to serve the Lady, and do Lycidas a
kindness: He assured her therefore, that the Garden-adventure was known all the
Town over; that Cephisa and the Cavalier had divulged it, having first been the
eyewitnesses of it in the Garden; that the Cavalier was Author of that Letter
that had made all that disturbance, and that talking of it in all company he
came into, Lycidas came to hear of it, and judging himself in Honor obliged to
demand reason for the injury; and Duel a person that had exposed that Lady that
he most passionately affected, to the laughtter and abusive raillery of all the
Town* he wounded the Cavalier, though not dangerously, and the business was
taken up at Madam Cephisa's, because her Husband had very much concerned
himself in their agreement.

Though this Relation very much afflicted Zelotide, when she heard how her
extravagancies were laughed at, and what an ill opinion the Town might justly
conceive of her Virtue, yet she could not choose in the midst of all her
sorrows, but resent the greatest joy conceivable.

She loved her Honor never the worse for this,
Her Fame and Credit she did still prefer*
To life, and what was else more dear*
Yet Love must bear down all, what ever it is.
Her kind esteem of both of them was great,
Great as esteem divided well could be,
But if the one of them must needs retreat,
Poor Honor then that one must be.
Love forced her to it with such a sweet necessity
That what ever Honor urged in his defense,
Was foolery,
Scarce Sense.
Thus that she might her Love more truly prove,
She sacrificed her Honor to her Love.
So that, Sir, you may easily imagine that Zelotide was not extremely troubled,
and that she could admit of some Consolation in the midst of her afflictions;
for though she had lost her reputation, she was more concerned at the loss of
her Lover, whom now she hoped she might recover. She could now no longer
preserve her anger against Lycidas, since she found her suspicions of him were
unjust, and he was more innocent than she imagined, and had behaved himself
like a Man of Honor in maintaining the interests of his Mistress with such
vigor, against the malice of a Rival, and the raillery of an Enemy. And then
she immediately was plotting how to revenge her self on Cephisa and the
Cavalier, but she thought it now more convenient to think of Love than Revenge,
and by all means to recall her Lycidas. She would not let slip so happy an
opportunity, but humbly thanked the Courteous Officer for the trouble he was
pleased to give himself in acquainting her with the cause, and full relation of
the quarrel; again assuring him, that till that moment she had been kept in
ignorance of what so much concerned her; she told him, she acknowledged her
self infinitely obliged to Lycidas for the defense of her Honor, and having
now found by his discourse, that the Officer was Lycidas's Confident, and
acquainted with all his secrets, she very ingeniously confessed to him, that
vehement inclination, she had for his friend, and having by this obliging
confidence drawn him into her Interest; she avowed to him, that Lycidas had
never seen her since the adventure in the Garden; that she was intollerably
troubled at it, and that he would oblige her eternally, would he bring his
friend along with him to honor her with a visit; that the chief reason why she
longed to see him, was to beg his pardon for her unjust suspicions of him, and
express her gratitude for the zeal he used in her service.

This civil obliging Officer promised her all see desired of him, and so left
her, with a firm resolution to oblige Lycidas to wait upon her as much as
formerly. The Lady had moved him with her pretty-taking conversation, and her
Wit and Beauty pleased him so much, and she was so wholly amiable in his Eyes,
that he concluded she deserved to be served with all the constancy in the
world; that any Man of Honor or Conscience ought to rest satisfied with such a
happiness, and that his friend was too too blame for his infidelity to so
incomparable a Lady; and truly it seems he really thought so, for he kept his
word most exactly; he told Lycidas of all the discourse he had with Zelotide,
and proved to him, that he was engaged to wait upon her, that he ought to take
those extrvagant effects of her jealousy for the marks of an incomparable
affection, and that if Love could not induce him to see her, yet fear might
persuade him to it, for what might he not with justice apprehend from a Lady as
mad and desperate, as amorous.

Lycidas, since his Quarrel with the Cavalier, had not seen Zelotide indeed,
but then neither had he seen Cephisa, having learned that she was an accomplice
of his enemy; and so at that time his Love lay fallow, and without employment.
For, Sir, I cannot justly count those for visits, that he made then (for it
seems by my intelligence, he was with some more of the Females of the Town then
two, though I have not learned their names nor quality) because he could not
lose his liberty to any of the Ladies. But his humor would not permit him to
live long thus.

Unhappy he
Should he for two whole days without a Mistress be
Two such whole days to him might well appear
More then a thousand year.
Cessation from his Love made seem
Each minute a whole age to him.
That musty rest to him appeared more rude,
Then all the Lovers servitude,
With all its Gall, and bitterness imbrued.
Trouble he loved and doated on, while he
Could not be quiet in tranquillity,
He a true Soldier
Without the War
Would quickly broken be.
Besides, Sir, he could not be out with his Mistress for above eight days for
the heart of him; and however they had plagued him, he forgot all their
cruelties in a very short time. So that there needed not much persuasion to
draw him to Madam Zelotide's, His careful friend led him thither on the morrow,
and knowing very well that when a pair of Lovers is once met, they, agree among
themselves a great deal better, then they would by the mediation of a third
person, he left them either to be honest together, or do what they would; and
they poor souls were so well employed, that they never saw their common friend
sneak away from them.

And though at first they both dissembled well, And faith here I think the Poet
is in as bad a humor as his Lover.

She personated the cruel,
And he as surly was as none can tell,
But he that wrote Squire Witherington's Knell;
He left Love to be judged of their quarrel.
This little supreme Judge knows his Art at well, as can be and draws
considerable advantages from such disorders, and those which pretend to have a
familiar acquaintance with him, assure us,

That he exacts his Fee
With all the vigor of another Judge,
Which if the surly Lovers grudge
Immediately to satisfy,
The cursed Villain leads him many a trudge.
But if they do, or at least counterfeit,
All that they can to pay the debt,
If they talk nonsense, play the fool
Sufficiently, and love by rule*
He gives so kind a sentence then
Both for the Ladies and the Men,
They both go satisfied away,
Though both are cast, both seem to win the day.
Our two Lovers, for now I think I may safely call them so, recompensed him for
all the care he took, to bring them to an agreement, with new acknowledgements,
and new testimonies of their submission. And, as he is indeed a very pretty
Arbitrator, and works our reconciliations, with the handsomest address
imaginable;

He brought the matter then about so well,
And did so neatly make them both agree,
With his sweet Art, and pretty industry*
That the most curious could not tell,
Who the most willing was, the Man or she,
Both kissed, both blushed, and blushing said;
In vain they have our Love betrayed.
Thus we redeem our fond delay,
And pull back yesterday.
Our melting kisses,
And amorous bliss's
May teach the World there is no such joy as this's:
Thus without wronging either,
The little Rogue pleased both, and injured neither
That Is thus, he brought them both together,
Zelotide was never more satisfied since she breathed, and Lycidas was never
more contented; Zelotide was ravished to find by the effect of her
Garden-Adventure, that her servant was more innocent then she thought he was;
and that that happy unhappy adventure, had made him renounce her Rival too.
Lycidas was no less satisfied at this conjuncture, that proved him a most
constant Inamorato, when if one might have searched his heart for him, he would
have found him otherwise, and that furnished him with fresh means to deceive
the poor Zelotide. They being thus equally overjoyed, the two Lovers, at last
parted, and resolved to meet as often as they possibly could.

While the two Lovers were thus happy to excess the fair Cephisa must not be
forgotten, who as brisk as she was, began to be troubled at Lycidas's absence;
she now began to perceive that her laughing had cost her dear, and that her
raillery had made her lose a man that she loved great deal more then she
thought she did, before he left her. She now repented of her Intrigues, and her
designs upon Zelotide, though she hated her more now then ever, since they
must all fall upon her. She heard of Lycidas and her Rivals agreement, and
thereupon redoubled her Hate of Zelotide, and Love of Lycidas. While the
Cavalier had entertained her with his fooleries, laughing, and diverting her
self at the expense of her Rival, was all her employment, but now she thought
on something else.

That she reflected on her Love,
That she did never, as she ought, improve,
She called her self an innocent,
A fool that so opposed her sweet intent,
And found that Zelotide,
Though she her sprightly passion did not hide,
Was yet the wiser of the two,
While she enjoyed, what she but wished to do.
Those pleasures that she might have had,
When her bad conduct all her joys betrayed.
Did now torment her soul,
Which present griefs and her lost joys control.
And now her Love too late had made her see,
That Lycidas,
(And then she called her self an Ass)
That Man of Men, that lovely he,
Was fit for something else then Raillery,
She was resolved to retrieve her Gallant, but here was the Devil on it, she
could not devise how to effect her wishes, and recall her injured Lover. The,
Cavalier, after their quarrel was no fit person for such a message, and Lycidas
had left his Landlady that had formerly been her servant, so that every thing
ran contrary to this unfortunate fair one. But, Sir, mere chance obliged her
with the happiest opportunity she could have wished, and that it was impossible
she should ever have thought on. She very happily met Lycidas at one of her
Cousins, that she went to visit; and this Cousin, as good luck would have it,
had got a Gentleman with her, that she had no aversion for, so that leaving
Lycidas to entertain Cephisa, she talked in private with this person, for
truly, Sir, I have not learned hit quality; Lycidas now very prettily engaged
without the least design of his, to talk with Madam Cephisa, he began his
discourse with reproaches; but the Lady made so many excuses, and protested so
unfeignedly, and with so great a tenderness, that she was extremely sorry for
what was past, that the easy Lycidas was touched with her submission. And
truly who could deny so distressed a Beauty any thing? certainly Lycidas could
not easily do it. Insensibility, I dare be sworn for him, was none of his crime.

When any Miss of his
Had by some base devise
(None ever displea'd him with their cruelties)
Angered the injured Lover,
And in his Air did his just rage discover.
She might her pardon easily procure,
Poor Lycidas could never endure,
(Ladies you will praise his pity sure)
Not to give pardon and himself unto her.
When his resentments raged as high,
As injuries could make 'em fly.
He the offense could easily forgive,
And let the offender in his bosom live.
Though by malicious subtilty
He by the pretty Sex should cheated be,
He Would still retain his clemency,
And might the Judgment be referred to him,
No witty Beauty, would long guilty seem.
One cannot therefore wonder if these submissive and charming excuses of
Cephisa's did not very sensibly move our Lycidas. Your Royal Highess will
undoubtedly avow, that any one else, far more insensible, and obdurate then our
Gentleman was, would be extremely touched with them; if you please to consider,
with how taking an Air our pretty Criminal uttered them. Nay, she pursued her
submission still and told him, that if by any fault of another nature, she
could expiate her past one, she was ready to engage in it, and prefer his Love
to her Innocence; and that in a word, she would most willingly procure his
pardon at the expense of what she held most dear in the world. The cunning Lady
managed her business rood incomparably, for the pacified Lycidas founded his
happiness upon her promises, and truly his hopes did not abuse him; for after
some small stay there, he led Cephisa home again, where the peace was concluded
to the great contentment of both parties. After this formality was once over,
they agreed upon certain rules for their living together in better
intelligence, and managing their pleasures for the future with prudence, the
longer to continue them: Then they fell a talking of poor Zelotide, and her
extravagant jealousy; but Lycidas being very unwilling to clash with her any
more, told Cephisa very ingeniously, that he must needs wait on her still; but
he assured her, it should be only out of policy, to avoid any new disorders,
that her mad Love and Jealousy might produce. It was not long before Zelotide
was informed of their reconciliation, and of those visits the Gentleman made
Cephisa after their agreement; but Lycidas excused himself very plausibly to
her, and told her it was very difficult for him not to see Cephisa sometimes,
since all the Gamesters continually met there, and all the spiritual and
ingenious persons of the Town made her House their Rendezvous; and then he
swore he had no private acquaintance with her, and never saw her but in
company; and thus the pretty Gentleman deceived the Ladies.

Now, Sir, You see all is quiet, the Cavalier and the two Rival Ladies agree
very well with our Gallant; but damned ill luck must raise up a new disorder
among them, and disturb their tranquillity as much as formerly.

A Consin of Zelotides, we called her Cleonice in the beginning of this
History, was to marry one of her Sisters (but truly, Sir, I could never learn
what hey called her, though I used all possible means to find it out) to a very
near kinsman of Cephisa's (but faith, I cannot tell who he was neither.) Being
the Wedding was to be public, and very magnificent (whence I gather it was no
Westminster one, though perhaps the couple scorned to have more honesty then
our English fools that are to be married at the place aforesaid) the Gallant
(for yet I think I may call him so* before he is brought to the Altar to
sacrifice his liberty, and debauch his Mistress into that dull and
insignificant thing commonly called a Wife) for his part invited Cephisa and
her Gentleman; and the Lady-Bride invited her friends thither, and among the
rest, Zelotide and the thing she called Husband. These two Families, as I told
you before, for all that feigned reconciliation, hated each other still most
mortally, but they concealed their enmity; they faintly saluted, one another
when they chanced to meet, and when ill fortune brought them into company
together, they were civilly complaisant, just as we are to strangers commonly,
so that they could not handsomely refuse their invitation, though they knew
before hand who they must expect to meet there. The Gentleman that was designed
for the Groom had been an Officer in Lycidas's Regiment, and had been for some
time an intimate friend of his; so that Lycidas was also invited. The Feast was
to be kept at a Villa of Cleonice's, about two miles out of Town. They all kept
their Assignation very exactly; and Lycidas that came something later then the
rest was in the greatest trouble in the world to meet his two Mistresses both
together in the same company.

Now Lycidas must neds confess
That Happiness
Has its excess,
And can to misery degenerate.
Thus plagued by two such loving Mistresses
He wished their favor less,
Their Love disturbs him more then would their hate
Now he must part his Favors too,
And his kind Graces justly share;
What should the poor distracted Lover do?
They both are witty, sweet, and fair,
Sweet as when gentle Zephyrs Fan the Air,
That does unto some Flowery Vale repair.
Brought to this sad distress
Both how to leave and choose a Mistress,
He all their charms looked over
And found them both as charming as before.
What shall I do? he cried,
Can I those Lips and sprightly Eyes forsake,
That would of Jove again a Satyr make,
Or force him so me new shape to take?
No, no, I cannot leave either,
Nor can I my true Love divide.
Then I mud keep and love them both together.
While thus confounded his poor foul remains,
Now on his Zelotide he casts a glance,
And thence he did his love the more advance,
While he new Beauties spied, and charms by chance,
That loaded him with more of the Lovers Chains.
But when he looked on his Cephisa, then
His Love for her returned again.
While thus in distracion he lay
Now leaning this, now the other way,
Now the sweet Girl, now the jealous bore the sway,
At last hit Fetters he would needs retain,
And constant unto both remain;
But now at present he must see
How to divert his misery;
And least he should displease either,
Resolved at present to choose neither.
So that he resolved that I may tell it your Royal Highness in Prose as well as
Verse, for that day to renounce both his Mistresses, and apply himself to Madam
Cleonice. Being she was the Mistress of the house, and he had some acquaintance
with her ever since he first saw Zelotide, and no body ever suspected him of
any particular acquaintance with her, he thought he had taken the less
dangerous resolution, and that by this happy means he might keep his Favor
with both his Ladies. And truly the reasonable Cephisa was contented to see him
bestow his love any where else but on Zelotide, and reckoned her self
infinitely engaged to him; but Zelotide was not of so tame a humor, she could
not endure that her servant should caress any body besides her dear self; and
though she was overjoyed to see that Lycidas did not so much as look upon
Cephisas; she was not satisfied with that, but would have had him cast an Eye
on no body else: but her prudence in this conjuncture, mastered her soul, and
concealed her resentments, so that by her actions none could judge of her
inward motions, though she suffered all the torments that Rage and Jealousy
could inflict, while our Lycidas at the Ball, at the Banquet, or where ever he
was, was always with Madam Cleonice, and carried himself so discreetly, that
one would have sworn he had not the least inclination for Zelotide or Cephisa,

Lycidas came off thus a day and for some part of the night, till the Lady was
brought whither she would be, to her Husbands embraces (for hang it, now that
dull name must be used) where we shall leave them between the Sheets to their
pleasures, (for, for the first night they will be something satisfied with one
another sure, or else they never will) and see what the rest do, for you may
guess at the married couples employment. Cleonice was now engaged to leave the
company to go and give order for something about the house, and Lycidas, though
he was very unwilling to part with her, was at last forced to leave her; so
that now he was at a loss how to carry himself* The Ladies were at play in two
several companies, whereof Cephisa was of the one, and Zelotide of the other.
So that for fear of displeasing either of his Mistrisses, he would not strike
in there: and the Men were as hot a fudling as can be imagined, and the greater
part of them even dead drunk, with a pretty kind of Wine they had got, that
charmed them so sweetly, that they could have been content to have died over
again, might they have so agreeable an Executioner. Lycidas was engaged there
for some time, but stayed not long among them; for this sport displeased him
worse then the former, so that at last he thought it best to leave the company,
and retire into some dark chamber, without speaking a Syllable, lest he might
be dissuaded from his resolution. He was no sooner got where he intended, and
laid himself upon a Bed, that very happily he light upon in the dark, but
finding himself excessive weary with Dancing, he composed himself to take a
nap, where he fell asleep very soundly, with his Clothes on, and had lain ruff
all night, had not a very pleasant adventure raised him: He had not been asleep
much above an hour (it is possible it might be an hour and half quarter) when
he felt something pull him by the Arm, and he was not well awake, when by some
caressing, and amorous kind of injuries, he perceived Zelotides voice; the
prudent Gentleman foreseeing what inconveniences might hence arise, if she was
caught with him in the dark, told her very civilly, she exposed her self to too
great a danger; that some servant might easily discover them together, and that
the preservation of her Honor engaged her to leave him immediately, and avoid
the displeasure that she must of necessity resent, if any one should sple them
together.

Any other Lover less prudent then Lycidas, would not have troubled himself to
mind his Mistress of her Duty in so happy an occasion; but, Sir, I am engaged
to avow it to your Royal Highness, for I know Lycidas to be naturally a very
prudent person, and one that loves to lay his Love-Intrigues as sure as can be.

But how gravely soever he preached to the Lady, it was ail to no purpose:
Zelotide told him that she had just left play, and had left all the company
mighty eager at it; that all their Husbands and their Servants were half drunk;
that she thinking to find him there by himself, had stolen up to him very
secretly; that no body would mind her absence, or if they did, would think she
was gone to Bed; so that she might without the least danger enjoy his sweet
company for some few moments.

Forgetting then his danger, up he drew,
And on his Prey he flew;
Now his dull prudence he did soon reject,
And nothing but hit Love respect,
His Love, his gamesom Love he thought upon;
Wisdom and Prudence with their gang begone,
To phlegmatic Philosophers retire,
That tell you of content, and dream of nothing higher.
Lovers must mount; they are all, they are all a fire,
What saucy danger dare his joys molest?
And pull the Lover from his Ladies Breast,
While he lies there 'twould impious be,
To think of ought but Loves felicity
And its fair Source, his lovely she,
As in a Church 'twould impious be,
To think of ought besides the Deity.
The Lady when she saw her Gallant full persuaded, took her place very
obligingly on the Bedside next the Wall, and begun a very pleasant
entertainment with the too too happy Lycides, whereat both parties were very
well satisfied, and I am confident, would never have been tired before morning,
had not an unlucky accident intervened. The Lady had not long enjoyed what she
desired, before she heard, as well as Lycidas, some noise upon the Stairs. This
sudden troublesome noise obliged them to keep silence, and hearken what the
matter was; immediately after they heard their Chamber door open, and some body
come into them. Your Royal Highness may very well imagine what a condition this
unexpected rencounter put our two Lovers in, they were afraid of all the world,
and the smallest fortune they could hope for, was to be found together with
Zelotides good Husband. This, excessive fear of theirs had rendered them
immovable, and so they continued till Lycidas felt some thing very gently pull
him by the Hair. He stirred not for all that, but snorted most courageously, to
persuade the unknown Creature, if he could, that he was sound asleep; but
whoever the incognito was, it pulled him so strangely, that he could not any
longer personate the sleeper? besides some pretty tender discourses, and some
few claps of the cheeks, had now almost discovered the person; and those pretty
sweet caresses made him swear it was Cephisa: and faith she was the very person
that disturbed the dark entertainment, who having left off play, and missing
Lycidas, she looked for him among the Debauche's, but not finding him there
neither, she came to look for him in this very chamber; Zelotide that was got
on the other side of the Bed, durst not so much as breath with freedom, for
fear she should be discovered, but listened very attentively, and easily knew
Cephisa by here voice, and seeing with what familiarity she caressed her
Servant, did but too plainly see their engagement; whereupon she grew stark mad
with Lycidas, and no less with Cephisa, her despire cracked her heart strings;
and that which very sensibly augmented these her misfortunes, was, that she
durst not reveal her Sentiments, and unravel her Resentments; But though she
durst not let her Rival know her, and revenge her self upon the brisk Jilt for
that injury she received* Lycidas must feel here fury; she scratched and bit
him by the hand, Arm, and Face, and pulled him by the Hair, of her side I mean,
and in a word, wherever her Teeth and Nails could reach, she clawed him, as
though the Devil were in her, or as though the Devil were in him, and she were
to draw blood of the Wizard.

Between a loving pair of Ladies lie,
And yet turn neither way?
Fie Lycidas, rise up, both satisfy,
It Is not impossible, faith try,
And bear the lovely prizes both away.
Thy sweet Catholicon will both appear,
Her lovely Rage, here killing kindnesses.
What misery can equal thine,
When Love and Rage to plague thee both combine?
Stretched and immovable he lay,
Like some dull lump of Clay
Which no brave sprightly form did actuate,
Not could the Ladies make him show
His Love or Hate,
For all they with their Lips or Nails could do.
This happy Cheek is kissed, and kissed again,
And her sweet charming Lips stood hovering there
About his Lips, his Eyes, and every where,
Whence love had loaded here with many a chain
And when her Lips she stole away,
Her whiter Hands began the Play,
And strok'd the Roses in his Cheeks aside,
That nothing like a Blush might stop the Tide
Of their delight, and cause a dull delay.
But then the other side must bleeding lie,
And suffer whate'r jealousy,
Can with it is Fury make him do,
She pinched his hand, and bit his Lip in two;
Yet still he lies insensible
To stormy Fury, and to milder Love,
Nor could you by his carriage justly tell
From whence he did the great pleasure prove.
What can we hope from out sweet Mistresses,
When in the midst of two such pretty Creatures
For Wit, and something else besides their Features
In deep distress
Poor Lycidas
Lay like an Ass
That Verse nor Prose can his sad Grief express.
For two such Beauties too insensible,
He can no passion feel,
But in the midst of Heaven he finds a Hell.
But necessity very much heightening his invention, together with that
apprehension, he had, lest some disorder should happen between the Rival
Ladies, he very nimbly leaped off the Bed, and taking Cephisa by the hand;
Faith, Madam, said he I must be unhappy at present in spite of all your
goodness, and your Favors must prove useless to me; nor can I embrace that
happiness, which I would at any other time have sacrificed my life to have
procured. I must have more prudence than you in this conjuncture, and preserve
your Honor at the expense of my pleasures. Come Madam, I must lead you out of
the chamber, and put you out of fear of a surprisal; without question, Madam, I
infinitely oblige you in this, and make you shun an accident, that would
trouble you as long as you breathed. He said no more, but taking her away with
a pretty kind of violence, he led her out of the chamber, and having brought
her down stairs, he left her at the Hall door, where all the Ladies were still
a playing; she, as the was a very neat dissembler, humbly thanked him, and
confessed he had very much obliged her. But, Sir, the business above Stairs had
not been carried so happily, that Cephisa heard nothing of it; she heard
something just as Lycidas was taking her away, and now must needs gratify her
Curiosity, and see what the matter is; so that Lycidas had no sooner left her,
but she followed him very silently to the Chamber door, where our too kind and
loving Cavalier, and no less beloved neither, was scarce entered, but Zelotide
that had now run mad with jealousy, caught him by the Hair, and with their
Teeth, Nails, and Feet, did so handle him, you would have pitied the poor
Gentleman.

Thus the poor Lycidas's destiny
Made him too late to see
What a misfortune it is,
How dull a bliss
To have a furious Lady for a Miss;
Thrice had the Man been Treated thus,
With furious hands, and words more furious.
At last assuming Courage, thus he said,
Prithee give over
No more, my Dear, no more,
Thy Fury has enough thy Love betrayed,
I see, I feel its vehemence,
Too smartly does it strike the sense.
I cannot with such Favors well dispense.
Thus I another simile may prove,
Destroyed by what I first desired, my Love.
Nay now e'n moderate
Your too much Love, or your pretended Hate.
Let me not have so kind a Mistress,
And if you will love me, love me less;
Love in excess does to a torment turn,
And what at first but warmed, begins to burn.
But Lycidas's Remonstrance had no great power over Zelotide's soul, her cries
were still coutinued, and her Female weapons were still employed in expressing
her resentments. All this, Sir, Cephisa heard very distinctly, and those bitter
reproaches that continually accompanied her assaults, taught the curious Lady
what was the cause of the disorder; she knew very well by what she heard
Zelotide say, that her secret Commerce and Intelligence with Lycidas was
discovered, and that if the noise she made were heard by any of the house, all
their mysteries would come out, and her Honor be ruined eternally. Whereupon,
very wisely considering for some small time, she reckoned it an extraordinary
piece of prudence, to go and embrace Zalotide, and desire her, since they knew
one another intrigues, to live in good intelligence with her, and like good
friends very honestly to share Lycidas betwixt them; Cephisa, who was a very
just good natured thing, would have consented to this Treaty with all her soul;
but Zelotide was not of so tame a humor to go sharers with any one, she must
engross the whole Commodity; and truly in that Rage she then was, a more
moderate person then Zelotide would be mad at such a Proposition, as really she
was, and Treated poor Cephisa after the strangest manner that ever was heard
of; she immediately left Lycidas, and fell soul upon her Rival, and being
incomparable good at kicking, biting, and those kind of laudable exercises; she
attacked Cephisa with so much cruelty, that the poor Lady was necessitated to
defend her self with the same weapons; Lycidas in the mean time did all he
possibly could to part them, but they were so divelish hot at it, that all his
endeavors proved ineffectual* the noise of this formidable and most dreadful
engagement, was presently heard by some of the Family, and they very
diligently, and with all the speed they could, acquainted the company, so that
in an instant, the greatest part of them, ran thither with lights, to discover
the unknown adventure.

Where the two Rivals did enraged appear,
Without or Wit or Fear,
Their Eyes did in their sparkling Dialect,
Their Rage detect.
Whilst from those sources of bright light their springs
Far other Darts than those that conquer kings.
They with an equal Rage are both possessed,
She clawed her Rivals naked Breast,
And with pure blood checkered her whiter Chest.
But the other then had lost her Hood,
And her fine tresses did dishe vel'd fall,
By which her Rival drags her to the Wall,
And so revenges all her loss of Blood.
But then her Point is gone,
And her new Locks are down,
And her pure Pendants scattered on the ground
Besides she 'as lost her Necklace;
Nor did the controverted Lover,
Though they both loved him, surffer less
They scrach'd him, threw him down, and tumbled over.
Six wounds he had all bleeding still,
Whence did that blood distill,
Could the impatient Jilts have staid,
Would have their fierceness and their Rage allayed.
Well tired he was and bloody too,
As well he might, after all this ado,
And all 'cause one was not enough for two.
Then for the Field where all this blood was spilt*
By one and the other Jilt,
It Is richly worth your observation too,
'Twas wondrous pretty, and I Will swear 'twas new
There lay Bracelets, Pearls, and Amber,
All spread about the Chamber,
Two Gloves at two yards distance lay,
Those white Inviters to so black a Fray,
There lay their Head dress,
That they had placed before with sch a dress,
Three Cuffs, if I remember too, there was
Among which lay Lycidas
Hit new white Wigg, half tore to pieces,
(What a sad misfortune this is)
There was a great deal more worth your Royal Highnesses Observation, if I
could remember it. But this may suffice to persuade you, that it was the
prettiest Scene imaginable. The first care that the spectators took upon them,
was to part the Combatants; but the disorder, had proceeded farther, had not
some peaceable persons among them took up the business. For the Husbands being
got half fudled, without examination, ran on like mad caps to take their Wives
parts, so that the Battle was beginning again as bloudily as ever, and had
continued so, had not the Master of the House, with the assistance of some
Friends, and Kindred, mediated betwixt them, and treated a cessation from Arms
on both parties, until the cause of the quarrel could be known. They asked
Cephisa, and asked Zelotide what occasioned their engagement, but neither of
them answered a word to purpose, but continued scolding at one another, as
though they had been brought up at Billing sgate, and stood six times in the
Cucking-stool; Lycidas, that had always a very quick invention in such
conjunctures, and never pumpt for a lie in his life, saw all was lost, if he
did not light on some sudden expedient, to bring all off again, and conceal
their Mysteries, and save his Ladies reputation. His sprightly imagination
immediately furnished him with the happiest device in the world; whereupon he
offered to inform the company of the true cause of the disorder; and when he
saw them all keep silence, he told them, That Cephisa and Zelotide (as ill luck
would have it) had some business at the same time to go up the same pair of
Stairs, and that they went up with so much precipitation, that they had not
time to call for a light; that in the dark, not seeing one another, they
chanced at the Stair-head to justle very furiously; And that having no good
will for one another, as all the Town knows, they took it for an abuse: And
thereupon came to words about it, and from words to blows, so that he lying in
chamber hard by, whither he bad retired from the Debauch, to sleep a little,
was awaked by their noise, and went out to end the quarrel; That he had by main
force brought one of the Ladies into hit Chamber, to keep her from her Enemy;
But that the other had pursued her so furiously, and they both continued so
obstinate in their fighting humor, that they had treated one another just so
as they saw, and had put him in that condition they found him in, for
endeavoring to part them.

While Lycidas was carrying on his relation, the Rival-Ladies came to
themselves a little, and began to fear, least the subject of their quarrel
should be discovered; but seeing, Sir, how ingeniously their common Lover had
excused them, and brought all off again, they avowed all he said, and made a
fit use of his probable excuses. She justled me, cried one, and she justled me
said the other,; and were so hot at it presently, that their friends came to
hold them in, lest they should again commence the combat. But the Master of
the House, and some other friends that Tere there, easily quieted this second
emotion, and remedied the relapse. I hey told the two interessed Gentlemen,
that no body was injured, that all was by mere chance, and that the blows were
so equally divided, that neither could boast of her success, The sage and
prudent Husbands having very gravely heard all the particulars, were the first
persons that laughed at the adventure, and swore their Wives were as drunk as
they were, and called the Female combatants Fools, and Gossips, and God knows
what; but begged Lycidas's pardon a thousand times over, made him all the
excuses they could think on, engaged their fighting Beauties to make Lycidas
satisfaction for the injury he had received, and without more ado reeled to
their debauch again. The two Rival-Ladies embraced one another, at the request
of the company of the Women, and were overjoyed in so dangerous a conjuncture,
at the preservation of their Honor, they laughed as heartily as the rest, at
the pleasant extravagance of their quarrel, and told it just so as Lycidas had
done before them.

The Husbands being got pretty well drunk by this time, and the Ladies having,
laughed their laugh out, all the company went to bed, and among the rest, the
Bride and her Gentleman; for though I told you they went to bed before, you
must know that they poor souls rose again, and came to see another kind of
combat then what they were engaged in, but now the Company once again brought
them together, where we shall leave them, for I think we cannot leave them
better: On the morrow the company parted, having first agreed, and judged it
requisite, that the two reconciled Ladies, Cephisa and Zelotide should go to
Town in the same Coach; and their Husbands fearing least Lycidas had not
heartily pardoned them for all the scratches, together with the bites and
bruises he had received, would by all means persuade him to go along with them,
without any other soul with him, but his two Mistresses; and these good
obliging Cornutos charged their Wives to pacify him too, and do all they could
to procure his pardon.

Thus do those civil Gentlemen
Sometimes our pleasure, and our joys advance
They hug their Ladies Favorite, and then
Commend the pretty souls into their hands.
Those horn-mad Cuckolds now are out of date
That would the Courtly Gallant hate
That Poisons, Swords, and Halters threaten still
And to do more than kill,
And vindicate their Honor on that Head
That had (for so they speak) defiled their Bed,
When as kind souls they did but all they could,
To please their Ladies at expense of Blood,
And do that Drudgery the Husbands should.
No; our obliging Generation
Will no such troublesome cracked fools admit,
It has more Sense and Wit,
Then still to blame that Act that must be done.
If a good Husband should discover
His Lady's Lover
He never would make a word of it,
'Twould be most cursed scandalous
To question what he does,
Prove him a Clown, no Courtier, nor no Wit.
No, he himself would their content procure,
And never trouble their Amor,
He lets her meet him when she will,
And both of one another have their fill;
He may his Lady then more easily
Content and satisfy,
For he alone he is sure can never do it,
Should she but rigorously hold him to it.
Thus he what e're her carriage be
Though he her visits and caresses see.
Still obstinately blind, will naught discover,
And though he sees, yet will not see a Lover.
Our Galllant and the two Rival-Ladies being now together in the same Coach,
your Royal Highness may easily conjecture, after so pleasant an adventure; that
their conversation was not unpleasant, and that a great many fine things were
spoken amongst them. Lycidas began to make them see their imprudence, and told
them, if his address had not helped them out at a dead lift, their extravagance
might have had very bad consequences; both the Ladies were of his opinion, and
rendered him their hearty thanks for so high an obligation. And now they were
in such a condition, that they could no longer conceal their affairs from one
another, so that by the mediation of Lycidas, they were made very good friends
again, and there past between them the finest Raillery, but yet the most civil
and innocent, about their Loves, that ever was heard. Cephisa told Zelotide of
her jealousy, and Zelotide rallied on Cephisa for being content with her
leavings, and all this had so little harshness in it, and was so extremely and
obliging, that two Rivals were never yet more fully reconciled then they.

What marvels did ingenious Love then do?
Love like the States could then admit of more,
While the fair Prize was shared between the two.
This was a wonder never seen before.
The pains and pleasures they do both partake,
And willingly their common chain endure.
Friendship from Hate he did with ease procure
That did at first their spirits captive make.
Since in one common third they both agree,
Let one the Lover of the other be.
Before they came to Town, they very solemnly covenanted, the better to silence
the impertinent Lampooners of the Town, and to cheat their Husbands the more
dexterously, to part Lycidas betwixt them, as a good that was equally common to
both of them. They moreover fully resolved and agreed to do all they possibly
could, to hinder any third Lady from robbing them of so agreeable a Treasure.
And that if through any Caprichio of his* he should favor the one more then
the other, the agrieved Lady should not make any public disturbance about it,
and that all the Arms she should make use of to retrieve the fugitive, should
be caresses and obligations, These condition thus formerly agreed on, were so
advantageous for Lycidas, that he could not with reason refuse them, as really
he did not. But assured his two Ladies, that he was very well satisfied with
them, and swore he would never on his part violate the Articles.

For some weeks the two Rivals, with the happy third person, the beloved
Lycidas lived in very good intelligence, according to the conditions agreed
upon in the last Treaty. The Ladies were infinitely happy, and thought
themselves so too, but Lycidas began to surfeit on their goodness, and was
presently cloyed With so much sweetness. This good intelligence of theirs
plagued him most unmercifully, and at last he found by sad experience, that he
might with less difficulty content his two Mistresses during their division,
then now he had made them friends, These two handsome persons loved one another
with as great a passion, as they hated each other formerly, they were never out
of one another company, and that former precaution of Lycidas's, that he had
before so scrupulously observed, and that the observance of so much, troubled
him, became now useless and insignificant.

Thus when the one spied with what gallantry,
He did his Love unto her friend address,
She never wished it less,
But knew he would make her happy by and by;
When he exactly showed the same confer
As much as to a glance or word on her,
She never blamed her Rivals kisses
Nor envied those more great and solid blisses
Since by and by
She the same Gallantry
Must without diminution enjoy.
This accurate kind of distributive justice was mighty troublesome to the too
too much beloved Lycidas; and I easily persward my self* that as well stoned as
he was of endearing caresses, (and truly, Sir, I believe few persons in France
could vie with him) all his stock would have been soon exhausted, and he have
been reduced to extreme beggary, and if there had not come an Order from his
Majesty to change his Garrison, and lead his Regiment into a Citadel, upon the
frontiers of picardy. How agreeable this Order was to Lycidas, that was now
even tired and more then satiated with their amorous Delicates, your Royal
Highness may easily conjecture; but the poor Ladies were struck dead with the
dreadful news, all the Thunders in nature could not have so much disturbed
their souls; but in fine, there was an absolute necessity for their enduring of
it; the King must be obeyed, and they must lose their Lycidas. Lycidas went to
take his farwell of them, when they were both together, and this sad farwell of
his, cost the poor Ladies a multinude of Tears, and Lycidas shed some too,
though I believe, out of a very different consideration, and they were only
Tears of joy for the recovery of his liberty, and his disingagement from so
troublesome a happiness, while his sad Mistresses wept most excessively, and
cared not to preserve the glories of their bright Circles, when the only Man
they esteemed in the world had deserted them, and they could see nothing now
worth the captivating: They entreated him to honor them with a visit as soon
as possibly he could, and to return the same Lycidas to their embraces, that he
was with that same sprightly Air, and Gayety of his, and above all, with that
ardent passion (for so they called it) he was pleased to have for them. Lycidas
promised them most liberally, all they could desire, but I can assure your
Royal Highness, that to this moment he never performed a word of these his
promises, and it is now above nine months since he left them. He himself was
pleased to tell me this story, and withal he assured me, that there were very
handsome and courtly Officers in that Regiment that came to relieve them, and
persons that without doubt were capable to undertake any amorous adventure. As
soon as they have changed their Garrison, I do not question but some one or
other among them will bring us more news of Zelotide, and her extravagant
Jealousy.

And now, Sir, I shall own the ambition, to say, I hope as well as wish, that
my Zelotide, with all her faults, may have the happiness to please your Royal
Highness, which if I shall be once assured of, my Muse stirred up by so
glorious an encouragement, and so brave a success, shall still continue in her
design of diverting your Royal Highness. Our French Gallantries are so frequent
and usual, that I shall never want a subject for Stories of this nature, and
they always are in themselves so pleasant and agreeable, that they cannot choose
but take, if the Historian spoils not their native graces. What an Honor shall
I be blessed with, if this foolery of mine shall prove fortunate enough to
please your Royal Highness! and what an infinite joy should I resent, if my Pen
at your Commands were employed in writing a more serious History! Could I be
the happy eyewitness of so glorious a life as yours, and be then Commanded to
transmit it to posterity, adorned with all its noble circumstances, I persuade
my self, Sir, that so brave a Subject would inspire me with new flights, and
that my style advanced and lifted up with the Dignity of so great a Subject,
would never flag, but keep up its excellence with an equal force continually.
If this wish, Sir, be rash and foolish, as with a blush I cannot but avow it
is, I humbly beg your Royal Highness will be pleased to pardon it, and impute
it to my Zeal for your Royal Highness's service, and to permit my Muses to
confer something to your divertisement, and vouchsafe me the glory to tell all
the world, that I am,

Sir, Your R. Highness's Most Humble, and Obedient Servant, LE PAYS.


