HYMEN'S PRAELUDIA: OR, LOVES MASTERPIECE.

Being the SIXTH PART of that so much admired ROMANCE, ENTITLED CLEOPATRA.

Written Originally in the French, and now rendered into English By I. C.

EVAND. Quid magis optaret Cleopatra parentihus orta Conspicuis, comiti qu am
placuisse thori?



LONDON, Printed by F. Leach, for R. Lowndes, at the White Lion in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1658.

To the most exactly accomplished in all natural endowments and acquired
perfections Mrs. Anne Slingsby, Only Daughter to Sir Anthony Cage Knight, and
Wife to the Honorable Henry Slingsby Esquire.
MADAM,
It Is the nature of Goodness to be diffusive; and the Sun from his highest
exaltation does as freely communicate his heat and influence to the meanest
Shrub, as to the tallest Cedar. This I experimented to be a real Truth by the
favorable aspect, which your Noble Father, your Virtuous and never too much to
be lamented Mother, and your incomparable Self were pleased to cast upon me,
when I had the honor to be serviceable to a Branch of your Illustrious Family.
Providence has put an opportunity into my hands to return a small
acknowledgement of your Goodness and my gratitude, or rather to give you a
fresh occasion to exercise your indulgence in bestowing a double pardon, first
upon my boldness, and then upon my faults. A Captive Princess begs your
protection; and since her hard fortune has deprived her of liberty, she cannot
think her servitude more glorious, than in being a Handmaid to your
divertisement. I am very sensible, Madam, how unfitly a Translation is
addressed to you, who are so well acquainted with the Original Languages: But
my design is not to inform your judgment, but to beg your Patronage, that the
luster of your Name may give some value and esteem to this worthless piece. If
you shall please in the least to own it, you will render it the more secure
from others censure, and lay an eternal obligation upon him, who will
ambitiously court all opportunities to approve himself,

Madam, Your most humble and obedient Servant JOHN COALS.

Upon my Friend Mr. Coals his Translation of Cleopatra.
Dear Sir!
ENgland and France should join in Complements:
Your praises are a Theme tor Parliaments.
Poets do use to wish for tongues per Cent.
And I would pay their use, could they be lent;
You tune our Nation, and delight our Ears
With words of Music, like the Heavens spheres.
From France you bring these charms, as though from thence
Hermes were sent to teach us Eloquence.
Thus rare, and choicer flowers transplanted are,
But lose no beauty, though they change their air.
Edward Thurman.

In Cleopatram translatam.
DEseruit Gallos fortes visura Britannos
Protraheret long as ne Cleopatra moras.
Vecta tuo Calamo venit huc, solioque relicto,
Non minus in vestris e^icat illa libris.
Forma nigris nitet aucta notis, magis inde venusta
Ex Atramento fit Cleopatra tuo.
Edv. Thurman.

To his learned friend Mr. Coals, upon his Translation of the 6th. part of
Cleopatra.
NOt that I dare to hope (no 'though a Spring
Of plaudits from my guilt should flow) to bring
And at your feet present oblations fit
To offer up at the Altar of your wit;
Not with intent some self-applause to win
Is It that I amongst your friends come erowding in;
But (whilst (with joy) I hear so learned a Quire
Chant forth your praise) I only came t'admire;
Yet this I Will say, though Loveday did excel
With His learned pen, now Coals has writ as well.
Antho. Prisso^.

To his esteemed Friend Mr. Coals upon his version of the 6th. part of Cleopatra
LEt couchant Elocution come, let phrase,
Humble and prostrate, make approach, and gaze
Upon the beauties which thy pen does shed,
In raising Cleopatra from the dead:
Thou'st brought Elysium with her, pure delight
Unmixed with terrene vapor, exquisite!
Bring me a Star, and I Will dissolve it, then
Having therewith impregnated my pen
I Will dare attempt thy praise, and speak it as
Becoms him that would on thee paraphrase,
How big's my Muse! how pregnant does she grow!
How high's she got that was but now below!
What makes her thus to soar, and mount the Air?
But only for to meet thy merits there;
This makes her break her bounds, her modest bars,
To follow thee installed amongst the Stars;
Where (for my Muse does bid me make stand)
I can but stay to shake thee by the hand,
Because, I must (induced by her sweets)
Kiss Cleopatra now between thy sheets,
Where I divine (being bedded with thy name)
She Will in short time be brought to bed of fame;
And 'cause I am so certain of the thing,
I Will bid my self unto the gossiping.
JOHN TRAVERS.

To the Reader.
READER,
HAving been formerly persuaded to break the Ice, I have adventured to
trespass once more upon thy patience, and to present thee with a Sixth part of
Cleopatra, after my rude manner, done into English If I had known of any more
promising undertaker I should not have envyed thee the satisfaction which thou
might have received from a more elegant Pen: But rather than thy expectation
should be wire-drawn into impatience, I have employed the few moments of my
leisure to give thee a dim light to a farther prospect into the Story, knowing
that a small Candle may be sometimes serviceable, when the Sun affords not his
rays; and Cold water may save a thirsty man from choking, when more precious
liquours are not so readily to be had. Thy Candor only can render this piece
excusable; but in this I may rest secure, that no man can have a worse opinion
of it than my self. Farewell.

Hymen's Praeludia: OR, LOVE'S Masterpiece.
THE SIXTH PART.
ARGUMENT.
Cornelius Gallus Praetor of Egypt is deeply taken with Candace's beauty. He
takes an opportunity to discover his affection, which she receives with much
inward trouble, and outward coldness. The coming of Elisa breaks off their
discourse. Elisa acquaints Candace with her dream, and she gives her her
thoughts upon it. Walking together in the Garden of the Palace they over-hear
the complaints of a fair Slave that attended upon Elisa: Their curiosity
prompts them to a further discovery, and upon their request she relates the
story of her life: She speaks her name Olympia, and herself daughter to Adallas
King of Thrace; Her own brother falls in love with her, and discovers his
incestuous desires, which she entertains with horror and amazement; She
opposes his passion with all the strength of Virtue and Reason, but in vain:
She acquaints her Father with it, who sharply reproves him, and resolves to
dispose of her, but is prevented by death: The young Adallas succeeding in the
Kingdom, armed his solicitations with authority, and threatens to compel his
Sister to marry him. She with a small retinue flies from Byzantium.

WHilst Love produced these sad effects at the Gates of Alexandia, his powers
were no less employed in the City, and the ancient Palace of the Ptolomies;
that Tyrant God found in the two Princesses, which fortune had committed to the
care and custody of the Praetor of Egypt, a fit subject to exercise himself
upon: These two admirable persons, from the very first day of their
acquaintance, had contracted such an amity, as had left nothing reserved in
their souls, and if by the charming conversation of the Queen of Ethiopia the
fair Princess of the Parthians could not repress that smarting grief, which
the loss of her brave, but unfortunate Artaban had rendered Master of her
heart; yet 'twas certain, tha in the sweetness which she found in the
affection* which she had conceived for so extraordinary person as Candace was,
she relished some sort of consolation, and gave place too to some shadow of
hope, induced thereto by the discourse which the fair Queen made her of the
marvailous events of fortune, and the appearances which might in some sort
flatter her with a belief of Artabans safety.

Candace's cares, though not slight ones, were yet more moderate than Elisa's
sadness, and the remembrance which was fresh in her mind, that she had se^n her
dear Cesario a few days before, dissipated the greatest part of her grief, and
she was a thousand times more satisfied to see her beloved Prince escaped from
the dangers wherein she had left him at her departure from Meroe, than she
could be afflicted at the loss of her dominions, or with the other effects of
her misfortune, which would have produced greater resentments in any other
spirit but hers. Notwithstanding, if her mind found any repose in the knowledge
that Cesario was living, that he was not far from the place of her abode, and
that by the report of those whom Cornelius had sent to his assistance, she had
learned, that together with his valiant companions, he was victorious in the
combat wherein she had left him engaged; she could not banish her fear, which
continually represented to her, that he was not escaped out of so great an
encounter without wounds, and her love making all things appear in the most
dangerous condition, she believed she saw every moment her beloved Prince all
wounded and bloody, and reduced to the extremity of his life. In the fear which
this imagination imprinted in her Soul, suffering herself to be transported
with the motions of her grief, Ah Gods! said she, if it be true that my dear
Cesario is still in danger of a life so often exposed, and so often relieved
from so many perils, why should you present him to my ^yes to give a more
sensible redoubling to my grief, than if he had died far off from me in that
unfortunate Country where I left him? the subject of my despair would be less
reasonable, if I had understood that he had perished upon an oc casion, when I
had little hope of his safety, than if after he had recovered me contrary to
all my hopes, you should permit my cruel fortune to deprive me of him for ever.
Alas! it is possible that at this very moment whilst I spend my life in such
cruel apprehensions, the unfortunate Prince draws near his end, and is
breathing out that faithful soul, which he had bestowed upon me to his
misfortune, and the glory of my days. Ah! if my fears be real, ye p^tyfull
Heavens do not permit me to survive him one minute, or if he be still Master of
any remainders of life, to employ them in the research of a Princess, who is
more happy in his love, than unfortunate in the accidents of her life, guide
his steps hither for pitie's sake, and do not suffer us to live in this
darkness, wherein absence entombs us.

As she spoke these words, her eyes performed what her mouth could not
absolutely express, and Clitie who stayed by her to dry up her tears, could
have no success in comforting of her, but by recalling things past to her
memory, and by representing to her the advantageous difference there was
between her present condition and that wherein she saw her self a few days
before, both in respect of the security of her own person, and of her beloved
Cesario. They consulted then together what course they should take to learn
news concerning that Prince; and they could find no other expedient than to
seek some person in whom they might have the confidence to send him to
Tyridates his house, hoping that by the means of that Prince they might have
some intelligence either of Cesario, or Eteocles.

But if this fair Queen was troubled with foam disquiets, whereunto her long
sufferings might have already inured her spirit, she caused as many in the mind
of a man, who a few days before had passed his life in liberty enough, and the
soul of Cornelius Gallus had so deeply received the dart which the Princess had
fixed there, that in the morning of his love he felt himself as much inflamed,
as if he had already bestowed whole years upon this dawning passion. At first
he was filent, out of the respect which the Majesty of Candace might imprint
upon the most licentious spirits; but afterward he believed he might indulge
himself a little more liberty, both in regard of the condition wherein he saw
this person, abandoned by all other assistance but his own, and the memory of
the service which he had rendered her, by which, in all probability, she was
obliged to a very great acknowledgement. This consideration joined to the
condition of his fortune, and the absolute power he had in Alexandria, gave him
more boldness than the countenance of Candace had wont to leave him, and he
believed at last (though beauty and high appearances might represent so much to
him) that no reason ought to oblige him to a constraint which did incommodate
him, and that he might justly hope much from a person, who was much engaged to
him.

The morrow after that day which the two Princesses had bestowed upon the
relation of the adventures of the afflicted Elisa, Candace being more early up
than the Princess of the Parthians, and walking alone with Clitie upon the
ballistred Terrace, which belonged to her lodging, saw he self accosted by
Cornelius, and having no knowledge of his intentions, nor any repugnance against
his person or entertainment, but what her inquietudes generally caused in her,
against every thing that might trouble her thoughts, she receided him with that
civility, which she believed was due to his condition, and the importance of
the service which he had rendered her.

Gallus having taken her by the hand to assist her in her walk, entertained her
a while with things indifferent, and being in a place which had a prospect into
the Sea, and some of the parts near Alexandria, he showed her those places
which were most remarkable either for their beauty or the memorable things that
had passed there. He caused her to behold that famous place where the great
Julius Caesar, whose memory was so venerable amongst men, seeing himself
pressed by Ptolomies troops, threw himself into the Sea, and swam over the
straight which divides the City from the Isle of Pharos. From thence causing
her to look further, he showed her the place where the battle was fought the
next day, and where the treacherous Ptolomie found under the waves the
punishment due to his perfidiousnesse, as well for his attempt against the
person of Caesar, as for the horrible cruelty which he had committed upon the
shore of Pelusium against the great but unfortunate Pompey. After that, causing
her to look more forward upon the Sea, he showed her the place where the Queen
Cleopatra first presented her self to Caesar, and desired his protection against
the cruel persecutions of her brother; and the place where Anthony met with
that fair Queen at the beginning of their unfortunate loves, and all other
places which were remarkable for any important events during the life of that
Princess, and the war she had with Augustus, wherein she lost both life and
Empire.

Candace beheld what Cornelius showed her, and hearkened to his discourse with
such a tenderness as brought tears into her eyes: and Gallus attributing that
to compassion only which proceeded partly from another interest, was the more
inflamed by the knowledge he received of the goodness of a person, in whom he
had already observed all other excellent qualities in their highest perfection.

After he had given by his discourse what was likely to be due to the curiosity
of a stranger Princess, and what he more truly rendered to the complacency
which his love caused in him toward her, looking upon her with eyes which
partly signified his intention. But Madam, said he, now I have acquainted you
with these small triflles which you desired to know of me, shall I be too
curious my self, or rather shall I be indiscreet, if I take the liberty to
enquire of you the name, and the condition of this admirable person, to whom by
my good fortune I have rendered some small service, without knowing of her, and
who though unknown, is in as high esteem with me, as if she were the wife or
daughter of Caesar? It Is not upon any design of abusing it, that I express
this curiosity to you, but only out of a desire of finding greater
opportunities to serve you in a more plenary knowledge of you.

Cornelius spoke in this manner, and the Queen who was already prepared for
this rancounter, and had premeditated with Clitie what to say, seemed very
little surprised at Cornelius his discourse. She did so far acknowledge the
Obligation she had to him, as to have declared to him the truth of her life,
and the condition of her fortune, if she could have done it without interessing
and endangering her dear Cesario, whom she knew to be in that Country, and to
have all Cesars friends for his declared enemies* Upon this precaution, which
she believed was due to the safety of her beloved Prince, she resolved to
conceal her name, her birth, and the greatest part of her adventures; and upon
this design, after she had signified to Cornelius with obliging expressions,
that his curiosity was not importunate to her, she told him that she was born
in Ethiopia, of very noble parents, who during the life of King Hidaspes had
enjoyed the highest dignities of that Kingdom; but that afterward being
desirous to testify their fidelity to the Qu. Candace his daughter, when she
was deprived of her Kingdom by Tiribazus, that Tyrant being too powerful for
them had ruined them, and so eagerly pursued them, that they were constrained
to put themselves upon the Nile, with part of their most portable goods, from
whence sailing down into the open Sea, with an intention to seek out a
Sanctuary from his Tyranny, they fell into the hands of the Pirate Zenodorus.
After this passage she concealed nothing of the truth from him, but only what
would have obliged her to make mention of Cesario; and relating to him the
dangers which she had escaped by reason of the Pirate's insolence, and the
flames of the Vessel which she had fired, and the wave^ into which she had cast
her self, she powerfully moved him upon diverse accounts, and filled him full
of admiration at her virtue and greatness of courage.

When he had given due praises to that noble resolution of sacrificing her life
to the preservation of her honor, looking upon her with an action much more
passionate than before: I should be ungrateful to the Gods, said he, if I
should not be thankful to them, as long as I live, for the favor they have
done me, in guiding me to the occasions of serving you, and in giving me the
means to conduct you into a place where I can offer you part of what you seek;
but if my interest might be considered to the prejudice of yours, and if I
might afflict my self as much at my own ill, as I ought to rejoice at yonr good
fortune, possibly I would say, that in this rancounter I have no more cause to
commend than to complain of my destiny, and that it is as much for my loss as
for your safety that the Gods caused you to land upon this Coast, and lead me
into the wood where I defended you agaiust the violence of Zenodorus.

Gallus spoke in this manner, and the Queen, though she almost comprehended his
discourse, and received it with a very grief, pretended for all that, that she
did not understand him, and that she might not continue without a reply, she
answered him without being moved: I should be very sorry that my arrival in
this Country should occasion any damage to a person to whom I am engaged for
the preservation of my life and honor, and to prevent the future, since it is
not in our power to recall what is past, I shall depart without regret from a
place where you have given me refuge, if my continuance here be never so little
offensive to you. Alas! replied Gallus, with a sigh, how unprofitable would
your departure be now, since you cannot carry away the wound, that I have in
the midst of my heart, together with the eyes that made it? or rather how cruel
would it be to me now, since in parting from me you will deprive my days of all
that makes them desirable to me, and possibly bereave me of a life, whereof all
the remaining moments are dedicated to you?

Whilst he spoke thus, the Queen oppressed with a violent grief, upon this
occasion of new crosses, which former passages made her foresee in a moment,
studied for terms to explain her self, both according to the greatness of her
courage, and the condition ofher present fortune, whereby she saw her self
absolutely subjected to Cornelius his power; and when he had done speaking,
composing her countenance to a more serious posture than before, which with the
Majesty that Gallus observed in it, struck him into some awe: I am obliged to
you, said she to him, for my life and honor, and I should be much more engaged
to you, if you would preserve the glory of your benefit entire, and not
diminish the price of it by the offense you do me. If it be an offense to love
you, replied the Praetor, and if it be an infinite offense to love you
infinitely, I confess that there is not a man in the world who has offended
you more than Cornelius; but if love, in the Country where you were born, be
not different from that which we have observed in ours, if it makes a man
abandon his liberty to bestow it upon that he loves, if it makes him forget his
own proper interests, to sacrifice himself entirely to the person beloved, and
in fine, if it produce no other effects, than what we have seen it produce in
those places where I have passed my life, I cannot easily comprehend the ground
of the offense which you can find in the love I have for you. I know not,
replied the Queen coldly, eiiher the effects or qualities of that passion, but
the discourse of it is not conformable to my humor, and I should be very much
obliged to yon, if you will find some other matter of entertainment.

Cornelius, though a little repulsed with the answer, which made him partly
understand the difficulties he should have to conquer the spirit, which he had
attempted, prepared himself to speak, when he saw the Princess Elisa approach,
who having understood that Candace had been walking upon the Terrace a great
while, had made her self ready with all speed to come and find her, to enjoy in
her company that little consolation which she could meet with no where else.
Elisa was in a very careless dress, part of her hair fell upon her cheeks
without art or order, her complexion was extraordinary pale, and her eyes were
dulled with watching, and red with their continual exercise of weeping, and yet
she appeared to the eyes of Candace and Gallus like a dazzling Star, and made
them judge that neither art, nor nature could produce any thing more beautiful
or more complete.

Candace being very much satisfied to find this agreeable diversion from the
importunate conversation of Cornelius, advanced toward the Princess with open
arms, and giving her the Good morrow with a great many kisses full of tender
affection, she received the embraces and caresses of the fair Princess, which
expressed no less affection than her own.

After they had spent some time in mutual embracings the fair Queen beginning
the discourse, I longed said she, to know how you had passed this night, and I
had come to inform my self at your chamber, but that I was afraid to interrupt
your sleep. Alas replied the Princess with an action full of tenderness and
sweetness, how little acquaintance have sleep and I together at this time, and
how ill an office did your goodness render me in depriving me, for a little
rests sake, which is now a stranger to me, of a sight wherein I find all the
comfort of my life. Candace repayed these words with others as full of
affection, and Cornelius seeing them enter into a discourse which did not
permit him to pursue that which he had begun with Candace, after he had
continued a while longer with them in a conversation full of civility, he left
them alone to go either to muse upon his passion, or to employ himself in such
affairs as his charge required.

After his departure the two Princesses began to entertain each other with more
liberty than before, and the first discourse being bestowed in the comforting
of Elisa, and upon the hopes which she might yet conceive of her Artaban's
safety, (though she built but little upon them) the Princess, though she
thought upon nothing else but the sad cause of her grief, for all that observed
some new pensiveness in Candace's countenance, and having asked her the cause
of it with a grace, which left her no liberty to deny, the fair Queen prefacing
the confession she was about to make with a little smile: It Is, said she,
because I am a little more unhappy than you, in that you did not arrive at
Alexandria before me; for if Cornelius had seen the Princess Elisa before
Candace, Candace would not be exposed to that persecution which she has begun
to suffer to day. Elisa easily comprehended the Queen's discourse, and
receiving it with a modesty like to her own, If it be the love which you have
caused in Cornelius, said she, which creates you a new subject of displeasure,
I was not capable to guard you from it, and what your powers have done in one
day, mine being far inferior to them, could not have done in diverse years. If
we had any other Judges but our selves answered Candace, the part which you
maintain would be very much weakened; but in brief, such as I am, if his words
be true, my misfortune has made Cornelius in love with me, and he has newly
made a declaration of it to me, which has almost as muh offended, me as he
obliged me by the assistance which he gave me some days ago.

Upon these words she related to the Princess, Cornelius his discourse, and
not desiring to make a secret either of this adventure, or the more particular
thoughts of her soul: Besides the crosses which I foresee will befall me,
pursued she, in the love of a man to whom I am obliged, and into whose power I
am fallen, I cannot see without a great deal of resentment, that he who
possesses as the Lieutenant of an adopted Caesar, the place which my true Caesar
ought to possess as Sovereign, raises his thoughts to the same place where he
has planted his; and my dear Cesario has received offenses great enough from
these cruel enemies by the loss of his dominions, his parents, and dignities,
though, through his hard destiny, the same enemies did not attach him in his
love, and in that thing wherein he thought himself secure from their
persecutions; you have a great deal of reason, replied Elisa, but I believe
that Cesario is very secure upon that part; and that if his enemies had had no
greater power in relation to the troubles and dangers to which they exposed him
in his tender youth, he had not only suffered very little by their persecution,
but had never seen any of the dominions of Ethiopia. I had rather, answered
Candace, never have seen the light, and though the affection I have for Cesario
may possibly cost me a great kingdom, that loss will be so far from diminishing
the content I have to have seen and loved him, that I cannot but take it well,
and acknowledge my self obliged to Augustus his cruelty, from which alone I have
received my beloved Prince, and without which, though possibly h^ might have
lived in a more peaceable condition, he had not lived for Candace. Heaven had
ordained him for you, added the sad Elisa, and the admirable perfections of the
fair Queen of Ethiopia could not be well matched but with the rare qualities of
Cesar's son; yet I advise you, that in preserving inviolably what you owe to
him, you gently manage Cornelius his spirit, and do not put your self in danger
by too rough usage of him, of making him make use of the power he has over
you. I am too sensible of it, replied Candace, not to follow your counsel, and
whatsoever difficulty I have to dissemble my thoughts; yet so long as the man
shall keep himself within the bounds of that respect which he has hitherto
observed, I shall forbear distasting him as much as is possible, but if he
never so little trasgress, I will make him know what I am, and I have seen
death often enough before my eyes already, to make me endure the face of it,
rather than the least offense against my honor, or that which I owe to the
love of my dear Caesar.

The two Princesses entertained one another in this manner, and they had a very
long discourse together besides, in the same place, wherein having passed from
Candace's affairs to Elisa's, that Princess, according to the Queens Counsel,
was resolved to conceal neither her birth, nor her name from Cornelius,
supposing upon good grounds that she could not find a better Sanctuary against
the cruelty of the King of Parthia, than amongst the Romans his enemies, where
Tyridates her Uncle had found refuge, and whose protection was the most
puissant that she could look for in the world. Candace believed, that then she
might, without putting Tiridates in danger, inform his Niece of the place of
his retreat, and the obligations she had to him, which she did without any
further delay, and by that discourse she wrought in the Princess great thoughts
of tenderness and esteem toward her Uncle, whose person was unknown to her,
and as earnest a desire to see him, as in this sad condition of her life she
was capable of having for any thing in the world.

This desolate Princess restrained her self pretty well before Candace, and
indeed without laying any restraint upon her self, she found a sweet
consolation in her company; but at the Core her grief was ^o violent, that
without an admirable strength of spirit, she could not easily have supported it
so long without sinking under it. The Image of her brave ^ut unfortunate
Artaban returned incessantly into ^er memory; and after she had ran over the
marvelous actions of that great man, and recalled into her ^membrance the fair
proofs of love which he had estowed upon her, when she fell upon that deploable
passage how she saw him thrown down headong, and buried in the waves, all her
constancy old not defend her against the violent effects of her grief, and she
remained more dead than alive between the arms of Urione, or her daughter, who
were eternally employed in drying up her tears, and recomposing her Spirit by
all the words which piry, and the real affection they had for such a Mistress
could put into their mouths. 'T was in her bed that the tears took the liberty
to overflow into a deluge, and the darkness wherewith the earth was then
covered much better fitting the sadness of her soul, than the brightness of a
fair day, brought back in^o it the sorrowful objects in their most natural
form, and left nothing in her mind but mere Ideas of death. Then it was, that
after she had shed Rivers of tears, wherewith her pillow was all wet, and
forcing the sobs, which would have stopped the passage of her speech: My dear
Artaban, said she, is it possible that Elisa should bestow nothing but tears
upon thy death, and that thou can take so poor a payment for so precious a
life as thou have given her, and lost only upon her account? Can all the
prodigious effects of thy valor, whereof she was the only aim and cause, all
those so tender, so excellent, and so admirable testimonies of love, and in
fine that cruel death which thou have suffered before mine eyes in the
destroying waves for my interest alone, find nothing in the weak Elisa but
tears for reparation of them all? Ah! mine eyes you spend you spend your stores
in vain, and though you could make a Sea as waste as that wherein my dear
Artaban is intombed, i^ you make it not of my blood, you will bestow bu^ little
upon Artaban, all my sighs, and sobs, an^ complaints make no change in his
condition, no in mine, and it is Elisa, certainly it is Elisa which he requires
amongst the shades below, if he can require any thing. Ah! continued she, with
many sighs, if it be only Elisa that thou requirest, thou have reason to be
satisfied, in whatsoever place the destinies cause thy Ghost to wander, Elisa
bears thee company inseparably, and if some weakness, or some remainders of an
ill-grounded hope, have hindered her from making the last attempt upon her life
to come, and bear thee company below, her spirit is not absent from thee one
moment, either out of any defire of life, or expectation of comfort.

From these sad discourses she had with Artaban, wherein she found more
sweetness than in all the other actions of her life, she turned her complaints
against her ill fortune, and all her moderation and piety toward the Gods
could not hinder her sometimes from quarrelling at the rigorous decrees of
Heaven, for the cruel continuance and sad success of her misfortunes. In this
sorrowful employment she passed almost whole nights, and hardly at the break
of day did she give any access to sleep, and that rather out of weakness, than
any intervals of repose.

One night, during which she had extrordinarily tormented her self, having
closed her eyes a little before the darkness began to quit the earth, at the
time when dreams present themselves to our imagination more clear and
undisturbed: After some visions without order or coherence, which most commonly
precede those which seem most agreeable to the truth; whether it were upon the
effect of those thoughts which had possessed ^er whilst she was awake, or upon
some intelligence that heaven was pleased to send her, it seemed to her that
she was again upon that unfaithful Element which she perpetually accused of
her losses, and where she had seen all her joys and hopes intombed in the
person of her Artaban. In this hateful place she had a while discharged her
resentments against the cruel waters, by which she had lost all, when she saw
arise from beneath the waters, the God of the waters, in a Chariot drawn by
Tritons, with his Trident in his hand, and such as he is represented by the
Poets, who after he had heard her complaints, looking upon her with a
discontented air. Forbear Elisa, said he, forbear to accuse me of thy
misfortunes, I detain nothing from thee, and I have rendered thee thy Artaban,
whom thou shall see again upon the Shore at the Tomb of a Faithful Lover. The
God, as he spoke these words, before he plunged himself again beneath the
waves, showed her with his hand the shore of Alexandria, and it seemed to this
sleeping Princess, that turning her eyes at the same time toward the place
which he pointed out to her, she saw upon the Shore her dear Artaban stretching
out his arms to her, and calling her to him with gestures all composed of
passion. This sight having produced a violent effect upon Elisa's spirit, she
would have cried out with transport, and by the effoort she used in that action
she wakened her self with a start. When she was awake he had her arms stretched
out to the Image which was presented to her eyes when they were shut, and not
being able by awakening presently to drive that dear Idea out of her
immagination, she felt about the bed, and sought after that Artaban which had
appeared before her, pronouncing his name two or three times. But when her
sleepiness was perfectly over, and she saw her self abused by sleep, her grief
renewed with violence, and seeing that object that was so agreeable to her
eyes, and dear to her memory, no longer appear, she abandoned her self to
regrets, and recalled her tears which had hardly stopped their course whilst
she was asleep: Ah! Artaban, said she, melting into tears, thou deceivest me,
and fliest from me, and thou do not present thy self to me during these
moments of sleep which thou leavest me, but to render the loss more present to
me, and to renew my griefs, thou call to me from the shore, or rather from
the port whereunto thou art arrived by thy death, after thou had been so long
tossed upon the tempestuous Sea of miseries and crosses, wherein thou leavest
the deplorable Elisa; thou call me Artaban, and by thy action reproachest me
for this weakness, which has not permitted me to go and seek with thee that
tranquillity which thou enjoyest; but if thou be not cruel, do not accuse me
for having abandoned thee out of any remainders of love of life; but believe
that I am so little in love with it since I lost thee, that I am ready to give
willingly the remains of it to be reunited to thee. Upon this thought diverse
Tragical resolutions presented themselves to her spirit, and passing from this
remembrance to the former part of her dream, where the God of the Sea promised
her that she should see her Artaban again at the Tomb of a Faithful Lover.
Yet, continued she, it is no small comfort to Elisa, that she may see again at
the Tomb, him whom she believed was buried in the entrals of the Fishes. I do
not doubt but that my Artaban has been faithful to his Elisa, and since I
have not been permitted to close his eyes, and to receive his last breath, I
could not, God of the Seas, receive from thee in reparation of the cruel
outrage thou have done, a dearer favor than thou do me, in bringing this
beloved body to the shore, and in giving me the means to enclose my self in the
same Tomb with my faithful lover; I willingly fly to the Tomb that is
consecrated for Elisa, and as Artaban himself is the grave wherein all my
affections are buried, so I will not avoid the occasion of enclosing my self
with him in the same Tomb upon the shore of Alexandria.

Whilst Elisa uttered these sad words in a condition which might move the most
insensble hearts to pity, the brightness of the approaching day began to spread
it self about her Chamber, and at the noise of some words which she pronounced
aloud, and some sobs that accompanied them, a young Slave, whom with diverse
others Cornelius had given to her to serve her (as he had given many likewise
to the Qu. of Ethiopia) drawing near her bed asked her with a great deal of
care if she were not well, and if she had need of any thing. Elisa being quite
buried in the sad thoughts which possessed her, heard not the Slaves words, and
instead of dreaming of her, resuming her discourse with many sighs; Ah dear
Image of that I love, continued she, return again to me for a few moments, and
since that by the cruelty of my destiny I am condemned never to see thee more
but by illusion, make these illusions last as long as the deplorable life thou
have left me.

These words pronounced with a tone of voice which might have made a passage
into the most obdurate souls, pierced deep into the mind of the Slave who heard
them, and she possibly being not ignorant of the effects of that passion, which
was the cause of Elisa's greatest misfortunes, her compassion made her
presently interesse her self in the grief of a person, whom her admirable parts
made her serve already with a great deal of inclination. Ah! said she, with a
sigh as profound as Elisa's could be; as far as I can judge both Love and
Fortune exercise their powers every where, and those which till now complained
of their Tyranny may find companions throughout the whole world. She had
possibly enlarged her self in this meditation, if Elisa, not being able to take
repose in any posture, had not turned here self that way, and seen her by her
Bed side, whereof the Curtain was a little drawn. The Princess was a little
surprised to see her there so early, and having taken notice that it was
neither Urione nor Cephisa, she asked her with a great deal of sweetness what
occasion had brought her thither. It Is my desire to serve you Madam, answered
the Slave, and I have heard some complaints from your mouth which made me fear
that you were indisposed. Alas! replied the desolate Princess, how can you
apply any remedy to my indisposition, and how unprofitably are your officious
cares employed in the comfort of so unfortunate a person? As for the diseases
of the mind, answered the Slave, reason, time, and the assistance of Heaven may
remedy them, and there are possibly Madam, some as unfortunate at your self,
who make their reason act for their consolation, and expect from Time and
Heaven the sweetning of their miseries.

Since the time that Cornelius had bestowed this Slave upon the Princess, she
had taken no notice of her; but hearing her speak in this manner, with an
accent which relished something of a more than vulgar sweetness, she cast her
eyes upon her face, and viewed her with some attention. Elisa's eyes were
troubled with the tears which she had shed, and there was not yet light enough
in that part of the Chamber, that she might discern particular objects, but if
Elisa could not particularly observe the features of the Slave's countenance,
she saw that she was of a very handsome proportion, and that in her eyes, as
dull and languishing as they were, there sparkled something very lively and
very bright; she was moved with some greater consideration for her, than people
ordinarily have for Slaves, and answering her discourse with more attention
than could probably be expected from the excess of her grief. They which can
make use of their reason in calamities of the same nature with mine, said she
to her, have left it a command over their spitit which such disasters as mine
are wont to destroy, and I doubt very much that reason has not strength enough
to take away all sensibility in misfortunes, wherein all hope of remedies,
either from the assistance of men, or the succor of Heaven, is quite
extinguished. "It would be too much to require at Reason's hands, replied the
Slave, to expect from that, that it should render us insensible of those
misfortunes wherein all hope has quite deserted us; but after we have yielded
to that resentment, part of that which humane infirmity can not deny it, we
shall find without doubt in the assistance of reason, part of what we have
lost, together with our hopes; and since it pleases you, Madam, out of an
excess of goodness to permit a poor Slave to enter into discourse with you, I
will take the liberty to tell you, that in the greatest calamities we partly
find some remedy and consolation in our selves, and that we help to exasperate
or sweeten them by the constancy wherewith we support them, and certainly
Virtue would signify little in us if we did not make use of it in afflictions,
and as it serves in prosperity to make us receive good success with out pride
and insolence, so likewise in adversity it ought to make us support disgraces,
without diminution of courage. Whether we have drawn these miseries upon us by
our own faults, or whether they fall upon us from Heaven, which for reasons
hidden from our weak understanding, is pleased to try, or exercise us; In
either case we can only have recourse to patience, in relation to the
calamities which we deserve, or to resignation in respect of those which fall
upon us, according to the will of our Superiors, against whom we are not
permitted so much as to murmur. Upon these words which the Slave pronounced
with an admirable grace, the Princess of the Parthians looking upon her with
much greater attention than before, in the beginning of their discourse: Ah
Maid! said she to her, by whom have you been so well instructed? If you
practice these Maxims of which you discourse so handsomely in the condition you
are in, there are but few not only amongst free persons, but those of the
highest dignity, whom you do not exceed in the excellency of your
understanding. Oftentimes, replied the Slave, Virtue is better known, than
practiced, but if my inclinations have carried me that way, I had as much
occasion to exercise it, as any other Maid possibly now in the world, and it is
only, Madam, upon the acount of the long acquaintance I have had with
misfortunes, that I have ventured to say something to you upon a subject
wherein experience has made me but too knowing. Ah! my Girl, replied Elisa, is
it possible that you have tasted of them too, and that pityless fortune has
spared you no more than others? Alas! answered the afflicted Slave, she has
spared me but too much in leaving me my life after she had rendered it more hard
and more insupportable a thousand times than all the most cruel deaths she
could make me suffer, and there remained only that end to conclude all the
cruelties to which she has exposed the most unfortunate life that ever was:
you may see one mark of it in the condition wherein you find me, since I can
assure you that I was not born a Slave, and I will add to what you know
already, that possibly servitude is the least of my miseries.

The Slave had spoken more to this purpose, and the Princess who hearkened to
her with thoughts far from indifferency, and out of her natural goodness began
to interss her self in those miseries, whereof she made mention, would have
pressed her without doubt to a further discovery, if Urione and her daughter
being got up, after they knew that Elisa was awake, had not come near to her
Bed side. The Slave retired at their approach, and the Princess, who in another
condition would not have let her been quiet without satisfying the curiosity
she had begun to raise in her, as she was at present was contented to defer the
remainder of their discourse till another time.

A little after the Queen Candace being but half ready came into the Chamber;
and sitting down upon the Princesses Bed side, she informed her self of the
condition of her health, and her last nights repose, as she had been accustomed
to do. Elisa continued a while without returning her any answer, pressing her
between her arms with a charming tenderness, and when she began to speak: Ah
Madam, said she sighing, how cruel has my awakening been to me this morning,
in depriving me of a dear sight which sleep had presented to me? I saw my
unfortunate Artaban stretching out his arms to me, and inviting me to him into
places whither my weakness hindered me from following him. He appeared to my
eyes being closed, such as he had formerly appeared to my heart; he had the
same port* the same actions, and the same features in his face, and that
unseasonable awakening hindered me from hearing the tone of the same voice,
which formerly made me such real protestations of an inviolable fidelity.

After these words she related to her with a very passionate action all the
particulars of her dream: The Queen hearkened to them with the interest which
she took in the affairs of that fair Princess, and did all she could possibly
to find something in it that might serve for her comfort, she apparently met
with it in the former part of the dream, and being unwilling to lose this
occasion of recomposing a little the Spirit of this afflicted Princess, Madam,
said she, the Gods without doubt contribute to confirm you in the hopes I give
you of your Artaban's safety, and he that governs that unfaithful Element
wherein you believe you lost him, takes care to justify himself against the
complaints you make of him, he tells you himself that he has not detained that
which you demand of him, but has rendered it to you upon the shore, where you
shall be permitted to see him again. Yes, interrupted Elisa, he tells me he
has restored it to me, but does not tell me in what condition, and considering
the small distance between the place where the unfortunate Artaban threw
himself into the waves, and the shore, I do not doubt but the waves, as they
say it is ordinary, may have carried his body to the Shore; Neptune may have
restored it, but he has not restored it alive, as he received it, and if it
had been so, he would not have forgotten to give me that comfort, since he had
begun to take care of it. Neither in dreams! replied Candace, nor in their
Oracles themselves are the God's accustomed to explain themselves more clearly
to us, and in all those which antiquity has observed, you shall find none
wherein part of the truth was not concealed until the manifestation of it by
the event. But answered Elisa, the God sufficiently declares himself in that he
tells me that I shall see Artaban again at the Tomb of a faithful Lover, and
if he promised me that I should see him again any where else but at a Tomb, I
might conceive some glimpse of hope for his life, but it is only at a Tomb that
we must be reunited, and in that respect the words of the God do make
themselves so intelligible, that it would be but folly in me to expect any
comfort from them. Candace was almost of Elisa's opinion, and found a great
deal of probability in what she said, but she disguised her thoughts a little,
to appease her grief, and seeking upon that design for some explication of her
dream, contrary to her own judgment: If it were only, said she, to acquaint you
with Artabans death, the Gods would not have taken the care to give you a
belief, which is but too much established already in your spirit, and there is
less probability that they meant to abuse you, in giving you false hopes by
ambiguous words. As for the word Tomb which terrifies you, you cannot, as I
conceive, find any just matter of fear in it, and as you never doubted but that
you were mortal, you ought not to be astonished if Heaven promises you that you
shall lie in the same Tomb with Artaban, in this promise there is something
more advantageous than in the rest of the dream, and Heaven without doubt
acquaints you, that after you have passed a great many years together, you
shall be buried in the same Tomb. However it be, my dear Princess, we must
always judge well of a thing when the appearances are more favorable than
contrary to us, and as the Gods have more inclination to acquaint us with good
than evil, we should offend them without doubt if we should not rather expect
good than evil, upon an occasion when they leave us more room for hope than
fear. Candace spoke in this manner, partly against her own thoughts, and Elisa
out of the belief she had in that fair Queen, did what possibly she could to
receive part of the consolation which she desired to administer to her.

From this discourse, which was of some longer continuance between them, Elisa
passed to that which she had had with the Slave, of whom she made such a
mention to the Queen, that she made her desire to see her presently. She
commanded her to be called, and a little after she came into the Chamber, and
presented her self before the two Princesses. They beheld her then in a perfect
light, and with more care than they had had for her before, and they found in
her person wherewithal to entertain their eyes and their attention. In the
condition where unto the miseries of her life had reduced her, the beauty which
she might have received from Heaven could not appear in its ordinary luster,
she had almost lost all her flesh, and the vivacity of her complexion was
almost spoiled by the length of the grief and troubles where with her mind and
body had been perplexed, her lips did not blush with that pure coronation which
formerly had covered them, and her leaness had lengthned her visage, and
changed the features of it, so that upon a slight view nothing could be seen in
her face which might give any ready knowledge of the beauties which she had
once been Mistress of. But after that the Princesses had more nearly and more
carefully observed her, they took notice of something in that almost decayed
complexion that was wonderfully delicate; in the form of her mouth, and the
composition of the features of her face, though they were altered by the loss
of her flesh, they remarked an admirable regularity, and when she lifted up her
eyes to answer the demands they made her, they saw lustres or rather lightnings
proceed from thence, which dazzled her sight: As languishing and cast down as
they were, yet they were full of that potent fire, against which Souls have but
little power of resistance, and if their languishing had taken somewhat from
the force of their regards, it had made them lose nothing of their sweetness,
but seemed to have added something more tender and moving to them, they were of
a bright gray as Elisa's were, and her hair very near the Princesses, her
proportion was tall and straight, and finally by the ruins of this beauty one
might judge, considering it attentively, that it had been one of the most
excellent in the world, and according to the youthfulness of the Slave (who
seemed not to be above twenty years of age) might return to its former
condition, if the cause of those sorrows which had thus defaced it were removed.

Candace looked upon her with a particular curiosity, and when she had observed
in her countenance some things which moved her to a different consideration
from that which we have for persons of that condition: Fair Maid, said she, I
have understood some things concerning you from the mouth of this Princess,
that have created a great desire in me to see you, and the report she has made
me of your person, and the virtue which appears in your discourse has wrought
an interest in me for you, that will make me willingly seek out the means of
administering comfort to you in your present condition. Madam, answered the
Slave, this effect of your goodness is very conformable to the grandeur and
nobleness that appears in your person, and as I believe that it is very
difficult to find any in the world equal to your self and the Princess, who
has made you this advantageous relation of me, so I do not doubt but that in
the honor of serving you both, I may find all the ease of my miseries that I
can hope for in the condition I now am. But O Gods! continued she, with some
tears that fell from her fair eyes, how hard is it to apply any remedy to my
displeasures, and how much are my griefs above ordinary consolation? You are
not, replied Candace, the only Maid that fortune has ill used, and possibly
you see an example in us of the greatest rigors that ever she exercised against
persons of our sex and birth. If the cause of your grief proceeds from your
servitude, we will employ our credit to make you change your condition, and
possibly we shall have power enough with the Praetor, continued she smiling upon
Elisa, to obtain your liberty of of him.

They would have spoken more, and Candace being moved with tenderness to the
Slave, and less oppressed with grief than the Parthian Princess, would have
pressed this Maid to a more ample declaration of her self, if Cornelius after
he understood that they were in a condition fit to be seen, had not entered into
the Chamber. The Princesses received him with civility, and though the
knowledge of his love began to work some repugnance in Candace, she thought her
self obliged by the necessity of her present condition to lay some constraint
upon her self. After the first complements of salutation and reception,
Cornelius told the Princesses, that he came to impart to them the news that he
had received from Augustus, he informed them that Caesar being departed from
Cyprus to come to Alexandria, where he had been long expected, had been
assailed by a furious tempest, probably the same that brought the Princesses
upon that shore, that great part of his Vessels were either cast away, or
scattered, and that he being by a singular favor of: Heaven preserved with a
few others, was landed at last at Polusium, where he staid a few days to
refresh himself before he came to Alexandria, and thence had sent him a command
to stay for his coming thither, and not to meet him as he was resolved to have
done. He told them likewise, that it was believed that by that shipwreck diverse
important persons were lost, and amongst the rest the Princess Cleopatra, of
whom they could hear no news, and for whom the greatest part of the Emperor's
Court was in great sadness.

Candace was mightily moved at this news, out of the interest she took in all
the Kindred of Cesario, and having asked Cornelius how Cleopatra had been
enveloped in that Shipwreck, seeing the principal persons had escaped it: She
was, replied Cornelius, in Octavia's Vessel, whom she accompanied in that
Voyage, and some hours before the tempest, that Princess with all her
attendants having passed into Cesars Vessel, Cleopatra who that day found her
self indisposed, or melancholy and unfit for greater company, stayed in
Octavia's Ship with some Maids that served her, and the Seamen. A little after
the Tempest surprised them with so much suddenness and violence, that the
Vessels could never join again, and since that time the ship wherein Cleopatra
was, was never seen, nor diverse others, by whose loss the Fleet has been
diminished. Candace was very much afflicted at this relation, and having
continued some moments without speaking, and yet not being able to dissemble
the sadness she resented for the loss of her dear Cesario's Sister: I have
heard so much spoken, said she, of the beauty and virtue of that Princess, that
I cannot receive the relation of her loss without grief, and I desire with all
my heart, that by some assistance of Heaven she may have escaped that danger.
They who have spoken to you concerning that Princess, answered Cornelius, were
not skillful enough to depaint unto you either her divine beauty or her
admirable qualities in that perfection wherein she possesses them, and though
some years are past since I saw her, which without doubt have made a grand
addition to those prodigious beginnings, the reputation of them has spread so
far since, that'tis almost impossible that any one should be ignorant of them
in places more remote than Alexandria. O Gods! said the fair Elisa lifting up
her eyes to Heaven with a sigh, O Sea, O fortune, how cruelly do ye sport you
selves with our destinies, and how does that unfaithful Element carry away the
most precious spotls, whilst it leaves the miserable remainders amongst men.

These words pronounced in a very pitiful manner, and with an action which
proceeding from such a beauty as Elisa's was, produced miraculous effects,
awakened the curiosity which Cornelius had always had to know this Princess,
and having signified as much to her, with the greatest discretion he possibly
could, Elisa who had resolved before with Candace to conceal herself no longer
from him, taking up the discourse with an attractive grace: You see Cornelius,
said she to him, you see the daughter of the Romans greatest Enemy, whom design
and fortune equally conduct into your hands, to receive from Caesar the
protection which he has already granted to my Uncle Tiridates. Phraates
brother to that Prince, and father to the Princess who speaks to you, is our
common persecutor, and I hope that Augustus will not refuse me the refuge which
I would desire of him against the cruelty of a man who sheds the blood of his
nearest relations, no otherwise than if they were his most cruel enemies. Elisa
had hardly any need of this discourse to persuade Cornelius that she was born
in a very high condition, and she carried so many marks of it in her
countenance, that it was not easy to take her for an ordinary person: But she
had no sooner acquainted the Praetor with this truth, but stepping a little back
with signs of astonishment, and looking upon her with the respect due to the
only daughter of the greatest of all Kings, and of that King who only in the
world opposed the greatness of the Roman Empire, I beg your pardon Madam, said
he to her, with an action full of submission, for the faults which my ignorance
has made me commit. I judged before by all manner of tokens that your birth
was not mean, but I should never have believed that fortune had brought upon
our coasts the daughter of the great King of the Parthians in the equipage
wherein we see you, and in the condition wherein we lighted on you, you need
not doubt but that you may find under Cesar's protection all manner of refuge
against the persecution of Phraates, and whilst you expect his own promise
which he will make you within these few days, you shall receive from his
Lieutenant all the respect and services that are due to an admirable person,
and of such a birth as yours. Elisa returned Cornelius thanks with a great deal
of sweetness, and after that he had reiterated his offers, and began to behave
himself toward her, as toward a Princess who might dispute priority with
Cesar's daughter, they passed the rest of the morning in discourse till dinner
time, and Elisa made a brief relation to Cornelius of the accidents of her
life, which could not be concealed from the public, and the last disasters
which cast her upon the Shore of Alexandria.

From this time forward he began to cause her to be served according to her
dignity, he appointed her a number of Officers and Slaves to attend her; and
though he believed Candace's quality to be inferior to Elisa's, the love he
had for her making him to supply that defect, made him to treat them both, as
to appearance, with little difference.

The Princesses lived in this manner at Alexandria some days, during which the
Praetor lost no occasion to testify his love to Candace both by his actions and
discourse. The Queen received the testimonies of his passion with a great deal
of displeasure, and if she had been ruled by her resentments, she had rejected
them with all the signs of sharpness and disdain, but by experience which in so
youthful an age the crosses of her life had taught her, she had learned, that
it is a grand piece of prudence to dissemble when one is not able to resist,
and calling to mind the hazards she had run by the violence of those persons to
whom her bad fortune had submitted her, she desired to keep a lover, whose
power was absolute, within the limits of that respect that he had begun to show
her, by a treatment of him, which, though it was severe, and not very capable
of giving him farther hopes, yet savoured nothing of rudeness or incivility.
Cornelius used diverse inventions to divert her, and the Princess Elisa too,
from whom she was inseparable, and besides the recreations he endeavored to
give them in Alexandria, he led them oftentimes to walk without the City, and
invited them a hunting, to which he had a great deal of inclination. The two
Princesses received his cares diversely, Elisa, as a person, in whom all
desires, and all hopes were extinguished, and Candace, as a person, in whom
hope was not defunct, but her mind was prepossessed with such great cares, that
she had but little attention left for all the divertisements that Cornelius
could give her. She contrived it so handsomely that by Cl^tie's means she might
enquire news of Cleomedon or Eteocles, and Elisa had caused the shore to be
often searched to find the body of her dear Artaban, according as the God had
promised her, and according to the probability there was that it was cast upon
the shore; but hitherto both their pains had been in vain, and they both
expected, though in a different manner, the ease of their miseries, in which
they found no such sweet consolations as those which they mutually gave each
other by the charms of their good company.

They walked one morning in the Gardens of the Palace, conformable in their
beauty to the magnificence of Cleopatra, Anthony, and so many mighty Kings who
had bestowed both cost and care in the embellishing of them, and they had
already measured part of the fair and spacious walks, when passing by a high
hedge, they heard through the branches which composed it, the voice of a person
that sung upon the other side, it was melodious enough to cause some attention
in the hearers, and Candace in whom all curiosity was not extinct, because her
hopes were still alive, staying Elisa by the arm, prayed her to hearken a few
moments to that agreeable sound, which had so sweetly saluted her ear; Ellsa
who was of a complying humor, stayed at Candace's request, though her grief
left her but little inclination to those things wherein other persons might
find divertisement, and the two Princesses hearkened a while with pleasure to a
very delicate voice which with a sorrowful tone breathed out amorous
resentments. It was a woman that sung, but her song was interrupted by another
that was near her, just when the Princesses began to be moved at it, but they
were the better pleased, because they could hear the discourse of those two
persons, who believing that they were not overheard, did freely declare their
most private thoughts. Leave this singiug, Ericia, said she who interrupted
her, leave this singing, which is no fit companion for my sadness, wherein I
cannot, as I have done formerly, find either ease or comfort, let us seek
elsewhere the sweetning of my grief, or rather let us seek for Sanctuary in
death against the persecutions of my pityless fortune. Let me die, let me die
Ericia, and do not oppose thy self any longer to the last remedy that the Gods
leave me, seeing by that only I can put an end to those cruel sorrows which my
destiny has prescribed me. This woman had hardly done speaking, but Cepbisa
coming near to Elisa, Madam, said she, I know not whether you have taken notice
of this voice, but I can assure you that it is the air Slave's whom you have
sometimes honored with your discourse, who comforted you so handsomely the
other day, and whom Madam, said she, pointing to Candace, you desired to see
and discourse with. It Is the very same said the Princess, who easily discerned
her voice: And that, added Candace, creates the greater curiosity in me, and
will make me hearken with the more attention out of the desire that I have had
a long time to be acquainted with her. These words were spoken so low that they
could not be heard on the other side of the hedge, and Candace having laid her
finger upon her mouth to enjoin them to silence, she laid her ear nearer to the
hedge, to hearken to the corversation of the two Slaves. She whose song was
interrupted began to resume the discourse, and discovering by a sigh what share
she had in those misfortunes which she lamented in her Song, Alas! said she,
will our miseries never have an end, and will Heaven never cease from
tormenting persons who have not merited by any crime the evils whereunto they
see themselves so long exposed? Never possibly was a life so innocent subjected
to so many disasters, and you have reason to believe, that neither by my
mournful song, nor by all the tears my eyes can shed I am able to accommodate
my self to the greatness of our mishaps. I am too blame, replied the fair
Slave, for letting one word slip in my giief, whereby I have possibly failed of
that resignation which I would always have to the will of the Gods, and it
proceeds from an effect of our weakness rather than a deliberate murmur, that I
have made any accusation against Heaven for the cruel continuance of my
misfortunes; But it is certain, Ericia, that I have need of a perfect constancy
to support the burden of my afflictions without sinking under them, and that
so weak a spirit as mine might possibly be excused sometimes when it
transgresses the strict rules of moderation: O Gods! continued she, lifting up
her hands and eyes to Heaven, Gods whom I have invoked without murmur in my
hardest afflictions, behold I absolutely submit to your will, and if that which
I have hitherto suffered be not capable to appease your wrath, and repair the
crimes of my relations, or mine own faults, throw down upon this unfortunate
creature more cruel evils than yet she has been sensible of, and only giver
her constancy enough to suffer them without offending you; there are few
displeasures to which this Spirit has not been subject, few toils to which
this body has not been exposed, and few dangers into which my honor and my
life have not been thrown; and yet, great Gods, I will endure all with
patience, and will not make the smallest complaint against your Divine
Ordinances, if you render me that which I have lost, and if you restore me that
which as absolutely lost as it can be for me, keeps me in grief, in misery and
slaverie.

This fair afflicted person without doubt had spoken more, if the Princess
Elisa, in whom the meeting with sorrowful persons like her self wrought a
puissant effect, feeling her grief revived by the Slave's discourse, had not
broken silence with an exclamation loud enough to be heard at a farther
distance than that which separated them. O Heaven, cried she, O pityless
fortune, it is not then upon us alone that you let fall the effects of your
choler! These words were understood by the fair Slave, and by her who was known
as well as she by Clitie and Cephise to be a companion of her servitude. At the
first they were rroubled when they perceived their discourse was overheard,
and they continued a good while without speaking or stirring from the place
where they sat, in search of some means to repair the fault which they
supposed they had committed; but they were much more amazed, when the fair
Queen of Ethiopia, who had hearkened to their discourse with much more attention
than the Princess of the Parthians, having found a passage through the hedge a
few paces off, passed to that side where they were, and showed her self to
them, and presently after came Elisa, and their women that attended them. At
their coming the Slave rose hastily from the place where she sat, and casting
down her eyes at the arrival of Candace, she let them understand that it was
not without confusion, that she saw her self surprised in a discourse which
perhaps might have made too large a discovery.

Candace desired to recompose her presently, and looking upon her with an eye
full of sweetness, Fair Maid, said she, be not grieved that we have heard some
words from your mouth, contrary to your intention, they have only made us know
that you are in the rank of unfortunate persons, and the conformity you have
with us, renders you yet more dear to those persons who had a very high esteem
before of your person, as well for that beauty which your sorrows have not been
able to conceal from our knowledge, though they have a little altered it, as for
those marks of virtue, courage and discretion that we have observed in you;
'ti^ a good while since that these good parts of yours havewrought in the
Princess whom you serve, and my self a great desire of knowing you more
particularly thanwe do ^et, and to ease you of those miseries whereof you
complain, by all the power that our own have left us, in a place where we are
strangers, and seek for refuge.

During the discourse of the fair Queen, the Slave recovered from her
astonishment, and looking in her face, with eyes full of the most lively and
sparkling sweetness, eyes that as heavy and as languishing as they were, could
dart out a thousand most violent flames, she appeared to the two Princesses in
such a condition as made them look upon her with more confideration than
before. The open light of the garden discovered more beauties to them than they
could so well observe in places more obscure, and they judged with a little
confusion, that this beauty in it is natural luster, had not possibly been much
inferior to their own.

Candace would have gone on to discover her thoughts, when the Slave having
fully recomposed her self, and arming herself with an absolute confidence
before such persons as gave her so many testimonies of their affection: Madam,
said she to her, I should not be displeased at all to have been surprised in a
conversation, the particularities whereof may possibly have discovered
something of my life, if the Princess whom I serve, and your self might find
any satisfaction in it, or any consolation to your displeasures; and the
knowledge I have now of your goodness has made me so little suspect you, that
though this accident had not engaged me, I should not have refused to discover
my self to you, when you should have signified your desires to me. I owe this
deference (and I will speak of you with more justice than you have spoken of
this unfortunate person) to the admirable beauty of two such uncommon persons,
to so many rare qualities of the mind that accompany the miracles of their
bodies, to the goodness of those offers full of compassion and generosity,
which you have made me, and (as much as to all these considerations) to the
conformity that happens out between miserable and afflicted persons. You may
dislike this liberty of speech in a simple Slave, but possibly you will partly
pardon me, when I shall have rendered to your commands the obedience that you
desire of me. Dear Maid, said Elisa, I have found so much consolation in your
discourse, that I cannot disapprove of it, and you express your self with so
much prudence and discretion, that one cannot hearken to you without esteeming
and loving you: this effect of merit gives me considerations for you, which
servitude cannot take from you, and though you are a Slave rather by the means
of your fortune than by your birth, yet you have created such a curiosity in me
of knowing you, as, in the deplorable condition wherein I am at present, I had
not possibly been capable of in relation to any other thing. I shall satisfy
your desires when you please, replied the Slave, and I shall make no difficulty
to do it before these persons that are with you (pursued she, pointing to
Urione, Cephisa, and Clitie, who without any other company followed their
Mistresses) upon the confidence that I have that their discretion is
conformable to the goodness of the persons whom they serve: I will acquaint you
with such things as you will judge to be of so much importance as not to be
communicated but to a few persons, and you will perceive by the confidence I
have in you, that inclination rather than servitude engages me to obey you; but
lest the discourse I have to make you should be overheard, as that was which I
had with this Maid, if you please, we will change our place, and I desire you
to take the pains to walk to that Arbor which you see at the corner of the
hedge, where with less fear I shall render you an exact account of that which
you desire of me.

The two Princesses having a fresh admired the grace she had in expressing her
self, did what she desired, and presently after went to the Arbor which she
showed them, where they could not be surprised by any person. The two
Princesses sat down upon the green banks, and their Maids being seated at
rheir feet, Elisa made a sign to the Slave to sit down by Cephisa; but she did
not obey that sign, and standing up as if she seemed not to have observed it,
and beginning the discourse with an assurance, and a gesture that signified
nothing of a Slave: Before I take the place which you appoint me, said she,
Elisa, I must inform you who I am, that you may judge whether I be worthy of
the grace you do to a Slave, and possibly you will partly pardon the liberty I
have taken with you, when you shall know that* I am a Kings daughter as well as
you, and that the Slave whom fortune has put into your service, is descended
as you are, from a long succession of Monarchs, who have all worn, and do yet
wear to this day, a Crown upon their head.

These words pronounced with an admirable grace, surprised the two Princesses
in such a manner, that at first they could not express their astonishment, but
only by their silence, and their looks which surveied the Princely Slave anew
from head to foot: But a little after recovering themselves out of the
confusion which this adventure caused in them, they rose up both together, and
coming nearer to her with an action full of civility and deference, What,
Madam, cried they out both at once, are you a Kings Daughter? I am, replied the
Princess, and in the present condition of my affairs I should have reason
enough to conceal it, rather than publish it, if I had not received a command
to do it from two persons whom I will obey being a Princess as I ought to obey
them being a Slave. Elisa the more confounded of the two* as remembering that
she had received services from that Princess, that are not usually received but
from persons of the meanest birth, spoke first, and expressing her shame by a
blush that mounted into her cheeks; Ah Madam, said she, in whas manner shall I
repair the faults I have committed against a Princess of an equal birth to
mine? I have no regret, replied the Princely Slave, for the services I have
rendered you, and I will willingly continue, out of inclination, that which I
have begun, in respect to my fortune, which has made me fall into servitude: I
have received from you but too many marks of goodness for a Slave, and in the
condition wherein I appeared to your eyes, I could not have hoped from you the
graces you have done me. Ah, Madam, answered Elisa, I am not excusable, or at
least I must make my grief my Apology, which deprives me of all manner of
knowledge, and has hindered me from observing in your countenance the marks of
grandeur, which discover your by th. If I have not taken notice of the absolute
truth, added Candace, I have at least conjectured a part of it, and if I have
not taken this Princess for what she is, yet it is very certain that since the
first conversation we had together, I have judged her birth to be very
disproportionable to her present fortune.

After these words Candace and Elisa embraced the Princely Slave, who making no
difficulty after the discovery she had made, to receive their caresses with
more equality than she had done a few moments before, stretched out her arms
too, and received their embraces with tears of tenderness, which trickled down
the eyes of the three Princesses, out of the consideration which they made at
the same time upon that fortune, which treated three persons of so high a
dignity with an equal rigor, and brought into the same place from diverse parts
of the earth, three King's daughters in an estate so different from their
condition. O humane grandeurs and felicities, cried Candace, how are they
abused that lay any foundation upon your stability, and how much inconstancy
and weakness have ye to blot out all the charms that blinded spirits find in
you! After these words and some others, which they added upon this Subject,
they desired the Princely Slave to sit between them, and relate the Story of
her life, the knowledge of her condition having much augmented their curiosity:
She made some difficulty to take that place in the habit she then wore, for
fear she might be surprised in a place which would have made her discover a
truth which she desired to conceal: But the Princesses would not permit her to
sit elsewhere, and to remedy the fear she had of being surprised, they made one
of their Maids stay at the entrance of the Arbor, to give them notice when she
saw any one approach.

The Princesses being thus placed, the Slave was entreated again by the two
others with all manner of civilities and caresses to discover them the events
ofher life, wherein they already took a great deal of interest, and she being
willing to give them that satisfaction without being any further pressed to it,
After she had meditated a few moments to recall into her memory a great many
accidents wherewith her life was crossed, she began her discourse in these
terms.

The History of Olympia.
NOthing does more strongly persuade me to beeeve the immortality of the Soul,
and the passage from this life to another more happy and more quiet, than the
miseries of the good, and the prosperity of the bad; and seeing the Gods are
just, there is little probability that they should suffer lives altogether
innocent to pass away in misfortunes, and lives highly criminal in happiness
and impunity, if we were not reserved to another life, wherein vice shall
receive it is punishments, and virtue it is recompenses: If it were not so, I
should have great cause to complain of that providence, which has the
Sovereign rule over our destinies, having experimented in such a condition as
mine, and in an age which has made no great progress, miseries under which a
long life would have groaned, and an ordinary constancy possibly have sunk.

Adallus King of Thrace, who was a great friend to Anthony, and served him with
his forces and his person in the famous battle of Actium, was my Father, and
his Son, who bears the same name, and reigns at this day over that people, is
my only Brother. I was but a very young Girl when the Queen my Mother died, and
her death was to me an irreparable loss; for had she continued longer in the
world, she might possibly have secured me from a great part of those disasters
wherewith I have been since overwhelmed. The King my Father caused me to be
educated with the greatest care and tenderness, and the persons to whom he
committed my education, forgot nothing that might frame my spirit to all things
agreeable to my birth: I was brought up in good manners, in the fear of the
Gods, and the love of Virtue, and all means was used to work in me from my very
Infancy an aversion and horror to Vice. I passed my first years without the
arrival of any remarkable accident, or any thing that is worth the relating to
you, having a relation to make to you of such a great number of adventures, so
strange, and possibly so little correspondent to what you expect of me, that I
should believe I lost time, if I employed it in discoursing of things of small
importance. The change which the sorrows and the toil of my mind and body have
wrought upon my countenance, will leave little credit for the report I can make
of what it formerly was, and not having preserved any footstep of beauty, it
would ill become me to go about to persuade you that I was once handsome: yet
it is certain, that this was the received opinion in the Country where I was
born, and that this beauty, such as it was, produced effects prejudicial to my
repose, whereby I have been reduced to the miseries wherein I have passed my
wandering and unfortunate life.

I do not doubt, said the Queen Candace, interrupting the Princess, I do not
doubt but that your beauty has been more accomplished, than your modesty
permits you to represent (...) to us, and if your grief could be but dissipated
by the change of your fortune, there is nothing so ruined and so defaced in
your countenance, but that in a person of about twenty years of age, as you
seem to be, a months satisfaction may restore to its former condition, and
render you one of the fairest persons in the world. I was never such, replied
the Princess of Thrace, and to expect the return of that mean beauty, which the
miseries of my life have deprived me of, I must likewise expect revolutions in
my fortune, which really are in the hand of the Gods, but so remote from all
probability, that I should be unreasonable to hope for them*

Howsoever it be (that I may return to my narration) at that time when my
sorrows had made no impression upon me, the King my Father thought me handsome,
his Subjects thought me handsome, and the Prince my Brother, to my mi^fortune,
thought me but too beautiful: I was younger than he by 7 or 8 years, and he
was almost a man grown, when I began to be Mistress of a little reason. I know
not by what rigor of my destiny, he found something in me whereupon to ground
an affection different from that which he ought to have for his Sister: I was
not yet twelve years old, when he bagan to spend whole days in bestowing his
caresses upon me, he sighed before me, and hated all other company but mine, I
was so far from suspecting him of so irregular a passion, that at first I took
all these testimonies of his love for the proofs of an innocent amity; I
rendered him caresses almost in the same manner that I received them of him, and
I conceived an extreme contentment in having a Brother so good and so
affectionate, and it was without doubt by this indulgence to his love, that I
gave it way to increase, to conceive hopes, and to form designs which offended
Heaven and Nature: But when with a little more age I had gained a little more
knowledge, I observed in his affection and in his caresses some things that did
not please me, and I began to distinguish the transports of a violent passion,
from the effects of a pure and innocent amity. I hardly began to doubt, but
that I received assurances from his own mouth; and one day, after he had
continued a good part of it expressing his thoughts with more ardour than I
desired at his hands*, finding my humor more repugnant to his kindnesses than
he had observed before, he took notice of my sighs: What is the matter Sister,
said he, and what have I done that can have diminished your affection, as much
as mine is augmented? Is it because I love you too well that you cease to love
me? Brother, said I, I shall never cease to love you, neither is it necessary
that you should love me too much, for all excesses are to be condemned, and I
shall always content my self with a moderate and rational amity, such as a good
Brother may have for his Sister. Ah! Olympia, said he, for the name of Sister
is cruel and cross to me, how far is that moderate friendship which you require
from that which I have for you? and how contrary is Heaven to me, in not
causing you to be descended from the greatest stranger in the world, rather
than from the King our Father? You wish me ill, replied I, dissembling my
thoughts, and making as if I knew not his, and if I were born of any other
Parents, I should not be your Sister. That would be my greatest felicity,
answered Adallus, the nearness of blood is the greatest obstacle that hinders
the repose of my mind, and the preservation of my life. Yes, Olympia I love
you, and I do not love you as a Brother, with a weak and languishing amity, but
as an inflamed lover, and as a man so desperately in love, that if your pity
does abandon me, I shall abandon my self to despair. Be not amazed, Olympia, at
this Declaration, my passion is not without example even in our own family, the
laws of love are stronger than those of blood, and those that may retain common
persons, are not powerful enough to bridle Kings, and oppose themselves to the
repose and lives of Sovereign Princes upon a weak and slight consideration.

This discourse, the understanding whereof I could no longer dissemble, stroke
me with an unparalleled astonishment, and troubled me in such a manner, that
for a long time I was not in a condition to reply: You terrify your self, a
ded the Prince, seeing me in that confusion, but if your affection does but a
little correspond with mine, you will find nothing strange e either in my
discourse, or my designs: Juno was the Sister, and the Wife of Jupiter, amongst
our ancestors, a like proximity did not hinder a more particular alliance, and
at this day, amongst diverse Nations of the world, brotherhood is no impediment
to marriage. To these words he added diverse others upon the same subject, at the
close whereof having had time to recompose my self a little, and looking upon
him with an eye that sufficiently signified the repugnance I had against his
horrid propositions: Adallus said I to him (for the name of Brother in you is
as little conformable to your discourse and designs, as the name of Sister in
me) you fill me with so much shame and confusion, that I kn^w not how to behave
my self one moment in your presence, since I heard the words you pronounced but
now, Heaven, Nature, you and I are offended by them in such a manner, that I
would willingly give the best part of my blood, that I could give my ears the
lie, and restore innocence to the most criminal thoughts that ever fell into
the mind of a Prince. Ah! Sir, if you have any sense of virtue left, oppose the
motions of a horrid passion, and do not dishonor your life with a stain so
black, that all your blood can never wash out. I find no shame replied Adallus,
interrupting me, in loving that which the Gods have made most amiable in the
world, and beauty in the person of my Sister is as powerful upon my Soul, as
in a stranger Princess, we have so many examples of a passion like to mine,
that I shall but little fear the reproaches of men for a love, of which I feel
no regret in my conscience, which would be the first to accuse me if there were
any thing of criminal in it; and in fine though it were a crime and a shame to
love you, I am carried to it by a power which I am not able to resist, and
engaged by a necessity which will force me to love you to my grave, without
any consideration of reproaches, or all the obstacles that you can oppose me
with. And for my part, replied I, I am obliged by virtue, and the nearness of
blood, which makes me look upon your intentions with horror and detestation, to
fly from you henceforth, as from a Monster that would devour me, and to offer
violence to that amity, which the relation of blood and reason had wrought in
me to a Brother, by the aversion I ought to have even to my grave against your
detestable thoughts. You may do it, added the Prince, and you may behold my
death with the same eye that you look upon my passion, and I do not know in
which of these 2 actions you will be the less criminal, either for having loved
your Brother, or for having caused your Brothers death. You will not die, said
I, when you shall render your self Master of this horrible passion, which
causes all the shame of your life, and though you should die upon that account,
I should be very innocent of a death, to which I shall have contributed nothing
but what I owe to my honor, which is dearer to me than your life or mine own.
I believe replied Adallus, that you will easily comfort your self for it: I
shall comfort my self better for that, answered I very briskly, than I should
do for the crime w ^h you propose to me, and though together with the loss of
your life I must consent to part with mine own, I should more easily resolve
upon it than upon a detestable action, the only proposition whereof makes me to
tremble. I did not believe, replied he, I should have found you of so bad a
nature, possibly time may alter it, and make you to consider, that it is not so
slight a crime as you imagine, to throw a Brother and a Lover into his grave. If
I must part with my life for my Brother, said I, I will do it without
repugnance; but as for a Lover in the person of a Brother, I will avoid him as
long as I live, if it be possible as my most dangerous enemy. We had more
discourse besides, by which with as much sweetness as I could possibly, I
endeavored to make him discard his passion, and represented all things to him,
which might strike some horror of it into him, with all the amity of a Sister,
and a rationality above my age: But my endeavors were in vain, and he patred
from me protesting that death only should cure his love, and that he would
renounce his life, if I would not preserve it for him by an affection equal to
his own.

After this day he lived with me as a declared Lover, and though his love
partly blotted out of my soul that friendship which nature had there
established, and began to render him odious to me, as a man whose thoughts were
detestable; yet such was his birth, that I could not avoid him, as I might have
avoided any other person, if I had had the design to do it; and besides, whilst
I expected that time, or reason, or the Kings authority should procure some
remedy, I did all that possibly I could to conceal a thing, of which, as I
thought, half the shame reflected upon me; and upon this consideration I could
not openly express with what repugnance I received the Prince's visits, because
I would not divulge the cause; yet I could not hinder it from being quickly
known, and he grew so blind in his passion, that he lost all manner of
discretion, and by his ill conduct made all the Court sensible of that which he
should have concealed at the rate of his own life.

The King had knowledge of it by a thousand too visible marks, and when I was
no longer able to support the persecutions of my Brother, I took my last
resolution to complain of him, and to discover to my Father that which out of
my care of his repose I had always concealed from him. When he was fully
confirmed in this knowledge, and when upon the discourse he made me concerning
it, I was constrained to confess it my self to him, he was transported with
anger, and testified his displeasure by diverse marks, which wrought no effect
upon the Prince's spirit; He caused him to be called, and after that he had
signified to him with diverse words full of sharpness, the grief he had to see
him fall into and persever in so uncommon a crime, he represented the deformity
of it in such terms as were capable to reduce him to reason, if he had been in
a condition to hearken to them; but after he had given a very quiet audience to
the Kings discourse, and surmounted the confusion which his reproaches might
have caused in him, making an effort upon the fear which the Character of a
Father ought to have imprinted upon his Spirit: Sir, said he, I wish with all
my heart I were in a condition to testify to your Majesty the submission I
have to your will, and I would strip my self of my strongest passions, to
render what is due from me to my Father, and to my King, if reason and
acknowledgement had preserved power enough over my spirit to retain it within
the limits of its duty: But, Sir, by the rigor of my destiny, I see my self
reduced to such terms, that I have no power left to comply with you, but only
by making an end of my life, if that be disagreeable to you. It Is true, Sir,
that I love Olympia, and I love her in such a manner, that death only can free
me from that passion which you condemn; It Is in this that my condition is more
worthy of pity than reproach, and seeing my self conducted by my ill fortune to
the love of a person of whom I am not beloved, a love coudemned as a crime by
the King my Father, I see no safety nor refuge for my self but in death alone,
nor will I seek it elsewhere; but since I am so unhappy as not to find pity,
neither in the soul of a Sister, nor of a Father, I will escape by the only
remedy wherewith my passion can inspire me, from the long calamities to which
it would expose my life, if the course of it were not cut short by my final
resolution. He pronounced these words with so much violence, that the King was
much troubled at them, and feared some violent effect of his despair, being
well acquainted with his boiling and impetuous humor. This fear made him act
with the more sweerness to endeavor to reduce a Spirit, which was not in a
condition to be restrained by violance; but all the things he could allege to
him to make him submit to reason were but in vain, and his love, as it seemed,
being spurred on by the resistance that it found, grew stronger every day, and
by its augmentation augmented my displeasure. I passed above a whole year in
this condition, neither the treatments that I made him to extinguish his hopes,
nor the Kings dealing with him, who from flattery, when it was without effect,
oftentimes fell to threatening, nor any humane consideration being able to
remedy this disaster of our Family.

In fine the King believing that it was his last and surest expedient, resolved
to marry me to some one of the neighboring Princes, amongst whom there were
diverse that desired his alliance, and he judged that by this separation from
the eyes of my Brother, his passion might be mortified, and that all his
criminal thoughts might be dissipated by impossibility, when he had executed
his designs. I know not what would have happened thereupon, if the poor Prince
could have acted his resolution but to my misfortune it was hardly formed when
he was seized by a violent Fever, which laid him in his grave within ten days:
Before he died, amongst diverse instructions that he gave his Son for the
government of the Kingdom he left him, he exhorted him the most tenderly that
possibly he could to quit himself of the love he had for me, and threatened him
with all manner of misfortunes if he persevered in it. Adallus seeing the King
near his end, dissembled his thoughts, and feigning that he was moved with
these expressions of his Fathers last will, promised him all he desired of him:
The King preached to me too upon the same Text, and expressly charged me never
to suffer that his family should be polluted with an incestuous marriage; But
this command was not necessary, and the horror of my Brothers intentions was so
deeply engraved in my heart, that I had no need of the King's solicitations to
dispose me rather to death than to his shameful consent.

The good King died, to my great regret, and his peoples grief, whom he had
govermed with a great deal of Justice and sweetness. I will not entertain you
with the complaints which this loss caused me to make; you may judge, Ladies,
that they were excessive, and besides the grief which the nearness of blood
could not but make me sensible of in the loss of so good a Father, I was
particularly interested by the loss of his protection, who had till then
defended me against the pursures of my Brother. He was publicly crowned in
Bizantium, and he had handsome parts enough to give his people good hopes of his
government, he is comely of his person, naturally endued with spirit and
courage, and if that irrational love, and the effects which it has produced
had not laid a blot upon his life that he will never be able to wipe off, he
would not be the least considerable amongst the Kings who at this day wear a
Crown.

He began his government with the ordinary forms, he rendered funeral honors to
the King our Father with a great deal of magnificence, and bestowed diverse days
about affairs of State, and the establishment of his dignity, giving me time to
lament the death of my Father, without interrupting me in that sad exercise by
his persecutions: And truly he made me conceive some hope, that I might for the
future be exempted from them, and that the Kings last words, or the change of
his condition had produced this effect upon his Spirit: but I saw my self
cruelly deceived in this hope, and whereas before I had had only the pursutes
of a Brother to suffer, who had no command over me, I found my self subjected
to the power of a King, who demanded that of me with authority, which before he
had sought by the ways of love and sweetness: Yet the first marks he gave me
of the continuation of his love were upon the former terms, and he was minded
to make use of the civility of a Lover, before he had recourse to the power of
a Tyrant.

I will not tell you, Ladies (for my narration would be of too excessive a
length) all the amorous discourses that he made me for diverse months, whereby
he thought to change my mind, and make me consent to marriage, nor the answers I
made him in that time, to make him comprehend the foulness of the crime which
he proposed, and to imprint in his heart the shame of an* action that would be
detested by all the world. He alleged to me instead of all reasons, that Kings
were not subject to the Laws they made themselves, and that they governed
themselves by other Maxims than they did their people. At last having observed
that the ways of sweetness were to no purpose, and that instead of expressing
any desire to comply with his intentions, I conceived every day more horror
against his design, he resolved to employ his authority, and declared to me,
that seeing neither as a Brother, nor as a Lover he was able to move me either
to love or pity, nor make me consent to a thing whereupon the preservation of
his life depended, he was constrained to act as a King in his dominions, and to
seek his own safety by that power which the Gods and his own birth had bestowed
upon him. At this cruel declaration I continued rather dead than alive, and
looking upon himwith eyes that signified my grief and just resentment, What
Sir, said I, will you make use of your authority to force your Sister to an
action which will draw upon you the indignation of Heaven, and the detestation
of the whole world? will you not consider that I am tied to you by such a
nearness of blood, that you cannot desire any greater alliance with me, without
rendering your self abominable? and will you not call to mind that I am
descended from too noble a blood, as well as you, to be exposed to that
violence which is not practiced against the meanest Subjects? If I had any
other ways, replied Adallus, to persuade you, I should not have recourse to
those you force me to make use of, and you know your self that I have forgot
nothing which was probably capable to prevail with you; but in the extremity
whereunto you have reduced me by the hardness of your heart, either I must
needs die, or serve my self with the power which I have received from Heaven to
save my self. Ah! Sir, replied I, transported with displeasure, you will not
die, but this unfortunate creature which has so unluckily troubled your
repose, and by her beauty, such as it is, reduces you to the necessity of
committing horrible crimes, will die without doubt, if other mean be wanting to
deliver her from that authority with which you threaten her; 'Twas in you that
I hoped to find protection against any foreign power; but since the Gods permit,
that in the person of a Brother I find a persecutor and a cruel Enemy, they
leave me those ways to free my self that are open to all the world.

The King was a little touched at these words, but he was not a jot staggered
in his resolution, and looking upon me with an eye divided between submission
and authority, You have no reason, said he, to throw your self into despair for
these testimonies of my love, which any other person but your self possibly
would not call persecution; I think you cannot hope to marry a Prince with
whom your condition would be better or more sublime than with me; and as for
the crime which you fear, if there be any, it will lie all upon me who cause
you to do a thing contrary to your inclinations by the power which I have in
my dominior^. This will be your justification before the people, and your
defense against the reproaches of your Conscience, which you fear. I will not
proceed to extremities (whatsoever impatience I suffer from my love) before I
have once more tried the wa^es wherewith I have hitherto served my self, and by
which I hope I shall mollify and change your mind; but when I have practiced
them a while, to as little purpose as I have formerly done, do not think it
strange, Sister, that for the preservation of my life, I make use of all my
rights to work you to a thing which you ought willingly to embrace.

He left me half dead with grief at these cruel words, and the tears which he
saw in my eyes at our parting were not capable to move him or divert him from
his cruel intentions. I abandoned my self to sorrow all the rest of that day,
and for diverse others, and not being able to digest this violence from that
person in the world from whom I ought to have feared it least, I wanted but a
little of throwing my self into Tragical resolutions. What, said I, shall the
Daughter of a King be used with such tyranny as is not exercised upon the
vilest persons? and shall that Brother, whose power ought to secure her from
violence and oppression, be the person by whom she shall see her self exposed
to outrage and indignity? Shall Olympia, in whom the Gods have implanted some
love to Virtue, and inclinations averse from vice, and thoughts though never so
little criminal, suffer her self by her weakness to be exposed to public
shame, and the reproach of the whole world? Ah! no Adallus, no Tyrant, for the
name of Brother is not due to thee because of the outrageous violence, which
thou committest against a Sister, who possibly was not unworthy of her birth,
neither do thou deserve the name of a King by reason of the injustice which
thou beginnest to practice against persons who ought to be least subject to it:
No Barbarian, thou art not yet absolute enough in thy dominions to extend thy
authority over spirits, and such a Spirit as Olympia's: I am not ignorant of
the ways to escape oppression, and to defend that which thou assaultest, I will
arm my self with a courage which possibly thou did not think to have found in
a young Princess, and the Sister of a man so little conformable to her
disposition.

In this manner I bemoaned my self, and deplored my misfortune night and day
with a flood of tears: But all in vain, the barbarous man was not moved at
them, and the repugnance I expressed to marry him augmented his desire, and
seemed to redouble his passion; I spent diverse months in this manner, during
which time he saw me every day, and tormented me perpetually. Sometimes he
entreated me; and when by his prayers he could not incline my spirit to his
design, he fell to threatening, and protested to me, that he was resolved to
make use of his authority, without any longer delay. A few moments after he
grew milder, seeing some tears fall from my eyes, his love having given me some
power over his Spirit.

There is no necessity that I should detain you any longer upon this account,
when he saw that all his flatteries were to no purpose, and that he was past
hope of making me consent to his desires, he resolved in good earnest to put
his threats in execution, and commanded me with a terrible countenance to
dispose my self to marry him within eight days, without any longer delay. I
wept, but to no end, I threw my self at his feet, but in vain, after that cruel
command, all this was not able to move him, but he protested to me before the
chiefest persons of his Court, that since I abused the indulgence he had for me
in this manner, nothing could hinder him from making trial, whether he was King
in his Dominions, or nor.

I passed the eight days he had given me in the saddest employments in the
world, and when I gave any intermission to my regrers* 'twas but to invent some
means to save my self from his tyranny: I was fully resolved, if all other ways
failed me, to embrace death rather than to consent to an action, upon which I
could not cast a thought without horror, but I was minded first to try whether
I could preserve my self from my misfortune by flight; I knew well that I could
not find any sanctuary in my Brothers Dominions against his power; but I verily
believed that if I could escape out of the places under his command, and be so
happy as to get as far as Cilicia, I should find a retreating place there with
the King, who was Brother to the deceased Queen our Mother, and probably though
my Brother was near to him in the same degree, would not desert me in so just a
cause. There was some uncertainty in the success of this enterprise, there was
danger to run, and trouble to support, and difficulty to save my self: But yet
this seemed to me more sweet than death, and finding no other way at all but
death, or flight, I preferred flight before death, out of a fearfulness
incident to my sex and age.

Before I had well taken this resolution, the time he had given me was almost
expired, and I had not put those things in order which were necessary for the
execution of my enterprise. At last, when I was fully resolved upon the design,
I showed the King a little better countenance than I had done before; and
having seen him in my Chamber the seventh day of the eight which he had given
me, after I had again made trial of prayers and tears, which wrought as little
effect as before, faining that I suffered my self a little to be overcome, and
fixing my eyes upon his face with a kinder action than ordinary: I see well,
Sir, said I, that I do resist your will in vain, and am too weak to oppose the
power of a great King in his Dominions: I confess I find a great repugnance in
my nature, as to the thing you desire of me, which hitherto I have not been
able to overcome: but at last I must resolve, after I have made all possible
resistance against an absolute authority, and all that is necessary to
justify my self from an action to which you constrain me: I desire eight days
longer of you, which I will employ to surmount the difficulties which yet
remain as impediments to an ultimate resolution, and after that time, Sir, I
promise you, you shall find in me no contr adiction of your desires. The King
was transported with joy at this discourse, and expressed an excessive deal of
contentment in his countenance, and in his words, he easily granted me the
eight days I desired, and protested to me that I should be the most happy
Princess upon the earth with a Husband who would adore me whilst he breathed. I
confirmed the promise I had made to him with a very sad countenance, for fear
he should discover my policy by too quick a change.

After I had begun to put my affairs thus in order, I desired to lose no more
time, knowing well that that which I had gotten was necessary to make
preparation for my departure; but then it was that I saw my self reduced to no
small trouble; For though I had diverse persons in my service, that were very
affectionate to me, yet I doubted whether I should find any bold enough to
oppose the King, in serving me upon this occasion, and to expose themselves to
ruin, as they would apparently do, by favoring me, and accompanying me in my
flight: I feared likewise that those to whom I should discover my self would
betray me, and by discovering my design to the King deprive me of the means of
putting it in execution. This fear kept me one day in a strange perplexity, but
at last I was resolved to put it to the venture, and I cast my eyes upon
Eurilas, the most ancient of my servants, and Husband to a Lady that was my
Governess; I had obsetved in him by diverse marks a great affection to me, and I
believed that I might better confide in him than in all the world beside. I
sent for him into my Closet, and having represented the sadness of my
condition, which was not unknown to him, I acquainted him with my design, and
the desire I had to trust my life, and whatsoever was more precious to me, upon
his affection and conduct. Eurilas was amazed at my bold resolution, and
represented to me the difficulties and the dangers of it; but seeing that all
things relished better with my spirit than the violence that would have been
done me, he declared to me that he thought himself highly honored by the
confidence I reposed in him, and that he would willingly embrace the occasion
of hazarding all, yea, and of dying too for my service. After this he named me
the persons whom he thought most affectionate to me, and whom he judged that I
might make the companions of my flight, and this little number was composed of
his wife my Governess, and three of my Maids, one of which you see before you
named Ericia, who has always been the dearest to me of all the rest, and three
or four servants the best known, and most necessary. He did not think it fit
that I should be attended upon by any more persons, for fear lest in a greater
number some or other might be capable of betraying me. After this resolution,
and the decision of some petty difficulties, upon which we bestowed part of the
day, he went to give private order for providing a nimble Vessel furnished with
all necessary accommodations for our voyage, there was always a great number of
them in the Port of Bizantium, and Eurilas had credit enough amongst those that
commanded them to have the liberty to depart thence at what hour he pleased,
without any hindrance.

I will abridge this part of my relation as the most troublesome, and I will
only tell you that the fourth day we were assured of the persons that were to
attend me, and all things sorted as well as we could desire to the execution of
our enterpise. The 5 day, the night whereof was designed for our departure, I
feigned my self sick, and having entreated the King, who had spent some hours
in my Chamber, to give me leave to repose my self till the morrow, he retired
himself, and having given order that no person should enter into my appartment,
I had absolute liberty to put in execution what I had resolved.

When we were free, having made all the persons, who were not to go with us,
retire into their chambers, I clothed my self in man's apparel that Eurilas had
brought me; my Governess and my Maids did the like; and if we had disguised our
selves upon a less sad occasion, I should have had some divertisement to see
our selves so trans-habited; but the account that obliged me to do it, and the
fear of being surprised made me tremble continually, and my fears made me
almost incapable of performing what I had resolved. At last having reassured my
self the best I possibly could, and having taken with me the greatest part of
my Jewels, I went down by a little pair of stairs which belonged to my
appartment, into the great Garden of the Palace, whether I had always free
entrance, and from thence by a gare, whire of Eurilas had the Key, we came to
the port near adjoining, where we were attended in the Vessel by the persons
whom Eurilas had left there.

We passed by those we met, covering our faces with our Cloaks, though, without
that precaution, the obscurity of the night, and the habits we were in were
favorable enough to our design. We entered at last into the Vessel an hour
within night, having hastened our departure to take the advantage of the whole
night, and to be far enough off before they perceived our absence, or put
themselves into a condition to pursue us. We hoised up our Sails, and made off
from the Port with all speed, taking the way of Cilicia, which our Pilot was
well acquainted him, and when he began to quit the shore, turning my eyes
toward the City and the Palace of my Father, I forsake thee, said I, my native
Country who have been more cruel to me than the most unknown Region could have
been, and seeing that in thy bosom the daughters of ^hy Kings are not exempted
from violence and oppression, I go under the conduct of Heaven, which will
never abandon me to seek out in a strange climate that repose which I could not
find in that Country where I received my birth, and to put my self into the
protection of the Good* if I be left destitute by men.

With these few words, and some vows I made to Heaven, recommending to i^ the
conduct of my life I fled from the shore of Bizantium with all the swiftness I
could possibly, and I chose rather to commit my self to the infidelity of the
waters than to attend upon the effects of the cruelty of men. Neither the sear
of the waves under which so many thousand persons have found their graves, nor
the dangers which threatened me in a long navigation, were capable to intimidate
the Spirit of a Maid, who to avoid the violence prepared for her, would have
thrown her self into more manifest perils, and of all the evils that the
condition of my life could represent to me, I only feared my being too slow in
my flight, and falling again into my brother's power.

You had good reason, Madam, said Candace to Olympia interrupting her, and few
persons born with virtuous inclinations like to yours, but would have taken the
same resolution; you really followed the way which virtue inspired you, and
Heaven in so rational a design ought to have favored you with all it is
assistances. The most innocent intentions, replied Olympia, are not always most
seconded by the succor of Heaven, and you will see in the sequel of my
unfortunate life, that the most criminal actions were never possibly more
rigorously treated by fortune, nor the lif^ of the most culpable persons
subject to any chastisements comparable to the miseries to which hitherto I
have seen my self exposed.

The End of the first Book.
Hymen's Praeludia: OR, LOVE'S Masterpiece.
PART 6. LIB. 2.
ARGUMENT.
The Princess Olympia continues her Story, She and her company are surprised at
Sea by a furious Tempest, and Ship-wrack'd upon a little Desert-Island. There
by the help of her Servants, she saves the life of a young Gentleman of most
noble aspect, newly cast upon the Shore. He, at first sight, is captivated by
Olympia's beauty, and she at the same time, is very much taken with his
exquisite perfections. They both, for a while, conceal their affections; but at
last he over-hears Olympia's discourse with Ericia to his advantage, and so
steps in and discovers his fllames. As she is about to relate his Name and
quality she is interrupted by the coming of Cornelins Gallus. Agrippa arrives
at Alexandria, visits Elisa, and falls in love with her. Cornelius invites him
and the Princesses a hunting. They receive intelligence of the rape of
Cleopatra and Artemisa: Agrippa and Cornelius post to their succor. Candace in
her return to Alexandria, spies Cesario at a window, but fcaring to discover
him, she defers her further satisfaction to a safer privacy.

WE quitted the shore of Bizantium with a prosperous gale, and the fear I had
of being pursued and taken by those whom the King might send after me, making
me continually solicit the diligence of the Mariners, We passed the Thracian
Bosphorus with admirable speed, and through the straight of the Hellespont, we
entered into the Egean Sea with full Sails. I thought my self then in some
security from the pursutes of my Brother, and I began to take a little breath
after those terrors that had tormented me the first days of our navigation:
Neither the peril whereunto I was exposed by the infidelity of that Element to
which I had trusted my life, nor the dangerous adventures that might occur upon
the Sea, could any way equal the satisfaction I had in my mind to see my self
escaped from the violence of the King of Thrace, and I rendered thanks to the
Gods upon that account, as if I had been already in the securest harbor.

In effect, both nature and reason had made me conceive so much averfion and
horror for the design he had against me, that to free my self from it I
despised all manner of inconveniences, and should have precipitated my self
into the most manifest dangers without consideration: Yet I could not reflect
upon the condition of my fortune, without making some small complaint to
Heaven, nor consider with an absolute moderation, how the Daughter of a great
King was handled by her destiny, which forced her being of so youthful an age,
and so tender a complexion, to fly her native Country, and to hazard her self
upon the inconstancy of the waves, to save her self from an Enemy who ought to
have been her Protector, and to avoid him as a Monster, from whom in all
probability she ought to have hoped for refuge against all manner of
misfortunes. How know I, said I sometimes when I was most troubled with these
sad considerations, how know I, but that in the same places where I seek for
Sanctuary I may find more enemies? and who will give me any assurance of those
persons who are allied to me by some proximity of blood, if I have met with
nothing but persecution and cruelty in my own Brother? Will an Uncle be more
pitiful to me than a Brother? and may not I fear that he will prefer the amity
of the King of Thrace before the protection due to me, and that he will put me
again into the hands of a Prince, whose alliance is more considerable to him,
than the occasion of assisting an afflicted Princess, and drawing an enemy upon
him, whose power is not contemptible? Ah! without doubt I have not sufficiently
deliberated upon this difficulty before I embarked my self in so hazardous an
enterprise, and I should have considered that the Maxims of Kings, and the
interests of State are very different from the thoughts which Virtue and Piety
inspire us with: Whether the King of Cilicia shall put me himself into my
Brother's hands, or refuse me the refuse I desire against him; In either of
these two misfortunes I see my loss absolutely infallible, and what way soever
I turn my thoughts, I know no other way for my safety, Well, added I, raising
up my courage, if Gods and men abandon us, death cannot fail us, and we will
receive it in the same manner either in Cilicia, or in the waves, as we would
have received it at Bizantium, rather than ^a^isfie ^he horrible designs of our
persecutor; than we shall be more excusable than we should have been upon
Adallus his first attempts and we shall sacrifice our life to our misfortunes
and our duty with a great deal less regret, after we have tried the means that
Heaven has left us for the conservation of it.

I oftentimes entertained my self with these discourses with Eurilas, with my
Governess, and this Maid named Ericia, on whom I have bestowed my most tender
affections from my Infancy, and they took the pains to comfort me, and to
represent to me the little likelihood there was that the King of Cilicia my
Uncle should refuse me his protection, to which he was obliged by
consanguinity, virtue, and all manner of considerations, nor need I to fear
that the King my Brother would obstinately demand me, or undertake war against
my Protector upon a quarrel which would expose him to the blame of all the
world. They made me some other discourses besides, wherein I really found
reason and consolation, and receiving my disasters from the hand of Heaven, I
expected the end of them with all the patience that possibly I could.

In the mean time we followed our Voyage with a great deal of diligence: We had
coasted the Isle of Lesbos, we had a view of Eubea, as we passed by, we had
left Creet upon our right hand, and Rhodes upon the left, and we had gone a
good way betwixt Cyprus and Cilicia, when fortune which had favored us ever
since our departure from Bizantium, changed her countenance, and made us know,
that changing of a Climate alters not destiny, and that unfortunate persons
drag the chain of their mishaps after them whithersover they go.

We were but one days journey from the nearest port to Tharsus, where the King
of Cilicia makes his residence, when, contrary to all appearances, the weather
changed, the winds became impetuous, and all the Sea was agitated by a furious
Tempest: Never was storm so sudden and so violent, and though our Mariners were
very expert, and our Vessel in very good condition, the tossing of the waves
was so vehement, that within a few moments, the Saylors, who had often been in
the like dangers, cried out we were lost, and began to despair of our safety.
You may judge fair Princesses, what my fears were then, and if the Spirit of a
young Maid, though already prepared for all manner of disasters, was slightly
troubled at the approaches of a terrible death: I was afraid, I sent up my
vows to Heaven with prayers and tears, and yet I could not repent my self,
that I had thrown my self into this danger, to avoid that whereunto I was
exposed in my native Country. It Is hard, said I in my self, it is a cruel thing
for a Princess to lose her life among the waves at such an age as mine: but it
would have been far more insupportable for me to live in the shame and crime to
which Adallus his violence had destinied me. We will die if the Gods have so
ordained it, but we will die in our primitive innocence, without polluting it
by any unworthy repentance, or regret for having sacrificed this unfortunate
life, to that which we owe to consanguinity and virtue.

In the mean while as the Storm redoubled, our Mariners did all things possible
for to save us. They cut down the Masts of the Ship, discharging it of all
their heaviest lading: and forgot nothing that their experience in this art
could prompt them to put in practice, possibly their care hindered us from
perishing all among the waves, but it could not hinder the loss of a part of
our company; and after we had parted a dreadful night in the continual terrors
of an approaching death, at the break of day we discovered the main land on one
side, and on the other side part of those rocks which render navigation
dangerous near the Coast of Cilicia. We would have done our endeavors to reach
the land, which we looked upon with some remainder of hope: but the winds were
not only contrary to this design, but our Vessel was no longer in a condition
to be conducted by the science of men; and when it had resisted a little longer
the impetuosity of the waves, it was taken by a gust of wind, which with a
swiftness comparable to an Arrow out of a Bow, dashed it againsl the point of a
Rock, where it split into a thousand pieces,

I had perished at this time if I had not been reserved for greater
misfortunes, and the Gods who had destinied me to them, were pleased that I
should be saved from this Shipwreck, to pass the remainder of my deplorable
life in a more cruel tempest than that which they permitted me at that time to
escape. I was preserved by the care that diverse persons took of my safety, two
of my Maids were drowned, with many of the Men; and together with Eurilas, his
wife Ericia, and some other of my servantr, and the Mariners, I was carried up
on the Rock all wet, and half dead with fear, and the pain I had endured: Yet
the Gods were pleased to our extraordinary good hap, that the provisions which
we had in the Vessel were driven upon the Rock, and by the pains our people
took about them, the greatest part of them was preserved, had it not been for
this, hunger would quickly have made us found, what we were lately threatened
with by the cruelty of the waves.

Whilst I lay upon the Shore quite spent with toil and grief, where holding my
eyes fixed upon Heaven, I silently accused it of my misfortune, instead of
returning thanks for the preservation of a life, which in that place, and the
condition we were in, could not probably be prolonged but for a few days: Some
of our men being mounted up to the top of the Rock, found sand, and some trees,
and walking a little further, they saw we were landed upon a small Island of
five or six hundred paces long, but craggy, desert and uninhabited. Upon the
report they made me of it, Eurilas coming to me, and stretching out his hand,
prayed me to arise to go and take some place less inconvenient, in expectation
of the succor of Heaven, from whence we might yet receive assistance. I arose
from my seat with my face all bedewed with tears, and looking every way upon
the pitiful remainders of our shipwreck. Ah! Eurilas, said I, what would you
have us now expect from Heaven, ean any thing remain for us in the place and
condition we now are, but a miserable day or two to live in grief, and want of
all necessaries? With these words casting my eyes again upon the bodies of the
two Maids that were drowned, which the waves had driven to the shore, I powered
out a stream of tears for their loss, and afflicted my self for it in such a
manner, that the care of those which remained could hardly oblige me to take
any consolation. Ah! cried I out, it is not just that a life begun by such cruel
crosses, and by the death of those persons who were dear and faithful to me,
should be of a long continuance, and I should offend the Gods who look upon me
with indignation, if I should make Prayers to them for an unfortunate person,
whom they judge to be worthy of their anger. Madam, said Eurilas to me, you
cannot by any of your actions, have drawn the anger of Heaven upon you, and
nevor possibly had any person more reason than you to expect particular
assistances from thence, the most innocent persons have fallen into the same
disaster which has lately befalen you, and I have hope still to see you
rescued hence, by the protection which without doubt is due from Heaven to your
virtue. Let us go then, Eurilas, said I as I rose up, and let us not despair of
Heavens succor since we cannot do it without further provoking of it against
us. Upon these words, after I had given the last Adieu to those poor Maids,
whom hey took up, together with the other persons that were drowned, to render
them the last devoirs of burial, as the place and condition we were in could
permit, I walked by the assistance of Eurilas upon the brink of those waves,
whose rage was not yet appeased, and we took, under the conduct of those that
had already discovered it, the plainest way to go to the least incommodious
place of the little Island.

But behold, to entangle me in new disgraces, much more sensible than those to
which I saw my self already exposed, 'twasthe will of fortune, that after I had
walked near upon a hundred paces upon the shore, I saw at my foot the body of a
man, which the water had cast up there upon a plank which he still embraced. I
stayed my self at this spectacle, and thought at first that it was one of our
own people, whose loss we had not observed, and I turned my self toward the
rest, to make them see if their companion was still in a condition to receive
any help, or to cause his body to be buried, if he was absolutely dead; but we
quickly changed our opinion when we saw the richness of his habit, upon which
though it was wet and soiled with the some and sand in some places, the gold
was presently spied by those that advanced to his succor. This made them take
a little more notice of that person; and though I was already cast down at my
owm misfortune, and incommodated by the wetness of my garments, I conquered
mine own inconvenience by the compassion I had upon a person fallen into the like
disaster with my self, and I staid to see his face, and to behold with some
attention the event of the office which my servants went to render him. His
legs were still in the water, his body lay along upon the plank, which he held
fast, and his face was turned toward the ground, and almost buried in the
sand. They drew him quite out of the water, and turned his face upwards, but it
was so covered with some and sand, that they could not at first perceive the
figure of it; they presently threw water upon him, and when he was cleansed
from the filth which covered him, they perceived as well as the pale wan color
of his face would permit, all the lineaments of an admirable beauty in a person
of his sex. His age seemed not to be above nineteen years; his person was the
most complete and best proportioned in the world, and his long black hair,
which the moisture of the water could not deprive of their natural Curles, hung
about his cheeks, and added an extraordinary grace to the whiteness of them:
but a great part of his beauties was clouded, his eyes were fast closed, his
lips were discolored, and a deadly paleness being spread all over his visage
had banished thence that vivacity of complexion, which does so advantageously
set off the lineaments and proportion of a handsome face. Yet in this
languishing form he appeared more comely to me, than all that had been
represented to my eyes till then, and out of a presage, whereof the cause was
unknown to me at that time, I felt a throbbing of my heart, which seemed to me
to foretell part of that which this adventure has made me suffer since.

There appeared but little show of life in this person, but Eurilas having laid
his hand upon his heart, found there some motion, and some heat: This man is
not dead, said he: Then we must succor him, added I presently, and give him
all the assistance we can to endeavor to save his life. Immediately all the
persons that were with us employed themselves about it, and two or three men
having taken him up by the feet, and holding his head downwards, the salt
water, with which his belly was all swelled up, began to run out of his mouth
in such great abundance, that we were struck with wonder how the body of a man
could contain so much. After he had cast it all up, he continued some moments
longer without showing any other signs of life than those they had already
observed, and though I was in an incommodious condition my self, I had the
patience to wait a while longer to see if he would recover his senses. The Gods
were pleased that my expectation should not be long, and the fair unknown
began, by his motion, to show the effect of the assistance which had been
rendered him; a little after he opened his eyes, and recovered his senses and
knowledge: I was very joyful to see him return into that condition, and out of
an unknown principle, I already interested my self in his preservation, so as I
partly suspended the memory of my own danger. He turned his eyes for a while
round about him, to observe the place where he was, and the persons which had
succored him, and his astonishment discovered it is self in his countenance,
where the color began to come again, and with that the exact perfection of
beauty in a person of his sex. At the first he was troubled to discern things,
and what to judge of his adventure; but when the vapors that clouded his
understanding were a little dissipated, he recalled to memory what had passed,
he remembered his shipwreck, and began to guess at part of the truth. When he
had a little reflected upon it, he sat up with a little pain, and looking upon
us with eyes which expressed the remains of his astonishment; I know not, said
he, whether it be by Heavens assistance, or by yours that I have recovered my
life, but I think it is not very long since I was exposed to the mercy of the
waves, and I am ignorant in what place I am, by what means I came hither, and
to whom I am beholding for my safety. You owe it, replied Eurilas, to the
assistance of the Gods, and next to them, to persons whose fortune is little
different from yours, and who by a Shipwreck like you, have been driven upon
this little I stand, with very little hope or means to get out of it, without
the extraordinary helping-hand of Heaven. The fair unknown whose memory and
understanding recovered more and more, and whose eyes resumed a vivacity and
sparkling light, which gave an unusual Luster and Majesty to his countenance,
looked upon the preservers of his life with more affection than before, and
having cast his eyes upon my face, he found something there which gave him a
particular respect for me.

I was not clad then in man's apparel, with which I disguised my self to get
out of Bizantium with the more facility; but after we came within sight of
Cilicia, out of the repugnance I had to this disguise so little sorting with
modesty as I thought, I had together with my women resumed the habit of my sex,
to enter in a more decent manner into the Country where I went to seek for
refuge. The uuknown had no sooner taken notice of me amongst the other persons
that stood about me, of whom, by the respect they gave me, he judged me to be
Mistress, but all his acknowledgement turned toward me, and striving with his
feebleness to crawl to my feet: Madam, (said he, in the Roman tongue, which was
the same wherein Eurilas had spoken to him, and which we all understood as well
as our own language,) it is to you, I think, that I ought to render thanks confo
mable to the benefit I have received of your goodness: Though I were not
obliged to it by the preservation of this life for which I am indebted to you,
I would render you that by way of adoration, which acknowledgement orders me
to, and from persons less capable of knowledge your face will always receive
those homages which are due to divinities: I know not what I can offer you for
the succor I have received of you and yours, and this life which I owe to your
assistances is now of too mean a value to satisfy my resentments: but if, such
as it is, I durst offer it at your feel, I would protest to you with the
highest truth, that the preservation of it shall not be so dear to me, as the
occasions of parting with it for your interests.

The fair unknown spoke in this manner, but it was with so uncommon a grace,
that in the most happy condition of my life I could not have hearkened to him
with a more entire attention: And when he had done speaking, looking upon him
with a countenance that expressed more satisfaction than our present fortune
could probably have left me: Neither my person, said I, nor the assistance you
have received of us can merit either your acknowledgment, or adorations: the
succor that has been rendered you, as it was due to all men, so it could not
be better employed than upon such a person as your self: and that which you
have observed in my countenance (if I may give absolute credit to your
discourse could move no other thoughts in you, but what pity might inspite you
with toward persons reduced into a condition like your own; the assistance
that has been given you will only serve to prolong for a few days that life
which you thought to have lost upon the waves, if it is continuance be not
longer than what we hope for in relation to our own. We are upon this Rock,
whither the tempest has driven us an hour since, without any vessel, with
little victuals, and without any hope of return, if Heaven does not afford us
some miraculous succor. Heaven, replied the unknown, has not placed in your
person whatsoever it had most great and admirable, to abandon you in the danger
which you represent to me, and you ought without doubt to hope from thence
whatsoever its providence can perform for those things that are most worthy of
its protection: however it be, if I can be moved with the news that you tell
me, it is only in consideration of your danger, which has expunged all memory
of my own out of my mind, and I should not be ill satisfied with my fortune, if
I could sacrifice this life which I hold of you to the preservation of yours.

He had spoken more to this purpose, if the interest which I already took in
him had not made me consider that he was weak and weary, and in a very bad
condition in respect of his health; he had hardly recovered strength enough to
stand up, and we were fain to make him lean upon two men, to conduct him with
us to a less incommodious place, where some of our men had already cut down
good store of branches; and began to make little lodgings for to shelter us. To
be short in my discourse, they made diverse of them, and one I caused to be
given to the unknown, with two of our men to attend upon him, I took one of the
most spacious they could make for my self and my women, and the men disposed of
themselves in the rest. They had saved some clothes which served us whilst
our own were dried, and they easily got fire out of the flints that lay in
great number upon the shore. Eurilas took the care of husbanding our provisions
to make them last as long as he could, seeing all the remainder of our hopes
relied upon them, and we could hope for no more but by the miraculous arrival
of some vessel: we made our selves beds with leaves, only upon mine they laid
some part of the clothes that were left, that I might lodge with the less
inconvenience.

The first night passed in this manner, part of which I spent in sleep, and the
rest upon the consideration of the misery to which I was reduced: I I would
add, if I durst, that my thoughts diverse times inclined to the remembrance of
the fair unknown, and that in spite of my misfortune, I could not banish out
of my mind, the Idea that was established there, of his Majestical and stately
mine, and the admirable grace he had in his action and discourse. The
reflection I made upon it, did not presently produce any powerful effect upon
me, it only raised some motions in my mind which I was not used to feel: and I
took some pleasure in calling to mind the extraordinary things I had observed
in that unknown person.

The next morning, the first thing that came into my thoughts was to enquire
how he did; and I had no sooner done it, but I repented my self of my
precipitation, and a blush that mounted up into my cheeks, reproached me for
having too much care of a man, who already encroached upon my liberty: Ah!
Olympia, said I upon this consideration, what a fool art thou to cast thy
thoughts upon a stranger, whom thou never saw till within these few moments?
Thou which would possibly have seen the greatest Princes of Asia whole years
in thy service without being moved at it, how little reason have thou to make
any reflection upon a man, at a time when all men ought to be banished from thy
remembrance, and at a time when thou ought to dream upon nothing but thy
death, which thou see present before thy eyes, and which thou can not defer
above a few days? What does it concern thee to hear news of this strangers
health, in a condition wherein the care of thine own would be unprofitable, and
the saving of thine own life is enough to take up all thy thoughts? And why
do thou inform thy self of it, when thou should only inform thy self of
some means to get out of this desert Island? Dye Olympia, since thou must dye,
in the free condition wherein thou have hitherto kept thy self, and do not
permit that purity, to which thou have sacrificed thy life, to be blemished
with the least stain: Thy thoughts hitherto are innocent, compassion and an
extraordinary merit might produce them without any culpable effect; but the
time, if there remains any longer time to live, may render them less
excusable, and it is by these beginnings that people engage themselves in that
passion which I never felt, nor ever had any experience of.

By this discourse I would have fortified my heart against the weakness whereof
I suspected it, and I took a kind of resolution to impute all to compassion,
without any other interest, and not look upon this unknown otherwise than I did
upon all other men. I had almost formed this design, when I was told, that by
his rest the last night he was perfectly recovered, and was at the entrance of
my lodging, where he waited till I was in a condition to receive his visit. As
I had not uncloathed my self, so I was not troubled to make my self ready, but
only raising my self from the leaves, where I had passed the night with
inconvenience enough, I gave order for him to come in: I did verily believe
that I could not see him without some small disturbance, but, I must confess,
I was much more moved than I feared, and he entered into my lodging in such a
manner as without doubt would have surprised a mind better fortified than mine.
Whatsoever the Sea, and the toil he had endured the day before, had done to
diminish his natural beauty, was dissipated by the repose he had taken, the
clearness of his complexion, the sparkling of his eyes, and the Majesty of his
port and action were returned with all their ordinary advantages; it is certain
that there was not one of those persons who saw him in that condition, but
looked upon him with admiration, and took him for a man far different from the
ordinary sort. He was of a taller size than ordinary, but so straight, so
clean, and so well-proportioned, his gate so noble, and the air of his
countenance composed of so natural and so excellent a grace, that 'twas
impossible to see any thing more complete in every part. The good opinion I had
of him, and the advantageous judgments I made of his exquisite parts, obliged
me to receive him with all the civility I could have rendered to a great Prince,
and he accosted me with all the marks of the most profound submission. Yet I
observed, or at least I thought I did so, that before he opened his mouth to
speak to me, he continued some moments in a maze, and looked upon me with marks
of some astonishment and confusion: He had some trouble, as I thought, to
recompose himself upon a sudden, but having done it at last, with a boldness
that is very natural to him: Madam, said he, I come to beg your pardon for the
faults I committed yesterday in a condition when I was not capable of rendering
what I owed to your person, and the benefit of life which I have received from
your bounty. If the Gods would please that I might employ the remains of it in
your service, the preservation of it would be much more dear to me than it is
out of the natural desire we have of it, and I should be farther engaged to
your self, if you would admit me to the opportunities of testifying my
acknowledgments to you, than I can be to those generous assistances to which I
owe my safety.

He uttered these words in such a noble and such a charming fashion, that I
continued a while in an incapacity of giving him an answer, and 'twas not
without trouble that I began at last to speak: I am very much satisfied, said
I, to see you in a condition so different from that wherein you appeared to me
yesterday; and that succor upon which you set too high an esteem, produces in
you an acknowledgment which exceeds the benefit: I could wish it had been
rendered to you to greater purpose, and that you had received that from us for
many years, which neither you nor we are like to enjoy but for a few days.
Those few days, replied the unknown with a sigh, and an action wherein there
appeared something of an interessed person, will be very different to me from
those I have passed hitherto, and I do not believe that the Gods, by your
assistance, would have saved me from a common or single death, to make me
perish by a death which will give me great cause to accuse them of cruelty. I
would not suddenly penetrate into the sense of these words, though the action
of him that uttered them, and mine own inclination made me partly suspect what
they meant; I answered him likewise in such terms as might make him judge that
I did not understand them. We entered into a conversation full of civility, the
handsomness of his person, and the marks of as high birth, which appeared in
his countenance, having wrought in me as much consideration as I could have had
for a great Prince.

The day being clear and fair, and very much different from those which had
preceded it, we went out of our lodging, and walked up and down the little
Island, which in some places we should have found agreeable enough, if we could
have looked upon it otherwise than upon the place of our Sepulture. Eurilus
caused some to stand Sentinels upon the top of the Rock, to discover some
favorable Vessel sent by Heaven for our succor, and our little company did
incessantly make vows to Heaven to obtain assistances from thence, of which
they had little hope.

This day being passed, the succeeding night filled mind with importunate
thoughts, and the Idea of the fair unknown presented it self, and fixed it self
there, more pertinatiously than I would have desired: his gallant mind, and the
sweetness of his countenance intermingled with Majesty, his noble deportment,
and the admirable grace which attended his discourse and action came again into
my memory in a very advantageous form, and made good their possession maugre
the endeavor to expel them thence: Leave me, said I, leave me troublesome Idea
which presentest thy self to my imagination so inconveniently and unseasonably,
it must be in some other Spirit than mine that thou may find part of that
complacency which thou seek for, but in Olympia's thou shall never produce
any effect, if the Gods do not forsake her. If this unknown be handsome, if he
be amiable, if he be admirable in all parts, what does it concern the
unfortunate Olympia? And what interest can she take in a man, with whom her
acquaintance is but of a days standing, whom she cannot know but for a few days
more, and whom she would not know at all, if that knowledge must disturb her
repose? Let him serve himself against some other heart than mine with all the
advantages that he has received from Heaven and Nature, and let him work
admiration and love every where else; but let him leave a mind in peace, to
which neither nature has given, nor her fortune left any dispositions to
receive the thoughts which he would introduce there. By this reasoning with my
self I put off for some moments this persecuting remembrance, and embraced, as
I thought very strongly, a resolution never to think upon him more: But a
little after, maugre my resolution, this importunate Image came again into my
memory, and made me fix my thoughts in spite of my teeth, upon the
consideration of those marvails which I had found in the person of the unknown:
This agitation of my Spirit permitted no access to sleep, and seeing the
greatest part of the night was passed, and I had not been able to close my
eyes, I began to be really angry both with these thoughts, till then unknown to
my spirit, and with him that caused them. What, said I, shall this unknown
usurp that already with authority, which possibly he would not have
sufficiently purchased all his life time? Have I scarcely seen him, and must he
oppose my sleep, and encroach upon my repose and liberty? In a condition of
life when I ought to think upon nothing but death, shall he alone be capable to
withold my thoughts, and shall he possess them so, that I should lose my
sleep, my repose and liberty? Ah! my liberty, Ah! my repose, ye are but weakly
grounded in my soul, if the first sight of a man can so easily overthrow you
and if ye abandon me for having seen a man a few moments, in whom possibly all
appearances are deceitful, a man that possibly has nothing amiable but that
outside which blinded me at first sight, a man, it may be of no birth or
virtue, a man which loves me not, nor possibly ever will whilst he lives. Will thou Olympia, hazard they affections upon such doubtful terms? and are they of
so little value that thou ought not to settle them in a place conformable to
thy birth and the profession which hitherto thou have made of a large share of
virtue? It would have been much better for thee, if thou had been buried
under those waves which have spared thee, or if they had swallowed up this
enemy which they have driven upon this shore to ruin thee: and if thou find
thy self so weak as to suffer thy self to be taken with the seducing charm,
which appears in his face, thou must hate him as a Monster ready to devour
thee, or at least thou must avoid him as an enemy ready armed for thy
destruction.

With these words I really gave way to some resentments, and some motions of
choler against him, and making a very violent effort upon these importunate
thoughts, I diverted them in such a manner, that a little after I fell fast
asleep: But in my sleep I was more strongly assaulted, and I was hardly asleep
but the cruel enemy of my repose presented himself before me with something
more great and more extraordinary than all I had observed till then, and
looking upon me with a countenance, which as full of passion as it seemed to
be, did yet express a great confidence in his fortune: Olympia, said he, in
vain do thou arm thy self against me, let the destinies take their course,
it is to no purpose to oppose them, it is the will of Heaven that you should love
me, it is for me only that thou have been brought upon this shore, I am not
unworthy of thy affections, and how soever thou would dispose of them, I
tell thee from the Gods that it is for me that they are absolutely reserved. It
seemed to me that as he finished these words, and was going from me, he laid
his hand upon his heart to show me the wound I had made there. I awaked a
little after, so troubled with my dream, that I could not recompose my self, I
knew not whether I ought to take it as a real advice from Heaven, which amongst
the vapors of sleep does frequently acquaint us with future things, or for an
effect of those thoughts which had so strongly agitated me when I was awake:
Howsoever it was, I could not hinder my self from being moved at it in such a
manner, that I had hardly any knowledge or use of reason; and the Idea of that
which was presented to me during my sleep was so strongly imprinted in my
imagination, that I could not dis-engage my memory for a moment.

After I had meditated a good while upon this, not being able to quit my self
of this pertinacious Image: Ah! Gods, said I within my self with a sigh, can it
be possible that my destiny should be such as ye tell me by the mouth of this
enemy of mine? and that ye have brought me out of my native Country, and caused
me to suffer shipwreck upon this Rock, to see there the cruel effect of his
threatenings. If it be your intention, great Gods! I know it would be but in
vain for me to resist it, but till I am more fully informed by some other way,
than by a mouth which I very much suspect, I will defend my self with all my
power against the assaults of this presumptuous person, who has already so
much confidence either in his merit or in his fortune. This was then my
intention, and I really summoned to my assistance all the resentment and choler
I could form against this audacious person which had so highly threatened me.
For all this it was impossible for me to sleep one moment longer, but I felt my
self so tired with watching, and the persecution I had suffered from my
importunate thoughts, that I desired to bestow part of the day in reposing my
mind and body, and it was almost Noon before I thought of quitting my sorry
lodging.

Ericia coming to me about that time asked me if I would not rise, and told me
that the unknown was at the entrance of my Cabin, and enquired how I did, and
if he might be permitted to give me Good Morrow. My blood was moved at Ericia's
discourse, and rallying up all the resentment wherewith I had fortified my
self: I cannot see him to day, said I, to Ericia, tell him I am indisposed, and
do you keep him company if you will, for he cannot possibly expect mine. These
words escaped me before Ericia, and I should have been very sorry, if it had
been before any body else, but this Maid, whom I have always trusted with my
most secret thoughts. She was troubled at this discourse, and at the action
with which I pronounced it, and fearing I had received some displeasure from
the Unknown: Madam, said she, have you any occasion to complain of this man,
who is beholding to you for his life, and expresses such great resentments of
that obligation? No said I, but I cannot see him, go and entertain him if thou will, and leave me a little to my repose. Ericia did as I gave order, and a
little after my Governess coming to me, I told her that I was troubled with a
pain in my head, occasioned by my want of rest that night, and that I would try
if I could take the other nap.

It would be a hard matter for me, fair Princesses, to represent to you what
the agitation of my Spirit was at that time, I know very well that of all the
passions which strove for place there, choler took up the most room, and I was
so ill satisfied with my self, for the weakness I observed in my self, that I
thought my self unworthy of my own esteem and amity. What, said I sighing, What
Olympia, in one day, and with a stranger too? With a stranger, repeated I, and
in one day, Olympia? These thoughts turmoiled me in such a manner all that day,
that my mind enjoyed not one moment of repose.

In the mean time Ericia, as I had commanded her, went to entertain the fair
unknown, and she had no sooner acquainted him (as she told me afterward) that
I would not see him that day; but she observed great signs of sadness in his
countenance. After he had kept his eyes fixed upon the ground a while, looking
this Maid in* the face with an afflicted air. Could it be possible said he,
that I should be importunately troublesome to your Lady, or that I should be so
unfortunate as to displease her by any of my actions? No certainly, replied
Ericia, considering the manner of the conversation you have had with her, it
would be hard if she should have received any trouble or displeasure from you:
but she is a little indisposed, and it is no wonder, considering what she
suffered at Sea, and endures still by her bad lodging, her sorry bedding, and
the inconvenience of all manner of things, which without doubt might alter a
complexion much less delicate than hers. If the unknown was troubled out of
fear of having displeased me, he was no less afflicted with the opinion he
conceived of my indisposition, and looking upon Ericia with an action that
signified to her that he took a great deal of interest in me already: I would
willingly render back, said he, this life of mine to the waves, from whence you
have rescued it, if any one of my actions has been disagreeable to that
Princess, to whom I owe all, both in respect of the infinite merit of her
person, and the preservation of my life. But though that misfortune should not
betide me, I cannot but be very unhappy in the knowledge you give me of her
indisposition, and I cannot but be nearly sensible of all the ills to which a
person so extraordinary, and to whom I am so much obliged, can be exposed. Her
malady is not very great, replied Ericia, she is only troubled with a pain in
her head proceeding from want of rest last night. If watching answered the
unknown, and the loss of rest must produce this effect upon a complexion
somewhat stronger than hers, there are some possibly that would be more
indisposed than the Princess is, and without doubt they would have given
something more precious than their health for the return and preservation of
hers.

He had diverse other discourses with her, by which he discovered some disorder
and alteration in his soul, till dinner time, and then he dined with her, and
Eurilas, and my Governesle, I keeping close, though with a great deal of pain,
to the resolution I had taken not to see him that day.

The succeeding night was as restless to me as that which went before, and the
next day endeavoring to make my Spirit yield to the constraint, which I had
laid upon it the day before, and to hinder my self from seeing the cruel enemy
of my repose, that in so small a time had made such strange depredations in my
soul, 'twas impossible for me to dispose my self to it, and to deny Ericia the
permission to see me, which she desired on his behalf. I saw him, not without
trouble and emotion, I saw him as he appeared to me in my dream, which came
incessantly into my remembrance, and I saw him in a condition capable to
overthrow all the resentments that I had mustered up against him in my Spirit.
He spoke to me, as I thought, with a great deal less assurance than before,
and I believed that every time I spoke to him, I discovered some part of my own
disorder.

I will not amuse you with the particularities of all our discourse, which
proceeded no farther yet, than to things indifferent, or at least very distant
from those thoughts which took up the greatest room in our Spirits; we talked
concerning the incommodities and miseries of our shipwreck, what hopes we had
of our safety from Heaven, and what resolution we ought to take to dye
courageously, if we received no succor, before the little provision we had was
spent: and when we were upon this subject, I plainly perceived that the fair
unknown expressed more resentment for the danger which threatened me, than for
his own. The more he proceeded in his discourse, the more he spoke to me with
an unassured countenance, his words were always accompanied with sighs, and
his looks, which were sometimes fixed upon my face, lost all their confidence,
when I looked upon him. Though I had no design to engage my self to this
unknown person, who probably was not of a birth proportionable to mine, and
with whom, in the evident danger we were, I could not contract any friendship
without the imputation of folly, yet I confess, my heart having made him way,
it was with some joy that I observed this alteration in his spirit, and having
been afraid till then, that, besides the disproportion of his birth, he had but
little disposition to love me, I could not begin to dissipate that fear without
some satisfaction. I had a great desire to be informed by him of his name, his
Country, and extraction, but then I met with great difficulties, and I no
sooner opened my mouth to ask him about the business; but it was stopped with
the fear I had to understand something that might displease me; He was not
forward of himself to declare himself, and I durst not venture to desire any
fuller intelligence of him, for fear of finding something in his extraction
that might make me condemn the thoughts I had for him. This fear really hindered
me from expressing my curiosity, and always when this desire urged me, this
fear expelled it so, that I had not the confidence so much as to enquire of
Ericia, to whom he might have discovered himself more familiarly, than to me.

Diverse days passed in this manner, I not daring to inform my self any
farther, and in the interim I found so many amiable parts in this unknown, or
rather so many parts capable of surprising the hearts and souls of persons less
apt to receive the impressions of Love, that neither the difference that I
believed to be between our conditions, nor the uncertainty of being beloved by
him, nor the apprehension of an approaching death, wherewith we were so
evidently threatened, could hinder me, fair Princesses, (I speak it with some
confusion) could hinder me, I say, from loving him. It must needs be that this
affection was decreed from above, seeing it received its original by such
extraordinary ways, and in a condition when, according to all probability, our
Spirits should have been incapable of its impressions: but in conclusion,
whether it were out of Sympathy which ordinarily produces such effects, or by
destiny which acted conformably to my dream in this adventure, I began to love
this unknown to the prejudice of mine own interests, and all the resistance I
could make, was not strong enough to defend the entrance of my heart.

I fear, Ladies, that you have not indulgence enough to pardon this weakness in
me, and that you have reason to find it a thing very much to be condemned in a
Kings daughter, to have so hastily engaged her inclinations to a man of whom
she had no knowledge, but the good opinion she had conceived of his person; one
that she had never seen but a few days before, and to whom she was not
beholding for any service, or obligation: and truly I will not excuse it,
either by the extraordinary merit of the unknown, or by any of those reasons
which are wont to be alleged in a justification of this nature, but I will
impute it only to the force of my destiny, which, as you will judge by the
sequel of my discourse, acted extraordinarily in this engagement of my soul.
It Is true I began to love this fair unknown, whatsoever endeavors I used to
the contrary, but I conserved command enough over this growing affection, to
frame a very strong resolution, never to make the least discovery of it, till I
knew that his condition was such, that without any blame I might hope one day
to receive him for my husband (if the Gods were pleased to prolong our days by
those succors which were necessary for us to get out of this little desert
Island, where in all likelihood we could hope for nothing but death) and if it
were my misfortune not to find him such as I might desire, to suffer death
rather than ever to declare to him my affection, in which without ecclipsing my
honor, and incurring reproach, I could not rationally expect any good
success. This was my resolution, and I found my self capable of putting it in
execution, a great deal more than I was to resist this passion, which had
assailed me with so much impetuosity, and from this moment I began to curb my
looks, and to lay a restraint upon all things that might give the unknown any
intelligence of the advantage he had gotten upon my Spirit: I entertained him
as seldom as in civility I could, and he observing that I retracted somewhat of
that which I permitted him at first, became a great deal sadder than ordinary,
and favored my design himself, more than I would have wished, in seeking
solitude in the most retired places of our little Island. I confess for all
that I was troubled at it, and though I did all that I could possibly to avoid
him, yet my desire was that my distance only might separate us one from
another, without his contributing any thing on his part, and I was well pleased
that he should look after me, though I was sometimes troubled to meet him. Yet
the complacency I had with my affection made me suspect that it was not out of
aversion that he kept from me, and that I had possibly wrought something upon
his Spirit which rendered him more circumspect in avoiding the occasions of
displeasing me, but the uncertainty I was in very much troubled me, and the
condition of my Spirit being strangely changed, I was as much afraid then,
that I was not beloved by him, as I was at first that I loved him better than I
should do.

Whilst we were upon these terms, when any other Spirits than ours, would have
found another subject for their thoughts than that which took up ours, we saw
no Vessel appear to succor us, and our provisions decreased in such a manner,
that we had no more left than for eight days: It Is true our men had found an
invention to catch fish, and there was in that little Island a spring of fresh
water, and by that means we hoped to spin out our days a little longer, when
all our other victuals failed us; but this was but a very sorry shift, and
there was little probability that a tender complexion should long subsist upon
no nourishment but only fish and water, besides the incommodities of lodging
and bedding, might in time ruin a more robustious constitution than mine. All
our people were in a very desolate condition, and though they expected some
return of the prayers which they continually made to Heaven, all hope had
almost deserted them. I was the least troubled at the apprehensions of death,
and the unknown made it sufficiently appear to me, that if he was moved at it,
'twas not upon the only consideration of his own life. I should be very
unfortunate, said he to me one day, if I have only prolonged my life to see the
end of yours; and the succor I received from your goodness would be very cruel
to me, if I must purchase these few days which it has added to mine by the
greatest of all displeasures under which a courage can suffer. Ah! If my
destiny be so, I may well accuse Heaven to my last gasp, for not permitting me
to lose my life amongst the waves where all my company have found their
sepulture. If that must happen, answered I, we must conform our selves to the
will of the Gods, who with sovereign authority dispose of our days, and your
murmuring will not make them change their decrees. No, added the Unknown, but
it will convince them of cruelty and injustice, and where there is so just a
cause of complaint, it is no easy thing to keep within the bounds of an
absolute moderation. Virtue, replied I, ought to produce this effect in us, and
from that only we may receive ability to support the utmost rigor of our
destiny. Ah! Virtue, cried he with a sigh, if thou ought to succor me, why
is thy assistance so slow, and why have thou not defended me in a far greater
necessity than this danger is to which our lives are now exposed. Ah! Madam,
continued he, looking upon me with an ill-assured countenance, how much
inequality will there be, if the God, have so decreed it, in the end of our
days, and how great ought the difference to be between our grief in respect of
the losses we must have. In uttering these words he let fall some tears, and I
was so moved at them, that I had almost let him understand by some marks of
weakness, that in the death which we expected, or in the thought which then
took up our spirits, there was no such great difference as he imagined.

We passed diverse days in this manner, without his giving me any more
particular knowledge of his cruel inquietudes, which I could not impute only to
the fear of death, and he went alone to spend the greatest of the day in the
most private and unfrequented parts of the little Island, that he might not be
interrupted in his musing and melancholy humor; and at those hours when he was
obliged in civility to visit me, he accosted me, and spoke to me with a
countenance so troubled, and so different from that, which he had showed me
some days before, that it was easy to judge by exterior appearances, that he
had inwardly received some powerful alteration. According to his example I
sought occasions of sollitude, and oftentimes quitting the company of my
Governess and Eurilas, I went abroad to walk with Ericia only, in those places
where we might be least disturbed in our conversation. This Maid had related to
me all the discourse she had heard from the mouth of the unknown, in which one
might easily observe some particular interest; and having an absolute
confidence in her, I had discovered to her, though with a little shame, all my
most secret thoughts, and the inclination I had for the unknown. Ericia was not
troubled at this declaration, and whether it were that her complaceney to me
hindered her from condemning me, or whether she was favorable to the man,
because she suspected his thoughts to be of the same nature with mine, she did
not strive to suppress this inclination in the birth, but oftentimes told me,
that if any man was capable of producing a sudden affection, without doubt it
was the unknown, and that if it pleased the Gods that he were of a birth never
so little near to mine, one could not see a couple in the world better matched.
This indulgence which Ericia had for my thoughts, made me love him the more,
and I declared my mind to her with the greater liberty. We often made
conjectures together, upon the actions and discourses of this man, to judge if
I was beloved by him, and though we had great suspicions of it, we were still
in uncertainty, when fortune sent us an occasion to clear our doubts.

I went one day out of my lodging, only with this Maid, to entertain my self
with her concerning that which at that time wholly employed my thoughts, and
leaning upon her arm, I walked to the least frequented parts of the little
Island, when approaching to one of the extremities of it, where there was a
little thick tuft of trees, and some points of a Rock above the Shore, Ericia
made me take notice of diverse inscriptions engraved upon the bark of the trees
with a bodkin, or the point of a knife, the letters which composed the
inscriptions were Greek, and the little knowledge we had of that Character
hindered us from discerning them handsomely; but amongst the inscriptions there
were wounded Hearts, True-lovers-knots, and other pretty representations much
used amongst amorous persons. We were amazed at first at this accident; and in
regard the Letters were but newly cut, we knew very well they could not have
been there long, and that consequently they were made by some person then in
the Island. Amongst my retinue I judged that none but Eurilas was capable of
these things, and yet both his age, and his humor too, in the condition we
then were, were so little conformable to this gallantry, that I could not
accuse him of it, and I was immediately of Ericia's judgment, that it must
needs come from the fair Unknown, Never believe me; said Ericia, if these be
not the effects of that which I have so much suspected, and if this man, who is
as passionate in my imagination as any man can be does not communicate to trees
and things insensible that which his respect and the fear of displeasing you
hinders him from discovering to you. I was almost of her opinion, but I
answered only with a sigh, which I could not possibly contain, and leaning my
head upon hers, I looked upon the inscriptions in several places with some
tenderness and interest: But a little after, Ericia being gone a few paces from
me, found some words upon the Rock written in Latin, which she understood, And
after she had read them, returning to me with extraordinary speed: I pray,
Madam, said she, be pleased to take the pains to come and see some things that
will fully confirm you in the judgment we have made. And with these words,
pulling me by the arm, she lead me to the foot of the Rock, which stood over
the shore, where amongst diverse characters like to those which were upon the
trees, I saw these words engraved in the same manner in the Roman language:
Here lang uishes, here declares its passion to things incapable of knowledge,
an heart inflamed with love, an heart upon which respect lays a cruel
violence: Ye insensible witnesses and confidents to whom I communicate my dear
secret, be ye as discrect as he that trusted you. And a little lower were
written these words in the same language and character: Why have the Gods
preserved me from the water, to make me perish in the fire? why have they
hindered me from dying free, to make die a Slave, and in what could this change
of my destiny advantage their glory? In another place a little further off were
engraved these words. I do not complain of thee, my heart, I do not complain of
thee my liberty, your destiny could not be more honorable, than to be
sacrificed to the divine O. There was no more than this first Letter of my
name; but I was almost confident that by this beginning he meant Olympia, and
with a new emotion which this sight caused in me, I continued to read that
which followed in this manner: But my heart! but my liberty, to what end do ye
hazard your selves, do ye believe that in bestowing your selves upon this
divinity, ye have made her a present worthy of her self, and do ye know that
eternal sufferings are all the reward ye can hope for thence? Suffer then, my
heart, these glorious pains, and never complain of them, since you have
submitted to them without resistance, and Heaven it self contributes thereto. I
finished the reading of these words with pain, and not being ignorant, as I
thought, either of the cause or the author, I could not read them without
taking an interest in them, which caused an extraordinary emotion in me. I sat
down upon the body of a rree that lay close by me, and leaning my head upon
both my hands, I began to meditate upon this adventure, when Ericia coming to
me: Well Madam, said she, do you not think that I am right in my conjectures? I
believe, said I, that the Unknown may have written these words, and I will tell
thee more, if thou will, that I will not assure thee that he did not write them
for me; but though it were true that he loved me ardently, if he be not of an
extraction worthy to be allied with mine, what can I expect from his love but a
torment to my soul, and an eternal displeasure? and though by on extraordinary
favor of Heaven, his birth should prove such as I could desire it, what can I
expect in our present condition, whilst we look for death, which threatens us
both within a few days?

I spoke these words simply, not believing that they were overheard, but I was
deceived; for the Unknown of whom we spoke, lay about four paces from us,
within a point of the Rock, from whence he had seen all our actions, and heard
all our discourse. At these last words which he had heard, supposing he had
found the fairest occasion that ever he could hope for in his life to present
and declare himself to me, he rose, and discovered himself to me in such an
unexpected manner, that I cannot yet call to mind that adventure without some
astonishment. The place where I saw him was so near to me, that I could not but
believe immediately that he had heard my discourse, and I was so full of shame
and confusion at it, that my countenance changed color a hundred times in a
moment, and not finding confidence enough in my self to look in the man's face,
who had learned so much of my secret, contrary to my intention, I could do
nothing else but turn my head the other way, and lean it upon Ericia's shoulder.

In the mean time he drew near me with an unsteady pace, and as I understood by
Ericia afterward, with a diffident countenance; he cast himself presently at
my knees, he fixed his eyes upon the ground, which he durst not raise up to my
face, and beginning to speak with such a tone of voice, as, in spite of his
natural boldness discovered the fear and trouble of his Spirit: Madam, said he,
I would not present my self to you in the criminal condition, wherein I now
appear, if in my conscience I did not know my self to be very innocent in
relation to you: I have thoughts of adoration for you which I cannot deny, but
they are so conformable to those which we have for the Gods, that if you were
divested of all that is humane, you could not possibly find in them any real
subject of offense. If silence was necessary to observe religiously the
respect which is due to you, Heaven is my witness, that I have not violated it,
but have been betrayed, contrary to my intention, by those insensible things in
which I imprudently confided; If my rashness displease you, howsoever I would
excuse it, I will inflict that punishment upon it which it deserves, by throwing
again amongst the waves that which you saved from thence, and depriving this
unfortunate man of your sight for ever, whose audacious thoughts have been
capable of meriting your anger: but if they may find any justification in those
things which possibly render them a little less disproportionable than they
have appeared to you, I will take the liberty to tell you, Madam, that if by my
person and my services I can merit any approbation from your goodness, you
will not possibly find any thing in my birth which may make you condemn it, and
that I am born of a blood sufficiently noble to entitle my thoughts to any
thing that a man can aspire to. The unknown expressed himself thus, with a
grace and action which notwithstanding his prostrate humility, did marvailously
authorize his discourse; and in his last words I found something so agreeable
to me, and so satisfactory against the doubt which I had of his birth, that the
trouble which had seized me was partly dessipated, and the resentments I had
against his rashness began insensibly to grow calm.

By little and little I turned my eyes toward his face, and in this submissive
humble condition, I found it so handsome, and so capable of making it self
beloved and of disarming my anger, that when I thought to open my mouth to
condemn his temerity with words of rigor, my heart could never consent to it,
but stifled in my mouth the discourse I intended. I turned away my eyes once
more from his face, to recall a resolution which this sight did too strongly
oppose, and I began to examine my self, and study what discourse to make to
reconcile my duty with my inclination, or to comply with my inclination without
offending against my duty. I know not whether my silence and confused action
did embolden him, but after he had waited a while for my answer, seeing that I
opened not my mouth to reply: I see very well, said he, that my rashness is
condemned, and it is reasonable that I should expiate the offense I have done
you with that life which I owe to your goodness, I will willingly sacrifice it
on that score, and all the regret I can have in so doing, will be, that in
parting only with my life, I shall part with nothing that is mine for the
reparation of my crime. Command me, Madam, to restore back again to the Sea,
that which by a secret order of Heaven, it threw at your feet, or command me to
take out of the world this object of your resentment by any other way that is
capable of giving you satisfastion: and if you find me slow in obeying you,
judge, as you may have reason to do, that I have undertaken to serve you with a
courage too low for so high an enterprise, or if Heaven, which has subjected
me to you by so uncommon a way, stirs up your pity in my favor, and disposes
you to suffer my adorations, as it suffers them its self, do not oppose those
pityful inspirations, and look with a gentle eye upon the most religious and
submissive slave that ever your divine beauties could make conquest of. Whilst
he was pronouncing these last words, I had a little recomposed my self, but not
so much neither but that there remained enough disorder and confusion in my
soul to hinder me from forming any rational discourse. I turned my self a
little toward him, and seeing him in that submissive posture, which he had
used all the time: And who art thou, said I, that come to assault my heart
with such arms as oblige me to look upon thee as my enemy, and one who in a
place, and a condition where, and when we expect nothing but death,
endeavourest to trouble the tranquillity of my last days? What is thy thought,
what are thy hopes, what is it thou offerest me, and what is it thou desire
of me? I offer you, replied the unknown, I offer you a heart that was never
offered to any but your self, and I sacrifice unto you the most innocent
thoughts that ever any mind conceived; I only desire you to allow of this
respectful passion which fixes me at your feet for that short time of my life
which yet remains, the fear of approaching death which you set before my eyes,
has not been able to oppose its birth, and if it please the Gods that our
days receive their period in this place where we seem to be deserted by their
assistance, the glory of these last days, when you have owned them, will be
more dear to me, than all the time of my life I have passed hitherto in a more
composed condition; if I trouble the repose of your days, and make an attempt
upon your heart with arms too weak to make any impression there, impute it to
your own powers which are too strong to find any resistance in a soul that is
susceptible of love, and to the destinies which have acted after an
extraordinary manner in this engagement of my liberty.

Whilst he was speaking in this manner, by little and little I inured my self
to look upon him, and hearken to him, and to a mind prepossessed as mine was,
all things appeared in him so agreeable and so advantageous that I could no
longer retain the motions of my inclination which urged me to let him know that
I did not hate him. In conclusion I could not be so much Mistress over them, but
that I blushed and expressed my self to him in such terms as quickly discovered
my thoughts to him. I see nothing in your person, said I, but what appears to
be worthy of esteem, and your thoughts do not seem so criminal to me, but that
with a little indulgence they might be excused if they were accompanied with
that which ought to authorize them: but two obstacles are in the way, which
should have stifled such thoughts, the danger in which we are, when probably
such a passion as you represent to me could not but have an unseasonable birth,
and my extraction which ought to have extinguished all your hopes, if you be
not of a blood proportionable to your designs. I pronounced these words with
so much shame, that it hindered me from proceeding, but the face of the unknown
was filled in a moment with all the marks of joy, and beginning to speak with
an action full of transport: As for the fear of death, said he, Madam I confess
it has not been powerful enough to blot out of my heart the fair image you
have imprinted there: and as for the consideration of your birth, that has not
extinguished my hopes, because I believed (if I may say so with respect) that
the blood from whence I am descended is not inferior to yours: I will no
longer conceal from you who I am, and if you had given me order, I had
discovered to you sooner a truth, which possibly would have made you find less
crime in my andacious thoughts. I am --

Olympia would have proceeded, when Ericia who stood at the entrance of the
Arbor, to hinder her from being surprised in her discourse, gave notice that
Cornelius was coming, and immediately after, the Princesses saw him approach,
attended upon by diverse of his followers. Olympia presently removed from the
place where she was seated, that she might not be taken for any other than a
slave; both Elisa and Candace received a very sensible displeasure to see her
narration interrupted when their curiosity expected most satisfaction; and they
would have been more troubled at it if they had not hoped to prevail with her
to resume her discourse when they should be freed from Cornelius his company,
and in the mean time; with some marks of discontent they rose up to receive
him. After he had given them the time of the day, and by some expressions of
civility, wherein his looks spoke particularly to Candace, he had signified to
them that the care he had of their repose and divertisement, had held them that
morning in some inquietude, he obliged them to return to their appartments, to
take their repast, the hour being already come. The Princesses could not
contradict him, and taking leave with their eyes of Olympia, who with Ericia
turned another way, they not daring to make any greater demonstration for fear
of discovering her, they marched along with Cornelius through a a spacious Ally
to the stairs by which they had descended into the Garden, and from thence into
the Hall, where their Dinner was prepared.

They were at the end of their repast, when the Praetor had intelligence, that a
body of two or three hundred horse were lately entered into the City, and
presently after he was told it was Agrippa, the worthy Favorite of Caesar, whom
Virtue rather than Fortune had advanced to the highest dignities of the Empire,
who for some affairs that obliged him to it, came to arrive at Alexandria some
days before the Emperor. He was already in the Court of the Palace, when
Cornelius understood that it was he, and he was much troubled that he had not
been informed sooner of his arrival, that he might have gone to meet him, and
render him that which was due to his merit and fortune; He hasted to him with
all the speed he possibly could, but he could not be so nimble, but that he
found him already upon the stairs, followed by a stately retinue of the young
Roman Nobility, whom his virtue and generous humor engaged to his person,
more than his favor. If Agrippa was the chief at Rome, in regard of his great
credit, and the esteem both of the Emperor and people, or at least if
Marcellus did dispute those advantages with him, whom his youth had not as yet
permitted to manage important affairs of State, and to have great commands of
Armies, wherein Agrippa had acquired so high a reputation, Cornelius was
likewise one of the most considerable persons of the Empire, and if he made
Agrippa the most honorable reception that he could devise, Agrippa conversed
with him too, as with a man who was dear to Caesar, and placed in the fairest
dignities. Gallus complained of him at the first for coming in this manner,
without giving him notice of his arrival, and time to receive him, as he ought
to have done, in all respects; and Agrippa, whom his fortune had never infected
with pride, but in all the actions of his life expressed a mavelous modesty,
found fault with his discourse, and told him that he did not desire to be
treated otherwise by him, than as his familiar and ancient friend. Cornelius
having conducted him to the lodging which was appointed for him against the
time when they supposed he would come with the Emperor, caused him to be
served a little after with as much magnificence as could be used: for the small
time there was of making preparation. A little after Agrippa communicated to
him part of the affairs which obliged him to come thither some days before the
Emperors arrival; and after they had passed some hours in this entertainment,
Cornelius acquainted him, how that the only daughter of the King of Parthia,
and inhetrix of that mighty Empire, which only vied power with that of Rome,
was then in Alexandria, and in the Palace in a lodging not far from his: He did
nor make so much mention to him of Candace, believing that her birth was not
answerable to Elisa's, and not desiring to be over lavish in discoursing of a
person in whom he already took so much interest as might make him suspicious of
all things. Agrippa seemed surprised at this news, and after he had meditated a
little upon it, he believed that Augustus would be highly satisfied to see the
only daughter of the powerful Enemy of the Romans refuged in his Court, and
disposed himself to go and give her assurance of the protection she might
expect from Caesar: But if he had this thought out of consideration of her
birth, it was much more strongly grounded in his mind by the discourse which
Cornelius made him of her admirable beauty, which he described to him in such
terms, that Agrippa being moved with an extraordinary curiosity, would no
longer defer the bestowing of a visit upon the Princess. Cornelius sent her
notice of it, and a little after they went together to her chamber, where they
found the Queen of Ethiopia with her, whom the desire of seeing a man so famous
and renowned in the world, had detained there. At the sight of those two
Princesses, Agrippa and those that attended him were all astonished, and though
they had seen in Cleopatra and in Julia such excellencies as could not be
surpassed by any mortal beauty, yet in the delicacy of Elisa's features, and
the Majesty of Candace's lineaments they found some subjects of admiration
which they had not expected.

The Princesses were very well satisfied with Agrippa's presence, and they
found all things in his person conformable to his dignity and reputation; his
proportion was completely handsome, his mind high and gallant, and his age about
three and thirty, or four and thirty years, in which time he had made himself
known to all the world, as well by the great things he did at the battle of
Artium the glory whereof was almost totally due to him, as by a great number of
other signal victories, whereby since the coming of Augustus to the Empire, he
had amply enlarged the extent of it on every side: The report that universally
went of him caused a greater attention in the Princesses, than they would have
had in the condition of their fortune, for a less considerable person: and the
sight of their admirable beauty immediately struck Agrippa with a respect that
is not ordinarily conceived for morral persons. He addressed himself to the
Princess of the Parthians, whom Gallus showed him; and with a discourse full of
civility and sweetness he signified to her that the Emperor would receive with
great joy the occasion of protecting so great and so fair a Princess, and
offered her his own particular services to comfort her in her afflictions, and
to defend her against all her enemies. Elisa answered him with that admirable
grace which accompanied all her actions, and thanked him for his offers with
exression full of acknowledgement.

Notwithstanding the cloud of her mortal sadness, her beauty still preserved
its Empire, and though it languished a little, yet that, in stead of
diminishing its powers, seemed to add new ones to it, by that interest which
affliction is able to form in generous souls. Agrippa made a very remarkable
experiment of it, and that martial spirit which had spent all the years of his
life in warlike employments, without ever submitting himself to the yoke of an
imperious beauty, at the first sight of Elisa, felt an alteration in that
repose and liberty which he had so long preserved: The sparkling eyes of that
Princess threw flames insensibly into his breast, and the charms he found in
her countenance and discourse, did so enchant him, that he continued a long
time as it were quite dazzled and amazed at the meeting with so many miracles.
Though his mind began to be prepossessed, yet that did not hinder him from
observing prodigies in Candace's person, that were not inferior to Elisa's:
And besides the respect he received for so extraordinary a beauty, the
intelligence which Cornelius gave him, that she was born a Princess in
Ethiopia, obliged him to trear her with a great deal of honor. He addressed
himself to Elisa for all that in the greatest part of their conversation, both
because he thought that most was due to the King of Parthia's Daughter, and
because his inclination carried him to it. Cornelius was not displeased at it,
and as his passion made him observe all things wherein he might be interessed,
so he joyfully took notice that Agrippa was more fixed upon Elisa's than
Candace's beauties. He had great reason to be af^raid of a rival so redoutable,
both in respect of his merit, and his power with Ces^r, and in all the Roman
Empire, but the thought of those which mignt have some pretensions to Elisa,
raised a more terrible storm, and more difficult to be calmed in Agrippa's
infant love, than all that ever fortune could have caused till then.

This first interview was spent in offers on Agrippa's part, and in discourses
touching Elisa's affairs, wherein Agrippa began already to take too much
interest, and Cornelius having desired that he would sup with the Princesses,
after their repast he entered again into conversation with Elisa, and found in
her discourse new occasions of being inflamed and farther engaged.

This employment hindered the Princesses from bestowing that evening as they had
resolved, upon the sequel of Olympias narration, and the part which they had
begun to take in her fortune, had caused such an impatience in them to hear the
rest, as made these two men's company unpleasant. Elisa was less troubled at
this passage, than Candace was; for Agrippa's thoughts being as yet unknown to
her, she received no other disquiet or importunity from his sight, than what
her sadness made her find amongst all persons with whom she could expect no
comfort. But Candace was not in the same condition, and Cornelius having a free
opportunity, whilst Agrippa discoursed with Elisa, employed all that time in
giving her assurances of his passion, and desiring of her some testimonies of
acknowledgement. Candace received these discourses with a great deal of
coldness, but yet she* was not willing to break out into any impatience, for
fear of his power to which she saw her self subject, and believing upon the
account of her former adventures, that she might retain his Spirit within the
bounds of respect much better by sweetness of carriage, than by declaring to
him the dis-esteem she had of him. Cornelius being desirous to give her all the
divertisement he could, and to show Agrippa some passetime, whom he highly
esteemed for many reasons, proposed a match of hunting the next day, knowing
how well Agrippa loved that exercise; and they engaged the Princesses to see
the Course of a Stag in the woods near Alexandria. They could very well have
omitted any such diversion, but they could not refuse to comply with such
persons in so small a matter, and therefore they promised, that seeing they
desired it, they would bear them company.

A little while after seeing it grew very late, Agrippa bad them good night,
and Cornelius having reconducted Candace to her chamber, had some farther
discourse with her concerning his vehement passion, which she received with
some trouble, but so, as the present necessity of her condition obliged her to
do.

Elisa being alone in her chamber, the Princess Olympia entered presently
after, and no body being with her who was not acquainted with the truth, Elisa
made no difficulty to receive her and caresse her according to the knowledge
she had of her condition, and Olympia willingly forgot the garb of a Slave to
receive her endearements, and to return them with that equality, which the
small difference between their births permitted. Elisa's caresses were not such
as they would have been at another time, when she was not so much dejected by
her mortal sadness, but they were not the less obliging for being the less
spriteful: an Olympia knew very well that she was in a condition too full of
grief to express her resentments by over-passionate demonstrations: My dear
Princess, said Elisa to her, since my last disaster I have not been so sensible
of any displeasure, as of that which I received when your discourse was
interrupted, and I was at that time so much interessed in your fortune, that my
fresh and pressing grief was allayed by that means: though it be late enough to
go to rest, yet I should not let you be at quiet before I was acquainted with
the remainder of your story, if the fair Princess, to whom you have declared,
as well as to my self, the beginning of your life, had not the same curiosity,
and ought not to be present, as well as I, at your relation. The fear I should
have of displeasing her, in desiring to prevent her in the knowledge of a thing,
wherein, I assure my self, that she takes the same interest that I do, or of
creating you the trouble to repeat the same discourse twice, makes me suspend
mycuriosity till to morrow at our return from the Hunting match, to which they
have engaged us, at which time I hope you will have the goodness to finish a
discourse which I as greedily hearken to as if it concerned my own self. It
shall be done, answered Olympia, whenever you desire, and as long as I live,
you shall have an absolute power over a Princess, who is not so much your
Slave in regard of her fortune, as of her inclination. This effect of your
fortune, replied Elisa, does not hinder me from esteeming you as my sister, and
I will endeavor, by rendering for the future what is due to a Princess of your
quality, to repair the faults which my error made me to commit. As for this
condition of a Slave, which conceals you from the knowledge of those persons
that see you, I suppose you may easily get out of it, and though you should not
discover your self to Cornelius or to Caesar, who upon the declaration of your
birth would without doubt restore you to the condition wherein you ought to be,
I know a person that has credit enough with Cornelius to obtain your liberty
of him, whenever you shall please to demand it, without making you known,
contrary to the intention which perhaps you have to conceal your self for a
longer time. It Is true, said Olympia, I am obliged to continue a while longer
in this condition because of my affairs, and nothing urges me yet to desire my
liberty the loss whereof I shall support with patience, as long as I shall
have the happiness to be near you.

With these words the two Princesses embraced each other with a great deal of
affection and tenderness, and sitting down both upon Elisa's bed, that Princess
made a brief relation to Olympia of those particulars of her life which she was
ignorant of. The fair Slave had been made acquainted with what the Princess had
related to Cornelius, but she learned a great deal more from Elisa's mouth, who
confessed to her the love she bare to the great and unfortunate Artaban, which
she had not discovered to Corneli^s, nor to any person in whom she could not
repose an absolute confidence. Olympia admired at the grand adventures which
till then were not come to her knowledge, and her grief was augmented when she
understood the just occasion which Elisa had to afflict her self for the loss
of so great a man, and one whom she had so dearly loved. Part of the night
being spent in their converse together, Elisa desired Olympia to lodge with
her, instead of returning to a bed and a chamber unworthy of her, and pressed
her to it very earnestly, but the Princess of Th^ace would by no means consent
to it, telling her that that would be enough to discover her without any
necessity, and that being used to the place which was assigned to her, her
lodging was not inconvenient. Elisa not being able to prevail upon her
resolution for that night, permitted her to depart the chamber, and going to
bed, she presently after composed her self to sleep, as well as her cruel grief
could possibly suffer her.

But Agrippa passed this night in a different manner from all the nights he had
ever passed in his life, and the beauty of Elisa had wrought that upon his
Spirit in one day, which a less extraordinary one would not have done in whole
years, and that which had not been done in so many years by all the Roman
beauties, and so many others of the highest reputation, amongst whom he had
insensibly spent his life. The image of that admirable Princess, in whom grief
had appeared as in its Throne, and that (...) a languishing and dejected
condition had preser^^d vigor and force enough to conquer the proudest liberty,
had penetrated that martial Spirit, with such a power as presently put all into
a flame, and Agrippa no sooner reflected upon what he had seen that fatal day,
but he found himself to be amo^ous and all on fire. He could hardly at first
digest this change of his condition, and reviewing his whole life with some
disdain as to what was past, and with some confusion as to the present, What is
the matter, Agrippa, said he, and by what misfortune do thou so suddenly
permit trouble and disorder to enter into thy soul? Have thou seen the Emilias,
the Octavias, the Julias, and the Cleopatras, without endangering thy liberty,
and will thou yield up thy self at the first sight of a young strange maid?
Shall that courage which hitherto had found no employment capable to engage it
but in war and the government of the Empire, submit it self to a beauty in one
day, at one single view? Ah! my heart what weakness will thine be accounted, if
thou give up thy arms with so little resistance? What will the Romans say,
who have seen thee at the head of their troops in those famous combats, which
have so successefully decided the Empire of the Universe? And what will those
famous beauties say who possess the highest ranks in the world amongst those of
their sex, if thou suffer thy ^el^ to be overthrown by one single look of
the daughter of a barbarous King, the daughter of the cruel enemy of the
Romans? These were his first discourses, by which he thought in some sort to
oppose the birth of his love: but a little after insensibly yielding to its
force: But what do thou find, went he on, so strange in this rancounter? Have
thou an heart of stone, or brass? have thou a more warlike soul than Alexander,
than the great Julius Caesar, or so many others, who amongst the combats wherein
they passed their lives, have suffered themselves to be vanquished by the power
of beauty? or do thou find either by reason or example that love and valor
are incompatible? Have those famous beauties from which thou have defended thy
self, or rather to whose Empire thou wast not destined, any thing more great
and high than this young beauty, to which, it seems, thou art ashamed to
submit? Is that of the Julias and Cleopatras more accomplished, or more
admirable than Elisa's? Are the graces which ought to accompany beauty, with
greater advantages in those Princesses, than in the Princess of the Parthians?
And as for birth, can a higher be looked for even in Cesar's family, or rather
is there any blood in the world that can compare in Nobleness with that of the
Arsacidae? No Agrippa, continued he, it will be no offense in thee to love this
Divine Princess, and if thou have any thing to fear in doing so, it must be
torments, it must be sufferings, perhaps to no purpose: It Is, it may be, an
engagement in the Princesse's Spirit, which will render her insensible of thy
love, and not the reproach and shame of having submitted to the fairest yoke
that ever fortune could impose upon thee: Rather fear that this Princess being
born with an Arsacian heart, and an Enemy of the Roman name (though the
necessity of her affairs compells her to seek for Sanctuary amongst the Romans)
hates thee as a Roman, and disdains thee as one born of an inferior blood to
hers, though by the favor of Caesar thou art in a condition not to envy Kings,
but see a great number of them every day below thee. That power which thou
have acquired either by thy merit or thy fortune, will possibly be less
considerable to her than a long series of Royal Ancestors, and besides Elisa is
the only daughter of Phraates, and Heir of the Empire of the Parthians, who
will never suffer that the dominion of their Country should fall into the hands
of a stranger, and of a Roman. This is the truth, Agrippa, and where thou
seek excuses for thy passion, thou find difficulties great enough to
divert thee from it, if thou leavest reason any command over thy Spirit. This
consideration kept him a while irresolute, and at a stand, but a little after
encouraging himself against this obstacle, which seemed to have terrified him:
It Is no matter, added he, if Elisa be the daughter of our enemies, if Elisa be
the heir of a Kingdom which will hardly submit to a Roman, that is not capable
of repulsing such a courage as mine, and if by my love and services I can gain
Elisa's inclinations, whilst she continues in the Roman territories, and whilst
she flies the persecutions of her Father, the power of Caesar, and of Rome, who
will take up arms for my sake, will possibly do the rest; and though Caesar
should make war upon the Parthians in my quarrel, and to preserve the rights of
their Princess, he will make no new Enemies to the Romans, but will only
continue what his predecessors have begun, and do that to which he ought to be
animated by the blood of so many Romans, who under Crassus and Anthony found
their graves in Parthia. In this manner Agrippa encouraged himself in his
resolution to love Elisa, and suffering himself to be flattered by his passion,
he slightly passed over some difficulties, which in another condition he would
have taken more notice of. Sleep had hardly closed his eyes when the day
appeared, and of all the time he continued in his bed, he bestowed not one hour
upon his repose.

As soon as Elisa was ready, she went into Candace's Chambmer, who that day was
a little more drousie than she, and was still in bed. Elisa coming to her with
a countenance that appeared to Candace not so sad as ordinarily it was: What,
Madam, said she, are you so drow sie upon a Hunting day, and will you get up
last to go to a meeting upon which you engaged* so willingly last night? I
have nothing to catch to day, answered the Queen with a smile, but you to whom
new preys are destined, have reason to be up with the first to go to the Chase.
I understand not your discourse, replied the sad Elisa, and I do so little
dream of taking preys, that if I had not been awakened by other cares, I should
have been still profoundly asleep. I am much deceived for all that, added
Candace, if you have not begun already* and all my conjectures are false, if
you have not laid a strong foundation of love in Agrippa's soul. It Is for such
beauties as yours, replied the Princess, to work such sudden effects, and by
that which you have produced in a moment in Cornelius his heart, you make this
judgment of a power much inferior to yours. I could easily convince you,
answered Candace if I would, in a discourse which your modesty prompts you to
make against truth and reason. But not to enter into that dispute with you, I
will tell you that in my opinion you are not indifferent to Agrippa, and if you
do not take that prey to day, 'twill only be because you did it yesterday. If
that should happen to me, said the Princess of the Parthians, seating her self
upon the Beds-side with a sadder countenance than before, or if it be befallen
me, it is much against my design, and I shall attribute that conquest, which you
twit me with already, to my misfortune only, rather than to this beauty, which
is not capable of making it self beloved by such a person as Agrippa. It Is the
knowledge I have of its admirable, power, replied the Queen, that has so
strongly confirmed me in my suspicions, and I do not think it strange, that
this man, of what humor soever he be, should give you that in one day, which,
if I were in his place, I should give you in a moment. I would very willingly,
answered Elia, stretching out her arms to the Queen, produce that effect in
you, if it were possible for me, and you could not make more haste to love me,
than I did to give my self wholly to you: but from Agrippa, or all men living
besides, I desire no other thoughts but what compassion may inspire them with
toward unfortunate persons. Your desire is not necessary, said the fair Queeny
to gain you hearts less susceptible of love, than Agrippa's is, and ^ou will
hardly imprint pity only in all souls that will be capable of another passion.
Ah! my fair Queen, added the Princess with a gesture all composed of charms,
you make your self sport with a miserable creature, and you derogate from your
own goodness by this cruel raillery, at a time when you know very well it is not
seasonable for me; rather let Agrippa follow the destiny of Cornelius, and do
not put that upon me which is your due, which I will not dispute with you. If
Agrippa has applied himself to me with a little more assiduity than to you,
it is because he thought there was more due to my birth which he knew, than to
yours which he was ignorant of: but if the equality of our conditions were
known to him, do not you believe that the difference he would put between us
could be to my advantage. I yield to you in all things, My fair Princess, said
Candace embracing her, and I freely give you Cornelius and all the men in the
world besides, except my dear Cesario, whom you would not take from me, and
whom, it may be, my cruel destiny has already deprived me of.

This thought stopped her short, and took away all desire of pursuing her
raillery with Elisa; and after she had expressed her resentments by some sighs,
she rose out of her bed, and caused her self to be made ready: and using at
that time but little art in her dress and habit, she was quickly in a
condition to go out of her chamber, and as soon as they knew that the two
Princesses might be seen, Agrippa and Cornelius came to give them good morrow.
Candace presently observed something in Agrippa's countenance, that partly
confirmed her suspicions, and she saw that in accosting Elisa he changed
color, he appeared a little troubled, and lost some part of his natural
boldness. Elisa, upon Candace's discourse, took some notice, but what she took
notice of was with a great deal of displeasure, as foreseeing great crosses of
her quiet in this man's love, for the little time her grief would suffer her to
live. He accosted her with all the respect and submission that could be, and
having asked her if she had rested well that night: I rested as I use to do,
answered the Princess; and the nights hence forward, upon my account are not so
much destined to repose as to torment, and the remembrance of my mis fortunes.
It Is true, replied Agrippa, that when the mind is disturbed by a violent
passion, the body does not easily find repose, and it is not long since I had
experience of it, having passed a night in such thoughts and such disquiets as
I never was sensible of before. It would be hard, said the Princess but that
such a person as you, employed in the management of the most important affairs
in the world, should have some interruption in his sleep, and the cares you
take for the government of the Empire are pressing enough, so as not to leave
always an absolute quiet in your mind. The government of the Empire, replied
Agrippa, is in such hands as are able to govern the whole earth, without having
any need of the assistance of my cares, and 'twas not the thought of the
Commonwealths affairs, that interrupted my sleep that night, I mentioned to
you, but the first motions of a passion, to which my Spirit had never before
been subject, and which in its very birth had strength enough to make me suffer
that in one nights space, which possibly I should not have suffered in many
years.

As he spoke these words, Candace cast a look upon the Princess, to let her
understand that she was not deceived in her conjecture, and Elisa who had
received some impression of it by the Queens discourse, no sooner observed her
action in the close of Agrippa's words, but she began to be of her mind: and
this opinion beginning to find room in her Spirit, she remained much troubled
and confounded: yet she would not continue without an answer, for fear that
Agrippa should judge by her astonishment and silence, that she began to know a
thing, which she was resolved to be always ignorant of, and endeavoring to
diss^pate that emotion, which might have been taken notice of in her
countenance: Of all the passions, said she, which might trouble your repose, I
am sensible of none but grief, and by the effects which that produces upon me,
I very easily comprehend what the others may make a mind endure, when it is
assaulted by them. Grief* replied Agrippa, is certainly the passion which makes
the most cruel impressions upon the mind, or to speak more properly, it is only
by the mo^ions of joy and grief that we are made sensible of the other
passions: yea it seems that the effects of all the rest are confounded to lead
us to these two; Love produces fear in our Spirits only* to bring us to grief,
and it causes hope only to entertain us with joy, desire is only formed by the
hope of accomplishment, and the mind does not dispose it self to joy, but that
the fear of bad success opens a passage for grief: in jealousy all the
effects conduce to sorrow, and in hatred, if the memory of the injuries which
have caused it entertains grief, the hope of revenge may be an occasion of joy:
Hope and fear do only serve the rest to bestow their effects either upon joy or
grief, and they seem to me to be nothing of themselves but as they minister to
joy or grief: All things finally, if you except a few that are indifferent,
which are not so much as taken notice of, incline our Spirits either to joy or
grief, or to speak more plainly, our whole life is absolutely rouled upon the
wheels of these two passions, seeing it is wholly composed of good and evil,
which are their objects. Alas! interrupted the Princess, how unequally is my
life divided between joy and grief, and how many days have I spent in grief,
in comparison of the few moments which have afforded me any joy? It may be,
replied Agrippa, that the accidents of your life have furnished you with more
matter of grief, than joy, and that in your fortune the evil has exceeded the
good, but though they should have been equally divided, I will tell you, Madam,
that evil (to which we have a natural repugnance, or rather which of it self is
contrary to our nature) is otherwise felt and otherwise observed than good is,
which seems to be essential and conformable to us, and born in us, and
consequently not so capable of making us sensible of it but by privation: this
is easily perceived in the quietness of the mind, the health of the body, and
the abundance of riches, which are not felt like unto inquietudes* sicknesses
and poverty; for when these pinch us, then we perceive there was good in their
contraries, which we hardly took notice of, when we had them in possession.

Agrippa would have spoken more to this purpose, and possibly from this general
discourse, he would have passed to particulars, finding an object in Elisa's
presence that encouraged and inflamed him more and more, if Cornelius had not
interrupted him to lead the Princesses to dinner which staid for them, and was
hastened a few hours, that they might the longer enjoy the pleasure of
hunting: They took their repast together, and they had no sooner made an end of
it, but they went down into the Court of the Palace, where all things were
ready for that days divertisement. The Princesses mounted into a light
Chariot, drawn by six white Horses, open before and upon the sides, and covered
only behind as much as was needful to shade the Princesses from the beams of
the Sun, without hindering them from discerning all the objects in the fields.
They were seated together, and Clitie. and Cephisa at their feet without any
other company. Agrippa and Cornelius being mounted upon two stately Horses,
marched by the Chariot, each as his inclination lead him, the persons of their
train fol-Iowed them in a very handsome equipage, and the Hunters with all
their company attended at one of the City gates. Agrippa and Cornelius were in
a Hunting garb, but they had affected more neatness and elegancy than they were
wont to make use of in their ordinary habit, and Agrippa whose dawning passion
had quite metamorpholed him in a days space, out of a particular care, had
forgot nothing that might set off his good parts: The two Princesses would not
add any thing to their apparel, and had excused themselves upon the account of
their sadness, and the condition of their fortune, for not accepting of those
habits which Cornelius had sent them that morning to accouter themselves
conformably to that days exercise. The two Lovers marching by the side of the
two Princesses all the way they had to go to the place where the Chase was to
begin, entertained them with some constraint; Agrippa not daring so suddenly
to discover his thoughts to a Princess whose birth and Majesty obliged him to a
more respectful silence, and Cornelius not having the opportunity before Elisa
and Agrippa, to pursue the discourse, whereof the fair Queen of Ethiopia had
heard the beginning with an ill will. Their inquietude might be read in each of
their countenances, and if Candace knew too much already of Cornelius his
passion, Elisa began to suspect as much of Agrippa's as grieved her to the very
heart.

When they were come to the Hunters Rendevous, which was at the entrance of the
wood, a shril noise of horns, and the cry of the Dogs, and the voices of the
Hunters, made the shore of Alexandria ring again for diverse furlongs, and they
found all things as ready as they could wish for their divertisement, by the
good order that Cornelius had taken. They presently put up the Stag before the
Dogs, and the Princesses had not only their part in the beginning of the
pleasure, but the wood being divided into an infinite number of ways, so that
their Chariot might go almost any way, the greatest part of that which passed
in the Chase was in their sight. Agrippa and Cornelius laying aside that day
the earnest inclination they had for that exercise, kept themselves almost all
the while close by the Ladies, and the Huntsmen to whom they committed that
care at that time, served their intention so well, and turned the Stag so
handsomely, that he was brought to a bay within sight of the Princesses and
almost at their feet, Agrippa killed him with his Sword.

They had spent part of the day in this divertisement, and the Sun began to
decline, when the Princesses passing along one of the ways, and their two
lovers at the side of the Chariot, they saw a Horse without a Master, that
leaping and bounding passed just by them, and drew near to the Chariot Horses.
He was all bloody by reason of a wound he had in his flank, and the blood
trickled down upon the grass as he went along: Cornelius seeing him in this
condition, believed in all probability that his Master might be killed, and
that there had been some combat near that place: and as his charge obliged him
carefully to inform himself of the business, and to remedy the disorders that
arrived in Egypt, he parted from Candace, and galloped toward the place whence
he saw the horse come. Candace conceiving with her self, that in all adventures
her Cesario had some interest, and that in all combats where there was blood
shed, her beloved Prince was in some danger, desired that the Chariot might
take the same way, and when they knew her mind they ^^^ned the heads of the
horses thitherward, and Agrippa followed them with all the company out of
complacency and curiosity: but because Cornelius, being carried on by a greater
interest, had put on his horse with greater speed, he got a great way before
the troup, and he had not gone far into the Wood, but he saw more horses
feeding upon the fresh grass at liberty, and a few paces thence a great deal of
blood shed, and seven or eight bodies of men completely armed lying dead upon
the Turf. The Praetor stopped at this spectacle, and after he had viewed the
dead, and the great wounds which had put them into that condition, with
surprise and astonishment, he turned his eyes every way, to inform himself
concerning this adventure, and commanded some of his retinue to disarm the
faces of these men, to s^e if there was any amongst them that had so much life
left as to declare the truth: Two of his men were already employed in that
office, when he saw a man come out from between the trees, who drawing near him
with an assured countenance: Sir, said he, all these men which you see deprived
of life, lest it by the hand of a single man on foot, and without any other
arms but his Sword: they have been punished for their crime by a blow of
Justice reached from Heaven, and one single man has performed the combat,
whereof you see the bloody marks. The victory and the field were his, but he
could not hinder by the admirable effects of his valor, but that two great
Princesses, for whose defense he fought, were carried away by the companions of
those whom he has slain: I learned the truth of it just now from one of these
men, who died here in my presence when I saw you appear. Gallus was astonished
at this discourse, as well in regard of what he understood concerning the man's
valor, as in respect of the carrying away of the Princesses, whose arrival in
the Countries under his government he had not heard of, and desiring to be
farther informed: And who, said he, are the Princesses who were carried away,
and the valiant man that so generously defended them, and what are they that
carried them away? The two Princesses, replied the man, are the Princess
Cleopatra, and the Princess Artemisa, Sister to the King of Armenia, he which
defended them is unknown* both to me and those he fought against, they that
carried them away are Armenians, who did this violence in this Country by their
Kings command; this is all I could learn from one of these men, who did not
live long enough to tell me any more. What, ye good Gods! cried the Praetor, is
the Princess Cleopatra, who was thought to have suffered shipwreck, lately
carried away, and are not you abused by the discourse that has been made you?
As for what relates to the Princesses, added the man, I can certainly assure
you of it, I saw them with my eyes, I know them very well, and I have continued
with them ever since yesterday, I would likewise have been farther informed,
and have known the place whither the barbarians carried them: but, Sir, trouble
your self no farther with me, who am not able to give you any more ample
instruction, but hasten to the assistance of the fairest Princesses in the
world, seeing Heaven has given you so fair an occasion. The man finished his
discourse in this manner, and was already gone from Cornelius, who being very
much surprised with so unexpected an accident, was preparing to hasten to
Cleopatra's assistance, when the two Princesses in their Chariot, and Agrippa
not far from them, arrived at the place. They were affrighted at the first of
the sight of the dead bodies, and Cornelius having given them an account in a
few words of what he had learned from the man's mouth, strongly moved Candace
and Agrippa upon Cleopatra's interest; Agrippa as a friend of that Princesses,
and of all her family, and Candace as one obliged by a great renderness to all
Cesarios kindred. Ah, Sir, said she, to Cornelius presently, if it be the will
of the Gods that Cleopatra, that Princess of whom you your self have made me so
advantageous a relation, be not perished in the waves, do not suffer her to be
without succor in those places where you have so much authority. There was no
need of saying any more to a man, to whom the occasions of pleasing Candace
were as dear as the obligations of his charge, neither was she in a condition
to make him any longer discourse, having cast her eyes upon the man who had
spoken to Cornelius, and whom, cross the trees, amongst which he retired
himself, she thought to be Eteocles the Governor of her well-beloved Prince.
She jogged Clitie with her knee, who sat at her feet, and laying her head to
her ear: Look Clitie, said she, and observe if that man of whom Cornelius has
had all his intelligence, and whom thou see retiring a great pace amongst the
trees, be not Eteocles. Clitie raised up her head at the Queens desire, but
though she saw the man, she saw nothing but his backside, and observed only
that he was of Eteocles his pitch, and had such clothes as Eteocles wore that
day they parted. The fair Queen was not quite free from the emotion which his
^ight caused, when Cornelius approaching to her, to the Princess Elisa, and to
Agrippa, desired permission of them that he might acquit himself of his duty in
pursuing Cleopatra's ravishers, and departed with some of his men, leaving a
good number of the rest to reconduct them into the City.

Agrippa was already sufficiently engaged to Elisa, not to stir from her upon a
slight occasion, but the respect he had for all Cleopatra's family, and for his
own honor, which obliged him to succor the oppressed, being powerful enough
to make him offer this violence to his inclinations, he took his leave of the
Princess to go with Cornelius. Had it been for persons of less importance than
Cleopatra and the Princess of Armenia, the Praetor would have been contented, in
relation to the duty of his charge, to have sent some of his men to their
assistance: but for Princesses of that confideration, he believed that he ought
to go in person, and Agrippa, though Cornelius with words full of civility and
respect end^avoured to divert him from the trouble, did too much esteem
Cleopatra's birth and person, to neglect this occasion of going to render her
that which was due to her from all virtuous persons. They which staid with the
Princesses, who were still above twenty horse, some belonging to Agrippa, and
some to Gallus, returned back with them upon the way to Alexandria, and Candace
was satisfied with nothing more, than that she conceived that to be the way
which the man went which she took for Eteocles. She was so much moved at this
adventure, that she could not for a long time pronounce one word; and after
that she had a little recomposed her self, she spoke only to Elisa. My
Princess, if you knew* what I have seen, you would bear a part in the
astonishment which you may observe in my countenance: I do not think it
strange, answered Elisa, that you should be a little troubled at the sight of
these dead men which we have seen, and if my grief had not rendered me
insensible or stupid as it were, I could not have beheld this spectacle without
amazement and terror: But I did not think that besides the compassion and the
horror, which this sight might move in persons of our sex, you had any
particular occasion of astonishment. Besides that which is common to us both,
replied Candace, I have something that concerns only my self, and since I do
not desire to conceal any thing from you, I will tell you, that the man, which
it may be you saw, and from whom Cornelius received his intelligence, if I be
not the most deceived person in the world, is Eteocles, Cesario's Governor, of
whom I have made you a long mention in my discourse, and whom I left some days
ago with that Prince; this makes me believe that he himself may be somewhere
near at hand, and Eteocles would not have staid so long here* if he were not
attending upon him. I believe it as well as you, replied Elisa, and I hope this
adventure will prove successful, seeing all probabilities are favorable. Ah
my dear Caesar, added the fair Queen, lifting up her eyes to heaven with a very
passionate action, what can hide thee from my eyes, what can deprive my heart
of the knowledge of thy retreat?

She spoke in this manner, and Elisa rejoiced with her in the hopes she saw her
conceive; when by the road which the Chariot, and those which guarded it
followed, they drew near to a very fair house, which was at the outside of the
wood, by which they must needs pass in their return to Alexandria. The Chariot
with all the company passed along the brink of a little Moat, which encompassed
the house, and as the Queen by reason of her amorous inquietude, turned her
eyes every way to try if she could see Eteocles, she cast them upon one of the
windows of the house, where immediately she spied a man leaning; his Head and
shoulders appeared without the window, and as much of his body as was seen was
almost naked, and in the condition of a person rising out of his bed; his head
was bound about with a linen cloth, under which his long hair, more nearly
approaching in color to fair, than black, fell carelessly upon his shoulders.
His countenance was very pale, like one that had been long sick but what change
soever we might have received, and what distauce soever there might be from the
window to the Chariot, and how speedy soever the pace of the Horses was which
drew the Chariot, all this could not hinder the Queen of Eshiopi^ from
observing in that face some features very like to Cesario's and conceiting with
her self, either according to the Idea she had of it in her Spirit, or
according to the truth, that it was Cesario himself. If she kept her self from
breaking out into exclamations at this sight, it was not so much by the power
she had over her self, as by the force of her astonishment, which tying up her
tongue, and all the functions of the body, by which the resentments of the soul
might be expressed, left her immovable in the Chariot, only holding her eyes
turned toward the dear object of her heart as long as she had the liberty to
see him. Before that she could come again to her self, the Chariot was gone so
far from the house, that though she should have put her head out of the boot,
and her self into such a posture that she might look still toward that which
she left behind her, the object was too far off to be any longer discerned. She
came to her self, as out of a profound sleep, and signified the return of her
spirits by a great sigh, which Elisa observed, and having taken notice of her
action, the interest she took in it making her unquiet, she pulled her by the
arm: Madam, said she, What is the news, have you seen Eteocles again, or any
thing that confirms you in your hopes or destroys that them? Ah! Madam, replied
Candace, embracing her, and whispering in her ear, that she might not be heard
by those that marched behind the Chariot, I have seen all that I could desire
to see, and I would it had pleased the Gods that you had seen Artaban as sure
as I saw Cesario from a window of that house. Is it possible, answered Elisa,
and are you not deceived? No certainly, added Candace, it is hard if I should be
deceived by an Image, which I carry eternally in my heart, I have seen my dear
Prince himself, whose features are too familiar to me, for to be mistaken by me
and I do not account it strange that his countenance is grown pale, because of
the wounds which probably he received in the combat wherein I left him engaged
some days ago. The Gods be praised for it, said Elisa to the fair Queen,
rendering her her caresses, and though they have not the same goodness for me, I
beg of them for you with all my heart that satisfaction which they refuse me.
It Is certain, replied Candace that I now receive from them the greatest favor
that ever I could desire of them, and since I am assured of my Cesario's life,
all my other losses, and all my other displeasures are incapable of making any
impression upon me: I can not at present follow the impetuosity of my
affection, which would carry me to this dear house, where all my happiness is
enclosed, and I have not sufficient power over these men which accompany us,
nor confidence enough in them to entreat them to conduct me back to my dear
Caesar, since without doubt I should put his life into a very manifest danger,
if I should discover his abode in this Country to these persons, who ought to
be all suspected by me; but since I know that he is alive, and in that house,
it is so near to Alexandria, that I may hope by the assistance of the Gods, and
my own invention, to find some means to give him intelligence of me.

These words of the Queen were followed by some others, in which* she testified
to Elisa the satisfaction of her Soul for that happy accident, and the fair
Princess of the Parthians, though she deeply sighed for her own misfortunes,
was more sensible of the Queen's contentment, than in all probability she could
be in the sad condition of her Soul. She expressed as much in words full of
tenderness and sweetness, to which the fair Queen replied with prayers and
vows to Heaven that the same happiness might befall her, and this conversation
full of the expressions of mutual affection, ended not till they arrived at the
City, where they entered not long after, just when the Night began to spread her
black Mantle over the Earth.

Hymen's Praeludia: OR, LOVE'S Masterpiece.
PART 6. LIB. 3.
ARGUMENT.
Agrippa following the pursuit of Cleopatra's ravishers loses all his company,
and himself in a wood, where he meets with Coriolanus on foot. He lends him his
horse to go in search of his Princess, and, it being dark, he takes up his
lodging under a tree. There he hears the amorous complaints of Philadelph, who
had wandered thither in search of Delia, and (...) him part from thence at the
break of day follows him at a distance. Philadelph lights upon two women
asleep, and conjecturing one of them to be Delia, as he is going to make a more
perfect discovery, he is interrupted by one who calls him to the combat. They
fight and are parted by Agrippa and the Lady who proves to be Delia indeed. The
mutual joy of Philadelph and Delia at this unexpecting meeting. Agrippa invites
them to Alexandria. At their e^^^ance there Olympia espies the fair Stranger,
who had fought with Philadelph, and falls into a swoon, and after that into a
Fever. She is visited by Elisa and Candace, who endeavor to comfort her, and
after a while they leave her to her repose.

IN the mean time Agrippa and Cornelius making haste to the assistance of
Cleopatra and Artemisa, had crossed a great part of the Wood without finding
any person that could give them any intelligence, they had observed the track
of the Horses as exactly as they could, and being come to a place where it
equally parted into two ways; that their pursuit might be with the greater
hope of success, they resolved to divide themselves, and Cornelius with his
men taking the way upon the left hand, Agrippa with his party, went to the
right, after they had promised each other mutually to meet the next night in
Alexandria, if they were not detained by some great impediment.

Agrippa marched a great while along the Road which he had taken, turning his
eyes and ears every way. The night was already near at hand, when he thought he
heard a great noise in a part of the wood which he had left upon his left hand,
this opinion made him stop a while to observe the place from whence it came,
and when he thought he had sufficiently discerned it, he turned his horse that
way at full speed. He crossed a great deal of ground in a small time, but
whether it was that he had mistaken the place where the noise was made, or that
the persons which had made it, were gone before he came, he sought and looked
about every way to no purpose, neither could he find any body to direct him.
This displeasure did not befall him alone; for being mounted upon one of the
fleetest Horses in the world, his men that spurred after him could not keep
pace with him, and in a small time they lost him amongst the trees, which
deprived them of his sight, so that when he turned that way where he thought
they were, he found himself alone, and this chanced to be just as daylight
failed, and the darkness began to cover the earth. He stayed a while upon the
place in expectation of them, and called them diverse times with a loud voice,
but all in vain; for in the error whereinto the swiftness of their course had
lead them, they had taken another way quite different from his, after they had
lost the view of him. This accident did much displease him, seeing himself
alone, in the dark, and in a Country where he was unacquainted, and
consequently deprived of all means of rendering Cleopatra those assistances that
were due to her, and after he had continued a while uncertain what to do, he
resolved at last to seek them out, and marched amongst the trees at all
adventures, calling them ever now and then as loud as possibly he could: but
because the night was not very clear, and he was quite out of all the ways, he
wandered more and more up and down the wood, and knew not which way to go,
either to find his men, or to return to Alexandria. Any other soul but his
would have been troubled with melancholy at this petty accident, but he was
only displeased that he had succeeded no better in the design of doing a good
action, and moderating his passion by the greatness of his courage, he
continued marching at adventure whither his fortune would guide him, supposing
that when he was out of the wood, it would not be difficult for him to find the
way to Alexandria.

In the mean time as he called out often to make himself heard by his men if it
were possible, a man which wandered, as he did, at those hours in the wood,
being drawn thither by his voice, drew near the place where he was, and when
he was at a distance that Agrippa might hear him: What art then, said he, thou
which make the woods to Echo with thy exclamations at a time when all things
else are buried in silence? He that spoke these words was on foot, and Agrippa
by reason of the darkness, spying him only a little amongst the trees, and
coming nearer to him: "But who art thou thy self, said he, thou which demandest
who I am, and who, as well as my self, do take this solitary walk during the
shadows of the night? I am, replied the man, a miserable creature abandoned by
the Gods, and by fortune, a man to whom thou would do a pleasure in killing
of him, or in furnishing him with any means to get out of the misfortunes into
which he is fallen. Hearing these words, which the unknown accompanied with
some sobs, Agrippa believed that this voice was not absolutely unknown to him,
but seeing little appearance in the Idea which presented it self to him, he
would not ground any thing upon it, but the better to inform himself: Thou must
needs be, answered he, very much afflicted, seeing thou desire death, to
which we are not wont to have recourse but only in the extremity of misery: and
in stead of being a means of that I would more willingly bestow some ease upon
thy grief, if the opportunity of doing it were in my power. Thou speak like
a generous person, added the unknown, and if I be not deceived, thy voice
resembles a man's who is likewise generous enough to administer consolation to
the miserable in their distress. I know not, replied Agrippa, whether thou
find any resemblance in my voice to any person that is known to thee: but
since thou have begun to speak to me, I have thought the sound of thine to be
so like a man's with whom I have had long acquaintance, and whom I very much
esteemed, that if there were any probability that he might be in this Country
at the hour and in the condition I meet thee, I should certainly have taken
thee for the same man: For my part I have no intention to conceal my self, and
I have no enemies that can oblige me to deny that I am Agrippa.

Upon this discovery, the unknown continued a while without speaking, but a
little after resuming his discourse: Your voice has not deceived me, said he,
and I knew it at the first to be Agrippa's, but the time of night, and the
condition wherein I meet you made me have reason to doubt of a truth, which
seemed to me as improbable, as that I should be here alone, by night, and on
foot in a place which my misfortune has made my enemy: I tell you enough to
make a perfect discovery of my self to you, and I suppose you are not ignorant
now* that I am the unfortunate Juba Coriolanus, upon whom you once bestowed a
share of your friendship, and who probably may have lost it by becoming Cesars
enemy. The confidence which I have in your virtue, and the small reason I have
to be in love with my life banish all the fear I might have had of discovering
my self to you in a Country where I can not be known without manifest danger:
but though you should be of the mind of my most cruel enemies (which I have all
the reason in the world to believe since the change of Marcellus and Cleopatra)
though you should acquaint Caesar, that I wander alone and unknown in his
dominions, and though by declaring my self to you I should run upon the
infallible loss of my life: in losing this wandering and unfortunate life, I
shall lose nothing but what is odious to me, and which I would have sacrificed
my self to my grief this deplorable day, if I had not thought it my duty to
employ the remainders of it in the service which I owe to that ungrateful
creature to whom I have devoted it all.

Whilst the valiant King of the Moors was speaking in this manner with a
throng of sighs and sobs that accompanied every word, Agrippa hearkened to him
with an amazement and irresolution which kept him a long time immovable and
quite astonished; He owed all he had to Cesars bounty, and he could not without
some offense to his virtue conserve any amity for his greatest enemies: but
besides the esteem he had always had for the admirable qualities, and the
sublime virtue of Coriolanus he thought he should brand himself with a
detestable baseness, if in so deplorable a condition as he saw him in, which
he partly knew by the loss of his dominions, and by what was represented to him
in his discourse, he had conserved the thoughts of an enemy, and had looked
upon him according to the consideration due to his fortune, rather than
according to that compassion which is due to virtuous men in misery. After he
had made a short reflection upon it, which by reason of his excellent nature,
and the greatness of his soul, wrought a much more sudden effect upon him,
than it would have done in a person of more common thoughts, he ^igh^ed from
his horse, judging it not to be civi^ to ^^ on horse back before such a Prince
as he, as long as he stood on foot, and acco^ing him with an action which
expressed the consideration he had for him as much as the obscurity of the
night could permit: I cannot, said he, without a very great astonishment, see
you in your enemies country in a condition so disproportionable to your birth,
and the rank you held some months ago: it is true I am bound to Caesar by such
strong obligations, that without ingratitude I can make no distinction between
his enemies and my own, but the esteem I have always made of your virtue and
of your person, has opposed those resentments which probably ought to be
common to me, with him, to whom I owe all, and besides I have found so much
justice in one part of your actions, and even in those which have made Cesas
your enemy, that at the report of those great things which you had done for the
recovery of your dominions, I was not moved as possibly I ought to have been by
the part which I ought to take in the interests of Augustus. You might have
received some proof of it in this, that I have avoided the occasions of going
to bear arms against you, and if I had not expressed some repugnance as to that
employment, Domitius possibly had not commanded that Naval Army whish you
defeated, and I should have had the charge of that expedition as well as of
diverse others, which I joyfully undertook, and from which I returned with
success enough. I was afterward afflicted at your ill fortune, more, possibly,
than is honest for the servants of Caesar to confess, and I could heartily have
wished, that by a happy reconciliation, he would have left you at peace in the
Kingdom of your Fathers. You have put your self into no danger by discovering
your self to me, and instead of doing you hurt in a condition which obliges all
virtuous persons to comfort you, I will serve you in what I am able without
wronging the fidelity which I owe to my Master. It Is certain, he is your enemy,
and your life would not be in security if you should be known in these
Countries; either depart speedily from hence, or keep your self concealed, if
you be stayed here by any necessity of your affairs, and in the mean time let
me understand what service you desire of a person, who will always respect, as
he ought, both your birth and the eminent qualities of your person.

Agrippa expressed himself in this sort, and Coriolanus, after he had meditated
a little upon an answer: I did not almost doubt, said he, but that I should
find in you still, all the marks of that generosity whereof all the world has
taken notice, I am too much obliged to those remains of friendship which
hindered you from employing against me that valor of yours, against which
without doubt I should not have had the same success which fortune gave me
against Domitius. I have little resentment against those, who during my absence
have deprived me of a Kingdom which I could not go to defend, and of which I
can make no great account since the loss of my repose, neither do I desire any
proof of your amity which may clash with your duty to Caesar, I shall always
esteem you too much to desire any thing of you that may hinder your fortune, or
diminish the esteem you have acquired all the world over, and I am not so fond
of my life, nor any thing that is left me besides, to look any security or
refuge by your means, at a time when I seek for it no where but in death; but
only I would desire of you without any longer discourse (for the pressing
condition wherein I am, does not permit me to converse any longer with you) the
means of pursuing the Ravishers of Cleopatra, who was lately carried away in my
presence, having been too faintly defended by me. What, said Agrippa
interrupting him, are you then that valiant man, who alone, and without arms
slew so many armed men for the defense of Cleopatra? I am that wretch, replied
Coriolanus, which had not valor enough to guard that Princess from the
violence of a few barbarians, I have now arms upon my back, but I am on foor,
and I have so wandered in the wood, that I cannot find the way back to the place
where I might recover horses to post to the assistance of that Princess. Such a
grand action, answered Agrippa, as that whereof we saw the marks upon the place
where it was done, must needs proceed from such a hand as yours, I was going,
as you were, to Cleopatra's assistance, and just as you did, I wandered and lost
all my company in the turnings of the wood, and the obscurity of the night: If
you could stay till day, you should find all manner of assistance amongst us;
but in that urgency which you express, I can only offer you this horse, which
you may make use of, as one of the best the world affords, to go whither your
desires, or your fortune shall direct you.

Coriolanus, what necessity soever he had, at first refused Agrippa's offer,
making some difficulty to leave a man of that importance, alone, on foot, in
the wood, and in the dark: But Agrippa being offended at his modesty; When ou
are upon a business of such consequence, said he, you ought not to stand upon
punctilio's, I would not deal so with you upon the like occasion, and you use
me as an enemy if you refuse any longer that which is now in my power to offer
you; you will constrain me to follow you on foot if you continue obstinate, my
attendants are not far off, the worst that can come to me, is to pass the rest
of the night here in expectation of them at a season, when my stay will not be
incommodious, I have no reason to fear any accident in a place where all
persons are my friends, and where I shall find no body from whom I may not
receive assistance.

Though Agrippa had added a great many more, and more prei^ing expressions,
Coriolanus would never have suffered himself to be overcome, if he had had any
other business in hand but the assistance of Cleopatra: but upon a necessity of
that importance, at last he closed his eyes against all that civility could
possibly represent to him, and receiving the horse which Agrippa presented to
him. Both you and my bad fortune, said he, constrain me to do an action, which
I would never have consented to for the recove^y of my Kingdom, the Gods will
recompense you for it, if I cannot, and in the mean time rest assured, that
during the small remainder of my life, I will treasure up in my heart, as I am
obliged to do, the memory of so generous an action. As he ended these words he
put his foot into the stirrup, and mounted into the Saddle, Agrippa holding the
Bridle of the horse himself, and promising him that when he found his men, he
would post after him to Cleopatra's aid. Adieu generous Agrippa, said
Coriolanus to him at parting, pardon this action which you force me to do, and
believe that if I live never so little while, I will not die ungrateful for
this good office. Having spoken these words, he parted from him, and turning
the head of his horse that way which he thought might lead him after Cleopatra,
he posted away amongst the trees with as much speed as the darkness would
permit.

Agrippa remained amazed at this accident, as well to find that Prince in so
strange a condition, and in so unexpected a manner, in a place where there was
little likelihood of his being found, when he thought him to be a great way
off, as to hear him express so much interest, and so much earnestness for
Cleopatra, to whom he thought, as well as a great many others, that he had been
unfaithful. He reflected then upon it, not having had time during the
conversation they had together; or at least Coriolanus his impatience not
having permitted him to enquire why he tormented himself so for a person, whom,
according to the vulgar opinion he had ingratefully forsaken. This
consideration took up his thoughts a good while, before he could pass any
judgment upon the uncertainty which this adventure afforded; but a little
after he believed that Coriolanus, whose generosity was known to all the world,
might do that merely upon the score of Virtue, which another would have done
for love, and that having seen the Princess, whom he had dearly loved, in some
danger, he had fought for her, and was so passionate to assist her, only out of
the motions of his Virtue. He did not find it strange, knowing himself to be
capable of doing as much, and easily guessing by his own inclinations at the
thoughts of virtuous persons, he meditated a while upon this accident, and
turning his memory with compassion upon the diverse revolutions of fortune, who
did so differently sport her self in the life of this brave African, whom ever
since his birth she had made the object of her inconstant Capricies, making him
fall before he was born, from Royalty into servitude, favoring him in a
thousand gallant actions which had acquired him immortal glory amongst men, and
after she had caused him to remount his Throne maugre all the forces of the
Empire, tumbling him down again with the same suddenness into the loss of all,
into misery, and that deplorable condition wherein he had met him, he could not
but be very much moved at it, and lifting up his eyes to Heaven with a sigh: O
Gods, said he, how incomprehensible are your judgments, and how inconsiderable
is the life of man, since the greatest and most virtuous are subject to so many
misfortune? it is in the fortune of this Prince, the bravest person that ever
the Sun shined upon, that the instability of humane things is easily
remarkable, and thence we learn a very observable lesson how little confidence
we ought to have in things so inconstant and so apt to perish. He had stayed
longer upon this consideration, which produced powerful effects in such a soul
as his, if his new passion, which at that time left little room for other
thoughts, had not insensibly banished thence another man's interests, to take
full possession of his mind its self.

By the misfortunes of Coriolanus, which love alone, for the most part, had
produced, he foresaw what he might fall into himself by the same passion, and
making a short mediation thereupon: Alas, said he, that which I deplore in
another, may possibly ere long befall my self, and Elisa without doubt is able
to cause the same disorders in my soul and fortune, that Cleopatra had caused
in Coriolanus's: I have all the reasons that can be to fear it, seeing in the
space of one night and a day, that imperious beauty has ruined my repose,
which to all appearance was so well established, and has made a greacer
progress in this little time, than another could have done in diverse years: I
feel and suffer already all that persons grown old in love can feel and suffer,
and if in the very beginning my passion handles me with so much violence, what
may I expect when its forces are augmented, and its powers are absolutely
established over this heart, which it spares so little already? Ah! continued
he, a little after, though I should have all the reason that might be to be
afraid of this fatal engagement of my heart, yet it is too handsome for me to
make any attempt to break it off, and that destiny that brings a divine beauty
from the farthest parts of Asia, and from out the midst of our cruel enemies,
to work that upon my soul which the Roman beauties could not do, binds me up
already so powerfully, that it has not left my will so much as one single
motion or desire to disengage my self.

As he uttered these words he laid himself down at the foot of Oak, being
resolved to pass away the rest of the night there; for it was at that season
of the year when they are at the shortest. In this place, he used some vain
endeavors to catch some sleep, which fle^ from him, and the image of Elisa
which gained an absolute power over his Spirit more and more, did not a great
while permit him to find any repose, in the least conformable to the first
violences of his love: What, said he, with a little motion of choler, or
resentment, have I lost all in so little a time, and will sleep approach my
eyes no more, since the beauties of Elisa have fatally appeared to them: Well,
pursued he, let us submit to the force of our destiny, and seeing we must
watch, let us watch with the Stars which bear us company, and which can only
bear witness of our sighs, and the words which Love draws from our mouth.

Agrippa spoke these words as he thought very loud, certainly believing that at
such an hour, and in that desert place, he was not overheard by any body, and
that he really had only the Stars at witnesses of the effects which his passion
might produce; but he was deceived, and that night being to him a night full of
adventures, 'twas the will of fortune, that a few paces from him, there lay a
man under the trees passing the rest of the night, and expecting the approach
of day in employments not much different from his. This man whose soul was much
more inflamed with love, than Agrippa's was, and possibly as much as a soul was
capable of, no sooner heard the amorous words, which Agrippa had uttered, but
he found some consolation in that rancounter, and after two or three impetuous
sighs, beginning to speak loud enough to be distinctly heard by Agrippa: Alas!
said he, is it possible then that I am not the only man, whom Love causes to
spend the nights in this dark and solitary place, whilst sleep exercises its
dominion over the whole earth? Agrippa who expected not that accident, was a
little surprised at it at first, thinking he had been in a place where he
might freely discover his thoughts to the face of Heaven: yet being of a Spirit
not easily daunted, he quickly recomposed himself, and finding, as well as the
unknown, some consolation in meeting with an amorous person, he thought it not
amiss to enter into a discourse with him that might render their solitude the
more confortable, and returning an answer to those few words he had spoken,
without stirring from his place: No, said he, you are not the only man, whom
Love causes to sigh at these hours in sol^tude, and though fortune has
conducted me hither, yet it is certain that Love only keeps me company, and
takes up all my thoughts. They can not be more worthily employed, replied the
unknown, and even amongst those whom hope has almost deserted, there are some,
which find all the entertainment of their life, only in the thoughts of their
Love. As for those, answered Agrippa, whom hope has abandoned, their thoughts
can not but be very full of grief and affliction, and hope does not ordinarily
leave us but in such extremities, when no hardly can tell what to think upon:
yea diverse persons believe that after the loss of hope, Love can not be
easily preserved, and as hope, in Love, cannot be entirely lost, but by the
loss of the object beloved, so by the same loss, it is probable that Love
abandous us together with our hope. Alas, added the unknown, with a sigh, how
little experience have you, so far as I can judge, in the effects of this
passion, to which nevertheless, it seems, you have submitted your Spirit. It Is
true, answered Agrippa, that I have passed a good part of my life in liberty
enough, and it is not long since that my soul has been made Loves subject by
such powers as have disarmed my heart at the first sight, and which at the very
beginning have already made me feel whatsoever others have felt most violent in
whole years. I easily believe it replied the unknown, and I do not doubt but
that at the first sight a heart may be disarmed, and submit it self to Loves
greatest cr^elty: I have had experience enough of it my self, to make me
believe it upon another account, but if your passion be yet in its infancy,
upon which all souls do not equally fix themselves at first, or at least if you
be not so far engaged that you have no power left over your Spirit, avoid, if
it be possible for you, any farther eng^gement, and stop the course betime of
an infinite number of pains and sufferings: in comparison of which all others
are trivial, and by which life is rendered worse than the most painful death. O
Gods! continued he, with a new supply of sobs, how different would mine have
been from this deplor able condition, wherein I miserably spend my days, if I
had followed the counsel which I venture to give to others? how many evils had
I been spared from, under which my unfortunate soul has always groned? how
many troubles both of body and mind had I avoided, under which both have deeply
suffered? and yet, O my adorable (there he stopped because he would not name her)
and yet, O dear Mistress of my heart, how sorry should I have been if I had
followed these counsels, which were profitable indeed as to my repose, but
contrary to the glory, and the satisfaction which I find in passing my days
for your sake in these miseries, which are a thousand times more sweet and more
dear to me, than all the pleasures and felicity I could have tasted in my life,
if I had not devoted it to you.

The unknown spoke in this manner, and suffering himself to be carried away by
the current of his passion, he held some other discourses by which Agrippa
observed, that never possibly any other Spirit had been more strongly or more
really possessed with love, and being of a noble and compassionate mind, he
could not choose but be troubled for the unknown, and beginning to speak when
he had done: I know not what you are, said he, and yet I cannot but take part
in your displeasutes, and believe, by all appearances, that few persons have
more sincerely loved than you. You have reason to do so, replied the afflicted
Lover, and it is very certain that never possibly did a foul so entirely
sacrifice it self to love as mine has done, nor devoted its life thereunto
with a more perfect resignation; They are not hopes (that we may return to our
former discourse) alas! they are not hopes that maintain it, and though they
are not absolutely extinguished in me, by reason of the natural disposition we
have to preserve some relics of them to the last extremity: yet according to
reason, and probability there is so little hope left, and that little is so
disproportionable to the greatness of my love, that in all likelihood it is not
by my hopes that my love is preserved. I love with a disengagement from all
other thoughts, that which appeared amiable to my eyes, that which my heart
loves without reservation and interest, that which it may be neither is nor
ever was sensible of my love, and I love, O Gods! that which possibly has no
longer a being in the world, either for me, or any man besides.

He concluded not these words without some sobs, which confirmed Agrippa in
the opinion which he had already conceived of the greatness of hi^ love, and
desiring to give him some consolation: Your condition, said he, would be truly
deplorable, if it were such as you represent it, but since you are still
permitted to hope for better fortune, I advise you to expect from Heaven those
assistances, which it seldom denies to persons whose intentions are innocent
and conformable to virtue. We see things fall out every day very far from our
expectation, and oftentimes in the most desperate affairs the Gods have sent
remedies unlooked for, and contrary to appearance; In the mean time take a
little rest, if you can possibly, and when the apppoach of day shall permit me
to see you, as the darkness has permitted me to hear you, I shall perhaps
desire a farther knowledge of your person, out of the disposition which I have
already to esteem a man, whose thoughts do not seen to me to proceed from a
common person, and it may be I shall find some means of giving some ease to
your displeasures, in a place where I have some acquaintance and some credit.

Agrippa made him this discourse, out of the disposition which he really felt
in himself to esteem and serve him, and by reason of some approaches of sleep
which began to seize upon him, and after two nights watching, and that days
toil lay heavy upon his Eyelids. The Unknown answered his offers with all the
civility his grief could leave him for a man, of whom he judged very
advantagiously already, and after some replies between them, Agrippa grew very
drowfie, and at last fell fast asleep. The fair Image of Elisa, wherewith his
soul was continually possessed, appeared to him as he was asleep, with all
those powers, which had so suddenly made him her subject, and he had the
contentment to entertain her, and to give her assurances of his passion, during
the time of his sleep; but it was for no long continuance, and at the coming of
the day, which appeared a little after, he was awakened by a noise which the
man made, with whom he had conversed, as he rose from the place where he was,
and mounted his horse, with two Squires which had spent the night some paces
from him. At another time this man, which wanted neither acknowledgement nor
civility, would not have gone from that place without being better acquainted
with Agrippa, or without thanking him for the offer he had made; but having his
soul prepossessed with a passion, which extinguished in him all other desires,
and all other remembrances but of his beloved object, he would not engage
himself in the company of a man, from whom he feared he could not retire to
seek either that which he had lost, or solitude which was much more dear to him
than the society of men. He was already upon his horse, by that time Agrippa
was fully awake, and the Roman being got up at the noise he made, saw him
amongst the trees parting from the place where he had spent the night, and
taking the way on the right hand with his two Squires, who following their
Masters pace, marched very slowly.

Agrippa judged by this departure of his, that he had no desire to make himself
known: and easily pardoned in him, out of the knowledge he had of the
preoccupation of his Spirit, that which a less rational person would have
taken for want of civility; he conceived a greater desire to see him, and to
inform himself more fully concerning his fortune and his person, whereof he
already had a very good opinion. Conducted by this curiosity, he followed him
at a distance amongst the trees, and that was not difficult for him to do,
because the unknown having no certain way to go, but being directed rather by
chance, than by design, went on a soft pace, deeply engaged in a profound
musing: Agrippa did already discern the handsomeness of his body as he rode,
and the fashion of his arms which were black, enriched with some Jewels of
great value, his Casque was covered with a black Plume of Feathers, somewhat
spoiled with the rain, and worn with a long voyage, and that which appeared of
his Casaque was black too, covered with an embrodery of silver, which had been
very handsome. Agrippa might observe all this as he walked amongst the trees,
and though he was on foot, and in a condition unconformable to his quality, he
was grown more curious upon ^is adventure than naturally he was, or probably
(...) be at a time when his growing passion sufficie^^^^ employed his Spirit.

The unknown had marched a good while without breaking silence otherwise than
by a few sighs, and then calling one of his Squires to him, But Dion, said he,
do thou believe that I ought to ground any farther assurance upon that man's
discourse, and is it probable that his science should give him knowledge of my
fortune for the future, when possibly he is ignorant of his own destiny? That
is not without example, Sir, answered the Squire, and by that which he has
told you concerning the present condition of your soul, you may give some
credit to what he has promised you for the future. He has promised me nothing
punctually, replied the unknown, but has only given me some uncertain hopes,
which I should not have fixed upon, if I had any designs which that confidence
might divert me from: Seek not, said he, as I remember, seek not far from the
shore of Alexandria, that which thou have lost; thou shall not find it any
where else, and thou may hope that the Gods will restore it to thee in the
same condition they gave it thee at first. These were has very words, said the
Squire, and I expect some success from them, because of the impression which
his science has made upon my Spirit. The success, added his Master, is in the
hand of the Gods that can do all things, and it is from you, O ye great Gods,
continued he, lifting up his eyes to Heaven, it is from you only that I ought to
expect the end of these miseries, to which this deplorable life is condemned.

As he had finished these words he perceived himself to be near a little brook,
which arising from a neighboring spring, ran amongst the trees down to ^^e
Sea, which was but a few furlongs off. This ^^^t revived some remembrances in
his mind, which ^^^ewed his sighs, and stopping at the place to look upon the
clear waters which glided along upon the little pebble stones, with a pleasant
murmur. Alas! said he, 'twas in such a place as this, that my destiny presented
my Delia to me, and if the Gods would please to restore me what I have lost in
the condition wherein they gave it me, it must needs fall out that upon the
brink of this rivulet I must find out my adorable Delia.

The amorous Philadelph (for these words did sufficiently discover him to be
the amorous Philadelph) had hardly spoken these few words, but casting his eyes
along the brook, whilst his horse was going over it, he thought he saw at a
good distance off some persons lying upon the bank, and looking that way with
more attention than before, he perceived they were women. At this sight, he
knew not why, a shivering ran over his whole body, and stopping the bridle of
his horse, he continued with his face toward that object unmovable and
astonished. Dion which followed next to him, seeing him stand still in this
posture, and reading in his countenance, which was partly visible his bever
being up, all the signs of a strange amazement: What ails you Sir, and by
what surprise is your visage so suddenly changed? Dion spoke thus to him twice
without receiving any answer, and Philadelph was so moved and troubled, that
for a long time he was not in a condition to make a reply: at last endeavoring
to dissipate this strong emotion. Behold, said he, pointing to the place,
behold those women which lie upon the bank of the rivulet, and remember that it
was in this condition that fortune sent me Delia. This sight and the
resemblance of the place and the accident, with that which was so fatal to my
life, have so much moved me, that it is impossible for me to recompose my self,
and if the Gods be but pityful, it may be amongst these persons I may find my
Delia. It may be so, if it please the Gods, replied Dion, and things more
improbable often come to pass: but it may be with more likelihood that it will
not fall out so, and I do not advise you to ground any hope upon it, that may
redouble your displeasures when you find your self deceived. I will hope for
nothing said the Prince, and yet I will neglect nothing, it must be by some
extraordinary adventure that Delia shall be restored to me, if she be still in
the world for one* and though I judge that the extraordinary motions where with
my heart is agitated, proceed from the violence of my love, rather than from
any presage that is sent me from Heaven, yet I am resolved not to part from
this place without satisfying my self in this point, and without seeing the
faces of these persons, whom fortune presents to me in the same condition
wherein I first saw Delia.

With these words he alighted, and leaving his horse to Dion, he walked along
the bank of the brook with an uncertain pace, and went toward the place where
the women lay along upon the grasie.

By means of the delay which this adventure had caused, Agrippa had the more
time and convenience to follow Philadelph, without being perceived, he heard
part of the words which were spoken to Dion, he saw him alight from his horse,
and guessing at something of the truth by his discourse, the goodness of his
nature made him interess himself in this adventure more than before, and wish
the man, though he was unknown to him, happy success in his business. The
richness of his Armor made him already conjecture that he was of no mean
condition, and every thing in Philadelph's person pleaded for his advantage.
The passionate Prince marched toward the place where he saw the Ladies lie,
with an extraordinary emotion and throbbing of his heart, and he was so
troubled between some beams of hope, and the fear of being deceived, that he
hardly had strength and assurance to go along. He came at last with the least
noise that was possible, to the place where upon the green grass two Ladies
were asleep, at first the number displeased him, remembering that Delia went
from Cilicia with her Aunt and her Sister, but he staid not long upon this
consideration, judging that in the voyages she had made since, she might be
separated from part of her company. He looked upon the two women with a very
passionate action, and lifting up his eyes to Heaven in a very suppliant
manner: Immortal Gods, said he, (but with his heart more than his mouth; for
that continuing mute for fear of making a noise, left all its functions to the
heart) pityful Gods, if by a miraculous effect of your goodness, ye permit me
amongst these persons which chance presents to me, to find my Delia, how much
should I be beholding to your pity, and for which should I be most obliged to
you, for the former life which I have received from you, or this latter which
you render me? He passed from this thought to some motions of an uncertain and
wavering joy, but immediately after that was destroyed by contrary appearances,
and his heart freesing again with fear, which had been thawed by hope: Alas!
replied he to himself, what reason can I have to imagine that this adverse
fortune, by whose means I have passed so many days in so deplorable a
condition, should deal so favorably with me to day? Have not I seen a hundred
thousand women since I sought after my wandering and fugitive Delia, without
meeting her in all that great number, and must I hope because she appeared thus
once to me, that every thing which presents it self so afterward must needs be
my adorable Delia? Ah! vain hope, how have thou abused me to no purpose, and
how easy is it to judge that my reason is troubled by my misfortunes, seeing
I hope so easily for that which I desire, contrary to all probabilities? It Is
not in woods, nor a dreadful solitude that Delia spends her nights, and if my
destiny caused me to find her there that fatal day, when I lost my self, must
I expect the same fortune every day? Go thy way then unfortunate man, to pursue
thy uncertain search, seek that which thou have lost in the company of men,
rather than in the retreat of beasts, and do not disturb the rest of those
persons which dream not of thee, nor so much as know thee.

Being deserted by his hope, and abandoning himself to grief, he sat down
upon the grass full of sadness and irresolution, and continued a long time in
deliberation, whether he should go on his way without relying upon the vain
hope which had deceived him, or whether he should have any indulgence for those
extraordinary presages which endeavored to persuade him, that he should
receive satisfaction from this adventure. At last, said he, though I should
find my self deceived in this expectation, which flatters me, I shall be in the
same condition I was a few moments ago: if I fail of finding Delia here in this
place, she will be no more lost to me, nor any farther from me, than she was
before, and seeing I live on^ie to spend my life in search of her, I ought not
to neglect any occasion of finding her, how improbable soever it be. Let us try
our fortune then, with a firm resolution to expect from Heaven, whatsoever it
shall please to send us, and let us beg of it, if it refuse to give us Delia,
either constancy enough to support the redoubling of our grief, or weakness
enough to yield to it, without lingering out this wandering and unfortunate
life any longer.

With this resolution he rose up, and drawing nearer to those persons, he
viewed them over in a trembling posture, and endeavored to take exact notice
of their faces; which was not easy for him to do without waking them, one of
the two having her face covered with a linen cloth, and the other lying in
another posture, leaned one of her cheeks upon her right arm, and covered the
other wi h her left which she had laid over her head; 'twas to her that he
addressed himself, because she had black hair, and her companions fair hair
made him know very well, that he must not expect her to be Delia. Never, in the
most evident danger, did the most fearful soldier march with so much fear and
confusion, and if the amorous Philadelph had seen death present before his eyes
in its most terrible shape, he would certainly have encountered it with more
assurance and resolution, than this shadow or appearance of Delia whom he
sought throughout the world. He stood a while upright before them with his arms
across over his breast, in the posture of a man deprived of a part of the
faculties both of body and soul, not daring hardly to venture his looks to seek
between those envious arms, the face which they concealed from him. He had
continued a time in this condition, when he was assaulted by a new fear, which
till then had not assailed him, and making cruel reflections upon what was
past: Alas! said he, though by some favorable miracle it should be true that
this is my Delia, I should have found her again, possibly to my greater
misfortune, and considering the inhumanity she had to defend her self against
my love, in a Country where I gave her so many testimontes of it, and to
forsake me by a flight which exposes me to so many miseries, just when I
believed that by my love I had merited the utmost recompense I had pretended
to, ought not I to fear that my presence will be disagreeable to her, and that
she will fly from me still, as from an enemy, whom she avoids in all parts of
the world. If so many obligations could not move her in the place of my birth,
what ought I to expect from my importunate pursutes in this desert, whither
possibly she is conducted by some affection which renders her insensible of
mine, which robs one of her sight all the world over, and which without doubt
has caused all my misfortunes, both by her flight, and by her hard
heartedness when she was in Ci^ici^. This thought afflicted him very sensibly,
but it was not able to interrupt his design, and he resolved to try whether
this woman that lay asleep, was his ungrateful or his acknowledging Delia.

After he had rallied up the remainders of his courage, he kneeled down upon
one knee before her, and lifted up his eyes to Heaven, begging his Delia of the
Gods, with sighs and vows proceeding from the bottom of his heart, as if he
had expected from them, that if this woman was an unknown person, they should
transform her into Delia at his request. After this he put himself to the
venture of looking what he could discover in her face, but, as ill luck would
have it, it was so closely covered by her arm, which was jealous of his
content, that he could discern nothing: this put him into an inquietude full of
impatience, not knowing whether he had best attend her awaking, or interrupt
her sleep. If this be not Delia, said he within himself, why should I trouble
the repose of a person, whose sex I ought to honor, and if it be Delia, why
should I take the liberty to awake her, since I may patiently wait till the end
of her sleep? Ah! added he, correcting himself, if this be not Delia, a little
incivility, which may be pardoned in relation to such a passion as mine, will
presently free me of this error, and if it be Delia, she will easily pardon
this small dissturbance of her repose, when she remembers that for her sake my
life is absolutely deprived of all quietness, and that for her sake, I spend my
nights without sleep, and my days without joy and comfort.

Upon this thought he reached out his arm to raise up that which covered her
face, but at the same time his fear pulled it back, and in this uncertainty,
devouring, as it were, the unknown person with his eyes, and bowing down his
head toward hers with transports full of ardour and violence: Delia, said he
softly, if you are my divine Delia, as my heart tells me, more than all
appearances, open, open, those fair eyes, whose first looks made so ready a
passage to my heart: and with those fair eyes, my Kings, my Masters, and my
Gods, which sleep too cruelly hides from me, look upon the unfortunate
Philadelph, which seeks after you all the world over* and can neither find
repose nor resting place in all the world without you: or if you be not my
Delia, whosoever you are, pardon an error in me which is not injurious to you,
and believe that I do you no wrong in taking you for that which I adore, and
for that, than which the whole world can show nothing more fair and amiable.
This thought troubled him again, and kept him for a while uncertain what to do;
but at last not being able to master his impatient desires, and fearing (as
unfortunate men have reason to fear all things) that some accident might
deprive him of this favorable opportunity, he ventured so far as to lay his
hand upon the arm which was contrary to him, and to endeavor to remove it from
her face, as gently as he could: He had already discovered that part of her
forehead which was toward him, and began to see one eye close shut, and seemed
with an excess of contentment to perceive nothing but what confirmed him in
his hopes: when the person half awaking at the touch, removed her self, and
turning more upon one side, she put her self into a posture much more contrary
to Philadelph's desires.

He drew back his trembling hand, and out of a fear which love only could cause
in him, he continued for some moments more immovable than a statue: But at
last supposing he had surpassed the greatest difficulty, and that by what he
had seen conformable to his desires, they were become more violent and
impatient, he put himself again into a condition to give himself more ample
satisfaction, and beginning again to uncover the Ladies face, his own was so
near to hers, that his mouth did almost touch part of that cheek which
appeared: but as he was very earnest in his discovery, he was disturbed by the
voice of a man, who cried out to him a few paces off: Hold, hold insolent, or
thou dyest. These words having made him turn his head that way which the voice
came, he saw an armed man, who rising up from between the trees where he had
layen a while, covered his head with his Casque which he held in his left hand,
and with his right hand drew his sword, with an intention to fall upon him with
a great deal of fury. If Philadelph's grief and trouble had left him time to
consider the face and the whole person of his enemy, he would have seen, that
possibly there was not a man in the world more handsome, or more complete in
every respect, his age was not above two and twenty years, and his face being
of an exact Symmetry, had in it so noble and so agreeable a fierceness, that
any one but a person threatened and assalted, as Philadelph was, would have
looked upon him with respect and admiration. He hastily threw on his Headpiece
upon his long curled hair, which covered part of his shoulders, but in stead of
his face, the proportion of his body might be seen, which was somewhat taller
than Philadelph's, but the streightest, and the most exactly formed that could
be. His arms were all composed of little silver scales filletted with gold,
his Casaque of cloth of silver, and his Casque covered with a great Plume of
white Feathers. Philadelph had not time to observe either his armor or his
person, but as soon as he saw him running toward him, he arose from the
posture wherein he was, to defend himself, and drawing out his sword to oppose
his enemy, he advanced toward him full of resentment and grief, not so much
for his threats, and the attempt he was going to make against his life, as for
being an obstacle to his satisfaction.

The Lady whom this noise had startled out of her sleep, hastily got up, and
ran with her companion behind the trees, to put themselves into some security,
or to see the event of a business, whereof they knew not the cause. Philadelph
breathing out fiery sighs through the passages of his Headpiece, would have
turned his eyes that way to look after his Delia, but his enemy gave him no
time to do that, nor hardly so much as to put himself into a posture of
defense. Then his choler mounted to the highest extremity, and looking upon him
with eyes inflamed with indignation: I know not, said he, why thou set upon
me, whom I never injuried, nor possibly ever saw, but what occasion so ever
thou may have, thy life shall make reparation for the bloody outrage thou
have done me. Thine rather, replied the unknown, holding up the arm which he
had raised before, is forfeited by thy insolence, and at that rate thou shall
learn what respect is due to such Ladies as thou lately injuredst.

Philadelph might easily have defended himself against this accusation, but he
would not justify himself to an enemy against whom he was infinitely enraged,
and by whom he thought himself to be infinitely injured: besides he thought he
should sooner make an end of the combat with him, than declare his innocent
intentions to him, and in that choler which transported him, he imagined that
man would make but little resistance: but he was deceived in his opinion, and
he had to do with an enemy, who in valor was not inferior to him, nor hardly
to any person in the world. By the first blows they bestowed each upon other
they took notice one of the others strength, and their arms with which they
both held their shields bowed under the weight of them: they seconded the first
with a great number of others with more fury and precipitation, than judgment
and address, and in a few moments they were engaged in a combat, in which one,
or possibly both, of their lives was in manifest danger, if Agrippa who was a
spectatour of it, though at a far distance, and by these beginnings had
conceived a marvailous opinion of both their valors, had not quitted the
place, from whence he attentively beheld these accidents, to go and hinder what
might come of such a furious combat. As he ran toward them, he cried out to
them diverse times to hold, but they were so eager that they took no notice of
his calling to them, and he was got up to them before they turned themselves to
look toward him.

Though Agrippa was alone on foot, and without any other arms but his sword,
his courage which had carried him upon so many great and famous designs, made
him easily slight the danger, that might be in going in that condition to part
two armed men, quite blinded with choler: and Philadelph's two Squires, who
upon equal terms, would not have dared to assist their Master, being very
joyful for all that to see the endeavor which Agrippa used to part them,
advanced toward him to help on that design as much as possibly they could;
Agrippa being come near to them, and laying his sword upon the point of theirs:
Valiant men, said he, be not so obstinate in fighting, possibly, for a slight
cause, no body will hinder you from proceeding, when the reason of it is known
to be of an importance enough to endanger the lives of two such men as you seem
to be: but in the mean time forbear a while at my request, and at the command I
lay upon you by the authority of Caesar. Agrippa spoke in this manner, and
possibly he would have had somewhat to do to obtain what he desired of two men
extraordinarily enraged, if the Lady which had been the cause of the combat,
had not ran to him to second him in his intention, and conjured him in the Name
of the Gods, not to permit (if he could possibly hinder them) these two men to
fight any longer.

At the tone of her voice Philadelph being struck to the very bottom of his
heart, turned his eyes that way, and such was his fortune, that in that face,
wherein by admirable presages he had hoped to find Delia, he really observed
all the lineaments of his well-beloved Delia. No joy, transport, or ravishment
was ever comparable to his at the sight of that adored countenance, which had
been so much sought after all the world over, and after he had expressed his
first resentments by a loud exclamation, slighting the enemy he was engaged
against, and the danger which threatened him, if he were never so little
negligent, he let fall his sword and his shield upon the grass, and ran to
Delia with so much suddainness, that he had embraced her fast about the knees,
before that either she or his enemy had time to perceive his intention. The
transport which possested him, depriving him of the use of his speech, he
expressed it at first by his action only, and Delia seeing her self between the
arms of a man whom she knew not, because he had not had time to discover his
face, was more ^roubled than before, and he that had fought for her, being
ignorant of his enemies design, maugre the hindrance he had received from
Agrippa and Philadelphs Squires, advanced toward him with his sword elevated:
when the Prince of Cilicia violently tearing off his Headpiece, and at last
beginning to speak, amidst a throng of sighs which hardly gave him liberty to
express himself: Delia, cried he out, my divine Delia, the Gods do then
restore you to him, whom you fly from throughout the whole world, and my heart
did not deceive me, when it persuaded me that in your person I should find my
Delia. In the conclusion of these few words he made diverse exclamations
without order, or coherence, by which his violent passion discovered its self
to those who observed his action, and particularly to his enemy, who having
stayed himself when he saw him no longer in a resolution or a condition to
fight, looked upon him with more amazement than the rest.

Delia (for this was really she, and the Gods for this time had with compassion
looked upon the sincere and violent passion of Philadelph) could not any longer
mistake either the voice or visage of that Prince, but was so surprised at it,
that for a long time, she did not appear capable to express her resentments,
and her astonishment was taken notice of by the standers by in her countenance,
her silence, and her immobility. When she had had a little time to ruminate
upon this adventure, and partly to recover her self from the amazement into
which this accident had put her: her face which in Agrippa's judgment, who
looked upon her with admiration, might compare with the most beautyfull upon
earth) was spread over with a blush, which gave it a new luster, and it was
hard to discern whether it proceeded from a principle of shame to see her self
accosted by a man with so much expression of passion, or whether it was for joy
of having met a Prince to whom she was so much obliged, and toward whom she
was not insensible. At last her astonishment being a little dissipated, by the
power which naturally she had over her Spirit, and by that admirable prudence
which she had expressed in all the actions of her life, she endeavored to
reduce her countenance to the former marks of tranquillity, and possibly
laying some violence upon her self not to discover to Philadelph her more
passionate thoughts by more tender endearements, she reached him one of her
fair hands with a great deal of sweetness, and looking upon hm with an air,
which in a person of Delia's humor, might persuade him to any thing to his own
advantage: Philadelph, said she, I am too much obliged to you to fly from you,
and the memory of those obligations I have to you is too dear to me, for me to
let slip out of my heart the esteem and the acknowledgment which I owe to your
goodness and to your person. Nothing ever kept me from you, but the effects of
my bad fortune, which has exposed me to great crosses since our separation,
and I see you now again with as much joy, as I can be sensible of at the
meeting of those persons which ought to be most dear to me.

As she made an end of these words with an admirable grace, she made use of
that hand which she had reached out to Philadelph to raise him up, and the
passionate Prince, who could hardly get himself loose from her knees, yielding
to that little violence with transports of joy, which his discourse was not
able to express, and raising himself out of a posture, wherein Delia would not
let him continue any longer, fixing his eyes with a violent ardour upon that
beloved face: Great Gods! cried he, is it possible, that you should restore me
Delia, whom my cruel fortune had taken and detained from me with so much
cruelty? And you Delia, or that which appears to my eyes under the shape of
Delia, is it possible that you should be really that Delia, to whom I gave my
heart the first moment I saw her, and whom I have carried in the middle of my
heart, in all the journeys which I have made in search of her? or am I not
abused by some dream or illusion, which in all manner of objects presents to my
crazed imagination the image of my divine Delia? Then he continued some moments
viewing that fair person from head to foot, with an action that easily made the
company take notice of the violence of his love, and Delia, who was tenderly
moved at it, and could hardly her self conceal part of her own resentments,
desiring to help him out of this astonishment, Yes, Prince, said she, I am
Delia her self without illusion, and you can not any longer mistake her in me,
if you have preserved any Idea of her, and if it be true that you have been so
mindful of her as you would persuade me.

At these words, Philadelph perfectly confirming himself in the knowledge of his
happiness, had scarcely force to resist the joy, which violently seized upon
his soul: It wanted but a little of depriving him of his senses and knowledge,
and it was as much out of weakness and inability to sustain himself, as out of
design, that he let himself fall the second time at Delia's feet, which,
notwithstanding all the endeavors she used to put him out of that posture, he
washed with a flood of tears, which the excess of his joy drew from his eyes at
this accident as abundantly as grief could have done. 'Twas in this condition
that he found himself incapable of making any coherent or rational discourse,
and abandoning himself to passion which entirely possessed him, he spoke
things, and did actions more capable to persuade the strength of his love, than
of his judgment. At last, quitting Delia's knees by the little violence which
she used to him, and lifting his hands and eyes to Heaven: Immortal Gods! said
he, your goodness has surpassed my hopes, and since that by so great and
uncommon a benefit, you blot out of my soul the remembrance of those
misfortunes, to which my unfortunate life has been exposed, I beg your pardon
for those murmurings, which out of humane frailety I may have made against your
divine wills: and you my pains, and my sufferings how dear and precious are you
to me now, since by your means I find again the Jewel of my life, and the only
good for which the remainders of this wandering life were preserved.

He made, after this, diverse discourses of the same nature in this transport,
which wanted but a little of prejudicing his reason or his health, and Delia,
who in all the Princes actions, observed the progress of that great Love,
whereof she had received such fair proofs in Cilicia, and which possibly she
took notice of with more joy and satisfaction than she durst express, after
she had given some time to this first heat, and this first impetuosity of
Philadelph, taking up the discourse with a composed action, and a look wherein,
as modest as she was, a part of her thoughts was discovered: Generous Prince,
said she, I do not deserve the testimonies which you give me of your affection,
though I can truly protest to you, that I am as joyful to meet you as you would
desire, and certainly I should be very ungrateful for the goodness you showed
to one unknown, to a maid exposed to the disgraces of fortune, if I had not
received into my heart the resentment due to it, and for your person all the
esteem which such an extraordinary merit as yours ought to introduce there.

Delia spoke in this manner, and the amorous Prince being highly taken with her
discourse, hearkened to her with transporting ravishments, which might be
observed both in his action and in his countenance: when the valiant man who
had fought against him, and till then had seen their actions, and heard their
discourse without interrupting them, pulling off his Casque as Philadelph had
done, and approaching to him with a countenance, which not only had nothing of
an enemy in it, but might cause love or admiration in the most insensible
souls: Generous Prince, said he, I take too much interest in the good affices
you have rendered Delia, and your virtue is already too well known to me by the
handsome effects which it has produced in its own favor, not to be obliged to
desire of you, together with your pardon for the vain attempt I made against
you, some part in your friendship: I owe this desire both to the particular
obligation I have to ^ou, and to the merit of your person.

Philadelph who till then had taken little notice of any thing but Delia at
this discourse of the unknown turning his eyes toward his face, found occasion
enough in the compleatness of his person to fix them there with astonishment:
He found him but too handsome, and too complete in every respect, and seeing in
what manner he was with Delia, and what interest he took in the good offices
which he had rendered her, he imagined presently that he had met with a rival,
and such a rival, so far as so little a time could discover, as was not
contemptible. This thought immediately made a chillness run over all his body,
and his jealousy was almost as strong in its original as if it had been of
long continuance. He looked upon him without returning any answer, with
thoughts that had little conformity to the discourse which he had heard from
his mouth, and meditated with himself, as unresolved what answer he should make
him, when Delia reading part of the truth in his looks, and desiring to draw
him out of the disquiet whereinto he began to plange himself; Philadelph, said
she, do not refuse this Prince your amity which he desires of you, and who
merits it upon all manner of considerations: there is no possible reason that
ought to hinder you from it, and on can not grant it to a person, who is or
ought to be more dear to me. What repugnance so ever Philadelph had already
conceived against the unknown, he had a love for Delia, and a submission to her
will, which did not permit him to refuse what she desired, and so turning
toward the man with a countenance not so full of kindness as his, I know not,
said he, what obligation you have to me, nor what service I have rendered you in
the person of Delia, but what interest so ever you take in that, the proofs I
have had of your valor could not but give me thoughts of esteem for you, and
the attempt you made against my life, leaves me no resentment, but what your
merit and Delia's command may easily dissipate. I perceive very well, replied
the unknown with a smile, that you have not absolutely pardoned me: but I hope
that effect from the services which I shall render you, and from the assistance
of Delia.

With these words he embraced him with an admirable grace in his caresses, and
Philadelph paid him back as much as he believed himself obliged to do by
civility and Delia's will.

All these things passed in Agrippa's presence, who ever since the endeavor he
had used to part the two combatants, had stood almost immovable to hearken to
their discourses, and to observe their actions, wherein he thought he ought not
to interrupt persons from whom their passion took away all other consideration:
But by the name of Prince, which they* had often pronounced, and that of
Philadelph which had many times reached his ears, judging of the qualities of
these persons, he interessed himself in their adventures more than before, and
resolved to offer them his assistance, in a condition when they might have need
of it, and in a Country where he had credit and authority. Upon his design
coming to Philadelph, who was better known to him than the rest by the
conversation which they had had together the night before. Prince, said he, the
discourse we had together last night, when we did not see each other, caused a
great desire in me to serve you, and though you shunned me this morning with a
kind of disdain, that slighting did not make me lose my design, nor hinder me
from serving you in getting near enough to hinder your combat: I believe your
condition is changed, and the sadness which you expressed to me by your
discourse last night is dissipated by this happy meeting; I take a great share
in your satisfaction, in regard of the knowledge I begin to have of you, and in
respect of that which the very sight of you, and that which you did in my
presence, persuade me to, to your advantage: and upon that which I have
understood of your birth in the discourse of that admirable person; I offer to
you now as to a Prince, and to those which are with you, as to persons of a
condition little different from your own, whatsoever, upon your present
occasions, you shall possibly desire of one who is interessed in you affairs,
and is not without credit in these parts.

Agrippa expressed himself thus, and Philadelph, as deeply engaged as he was in
his passion, turning toward him, and having looked upon him very attentively
during his discourse, easily knew him by his voice, for the same man with whom
he had entertained himself in the dark, and by whom his enemy and he had been
parted in their combat. His discourse was not only obliging and generous, but
signified too that he was a man of authority, and though Agrippa was alone and
on foot at such an hour, in a ^esart and solitary place; yet his garb made
something extraordinary remarkable in his person, and his habit which he wore
that day, to appear in Elisa's presence, though it were but a hunting suit, was
yet set out in diverse places with Gold and Jewels, and did not ill become
Agrippa's gallant appearance.

Philadelph having viewed him a while, was about to return him an answer,
though he did not know very well how he should treat with him, when they heard
a great noise, and at the same time saw a great troop of horse appear, who
came up to them as soon as they had spied Agrippa, Delia and her company were
troubled at this sight, and the unknown and Philadelph were putting themselves
into a posture of defending themselves, if these men should offer any
incivility, but by their action they saw they had no need to fear them; for
they all alighted and came round about Agrippa with such submissive respects as
made them judge that he was their master. They were indeed the people of
Agrippa's retinue, who having sought all night for him in places far distant
from that where he was, came thither at last having searched all the corners of
the wood: he that was the chiefest amongst them coming to Agrippa before the
rest: The Gods be praised, Sir, said he, that we find you in so good a
condition, after we have spent all the night in search of you, not without
cruel apprehensions that some accident had befallen you. They made likewise
great excuses for having lost him, laying the fault upon the swiftness of his
horse, which had so far outstript theirs, that they could never find him again,
having unluckily followed different ways from that which he had taken. Agrippa
received their excuses without passion, and in the mean time the fair Delia,
the brave unknown, and the Prince of Cilicia, confirming themselves by this
great train, and by the respect which the persons gave him, in the opinion
which they had begun to conceive of Agrippa's dignity, looked upon him with
more attention than before, and Philadelph to whom he had particularly
addressed himself, taking up the discourse to answer his civilities: I have not
deserved, said he, the goodness you express to me by interessing your self in
my affairs, as you do, and if I went from you this morning without giving you
thanks for the offer you then made, it was not for want of acknowledgment, but
out of the knowledge of my own melancholy humor, which made me avoid all manner
of company, because it made mine troublesome: it is true my condition is
changed, at least if I do not find in the Spirit of this adorable person whom
you see, an aversion or an insensibility which may throw me back into my former
miseries, and having found that which I sought for throughout the world, and
the only thing for which I continued in the world, the mortal grief wherein I
have passed so many days, and of which you observed some marks in our last
nights converse, is changed into a joy which my soul is not able to contain; be
pleased to pardon the transports which it has caused me, and the faults I
might commit against you, and judge if you please, whether the miraculous
recovery of such a loss as mine was, and the loss of such a person as appears
before you, might not cause some alteration, and trouble in a more solid and
less passionate Spirit than mine. As for what you have judged of our birth by
our discourse, I will confess to you that I am a Prince, and that the
incomparable Delia is such, that there is neither Princess nor Queen under
Heaven, to whom the services and the respects of all virtuous persons can be
more justly due. As for this valiant man against whom this happy adventure
caused me to draw my sword, I can give you no accounnt of him, having never
seen him before: but all the marks in his countenance, and in his whole person
are so extraordinary, that one can not but judge very advantageously of them.
The judgment you make of them, replied the unknown, is too favorable on my
part, and it is not by the marks which appear in my person that my birth can be
discovered: Delia will answer for me that it is none of the meanest, and then
possibly you will grant me a part in your friendship, which you can hardly
vouchsafe me now.

Philadelph was going to reply, whilst Agrippa having accosted Delia with
respect and admiration, offered her all manner of service and assistance: when
Dion coming to his master, informed him, as he had learned of his followers,
that this was Agrippa. Agrippa was known over all the world, for his dignity in
the Empire, for the greatness of his actions, and the favor of Augustus: there
was not a King, that was acquainted with the Roman power, which did not seek
his friendship and assistance; and as he had jo^ned a great number of excellent
virtues to the dignity whereunto he was advanced, so next to Cesar's there was
not a Name amongst men more famous and more reverenced than his. Philadelph had
no sooner understood this, but turning toward him with a more respective
action than before: I had observed before, said he, by diverse marks, that you
were no common person, but I was not informed of the truth, and I desire our
p^^don if I have not rendered you that which is due to the name and person of
the great Agrippa. At the name of Agrippa, the fair unknown stepping some paces
back, and viewing him with more attention than before* It Is certain, said he,
that it is a Name to which all men, and particularly all the Princes that are
friends and allies to the Roman Empire, owe respect; and I esteem my self very
happy, by this adventure, to see a man, whose great actions make him so well
known over all the world. Agrippa answered both their discourses with a great
deal of modesty, and reiterated the offers he had made them, when they saw
Cornelius Gallus arrive at the place, followed by a party of those which had
accompanied him in the search of Cleopatra: as soon as he saw Agrippa, he rode
up directly to him, and alighting because he saw him on foot: I was extremely
in pain for you, said he, and having understood by one of your retinue, that
you were wandered from your company, I have employed in search of you all the
time we had, since we lost the search of Cleopatra: And have you no news of
that Princess, said Agrippa, with great signs of discontent? I have spent the
night in quest of her as well as you, replied Cornelius, and but an hour ago I
met with two men who saw her yesterday with her companion between the arms of
their ravishers, and having followed them at a distance by their outcryes, they
saw them carried into a vessel hidden behind the rocks upon this coast, which
immedia^ely after went off, and put to Sea with full sails. O Gods! cried the
virtuous Agrippa, shall not that Princess be succored then? All that I could
do, added Cornelius, has been to send order for some vessels to go from the
port in pursuit of them, and by the command, which you know I have received
from Caesar, neither you nor I are permitted to go far from Alexandria: and
besides, the persons which I have sent to her assistance, will render it her,
without doubt, with the same success, that we our selves might hope for. May it
please the Gods to guide them, replied Agrippa, for it would be a great loss,
if such a Princess as Cleopatra should continue at the mercy of her enemies,
whosoever they be.

After these words and some others which they had together upon this subject,
by which Agrippa particularly expressed how much he was displeased that he
could not go in person to the assistance of Cleopatra, Cornelius cast his eyes
upon the fair Delia, and upon the admirable unknown who was by her, with the
Prince of Cilicia: the sight of these three persons, who were of no ordinary
appearance, made him presently make a stop, and he turned his eyes toward
Agrippa, to be informed by him, when preventing the effect of his curiosity: I
perceive, said he, that you look with some astonishment, upon these persons who
carry such uncommon marks in their countenances: mine was no less than yours
when I first met with them, and I judged conformably to the truth, that under
such noble appearances persons of the most sublime condition were concealed.
They are Princes of rare merit, and extraordinary valor (as far as I could
judge in the small time when I saw them have occasion to express it) whom
fortune has brought into the Countries under your government, and I thought I
should not be disowned by you, if I should offer them a place of retreat here,
and all the assistances which they could desire of virtuous persons. Both in
these Countries, and throughout the whole Empire, replied Cornelius, my power
shall always submit to yours: and if upon your own account, you had not
offered what is due to such persons, they carry enough in their garb to command
entertainment and service, as they shall do at Alexandria, so far as I can
promise them upon all the credit that Caesar has given me there.

The fair unknown taking occasion at this discourse, and addressing himself to
Agrippa and Cornelius: I did not doubt, said he, but that all manner of
assistance and courtesy might be found in such persons as you, and I do less
attribute it to that which might appear somewhat advantageous in us, than to
your virtue only, and inclination which carries you out to generous actions. As
for these Ladies and my self we will not refuse, in the present condition of
our affairs, the retreat which you offer us, and as for Prince Philadelph, I
do not think he is willing to quit Delia so suddenly. Philadelph blushed at
this discourse of the unknown, and laying a restraint upon the suggestions of
his jealousy: It Is true, said he, that after I have sought for Delia over all
the world, there is little probability that at that very moment when the Gods
have restored her to me, I should part from her upon any consideration but her
own command, and if she be pleased that I should wait upon her, you may answer
for me, as you do, that I will never he divided from her whilst I live. I
esteem your person too much, replied Delia, and am too much obliged to your
goodness, to refuge your company: it shall not be by my will that we should
part so suddenly, and the meeting with you ought in all reason to be too dear
to me to lose the benefit of it so soon. Ah Delia! cried the Prince of Cilici^,
with a countenance, wherein his contentment was visible to all the company: Ah
Delia how charming are you in your generous goodness, as well as in that
admirable beauty in which the Gods have given you an advantage above all the
persons of your sex? and how well do I know that you are the same Delia,
sensible as to acknowledgment and pity, but insensible in the way of love.

He would have spoken more to that purpose, if Agrippa and Cornelius, after
some other discourses full of civility, had not entreated them to take horse to
go toward Alexandria.

The fair unknown and Philadelph had horses in their Squires hands, and Delia
and her Companion made use of such as Cornelius furnished them with all. They
were not so delicate, but that by the accidents of their life, and the voyages
they had made, they were accustomed to more difficult things, than to ride on
horseback, and Delia being mounted by the assistance of Philadelph, drew the
eyes of Agrippa and Cornelius upon her then, more than she did before. She
seemed to Agrippa more beautiful than all that he had ever seen, except Elisa
only, Cornelius could find no equal to her in his remembrance, but the Queen
Candace, and if this judgment, which (besides its conformity to the truth) was
backed by their passion, permitted them to go beyond their own interest to find
a beauty not inferior to hers, none but Cleopatra could be she. Indeed there
was hardly ever seen in the world, a more exact beauty than the fair Strangers
was, and besides the advantages, which by the sparkling quickness of her eyes,
and the just proportion of the lineaments of her face, she had over the most
illustrious beauties, never did the fairest visages carry in them so many marks
of modesty and virtue as hers did, in which they might be seen as in their most
real and most natural place. The Symmetry of her whole person was so composed
as that it might securely outbrave envy, her port and her action were
accompanied with a grace, wherein nature had imprinted something as great and
high as she was able to represent.

The amorous and transported Philadelph marching by the side of this admirable
person, by the compliance of Agrippa and Cornelius, who knowing the strong
interest wherewith he was engaged, were willing to give him free liberty to
entertain her, and looking upon her with eyes almost sparkling with the ardency
of his affection: Divine Delia, said he, Delia, the only aim, and the only
cause of my life, where shall I begin to declare to you the thoughts of my
soul, or desire to know yours, upon which my days are inseparably fixed? Shall
I blame you for that cruel flight, by which you have made me wander so long in
the most deploplorable condition, that ever an unfortunate Lover was reduced
to? Shall I represent to you the grievous sufferings, wherein I have passed my
life, occasioned by the loss of your sight, and almost of all my hopes? Or
rather, shall I ask of you, if there remains still in your Spirit any
remembrance of my love, any relics of pity, or any favorable intention for
your faithful Philadelph? Alas! it is upon this last point only that I ought to
insist: my complaints will work no more effect upon your Spirit, than they did
heretofore in Cilicia: you will apprehend nothing of the pain which your
absence has made me suffer, but what you know already by the knowledge you
have of my love. All that is past is pleasing to my memory, when I call to
mind, that it is for you that I have suffered all, and in stead of calling it to
mind by my discourse, 'twere much better Delia, that I should ask you, and
expect from your mouth the destiny of Philaladelph. But O Gods! here it is that
my courage fails me, and I continue without resolution or assurance in
expectation of a sentence upon which my life or death does certainly depend. I
am still ignorant whether amongst the thoughts of acknowledgment, which work
some effect upon such a a soul as yours, there was formerly intermingled any
motion of a particular affection. I know not whether those thoughts, whatsoever
they might be, continue in the same condition, in relation to me, as they were
discovered to me in Cilicia; whether your departure out of our Country, was not
caused by something that destroys all the hope which my love had permitted me
to conceive; whether that hard-heartedness, which you always had for me, be
not increased by absence, or rather Delia (and I tremble in speaking it to you,
both for fear of offending you, and for fear lest my suspicions should be too
true) whether all the avenues of that heart, which I have so vainly attempted
with so much love, be not blocked up against me by some other affection which
received its birth since our separation, or before our acquaintance.

Philadelph spoke these words with some pain, and finished them with his eyes
cast down to the ground, with an action that signified to Delia, a great deal
of fear and confusion: the fair Lady looked upon him a while in that condition,
without returning him any answer, and a little after smoothing her countenance
with a little more than ordinary sweetness and serenity, and giving the
passionate Prince a look, able to recall him from the grave: Be pacified
Philadelph, said she, and believe that if my Spirit was ever capable of any
affection, or may be so for the future, it never was, nor ever shall be, but
for you: by this assurance you may be secured against all your fears, with part
of which I could find some occasion to be offended, if the obligation I have to
you did not make me easily pass over slight considerations. As to the reproach
you make me concerning my departure out of Cilicia, I thought I had been partly
justified by the reasons which I alleged you for it, in the paper which I gave
you at our parting, and I believed that you would find enough there to excuse a
procedure which appearances made you condemn. Ah! Madam, cried the Prince,
interrupting her, I understood nothing upon that account, and if the Gods had
left me that means to let me know my fortune, it may be I had not wandered so
long in search of you, with so much misery and grief: that sacred paper wherein
the secret of my life was enclosed, was taken from me by an incredible
misfortune, and the religious observation of the prohibition which you made me
when you gave it me, caused me a loss whereof I was more sensible, than I
should have been of the loss of my Fathers Crown.

Upon that he related to her how he lost the Cabinet where the paper was
enclosed, and he made her that discourse in such terms as made her more and
more acquainted with the violence of his passion, and when he had done
speaking, Delia, who had quietly hearkened to him, taking up the discourse with
a smile: You have lost nothing, said she, since by our meeting, the address I
gave you to inform your self of me is rendered unnecessary. If you might be
accused of negligence, for having ill kept a thing, which in regard of the
interest you take in it ought to be of some importance to you, yet the respect
you had to the request I made you when I gave it you, ought to satisfy me, and
I receive it as no slight proof of your affection, which shall always be as
dear to me as you can desire. I did a little wonder to hear you talk in such a
manner as might make me judge that you were still ignorant of those things
which you might have understood by that means: you shall shortly understand
them from the mouth of a person, who is too much obliged to you to use any
disguise with you whilst she lives, and then I will acquaint you with the
adventures which have befallen me since our separation, which were the cause
that you failed of finding me in the Country where I was born, which I did not
conceal from you.

Philadelph even surfeting with a joy which his soul was hardly able to
contain, was about to answer Delia's obliging discourse, when the brave
unknown, who looked upon him with a countenance full of all the marks of amity,
rode up to his side, and came to participate in their conversation, Philadelph,
who upon another account would have looked with love and admiration upon the
wonders that appeared in his person, and who naturally had a soul as full of
sweetness and courtesy as any man in the world, beheld this man with a
repugnance which he could not dissemble, and seemed as little sensible of the
testimonies of esteem which he gave him, as if he had lost his judgment and
knowledge. The meeting of a man as highly accomplished as ever any nature
framed, in Delia's company, and the familiarity that seemed to be between
them, was so much suspected by him, that had it not been for the respect he
bare to Delia, he had made the effects of his jealousy appear against him
without any farther delay: and whilst Agrippa and Cornelius looked upon him as
an admirable man, and as one that did equal at least all the completest persons
that ever they saw, all the confidence he had in Delia's words, and the long
experience he had of her admirable virtue could not hinder him from looking
upon him as a Tiger ready to tear his heart in pieces: The brave unknown
highly courted him without being repulsed at his coldness, and guessing
somewhat nearlie at the cause: I hope, said he, that you will not be always
insensible of the esteem I have for you, and that you will bemone me in stead
of hating me, when you shall know that my ill fortune can move nothing but pity
in such persons as you are; He spoke only these words to him holding him by the
hand, and being unwilling to interrupt him any farther, breathing out a deep
sigh, he turned his horse toward Cornelius, just as the company was arrived
close by the gates of Alexandria.

Cornelius would willingly have lodged this last company in the Palace of the
Kings of Egypt, with Elisa and Candace, had it not been for Cesar's coming, for
whom all the lodgings were already taken up, though Cornelius had left his two
illustrious guests in theirs, supposing that the Emperor himself would be well
pleased that he had rendered this civility to the Heir of the Crown of Parthia,
and he conducted them to one of the fairest lodgings in the City, which he had
sent one of his men before to take up for them. The brave unknown and
Philadelph were completely armed, but they had given their Head-pieces to their
Squires, and marched barefaced through the streets of Alexandria. The brave
unknown rode by Cornelius his side, and his handsomeness drew upon him the eyes
and the admiration of all that were present at his passing by: amongst those a
woman, who with some others; stood upon one of the Balconies of the Palace, had
no sooner looked upon him and viewed him a little while, but without
considering how many people were about her, lifting up her hands and her eyes
to Heaven, O Gods! cried she, O great Gods! and at the same time being
overpressed with some violent motion, she lost her senses, and fell down
between the arms of those persons who were near her. The fair unknown was not
so far off, but that this voice came confusedly to his ears, and he took notice
of the bustling of the people upon the balcon, that carried away the woman that
swooned, yet he did not hear the tone of the voice distinctly enough to discern
it perfectly; neither did he hear so little, but that he presently felt an
extraordinary emotion thereupon: the Idea which was present in his memory
carried the sound into the middle of his heart, with so much trouble that it
was taken notice of by Cornelius, and not being able to dissemble it: Am I a
fool? said he, changing his color two or three times in a moment. Agrippa
makinog a sip to look upon him asked him if he found himself ill, and the
unknown endeavoring to recompose himself: It Is nothing, said he; but something
must be indulged to a man, whose imagination is a little crazed, and who is not
always himself. As he spoke these words, he endeavored to dissipate that
which he attributed to his imagination, and recovering his former condition as
much as possibly he could, he rode on, and arrived with Cornelius at the
lodging which he had designed for them.

Cornelius after he had given order himself, for their accommodation, with a
care whereunto he was not obliged in relation to persons of a meaner quality
than those of Sovereign dignity, and had learned from Philadelph's mouth his
birth, and a small abridgement of his principal adventures, returned to the
Palace to dispatch diverse affairs, which were then upon his hands, and (more
than upon any other consideration) to see Candace, and to render her some
account of the diligence he had used in the service of Cleopatra, wherein he
had seen her interessed. He found that fair Queen in the Princess Elisa's
chamber, where she had lain that night to discourse with her concerning the
discovery, she thought she had made, of her dear Cesario. Ever since that
moment, wherein that well-beloved countenance appeared to her eyes, the Spirit
of that great Princess could not recover its ordinary composure, and all that
an excessive joy, yet moderated with a fear of being mistaken, could produce in
a soul, had agitated here is without intermission. All that night sleep never
approached her eyes, and she experimented that joy was much more contrary to
it, than grief which ordinarily causes sleep, and does not keep the Spirits in
that agitation, which hinders the repose of the body. The sad Eliza was
constrained to watch a good part of the night to answer the Queen's discourse,
and to give her the counsel she desired upon that adventure. Candace was very
uncertain what way to take, to inform her Cesario of her condition, and having
no man near her whom she could trust with a secret of that importance, she
remained very much unresolved and ignorant what to do. But however it was some
comsort to her to know (if her sight did not deceive her) that her Cesario was
at so little a distance from her, and if the paleness which she had observed in
his countenance, did grieve her in relation to the bad condition of his health,
she assured her self on the other side, out of a belief she had, that in that
case Cesario could not suddenly go far from Alexandria, and so she should have
what time she desired to make use of this adventure. She was not likewise
without some hope that the Prince had seen her from the window where he leaned,
and reflecting upon that thought: If my Image be in his heart, said she, as his
entirely possesses mine, without doubt he saw me and knew me, and he did not
fix his sight so much upon the persons of our company and our train, but that
he discerned amongst that number, her, who not long since, was the object of
all his thoughts and all his affections. From this brief reasoning with her
self, she passed to a consnlation with Elisa how to find out some means to help
her self, and after she had sufficiently meditated upon it, she believed it
could not be better done, than by the assistance of Prince Tiridates, to whom
she was already beholding for her life, whom she had acquainted with part of
her adventures, and whom she knew to be very generous, and well-affected to her
interests.

Upon this thought addressing her self to Elisa: My fair Princess, said she,
the Prince Tiridates your Uncle is a Prince so virtuous, and so worthy of the
esteem of all his relations, that you can not without injuring your self,
neglect the opportunity of knowing him, and I should be ungrateful for the
obligation I have to him, if I should not contribute whit I could to the making
of you known to each other: though he discovers himself to few persons, and
especially to those of Phraates his family, I assure my self he will take it
well at my hands when I shall have procured him the sight of such a Niece as
you, and of a Princess who is discontenced, and that flies, as well as he from
the cruelty of Phraates: the aversion he has from company, and the difficulty
there will be to persuade him to quit his solitude, to come amongst the world
of people in Alexandria, obliges me to propose a walk to you toward the house
which he has chosen for his retreat: Cornelius will willingly furnish us with
a necessary equipage for this design, and I presume upon my small interest,
which partly obliges me to make you this proposition, to make use of Tiridates
his goodness, after I have discovered Cesario's retreat to him, which, so far
as I can judge, is not far distant from his. By the assistance of this
courteous Prince, to whom I have discovered my name and part of my affairs, I
may, without doubt, see my dear Cesario, or find out some means to let him know
where I am. Candace expressed her self in this manner, and Elisa having a
little meditated upon her discourse: That which you propose to me, said she, is
not very imptobable, and besides the desire I may have to know a man of mine
own kindred, and a virtuous man too, as you describe him, and as the common
report goes of him; I shall be very much satisfied, my fair Queen, if upon this
occasion you can find out any means to serve your intentions. I will go with
you to see both Tiridates and Cesario, and I shall receive no small consolation
of my own displeasures, if I can any way contribute to the case of yours.

Candace tenderly embraced Elisa upon this discourse, and they were still
engaged in this conversation, when Agrippa and Cornelius came into the chamber.
The sight of Cornelius was not very welcome to Candace, since she (...) love,
and the susicion Elisa had c^nceived of ^^ grippa's affection, closed her
ey(...) deration of his great quality (...) what was trouble some and (...)
they received them both, (...) of Agrippa, and the obligation (...) Cornelius.
The Queen of (...)ly asked what news concerning Cleopatra, and Cornelius having
told her as much as he knew, and what disigence he had used toward her ^ce,
put her into as much inquietude for her Cesar's sister, as her own affairs
could permit her to be capable of. Agrippa gave them an account in his turn, of
the employments he had had that night: but if he said nothing to them of the
meeting of Coriolanus, for fear of doing that Prince some hurt by discovering
his abode in his enemies Country, he enlarged himself upon the rancounter of
Philadelph and Delia, and made the two Princesses hearken with great attention
to the relation he made them of that adventure: he represented to them the
admirable beauty of Delia, the handsome use of Philadelph, and insilled
particularly upon the description of the wonders he had observed in the person
of the fair unknown, whom he represented to be one of the most accomplished men
in the world: Ah! if you had seen my Artaban, Ah! if you had known my Cesario,
said the two Princesses to themselves, at the same time, you would be silent
concerning all other men; to give them alone all the praises which you bestow
upon the unknown: They continued a while in this conversation, and though the
two Lovers had something else upon their hearts, Agrippa durst not declare
himself to Elisa before Candace and Cornelius, nor Cornelius proceed in that he
had begun with Candace, before Agrippa and the Princess of the Parthians.

After they were gone forth, the two Princesses has some farther discourse
concerning the resolution they had to go and seek out Tiridates and Cesario,
and they agreed to take that walk the next day if Cornelius would give them
opportunity to do it. After they had pitched upon this design, they thought
upon the Princess Olympia, toward whom for her beauty and for her rare
qualities they were very affectionately inclined, but they had not seen her
that day. The evening before, the trouble wherein Candace's spirit was, in
relation to the adventures which had befallen her, had hindered them from
desiring of her the continuation of her history, but when they saw themselves
a little free, they reflected upon it, and found themselves very desirous to be
acquainted with the sequel of it, and to give the Princess new testimonies of
the amity which they had already contracted with her. They would have gone
presently to visit her in her chamber, and they were not ignorant that they
owed that civilitie to a person, who in birth, and all manner of excellent
parts was little inferior to them, but they knew she had no intention to
discover her self, and that they could not render that good office to a slave,
without making that suspected which she desired to conceal. They contented
themselves for that time to send Cephisa to her, to know how she did, and to
make their excuses, because they did not visit her, out of fear of displeasing
her. Cephisa went to do her message, and a little while after, she returned to
the Princesses with some astonishment in her countenance: Candace having
presently asked her the cause; Madam, said she, the Princess of Thrace is not
in a condition to give you a visit to day, and I have left her upon her bed in
a violent fever, with greater troubles in her mind than there appears
disturbance in her body. The Princesses at this report, had no regard of their
former circumspection, and made no doubt but that in this case they ought to go
and visit Olympia. Let us go see her, Madam, said Elisa to Candace; for I have
such an esteem and affection for her, that I can not hear of her being ill,
without being afflicted at it. I will bear you company very willingly, replied
Candace, and as far as I can judge, that Princess is so worthy of the affection
and esteem of those persons that know her, that I should be very sorry that you
should go beyond me upon that account.

Having spoken these words, they went together to the chamber of the Princely
slave, which was hard by theirs, and as they came in they were ashamed to find
her in a place so unconformable to her condition. She was upon the bed just as
Cephisa had told them, and only Ericia with her, who had shut the windows, and
left but little light in the chamber. As soon as the Princesses were come near,
Candace sitting down upon the side of the bed, and leaving Elisa a chair at the
beds head: What is the matter, my fair Princess, said she, and what alteration
have you received since yesterdaie in your health, which is very dear to all
the persons that know you? The alteration, replied Olympia, is very great,
both in my health, and my condition, and you see me now, as it pleases the Gods
and Fortune, in a very different estate from that wherein I was this morning.
And what is bef l en you of so great importance, added Elisa presently? be
pleased to tell us, that we may take our share in it, as we have hitherto done,
out of inclination and knowledge, in every thing that concerned you. I am so
discomposed, answered Olympia that I know not whether I shall be able to
express my self, and all the passions are confused in my soul with so much
violence, that my body is not able to resist them, and I have hardly so much
as my speech at liberty, I know not whether it be joy that puts me into this
condition, or whether is be grief that works this effect both upon my body and
my Spirit, but however it be, I will tell you, if I can, seeing you have the
goodness to interesse your selves thus in my fortune, that the man of whom I
formerlie spoke to you with so much passion, the fair unknown, to whom by a
strange fatalitie I gave my heart at the first sight, he who afterward by
diverse great actions, and great proofs of his love took the absolute
possession of my soul, he, for whose sake only I have survived such long
sorrows, and for whom I preserved this unfortunate life with a little hope of
seeing him again, is now in Alexandria. O Gods, cried Candace, what do you tell
us Olympia, and what assurance have you of his arrival? That replied Olympia,
which my eyes gave me, and being with Ericia, and some other persons upon that
Balconie which looks into the street, when Agrippa and Cornelius returned, I
saw him with his face uncovered, I saw him so plainly that I could not be
mistaken, and I could not see him but with so great a trouble and emotion, that
my senses failed me, and I fell in a swoon betwixt Ericia's arms. Ah! without
doubt, added Candace, it is the fair unknown, of whom Agrippa speak to us with
so many Elogies, he, whom he found in the wood with a Lady, whose admirable
beauty he represented to us. It Is the very same, answered Olympia, and Agrippa
could not speak to you of him with so many praises, but he must forget some
admirable qualities in his person, he, for whom I have breathed out so many
sighs, is at last returned to me, and he for whose sake I lingered out my days
in slavery and misery, comes to be a witness of my captivity, and servitude,
which I supported with patience through the love I had for him. Well, said the
sad Elisa, interrupting her, Well, my dear Olympia, see, you have the greatest
occasion of joy that ever you could desire, and in the mean time it produces in
you such effects as do not ordinarily proceed from any thing but grief: Alas!
you recover all that you had lost, and Elisa only remains without hope of ever
seeing again that which the pitylesse destinies have taken from her. It Is
indeed to me, replied Olympia, with two or three sighs, the only occasion of
joy that I could wish for, to see him again whom I so dearly loved, and the
Gods bear me witness, that had it not been for the hope I had of it, my
unfortunate days had not been of so long a continuance: but it is indeed to me
a greater occasion of grief if I see him again unfaithful, than if I had never
seen him again, nor outlived so many miseries, only to be a witness of his
infidelity: It had been more acceptable, and much better for me to have lost
this deplorable life, either amongst the waves, or in those miseries wherewith
hitherto it has been turmoiled. You have some reason, said Candace much
troubled, but what knowledge, or rather what suspicion have you, that this man,
from whom you have received so many restimonies of love, is now unfaithful to
you? I have, answered Olympia, the same that you your self gave me, when you
told me, that he was found in the wood by Agrippa with a Lady of admirable
beauty; those few words you spoke of it exasperated my wound with a violent
pain: but besides that, I will tell you, that being come again to my self out
of my swoon, whereinto so unexpected a sight had cast me, and being hardly able
to give credit to my eyes upon the report they had made to my heart, nor
believe that this object of my life had appeared to my sight any otherwise
than by illusion, or the effect of my imagination, I desired Ericia to go
presently to make a farther discovery, and having enquired out the house,
where Cornelius had lodged those strangers, I commanded her to mingle her self
amongst the other slaves which were employed in their service, and to go into
the house with her face covered, to take notice of him who had put me into the
trouble I was in: She punctually executed this order, and easily found means to
slip into the chamber, whither he was then retired, she saw him, and she knew
him so well, that she could not doubt in the least, but that it was he. But, O
Gods! she saw him with that young Lady, of whom Agrippa spoke to you, who
diverse times in Ericia's presence threw her arms about his neck, and used
many affectionate expressions, which this perfidious man answered again with
caresses full of all the marks of Love. The report which Ericia plainly made me
of it put me into the condition you see, and there needs no more to send this
unfortunate creature to her grave.

She ended these words with a many sobs, and a multitude of tears, which her
resentment drew from her fair eyes.

Elisa and Candace sympathized in her grief, and were nearly touched with
compassion at it; they reflected at the same time upon the report which Agrippa
had made them of the beauty of Delia, and the marks of amity which in his
presence she bestowed upon the unknown, and upon the remembrance of this
discourse they conjectured that the suspicions of the sad Olympia might be
rational enough, yet they would not confirm her in them, nor declare their real
thoughts to her for fear of aggravating her affliction. And Candace resuming
the discourse, after she had been a while silent: My fair Princess, said she,
your grief would be justifiable, if you should really find in fidelity in a
man, to whom you express so much affection, or rather this grief ought to make
way for a just resentment, which with reason enough might banish him from your
heart and memory; but you ought not, upon slight appearances, to entertain this
belief which is the enemy of your repose; and the importance of it is so great
that you ought not no neglect any thing that may instruct you in the truth.
Olympia in stead of returning an answer to Candace's words, lifting her eyes to
Heaven in a very pityful manner: Great Gods! said she, ^f my Prince be
unfaithful, do not permit me to survive a moment after this cruel discovery,
and end the course of my unfortunate days by a favorable effect of your pity,
rather than expose this miserable Princess to the only effect of your
indignation, which as yet she has not felt. She accompanied these words with
diverse others to the same sense, at the end whereof the two Princesses being
tenderly moved, used all the arguments their invention could furnish them with,
to comfort her, and to banish out of her mind that cruel opinion, which put her
into so pityful a condition. After they had spent some time with her in this
employment, they believed she had need of rest, and that her passionate
expressions in their presence might redouble her fever. This belief obliged
them to quit her, after they had promised her that they would return within an
hour, and not leave her till she was better settled in her mind.

The end of the third Book.
Hymen's Praeludia: OR, LOVE'S Masterpiece.
PART 6. LIB. 4.
ARGUMENT.
Philadelph misconstrues Delia's kindness to her fair Companion. His jealousy,
almost heightened ^o revenge, is dissipated by a discovery that he is not the
Lover, but the brother of Delia* Delia discovers her self to be Arsinoe
daughter to Artabazus King of Armenia, and relates her Story to Philadelph. She
tells him of her departure from the Cilician Court under the conduct of
Antigenes, who, in stead of conveying her into Armenia, carries her by force
into Cyprus; and there having unsuccessefully used all probable means to gain
her Love, he at last resolves to storm her chastity. As he is about to act his
villainy, Arsinoe's outcries call in Britomarus, accidentally there, to her
rescue. By the death of Antigenes and his companions, Britomarns frees the
Princess and undertakes to conduct her into Armenia. At Sea they are set upon
by Pirates, but by the valor of Britomarus, and of a gallant Slave in the
Pirates Ship the Pirates are discomfited. Britomarus leaves Arsinoe to the
conduct of her brother, and suddenly departs. Ariobarzanes upon some important
occasions takes Egypt in his way, and near to Alexandria they are found in a
wood by Philadelph.

IN the meam time the charming Delia, the fair unknown, and the amorous
Philadelph passed the rest of the day in little differing cares and
employments, in the house where Cornelius had lodged them. Philadelph being
alone in his chamber, began to study with a profound meditation, what judgment
he should make of his fortune, and considering the blessing he had received
from Heaven that day, he was ready to give himself up to transports of joy,
but he quickly found that modeated by the motions of his jealousy. I have
found my Delia again, said he, and after so long a search, and an absence so
cruel to an amorous spirit as mine is, the Gods have looked upon me with pity,
and have restored to me the only aim and object of my life. I will live no
longer in that dreadful darkness, wherein my soul has been so long entombed,
and I shall be permitted to look upon my Delia with the same eyes, which have
shed so many tears for her since our separation. Ah my sorrows! Ah my
languishings! Ah my tedious nights! you are all dissipated by this blessed day
which Delia has brought back into my soul, and from hence forward the sad
remembrance of my cruel sufferings, shall work no other effect upon my Spirit,
than to render the good things I am to taste, more sweet, more charming, and
more sensible.

He paused a while upon this consideration of his good fortune, but a little
after, that passion, the enemy of repose, which having its original from love
always endeavors its ruin, that importunate jealousy which corrupts the
best thoughts, bringing to his remembrance the fair unknown, and the marks of
amity, and familiarity which he had seen between Delia and him, overclowded
all his joy, and troubled him in such a manner that he was but very
imperfectlie sensible of any part of it. What does it avail me, said he, to
have found Delia again, if I find her unfaithful? and what advantageous change
have I received in my condition, if I see her again whom I loved so dearly,
only to see her in a rivals arms? She travailes up and down the world, she lies
in woods in the company of a man endued with all manner of lovely parts, she
caresses him, and treats him with friendship in my presence, and indeed forgets
nothing that may occasion a just suspicion. Ah! Delia, how strange an
alteration is this in you, and how different is this manner of life from that
severe and scrupulous virtue, which caused me so many sufferings in Cilicia?

But on the otherside, added he, checking himself, seeing I have so many
testimonies of the virtue, the sincerity, and the purity of Delia's heart and
spirit, ought I upon the first conjecture to overthrow an opinion grounded upon
so many proofs? did I find any change in her countenance, or in the
entertainment I received from Delia? and have not I received from her own mouth
more clear and ample assurances of her affection, than ever she gave me
heretofore? did there appear any constraint in her countenance in the
performance of that action? did she vary in any thing which might make me
suspect her inconstancy? and do not I owe respect and consideration enough to
the knowledge I have of her Spirit, to give absolute credit to her words? All
this is very true, pursued he, but yet, who is this fair unknown? what is this
man, who possessing so many amiable qualities, accompanies her almost alone in
her voyages, that passes the nights with her in the woods, that armed himself
against me with so much fury when I would have accosted her, and that receives
so many testimonies of affection and familiarity from her in my presence? what
is this unknown if he be not a Lover, if he be not a man, beloved and favored
by Delia? Ha! whatsoever he be, continued he, growing into passion, he shall be
the object of the most just resentment that ever soul conceived, and if it be
true that he deprives me of Delia, the respect I have for her, which tied my
hands to day in her presence, will not be able to hinder me from killing him in
any patt of the world where I shall find him, or from leaving at the point of
his sword a life, which he has already more cruelly assaulted, than he can do
by the way of arms.

He entertained himself thus in his thoughts, when he heard a noise at his
chambet door, and casting his eyes immediately that way, he saw the brave
unknown come in, who at that time took up all his thoughts, and who was no less
the object of his hatred and resentment, than Delia was of his Love. Philadelph
who was not prepared for this visit, grew pale at the fight of him, and by the
changes of his countenance made him easily guess at the agitations of his
soul, and the little inclination he had for so unexpected a sight. The fair
unknown was not repulsed by the coldness of his entertainment, but accosting
him with a countenance, wherein if there were not all the marks of joy, there
were at least all the assurances of amity: I come, said he, to render you that
which I owe you, both in relation to the merit of your person, and to the
obligation by which you have engaged both me and my relations to your service.
You are not obliged to me, replied Philadelph, except you pretend to be so for
the services I rendered Delia, when her fortune made her land in our Country,
where she received nothing from me, but what she might expect from all persons
that were capable of knowing her. It Is upon that very score, answered the
unknown, that I am redeuable to you, and you could not render Delia those
assistances which she received from your generositie, in defending her against
the enemies, which your affection raised her, and preserving her with so much
care and bounty from those dangers which threatened her life and reputation,
without laying a strong obligation upon a man, who interesses himself in
Delia's preservation as much as in his own. I free you from that obligation,
replied Philadelph, beginning to be choleric at this discourse, and if my
desire was to preserve Delia from those dangers whereinto she fell by my
misfortune, 'twas never my intention to preserve her for you, or for any
person else, that might make benefit of the effects of my love and duty, as
long as I have a drop of blod or a moment of life left to defend my pretention.
If I be not obliged to your intentions, said the unknown, I am so, without
doubt, to the effects of them, and it is that which partly injoyns me to desire
that friendship of you, which you have little disposition to grant me, though
Delia her self desired it of you for me. You have, answered Philadelph, all the
qualities that might gain more important friendships than mine, but that ought
to be very indifferent to you, seeing I can not receive yours, nor look upon
you but as upon the most crnel of my enemies, as long as you shall dream of
Delia, and pretend to reap the fruit of the services which I have rendered her.
There is no necessity of dissembling any longer. No, you can not but be my
enemy, and the resentment you express for an office, which I never had a
design to render you, kindles another in my soul, which renders our two lives
incompatible. If you interesse your self in the service which I rendered Delia,
so much as you make show of, or rather if you love her as well as you would
express, you must dispute her with me other ways, than by offers of a
friendship which I cannot receive from you. The respect I bear to Delia hindered
me from declaring in her presence that which has been upon my heart all this
day, but since she knows very well that the love I have for her has made me
fail a hundred times in my duty to my Father, she will pardon me, what the same
passion shall make me undertake against a man, whom she looks upon but too
favorably to my misfortune, and whom she ought never to have looked upon to
the prejudice of such a fidelity as mine.

Philadelph spoke in this manner, and by these words vented a part of his
inward fire with a furious impetuositie, when the fair unknown looking upon him
with his former coldness, and adding a smile full of sweetness to the
moderation which appeared in his countenance, I know not, said he, whether I
ever wanted courage hitherto, or whether dangers and threats have over much
affrighted me in the occasions I have met withal, but I very well perceive that
you will hardly make me resolve to draw my sword any more against you, and if
Delia can not be disputed between us but by arms, the pretentions we may have
to her will not be suddenly decided. I am very unhappy to find in you such a
hardness of heart as I thought not to have met with, and no body but your self
would possibly be so cruel as to deny me a friendship which I thought I might
merit by the desire which I have expressed of it. You deserve better, answered
Philadelph, and you have but too excellent parts to be my enemy; I should have
had less disposition to become yours, if you had nothing but ordinary in you,
and this is an effect of my ill fortune that finding in you whatsoever, upon
another account, might have attracted my esteem and affection, it must needs
be, that principally in that respect, you are so much the more odious to me,
by how much you are the more redoutable: But I wonder, pursued he, looking upon
him with a severer eye than before, that you persevere in this manner of acting
with me, seeing the little sensibilitie I express of your kindness, and it
seems you have a mind to make a piece of raillerie of the most important
buisiness that ever you meddled with in your life. If you reallie love Delia as
your words and actions do declare, there is little probability that you should
desire my friendship so much as you would persuade me you do, and I know not
upon what consideration you court a man, for whom this concurrence can leave
you nothing but repugnance and aversion: and if you do it to insult over an
unfortunate man in your happy condition, know that as yet it is but ill
grounded, and you have not so contemptible an enemy of me, but that you have
need of all your power to preserve that, which at the rate of your life he will
dispute with you to the last moment of his own.

Philadelph uttering these words with violence, and not being able any longer
to endure the sight of the unknown, was going to fling out of the chamber, when
he staid him by the arm, and having much ado to hold him: Stay Philadelph,
said he, and if you can not endure me as the Lover of Delia, at least endure me
as her brother. As her brother? cried Philadelph, looking upon him with an
action full of astonishment: Yes as her brother, replied the unknown; Delia is
my sister, and upon this confession which I make to you hence forward our
amity will be n^ more suspected by you. O Gods, said Philadelph, what is it
you tell me, could it be possibly that you should be the brother of Delia, or
is it to make your self more spor^ that you make me this discourse? I am the
brother of Delia, replied the unknown, and she knowing that our amity caused
your jealousy, would not have me deser any longer the discovery of this truth
to you my self, I was not unwilling to give her that satisfaction, and besides
what the knowledge of your merit might produce in me since I saw you, the
relation she made me of your generous procedure toward her, caused so much
esteem and so much affection in me for you, that there was hardly any thing in
the world which I could more ardently desire than the opportunity of seeing and
serving you.

With these words he strerched out his arms to him, and Philadelph receiving
him into his with an excessive joy, O Gods, said he, how happy am I, if it be
true that you are the brother of Delia, and how satisfied shall I be, that now
I may love and adore in you those admirable parts which caused so much
jealousy in me? Never doubt, answered the unknown, of a truth which in time
and at leisure you will learn from Delia's mouth: my actions shall make you yet
a fuller discovery, and you shall receive from me, as from the brother of
Delia, such services in relation to her, as you could not expect from her
lover. I beg your pardon then, added Philadelph, transported with joy, for the
faults which my error made me commit, and I conjure you with a real repentance,
to grant me that friendship now which my indiscreet jealousy made me so
unhandsomelie reject.

With these words they embraced each other with a real brotherly affection,
and Philadelph looking upon him then as Delia's brother with different eyes
from those which his jealousy before had opened, felt himself presently
inclined to love and admire him, who had a little before caused so many
suspicions in him; they continued a great while embracing each other, and after
they had made diverse mutual protestations of eternal amity: Delia, said the
unknown, must perfect our reconciliation, let us go and visit her together, if
you please, and you shall begin to know whether I interesse my self in
Philadelph's satisfaction, as the brother, or as the lover of Delia.

Having done speaking these words, they went together out of the chamber, and
passed into Delia's, which was not far off. That fair Lady was laid down upon
her bed to repose her self after a little wearyness, and she no sooner saw the
two new friends approach, but addressing her discourse to the unknown: Well
brother, said she, have you appeased that enemy, which had so much repugnance
for the brother of Delia? The brother of Delia, answered Philadelph, is and
shall always be as dear to me as my life, but the person of a lover, and of a
lover favored by Delia could not but be very odious to me. You shall never,
replied Delia, causing him to place himself in a chair near her bed's head, you
shall never have cause to envy the favors you shall see me do any other, and
since the time you have seen me, you might have known me well enough, to
believe that it is not easy to find any lovers favored by Delia: It Is true
this man, whom you have so much suspected is my brother, and a brother,
continued she, making him sit down upon the side of her bed, and embracing him
with a great deal of tenderness, who is as dear to me as my life: but I will
make no difficulty to tell you before him, that he is not more dear to me than
Philadelph, and though the qualities of your person had not been capable to
produce the effect you may hope for from them only, the remembrance of your
pure and generous affection continues in my heart with such a real resentment,
that nothing will ever be able to efface it thence. I lived in Cilicia with
some circumspection, that possibly you did not approve of, and I went from
thence at a time when you might probably expect all the acknowledgment that
might be of your affection, but it is time now, Philadelph, to declare to you
those reasons which may justify my actions, and to let you know that Fortune
has not been so blind, as you believed, in making you address your affections
to a person of a base and obscure birth; truly you have been generous and
dis-interessed in loving with so honest and so rational intentions, a Maid,
whom you believed to be infinitely inferior to you, and designing for her,
merely out of the knowledge you had of her face and virtue, a Crown and a
place which the greatest Princesses of Asia would gladly have accepted of: but
it was not the will of the Gods that this generositie should remain without
recompense, and they have permitted you, in the person of that obscure Delia,
to love the daughter of a great King, and a Princess that might pretend, being
known to you, to that which you so freely offered her before you knew her.
What, Madam, cried Philadelph, are you a Kings daughter? I am so without doubt,
replied Delia, and the daughter of a King of the supremest ranks of Asia. Ha!
Madam, answered the Prince, falling upon his knees by her beds side, this
discovery causes me more grief than joy, and if I take part in the
satisfaction which you have in being of a birth conformable to the greatness of
your virtue, what excuses shall I be able to find for so many faults, which my
error has made me commit against you? It Is that, added Delia, for which I have
great cause to commend you eternally, and though you had known my true
condition, I could not desire more respect from you, than you have always
expressed to me. Ah! without doubt, replied the Prince, I might have perceived
by so many marks of greatness which appeared in your person, and your
actions, that you were not born of an obscure blood; and I had great suspicions
of the truth, which I have often communicated to the Princess Andromeda: but
this belief was stifled by the little reason we saw in you to conceal that
truth with so much perseverance, at a time when this declaration might have
freed you from a great many displeasures, and given a great deal of
satisfaction to those persons of whose affection you could not doubt. I had
some reasons for it, answered the Princess, which other persons possibly might
have passed by, but in those of my humor they were capable of doing what they
did; and if it were advantageous for me in your mind to declare that I was born
of a Royal blood, it was dangerous for me to confess that I was of a family,
which is an enemy to yours, and so much hated by yours, that I could expect
nothing upon any consideration but a shameful and cruel usage from the King
your Father. Ha! Madam, interrupted Philadelph, though you were the daughter of
Artabazus, and the sister of the cruel Artaxus King of Armenia, who by the
death of our near relations has done such bloody injuries to our family; you
carry that in your countenance which might guard you from all dangers, and you
should have always found me your slave, that would have defended you to the
last drop of his blood against his Father as well as against the strangest
enemies. I was afraid too upon your account, replied the Princess, not of any
ill usage, being so well acquainted with your virtue and goodness, which
without doubt would have protected me, though Love had not interposed, but some
change, or coldness in your affection of which I always had a high esteem: but
since it is come to the proof of such a declaration, I will make no more
difficulty to confess to you that I am Arsinoe daughter to the King of
Armenia, and sister to the same Artaxus, from whom you have received such
bloody displeasures in your family, and this Prince for whom at first you had
so much aversion, is the Prince Ariobarzanes my brother, of a very different
humor from the King his elder brother, and who had no hand in that cruelty,
which caused so great a resentment against Artaxus in the Spirit of the King
your Father. See now, Philadelph, whether you love Delia still, or the sister
of Artaxus, and whether I have not lost what my good fortune had gained upon
your Spirit, by being born of a blood which is odious to your Family. Ah!
Madam, cried the transported Prince, imprinting almost by force a fiery kiss
upon Arsiones fair hand, though Artaxus should have exposed me my self to the
most violent effects of cruelty, the Princess Arsinoe his sister, and yet my
adorable Delia, is no less amiable, nor less worthy of my respects, and I do
not only continue in the former terms of my love to her, but upon her
consideration Artaxus is no longer odious unto me, and seeing he is Delia's
brother I would serve him with my life and blood.

Upon these words the Prince Ariobarzanes stretching out his arms to him: And
may not I, said he, who did no way contribute to those actions which gave you
so just an occasion to hate the cruel Artaxus, I who was a great way off from
the place where they were committed, and after I had heard of them always
looked upon mine own brother with aversion and repugnance, may not I hope more
justly than he, that the same goodness which causes you so easily to pardon
the culpable, will incline you to love the innocent, and those which have never
offended you nor yours? Philadelph tenderly embracing Ariobarzanes: What
resentment so ever, said he, my jealousy caused in me to day against you, you
are composed of such admirable parts, that it would be no difficulty for you to
gain the hearts of your most cruel enemies, and if any thing could remain upon
my heart against you, it would be because I believed you were the Lover of
Delia, and not because I know you to be the brother of Artaxus: But, Madam,
continued he, turning to the Princess, you surprise me with your discourse, I
have been informed that in the King of Armenia's Family there was a Prince
Ariobarzanes, and a Princess Arsinoe, born both with admirable qualities: but
there came a report to us since, that as they were going to Rome, both Arsinoe
and Ariobarzanes perished by a shipwreck, which made all Armenia deplore their
loss, as being two imcomparable persons. We did really suffer shipwreck,
replied Arsinoe, and I believe we are dead still in the opinion of the
Armenians, and of the greatest part that of those that knew us: but the Gods to
whom the person of Ariobarzanes was precious, would not let him perish, but
saved me too for his sake. This is that which I would now acquaint you with,
and after that I have briefly made known to you the reasons which caused me to
conceal my self in Cilicia, and which obliged me to depart thence, I will give
you an account of that which has befallen me since our separation, which
hindered me from retiring into Armenia, as my intention was to do.

With these words she caused him to sit down again in his chair, and in the
mean time the Prince Ariobarzanes, not judging it necessary for him to be
present at a relation, whereof he knew all the particulars, and desiring to
give the two Lovers leisure to discourse of their adventures with all freedom,
whilst he went to entertain himself with those thoughts with which his Spirit
was disturbed, went out of the chamber, to go and walk in a garden, which he
saw under the windows. Only the Princesses maid continued with her own and
Philadelphs Mistress, and the Princess having kept silence a while to call to
remembrance those things which she intended to relate, she began her discourse
in these terms.

The History of the Princess ARSINOE.
THere are few remarkable things in my life wherewith you are not acquainted:
those of the most importance befell me in Cilicia, whereof you were a witness
and the principal cause: and you are ignorant of nothing almost, but what has
happened since our sepatation, and that I shall acquaint you with at large,
after that I have succinctlie passed over former businesses, and those reasons
which may defend me against your accusations.

I will not begin my discourse with the beginnings of my life, which have
nothing of importance in them, but what is known throughout all Asia; my first
years passed away with sweetness and tranquillity enough, and the time of our
tender infancy was spent in a flourishing Court, and a peaceable and fortunate
Kingdom: but I hardly began to have the use of reason, or any knowledge of our
condition of life, when by the cruel surprise of Anthony, the unfortunate
Artabazus our Father was carried prisoner to Alexandria, and all his family
with him, except Artaxus our elder brother, who succeeded him in the enjoyment
of the Crown. My brother Ariobarzanes, my sister Artemisa and my self lived in
a captivity in a pompous Court, till I was about eight or nine years old, and
this loss of our liberty (the sorrow whereof was so cruelly redoubled by the
deplorable death of the King our Father, which I believe no person is ignorant
of) was not repaired till after the defeat and the last misfortunes of Anthony
and Cleopatra, at which time Caesar being master of Alexandria, and the Empire
too by the fall of his competitour, freed us from captivity, and sent us back
with an honorable convoy to the King of Armenia our brother, whom he received
into the number of his Friends and Allies.

Prelate this to you in a few words as a thing sufficiently divnlged, and I
will not entertain you with the reception which Artaxus gave us, who looked
upon the wrack of our family with great resentments for our common
misfortune. We lived in his Court with all the splendour we had lost, and we
recovered there, together with our liberty, our former rank and dignity. We
were brought up, my brother, my sister, and my self, with great care, and it
was not the fault of those persons who were put about me, that the slight
advantages which I might have received from nature were not favourablie
seconded by good education. There was nothing forgotten, which might frame my
Spirit to the horror of vices, and to the love of virtue, and I will say, if I
may do it without offending against modesty, that I had my inclinations
naturally carried to esteem that, which seemed good, and to avoid that which
appeared to me to be vicious. I had a good Governess, the very same you saw in
Cilicia, whom I made to pass for my Aunt, who took a great deal of pains to
cultivate whatsoever she thought she observed of good in me, and contributed as
much as possibly she could to form me according to her desires, and virtuous
inclinations.

About this time, as you know, the King my brother prompted by a very just
desire of revenge, made war upon the King of the Medes your Allie, and in the
first year he had some advantages, which made him hope the absolute ruin of
his enemies. It Is true, by what we could understand, he dis-honoured them by
his cruelty, and the Gods likewise to punish him for it, stopped the course of
his good fortune by the succors you gave Tigranes, which changed his fortune,
and forced him to be gone out of the Dominions of your Allies. 'Twas at that
time that he committed that action, which has been so much condemned by all
virtuous persons, to cut the throats of two Princes of your blood, prisoners in
a just war, and against whom he could have no lawful resentment.

This was that which made him lose the valiant Britomarns, whose valor had
been so favorable to him in the first years of the war, and upon the relation
which was made me of the generous quarrel he had with the King for the safety
of his prisoners, what cause so ever I had otherwise to blame the presumption
of that young warrior, I could not but have his virtue and greatness of
courage in admiration, and that esteem made me forget some part of the
resentment I had against him. Ariobarzanes, who by the Kings command continued
at Artaxata, as well because of his youth which as yet was not capable of
bearing arms, as to keep the Armenians in obedience, whilst their King made
war in foreign Countries, wept for regret and grief at the relation of this
cruel^ie, and made all those judge who saw him at that time, that his
inclinations would be very different from those of the King his brother. I
enlarge my self particularly upon this action of Artaxus, because it was upon
this account that the hatred of the King your Father was so violently
exasperated both against him and his, and it was upon the resentment of this
action that he made an oath never to pardon any person of the blood or
Alliance of Artaxus whom fortune should cause to fall into his hands, and it
was upon this knowledge, and out of the fear of this choler, that I obstinately
resolved upon so long a disguise in Cilicia. You know better than I, what were
the last successes of that war, and how at last it was ended by Augustus's
authority, who by the terror of his power, made these Kings, who were cruelly
bent to ruin each other, to lay down their arms, and forced them to peace,
when the weakness of them both might sufficiently have disposed them to it, if
their hatred had not maintained the war, rather than their forces. It Is true,
(said Philadelph, interrupting the Princesses discourse) that the King my
Father retired with so much grief and resentment against Artaxus for the death
of Ariston and Theomedes his Nephews, that to revenge himself of that cruelty,
there was no cruelty but he would have exercised; and I believe if fortune had
made you your self fall into his hands with this miraculous beauty and these
divine graces, which might have disarmed the rage of a hunger starved Tiger, he
would have made you to have felt the effects of his indignation without any
respect. Do not think it strange then, if I was afraid of him, replied
Arsinoe, and do me the favor to believe still, that the consideration of my
life was not the cause of my greatest fears, and I had not used so much care
for the preservation of it, if I had not thought it due to my honor, which in
his indignation an implacable enemy might possibly have exposed to ignominy to
take the more severe revenge upon Artaxus's his cruelty. I should not possibly
have had this fear of a man born of a Royal blood, and of one that was your
Father, if it had not been confirmed in my Spirit, by the knowledge he gave me
of it, as you shall understand in the sequels of my discourse.

You know that a little while after this forced peace, Augustus sent to demand
Ariobarzanes and my self to be brought up at Rome near him, with diverse Kings
children which were educated there in the same manner, and were kept by
Augustus near himself, either to testify his affection to their Parents, or to
have a greater assurance of their sidelitie by means of those hostages. Artaxus
knew not presently what to judge of it, but he durst not disobey Augustus's
will, of which in all probability this was an obliging effect on his part, and
having communicated to us the order which he had received, he found us not
unwilling to go the voyage. Ariobarzanes being naturally amorous of great
things, joyfully received the proposition which was made him of going to that
stately City, Mistress of the greatest part of the Universe, to pass some years
in that pompous Court, where almost all the Kings in the world came to pay
their homage: and besides he had small inclination to the severe dealings of
Artaxus, but being of a sweet and pityful disposition, he could not live
without repugnance with a man so cruel and inexorable toward those who had
offended him.

These were the reasons which obliged Ariobarzanes willingly to undertake the
voyage to Rome, and his good will easily gained mine, without him I should
hardly have ventured upon this enterprise, but ever since we were little ones
there was contracted so near an amity between us, that we could hardly live
one without the other and I did more easilielresolve to go all the world over
with Ariobarzanes, who was as dear to me as my self, than to stay at Artaxata
without him.

It would be to no purpose to relate to you the preparations for our voyage,
and the regrets which Artaxus and Artemisa expressed at our departure, it will
suffice me to tell you, that all things were ordered as they should be, with an
equipage beseeming our birth, we departed from Artaxata upon the way toward
Italy, and marched as far as the Egean Sean, where we embarked; after we had
crossed a good part of Armenia, and coasted Licia and Pamphilia by land,
without any memorable accident. From the Egean Sea, in stead of passing over
the Straight, to descend into Macedonia, and to take shipping again upon the
Adriatique Gulf, as that was our most direct way; fearing the tediousness of
those long voyages by land, where with we were already tired, we turned upon
the left hand toward Peloponnesus, and descended into the Mediterr auean Sea,
believing, that though it would be the longer, yet it would be the easyer way,
not being obliged to embark and disembark so often. It was rather our destinies
that would have it thus, and the Gods who reserved Ariobarzanes and I for other
adventures, had not ordained that we should see the banks of Tiber.

We had been but a small time upon this Sea, when we were seized upon by that
furious tempest, wherein we suffered that shipwreck, which you have heard
spoken of, and lost our lives in the opinion of so many persons. I will not
describe to you the particulars of that impetuous storm, I will content my self
to tell you, that the winds immediately rose so contrary to us, that they made
us take a quite contrary way to that which we had begun to sail; and after we
had been tossed up and down two days and two nights in perpetual fears of
death, which presented it self to our eyes; they cast our battered vessel upon
that coast of Cilicia which is opposite to Cyprus, where navigation is so
dangerous by reason of an infinite number of small rocks, which reach no higher
than the superficies of the water, against one of which our vessel being
disabled from sailing, was dashed all to pieces and left us exposed to the
mercy of the pityless waves. I could not know then what became of Ariobarzanes:
and though the strict amity which had always been between us, rendered his
safety as dear to me as mine own, yet I was in a part of the ship, distant
from that where he was employed, and the dreadful danger I was in at that
time, made me forget every thing else but the preservation of my life; I had
little hope of it, and yet I would not neglect the means which Heaven might
give me to prolong it. I closely embraced a piece of the mast, upon which I
laid hold just when the vessel split, and my Governesse and one of my maids who
were always close by me, were likewise companions of my fortune, and holding
by my two sides they were carried above water by that favorable piece of wood,
to which I owed my safety, the violence of the waves made us many times
almost let go our hold, but necessity gives strength in such extremities as
those, to which next to the assistance of Heaven we owed without doubt the
preservation of our lives. By good fortune the shore was not far off, and after
we had been a long time tossed up and down with little hope, and small strength
or knowledge left, the mast which sustained us, by a wave, which was more
impetuous than all that went before, was driven on shore with so much
vehemence, that we found our selves upon the sand, when we almost despaired of
ever reaching to it.

We continued lying a long while upon the shore, half dead with wearyness, the
coldness of the water, and so many miseries as we had suffered, where I looked
upon what had befallen us as upon a dream, and had hardly so much knowledge
left as to reflect upon my shipwreck. We were in this condition, when Briseis
that good woman, at whose house you met me, arrived as she was walking upon the
shore, and being moved with compassion at so pityful a spectacle, she
presently offered us all the assistances we could desire of her in our present
misery. I did not refuse her offers in the necessity we had of her succor,
and I easily disposed my self to go with her to her house to dry my self, and
to take some rest which I had need enough of: But I hardly began to know that
the Gods had saved my life from the danger which had threatened it, but I
remembered my brother, and upon that remembrance, grief wanted but a very little
of making me lose that which the waves had spared, I would not leave the shore
as wet and weary as I was, without searching it as far as my strength would
permit, and calling on every side with a feeble voice upon the name of
Ariobarzanes.

I will not Philadelph, describe to you the particulars of my grief, that
discourse would be too troublesome to you but I will protest to your truly and
the Gods bear me witness, that the loss of my dear brother, hindered me from
being sensible of any joy for my own safety, I earnestly complained that
Heaven had permitted me to survive so amiable and so well-beloved a brother.
and if I had not been flattered with some small hope that he might have
received from Heaven an assistance like to that which saved me, whereof being
much stronger than I, he might make much better use, my grief would have been
strong enough to have given me that upon the land, which I avoided upon the
water. The comfort which my Governess labored to give me in this uncertainty,
and the endeavors of Briseis, who applied her self to comfort and serve me
with a great deal of goodness, wrought no effect upon my Spirit, and I spent
the three or four first days in tears, which no discourse could dry up; I had
the name of Ariobarzanes perpetually in, my mouth, and his visage eternally
before my eyes, losing no time in the mean while, in making the shore to be
searched every way by Briseis's servants, to learn some news of him.

This affliction which absolutely took up my thoughts, did not permit me for
above eight days so much as to inform my self in what place we were; but when
I was rendered capable of some discourse, and the first transports of grief were
a little dissipated by a ray of hope which I conceived, that the destiny of
Ariobarzanes might be the same with mine, I gave my Governess leave to enquire,
and I understood that we were but a days journey from the capital City of
Cilicia. This intelligence filled me with as much fear as I was capable of in
my profound sadness, and not being ignorant upon what account the King of that
Country was an enemy to our family, and an enemy full of hatred, which could
let me hope for nothing but all manner of shame, and ill usage if I was
discovered in his dominions, I resolved to disguise my name and my birth, and
understanding by Ericlea my Governess, and by Melite, who, as you knew, is the
maid who is still with me, that they had not acquainted Breseis with any thing
of the truth, I concealed my true name under that of Delia, and my condition
under that of Ericlea's Niece, praying my Governesse to carry her self toward
me in public as her Niece, and Milite to treat me as her sister. This was
performed as I desired, and the same day Briseis was informed by us of those
things which we desired she should know, and which were related to you a few
days after: I had diverse Jewels upon my clothes, which I took off the better
to disguise the truth, and I caused part of them to be given to Briseis by my
Governess in acknowledgment of her generous bounty, though she refused them a
great while, and did not resolve to take them till we threatened to be, gone
from her, if she refused those small tokens of our gratitude and amity.

We were upon these terms, Philadelph, and waiting for some favorable
opportunity to return into my own Country without being discovered, I spent my
time, when I could get free from those women, in solitude, which was more
agreeable to me than any company, by reason of the sadness which the loss of
Ariobarzanes had established in my soul, when it pleased the Gods that I should
meet you in that fatal wood, whither our common destiny conducted us. You know
better than I all that befell me in Cilicia from that day till the day of our
separation: but you did not know part of the resentments and the thoughts
which* possessed my soul since that time, I will give you a brief account of
them before I proceed to the relation of that which befell me since your
departure out of Cilicia.

Do not think, Philadelph, that I could look upon so many proofs of so pure,
and so perfect an affection, from a Prince so highly accomplished as your
self, with that insensibilitie wherewith you have so often reproached me. I had
eyes, as well as any other person, open, and clear-sighted in the knowledge of
your excellent qualities; I had a Spirit capable of resentment for so many good
offices as you rendered me, and I had a soul upon which this resentment and this
knowledge might produce all the effects which are not contrary to virtue; I did
really esteem you as much as in reason you could possibly desire, as soon as by
a little experience I had observed the conformi^ie of the exterior qualities
of your person to the beauty of your interior perfections, and this esteem was
so strongly fixed in my Spirit, that I did not believe there was any person in
the world more worthy of it than your self. I began at last to approve very
well of your affection, after that the purity of your intentions was made
known to me; and I could not see a great Prince, as you were, love an unknown
maid with so much sincerity and respect, and with a design to make her his
wife, without feeling my self tenderly obliged to such obliging intentions.

For a long time you gained nothing more upon my Spirit, than this esteem and
acknowledgment; and besides that I believed that this was all I could in reason
grant you; till then my Spirit had never had any disposition to engage it self
in that passion which is a troubler of repose, and which, in my opinion, how
just a ground so ever it may have, is not absolutely permitted with decency to
persons of our sex. I had seen but one man in my life, composed of admirable
parts, in whom I observed particular thoughts for my self, and though his
person was such, that if his birth had been proportionable to mine, I should
have looked upon him without repugnance; yet the inequality which was between
us made me look upon his boldness with aversion, and rendered all his good
qualities useless to his intentions. I had my Spirit free then, when I came
into your parts, and this liberry, Philadelph, defended it self a long time
against all the testimonies of your love.

You began at last to make some attempts upon it, and it does not trouble me to
make this confession to you, when I call to mind that the most obdurate soul in
the world would have been moved with so many proofs of your passion. Yet I
opposed my self diverse days against the birth of these particular
resentments, till then unknown to my Spirit, and to which my heart could not
accustom it self. I was offended at the weakness which I found in my Spirit,
and I endeavored to fortify it by calling to mind my former resolutions,
which till then had opposed all manner of engagement, and by all the
considerations, which in the condition I was then, might divert my inclinations
from it. The best remedy I could find for the defense of that, which you too
strongly aslaulted, was to desire leave of the Princess your sister to be
gone, and to fly the occasions of engaging my self any farther, by leaving of
Cilicia: I had other pretenses enough without discovering that, and besides the
desire of seeing my native Country, and our family which without doubt had
resented my loss with some affliction, and of getting out of a condition which
was so different from that wherein I was born, and the danger which threatened
me, if I was discovered in the King your Fathers Court; the troubles which I
raised there, and the divisions which I innocently caused between the King and
you, were a sufficient motive to make me hasten my departure out of Cilicia.
This was that likewise which I oftenest alleged, both to the Princess your
sister and your self, when I prayed you both to consent to my return. You know
I pressed you very often to it, and at last I had concluded upon it, if I
could have upheld my resolutions against the grief which you expressed at this
proposition, and the protestations you made with tears and oaths, and with all
the marks that might persuade a verity, that you could not, without dying,
endure this separation.

'Twas in that weakness, Philadelph, that I knew I loved you, and you might
have taken notice of it your self, whatsoever intention I had to conceal it, if
you had considered that complacencie only was not capable of making me expose
my self to so many disgraces as had almost ruined me through the indignation of
the King your Father, nor to make me continue in his Kingdom against the orders
which he sent me to be gone, and to put my self into danger of an eternal
confinement, and of poison, by which a little after you saw me reduced to the
utmost extremities: 'Twas in this rancounter, Philadelph, that my soul received
a very sensible impression for you, and though I could accuse nothing for my
approaching death, but only your love, in stead of having any resentment
against you for it, you did so move me with your grief, that I was hardly
sorry for the loss of my life but only for your sake, and I should not at
that time have desired the prolongation of it, but only to bestow the rest of
it upon you, when the change of my condition, and the consent of my friends
would have permitted me to do it handsomely. You may remember how that when I
thought I had been at my last gasp, I began a discourse by which you might
probably judge, that I was going to discover to you some things which till then
you had been ignorant of, and it is certain that it was my intention to acquaint
you with that then, which I have declared to you to day, and to free you at my
death from the regret or shame which might remain to you, for having debased
your thoughts and your designs to^ person unworthy of you in regard of her
birth. Alas! cried Philadelph, interrupting the Princesses discourse with a
sigh, Alas! Madam, how well do I remember that passage of my life, and how
often has it come into my memory since our separation, as one of the most
remarkable things and most worthy to be fixed in my memory? It Is true that
when you were in a better condition you repented your self of the good
intention you had had, and though I urged you very much upon it, you made as if
you had forgotten what you had so well begun. But since that time, Madam, after
you had received such proofs of my love, as could not in reason permit you to
be thus close, and distrustful of me, and then too when by your virtue you had
reduced the King my Father to desire, and request so earnestly himself of you,
that which till then he had so much rejected, what just reason could you have
to conceal from me the truth of your birth, and what could you fear upon this
confession in a place where you were adored by all the persons who had any
power there? I was afraid of every thing, replied Arsinoe, and besides what I
heard you say your self every day, of the hatred you bare to the King of
Armenia, which might make me apprehend some change in your affection (for as
for any other ill usage I was secure on your part by the knowledge I had of your
virtue) my fears were redoubled by an accident which discovered the Kings
thoughts to our family, more fully than I had understood them till then, and
I will tell you, if you do not know it already, that about the time that you
recovered of that sickness which reconciled you to him, and he began to
signify by his discourse that he would no longer oppose your intentions, he
came one evening into the Princess your sisters chamber, who having been
indisposed that evening, had no body with her but my self and two of her
maids, one of which read to her the history of Dionysius the Tyrant of
Syracuse. When the King entered into the chamber, she had newly heard read of
the cruelty which the Syracusians exercised against the daughters of that
Tyrant, making them dye the most cruel death they could invent, after they had
exposed them to all manner of shame and ignominy: The Princess who had her mind
full of the Idea of that which had been read, could not forbear speaking
immediately to the King, with detestation and horror, concerning the cruelty
of the Syracusians, making imprecations against those barbarians who had used
such young, such fair, and such innocent Princesses with so much inhumanitie.
The King after he had patiently hearkened to her: This action was very cruel,
said he, but a just and violent resentment may carry us to many things, and
though I have not a natural inclination to cruelty, the outrage I received from
the King of Armenia in the death of my Nephews, has filled me with such a
grand resentment against him, that I believe that if fortune should put into my
power any persons of his family, of what age or sex so ever they were, I should
use them as bad as possibly might be, to revenge my self upon that cruel man.
These words filled the Princess who heard them full of horror, but if they had
observed my countenance in those emotions, they would easily have perceived
the strange effect, which they produced upon my Spirit. All that night, nor for
many days afterward, I could not overcome the fear that this discourse caused
in my Spirit, and I conceited every moment that I was ready to be discovered,
and exposed by the Kings implacable hatred against our family, to all manner
of bad usage. This was that which at last made me take a full resolution to be
gone out of Cilicia, and to wait for an opportunity to put it in execution in
good earnest.

Not long after it offered its self of its own accord, when Tigranes being
outed of his dominions, came to Tharsus to beg succor, and it was resolved
that you should go at the head of an army to restore him to his Kingdom. This
is another passage, Philadelph, wherein I confess my weakness, as I observed
it my self in that transaction, I believed that nothing but your absence could
give me courage enough to depart out of your Country, and if you had stayed
there still, I know not whether I should ever have been able to resolve to
leave you in that grief, whereinto, as I might judge by former probabilities,
my departure would put you. Besides, Philadelph, 'twas not without some
displeasure upon my own part, that I disposed my self to be gone from you, and
you might have taken notice by diverse marks that you were not indifferent to
me. I judged then that I ought to take this time in your absence, to free my
self from all difficulties, and from all the impediments which your affection,
and all that was on my part, had laid in my way to hinder my departure; but
believing that without ingratitude I could not part from you for ever, and make
you lose all the hopes which in regard of your love and services you might with
a great deal of reason have conceived, I desired partly to exempt myself from
the reproach which you might lay upon me for it, and to comply with mine own
inclination, which would not have permitted me without grief to part with you
for ever, and upon this design, I thought it best (by some way or other, which
might not retard the effect of my intention) to acquaint you with the truth of
my name and birth, and the place whither I intended to retire; to the end that
if you persevered in your affection, after you knew who I was, and to whom you
ought to address your self, you might find out some means to come and see me,
and obtain me for your wife of the King my brother, by those ways which are
ordinarily used amongst persons of our birth. And moreover I will tell you
(and that will possible make you excuse in part the refusal I made of the
honor which the King your Father presented me) that though I might have been
discovered in his Court without any danger, and though my inclinations had
been more favorable to you, I should never have consented to the marriage
which was proposed to me, without putting my self into the power of the King my
brother, and obtaining his consent in my absolute liberty, and not whilst I
was in the power of his enemy. This likewise was one of the strongest reasons
that made me hasten my departure for your sake, thinking that this was the best
way for me to be gone as soon as possibly I could to that place, in which
only you could hope to find your satisfaction. Behold, Philadelph, the naked
truth of my intentions. In order to the executions of them I meant to serve my
self with that paper which I gave you, and knowing the sincerity of your love,
I made no difficulty to trust you with it, after you had promised not to open
it without permission. Seeing you have lost it, I will tell you the con^ents of
it, which were expressed almost in these words.

To Prince Philadelph.
I Am constrained at last to take that leave, which you have so long refused
me, and to seek a retreat in our own family, where with more convenience than
in yours, I may receive the testimonies of your affection. Upon this design
your absence is favorable to me, seeing it secures me from the complaints and
reproaches of a Prince, whom I could not leave in grief without resenting a
great deal of it my self. It Is to the Court of the King of Armenia my brother
that I retire my self, and if, after you know this, you have any love left for
the sister of your enemy, it is in that place you may seek for Delia, in the
person of Arsinoe, and there learn that my birth is not inferior to yours. By
this declaration I partly justify what you condemned, and you will know
without doubt that the sister of Artaxus had reason to keep her self concealed
in the King of Cilicia's Court, and that a Princess of Arsinoe's extraction was
obliged to a greater circumspection in the conduct of her life than a mean and
unknown Delia. You know the ways you must use to acquire me, if you retain any
desire to do it, the enmity which is between our families will not hinder
Artaxus from considering the obligation I have to you, and the merit of your
person, if the King your Father desires his alliance: I am obliged by decency
and by virtue to submit my self to his will, but as far as they can permit my
inclinations to act for you, I promise you that Arsinoe will be as favorable
to you, as you can expect from the honor and the generous treatment you have
showed to Delia.


O Gods! O omnipotent Gods! cried Philadelph, having heard out the words of
Arsinoe's Letter, from how many pains and troubles, and sorrows worse than
death might I have secured my self, if I had been permitted to read these
sacred words wherein my destiny was contained! O my too regular obedience, and
yet such an obedience as I can not repent of, how many tears have thou caused
me, how many torments, and cruel traverses have thou cost me! Accuse your
negligence rather, replied the Princess smiling, seeing by your negligence
only in not preserving of that which you say was so important to you, you
exposed your self to all the displeasures you have been sensible of: yet I will
willingly pardon it upon the score of the obligation I have to that regular
obedience whereof you complain, and to give you some comfort upon that account,
let me tell your that though you had read that letter, the loss of which has
so much afflicted you, would have received no other satisfaction by it, but
only to have known that in the person of Delia you had loved the daughter of a
King, without knowing, for all that, the place of my retreat, which hitherto
has been quite contrary to my intention. I wrote the letter in these terms, I
gave it to you, and I exacted of you the promise which was necessary for my
security, and I saw you depart, if I may be permitted to say so, with more
regret than I expressed to you either by my countenance or discourse: yet you
observed by that, that I was not insensible of that separation, and it is
certain, though I may be blamed for this confession, that you were not so
indifferent to me, but that I felt the grief of it at the bottom of my heart: I
endeavored to dissemble one part of it, and discovered the other, believing
that I was so far obliged to you, that I might, without crime, give you these
marks of my acknowledgement and affection. Nevertheless I would not quit your
Country immediately after your departure, that I might receive news from you,
which was very welcome to me, and that the Princess Andromeda might not judge
by my sudden going away, that your consideration only detained me with her.
During the stay I made there, I heard, with a great deal of joy, of the happy
success of your arms, and the particular relation of your gallant actions, in
the glory where of I interessed my self, possibly a little more than I should
have done, and at last, when I judged that the affairs of that war were very
forward, and that you might shortly return into Cilicia, I resolved upon my
departure, to the end that if your return was more speedy than was believed,
you might not find me in a place where possibly your presence and your prayers
would have staid me still, contrary to my intention. 'Twas the knowledge of my
own weakness which made me hasten my voyage, and I was very sensible of the
trouble I had to resist those tears, and those marks of grief and despair which
had retained me so long in Cilicia.

I will not repeat particularly to you the difficulty I had to obtain leave
to go of the Princess your sister: but truly you have this obligation to to
her amity, that out of the care she had of your satisfaction, she spared
neither prayers, nor tears, nor any testimony of the most ardent affection,
to stay me. I continued diverse days before I could dispose her to let me go,
and besides the displeasure she expressed at my departure upon her own
consideration, she protested to me that I could not have that design, except I
meant to take away your life, and that I committed an action of ingratitude and
inhumanitie unworthie of my self: I told her, but in vain, that the matter was
not so bad as she made it, and that in the letter which I had given you, you
would find wherewith to comfort your self, and all the address you could desire
toward an absolute satisfaction and contentment, which doubtless would be more
dear to him, than my continuance in Cilicia: She took all this discourse for a
put-off, and I believe I had never wrought her to consent, if she had not
remembered the request you made to the King, and to her, to use fair means only
to retain me, and not to offer me any violence. This consideration brought her
at last to that which I desired of her, when she saw that my resolution could
not be altered, she acquainted the King with it her self, and prayed him, as I
had requested her, to cause me to be safely conducted to one of the Cities
under the obedience of the King of Armenia. I desired no more for fear of
declaring my self too far, and I knew well enough, that when I discovered my
self in the King my brothers dominions, I should find all manner of assistance
and convoy to Artaxata.

The King himself, after the Princess had done, employed a great deal of care
to stay me, and protested diverse times to me that he was as desirous now that
I should be his daughter, as he had been averse from it before. At last when he
saw me resolved upon my design, he offered me all I could desire for my voyage,
and after he had considered whom he might trust to conduct me, he gave the
employment to Antigenes. This man at first I suspected, because he had
formerlie made love to me with a great deal of earnestness, and with assurance
to marry me by the Kings favor, who as you know, upheld him in that design,
yet remembering how he had behaved himself toward me since the day you
prohibited him to see me, the respect he expressed to me in all his actions and
all the Apologies he often made me for those things which he was constrained to
do in obedience to the Kings command, I believed he had absosutelie lost that
intention, which he only pretended for fear of incurring the Kings
displeasure, and I as easily imagined that he would acquit himself of his
commission with more affection than another, that by that means he might the
better gain his Prince's favor. At last I disposed my self to depart under his
conduct, after the King had assured me of his fidelity and discretion, and
after I had taken my last leave of the Princess Andromeda with a great many
tears upon both sides, and received from the King all the testimonies of love
and goodwill, I mounted with my Governess and Melite into a Chariot which the
King caused to be provided for us, and Antigenes accompanied us on horseback
being attended by seven or eight men in the sam^ equipage.

The good usage I received from the King your Father after your departure, the
endeavors he used to retain me, and the belief I owe to the word of a King,
and of a King who is the Father of Philadelph, always hindered me from
suspecting the treason that was practiced against me, which might proceed only
from the villainy of that person which committed it, or if it was by any
order, I never accused any body for it but the Queen your Stepnother, who
has always born a great deal of reentment against me, for being, though
innocentlie, ^n hindrance to your marriage with the Princess ^^ania her
daughter. Howsoever it was, we depar^ed from Tharjus, and travailed the first
stage the direct way to Armenia: but the next morning, without being perceived
by me, by reason of the little knowledge I had of the ways, Antigenes made us
^ke one quite contrary, and having no body with ^m but such persons as he
absolutely disposed of, ^e followed his premeditated way, without being
^pposed by any body in his intention. All that ^y I mistrusted nothing,
marching under the faith my Conductor, and not suspecting any such indelitie
in a man in whom the King had reposed so such confidence; but the next day I
was amazed ^hen I saw my self upon the Sea side, and saw a ^essel that waited
for us by Antigenes's private order, ^o which he told me I must enter.

Though I was so ignorant of the Country, as not perceive the first cheat they
put upon me, yet I ^s not so simple, but that I knew well enough, ^t to go the
direct way out of Cilicia into Armenia, there was no Sea to pass, and I had
seen in the Map, and had often heard that the way lay by land, crossing over
Mount Taurus and entering into Armenia the less, I presently let Antigenes know
as much, and refused to enter into his Vessel, telling him I knew very well
that that was not the way to Armenia. Antigenes at first would have amused me
with words, and have made me believe that I was mistaken in my Map: but when he
saw me steadfast in my opinion, and that he had no hope to get me into his
Vessel by his discourse and persuasions, he took me under one arm and making
one of his companions do so by the other, these two men carried me by force,
and put me into the Vessel, my words, my cries, and all the resistance ^ could
make, not being able to save me from it. They which followed did as much by my
Governess and Melite, and they were not much troubled to d^ it, finding them
fully resolved to follow me in ^ what part of the world so ever my ill fortune
should conduct me. In conclusion they shipped the charie^ and the horses, and
after they had hoised up they sails, they commanded the Pilot to steer toward
the Island of Cyprus, which as you know, is sep^rated from Cilicia, but by a
little arm of the Sea.

You may judge very well, Philadelph, witho^ my striving to represent it to
you, what my g^ was upon the knowledge of this cruel treason, a^ with what
fears I was seized, seeing my self in t^ power of a man, who had had the
confidence of committing this disloyalty. I am not naturally apt be
over^passionate, and if I may say it of my self patiently support the assaults
of my bad fortu^ but in this unluckie adventure, by which I was come the prey
of a traitor, and of a man who by this action made me sufficiently judge him
capable of any thing that might afflict me, I lost my constancy and
moderation, and looking upon the perfidious Antigenes with eyes inflamed with
indignation: Traitor, said I to him, is it thus that thou acquittest thy self
of what thou owst to the fear of the Gods, to the command of thy King, the
interest of thy Prince, and the honor of our sex? are all the considerations
of honor, fidelity, and virtue extinguished in thy soul? or if they have no
power to set the hor^or of thy crime before thy face, do thou not fear to be
punished for it by so many enemies as thou raisest against thy self by thy
infidelity? Madam, answered the disloyal man, I hope to be pardoned by Gods and
men and your self too for the offense which you reproach me with, and the Gods
will not be angry with me for it, seeing they themselves have visibly
contributed to it. Do not judge, Madam, by the constraint which I laid upon my
self in respect to Philadelph, that the love, which formerlie I expressed to
you is either extinguished or diminished, it was never so strong and so violent
in my soul as now, as you may judge by this action, seeing it makes me to
despise all that any other man might fear in relation to the anger of the King
and Prince Philadelph, and abandon all things, to confine my self with you in a
place, where without any obstacle, or disturbance, I may give you ^estimonies
of that love which you have so much dislained. Fear not, Madam, nor afflict
your self, your destiny will not be had with a man, who adores you, and you
^ught not to grieve for a Prince whose inclinations possibly are already
changed, nor for a Crown which you never would have possessed, and which you
quit your self by retiring into Armenia. To these words, the perfidious man
added a great many others, to cause some moderation in my grief, but it was
exasperated the more by them, and throwing a look upon him that partly
signified my intention, Do not think, said I to him, do not think thou monster
of infidelity that (...) base flatteries can gain any thing upon my Spirit:
thy Person which before I did only disdain, is now made as odious to me by thy
treason, as the most detestable man in the world, and; most cruel enemy. Do
not hope that these thoughts may be changed, but only by the repenting of thy
crime, and returning into the way by which thou promisedst thy King to conduct
me into my own Country, and be well assured that whenever thou shall add
violence to thy flattery, thou shall see that I can so much despise death,
that the face of it shall be much more supportable to me than thine.

Though Antigenes might partly have known my humor in the time I had staid in
Cilicia, and have observed a great deal of constancy in my resolutions, yet he
believed I might be changed in time, and being willing to let the heat of my
first resentments cool, he ceased from afflicting me any farther with his
discourse. It Is very certain, that in this encounter I had need of that little
courage, and strength of Spirit, which the Gods had bestowed upon me, and had
it not been for the resignation I had to their will, I should have dyed rather,
than have any longer patiently endured the mis*fortune whereinto I was
fallen. Ericlea and Melite though they were well acquainted with my humor, ye^
they did not so much trust to it, but that they always kept close to me, to
hinder me from attempting any thing against my own life. They did not see me
any way go about it, but they had much ado to make me take any nourishment,
and I rejected all as poison which my infamous ravisher caused to be offered to
me. In fine they represented so many things to me, and did so plainly convince
me that I ought to commie the conduct of my destiny to the Gods, and that I
might still hope for succor, after the example of diverse persons, who in as
miserable a condition as mine had received visible assistances from them, that
at their entreaty I took something, after I had fasted almost two days.

We passed the Straight which separates Silicia from the Island of Cyprus, and
being landed in that Island, Antigenes put us again into the Chariot, and with
the same violence, as before, carried us whither he pleased. He chose this
retreat because his kindred were originallie of this Island, and his brother
dwelt there, to whose house it was his design to carry me, supposing that the
news could never come to the King your Father, nor to you, and that being born
of an obscure and unknown family, there would be no body to enquire after me,
or ever think upon me after I was gone out of Cilicia. Besides if you should
know the truth, he believed he was secure, being out of the dominions under
your obedience, and if he could conceal it, as he hoped he should, by the
distance of place, and the separation by Sea, he had the conveniencie to return
to Tharsus, leaving me with his brother, where he thought me secure, and report
to the King that he had executed his commission.

In conclusion whatsoever his thoughts were, or howsoever I could express to
him, that he should never gain any thing upon my Spirit either by fair means
or by violence, he carried me to his brothers, who was as bad as he, whose
house was situated upon the bank of the river Lapithus in a place very
solitary, and proper for his intention. He was received there according to
his expectation, and I was treated there as a person whom they desired to
pacify with their caresses.

You are willing, Philadelph, as I suppose, that I should relate these
passages, the most disagreeable of my whole life, as succinctlie to you as I
can possibly, and you will content your self that I should tell you, without
descending to the particulars of all the discourse I had with this perfidious
man, that he forgot nothing which he thought was capable to persuade me, and
dispose me to his intentions. He made a proposition of marriage to me, as a
great advantage for me, and would have made me believe that my condition should
be very happy with such a man as he, who passionatelie loved me, and was
master of no mean fortune, that in time he should make his peace with you, and
the King your Father, and might recover all the possessions and diggnities
which he had in Cilicia, and which he forsook only for my sake; but I rejected
his propositions with so much scorn, that he not being able to endure such
usage, which (judging of my birth as he did) he imputed to an unjust pride;
from fair means he fell to threatening, and made me fear all things from the
violence of his passion, and the power he had over me. You must have a Kings
son, said he to me sometimes in his choler, and you will look upon no body
under a Crown, and such a Prince as Philadelph. This ambition is very laudable
Delia, but you may be very certain that Philadelph dreams no more of you, and
if the King his Father had had any care of it be would not have committed you
to the conduct of a man, whose love and intentions were known to him: He spoke
diverse other words to persuade me that the King your Father was not ignorant
of what had befallen, and that you would make no account of it when you knew
it: but besides the little disposition I had to suspect either*of you of that
infidelity, I thought so ill of every thing that came out of such a man's
mouth, that I gave no credit at all to it.

Milite, when she saw him transgress the bounds of respect, would have had me
declare the truth of my condition to him, and I was often almost resolved to do
it, but I considered at last, that this knowledge in stead of making him
respect me the more, would have rendered him the more bold to injure the sister
of Artaxus, out of hope of being easily pardoned by the King of Cilicia, whose
hatred was so cruel against our family; or possibly if he could not work me to
his will, he would put me himself into the Kings hands, from whom I might
expect the worst that could be, if I were known to be the sister of Artaxus. He
kept me in this manner above two months at his brothers house, who being as
bad, or worse than he, employed every day both prayers and threatenings to make
me change my humor. But neither of them could prevail, and the wicked
Antigenes after he had tried both ways in vain, at last flew out to the
extremities of insolency and villainy, and let me know the perfidiousness of his
intentions in a business that threatened me with manifest danger, if the Gods
had not succored me

I am going now to relate to you, without any farther delay, the most
disagreeable passages of my story. I was permitted to walk upon the bank of the
river, which washes the foot of the house, and in a great wood which environed
it in on every side, but never without having with me, either Antigenes, or
his brother named Thrasillus, or many times both of them with six or seven men
at their heels.

One day, attended by this convoy, having followed the bank of the river, where
the walk was very pleasant, and being gone farther from Thrasillus's house than
ever I had been before, drawing near to a little brook which there about ran
into the river, being bordered on both sides with a tuft of trees thicker than
the rest of the wood, upon our right hand, some paces distant from us, I heard,
after diverse sighs and sob^, the voice of a man who by the violence of his
grief was forced to complain in that solitary place before insensible
witnesses. At the first sound that reached my ears, I stopped and lent attention,
but not out of any motion of curiosity, which at that time had little room in
my soul, Antigenes who followed me staid as well as I, and we had not long
continued attentive, but we distinctlie heard the complaints of that afflicted
person. To what intent, said this disconsolate man, to what intent, wretch as
thou art, do thou spain out the remainder of thy unfortunate life in an
extremity of misery, when thou see thy self abandoned by all hope? what
motive can any longer make thee endure this deplorable life which has been
divided between glory and mis fortunes, and what effect at last do thou
expect from thy grief to execute that, which thine own hand should have
performed? Do thou believe that by that courage which has acquired thee some
reputation amongst men thou ought to support with constancy, or rather with
insensibilitie evils worse than the most cruel deaths, from which one death
only might have secured thee? The Sun does now unwillingly lend thee his
light, and after the perfidiousnesse and ingratitude of men, whereby thou see
thy self exposed to so many miseries, all things are contrary to thee, all
things are cnemies to thee; there is no more day, there is no more light for
thee amongst men, and if that which made thee love the day, be yet a live, it
is no more for thee, poor wretch, it is no more for thee, the outcast of men
and fortune. He stopped a while after these words, and it seemed to me that this
tone of voice was not an absolute stranger to me, although I could not well
discern it. I turned my self toward Melite to communicate to her what I
thought of it, but I was diverted from it by the sequel of his complaint, which
he continued in this manner: O the obscurest night! O the most gloomy darkness,
how dear and agreeable are ye to me in comparison of this importunate Sun,
which possibly gives light to day to the Fortune of my en^mies! All the rays
it darts upon me are so many witnesses of my mis*fortunes, and by its light
henceforth I can behold nothing, whereupon to fix my sight without repugnance,
since that for ever, alas! for ever I have lost the sight of my adorable
Princess. Ah! my grief, ah! my just resentment, is it possible that upon so
sad a remembrance you can leave my soul in so great tranquillity? Can you
content your selves with a few regrets, and a few tears, which testify my
weakness as much as my affliction, when you ought to have made your selves
known to all Asia by Tragical and dreadful marks, and by rivers of blood which
should repair such bloody injuries. Ah! without doubt my hand will serve me
still upon that design, and that valor which has acquired me some reputation,
amongst men, will arm thousands of them still in my quarrel, if I would wear
this sword amongst them to which heretofore they have attributed the gaining of
battles: but alas! I have my hands tied by a respect which I ought to
preserve to my grave; and my adorable Princess is so much the more worthy of
it, as she is innocent of my misfortunes, and has sympathized in them by her
pity; neither can I accuse any body of them but the cruelty of men, and my own
ill fortune. The sad unknown accompanied these last words with a throng of
sighs, which stopped the passage of them, and sighs and sobs were the only
language in which his grief did conclude its expressions, not a word more
proceeding from his mouth that we could understand.

Some moments after, having heard, as I believed, some noise in the place where
we were, and avoiding nothing so much as company, he arose from the place
where he was to look out one more private, and permitted us to see, as he
retired between the trees, the handsome proportion of his body, and part of his
face. By that which appeared to our eyes we knew that he was extremely pale and
wan, and I perceived very well that his grief might be taken notice of by other
marks besides his complaints. My heart was tenderly moved at those which I had
heard, and though it seemed to me, as I told you before, that the voice (though
a little changed with weakness) was not an absolute stranger to me, I
conjectured by the words which I had heard, which spoke of Princesses and the
gaining of battles, that he which uttered them was no common person. I mused
upon it being very pensive, as much as the remembrance of mine own misery could
pe^rmit me, when Antigenes who had heard all as well as I: This man, said he,
whosoever he is, eases his grief by his complaints, whilst another man more
wise than he would have been seeking remedies for it. It Is, replied I smartly,
because he is not a villain, because he is not a ravisher, and because he
rather chooses to be miserable all his life, than to owe the end of his misery
to his crimes. You see how well he fares for it, answered Antigenes, and how
happy his condition is, for having been so respectful and circumspect. It Is
more happy than yours, said I, being much netled and much concerned in this
discourse, and besides that, he possibly has the comfort of being beloved by a
person whom he serves with respect, as much as you are hated and detested by
her whom you use so baselie, he has the satisfaction of not being troubled
with any remorse, whilst your conscience may well torment you worse, than the
most cruel death.

I saw that Antigenes grew pale at these words, and was like one amazed, he
changed his color diverse times in a moment, he trembled from head to foot,
and he seemed to me in the condition of a person that meditated upon some
grand design. I consess that the changing of his visage, and his troubled
countenance made me afraid, and seeing him in such a form as he had never
appeared in to me before, I began to tremble my self out of an apprehension of
fear which promised me no good. I was not fearful without reason; for the
disloyal villain approaching to me with a furious look: If I am so much hated
and so much detested by you, said he, I must merit this hatred and detestation
by such actions, as may secure you from the blame which you would have for
hating me unjustly, and if I must be exposed to remorse, it shall be for a
crime which may yield me some profit, and not for those respects and
adorations, which hither to I have so unprofitably rendered you; my patience is
stretched to its uttermost dimensions, and I will know this day, whether a
heart which is invincible by love and pity can be tamed by any other ways.

Upon these words (I know not whether his action was premeditated or not, as in
probability it was, or whether the occasion prompted him to the design) having
made a sign to his brother, and another of those which followed him, they came
at the same time to pull Ericlea and Melite from off my arms, who held by me on
both sides, and Antigenes putting himself in Ericlea's place, began to lead me
by force toward the most private part of the wood, whilst his brother, and one
of his men held my two women by violence,

This action made me desperately afraid, and believing that in such an
extremity a disguise was no longer necessary: Antigenes, said I, think what
thou go about, and look no more upon me as an unknown Delia, but as the
daughter of a great King, and as a Princess who in what part so ever of the
world thou shall retire to, will make the vengeance of they crime light heavy
upon thy head.

I believe that Antigenes gave no credit to these words, which he thought I was
inspired with by the pressing necessity wherein I was, to draw him off from his
design by the respect which they might imprint in him. Howsoever it was, he
did not seem to be moved at them, and not vouchsafeing so much as to give me a
reply, and continued dragging me with all his force toward the most solitary
part of the wood. In this extremity I made the wood to Echo with my cries, and
my women whom they hindered from coming to my assistance were as loud as I:
Their cries and mine without doubt did us more good, than our resistance could
have done, and they drew a man to us, who was retired into that thick and
solitary place, whom we presently knew to be the same, whose complaint we had
heard a little before: He came out from between the trees where he sought for
silence and obscurity, and casting his eyes upon us, he presently saw the cause
of our cries and the violence they offered to us, and his grief not being
capable to extinguish generous resentments in his soul, and the remembrance of
the succor that was due to oppressed maids, he ran to us with more speed than
could have been expected from the languishing and dejected condition where in
he appeared to us. Antigenes seeing him come, and fearing the hindrance of his
design more than any other harm he could do him, being accompanied as he was,
called his brother, who leaving my women in the hands of two of his men, came
to Antigenes with the rest. This number did not trouble the unknown, but
addressing himself to Antigenes without so much as looking upon the rest, Base
fellow, said he, with an imperious voice, stay, and do not oblige me to give
thee thy death for a punishment of thy crime. Antigenes seeing himself
fortified by the number of his companions mocked at the pride of the unknown,
and not vouchsafing to forbear from his design for him, he made a sign to his
brother either to stay him or punish him; but he had to do with a man who was
not so easily corrected in that manner, and though he had no more than
Antigenes and his companions had, only his sword, without any other arms, he
presently presented it to the eyes of his enemies, and fell upon them with as
much assurance as if he had been backed by a greater number than theirs. O
Gods! Phiiadelph, what proofs of valor did he give us in a few moments, and
what speedy execution did he make before our eyes, of five or six men, who
seemed as nothing in his single hands? The first that fell under his sword was
the brother of Antigenes, whose right arm he cut off at one blow, and made a
large passage in his side, through which his soul bare his blood company: and
almost at the sacred time, having avoided a blow which another enemy made at
him, he thrust his bloody sword into his body up to the hilts. I could see that
action, and those he did afterward, because the perfidious Antigenes no sooner
saw his brother fall, but leaving me with a great cry, he ran either to revenge
his death or to bear him company. These two which were left to guard my women
ran to Antigenes at his cry, and these three enemies fell upon the Valiant
Unknown, just as he had cloven the head and half the face of the last of the
others with a back blow. He cared as little for these as he had done for the
former, and picking out Antigenes between his two companions, he gave him a
mortal wound in the throat, with which he fell at his feet, and presently after
was choked with his blood and dyed. My valiant defender received at the same
time a slight wound upon his side, which did but encourage him the more, and
hastened the death of him who gave it* for as he was just turning his back to
run away, he thrust his sword into his reins and laid him dead close by
Antigenes. The last seeing so bloody an execution, had not confidence any
longer to resist so terrible an enemy, and committing his safety to the
nimbleness of his heels, he ran cross the wood in a deadly fright.

I cannot tell you whether was greater in me, the astonishment at so prodigious
a valor, or the joy of seeing my self delivered from the hands of my
treacherous ravisher, or the horror of being amongst so many dead men, who had
lost their lives upon my occasion. I was so amazed, and so troubled, that I had
not so much as the power to return thanks to my valiant deliverer, and I
continued in a confusion not knowing how to begin to speak to him, when he
approaching to me with his bloody sword in his hand, and with a color which
the heat of the combat had raised in his face: Your enemies are dead, Madam,
said he, and if there remains any thing to do for your service, I have strength
enough still to free you out of a greater danger. He speak no more, because
astonishment cut off the thread of his discourse, and he had no sooner cast his
eyes a little nearer upon my face, but he was full of amazement, and confusion:
My surprise was no less than his, when having looked upon him with attention,
and discerned the tone of his voice, maugre the change which three or four
years, and an extraordinary palenesse might have wrought upon his countenance,
I thought I knew him for that brave and valiant Britomarus, of whom I made some
small mention to you in my discourse, who by his miraculous actions of valor
in a few months attained to the highest martial employments in the service of
the King my brother, and quitted it out of a generous resentment against that
cruelty, which caused the King your Father's hatred against our family; the
very same, who being puffed up with the glory of his gallant actions, had the
boldness to raise his eyes to me; and the same, whom, as I told you, I repulsed
with choler and disdain only for the meannesse of his birth, not finding any
thing else in his person which might not make him aspire to the highest
fortunes.

I have heard much talk of Britomarus, said Prince Philadelph, upon this
passage of the Princesses relation, and besides the esteem which the same of
his great actions has given me for him, the obligation I have to him for this
last, adds to it an acknowledgment and an affection which will render him dear
and considerable to me as long as I live: but why must it needs fall out that
the punishment of the perfidious Antigenes should be reserved for any other
hand than mine? and how could it be just that any other but Philadelph should
free his Princess from the danger whereinto she was fallen by the imprudence of
the King my Father? It was not necessary, replied Arsinoe, that you should add
that obligation to so many others for which I am redeuable to you, and I had
received sufficient proofs of your affection, without having need of this last,
which without doubt your virtue only would have prompted you to, upon the score
of an unknown person reduced to the same extremity.

I doubted still that my eyes did abuse me in the knowledge of Britomarus; but
he cleared my doubts in defiring to satisfy his own, and after he had looked
upon me a long time with an attention that signified the surprise of his
Spirit: O Gods! cried he upon a sudden, can it be possibly that you should be
the Princess Arsinoe? I am Arsinoe, answered I, but is it true that you are
Britomarus? Yes, Madam, replied he, I am Britomarus, and Britomarus much more
happy than he durst hope to be in the deplorable condition whereunto he is now
reduced, since he is permitted to see a Princess living, whose death is
published all over Asia, and since he has had the fortune to render you a
service which may partly repair the offense by which I formerly merited your
indignation.

These words recalling what was past to my remembrance, made a blush mount up
into my face, but did not hinder me from returning him an answer in these
terms: The offense you did me might be repaired by repentance and
discontinuation, and the service which you have rendered me is of such a value,
that it may not only repair such an injury, but command all the acknowledgement
that is due to the generous defender of my life and honor.

I spoke these words with a real resentment, as without doubt was due to the
importance of so great a service, and yet I was not without some displeasure to
see my self fallen again into the hands of a man that had made love to me, and
though by the knowledge which I had of his virtue, I thought my self secure
from those violences and dangers which I had lately escaped, I was aftraid of
the company of a man, whom I could not look upon with a particular affection,
without being ungrateful to Philadelph's love, and betraying my own courage,
which made me formerly so much disdain his presumption: I believed too, as we
are apt to flarter our selves in the good opinion we have of our selves, that I
might have partly caused, either by my disdair, or by the report of my death,
his sadness and solitude, and I did not make a sudden reflection upon the
words, which I had heard him speak a few moments before which might partly have
freed me from that suspicion.

I know not whether my countenance did any way express the thoughts wherewith
my Spirit was at that time disquieted, or whether Britomarus observed any thing
by it; but how^ever it was, he spoke to me as if he had seen my very heart,
and resuming the discourse after he had been a while silent: If the
discontinuation of my fault, said he, may make me hope for pardon, I hope,
Madam, that you will look upon me without anger, and though such impressions as
are received from such divine powers as yours can hardly be erased out of a
soul, yet it is certain that mine has repented of its boldness; time, and the
fear of your displeasure, and other adventures wherein my life has been since
employed have wrought that change upon me, that I need not to be any longer
odious to you. Do not make any difficulty then to receive those services of me
which I am able to render you, and which may be necessary to you in the
condition wherein I meet you, and be fully assured, that during the time that I
shall be obliged to bear you company, either to complete your delivery from
your enemies power, if you have any yet left, or to reconduct you to the place
whither you designed to retire, you shall see nothing in my actions that may
importune you, or at least make you fear the return of that passion which you
justly condemned.

These words of Britomarus made me very joyful, and having a good opinion of
him, as all those had who were acquainted with his virtue, I presently gave
absolute credit to them, and made no difficulty to commit my self to his
discretion in the urgent necessity wherein I was at that present, but speaking
to him with a more assured countenance than before; I shall never doubt, said I
to him, but that virtue will be your guide in all your actions, and you are so
habituated in the practice of it, that I should be much too blame if I should
be afraid to find any thing troublesome or disagreeable in you: The change you
have received in that passion, which I condemned out of a natural repugnance I
had against it, rather than out of any disdain of your person, adds a new
obligation to the service which you have rendered me, and in this condition you
may believe that I shall esteem and respect you as long a^ I live, as the merit
of your person, and the importance of the assistance I have received from you
do oblige me: I do not refuse the generous offers which you make me, and though
I have suffered much for having committed my self to the conduct of men, I will
not be afraid to trust my self with you, because of the knowledge I have of
you.

After these words, which he received with a great deal of respect, he asked
me what my intention was, and I having told him that I would return no more to
my enemies house, where I had been a long time captive, and in the danger out
of which he had rescued me by his valor: he told me that he was lodged but a
few furlongs from that place at a friends house who was a native of that
Country, where he had been staid by a sickness which had detained him there
some days, and that if it pleased me to take my retreat there, I should be
secured from all manner of enemies to the last drop of his blood, and in the
mean time he would give order to accommodate us with a vessel, and other
necessaries to conduct me into Armenia, or any other part of the world whither
it should please me to retire. I thanked him very much for his good intentions,
and did not refuse the effects of them, making the extremity whereunto I was
reduced, my excuse for the incivility which I was constrained to commit, in
suffering him to quit his own interests for mine, and to interrupt the designs
he might have to protect me in Cyprus, and to conduct me into Armenia.

After I had desired his pardon, I made no difficulty to follow him, but
permitted him to lead me to the house where he had taken up his abode. It was
distant from that place about a quarter of an hours walk for softly goers, and
Britomarus seeking after nothing so much as solitude, a voyded the company of
his servants, and all persons that might interrupt him in the entertainment of
his sad thoughts. We found there some number of domestics, who durst not
follow their master in his walks, though they would not part from him in his
voyages, what change of fortune so ever might befall him. Though the house was
not very great, yet I had a very convenient lodging there for my self and my
women, and I was served with all the respect that I could desire of so vet^uous
a man a^ Britomarus. The master of the house (who was one of his Officers) had
the care of procuring from the next Town all things that were necessary for us
for the stay we were to make in that house, and another of his servants went
the second day after to go seek and stay a vessel at the next port upon the way
to Armenia.

In the time of our tarrying there, I received from Britomarus, as much as his
sadness would permit him, all the consolation he could give me in my
displeasures, and I did all that possibly I could upon my part to mitigate the
mortal grief that appeared in all his actions: but in that I labored in vain,
and though he constrained himself very much to make his company supportable to
me, I think that during all the time of our continuance together, I did not see
him 'laugh so much as once, or any way express to me that his affliction had
been eased for so much as a momen. His sighs made continual sallies out of his
breast, accompanied with sobs, and sometimes with some complaints, which with
all his moderation he could not refrain, and at those hours when he did not
think himself obliged to keep me company, he went abroad in the morning to seek
for solitude in those places which were least frequented by the society of men.
He kept his promise very exactly with me which he had made not to give me any
marks of the return of his former passion either by his discourse or actions,
and in stead of making me fear any such thing, he made me judge with a great
deal of probability, that that passion had given place to a second, where with
his Spirit was at that time disquieted; and which in my thoughts, made up the
greatest part of his displeasures and inquietudes. As I saw no design in him
to discover himself any farther to me, so I did not desire to press him to it,
and I expected that only from his own will, which I could not ask him without
indiscretion, yet one day having expressed a little more curiosity than
ordinary, yet not so much as to make him judge that I desired to know more of
him than he was willing I should, forcing some sighs which commonly brake off
the thread of his discourse, and hardly retaining some tears which were ready
to overslow his eyes: Madam, said he, if there were any thing of divertisement
in my life, I would have given you a relation of it, to pass away the
tediousness of your solitude: but of all that I have to tell you there is
nothing worthy of your attention. I will only tell you, that Fortune has
di^ersely sported her self with my destiny; she has given me in all places,
where I have worn a sword, all the glory and reputation that I could desire
amongst men; by a little valor which she has well seconded, she has
sometimes put me into a condition that the most considerable Kings daughters in
the world would have endured the declaration and progress of my love, without
being offended at it, and she has sometimes pu^fed me up with such a pride,
that I could hardly look upon the most puissant Kings upon earth as my
superiors: but if she has served me in my glory she has abandoned me in the
repose of my life, and has left me nothing of all the good I received from her
or my self, but the regret of having lost all, and the cruel remembrance of
those fair hopes which possibly I had unjustly conceived. Since this hard
change, or rather since this deplorable fall, I wander like a Ghost amongst
men, finding nothing amongst them but ingratitude and infidelity, and I spain
out a languishing life by an absolute command which has not permitted me to
dispose of my destiny, as without doubt I should have done, if an obedience,
which ought to continue as long as my life had left me at liberty.

Britomarus spoke in this manner, and I perceived that he was not willing that
I should know any more, so that I expressed no desire that way, I only let him
know that I sympathized with him in his displeasures, and I did all that
possibly I could, by such reasons and examples as I alleged to him, to make him
hope for some happy change in his condition. I was not so reserved toward him
as he was to me, but the second day I spent in his company, I told him plainly
all that had befallen me since his departure from Armenia, believing my self
obliged to put that confidence in a man to whom I was so much redeuable, and
not seeing (after the change of his affections) any reason which engaged me not
to acquaint him with the truth. I may truly say, that by the relation which I
made to him of your generous and sincere carriage toward me, I rendered him
very affectionate to you, and he often testified to me by his discourse, that
he should be much satisfied in the opportunities of serving a Prince, whose
virtue he infinitely esteemed upon my narration.

In the mean time, I know not, Philadelph, whether I am obliged to tell you
what place you possessed at that time in my memory, and whether modesty will
permit me to confess that my thoughts were daily upon you, as a person whose
Idea did pleasingly flatter me, and as a Prince, whom without ingratitude I
could not forget. It Is certain, Philadelph, and I will tell you as much without
any fear that you should abuse it, or make any ill construction of it, that
during the time I continued captive with Antigenes, and at liberty with
Britomarus, you came oftener into my mind than possibly you should have done,
and when I complained of my misfortunes, I complained of them more upon your
consideration than upon mine own. I will speak no more of this Philadelph, and
without doubt I have spoken enough to make you judge that I have wanted neither
acknowledgment, nor inclination for you.

Our stay at that house was longer than we expected, and though the man whom
Britomarus had sent to make stay of a vessel, executed his commission with a
great deal of diligence, yet we were fain to wait till the wind, which was then
quite contrary to our intended course, became favorable to our navigation, and
in the mean while, by a misfortune which made me shed a great many tears, and
which I still do oftentimes deplore, my Governess Ericlea, whom you saw pass
for my Aunt in Cilicia, and to whom I had dear and tender obligations, as well
for the care she had bestowed upon my education, as for her readiness to
comfort me in my afflictions with a great deal of constancy and firmness of
courage, fell sick, and dyed within fifteen days. I was very nearly sensible,
of this loss, as well for the reasons which I have alleged to you, as in
respect of our friendship which was much more strongly established in my Spirit
by our voyages, and common crosses, than if we had never stirred out of
Armenia; but after I had bestowed some days in deploring her death, the
acquaintance which I had long since contracted with grief, did a little
mitigate it, and made me accustom my self to this displeasure, as I had inured
my self to so many other afflictions, that my ill fortune had raised me.

After we had rendered her our last devoi S, and furnished our selves with all
things necessary for our voyage, as well by Sea as by land, we departed from
that house under the conduct of Britomarus, attended by fifteen or twenty men
which continued still in his service, and we went down the river Lapithus in
boats, which carried us to Cemunia, where the river disembogues itself into the
Sea, and there we embarked the same day in the vessel which waited for us.

Our streightest way to go into Armenia, was to return to Tharsus, and to
cross all Cilicia, and this way we had only an arm of the Sea to pass over:
but I desired to avoid all occasions of being seen again in the King your
Fathers Court, whither you might have been returned, and where I might have
been stayed by some accident, and because we could not avoid passing through a
corner of Cilicia, Britomarus, who was well acquainttd with the Map, was of
opinion that we should coast between that Kingdom and the Island which we lest,
and go land at the foot of the mountain Amanus hard by the place called the
Streights of Amanus, by this means our voyage by Sea would be much longer, but
our journey by land much shortened.

I absolutely committed my self to the good conduct of Britomarus, and having
so much confidence in his virtue, I hardly enquired what his intention was. He
had a resentment against the King my brother, for the displeasure he had done
him by the death of your two Kinsmen, which would not permit him to go to his
Court, and conduct me to Artaxata, but he promised me to bring me as near the
City as I pleased, and it was sufficient for me to be conducted to the first
place upon the frontires, where I believed I should find a convenient convoy,
and all things necessary for the performance of my voyage: But the Gods
disposed things otherwise than we had proposed, and sailing with a favorable
wind we had hardly lost the sight of the Isle of Cyprus, when we met with a
vessel of Pirates, which having sailed close up to us with all the signs of
peace, and passed by us to view us without discovering themselves, they had no
sooner observed the small number of our men, but trusting in their own, which
was a great deal bigger, they turned their prow toward us, and after they had
cried out to us to yield, they fell upon us with a great deal of fury.

Britomarus clapped on his armor in a moment, and encouraging his men with a few
words, he put himself in the head of them with his sword in his hand, and
finding himself more fit, for this kind of combat, than for that with arrows
which the Pirates shot at our men, he gave them leave to grapple our vessel, and
presented himself the first upon the deck to the enemies that would enter.

You may judge, Philadelph, in what a fright I was at that time, and though I
had a very great confidence in the valor of my defender, the great number of
our enemies froze me with fear, and made me, not without reason, to tremble in
thinking what might be the success of so unequal a combat, yet I was ashamed
to go and hide my self, and though those enemies which could not come to
handy-blows, shot arrows at us with which I might have been hurt, yet I did not
go down into the Hold as Melite advised me, but stood a little out of the way,
where I might see a good part of what passed, and there according as necessity
presented it self to my sight, I made vows to Heaven with a great deal of
fervency.

You will not credit my discourse, Philadelph, when I shall relate to you the
prodigious effects of Britomarus's valor, but it is certain for all that, that
I shall add nothing to the truth, when I shall tell you that a batallion of
armed men upon the deck could not have done greater service, nor made greater
resistance than he did with his single hand, and the few men he had with him,
being ranked on each side of him, and animated by his example, did things
infinitely above their ordinary strength. The first that were so bold as to
board our vessel were tumbled back dead either into their own, or into the Sea
by the hand of Britomarus, and in a few moments he was so covered with the
blood of the most adventurous, that the rest were as much afraid of his
approach as of lightning and thunderbolts, and assaulted him with the more
precaution. The success of the combat was still doubtful, and if the valor of
Britomarus gave us some hope of the victory, the number of our enemies which
exceeded our men by one half, made us partly despair of it, and in all
likelihood there was as much cause to fear as to hope, when amongst the Slaves
which were in the Pirates vessel, one above all the rest who had both his legs
and arms laden with Irons, turning himself toward some of his companions,
whilst the last of the Pirates, seeing that all their forces were but
necessary, were run to the combat: Friends, said he, what hinders us from
attempting to regain our liberty, free me from these Irons which shackle me,
and you shall see how I will open you the way to it. He had hardly uttered
these words, but two slaves who owed him a more particular respect than the
others, presently took his Irons in hand, and by the help of their companions
having freed him of them with some pain, he instantly clapped a shield upon his
arm, which he found at his feet, and snatching, with as much swistnesse as an
Eagle, the sword out of the first Pirat's hand that came in his way, he laid
two of them dead at his feet with the two first blows he gave amongst them,
and throwing himself amongst the rest with a marvailous fury, he presently
filled them with terror, disorder, and confusion. Only three or four men
followed him in this encounter, and the rest being uncertain of the issue,
expected it with a great deal of fear not daring to declare themselves.
Britomarus having perceived this assistance by the tumult which he saw, and the
cries which he heard amongst the Pirates, resolutely leapt into their vessel,
and laying the first he met at his feet, he flew amongst the others like a
Lion; he was courageously seconded by his men, and to abridge the discourse of
a thing wherein I have no skill, after the general fright had seized upon the
Pirates they made no considerable resistance.

In this condition the slaves who durst not expose themselves to danget a few
moments before, killed a good part of them, and a small number of the rest was
saved by the pity of Britomarus, and that valiant Slave which had so great a
share in the victory. Britomarus and he did mutually admire each other, and if
the slave saw Britomarus kill the Commanders of the Pirates with his own hand,
and lay more of them upon the ground than all that followed him, Britomarus saw
the slave, though without any arms more than a Sword and a Shield, give almost
as many deaths as blows, and hew the bodies of the Pirates with such wounds as
could not proceed but from a prodigious force.

After that their hands had no more employment ^ exercise themselves about that
was comformale to their generosity, and they had cried to one another to pardon
those who made no resistance, hey advanced reciprocally one toward the other,
and by their looks prevented the testimonies of mutual esteem which they
desired to give each other. Britomarus lifted up the bever of his Helmet, but
the valiant slave had his face bare, and Britomarus had no sooner cast his eyes
upon him, ^ut with an admirable beauty he discerned some features which were
not unknown to him. Amazement immediately surprised him in such a manner that
he continued dumb some moments, but a little after having viewed his face with
a little more attention: O Gods! cried he, do not I see Prince Ariobarcanes?
for it was he indeed. By this tone of voice perfectly knowing Britomarus, whom
his countenance and valor had almost discovered: Yes, answered he, running to
him with his arms open, I am Ariobarzanes, and having seen the miracles you
have done upon this occasion, I make no more doubt but that you are Britomarus.
After these words they embraced each other with expressions full of affection,
and all the satisfaction they were capable of receiving one from another in the
condition of their fortune, but Britomarus was the most amazed of the two, to
see before him a Prince whom he thought to be dead, both according to the
public report, and the particular account I had given him of our shipwreck, He
began to express his astonishment to him, and my brother was about to give a
true relation of what had passed, when the name of Ariobarzanes was carried
from mouth to mouth to the place where I was and hearing them say diverse times
that Prince Ariobarzanes was in the Pirates Vessel, I was so transported at it,
that running amongst the dead bodies without fear, and throwing my self into
the Vessel, which was grappled to ours, I went to seek in the middle of the
throng for that brother whom I had so much lamented, and who had always been
dearer to me than my life. I found him, I saw him, I knew him, and he was not a
little amazed when he felt me hanging about his neck, and heard me use all the
expressions that so unexpected a joy could put into my mouth. I gave him no
leisure a long time to inform himself, and to satisfy his eyes in those
doubts, which his ears had raised upon my interrupted discourses.

It would be very hard, Philadelph, to repeat to you our discourses full of
transport and confusion and to represent to you the amazement we were both in
at so unexpected an encounter, it would be sufficient to make you comprehend
it, if you had known with what friendship we had been always linked together,
and had well understood what grief we endured whilst we thought each other
dead. We could not for a long time giv credit to our eyes or ears, and a whole
hour, being spent in exclamations and incoherent questions, could hardly make
us believe our happiness At last when we had resolved our selves that w were
alive indeed without illusion, amazemen surrendered its place to joy, and we
solemnized it by all the marks that could be expressed in so uncommon an
adventure. Ha! brother, said I, how can I contain the joy which I have to see
you living after I had shed so many tears for your supposed death? Ha! sister,
said he, what other comfort could I receive in my afflictions, but to meet so
dear a sister, whom the Gods bestow anew upon me, after that, in my opinion,
they had taken her out of the world? The opinion of your loss, replied I, made
me out of love with life: And the meeting, with you, added he, interrupting me,
makes me endure it with pleasure, at a time when my misfortune makes me
support it with regret.

We spent a great deal of time in this manner of conversation, but Ariobarzanes
brake it off at last, to render due thanks to Britomarus for his liberty, to
inform himself by what fortune I was in his company, and to be satisfied in a
great many particulars of this adventure which caused his astonishment. Before
I acquainted him with other things, as I pretended to do at large, I told him
in a few words the obligation I had to Britomarus, and the adventure that
obliged me to put my self under his conduct, and having let him know by this
discourse how redeuable we were both to him, I filled him with resentment for
that valiant man to whom we owed our honor, life and liberty. Ha! generous
Britomarus, said he, hugging him between his arms, with how much envy should I
look upon you, if the benefits with which you have chained us to you, would
permit me to do it without ingratitude, and how unjust will Heaven be if it do
not recompense your virtue with the highest fortunes that it can bestow upon
men? I have received great favors thence some days since, replied Britomarus,
in being permitted to render a small service to those persons, to whom I owed
and had vowed a great deal more, but as for this, valiant Prince, you have
little reason to believe that you are redeuable to me for it, and this victory
which has regained your liberty is the effect of your own valor, and the
assistance you gave us, rather than of any thing I could have done without you
help.

Ariobarzanes answered the modest discourse of Britomarus with the like
submission, and after a conversation full of civility, and as many caresses as
two men could use, who were under the tyranny of grief, they desired we might
pass into our vessel, which was not so much imbrewed with blood, nor so full
of Tragical spectacles, as the Pirates was, in which Britomarus intended to put
things in order, and set the slaves at liberty, restoring them the goods which
were taken from them. Amongst them there were two Medes, whom, as we retired
into our vessel, we saw fall down at Britomarus's feet, and express diverse
signs of astonishment and joy to meet him.

Whilst Britomarus was discoursing with them, Ariobarzanes and I retired our
selves into my chamber, where presently we began to give one another an account
of the successes by which we were saved from shipwreck, and of those things
which had happened since our separation. I made a relation of my adventures
first, being unwilling to deprive Britomarus who was absent and well acquainted
with mine, of the satisfaction he might receive in hearing Ariobarzanes's
story. The Prince was sensibly touched with my discourse, and upon the relation
I made him of what you had done for me in your Kingdom, he conceived so much
resentment, and so much affection for you, that he often brake our into
exclamations, and protested to me that he never more earnestly desired any
thing than to see you, and to express his acknowledgment to you for your
generous bounty. He himself in some passages blamed my procedure of a little
too much severity and circumspection, but he was partial, Philadelph, and of
the opinion of all other men, to whom the rules of our duty are not known, or
rather to whom the practice of them is not agreeable.

We had passed two or three hours in discourse without seeing Britomarus, and
when we enquired for him, they told us that after he had entertained himself a
while with the two Medes, to whom he had restored their liberty, and the goods
which the Pirates had taken from them, he shut himself up in the Cabin of that
vessel, and prayed them to let him alone a few hours without interrupting him.
The acquaintance I had with him, which rendered his sadness very familiar to me,
made me receive this news without astonishment; and I was not at all surprised
at it; presently after they served in supper, and part of the night was spent
and yet we had no sight of him.

We bestowed the rest of the night in sleep, I having certified my brother,
that we could not do a greater displeasure to Britomarus than to trouble his
solitude: But the next day we were no sooner awake, but we saw him come into
the Cabin in such a condition as presently filled me with fear and pity. His
countenance was so changed that it could hardly be known, and one could hardly
have imagined that the space of diverse days could have wrought that change
which appeared there in a few hours, his complexion was pale and wan, his eyes
wild and rouling in his head with a fierce look, and in all his countenance
there was the true image of a man not far from the brink of despair. Yet he
used some endeavors to refrain himself before us, and forcing some sobs that
opposed the current of his speech: Madam, said he, though I had no inclination
to appear again to the world in this sad condition, which makes my company
insupportable, yet I had a design to render you the service which I owe you,
and I should not have left you, till you had been conducted to the place where
you would have pleased to have made your residence. The Gods are my witnesses
that the wretched remainders of my life were employed in that office with a
great deal of satisfaction, and I should never have neglected the opportunities
of doing you service, upon any consideration of mine own interest: But seeing
that the Gods have more advantagiously provided for your conduct, than when
they called me to that honor, and have permitted me to commit you into the
Prince your brothers hands, who may conduct you into your own Country a great
deal more conveniently than I can do; give me leave, if you please, to run that
course which my destiny calls me to: my condition and the state of my mind are
so much changed since yesterday, that I have no comfort nor remedy left in the
world, but only what I am now going in search of. I leave you this vessel
furnished with all necessaries, and of all these persons, of whom you may have
need in the rest of your voyage, I will have only three of my servants along
with me, and the rest shall continne at your service in this vessel; that which
we have taken from the Pirates shall serve my turn, with the assistance of some
persons that I have met there, who will guide me to the place, whither I must
needs make all the haste, I can. Pardon, Madam, pardon, generous Prince,
continued he, addressing himself to Ariobarzanes, the hastiness of my
departure, and believe that the necessity which constrains me to it, renders me
more worthy of your pity, than of your displeasure for this incivility.

Having spoken these words he parted from us, without giving me time to reply,
to thank him for his generous assistance, and to express my forrow for the
redoubling of his grief. Ariobarzanes having continued a while very much
surprised and full of passion, arose from the place where he lay to run after
him, but he was already gone into the Pirates vessel, and having caused it to
be disengaged from ours, was put off to sea at full sail.

See, in what manner the valiant Britomarus went from us, and not having heard
of him ever since, leaving us a very great regret for his departure, a just
resentment for the obligations we had to him, and an admiration of his virtue,
which makes us preserve the memory of him as of a miraculous person.

Ha! Madam, cried Prince Philadelph, at this passage, how much reason have you
to preserve this esteem, and how willingly would I purchase opportunities to
spend my blood for the interests of a man to whom I owe my Princess.

If you were acquainted with his person, replied the Princess, you would say
more, and you would judge that Fortune would not have denied him to have been
born to a Crown, but only because they are all inferior to his courage and
virtue.

I am very happy, added the Prince smiling, that he was no longer my rival, and
though he was not born to a Crown, I should be more afraid of him, than of
those whom Fortune had best befriended that way.

You need not fear any thing, answered Arsinoe, for besides your birth and your
Crowns, you are endued with all the qualities which may make a person
considerable, and more than that you have the advantage of so many services,
and of so many precious proofs of affection, that I should be the most
ungrateful person of the world, if I should not prefer you as long as I live
before the masters of the Universe.

But to finish my narration, I will tell you, that we would have continued our
voyage toward Armenia, but the Prince my brother prayed me first to hear the
relation of his adventures, and having discoursed them to me in the same place,
where he acquainted me with as great and as wonderful things as ever I heard
of, which you shall hear at better leisure, either from his mouth or mine; he
let me know at last that he was necessarily obliged to be at Alexandria with
all possible speed, believing that in that place only he might hear news of a
person, to whom he had absolutesy devoted his life, and without whom he could
have neither repose nor comfort. Though I had a great desire to return to my
native Country, and though the memory of you might make me fear on your behalf,
that, if I had any place still in your thoughts, you would seek for me in
Armenia to no purpose: yet my brothers interest was so urgent, and of so great
importance (as you will understand when I shall acquaint you with it) that I
should have been absolutely void of friendship, and respect toward him, if I
should have expressed the least repugnance to go that voyage, before I went to
Armenia.

Ariobarzanes gave me to understand that we went to seek in that Country for
what he had lost, that being the only part of the world where he believed he
might receive intelligence: and that if the Gods would permit him to find
satisfaction there, we should go into our native Country full of joy and
contentment, but if fortune crossed him, he would reconduct me out of Egypt
into Armenia the shortest and the easiest way. I loved Ariobarzanes so well
that I desired his repose as much as mine own, and by the relation which he
made me of his strange adventures, I did so much interesse my self in the
fortune of that person for whom he sought, that I was the first that urged
that voyage, and told him that all the trouble I could endure upon that account
was not considerable in relation to a design of that importance.

Ariobarzanes embraced me with tears in his eyes, as well in respect to the
marks of affection which he found in me, as to the memory of the deplorable
condition of his fortune, wherein I did so participate, that he hardly seemed
to be more afflicted than I.

We turned about our vessel, and the wind not being contrary to us, in a short
time we entered into the Syrian Sea: but, as ill luck would have it, either the
troubles of my mind, or the toil of my body made me fall sick, and it came to
such an extremity, that Ariobarzanes, notwithstanding the impatience which
carried him along in thas voyage, perceiving that in that condition I could not
brook the Sea, landed us at Sidon, where (to make as quick dispatch of a thing
of so small importance as I can possibly) whatsoever care I took to forward my
recovery, I was not in a condition to endure the Sea for above a month.

After that time we put to Sea again, where contrary to my expectation, I
suddenly recovered my health. The men which Britomarus left us accompanied and
served us all the voyage with a great deal of affection; and by the diligence,
and good conduct of his Mariners, without any adventure worth speaking of, we
arrived yesterday in the evening upon this coast. But our Vessel was in so bad
a condition, having born the brunt of a furious Tempest but a few days since,
that we did not think we could lie there all night in safety: and leaving the
care to our men to raccommode it, we came out of it in that condition wherein
you met us to come to this City; but it was so late that night surprised us in
the Wood, and so dark, that not knowing the way, we were constrained to take up
our lodging under the trees, where we spent the night, and whither our common
destiny conducted you, to render you what you sought for with more trouble
than I deserved, and to give me the comfort of seeing a Prince again, who for
so many reasons ought to be most dear to me, and highly esteemed by me as long
as I live.

Arsinoe ended her discourse in this manner, and when she had done speaking,
the passionate Prince throwing himself at her feet, and embracing her knees
with tears of joy, expressed himself with so much ardor, that the Princess to
whom the testimonies of his love were not disagreeable, was more moved to
tenderness than ever she had been before, and gave him all the marks of
affection, that he could expect from so eminent a virtue as Delia's was.

The end of the Sixth Part.

