THE SECOND PART OF REPORTS AND CASES OF LAW, Argued and Adjudged in the COURTS
at WESTMINSTER, In the Time of the late Q. ELIZABETH, From the XVIIIth to the
XXXIIId Year of Her Reign.

Collected by that Learned Professor of the LAW, William Leonard, of the
Honorable Society of Gray's-Inn, Esquire

With Alphabetical TABLES of the Names of the CASES and of the MATTERS
contained in the BOOK.

LONDON, Printed by the Assigns of R. and E. Atkins, Esquires, for R. Chiswell
and Tho. Sawbridge, in St. Paul's Churchyard and Little Britain. 1687.

To the READER.
I Here present to thy view and study, The second Part of the Reports and
Cases, collected and taken in French (by that grave, industrious, and Learned
Professor and Practiser of the Common Law, William Leonard Esquire sometimes of
the Honorable Society of Gray's Inn) in the Reign of the late Queen Elizabeth;
which Reports were of such inestimable value, by reason of their authentic
Arguments, that they were transcribed by diverse Honorable and Learned persons,
as may appear by my Epistle to the first part of His Reports: these, together
with the first part, being select Cases, by many Eminent Lawyers of this
Nation, thought to be worthy the Press. How deserving the Author is of thy
candid censure I refer to thy deliberate judgment; Hic labor, hoc opus est: As
for the Work it requires totum non mixtum hominem, an entire man, without other
diversions. If thou best a representative Warrior, for the lives and
patrimonies of thy Clients, I here present thee with a weapon to defend them;
and though the Military Profession be very Noble and Honorable, because most
dangerous; yet the Profession of the Law, herein challenges precedence, (...)
because the Sword is but a servant to Justice, consecrated by the Almighty, to
maintain and defend the Law, for if men were just, the Sword might be sheathed:
and to speak in the Dialect of Sir John Davies, in his eloquent Epistle to the
Irish Reports; We see Heathen Kingdoms subsist without Religion, and you may
imagine a Kingdom to subsist without Physicians, as once Rome did, but all men
at all times, and in all places, stand in need of Justice and Law, which is the
commensurate rule of Justice, and consequently Lawyers, who are the Ministers
and Secretaries of Justice, the Queen and Empress of all other Moral Virtues
according to the axiom, or Maxim Conciliarii sunt organa Justitiae in corpore
Politico. But (Candid Reader) not to defatigate thy clemency, neither to
trespass too much upon thy patience with a prolix Epistle, I do here tender
these Reports to thy judgment, upon a serious and deliberate consideration,
presuming they (as well as the first) may tend to thy use and benefit, in the
course of thy study and practice of Law, which is all that is desired.

The Names of the Learned Lawyers Sergeants at Law, and Judges of the several
Courts at Westminster, who Argued the Cases, and were then Judges of the said
several Courts; Viz.
A
ANDERSON, Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas. Anger. Attham, Sergeant at
Law, afterward one of the Barons of the Exchequer. Atkinson, Ayliffe, Justice
of the King's Bench.
B
Beaumont, Sergeant at Law, after Judge of the Common Pleas. Bromley, Lord
Chancellor of England. Bacon, afterward Lord Chancellor of England. Barkley.
C
Coke, afterward L. C. Justice of the Common Pleas. Clench, one of the Judges
of the King's Bench. Cooper, Sergeant at Law. Clark, Baron of the Exchequer.
Coventrie, after Lord Keeper of the Great Seal.
D
Daniel, one of the Judges of the Common Pleas. Drew, Sergeant at Law. Dyer,
Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas.
E
Egerton, Solicitor of the Queen, after Lord Chancellor of England.
F
Fleetwood, Sergeant at Law, Recorder of London. Fuller. Fenner, Sergeant,
after Judge of the King's Bench: and then after Lord Chief Justice.
G
Gaudy, Sergeant at Law. Gaudy, one of the Judges of the King's Bench. Golding,
Sergeant at Law. Glanvile, one of the Judges of the Common Pleas. Gent, one of
the Barons of the Exchequer. Godfrey.
H
Haughton, Sergeant at Law, after one of the Judges of the Common Pleas.
Hammon, Sergeant at Law. Harris, Sergeant at Law. Heal, Sergeant at Law.
Hobart, after Lord Chief Justice of the Court of Common Pleas.
K
Kingsmill, Judge of the King's Bench.
L
Laiton. Leonard.
M
Meade, Sergeant at Law, after Judge of the Court of the Common Pleas. Morgan,
Sergeant at Law. Manwood, Lord Chief Baron of the Exchequer. Mounson, Justice
of the Common Pleas.
O
Owen, Sergeant at Law, after Baron of the Exchequer.
P
Popham, Attorney General of the Queen, after L. C. Justice of the King's
Bench. Periam, Judge of the Common Pleas. Pepper, Attorney of the Court of
Wards. Plowden. Puckering, the Queens Sergeant at Law.
R
Rhodes, one of the Judges of the Common Pleas.
S
Snag, Sergeant at Law. Snig, one of the Barons of the Exchequer. Shuttleworth,
Sergeant at Law.
T
Tanfield, Sergeant at Law: after Lord Chief Baron of the Exchequer. Topham.
W
Wray, Lord Chief Justice of the King's Bench. Windham, one of the Judges of
the Common Pleas. Walmesley, Sergeant at Law, after one of the Judges of the
Common Pleas.
Y
Yelverton, Sergeant at Law, after one of the Justices of the King's Bench.
THE Names of the Cases.
A
ARds and Smiths Gase. SECT. 82 Amner and Luddintons Case. SECT. 115 Alexander
and Dyers Case. SECT. 121 Aldersley and Dupparries Case. SECT. 126 Andrews
Case. SECT. 231 Alford and Leas Case. SECT. 145 Ashpernons Case. SECT. 228 Sir
Anthony Denneys Case. SECT. 239 Anonymus. SECT. 8 9 12 13 18 19 22 23 41 44 60
69 85 86 93 135 186 193 196 197 210 211 214 218 221 227 246 247 252 254 259 260
261 272 276 277 278 279 280 285
B
Beaumont and Deans Case. SECT. 15 Brents Case. SECT. 25 Barns and Smiths Case.
SECT. 28 Baskervile and the Bishop of Herefords Case. SECT. 66 Backhouse and
Spencers Case. SECT. 68 Brasiers Case. SECT. 73 Bardens and Withingtons Case.
SECT. 75 Beaumonts Case. SECT. 79 Brian and Cowsens Case. SECT. 92 Brooks Case.
SECT. 111 Bridget Clerks Case. SECT. 113 Bashpools Case. SECT. 123 Bennet and
Shortwrights Case. SECT. 124 Bigg and Clarks Case. SECT. 132 Bows and Vernons
Case. SECT. 136 Barefoot and Luters Case. SECT. 148 Brown and Ordinacres Case.
SECT. 149 Bedels Case. SECT. 153 Bostock and Coverts Case. SECT. 174 Berry and
Goodmans Case. SECT. 182 Borough and Holcrofts Case. SECT. 195 Basset and
Prowes Case. SECT. 200 Barker and Tailors Case. SECT. 206 Bostwick and
Bostwicks Case. SECT. 238 Beale and Langleys Case. SECT. 257 Brocchus Case.
SECT. 264 Bawell and Lucas Case. SECT. 281
C
Cranmers Case. SECT. 7 Creswell and Cokes Case. SECT. 10 Colshill and Hastings
Case. SECT. 20 Clark and Greens Case. SECT. 34 Clarks Case. SECT. 36 Collet and
the Bailiffs of Shrewsburies Case. SECT. 43 Cobb and Priors Case. SECT. 46 62
Costard and Wingfields Case. SECT. 58 Carters Case. SECT. 61 Corbets Case.
SECT. 88 Challoner Bowyers Case. SECT. 94 Countess of Linox Case. SECT. 95
Curtise and Cattells Case. SECT. 97 Cony and Chomleys Case. SECT. 157 Collet
and Robstons Case. SECT. 160 Crop and Hamledens Case. SECT. 173 Cony and
Beveridges Case. SECT. 181 Crabdels Case. SECT. 199 Case of the Town of
Leicester. SECT. 240 Courtney and Killoways Case. SECT. 249 Coopers Case. SECT.
253 Coniers and Hollands Case. SECT. 270
D
Dormers Case. SECT. 6 Devered and Ratcliffs Case. SECT. 33 Daws and Mollins
Case. SECT. 105 Dogheads Case. SECT. 156 Davies and Percies Case. SECT. 164
Dean and Chapter of Windsors Case. SECT. 180 Dunns Case. SECT. 188 Dighton and
Clarks Case. SECT. 248
E
Edwards and Hallinders Case. SECT. 116 Executors of Sir William Cordell and
Cliftons Case. SECT. 185 Edgar and Crispes Case. SECT. 215
F
Farrington and Fleetwoods Case. SECT. 78 Firrell and the Hundred of Bs. Case.
SECT. 109 Foskews Case. SECT. 114 Forster and Walkers Case. SECT. 198 Frankwels
Case. SECT. 216 Freeman and Drews Case. SECT. 223 Farnams Case. SECT. 232
Frenches Case. SECT. 253 Fosters Case. SECT. 265 Fuller and Trimwells Case.
SECT. 274
G
Gregorie's Case. SECT. 11 Green and Everards Case. SECT. 58 George ap Rices
Case. SECT. 54 Goddards Case. SECT. 80 Goldings Case. SECT. 96 Gower and others
against Daubeny. SECT. 100 Griffins Case. SECT. 102 Gray and Constables Case.
SECT. 155 Gerings Case. SECT. 163 Grove and Sparrs Case. SECT. 166 Gerrards
Case. SECT. 205 Gittinson and Tyrrells Case. SECT. 208 Giles Case. SECT. 222
Gray a Bencher of the Temples Case. SECT. 233 Gomersall and Gomersals Case.
SECT. 245
H
Hynde and Sir John Lions Case. SECT. 16 Hartford and Gardiners Case. SECT. 35
Hall and the Bishop of Baths Case SECT. 83 Hughs Case. SECT. 84 Herring and
Badlocks Case. SECT. 107 Hunt and Somes Case. SECT. 137 Hoopers Case. SECT. 143
Heals Case. SECT. 154 Holland and Bonis Case. SECT. 168 Hawkins Case. SECT. 171
Harris and the Lord Mountjoys Case SECT. 209 Helyards Case. SECT. 213 Hoopers
Case. SECT. 226 Hoar and Wridlesworths Case. SECT. 230 Hurlestons Case. SECT.
244 Holland and Drakes Case SECT. 250 Hampers Case. SECT. 262 Humphrestons
Case. SECT. 275 Highams Case. SECT. 287
J
Johnson and Bellamyes Case. SECT. 48 Joys Case. SECT. 49 Inchley and
Robinsons Case SECT. 57 Sir John Savages Case. SECT. 140 Sir John Southwells
Case. SECT. 175 Sir John Sands and Packsall Brocas Case SECT. 217
K
Kirkman and Reignolds Case. SECT. 2 Knevet and Tailors Case. SECT. 144
Kingwell and Chapmans Case. SECT. 189
L
Lovelesses Case. SECT. 24 Lord Cromwels Case. SECT. 39 Lightfoot and Butlers
Case. SECT. 27 Leonard Lovelaces Case. SECT. 54 Lucas and Picrofts Case. SECT.
55 Lord of Northampton and Lord Saint John's Case SECT. 81 Lacy and Fishers
Case. SECT. 87 Lawson and Hares Case. SECT. 98 Larges Case. SECT. 110 Linacre
and Rhodes Case. SECT. 117 Lord Howard and the Town of Waldens Case. SECT. 184
Lodges Case. SECT. 190 Lord Awldeys Case. SECT. 194 Litchfield Cages Case.
SECT. 203 Lord Norths Case. SECT. 219 Lennards Case. SECT. 241
M
Machel and Duntons Case. SECT. 40 Martin Van-Henbecks Case. SECT. 52 Mounsel
and Vernons Case. SECT. 64 Morgan and Chandlers Case. SECT. 67 Merry and Jews
Case. SECT. 72 Mecok and Broughton and Davies Case. SECT. 77 Moore and Sir John
Savages Case. SECT. 108 Moueing and Worleys Case SECT. 122 Marsh and Rainsfords
Case. SECT. 146 Mingay and Earls Case. SECT. 150 Marsh and Joans Case. SECT.
156 Moore and Savils Case. SECT. 176 Sir Moil Finches Case. SECT. 178 Morris
and Webbers Case. SECT. 207 Mead and Cheneys Case. SECT. 230 Manwood and
Burstons Case. SECT. 255 Moultons Case. SECT. 263 Muttons Case. SECT. 293
N
Nevil and Cokes Case. SECT. 5 Norris Case. SECT. 37 Noones Case. SECT. 90
O
Ognel and Pastons Case. SECT. 112 Offley and Johnsons Case. SECT. 202 Ordway
and Parrots Case. SECT. 269
P
Perry and Somes Case. SECT. 30 Povies Case. SECT. 56 Penruddock and Newmans
Case. SECT. 65 Partridge and Pooles Case. SECT. 104 Parker and Burtons Case.
SECT. 127 Piggot and Russels Case. 139 Parker and Harrolds Case. 153 Phillips
and Stones Case. 162 Pleadalls Case. 192 Paschals Case. 220 Perchalls Case. 234
Pretiman and Cooks Case. 243 Pains Case. 256 Partriges Case. 266
Q
The Queen and Partriges Case. 31 Queen and Jordans Case. 42 Queen and Lord
Lumleys Case. 106
R
Rosse and Morrices Case. 29 Robinson and Robinsons Case. 38 Rous and Artois
Case. 58 Rolson and Chambers Case. 70 Ralph Morris Case. 74 Rymersly and Ropers
Case. 120 Ropers Case. 138 Rushtons Case. 167 Sir Richard Buckleys Case. 225
Rooke and Dennys Case. 242 Russel and Brokers Case. 258 Richmond and Butchers
Case. 271
S
Savacres Case. 4 231 Stewards Case. 21 Salway and Lusons Case. 47 Sands and
Scagnards Case. 50 Spittle and Davies Case. 51 Smalman and Lanes Case. 76
Seckford and Wolderstons Case. 103 Sir John Southwells Case. 132 Stainsby and
Hales Case. 141 Sands and Hempstons Case. 142 Scot and Scots Case. 170 Sleds
Case. 179 Segar and Baintons Case. 191 Seots Case. 204 Shrewsbury and the
Inhabitants of the Hundred of Ashdon. 212 Scragg and Griffius Case. 273
Stamfords Case. 284 Sidenham and Worlingtons Case. 286
T
Thatcher and Damports Case. 2 Thurkettell and Teyes Case. 26 Tailor and
Brounsalls Case. 63 Sir Thomas Bacons Case. 128 Trusto and Ewers Case. 130
Toley and Windhams Case. 133 Thorp and Tomsons Case. 165 Tomson and Traffords
Case. 236
V
Veale and Roberts Case. 134 Venables and Sergeant Harris Case. 169 Vicountess
Bindons Case. 201 Vavasors Case. 282
W
Werdman and Yates Case. 3 Wingfield and Seckfords Case. 14 Woodward and Buggs
Case. 32 Wrenn and Bulmans Case. 71 Sir William Pelhams Case. 89 Western and
Weilds Case. 91 Wellocks Case. 98 Sir William Walkers Case. 101 Webb and
Mainards Case. 118 Willis and Jermins Case. 119 Walter against Pery and Spring.
125 Weshbourn and Mardants Case. 129 Williams and Linfords Case. 147 Wellock
and Hammons Case. 152 Willoughbys Case. 159 Wye and Throgmortons Case. 173
Wisemans Case. 183 West and Stowels Case. 187 Wood and Averies Case. 237 Wiggon
and Arscots Case. 267 Winter and Lovedays Case. 268
Y
Yates Case. 161 Summers and Sir Richard Buckleys Case. 224
THE SECOND PART OF Reports and Cases OF LAW, Argued and Adjudged in the time
of Queen ELIZABETH, from the Eighteenth to the Three and thirtieth Year of her
Reign.
I. Kirkman and Reignold 's Case. Mich. 30 Eliz. In the Common Pleas. Rot. 30.
THE Case was, That a Lease was made unto two, Leases. 1 Cro. 182.
Habendum to them, and to two others for four lives, and the longer liver of
them; It was resolved by the whole Court, That the two named in the Habendum
did not take any thing; and that if the first two in the Premises of the Deed
die, that there shall be no occupancy; For the lives of the two in the Habendum
was intended an Estate to them, and not a limitation of the Estate of the first
two: And so it was resolved, 28 Eliz. in the King's Bench, Rot. 509. Hubbart
and Windsmore's Case.
in Hubbart and Windsmore's Case.

II. Thatcher and Damport 's Case. Mich. 32 and 33 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
Rot. 19.
THatcher recovered against Damport as Administrator of one Zouch, 1 Cro. 145.
215. ib. Error.
The Defendant put in Bail, and afterward Judgment was given against the
Defendant in this manner: Ideo videtur Justiciariis, quod querens recuperet
debitum suum versus, etc. and thereupon a Scire facias was sued against the
Bail, Judgment against the Bail.
and a good and lawful Judgment given against them; And they brought a Writ of
Error to reverse the Judgment given against them, and assigned Error, because
Judgment was entered against them before a good and lawful Judgment was given
against the Defendant himself; For Videtur Justiciariis quod querens recuperet,
etc. is not any Judgment; and the Court held, that the Judgment given against
the Bail, ought to be reversed, but that the other Judgment should stand such
as it is, neither affirmed nor disaffirmed, but the Bail should not cause the
same Judgment for their discharge to be entered, And afterward came Thatcher
and surmised the nullity of the said Judgment, and prayed that Judgment might
be entered for him in forma juris, and habuit: And now upon this new Judgment
Damport brought a Writ of Error, and assigned for Error the entry of that new
Judgment, for before a Judgment was entered, tiel queb. and Thatcher proceeded
upon it, and had a Scire facias against the Bail, and Judgment thereupon given
against the Bail: Also the Record was removed by Writ of Error, and this second
Judgment is merely erroneous, for then there should be two Judgments; and they
should give Judgment upon a Record, which was not before them.

Gaudy Justice, The Writ of Error is to remove the Record, Si Judicium inde
redditum sit, by which if Judgment be not given, the Record does remain
unremoved, and then they may well enough give Judgment; For the former
pretended Judgment was no Judgment at all, and the Record is not removed, As 4
Eliz. Dyer 206. a Certiorari to remove a Record, capt. in Curia nostra, whereas
it was in Curia of the predecessor, the Record is not removed. The former Writ
of Error was to remove the Record of the Scire facias against the Bail which
might be removed, although the other Record did remain, for they are two
distinct Judgments. And such was the opinion of the other Justices; And
afterward upon advice of the whole Court, the Judgment against the Defendant
himself was affirmed, but that which was given against the Bail was reversed,
because given before Judgment given against the Defendant himself.

III. Werdman and Yate 's Case. Trinit. 32 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
Partition. 1 Cro. 155. 281.
WErdman brought a Writ of Partition against Yates and others, who all appeared
and confessed the Action, and afterward brought Error, which was entered,
Pasch. 27 Eliz. Rot. 43. and they assigned Errors, and the opinion of the Court
was against them, and they seeing it, did discontinue their Writ of Error, and
now they sued a new Writ of Error out of the Chancery, Error.
directed to the Lord Anderson, being dated 19 Nov. 31 Eliz. containing, That
whereas a Writ had been directed to him to remove such a Record, That all the
Record is not yet removed; wherefore this was to remove the residue of the said
Record; Upon which Writ was sent hither a small parcel of the Record, upon
which the Plaintiffs sued a new Writ of Error out of the Chancery, Coram vobis
residet, and that was Hill. 31 Eliz. and it was entered upon a new Roll of the
same Term, and not upon the ancient Roll, and thereupon new Errors were
assigned in the judicial process out of the body of the Record.

1. That the Plea was discontinued for Pone was awarded against three of the
Defendants, and idem dies not given to the other two, nor any thing spoken of
them.

2. Because there were not fifteen days betwixt the date of the Pone, and the
Retorn of it, (scil.) the first day of the Retorn, i. the first day of Essoins,
as ought to be by Law.

3. Judgment was given that the Defendants should be amerced, where they appear
upon the first Process, and thereupon the Plaintiff sued a new Writ of
Diminution, one to the Lord Anderson, and the other to the Custos Brevium, And
now came and pleaded all the matter aforesaid, viz. the former Writ of Error,
the proceeding in it, and the discontinuance of it, and demanded Judgment if
the Plaintiff should have a new Writ of Diminution, upon which the Plaintiff
did demurr: Coke, this second Writ of Error is not maintainable: For the first
Writ sent to the Lord Anderson, could not be sued out of the Chancery, for it
is not a Writ of Error, but a Writ of Diminution: For in the Register there are
but two Writs of Error, the first to remove Record, the second Quod coram vobis
residet, 2 H. 7. 19. and in the Writ there is not any mention of Error, and
therefore it cannot be a Writ of Error, and if there be not any such Writ in
the Register, then it is a good argument to say there is no Writ at all, as the
Lord Dyer argued in the Lady Hale's Case, 5 Eliz. 262. in Plowden in the Case
of the Writ of Escheat: Also it is against all the precedents, that a Writ of
Error, Quod coram vobis residet, should be otherwise entered than upon the first
Record, and not upon a new Record, and the Writ of Diminution is not an
Original Writ, and ought always issue out of the Court where the Writ of Error
is depending: And also the party cannot now allege Diminution, i. after a
Scire facias ad audiendum Errores, which see 22 E. 4. Diminution.
45. by Hussy: For by the Scire facias ad audiendum Errores, he affirms the
Record to be full: So 7 E. 4. 25. After the Defendant in the Writ of Error has
pleaded in nullo est erratum he shall not allege Diminution, for the parties
are agreed upon the Record, 28 H. 6. 10. after a Scire facias, the Plaintiff
shall never assign Errors in fact, etc. Tanfield contrary, he agreed, that a
Writ of Diminution cannot be sued out of the Chancery, but that will not hurt
us, for it is idle and utterly void: And when the Record is removed, it is not
material how it comes in, so as it be here, for they are both the King's Court,
as it is in the common Case of Indictments: and then the Writ of Error is to
examine the Record, Quod coram vobis residet, And although the same be in
diverse Rolls, the same is no matter of Exception; Entry of Records.
but if the Roll be entered in a wrong Office it is not good, but if all be in
one Office, the misfiling of the Roll will be no hurt: So here, it is not so
formal as it ought; yet it is not any prejudice to us. But the great matter is,
if the Plaintiff may assign new Errors and have a new Writ of Diminution, two
of the Errors assigned in the Mesne Process, but the third is in the Record it
self; i. the Judgment. And there is no doubt but that a man may have diverse
Writs of Error, but he shall have but one Supersedeas, and so diverse Errors,
but one delay: Also it is not a Writ of Diminution which we have sued, for I do
not say that it is a thing below, which is not here, but I say that is not a
thing below which ought to be, viz. there is not any discontinuance; but the
Court awarded that Writ for their satisfaction, for the non esse of the thing
shall come on the other side, and 9 E. 4. the Court awarded a Certiorare to
enform themselves. And he said that after a Scire facias, the Plaintiff may
assign new Errors, Trin. 20. H. 7. Rot. 84. betwixt Edge-Court and London, a
Writ of Error was brought against two, and after Errors assigned, one of the
Defendants died, before a new Writ of Error could be assigned: But here the
first Record is discontinued and determined, for which there is not now any
Record which may be objected against us, nor any thing in it: as 20 H. 7. A man
avows for a Rent due at such a day, and is nonsuit; Now he may avow for the
same Rent, and suppose the same to be due at another day, Estoppell.
for he shall not be estopped by the Record upon which he was nonsuit: and so
here upon the whole matter the Writ out of the Chancery is not material, and
the Roll is not misplaced, but is in the right Office: Also this is not a Writ
of Diminution, but a Writ to inform the Justices, Wherefore upon the whole
matter the Writ of Error will well lie. It was adjourned.

IV. Savacres Case. Rot. 7. Mich. 31 and 32 Eliz. In the King's Bench. Error.
Post 185.
A Writ of Error was brought by Savacre and the Bishop of Gloucester upon a
Judgment given in a Quare Impedit for the Queen, and Errors assigned. 1.
Attachment was awarded against the Defendants in the Quare Impedit, retornable
Quind. Pasc. at which day Savacre appeared, and cast an Essoyn; and
notwithstanding that, a Distress was awarded against them both, retornable
Crastin. Trinit. and this awarding of the Distress was erroneous, for the
Essoyn was, as appears, to save, etc. and therefore against him no Distress
ought to have been awarded: And upon alleging of Diminution the Record of the
Essoyn was certified, but the same does not appear upon the Plea Roll. 2. This
Record is, ideo ipsi in misericordia, and so both the Defendants are amerced
for their default of appearance 15 Pasch. whereas Savacre was then Essoyned,
and so no cause to amerce him.

Coke, The Original Writ was sued Mich. 26 Eliz. returned 15 Hillarii, and then
both the Defendants made default, for which an Attachment was awarded,
retornable 15 Pasc. and then Savacre appeared, and Judgment given, quod ipsi
sint in misericordia, in which point the Error is apparent: but I conceive that
it is not Error, for upon the Attachment the parties ought to put in Sureties
for their appearance; and the said Sureties took upon them, that the Defendants
and each of them should appear; and if they or any of them make default, they
shall be amerced: And so here, this Judgment, ideo ipsi in misericodia, does
refer to the Sureties, not to the parties, for the Defendants shall not be
amerced until the end of the Suit, and but once only in an Action: which see
Book of Entries 464 where there was but one Defendant: and therefore if the
amercements shall be referred to the Defendant, then it shall be ideo ipse, not
ipsi, etc. And that is the Reason wherefore the Queen, nor an Infant, shall not
find Pledges, for no amercement shall be upon their default, therefore it were
in vain for them to find Pledges, etc. If the Sureties be amerced where they
ought not to be amerced by the Law, yet the Defendant shall not have a Writ of
Error thereupon, for he is not the party grieved by the amercement: and upon
that Reason it is, if in a Scire facias against the Bail erroneous Judgment be
given, the Defendant in the Action shall not have a Writ of Error. The awarding
of the Distress upon the Roll against both, where one of them only made
default, is not Error, especially as this case is: for although one of them was
essoyned until the day aforesaid, yet at that day they make default, and so the
Distress well awarded against them: and although the Writ was not well awarded,
yet when they appear Crastin. Trinit. at the day of the Retorn of the Distress,
all mesn defaults in the Process are saved, and so the misawarding of the
Distress by appearance after is supplied: as 39 E. 3. 7. The Law requires, that
in an Action founded upon the Statute of Praemunire, etc. 27 E. 3. the
Defendant gave Garnishment by two Months, yet if the Defendant, not having
warning appear, now the Process is good enough: So 9 E. 4. 18. where upon any
Process the Defendant does appear, although the day of appearance be not
lawful, yet he shall be put to answer, and see many Cases there to that
purpose. And so was the Opinion of the Court in the principal Case.

As to the second Error, That this Judgment, ideo ipsi in misericordia, shall
be reserved to the Sureties only, and not to the party, and that the Defendant
shall be but once amerced in one Action; True it is, he shall be amerced but
once for one default; but if there be many defaults, the Defendant shall be
amerced severally for the several defaults for every offense; and it should be
unreasonable that the Sureties should be amerced, and that the Defendant, who
is the principal, should be freed: which see in the book of Entries 193.
ipsique and plegii sui in misericordia, etc.

V. Nevil and Cook 's Case. Trinit. 32 Eliz. Rot. 76. In the King's Bench.
IN an Action of Covenant the Plaintiff declared, Covenant.
That where it was covenanted betwixt the Plaintiff and the Defendant, That
each of Them upon request should be accountable to the other for all the Corn
growing upon such a place, and that upon such account the one of them should
deliver to the other the moiety of the Corn, or the profit of it: and whereas
the Defendant had taken all the said Corn, scil. twenty loads of Wheat, forty
loads of Barley, and thirty loads of Pease, growing upon the said Lands, and
had been required to render account of the said Corn, which he refused to do:
The Defendant traversed the request, upon which they were at issue, and it was
hereupon demurred: and it was moved, that the Traverse was not good, but the
Defendant ought to say, that the Plaintiff did not require him modo and forma;
but the Exception was not allowed, but the Traverse was holden good by the
whole Court and Judgment was given for the Plaintiff.

VI. Elizabeth Dormer 's Case. Trinit. 32 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
ELizabeth Dormer was indicted upon the Statute of 23 Eliz. of Recusancy; and
Exception was taken to the Indictment, 1 Len. 241.
because that these words of the Statute were omitted out of the Indictment,
viz. [non habens aliquam rationabilem causam] But the Exception was not
allowed; for Wray, chief Justice, said, That upon conference betwixt himself
and all his companions, it was resolved by them, That those words need not be
put into the Indictment, but are to come on the other side. Another Exception
was taken to the Indictment, That she being of the age sixteen years refused to
come to any Church ( contra formam Statut. 1 Eliz. and in malum exemplum, etc.
and contra formam Statuti in hujusmodi casu editi and provisi) and the Statute
of 1 Eliz. does not speak of sixteen years, but the same is mentioned in the
Statute of 23 Eliz. Fenner was of Opinion, that the last Contra formam Statuti
should be referred to the Statute of 23 Eliz. Wray contrary, and that it should
be referred to the Statute of 1 Eliz. It was adjourned.

VII. Cranmer 's Case. 16 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
THE Case was, That Thomas Cranmer, 1 Anders. 19. More Rep. 100. 1 Len. 196. 3
Len. 20. Dyer 309, 310.
late Archbishop of Canterbury, made a Feoffment in Fee to the use of himself
for life, without impeachment of Waste, and after his decease to the use of his
Executors for twenty years, and after the twenty years to the use of his Son
and Heir in tail. And afterward Thomas Cranmer was attainted of Treason, and
dyed, so as he could not make Executors, but dyed intestate without any
assignment. Office Executors, 118.
(Note, the limitation was to his Executors and Assigns.) Queen Mary claimed
the term limited as aforesaid, and granted the same over, the Heir in tail
entered, and Leased the same for years, the Patentee entered, and the Lessee of
the Heir of the Tenant in tail brought Ejectione firmae.

Manwood. All the doubt of this case is, If the said term was in Tho. Cranmer
so as he might forfeit it? And he conceived, that the said term was in Tho.
Cranmer, and that he had not power only to dispose of it, but also had
possession of it: 11 H. 4. 186. Scire facias 67. And Br. Annuity 17. Such a
Grant is good and effectual, and if he do not grant it his Executors shall have
it, and yet the term was not limited to him, but he shall have it by
implication of Law. 39 E. 3. A Lease was made to one, his Heirs and Assigns
during his life, and one year after, the Executors shall have the said term
after the death of the Lessee, yet the said term was not limited to him: 7 E.
3. A Lease made for term of live and a year after, in that case the term is
conjoined unto the Estate for life by the act of the Grantor himself; and there
is a difference when the Remainder is joined to the particular Estate by the
act of the Grantor, and by any Purchase, Grant, or any act after: for in the
first case the Remainder shall be executed, but in the latter not. A Lease for
life, the Remainder in tail, the Remainder to the right Heirs of Tenant for
life; he in the Remainder in tail dies without issue in the life of Tenant for
life, now the Fee is executed to the Freehold, etc. and the Heir shall not have
a Scire facias where such conveyance is made by Fine. See 17 E. 3. 29. In a Cui
in vita, A. Executor of B. came and said, that the Land in demand was Leased to
the said B. for the term of his life, the Remainder for the term of eight years
to his Executors, and prayed to be received, and they were received. See 19 E.
3. A Lease was made for life to A. the Remainder to his Executors for twelve
years: the Less for life died, the Executors died, there it is agreed, that
the Executors of the Executors should have an Action of Covenant, if they be
ousted. And see 20 E. 3. Quid juris clamat 31. A Lease is made to A. for life,
and if A. dies within twenty years, that his Executors shall have the term
until the end of such term: and in a Quid juris clamat against A. he saved his
term by protestation, which proves, that the term was quodam modo in him. 49 E.
3. A Lease for life unto A. the Remainder to his Heirs and Executors for twelve
years, and afterward the Lessor confirms the Estate of the Lessee for life, to
have and to hold the Land to him for life, and thirteen years over to his
Executors; the Lessee devises the term, and the Devise holden good, which
proves, that the term was in him.

Harper, Justice, contrary: Many cases put before may be answered; for in the
said case the term is limited to begin immediately, and not by way of
Remainder, or after the death of the Lessee, and then the Executors in the life
of the Testator are not known, nor able to seek any thing by the name of
Executors, and therefore that term shall take its beginning in the life of the
Testator: But in the Case at Bar the term is limited to the Executors after the
death of the Testator, Co. 1 Inst. 54. b.
and the Executor takes the term as a Purchasor, and he has it not as a
Chattel of the Testator, but as his own Chattel. And in the Case of Receipt
before cited, the Executor shall be received as Executor, for the term was
limited to him as Executor. And here the Statute of 27 H. 8. 1 Cro. 666.
is to be considered, for it extends as well to Chattels as to Freehold, and
the Statute does execute the possession to the use limited for years, as for
life, or in Fee: and here the use is limited to the Executors, and not to the
Testator, and therefore it shall not be otherwise transferred. And therefore if
a man seized in the Right of his Wife discontinueth, and afterward the
Discontinuee makes a Feoffment in Fee unto the use of the said Husband and Wife
for their lives, in that case the Wife shall not be remitted; for the Statute
does transfer according to the use, and the use was limited for their lives,
therefore they shall not be in of another Estate.

Dyer, chief Justice, to the same intent: The Feoffor, i. Thomas Cranmer,
limits all the uses, and therefore he shall not have that which he has
limited; and it is in the nature of a Reservation, which shall be taken
strictly and very strong against him who made the Reservation: and he relied
much upon the last Reason urged by Harper upon the Statute of 27 H. 8. that
this was limited to the Executors, Co. 13. Rep.
and not to him who limited it, and therefore the possession shall be executed
to the Executors, to whom the use was limited; and this term shall not be
Assets in the hands of the Executors: And he said, That he had seen a Record, 2
H. 8. setting forth, That A. having Feoffees to his use, devised, that his
Feoffees should sell his Lands, who did accordingly; now the money coming by
the sale shall be Assets, etc. but it is not so limited in our case, therefore
it shall not be Assets. A Lease is made to A. for life, the Remainder to the
right Heirs of B. B. purchases the Estate of A. the Estate in Remainder is not
executed, for it is not conveyed by the Grant of the first Grantor, but by the
Act of another person after the Grant. A Lease for life to A. the Remainder to
a Feme sole for years, they entermarry, Waste is committed, the Lessor brings
an Action of Waste, he shall recover as well the Estate for years as for life.
A. Leaseth unto B. for life, the Remainder unto the Executors of A. for years,
the Remainder over in Fee to a stranger, the Remainder for years is good, for
the Lessor cannot limit such an Estate to himself, and the Executors shall take
the Estate as Purchasors, and the term shall be in abeyance until the death of
A.

There was a case before the Lord Brook in the time of Queen Mary, viz. A Lease
was made for life, Proviso, that if the Lessee dies within the term of sixty
years, that the Executors shall have the Lands, as in the Right and Title of
the Lessee, pro termino totidem annorum, which do amount to the number of sixty
years, to be accounted from the said Indenture. The Opinion of the Justices of
the Common Pleas upon the Case was, That the term was not in the Lessee for
life. So this future term in the principal Case was not in Tho. Cranmer. But
see that Case cited by Dyer, reported by himself 4 Ma. 150. and there the
opinion of the Court was, That the same was not a Lease, but a Covenant.

And afterward in the principal Case Judgment was given for the Plaintiff,
That the future term was not forfeited by the Attainder of Cranmer.

VIII. 7 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
THE Case was, Dyer 317. b. 318. a.
J. S. is seized of a Close adjoining to the Close of J. D. and J. S. ought to
enclose against J. D. J. S. leaseth his Close to another for years, rendering
Rent, J. D. puts in his cattle into his own Close, who for want of enclosure
escape into the Close of J. S. and before that they be levant and couchant,
Distress for Rent.
J. S. distrains them for his Rent: It was said by Manwood, Justice, that the
distress was not well taken; Doctor and Student 150. 1 Inst. 476. Brown 1 part
170. Roll Tit. Distress 1 part in toto.
for there is a difference when the cattle come upon the Lands of another in
the default of the owner of the cattle, as by escape or stray, and where in the
default of another: For in the first case the Lord may distrain them before
they be levant and couchant; but in the latter case not: Also a Rent reserved
upon a Lease for years, is a new Rent, and not like unto an ancient Rent, due
upon an ancient Tenure betwixt the Lord and the Tenant: For, for a Rent
reserved upon a Lease for years, Roll 1 part 672. acc. Hob. 265. Brown part 2
170.
or for a Rent charge a man cannot distrain the cattle, before they be levant
and couchant upon the Lands, although they come upon the Lands by escape,
estray, etc. Dyer, The Lord cannot distrain the cattle which escape into the
Land of his Tenant for want of enclosure of his Tenant before they be levant
and couchant: and yet the seignory is favored for the antiquity of it: But
here is new Rent, not in respect of any seignory, but of reservation upon a
Lease for years, and therefore no distress before the cattle be levant and
couchant upon the Lands, Quod Harper and Mounson concesserunt, and Judgment was
given accordingly.

IX. 17 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
Writ of Entry in the Per.
THE Case was, In a Writ of Entry in the Per, against A. and B. A. pleaded
several tenancy: It was holden by Dyer, chief Justice, that it is not any plea.
Harper Justice: In Assise it is no plea; for here the Land is not in demand:
Several Tenancy where no good Plea.
but here it is a good plea, and the Demandant ought to maintain his Writ;
Manwood, In no action founded upon disseisin is this good: For although the
Demandant by policy will bring his Writ against the Tenant of the Land, and
another who he will name in the Writ, upon trust and confidence, and that he
will not agree with the Tenant of the Lord in Dilatories, for the Tenant of the
Lands shall not be received to plead Dilatories; Yet in that case several
Tenancy is no plea for the Tenant, but in a Formedon, or other such like
action, which is not grounded upon disseisin, if the Writ be brought in such
manner as above, the Tenant by policy, that he may have the view, and other
reasonable delay, may plead several Tenancy, and so enforce the Demandant to
maintain his Writ, but contrary in the Case at Bar, and so it was adjudged per
Curiam.

X. Creswell and Cokes Case. 19 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
Dyer 351.
CReswell brought Debt against Coke, and demanded 200 Marks upon the Statute of
13 Eliz. of fraudulent Deeds, Gifts, etc. upon the second clause of the
Statute, Debt.
viz. That all parties, or privies to such fraudulent Deed, willingly putting
in ure, avowing, etc. as true, simple, Custom.
and given bona fide, shall forfeit, etc. And showed that one A. held of the
Plaintiff 12 acres of customary Lands, and died seized, And that by the custom
of the Manor, Heriot.
the Lord was to have for a Heriot, the best beast whereof his Tenant died
possessed, and farther showed, that the said A. in his life time, and a little
before his death, being possessed of 30 Horses, of the value of 200 Marks, gave
the said Horses to the Defendant, with intent to defraud the Plaintiff, and
other Lords of their Heriots, and that he went to the Defendant's house to
seize his Heriot, and the Desendant then strained the said Horses, by reason of
the Gift aforesaid, for which the Action is brought, To which the Defendant
pleaded, that the Plaintiff had seized one of the Horses nomine Herioti: and as
to the rest he did demurr in Law. Mounson Justice, was of opinion, that the
Plaintiff should recover the whole 200 Marks, although he was defrauded but of
one Heriot only: as if a man be indebted to me in 20 l. and he makes such a
fraudulent Deed of his goods, of the value of 2000 l. although I be defrauded
but of the 20 l. yet he shall forfeit the whole value of the goods so conveyed.
Manwood Justice, was of opinion, that the Plaintiff should recover the value of
one of the Horses; and the Gift by the first branch is void, as to the
Plaintiff but for one of the Horses only, and not for all the Horses contained
in the Gift, for no more than one Horse was fraudulently given: And as by the
first branch the Gift is void but for one Horse, so by the second branch the
penalty extends but unto one Horse, for the fraud extends but to one Horse, and
no farther. And this Action is not a popular Action, but extends only to the
party grieved. And of the same opinion was Dyer chief Justice, and he confessed
the Case put by Mounson Justice, where the Debtor of 20 l. makes a fraudulent
Deed of his goods of 3000 l. etc. for the person of the Debtor is chargeable,
and peradventure, goods of the value of 2000 l. may be put in execution for 100
l. but here the person is not charged for the Heriot. Barham Sergeant, the
fraud goes to the whole (scil.) to all the Horses: for although the Plaintiff
is to have but one Horse, yet he is to have the choice of all the Horses, which
of them he will have for the best Beast, and because the choice goes to all the
thirty Horses; and by this fraudulent Gift, he is defrauded of his election,
which of the Horses he would have, therefore he shall have the value of the
whole thirty Horses. But Dyer and Mounson said to the Sergeant, set a price
upon any of the thirty Horses, as the best Horse in your election, and demand
the value of that Horse as forfeit by the Statute, and then your election is
saved to you.

XI. Gregory 's Case. 19 Eliz. In the common Pleas.
IN the Assise against Arthur Gregory and his wife at Warwick, Assise. 1 Len.
86. Key's steds case cont.
before Dyer and Barham, Justices of Assise, the husband made default, and the
Assise was awarded by default: and the wife came and prayed to be received, and
the opinion of the said Justices was, that Receipt lay in that Case; as in
other cases of Praecipe quod reddat; Receipt of the wife.
and therefore the wife was received. And now Dyer in Banco, demanded of his
companions, the other Justices if the Receipt was well granted: And by Manwood
and Mounson, Justices, clearly the Receipt lies: For although that the Statute
does not give Receipt, but where the Lands in demand are to be lost by such
default of the husband, and in an Assise the Land shall not be lost by the
default of the husband, but the Assise shall by taken by default, Yet because
the husband and wife lose their challenges to the Jury, because the Assise is
taken by default, It seemed to the Justices, and also to the Preignothories,
that Receipt did well lie in this Case.

XII. 19 Eliz. In the Common Ples.
IN an Action upon Escape, the Plaintiff is nonsuit: It was holden, No costs
upon Nonsuit in an Action upon Escape.
that the Defendant should not have costs, by the Statute of 23 H. 8. Note the
words of the Statute, i. (Upon any Action upon the Statute) for any offense or
personal wrong, supposed to be done immediately to the Plaintiff,
notwithstanding this Action, is Quodam modo, an Action upon the Statute, i. by
the equity of the Statute of West. 2. which gives expressly against the Warden
of the Fleet; yet properly it is not an Action upon the Statute: for in the
Declaration in such actions, no mention is made of the Statute, which see in
the Book of Entries, 169, 171. And here is not supposed any immediate personal
wrong or offense to the Plaintiff: And an Action upon the Case it is not: for
then the Writ ought to make mention of the Escape, and that it does not here;
and yet at the Common Law, before the Statute of West. 2. An Action upon the
Case did lie for an Escape: and so Dyer, Manwood, and Mounson, costs are not
given in this Case. And by Manwood, upon the Nonsuit, in an Action upon the
Statute of 8 H. 6. the Defendant shall not have costs, for that is not a
personal wrong, for the Writ is dissesivit, which is a real wrong.

Mich. 19 and 20 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
Prescription. Townsend Table 96. Hern. 709. Tit. Trespass ib. 803. 1 Cro. 898.
Rectory quid. Jones Rep. 230.
IN Trespass for breaking of his Close, the Defendant justified, to have a way
by prescription over the Land in which the trespass is supposed, for carrying
of such Tithes Usque ad Rectoriam de D. from such a place: And it was holden by
Wray, and the whole Court, that the plea was not good; for in pleading such a
way, there ought to be set forth, terminus a quo, and terminus ad quem, And
this word Rectory, which ought to be terminus ad quem, is uncertain; for a
Rectory is a thing which consists of diverse things, as Glebe, Tithes, etc. But
he ought to have said, the Parsonage House, or other place certain: And
afterward it was showed to the Court, that the said Rectory did consist only
of Tithes, and so there is not any place certain, as Parsonage House, Barn,
etc. to which the Tithes have used to be carried, for the Tithes have used to
be let to farm to diverse persons, who have carried such Tithes to their own
houses, and the Defendant is one of the Farmers of the Tithes. Wray, If your
case be such, you are to plead in this manner; That J. S. is seized in Fee of
the Rectory of D. and that time out of mind, he, and all those, etc. have used
for them and theirs formerly to have a way to carry their Tithes from such a
place over the Land where, etc. unto such a high way, and name a way, which is
the next to the place where the trespass was done; the which cause the
Defendant pleaded so according to the direction of the Court.

XIV. Wingfield and Seckford 's Case. Hillar. 20 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
Debt for Rent. Co. 3. Rep. 24.
IN Debt for arrerages of Rent upon a Lease for years, the truth of the case
was, That before any arrerages incurred, the land Leased was evicted upon an
Eigne Title; The Defendant pleaded, that he owed him nothing: If now he might
give in Evidence the said eviction was the Question; and it was the opinion of
Dyer, Manwood, and Mounson, Pleadings.
that he could not, but he ought to have pleaded it especially; and they denied
the opinion of the Preignothories, who said, that the Defendant ought to have
pleaded the Eviction, and concluded Judgment of Action; and not rein luy doit,
and the Court advised the Defendant to plead accordingly.

XV. Beamont and Dean 's Case. Hillar. 20 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
Dower. Dyer 361.
IN Dower brought by the wife of Beamont, Master of the Rolls, in the time of E.
6. The Defendant said, that he himself, before the Writ brought, did assign a
rent of 10 l. per ann. to the Demandant, in recompense of her Dower, upon which
the Demandant did demur in Law; and the cause was, because the Tenant had not
showed what Estate he had in the Lands at the time of the granting of the Rent,
as to say, that he was seized in Fee, and granted the said Rent; so as it might
appear to the Court upon the plea, that the Tenant had a lawful power to grant
such a Rent, which was granted by the whole Court, and the demur holden good.

XVI. Hind and Sir John Lion 's Case. Hill. 20 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
IN Debt by the Plaintiff against the Defendant as Heir, Dyer 124. a. 3 Len.
70. 3 Len. 64.
he pleaded, That he had nothing by Descent but the third part of the Manor of
D. The Plaintiff replied, Assets; and showed for Assets, that the Defendant had
the whole Manor of Dale by descent, upon which they were at issue: and it was
given in evidence to the Jury, That the Manor was holden by Knight's-service;
and that the said Sir John, the Ancestor of the Defendant, Devises.
by his Will in writing devised the whole Manor to his Wife, until the
Defendant, his Son and Heir, should come to the age of 24 years; and that at
the age of his said Son of 24 years, the Wife should have the third part of the
said Manor for term of her life, and her Son should have the residue: and that
if his said Son do die before he come to his age of 24 years, without Heir of
his body, that the Land should remain to J. S. the Remainder over to another:
The Devisor died, the Son came to the age of 24 years; and the Question was, If
the Son has an Estate-tayl, for then for two parts he is not in by Descent?
And by Dyer and Manwood, Justices, here is not any Estate tail, for no tail was
to rise before his said age, and therefore the tail shall never take effect;
and the Fee-simple does descend, and remain in the Son, unless he dies within
the age of 24 years, and then the Entail vests with the Remainders over. But
now having attained his said age, he has a Fee-simple, and that by Descent of
the whole Manor, and a general Judgment shall be given against him, as of his
own Debt: And an Elegit shall issue forth of the moiety of all his Lands, as
well those which he has by descent from the same Ancestor, as any else; and a
Capias lies against him. But Manwood conceived, That if general Judgment be
given against the Heir by default, in such a case a Capias does not lie,
although in case of false Plea it lies. Dyer contrary; and the Writ against
the Heir is in the Debet and Detinet, which proves, that in Law it is his own
Debt: and he said, that he could show a precedent where such an Action was
maintainable against the Executors of the Heir.

XVII. Hill. 20 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
A Man made a Lease of Lands by Indenture, Roll. 1. part. 870.
to begin after the expiration of a Lease thereof made to one Duffam; and in an
Action of Covenant brought by the second Lessee against the Lessor, Covenant.
the Lessor said, That there was no such Duffam in rerum natura, at the time of
the supposed Lease made to Duffam: it was argued, Estoppell.
That this Plea does not lie for the Lessor, for he is estopped to say against
the Indenture, That there is no such Duffam, etc. And also if no such person
was, then the first Lease was void, and then the second Lease shall begin
presently, which Manwood and Mounson granted, and by Manwood, the Defendant
shall be estopped by the Recital of the first Lease, to say, That there was no
such Duffam: And although the common Ground is, That a Recital is not an
Estoppel, yet where the Recital is material, as it is here, it is otherwise,
for here the second Lease is to begin upon the expiration of the recited Lease;
and therefore in this case it shall be an Estoppel.

XVIII. Mich. 20 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
Action upon the Stat. of 5 Eliz. for Perjury. 3 Len. 68.
IN an Action upon the Statute of 5 Eliz. for a Perjury by three, the Plaintiffs
declared, That the Defendant being examined upon his oath before Commissioners,
If a Surrender was made at such a Court of a Copyhold to the use of A. and B.
two of the Defendants? The Defendant swore there was no such surrender made,
etc. Exception was taken to the Declaration, because that the certainty of the
Copyhold did not appear upon the Declaration: for the Statute requires that in
such Case the party grieved shall have remedy, so as it ought to appear in what
thing he is grieved; quod fuit concessum per totam Curiam. Another Exception
was taken, because the Action is given in this Case to the party grieved, and
it appears upon the Declaration, that the Surrender, in the negative deposing
of which the Perjury is assigned, Abatement of Writ.
was made to the use of two of the Plaintiffs only, and then the third person
is not a party grieved, for he claims nothing by the Surrender; and therefore
forasmuch as the two persons grieved have joined with the party not grieved,
the Writ shall abate against them all, which Wray and Southcote granted.

XIX. 19 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
Action upon the Stat. of 13 E. 1. of Winchester. 2 Inst. 569.
IN an Action upon the Statute of Winchester 13 E. 1. against the men of the
Hundred of A. Barham, Sergeant, took Exception to the Declaration, because it
appears upon it, that the half year after the Robbery is not yet come; for by
the said Statute it is ordained, that the Country have no longer time than
half a year after the Robbery done, within which time facent-gree of the
Robbery, or respondent the body of the Misfeasors. And here the Action is
brought within the half year: And for this cause the Declaration was holden to
be insufficient by the whole Court. And the Lord Dyer spoke much in
commendation of that Statute being made for the public benefit of the whole
Commonwealth: for the Law intends when a Robbery is done, That if the Country
will not pursue the Malefactors, that some of them are Receivers or Abettors of
the Felons.

Manwood, Justice, said, When I was a Servant to Sir James Hales, one of the
Justices of the Common Pleas, one of his Servants was robbed at Gadds Hill,
within the Hundred of Gravesend in Kent, and he sued the men of the Hundred
upon this Statute; and it seemed hard to the Inhabitants there, that they
should answer for the Robberies done at Gadds Hill, because Robberies are there
so frequent, that if they should answer for all of them, that they should be
utterly undone. And Harris, Sergeant, was of Council with the Inhabitants of
Gravesend, and pleaded for them, that time out of mind, etc. Felons had used to
rob at Gadds Hill, and so prescribed, and afterward by award they were
charged: And note, That the Case was, that three men were robbed, and they
three joined in the Action against the Inhabitants.

XX. Colshil and Hasting 's Case. 20 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
AN Extent was sued forth upon a Statute-Merchant by Colshil against Hastings,
for Lands in his possession in the County of Southampton: The Sheriff put the
Plaintiff the Conusee in possession of parcel of a House and of Lands, and
suffered Hastings to continue in the rest of the House, Execution executed. 1
Leon. 145.
by reason whereof Hastings kept the possession of the whole, and held the
Conusee out; The Conusee, to the intent that he might have full and perfect
possession of the whole, caused the Sheriff, that he did not retorn the Writ of
Extent, upon which it is entered on the Roll, Quod Vice-Comes nihil inde fecit,
nec misit breve. Whereupon issued an Alias extendi facias, upon which the new
Sheriff did retorn, That in the time of the old Sheriff, a Writ of Extent
issued forth, etc. and that the said Sheriff had extended the Lands, by reason
whereof the now Sheriff could not extend them upon the new Writ. It was moved
for the Conusee, That the retorn was not good; For although that the Lands be
extended by the first Writ, Yet because it is not returned, it is not any
Execution in Law, nor could the Conusee have an Assise, which Manwood, Justice,
denied: Loare Preignothory, Our course is, when no retorn of such Writ is made,
to grant an Alias, at the prayers of the party, and to enter upon the Roll,
That the Sheriff upon the first Writ, Nihil inde fecit, nec misit breve. And
that was taken by the Court to be a good and lawful course in such Case; for
upon such surmise, that no Execution has been done, and that upon such entry
on the Roll, an Alias Breve might be well awarded. And afterward, this second
Writ of Extent was not filed by order of the Court: And note, that the new
Sheriff was examined upon his Oath by the Court of the Action, and he said,
that he made the retorn by the advice of Master Plowden, who told him, that he
might safely retorn, that the Land was formerly extended, and although that the
said Extent was not returned; yet it is an Execution for the Party. Manwood,
Certainly this is an insufficient retorn: But, perhaps Master Plowden did not
know of this entry in the Roll, as aforesaid, for now it appears upon Record,
that no Execution was done. If this entry had not been, I should well agree
with Master Plowden, that the same is an Execution for the party, although it
be not returned.

XXI. Steward 's Case. 19 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
THE Case was, A. seized of certain Lands in Fee, granted a Rentcharge out of
the same to another, and afterward aliened the Lands to a stranger. The
Grantee in a Replevin did avow for the Rent, and the other party pleaded, that
nothing passed by the Deed: It was holden by the whole Court to be no plea, nor
can any issue be joined upon it, but the Plaintiff ought to have said, That he
did not grant by the Deed: For the same is a Rent newly created, and which had
not his essence before the grant, and it cannot properly be said, That nothing
passed by the Deed, but not of a thing that is in esse, but of things not in
esse, That he did not grant, is the most natural issue, for a thing not in
esse, non potest transire.

XXII. 19 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
IN an Action upon the Case upon a Trover and Conversion to his own use per
venditionem quibusdam hominibus ignotis, Trover and Conversion.
the Defendant pleaded, That the goods were bailed to him, to bail over to J.
S. to whom he had delivered them, absque hoc, that he did convert them to his
own use, per venditionem hominibus ignotis. It was moved by Egerton, that that
matter is not traversable, quod Wray concessit, for the conversion to his own
use, is the cause and ground of the Action, and not the selling of the goods,
etc.

XXIII. Mich. 19 and 20 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
A Man was outlawed in the Court of Hustings of London; and the Hustings in
which the Judgment of Outlawry was given, Outlawry.
was holden two Weeks next after the last Hustings; so as there was but two
Weeks betwixt the two Hustings, whereas commonly the Hustings is holden but
every three Weeks, and now the Sheriffs of London were in doubt, if they might
safely retorn the Outlawry, without danger of an Action upon the Case brought
against them by the party outlawed; It was holden by Dyer and the whole Court,
that they ought and might safely retorn the said Outlawry: for the Lord Dyer
said, That there is a Record in the time of R. 2. whereby it appears, that in
London they might hold their Hustings every Week, if they pleased, and
afterward he commanded Mosley and Christopher, Secondaries, to retorn the
Outlawry, which was done accordingly.

XXIV. Lovelesse 's Case. 19 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
Debt upon Recognizance. 1 Cro. 608. 817.
LOvelesse, Sergeant, brought a Scire facias upon a Recognizance, and had
Judgment upon default, Quod habeat Executionem, and afterward he brought an
Action of Debt upon the said Judgment, and exception was taken to the Action:
for that he ought to proceed upon the Judgment given upon the Scire facias, and
ought to sue Execution according to the said Judgment by Elegit, or Scire
facias, but not by Capias; but the Exception was not allowed; For the
Recognizance is a Judgment in it self, and an Action of Debt will lie upon it;
without any Judgment in the Scire facias; And Debt lies as well upon the
Judgment, as upon the Recognizance it self; and so was the opinion of the whole
Court.

XXV. Eliz. In the Common Pleas. Brent 's Case.
Dyer 340. b.
THE Case was, That Robert-Brent being seized of Lands in Fee, made a Feoffment
thereof unto the use of himself and Dorothy his Wife, for their lives; and if
he do survive his said Wife, then to the use of him the said Robert and such a
Woman as he should after marry, for the Iointure of such Wife; the Remainder
over to a stranger in Fee: And afterward (with the privity and assent of the
Feoffor) he in the Remainder and the Feoffees join in a Feoffment to diverse
persons, (Note, both Feoffments were after the Statute of 27 H. 8.) and
afterward Robert Brent, the Husband, levied a Fine to the same uses, and took
a second Wife, and died: The second Wife, by the assent and commandment of the
first Feoffees, after the five years past after the Fine, entered to raise the
uses mentioned in the first Feoffment limited to the second Wife.

This Case was argued by all the Justices of the Court of Common Pleas: and
Mounson, Justice, conceived that the Entry of the Wife was lawful, and that
without the assent or commandment of the Feoffees. An use may be limited to one
who is in esse, or in posse; and the second Wife here was in esse when the use
was limited, and she was also in posse; for by possibility the first Wife might
die, and also by possibility the Feoffor might take to Wife this Woman. A Gift
to one who is not in esse or in posse, is void. A Gift to J. S. and primogenito
filio suo, if he have a Son alive at the time of the Gift, he shall take
jointly with his Father; but if not, Co. 1 Rep. Shelley's Case.
yet after his death he shall take by way of Remainder. A use is nothing else
but a trust and confidence, and was not any Inheritance by the course of the
Common Law; for no mention is made of uses in our ancient Books, when the
Common Law greatly flourished, as in the time of E. 1. and E. 3. and also uses
are not subject to the grounds of Law: And although diverse Statutes have been
made for the avoiding of diverse policies for the gaining of Lands in Mortmain,
yet the makers of the said Statutes could not find out any such conveyances to
uses. See the Statute of Religiosis, 7 E. 1. and see 29 H. 8. tr. Mortmain 39.
There is a glance at uses 44 E. 3. 25. b. the words are, En foy demist, etc.
and the Feoffees sued Livery. And the first mention of Uses in our Books is 30
H. 6. Br. Title to Uses 49. and the same case Devise Fitz. 22. In the time of
E. 4. Uses were more frequent; for 5 E. 4. 8. diverse cases concerning Uses are
there put, etc. and afterward 1 R. 3. a new Statute was made for the benefit
of Cestuy que use: and afterward the Statute of 4 H. 7. for the Wardship of
Cestuy que use: and afterward the Statute of 27 H. 8. which made an end of
Uses. These Uses at the first were of no value, but afterward by continuance
Communis error fecit jus, so as they were taken and esteemed as Inheritances:
And they cannot be more fitly resembled to any thing, as to Copyholds, which at
beginning were but Tenures at will, and were not known at the Common Law, but
now they are in the same reputation in Law as Inheritances: and they are not
guided by the Rules of the Common Law, but by the intent of the parties: which
appears in this Case at Bar to be, That she who should be the second Wife of
Robert Brent, the Feoffor, should have the Lands ut supra: and therefore this
Use shall rise, and the Statute of 27 H. 8. shall draw the possession after it.

Manwood, Justice; As to the commencement of Use, it has been as long as
mankind has been guided by Reason: and although no mention is made of Uses in
our ancient Books, yet that is no argument that Uses have been but of late
times. Uses were not common, therefore were not at all, is a Non sequitur. As
long as Wills have been, Trust and Confidence has been; and also as long as
Marriage has been. See the Writ of Causa Matrimonii prolocuti: and see the
Statute of Marlbridg, cap. 6. there is mention of falsa Feoffamenta: And note,
by other words of the said Statute there was a Trust, but it was a false trust
to deceive another; and therefore such a misshapen Trust is not called a Trust
by the said Statute, but a Collusion. And Mr. Littleton says, That Cestuy que
use shall be sworn upon Enquests, which was not enacted by any Statute, but
practiced and put in ure by reason of Common Law. And I have seen diverse
ancient Deeds of Uses: and in ancient time, you shall not find that any would
purchase Lands to himself alone, but had two or three joint Feoffees with him;
and he who was first named in the Charter of Feoffment, was Cestuy que use,
although that no Use was declared unto him upon the Livery, and so it was known
by the occupation of the Lands. And the reason why no mention is made in our
ancient Books of Uses, is, because men were then of better Consciences than now
they are, so as the Feoffees did not give occasion to their Feoffors to bring
Subpoena's to compel them to perform the Trusts reposed in them.

As to that which has been said, That Uses have taken their beginning after
the Statute of West. 3. For before the said Statute, if a man had made a
Feoffment in Fee without declaring any use, it should be to the use of the
Feoffee, because there is a sufficient consideration betwixt the Feoffor and
Feoffee to raise the use, i. the Seignory created by the Law betwixt them: but
now by the said Statute such consideration is taken away; and then upon such
Feoffment, without consideration or declaration of use, it is to the use of the
Feoffor himself; the same is no reason against them: for although that an Use
implied was not before the said Statute of West. 3. yet a Use expressed was;
and if before the said Statute the Feoffor had declared an Use; the same had
been good: as at this day, a Gift in tail, or a Lease for life, is made to
another use, yet notwithstanding that the Law does create a Tenure upon the
Lease or Gift, yet the use expressed shall be good. And although Uses are of
such Antiquity, yet they are not directed by the Rules of the common Law, but
by the Will of the Owner of the Lands: For the Use is in his hands as clay is
in the hands of the Potter which he in whose hands it is may put into what form
he pleases: And notwithstanding that now the possession be executed to the
Use, yet the property and quality, as abstracted from the possession, shall not
be drowned in the possession: and so for as much as Uses were by permission of
Law guided at the wills of the parties, so also shall be the possessions: And
so because, That an use, as abstracted from the possession, might have been
well limited to the Wife which should be, notwithstanding that at the time of
such limitation such a one was not in esse, in the same manner it shall be now,
when the possession is presently executed to the use: and so in this case, the
second Wife shall be capable of this use, according to the will and direction
of the Owner. If a Feoffment in Fee be made to the use of B. for life, and if
A. before such a day shall pay 10 l. to the Feoffor, then to the use of the
said A. for life, the same is a good use to begin upon the said condition; and
yet if it had been limited in possession, it had been otherwise: and that an
Use may begin upon a contingency, see the case 27 H. 8. 5. A Covenant is made
by Indenture betwixt A. and B. that the Son of A. shall marry the Daughter of
B. upon which B. pays 100 l. to A. and the said A. does covenant, that if the
said marriage does not take effect, that then the Feoffees of the said A. shall
suffer the said B. his Executors and Assigns, to have the issues and profits of
certain Lands, until B. his Executors and Assigns, shall be contented and
satisfied of the sum aforesaid by the said A. his Executors or Assigns, there,
if the marriage does not take effect, upon such contingent, the use shall rise
to B. And see 30 H. 8. Br. Feoffs to Uses 50. A. covenants with B. that then B
shall enfeoff A. of the Manor of D. then B. and his Heirs shall be seized of
the Manor of D. to the use of the said A. and his Heirs: Now if A. enfeoffeth
B. ut supra, then, etc. vide librum. And here in our case, the second Wife does
not hold jointly with her Husband, for their Estates do not begin together, for
the Husband is in of his ancient Estate which he had during the first marriage,
notwithstanding the words of limitation to the said Husband and his second
Wife, but she shall take by way of Remainder.

Harper, Justice, Uses began about 18 E. 2. after which time there was such a
general liking of them, that they were anew used, but they did not come into
common practice before the time of King Henry the sixth, when the great
contention fell out betwixt the two great Houses of York and Lancaster, at
which time Uses were in great estimation for the safety of Inheritances.
Afterward, Uses by practices became mischievous, and prejudicial to the
public Justice of the Realm, and to many particular persons; for some timentes
implacitari, conveyed their Lands secretly to uses, so as he who had right knew
not against whom to bring his action: and for that, diverse Statutes have been
made to enable the Subject to implead the pernor of the profits, 4 H. 4. 7. 11
H. 6. 4. 1 H. 7. And as to the making of the Statute of 27 H. 8. the truth is,
that the King was displeased for the loss of Wardships, and other injuries done
to him; for which cause he complained to the Judges of the defect of the Law in
that case who therefore showed unto the King the causes of those injuries and
losses to the King; and farther showed to the King, That if the possession
might be joined to the use, all would go well, and all the injuries, wrong, and
loss, which came to the King by reason of such Uses, Wills, and secret
Feoffments, would be avoided: For which the King commanded his Council to frame
a Bill to that purpose, and present it to the House of Commons in the 24 year
of his Reign, but it was then rejected; and the King at that time would have
been contented, that the fourth part of the Land only should descend: and from
that time the King stayed farther proceedings in the said cause until 27 H. 8.
at which time it took effect: And their cure was to pen the Statute so
precisely, that nothing should be left in the Feoffees, but that the whole
Estate should be executed by the Statute, so as the said Statute did utterly
take out all from the Feoffees. Whereas it has been said, That a Use has been
as long as any Marriage has been, and so conceived upon the Writ Causa
Matrimonii prolocuti, the same is not any reason; for in that Case there is not
any Confidence or Trust: for if the marriage does not take effect, the woman
shall have her Writ de Causa Matrimonii prolocuti. In Conveyances we are to
respect two things, the form, and the effect of it; and in all cases where the
form and the effect cannot stand together, the form shall be rejected, and the
effect shall stand. A Lease for life is made to a Feme sole, she takes Husband,
the Lessor confirms to both of them; the Husband cannot take any Estate
presently according to the words of the Confirmation; but because the Will of
the Lessor is, that an estate shall accrue to the Husband, he shall have it as
the Law will, by way of Remainder. So Lands are given to an Abbat and a secular
man, the form of the words purport a joint Estate, but that by Law cannot be;
and therefore they shall take as the Law will, rather than not at all. In our
case here, The limitation of the Use cannot be pursued precisely according to
the words, which are, viz. If the Husband over-live his said first Wife, then
to the use of the said Husband and his Wife which shall be; which in words is a
joint Estate: and therefore the words shall be construed, After the death of
the first Wife, unto the use of the Husband until he marries, and afterward
to the use of him and his second Wife, in which case they shall take jointly.

Dyer, chief Justice, As to the beginning of Uses, See Bacon's Reading upon
this Stat.
he conceived that the same was immediately after the Statute of Mortmain, at
which time all their shifts then in practice were found out: which see, the
Statute of Mortmain, 7 E. 1. Stat. de Religiosis: for which cause they were
after driven to find out other shifts not provided for by the Statute, which
were espied by the making of the Statute of 15 R. 2. cap. 5. and in that
Statute these words, Behoof and Use are used; which is the first place those
words have been used in our Law, and yet long time before that Statute Uses had
been in practice, as appears in the Exchequer, 34 E. 3. the which in the time
of Queen Mary, when the said Record was showed in the Exchequer to the
Justices, the effect of which Record was, That Walter de Chirton, who was
Customer of the King, became indebted to the King in the sum of 18000 l. and
with that the King's money had purchased in the name of his friends, to defraud
the King, many Lands, and took the profits of them; those Lands so purchased
were extended to the use, and for the King, in payment of his Debt, as well as
if Walter de Chirton himself had been seized of them, and that by the advice of
the Chancellor and the chief Justices. Now Uses by tract of time have grown in
credit, so as Cestuy que use have been sworn in Inquests, and by the Law they
might justify the maintaining of their Feoffees when they had been impleaded,
which they could not have done if they had not more interest in the Lands than
strangers: and they (Uses) have been in such reckoning and account since, that
an Use has obtained the name of an Inheritance, and is now reputed amongst the
Estates of Lands in our Law; and therefore we say in Speeches, and in penning
of Statutes, Estates in possession, and Estates in use: and a Use cannot be
limited to Parishioners, no more than the Land it self; so as there is a great
affinity betwixt the words, Lands and Use. It is to be granted, That the
Statute of 27 H. 8. does divest all out of the Feoffees, yet it does not divest
it before that the use be vested in Cestuy que use; for the words of the
Statute are, That the possession shall be executed in such manner, quality, and
degree, as was the Use; therefore the vesting of the Use ought to precede the
execution of the possession to it. And he was of opinion, That this future Use
in the principal Case limited to the second Wife did remain in the Feoffees at
the first, but that they had destroyed it by their Feoffment; for the second
Wife at the time of the Feoffment was not known, and therefore it shall now
accrue: and he was also of opinion, That this limitation to the second Wife was
void at the beginning; for the second Wife was not a person able to take, when
the Estate and Use limited to the first Wife was determined, and therefore she
shall not take at all: and if such an Estate had been limited in possession, it
should not have vested, no more than now.

Mounson, Justice; When the Feoffor and the Feoffees join in a Fine of that
Land, within which the use in future is wrapped, he conceived, That the Use
being in abeyance and consideration of the Law, could not be touched by the
Fine. It is to be confessed, That an Use may be discontinued: See 4. H. 7. 18.
A Feoffment made to the use of A. for life, and after to the use of B. in tail,
etc. A. makes a Feoffment in Fee, and dies, the same is a discontinuance of
the other Uses: and see 27 H. 8. 29. And in our Case, the Use might arise
without any Entry of the Feoffees; for the Use is not discontinued, but the
Feoffees are barred by the Fine: And he was also of opinion, That this Use
might take effect without any Entry, and take effect according to the
limitation.

Manwood, This Estate which is limited in use to the second Wife, because it
cannot vest in her because not known, the Feoffees are yet content with it, and
this Use is to grow out of their Estates at the seasonable time: Then when they
join in a Feoffment, their Estate which was the root of the Conveyance, and the
Uses which are the branches, spring not till she dies; and therefore if the
Estate of the Feoffees, which is the root of the Uses, be destroyed by
alienation of the Land before the Uses have their being, as in our Case it is,
because that then the second was not known, no use can afterward rise, for by
the Feoffment they are destroyed, and also every possibility of them. But if
the Uses had been in esse, so as the persons to whom they are limited are
known, then the Statute shall execute the possession to such uses. And as to
that which has been objected by my Brother Mounson, That the Law shall keep
and preserve the Use, and that notwithstanding any thing done by the Feoffees
at its due time it shall rise: That cannot be; for the Statute of 27 H. 8. does
not speak of such Uses as this in our Case, but of such Uses only, of which
one may say, such a use is limited to such a person and such to such a person,
etc. and such Uses are only executed by the Statute. It may be demanded, What
Estate the Feoffees have in the Lands until such uses be executed? It may be
answered, A Fee simple determinable, as the Lord has when he enters upon his
Villein Donee in tail: And I conceive, That this use was not in Custodia Legis,
quia de minimis non curat Lex: and the use was such a thing of which the Law
took no knowledge; and in case of an Estate in possession, such an use in
abeyance should be bound: As a Lease for life unto A. the Remainder to the
right Heirs of B. A. suffers a common Recovery in the life of B. who afterward
dies, and afterward A. dies, the Heir of B. is bound, for he had not right
at the time of the Recovery. This Fine levied by the manner shall not destroy
the uses limited to the second Wife; for as to the Feoffees, they have nothing
to do with the Lands to transfer any Estate against the former limitation; for
the Statute leaves nothing in the Feoffees, but vests all in Cesty que use, and
that which cannot vest in him to whom it is limited, shall return to the
Feoffor: As if I make a Feoffment in Fee to the use of my self for life, and
after to the use of my second Wife, all the Fee is now in me, and when I take a
second Wife, then the Feoffees shall be seized to the use of such Wife in
Remainder for her life: but in the Case at Bar, the Feoffees at the time when
this second Wife was in esse, had not any thing in the Lands, for they had
departed with all their Interest before by their Feoffment and Fine.

Note, That by the first Feoffment the use was limited to D. the first Wife of
the Feoffor, for term of her life, the Remainder in tail to A. Brent, the
Remainder in Fee to one Broughton, and all these uses were executed by the
Statute; but these persons were not parties to the Livery, but only the
Feoffees, which had not any thing: Then when they make their Letter of Attorney
to make Livery of seisin (not being seized of the Land) the Attorney only is a
Disseisor, and so nothing passed from the Feoffees, if any right had been in
them: and for another reason nothing passed by this last Conveyance out of the
Feoffees, for the parties to the latter Conveyance had notice of the use, and
so it appears by the second Indenture, the which makes mention of the first
uses, etc.

Dyer, Here in our Case, the Founders of these uses, i. the Feoffor and the
Feoffees, have an intent to overthrow these uses, for at the Common Law the
Feoffees might do it of themselves; As if the Feoffees had made a Feoffment in
fee in consideration of Money to others who had not notice of the uses, now the
uses are gone, and the second Feoffees in such Cases were seized to their own
uses. I well know, That by this Feoffment all is divested out of the Feoffees,
which might vest in the person to whom the use is limited; but here this use
which was limited to the second Wife, could not upon the limitation of it vest
in any person; and therefore it shall remain in the Feoffees who are put in
Trust with it, and therefore have interest in the Lands until all the Trusts be
performed: and therefore the second Wife was advised by her Council to make her
Entry in name of the surviving Feoffee, and the interest which the Feoffees
have in the interim, until the execution of all the uses, is a Fee-simple
determinable; for the whole interest is not divested or driven out of the
Feoffees until the whole Trust be accomplished, i. until all the uses limited
upon the Feoffment are executed, and have their full perfection.

And whereas it has been alleged on the other side, That upon the second
Feoffment nothing passed out of the Feoffees, for which it shall not be said in
Law their Livery, but that the Attorney shall be said the sole Disseisor; As to
that I conceive, That whatsoever was lost in the Feoffees passed by that
Livery. If he in Reversion upon an Estate for life makes a Charter of a
Feoffment, and a Letter of Attorney to make Livery of seisin without words ad
expellendas omnes, etc. if Livery be made by force thereof, the Fee-simple
shall pass: And he cited a Case which was argued before all the Justices of
England, reported by himself 2 and 3 Ma. 131. Diverse Leases for years were made
of the Demeans of an Abbey, after which the Reversion was granted to the
Countess of Richmond for life, after which King Edw. 6. granted the Reversion
in Fee to the Earl of Warwick, who made a Feoffment of all to certain persons,
to the use of his eldest Son and his Wife for her Iointure, with a Letter of
Attorney to make Livery and seisin; the Attorney made Livery accordingly, and
by that Feoffment and Livery, it was adjudged, that the Fee-simple did pass: So
in our Case, upon this second Feoffment, a Disseisin is done to D. the first
Wife, and yet the right of the Feoffees does pass thereby; and although it
shall not be taken in Law their Livery, yet it shall be adjudged their
confirmation, because they have joined in the Deed, and that shall bind their
right to establish the same in the new Feoffees, as if the Disseisee join in a
Feoffee by Deed with the heir of the Disseisor: And as to that which has been
objected, that because at the time of the Feoffment, the Feoffees had not any
thing, etc. and therefore nothing shall pass: and they have likened to the
Case, where the Father is disseised, and the Son and heir does release to the
Disseisor, the same shall not bind the heir after the death of his Father: The
same is not like our Case; for there is a great difference betwixt a Release
and a Feoffment; for if the Son disseise the Father, and makes a Feoffment in
Fee in the life of his Father, notwithstanding that he had not any right at the
time of the Feoffment, yet he is bound.

XXVI. Thurkettell and Tey 's Case. Trin. 29 Eliz. In the King's Bench. Rot.
342.
1 Cro. 110, 111.
IN Debt by John Thurkettell against Edw. Tey, and Mary his Wife, Executrix of
Robert Thurkettell, the Case was, That Agnes Thurkettell, Mother of Robert, the
Testator, devised certain Lands to Robert, and afterward devised 40 l. to the
Plaintiff, John, upon condition, that the said John, Cum requisitus esset
acquietaret, and retaxaret praedict. Roberto omnes actiones reales and
personales, querelas, etc. praedict. 40 l. per dict. voluntat. legatis
tantummodo exceptis; Agnes died, Robert made two Bonds to John, The first was
endorsed to pay 20 l. parcel of the said Legacy, within a year after the death
of the said Agnes, so as the Plaintiff release according to the will of the
said Agnes. The second Obligation was with the same condition, to pay 20 l.
residue of the said Legacy, within two years after the death of the said Agnes,
upon condition to release, ut supra, and all this matter was pleaded in bar;
And farther, That Robert required the said John to make the Release, etc. which
he refused, and they were at issue upon the request, and it was found for the
Plaintiff; i. Quod dict. Robert. non requisivit, etc. upon which Verdict
Judgment was given for the Plaintiff; upon which the Defendants brought Error,
because it appears upon the Record here, quod Billa praedict. prosecuta fuit
infra duos annos post mortem dict. Agnet. and sic ante diem solutionis: For the
second Bond, see 46 E. 3. 28. by Finchden and Persay, and see there, by Persay,
That if my Writ be brought before the day of payment, and does depend in suit
till after the day of payment, that my Writ is made good; for at all times the
Defendant was my Debtor. And afterward in the principal Case the Judgment was
affirmed in the Exchequer-Chamber: and note, that the day of payment did
incurr, pendent the Writ.

XXVII. Lightfoot and Butler 's Case. 29 Eliz. In the Exchequer.
IT was said in this Case by the Solicitor General, That if one holds of the
Queen, as of her Manor, he shall not have the privilege of the Exchequer for
that cause; But if the King grants Tithes, and thereupon reserveth a Rent,
nomine decimae, and a Tenure of him, there he shall have the privilege: The
principal Case was, Co. 4. Inst. 118, 119.
that one of the parties claimed the Lands in question as his Freehold, but
holden of the Queen, as of such a Manor; and the other claimed it as Copyhold,
holden of the same Manor; And the Freeholder did suggest in the Exchequer, That
the demands of the Manor are not indifferent. Clark, Baron, If it be so, this
Court shall have jurisdiction. Manwood, If the matter pass against you
wrongfully, wherefore may you not have an Assise? And the Case of Beaumorris
was cited (but I remember not to what purpose) i. The Mayor and Commonalty of
Beaumorris were Patrons of a Chantry; and they and the Chantry Priest made a
Lease for years by Indenture, in the end of which was this Clause, In cujus rei
testimonium, tam the Priest, quam the Mayor and Commonalty have put their
common seal, and it was moved that there was not any seal for the Priest, for
he could not have a common seal with the Mayor and Commonalty. Clark, Twenty
men may seal with one seal, and they may also seal with one seal upon one piece
of Wax only, and that shall serve for them all, if they all lay their hands
upon the seal together. Manwood, They may all seal with one seal, but upon
several pieces of Wax. Gent, when many are parties to a Deed, the words are
Sigilla omnia; which cannot be aptly said in this Case, where all seal upon one
piece of Wax.

XXVIII. Barns and Smith 's Case. 29 Eliz. In the Exchequer.
EManuel Barns, Executor of Barns, late Bishop of London, 3 Len. 171.
brought Debt for arrerages of Rent, reserved upon a Lease for years, of
certain Mines demised to Smith, i. Mines called Argil, and Mines called
Greenbourn; and it was against the Executors of Smith. The Defendant pleaded,
as to parcel non detinet, and as to the other parcel of the arrerages, That in
the Indenture of Lease, there is a Covenant, That if it shall happen that the
said Lessee be hindered, Quo minus Mineriis, praed. gaudere possit; That then so
much Rent should be deducted anno, to the value of the Mine, that he could not
enjoy, etc. And he said, that he was hindered, Quo minus gaudere potuit Mineriis
praed. etc. and issue was joined, that the Lessee could not enjoy, etc. and it
was found for the Plaintiff. It was moved by Coke, in arrest of Judgment, That
here is not any place showed where these Mines were, so as it does not appear
from what place the Visne should come; as if in an Action (as here) the
Plaintiff declares of a Lease made of Lands, called R. in such a County, the
same is not good. The issue here is, Non potuit fodere in praed. Minera de
Greenbourn, for the space of seven years and an half, from whence shall the
Visne come for trial of it? Not from Durham where the Lease was made; for no
affinity or nearness is betwixt the place where the Lease was made and this
issue. But if the issue had been, That the Lessor had not any thing in the
Mines at the time of the Lease, that might be tried where the Lease was made:
Another exception was, because that the plea is; Quod non potuit fodere, in 3,
4, 5, 6, 7, 8. dimidio, 10, and 11. and that appears to be seven years and a
half, and the Jury find that he could not digg, per spatium septem annorum
tantum, without speaking of the half year, and so they have not given a full
Verdict: And as to the first Exception, it was said, If a thing be alleged in
pleading which is issuable, and there is not laid down any place of it,
although that no issue be joined upon it, yet because he has prevented the
other of his plea to it, Judgment given in such case shall be reversed: and so
it was rated, betwixt Matthew and Stansham: So upon the Statute of Usury, the
Informer charged the Defendant, that by way of corrupt bargain he has received
so much, and does not show the place, although no issue was joined upon it, but
they were at issue upon another point, yet if Judgment in such case be given,
it shall be reversed. And in all Actions upon the Case, where Request is
necessary, and the Plaintiff ought to allege it; the place of the Request must
be showed: and he said, That such issue was to be tried where the Mines leased
are; and here no place is alleged, where the Mines are, but only in the
County of Durham; and yet a Visne of the City of Durham has tried the issue,
which ought not to have been, but the Visne ought to have come, De Corpore
Comitatus. Clark, Baron, If the issue be joined upon taking of the profits, it
shall be tried where the Land is, but Non debet or detinet, where the Lease is
made. Coke, The issue is, Non potuit fodere, and that is local; therefore it
shall be tried where the Mines are. Manwood, Non potuit fodere, Non potuit
gaudere, are not local; but Non fodit, Non gavisus fuit, is local, and shall be
tried where the Mines are: and here it is not showed how he was hindered to dig,
etc. and the issue is to be de postatia, non de actu. Tanfield, as to that
which Coke has said, That the Visne in this Case shall come, de corpore
Comitatus, the same is not so, for such a Visne shall never be, but where the
issue is upon Null tiel vill hamlet, or place known: In another Case the trial
shall be, de corpore Comitatus, as in a false imprisonment the Defendant
justifies, that the common voice and fame was, that the Plaintiff committed
such a Felony, etc. The Plaintiff traverseth the common voice and fame, there
the Visne shall be, de corpore Comitatus, 11 E. 4. 4, and 5. and see also 25
Eliz. the Case of Gynne and Constantine reported now in Coke, 6. part Dowdale's
Case, 48. As to the defect in the verdict for the half year, the Record is not
so; for the Record is, dimidio anni decimi, and undecimi, and so two half years
make a whole year, and so there is but seven years in which the disturbance is
supposed to be done. See as to the Visne, de corpore Comitatus, 22 E. 4. 4
Visne 27. Another Exception was taken, because that the Declaration is, That
the Lease was made at Durham, in Comitatu Dunelm. and does not say also in
Selberg, for such is the name of the County Palatine; but to that it was said,
That every Writ of Execution which goes into the County Palatine, is directed
Episcopo Dunelmensi, and Cancellario suo, quod det in mandatis Vice-com. suo,
etc. And Durham was called Selberg in ancient times, and the name of the County
Palatine there, is commonly Dunelm. and Selberg. and their pleas there entered;
Placita coram Justiciariis de Dunelm. and Selberg. but the same is amongst
themselves only, and all directions from hence to them are Episcop. Dunelm.
without mention of Selberg, and a Precedent was showed to the Court to that
purpose and intent. Manwood, Levied by distress, and issint rein arere shall be
tried where the Lease was made: Clark, That is true, for by the (Issint) the
plea before is waved: And see 8 H. 5. 10. Where an issue is to be tried in
Lincoln, or such a Town, which is a Franchise, the Ven. fac. shall be of
Lincoln, etc. and not de vicineto de Lincoln; for then the Jury shall be as
well of the County adjacent, as of Lincoln it self, which the Sheriff of
Lincoln cannot do: but a Venire facias de suburbiis of Bristow was awarded
good: And if in the case at Bar, the defendant had pleaded, that the Defendant
had entered into part of the Mines, and so suspended his Rent, upon which they
are at issue; that, by Manwood, shall be tried by a Jury, de corpore Comitatus.
The issue here is, If the Defendant might enjoy those Mines, Secundum veram
intentionem dimissionis praedict. and that is referred to the Devise which was
made at Durham, and there it is well triable. And afterward, at another day it
was holden, That all the issues are Jeofailes; but as to the want of place, the
same was holden to be a material Exception. See the Case of Mines, Plowd. 337.
Exception was taken to the Information, because it is not laid down there is
what Town or Hamlet Newlands lay; and it was holden, the same had been a
material Exception, if the Defendant had demurred upon the Information, in
which case there is no trial by Jury, etc. and he said, Misnosmer shall be
tried where the Writ is brought, etc. So Ne unque administer as Executor, etc.
Manwood, Here the Lease is said to be made at Durham, in a place certain; if
now there be not any other local thing said which might draw the trial
elsewhere, it shall be tried at Durham where the Lease is made: An Infant makes
a lease for years, rendering Rent, and afterward reenters, and avoids his
Lease by reason of his nonage, and Title is made against him by the Lease, upon
which he pretended nonage, it shall be tried where the Lease was made, and
afterward Judgment was given for the Plaintiff.

XXIX. Ross and Morris 's Case. Pasch. 30 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
EDward Ross was Plaintiff in a Replevin against Edward Morris, 1 Cro. 108,
109.
and George Manly Defendants, who made Conusance, as Bailiffs to Jerome Weston.
The Plaintiff declares, of the taking of two Geldings, 20 December. 29 Eliz. at
Nayland, in the County of Suffolk, in a certain place called
Nayland-Court-Meadow. And the Conusance is that the place where was a Freehold
of the said Jer. Weston, etc. The Plaintiff in bar of the Conusance showed,
That long time before, Sir Christopher Danby was seized of 30 acres of Meadow
in Nayland, whereof the place where, etc. and Leased the same by Indenture to
Thomas Calton, 19 Maii, 31 H. 8. Habendum from the Feast of the Annunciation,
1553. for the term of 45 years; Who, 1 E. 6. assigned his Interest to Edw.
Ross, the Plaintiff's Father, who, 1 Maii, the said 1553. entered, and 11 Eliz.
granted his Interest to Bamford and Mascal, who entered and were possessed. Sir
Christopher Danby died seized of the Reversion, 13 Eliz. and the same descended
to Thomas Danby his son and heir: 14 Eliz. Mascal died, Bamford, 15 Eliz.
granted to the Plaintiff, Habendum from the 17 of March 1583. for three years,
which expired 26 Eliz. Bamford entered, and afterward Thomas Danby granted the
Reversion to Edw. Rockwood in Fee, to which the said Bamford Attorned; and the
Plaintiff by force of the said Lease,, put in his Cattle, etc. The Plaintiff
Replicando said; That long time before that Danby had any thing, Jeofry, Lord
Scroop, had issue of his body, Henry, Lord Scroop, and died; And that one John
Guntwarby was seized of the said Manor of Nayland, whereof, etc. in Fee, by his
Charter, 25 E. 3. gave to the said Henry, Lord Scroop, the same, Et haeredibus
corpore suo exeuntibus, who had issue Stephen, who entered, and died seized,
having issue John, who entered, and died seized, having issue Thomas, who
entered, and 3 H. 7. suffered a Common Recovery to the use of himself and his
heirs, The Recoverers enfeoffed, Thomas seized also of many other Lands, and
had issue, Ralph, Jeofry, Alice, Elizabeth and Margery, and afterward died
seized. Ralph Lord Scroop entered, and thereof did enfeoff diverse persons unto
the use of himself, and Eleanor his wife, for their lives, and the heirs males
of the said Ralph; and afterward, the said Ralph being possessed of the said
Charter of entail made, ut supra, by Guntwardy, 7 H. 8. Devised that the
Feoffees should be seized of the said Manor of Nayland to the use of himself,
and Eleanor his wife, for their lives; and if they died without issue of the
body of the said Ralph, the said Jeofry then living, that then the Feoffees
should be seized to the use of the said Jeofry, (being his Uncle) for his life,
and after his decease, ad usum Rectorum haeredum in perpetuum secundum antiquam
Evidentiam inde ante factam; with an averment, that the said Ralph, at the time
of the said Devise, and of his death, was possessed of the Charter of Entail
made by the said Guntwardy: and that the said Charter was the most ancient
Evidence of the said, concerning the said Manor. Ralph died without issue
possessed of the said Charter by which the Feoffees were seized of the said
Manor of Nayland to his use for life, and after to the use of the said Jeofry
for life, and after his decease, of the right heirs of the body of Henry, Lord
Scroop, lawfully begotten, by reason of the said Devise, and the said Charter,
and of the residue of the Manors, to the use of the said Jeofry and his heirs;
Eleanor died, after whose decease, the Feoffees were seized of the said Manor
of Nayland, to the use of the said Jeofry, right heir of the said Henry, Lord
Scroop, of his body begotten, and of the other lands to the use of the said
Jeofry in Fee: Jeofry died without issue, by which the Feoffees were seized to
the use of the said, Alice, Elizabeth and Margery, Cosins and heirs of the body
of the said Henry Scroop, etc. And of the heirs of the bodies of the said
Alice, Elizabeth and Margery, lawfully begotten, by reason of the said Devise
and Charter, as to the said Manor of Nayland, and of the other Manors to their
use in Fee: And afterward the said Alice took to husband, James Strangways,
who had issue, Thomas: Elizabeth took to husband, Fitz Randolph, who had issue
Elizabeth, Dorothy, Agnes, Alice: Margery took to husband, Danby, who had
issue, Sir Christopher Danby, named in the Bar, and afterward all the said
husbands and their wives died, by force of which the said Feoffees were seized
of one part of the said Manor of Nayland in three parts to be divided, to the
use of the said Thomas Strangways; and of another part, to the use of the four
daughters of the said Elizabeth, and her husband Fitz Randolph, and of another
such part to the use of the said Christopher Danby, and of their heirs in Tail;
and of the other lands to the use of them in Fee, in degree of Coparcinary;
Elizabeth, the eldest daughter of Fitz Randolph, took to husband Shirley;
Dorothy her sister took to husband, Eshe: Agnes took to husband, Maynel, and
Alice took to husband Dranfield. Thomas Strangways had issue, James, and died.
And afterward partition was made, by which, to James Strangways were allotted
lands in Kent, and agreed that the Feoffees should be seized of the said lands
to the use of the said James and his heirs, and to no other use. To Sherley,
and Elizabeth his wife, lands in Essex were allotted and agreed upon the
partition, that the Feoffees should be seized to the use of them, etc. in Fee,
etc. And to Danby the said Manor of Nayland, in tail, by reason of the Devise
and Charter, aforesaid, as to the said Manor of Nayland, and of other lands in
Fee. And afterward, 23 E. 8. notice was given to the Feoffees of the said
partition, and averred that the partition was equal, etc. and that the Feoffees
were seized to the use of the said partition, until 27 H. 8. and confessed the
Lease made by Danby to Calton, and all the assignments set forth in the Bar to
the Avowry, and farther showed, That Thomas Danby entered upon Ross the
Plaintiff, and enfeoffed Rockwood, who enfeoffed Weston.

Coke, for the Plaintiff, The Case is no more; but where a man has issue, a
son and a daughter by several women, and Devises his Lands to his son, and the
heirs of the body of the Father lawfully begotten, in which case, if the Son
dies without issue, the Tail is extinct, and the Daughter shall never have the
Land, for she does not take by way of Reversion or Remainder, and she does not
take in possession, because the possession was in Jeofry who was the Heir of
Henry, etc. And these Cases were vouched; 1 Roberge's Case, 2 E. 3. 1. to Tail:
John Mandevile took to Wife Roberge, and Mandevile gave land to Roberge, and
haeredibus ipsius Johannis quos ipse de corpore praedict. Robergiae
procreaverit; there the Book is, That the Formedon was, Quae M. dedit Robergiae
and haeredibus dict. Johannis quos ipsae de corpore dictae Robergiae
procreaverit; Et quae post mortem praefat. Robergiae, and R. filii and haeredis
dict. Johannis Mandevile, and haeredis ipsius Johannis de corpore dicto
Robergiae per dict. Johannem procreat. etc. and the same Writ awarded good,
which Coke denied to be Law. And he cited the Case of Dyer, 4 and 5 P. and Ma.
156. A. gives Lands to one for life, the Remainder thereof rectis haeredibus
masculis de corpore dict. A. legitime procreat. remanere inde rectis haeredibus
dict. A. who has issue two Sons, and dies; A. dies, the eldest Son has
issue a Daughter, and dies without issue male: And he conceived first, That in
this case the limitation of the Remainder in Tail to the right Heirs of the
body of the Donor is void, for the Donor cannot make his own right Heir a
Purchasor, without departing with the Fee-simple of his person: But admitting
the limitation is good, he said we are to consider, If this entail to the Son,
once vested and commenced in the possession of the Son, when he dies without
issue male, The Estate be spent, or that the same shall go to the younger Son?
And he said, that it was the opinion of Dyer in that case, That the younger Son
was inheritable to the said Estate-tail: as in the Case of Littleton 82. where
the condition is, That the Feoffee shall give the Lands to the Son and Heir of
the Husband and Wife, and to the Heirs of the body of the Father and Mother
lawfully begotten: and the Husband and Wife before any such Gift die, having
issue, and afterward the Feoffee gives the Land to the Son and Heir of the
Husband and Wife, and to the Heirs of the body of the Father and Mother
begotten, the condition is well performed: and if the eldest Son, to whom the
Gift is made, dies without issue, the youngest Son shall inherit: And in a
Formedon in the Reverter, upon such a Gift the Writ shall be, Et quae post
mortem of the eldest Son, ad ipsum reverti debet; because the Husband and Wife
obierunt sine haerede de corpor. suis inter eos exeunt. And such was also the
Opinion of Saunders. But Brook, Brown and Catlin were clear contrary; And he
said, that Bendloes Sergeant, who reports that Case, does affirm, That
Judgment was given in that case, That the Estate-tail was spent, and that the
Daughter should have the Lands, and not the second Son: and so he said, That in
the Case at the Bar, the Estate-tail was spent: But he said, That he conceived
that in the principal case at Bar there is not any Estate-tail at all, because
the words (upon which the Estate-tail is conceived) are uncertain and too
general, viz. [secundum antiquam Evidentiam,] for there might be many ancient
Evidences, for the words may extend to Evidences which cut off the Estate tail,
as well as to the Entail of Guntwardy. He also argued, That the Partition was
void; and then the Lessee had a good interest for certain parts of the Lands,
for Partition cannot be made of an Use: and he said, that he agreed, That
Partition betwixt Husband and Wives of Lands, if it be equal, should bind the
makers, because they are compellable to make Partition of them; but contrary of
an Use, for that they are not compellable to do: Also, in the principal Case,
the Land entailed is allotted to one of the Coparcenors, which is not good but
during the Coverture, and afterward void; and then the Lease is void but in
part, and so the Conusance is not good.

Atkinson contrary; and he said, I conceive, that by words of Relation a Fee
may pass without the word Heirs. See 39 Ass. 12. The Father seized of Lands in
fee, does enfeoff his younger Son in fee, and the Father continues the
possession of the Lands, claiming to hold them at the will of the Son; and the
Son coming into the Town where the Lands do lie, in the hearing of his
Neighbors says to his Father, You have given to me these Lands, naming them;
As fully as you have given them to me, I give them back to you again: and the
same was holden to be a good Gift to the Father: 43 E. 3. 22. The King seized
of a Manor, to which an advowson is appendant by Escheat or Conveyance, gives
the said Manor as entirely as such a one held the said Manor before the Escheat
or Conveyance, the Advowson shall pass without special mentioning of it: And so
here in our Case at Bar; This Will has reference to the ancient Evidence, and
it shall be as strong as if he had set down the special words of Entail; and to
ancient Evidence before the Entail it cannot extend, for then a fee should
pass, and then the Devise should be void, because to his Heir; and the word
Antiqua Evidentia shall have reference to the Charter which was made by
Guntwardy, for that was an ancient Evidence made two hundred years past: and he
cited the Case of 40 E. 3. 8. the Provost of Beverley's Case, and conceived
that the Estate was not spent, for that the Estate-tail was in Jeofry, as the
fee was in him. Lands are given to the Father for life, the Remainder to the
Son in Tail, the Remainder to the right Heirs of the Father; the Father dies,
the Tail and the fee are in the Son; but yet after the death of the Son without
issue, the Lands shall be in the Brother's Son by descent, and not as
Purchasor. And in our Case, Jeofry was in in the Tail, as right Heir of Henry;
and if Jeofry dies without issue, his Brother of the half blood shall have the
Lands, as in the Case before cited of 40 E. 3. but that shall be in Tail by
force of the Devise. And he said, That in this case here, the Partition was
made good enough, although it were of Lands in use, for a man might contract
for an Use without Deed: 11 H. 4. Partition 156. Partition of an Advowson
without Deed: and that is by reason of the privity betwixt them, and because
they are compellable to make Partition: and in our Case they are compellable by
Subpoena in Chancery to make Partition; and notwithstanding that the Lands
entailed be allotted to one Coparcenor only, and the fee to the other three,
yet thereby the Partition is not void, but voidable: As an Exchange by Tenant
in tail is not void, but if the Issue in tail accept of it, it shall bind him
during his life: So here; and also by the death of the Husbands the Partition
is not void, but voidable only.

Clench, Justice; How shall the Heir be said seized of the Lands entailed,
which was allotted to his Father and Mother after acceptance and agreement?

Atkinson, Of certain part as Issue in tail, and of other parts by force of the
Partition and acceptance, Quaere of that: for if it be not of the whole as
Issue in tail, then the Lease is not void, but for so much whereof he was
seized in tail, and then the Lessee is Tenant in common with Weston, and then
the Conusance is not good.

Cooper, Sergeant elect; Here wants certainty, for the words of reference are
too general, and therefore void, ad usum rectorum haeredum, without showing of
the Donor or of the Donee; and they are not helped by the subsequent words,
secundum antiquam Evidentiam ante hac factam, for that also is uncertain; for
it appears upon the Record, That there are diverse Evidences of the said
Lands, as the Charter of Gift, the Recovery, and the Conveyances made 4 H. 7.
and which of them is intended by the Devise, non constat: and the said defect
is not helped by any of the Averments; i. That the Devisor was possessed of the
said Charter of Entail at the time of his death; and it is also not to the
purpose, for it may also be, that he was possessed of other Evidences as
ancient as the said Charter of Entail: It is said, that there is no other
ancient Evidence of the Lord Scroop, but it is not averred That there was not
other ancient Evidences of the said Lands. But admit that the limitation be
good by that reference, yet there was not any Estate-tail, for every
Estate-tail ought to be limited in certainty, which see in the Statute of West.
2. secundum formam in Charta Doni manifesto expressam, etc. and here it does
not appear upon the words of the Charter, if the Estate-tail be limited to the
Heirs of the Donor, or unto the Heirs of the Donee? and he said, Admit that the
same is an Estate-tail, then the Question is, If Jeofry be a Purchasor? and if
he be, then by his death without issue the Estate-tail is spent: And he said
that the Estate for life in Jeofry is drowned by the Estate-tail limited to
him, for they are united together.

Egerton, Solicitor-General; Reasonable and favorable construction ought to be
made of this Devise according to the intent of the Devisor: As 35 Ass. 14.
Lands are given to B. and his Heirs, if he has issue of his body; and if he
die without issue of his body, that the Lands shall revert to the Donor and his
Heirs, the same is a good Entail; and upon the death of the Donee without
issue, the Donor shall re-enter: And so here, although that [rectorum haeredum]
be uncertain words, yet the same is supplied by the subsequent words, viz.
secundum antiquam evidentiam. As, where the King grants to a Mayor and
Commonalty such Liberties as London has, the same is a good Grant: 2 H. 7. 13.
1 Leo. 245.
And he conceived, That this Estate-tail shall be said to begin in Henry,
although he was dead before, and that all his Issues should inherit it, and
that it should not be determined by the death of Jeofry without issue; and in
proof thereof he vouched the Case before cited, Littl. 81, 82. for in that case
the condition could not be holden to be performed, if the Heir to whom the Gift
was made in facto should be in by purchase, and so the Estate-tail spent by his
death without issue: and also he vouched the Case of one Shelley, That although
the Heir took that which was not ever in his Ancestors, yet he did not take it
as a Purchasor, but as in course of a descent; and he also cited Robridge's
Case. And afterward, the same Term, by award of the Court, Judgment was entered
for the Plaintiff, for the incertainty of these words [secundum antiquam
Evidentiam] to what Evidence it should refer; and also [rectorum haeredum]
without showing whose Heirs, i. of the Donor, or of the Donee. And Wray, chief
Justice, said, It shall be intended upon this Will, That the meaning of the
Testator was, That the Lands should go unto his Heirs according to the Law,
according to all his Evidences which he had of his Lands, and that is a Fee
simple; and it shall not be intended, That the Testator had such a special
remembrance of one Deed made two hundred years before, viz. 25 E. 3.

XXX. Perry and Some 's Case. Mich. 30 Eliz. In the King's Bench. Rot. 482.
SOme, Parson of the Church of Sherring in Essex, 1 Cro. 139.
libelled in the Spiritual Court against Perry, for the Tithes of green Tares,
eaten before they were ripe, and for the Tithes of the Herbage of dry Cattle,
and for Tithes of Sheep bought and sold, and for Churchings and Burials; Perry
prayed a Prohibition, and in his surmise; as to the green Tares, he said, That
they had used, time out of mind, etc. in the same Parish. In consideration that
they had not sufficient Meadow and Pasture for their milch Kine, and draught
Cattle to pay for the Tithes of the ripe Tares, the tenth shock; but for their
green Tares which are eaten up before they are ripe, in consideration that they
gave them to their Cattle, they had used to be discharged of any Tithes
thereof; and the truth was, That 400 Acres of Lands within the said Town had
used to be plowed and sowed every year by the labor of draught Cattle, and
industry of the Inhabitants, in consideration of which, and that in the said
Parish there was not sufficient Meadow nor Pasture for their draught Cattle,
they had used to be discharged of the Tithes of green Tares eaten before they
were ripe: It was holden by the Court, that the same was a good custom and
consideration, for the Parson has benefit thereby, for otherwise the said 400
Acres could not be plowed; for without such shift to eat with their draught
Cattle the green Tares, they could not maintain their plough Cattle, and so the
Parson should lose his Tithes thereof; and for the Tithes of the green Tares,
he has the Tithes of 400 Acres. There was a Case lately betwixt the Lord
Howard and Nichols, where the suit in the Spiritual Court was for the Tithes of
Rakings, and a surmise to have a Prohibition was made, that the Inhabitants had
used to till and sow their Lands, etc. and they had used to be discharged of
their Tithes of rakings after that the shocks were carried away. And Coke, who
was of Council with the Parson, durst not demurr upon it, but traversed the
Prescription. Wray, Chief Justice, The want of Meadow and Pasture in the
Parish, is the great matter here, and there is not any mischief here, as if
they had surmised, that for want of Meadow and Pasture, they had eaten their
Meadows with their Cattle; And it was held by the whole Court, that it was a
good Prescription.

XXXI. The Queen and Partridge 's Case. Trin. 30 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
1 Cro. 125.
IN a Quo Warranto, brought against Partridge, It was holden by all the
Justices; That a man might prescribe to hold a Leet oftener than twice in a
year, and at other days than are set forth in the Statute of Magna Charta, Cap.
35. because the said Statute is in the affirmative: But Popham, Attorney
General said, That one cannot prescribe against a Statute. And it was moved by
him; If a general Pardon be granted with general Exception in it, he which will
have advantage of it, ought to plead it, and show that he is not any person
excepted, for otherwise the Judges cannot allow him the benefit of it, because
they do not know if he be a person excepted or not; But if there be special
persons excepted by name, and no others excepted, but so many persons, there he
need not to plead it; for the Court may discern J. D. from J. S. 8 E. 4. 7.
vide 26 H. 8. 7. If a man commits Felony, and also Treason, and afterward
comes a general pardon for Felony, but Treason is excepted, and the party is
arraigned for Felony: By Coke he shall have the benefit of the pardon; Popham,
contrary, For he is disabled by the Treason: See Coke's Case, 13 Eliz. Plowd.
401. he pleaded to the Felony, the general pardon by Act of Parliament, and
added, that neither himself, nor the said offense was excepted: And it was
agreed by the whole Court, That in a Quo Warranto, it is not sufficient for the
Defendant to say, That such a Subject has lawful interest to hold Leets
without making title to himself; for the Writ is, Quo Warranto he claims them.
And afterward Judgment was given for the Queen.

XXXII. Woodward and Bugg 's Case. Trin. 30 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
WOodward libelled in the Spiritual Court against Bugg and Nelson for Tithes of
certain Lands, called Christian-Hill; 1 Cro. 188. Owen Rep. 103. 2 Roll. 63. 3
Len. 257.
The Defendant sued a Prohibition, and surmised, That one Prettiman was seized
of the said Land, and in consideration of 5 l. by him paid to the said Parson,
it was agreed betwixt them, That the said Prettiman and his assigns should be
discharged of the Tithes of the said Lands during his life, And afterward the
said Prettiman leased the same to the Defendants, upon which a Prohibition was
granted; and it was holden that the party need not to make proof thereof within
six months, for it is not within the Statute, because a composition with the
Parson: But now a consultation was granted in the same Cause, because the
agreement is showed, but no need of it, the which cannot be any discharge; but
if it had been for a time, i. Unica vice, it had been good, but contrary, being
for life: Also there is not any express Grant of Tithes, but only a Covenant,
and agreement that he should be discharged, upon which he may have an Action,
but no Prohibition: It was said on the other side, That although without Deed
Tithes cannot pass in point of interest, yet by way of discharge they well may,
Coke, It was holden betwixt Pendleton and Green, That upon such words of
Covenant and agreement, the party should hold the Lands discharged of Tithes,
which was denied: For if the Grantee of a Rentcharge will grant it to the
Lands without Deed, it is not good; And there was of late a Case betwixt
Westbed and Pepper, where it was agreed betwixt the Parson and one of his
Parish, that for twenty shillings Rent per ann. the Parishioner should be
discharged of Tithes for twenty years, if he lived so long; and it was holden
that no Prohibition did lie thereupon, a Fortiori where the Estate is for life:
Gaudy, In a Case of grant of Tithes for life, a Deed is requisite, but here it
is but a Covenant for money: See 21 H. 6. 43. Wray, If it had been for years,
it had been good, but here it is not any Contract, but only a discharge for
life, which cannot be during his life, without Deed; And afterward the Record
was read, which was Concordatum and agreatum fuit between the two parties, pro
omnibus decimis, during the time that one should be Parson, and the other
occupier of the said Lands, that in consideration of 5 l. the said Prettiman
and his assigns, should hold the said Lands discharged of Tithes; Wray, The
same is not a Contract, but Promise; for he does not grant any Tithes, etc.

XXXIII. Devered and Ratcliff 's Case. Pasch. 32 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
IN Debt, the Plaintiff declared, 1 Cro. 185.
That he himself had brought an Action in London against one A. and had
Judgment to remove; and a Capias was awarded and issued forth, to take the said
A. in execution upon which, Non est inventus was returned; upon which one of
the sureties of A. being in prison in London, under the custody of the
Defendant, upon a Plaint against him, was detained in Prison for the said Debt
so recovered against A. Secundum consuetudinem Civitatis praedict. prout per
record. ejusdem Curiae apparet, and after the Defendant suffered the surety to
escape; upon which there was a demurr; The matter was, If the said surety was a
Prisoner in Law for the said Debt, as surety of A. for in the Declaration it is
not expressly laid, that there was such a custom in London, ut supra, but only,
Secundum consuetudinem, etc. And secondly, there were two sureties of A. and
the one of them only is detained in execution: Also the custom, as it is here
laid, is not reasonable; For a Scire facias ought to issue out against the
sureties, and they ought not to be taken or detained in execution presently;
For the condition of the Recognizance of sureties is, That they bring in the
Defendant, if he be condemned, or to pray the Debt; and now by this custom,
the party who is surety being taken, cannot plead the release of the Plaintiff,
or the death of the Defendant in his discharge, as he might upon a Scire
facias, which was agreed per Curiam; and adjudged accordingly.

XXXIV. Clark and Green 's Case. Trin. 30 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
AN Action upon the Case was brought for these words: He lives by Charming,
Sorcery and Witchcraft; It was moved, that the words were not actionable; for
the words might be construed, as if the life of the party were preserved by
that means. And it was holden, 30 Eliz. in the Case betwixt Smith and Morris,
that the word Witch is not actionable; And therefore, if a man be sued in the
Spiritual Court for defamation, for calling one Witch, a Prohibition does not
lie. It has been holden, that upon these words, He went to destroy a child in
a woman's belly, were actionable, and yet it is not Felony, but a great
discredit; and these words, Thou usest Witchcraft, are not actionable. And
afterward, in the principal Case, Judgment was given, Quod nihil capiat per
Billam. And by Gaudy, It might be that the Plaintiff had the forfeiture of
those who are convicted of offenses, and so lives thereby.

XXXV. Harford and Gardener 's Case. Trin. 30 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
IN an Action upon the Case, The Plaintiff declared, that the Defendant in
consideration that the Father of the Plaintiff had employed his service about
the business of the Testator of the Defendant, to the great profit of the
Testator; and in consideration of love and affection that the Testator bore to
the Plaintiff, promised to give unto him 100 l. Curia, Love is not a
consideration, upon which an Action can be grounded; 3 Cro. 756. 1 Len. 94.
the like of friendship: Wray, If the Plaintiff declares, That the Defendant in
consideration that he was indebted unto the Plaintiff in diverse sums of money,
and promised to pay him 100 l. it is not good for the incertainty: Also the
consideration here, was past and executed before the promise made, and nothing
is done by the Son. And afterward Judgment was given against the Plaintiff.

XXXVI. Clark 's Case. Mich. 31 Eliz. In the Exchequer.
Post. 89.
BRidget Clark was indebted to Archdell by Obligation, and afterward she
delivered to one Andrews certain Hogsheads of Wine to satisfy the said
Archdell de debito praedicto: afterward the Obligation of Clark was assigned
to the Queen for the Debt of Archdel: and if the property of the said Hogsheads
of Wine were altered by the delivery of them to Andrews before the assignment?
was the question.

Egerton, Solicitor General; The property is not altered; for the Bailor might
have an Action of Account against Andrews before he has delivered them over
according to the Bailment; but if he has delivered them over, the same is a
good bar in Account: But if one be accountable to me upon a Bailment, and
afterward I require him to bail the goods over to A. the same is not in bar of
the Account, but is a good Plea in discharge of Account before Auditors, for
that is matter after the Bailment, not upon the Bailment. If Goods be bailed to
bail over upon a consideration precedent on the part of him to whom they ought
to be bailed, the Bailor cannot countermand it, otherwise it is where it is
voluntary and without consideration, but where it is in consideration of a Debt
not countermandable; contrary, if to satisfy the Debt of another.

Manwood, chief Baron: Where the Debtor of the King is sufficient, there a Debt
due to him ought not to be assigned to the King, but only where the Debt is
doubtful, and that was the ancient course: but now at this day many seem and
are accounted to be rich who are not, and therefore omnis ratio tentanda est to
recover the Debts of the King. But as to the Case before us, Briget is
Executrix to her Husband, who was indebted to Archdel, and she delivered the
Goods to Andrews to satisfy Archdel, and all that before the Assignment. And I
conceive that the property of the said Goods is altered; for, as the case is
here, Andrews was Surety for Clark, and had a Counter-Bond of Clark to save him
harmless. If I borrow Money, and deliver Plate for the security of it, the
general property is in me, yet the Bailee has a special interest in it, till
the Money is paid. If Goods be delivered to A. to pay to B. A. may sell them.
An Executor has Goods of the Testator, and he with his own Moneys pays the
Debts of the Testator, he shall retain the Goods, and the property is altered.
And here in our Case, Andrews might by virtue of the Bailment sell the Goods,
and with the Money pay the said Archdel. And afterward Judgment was given,
That the property of the Goods was altered.

XXXVII. Norris Case. 31 Eliz. In the Exchequer.
IN an Information upon Intrusion against Norris and others concerning Folly
John Park, the Defendants pleaded in Bar a descent: It was holden clearly by
the Court, That against the Queen a Descent is no Plea, nor any Title against
the Queen, because nullum tempus occurrit Regi: neither shall Lachess be
imputed to her: for the possessions of the Queen are large, and it is not
reason that she should be bound or tied to look to her affairs concerning her
possessions, or to incur any damage in default thereof; for she is to intend
and manage the public affairs of the Kingdom and State. It was also held by
the Court, That in pleading of a Lease for life, or Feoffment, the party needs
not to show the place where the Lease or Feoffment was made.

Popham, the Queens Attorney, took Exception to the Bar to the Information, That
whereas in the Information Title is made to the Queen, and concludes, prout
patet per plurima Recorda and memoranda Scaccarii; the Defendants have not
Traversed it by saying, Absque hoc quod habetur aliquod tale Recordum, To which
it was said by Harris and Savil, Sergeants, That if a special Record had been
alleged in certainty, then we ought to have taken such Traverse; but here it
being in the generalty, we ought not to traverse at all. Manwood, Because the
Information is general, i. ut patet per plurima Recorda, so the Traverse ought
to be also.

Another Exception was taken to the Bar, because in the Information the Title
of the Queen is set forth: and the Defendants plead, That long before the
Intrusion A. was seized in Fee, and enfeoffed B. who died seized, etc. where it
might be that the Title of A. was mean betwixt the Title of the Queen and the
Intrusion: whereas by Manwood and Popham they ought to have said, Diu antequam
the Queen was seized, A. was seized, etc. Savil and Harris, If which should so
plead, we should confess that the Queen once had a Title, and that is not true,
which Manwood denied, for by such Plea nothing is confessed. And it was said by
some, That where in the Bar the Title of the Queen is confessed and avoided,
there the Defendant shall say, Diu antequam the Queen had any thing, etc.
otherwise not. And it was holden by all, That in such case, a Feoffment might
be an induction unto a Traverse, but not a Descent. And by Manwood, it is a
general Rule, as well in the case of a Subject, as in the case of the Queen,
That nothing can be an Inducement to a Traverse, but such a thing as is
Traversable; and here the Descent induces the Traverse, being not Traversable
in this case. Also it was holden, That the place where the party dies seized
needs not to be showed in pleading a Descent. And afterward Manwood at another
day, mutata opinione, conceived, That as to plurima Recorda, there needed no
Traverse, although there were many presidents to the contrary: Diu ante
transgressionem fieri sup. is a good Plea in Trespass in Case of a common
person, not in the King's Case, diu ante Intrusionem, etc.

XXXVIII. Robinson and Robinson 's Case. 31 Eliz. In the Exchequer Chamber.
IN the Case betwixt Robinson and Robinson in the Exchequer-Chamber by English
Bill concerning the Manor of Draiton Basset; The Defendant pleaded in Bar a
special Plea, to which the Plaintiff replied; and afterward the Defendant,
when he should have Rejoyned, would have relinquished his special Plea, and
pleaded the general Issue.

Manwood, In the Common Pleas, and King's Bench, and in the Court of Common
Pleas in the Exchequer, before the Issue joined, the Defendant might relinquish
his special Plea, and plead the general Issue, for the Pleadings there are in
paper until Issue be joined, and therefore at any time before Issue joined, the
Plea might be withdrawn: But in the Chancery, Court of Requests, and here, all
Pleas put in are in Parchment, and filed; and therefore it cannot be so done:
and therefore here, if the Plea be once engrossed into Parchment and filed, the
Defendant cannot relinquish his Plea, and plead the general Issue; contrary,
where the Plea is yet in Paper.

Gent, Baron, That if upon the Plea in Paper an Issue be offered with an Absque
hoc, etc. the other party cannot relinquish it, although it be but in Paper.
But afterward the Barons asked the Clarks, what was their course in such
cases? who answered, That if the Plea be in Parchment, and upon the File, it
shall never afterward be taken from off the File, but with the consent of the
parties, and Order of the Court. And afterward Manwood, with the assent of the
rest of the Barons, gave a Rule, That the Defendant should rejoyn to the
Replication, or otherwise a Nihil dicit to be entered.

XXXIX. The Lord Cromwell 's Case. 31 Eliz. In the Exchequer.
IN the Case of the Lord Cromwell upon the Statute of 33 H. 8. for levying of
the King's Debts: A Debt came to the Queen by Attainder of the Creditor, upon
which an Extent issued against one of the Ter-tenants liable to the Debt, and
not against all: It was moved, That upon a branch of the said Statute, all the
Ter-tenants ought to be charged: But it was the Opinion of diverse, that such a
Debt which comes to the King by Attainder, is not within the said Statute; for
although the Attainder is by a Judgment, yet Debt by Judgment it cannot
properly be said, but where a Debt is recovered by Judgment. And that was the
Case of the Lord Norris, for a Debt due to Heron by the Lord Williams, which
Heron was attainted.

XL. Machel and Dunton 's Case. Hill. 29 Eliz. Rot. 631. in the Common Pleas.
IN Ejectione Firmae the Case was, That one Machel, 1 Cro^. 288. Owen 54, 92.
Poph. 8.
Alderman of London, was seized and Leased for years, with clause of re-entry
for non payment of Rent; and in the Indenture of Lease there were diverse
Covenants on the parts of the Lessee: And afterward the said Machel by his
Will willed, That the Lessee should retain the Land-demised for thirty one
years, reckoning the years of the first term not expired as parcel of the said
term of thirty one years, yielding like Rent, and under such Covenants as the
Lessee held the former Lease; and by the same Will devised the Inheritance over
to a stranger. It was first moved, If here the Lessee for years had a new
interest accrued to him by the Will? If it shall vest in him as an interest by
it self, or that both Estates, as well the former Lease, as the Estate for
years devised by the Will, should be united by way of Surrender? Another matter
was because that the Devise is yielding such Rent, and under such Covenants,
etc. Now because the meaning of the Devisor was, That the Devisee should hold
over the Land for the term increased as he held before; if here the Law shall
give construction to this Devise as near the intention of the Devisor as it may
be? and so construe the words of the Will to amount to a condition. But by the
Opinion of the whole Court, the words of the Devise cannot make a Condition;
for a Condition is a thing odious in Law, which shall not be created without
sufficient words. Another matter was moved, If the Fee-simple should pass by
this Devise in point of Reversion, or Remainder? And by the better opinion of
the Court, it shall pass in point of Reversion; for if it should be a
Remainder, then the Rent which is reserved upon the Lease by the Will, shall
not be incident to such Remainder, and therefore the Law shall qualify it into
a Fee-simple. Another matter was moved; Admitting that the words of the Devise,
ut supra, are Condition, If here in this Case there be a Grantee of the
Reversion intended within the Statute of 32 H. 8. As A. seized of Lands in Fee,
devises them to B. for years, rendering Rent, with clause of Re-entry; and by
the same Will devises the Reversion to another: If because that it was never
in the Devisor a Reversion or a Condition? If the Devisee be within the said
Statute to take advantage of it? And the Opinion of the whole Court was, That
the Devisee of the Fee-simple should take advantage of this Condition.

XLI. Trin. 29 Eliz. In the Common Pleas. Postea 210.
A Justicies issued forth to the Sheriff of H. for the Debt of 40 l. and the
same Plea was held and determined before the Undersheriff in the absence of
the Sheriff: It was moved by Puckering, Sergeant, If a Writ of Error or a false
Judgment lies in this Case? And it was resolved by the Justices, That the
Sheriff himself in his person ought to hold Plea of a Justicies; and if he make
a Precept or Deputation to another, it is merely void: 34 H. 6. 48. See the
Case there abridged, Fitz. Bar. 161. And a Justicies is not an Original Writ,
but a Commission to the Sheriff to hold Plea above 40 s. And upon a Judgment
given upon a Justicies, a Writ of false Judgment lies, and not a Writ of
Error. See 7 E. 4. 23. And it was the Opinion of the Lord Anderson, That the
Judgment given in the principal Case was utterly void, and coram non Judice.

XLII. The Queen and Jordan 's Case. Trin. 29 Eliz. In the Exchequer.
11 Co. 89, 90, etc.
AN Information was exhibited in the Exchequer for the Queen against the
Executors of William Jordan, Surveyor of the Ordinance, etc. and the Executors
of John Bowland, Deputy of Ambrose Earl of Warwick, Master of the Ordinance,
etc. In which was set forth for the Queen, That certain Powder, Pellets, and
other furniture of War, came unto the hands of the said Jordan and Bowland, in
respect of their said Offices, to the value of 400000 l. and showed how much
came to each of them, and the special charge uncertain, per quod onerabiles and
computabiles Dominae Reginae devenerunt, nec tamen computum unquam inde
reddiderunt, nec reddere voluerant, sed bona and catalla praedicta ad usus suos
proprios converterunt, in deceptionem dictae Dominae Reginae, etc. The
Defendants pleaded Not guilty, upon which the Queen's Attorney did demur in Law,
because the Defendants have answered only to the Conversion: in which case
although they have not converted, yet if the said Goods have come to the hands
of their Testator, it is sufficient for the Queen, and the Defendants are
chargeable to the Queen for the same: And the Opinion of all the Barons was
clear, that the Defendants ought to answer to the Charge, etc.

XLIII. Collet and the Bailiffs of Shrewsbury 's Case. Pasc. 29 Eliz. In the
Common Pleas.
IN a false Imprisonment, the Defendants justified by Prescription, scil. that
they have used, if any person within their Town contemptuose se gesserit
against the Bailiffs of the said Town, or any Warden of any Trade there, to
commit such a person to Prison for the space of a day or more at the least, at
their discretions: And showed farther. That the Plaintiff did mis-behave
himself, tam factis quam verbis, against the Wardens of such a Mystery in the
said Town, etc. And when the Bailiffs, super Querimoniam eis inde factam, sent
for the Plaintiff, he would not come to them, but mis-behaved himself against
them, tam dictis quam factis; for which they did commit him to Prison, etc.
upon which there was a Demurrer. And afterward Judgment was given for the
Plaintiff, because their Prescription is not good; for it is too large to
imprison Subjects at their discretion: Also they have set forth the offense of
the Plaintiff generally; i. Misbehaviour, tam factis quam dictis, without
alleging any special Misdemeanor in certain.

XLIV. Pasch. 29 Eliz. In the Common Pleas. 3 Leu. 79.
IT was holden by the whole Court, That where a man makes his Will in this
manner, I will and bequeath my Land to A. and the name of the Devisor is not in
the whole Will, yet the Devise is good, by averment of the name of the Devisor,
1 Cro. 100. 1 Leo. 113.
and by proof that it was his Will. And if one lying sick in extremis, having
an intent to devise his Land, by word makes such a Devise, but does not command
the same to be put in writing, but another without his knowledge or command
puts the same in writing in the life of the Devisor, it is a good Devise, for
it is sufficient if the Devise be reduced in writing during the life of the
Devisor.

XLV. Leonard Lovelace 's Case. Trin. 27 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
IN Waste, the Case was, 1 Anders. 132. More Rep. 371. Savile Rep. 75. 1 Cro.
40.
That Lands were devised to the Father of the Defendant, and to his eldest
Issue male, de corpore suo exeunti: And upon Demurrer it was adjudged, That by
this Devise no Estate passed but an Estate for life unto the Father of the
Defendant, the Remainder to his eldest Son for life, so as no Estate of
Inheritance passed thereby; and therefore punishable for Waste.

XLVI. Cobb and Prior 's Case. Postea 48. Hill. 33 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
THE Case was, A man devises his Lands to his Wife during the minority of his
Son, upon condition, That she shall not do Waste during the min^^^^y of her
said Son, and dies: The Wife takes a Husband, a^^ dies; the Husband commits
Waste: It was holden by the whole Court, That the same is not any breach of the
Condition.

XLV. Salway and Luson 's Case. Mich. 30 and 31 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
1 Leon. 169.
MAtthew Salway brought a Writ of Right against Luson, and the Writ was,
Messuagium, and 200 acr. jampnor. and bruerae, and exception was taken to the
Writ, because that jampnor. and bruerae, were coupled together where they ought
to be distinctly severed; and so many acr. jampnor. and so many acr. bruerae:
although it was objected on the part of the Demandant in maintenance of the
Writ, That in the Register, fol. 2. the Writ of Right is, Redditu unius librae
Mac. and Obed. i. Mace and Cloves together without distinction or severance.
And it was said in a Writ of Right, we ought to follow the Register, and
therefore a Writ of Right was abated, because the word Pomarium was put in the
Writ, for in the Register, there is no such Writ, and the word Gardinum
comprehends it, But in other Writs, as Writs of Entry, etc. it is otherwise:
See the Case of the Lord Zouch, 11 Eliz. 353. In a Writ of Entry, Sur Disseisin
mill acr. jampnor. and bruerae. But the exception was not allowed, for it may
be, that jampnorum and bruerae lie so promiscuously, that they cannot be
divided: And see 16 H. 7. 8. and 9. The respect which the Justices there had to
the Register, so as they changed their opinions, conformable to the Register:
Another exception was taken to the Writ, because the Demandant demands duas
parts custodiae, de Hay in the Forest of C. and the opinion of the whole Court
was, that the Writ ought to be Officium custodiae duarum partium de Hay, and
not duas parts custodiae, As Advocatio duarum partium Ecclesiae, not duas
parts advocationis: another exception was, because the Writ was, duas parts,
etc. in three to be divided, whereas it should be divisus, and non dividend.
for dividendum is not in any Writ but a Writ of Partition. And by Windham, the
parts of this Office are divided in right, Quod Curia Concessit, another
exception was taken, because in the Writ, it is not set down in what Town the
Forest of C. is, so as the Court does not know from whence the Visne should
come; for no Venire shall be de vicineto Forestae, as de vicineto Hundredi and
Manerii; and that was holden to be a material exception: Another exception was
taken, because a Writ of Right does not lie of an Office; for at the Common
Law, an Office did not lie of it, but now it does by the Statute of West. 2.
For it was not liberum tenementum, but the party grieved was put to his Quod
permittat. And of this opinion was the whole Court.

XLVIII. Johnson and Bellamy 's Case. Hillar. 31 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
Postea 82, 83.
IN Ejectione firmae, It was found by special Verdict, That Mr. Grant was
seized of the Lands, etc. and by his Will devised the same to Joan his Wife,
for life; and farther he willed, That when Richard his brother shall come to
the age of 25 years, he should have the Lands to him and the heirs of his body
lawfully begotten. Mr. Grant died, having issue of his body, who is his heir,
Richard, before he had attained the age of 25 years, levied a Fine of the said
Lands, with Proclamations in the life, and during the seisin of Joan, to A. Sic
ut parts ad finem nihil habuerunt: and if this Fine should bind the
Estate-tail was the Question; And the Justices cited the case of the Lord
Zouch, which was adjudged, M. 29 and 30 Eliz. Tenant in tail discontinues to E.
and afterward levieth a Fine to B. although the parts ad finem nihil
habuerunt, yet the Fine shall bind the entail: But the Sergeants at Bar argued,
That there is a great difference betwixt the Case cited, and the Case at Bar;
for in that Case, the said Fine was pleaded in Bar, but here the Fine is not
pleaded, but found by special Verdict; To which it was said by the Court, that
the same was not any difference; For the Fine by the Statute is not any matter
of Estoppel, or conclusion; but by the Statute does bind and extinguish the
Estate-tail, and the right of it; and Fines are as effectual to bind the right
of the entail when they are found by especial Verdict, as when they are pleaded
in Bar: And by Periam, Collateral Warranty found by Verdict, is of as great
force, as if it were pleaded in Bar, And afterward Judgment was given, That
the Estate-tail by the Fine, was utterly destroyed and extinct.

XLIX. Jay 's Case. Trin. 29 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
JAY brought an Action of Debt before the Mayor of Shrewsbury, etc. and
declared upon an Obligation which was upon condition to pay money at London,
and issue was there joined upon the payment. And it was moved how this issue
should be tried, viz. 4 Inst. 205.
If it may be removed by Certiorare into the Chancery, and thence by Mittimus
into the Common Pleas, and from thence sent into London to be tried, and when
it is tried, to be remanded back to Shrewsbury to have Judgment: See 21 H. 7.
33. Upon voucher in the County Palatine of Lancaster, the Law is such in
matters real; for real actions cannot be sued but in the said County Palatine,
but in personal matters it is otherwise, for such actions may be sued
elsewhere, at the pleasure of the party; And thereunto agreed the whole Court:
and although such matters have been removed before, yet the same were without
motion to the Court, or opposition of the other party, and so not to be
accounted Precedents: See 3 H. 4. 46. abridg'd by Brook, Cause de remover Plea
41. Where he says, That a Foreign Plea pleaded in London in Debt, goes to the
jurisdiction; but upon a Foreign Voucher in a Plea real, the Plea shall be
removed in Bank by the Statute to try the Warranty, and afterward shall be
remanded.

L. Sands and Scagnard 's Case. Trin. 29 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
IN an Action upon the Case, The Plaintiff declared, that he was possessed of
certain Chattels which came to the Defendant by Trover. The Defendant pleaded,
That heretofore the Plaintiff brought Debt against the now Defendant, and
demanded certain moneys, and declared, that the Defendant bought of him the
same goods, (whereof the Action is now brought) for the sum then in demand, to
which the then Defendant waged his Law and had his Law; by which Nihil Capiat
per breve, etc. was entered. And demanded Judgment, if, etc. And by Windham and
Rodes, Justices, The same is no bar in this Action, for the waging of the Law,
and the doing of it, utterly disproves the Contract supposed by the Declaration
in the said Action of Debt, and then the Plaintiff is not bound by the supposal
of it, but is at large to bring this Action; and so Judgment was given for the
Plaintiff.

LI. Spittle and Davie 's Case. Trin. 29 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
Owen Rep. 8, 55.
IN a Replevin, the Case was, That one Turk was seized of certain Lands in Fee,
and by his Will devised parcel of his said Lands, to his eldest Son in tail,
and the residue of his Lands to his younger Son in Fee, Provided, that neither
of my said Sons shall sell or make Leases of the Lands given or bequeathed unto
them by this my Will, or do any Act with any of the said Lands, to the
hindrance of their children or mine, by any devise or means, before they come
to the age of 30 years; and if any of my Sons do so, then my other Son shall
have the portion of my Lands so devised to his Brother, the eldest Son before
his age of 30 years leased the Lands to him devised, ut supra, for years,
against the intent of the said Proviso. The younger Son entered, 2 Cro. 398.
and he leased the same Land for years before his age of 30 years, Upon which
the eldest Son did re-enter, and the opinion of the Court was, that here is a
Limitation, and not a Condition; and here the re-entry of the eldest Son was
holden unlawful; for this Proviso did not extend but to the immediate Estate
devised, expressly to them, and not to any new Estate, which did arise upon the
limitation; and when the younger Son enters upon the eldest Son by the said
Limitation, he shall hold his Estate, discharged of the Proviso, or any
limitation contained in it.

LII. Martin Van Henbeck 's Case. Trin. 30 Eliz. In the Exchequer.
AN Information was exhibited in the Exchequer, against Martin Van Henbeck,
Merchant-stranger, upon the Statute of 18 H. 6. Cap. 17. concerning the gaging
of vessels of Wine, and showed, That the Defendant had sold to such a one, so
many pipes of Wine, and that none of them did contain as they ought, 126.
gallons; and although they were so defective, yet the Defendant had not
defalked the price, etc. according to the want of measure, for which he had
forfeited to the Queen, all the value of all the Wine so defective. Exception
was taken to the Information, because there is not set down how much in every
pipe was wanting, as one or two gallons, etc. To as a ratable defalcation might
be made according to the proportion of the want of measure; But if the Informer
had set forth in his Information, that no defalcation was at all, such general
allegation of want of measure, without other certainty, had been good. And the
Case was cited, 32 E. 4. 40. Lysle's Case, Where the plea wants certainty; or
where he pleads that he was ready to show to the Council of the Plaintiff his
discharge of an Annuity, etc. and does not show what manner of discharge, as
release, etc. So 2 H. 7. 6. in Dower, against the heir, who pleads in Bar,
Detainment of Charters, without showing what Charters in certain: also there is
time enough of defalcation, when the time of payment comes, and not upon the
Contract; and it is not showed, that the Vendee had paid for the Wine. Egerton,
Solicitor, contrary, When the thing demanded is to be recorded, there it ought
to be certainly showed, but contrary, where it goes only to the point of
Conveyance of the Office; and here, the thing to be abated is not in question;
for be it more or less, the Defendant is to lose the value of all the Wine, and
that which is to be defalked, is but an Induction, or Conveyance tending to the
payment of the forfeiture: As in Partridge's Case, 7 E. 6. Plow. 85. Whereupon
the Statute of 32 H. 8. Maintenance, The Plaintiff charges the Defendant with a
Lease for years, made to a stranger, without showing for what term certain, and
yet it was there holden well enough, notwithstanding that the Lease was not to
be forfeited, but was a Conveyance to the point of forfeiture; i. the value of
the Lands 38 Ass. 12. A Steward of a Leet was presented, for that he had
suffered many Brewers and Bakers to ba^^ and brew, contrary to the Assise, pro
redemptione inde capiend. without showing in certain, what Bakers, or of whom
he had taken redemption; but notwithstanding that, the Defendant took issue
upon the matter, etc. And it is impossible for the Informer, to know the
quantity of the full measure of every pipe of Wine, which does not belong to
him, but to another, and if the Law should compel him to this impossibility,
the Statute should be of none effect. 3. E. 3. 363. In Nuisance for drowning of
his Lands, exception was taken, because it was not set forth what quantity of
land, but it was not allowed; for it is impossible to know, to what depth the
land was drowned, and how much of the land was drowned: So here the Informer
cannot know every spoonful, etc. And he said, that the defalcation ought to be
at the time of the Contract, or within convenient time after. Coke, contrary,
Here is a great incertainty, which is not tolerable in an Information, for the
quantity of the want is uncertain, and so likewise the quantity of the
defalcation, for the want must be forty, twenty, ten, five, or one gallon,
pottle, quart, or pint, and in such Information upon penal Laws, the matter of
it ought to be certainly showed. Oportet ut res certa deducatur in judicium, so
as the Court may judge thereof: as where an Information is exhibited upon the
Statute of Usury, That Statute is, that if any take above 10 l. for the loan of
100 l. for one year, he shall forfeit the whole value of the principal, here
there ought to be an usurious Contract for above 10 l. in the hundred; and also
there ought to be a taking; and it is impossible to discover the subtilty of an
Usurer: But if Information be exhibited, here against an Usurer, and charge
that he took more then 10 l. in the hundred, without showing how much, such
Information is utterly insufficient; for the Informer ought to set forth the
quantity of the interest received, and yet the same is not to be recovered:
Also if the Informer sets for an usurious Contract, Cum quodam homine
ignoto, it is insufficient, 5 H. 7. 17, 18. If an Information be exhibited upon
the Statute of Liveries, as well the giver as the taker, ought to be certainly
showed, etc. Another exception was taken, because the words of the Information
are, Quae quidem dolia, vel eorum aliquod, etc. did lack, etc. But by Manwood,
the same is well enough, Wherefore Coke did not speak to it; And he said, that
the time of the defalcation of the price is upon the payment, and not before.
If J. S. lend to one 100 l. for a year, and upon the loan, contract with me, to
give me 20 l. for the loan of the same for one year, If now when I pay him he
takes but 10 l. he shall not be punished for the Contract, but perhaps the
Bond shall be void. And upon the Statute of 5 E. 6. of Ingressors, If the
Information be, that the Defendant has bought Corn, etc. it is not sufficient;
for the words of the Statute are, Get into his hands, etc. Owen Sergeant to the
same purpose: He has not alleged, Quantum, vel in quanto defecit, If there
had been but a Pint, it had been sufficient; The Information goes farther, Non
defalcavit tantum de pretio, quantum defecit, and so tantum, and quantum, is
incertainly laid; 22 H. 6. If A. be bound to B. to make him a sufficient Estate
in such Lands, in an Action brought upon such an Obligation, it is no plea to
say, That he has made unto him a sufficient Estate, etc. but he ought to show
what Estate, So 7 E. 4. If one be bound to repair such a house, It is not
sufficient to say, that he has repaired it, but he ought to show, in hoc, vel
in illo: Egerton, The abatement shall be upon the Contract. And afterward
Judgment was given against the Informer, because it is not showed in the
Information in how many Vessels there was want; but if he had alleged but the
want of one Pint, it had been good for the value of all the Wine: And by
Manwood that might have been well enough known by the Gauging how much every
Vessel wanted.

LIII. Green and Everard 's Case. Mich. 30 Eliz. In the Exchequer.
IN Ejectione Firmae against Everard by Green, the parties were at issue, and
the said Green challenged one of the Jurors, and assigned for cause, because
the said Iuror held Land under the same Title as the Defendant did: To prove
which one Lancelot Chandler was produced as a Witness for the said Green, who
deposed upon the said Challenge the same, for which the Iuror challenged was
drawn, and so there was no Inquest: and so the Plaintiff was delayed of his
Trial: whereupon he sued the said Lancelot, tam pro Domina Regina quam pro
seipso: and it was found for the Plaintiff. And now Exception in Arrest of
Judgment was put into the Court engrossed in Parchment; viz. Ad Judicium pro
Domina Regina, and praefat. Querente, Curia procedere non debet, quia manifest
apparet, per informat. dict. Querent. quod ipse non fuit pars gravata, quod per
calumniam in dicta informatione specificat. ac per jurament. dict. Lancelot
super inde fact. dictus Querens, non fuit damnificat. sed in calumnia praedict.
and jurament. praedict. super inde factum tendebat in commodum ipsius Everardi,
propter quod ipse idem Everardus tempore calumniae praedict. existens tenens
Tenementorum praedictor. per dict. declarat. specificator. eadem Tenementa
ratione calumniae praedict. ac praedict. jurament. tenebat and proficua inde
provenientia diutius quam aliter si praesens Triatio habita fuisset sine aliqua
calumnia tenere potuisset. See the Statute of 5 Eliz. against Perjury, the
words are, grieved, let, or molested, etc.

LIVE. George ap Rice 's Case. Mich. 30 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
George ap Rice, Tenant in Tail after possibility of Issue extinct, assigned
his Estate to one A. against whom he in the Reversion brought a Quid juris
clamat, and it was adjudged that he should Attorn; for although Tenant in Tail
after possibility of Issue extinct, himself is not compellable to attorn, yet
his Assignee shall attorn; for the privilege is knit to the person who is in
truth Tenant in Tail after possibility of Issue, which cannot be the Assignee,
for by the Assignment the privity and the privilege are destroyed. 1 Len.
290.291.
And where the Defendant, in a Quid juris clamat, is adjudged to attorn,
Distress infinite shall issue forth against him, to compel him to attorn; and
if he, when he appears, does refuse to attorn, he shall be imprisoned until he
does attorn: And this Judgment, That the Assignee of Tenant in Tail after
possibility should attorn, being given in a Court in Wales, was afterward
affirmed in a Writ of Error brought upon it in the King's Bench.

LV. Lucas and Picrost 's Case. 30 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
THE Case was, 3 Len. 137.
That an Assise of Novel disseisin was brought in the County of Northumberland
of two Acres of Land; and as to one Acre, the Defendant pleaded a Plea tryable
in a Foreign County, upon which the Issue was adjourned into the Common Pleas,
and from thence into the Foreign County, where by Nisi prius it was found for
the Plaintiff: And now Snag, Sergeant, prayed Judgment for the Plaintiff, and
cited the Book of 16 H. 7. 12. where Assise is adjourned in Bank for difficulty
of the Verdict, they there may give Judgment But the whole Court is of contrary
Opinion; for here is another Acre, the Title of which is to be tried before the
Justices of the Assise, before the Trial of which no Judgment shall be given
for the Acre for which the Title is found: And the Assise is properly depending
before the Justices of the Assise, before whom the Plaintiff may discontinue
his Assise: And it is not like unto the Case of 6 Ass. 4. 8 Ass. 15. where in
an Assise, a Release dated in a Foreign County is pleaded, which was denied,
for which cause the Assise was adjourned in Bank, and there found by Inquest
not the Deed of the Plaintiff: now the Plaintiff, if he will release his
damages, shall have Judgment of the Freehold presently: But in our Case,
Postea. 199. 14 H. 7. part 118.
parcel of the Lands put in view does remain not tried, which the Plaintiff
cannot release as he may the damages: And therefore the Court awarded. That the
Verdict should be sent back to the Justices of the Assise.

LVI. Povye 's Case. Mich. 30 Eliz. In communi Banco.
POvy, an Attorney of the King's Bench, brought an Action of Trespass there
against the Warden of the Fleet, who came into the Common Pleas and demanded
the Advice of the Court, because he is an Officer of this Court, and therefore
ought not to be impleaded elsewhere: But it was said by the Court, 3 Cro. 180.
That because that the Plaintiff has also his Privilege in the King's Bench,
as well as the Defendant has here, this equality of Privilege shall render the
parties at liberty; and he shall have the benefit of the Privilege who first
begins Suit: and so the Warden of the Fleet was advised to answer.

LVII. Inchley and Robinson 's Case. Hill. 29 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
IN an Ejectione Firmae, it was found by special Verdict, Owen Rep. 88. 3 Len.
165,
That King E. 6. was seized of the Manor and hundred of Fremmington, and by his
Letters Patents granted the same to Barnard in Fee, rendering 130 l. per annum,
and also to hold by Homage and Fealty; and afterward Queen Mary reciting the
said Grant by E. 6. and the Reservation upon it granted to Gartrude,
Marchioness of Exeter, the Manor of Fremmington, and the said Rents and
Services; and also the Manor of Camfield, and other Lands and tenements, to be
holden by the twentieth part of a Knight's Fee: Gertrude so seized, devised to
the Lord Montjoy the Manor of Fremmington, the Manor of Camfield, etc. and also
bequeathed diverse sums of money to be levied of the premises: and they farther
found, That the said Rent of 230 l. was the full third part of the yearly value
of all the Lands and Tenements of the Devisor. The Question was, If by those
words of the Devise, Of the Manor of Fremmington, the Rent and Services of the
Manor did pass? i. the Rent and the Homage and the Fealty reserved, the Grant
of King E. 6. of the Manor and Hundred of Fremmington? and if the said Rent and
Services are issuing out of the Manor? for if the Rent does not pass, then the
same is descended to the Heir of the Marchioness; and then being found the full
and third part of the value, the King and the Heir is fully answered and
satisfied, and then the Inheritance of the residue discharged, and settled in
the Devisee: And if the Rent does not pass, then is the Heir of the Marchioness
entitled by the Statute to a third part of the whole.

Shuttleworth, Sergeant, If the Marquess had devised by express words the said
Rent and Services, they could not have passed: for as to the Services, they are
entire things, as Homage and Fealty, and they cannot pass by Devise in case
where Partition is to follow, for such things cannot receive any Partition or
Division, therefore they are not divisible; for the Statute does enable the
Proprietor or Owner to devise two parts of his Inheritances, in three parts to
be divided; i. as Catalla Felonum cannot be devised for the reason aforesaid;
which was granted by the whole Court. And as to the Devise, he argued much upon
the grounds of Devises, and put a ground put by Fineax, 15 H. 7. 12. where
every Will ought to be construed and taken according as the words do import, or
as it may be intended or employed by the words, what the meaning of the Testator
was out of the words of the Will. See thereof a good Case 19 H. 8. 8. and 9.
and he relied much upon the Case of Bret and Rigden, Plow. 342. So he said in
this case, because the intent of the Devisor does not appear upon the words of
the Will, that this Rent should pass; it shall not pass, for there is not any
mention made of any Rent in all the Will.

Fenner contrary, and he argued much upon the favorable construction which the
Law gives to Wills, 14 H. 3. Reversion for Remainder, and e contr. 17 E. 3. 8.
A man may make a Feoffment of a Manor by the name of a Knights Fee, a fortiori
in case of the Devise: and in our case the Marquess conceived, That the Rent
and Services reserved out of the Manor of Fremmington was the Manor of
Fremmington; and the Law shall give strength to that intention.

Walmsly conceived, That the Rent did not pass by the name of Manor, etc. for
this Rent, nec in rei veritate, nor in reputation, was ever taken for a Manor:
Also the words, Of the Manor and Hundred of Fremmington, are put amongst others
which are Manors in truth; by which it seems, That the Devisor did not intend
to pass but one Manor, and no other Hereditaments, by that Manor of
Fremmington. It is a Rule in Law, That in the construction of a Will a thing
employed shall not control a thing expressed: But here, if by implication the
Rent shall pass, then the Manor of Camfield shall not pass, which it was the
intent of the Devisor to pass, and that by express words, See 16 Elizab. Dyer
330. Clatche's Case: and see 16 Eliz. Dyer 333. Chapman's Case. But in our Case
here, there are not any sufficient words to warrant any implication; for
neither in truth nor in reputation was it taken to be a Manor: 22 H. 6. 2.
Green Acre might pass by the name of a Manor, although it were but one Acre of
Land, because known by the name of a Manor. See accordingly 22 H. 6. 39. And
see, where, before the Statute of Uses, a man had Recoverors to his use, and he
wills by his Will, That his Trustees should sell his Lands, they may sell. And
he said, That if a man seized of a Manor parcel in Demesne, and parcel in
service, and he grants the Demesnes to one and his Heirs, and afterward
devises his Manor, peradventure the services shall pass; but this Rent has no
resemblance to a Manor.

Gaudy, This Rent shall pass by the name aforesaid. Favorable construction is
to be always given to Wills, according to the intent of the Devisor, and no
part of a Will shall be holden void, if by any means it may take effect; then
here it appears, that his meaning was, that upon these words every thing
should pass to the Devisee concerning the said Manor of Fremmington; for
otherwise, the words of the Manor of Fremmington should be void and frivolous,
which shall not be in a Will, if any reasonable construction can be; for it is
found expressly by the Jury, That neither at the time of the Will made, nor at
the time of the death of the Devisor, the said Devisor had any thing in the
said Manor of Fremmington, but only the said Rent of one hundred and thirty
pounds. And it may well be taken that the Devisor being ignorant what thing a
Manor is, though that the Rent was a Manor, because that he had Rents and
services out of the Manor. For in construction of Wills, the words shall serve
the intent of the party; and therefore if a man devises, That his Lands shall
be sold for the payment of his debts, his Executors shall sell them, for the
intent of the Testator naming the Vendors, is sufficient: And see Plowden, 20
Eliz. 5. 24. L. after the Statute of 27 H. 8. devises that his Executors shall
be seized to the use of A. and his Heirs in Fee, whereas then there was no
Feoffees to his use; the same was holden a good Devise of the Lands of A. and
the Judges conceived, that the Devisor was ignorant of the operation of the
Statute in such case, and therefore his ignorance was supplied: See Br.
Devises, 44. 29 H. 8. A. had Feoffees to his use, and afterward, after the
Statute of 27 H. 8. willed that his Feoffees should make an Estate to B. and
his Heirs, it was holden by Baldwin, Shelley and Mountague, Justices, that it
was a good Devise: See 26 H. 6. Feoff. 12. A Carve of Lands may pass by the
name of a Manor, Ergo, a multo fortiori, Rent, for Rents and Services have more
nearness, and do more resemble a Manor than a Carve of Lands; and it cannot be
intended, that the meaning of the Testator was to grant the Manor it self, in
which she had nothing, especially by her Will; for covin, collusion, or
indirect dealing, shall not be presumed in a Will: Also the Marchioness, for
four years together before her death, had the Rent and Services of the said
Manor, and she well knew, that she had not any other thing in the said Manor,
but the said Rent and Services; and therefore it shall be intended, that that
was her Manor of Fremmington, A. seized of a Capital Message, and great
Demesnes lying to it, leaseth the same for years, rendering Rent, and afterward
devises to another all his Farm, lying in such a place, It was rated in that
case, that by that Devise, the Rent and the Reversion should pass: See the Case
betwixt Worselie and Adams, Plowd. 1 Eliz. 195. by Anthony Brown and Dyer.
Periam, Justice, was of opinion, that this Rent might be divided well enough;
But by Anderson, It is but Rent-seck; but Periam said, it was a Rent
distrainable of common Right, but all of them agreed, that the Rent might be
divided, but there should not be two Tenures. And the Lord Montjoy being
advised that this Rent did not pass by the Grant, but descended to the Heir,
being the full part of the whole, entered into all the residue of the Lands, and
made a Lease of the Manor of Camfield unto the Plaintiff, upon which entry, the
Ejectione firmae was brought, and afterward the Plaintiff seeing the opinion
of the Court to be against him, and for the Devisee of the Rent by the name
aforesaid, did afterward discontinue his suit, etc.

LVIII. Costard and Wingfield 's Case. Trin. 30 Eliz. Intrat. T. 28 Eliz. Rot.
507. In the Common Pleas.
6 Co. 60.
IN a Replevin, the Defendant did avow for damage-feasant, by the commandment of
his Master, the L. Cromwell; The Plaintiff by way of Replication did justify
the putting in of his cattle into the Land, where, etc. by reason that the Town
of N. is an ancient Town, and that it had been used time out of mind, etc. That
every Inhabitant of the said Town, had had common for all manner of cattle
levant and couchant within the said Town, and so justified. The Defendant said,
that the house in which the Plaintiff did inhabit in the said Town, and by
reason of residency in which House he claimed common, was a new house erected
within 30 years; and that before that time, there had not been any house there,
upon which the Plaintiff did demurr: Shuttleworth, Sergeant, argued for the
Plaintiff, That he should have common there by reason of resiancy in the said
new house; and he said, that the Resiancy is the cause, and not the Land, nor
the person thereof; and thereupon he put the Case of 15 E. 4. 29. And he agreed
the Case, That if the Lord does improve part of the common, that he shall not
have common in the residue of the Land, for the Lands improved, because, That
he cannot prescribe for that which is improved, as the Book is, in 5 Ass. But
here in the principal Case he does not prescribe in any person certain, or in,
or for any new thing; but he sets forth that the use of the Town has always
been, that the inhabitants should have common there, And this common is not
common appendent, or appertinent, but common in gross, See Needham, 37 H. 6.
34. b. And he said, That if the house of a Freeholder, which has used to have
such common, does fall down, and he erecteth a new house in another place of
the Land, that he shall have common to that new erected house as he had before?
And he took a difference betwixt the case of Estovers, where a new Chimney is
erected, and this Case, and he stood much upon the manner of the prescription.
Gaudy, Sergeant, contrary, And he took exception to the prescription; For he
said, that it is said therein; That it is Antiqua Villa, but he does not say,
that it has been so time out of mind, etc. and so it ought to be said, as the
Book is in 15 E. 4. 29. a. And then, if it be not an ancient Town time out of
mind, the parties cannot prescribe as Inhabitants of the said Town, to have
common time out of mind, etc. And he said, That if such a prescription as is
said in this Case be good in Law, viz. That every one who erected a new house
within the said Town, should have common to his said new house, the same should
be prejudicial to the ancient Town, and to the utter overthrow and manifest
impairing of the common there; and it might so happen, that one who had but
little Lands in the said Town, might erect twenty new houses there, and so an
infinite number of houses might be newly erected there; and there should be
common allowed to every Inhabitant within the said new erected houses, which
should be inconvenient and unreasonable. Anderson, chief Justice, He who erects
a new house, cannot prescribe in the common, for then a prescription might
begin at this day, which cannot be; and he insisted much upon the general loss
which should happen to the ancient Tenants, if such a prescription for new
erections should be good. Periam, If it should be Law, That he should have
common in this Case, That all the benefit which the Statute gives to the Lord
for improvement, should be taken away by such new edifications and erection of
new houses, which were not reasonable; And such was the opinion of the other
Justices, and therefore they all agreed, that in the principal Case, the
Plaintiff should not have common to this new erected house; but the entry of
the Judgment was respited until the Court had seen the Record, and after they
had seen and considered upon the Record, Anderson and Periam were of opinion as
before: But Windham did not incline to the contrary; but they all agreed, That
he who set up again a new Chimney where an old one was before, should have
Estovers to the said new Chimney: and so if he build a new house upon the
foundation of an old house, That he should have common to his said house new
erected: So if a house falls down, and the Tenant or Inhabitant sets up a new
house in the same place: Also if a man has a Mill, and a Watercourse to it
time out of mind, which he has used time out of mind to cleanse, if the Mill
falls, and he erecteth a new Mill there, he shall have the Watercourse, and
liberty to cleanse it, as it had before, and afterward the same Term, Judgment
was given for the Defendant, to which Windham, Justice, agreed.

LIX. Rous and Artois Case. Hill. 29 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
THE Case was large, but the points in this Case were but two: Owen Rep. 27. 4
Co. 24.
The first was, If Tenant per auter vye, after the death of Cestuy que vye
holds over. If he be a Disseisor or not: The second point was, If Tenant at
will, or at sufferance, be such a Tenant of the Manor as he may grant Copyhold
Estates to Copyholders: For the first point; It was agreed by Godfrey, and he
held, that the principal Case was, That if Tenant pur auter vye holds over
the life of Cestuy que vye, that he thereby gains the Fee; But he granted the
Cases, That where a man holds at the will of another, that after the Estate
determined, if he holds over, he has not thereby gained fee, for he is
Tenant at sufferance; and as Littleton says in his Chapter of Releases, 108.
Tenant at sufferance, is where a man of his own head occupies the Lands and
Tenements at the will of him who has the Freehold; and such an occupier claims
nothing but at will; But he said, That in the principal Case, he otherwise
claimed than at the will of the Lessor; for that it appears, that he has
granted Copy: and he said, that this difference does give answer to the Case
which is, t. H. 8. br. t. per Copy 18. where it is said for Law, That none is
Tenant at sufferance, but he who first enters by authority of Law: As if a man
makes a Lease for years, or for the life of another, and he holds the Lands
after his term expired, or after the death of Cestuy que vye; If he claim
nothing but at the will of him who has the Freehold; he is a Tenant at
sufferance. But if he holds in the Lands against the will of his Lessor, then
he is a Disseisor; and so if he do act after such continuance of possession,
contrary to the will of his Lessor, he is a Disseisor, 10 E. 4. If an Infant
makes a Lease at will, and the Lessor dies, and the Lessee continues in
possession, and claims Fee, the Heir shall have Mortdancester, 18 E. 4. If
Cestuy que vye dies, and the Tenant hold in, and was impleaded, The Lessor
shall not be received, and he conceived the reason of the Case to be, because
that the reversion was not in him; but that the Fee was gained and rested in
the other, 22 E. 4. 39. g. by Hussy. If a Termor holds over his term, there
an Estate in Fee is confessed to be in him, because he holds the possession
of the Lands by wrong; but there is a Quaere made of it, if he be a Disseisor
or not, but I conceive that he is, for Trespass does not lie against him,
before the Lessor has made his entry; and therefore, if the Lessee does
continue in the possession of the Lands by reason of the first entry; that is
the reason, as I conceive, that the Writ of Enter ad terminum qui praeteriit,
lies against such a Termor, who holds so over his Term; and that Writ is a
Praecipe quod reddat, which does not lie but against a Tenant of the Freehold.
And such is the opinion of Tilney, 7 H. 4. 43. That if the Guardian holds in
the Lands at the full age of the Heir; or if the Tenant for years after the
term expired, holds over the Lands, their Estates shall be adjudged a Fee.
And in our Case here, he does not claim to hold in at the will of the Lessor;
for he has done an act contrary to the will of the Lessor; For he being Lord
of the Manor, in manner as aforesaid, 3 Cro. 302.
has granted Estates by Copy; and it is holden, 12 E. 4. 12. by all the
Justices, That if Tenant at will, or Tenant at sufferance at will, makes a
Lease for years, that the same is a Disseisin to the Lessor, and the Tenant at
will thereby gains the Freehold: and the reason of the Book seems to be,
because he claims to hold a greater Estate than of right belongs unto him. The
second point was, If Tenant at sufferance might grant Copies, and he said, that
he might, and such grant should be good, because he is in by lawful means, and
an Assise does not lie against him, as in the Book of 22 E. 4. 38. before, and
he is Dominus pro tempore. And this Case is not like to the Cases, where Copies
are made by Abators or Disseisors; for the Law does adjudge, that Copies made
or granted by them are void, and his act here as a Tenant at sufferance of
making and granting of the Copies stands with the custom of the Manor which
warrants them; as in the Case of Grisbrook and Fox, if an Administrator made by
the Ordinary sells the goods of the Intestate; and with the money thereof
arising, pays the debts of the Intestate, and afterward he who was made
Executor proves the Will, he shall not avoid such sale of the goods, because he
has made it according to Law, and has done no more than an Executor is
compelled to do: So 12 H. 7. 25. b. If a Baily cut down trees to repair an
ancient pail, the same is good: So 4 H. 7. 14. b. If he pays a Quit Rent, it
is good. And note, 4 Mariae Br. Tenant by Copy, 27. That the Lessee of a Manor,
in which there are Copyholds, after the death of the Copyholder, may admit the
Heir of the Copyholder to the Land; and so he may do, who has but an Estate
in the Manor durante been placito: and yet it seems by the Book, that such a
Tenant of the Manor, cannot reserve and lessen Rent, but he ought to reserve
the ancient Rent, or more. Coke contrary; And first he said, that he who
holds over the life of the Cestuy que use, does not gain any Fee where he
comes in first by right, for that he is but Tenant at sufferance, 35 H. 8. Dyer
57. in the Case of the Lord Zouch, Cestuy que use for life, the remainder over
in tail makes Lease for life of the Lessee, he dies, the Lessee continues his
Estate, and the opinion of the Justices of the Common Pleas, and of others was,
that he is but a Tenant at sufferance, for the Lease was not any discontinuance
of the Remainder, because he had authority by the Statute of Rich. 3. to make a
Lease, and that is intended of such Estate which he might lawfully do; and
this is our Case, and so it is adjudged already. As to the second point, I
grant, that Tenant for years, or at will, or at sufferance is Dominus pro
tempore, but there is a difference as unto granting of Copies by them: For it
was adjudged 25 Eliz. that they might grant Copies which are to be granted upon
surrenders, made by Copyholders: As if a Copyholder does surrender to the use
of another, they may accept of such a surrender, and grant the Lands by Copy to
him to whose use the surrender is made; But if a Copyholder dies, they cannot
grant voluntary Copies de novo. And he said that Popham, who argued the said
Case in 25 Eliz. That this difference was agreed, and so adjudged in one
Sleer's Case. And so 17 El. in the Case of one Stowley, where the Case was,
That a Manor was devised to one, and the Devisee entered and granted Copies, and
afterward it was found that the Devise was void, and it was there holden that
Copies made by such Devisee upon surrenders, were good, and were not to be
avoided; but contrary of Copies made after the death of Tenants upon voluntary
grants. I grant, that when Cestuy que use dies, the Estate for life is utterly
void and gone; and therefore he is in by wrong, but he cannot thereby gain so
great an Estate as a Disseisor, because he came in at the first by right.
Atkinson put a difference betwixt Tenant at will, and Tenant at sufferance; for
Tenant at will shall have aid, but contrary, of Tenant at sufferance, as the
Book is, 11 H. 4. a Release to Tenant at will is good, contrary to Tenant at
sufferance; when after the death of Cestuy que use he holds over, he has
some interest, scil. to this purpose, that he shall not be a wrong doer, for he
is neither Abator nor Desseisor, therefore not a wrong doer, and then if he be
in by a right, or rightfully, he is then Dominus pro tempore, and then the
grants made by him by Copy are good. 7 H. 7. 3. Tenant at sufferance, was to
justify the distraining the cattle of another damage feasant. Coke, True, it
is, the beasts of a stranger, but not of the Tenant of the freehold: Gaudy
Justice, The Lessor cannot have Trespass against him before entry; not because
he is not a wrong doer, but because it is his folly that he does not enter: All
the Justices did hold with the Plaintiff against the Copy granted: and that he
which granted it was but Tenant at sufferance, and not a Desseisor, nor had
gained the Fee, because he came in first by right: And therefore they awarded,
that if the Defendant did not show better cause, that Judgment should be entered
for the Plaintiff.

LX. Trin. 29 Eliz. In the Exchequer.
IN the Exchequer Chamber, there was this Case: An Indenture Tripartite, was
betwixt three, A. was one of them, and he covenanted with them, Et quolibet
eorum. And the Covenant was, that the Land which he had aliened to one of them,
was discharged of all encumbrances; and he to whom the limitation of the Lands
was, but a Writ of Covenant sole. Buckley argued, that it was well brought, and
cited the Case of 6 E. 2. Br. Covenant 49. where one covenanted with twenty, to
repair the Sea-banks, and he did not repair against two of them, and they two
brought a Writ of Covenant solement, and the Writ holden maintainable, because
they only were damnified, and so he said in this Case: But notwithstanding
this, it was afterward, 5 Co. 18.
viz. M. 30 Eliz. adjudged by the whole Court, that the Covenant did not lie by
one of them only, but ought to be brought by them both.

LXI. Carter 's Case. Mich. 33 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
A Being seized of the Manor of Staple in Odiham, 1 Cro. 208. Owen Rep. 84. 8
Co. 119.
and of diverse other Lands in Odiham, suffered a common Recovery of the whole,
and by Indenture expressed the uses in this manner, viz. of all his Lands and
Tenements, in Odiham, to the use of his wife for life, the remainder over, etc.
And of the Manor of Staple, to the use of his youngest son in tail; but by the
clear opinion of the whole Court, although the Manor of Staple was in Odiham,
yet the wife shall have nothing therein; for the intent of the party was, that
the son should have the same, and his wife the residue; and accordingly
Judgment was given.

LXII. Cobb and Prior 's Case. Mich. 33 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
THE Case betwixt Cobb and Prior was this; A man seized of Lands in Fee,
devised the same to his Wife during the minority of his Son, upon condition,
that she should not do Waste during the minority of the said Son, and died; The
Wife married a Husband, and died; the Husband committed Waste: It was holden by
all the Justices, That the same was not any breach of the Condition; and
Judgment was entered accordingly.

LXIII. Tailor and Brounsal 's Case. Trin. 33 Eliz. in the Common Pleas.
IN an Information upon the Statute of 32 H. 8. by Tailor against Brounsal, the
Case was, That John Brounsal was seized, and gave the Lands to T. B. and the
Heirs of his body, etc. the Remainder to R. B. and the Heirs male of his body,
the Remainder to the right Heirs of J. B. T. B. died, having issue a Daughter;
and R. B. made a Lease for years of the Lands: And it was holden by the Court
to be no maintenance within the said Statute, for he in the Remainder might
make a Lease for years: Then it was given in Evidence, That a common Recovery
was had against the Husband and Wife with a single Voucher, and so. the
Remainder limited to R. B. destroyed, and that after that Recovery R. B. made
the Lease: To which it was said by the other side, That the said Recovery was
never executed, and no discontinuance of the Remainder, and then the Lease made
by R. B. was good: and the truth of the Case was That such a Recovery was had,
and an Habere facias seisinam awarded and returned, but no Execution was in
truth had upon it, nor the Recoveror never entered: And if R. B. who is a
stranger to the said Recovery shall be admitted against the Recovery to say,
That no Execution was thereof, was the Question? and therefore all the matter
was found by special Verdict. It was also given in Evidence, That the Land was
given to T. B. and the Heirs males of his body; and then when the Daughter,
which is not in truth inheritable, enters, if that Entry, she being privy in
blood to R. he Uncle, shall be a Disseisin, or Abatement, etc. as in the Case
of Littleton, where the youngest Brother enters after the death of the Father;
for in such case, the youngest Son does not get any Freehold, but is but a
Tenant at sufferance. Anderson, When the Daughter enters, and takes a Husband,
who leaseth for years, and the Lessee enters, the same is a Disseisin. Periam
doubted it, for he said, When the younger Son entered, the Freehold was in him,
which Anderson doubted.

LXIV. Maunsel and Vernon 's Case. Trin. 33 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
IQ Debt by Maunsel against Hen. Vernon Esquire, who came in by Capias, i.
compulsary Process, and pleaded, That he was Hen. Vernon Lord Powis, and so a
Baron of the Parliament, and demanded Judgment of the Writ. (Note, some said,
That if the Defendant had come in by Issue joined, or gratis, and not by
compulsary Process, he could not have pleaded this Plea, or any other
Misnosmer.) The Plaintiff replied, That the Defendant is an Esquire, absque
hoc, that he is Lord Powis, and a Baron of the Parliament; and as the Jury was
ready at the Bar to try this Issue, this matter was objected. And Anderson
conceived, That this Plea to the Writ was not good, for the name of Lord is not
any degree, as Knight, Duke, Earl; nor is it parcel of the name, nor parcel of
addition; and therefore it is no Plea in abatement of a Writ: and all the Writs
of Parliament directed to Barons to summon them to Parliament, shall have their
Names, Sirnames, and Additions: as if they be Knights, Knights, and if
Esquires, they shall be named Esquires; and if a Bond be made by J.S. Lord R.
the Writ shall not be so, for the King by his Writ does not name any one Lord;
but otherwise it is of Duke, Earl, etc. for these are Offices of Dignity, and
parcel of their Names, and not only Additions. Windham and Periam contrary;
and they conceived that there was no difference in this point betwixt a Lord
and an Earl; for which cause the Court being in doubt, although that the
Exception was entered of Record, would have saved the same to the party, and
taken the Jury de been esse: but afterward, because it appeared it was joined
in the prejudice of Sir Edward Herbert, who was a stranger thereunto, and whose
Title was concerned therein, and there was none on his part to inform the Jury;
the Jury was at last dismissed by the Court.

LXV. Penruddock and Newman 's Case. Trin. 28 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
IN an Ejectione Firmae by Penruddock against Newman, 1 Leon. 279,
the Plaintiff declared of a Lease made by the Lord Morley, and upon Not-guilty
pleaded, the Jury found this special matter, (scil.) That W. Lord Mounteagle
seized of the manner of D. whereof, etc. became bound in a Statute in such a
sum of Money to A. who died; the Executors of A. sued Execution against the
said Lord, (scil.) Extendi facias, a Liberate issued, upon which the said Manor
was delivered to the Executors, but the said Liberate was not returned: and it
was farther found, That the Executors being so possessed of the Manor, the Lord
commanded a Court Baron to be holden there, which was done by sufferance and
permission of the Executors, and in their presence: at which time the Executors
said to the Lord the Conusor. We have nothing to do with this Manor. And upon
this Verdict several matters were moved.

1. If the Execution were well done, because the Writ of Liberate was not
returned? and as to that, diverse Books were cited, 21 H. 6. 8. 18 E. 3. 25. And
there is a difference betwixt a Liberate, and a Capias ad satisfaciend. and
Fieri facias, these Writs are Conditional, Ita quod habeas corpus, etc. Ita
quod habeas denarios hic in Curia, 32 H. 8. ca. 28. 16 H. 7. 14. but contrary
in a Writ of Habere facias seisinam, or in a Liberate, for in these Writs there
are not such words; and therefore although they be not returned, Execution done
by virtue of them is good enough: See 11 H. 4. 212. If the Sheriff by force of
an Elegit does deliver the moiety of the Land, and does not retorn the Writ; if
the Plaintiff will plead a new Action of Debt, the Defendant may plead in Bar
the Execution aforesaid, although the Writ be not returned, nor does remain
upon Record: and it is not like unto the Case of Partition made by the Sheriff,
for that must be returned, because that after the Retorn of it, a secondary
Judgment is to be given, (scil.) Quod Partitio praedict. firma and stabilis
remaneat in perpetuum, firma and stabilis in perpetuum tenetur, says the Book
of Entries 114. And Egerton, the Solicitor-General, cited a Case to be lately
adjudged betwixt the Earl of Leicester and the Lady Tanfield, Earl of Leicester
and Tanfields case.
That such an Execution was well enough, although the Liberate was not returned.

The second point was, Admitting that it be a good Execution, If the Executors
being in possession of the Manor, and suffering the Conusor to hold a Court
there, and saying the words aforesaid in the presence of the Lord who is
Conusor; if the same do amount unto a Surrender, or not? And it was the Opinion
of Wray chief Justice; That it was not a Surrender, for that here the words are
not addressed to the Conusor, who was capable of a Surrender, but to other
persons: And it is not like unto the Case of 40 E. 3. 23, 24. Chamberlains
Assise, where Tenant for life says to him in the Reversion, That his Will is,
that he enter upon the Land; the same is a good Surrender, because here is a
person certain who may take the Land: But in our case, it is but a general
speech, and therefore it shall not be a Surrender.

LXVI. Baskervile and Bishop of Hereford 's Case. Mich. 29 Eliz. In the Common
Pleas.
IN a Quare Impedit brought by Walter Baskervile against the Bishop of
Hereford, and others; the Plaintiff counted, That Sir Nicholas Arnold Knight,
was seized of the Advowson in gross, and granted the same to the said
Baskervile and others, to the use of himself for life, and afterward to the
use of Richard Arnold his Son in tail: Proviso, That if the said Nicholas died,
his Heir being within the age of twenty three years, that then the Grantees and
their Heirs should be seized to themselves and their Heirs, until the said
Richard had accomplished the said age. Sir Nicholas died, Richard being but of
the age of fourteen years; by force whereof the Grantees were possessed of the
said Advowson, etc. and afterward the Church became void, and so it
appertained to them to present.

Exception was taken to the Count by Sergeant Gaudy, because the Plaintiff had
not averred the life of Richard, upon whose life the interest of the Plaintiff
did depend: and he compared the same to the Case of the Parson, which had been
adjudged, where the Lessee of a Parson brought an Ejectione Firmae, and it was
found for him; and in Arrest of Judgment Exception was taken to the
Declaration, because the life of the Parson was not averred; and for that cause
the Judgment was stayed.

Anderson, Upon the dying of Sir Nicholas, Richard being but of the age of
fourteen years, an absolute Interest for nine years vested in the Grantees, not
determinable upon the death of Richard; or rather, they are seized of a Fee
determinable upon the coming of Richard to the age of 23 years.

Rhodes and Windham Justices, contrary; and that here is an Interest in the
Grantees determinable upon the death of Richard within the term; for if Richard
dies without issue within the term, the Remainder is limited over to a
stranger.

And as to the Exception to the Count, it was argued by Puckering Sergeant,
That the Count was good enough; for although the life of Richard be not
expressly added, yet such an averment is strongly implied, and so supplied: For
the Count is Quod dictus Nich. obiit, dicto Richardo being of the age of
fourteen years, and non amplius, by force of which the Plaintiff was possessed
of the said Advowson, quo quidem Nich. sic possessionato existente, the Church
voided: and possessed he could not be, if not that the said Richard had then
been alive; and that is as strong as an Averment: See 10 E. 4. 18. In Trespass
for breaking of his Close, the Defendant pleaded, That A. was seized, and did
enfeoff him, to which the Plaintiff said, That long time before A. had any
thing, B. was seized, and leased to the said A. at will, who enfeoffed the
Defendant, upon whom B. re-entred, and leased to the Plaintiff at will, by
force whereof he was possessed until the Defendant did the Trespass; and that
was allowed to be a good Replication without averring the life of B. who leased
to the Plaintiff at will, for that is supplied by the words, scil. virtute
cujus, the Plaintiff was possessed until the Defendant did the Trespass: See
also, 10 H. 7. 12. In an Assise of Common, The Defendant made Title, that he
was seized of a House and a Carve of Land, to which, he and all those whose
Estate he has, etc. had common appendant, and does not say, That he is now
seized of the House; but the exception was disallowed; for seisin shall be
intended to continue until the contrary be showed.

LXVII. Morgan and Chandler 's Case. Trin. 29 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
IN Debt for Arrerages of Rent, by Morgan against Chandler, It was found by
special Verdict, That the Land out of which, etc. was assured by an Act of
Parliament to the Marchioness of Northampton for the term of her life, the
remainder to the Lady Bourcher, her daughter, and the heirs males of her body,
the remainder to King H. 8. in Fee; And it was ordained by the same Act, Quod
omnes concessiones and dimissiones, Anglice, Grants and Leases, factae vel in
posterum fiendae, by the said Marchioness, of the Lands aforesaid, per script.
Indentat. dict. Marchio. bonae and validae, in Lege erunt, durante termino,
etc. The Marchioness made a Lease for 21 years to Kenelm Throgmorton rendering
10 l. Rent, who assigned the same to the Defendant. The Lady Bourcher died
without Issue, the Marchioness died; and if the Lease should now bind the
Queen, was the Question: And it was moved by Clark of Lincoln's End, That it
should, for the King was party to the Act of Parliament; and those Estates for
life in Tail, and in Fee, are all as one Estate, and derived out of one Estate,
and the Estate of the King is bound with the Lease; and it was moved by
Broughton, That the Lease should not bind the Queen, and so by consequence not
her Patentee; and he cited a Case, adjudged upon a like Act, scil. the Statute
of 35 H. 8. by which it was enacted, That the Lady Katharine, Wife of the said
King, should be as a Feme sole, and that she might make Leases, etc. In that
case, the Leases should not bind the King or his successors; for the said Act
did not extend to make the Leases good, but only against Coverture. And it was
observed by Clench, Justice, that in the Act of Parliament now in question, It
is expressly provided, that the Rent reserved by the Marchioness, should go to
the lady Bourcher, but no provision made, that it should go to the King, and
therefore it is not reason that the King should be bounden: But another matter
arising upon the pleading, the point did not fall in judgment.

LXVIII. Backhouse and Spencer 's Case. Trin. 29 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
SAmuel Backhouse brought a Writ of Annuity against Alderman Spencer of London,
1 Roll. 228.
and declared upon a Grant of an Annuity for term of years, and depending the
Action, the term expired. And it was the clear opinion of the whole Court, that
the Plaintiff could not have Judgment, for the Judgment in this Writ, is, Quod
querens recuperet annuitatem praedictam, and now there is not any Annuity in
being, See 34 H. 6. 20. 6 Co. Higgin's Case. 1 Inst. 285. a. 14 H. 7. 31. 19 H.
7. 16.


LXIX. Mich. 29 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
IN a Writ of Partitione facienda, The Defendant prays Aid; and the Plaintiff
counterpleads the Aid, upon which counterplea, they are at issue, and it is
found for the Plaintiff: It was adjudged, that same is peremptory to the
Defendant; and the Judgment shall be, Non quod respondeat, sed quod Partitio
fiat, etc.

LXX. Rolston and Chamber 's Case. 1 Leon. pa. 282. Mich. 29 Eliz. In the
Common Pleas.
ROlston brought an Action of Trespass upon the Statute of 8 H. 6. of forcible
entry, against Chambers, and upon issue joined, it was found for the Plaintiff,
and damages assessed by the Jury, and costs of suit also, and costs also de
incremento adjudged, and all were trebled in the Judgment, with this perclose
Quae quidem damna in toto se attingunt ad, etc. and all by the name of damages;
and it was objected against this Judgment, That where damages are trebled, no
costs shall be given, as in Wast, etc. But afterward it was clearly agreed,
that not only the costs assessed by the Jury, but that which was also de
incremento adjudged, should be trebled, and so were all the Presidents, as it
was affirmed by all the Prothonotaries; and so are many Books, scil. 19 H. 6.
32. 14 H. 6. 13. 22 H. 6. 57. 12 E. 4. 1. Book of Entries, 334. and Judgment
was given accordingly: It was also agreed, that the party so convicted of the
force at the suit of the party should be fined, notwithstanding that he was
fined before upon an Indictment for the same.

LXXI. Wren and Bulman 's Case. Mich. 29 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
1 Len. 282. Rolston and Chambers.
WRen brought an Action upon the Statute of 1 and 2 of Phil. and Ma. for
unlawful impounding of Distresses against Bulman, and was Nonsuit, and it was
moved by Shuttleworth, Sergeant, If the Defendant should have costs upon the
Statute of 23 H. 8. and it was adjudged, that he should not; and that appears
clearly by the words of the Statute, etc. For this Action is not conceived upon
any such matter which is comprised within the Statute: And also the Statute
upon which this Action is conceived, was made after the said Statute of 23 H.
8. which gives costs, and therefore the Statute of 23 H. 8. and the remedy
thereof cannot extend to any Action given by 1 and 2 Phil. and Ma. And so
Rhodes, Justice, said it was adjudged 8 Elizabeth.

LXXII. Merry and Jews 's Case. Mich. 29 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
Merry brought an Action upon the Case against W. Jews, 3 Len. 91.
Executor of David Jews, late Master of St. Katharine, juxta London, and
declared, That the said David in consideration, that Quaedam pars domus fratrum
and sororum Sanctae Katharin. fuit vitiosa and in decasu, The said Merry ad
requisitionem dicti Davidis repararet eandem, assumed to pay to the said Merry
all such moneys that the said Merry expenderet in such reparations; And farther
declared, That eandem partem Domus praedict. reparavit, etc. and upon Non
assumpsit, it was found for the Plaintiff; In arrest of Judgment it was
objected, That the count was too general, Quaedam pars domus: For the Plaintiff
ought to have showed specially, what part of the house in certain, as Hall,
Chamber, or other Rooms, but the same was not allowed: Another objection was,
because it is set forth in the consideration, that the Plaintiff, Ad
requisitionem dict. Davidis repararet; and the Plaintiff declared, Quod
reparavit, generally, without saying, 2 Cro. 404.
ad requisitionem dict. Davidis reparavit, and that is not the reparation
intended in the Declaration, scil. Reparatio ad requisitionem, but a reparation
of his own head, and at his pleasure, and for that Case judgment was reversed.

LXXIII. Brasier 's Case. Mich. 29 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
NOTE, It was agreed in the Case by all the Justices, and by the
Prothonotaries, That if the Disseisor levy a Fine, and the Disseisee in the
preservation of his right against the said Fine, enter his claim in the Record
of the Foot of the Fine, that the same is not any such claim as shall avoid the
Statute of 4 H. 7. See for this Case of the Lord Zouch, in Plowden's
Commentaries.

LXXIV. Ralph Morris 's Case. Trin. 29 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
RAlph Morris and his Wife, libelled in the Spiritual Court, for that the
Defendant called the Wife of one of the Plaintiffs, Veneficam, Sortilegam, and
Incantatricem Daemoniorum; and now came the Defendant into this Court, and
surmised, that the matter of the Libell is determinable by the Common Law, and
thereupon prayed a Prohibition, and it was holden by the Court, That although
the offense of Witchery be in some cases triable by Law, yet the same does not
take away the jurisdiction of the Spiritual Court; and therefore, to call one a
Witch, generally an Action will not lie at Law, as it has been adjudged; But
to say, that he has bewitched such a one, an Action will lie at Law. Wray,
Such Witchcraft as is made Felony by any Statute, is not punishable in the
Ecclesiastical Court, but in case of slander of such Witchcraft, upon such
slanderous words of Witchcraft which is not Felony, the Ecclesiastical Court
shall punish the same, and afterward in the principal Case, a Consultation was
awarded.

LXXV. Bardens and Withington 's Case. Trin. 29 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
A. Is bound in a Statute to B. and sows the Land. B. extends the Lands, which
are delivered unto him in execution; it was adjudged in this Case, that the
Conusee should have the Corn sowed; The same Law in case of a Recognizance.

LXXVI. Smalman and Lane 's Case. Trin. 29 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
THE Case was, a Capias upon an original Process, was delivered to the new
Sheriff of Warwick against Lane, at the suit of Smalman. And the Sheriff
informed the Court, that before that the Process was directed to him, That the
said Lane was taken in Execution by the old Sheriff, upon a judgment given
against him in the King's Bench; and that the said old Sheriff had imprisoned
the said Lane, by force of the Execution in his own house, and there he
remained, and prayed the advice of the Court, what retorn he should make upon
that matter, because the said Lane was never in his possession; for all the
other prisoners which were in the Gaol, and in the ordinary Prisons, were
delivered to him, and the old Sheriff would not bring Lane to the place where
the other Prisoners were delivered. And it was the opinion of all the Justices,
That by the Law, the old Sheriff ought to deliver the body of him who is in his
custody by view, to the new Sheriff; and such Prisoners ought to be brought
unto him to view, and from that time, the Law shall adjudge such Prisoners to
be in the possession of the new Sheriff, and not before; for he is not bound to
go to them, not being in the ordinary Prison of the County. Anderson, The new
Sheriff may retorn, That the said Lane is in Execution in custodia sua, and so
charge himself; For although the Office of the old Sheriff be determined, yet
it is not an escape, so long as the party be in custodia and not at large.
Periam contrary, It is an escape in the old Sheriff as soon as his authority is
determined, the Prisoner not delivered: See now C. 3. part 71. Wesby's Case.

LXXVII. Megot and Broughton and Davie 's Case. Mich. 29 Eliz. In the
King's Bench.
1 Cro. 105.
IN an Action upon the Case upon Assumpsit, it was found by Nisi prius for the
Plaintiff, and afterward before the day in Bank, one of the Defendants died,
and after Judgment given, the other Defendant brought a Writ of Error in the
same Court, where the Judgment was given, and assigned an Error in fact: scil.
the death of one of the Defendants pendant the Writ, Roll 798. b. 3 Len. 96.
Vide 2 E. 3. 21. It was said, that the Case is not like the Case of an Action
of Trespass, for every Trespass done by many, is several by each of them, but
every Assumpsit is joint, and not several. Another point was moved, If the
Court could reverse their own Judgment? Quaere.

LXXVIII. Farrington and Fleetwood 's Case. Trin. 29 Eliz. In the Exchequer.
THE Case upon the Statute of 31 H. 8. of Monasteries, was this, 3 Len. 164,
165. ante 333. Plus.
The Abbat and Convent of A. etc. 29 H. 8. made a Lease of certain Lands for
three lives, to begin after the death of one F. if they so long live: and
afterward, 30 H. 8, within a year before the dissolution, they make another
Lease to Fleetwood: If the first Lease in the life of the said F. be such an
Estate and Interest, as by virtue of the said Statute shall make the second
Lease void? was the Question; for it was not in esse, but a future Interest.

Manwood, All the reason that has been made for the second Lease, is, because
the first Lease is but a possibility; for F. by possibility may survive all the
said three, and so it shall never take effect: But notwithstanding, be it a
possibility or otherwise, it is such a thing which may be granted or forfeited,
and that during the life of F. And note the words of the Statute; If any Abbat,
etc. within one year next before the first day of this present Parliament, has
made, or hereafter shall make, any Lease or Grant for years, life or lives, of
any Manors, etc. whereof and in which any Estate or Interest for life or years,
at the time of the making of any such Lease or Grant, then had his being or
continuance, and hereafter shall have his being or continuance, and then was
not determined, etc. shall be void, etc. And here is an Interest, and that not
determined at the time of the making of the Lease to Fleetwood. And of such
Opinion were all the Barons, and diverse other Justices; and therefore a Decree
was made against the Lease, etc.

LXXIX. Beaumont 's Case. Trin. 29 Eliz. In the Exchequer.
NOte, it was holden by all the Barons in the Exchequer, Owen Rep. 46.
That a Duty which is not naturally a Debt, but by circumstances only, as Debt
upon a Bond for performance of Covenants, or to save harmless, may be assigned
over to the Queen for a Debt; but in such case, a present Extent shall not
issue, but a Scire facias shall issue forth, to know if the party has any
thing to plead against such Assignment.

LXXX. Goddard 's Case. Trin. 29 Eliz. In the Exchequer.
IT was moved in the Case of Goddard concerning the Manor of Staple in
Hampshire, 11 Leon. 8.
If the Tenant of the King of Lands holden in Capite be disseised, and the
Disseisor aliens the Lands, and afterward the Disseisee does re-enter? Manwood
said, That the Land shall not be charged with a Fine for alienation without
license, because the Title of the Alienee grew under the wrong of the
Disseisor; but the person of the Disseisor shall be charged with such Fine.
Tenant of the King in Capite makes a Lease for life, the Lessee for life makes
a Feoffment in Fee without license, the Lessor re-entreth, neither his person
nor the Land shall be charged: But if my Feoffee upon Condition makes a
Feoffment without license, and I re-enter for the Condition broken, now my Land
shall be charged with the Fine upon Alienation, for the Feoffee was in by me by
good and lawful Title, because he had power to make a Feoffment over, although
subject to the Condition. So if Tenant in tail, or the Husband seized in the
Right of his Wife, make a Feoffment in Fee, and afterward the Land is
recontinued, the Fine accruing for Alienation without license shall bind the
Land: And if Tenant for life loses issues, and dies, the Lands shall be
charged with the same.

LXXXI. The Lord of Northampton and Lord St. John 's Case. Trin. 29 Eliz. In
the Exchequer.
2 Roll. 195. Co. 12. 1, 2. Co. 4. 95. Dyer 262.
THE Lord of Northampton had by ancient Letters Patents bona and catalla felonum
and fugitivorum within the Isle of Ely; and one dwelling within the Island was
attainted of Felony, to whom another was indebted by Obligation, and the money
by the Condition of the Bond was to be paid at a Manor of the Lord St. John's,
who within his Manor had also bona and catalla felonum and fugitivorum; and at
the payment the Lord St. John claimed the money: But all the Barons of the
Exchequer were clear of Opinion, That the Lord St. John could not have the
money, for the place of payment nihil operatur, but the Obligation is the
substance which came to the Lord of Northampton within the Isle of Ely. Popham,
the Queens Attorney, claimed the money for the Queen, for the Lord of
Northampton cannot have it; for by the general words of bona and catalla
felonum things in Action do not pass, but by express words they well pass,
otherwise not: And therefore day was given to the Lord of Northampton to show
his Letters Patents.

LXXXII. Ards and Smith 's Case. Mich. 30 Eliz. Rot. 2737. In the Common Pleas.
3 Co. 8.
EDward Ards brought a Replevin against Smith and Reading; the Defendants made
Conusance as Bailiffs to Robert Chamberlain, and showed, That one A. was seized
of the Manor of Keney in Fee, whereof the place where is parcel, and so seized,
gave the said Manor to Richard Chamberlain and Sibil Fowler, and to the Heirs
males of the said Richard: Richard and Sibil intermarry, and have issue Edward;
Richard dies, Sibil dies, Edward has issue Leonard, and dies; Leonard has
issue Francis, and dies; Francis has issue Robert, in whose Right the
Conusance is made, and dies; Robert enters: The Plaintiff in bar of the
Conusance shows, That one B. was thereof seized, and thereof enfeoffed one
Cottesford, then Master of Lincoln College, and the Fellows thereof: after
which the said Leonard, Son and Heir male of the said Edward, 25 H. 8. did
release to the said Master and Fellows with warranty, the said Robert, in whose
Right the said Conusance is made, being Heir male of the said Robert, and
demanded Judgment, if against that warranty, etc. The Defendants confess the
Gift before to the said Richard and Sibil, and that they had issue the said
Edward; but farther showed, That after the death of the said Richard, Sibil,
and Edward her Son leased the said Manor for years to one Mascal, who entered,
and was possessed: Edward suffered a common Recovery unto the use of the
Recoverors, who entered and ousted the Lessee, and enfeoffed the said B. who
enfeoffed the said Master and Fellows; the Lessee re-entred, Sibil died,
Leonard, Son and Heir apparent of Edward, released to the said Master and
Fellows with warranty; Edward died, Leonard died, and thereupon a Demurrer was
by the parties: and the matter was, If this Recovery being suffered by him in
the Remainder in tail upon an Estate for life, the Recoverors entering upon the
Lessee for years of the Lessee for life, and putting him out, and afterward
the Lessee for years re-entring: If now any Estate did remain in the College,
after the Re-entry, which might work a Release?

Snag, Sergeant,, argued, That a sufficient Estate did remain in the College,
upon which a Release might enure; i.e. an Estate to begin after the death of
Sibil, and the expiration of the term for years: and although rei veritate,
Edward was not Tenant of the Freehold at the time of the Recovery, yet such an
exception does not lie for the Issue; and to that purpose he cited the Opinion
of Fairfax, 12 E. 4. 14.

Shuttleworth, Sergeant, contrary; This Recovery works nothing but by way of
Estoppel and Conclusion, and therefore the issue in tail may well disclose the
matter, and avoid such Recovery: and the better Opinion in the Case cited
before, 12 E. 4. is, That such a Recovery against such a person is utterly
void, which see there by ^ittleton, Choke and Brian. 14 E. 4. 2. and also 28
Ass. 17. and Dyer 8 Eliz. 252, 253. Land conveyed to the Husband for life, the
Remainder to the Wife in tail, the Remainder to the Right Heirs of the Husband
and Wife; The Husband and Wife suffer a common Recovery, the Husband has issue
and dies, and afterward the Wife dies, the issue shall avoid the Lease and
Recovery. See also the Case betwixt Hare and Snow, Plow. 20 Eliz. 514. where a
common Recovery was had against Tenant in tail, and his Wife, whereas in truth
the Wife had nothing in the Land whereof the Recovery was suffered: It was
holden, that the issue in tail, or any other person, might show the truth of
the matter; for he shall not be bound by any Estoppel which his Father has
admitted, by joining in Voucher with his Wife, for he is not subject to the
Estoppel; and therefore it was holden, That if the Wife in such case might sue
Execution to have in value, yet the Son in tail might oust him of it. So 8 H.
4. 122. a Praecipe is brought against Tenant in tail, who prays in aid of a
stranger as Tenant for life, who enters into the aid, and bars the Demandant,
and afterward the Tenant in tail dies; his issue is at large to claim the
Estate-tail, although the mouth of his Father was estopped as to it. So Tenant
in tail brought a Quod ei deforceat, and counted upon an especial tail, whereas
in truth it was a general tail, and recovereth, and dies; the said Recovery
shall not conclude the issue. See 33 H. 6. 18. And in our Case, when the
Recoverors enter by force of the recovery, the same is a wrong to the Lessee
for years, and also to the Tenant for life; for the one is ejected, and the
other disseised; and therefore the Re-entry of the Lessee does defeat all the
Estate which was in the College under that Recovery: and here the Entry of the
Lessee for years shall avoid all the Estate which was conveyed to the College
by the Recoverors. See 44 E. 3. 30, 31. Bassingborn's Assise: Land is given to
A for life, the Remainder to B. for life, the Remainder to C. in Fee: A. aliens
in Fee, the Ancestors collateral of him who has the Fee does release to the
Alienee with warranty; B. enters, here the whole warranty is lost, and all the
first Estate is recontinued: So in our Case, by this Entry of the Lessee, the
whole Estate of the College under the Recovery is defeated, so as nothing
remains in the College, upon which the Release can enure, and then there is no
warranty in the Case: And as the Case is here, Edward, who suffered the
Recovery, dies before the descent of the warranty by the death of Leonard, by
whom the Release with warranty was made; by the death of which Edward the
Interest which the College had in the said Manor by the said Recovery, and the
Estoppel of it, was determined and utterly gone, and then the warranty
descending afterward cannot attach upon the possession which was at the time
of the warranty made, which was by the conclusion, which by the death of Edward
is determined and removed by an Eign Title, i. the Entail. As if Tenant in tail
does discontinue, the Discontinue is disseised, Tenant in tail releaseth with
warranty to the Disseisor, the Disseisee enters in the life of Tenant in
tail, who afterward dies; the warranty works nothing for the cause aforesaid.
And also he put this Case, Tenant in tail of Land grants a Rentcharge in Fee,
and an Ancestor collateral releaseth to the Grantee with warranty, and dies,
the Tenant in tail dies, now the issue is bound: but if Tenant in tail dies
before him who makes the Release, now the Rent is determined by the death of
Tenant in tail, and then the warranty cannot attach upon it. At another day the
Case was moved, and conceived in these words, (scil.) Tenant for life, the
Remainder in tail, Tenant for life leaseth for years, a Recovery is had against
him in the Remainder in tail, living Tenant for life, the Recoverors enter, and
oust the Lessee for years, the Son and Heir of him in the Remainder in tail
releaseth with warranty to him to whom the Recoverors have assured the Lands,
the Lessee enters, he against whom the Recovery was had dies, the Releasor
dies, etc. It was holden, that the Entry of the Lessee, before that the
warranty had attached upon the possession which passed, had avoided the
warranty. And the Lord Anderson conceived, That the Recovery should not
prejudice the issue in tail, but that the issue shall Fauxifie the same: And if
Tenant in tail be disseised, and so disseised suffers a common Recovery, his
issue shall not be barred, quod fuit concessum per omnes: And afterward
another matter was moved, (scil.) That the Release is pleaded to be made to
Lincoln College by the name of Custodi sociis and Scholaribus Lincolniensis
Collegii in Oxonia, where the true name of the College, as is confessed by the
Record in the Plea pleaded, is, Custos sive Rector, Socii and Scholares
Lincolniensis Collegii in Oxonia, etc. It was adjourned. See this Case
reported, (3 part, Lincoln College Case.)

LXXXIII. Hall and the Bishop of Bath 's Case. Mich. 32 Eliz. In the Common
Pleas.
HAll brought a Quare Impedit against the Bishop of Bath, and others: The
Incumbent pleaded, Quod ipse nihil habet, nec habere clamat, etc. nisi de
praesentatione Georgii Sidenham militis, not named in the Writ, and demanded
Judgment of the Writ, upon which the Plaintiff did demur in Law: And it was
argued by Drew, Sergeant for the Plaintiff, That the Writ was well brought
without naming the Patron: for if a Quare Impedit be brought against the Patron
and Incumbent, and the Patron dies, 1 Leon. 45.
pendant the Writ, the Writ shall not abate: 9 H. 6. 30. It might be, that the
Plaintiff did not know, nor could tell, who presented the said Incumbent, but
he finds the Incumbent a Disturber by his Incumbency: and if of necessity
such Patron ought to be named, then if such a Usurper should die before the
Writ brought, he which has cause of Action should be remediless. And by
Anderson and Periam, the Writ is good enough for the reason aforesaid: And
Anderson put this case; If A. wrongfully by Usurpation does present, and his
Clark is received; and afterward A. having gained the Patronage, grants it
over to B. Against whom shall the Quare Impedit be brought? Walmsley, Against
B. which Anderson doubted.

LXXXIV. Hughe 's Case. Mich. 32 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
IN a Formedon, the Writ was, That A. Dedit Aliciae filiae suae, and to J.S.
and to the Heirs of their two bodies begotten, and it was showed in abatement
of the Writ, That the name of the Wife is put before the name of the Husband,
To which it was said by the Court, that if such a Writ be brought against the
Husband and Wife, and the name of the Wife be put before the name of the
Husband, the Writ shall abate; and if in the Case at Bar it had appeared, That
the Donees at the time of the Gift, were Husband and Wife, upon such a matter
disclosed the Writ should abate; but that does not appear plainly to the Court.

LXXXV. Mich. 32 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
NOTE, It was holden by the Court, 1 Cro. 567. 3 Cro. 224. Post 189.
That if a Writ of Dower be brought against an Infant, who loses by default at
the Grand Cape; that he may reverse the same by a Writ of Error; but where an
Infant appears by Guardian, and afterward loses by default, there he shall
never avoid it: for if any default be in the Guardian, the Infant shall recover
against him in a Writ of Deceit. And afterward, the Judgment in the first case
was reversed.

LXXXVI. Mich. 32 Eliz. In the Exchequer-Chamber.
NOTE, In the Exchequer-Chamber, before the Lord Chancellor, The two chief
Justices, and the chief Baron; a Writ of Error was cast upon a Judgment given
in the Court of Exchequer; and it was agreed, Quod propter absentiam Dom.
Thesaurarii Angliae, They ought not, nor could receive the said Writ; and the
Statute of 31 Eliz. does not help the matter, for that extends but to
discontinuances, which before the Statute many times happened for the not coming
of the Chancellor or Treasurer, and not to give Conusance in a Writ of Error
in the absence of the Treasurer, etc.

LXXXVII. Lacy and Fisher 's Case. Mich. 32 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
IN a Replevin by Lacy against Fisher, The Defendant pleaded, that the place
where, etc. is called Spicold, and holden of the Manor of Easthall by certain
Rent, and made Conusance as Bailiff of the Lord of the said Manor; and issue
being joined hereupon, It was tried by the Jury of the Visne of Spicold, and it
was moved in arrest of Judgment, that the issue was mis-tried; For the Visne
ought to have been of Spicold and Easthall also: Web and Richmond's Case.
And a Case was cited to have been adjudged accordingly betwixt Webb and
Richmond. M. 31 Eliz. in the same Court.

LXXXVIII. Corbet 's Case. Mich. 32 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
THE Case was, That an Action of Debt was brought by original Writ against an
Administrator in another County than where the Administrator was dwelling, and
before notice of that suit, he paid diverse other debts of the Intestate, due by
specialties; so as he had not Assets to pay the debt in demand, having Assets,
at the day of the Test of the original, and now the Defendant appearing,
pleads the same special matter, and concluded, And so nothing remained in his
hands. And it was holden per Curiam to be a good Plea: See 2 H. 4. 21, 22.

LXXXIX. Sir William Pelham 's Case. Pasch. 31 Eliz. In the Exchequer.
1 Co. 41.
THE Case, short put, was this: A. Tenant for life of a Message, etc. the
remainder in tail to B. with diverse remainders over: A. by Deed indented and
enrolled, bargained and sold the Message, etc. so conveyed to Sir William
Pelham in Fee, who afterward suffered a common Recovery thereof, in which A.
is vouched; and so a common Recovery is had and executed, and all this was
before the Statute of 14 Eliz. And if the said Recovery should bind B. who was
in the remainder in tail; or if it be a forfeiture, was the Question. Altham of
Gray's-Inn argued, that here is a forfeiture: First, it is to see, if a common
Recovery suffered hy Tenant for life (who is also Bargainor in this case) be a
forfeiture or not by the Common Law, if no Execution be sued upon the same
Recovery. Secondly, If the Recovery be executed, if he in the Remainder may
enter for the forfeiture. When Tenant for life bargaineth and sells the
Message, Post. 65. acc. 1 Len. 264. 1 Inst. 251. b. acc. 1 Inst. 330. b.
etc. although upon it an Estate in Fee be limited, yet nothing passes from
him, but that which he may lawfully pass, and that was the Estate for the life
of the Bargainor, for such Estate only might lawfully pass; and here the
Bargainee is but Tenant for the life of another, and when with his own consent
he suffers a common Recovery and that without right, the same is a forfeiture.
By matter in fact, a particular Tenant may commit a forfeiture, as well as by
matter of Record: By matter in fact he cannot commit a forfeiture, if the
Reversion be not thereby pulled out of him in the reversion: As if Lessee for
ten years makes a Lease for 1000 years, the same is no forfeiture, for by that
the Reversion is not touched; but if he in matter of Record do any thing which
sounds to the disinheriting of him in the Reversion, although in truth it does
not touch the inheritance, yet it is a forfeiture; which see 39 E. 3. 16. If
Tenant for life plead any thing against the right of him in the Reversion, it
is a forfeiture. And by Finchden and Belknap, he cannot plead to the right. 5
Ass. 3. Tenant for life is impleaded in a Praecipe by a stranger, and
confesses the Action upon which the Demandant has Judgment; the Lessor
enters, against whom the Demandant sueth Execution, and the Lessor brought an
issue, and had Judgment to recover, for it is a forfeiture, because the Tenant
for life has admitted the Reversion in another, because it is an alienation to
the disinheritance of the Plaintiff, i. the Lessor. 19 E. 3. t. Receipt 14.
where Tenant for life pleads in chief, or does not gainsay the Action of the
Demandant, or makes default by Covin, he shall forfeit his Estate; but if a
Rent be demanded against Tenant for life, and he render the same, it is no
forfeiture: 22 Ass. 31. Tenant for life is impleaded by Covin betwixt him and
the Demandant, and pleads in chief without aid prayer, upon which Judgment is
given, he in the Reversion may enter: In a Quid juris clamat, against Tenant
for life, who pleaded faulty, traversing the point of the Action, he in the
Reversion shall not be received, for in as much as the Tenant has traversed
the Action, he is not within the Statute of West. 2. of default, Reddition; but
he in the Reversion may enter by the Common Law: 22 E. 3. 2. In a Scire facias,
to execute a Fine against Tenant for life, who pleaded to the Enquest, whereas
in truth, the Land in demand was not comprised within the Fine, and Judgment is
given for the Demandant in the Scire facias, that he in the Reversion may
enter: In the principal Case here, there is apparent and manifest covin; for
the Tenant for life is vouched without cause, and this Recovery is by assent,
and is to the use of the Bargainee, who is Tenant for the life of another, and
therefore by the Common Law, he in the Reversion may enter before the Execution
be sued. And it is well known, that these common Recoveries are used to dock a
Remainder in tail; and that was the scope of this Recovery: And as to the Case
of 5 E. 4. 2. Tenant for life is impleaded in a Praecipe quod reddat, who
voucheth a stranger, the Demandant counterpleads the vouchee, and it is found
for him; he in the Reversion has no remedy, but a Writ of Right, and if such
vouchee enters into the Warranty, and loses by Action tried, or by default,
etc. That Book is to be intended of a Recovery executed; for there in such a
case, he in the Reversion may not enter, but is put to his Writ of Entry by the
Common Law, vide Br. Tit. Forfeit 87. 24 H. 8. Tenant for life is impleaded and
prays in aid of a stranger, he in the reversion may enter, but if he does not
enter until the other has recovered, then he cannot enter, but he is put to
his Writ of Entry, Ad terminum qui praeteriit, vel de ingress. ad com. Legem,
and therein shall falsify the Recovery. And there by Brook, Voucher of a
stranger is not a cause of forfeiture; for he does not disaffirm the Reversion
to be in the Lessor. And he vouched, 24 E. 3. 68. where Tenant for life pleaded
in the Right without aid prayer; and so he argued, That before execution, he in
the Remainder might enter, but after execution, he is put to his Action; but in
our Case, although Execution be sued, yet he in the Remainder may enter, for it
is found by verdict, That at the time of the Recovery he was within age, and
then no Laches of entry shall be imputed unto him, and then he shall not be
driven to his Action: As if Tenant by the Courtesy makes a Feoffment with
Warranty, and dies, and the same descends to his Heir within age, yet he
shall enter, although that he had not avoided the Warranty in the life of his
Ancestor; And he also conceived that the Statute of 32 H. 8. cap. 31. did
extend to this Case: For Sir William Pelham, the Bargainee, was but Tenant for
life, and although that he be but Tenant for the life of another, yet he is
Tenant for life as fully as if he were Tenant for his own life: The words of
the Statute are, or otherwise for the term of life or lives quo ad nom. As upon
the Statute of 20 E. 1. which gives receipt, i. de defensione juris; the words
are, Cum quis aliquod Breve Dom. Regis impetret versus tenentem per Legem
Angliae, vel feodum talliatum, vel sub nomine Dotis, vel alio modo ad terminum
vitae, etc. Also, although that he who enters at the time of the recovery was
not next in the Remainder to the particular Estate, yet he is within the
Statute of 32 H. 8. for he was in the Remainder at the time of the Recovery,
and at the time of the entry, he in the immediate Remainder was dead, and then
he next in Remainder: See 15 E. 4. 9. by Littleton, If I grant my services to
one for life, and he in a Praecipe brought against him, plead in the Right; or
grants unto another the said services in Fee, the same is not any forfeiture,
because it is not any discontinuance. It will be objected, That the words of
the Statute of 32 H. 8. are, That such Recoveries shall be utterly void; and if
so, then he in the Reversion cannot be damnified, and then no cause of
forfeiture; To that it was easily to be answered, That where Tenant for life
does any thing which sounds to the disinheriting of him in the Reversion by
matter of Record, although it does not divest or otherwise prejudice the
Inheritance, yet it is a forfeiture. Coke contrary; Here in our Case there is
not any Covin: Sir William Pelham, the Bargainee, he was deceived by the
Bargainor, for he did not know but that the Bargainor was seized in tail at the
time of the Bargain, and it was lawful for him to do other act in the farther
assurance of his bargain; and it was also lawful for him to vouch his
Bargainor; and although the Bargainor vouched a stranger, yet it is not a
forfeiture, 39 E. 3. 16. Aid prayer of a stranger is a forfeiture, and the
reason thereof is, because he acknowledges the Reversion to be in a stranger,
and that is the cause of the forfeiture. See Book of Entries 254. Where upon
aid prayer, the party to have aid shows special matter; but in our Case, Sir
William Pelham has vouched his Bargainor, and that not without cause, for he
has a Warranty from him; and the Demandant could not counterplead it, for he
had seisin, by force whereof he might make a Feoffment: As unto the Case of 14
E. 3. Tit. Receipt 135. Less for life in a Praecipe against him without aid
prayer pleaded to the Enquest at the first day, in that case it is said, that
he in the Reversion may enter. It is true, that he may enter in the Receipt, but
not into the Land for forfeiture, for then Fitz. would have abridged the Case
in title of Entry Congeable, and not in the Title of Receipt: and the Book of 5
E. 3. is good Law, for there the Tenant does confess the Reversion to be in
another; but in our Case the Tenant voucheth, which is a lawful act done, and
according to the Covenants of his purchase: And although the Recovery be by
agreement, yet it is not therefore a forfeiture; for if the Tenant for life
voucheth truly, it is no forfeiture. Before the Statute of West. 2. cap. 3.
which gave Receipt to the Wife, and to those in the Reversion where the
particular Tenant is impleaded, and makes default, vel reddere noluerit, there
was no remedy in such cases, but by Writ of Right, but no entry, and that was
for the reason of the credit which the Law gave to Recoveries, for if they
might enter; wherefore is Receipt given? but that was in two cases only: But
afterward, because it was found, that many particular Tenants being impleaded
would plead faintly, the Statute of 13 R. 2. gave receipt in such cases. And
upon what reasons were these Acts and Statutes made, if in such cases the entry
was congeable? But after these two Statutes, another practice was devised, for
such particular Tenants would suffer Recoveries secretly, in such sort, that
those in the Reversion could not have notice thereof, so as they could not
before Judgment pray to be received, to remedy which mischief, the Statute of
32 H. 8. was made, by which all Recoveries had against Tenant by the Courtesy,
or otherwise for life or lives, by agreement of the parties of any Lands
whereof such particular Tenant is seized shall be void, as Tenant by the
Courtesy, etc. should be void against him in the Reversion; and yet there was
an evasion to creep out of that Statute; for such particular Tenants, would
make a Feoffment with Warranty, and then the Feoffee should be impleaded in a
Writ of Entry, and he vouch the Tenant for life, who would aver, and such
Recovery was holden to be out of the Statute of 32 H. 8. For the Recovery was
not against such particular Tenants, etc. For the remedy of which mischief, the
Statute of 14 Eliz. was made, by which it is provided, That such Recoveries had
where such particular Tenants are vouched shall be void, if such Recovery be by
Covin betwixt them: And he conceived, That the forfeiture is not in respect of
the Recovery it self, but of the Plea pleaded by the Tenant: And here in our
Case, there is not any Covin found, or that Sir William Pelham knew that he was
but Tenant for life; but it is found, that this Recovery was with their assent,
and that was lawful as the case is; for they might agree to have such a
Recovery for farther assurance: and so Sir William Pelham has not vouched any
but his Bargainor, and that according to their Covenants; and this Bargainor
was not a bare Tenant for life, but he had also a Remainder in tail, although
not immediately depending upon the Estate for life, which he had cut off; there
it was not merely a feigned Recovery: See 5 E. 4. 2. and 24 H. 8. br. Forfeit.
87. where Tenant for life being impleaded in a Praecipe, voucheth a stranger,
the same is no Forfeiture, for the same does not disaffirm the Reversion: but
contrary of Aid prayer, for a stranger may release with warranty to Tenant for
life, upon which he may vouch: And he reported in his Argument, That Bromley,
Chancellor of England, sent him to both the chief Justices, to know their
Opinions upon this point; and they were of Opinion, That the Voucher of a
stranger was not any Forfeiture, and also that after the Recovery was executed,
he in the Remainder could not enter; but they conceided, that the Right of him
in the Remainder was not bound: And he said, That after the Recovery was
executed, that he in the remainder could not enter: See 24 H. 8. Br. Forfeit
87. For if Entry in such Cases should be lawful, infinite Suits would follow
thereupon, which would be much to the Discredit of common Recoveries, which are
now the Common Assurances of the Land. As to the objection of the Enfancy, the
same will not help the matter. Br. Sav. Default 50. 6 H. 8. A Recovery had
against an Infant, in which he voucheth and loses, is not erroneous; contrary
of a Recovery upon a default: And if an Infant, Tenant in tail, suffer a common
Recovery, the same is a discontinuance, for in such Recoveries Infancy is not
respected: And in a Scire facias upon a Judgment had against the Father, the
Heir shall not have his age: And he cited a case out of Bendloe's Reports, 5
Eliz. Tenant for life, the Remainder over to a stranger in Fee, Tenant for life
is disseised by Covin; in a Praecipe quod reddat against the Disseisor, he
voucheth the Tenant for life, who enters into warranty generally, and voucheth
over the common Vouchee: It was adjudged, That the Recovery was out of the
Statute of 32 H. 8. for the Recovery was not had against the particular Tenant,
for he was but Tenant in Law, because Vouchee; and also that the Recovery was a
good bar to him in the remainder, notwithstanding that he was within age at the
time of the Recovery.

And afterward at another day the Case was argued by the Barons; and Clark
Baron conceived, That the Entry of him in the remainder was congeable: It has
been said, That Sir William Pelham did not know that the Bargainor had an
Estate but for his life, or that any other person had any remainder therein;
the same is not to any purpose to excuse him: for 42 E. 3. Every Purchasor
ought at his own peril take notice of the Estates and charges which are upon
the Lands of which he is Purchasor; and the Law presumes that none will
purchase Lands without advice of Council, and without knowing the Titles to the
Lands. And although diverse Statutes have been made to provide against the
practices of particular Tenants, yet it is no argument, that no other remedy
was before. And by Littleton, If Tenant for life joyneth the Mise upon the mere
right, it is a forfeiture. And he held strongly, That the Judgment did not take
away the Entry, cause of forfeiture being given before the Judgment: See 5 Ass.
3. and 22 Ass. 31. to that purpose: For where Tenant for life is impleaded, he
ought to attend upon him in the reversion, and to expect instructions from him
in defense of his Title, etc. And therefore if he makes default, or confesses
Action, the same is a forfeiture: And as to the supposed recompense, the same
shall not help this Case, for this is a common recovery, and nothing else but
an Assurance: And Recoverors they are but Assignees, and they shall take
advantage of Conditions by 32 H. 8. and a Recoveror shall be seized to the use
of him who suffers the Recovery, if no other use be expressed. And he also
held, That when Tenant for life bargains, and sells his Lands by Deed enrolled,
although no Fee passes, yet it is a forfeiture, and that by reason of the
Enrolment, which is matter of Record. And he said that if an Infant, Tenant for
life, be disseised, and the Disseisor dies, and afterward the Infant dies,
that he in the Remainder might enter.

Gent, Baron, argued to the same intent; and he said, That if Tenant for life
suffers a Recovery, the same is not simply a forfeiture, for he may have a
warranty upon a Release or Confirmation made to him. Attornment does not give a
Right, but is only a Consent, yet if he who has not any thing in the
Reversion will levy a Fine thereof unto another, and afterward the Conusee
brings a Quod juris clamat against the Tenant of the Land, and he attorn, it is
a Forfeiture.

Manwood, Baron, to the same intent; this is a new Case, and I have not seen
nor read the Case in any Book, nor seen any presidents; and it is a great case,
and a general case, and worthy to be argued: And I conceive clearly, That here
is a direct and express forfeiture: the Dignity of Judgments in reputation of
Law has been urged, which ought to stand in force until they be reversed by
Error or Attaint: And also Littleton 481. has been urged, where upon the
Statute of West. 3. he says, That before the Statute aforesaid, if a Lease had
been made to one for life, the remainder to a stranger, and afterward a
stranger by faint Action has recovered against Tenant for life by default, and
afterward the Tenant for life died, he in the Remainder had not any remedy:
But there Littleton does not report the same as his own Opinion, but as an
Opinion conceived by a Reader upon the said Statute; and in truth it is but a
mere conceit. And as to the main point, he took this difference; Such
Recoveries in which the title of the Demandant stands indifferent to the Court,
and non constat, if it be good, or not being suffered by Tenant for life by
default or confession, without aid-prayer of him in the Reversion, do not make
any forfeiture, although that the Tenant for life has not dealt with him in
the Reversion, not having prayed in aid of him: And in such case, if a Lease be
made for life, the Remainder over in Fee, upon such Recovery he in the
remainder shall have a Formedon in the remainder, or a Writ of Right, and shall
not put out him who recovered, without any Action, and that by the common Law.
Then came the Statute of West. 2. c. 3. which gave unto the Wife a Gui in vita,
upon a Recovery had against the Husband by default, where before she had not
any remedy, but only Writ of Right: and notwithstanding, si ulterius
quaeratur, si necesse habet ostendere jus suum, secundum formam brevis quod
prius impetraverat: And if his Right be not better than the right of him in the
Reversion, he shall lose it, notwithstanding the Judgment given before for him:
and that Statute gave Receipt, or Writ of Entry, ad terminum qui praeteriit;
and that Statute is to be intended of such Recoveries where a good Title or
indifferent is, so as non Constat Curiae, if it be good, or not? After that
Tenant for life was driven unto a new shift, and would not make default, or
lose for not pleading, but he would plead, but that faintly; for the remedy of
which mischief, the Statute of 13 R. 2. which gave Receipt in such case; the
particular Tenant being restrained by this Statute, he jugled yet, and
practiced to suffer a Recovery secretly, without notice of him in the
Reversion: for the remedying of which mischief, the Statute of 32 H. 8. was
made, and that makes such Recovery had against such a particular Tenant void
against him the Reversion.

It has been objected, That the said Statute of 32 H. 8. did not give any
forfeiture in this case, but makes the Recovery void; and therefore he in the
Reversion ought to stay until after the death of the particular Tenant: To that
I shall speak after. But here our case is of a common Recovery, and it does
appear to the Court, that the Demandant has not right, for the Tenant might
have barred him: Also this Recovery is not to the use of the Recoveror, but to
the use of him who was Tenant in it; and in truth it is nothing else but an
assurance: and in these feigned Recoveries the Recoveror comes in under the
Title of the Tenant to it, and not paramount, as in case of a Recovery upon a
good Title. A Lease for years made by him who after suffers a Recovery is good,
and shall not be defeated by the Recovery; otherwise it is where the Recovery
is upon a good Title. See Statute of Glocest. cap. 11. where upon default of
the Tenant, Receipt is given for Lessee for years; yet if the Tenant vouch,
upon default of the Vouchee the Lessee for years shall be received: and now
Receipt of Lessee for years is out of the Book, for by the Statute of 21 H. 8.
cap. 15. he may falsify the Recovery: but no Receipt lies in the case of a
common Recovery, for that he who recovers cannot put out the Termor. As to that
which my Brother Clark has said, That the bargain and sale in this case is not
any forfeiture, but when the bargain and sale is enrolled, then it is a
forfeiture; I am not of such Opinion: for although that the Enrolment be of
Record, yet the Deed is not of Record; for against a Deed enrolled, a man may
plead Infancy, although none can plead Non est factum. Also he held, That
although by the bargain and sale, and the Enrolment of it, the Bargainee had
not a fee, for by such act the Reversion is not removed; yet by the Recovery,
and the Execution of it, the Bargainee has gained a fee out of the Lessor, for
the Recovery is to the use of the Bargainee, against whom it was had. It has
been objected, that here is only a Voucher, which paradventure was lawful in
this case, by reason of a warranty paramount, or of a Release or Confirmation
with warranty: and two Cases have been vouched to that purpose, viz. 5 E. 4. 2.
Tenant for life being impleaded in a Praecipe, voucheth a stranger, the
Demandant counterpleads the Voucher, which is found for him, he in the
Reversion has no remedy but a Writ of Right; so if the Vouchee had entered into
the warranty, and lost, etc. As to that book, we ought not to conceive, That
every Case reported in our books is Law; but let us observe, of what authority
that case is; truly it is the conceit of the Reporter himself, for he puts the
Case, and resolves the case, but no Judge or Sergeant is named in the case,
etc. The other case is 5 E. 4. 2. b. Note by Heydon clearly, If my Tenant for
life voucheth a stranger, who enters into the warranty generally, and does not
know how to bar the Demandant, the Tenant shall recover in value, and the
Reversion of that which he has in value shall be in me in lieu of my former
Reversion; as a Release to the Tenant for term of life shall enure to him in
the Reversion: But that is but the Opinion of one Sergeant, etc. But I answer
to these books, If the demandant in such recovery has a good Title, so as the
Tenant or the Vouchee, as Heydon says, do not know how to bar the Demandant,
there such Voucher of a stranger is no forfeiture, nor such Recovery suffered
upon it, for against his Will, volens nolens, he suffered it: but if the Tenant
has good matter to bar the Demandant, and no good cause of Voucher, nor any
warranty, as the matter is in the case of a common Recovery, there the Voucher
of a stranger, or suffering of a Recovery, is a forfeiture of his Estate. And
here in our case if the Demandant has not any Title, the Tenant or Vouchee
has not any warranty; but the Tenant might have barred the Demandant if he
would: And he said, That the Voucher only does not make the forfeiture, but
rather the recovery; for when Judgment is given, and Execution is had, then the
Fee is plucked out of the Reversioner: vide 6 R. 2. If Tenant for life claims
a Fee, the same is a forfeiture: but here Sir William Pelham has done more,
for he has gained Fee by the Judgment, therefore a fortiori it shall be a
forfeiture. But let us see a little what meddlings or attempts by the
particular Tenants are causes of forfeiture, and what not: 5 Assis. 3. A.
brought a Writ of Entry against Tenant for life by Collusion to oust B. of his
Reversion, supposing that the Tenant for life held of his Lease; the Tenant
confessed the Action, upon which Judgment is given; B. enters, and his Entry
adjudged lawful, for this Recovery is adjudged in Law but an alienation to the
disinheritance of him in the Reversion: and there it appears, that such
Recovery by Covin is but an alienation, and without any strength of a Recovery.
And he cited many other cases cited before by Altham: 14 E. 3. Recept 135.
where Tenant for life pleads in chief, and prays in aid of a stranger, where he
might bar the Demandant, and would not, the same is a forfeiture: Also 2 E. 3.
2. and 27 E. 3. where Tenant for life, in a Quid juris clamat, attorned to the
Conusee upon a Fine levied by him that had not any thing in the Land, the same
was a forfeiture; and yet the Attornment does not divest the Reversion out of
the Lessor: 50 E. 3. 7. and 8. Land was given by Fine in tail, the Remainder
over to a stranger in fee, the Donee took a Wife and died without issue, the
Wife accepted Dower assigned by a stranger, he in the remainder brought a Scire
facias against the Wife; she is Tenant in Dower of the assignment of a
stranger, and pleads to the Title; the Demandant recovereth, she has lost her
Dower, for she has not pleaded as she ought, being a particular Tenant, etc.
H. 4. Tenant for life loses his Land in a Recovery against him against his
Will, and thereupon brings Quod ei deforceat, and declares upon an Estate-tail,
and recovers, the same is a forfeiture, because he has challenged a higher
Estate than he had. 5 H. 5. Tenant for life joins the Mise upon the mere right:
2 H. 6. Lessee for years being ousted, brings an Assise, and recovers: 1 H. 7.
Accepts a Fine of a stranger upon condition come ceo, etc. all these are
forfeitures. In the principal Case here, the Tenant who suffers his Recovery
does not plead at all to defend the Right: but whereas he might have barred the
Demandant, he gives strength to his pretended Title, and makes it a perfect
Title; and by suffering this Recovery and Judgment to pass upon it, he has
taken the Reversion out of the Lessor to whom he owed Fealty, and therefore he
shall forfeit his Estate. And without any doubt it is apparent to the Court,
that the Demandant in this Recovery has not any Title, but the Recoverors in
such cases are but as Assignees or Purchasors, which appears by the Statute of
7 H. 8. ca. 2. which gives Distress and Avowry to Recoverors, etc. As to the
inventing of Recoveries, it was a necessary device, for it was to take away
Estate-tails, which were the causes of great mischiefs and inconveniences in
this Realm: and there was great reason for it; for Tenant in tail might by the
common Law alien his Lands post prolem suscitatam, and now he has an
Inheritance, and may do Waste, But he was so restrained by the Statute of West.
2. that all the Realm, and the Subjects in it, were inveigled thereby;
Ioyntures of Wives, Leases of Fermors, Mortgages to Creditors, Statutes, and
other Assurances, were defeated by the deaths of Tenants in tail, which was
both against the common Law, and also against all Conscience. These matters
coming to the knowledge of the Justices, and the mischiefs thereupon following
being very frequent, and it appearing that the Tenant in tail was a dangerous
fellow, and that there was no safe dealing with him, they took consideration of
them: and considering also with themselves, That Lineal Warranty and Assets,
and Collateral Warranty without Assets, did bar the Entail, upon this
consideration they grounded the practice and usage of common Recoveries. So as
by that means Tenant in tail, has Potestatem alienandi, as he has at the
Common Law; and by this means, right was done to the Common Law because its
authority was restored; and thereby injury was done to no man: But as for
Tenant for life, he never had Potestatem alienandi. And as to that which has
been said, That the recovery shall stand in force until after the death of
Tenant for life; and in our Case here, Tenant in tail is alive; Truly, if the
Law should be such, great mischiefs would follow: For then great Iointresses,
the Widows of great persons, having assurances to them of great and stately
Houses, and of Lands furnished with Timber, of great yearly value, might suffer
such Recoveries; and so having plucked the Fee out of the Heirs, might commit
waste, and the same should be dispunishable, which would be an intolerable
mischief; and so he concluded, that the suffering of a Recovery was a
forfeiture, and Judgment, Trin. 21 Eliz. was given, and entered accordingly.

XC. Noon 's Case. Trin. 31 Eliz. In the Exchequer.
DEBT was brought in London, against one as Executor, and upon fully
administered pleaded, it was found for the Plaintiff, who assigned the same to
the Queen, whereupon a Scire facias issued out of the Exchequer against the
Defendant, into the County of Dorset, The Serhiff returned Nulla bona, etc.
which Scire facias was upon a Constat of goods in another County; It was agreed
by all the Barons, that the Debt was well assigned to the Queen: And also that
the Scire facias might issue forth of another Court, than where the Record of
the Judgment remained; and that upon a Constat of goods, in another County than
where the Writ is brought, or where the party is dwelling, he may well have a
Scire facias in another County. But the Retorn was challenged, because contrary
to the verdict: As in a Replevin, No such beast, is not a good Retorn, but
Averia elongata; or Nullus venit ex part querentis ad monstrand. averia: And
here the Sheriff might have returned, Devastavit, which well stands with the
Verdict, 5 H. 7. 27. But as to that, it was said by the Barons, That it is
true, that the Sheriff of the County where the Writ was brought, is concluded
by the Verdict, to make any retorn contrary to it; but the Sheriff of another
County shall not so be; but the Sheriff of the County where the Writ is brought
ought to retorn Devastavit, etc. and thereupon the Plaintiff shall have Process
into another County; But the Question farther was: If a Scire facias upon
Testatum shall issue into another County, before that the Sheriff of the County
where the Writ is brought, had returned a Devastavit? for some conceived, That
a Devastavit where the Writ was brought, ought first to be returned, and then
upon a Testatum, Process should issue forth into any County within England; But
others were of opinion, That without a Devastavit returned upon a Testatum,
Process might be sued forth immediately into any other County. Williams said,
If I recover goods by Action brought in Midd. I may upon a Testatum, have a
Capias into any foreign County.

XCI. Western and Weild 's Case. Trin. 31 Eliz. In the Exchequer.
IN a Writ of Account brought in London, the Defendant pleaded, Never his
Receiver, etc. which was found for the Plaintiff, and Judgment given, that the
Defendant should account; Afterward the Defendant brought his Writ of
Privilege; and if the same should be allowed after Judgment? was the Question:
Coke, It shall be allowed, for the Defendant has not surceased his time. This
Judgment to account is not properly a Judgment, for no Writ of Error lies
upon it before the account be ended: Manwood, Regularly, after Judgment, no
privilege shall be allowed, but that is to be intended of a Judgment ended; but
here, notwithstanding this Judgment, the Action is depending, and therefore he
conceived that the privilege should be allowed in this case. It was objected,
That then the Plaintiff should be at great mischief, for he should lose the
advantage of his Trial; for he must begin again, and plead again, and have a
new Trial. Clark, the Plaintiff shall have benefit of his former Trial by way
of Evidence.

XCII. Brian and Cawsen 's Case. Trin. 27 Eliz. In the Common Pleas. Rot. 1353.
3 Len. 115.
IN an Action of Trespass by Brian and his Wife, and others, against Cawsen;
That William Gardener was seized in Fee, according to the custom of the Manor
of C. of certain Lands, and surrendered them to the use of his last Will; by
which he devised them in this manner; i. I bequeath to John Th. my House and
Land in M. called Larks and Sone: To Steph. Th. my House and Land, called
Stokes and Newmans, and to Roger Th. my House and Lands, called Lakins and
Brox. Moreover, If the said John, Stephen or Roger, live till they be of
lawful age, and have issue of their bodies, lawfully begotten, then I give the
said Lands and Houses to them and their Heirs in manner aforesaid, to give and
sell at their pleasure; but if it fortune one of them to die without issue of
his body, lawfully begotten, Then I will that the other brothers, or brother,
have all the said Houses and Lands in manner aforesaid: and if it fortune the
three to die without issue, in like manner, Then I will, that all the said
Houses and Lands be sold by my Executor, or his Assigns, and the money to be
given to the poor: The Devisor dies; John, Stephen and Roger are admitted
according to the intent of the Will, Roger dies within age, without issue,
John and Stephen are admitted to his part, John comes of full age, and has
issue, J. and surrenders all his part of the whole, and his Estate therein,, to
the use of Stephen and his heirs, who is admitted accordingly; Stephen comes of
full age, John the father dies, Stephen dies without issue, John the son, as
cousin and heir of Stephen is admitted, according to the Will, and afterward
dies without issue, The Wives of the Plaintiffs are heirs to him, and are
admitted to the said Lands, called Larks and Sone, and to the moiety of the
Lands, called Lakins and Brox, parcel of Lands where, etc. by force whereof
they enter into all the Lands where the Trespass is done, and it was found,
That A. sole Executor, died intestate, and that Cawsen the Defendant is cousin
and heir of the Devisor, and that he as heir, entered, and did the Trespass.
First, it was agreed by all, That by the first words of the Will, the three
Devisees had but for their lives. But Fenner and Walmesley, who argued for the
Plaintiffs conceived, that by force of the latter words (scil.) If the said
John, Stephen and Roger, live till they be of lawful age, and have issue of
their body, lawfully begotten, Then I give the said Lands and Houses to them
and their heirs, in manner aforesaid, etc. that they have Fee; and the words
(in manner aforesaid) are to be referred, not to the Estate which was given by
the first words, which was but for life, but to make them to hold in severalty,
as the first Devise would, and not jointly, as the words of the second Devise
do purport: And Fenner said, It had been resolved by good opinion, That where a
Fine was levied to the use of the Conusee and his Wife, and of the heirs of the
body of the Conusor, with diverse Remainders over, Proviso, That it should be
lawful to the survivor of them, to make Leases of the said Lands in such
manner as Tenant in tail might make by the Statute of 32 H. 8. Although those
Lands were never devised before the Fine, yet the Wife survivor, might demise
them by force of the Proviso, notwithstanding the words in manner, etc. So if
Lands be given to A. for life, upon condition, the remainder to B. in manner
aforesaid; these words, in manner aforesaid, shall refer unto the Estate for
life limited to A. and not to the Condition, nor to any other collateral
matter. The words, If they live until they be of full age, and have issue, are
words of Condition, and shall not be construed to such purpose, to give to them
by implication an Estate tail; for the words subsequent are, That they shall
have to them and their heirs, to give and sell at their pleasures, by which it
appears, that his intent was not to make an Estate tail; for Tenant in tail
cannot alien or dispose of his Estate, etc. And as to the latter words, And if
it fortune they three to die without issue, etc. these words cannot make an
Estate tail, and the express limitation of Fee in the former part of the Will,
shall not be controlled by implication, out of the subsequent words: As if
Lessee for forty years devises his term to his Wife for twenty years, and if
she die, the remainder of the term to another, although she survive the twenty
years, she shall not hold over. And here, the second sale appointed to be made
by the Executor, shall not take away the power of the first sale allowed unto
the Devisees after issue. Snagg and Shuttleworth, Sergeants, to the contrary:
And they said, that the Defendant has right to two parts, for no Inheritance
vesteth in the Devisees until full age and issue; and because two of the
Devisees died without issue, they never had an Inheritance in their two parts,
and so those two parts do descend to the Defendant, as heir to the Devisor, no
sale being made by the Executor; These words, If John, Stephen and Roger, are
to be taken Distributive, viz. If John live, etc. are to be taken Distributive
(scil.) If John live until, etc. he shall have Inheritance in his part, Et sic
de reliquis: As if I have right unto Lands which A. B. and C. hold in common,
and I by Deed release unto them all, the same shall inure to them severally, 19
H. 6. And here, these latter words, If they three die without issue, it seems
to be but an Estate tail: See to that purpose, 35 Ass. 14. 37 Ass. 15. For a
man cannot declare his intent at once, but in several parts; all which make but
one Inheritance, and so it is said by Persay, 37 Ass. 15. we ought to adjudge
upon all the Deed, and not upon parcel. And see Clatche's Case, 16 Eliz. Dyer
330, 331. And it was said, That if I give Lands to one and his heirs, as long
as J. S. has heirs of his body, the same is a Fee-simple determinable, and not
an Estate tail, Quaere of that. Then here the Fee-simple is determined by the
death of the Devisees without issue, and therefore the Lands shall revert to
the heir of the Devisor, especially there being no person in rerum natura, who
may sell, for the Executor before any sale by him made, died intestate; and if
he had made Executors, yet the Executor of the Executor could not sell, which
see, 19 H. 8. 9, 10. And afterward, the Justices resolved, That no Estate tail
is created by the Will, but that the Fee-simple is settled in them when they
came to their lawful age, and have issue; so as the residue of the Devise is
void: And Judgment was given for the Plaintiffs.

XCIII. Hill. 29 Eliz. in the Common Pleas.
THE Case was this, (viz.) By the Civil Law the Parson ought to have his Tithe
by the tenth Ridg: And in a great Field there was Corn upon the Arable Land,
Roll. 646.
and Grass upon the Head Lands; and in a Suit for Tithe Hay, and Rakings of the
Corn, the Defendant did prescribe, to pay the tenth Shock of Corn for all the
Corn, Hay and Rakings of the Corn; and the Prescription was challenged not to
be good, for it is upon the matter a Prescription of Non Decimando, for the
tenth Shock is due of common Right, and so nothing is for the Hay and Rakings:
It was holden by all the Justices, That for tying of Horses upon the Head
Lands, and eating of the Grass and Corn together, that the Prescription was
good: But the doubt was, when the Grass is made into Hay, which is upon the
Head Lands, If it be a good Prescription then, and discharge for the Hay,
because it is another thing than what is growing upon the Land? But in the end
all the Justices agreed, That by the Civil Law (ut supra) the tenth Ridg is due
for Tithe Corn; 1 Cro. 446. 475.
therefore for the reaping, binding and shocking, it is a reasonable
Prescription, that the party shall have the Hay upon the Head Lands in
recompense of the said other things, and the Hay upon the Head Lands is but of
little value.

XCIV. 29 Eliz. Challoner and Bowyer 's Case.
IN Assise of Novel Disseisin by Challoner against Bowyer, it was given in
Evidence at the Assise, That William Bowyer was seized, and having issue two
Sons, and two Daughters, devised his Lands to his younger Son in tail, and for
want of such issue, to the Heirs of the body of his eldest Son; and if he die
without issue, that then the Land shall remain to his two Daughters in Fee:
William Bowyer dies, the younger Son dies without issue, living the eldest
Son, having issue him who is Tenant in the Assise: It was moved, That
notwithstanding that by way of Grant, the Son, living his Father, cannot take
as heir, i. by limitation, as Heir to his Father, because that none can be said
or held Heir to his Father as long as the Father be alive; yet by way of Devise
the Law shall favor the intention of the party, and the intent of the Devisor
shall prevail. But all the Court was strongly against it, and held, that as
well in Case of Devise, as of Grant, all is one. Whereupon the Tenant produced
Witnesses, who affirmed upon their Oaths, That the Devisor declared his meaning
concerning the said Will, That as long as his eldest Son had issue of his body,
that the Daughters should not have the Land: but the Court utterly rejected the
matter; and Judgment was given for the Plaintiff.

XCV. the Countess of Linnox Case. 29 Eliz. In the Exchequer.
IN this Case it was said by Manwood chief Baron, That whereas the Cistercians,
etc. had a Privilege, that they should not pay Tithes for their Lands, quas
propriis manibus excolant, but their Fermors should pay Tithes: and now by the
Statute of 31 H. 8. they are dissolved, That the Queen and her Fermors should
be discharged of such Tithes as the spiritual persons were: for the Queen
cannot excolere; ergo, her Fermors shall be discharged: and so long as the
Queen has the Freehold, her Fermors shall have such Privilege, although she
Leaseth for years, or at Will: But if the Queen grants over the Reversion,
then the Fermors shall pay Tithes. More Rep. 915.


XCVI. Golding 's Case. Mich. 29 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
IN an Action upon the Case against Gloding, the Case was; 1 Len. 296. 1 Cro.
50. Noy 18.
A Feme sole, being Tenant for life by Devise of Lands, Leased the same for
years, to begin after her death; and afterward made another Lease, 18 October.
for twenty one years to the same Lessee, to begin at Michaelmas before; and the
Pleading was, Virtute cujus quidem dimissionis: and the Lessee entered Crast.
Sanct. Mich. which was before the making of the Lease: And upon the Grant of
these two Leases, the consideration of Assumpsit was grounded in an Action of
the Case thereupon, and six hundred pounds damages given: And now this was
moved in Arrest of Judgment.

Coke for the Plaintiff; Where two Considerations are laid down in the
Declaration, although that the one be void, yet if the other be sufficient, the
Action upon the Assumpsit lies, and damages shall be taken accordingly. And
the Grant upon the Assumpsit was, That both the Leases should be assigned to
the Defendant; and the Plaintiff has declared accordingly, although that one
of the Leases be void: And the Agreement was, That the Plaintiff should assign
totum statum, titulum, and interesse suum quae habet in, etc. It appears here
in the Pleading, That the Lease was made the eighteenth of October, and the
Lessee did enter, and was thereof possessed, Crast. Mich. which was before, and
so the Lessee then entering was a Disseisor, But by Coke, the same is not a
Disseisin, although that the Lessee enters before the Lease made; for there
was a communication of a Lease, although the Lease was not made before the
eighteenth of October; and peradventure it was by assent of the Lessor, in
which case it cannot be a Disseisin: but be it a Disseisin, yet in as much as
he has assigned all his interest, quod ipse tunc habuit, the Consideration is
answered; and he has also delivered both the Indentures of Demise, and has
granted all that which he might grant; be such Grant void or good, it is good
Consideration enough as to us.

Egerton, Solicitor, contrary; In every Action upon the Case upon a Promise,
there are three things considerable, Consideration, Promise and Breach of
Promise; As to the Consideration in our Case, the Grant of the Lease, which is
to begin after the death of the Lessor, is merely void. And as to the second
Consideration, it appears, That the Lessor at the time of the making of the
Lease had but a Right, for he was disseised; for he who was afterward the
Lessee entered before he had any Lease made unto him; and so here is not any
consideration to ground the Assumpsit upon: But admit that there be a
consideration, yet the Action does not lie: For 19 Eliz. a difference was taken
by the Justices, (scil.) When in the Declaration in an Action upon the Case,
two or more considerations are laid, and are not collateral, but pursuant: As
if I owe you an hundred pounds, and I say, That in consideration that I owe you
100 l. and in consideration that you shall give me 10 l. I promise to pay unto
you the said hundred pounds which I owe you: If you bring an Action upon the
Case against me for the hundred pounds, and lay in your Declaration both
considerations, although you do not pay me the ten pounds, yet the Action
lies: But where the considerations are not pursuant, but merely collateral,
and do not depend the one upon the other, As in consideration that you are of
my Council, and you shall ride with me to York, I promise to give to you an
hundred pounds; there both considerations ought to be performed, or otherwise
the Action does not lie: and so here in the principal Case; the considerations
being collateral, they both ought to be performed. Afterward, upon
consideration had of the Case by the Court, Judgment was given for the
Plaintiff: and it was said by Coke, That there was not any Disseisin in the
Case, but he who entered was Tenant at sufferance, by reason of the precedent
communication.

XCVII. Curtise and Cottel 's Case. Trin. 28 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
THE Case was this, That one Bonham was seized of a Manor, within which there
were diverse Customary Lands demisable by Copy for three lives: The Lord of the
Manor did demise some of those Lands to three Sisters, Habendum to them for
their lives successive, for the Fine of 100 l. by them paid; and they being
seized accordingly, the eldest Sister, who was Tenant in possession, took to
Husband one Chapman; after which the said Lord by Indenture leased the same
Land to the eldest Sister, the Remainder to the Husband, the Remainder to the
second Sister, and no Agreement was made thereunto by the second Sister by
Deed, before or after the making of the Indenture; but four days after the
Lease made she agreed to it in the Country, and then took to Husband Curtise,
and they entered, claiming the said Land, upon which Entry the Action was
brought: The point was, That when the Lease by Indenture was made to the eldest
Sister, at which time no agreement was made by the second Sister who was in
Remainder; yet when after she agreed, If by that Agreement her Right to the
Copihold were extinct, or not? so as the interest of the eldest Sister being
gone by the acceptance of the Estate by the Indenture, the second Sister might
come and claim her customary interest, as it were paramount the interest of the
eldest Sister, which she claimed by the Indenture.

Glanvil, The customary interest of the eldest Sister is extinct upon this
matter, by reason of her agreement to it afterward. Where an Estate is given
to one by a lawful act, it shall be adjudged in the party before agreement,
until it be disagreed unto; and if the party do once agree, he cannot
afterward disagree unto it. If an Estate be lawfully made to a Copyholder but
for years, his whole interest in the Copyhold is determined: and that a
Freehold cannot be waived in pais, but only by matter of Record: See 13 R. 2.
Joynt-tenants 13. A Charter of Feoffment was made to four, and Seisin was
delivered to three of them in the name of them all; and afterward the fourth
Feoffee came and saw the Deed, and said, That she would not have any thing in
the Lands, but altogether disagree unto it; and it was, that that disagreement
by word in pais did not divest the Freehold out of her: But when the party does
disagree in a Court of Record, there the Freehold is out of the party ab
initio; and if he once agree, he shall not disagree afterward. See Littl.
Sect. 648. Tenant in tail enfeoffeth his Son and Heir apparent, and another,
and Livery and Seisin is made to the other, according to the Charter of
Feoffment, in the name of the Son also, the Son not knowing of it, nor
disagreeing to the Feoffment; the other Feoffee dies, the Son neither occupies
the Lands nor takes the profits of them during the life of his Father; the
Father dies, the same is a Remitter to the Son, because the Freehold is cast
upon him, and there is no default in him, and therefore he is remitted: But
upon an illegal act is otherwise; for if A. disseise B. to the use of C. in
such case nothing is in C. before an express Agreement, for the Disseisin was
an unlawful act. And in this Case at Bar, it does not appear that the eldest
Sister is dead, and therefore the Right of the second Sister cannot now come in
question.

Shute, Justice, If the second Sister, at the time of the making of the said
Indenture, had agreed unto it, then it had been a full extiguishment, but by an
agreement afterward it is not good.

Gaudy, Justice, The remainder is in consideration of the Law; and the Estate
of the first Sister is not so determined, that any can take advantage of it;
for the Lord, against this Lease by Deed indented, cannot enter, or claim any
thing: and the second Sister, although she has not agreed, yet she cannot
enter during the life of her elder Sister, for her Remainder takes effect in
possession after the death of her said Sister. But if any should take advantage
of it, it should be the Lord, if his Deed indented did not stand against him.
And afterward Judgment was given against the younger Sister.

Clench, Justice, was of another Opinion, viz. That the Entry of the younger
Sister, notwithstanding that her elder Sister was alive, was lawful: Quaere of
that.

XCVIII. Wellock 's Case. Trin. 28 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
A Parson, in consideration of twelve pence, granted to one of his
Parishioners, That he should hold his Lands discharged of Tithes: It was holden
by the whole Court, That the same was no good Discharge, being without Deed, as
a Lease of his Tithes. But it was holden, If the Parson afterward sueth the
Parishioner for Tithes against the same Grant and Promise, the Parishioner may
have an Action upon the Case against the Parson upon his Promise, although he
cannot plead the Grant as a Lease.

XCVIII. Lawson and Hare 's Case. Trin. 28 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
3 Len. 178.
A Replevin by Lawson against Hare, who avowed for a Leet Fee; and showed how
that he, and all those whose Estate he has in the Hundred of C. have used to
hold a Leet, once every year; and that at each time, when such Leet has been
holden, the Inhabitants within the said Leet have used to pay to the Lord of
the Leet 16 d. for a Leet Fee; and that the Lords of the said Leet have used to
distrain for the same: and showed farther, that 5 Julii 26 Eliz. he held there
a Leet, etc. The Plaintiff replied, Absque hoc, that they had used to distrain;
and issue being joined, it was found for the Defendant. It was moved in Arrest
of Judgment, because, that the Defendant had entitled himself to a Leet, by an
Estate in the Hundred, and did not show a Deed of it, which was said, he ought
to have done; as is 11 H. 4. 48. And of such opinion was Anderson and Windham,
Justices. Periam and Rhodes Justices, contrary, as this case is, and that the
Avowant need not show a Deed, But if the hundred it self had been in question,
then a Deed ought to have been showed; But here the Avowant entitles himself to
one thing, (scil.) a Leet, and a Leet Fee, by reason of the Hundred, and it is
sufficient for him to say, That he is seized of the Hundred, etc. although it
be by disseisin: for if he has possession of the Hundred, be it jure, vel
injuria, he shall have also all things incident thereunto, for the possession
of the Hundred draws to him the Leet, and the Leet, the Leet Fee. But admit in
this case a Deed ought to be showed, 1 Cro. 217. 245.
we are to see if the same be helped by the Statute of Jeofailes, which extends
to defaults in form in Writs, Original or Judicial Counts, Declarations,
Plaints, Bills, etc. 18 Eliz. cap 14. and such defects are thereby helped. And
by Anderson, although that the Avowant be Quasi an actor, yet in Rei veritate,
he is Defendant: For although that he is to have retorn of the Cattle, if it be
found for him, yet he who fueth the Replevin is the Plaintiff, and if the
Defendant will justify the distress, and not avow, he is merely Defendant, and
not a Plaintiff, or Actor, no more than in a Pra^cipe quod reddat, The Tenant
voucheth and recovereth in value, he cannot be said Plaintiff, or Defendant,
and the Avowant cannot be Nonsuit, as the Plaintiff. But Windham and Periam
were of a contrary opinion; For Avowry is in lieu of a Declaration, and the
Plea of the Plaintiff to the Avowry, is not called a Replication, but a bar to
the Avowry. But admit the Avowry be within the Statute, then if the Statute of
Jeofailes there extend to help it? And Anderson conceived that it did: But the
Plaintiff might have demurred upon the Avowry for the not showing the Deed, and
Judgment should have been given for him; but when he has traversed, and the
issue found against him, now it shall be intended, that Avowant has a Deed,
although he has not showed the same. Another Exception was taken, because it
is said in the Avowry, That the said Leet was holden, 5 Julii, and then it was
void: For the Statute of Magna Charta, cap. 35 requires, that Leets be holden
within one Month after Michaelmas and Easter; But that Exception was not
allowed: For by Anderson, Windham and Rhodes, by force of the Prescription, The
Lord might hold his Leet what day he pleased, and that his Liberty is not
restrained by the Statute; and such is the common experience: for the same
Statute provides for it, (scil.) Quod quilibet habeat libertates suas quas
habuit, and habere consuevit tempore Regis H. avi nostri, vel quas postea
perquisiret: And by Rhodes, the said Statute does not extend but to the
Sheriffs Towns, and not to other Leets, which see Br. Leets, 23. upon the Case
of 8 H. 7. 1. which was affirmed by him to be good Law; Contrary by Periam, but
he granted, that if a Leet has used to be holden at one day certain, other
than that which is limited by the said Statute, the same may so continue,
notwithstanding the Statute, for such Liberty is saved by the Statute. And by
Anderson and Rhodes; If the King grant to one a Leet to hold Semel quolibet
anno, and does not say, Ad libitum of the Grantee, yet the Grant is good, and
the Grantee may hold it at what day he will.

C. Goore and others against Dawbeny. 13 Eliz. In the Exchequer-Chamber, Error.
A Writ of Error was brought in the Exchequer-Chamber by Goore and Goore,
Swinnerton and Tedcastel, against Dawbeny, of a Judgment given against them in
the Court of Exchequer, in an Action upon the Case, in the nature of a
Conspiracy brought by Dawbeny, etc. who declared, That Goore and Goore, were
joint Merchants of a stock of many wares, in moyeties transported in Barbary,
and Swinnerton and Tedcastel were their Factors, and Dawbeny and the Goores
were also joint Merchants entire of Merchandises transported, etc. And the said
Swinnerton and Tedcastel were their Factors therein; and that was to
merchandise for two years; and showed farther, That the said Plaintiffs did
conspire against the said Dawbeny (See the Declaration in the Number Roll, for
I could not take it in brief.) Coke of Council with the Plaintiff assigned the
Errors; because Dawbeny in his Declaration has declared, that they were joint
Merchants (scil.) the now Plaintiffs, and have conspired against him, and has
not showed the place where they were joint Merchants, or where they were made
joint Merchants, and that is issuable, although it be not the principal thing
in the Declaration; for that is the fraud: As where Debt is brought for Rent
reserved upon a Lease for years the principal matter is the Debt, and the
principal Issue is Nihil debet; Yet the Demise is issuable, and Non dimisit is
a good Plea: And here the Defendant by the Plea of Not guilty, has not lost
the advantage of Exception aforesaid. And he cited a great Case lately adjudged
betwixt Stansam and Matthew, in an Action upon the Case, conceived upon the
Trover of a Bond and the Conversion of it to his use; The Defendant pleaded,
Not guilty, and it was found against him; And because in the Declaration there
was not any place of the Conversion, Judgment was stayed. Here in the
Declaration are two things, First, the Conspiracy, Secondly, the execution of
it,, for the one without the other will not maintain the Action, but here the
Conspiracy is not pursued, nor executed according to that which is laid to be
conspired. The Conspiracy is laid, That the Factor upon his account demanded
4000 l. of Barbary money, per nomen bona and denariorum summas, and the
Execution is laid, That he demanded in allowance of wares delivered to Isaac
Abess: And he took a general rule, That a Commander shall never be charged, but
where his Commandment is strictly and precisely pursued. Barbary money is
included in this word Bona, for it is not current in England: See as to the
pursuing of the Commandment; Sanders and Archer's Case, Plow. 18 Eliz. 437. And
in our Case, he not only puts the thing, but also the person, for the
Conspiracy is that he demanded allowance for goods delivered to Isaac, and his
four sons, for Isaac. In the one Case it is pretended, That Isaac and four sons
are Debtors; and in the other Case Isaac only: Also here Dawbeny has allowed
and accepted the account of the Factors, against which he cannot have this
Action; for it is ignorantia crassa, idque facti, quae non excusat: Also upon
such uncertain demand as is laid in the Declaration, Dawbeny was not holden to
make allowance: i. for so much wares upon a certain bargain made with Isaac;
and that was not a lawful demand, and upon such uncertain demand, he was not
bound to make allowance; Et hoc modo est ignorantia juris quae non excusat
omnino. Also here Swinnerton only accounts and demands allowances, and
Swinnerton only was not Factor, but also Tedcastel, and therefore Dawbeny was
not bounden to allow that account to Swinnerton, no more than to a mere
stranger: And also Dawbeny alone was not to make allowance, for the two Factors
were accomptable to him, and to Goores also. And so allowance by one of them to
whom they are accomptable, is not good. One Executor (where the power is
committed to two) sells the Land, the sale is void, and two joint Attorneys,
etc. one only can do nothing: And here in this Declaration, it is many times
alleged, that they were conjunctim Mercatores, conjunctim Factores; But I
confess, that one joint Factor, with the express consent of his companion, may
account alone; and so of the other, one may by express consent take an Account
only. One Factor is no Factor where there are many joint Factors; and in our
Case, the two Goores and Dawbeny saw the account, but Dawbeny only allowed of
it, and that is not good: As if two Arbitrators are, and one only makes the
award, although both hear the matter. 14 E. 3. Fitz. Acc. 72. That the one
Accomptant cannot account without his companion; but there Parn says, That it
had been adjudged, 6 E. 3. that the one might account without the other: See 41
E. 3. 3. and 9. Tamworth's Case. Tanfield contrary: As to the first Error, it
is but conveyance and matter of inducement to the fraud and conspiracy, which
is the principal point of the Action; and therefore needs not to be so
precisely alleged: and also by the general issue, they have passed the
advantage of it, and all the special matter of the Count is contained in the
general issue; for not guilty, goes to all, and includes the whole. Also upon
the matter, the Jury has found that they were joint Merchants; and although
they were joint Factors, and the one only has accounted, yet the same account
is good enough, for it was made with the consent of the other, as appears by
the Declaration. Conspiraverunt, and agreaverunt, that Swinnerton in his
account, peteret allowance, etc. so there was consent to take the account, etc.
and 6 E. 3. it is adjudged ut supra. And that the one joint Factor may account
without his companion, is the Law of Merchants; for Factors are oftentimes
dispersed, so as they cannot be both present at their accounts, and so it has
been heretofore allowed in the King's Bench: And as to that that Dawbeny only
has given allowance to this account, the same is good enough: If I promise to
two to do any act, the one of them may discharge me from it, and that by word,
for it is but a personal thing: Two joint-tenants of a Manor grant the
Stewardship thereof to one, and 20 l. per ann. for the exercise of it; if the
one discharge him, it is a good discharge as to the service, but yet he shall
have his Fee: If the Lord of the Manor grant the Stewardship thereof to
another, taking 10 l. per ann. of the issues and profits of his Court there for
his Fee: and afterward the Lord discharges the Steward, the same is void; for
it is a disadvantage to the Steward, for he cannot have his Fee, if no Courts
be holden; but if the Fee be limited to issue out of Lands, there such
discharge is good; for there the Steward shall have his Fee although that no
Courts be holden there, See 18 E. 4. 8. to that purpose. Egerton, Solicitor, to
the contrary; although (as has been objected) the matter of joint Merchant be
but matter of inducement, it is notwithstanding material, and without it the
Action will not lie: In Debt, upon Arbitrament, The Plaintiff in his
Declaration, ought to show the submission; and although the Defendant pleads,
Nihil debet, yet if the place of the submission be not showed in the
Declaration, all is naught; for although that it be but inducement, yet it is a
material inducement; for if no submision, no award, and if no award, no Debt,
and then no cause of Action. The Case of 14 E. 3. cited before, there the
Accomptants by their Deed, or jointly, or severally accomptable at the pleasure
of him to whom, etc. Also, because it is set forth in the Declaration, that
they were joint Merchants of wares, adventured into Barbary, for the space of
two years; the Factor in praying of allowance, ought to show what wares were
adventured into Barbary within the said two years. Conspiracy is a thing
odious, and ought to be directly proved; and it is not reason, that that which
he himself has once allowed, he himself shall after defeat it, as here he
attempts. And he relied much upon the variance between the Conspiracy and the
execution of it moved before by Coke, where by the Conspiracy, Isaac is made
the Debtor, with his four sons; and in the Execution, Isaac is made the only
Debtor, and to that point, he vouched the Case, 3 and 4 Ph. and Ma. betwixt
Brown and Nevil, That an award was to be performed, Brown and Nevil's Case.
(scil.) an award made between Joh. Brown, for, and in the behalf of John Moore
on the one part, and R. Nevil on the other part; and did not show that Moore
made the submission, and for that cause it was holden naught: For Moore was a
principal person in the award, and Brown but a servant, etc. So in our Case for
Isaac. Popham, Attorney General, in an Action upon the Case, The Plaintiff
declares, Quod cum the Defendant was indebted to the Plaintiff in 20 l. he
promised to pay to the Plaintiff 20 l. Here it needs not, that the Plaintiff
show in his Declaration, the place or time in which the Defendant became his
debtor, for the promise is the principal matter, and the other matter is but
inducement: So if A. in consideration that I at his request have married his
daughter, promised to pay to me 100 l. In an Action upon the Case brought by me
upon this promise, it is not necessary that I show the place where I married
his daughter. In all personal things, where two are chargeable to two, the one
may satisfy it, and one may accept of satisfaction, and bind his companion,
and yet the one cannot have an Action without his companion, nor both only
against one, 18 E. 4. 3. Two joint tenants of a Manor have one Bailiff of it,
the one of them assigns Auditors to the Bailiff, who accounts, and is found in
arrearages, the same is a good account, and it is holden there, that both, etc.
may have Debt upon the arrearages of the account taken by the manner. And if
one may assign Auditors, he may also take account, and discharge the accomptant
against his companion. And he conceived, That this allowance of the account by
Dawbeny, did not exclude him of his Actions, but rather gave him cause of
Action, Nam Laesus non esset, nisi credidisset; and the Bailiff of my
Husbandry, who bargains and sells for me, if upon his account to me, he
alleges and surmiseth, that he has sold my Cattle to one who is decayed, and
upon that surmise I allow his account; afterward, Re comperta, I shall have an
Action of Deceit: And in this very Case at the Bar, it was holden in the
King's Bench, That Dawbeny, notwithstanding his allowance of this false
account, should have his Action, etc. Note that afterward, viz. Trin. 32 Eliz.
The Judgment given for Dawbeny was reversed.

CI. Sir William Waller 's Case. Trin. 31 Eliz. In the Exchequer.
IN this Case it was moved by Winter, 3 Len. 259. 4 Len. 44. Post 87.
That if one has Judgment in Debt, and upon that, within the year and day,
sues a Capias ad satisfaciendum, although that he does not prosecute the same
by the space of two or three years, yet when he pleases he may proceed
thereupon, and he shall not be put to a Scire facias; for a Writ of Execution
once sued forth, shall be a continual claim, and the party shall never be put
to a Scire facias; and of such opinion was Philips.

Manwood, I grant, that if one has sued forth a Writ of Execution, and that be
continued by Vicecomes non misit breve, for two or three years, yet the
Plaintiff may proceed thereupon, and shall not be put to a Scire facias: but if
such Writ be sued forth, and not continued, but discontinued by a year and a
day, he shall be put to a Scire facias, for it is negligence of the Plaintiff
of not continuing of it, which within the year and day he might without Order
of the Court, but after the year not by any Order of the Court, etc.

CII. Griffin 's Case. Trin. 31 Eliz. In the Exchequer.
IT was holden in this Case, That if Lessee for years of a Message grants
totum Messuagium suum, the Grantee has but at Will; but if he grant all his
Interest and Estate in such a Message, then the whole Lease passes: and so it
was said to have been lately adjugded in the Case of one Winnibank in the
King's Bench.

CIII. Seckford and Wolverston 's Case. Psach. 26 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
THE Plaintiff being Bailiff of the Liberty of Esheld, in the County of
Suffolk, the Sheriff of the said County directed a Warrant unto him to arrest
the Defendant upon a Latitat retornable in the King's Bench; by force of which
the Defendant being arrested, became bound in the Obligation upon which the
Action is brought; the Condition of which is, 1 Cro. 672. 776. Owen Rep. 40.
That if the Defendant personally appear in the King's Bench at Westminster,
and there to answer, etc. It was moved, that the Obligation was void by the
Statute of 23 H. 6. For the form which the said Statute prescribes for
Obligations to be taken by the Sheriff, is according to these words, Appear at
the day contained in the Bill, Writ or Warrant, and in such place, etc. and
that all Bonds taken in other form shall be void. As to the words of surplusage
[personally] the Justices were of opinion, that the Obligation was well enough,
notwithstanding that because, as the Case is, the appearance of the Defendant
ought to be in person upon a Latitat, for the Defendant is supposed to be in
Custodia Mariscal. And so it has been adjudged in the Common Pleas, where the
appearance of the party arrested is de jure personal, etc. contrary where
personal appearance is not requisite. As to the other matter [and there to
answer] Wray put a difference, where the words are [there to answer] that the
Bond is well enough, for it is no more in effect, but that he shall appear eo
animo ut respondeat. But if the words had been [Appear and Answer] the same is
a void Condition, for it may be that the Plaintiff will never declare against
him: But Gaudy and Ayliff, Justices, were of a contrary opinion, and that the
Bond was void by reason of the words aforesaid: but the Court would not give
Judgment against the Plaintiff, but ex gratia Curiae suffered the Plaintiff to
discontinue his Action.

CIV. Partridg and Pool 's Case. Pasc. 26 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
IN an Action of Trespass by Partridg against Pool, 3 Len. 97.
the Plaintiff did suppose the Battery at D. in the County of Midd. The
Defendant justified, by reason of an Assault at S. in the County of Gloucester,
absque hoc that he beat the Plaintiff at D. in the County of Midd. upon which
Traverse the Plaintiff did demur in Law. 1 Cro. 842.
It was argued by Popham, Attorny-General, That the Traverse of the County is
good; and he put the Case 21 H. 6. 8, and 9. In Trespass of Battery at D. in
the County of York, the Defendant does justify by an Assault at London, in
such a place in such a Parish, and the hurt which, etc. absque hoc, that he was
guilty de aliqua transgressione in Com. Ebor. upon which issued a Venire facias
into Yorkshire, and as the book is, the Traverse to the County was taken with
great deliberation, etc. prout, etc. See also 22 E. 4. 39. And the Traverse de
jure ought to be allowed, for the Jury of Midd. are not bounden to find the
Assault in the County of Gloucester: See 2 Ma. Br. Jurors 50. In Actions upon
transitory matters, although they be laid in Foreign Counties, yet the Jurors,
if they will, may give their Verdict, but they are not bounden to it.

Egerton, Solicitor, contrary; And he put a difference, where the justification
is local, and where transitory: As in false Imprisonment the Defendant
justifies, as Sheriff, the taking of the Plaintiff by virtue of a Capias
directed to him at D. within the County of G. where the Plaintiff declares of
an Imprisonment in another County, there the Traverse of the County is good;
for the Defendant could not take the Plaintiff by force of the said Process in
any other County, than where he himself is Sheriff, and so the justification is
local: 11 H. 4. 157. But in our case the matter of the justification is merely
transitory. And at last, after many motions, it was adjudged, That in the
principal Case the County was not Traversable; and so Judgment was given for
the Plaintiff; Gaudy, Justice, being of a contrary Opinion: but by Wray
clearly, The Jurors are bounden, upon pain of Attaint, to take notice of such a
transitory thing done in another County: which see 2 Ma. Br. Attaint 134. 9 H.
6.63.

CV. Daw 's and Mollins 's Case. Pasc. 26 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
IN an Attachment upon a Prohibition by Daws against Mollins, for that the
Defendant traxit Querent. in Curiam Christian. for Tithes of great Trees, sub
nomine sylvae ceduae: The Defendant pleaded, that the Loppings for the Tithes
of which he sued, were the Loppings of Trees, called Asp, Beech and Oak, de
stipitibus prius succisis crescentes: and also for Hornbeams, Maples, Hazels,
etc. The Plaintiff, as to the Asp, Oak, and Beech, did demur in Law; and as to
the residue, he pleaded, that with part he mended the Hedges, and the rest
being de minimo valor, were bound up with the boughs of the Oak, etc. into
Faggots; upon which the Defendant did demur in Law. It was argued by Egerton,
Solicitor, on the part of the Plaintiff; and he held, That a Wood of common
Right ought not to pay Tithes, not because the soil in which it grows yields
other Tithes of the Herbage, but because non renovantur in annum; and therefore
at this day no Consultation shall be granted for Quarry, Stone, and Coals: But
after came the Statute of Sarum, (vide F. N. B. 51. h.) by which it was agreed,
coram Concilio Regis in Parliamento apud Sarum, Quod Consultationes fieri
debeant de sylva cedua, eo non obstante quod non renovantur per annum: and see
to that purpose the Register 49. Et ulterius, super hoc facta fuit quaedam
Consultatio pro Abbate de Notley de sylva cedua: which Statute was afterward
expounded by the Statute of 45 E. 3. cap. 3. not to extend to great Wood of the
growth viginti annorum, vel amplius, but only to such Wood which is called
Sylva Cedua. And at last, after many motions, it was ruled, That because the
Defendant had not showed, that the Trees, (scil.) Oak, Ash, and Beech, were not
before cut within twenty years before the last succision, of which the Tithes
are now demanded, Tithes shall not thereof now be paid. And as to the other
point, That the Hornbeams, Sallows, etc. did grow sparsim amongst the Oaks, and
the Owner felled the whole Wood, and caused them to be promiscuously cut into
Faggots, and bound up in Faggots together, and the most part of every Faggot
was Oak, and the residue was of little value, so as the severance of the
Sallows, etc. from the Oak, etc. would not quit the charge; in such case Tithe
shall not be paid: but of the other part, If the most part of the Wood be
Sallows, etc. and here and there sparsim grows an Oak, etc. and the Owner
cuts down all the Wood, and makes Faggots as before, Tithes in such case shall
be paid of them.

CVI. The Queen and Lord Lumley 's Case. Trin. 26 Eliz. In the Exchequer.
Hob. 304. 3 Len. 101.
BEtwixt the Queen and the Lord Lumley, it was moved in the Exchequer; Queen
Mary seized of the Rectory of D. granted advocationem Ecclesiae de D. If now by
this Grant the Advowson passes as now disappendant, or the Rectory it self
passes as appropriate? or nothing at all passes? was the Question. And by
Manwood, chief Baron, the Advowson does not pass, but does remain appropriate;
as it was before; for the Church, as it was appropriate by a judicial act, so
without such an act it cannot be disappropriate: And he said, That by the Grant
of the Advowson, the Rectory did not pass; for by the Appropriation the
Advowson is gone, and is not in esse, and so by consequence cannot be granted:
And it is not within the Statute of 4 and 5 Ph. and Ma. of Confirmation of
Grants of the King; for the said Statute does only help misrecital, misnaming,
mistaking, etc. but here there is no such thing in rerum natura, as the
Patentee pretends to be passed by the Patent: and if it were in the case of a
Subject, nothing would pass; Sand's Case.
as it was adjudged in one Sand's Case, 11 Eliz. And he said, that at this day
a Parsonage may be disappropriated, but that ought to be by a judicial act, as
by Presentment, and not by any other private act of the Proprietor: Roll. 240.
Tit. Appropriat.
And so he said, a Church was disappropriated by the Lord Dyer, by Presentment,
which of late he made unto it.

CVII. Herring and Badlock 's Case. Trin. 26 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
3 Len. 94.
A Replevin was brought by Herring against Badlock, who avowed for
damage-feasant, and showed, That the Lady Jerningham was seized of such a
Manor, whereof the place where, etc. and Leased the same to the Defendant for
years, etc. The Plaintiff said, That long time before King Henry the eighth was
seized of the said Manor, and that the place where, etc. is parcel of the said
Manor demised and demiseable by Copy, etc. And that the said King, by such a
one his Steward, demised and granted the said parcel unto the Ancestor of the
Plaintiff, whose Heir he is, by Copy in Fee, etc. and upon that there was a
Demurrer, because that by that bar to the Avowry the Lease set forth in the
Avowry is not answered, for the Plaintiff in the bar unto the Avowry ought to
have concluded; And so was he seized by the Custom, until the Avowant
praetextu of the said term for years entered: And so it was adjudged.

CVIII. Moor and Sir John Savage 's Case. Trin. 28 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
IN an Action upon the Case by Moor against Sir John Savage and his Wife, for
that the said Lady had reported, That Moor was a lying Knave, and a perjured
Knave; The Defendant justified, That where an Estate for life absolute was
devised to the said Lady by her former Husband, the Plaintiff had deposed, that
the said Land was devised to the said Lady, if she kept her self sole: Postea
102, 103.
To which the Plaintiff replicando said, Of his own wrong without such cause:
Egerton, Solicitor, did demur upon it; for he said, The Plea goes to all the
justification before; for where part of a Plea, (scil.) the justification is
matter of fact, and part is matter of Record, there, Of his own wrong, etc. is
no good Plea, but there ought to be a special Traverse, absque hoc, that he so
deposed, or absque hoc, that the Devise was absolute: And this Plea here, Of
his own wrong, etc. goes to matters in fact only, and such which lie in the
notice of the Jury: See 5 H. 7. 6. Although that diverse matters are alleged in
the bar, yet this Plea, Of his own wrong without such cause, etc. extends to
all, where no matter of Record is alleged in the Plea: As in false
Imprisonment, a Capias is directed to the Sheriff, being Defendant, to arrest
the Plaintiff, in such case such general Plea is not good; but there he may
plead Null tiel Record: See also 13 H. 7. 3. 21 H. 6. 5. And here a principal
matter in the justification is matter of Record, and therefore such a Plea here
is not good. Altham contrary, If the principal matter in such justification be
matter of Record, then such a Plea is not sufficient; but if the matter of
Record be but inducement, then the Plea is good enough: And he vouched 45 E. 3.
7. In Trespass the Defendant says, That he is Forester of the said Forest of
B. and at a Swanmoot it was presented by the Foresters, Verderors, Regardors,
and Agistors, That the Plaintiff had taken Deer in the said Forest, upon which
the Defendant came to the Plaintiff, and prayed him to find Pledges to answer
before Justices in Air, etc. and he refused so to do, for which cause he kept
the Plaintiff until he made agreement, and demanded Judgment, if any wrong,
etc. and the Plaintiff replicando said, Of his own wrong, etc. and the issue
was accepted of by the Court; yet he said the Presentment in the Swanmoot was
not matter of Record, but only inducement, and the Request to find Sureties,
which he would not, for which cause he took and imprisoned him, the same was
the principal matter, and but matter in fact; and therefore he said, that the
Plea was good; and he said that in this case the Oath is not on Record. And
Coke said, That in the Cases put by Altham, Of his own wrong without such
cause, is a good Plea, with an absque hoc unto the matter of Record: See the
Book of Entries 320. see 30 H. 8. Action upon the Case 104. without that, that
he swore modo and forma: It was adjourned.

CIX. Firrell and the hundred of B 's Case. Trin. 28 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
IN an Action upon the Statute of Hue and Cry by Firrell against the Hundred of
B. The Defendants pleaded, Not guilty, and in Evidence, the Plaintiff, to prove
that he was robbed, as he had declared, offered to the Jury his oath, in making
good his Declaration, which Anderson and Periam Justices, utterly refused. But
Windham affirmed, That such an oath had been accepted in the Case of one
Harrinton, where the Plaintiff could not have other Evidence to prove his
Cause, in respect of secrecy; For those who have occasion to travel about their
business, will not acquaint others what money, or other things they have with
them in their journies: And we see, that in some causes, the Law does admit the
oath of the party in his own cause; as in Debt, the Defendant shall wage his
Law: Periam, That Is an ancient Law, but we will not make new Presidents, for if
such oath be accepted in this Case, by the same reason in all cases where is
secrecy, and no external proof, upon which would follow great inconveniences:
and although such an Oath has been before accepted of, and allowed here, yet
the same does not move us; and we see no reason to multiply such Presidents.
The Declaration is, that the Plaintiff was robbed of 10 l. de denariis ipsius
querentis; and upon the Evidence it appears, That the Plaintiff was the
Receiver of the Lady Rich, and had received the said money for the use of the
said Lady, and exception was taken to it by Shuttleworth, but it was not
allowed; for the Plaintiff is accomptable to the Lady Rich the said money. And
it was agreed, that if he who was robbed, after he has made Hue and Cry, does
not farther follow the thieves, yet his Action does remain.

CX. Large 's Case. Mich. 29 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
3 Len. 182.
THE Case was, A. seized of Lands in Fee, devised the Lands to his wife, until
William his son should come to the age of 22 years, and then the Remainder of
part of the Lands, to his two sons, A. and John, The Remainder of other part of
his Lands, to two others of his said sons, upon condition, That if any of his
said sons before William should come to the age of 22 years, shall go about to
make any sale of any part, etc. he shall for ever lose the Lands, and the same
shall remain over, etc. And before his said son William came to the age of 22
years, one of the other sons Leased that which to him belonged, for 60 years,
and so from 60 years to 60 years, until 240 years ended, etc. Bois, A. and J.
are joynt-tenants of the Remainder, and he said, That the opinion of Audley,
Lord Chancellor of England, is not Law, (scil.) where a man devises Lands to
two, and to their heirs, they are not joynt-tenants, as to the survivor, but if
one of them dies, the survivor shall not have the whole, but the heir of his
that dies shall have the moiety: See 30 H. 8. Br. Devise 29. And he said, That
this Lease, although it be for so many years; is not a sale intended within the
Will, and so is not a Ioynture. 46 E. 3. One was bounden, that he should not
alien certain Lands, and the Obligor did thereof enfeoff his son and heir
apparent, the same was held, to be no alienation within the Condition of the
Obligation: Of the other side it was argued, The remainder does not vest
presently; for it is uncertain, if it shall vest at all; for if William dies
before he comes to the age of 22 years, it was conceived by him, that the
Remainder shall never vest, for the words of the Will are, Then the Lands shall
remain, etc. 34 E. 3. Formedon 36. Land is devised to A. for life, and if he be
disturbed by the heir of the Devisor, that then the Land shall remain to D.
Here D. has not any remainder, before that A. be disturbed; It was farther
argued, that here is a good Condition, and that the Devisee is not utterly
restrained from sale, but only until a certain time, (scil.) to the age of
William of 22 years. And it was said, that this Lease is a Covenous Lease,
being made for 240 years, without any Rent reserved: As such a Lease made for
100 years, or 200 years, is Mortmain, as well as if it had been an express
Feoffment, or Alienation. But it was said by some, Antea 36, 37.
that here is not any sale at all, nor any lease; for the Lessor himself has
not any thing in the Land demised: As if a man disseiseth a Feme sole, and
seaseth the Lands, and afterward marries the disseisee, he shall avoid his
own Lease, 5 E 3. One was bound that he should not alien such a Manor, the
Obligor alieneth one Acre, parcel of it, the Obligation is forfeit, See 29 H.
8. Br. Mortgage 36. A. leaseth to a religious house for 100 years, and so from
100 years to 100 years, until 800 years be encurred, the same is Mortmain,
Vide Stat. 7 E. 1. Color termini emere, vel vendere. And in the principal
Case, if the Devisee had entered into a Statute to the value of the Land leased,
by the intent of the Will, the same had been a sale; and such was the opinion
of the whole Court: and by the Court, the word in perpetuum, shall not be
referred to the words precedent, but unto the words following; (scil.) in
perpetuum perdat the Lands. And if a custom be in the case that the Infant of
the age of 15 years may sell his Lands; if he make a Lease, the same is not
warranted by the custom: And afterward it was adjudged by the whole Court,
that the Lease made as before, was a sale within the intent of the Will of the
Devisor.

CXI. Brook 's Case. Hill. 29 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
APpeal of Burglary was brought against Brook, who was found guilty; and
before Judgment given, the Plaintiff died, And now Egerton moved that Judgment
should be given for the Queen upon that verdict, or at least that the
Declaration in the Appeal should be in lieu of an Indictment, and that the
Appealee be thereupon arraigned and put to answer the same. For if the
Appellant had been Nonsuit, or released, the Defendant should be arraigned at
the suit of the Queen. Coke, God has now by the death of the party, delivered
the Defendant: and it is not like, where the Plaintiff releaseth, for there it
is the default of the Act of the party, but here it is the Act of God; and he
held it for a rule, That where auterfoits acquit is a good Plea, there also
auterfoits convict shall be a good Plea: And it was holden in Sir Tho.
Holcroft's Case, Sir Thomas Holcroft's Case.
That where the party is convicted at the suit of the Queen, there the Appeal
does not afterward lie. Wray, If the Appellant dies before Verdict, the
Defendant shall be arraigned at the suit of the King; But if his life has been
once in jeopardy by Verdict, he conceived, that it shall not again be drawn
into danger; and some were of opinion that the Defendant should be arraigned at
the suit of the Queen upon the whole Record, and plead auterfoits acquit, and
that they said was the surest way.

CXII. Ognel and Paston 's Case. 29 Eliz. In the Exchequer..
1 Cro. 64.
CLement Paston was Defendant in an Action of Debt brought against him by
George Ognel, upon an Escape, and the Case was this: Francis Woodhouse was
bound in a Recognizance to the said Ognel; Whereupon Ognel sued forth a Scire
facias, and upon two Nihils returned, had Judgment, and upon that a Levari
facias, and then a Capias ad satisfaciendum, upon which Paston the Defendant, a
Sheriff of Norfolk, to whom the Capias was directed, took the party, and
afterward suffered him to escape. The Defendant pleaded, That before the said
Capias, the said Francis Woodhouse was committed to him, and in his ward
continued for Felony; and after the Capias, was endicted thereof, and
arraigned, and found guilty, after which he escaped; And all this was found by
special verdict: First it was argued, if upon a Recognizance acknowledged in
the Chancery an Action lies; and it was said by Bois, That it does not lie in
the mouth of the Sheriff to say, that this Capias does not lie in the Case: As
if a Justice of Peace makes a Warrant to a Constable, which Warrant is not
good in Law, yet the Constable is not to examine that, or to dispute the
validity of it, 5 H. 7. And a Capias has lain in such case, and so it has
been the course for the space of 200 years: and he said, That although Francis
Woodhouse was convict of Felony, yet the same is not any discharge of the
execution, as 35 H. 6. 8. although the husband be attainted of Felony, yet he
is not so dead in Law, but if the King pardon him afterward, he shall be
restored, and his wife shall have Dower; and if he be killed, his wife shall
have an Appeal: 12 H. 4. My Villain is attainted, the same is no discharge of
his villainage as to me; But if the King pardon him after, he shall be my
Villain, 6 E. 4. 4. One is in Execution pro fine Regis, and afterward is
outlawed for Felony, and has his Charter of pardon for the Felony yet he
remains in Execution for the interest of the party, for there the Execution is
not extinct, but only suspended. Godfrey contrary, Capias does not lie upon a
Recognizance; but if Debt be brought upon a Recognizance, and the Plaintiff
recovereth, then a Capias lies; which see 14 Eliz. Dyer 306. Puttenham's Case.
2 H. 4. 6. In Dower the Demandant recovereth her Dower, and damages, and
prays a Capias ad satisfaciendum for the damages, but she could not have it;
for no Capias lies upon the original; and to the same purpose, see 8 R. 2.
Fitz. Execution, 164. 15 H. 7. 15. Capias pro fine lies for the King, where no
Capias lies in the Original; but no Capias ad satisfaciendum for the party; no
Capias in Debt before the Statute of 25 E. 3. and see the Stat. of West. 2.
cap. 18. cum debitum fuerit recognit. si in electione sequent. execut. habere
per Fiere facias, or Elegit, therefore no other manner of Execution; for the
Statute has provided ut supra. And he said, That debt does not lie upon a
Statute Merchant, or Staple: See 15 H. 7. 16. Another reason why a Capias does
not lie in such case, is upon the words of the Recognizance, Et nisi fecerit,
tunc concedit, quod summa praedict. levetur de bonis and catallis, terris and
tenementis; Ergo, not of the body. And when Woodhouse was convict of Felony,
the Queen had an interest in his body, and upon the pardon, the Execution which
was suspended during the conviction, is now received: And he confessed the case
of Villainage; that during the attainder, the Lord cannot meddle with the
Villain in the presence of the King, See 27 Ass. 49. and see 2 H. 4. 65. A. was
condemned to B. in certain damages upon an Action of Trespass brought by B.
against A. and A. was committed to Newgate, in Execution upon a Capias ad
satisfaciend. and afterward was arraigned of Felony, and thereof attainted,
and committed to the Ordinary, as Clark, Attaint. And the Justices commanded
the Ordinary, That after that the prisoner had made his purgation, that he
should not let him go at large, but should conduct him to the prison of Newgate
again: And there is a Quaere made by the Reporter, If after purgation the
Ordinary might suffer him to escape; and if he at whose suit he was condemned
in Trespass shall have debt against the Ordinary for such escape. At another
day the matter was argued by Coke for the Plaintiff, at the Common Law, No Land
was subject to Execution, i. no Lands of the Debtor himself; but yet the Lands
of the Debtor being descended to his heir, should be chargeable to the Obligee
of the Debtor, in which he and his heirs were bound, and that seemed to be very
strange; and he conceived, That in that point, custom and usage had encroached
upon the Common Law: The Statute of West. 2. c. 13. gave Elegit of the moiety
of the Lands; but yet there was no Capias in Debt before, 25 E. 3. cap. 17.
before which Statute, it was a general Rule, That no Capias lay at the Common
Law, but where the King was to have a Fine, See 35 H. 6.6. At the Common Law
Capias did not lie but where the Action is vi and armis, or that the King is to
have a Fine; For there was Outlawry at the Common Law in such case. It will be
objected, That the Statute of 25 E. 3. which gave Capias in Debt, does not
extend to a Scire facias upon Recovery; That such Process shall be made in a
Writ of Debt, as is used in a Writ of Account; and here is no Writ of Debt, but
a Scire facias only: If my Debtor upon an Obligation comes without a Writ,
and confesses the Debt, I shall have a Capias against him, and yet the same is
not in a Writ of Debt: Ergo, so in case of Recognizance. Where a Statute speaks
precisely of a Writ Original; yet oftentimes by Equity it shall extend to a
Scire facias, and other judicial Process: As upon the Statute of 25 E. 3. cap.
7. which enables the Incumbent to plead in a Quare Impedit. It shall extend to
a Scire facias upon a Recovery in a Quare Impedit, 46 E. 3. 13. And in our case
a Capias does not lie by the Letter, yet it lies by Equity. And he said, That
Statute which helps the Subjects to get their debts and rights, are to be, and
have been taken beneficially and liberally expounded, in advantage of the
Creditors. And see 48 E. 3. 14. Where a Scire facias is sued upon a
Recognizance, a Capias does not lie, but there it is holden, that in a Scire
facias, upon a Recovery in debt, a Capias lies. And as to this Capias, the
Sheriff is but the minister to the Court, and he is not to control the Court,
but to accept of the same, as the same is directed to him. It is a common
learning in our Law, That although the Court does proceed inverso ordine, yet
it shall not be utterly void, 36 H. 6. 34. Judgment given at the Common Law of
Lands within the five Ports; for the five Ports in times past, were parcel of
the Crown: But of Lands in Wales it was otherwise before the Statute of 27 H.
8. by which Wales is united to the Crown. And although that the Capias erronice
Emanavit, the same is but erroneous, and so voidable, and not void, for Error
may be as well assigned in the Executione judicii, as in redditione judicii, 16
H. 7. 6. Outlawry without an Original Writ, is not void, but voidable, 2 R. 2.
and the reason thereof is given, 11 H. 7. in Collins's Case, but they are
Judges of the cause, although that their proceedings be not according to Law.
But the Sheriff, or any other stranger, shall not take advantage thereof, See 8
E. 4. 21 E. 4. and he cited to this purpose, 13 E. 3. Bar 253. The Iailor
shall not take advantage of undue proceedings of the Auditors against an
Accomptant; and he insisted much upon the Usage and Precedents, and customs of
Courts which are Laws in such cases. And although that by strict and precise
rule of Law, a Capias does not lie naturally nor properly upon a Recognizance,
where the suit begins by Scire facias, yet because the usual practice, and
common experience has allowed of it, and admitted thereof from time to time:
It is safer to suffer a mischief to one, than an inconvenience to many. And
although the Proverb, Exempla illustrant, non docent aut probant, may hold
place in some arts and Sciences, yet in our Law, Examples are good arguments,
11 E. 4. 3. In the King's Bench, a man in custodia Marischalli, shall be put to
answer a Bill, but in the Common-Bench, a man who is in the custody of the
Guardian of the Fleet, shall not be put to answer to a Bill, and that is by
reason of the several usages and customs in the said several Courts; so as
custom and usage makes a Law in such case. 39 H. 6. 30. in a Writ of Mesne,
The Judges were clear of opinion, That the Plaintiff ought not only to show
the Tenure betwixt him and the Tenant Peravail, but also betwixt the Mesne and
the Lord Paramount; yet when they had conferred with the Prothonotaries, and
saw the Precedents of former times in such cases, They would not change the
former courses, notwithstanding that their opinions were to the contrary: So 2
H. 7. 8. The Venire facias is, 12 liberos and legales homines, and the Sheriff
returned 24, and holden good, by reason of the usual course of the Court in
such cases; and yet in our Law, the number of persons is not material, which
see in the Earl of Leicester's Case, 15 H. 8. but custom dispenses with the
same.

Atkinson argued the contrary; At the Common Law for Execution in Debt within
the year, a Levari facias, and a Fieri facias lay; after the year the party was
put to a new Original; and there was no Capias at the Common Law, but in cases
of contempt, force, or other notable misdemeanour, until the Statute of 25 E.
3. cap. 17. which gave it in Debt, Detinue, etc. And the Statute of West. 2.
cap. 18. gave Fieri Facias and Elegit, but no Capias was given upon a
Recognizance by any Statute, and he relied much upon the Book of 48 E. 3.
before cited, the rule of which Book is, That in a Scire facias upon an
Original in which a Capias lies, the Scire facias shall follow the nature of
the Original upon which it is founded: but where a Capias ad respondendum does
not lie, there not a Capias ad satisfaciendum, 34 H. 6. 451. In Debt against
Executors, they appear and plead fully administered, and it is found against
them, and Judgment is given for the Plaintiff, who after the year sueth a Scire
facias against the Executors, and Execution awarded by default, and thereupon a
Capias and Exigent: And that matter being showed to the Court, a Supersedeas
was granted, because the Capias improvide and erronice emanavit: for no Capias
lies against Executors where they plead, etc. although it be found against
them, Ergo, neither a Scire facias grounded thereupon. And although the Stat.
of 25 E. 3. gives a Capias in Debt, yet if Debt be recovered in a Justicies, a
Capias does not lie by the Equity of the said Statute: and he relied very
strongly upon Puttenham's Case, 13 Eliz. cited before. And as to that which
has been said, That notwithstanding, that the Capias was against the Law, and
so his imprisonment by color thereof wrongfully, yet, de facto, he was in
Prison, and the Sheriff has taken him, and he shall excuse himself in a false
imprisonment brought; yet I say, That this erroneous Process appearing to you,
you will not again err, by allowing these erroneous proceedings, but rather
reform them: For the Sheriff himself, who is a stranger to the Record, cannot
have Error to reverse these proceedings, and so without remedy, unless the
Court does relieve him therein. And he said farther, That this Capias, Posito
quod legitime emanavit, cannot fasten or work upon Francis Woodhouse, being
imprisoned, and convict of Felony; for being imprisoned, and restrained of his
liberty, how can he (his restraint continuing) be de novo restrained before
that he be enlarged and restored to his liverty? Nam omnis privatio
praesupponit habitum; and Ergo, imprisonment, liberty precedent. And so he
concluded, That Francis Woodhouse, Neque de facto, nor de jure, was in prison:
and that no Capias lies in the Case, especially after the year, as here it
was, and the party being convict and in prison, cannot be taken, etc. Manwood,
If within the year a Levari facias, or a Fieri facias be sued forth and be
returned, not served, or that Vicecomes non misit Breve, and so the year
passes in the default of the Sheriff; yet the Plaintiff shall not be put to a
Scire facias. At another day it was argued by Tanfield for the Defendant, That
upon this Scire facias no Capias lies, and then no lawful Execution, and then
no escape. Where there is no Capias in the Original, there is no Capias in the
Execution, but here in our Case, there is not any Original, because it is a
Scire facias upon a Recovery, Ergo, no Capias can be where there is not any
Original. As to that which has been said, That the ancient Presidents and
course in Cancel. is against us; be it so; yet the course in the King's Bench
and Common Pleas is with us, That a Capias does not lie in such case of Scire
facias. And the Chancery as to the Common Law ought not to vary from these
Courts, for one and the same Common Law ought to be in all the said Courts, of
things of the Common Law, and the Presidents alleged of the other side are
silent, and sleeping proceedings and presidents, Slips of Clarks, which were
never drawn into question; the ancientest of which was hatched but in the later
part of the Reign of King H. 8. And if the Common Law does not warrant such
Executions, Truly the presidents cannot make such imprisonments lawful without
Act of Parliament. It has been said, that Executions ought to be favored,
that is true, but also Liberty, to which the Law has special respect: See the
Statute of Magna Charta, Nullus liber homo capiatur, vel imprisonetur, nisi per
legale judicium parium suorum, vel per legem terrae; and this is not Lex
terrae, but usage only: and Malus usus est abolendus, 26 Eliz. Error was
brought upon a Judgment given in Curia de Woodstock, which is a Court of
Record, and Error assigned, for that they had awarded Execution secundum
consuetudinem Villae, against one who had bailed the Defendant without a Scire
facias first sued forth against him, i. the bailee, and it was adjudged Error,
and the custom could not maintain it, for the Bailee might have a release or
other matter of discharge to plead: And he cited the Case of 13 and 14 Eliz.
Dyer 306. That upon a Scire facias out of a Recognizance in Chancery, Judgment
was given for the Plaintiff, and the Warden of the Fleet was commanded to
detain the Conusor in his custody, in Execution for the Plaintiff, and
afterward the Conusor escaped, the Plaintiff not satisfied, And it was holden
no escape, for his body was not liable; in case of a Recognizance, to the
Execution: and see also the book of Entries, 500 there is a Rule put, If the
Recognizee will have execution within the year, he may have a Fieri facias, or
Elegit, but not a Capias ad satisfaciendum. And he conceived; that this Process
is not only erroneous; but also utterly void: As a Capias in a Formedon, antea
77.
contrary where in Debt a Capias is awarded after the year where it ought to be
Scire facias, the same is but erroneous; for such Process lies upon such
Judgment, if he had not surceased his time. Another matter he moved, because
this issue is not well tried, for it was tried by Nisi prius out of the
Exchequer, and the Statute of West. 2. cap. 30. Mar. 14 E. 3. cap. 1. do not
give Nisi prius in Causes out of the Exchequer but only out of both Benches;
but Causes out of the Exchequer are tried by Commission; and here their
Commission was insufficient; for it was directed, Chr. Wray and Williel.
Periam, without saying, Et eorum alteri; so as it was joint, and not several,
and Wray at the time of the trial, was as the Parliament at London, and so the
cause was tried before Periam only, and therefore coram non Judice. At another
day, The Case was argued by the Barons of the Exchequer. And Clark Baron,
conceived that the Plaintiff ought to recover, and he said, That upon the
escape, the Common Law gave an Action upon the Case against the Sheriff; and
the reason why the Sheriff shall be charged, is, that one cannot be in
Execution but once; and then if the Sheriff should not be charged, the party
Plaintiff should by negligence of the Sheriff lose his Suit, and also his Debt:
And admit that a Capias does not lie in the Case, yet the Execution by force
thereof is not void, but voidable only; and Error may be assigned as well in
the Execution, as in the Judgment; which see 17 Ass. 24. where the Recognizor
in a Statute Merchant aliened the Land, and afterward the Conusee sued forth
Execution, so as the Land was extended, supposing the payment, i. Solvend. 14
E. 3. whereas in truth it was 16 E. 3. and the Feoffee brought a Writ of Error
thereupon, and it was allowed; but the Sheriff shall not take advantage of the
same: And truly the common course is, That a Capias lies upon a Recognizance:
and 7 H. 4. 101. upon a Recognizance acknowledged for the Peace, a Capias lies
for the King: and a Recognizance is but an Obligation of Record; and wherefore
should not a Capias lie thereupon, as well as upon an Action brought upon an
Obligation? The Statute of West. 2. cap. 45. Si recens sit Cognitio statim
habeat Querens Breve de Executione illius Recognitionis: and the Statute does
not speak in certain what manner of Writ, or what manner of Execution,
therefore we ought to resort to the Common Law for it, as that is a Capias.
Gent, Baron argued and agreed in every point with Baron Clark.

Manwood, chief Baron, argued, That the Plaintiff should recover; and he put
the Case of Recognizance: The Plaintiff sueth two Scire facias's, upon which
two Nichel's are returned; and afterward a Levari facias, and upon that also
Nihil is returned, and then issues a Capias ad satisfaciendum for to take the
said Francis Woodhouse, who then was in Prison for Felony, upon which Capias
the Sheriff did arrest him, and he being afterward convicted of Felony,
escaped; upon this matter Debt is brought against the Sheriff. A Recognizance
taken in the Chancery is a thing upon Record in a Court of Record, an
Obligation of Record, and a Debt upon Record. It has been objected, where no
Capias lies in the Process upon the Original, there no Capias lies upon the
Execution: but it is good to examine the Reason thereof; for Lex plus laudatur
quando ratione probatur: The Capias upon a Recognizance is not by 25 E. 3. but
by the common Law: for here is a Debt upon Record, wherefore shall not this
body be subject to it, as well as in the case of a Debt upon a bare Obligation?
I do admit the Rule, That where there is no Capias ad respondendum, there is no
Capias ad satisfaciendum, but that ought to be intended in cases where there is
an Original, and Mesn Process before Judgment; but here is no Original, nor
Mesn Process before Judgment, ergo, our Case is not within the same Rule: But I
will put a good Rule; It is Debt upon Record, ergo a Capias lies: In the
King's Bench, If the Defendant comes in by Latitat, if the cause whereof the
Action is brought be of importance, he is to put in special Bail; and those who
bail him shall be bounden in a Recognizance, etc. The Defendant is condemned in
the Action: Now if the Defendant cannot be found, so as Execution may be sued
forth against him, then a Scire facias shall issue forth against the Sureties
which bailed him, and upon that a Capias, and that is very frequent therein
use: So also is the course of the Court of Common Pleas; ergo it shall be so in
the Chancery in case of a Recognizance. If one be taken in Execution upon a
Statute Staple, and sueth an Audita Querela upon a Release, or other matter,
and be bound with Sureties in the double value, etc. to the King, and to the
party: If he be condemned in the Audita Querela, etc. and cannot be found, a
Scire facias shall issue forth against the Sureties, and thereupon a Capias.
And this question, If the Capias in this case lies, or not? is to be decided
either by Audita Querela in the Chancery, or by Error in the King's Bench: for
the said Courts have authority to affirm the proceedings, or to disaffirm them.
And here the Question was, If Woodhouse were imprisoned or no? and not, if the
Capias erronice emanavit or not? And he took a difference where Process is
awarded out of a Court which has not authority of the Principal cause; there
it is coram non judice, and the Process is void; and if the Sheriff takes the
party by force of such Process, it is merely void, and he a Trespassor; but
contrary if the Court has authority of the principal cause, there if the
Process be misconceived, it is only erroneous. 10 Co. 76.
An unskilful man in Chancery makes an Appeal of Murder, retornable in the
Common Pleas; and there an unskilful Clark makes a Capias upon it, the same is
coram non-judice, and not all together void: But if in a Writ of Entry, in the
nature of an Assise, the Demandant has Judgment to recover Debt and Damages,
and thereupon issues a Capias, the same is not void, for it is but a
misawarding of the Process, and provide emanavit. If out of the Common Pleas
immediately a Writ issues to the Sheriff of Chester, which is a County
Palatine, where the King's Writ does not run, the same is void, and false
imprisonment lies upon such a taking. A Formedon brought in the King's Bench,
and upon that a Capias, is void, and coram non judice; and the Sheriff is bound
to take notice of the Law in such cases, that those of the King's Bench have
not authority to hold plea in real Actions. As to that, That Woodhouse was
convict of Felony, the same shall not avoid the Execution; but I grant, that
the King shall be satisfied before the subject, etc. And he relied much upon
the said Case cited before, 13 E. 3. Bar. 253. as to the matter of the Capias:
19 H. 9. In Escape the Defendant pleaded a Release of him who recovered to the
Prisoner being in Execution, and it was holden no Plea. And in the principal
Case Judgment was given for the Plaintiff.

CXIII. Bridget Clark 's Case. Antea 30, 31. Mich. 29 Eliz. In the Exchequer.
THE Case was, Clark was indebted to Archdel by Obligation, and afterward
delivered to Andrews certain Hogsheads of Wine to satisfy the said Archdel the
said Debt: and afterward the Obligation of Clark is assigned to the Queen for
the Debt of Archdel: And if the property of the said Hogsheads of Wine were
altered by the delivery of them to Andrews before the Assignment? was the
Question. Egerton, Solicitor, The property is not altered, for the Bailor might
have an Action of Account against Andrews before that he has delivered the
same over according to the Bailment: but if he has delivered them over, the
same is a good bar in an Account: But if one be accountable to me upon a
Bailment, and afterward I do require him to deliver the Goods over to A. the
same is not in bar of Account, but is good in discharge of account before
Auditors; for the same is matter after the Bailment, not upon the Bailment. If
Goods be bailed to bail over upon a consideration precedent of his part to whom
they ought to be bailed, the Bailor cannot countermand it; otherwise it is,
where it is voluntary and without consideration; but where it is in
consideration of a Debt not countermandable, contrary, if it be to satisfy the
Debt of another. Manwood, Where the Debtor of the King is sufficient there a
Debt due to him ought not to be assigned to the King, but only where the Debt
of the King is doubtful, and that was the ancient course; but now at this day
multi videntur and habentur divites, qui tamen non sunt; and therefore omnis
Ratio tentanda est, for the Recovery of the King's Debts. But as to the Case
before us; The Wife is Executrix to her Husband, who was indebted to Archdel,
and she delivers the Goods to Andrews to satisfy Archdel, and all that is
before the Assignment: And I am of Opinion, That the property of the said Goods
is altered; for, as the case is, Andrews was Surety for Clark, and has a
Counter-Bond of Clark to save him harmless: If I borrow 100 l. and deliver unto
the Lender Plate for the security of it, the property general of it is in me,
yet the Bailee has a special interest in it, until he be paid. If Goods be
delivered to A. to pay unto B. A. may sell them. An Executor has Goods of the
Testators, and he with his own Moneys pays the Debts of the Testator, he
shall retain the Goods, and the property is altered. And here in our case,
Andrews may by virtue of this Bailment sell the Goods, and with the Moneys
arising thereof pay the said Archdel. And afterward Judgment was given
accordingly, that the property of the Goods by the delivery over by Andrews was
altered.

CXIV. Foskew 's Case. Mich. 29 Eliz. In the Exchequer.
FRancis Foskew, seized of the Manor of Foskew in his Demesne as of fee in
consideration of a Marriage to be had with Francis his Son with M. Daughter of
Sir Edw. Huddleston, 9 Feb. 25. Feb. covenanted to levy a Fine of the Manor
aforesaid; and that the said Fine should be to the use of himself and his Wife
for their lives, and after their deaths to the use of the said Erancis their
Son, and M. and the Heirs of their bodies begotten, with remainders over: The
Fine was levied accordingly: afterward, 19 October. 27 Eliz. Francis the Father
acknowledged a Recognizance to the Queen, and died, his Wife died; and now this
Manor is extended for the Debt to the Queen by force of the Statute of 33 H. 8.
And now Coke came into Court, and prayed that the said Manor might be
discharged of the Debt to the Queen, because it is not chargeable by the said
Statute; the words of whicih Statute are, All Manors, Lands, Tenements, etc.
which hereafter shall descend, remain, or revert in Fee-simple, tail general or
special, by, from, or after the death of any his or their Ancestor or Ancestors
as Heir, or by Gift of his Ancestor whose Heir he is; which said Ancestor or
Ancestors was, is, or shall be indebted to the King, or any other person or
persons to his use, by Judgment, Recognizance, Obligation, etc. In every such
case, the said Manors, etc. shall be charged, etc. This Statute was made for
the benefit of the King in two points: 1. To make Lands entailed liable to the
King against the issue tail for the Kings Debts in the cases aforesaid, where
they were not liable. 2. To make Bonds taken by the Officers of the King to the
use of the King, as also of Statutes. We cannot deny but that we have Lands of
the Conusor, and of the Gift of the Conusor our Ancestor, whose Heir we are,
who was indebted to the Queen, and yet we are not within this Statute: Was or
shall be indebted, shall not be intended after the Gift made; for if he first
convey his Land, and afterward becomes indebted, the same is not within the
Statute: and where a mischief is to be remedied by a Statute, the remedy in
exposition of the Statute is to be applied according as the mischief does
require: [Shall be] is to be intended of future Debts after the Statute: and in
our case, the Father was not Receivor, or other Officer to the Queen: And if
this Statute should be so construed, the Father might take 10000 l. for the
Marriage of his son, and assurance of Lands unto him; and then if he will
acknowledge a Debt to the Queen, he should defeat the whole, which should be a
very great mischief: The words are, [By Gift after the Debt acknowledged to the
Queen.] And he cited the Case, 19 Eliz. Plow. 191. betwixt Ludford and Gretton,
upon the Statute of 18 H. 6. the words of which are, [ That whatsoever Warrant
hereafter to the Chancellor of England addressed, the day of the delivery of
the same it be entered of Record in the Chancery; and that the Chancellor make
Letters Patents upon the same Warrants, bearing date the day of the said
delivery in the Chancery, and not before: and all Letters Patents made to the
contrary shall be void.] And the Case was, That a Warrant was directed to the
Chancellor, for the making of Letters Patents, and delivered to him before the
making of them, but the day of the delivery was not entered of Record, etc. And
it was holden, that notwithstanding that, the Letters Patents were good; for
the mischief at the Common Law intended to be reformed by that Act, was not the
post-dating of the Letters Patents, but the ante-dating, and therefore that
ought to be principally taken into consideration: which mischief being
understood, the words of the said Statute are to be applied to it; ipsae etenim
Leges cupiunt, ut jure regantur; i. with an Equity according to the Mischief,
and not always according to the precise words: and in that case it is
sufficient if the Letters Patents bear date after, and not before the delivery
of the Warrant, and that was the matter intended to be reformed. Also, as our
Case here is, we are not within this Statute; for the words are, Of the Gift of
his Ancestour, but here the Son has not the Lands of the Gift of his
Ancestour, but rather by the Statute of Uses, and so he is in the Post and not
in the Per, by his Ancestour; for here the Fine was levied to diverse persons
unto the Uses aforesaid: and here the Gift was not a mere gratuity to his Son,
but in consideration that he should marry the Daughter of Sir Edw. Huddleston;
and also the Father was the King's Debtor after the Gift, and not before.

Popham, Attorney General, to the contrary: The letter of the Statute is with
us, for he comes in of the Gift of his Ancestour, who was indebted to the
Queen: and although that the Gift was by way of use, yet the precedents in the
Common Pleas and other Courts are, That he may declare, of the Feoffment of
such a one, although it was by way of use: and he said, If A. be bound to
enfeoff B. of such Lands, if he makes a Feoffment to the use of B. and his
Heirs, he has well enough performed the Condition: and if the Case should not
be within the Statute, then should that branch of the Statute be idle, and to
no purpose: For if the Ancestour be seized, and becomes indebted to the Queen,
and after makes a conveyance ut supra, the same is provided for by the first
branch of the Statute: For the Land is liable to the Recognizance or Obligation
made to the King, and that they shall be as effectual as a Statute Staple; and
reason requires, that the son, who comes in by mere gratuity of his Ancestour,
should be charged: And it was a common practice before the making of that
Statute, That the King's Officers would convey their Lands to their children,
and then become the King's Debtors; for the remedy of which mischief the
Statute was made, and the Statute of 27 Eliz. does not respect the Heir,
because he is Heir, but as a purchasor only, and that upon good consideration:
Coke, If any fraud can be found in our Case, then without doubt we should be
within the Statute, but being upon good consideration, it is out of the
Statute; nor was there any purpose in the father when he made the said
Conveyance, to become the King's Debtor, or Officer to him, for if there were,
then he is within the Statute, also the Gift had been a mere gratuity, etc. And
afterward, at another day, the Case was moved by Coke, and he said, That here
is not any Gift, because it was in consideration of Marriage, and then no gift,
for it is an old Proverb, What is freer than gift? Egerton, The father gives
to his son and heir, the same is within the Statute, and yet here is
consideration, (scil.) of blood; Coke contrary, Where the father gives to his
younger son, or to his daughter, which is not his heir; and of that opinion was
Manwood, chief Baron: And afterward, (as Coke reported) the son and his Lands
were discharged.

CXV. Amner and Luddington 's Case. Mich. 26 Eliz. In the King's Bench. Error.
3 Len. 89. 8 Co. 96.
ERror was brought in the King's Bench by Amner against Luddington, Mich. 25
and 26 Eliz. Rot. 495. The Case was, That one Weldon was seized, and leased
unto Pierpoint for ninety nine years, who devised the same by his Will in this
manner; I bequeath to my Wife the Lease of my House during her life, and after
her death I will that it go amongst my Children unpreferred. Pierpoint died,
his Wife entered, and was possessed virtute legationis praedict. and took
Husband one Fulshurst, against whom one Beswick recovered in an Action of Debt
140 l. upon which Recovery issued forth a Fieri facias, and upon that a
Venditioni Exponas, upon which the Sheriff sold the said term so devised to one
Reynolds: Fulshurst died, his Executor brought Error to reverse the Judgment
given against the Testator at the Suit of Beswick; the Wife did re-enter, and
sold the Land, and died. Alice, an unpreferred Daughter of Pierpoint, did
enter, and upon that matter found by special Verdict in the Common Pleas, the
entry of Alice was adjudged lawful: upon which Judgment Error was brought in
the King's Bench. And it was argued upon the words of the Devise, because here
the House is not devised, but the Lease it self, (scil.) all his interest in
the thing devised: And it is not like unto the Case betwixt Welchden and
Elkington, 20 Eliz. Plow. 519. where the Case was, That Davis being Lessee for
years, devised that his Wife should have and occupy the Land demised for so
many years as she should live; nor unto the Case of Paramour and Yardley, 21
Eliz. Plow. 539. for there the Less devised, That his Wife shall have the
occupation and profits of the Lands until the full age of his Son: For in
these two Cases the Land it self is quodam modo devised, but in our Case all
the Estate is devised, i. the Lease it self. And also in those two Cases a
certain person is assigned and named in the Will, who should take the residue
of the term which should be expired after the death of the Wife: But in the
Case at Bar, there is not any person certain appointed, etc. but the Devise, as
to that, is conceived in general words, to Children unpreferred; therefore
neither any possibility, nor Remainder in any person certain, therefore all the
term is wholly in the Wife, and then she might well dispose the whole. But all
the Court was to the Contrary, and that in this case the possibility should
rise well enough to the death of the Wife, to that Daughter unpreferred.
Another matter was moved, If the said term, being sold in the possession of the
Wife of the Devisor by force of the Execution aforesaid; If now, the judgment
being reversed, the sale of the term be also avoided? for now the party is to
be restored to all that which he had lost. And it was argued by Coke, That
notwithstanding the reversal of the Judgment, the sale did stand good; for the
Judgment for the Plaintiff in a Writ of Error is, That he shall be restored to
all that which he has lost Ratione judicii praedict. and the Judgment was,
That the Plaintiff should recover 140 l. and therefore by the Judgment in the
Writ of Error he shall be restored to so much, but the mean act, (scil.) the
sale of the Lease, shall stand, and shall not be defeated or avoided. As 7 H.
6. 42. A Statute Staple is bailed in Ouster le main, the Conusee brings Detinue
against the Bailee, and has Judgment, and recovers the Statute, and upon that
has Execution: The Baylee brings a Writ of Error, and reverseth the Judgment
given in the Detinue, yet the Execution shall stand, and Audita Querela does
not lie for the Conusor: And see 13 E. 3. t. Bar. 253. Accountant found in
Arrearages, committed to the next Gaol, escapes, and reverseth the Judgment
given against him in account, by an Ex part talis, yet the Action upon the
escape lies; and the Court, as to that point, all agreed; but that point did
not fall in Judgment; for by the sale nothing shall pass, but the interest in
praesenti, which was in the Wife of the Devisor; but the possibility to the
children unpreferred, was not touched thereby; And afterward the Judgment was
affirmed.

CXVI. Edwards and Halinder 's Case. Mich. 36 Eliz. In the Exchequer.
RIce Edwards brought an Action upon the Case against Halinder, See the Case
reported in Popham's Reports fol. 46. very short, but not with the Arguments.
and declared, That whereas one Banister had demised unto the Plaintiff a
Cellar, to have from week to week, Quandin ambabus partibus placuerit; And also
whereas the said Banister had leased to the Defendant a Shop, directly over the
said Cellar, there the Defendant had laid so great a burden upon the floor of
the said Shop, that there by the said floor fell down, and brake certain
vessels of the Plaintiff's full of Wine, by reason whereof the Plaintiff lost
his Wine, to the value of, etc. to his damages, etc. The Defendant said, That
before the charging of the floor, ut supra, The said floor had sustained
greater weight; and farther, that the said Banister let unto him the said Shop
for to lay there the weight of 30 Tun, and he had laid there but the weight of
12 Tun; and also that the Walls of the said Cellar are so weak, that the floor
of the said Shop fell by reason thereof; upon which there was a Demurrer in
Law. It was argued by Godfrey for the Plaintiff; Where injury or wrong is done
unto any, the Law gives remedy to the party grieved; and although that the Shop
was let unto him to lay wares there, which he has done, and that it was not
his intent to surcharge the said Warehouse, although the event be contrary, yet
forasmuch as by the laying of wares there, a wrong and damage follow to the
Plaintiff, the Defendant shall be punished; for the rule is Sic utere tuo, ut
alienum non laedas: If I have a house, and another builds so high over me,
that rainwater descends and falls from his house upon my house, an Action upon
the Case lies, See F. N. B. 184. So if by his building he stops my light, as
it was lately adjudged in the King's Bench, in the Case betwixt Bland and
Mosely: See 6 E. 4. 7. and 8. Damages recovered for a wrong done against the
will of the party: and see other Cases upon this Learning, 13 H. 4. t. Action
upon the Case 48. The Plaintiff had sold certain trusses of Hay to the
Defendant, within such a Meadow, to be carried away from the said Meadow within
a certain time; but the Defendant let the Hay lie there without carrying the
same away, so it putrified the Meadow, by reason whereof the Plaintiff lost the
profit of his Meadow for a great time; and thereupon brought an Action of the
Case against the Defendant, and the Action was adjudged maintainable: See 22 E.
4. 8. where the owners of the Plough in turning of the Plough, according to the
custom in the common fields upon the Land of another; one of the Plough
Cattle, against the will of the driver, takes a mouthfull of Grass, the same is
justifiable, but if the driver of the Cattle suffers the same to continue, an
Action will lie against him: So 22 E. 4. 49. Where I am bound to enclose my
Land against another, and in default of enclosure, the Cattle of the other
escaped into my Land and Close, I shall not punish him; but if he after notice,
does suffer them to continue there, he shall be punished, although it be
through my default: Also it is alleged in our Declaration, That the Defendant
intending to hurt and spoil the Plaintiff's Wines, did lay such a weight, etc.
And the Defendant answers thereunto. That the floor fell in default of
repairing of the walls of the Cellar, or for the ruinousness of them, where he
ought to have pleaded farther, Absque hoc, that the Shop was surcharged with
the intent to hurt the Plaintiff's Wines; In an Action upon the Case, upon a
Trover, The Defendant pleads, that the goods whereof, etc. were pawned unto him
for the security of certain money not yet paid, The same is no plea without
saying farther, Absque hoc, that he did convert, etc. See 43 E. 3. 33. In an
Action brought against a Smith, for his negligence in curing of a Horse which
he took upon him to cure; the Defendant was driven to traverse, Absque hoc,
that the Horse perished in default of his care: Dalton contrary, Where in doing
of a lawful Act, by a mishap a damage comes to another, against the will of
the doer, no punishment shall follow: See the Case cited by the other side in 6
E 4. 7. and 8. If he might have done more than he had done to have prevented
the mischief, he should be punished; but if he could not have done more than he
has done, or otherwise than he has done to prevent it, he is dispunishable,
and he may, Uti jure suo, although it be to the prejudice of another: See 12 H.
8. 2. and 3. Harcourt's Case; If I cannot otherwise let the water out of my
Land, I may justify the letting of it in your Land which is adjoining,
although that your Land be drowned thereby: Sometimes ignorance of the party
shall excuse the offense: As if my Dog worry your Sheep, if I do not know of
such ill quality in him, I shall not be punished for the same. And it does not
appear that the Defendant had notice of the ruinousness of the walls, although
now it appears that they were ruinous, and for that cause the floorfell; for
the Defendant said, That the walls were ruinous, in occultis and absconditis
partibus ipsorum; And here needs not any Traverse: For it is confessed, That
the floor of the Shop was surcharged, but the same is avoided and excused,
because that the walls were ruinous, in occultis and absconditis ipsorum
partibus; And forasmuch as our Landlord (who is also the Landlord of the
Plaintiff,) has let to us the Shop, to lay there the weight of 30 Tun,
therefore the Defendant has good right, as to such weight against the Lessor
of the Plaintiff, and all others, claiming under him. And here the Plaintiff
has declared of a Lease from week to week, Quamdiu ambabus partibus placuerit,
and has not averred the continuance of his Lease, etc. Godfrey, A Lease is
made from year to year, ut supra, etc. The Lessor brings Debt for the second
year, he need not to aver the continuance of the Lease; for when the second
year does begin, the Lessor cannot put him out that year; But we, upon the
matter, have averred the continuance, for we have said, Et sic possessionatus
existens, etc. Manwood, The Declaration is, That the Defendant, Nequitur and
malitiose intendens, etc. tantum ponderis, was laid upon the floor, Ita quod vi
ponderis dirupta fuit contabulatio: And the Plea of the Defendant is, Quod muri
in partibus occultis and absconditis ruinosi fuerunt, etc. and ideo corruerunt.
So as the Plaintiff speaks of the floor, and the Defendant of the walls, and so
the Defendant does not answer the Plaintiff; for the Shopman ought not to go
into the Cellar, nor the Cellar-man into the walls. But Dalton said, That the
Plea was, Quod diruptio and fractio contabulationis fuit ex eo quod muri
ruinosi fuerunt in partibus occultis and absconditis. At another day, it was
argued by Flemming for the Plaintiff, A voluntary and unlawful act is laid to
the charge of the Defendant, who pleads special matter to excuse himself, but
does not answer the point of the Action, but only that the fall was sudden, Et
quia muri fuerunt ruinosi in partibus occultis, etc. whereas we have declared,
that the weight was the cause thereof: 3 H. 6. Double Plea 31. In an Action
upon the Case, for negligent keeping of fire, the house of the Plaintiff was
burnt, he ought to take a Traverse, without that, that it was burnt by the ill
keeping of the fire of the Defendant; and he needs not to aver the continuance
of the Tenancy at will: 38 H. 6. 27. A Lessee for life assigns his Estate to B.
who Leases at will to C. B. is disseised by D. and C. ousted, C. reenters, and
brings Trespass, he must aver the Life of A. but not of B. nor the continuance
of the will. Atkinson contrary; I conceive there needs no Traverse, for the
matter of the Declaration is expressly confessed, and avoided, 5 H. 7. 12, 13.
where one makes Title to common, or Rent by prescription, if the other pleaded
unity of possession, he needs not traverse; so where he claims B. for his
Villain, etc. B. says, that he is a Bastard, there needs no Traverse. We have
confessed in pleading, Quod gravitate ponderis, the floor fell down; but we say
farther, that the cause was, because the walls were ruinous, etc. and here is
matter in Law; Who ought to repair them: The Lease was made unto the Defendant,
29 Julii, and the floor fell 30 Julii, the day following: and if by Law the
Defendant ought to repair them, it was impossible for him to do it, and that
shall excuse him: If one has a Shop, and another a Cellar under it, and the
Shop minatur rainam, there is a Writ in the Register, De reparatione facienda.
153, etc. And it lies against him who ought to repair by prescription, or by
the Law. And we who are the Lessee, are not bound to repair; for if the ground
Timber be in decay, and so the house ruinous at the time of the Lease, it is a
good Plea in an Action of Waste, if the house fell in such defect; for the
Lessee is not bound to such reparation, (scil.) for great timber, which was
rotten at the time of the Lease. But if after the Lease it becomes rotten for
want of covering, it is otherwise, See 12 H. 8. 1. And here the Plaintiff has
remedy against his Lessor, for he is bound to the reparations by the Law, and
not the Lessee; And as he may have the said Writ, De reparatione facienda,
before the mischief, so he may now have after the mischief: and therefore no
Law binds the Defendant to repair; Nor is there any custom pleaded to that
purpose: and also for as much as the occasion of the Cause of action was the
ruinousness of the walls, the Defendant shall not be charged with the same: And
also he shall not be charged with a thing he could not prevent. Manwood, The
Defendant has pleaded, that the fall of the floor was, eo quod, the walls were
ruinous in partibus occultis, which was a secret thing, and unknown unto the
Defendant, upon which the Plaintiff has demurred, and so confessed the plea of
the Defendant to be true; and that he was ignorant of the feebleness of the
walls, and therefore he needs not any Traverse. And here the Defendant has
pleaded, That the Shop was demised to him for greater carriage. Gent, Baron,
was of opinion, That the Defendant had not fully answered to the Declaration;
for he is charged with the laying of so much weight upon the floor there, so
as, vi ponderis, it fell down; To which the Defendant has said, That the walls
were ruinous, in occultis partibus; and does not answer to the surcharging,
(scil.) Absque hoc, that he did surcharge it: Clark, Baron, It is a general
Rule, That every material thing alleged in the pleading, ought to be
traversed, confessed and avoided, which the Defendant has not done here but he
would excuse himself through the default of another, and answer nothing to that
with which he himself is charged; And afterward Judgment was given in the
Court of Exchequer for the Plaintiff. Whereupon, afterward, the Defendant
brought a Writ of Error in the Exchequer Chamber, where the Case was argued
again; But there the Judgment given in the Court of Exchequer was affirmed. See
this Case reported short, in Popham's Reports lately published.

CXVII. Linacre and Rhode 's Case. Trin. 31 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
Co. Rep. Blomfield's Case. 3 Len. 230.
THE Case was, That Linacre was bound in a Statute; and his body taken in
Execution, and the Sheriff voluntarily set him at large, and afterward the
Conusee sued Execution of the Lands of the Conusor; who thereupon brought an
Audita Querela. It was moved by Yelverton, Sergeant, That by that voluntary
discharge of him by the Sheriff, the whole Execution was discharged, for the
Execution is entire: See 15 E. 4. 5. Where the Conusee in a Statute Merchant,
has the body and lands of the Conusor in Execution, and afterward the Conusee
surrendreth his Estate which he has by Extent; now the Execution of his body
is discharged; and the Conusor shall have a Scire facias, or Audita Querela to
discharge his body: So if three Conusors be in Execution, and the Conusee does
discharge one of them, the same is a discharge of them all, and in the
principal Case, the body is the principal, and therefore the discharge of the
principal part of the Execution is the discharge of the whole. Hammon, Where
the Conusee himself discharges the Execution in part, it is good for the
whole, but where discharged by the Sheriff, Nihil operatur: Anderson, If the
Conusor dies in Execution, yet the Conusee shall have Execution against his
Heir of his land, for the having of the body in Execution, is not any
satisfaction to the party; for his body is but a pledge until the money be
paid; and there is no reason, that the act of the Sheriff should discharge the
Execution. Windham, to the same intent; And if the Conusee sueth Execution, and
has the body of the Conusor in Execution this day, he may the next day sue
Execution of the lands, and the next day after, of the goods; and if the
Conusee does discharge the body, the whole Execution is discharged, and it is
true, That if A. recovereth against B. in an Action of Debt, and B. is taken by
a Capias ad satisfaciendum, and afterward the Sheriff permits B.
voluntarily, to escape, here B. is discharged, although it be not the act of
the party; for there the Plaintiff had a full Execution, which is not here; for
in Case of Execution upon a Statute-Merchant, the Execution by the body is not
the full Execution, and therefore although the Sheriff has discharged the
body, yet the Conusee may have Execution of the goods and lands, but not of the
body; and afterward Judgment was given against the Plaintiff; That the Audita
Querela did not lie, and that Execution might be sued of the goods and lands
but not of the body.

CXVIII. Web and Mainard 's Case. Trin. 32 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
IN Ejectione firmae, The Case was, Walter Goldsmith, seized of certain lands,
made a Feoffment to the use of himself for life, and after to the use of John
his eldest son in Fee; Proviso, That after his death, his said son shall pay
unto his younger son, William, 30 l. by 3 l. per ann. at the Feast of St.
Michael until the entire sum be paid, and if he fail of payment, then to the
use of the said William and his heirs; Will. Goldsmith the Feoffor dies, the
money is not paid, but afterward the said younger son makes an Acquittance,
and thereby acknowledges the Receipt of the said money, according to the
Proviso, John dies; Now, if the younger son may enter? And first, if the
younger son be concluded by that Acquittance, to say that the 30 l. was not
paid? And if he be not concluded, Then if because that the words are but words
of limitation, the younger brother has Title of Entry. and then, if this Entry
be bound by the descent from John to his Heir? or if John by continuance of the
possession, after the breach of the Proviso, be a Dissesor, or not? were
Questions propounded to the Court, which the Court took time to consider of,
yet it was then said, That the use was settled in William, and the possession
executed unto it, but not such a possession upon which an Assise or Trespass
lies.

CXIX. Willis and Jermine 's Case. Hill. 31 Eliz. In the King's Bench. Rot. 647.
IN Ejectione firmae, It was found by special Verdict, 1 Cro. 167. Roll Tit.
Estate 830.
That the Dean and Chapter of Exeter Leased the Land, where, etc. to Jermine,
rendering Rent to be paid at their Chapter House at Exeter, and for default of
payment, that such Lease shall be void and cease; and that the said Jermine
conveyed his interest to the Defendant, and afterward the Rent was demanded at
the Chapter House, but not paid; and afterward, The Dean and Chapter, by the
name of Dean and Chapter of St. Mary of Exeter, where they are incorporate by
the name of Dean and Chapter of St. Mary in Exeter,) make an Indenture of Lease
for forty years, in their Chapter House to Willis, and thereunto put their seal
in the Chapter House, and made a Letter of Attorney to another to enter, and to
make Livery of the said Deed, which was done accordingly: it was moved by
Harris, Sergeant, That this Lease made in manner, etc. is not good, for the
Corporation is misnamed, i. of Exeter, for in Exeter; but the Court disallowed
that Exception; for there is not any material variance, and so it was said, it
has been ruled. And he said, that for another cause the Lease is not good; for
when the Dean and Chapter in their Chapter House make this Indenture of Lease,
Davis Rep. 42.
and set their Chapter-seal to it, It was their Deed presently, without other
delivery: and then Jermine being in possession at the time of the putting of
the seal to it; they were out of possession thereof, and so the new Lease void,
because they were not in possession at the time of the making of it; for no
delivery is necessary to the Deed of a Corporation; but the date of the sealing
of it, makes it a perfect Deed, and then the delivery of the same by the
Attorney is of no effect. Wiat to the contrary, This Lease is good: For Jermine
was but Tenant at sufferance at the time of this Lease; but if Jermine had been
a Disseisor, then delivery in the Chapter House was void, and then the second
delivery upon the land good. And Harris agrees, That if Jermine be but Tenant
at sufferance, then the second Lease made of the land was good enough. But it
was agreed by the whole Court, That the Lease is good enough for the manner,
and there is not other form or means for a Corporation to make a Lease than
this here: And it was moved; That the first Lease was not utterly ceased
without entry, and then the new Lease being made before, entry is void; But
Wray was clear of a contrary opinion; and said, That the Dean and Chapter might
make such a Lease before entry; But Gaudy, Justice, doubted of it, Vide 28 H.
8. 6. Dyer and Com. 2. and 3. Ph. and Ma. 132. Browning and Beston's Case.

Harris The Attorney has not pursued his Authority, for his Warrant is to
enter into the Land in the name of the Corporation, and claim it to their use,
and then to deliver the Lease made upon the land; but the Jury have not found
such matter, but have found only that he came by virtue of the said Letter of
Attorney, and delivered the same upon the land, but do not find that he entered,
and claimed the same to the use of the said Dean and Chapter, But the Court
held the same good enough; for in a special Verdict, every particular
circumstance need not to be found, and in pleading it ought to be; and because
it is found, That the Attorney, by virtue of the said Warrant of Attorney, has
delivered the Deed upon the Land, he has pursued his Warrant in all. Gaudy,
Delivery of the Deed is as necessary in case of a Corporation; as it is in the
case of other persons.

CXX. Rymersly and Cooper 's Case. Trin. 31 Eliz. Rot. 768. In the King's Bench.
1 Cro. 168, 169.
IN an Action upon the Case, for slanderous words, the Plaintiff declared, That
where, by the custom of the City of London, it has been used, If the Mayor,
Recorder, or any Alderman, being a Justice of Peace there, might take the
Deposition of any person produced before them, or any of them to be deposed in
perpetuum rei memoriam ex part alicujus personae, which Depositions are there
recorded, in perpetuam rei memoriam; and are good matter to be given in
Evidence to any Jury there to inform their consciences of the truth of the
thing in Question, and declared farther, That he himself was produced before
one Bond, as a Witness to testify his knowledge in quadam causa ibid. ex part
Edw. Stapleton, before whom he deposed, etc. The Defendant spoke these words in
scandal of the Plaintiff, Rymersly was forsworn in the said oath before, etc.
The Defendant pleaded, That the Plaintiff made not any such oath, and upon that
the Plaintiff did demur in Law. George Crook prayed Judgment for the Plaintiff,
for the same is no plea; for the oath is but an Inducement, and therefore not
traversable; for the ground of the Action is the speaking of the words; and
admit there were not any such Oath taken by the Plaintiff, the offense of the
Defendant was the greater, Nam peccavit in utroque, tam in juramento, quod
nullum omnino fuit, quam in perjurio, quod sine juramento esse non potuit; for
if one says, A. Murdravit J. S. whereas there never was any such J. S. yet the
Action lies for the scandalous words: Also this Plea does amount but to the
general issue, See 4 E. 6. Action, Sur le Case 113. 34 H. 6. 28. And as to the
words, they are Actionable; for (forsworn) amounts to purjured, being spoken
upon on oath taken in a Court of Record, and so was it lately holden in the
Case betwixt Brook and Doughty: Brook and Doughtie's Case.
Godfrey, Contrary, The Declaration is not good, for the custom in London is
not well laid, or pursued; and therefore, upon the matter, it is but an oath
taken before a private man; for he has declared, That in the City of London,
it has been used, etc. but does not say, That the City of London is Antiqua
Civitas, as he ought. See the Case of the Prior of Lantony, 12 E. 4. 8. and 22
H. 6. Prescription, 47. If a man alleges a custom within a Town, he ought
first prescribe, That the said Town is an ancient Town. Also it is not set
forth in the Declaration: That Bond, at the time of the Deposition taken, was a
Justice of Peace in London, and then the custom is not well persued. But
afterward, the Record was looked upon, and allowed to be good by the Court,
and the Court conceived, that the Plea of the Defendant was good enough, as 13
E. 4. 8. In Debt against an Abbat, the Plaintiff counted upon a borrowing by
the predecessor, etc. the Defendant pleaded, That he did not borrow, and it was
holden a good Plea, and yet the Plaintiff in such Case might plead the general
issue, See 26 H. 8. and 34 H. 6. Br. Action Sur le Case, 103. 3. Ma. Dyer. 121.
The Lord Mounteagle's Case, 34 H. 6. 43. by Moile. In Trespass, Quare
servientem suum verberavit, etc. It is a good Plea, to say, That he was not the
servant of the Plaintiff; and if in the principal, the Defendant plead, Not
guilty, he should thereby confess, that the Plaintiff was sworn. Wray, chief
Justice, The Plea of the Defendant is good: And it was moved by Egerton,
Solicitor general, That the custom to take Oath, as is alleged, is not
allowable, because it is not a reasonable custom, that such Depositions should
be taken, in perpetuam rei memoriam, If there be not a suit depending in the
Cause; and because that such custom not alledgable, it is not reasonable, and
then the Plaintiff ought not to have Judgment; and such also was the opinion of
Wray and Gaudy, Justices, But for the default in the Declaration, That it is
not alleged, That London is antiqua Civitas, Judgment was given against the
Plaintiff.

CXXI. Alexander and Dyer 's Case. Trin. 31 Eliz. Rot. 901. In the King's Bench.
IN Debt for Rent reserved upon a Lease for years, 1 Roll. 605. 1 Cro. 169.
The Plaintiff declared, That he leased to the Defendant 37 Sept. certain
Lands, to have and to hold from the Feast of St. Michael next ensuing, for a
year, rendering 10 l. Rent, Virtute cujus, 29 Sept. the said Lessee entered, and
enjoyed the said land, from the Feast of St. Michael, all the said year; and
because the Rent was behind, etc. And upon Nihil debet pleaded, it was found
for the Plaintiff. It was moved in Arrest of Judgment, that upon the Plaintiffs
own showing, here is no Rent behind, and then no cause of Action; for it
appears in the Declaration, that the Lessee entered 29 Sept. which is before
the Term begins; For the words of the Habendum are, From the Feast of St.
Michael, therefore the Feast of St. Michael is no part of the Term, and then
was the Defendant a Disseisor, and the day after, the Term began, which cannot
alter his Estate, but that he continues a Disseisor, and then he is not in by
force of the said Lease, and so no Rent can be due: Williams, As the
Declaration is here, the same is not any disseisin; for the Plaintiff set forth
in his Declaration, That the Lessee, the Defendant has occupied the Land
demised, the whole year, and so has not admitted any Disseisin, it being in
his election to make it a Disseisin or not: Clench, Justice, Be it a Disseisin
or not, or be it that the Defendant enters or not, he is to pay the Rent:
Gaudy, The Lessee is a Disseisor, and continues a Disseisor, and yet Debt
lies against him for the Rent, by reason of the privity of Contract: which see
Rysden's Case, 24 H. 8. Dyer 5. And so in our Case, Quod fuit concessum per
totam Curiam, and afterward Judgment was given for the Plaintiff.

CXXII. Monings and Worley 's Case. Hill. 32 Eliz. In the King's Bench. Rot.
561. Error.
IN Debt upon an Obligation brought by Mary Worley, against Monings in the
Common Pleas. The Condition was, That if Mary Worley the Plaintiff in the said
Action does not depart out of the service of the Defendant without license of
the Defendant Monings; nor marry her self, but with his consent, Then if the
Defendant shall pay to the said Mary within twenty eight days after demand by
her made (of Monings) at his house at Waldersey, 100 l. That then, etc. And the
Defendant in the said Action pleaded, That the said Mary the Plaintiff, in the
said Action, 4 Maii, 30 Eliz. departed out of his service without license, The
Plaintiff Mary, by Replication said, That 6 September. the same year she departed
out of his service with license, and that 4 October. after, she demanded the said
100 l. at Waldersey aforesaid, and he refused to pay it, Absque hoc, that she
departed out of his service 4 Maii, 30 Eliz. without license, and the Writ bare
date, 18. of October, next after the demand; And it was found for the
Plaintiff, and Judgment given for her in the Common Pleas; and now a Writ of
Error is brought by Monings. Tanfield, The Judgment ought to be reversed; for
always the Replication in such cases, ought to contain sufficient Cause of
Action, and sufficient breach of the Condition, or otherwise the Plaintiff
shall not have Judgment, although that the Issue be found for him: as 7 E. 4.
31. In trespass for taking of goods, of A. and B. A. pleads Not guilty, B.
justifies, the Plaintiff makes Title to the goods by a gift, B. traverseth the
gift, and it is found for him against the Plaintiff, A. is found guilty: Now,
although A. be found guilty, yet the Plaintiff shall not have judgment against
him; for it is found, that he has not any Title to the goods. As in Debt upon
a Bond against A. and B. A. pleads Non est factum; B. pleads the release of the
Plaintiff, and it is found the Deed of A. and that the Plaintiff has released
to B. the Plaintiff shall never have Judgment; for upon the Verdict, it
appears, that he has not cause of Action: And here in the Replication, there
is not a sufficient breach showed of the Condition; for although that Mary has
not departed from the service of the said Defendant, yet the same is not
material; but the Defendant had twenty eight days after the demand, to pay the
100 l. but the same is not so here, for the Plaintiff has prevented the
Defendant; for the demand is alleged to be 4. Oct. and the Writ bears date 18.
October. the same year, and so the Defendant had not his time allowed him. Gaudy,
The issue is taken upon the departure out of his service, so as the demand is
not now material, and therefore the alleging of the same is surplusage, and
shall not hurt: And the Defendant has pleaded in Bar, the departure of the
Plaintiff out of his service, upon which he relieth, and the demand set forth
in the Replication, is not to be regarded, as to prejudice the Plaintiff: As 3
Ma. Dyer 115. Lessee for years covenants that he will not cut any Trees, The
Lessor assigns the breach of the Covenant in succidendo twenty Oaks, The Lessee
pleads, that he did not cut the twenty Trees, nor any of them; The Jury found,
that the Defendant had cut down ten Trees, The Plaintiff upon that Verdict
shall have Judgment, for the rest is but surplusage; and more put in issue than
there needs to be. Fenner, It is not any full Plea to say, That the Plaintiff
did not depart out of the service of the Defendant 4 Maii, for if she departs
at any other time, she shall not recover, for which cause she ought to have
pleaded, That she continued in his service until such a day, and then she
departed with his license, and the inducement to the traverse ought to be
sufficient matter, otherwise it is not a full Plea, nor the Traverse is not
good. And if it be surplusage, yet if it be not matter against her self, it
makes the Plea naught, which see 1 H. 7. 29. 6 H. 7. 16. Gaudy conceived, that
the Judgment was well given, for the Defendant was at his liberty to plead the
departure of the Plaintiff without his license, or to stand upon the demand.
And now, although he pleads the departure, yet the demand is not confessed. And
afterward the Judgment given in the Court of Common Pleas was affirmed.

CXXIII. Bashpool 's Case. 27 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
THE Case was this, The Father seized of Lands, Styles Rep. 148.
is bound in an Obligation, and devises his Lands to his Wife until his Son
comes to the age of twenty one years, the remainder to the Son in Fee, and
dies; and no other Lands descend or come to the Son from his Father. It was
moved by Godfrey, That the Heir in that case at his Election might wave the
Devise, and take by descent, or e contra: See 9 E. 4. 18. by Needham. But Gaudy
and Shute, Justices, 3 Len. 118.
were of opinion, That the Son should be adjudged in by Descent: Clench
contrary.

CXXIV. Bennet and Shortwright 's Case. Trin. 30 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
THE Case was, 1 Cro. 206.
The Defendant sued the Plaintiff in the Spiritual Court for Tithes in kind,
and now the Plaintiff prayed a Prohibition, and suggested, That they had used
in the said Parish, time out of mind, etc. to take the tenth Sheaf in
satisfaction of Tithe of Corn, etc. and in those years in which the Plaintiff
had supposed the subtraction of his Tithes, he had severed the tenth Sheaf from
the nine parts, and the Parson would not take them away: and that he had
offered that matter by way of Plea in the Spiritual Court, but they there would
not allow of it: And the Court was clear of opinion, That the suggestion was
good; for if the Parishioner sets out his Tithes, and the Parson will not
take them, or if they be destroyed by Cattle by his Laches, he shall not have
Tithes again: and therefore if the Ecclesiastical Court will not allow that
Plea, it is reason that the party have a Prohibition, for after severance
transit decima in Catalla: But it was said by the Court, That if the
Parishioner does set forth his Tithes, and takes them again, he may be sued for
Tithes in the Spiritual Court, and the setting forth shall not excuse him.

CXXV. Walter against Pery and Spring. Mich. 32 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
WAlter brought a Scire facias against Pery and Spring, Sureties for one Brook
upon Bail in an Action of Debt: The Defendants pleaded the death of Brook
before Judgment given against him: And all the Justices (except Wray) held,
that the Plea was not good, for it is a surmise against the Judgment; for
Judgment cannot be given against a dead man. Wray, The same is Error in fact,
and of such Error the party may have advantage in this Court. Gaudy, The Surety
cannot take advantage of Error, nor plead it, for he is a stranger to the
Record. Wray, He may plead, that the Defendant is dead after the Judgment, quod
fuit concessum: but it was ruled, That the Defendants should be sworn that
their Plea was true.

CXXVI. Aldersley and Duparrie 's Case. Mich. 32 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
IN Debt upon an Obligation bearing date 4. Julii, 30 Eliz. The Defendant
pleaded, that it was endorsed with condition to pay 50 li. before 15 October. 31
Eliz. and pleaded, that he had paid it before the 15. of October. aforesaid,
scil. the ninth of June, 30. Eliz. which is three Weeks before the date of the
Obligation, upon which the Action is brought: And they were at Issue, That the
Defendant Non solvit before 15 October. etc. And the Jury have found, That the
Defendant had not paid it before 15 October. and that matter was assigned for
Error; for that Plea is contrary and repugnant in it self, to alledg the
payment before the date of the Obligation: But it was moved, That here the day
of payment is not material, and but matter of surplusage; for the Issue is,
Whether the Defendant paid the money before the 15. day of October? and the
Jury have found the negative, so as the day in the Scilicet is not material,
and the alleging of that is matter of surplusage: As 20 H. 6. 15. Trespass
Quare clausum fregit, and herbam consumpsit, continuand. transgress. from such
a day usque ad diem impetrationis brevis praedict. Scilicet, 14 F. 17 H. 6.
whereas the date of the Writ fuit 12. October. 17 H. 6. scil. the October before
February: But it was not allowed; for the day of the Writ brought is certain
enough, and the mistaking in the Scilicet is not to any purpose. Wray, Payment
before the day is not a good Plea, if he does not show the day and place. It
was adjourned.

CXXVII. Parker and Burton 's Case. Trin. 31 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
IN an Action upon the Case for slanderous words, (scil.) That the Plaintiff
was perjured: The Defendant does justify, That whereas a suit was prosecuted
in the Exchequer-Chamber at Westminster betwixt the Defendant and another, and
from thence a Commission was awarded out of the said Court to diverse persons,
to examine certain Witnesses at B. in Berk. and there, by virtue of the said
Commission, the Plaintiff was deposed, and false deposuit, praetextu cujus, he
spoke the said words. Antea 811.
The Plaintiff replicando says, De injuria sua propria absque tali causa: upon
which Issue was joined, and tried in Berk. and found for the Plaintiff. And it
was moved by Coke in Arrest of Judgment, That the said Issue ought not to be
tried in Berks only, but by both Counties Mid. and Berks; for all the matter
of justification does arise out of both Counties; the Suit and the Commission
which was in Midd. and the Execution of the Commission and the Oath which were
in Berks; all which matters is but one Case: as 2 H. 7. 3. and 4. Atkinson, The
Trial is well for the manner, for the matter of the justification is the
Perjury, and the Suit and Commission are but induction and conveyance to the
Action: Also the Defendant has not showed, that the Exchequer-Chamber is in
the County of Midd. as he ought: As where a man pleads a thing done in any
Court, except in the Common Pleas, he ought to show in what County the said
Court was at the time that such thing was done, for Communia Placita teneantur
in loco certo. Gaudy and Wray, When the Defendant does justify by reason of
the Perjury, and the Plaintiff replies without such cause, the same amounts to
as much as if he had traversed the Perjury, which being supposed to be
committed there, shall be tried there. Coke, It was the Case of one Loveday, 25
Eliz. In an Action upon the Case for slanderous words, the Defendant did
justify, by reason of a Robbery committed by the Plaintiff in another County;
and the Plaintiff pleaded De son tort demesne sans tiel Cause: the same shall
be tried by both Counties: See 2 H. 7. 3. Also it was moved, that here it is
not showed in what County the Exchequer Chamber is: Admit that it be in Berks,
yet it ought to be tried by both Counties, and that was Chelderlie's Case: And
although it be not showed in what County the Exchequer Chamber is, the
Plaintiff had Judgment to recover, and the Trial was held good enough.

CXXVIII. Sir Tho. Bacon 's Case. Hill. 31 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
A Writ was awarded out of the Court of Admiralty against Sir Thomas Bacon and
Sir Thomas Heyden, to show cause, (whereas the Earl of Lincoln, late High
Admiral of England, had granted to them by Letters Patents, to be Vice-Admirals
in the Counties of Norfolk and Suffolk,) why the said Letters Patents ought not
to be repealed and adnulled? and so the said Writ was in the nature of a Scire
facias. And now it was made by Coke, Postea 114.
That although the Admiral had but an Estate for life, yet the Patents did
continue in force after his death: As the Justices here in the Common Pleas,
although they have their places but for life, yet they may grant Offices which
shall be in force after their deaths, etc. And because this matter is
determinable at the common Law, he prayed a Prohibition; for in the Admiral
Court they will judge according to the Civil Law: and the Court gave day unto
the other side, to show cause unto the contrary, or otherwise a Prohibition
should be awarded.

CXXIX. Weshbourn and Mordant 's Case. Mich. 31 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
IN an Action upon the Case, the Plaintiff declared, 1 Cro. 291. 1 Len. 247. 3
Len. 174.
That whereas he was possessed of a parcel of Land called the Parsonage, lying
adjoining to a certain River, from the 29 of May, 29 Eliz. until the day of
the bringing of this Writ, the Defendant had the said twentieth day of May
stopped the said River with certain Loads of Earth, and so it continued until
the fourteenth day of February, by which his land was drowned, and so he had
lost the profit of it by that time. And it was moved in Arrest of Judgment,
That upon the Declaration there does not appear any cause of Action, for the
Plaintiff has made Title to the Land drowned from the twentieth of May, so as
that day is excluded, and the Nuisance is said to be made the twentieth day, and
so it appears the Nuisance was before the possession of the Plaintiff; and if
it were so, then cannot he complain of any wrong done before his time: To which
it was answered, That although the stopping was made before his possession, yet
the continuance of the same is after, and a new wrong, for which an Action
lies: as 5 H. 7. 4. It was presented, That an Abbat had not cleansed his
Ditch, etc. by reason of which the Highway is stopped: The Successor shall be put
to answer to the said Indictment, by reason of the continuance of it: And see,
that continuation of a Nuisance is as it were a new Nuisance, 14 and 15 Eliz.
320. And it may be that the Plaintiff was not damnified until long time after
the twentieth day of May, (scil.) after the stopping: And the words of the Writ
here are satisfied and true: And afterward Judgment was given for the
Plaintiff.

CXXX. Trusto and Ewer 's Case. Pasc. 31 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
1 Cro. 23.
IN this Case it was agreed for Law, That if a Controversy be betwixt two for
the Title of a Lease for years, and they submit the matter to Arbitrament: and
the Arbitrators award, that one of them shall have the term: the same is a good
Gift of the interest of the term: See 12 Ass. 25. 14 H. 4. 19. 24. But if the
Award be, that the one shall permit the other to enjoy the term, the same is no
Gift of the interest therein: See, as to the Arbitrament, 9 E. 4. 44.

CXXXI. Andrew 's Case. Pasc. 32 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
1 Cro. 214.
IN the Case of Andrews of Grays Inn, it was holden by Gaudy and Fenner,
Justices, That if a Lease for years be made by Deed indented with these words,
demisi and ad firmam tradidi; That upon that Writ of Covenant lies against the
Lessor, if he himself enters upon the Lessee; but contrary if a stranger
enter, if it has not clause of Warranty: For by Fenner, when Covenant is
brought upon that word Demisi, the Plaintiff shall recover the term it self,
but not damages, and that cannot the Plaintiff do when a stranger enters; and
that was holden for clear Law: See 9 Eliz. Dyer 257. A covenant against the
Heir in such case.

CXXXII. Bigg and Clark 's Case. Hill. 32 Eliz. Rot. 549. In the King's Bench.
IN an Action upon the Case in the Court of Hertford, the Plaintiff declared,
How that the Defendant hired a Horse of the Plaintiff to carry three Bushels of
Coals from Ware to his House in Hertford, and that the Defendant in
consideration thereof did promise the Plaintiff, quod ipse in via praedicta
nollet onerare the said Horse aliter, than with the said three Bushels of
Coals: And the Plaintiff said, That the Defendant had loaded the said
Plaintiff's Horse with a greater weight than with the said Coals, and so had
hurt his Horse, upon which the Plaintiff recovered: And Error was brought, and
the Error assigned was this, That it is not specially showed, how the Defendant
aliter loaded the said Horse, with what thing: As 19 H. 6. In Debt against
Executors, they plead, That they have only expended such a sum of the Goods of
the Testator in Funeral expenses, absque hoc, that they have administered
aliter, vel alio modo; the Plaintiff cannot Reply and say, that they have
administered aliter, vel alio modo, without showing how. Another Error was
assigned, because it is not certainly showed, how the Horse was hurt; but that
Exception was not allowed, for it is not the point of the Action: but for the
first matter, the Judgment was reversed,

CXXXIII. Toley and Windham 's Case. Trin. 32 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
IN an Action upon the Case, the Plaintiff declared, 1 Cro. 206. 3 Len. 150.
That whereas certain controversies were betwixt the Plaintiff and Defendant
for the profits of certain Lands which the Father of the Defendant had taken in
his life time: and whereas he had brought a Writ of Subpoena out of the
Chancery against the Defendant for the said profits taken by the Father of the
Defendant in his life, intending to put in a Bill against the Defendant in the
said Court: The Defendant, in consideration that the Plaintiff would stay his
intended Suit, promised, That if the Plaintiff can prove, that the Father of
the Defendant took the profits, or had the possession of the said Land under
the Title of the Father of the Plaintiff, that he should pay to him for all the
said profits: And farther declared, That he had proved, that his Father had
taken the profits under the Title of the Father of the Plaintiff. Coke took up
Exception to the Declaration, because it is not showed, How and by what means,
under the Title of the Father of the Plaintiff, he took the profits, as by
Lease, for that is traversable. Gaudy, Justice, The Son has not any cause of
Action or Suit for the profits taken in the time of the Father, therefore the
staying of Suit arising from such matter is not any consideration: But as to
the other Exception, because it is not showed how, and by what Title he took
the profits, it is well enough. As unto the other Exception, it was moved at
another day, that there was a Case betwixt Stone and Withypool; An Infant
promises to pay a simple Contract, Stone and Withypool's Case.
and thereupon there was a Suit in the Chancery, but it was holden that it was
not maintainable, for the promise was void, because there was no consideration.
And it was agreed by all the Justices, that this Action would not lie; for the
Plaintiff has declared, That where certain Controversies were betwixt the
Father of the Defendant and him, (scil.) the Plaintiff himself, for the profits
of certain Lands, which the Father of the Defendant had taken in the time of
the Father of the Plaintiff, etc. and he does not show, that he himself is Heir
or Executor of his Father, and therefore the Chancery cannot give him any
remedy: And on the other side, if the Plaintiff had any remedy, the same ought
to be against the Executors of the Father of the Defendant; and the Plaintiff
has not allowed, that the Defendant is Executor to his Father, and therefore
he has not any color of Suit against him, nor therefore is there any
consideration. Fenner, The Defendant by the Law is not chargeable, nor in
conscience, upon this matter he shall be charged; for by the same reason he
should be charged for the simple Contract of his Father, and a promise to pay
it will not bind him: And afterward Judgment was given against the Plaintiff.

CXXXIV. Veal and Robert 's Case. Trin. 32 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
IN an Ejectione Firmae, the Plaintiff declared, 1 Cro. 199.
How that John Veal leased to him, 30 Eliz for twenty one years ten Acres of
Land called M. The Defendant pleaded, That before the Demise and Ejectment, one
John Roberts was seized of the said ten Acres called M. in Fee, and 14 Eliz.
demised the same to one John Cox for life, and afterward 25 Elizab. John
Roberts dyed, and the Reversion descended to the now Defendant; Cox demised the
Land to John Veal for thirty years, who leased unto the Plaintiff, as in the
Declaration, of which he was possessed quousque, etc. Cox dyed 30 Eliz. after
whose death the Defendant entered and ejected prout was lawful for him to do,
etc. The Defendant by replication says, That before John Roberts had any
thing, one Wall of P. of Gloucester was seized of the said ten Acres inter alia,
and 29 H. 8. demised to John Veal, Father of the Lessor of the Plaintiff, the
said Land inter alia, by the name of two Messuages and two Yard Lands in the
County of Gloucester, nuper in tenura J. S. and of two other Houses in a Yard
Land tunc in tenura E. H. nec non de ten acres vocat. M. lying inter C. and I.
tunc in occupatione E. W. for term of years yet during, Habendum dict. four
Messuages and three Yard Lands, in tenura I.S. and E.H. nec non the said ten
acres to the said John Veal, a tempore mortis sursum redditionis forisfactur.
vel determinationis status vel terminor. praedict. I.H. and W. in eisdem, for
sixty years; by force of which he was possessed of the interest of the term
aforesaid: and afterward 14 Eliz. the Estate of the said E. W. in the said ten
acres ended, for which the said John Veal entered, and 25 Eliz. dyed intestate;
and Administration was committed to J. S. Lessor of the Plaintiff, by force of
which he entered, and Leased to the Plaintiff, and so he was possessed until
ejected: The Defendant did rejoyn, and said, That long before John Roberts had
any thing, William Roberts was seized in Fee, and enfeoffed the said John
Roberts before the Ejectment supposed, who demised unto John Cox, and so as in
the Bar, absque hoc, That the said Abbat demised to the said John Veal, modo
and forma prout the Plaintiff replicando allegavit, the which matter he is
ready to aver, and petit Judicium: The Plaintiff said, That the Abbat demisit
ut supra, and hoc petit quod inquiratur per patriam: and it was found for the
Plaintiff. And it was objected by Snag, That this issue was not well taken, for
the Estate of John Veal was not to begin before all the Estates, being in esse
at the time of the making of the Lease by the Abbat of Gloucester, are expired.
Coventry contrary; and that the Estates do begin severally, and singulatim, as
the Estates precedent shall end, and shall not expect until the other Estates
be determined; which see Justice Needham's Case, now reported by Coke, 5 part.
37 Eliz. and see Pollard's Case there cited. At another day it was objected by
Snag, That the new Estate could not begin in any part until all the former
Estates be determined; for if this new Lease be made, reserving Rent; and one
part thereof is now come in possession, then he should pay for that part all
the Rent: But the Court was clear of Opinion, That the Lease in the ten Acres
did begin presently, without having regard to the other Estates in demand for
the intent of the Lessor was, That no mean time should be betwixt the
expiration of the Lease for ten years, and the beginning of the new: As in the
Case betwixt Wrotesley and Adams, 1 Eliz. Plo. Com. 198. A Lease is made to
begin after the expiration of a former Lease for years; the first Lessee takes
a new Lease of the Lessor, which was a Surrender of the former Lease; If the
Lease, (scil.) the second Lease, shall now begin? was the question: or should
expect until the first Lease shall end by expiration, for the former Lease is
ended, but not expired, i. by effluction of time: And it was holden, that the
said second Lease should begin presently; for the intent of the Lessor was,
that no mean time should be betwixt the end and beginning of the said Estates.
And afterward Judgment was given for the Plaintiff.

CXXXV. Pasch. 32 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
NOTE, If a Record be removed out of the Common Pleas into the King's Bench by
Writ of Error, and the Plaintiff shall not assign his Errors, then a Scire
facias shall issue forth, quare executionem habere non debet: and upon summons,
or two Nichels returned, the Plaintiff shall have Execution, yet the Plaintiff
may assign his Errors. And to such a Scire facias Exception was taken, because
the Writ was coram nobis apud Westminster. where it should be, ubicunque fuerimus in
Anglia: and for that cause a Supersedeas was granted. It was also holden, That
although a Writ of Error does not lie here, upon a Judgment given in London;
yet upon a Judgment given at Newgate, which is upon Commission in their
Sessions, Error lies here.

CXXXVI. Bows and Vernon 's Case. Pasch. 32 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
DEBT upon an Obligation was brought by Bows against Vernon and Hennington, who
pleaded the Statute of 23 H. 6. and showed, that Vernon was in Execution, and
that the Bond was made for his deliverance against the Statute: The Plaintiff
replied, and said, That at the time of the making of the said Bond, the said
Vernon fuit sui juris, and at large, absque hoc, that he was in Prison tempore
confectionis scripti praedict. modo and forma, etc. Egerton, Solicitor, moved,
that the Traverse was not good; for if a man be in Prison in Execution, and
makes a promise to make a Bond, for which he is enlarged, and within an hour
after he makes the Bond, the same is within the Statute: and therefore this
issue is not well joined, but it ought to be absque hoc, that it was pro
deliberatione, etc. and of such opinion was Fenner and Gaudy, Justices: See
Dive and Manningham's Case, 4 E. 6. Plo. Com. 68, 69. acc.

CXXXVII. Hunt and Sone 's Case. Hill. 29 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
IN an Action upon the Case, the Plaintiff declared, Owen Rep. 42. 1 Cro. 118.
1 Roll. 30. 4 Len. 13.
That whereas the said Plaintiff was seized in his Demesne as of Fee, of certain
Land, and shows the certainty of them; the Defendant Sone, in consideration
that the said Plaintiff permitteret the said Sone, occupare terras praedictas
ab eodem die, (scil.) 20 Julii, 27 Eliz. usque ad secundum diem Novembris, quod
esset in Anno Dom. 1589. super se assumpsit, quod ipse idem W. Sone ad festum
omnium Sanctorum proxime sequen. 10 l. 2 s. 6 d. ac abinde annuatim durante
termino dicto 20 l. and 5 s. at festa Annunciationis beatae Mariae, ac omnium
Sanctor. per aequales portiones solvend. eidem Hunt (the Plaintiff) been and
fideliter contentare vellet: Ac licet praedict. W. Hunt permisit praefat. Sone
occupare terras praedict. a dict. 20 die Julii, 27 Eliz. usque ad secundum diem
November. 28 Eliz. Licetque post dictum 20 diem Julii, 27 Eliz. and ante
praedict. diem 2 November. Anno 20 Eliz. dictum festum omnium Sanctor Anno 27
Eliz. supradict. ac festum Annunciationis beatae Mariae Virginis, ac festum
omnium Sanctor. 28 Eliz. praeterierunt, praed. tamen W. Sone dict. 10 l. 2 s. 6
d. ad praed. festum omnium Sanctor. proxime sequent. post permissionem and
assumptionem praed. ac aliud 10 l. 2 s. 6 d. ad festum Annunciationis 28 Eliz.
ac alia 10 l. 2 s. 6 d. ad fest. omnium Sanct. Anno 28 Eliz. supradict. nondum
solvit, etc. The Defendant pleaded, That the Plaintiff entered into parcel of
the premises ultimo October. 28 Eliz. and eadem occupare eidem W. Sone non
permisit: upon which they were at issue, and it was found for the Plaintiff:
And now it was moved in Arrest of Judgment, That the Plaintiff had not cause of
Action before the whole Term be expired, for it is an entire Assumpsit, and
cannot be by Action severed; and therefore it was said, That if I promise to
pay you 20 l. viz. at such a Feast 5 l. and at such a Feast other 5 l. etc.
there before the last day of payment no Action lies, for the sum of 20 l. is
one and entire: but if I promise to another at Easter next 10 l. and at
Midsummer as much, etc. here are several Assumpsits; and upon default of
payment of the first sum Actio oritur, without respecting the last payment: But
at the last the Court was agreed, That Judgment, notwithstanding the said
Exception, should be given for the Plaintiff: and said, That the Declaration
was well enough, as well in respect of the Exception aforesaid, as also that
this word [licet] is effectual enough for the setting down the permission.

CXXXVIII. Roper 's Case. Trin. 30 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
Stamf. 166, 167. Terms of the Law, 75, 76. Inst. 131.
ROper was robbed by Smith, and within a Week after the Robbery he preferred an
Indictment against him, and within a Month after the Robbery he sued an Appeal
against Smith, and prosecuted the same until he was outlawed; and thereupon
Coke moved to have restitution of the Goods taken: And B. of the Crown-Office
said, That the Fresh-suit was not enquired; for upon an Appeal one shall not
have restitution without Fresh-suit. Coke, The Books are, That if the Defendant
in an Appeal of Robbery be attainted by Verdict, the Fresh-suit shall be
enquired of: but here he was attainted by Outlawry, and not by Verdict, and so
the Fresh-suit cannot be enquired: and here the Indictment within a Week, and
the Appeal within a Month after the Robbery, is a Fresh-suit. Wray, Fresh-suit
in our Law is to pursue the Felon from Town to Town, but the suing of an Appeal
is not any Fresh-suit: See 21 E. 4. 16. Restitution granted upon an Outlawry in
an Appeal of Robbery without Fresh-suit enquired: 1 H. 4. 5. if he confess the
Felony: See 2 R. 3. 13.

CXXXIX. Piggot and Russel 's Case. Trin. 30 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
1 Cro. 124. 1 Co. English his Case.
NOTE, it was agreed per Curiam in this Case, That if Tenant for life being of
full age, and he in the Remainder within age levy a Fine, and afterward the
Infant reverseth the Fine as to him for the Inheritance, he shall not enter for
forfeiture, because he joined in the Fine, and so assented to it.

CXL. Sir John Savage 's Case. Trin. 29 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
IN Trespass, the Defendant justified, because Sir John Savage was seized of
the Manor of D. within which Manor the custom is, That if any man takes to
Wife, any customary Tenant of the said Manor, and has issue, and shall
overlive his Wife, he shall be Tenant by the Courtesy; and pleaded farther,
That he took to Wife one Ann, to whom, during the said coverture, Postea 208.
a customary Tenement of the said Manor did descend, and that he had issue by
the said Ann, and that she is dead, and so, etc. and it was adjudged, That the
Husband by this custom upon this matter, should not be Tenant by the Courtesy;
for Ann was not a customary Tenant of the said Manor at the time of the
marriage.

CXLI. Stainsby and Hales 's Case. Trin. 29 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
IN a second Deliverance by Stainsby against Hales, Challenge was taken for the
Hundred, and it was showed and confessed, That the Hundred of Feversham in
Kent, was and is within the Lathe of Seray, and that there is not, nor ever had
been any Court holden in the said Hundred of Feversham, but that all the
Inhabitants within the said Hundred have used to go to the Court of the Lathe
of Seray: and it was holden by all the Justices, that in this Case Challenge
ought to be taken for the Lathe, and not for the Hundred, for no Court had been
holden in the Hundred; See 2 H. 4. 6. 11 H. 4. 2. A Iuror was challenged for
the Hundred, and the Triors said, That the party challenged was not of the said
Hundred, where, etc. but they farther said, that there were six Hundreds, all
which came to one Court; and the same was holden a good answer to the
challenge, and the party challenged was sworn.

CXLII. Sands and Hempston 's Case. Trin. 27 Eliz. Rot. 1201. In the
King's Bench.
IN a Replevin, The Case was, That Henry, Earl of Westmerland, Die. 270. 2
Brownl. 26. 3 Len. 59. 1 Leon. 4. 16. Postea 15. 2 Roll. 157.
was seized of the Manor of Kennington in Fee, and granted a Rentcharge to
William Cordel, afterward Master of the Rolls, for life, and afterward made a
Feoffment thereof to Sir John Clifton, who granted a Copihold to Sands for
life, according to the custom of the said Manor, the same being an ancient
Copihold; Sir John died seized, the Rent is behind, Sir William Cordel died,
Hempston as Bailiff of Carry, Executor of Sir William Cordel, distrained for the
arreages upon the possession of Sands, and it was clearly holden by the whole
Court, That the possession of the said Copiholder was not chargeable to
distress upon this matter, for the Copiholder is not in by him who ought
immediately to pay the Rent, but is also in by the custom: Note by some, That
the possession of a Copiholder is not liable to the Executor, by the Statute of
If it be so, that the Lord of the Manor be within the degree limited by the
said Statute.

CXLIII. Hooper 's Case. Trin. 29 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
HOoper of Salisbury was brought to the Bar, to wage his Law in an Action of
Debt, and upon examination, the matter appeared to be, That the Defendant was
indebted to the Plaintiff upon a simple Contract, and upon communication
betwixt them, it was agreed, that one J. S. should become bounden to the
Plaintiff in an Obligation for the said debt, to be paid at a day certain,
which J. S. became bound accordingly, and the Defendant was also bound to the
said J. S. in a counter-bond for to save him harmless against the Plaintiff.
And the Court was clear of opinion, that upon this matter, the Defendant could
not safely wage his Law; for by this Obligation, made by a stranger to the
Contract, the Contract upon which the Action is brought is not determined: And
also here the Obligation was made after the Contract; But if J. S. had been
bound, Ut supra, upon the Contract, it had been otherwise; and upon that
reason, the Case of one Pudsey was adjudged. Pudseys Case.
Where, upon the Contract, a stranger to the Contract being present, made
promise to enter into a Bond unto the party, etc. for the payment of the money,
agreed upon the Contract, and afterward became bounden accordingly; in that
Case the Contract was determined, because the Obligation was pursuant to the
Contract; and in the principal Case, the Court would not admit the Defendant to
wage his Law, although he earnestly desired it.

CXLIV. Knevit and Tailor 's Case. Trin. 29 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
KNevit informed against Tailor in the Common Pleas, upon the Statute of Usury,
and the parties were at issue; and the matter depended four Terms untried after
issue was joined; and now the Defendant prayed, for his own expedition, that he
might have Nisi Prius with Proviso, as the course is in the Exchequer in such
case, to send Commissions into the Country where the Information is laid for
the trial of the issue joined in the said Court, and that at the suit of the
Defendant. And it was much doubted, if the Court might grant such Nisi Prius,
because the Queen is Quodammodo a party to the suit. And by Fleetwood,
Sergeant, The common course is so; But where the Queen her self is merely
party, no such Nisi Prius shall be granted: and he said, That the Informer
might be Nonsuit, although that the Queen be in such manner party. Nelson,
Prothonotary, said, That he never saw such a Precedent, Postea 116.
See F. N. B. 241.

CXLV. Alford and Lea 's Case. Trin. 29 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
1 Cro. 54. Post 181.
ALford brought Debt upon a Bond against Lea, and the Case was, That the
parties were bound the one to the other upon Condition, to stand to the Award
of B. and C. who award, that the said Lea, before such a Feast, shall make a
release to Alford, but no place assigned where the release shall be delivered
to the Plaintiff. Lea, Before the said Feast, sealed a release according to the
award, and delivered the same to one Pine, to the use of the Plaintiff, who
delivers it to one Mason, one of the servants of Alford, the Plaintiff, who two
or three days after, offers it to Alford, but he refused it, It was holden by
Wray, That the award upon this matter was well performed, notwithstanding the
refusal of Alford, See Tawe's Case, 1 Eliz. Dyer 167. A. enseals, Quoddam
scriptum Obligat. and delivers the same to one C. for to deliver it to the
Obligee, who delivered it accordingly, as the Deed of A. who refuses to
receive it; and after gets the Obligation, and recovers upon it.

CXLVI. Marsh and Rainsford 's Case. Trin. 30 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
IN an Action upon the Case; the Case was, That a communication was had betwixt
the parties, That the Plaintiff should marry the daughter of the Defendant, in
consideration of which, the Defendant promised the Plaintiff to give him 200 l.
but they could not agree upon the days of payment of it, after which they stole
away the Defendant's daughter, and secretly married her, without the
Defendant's knowledge; yet afterward the Defendant gave his consent to it, 1
Leon. 102.
and allowed of the said marriage; and in consideration of the said marriage,
promised to pay the Plaintiff 100 l. Egelton, Solicitor General for the
Defendant, That the Action upon this matter will not lie; for here the
consideration is precedent to the promise, whereas the consideration in such
cases, ought to be future and subsequent; and as the Case is here, the
Plaintiff is out of the course of consideration of marriage; for he has stolen
away and married his wife, without the knowledge or consent of her father: See
such Case, 10 Eliz. Dyer 272. The servant of one A. is arrested in London, and
two friends of his Master bail him, and afterward A. promises to them, for
their friendship, to save them harmless from damages and costs, etc. It was
holden that the Action does not lie, for here is not any consideration, for the
bailment was of their own heads, and it is executed before the promise; But if
the Master before the enlargement of his servant had requested the Plaintiff
for to bail his servant, and he had so done, the Action would have lien. Wrey,
Justice, Although the consideration be precedent, yet if it were made at the
instance of the other party, the Action would have lien. But here the natural
affection of the father to his daughter, is sufficient matter of consideration.
If one comes to a Sergeant at Law to have his counsel, and the Sergeant does
advise him, and afterward the Client in consideration of such counsel,
promises to pay him 20 l. an Action lies for it. And so Popham said, it had
been adjudged in the Exchequer: And it is the common Practice in this Court, in
consideration Quod querens deliberasset to the Defendant, etc. He promises to
pay him so much; and as it was late adjudged betwixt Style and Smith: If a
Physician, who is my friend, hearing that my son is sick, goes to him in my
absence, and helps and recovers him, and I being informed thereof, promise him
in consideration, etc. ut supra, to give him 20 l. an Action will lie forth
money; and afterward in the principal Case Judgment was given for the
Plaintiff.

CXLVII. Williams and Linford 's Case. Trin. 30 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
WIlliam's brought an Action upon the Case against Linford, 3 Len. 177.
for standerous words spoken of the Plaintiff's land, viz. Williams is worth
nothing, and do you think that the Manor of D. is his? It is but a compact
between his brother Thomas and him; And farther declared, That at the time of
speaking of the words, he was in speech with one J. S. to give to the said J.
S. the said Manor of D. for his Manor of K. and that by reason of the said
slanderous words, 1 Cro. 346, 787.
the said J. S. durst not proceed in the said intended exchange. It was
objected, That upon this matter, an Action upon the Case does not lie; For the
scandalous words were not spoken to him who was to be the Purchasor of the said
Manor, Smith and Johnson's Case.
but to a stranger. For in the Case betwixt Smith and Johnson, Johnson was in
speech with another to sell his lands to him; and Smith said to him who was to
purchase them, Will you buy Johnson's land? Why, it is troubled with more
charges and encumbrances than it is worth. Wray, Justice, There is no
difference, whether words be spoken to the party, or unto a stranger, for in
both cases the Title of the Plaintiff is slandered, so as he cannot make sale
of his lands: Judgment was given for the Plaintiff.

CXLVIII. Barefoot and Luter 's Case. Trin. 30 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
THE Case was, A. B. and C. Ioynt-tenants in Fee, C. granted his part unto D.
and afterward A. B. and D. Leased for years, rendering Rent, and afterward A.
died, and they brought an Action of Debt for the Rent reserved, and declared
generally, and upon the Evidence, the special matter appeared, that two parts
of the Rent did belong to B. and but the third part to D. And the opinion of
the Court was; That the Declaration ought to have been special upon the whole
matter; For Prima facie, it was conceived that each of the Plaintiffs ought to
have had the moiety of the Rent, and that is a supposal of the Declaration: But
now upon the Evidence, it appears to the contrary: So as the Defendant nil
debet, in that form; Another matter was, The Plaintiff declared of Rent of a
whole year, ended at the Feast of St. Michael last past, whereas the Rent was
not due at Michaelmas, as the Plaintiff had declared, but the thirtieth day
after.

CXLIX. Brown and Ordinacre 's Case. Trin. 32 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
HEnry Brown, and Joice his wife, Executors of Thomas Brown, brought an Action
upon the Case against Van Ordinacre, Alien, and declared, That where A. and B.
were indebted to the Testator, The Defendant, in consideration that the
Testator respectuaret the said A. and B. pro solutione debiti praedict. per
spacium unius septimanae tunc proxime sequen. to pay the Debt to the said
Plaintiffs, modo sequent. viz. one moiety within one week after, and the other
moiety at the end of the said week; and farther declared, That the Testator did
forbear by the space of a week; and after Imparlance, Joice was summoned, and
severed. The Defendant pleaded, That he did not promise, modo and forma prout
pra^dict. Brown allegavit, and that it was alleged by both Executors. And by a
Jury, De medietate Linguae, it was found for the Plaintiff. It was objected by
Coke, That here is not any issue, prout Brown querens allegavit, where in
truth, it was alleged by both the Executors, before severance, and not by
Brown only. Also here is not any sufficient consideration alleged; for the
Plaintiff has declared, That he has forborne by a week, without saying, next
following, as the consideration is laid in the Declaration; But that was not
allowed, for so it shall be intended. It was also objected, That the
Declaration is contrary to it self; for it showed, That in consideration that
the Testator should forbear for a week, he promised to pay him within a week;
but that exception was not allowed: For the week, in the Assumpsit, shall be
construed, the week after the week in the consideration. Another exception was
against the trial; for the Defendant being an Alien, The Venire facias was to
summon twelve persons, Quorum quilibet eorum habeat 4. l. in lands of annual
Rent, and that cannot be; for Aliens cannot have lands, not being made
Denizens: By the Common Law before the Statute of 27 E. 3. An alien by the
Grant of the King, might have an Action depending betwixt him and a Denizen,
per medietatem Linguae, which see 22 E. 3. 14. and afterward to make the same
a general Law, the Statute of 27 E. 3. was made; but the same does not extend
to cases where the King was party, which defect was supplied by the Statute of
28 E. 3. cap. 13. Afterward came the Stat. of 2 H. 5. by which it is enacted,
That where the debt or damages amount to 10 marks every Iuror returned for the
trial, should be able to expend lands of the value of 40 s. which was
mischievous as to aliens; and for the remedy of that, The Statute of 8 H. 6.
cap. ult. was made, which took away the effect thereof, as unto aliens; Then
came the Statute of 27 Eliz. which enacted, That every Iuror, etc. should
expend 4 l. lands, but that is where 40 s. was required only, and does not
extend to our Case; and therefore the Venire facias in our Case, was not well
awarded, To which it was said by the Clarks, That after the Stat. of 27 Eliz.
It had always so been, to make the Venire facias generally according to the
Statute; but that is not a thing material, and the Sheriff needs not regard
that: Wherefore it was holden; That the Venire facias in the principal Case was
well awarded.

CL. Mingey and Earl 's Case. Pasc. 32 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
IN Debt upon an Obligation, The Defendant pleaded, 1 Cro. 212, 267.
That the Obligation was with condition, That whereas the Defendant had sold to
the Plaintiff certain wood, growing upon certain lands, called S. in the County
of Sussex. If the Plaintiff might quietly take and enjoy the said woods; and if
the ground whereupon it grows be four miles from the Town of Rye, that then,
etc. And for plea he said, That the Plaintiff had quietly taken and enjoyed the
said wood, and that the said land, by the next high and usual way for
carriages, is 4000 paces from the Town of Rye, reckoning to every pace five
foot; upon which the Plaintiff did demur in Law. Gaudy, Justice, For the
computation of a mile, in common understanding, it is 1000 paces, and if it
shall be counted by the common way, is the doubt; but the meaning of the
Parties was, That the Plaintiff by felling of that wood, should not encur the
damage of the Statute of 23 Eliz. cap. 4. And the Statute does not respect the
way of carriage, but that altogether, and to all intents, it be the distance of
four miles betwixt the place where, etc. and the said Town of Rye; and here it
is not material which is the common and usual way to Rye for carriages; but the
nearness of the place where, etc. Quomodocunque, is the matter; and therefore
the Defendant ought to have pleaded, That the place where, etc. is every way
distant four miles from Rye; and as to that, that he has answered four miles,
with 4000 paces, the same is well enough; for although he does not answer the
direct the words; yet if he does answer in effect, it is well enough; for 1000
paces, and a mile, are all one in substance: Wray, The distance shall be
accounted the nearest way, not as a Bird may fly.

CLII. Wellock and Hammon 's Case. Trin. 31 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
3 Co. 20. 1 Cro. 204, 205.
THis Case is reported by Sir Edw. Coke, in his 3 Reports: See the principal
case there. Here is a Limitation, and not a Condition; for if it should be a
Condition, it should descend to the Heir at the Common Law, which is the
Devisee, and so shall be extinct in his person, and then the restraint is of no
effect, for there shall be then no means to compel the Heir who has the Land,
to pay the Legacies, nor have the Legatories any remedy to compel the son to
pay the Legacies, which shall not have effect, if it be not taken by way of
Limitation: and to that intent, Scholasticas Case was cited, 15 Eliz. Dyer,
317. And this word, paying, in a Devise, shall never be construed to be a
Condition. And it was holden by the Justices, That where a man devises lands
to his younger son, paying such a sum unto such, the Devisee has a Fee-simple;
and if he do not pay the moneys accordingly, his Estate shall determine, by the
same Limitation, and shall go to the heir without any other limitation, and the
quantity of the moneys, be it great or small, is not material: And they were of
opinion also, that here the moneys were not payable, but upon request: Coke, 2
Cro. 56, 57. 1 Roll 439.
If a man be bound to perform Covenants, and one Covenant is to pay Legacies,
there he needs not pay them without a demand; But where one is expressly bounden
to pay such a Legacy, there he must pay it at his peril. And he said, That the
Case, 28 H. 8. Dyer 33. is not Law; for there it is holden by Fitz-herbert and
Baldwin, That where land was devised unto the Prior, and Convent of S. Barthol.
Ita quod reddant annuatim Decano and Capitulo Sancti Pauli. 5 l. and they fail
of payment of it, that their Estate shall cease, and the Dean and Chapter, etc.
shall have, etc. such conditions void. And that upon one Fee-simple, another
Fee-simple cannot be limited; For by Coke, Common experience is otherwise, That
upon a Fee-simple determinable, another Fee-simple may be limited; which Gaudy,
Justice granted: And as to the principal Case, Judgment was given, with the
limitation.

CLIII. Parker and Harrold 's Case. Pasc. 28 Eliz. Rot. 485. In the King's
Bench.
3 Len. 142.
IN Debt upon an Obligation, The Condition was, That whereas the Plaintiff and
Defendant be now jointly seized of the Office of the Register of the Court of
Admiralty, If the Defendant shall permit the Plaintiff to use the said Office,
and take the profits of it wholly to his own use during his life, without let
or interruption done by him, that then, etc. The Defendant Pleaded, That the
custom of the Realm of England is, That the Lord Admiral for the time being,
might grant the said Office, and that such grant should be good but for the
life of the Grantor; antea. 103.
and showed farther, That the Lord Clinton, Lord Admiral; granted the said
Office unto the Plaintiff and the Defendant, and died; and that the Lord Howard
was appointed Lord Admiral, and that he 27 Eliz. granted the said Office to one
Wade, who ousted and interrupted him, before which time, the Defendant did
suffer the Plaintiff to enjoy the said Office, and to take the profits of it,
upon which the Plaintiff did demur in Law, Coke argued for the Plaintiff, That
the Plea of the Defendant is not good; for he has not entitled the Lord
Admiral to grant the Office; for he has said, That the custom of the Realm of
England is, and that cannot be good, for it cannot be tried; for a Visne cannot
be from the Realm of England: Also if it lie through all the Realm, then the
same is Common Law, and not custom, which see, Br. Custom 59. and see 4 and 5
Ph. and Ma. 152, 153. an express Case of the same Office, and there he
prescribed, Per consuetudinem in Curia, etc. and also that such grant is good
but during the life of the Admiral who grants it: Also he does not answer to
any time after the grant of the Admiral Howard; for if we were lawfully put out
by Wade, yet the Defendant against his Bond, shall not put us out, or interrupt
us: As 5 E. 4. 115. In a Quare Impedit against an Abbat, and the Incumbent, who
make default upon the distress, upon which a Writ was awarded to the Bishop for
the Plaintiff, upon which the Bishop returned, That the Incumbent had resigned,
of which he has given notice to the Prior, and lapse incurred; and the Bishop
collates the former Incumbent, and then this Writ came to him; Now, although
the Incumbent be in by Title, yet he is bound by the Judgment: So here,
although the Defendant has another Title, and the former Title of the
Plaintiff be determined, yet against his own Bond and Deed, he shall not put
out the Plaintiff, etc. And the Court was clear of opinion, That Judgment
should be given for the Plaintiff; but afterward the Cause was compounded by
order of the Lord Chancellor.

CLIII. Bedel's Case. Trin. 32 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
THE Case was, 3 Len. 159.
That A. leased to B. certain Lands for 40 l. per ann. and a stranger
covenanted with A. that B. should pay unto him the 40 l. for the Farm and
occupation of the said Lands. A. brought an Action of Covenant; the Defendant
pleaded, That before the day of payment the Plaintiff ousted B. of his Farm: It
was moved by Godfrey, that it was no Plea, because this is a collateral sum,
and not for Rent issuing out of Land: Also the Defendant is a stranger to the
Contract for the Farm: But the opinion of the Court was to the contrary; for
the Defendant has covenanted, that the Lessee shall pay for the said Farm and
occupation 40 l. so it is as a conditional Covenant, and here is Quid pro Quo;
and here the consideration upon which the Covenant is conceived, (scil.) the
Farm, and the occupation of it, is taken away by the act of the Plaintiff
himself.

CLIV. Heal 's Case. Pasch. 30 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
HEal, a Bencher of the Inner Temple, being at the Bar; Wiat, another
Apprentice at Law, informed the Court against the said Heal, and showed, That
where his Client had obtained a Judgment in the King's Bench: The said Heal,
being of Council with the other part, did advise his Client to bring the party,
who had obtained the Judgment, into the Chancery, and he procured an Order
against him, Co. 3 Inst. 12. 123, 124. 4 Inst. 86, 91.
by which he was cast into Prison: Which matter Heal could not excuse, but
submitted himself to the Court, saying, That he had seen a precedent which
induced him so to do: and that was the Case of one Prince, Princes Case.
where a Judgment given in this Court was drawn into question and examined in
the Chancery: But the Justices said, That the same was an ill precedent, and
against the Statute of 4 H. 4. which is, That no Judgment be undone but by
Error or Attaint.

CLV. Gray and Constable 's Case. Pasch. 30 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
SIR Thomas Gray covenanted with the Lady Constable, That where he is possessed
of a Lease for twenty one years of certain Lands, That he will assure, convey
and assign the said Lease to one Nevil, excepting the two last years of the
said twenty one years: and he said Sir Tho. Gray was bound in a Bond to perform
the Covenants of the said Indenture; upon which Indenture the Lady brought Debt
against the said Sir Tho. Gray, who pleaded the Conditions, and the performance
of them: The Plaintiff replicando said, That the Defendant non assuravit,
conveiavit, and transposuit, Anglice, set over, the said Lease; upon which they
were at issue: And at the day of the Nisi Prius, it was moved by Cooper and
Beaumont, That the Issue was misjoined; for the Defendant pleads (as the
Covenant it self is) That he had assured, conveyed, and assigned the Lease, and
so pleaded the performance of other Covenants, etc. The Plaintiff assigned the
breach in this, Quod non assuravit, conveiavit, and transposuit, Anglice, set
over; which word [transposuit] is not in the Covenant, nor in the pleading of
the performance thereof: and the English word [set over] although it sounds the
same with assigning, does not help the matter; and if the Latin word does not
agree with the matter, non refert of the English word, although in the Plea
there be this word Anglice [set over.] Note, the Covenant was (ut supra) The
Plaintiff assigned the breach, Quod non assuravit, conveiavit, and transposuit,
Anglice [set over,] etc. And the Defendant pleaded, Quod assuravit, conveiavit,
and transposuit, Anglice, set over, etc. And the Court was clear of opinion,
That the Issue for that cause was not well joined: And afterward, by the
assent of the parties it was amended.

CLVI. Doghead 's Case. Pasch. 30 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
Hutt. 35. Hob. 250. Antea 110. 1 Cro. 177. And. 116.
AN Information was upon the Statute of 27 Eliz. cap. 4. by the party grieved;
which Statute gives unto the King one moiety of the value, and the other moiety
to the party grieved: The Plaintiff was nonsuit; It was holden by the Court,
that he shall not pay costs and damages by the Statute of 18 Eliz. for the
Statute (as the Title of the same does imply) is to redress Disorders in common
Informers; and so is the Preamble: and the words also of the clause of costs
and damages are [Every such Informer] and so by Ive, Secondary of the
Crown-Office, An Action given to the party grieved is not a popular Action; and
the Statute of 18 Eliz. extends only to popular Actions.

CLVII. Cony and Chomley 's Case. Pasch. 30 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
IN an Ejectione Firmae, after Verdict in Arrest of Judgment, it was moved,
That the Plaintiff had declared in Ejectione Firmae, Quod cum Robertus Diggon
per Indenturam suam gerent. dat. 20 Maii, 1 Cro. 773. 890.
dimisit, etc. where he ought to have said, iisdem die and anno: For although
the Indenture bear date (ut supra) yet it may be that it was delivered at
another day, and then it does begin to be a Demise. And if in an Action upon
the Case upon Assumpsit to pay money upon request, although it be found for the
Plaintiff, yet if no day be put in the Declaration when the request was made,
but only [licet saepius requisitus] in case where a request ought to be made,
there the Plaintiff shall not have Judgment; as it has been oftentimes
adjudged, Quod omnes Justiciarii concesserunt: But yet afterward,
notwithstanding the Objection aforesaid, Judgment was given for the Plaintiff.

CLVIII. Marsh and Jones 's Case. Mich. 29 and 30 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
IN a Replevin, the Case upon the Evidence was, 3 Len. 114.
That before the Statute of Quia Emptores terrarum, a man made a Feoffment in
Fee, to hold of him by the service, solvendi post quamlibet vacationem sive
alienationem, the value of the annual profits of the Lands: And it was holden
by the Court, That the value shall be intended such a value, as was the value
at the time of the Feoffment made, and not as it is improved by succession of
time.

CLIX. Willoughby 's Case. Mich. 29 and 30 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
WIlliam Willoughby and two other were indicted, 1 Cro. 3 Len. 216.
That whereas the Parson of the Church of D. and all his predecessors have
used to have Common in such a place, the said Willoughby, etc. vi and armis,
etc. had enclosed it, and the Enclosure was upon their own Lands: It was moved,
That upon this matter they ought not to be indicted, but the party grieved is
put to his Action; as where a Presentment is made of a Disseisin: See 27 Ass.
20. And it was the Case of one Morden, Morden's Case. 1 Cro. Madox Case.
29 Eliz. upon the stopping of a Way upon his own Land: And it was said, That
if it should be upon the Lands of another, it were not material: for it is but
a hindrance from the taking of Common, which cannot be vi and armis. Also it
was said, That the Indictment is recorded and certified, as found before the
Justices of Assise and Jail-deliver, and they cannot take such Presentiments:
And although the said Justices of Assise and Jail-deliver were in rei veritate
also Justices of the Peace, yet the Indictment being recorded, and certified to
be taken before them, in quality of Justices of the Peace, will not help it:
for the Court shall not respect any other authority, but that which appears
upon Record; and therefore for the causes aforesaid they were discharged by the
Court.

CLX. Collet and Robston 's Case. Error. Hill. 30 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
3 Len. 149.
COllet and Andrews recovered in a Writ of Account against Robston: Hill. 29
Eliz. Rot. 1. and now Robston brought a Writ of Error, and assigned for Error,
That whereas the said Writ of Account was brought against the said Defendant as
Receiver of Moneys, for to render Account, quando ad hoc requisitus fuerit, the
said Writ ought to have been more special: But the opinion of the Court was,
That the Writ in his generalty was holden good: And so it was adjudged in the
Case of one Gomersal, (scil.) quod reddat ei rationabilem computum suum de
tempore, quo fuit Receptor Denariorum ipsius A. Another Error was assigned,
That the Jury had assessed damages which ought not to be given in an Action
upon Account: which see 2 R. 2. Acco. 45. and 2 H. 7. 13. But see the Book of
Entries, fo. 22. In a Writ of Account against one, as Receivor to Account
render, damages were given: For if my Bailiff, 1 Leon. 302.
by employing of my Moneys, whereof he was the Receivor, might have procured to
me profit and gain, but he neglects it, he shall be chargeable to me in right,
and shall answer for it. And here in our case, damages shall be given: and
afterward, notwithstanding all objections made to the contrary, the Judgment
given before was affirmed.

CLXI. Yates 's Case. Hill. 30 Eliz. In the King 's-Bench.
3 Len. 231.
A Writ of Error was brought by Yates and others upon a Judgment given in a
Writ of Partition; and it was assigned for Error, that the Writ of Partition
was not sufficient; for it is there set forth, That the Plaintiffs insimul and
pro indiviso tenent cum defendente, etc. and do not show, of what Estate, or
whose inheritance: See F. N. B. 61. 5. and 62. a. insimul and pro indiviso
tenent de haereditate quae fuit A. matris of the Plaintiff and the Defendant. 1
Cro. 759, 760.
And yet see F. N. B. 62. A. A Writ of Partition betwixt strange persons,
without naming haereditate in the Writ: And see also that a Partition of Lands
in London, without showing of what Estate: Courtney and Polewheel's Case. Finch
and Firrel's Case. L. Cheney and Bell's Case.
See Register 76. 6 Eliz. in a Partition by Courtney against Polewheel, no
Estate showed in the Writ: so betwixt Finch and Firrel, and betwixt Fry and
Drake, 14 Eliz. Devon. 26 Eliz. betwixt the Lord Cheney and Bell: and Mich. 4
and 5 Ph. and Ma. Rot. 208. It was holden, That it is not necessary in such a
Writ to show the Estate: and such also was the opinion of the Court in the
principal Case: but Tenants in common ought to show it in the Count: And the
Judgment given was affirmed.

CLXII. Phillips and Stone 's Case. Mich. 29 and 30 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
IN Debt upon an Obligation, the Defendant pleaded the Statute of 32 H. 6. upon
which this special matter was found, That one J. S. had heretofore recovered
against him 100 l. in an Action of Debt, and upon the Capias ad satisfaciend.
he was taken and committed to the Plaintiff, who was Jailer, etc. to the
Sheriff, and so being in Execution he escaped and afterward he was re-taken by
the Plaintiff, and kept in prison; and so being in prison, made the Bond upon
which the Action is brought: It was said by the Court, That if a Prisoner being
in Execution, escapes with the permission of the Jailer, the Execution is
utterly gone and extinguished, and the Plaintiff, at whose Suit he was taken in
Execution, shall never resort to him who escapes, but shall hold himself to the
Jailer for his remedy: but if such a Prisoner escapes of his own wrong without
the privity or consent of the Jailer, the Jailer may well take him again for
his indemnity, until the Plaintiff has determined his Election, whether he
will have his remedy against the Jailer, or that he will maintain his
Execution: 13 H. 7. 1, and 2. But as unto the Statute of 23 H. 6. the Court was
of Opinion, That posito that the party who escapes cannot be taken again; yet
being taken, the Bond which is taken color Officii, is within the said
Statute, because the party was retaken color Executionis, and so the Bond was
void.

CLXIII. Gering 's Case. Mich. 29 and 30 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
IN Debt upon an Obligation, against one as Executor; 1 Len. 87.
the Case was, That the Testator of A. by his Will, appointed certain lands,
and named which should be sold by his Executor, and the moneys thereof coming,
to be distributed betwixt his daughters, when they have accomplished the age of
one and twenty years. The lands are sold, and if the moneys thereof being in
the hand of the Executor, until the full age of the daughters shall be Assets
to pay the debts of the Testator,, was the question; and it was the opinion of
the whole Court, that the said moneys should not be Assets; for they said, that
that money is limited to a special use: Quaere of this Case; For I have heard,
that it was afterward resolved in another Case, that the moneys in the like
Case remaining in their hands should be Assets.

CLXIV. Davies and Percie 's Case. Mich. 29 and 30 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
BEtween Margaret Davies and one Perce, the Case was, 2 Roll 284. Goldb. 58.
That one Anth. Perce, upon speech of a marriage to be had betwixt the said
Anthony, and the mother of Margaret, covenanted by Indenture with certain
friends of the mother, to pay to all the daughters of the mother 20 l. a piece
at their several ages of four and twenty years, and to perform the Covenant,
was bound to the said friends in an Obligation. Anthony Perce made his Will,
and willed, that his Executors should pay to each of the daughters 20 l. at
their several ages of four and twenty years, in discharge of the said Covenant,
and died; Now the said Margaret sued the Executors in the Spiritual Court for
the 20 l. bequeathed to her, and upon this matter, the Executors prayed a
Prohibition: And by the Lord Anderson, a Prohibition will lie; for here is no
Legacy, but the Will refers to the Covenant, and is in discharge of the
Covenant: As if A. be indebted to B. in 20 l. And if A. by his Will wills
that his Executors shall pay to the said B. 20 l. in discharge of the said
debt, the same is not any Legacy, but a Declaration that the intent of A. is,
that the debt shall be paid. Periam, Justice, was of the same opinion as the
Lord Anderson; and Anderson said, If a Legacy be bequeathed to me, and the
Executor covenants to pay me the said Legacy, and afterward J. sueth the
Executor in the Spiritual Court, he shall have a Prohibition; Quod caeteri
Justiciarii negaverunt, See F. N. B. 44 Br. If the Testator by his Will charge
his Executors to pay his debts and his creditors, they do not pay them, and the
creditors sue them in the Spiritual Court, they shall not have a Prohibition,
Vide 6. H. 3. Prohib. 17.
which Anderson Vehementer negavit; and afterward the Justices looked and
advised upon the Indenture, and found that the indenture and Obligation were
made to the friends of the mother of the daughters, and not to the daughters
themselves, to whom the Legacies were give and bequeathed; and therefore were
of opinion, that a Prohibition did not lie.

CLXV. Thorp and Tomson 's Case. Hill. 30 Eliz. In the Common Pleas. Rot. 336.
IN Ejectione firmae, It was found by special Verdict, That one Thimblethorp
was seized of the lands where, etc. and by Contract, sold the same to Thorp,
but no assurance was yet made; and afterward, Thorp before any assurance made,
sold likewise the said lands to Tomson, and afterward, Thimblethorp made
assurance thereof to Tomson, and afterward Tomson being seized, devised the
Lands to his younger son, Dyer 376.
by these words: I bequeath to R. my son, all the lands which I purchased of
Thorp, whereas, in speaking the truth according to Law, he purchased them by
immediate assurance of Thimblethorp, although he did contract with Thorp for
the same; And the opinion of the whole Court was without argument either at
Bar, or at the Bench; That the Devise was good; for in the repute of the
people, they preseised of Thorp, for Tomson paid the moneys for the same to
Thorp, and the Court commanded Judgment to be entered accordingly: And
afterward Exception was taken to the Verdict, because it is not found by what
service the land devised was holden, Socage, or Knight Service; nor that the
Devisor is dead; and these were holden to be material Exceptions, and for that
cause, the Judgment was stayed, and afterward the Verdict was rejected, and a
Venire facias de novo awarded.

CLXVI. Grove and Sparre 's Case. Hill. 30 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
AN Action of Trespass was brought by Grove against Sparre, Process continued
until Sparre was outlawed; and now it was moved unto the Court, to avoid the
Outlawry, That the original Writ, and all the Judicial Process thereupon are
directed Vice-Com. Wigorn. and in the Filazar's Roll, in the Margent is
written, Hereford, and in the body of the said Roll is written, Et praedictus
Grove obtulit se quarto die post, Et Vicecomes modo mandat. quod praedictus
Spar non est inventus, etc. Ideo praeceptum est Vicecom. etc. and at the Capias
returned, it is entered in the Roll as before, Hereford: whereas the Capias is
directed Vicecom. Wigorn. as of right it ought to be: and the Roll was perused
by the Court, and it was, ut supra, and that without any suspicion of Rasure;
for which the Court gave day to the Queens Sergeants to advise themselves to
maintain the Outlawry; and the Defendants Council prayed, That a Recordatur be
made in what Estate the Roll now is, for doubt of amendment by way of Rasure,
or otherwise; which was granted by the Court.

CLXVII. Rushton 's Case. Mich. 33 Eliz. In the Exchequer.
RUshton was indebted to the Queen in 200 marks, See this Case vouched in C. 4
part, in Palmer's Case. 3 Len. 204.
upon which issued an Extent against him out of the Exchequer to levy the said
sum to the Sheriff of Suffolk; and it was found by Inquisition, That Rushton 22
Junii, 22 Eliz. was possessed of a Lease for the term quorundam annorum adhuc
venturorum; and the debt of the Queen did begin 12 Febr. 17 Eliz. Exception was
taken to this Office, because that the term is not certainly found but
generally quorundam annorum; and it was said by Coke, That the Office was good,
notwithstanding that Exception, for the Queen is a stranger to the Lease, and
therefore ought not to be forced to find the precise certainty; which see in
Partridge's Case in Plowd. The Defendant had made a Lease Pro termino quorundam
annorum contra formam statuti: Also Rushton came not to the Lease by Contract,
but by compulsary means, as by Execution, etc. And here we are not in the Case
of pleading, but of an Office, where such precise form is not requisite: As if
it be found by Office, that J. S. was seized in tail, without showing of whose
gift the same was, it is good; so an Indictment, De morte cujusdam hominis
ignoti, the same is good, but such Endictment taken before the Coronor, is not
good: And that a Lease for years may be extended, see 21 Ass. 6. If a man be
indebted to the Queen, being a Lessee for years, and afterward before any
Extent comes, sells his term, the same cannot be extended after. And here it
appears, That this Lease was to begin at a day to come, and that the Lessee did
enter before the day, by which he was a Disseisor; and so he said he had lost
his term. Tenant for the life of another is disseised, and dies, he remains a
Disseisor, and the occupancy does not qualify such disseisin: And afterward
the Inquisition for the incertainty aforesaid was holden void, and a new
Commission was awarded.

CLXVIII. Holland and Boin 's Case. Mich. 29 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
IN a Replevin by Thomas Holland against William Boin's, 3 Len. 175. 1 Len.
183. Ow. 138.
who made Conusans, as Bailey to Thomas, Lord Howard, and showed, that the
Prioress of the late dissolved Priory of Hollywell was seized of the Manor of
Priors in the County of Hertford, and granted the same by words of Dedi and
Concessi pro certa pecuniae summa, to Thomas Audley, Chancellor of England, and
his Heirs, who entered and died seized, and that the said Manor, inter alia,
descended to Mary, daughter and Heir of the said Thomas Audley, who entered, and
also died seized, by force whereof the said Manor descended to the said Thomas
Lord Howard, etc. and showed, that the said conveyance, by the prioress to
Audley bore date 4 November. 29 H. 8. and then enrolled in the Chancery. The
Plaintiff in Bar of the Avowry, showed, that after the making and enrolling of
the said Conveyance, the said Prioress Leased the said land to Sir H. Parker
for 99 years, and conveyed the said land to him, and showed farther, That the
said Conveyance specified in the Conusans was primo deliberatum, 4 Nov. 31. H.
8. Absque hoc, that the said Prioress, the said 4 Novembris, 29 H. 8. dedit and
concessit, the said Manor to the said Audley, upon which it was demurred in
Law; and the Court was clear of opinion, That the averment of primo
deliberatum, against a Deed enrolled ought not to be reversed, for by the same
reason it may be averred never delivered, and so upon the matter, Non est
factum: And it was farther objected, That bargain and sale by a Corporation is
not good; for a Corporation cannot be seized to another use, and the nature of
such Conveyance is to take effect by way of use in the Bargainee, and after the
Statute to draw the possession to the use; But the Court utterly rejected that
Exception was dangerous, Note, Pasch. 30 Eliz. it was adjudged for the
Plaintiff in the Replevin; (scil.) the Conveyance of the Prioress was not well
pleaded; for it ought to be plead as a Bargain and Sale, and not as a grant:
and Judgment was given accordingly.
for such was the Conveyance of the greater part of the possessions of
Monasteries: And by Shuttleworth Sergeant, Although such a Corporation cannot
take an Estate to the use of another, yet they may charge their possessions
with an use to another.

CLXIX. Venable 's and Sergeant Harris 's Case. Mich. 28 and 29 Eliz. In the
King's Bench.
Quaeries. Hughs R. 13. 3 Len. 185. 4 Len. 112.
THE Case was, a Lease was made to A. and B. for their lives, the Remainder to
Thomas Venables in tail, who 3 Eliz. was attainted of Felony; 23 Eliz. was a
general pardon: Thomas Venables 24 Eliz. levied a Fine, and suffered a common
Recovery to the use of Harris Sergeant. An Office is found, Harris traverseth
the Office, and upon that there is a demurrer. Leke argued, That traverse does
not lie in this Case: 4 H. 7. 7. where the King is entitled by double matter of
Record, the party shall not be admitted to traverse, nor to his Monstrans de
Droit, but is put to his Petition, which see, 3 E. 4. 23. in the Case of the
Earl of Northumberland, 3 Len. 75.
where the Tenant of the King is attainted of Treason, and the same found by
Office: See also 11 H. 4. in the Case of the Duke of Suffolk, and that is not
helped by the Statute of 2 E. 6. cap. 8. For the words are untruly found by
Office, but here the Office is true. By this Attainder, Thomas Venables is
utterly disabled to do any Act; for by Bracton, a person attaint, shall forfeit
Patriam, Regnum and Haereditatem suam: 11 H. 4. one was attainted of Felony,
and before Office found, the King granted over his Lands: Also he is not helped
by the general pardon; for before the general pardon, he had a special pardon,
so as the general pardon non operatur. But the Justices said, The forfeiture
did remain until the general pardon. Harris, contrary; And he put the case of
Sir James Ormond, 4 H. 7. 7. where the King is entitled by matter of Record,
and the subject confesses the King's title, and avoids it by matter of as high
nature as that is for the King, Traverse in that case lies: and if the King be
entitled by double matter of Record, if the party does avoid one of the said
Records by another Record, he shall be admitted to his traverse; and so here we
have the pardon, which is a Record, and that shall avoid the Record of the
King: See 3 E. 4. 24. in the Earl of Northumberland's Case; and here the pardon
has purged the forfeiture, in respect of the offense: and he said, Tenant in
tail being attainted of Felony, shall not lose his lands, but the profits
only, for he has his Estate by the Will of the Donor, and there is a
confidence reposed in him: as in Walsingham's Case, he cannot grant his Estate
over: and see Wrothe's Case; An annuity granted, pro Consilio impendendo cannot
be granted over or forfeited, for there is confidence: And see Empson's Case,
and Dyer 2. 29 Ass. 60. If the issue in tail be outlawed of Felony in the life
of his father, and gets his Charter of pardon in the life of his father,
after the death of his father he may enter; but by Thorp, If the issue in tail
gets his Charter of pardon after the death of his father, then the King
shall have the profits of the lands during the life of the issue: And the Case
of Cardinal Pool was debated in the Parliament, Cardinal Pool's Case,
27 Eliz. That he being Dean of Exeter, was seized of Lands in the right of his
Church, and was attainted of Treason: It was holden, That he should forfeit the
profits of such Lands: But admit, that by this Attainder the Land be forfeited,
yet the party has the Freehold until Office found: See Nicols's Case on the
Commentaries: and see also the Case of the Duchy in the first Commentaries.
And here the Pardon has dispensed with the Forfeiture. Tenant of the King
alieneth in Mortmain, before Office found, the King pardons it, this is good.
The Lord Poynings conveyed all his Lands to Sir Adrian Poynings, who was an
Alien, and afterward is made a Denizen, and the King pardons him, and
releaseth unto him all his right in the said Lands without any words of Grant;
and it was adjudged, the same shall bind the King. And he said, that he had
found a good precedent, 14 H. 7. where a general pardon before seizure into the
King's hands was allowed, contrary after seizure without words of Grant. See
Br. 29 H. 8. Charter of Pardon 52. If a man be attainted of Felony, and the
King pardons him all Felonies, and executiones eorundem, the same shall not
serve for life and Land, if no Office be found, but it shall serve for the
Goods without words of Restitution and Grant; for the King is entitled to them
by Outlawry without Office, but the King is not entitled to the Lands until
Office be found: See ibid. 33 H. 8. 71. The Heir intrudes, and before Office
found the King pardons; now the Heir is discharged as well of the issues and
profits, as of the Intrusion it self, and also of Livery: But a pardon given
after Office is available for the Offense, but not for the issues and profits:
And he cited the Case of Cole in the first Commentaries, where a pardon was
granted Mesne betwixt the stroke and the death: See 35 H. 6. 1. 1 E. 4. 1. 8
Eliz. Dyer 249. Brereton's Case, 11 Eliz. Dyer 284, 285.

Egerton, Solicitor to the contrary; This Traverse is not good; for he that
traverseth, has not made Title to himself as he ought, upon which the Queen
may take Issue; for it is at the Election of the Queen to maintain her own
Title, or traverse the Title of the party. At the Common Law, no Traverse lay
but where the Livery might be sued; but that is helped by the Statute of 34 E.
3. cap. 14. but where the King is entitled by double matter of Record (as in
our case he is) no Traverse is allowed until 2 E. 6. cap. 8. And in such case
two things are requisite: 1. That the Office be untruly found: 2. That the
party, who is to be admitted to his Traverse, have just Title or Interest of
Estate of Freehold, etc. But in our case, The Office is confessed by the
Traverse to be true, although that the Conveyance be not truly found: Also
Harris, at the time of the Office found, had not just Title but an interest
came unto him long time after the Office found: Also the Traverse is not good,
for he traverseth the matter of the Conveyance, which is not traversable; for
if the King has Title, non refert quomodo, or by what Conveyance he has it.
As to the matter in Law, (scil.) Tenant in tail in Remainder is attainted of
Felony, if the King during the life of Tenant in tail shall have the freehold?
and he conceived that he should, for it shall not be in abeyance, and it cannot
be in any other; for when he is attainted, he is dead as unto the King. The
chief Lord cannot have it, for Tenant for life is alive, and also he in the
Remainder in Fee, etc. the Donor shall not have it, for the Tenant in Remainder
is not naturally dead, but civilly; and the Land cannot revert before the
Tenant in tail be naturally dead without issue: but if there were any other in
whom the Freehold might vest and remain, then the King should not have the
Freehold, but only the profits. So if the Tenant be attainted, the Lord shall
have the Lands presently; 3 E. 3. 4 E. 3. The Husband, seized in the right of
his Wife, is attainted of Felony; the King shall have but the profits, for the
Freehold vests in the Wife, and if the Lord enters, the Wife shall have an
Assise. And Tenant in tail may forfeit for his life, as he may grant for his
life: See Old N. B. 99. If Tenant in tail, for life, dower, or by the courtesy,
be attainted of Felony, the King shall have the Lands during their lives; and
after their deceases, he in the Reversion shall sue unto the King by Petition,
and shall have the Lands out of the King's hands: and there it is farther said,
That the Lord by Escheat cannot have it, for the party attainted was not his
very Tenant, nor he in the Reversion, for the term yet endures. But now it is
to see, if the Freehold be in the King without Office? and he conceived and
argued, that it was: Where the King is entitled to an Action, there the King
ought to have an Office, and a Scire facias upon it: as where the King is
entitled to a Cessavit, Action of Waste, etc. 14 H. 7. 21. where the Entry in
case of a common person is necessary, there it is requisite that there be an
Office for the King: As if a Villain of the King purchases Lands, or an Alien
born, etc. so for a condition broken, Mortmain, etc. And in some cases, an
Office is only necessary to instruct the King how he shall charge the Officer
for the profits which may be supplied as well by Survey, as by Office: as if
the King be to take by descent, or as the Case is here. And true it is, that a
person attainted of Felony may during his Attainder purchase Lands, and yet he
cannot hold it against the King: and it is clear, that by the Common Law in
such cases, the Land was in the King, but not to grant, for the Statute of 18
H. 6. was an impediment to it: but now that defect is supplied by the Statute
of 31 H. 8. cap. 20. So that now the King may grant without Office: See
Doughtie's Case, 26 Eliz. And in our Case, an Office is not necessary to
entitle the King, but for explaining of his Title: and see 9 H. 7. 2. The Lands
of a man attainted of High Treason are in the King without Office; so where the
King's Tenant dies without Heir; or Tenant in tail of the Gift of the King
dies without issue: See Br. Office before the Escheator 34. and see 13 H. 4.
270. A man is attainted of Treason, the King before Office grants his Lands and
Goods. Things which lie in Grant, as Advowsons, Rents, Remainder, such things
upon Attainder are in the King without Office. As to the general pardon of 23
Eliz. he said, That that does not extend to this Case; and that this interest
of the Queen by this Attainder does not pass by that pardon out of the Queen,
so if the Queen had but a Right or Title only.

Popham, Attorney General; By this Attainder the Estate of him in the Remainder
in tail, accrueth unto the Queen for the life of him in the Remainder; for by
our Law, Felony is punished by the death of the Offender, and the loss of his
Goods and Lands for the examples of others, therefore nothing is left in the
party: Tenant for life is attainted of Felony, the King pardons him his life,
yet he shall have his Lands during his life, and he may dispose of the same for
his life: And so is it of Tenant in tail, for he may forfeit all that which he
has, and that is an Estate for his life, which is a Freehold. If Lands be
given to one and his Heirs for the term of the life of another, and the Donee
be attainted of Felony, the King shall have the Land during the life of Cestuy
que vie, for the Heir cannot have it, because the blood is corrupt, and there
is not any occupancy in the case: for 17 E. 3. the Justices would not accept of
a Fine for the life of another, because there might be an Occupant in the case:
But for a Fine of Land to one and his Heirs for the life of another, they would
take a Fine, for there is no mischief of occupancy. Land is given to A. for
life, the Remainder to B. for life, the Remainder to the right Heirs of A. who
is attainted of Felony; B. dies, now the King has the Fee executed. And here
in our Case, If the Tenant for life had been dead, no Praecipe had lien against
him in the Remainder being in possession, but the party who has right is to
sue unto the King by Petition. 4 E. 3. If one seized of Lands in the right of
his Wife for life be attainted, the King shall have exitus and proficua: but he
conceived that Case not to be Law: For see F. N. B. 254 D. The Husband seized
in the right of his Wife in Fee, is outlawed for Felony, the King seiseth, the
Husband dies; now shall issue forth a Diem clausit extremum, the words of
which Writ in such case are, Quia A. cujus Terr. and Tenement. quae ipse tenuit
de jure and haereditate N. uxoris suae adhuc superstitis occasion ejusdem
Utlagar' in ipsum pro quadam Felonia unde indictatus fuit, etc. in Man. Domini
H. patris nostri extiterunt, etc. therefore the King had not the issues only,
but also the Lands: See to the same purpose the Register 292. b. Stamford's
Placita Coronae, 186, 187. affirms, That Tenant in tail being attainted of
Felony, shall forfeit his Lands during his life. And he said, that the Estate
of Thomas Venables was in the King without Office not to grant, for that is
restrained by the Statute of 18 H. 6. but it is in him before Office, so as he
who has right ought to sue to the King by Petition, if he will have his Land:
yet he conceived, that before the Statute of 18 H. 6. the King might grant the
Land before Office, as it appears by Thirning, 13 H. 4. 278. who was before
the said Statute: So if the King's Tenant makes a Lease for years, the
Remainder over to another in Fee, who dies without Heir; the Remainder is in
the King without Office, because a common person in such case cannot enter, but
a claim is sufficient, and therefore it shall be in the King without Office. As
to the pardon, he said, That it does not extend to this Estate, for this is a
Freehold, ergo, not within the pardon: As if the King's Tenant be attainted of
Felony, and the King pardons him all offenses, and all things which he may
pardon, these words shall not go nor extend to Freeholds, but only unto
personal matters, and such punishments and peins which do concern Chattels. But
it may be objected, That by this pardon, Title of Quare Impedit, and Re-entries
for Conditions broken are excepted; and therefore if they had not been
excepted, they had been remitted by the pardon; and therefore this pardon shall
extend to Inheritances and Freeholds: As to that, I say, That such Exceptions
were not in use in the time of H. 4. and yet Inheritances and Freeholds were
not taken to be within such pardons, and such Exceptions did begin 5 Eliz. And
he said, he had been of Council in such Cases where it has been taken, that
such pardons did not extend to Freeholds: As an Abbat was disseised, and
afterward during the Disseisin the Abbey is dissolved; the King makes such
pardon, the same does not transfer the Right of the King, and in that Pardon
are diverse Exceptions of Goods and Chattels in many cases, and therefore it
cannot be intended that the pardon does extend to Freeholds. And see the said
Act of pardon: The Queen grants all Goods, Chattels, Debts, Fines, Issues,
Profits, Amercements, Forfeitures, Sums of Moneys; which word [Forfeiture]
shall be intended of a personal Forfeiture, and non aliter, for it is coupled
with things of such nature. And as to the Traverse, he said, It did not lie in
this Case; for the Office is not untrue, but true in substance, although void
in circumstance: And also the King here is entitled by double matter of
Record, (scil.) the Attainder and the Office: and he said that the Statutes of
34 and 36 E. 3. which gave Traverse, are to be intended of Offices found
virtute Officii, and not virtute Brevis, for then Efcheators were very
troublesome: And the Statute of 2 E. 6. does not give Traverse, but where the
Office is untruly found; as if Tenant of the King be disseised, and the
Disseisor be attainted; the Queen seiseth the Land: Now the Disseisee has not
remedy by Traverse upon the Statute of 2 E. 6. but is put to his Monstrans de
Droit, for the Office is true: But if I be Tenant of the King, and seized of
Land accordingly, and it was found that J. S. was seized of my Land, and
attainted, etc. whereas in truth he had not any thing in my Land, there
Traverse lies, for the Office is false; and so in our Case, for the Traverse
it is at the Common Law: and it was true that Venables was seized.

Coke to the contrary; and he said, That by the Attainder the Queen has gained
but a Chattel; and that notwithstanding this Forfeiture, if Venables had been
in possession, a Praecipe should be brought against him: And where it has been
said by Mr. Attorney, That Writs set down in the Register are the best
Expositours of our Law, the same is not so; for the Register says, That Waste
lies notwithstanding a Mesn Remainder, which is not now Law, but it has been
clearly ruled to the contrary: and see accordingly 50 E. 3. the Register
therefore and the Writs are subject to the Judgment of our Law; and the Writ of
Diem clausit extremum is not to the contrary; for I confess, that in such case
the Land shall be seized into the hands of the King, but the King shall not
have but a Chattel therein: It has been argued, It may be granted, Roll. Tit.
Grant. 4 Len. 112. ac. Godb. 351. a.
therefore it may be forfeited; Nego Consequentiam: for a man seized in the
right of his Wife, may grant, but not forfeit: Guardian in Socage may grant, but
not forfeit; the Husband may grant a term for years, which he has in the right
of his Wife, but he cannot forfeit it. A woman Inheretrix takes a Husband, who
afterward is attainted of Felony, the King pardons him, they have issue, the
Husband shall be Tenant by the courtesy, which proves, that the King has not
the Freehold by that Attainder. Before the Statute of Westminster. 2. Tenant in tail,
post prolem suscitatam, might forfeit his Lands, but now the Statute has so
incorporated the Estate tail to the Tenant in tail, that it cannot be divested,
even a Fine levied by him ipso jure nullus, although as to the possession it be
a Discontinuance; and that is the reason wherefore Tenant in tail shall not be
seized to another's use. See Stamford 190. The Husband seized in the right of
his Wife is attainted of Felony, the King shall have the profits of the Lands
of the Wife during the life of the Husband, etc. So if Tenant in tail be
attainted of Felony, and that is but a Chattel in the Lands of the Wife, and
also in the Lands of the Tenant in tail: and if the possessions of a Bishop be
seized into the Queen's hands for a Contempt, in such case the Queen has the
possession, and not the profits only: the same Law of the Lands of Tenant in
tail, or for life, being attainted of Felony: so of seizure for Alienation
without license, or of the possessions of Priors, Aliens. See Brook Reseiser
10. So where the Seizure is for Ideocy. And he said, That in the principal Case
nothing is in the King until Office: and as to the Case of 13 H. 4. 6. he
confessed the same; for at that time many, and amongst them Lawyers and
Justices, were attainted by Parliament, and so was Sir John Salisbury, whose
Case it was; and their Lands by Act of Parliament given expressly to the King:
and therefore I grant that their Lands were in the King before Office. Tenant
in Fee of a common Lord is attainted of Felony, his Lands remain in him during
his life until the Entry of the Lord, and where the King is Lord until Office
be found: but in the Case of a common person, after the death of the person
attainted, they are in the Lord before Entry, and in the Case of the King
before Office, for the mischief of abeyances. And see the Lord Lovel's Case, 17
and 18 Eliz. 485, 486. Plow. where it is holden, That upon Attainder of Treason
by Act of Parliament, the Lands were not in the King without Office in the life
of the party attainted, upon the words of the Act, shall forfeit. See Stamford
Prerogat. 54, 55. acc. He said, That this interest which came unto the King by
this Attainder, is but a Chattel, and then it is remitted by the Pardon; and so
he conceived, if it be a Freehold: For the words of the general Pardon are
large and liberal, [Pardon and release all manner of Treasons, etc. and all
other things, Causes, etc.] and here Forfeitures are pardoned; and this word
[things] is a transcendent, etc. and although it be a general word, yet by the
direction of the Act of general Pardon it ought to be beneficially expounded
and extended, as if all things had been specially set down: Also the words are,
[Pardon them and their Heirs,] therefore the Pardon extends to Inheritance, for
otherwise there is no use of that: And he conceived, That by the first branch
of this Act, that the same extends to Inheritances, and to acquit the Lands of
all encumbrances, for every Offense not excepted, for there is the word
[Heirs,] and the third branch concerns only Chattels, and that is by the word
[Grant,] where the first is by words of acquittal: See 33 H. 8. br. Charter of
Pardon 71. Tenant of the King dies seized, the Heir intrudes, Office is found;
by Pardon of Parliament all Intrusions are pardoned; in that case the Offense
is pardoned, but not the issues and profits of the Lands; but by a Pardon
before all is pardoned. But here in our case the Office is not void; for the
Statute makes all Precepts, Commissions, etc. void, being awarded upon such
forfeiture. See also in the second branch, Vexed or inquieted in Body, Goods,
or Lands: and see also among the Exceptions, That persons standing indicted of
wilful Murder, and Forfeiture of Goods, Lands, Tenements, grown by any
offense by such person: By which he said, that if such Exception had not been,
the Land of such person, if he had been attainted upon such Indictment, should
be forfeited: as to the Traverse, he said, That because the Office is true, our
Plea is in the nature of Monstrans de Droit, although it concludes with a
Traverse: We vary from the Office in number of the persons, and in the day of
Feoffment, and every circumstance in case of the King is to be traversed, and
our Plea in substance confesses and avoideth the Offense. Although that here
the King be entitled by double matter of Record, (scil.) the Attainder and the
Office: yet one of the said Records, (scil.) the Attainder, is discharged by
another Record, (scil.) the Pardon, and then but one Record remains, (scil.)
the Office, and therefore our Traverse well lies. And he said, that by the
common Law there was a Traverse; as where it was found by Office, that the
Lessee of the King had committed Waste, or had cessed for two years; and that
in such case the Lessee and Tenant, in an Action brought against them, may
traverse the Offense; therefore there was a Traverse at the common Law, where
the King was entitled by single matter of Record: So upon Office finding
Alienation without License, there was a Traverse by the common Law: See
Traverse in such case in the Case of William de Herlington, 43 Ass. 28. See Br.
Traverse of Office 54. Petition is by the common Law, and Traverse by the
Statute: Frowick in his Reading. See Stamf. Prerogat. 60. That Traverse in case
of Goods was at the common Law, but for Lands by Office, by 34 E. 3. 14. for
before the remedy was by Petition. See Co. 4. part. the Sadler's Case 55, 56.
Traverse was at the common Law concerning Freehold and Inheritance, but that
was in special Cases, (scil.) when by the Office the Land is not in the King's
hands, nor the King by that is in possession, but only by the Office is
entitled to an Action, and cannot make a Seizure without Suit, for there in a
Scire facias brought by the King in the nature of such Action to which he is
entitled, the party may appear to the Scire facias, and traverse the Office by
the common Law. It was adjourned.

CLXX. Scott and Scott 's Case. Mich. 29 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
1 Cro. 73. 3 Len. 225. 4 Len. 70.
IN a Replevin, betwixt Scott and Scott, the Case was, George Scott, 2 H. 8.
being Tenant in tail of certain lands, suffered a common Recovery to the use of
his last Will; and 15 H. 8. made his Will, by which he did declare, That the
Recoverors should make a good and favorable Lease to Hugh Scott his younger
brother: and 25 H. 8. they make a Lease of the same land to the said Hugh for
199 years according to the Will of the said George Scott, rendering Rent, 11 l.
6 s. 8 d. payable at the Feast of the Annunciation and S. Michael, by equal
portions, and that to the Recoverors, their Heirs and Assigns; and there was a
Covenant, that after the death of the Recoverors, the said Rent should be paid
to Cestuy que use, his Heirs and Assigns, any thing in the said Indenture
notwithstanding. Proviso, That if the Less make his Heir male his Assignee of
that term, that then he shall pay the said Rent to the Recoverors, their Heirs
and Assigns, and the Lessee shall not pay the Rent to the Heirs of Cestuy que
use, upon which a Distress is taken, and thereupon a Replevin brought. Drew
argued for the Plaintiff: When a Condition is created, the Law says, That it
shall be taken and construed favorably in the behalf of him who is to perform
it: As if one be bounden to appropriate such a Church to such a house before
such a day at his own costs, and the Obligor grants a Pension out of the said
Parsonage, and afterward appropriates the said Church, it was holden that the
Condition was well performed, 3 H. 7. 4. A Lease for years upon condition, to
scowre the Ditches, if the Lessee scowreth them once, it is well enough: And as
to this word Proviso, It is to see, If here it be a word conditional: In some
Cases, this word Pro, makes a Condition, as 45 E. 3. 8. Grant of a Ward, pro
bono servitio, if the Grantee departs out of his service, the Grant is void:
So if an Annuity be granted unto a Physician pro consilio impendendo, the same
is a Condition, 41 E. 3. 6. For the Grantor has not means to compel the
Grantee to give his Council; but in some Cases, this word Pro, does not make a
Condition: As if before the Statute of West. 3. Land was given pro homagio suo,
there, if the Homage be not done, the Feoffor could not re-enter, but he ought
to distrain. And I conceive, that in our Case, Proviso does not make a
Condition. 7 H. 6. 44. A Feoffment in Fee with Warranty, Proviso, that the
Feoffee shall not vouch: So a Grant of a Rentcharge, Proviso, that the Grant
shall not extend ad onerand. personam of the Grantor; for here the Proviso is
rather an Exception than a Condition: A Lease for years without impeachment of
Wast, Proviso, that he shall not do voluntary Wast, the same is a Qualification
of the liberty for doing Wast. Grant of a Manor, Proviso, that it shall not
extend to wood growing upon the Manor, the same is an Exception, not a
Condition. See the Bishop of York's Case, 5 Eliz. Dyer 222. The said Bishop
made a Lease for certain years of certain Lands, Proviso, quod tempore
vacationis, the Rent shall be paid to the Chapter, It was holden that the
Proviso was not a Condition. And here in this Case, the Will of George Scott
was, That the Recoverors should make to the said Hugh, a favorable Lease,
which cannot be, if it be a conditional Lease: Another point was; because the
Rent is not well demanded; for he has demanded the whole Rent of the year,
whereas but half a years Rent was only due. Coke, contrary: where the Proviso
is parcel of one sentence which contains a Covenant, or abridgeth the Covenant,
there it shall not amount to a Condition, but to an Exception, as a Grant of a
Rentcharge, Proviso, that he shall not charge the person, abridgeth the force
of the Grant: so a Lease without impeachment of Wast, Proviso, that the Feoffee
shall not do voluntary Wast, the same abridgeth the liberty; But in our Case,
this Proviso makes a Condition, and not a Qualification of the sentence, or of
any Covenant contained in the sentence, nor does it participate altogether with
the sentence, but stands substantively, for it was a full sentence before: A
Feoffment in Fee with Warranty, Proviso, that when he is impleaded, he shall
not vouch J. S. the same is a good Condition, for J. S. is a stranger:
contrary, that he shall not vouch the Feoffor: And a Proviso never makes a
Covenant, and therefore it shall be either a Condition, or void. And he said,
That by the devise, Hugh Scott had a Lease without any Lease to be made by the
Recoverors. As unto the demand of the whole Rent, where but half a years Rent
was due, the same is good enough. And so was it adjudged in a Case betwixt
Andrew's and the Lord Cromwell; for he is at his peril to pay the one moiety,
and in as much as he denies the whole, he denies every part. It was adjorned.

CLXXI. Hawkins 's Case. Mich. 29 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
ONE Hawkins was seized of three Messuages in Bury in his Demesit as of Fee,
and had issue, Robert, Christian, and Joan; Postea 193. 1 Cro. 53. 3 Len. 180.
and devised all his said Messuages to his wife for life, the remainder of one
of the said Messuages to his son Robert and his heirs; the remainder of another
of his said Messuages to his daughter Christian and to her heirs, and the
remainder of the third Message, to Joan and her heirs. And farther, by his
Will devised, That if any of his said issues die without issue of his body,
that then the other surviving shall have totam illam partem, etc. between them
equally to be divided. The Devisor dies, the wife of the Devisor dies, Joan
dies, having issue, Robert dies without issue, Christian enters into all the
house of Robert, and dies, and her husband holds in as Tenant by the Courtesy.
Coke, The surviving child shall have the whole, and the issue of Joan shall
have nothing; and he said, That by this Devise, they have an Estate in tail,
for the Fee does not vest in any of them; for it is written, Who shall survive:
But when one overlives, he shall have in Fee, for these words, totam illam
partem, go to the whole Estate, as well as to the whole Land. I devise my Land
wholly to one, he has Fee thereby: And he said that the three Devisees have
Fee-tail, and Fee expectant each severally as to the Message to him limited.
Golding, contrary; Each has an Estate tail in the house devised to him, and
but an Estate for life, expectant upon the death of the other without issue,
for there are no words by which it may appear what Estate he shall have by the
survivorship. I grant the Case which Perkins denies, but Littleton affirms
(scil.) A Devise to one of lands in perpetuum; for there the intent appears;
But where there are not words of Inheritance, nor words amounting to so much,
then it shall be but an Estate for life: And as to the words, totam partem
illam, the same is all one as if he had said, partem illam without the word
totam. And also he said, That where one only survives, no farther the Estate
vests; for there ought to be two to take by the survivor; for the words are,
Equally to be divided betwixt them, And then if it cannot accrue by survivor,
then it shall descend; and if it had accrued to two by the survivor, they shall
be thereof Tenants in common, not Ioynt-tenants by reason of these words,
Equally to be divided. Clench, Justice, The words, Totam illam partem, go to
the house, and not to the Estate in it: Shute, Justice, accordingly: and he
said, If both daughters had survived, they should have Fee in the house of
Robert, but not by the Will, but by descent in coparcenary: Also when two are
dead, the son and one daughter, then it cannot be divided, therefore the Will
as to that is void, and then the common Law shall take place, and put the house
to the issue of one daughter, and of the other daughter surviving. Gaudy,
Justice, Here is but an Estate for life in the survivor; It has been objected,
That then having but an Estate for life, the same Estate is drowned by the
descent of the Fee-simple, so as now the Estate limited by the Will, is void;
To which it may be answered, That although now, upon the matter it be void,
yet, Ab initio, it was not so; for it became void by matter of later time,
(scil.) by the descent of the Fee-simple; for if one of the daughters had died
without issue before the death of Robert, so as the house of such daughter
should have come to the said Robert and the other sister, there is no
coparcenary, for the son has all the Fee, and the moiety of the same is
executed, and the other moiety expectant, and the sister has a moiety for
life, and then the Devise not void: Also here are not two survivors, so nothing
is to be divided, and therefore the Law shall say, that the house of Robert is
descended, (scil.) the Fee of it to the daughter of Christian and Joan, and so
Judgment was given against the husband, who claims to be Tenant by the Courtesy
of the whole Message.

CLXXII. Wye and Throgmorton 's Case. Pasc. 27 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
IN Debt upon a Bond by Wye, against Throgmorton, The Condition of the
Obligation, was to perform Covenants in a pair of Indentures; And the Covenant
wherein the breach was assigned was, That if R. W. Brother of the Plaintiff,
should say, Make assurance of such a Manor to the Defendant, as the Council
learned of the said Defendant should advise, Then if the Defendant pays unto
the Plaintiff 50 l. the Obligation to be void; The Defendant by advice of
Council, demanded a Release with Warranty, etc. And by Periam and Windham, The
same is not any Assurance, but a means to recover in value. Anderson, contrary:
That it was a Collateral Warranty, etc.

CLXXIII. Cropp and Hambleden 's Case. Hill. 28 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
1 Cro. 48.
IN Trespass by Cropp against Erasmus Hambleden, upon the special Verdict, the
Case was; That one Martin Hastings was seized of the lands, where, etc. in the
right of his wife, for the life of the wife; and that they both did Lease unto
the Defendant for years, rendering Rent, payable at the Feast of S. Michael, and
the Feast of the Annunciation, etc. with clause of re-entry, if the Rent be
behind, by a Month after any of the said Feasts, and after the feast of S.
Michael, 26 Eliz. and before the Month expired, the Lessee, the now Defendant,
sent his servant unto the house of the Lessor, for to pay to him the Rent then
due; the servant went unto the house of the Lessor, and there asked for him, to
whom it was answered by one Mary Briggs, daughter of the wife of the Lessor,
who there dwelt in the said house with her mother, that the Lessor was not at
home, for which the said servant delivered the said Rent to the said Mary,
requiring her to deliver the same over to the Lessor, upon his retorn to the
house, in the name of his servant; Mary reserved the said Rent, and upon the
retorn of the Lessor, at his house, told him all the matter aforesaid, and that
the servant of the Lessor, the Defendant, had required her to tender the said
Rent to the Lessor, in the name of the Defendant, and thereupon offered and
tendered to him the said Rent, and the Lessor refused it. And the Jury found,
That the third half year before the tender mentioned before, the Lessor
commanded the said Mary to receive the Rent then due, who did accordingly, and
that the next half year then following, the said Mary did receive the said
Rent, without commandment of the Lessor, but after the Lessor agreed unto it,
and that the immediate half year before this tender in question, the Defendant
paid the Rent then due, to the Lessor himself, who received it, And it was the
opinion of Wray, chief Justice, that this tender was good, and it is not like
unto the case of an Obligation; for there the Obligee cannot have an Action of
Debt before the last day: but here the Lessor might have distrained, or have
had an Action of Debt before the Month expired, and so the Lessor is bound by
this tender; and by Gaudy, Justice, This tender cannot be said a tender by a
stranger, for here Mary came in privity of the servant of the Lessee, and as it
is found by Verdict, Mary tendered it to the Lessor, as being requested by the
servant of the Lessee: And afterward, upon consideration had betwixt the
Justices themselves; the Justices, viz. Clench, Gaudy and Wray, (for Shute was
then sick) it was clearly resolved against the Plaintiff, and that the said
tender, as it is found in the Verdict, is a good and sufficient tender; and the
Lord Wray delivered the reason, as before, and farther said, That if the said
Rent had been reserved payable at the feasts aforesaid, or within a Month after
each of them, there the tender as above, had not been good, nor should bind the
Lessor; for in such case the Lessor could not distrain, or have an Action of
Debt for the said Rent before the Month expired. And this is a case of
extremity, and deserves no favor; and here is no mischief to the Lessor, for
he might have had his Rent in due time if he would, and his captious refusal
shall not avail him; And Judgment was given accordingly.

CLXXIV. Bostock and Covert 's Case. Trin. 33 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
BOstock and his Wife brought a Writ of Dower against Covert, son and heir of
her former Husband, who pleaded, That the Husband of the Demandant was seized
of Lands, amounting to the number of 300 Acres; and held the same by
Knights-service, and died seized, after whose death, by virtue of the Statute
of 34 and 32 H. 8. he entered into 100 Acres of the said Lands, as the third
part of the said Lands descended, and held the same in severalty, being the
third part of the clear yearly value of the whole discharged of a Dower; and
that the Wife ought to have all her Dower out of the two parts devised. And
Anderson said, That the Plea was not good; for the heir who will take advantage
of the Statute in that point, ought to enter generally as Tenant in common with
the Devisee, and then in a Writ of Dower it is a good Plea: so if after his
entry as Tenant in common Partition be made betwixt him and the Devisee, such a
Plea is good; but here he has entered severally into a third part, distinct
from the residue, and so has ousted the Devisee of a third part severally; for
which cause he cannot have advantage of this Plea: To which the rest of the
Justices, Non contradixerunt.

CLXXV. Sir John Southwel 's Case. Pasch. 37 Eliz. In the Exchequer.
3 Len. 147.
SIR John Southwel of the County of Lancaster, 7 Julii, 19 Eliz. made a
Conveyance of his Lands to diverse Feoffees and their Heirs, upon condition,
that they should find him and his Wife, and so many persons in his house, etc.
prefer his Daughters in marriage, pay his debts, etc. And if there fell out at
the years end upon account made by the Feoffees any surplusage, that then at
the end of every such year, they should answer such surplusage as should then
remain in their hands unexpended of the Rents and profits of his said Lands;
with clause of revocation, etc. Afterward, the said Conveyance being in force,
came the Statute of 23 Eliz. concerning Recusants; upon which Statute, the said
Southwel is now endicted; and afterward upon a Commission issuing out of the
Exchequer to the Sheriff of Lancaster, to enquire of the Lands of the said
Southwel, although against the said Conveyance it was given in Evidence, That
after the said Conveyance, the said Sir John Southwel had granted Trees from
off the said Lands, and had received Fines and Incomes for Leases, etc. yet the
Jurors charged to enquire, would not find that the said Sir John Southwel had
any Lands, etc. And by special command from the Queen, it was referred out of
the Exchequer, to all the Judges of England, If the Lands of the said Sir John
Southwel conveyed as aforesaid, were subject to the said Statute, and the
penalties thereof. And upon a great deliberation, it was by them all resolved
and agreed, That notwithstanding the said Conveyance, the said Lands were
liable to the said Statute. And as to the Jurors, who against the Evidence
given to them for the Queen, gave their Verdict (ut supra) Process was awarded
against them out of the Court of Exchequer, for to appear before the Lord
Treasurer and the Barons. And for their said contempt, they were committed to
the Fleet, and each of them fined 50 l.

CLXXVI. Moore and Savil 's Case. Trin. 27 Eliz. In the Exchequer.
IN an Ejectione firmae, by Moore against Savil, the Case was, That Tenant in
tail leased the Land to the father, mother and son for their lives, by
Indenture, in which it was comprehended, That forasmuch as the Lessor is but
Tenant in tail, and so cannot by Law limit these Estates by way of Remainder,
but jointly in possession; and his intent was, That because this Lease was
procured and obtained at the special suit, and costs and charges of the father,
That the said son should suffer his father, and after him his mother, to take
the profits of the said Lands demised, and to occupy and hold the said Lands to
their only profit without interruption of the said son, notwithstanding his
joint Estate in possession with them, Provisum igitur est, That if the said son
shall challenge, claim, demand or take any profits of the Lands so demised, or
enter into the same, during the life of his said father or mother, That then
the Estate to him limited by the said Indenture should cease, and be utterly
void. And it was the clear opinion of the whole Court, That this Condition and
Proviso was utterly void, for it is contrary to the Estate limited before; as
in the Case cited by Coke at the Bar. If I lease to you my Lands for 20 years,
Proviso, that you shall not occupy the same the two first years, the same
Proviso is void and contrary, and repugnant to the Estate.

CLXXVII. Lord Cromwell and Townsend 's Case. Mich. 28 Eliz. In the Star Chamber.
HEnry Lord Cromwell, exhibited a Bill in the Star Chamber, against Roger
Townsend, Esquire, for that the said Roger Townsend, in an Action betwixt James
Taverner Plaintiff, and James Cromwell Farmor, of the said Lord Cromwell
Defendant, in Trespass, in the favor and unlawful maintenance of the said
Taverner, did procure a partial Jury to be returned. And upon the hearing of
the Cause, the matter given in Evidence was, That the said Taverner was a
Copiholder of the said Lord Cromwell, and that the said Lord Cromwell, pretending
that the said Taverner had forfeited his Copihold, caused the said James
Cromwell to make an Entry, in the right of the said Lord, upon the said
Taverner; upon which Entry, Taverner brought an Action of Trespass against the
said James Cromwell, in which Action the parties were at Issue upon the
forfeiture. And before any Venire facias issued forth, Taverner hearing that
one Steward, who was Bailiff of the Franchize, under the Earl of Arundel, and
who ought to make the Panel, etc. was purposed to have made the said Panel
not duly; viz. to retorn therein, great Gentlemen of the County, who were Lords
of Manors, in favor of the said Lord Cromwell, went unto the said Roger
Townsend, who was then one of the principal servants and agents of the said
Earl, and showed to him, that if those great persons and Lords of Manors be
returned for the trial of that Issue, peradventure they would not so easily
appear for the expedition of the parties, as people of lesser condition; and
also many of them being Lords of Manors, and having customary Tenants, and
therefore not indifferent to try that Issue, and prayed his Order to the said
Steward, for the making of an indifferent Panel; where, upon a conference with
the said Steward for the making of an indifferent Panel, and showing to him,
the making of the said Panel was not convenient, or any equal course to retorn
Knights, Esquires or Lords of Manors, but rather such sufficient persons, for
the greater expedition of Justice, and indifferency of the trial; And
afterward the said Taverner exhibited a Petition, showing all the special
matter, and praying him to give Order for the making of an indifferent Panel
for the trial of that Cause, which Petition was delivered to the said Earl by
the said Townsend, in the name of the said Taverner. Upon which the Earl did
refer the said matter to three of his chiefest agents and Counselors, i.
Dicksey, Townsend and Carrel, and delivered to them the Book of Freeholders
within the said Franchise, who, according to their Commission made a Panel,
which was returned; and the Jury passed with the said James Cromwell in the
right of the said Lord: And if this intermedling of Townsend with this matter,
as abovesaid, etc. especially his conference with the Bailiff, be maintenance
or not, was the Question. And by the Lord Anderson and the Lord Wray, chief
Justices, It was delivered for Law, That because the said Townsend was in
manner a servant of the said Earl, who had retorn of Writs, and one of his
principal Counselors and agents, and hearing, Ex insinuatione, of the said
Taverner, the misdemeanour of the Bailiff of his Lord could not do better, than
to show to the Bailiff his duty, for it concerned the honor of his Lord, and
also his Inheritance in the Franchise; But if the said Townsend had been a mere
stranger to the said Earl, so as no such privity had been betwixt them, it had
been clearly maintenance in Townsend; as it was lately adjudged in this Court,
in the Case of one Gifford; Gifford's Case.
where the parties being at Issue, and a Venire facias was to the Sheriff to
retorn a Jury, a stranger wrote to one of the Jurors who was returned in the
Panel, praying him to appear at the day, and to do in the Cause according to
his Conscience; and that was adjudged Maintenance. And afterward, upon the
full hearing of the cause, the said Townsend, by the sentence of the said
Court, was acquitted of every Maintenance, with great allowance and approbation
of many Lords of the Council there present: Bromley Cancellario tantum
exclamante.

CLXXVIII. Sir Moil Finch 's Case. 33 Eliz. In the Exchequer.
2 Roll 184. 1 Cro. 220. Poph. 25. 1 Roll 215.
THE Case was this; The King and Queen, Philip and Mary, leased for seventy
years for certain Rent payable at the Feasts of Saint Michael and the
Annunciation; Proviso, that if the Rent be behind, and not paid by the space of
forty days after any of the Feasts aforesaid, that the Lease shall cease and be
void. At Mich. 9 Eliz. the Rent was not paid according to the Proviso, but a
Month after the said forty days it was paid, and Acquittance given for it; and
so the Rents due after unto 30 Eliz. were duly paid, and Acquittances given for
the same. The Queen gave and granted the Reversion in Fee to Sir Thomas Henage,
etc. and after it was found by Office that the Rent was arrear, ut supra: Sir
Thomas Henage entered, and leased for years to Sir Moil Finch, who being
ejected, brought a Quo minus in the nature of an Ejectione Firmae, etc. It was
argued by Coke, That this Lease upon the matter aforesaid is avoidable by the
Patentee, and that without Office; for the conclusion of the Proviso is not,
that the Queen shall re-enter, but that the Lease shall cease and be void: and
the Queen is not driven to demand her Rent, as in such case a Subject is tied.
And he compared it to the Case of a common person; If a common person leaseth
for years, upon condition, that if the Lessee does not build upon the Land
demised a House within a year after, that the Lease shall be void, and
afterward grants the Reversion to a stranger: the Grantee shall have advantage
of this Condition, be it broken before or after the Grant; for the Lease in
such case is void, not only voidable; and the reason is, because the Condition
is collateral: which see 11 H. 7. 17. A Lease for years is made upon Condition,
that if the Lessee does not go to Rome before such a day, that the Lease shall
be void; the Lessor grants the Reversion over, the Lessee attorns, and does not
go to Rome within the time appointed, the Grantee may re-enter; contrary, if
the conclusion of the Condition had been by way of re-entry, for then it should
run in privity by the Common Law: But where a Lease with such Condition was
made for life, with this conclusion of the Condition, that the Lease shall be
void, the Grantee shall not take advantage of that by the Common Law, for there
the Estate is not void until re-entry, for there is a Freehold which ought to
be avoided by Entry: But in our Case the Condition is upon the matter
collateral, for no demand is requisite to take advantage of the Condition. And
he said it is a general Rule, where in the Case of a common person an Estate
may be divested without Entry, there in the Case of the Queen there needs not
any Office; but here in our Case, if it had been a Case of a common person, the
Estate should be divested without Entry, therefore in the Case of the Queen
without Office: See Stamford for the Major Proposition 55. but it does not vest
to have Trespass before Entry: and he vouched the Case of Browning and Beston,
Plow. 136. where such Lease after such Condition broken, is merely void and
dissolved. And he said, That it was the Opinion of the Justices of the Common
Pleas, now late, That by a Release to such Lessee, after the condition broken,
nihil operatur; for after the Condition broken he is but Tenant at sufferance;
and a Lease for years, being but a Cattle, may begin without ceremony, and end
without ceremony: 2 H. 7. 8. If the King make a Lease for years, with clause of
Re-entry for not payment of the Rent, although the Rent be behind, yet the King
shall not re-enter before Office found; and there ought to be a Seizure, for
the Lease is not void by the non-payment of the Rent, but only voidable: but
if the Lease be void for not payment, as in our case it is, to what purpose
shall an Office be? for by the mere contract the Lease cease, without
re-entry, or without Office: But admit that the Lease shall not cease without
Office, and before Office the Queen grants the Reversion over, yet an Office
found after the Grant shall avoid the Lease as well as if it had been found
before the Grant. A Lease is made upon condition, that if the Lessor build a
House upon the Land leased, and pay to the Lessee 20 l. that then the Lease
shall be void; the Lessor builds the House, and afterward grants the
Reversion, the Grantee pays the 20 l. now the Lease is void, although the
Condition be partly performed in the time of the Lessor, and partly in the time
of the Grantee. So here, although the Grant of the Queen be Mesn between the
non-payment of the Rent, and the Office; for the Queen is not entitled by the
Office to the Land, but by the Condition broken, and the Office is only to
inform the Queen of her Title; and when the Office is once found, it shall
relate unto the time of the Condition broken, and shall be of such force as if
then it had been found: H. 3. H. 7. f. 3. Cro. 221.
and here in our case an Office was necessary for to entitle the Queen to the
mean profits due betwixt the Rent arrear, and the Grant of the Queen, with
which the Queen by her Grant has not dispensed; and without Office he could
not have them; for the arrearages of the Rent do not pass to the Patentee, no
more than if the Queen be seized of an Advowson, and the Church become void, if
the Queen Grant the Advowson unto another, the avoidance shall not pass. The
King seized of a Rent which is arrear, grants the said Rent, the arrearages
shall not pass: So here of the mean profits, for they are flowers fallen from the
stalk, etc.

Godfrey contrary; and he said, That the Lease is in being not impeached by the
Condition, or the Office: and he said, That notwithstanding that the words of
the Lease are, That the Lease shall be void, yet before that an Office be
found, the Lease shall not be avoided: In all cases where the Queen is entitled
to any thing, or to defeat the Estate of another, an Office is necessary; and
that ground is taken in the case of the Lord Berkley, Plow. Com. 229. by Brown,
therefore here, it ought to be found by Office: See also the case of the Bishop
of Chichester, Fitz. Abridg. Forfeiture 18. 46 E. 3. The Bishop leased for life
certain Lands given by the Progenitors of the King, as parcel of the Barony of
the Bishopric, rendering 30 l Rent; and afterward, by assent of the Dean and
Chapter, released a great part of the said Rent; the Lease and the Rent ought
to be found by Office. So an Alienation in Mortmain ought to be found by
Office, because the interest of another is to be defeated: So where the King's
Tenant cease, etc. the Villein of the King purchases Lands, or but a Lease
for years: So where the King is but to have annum, diem and vastum, Waste
committed by the Committee of the King: Lessee of the King for years makes a
Feoffment in Fee; in all these cases the King, without Office, shall not be
entitled. The same Law is in case of a Condition broken; which see 2 H. 7. 8.
Plow. 213. Frowick in his Reading puts this case: A Subject leaseth for years
upon condition, which is afterward broken, and afterward the Lessor becomes
King, here needs no Office, for at the time of the breach of the Condition the
Lessor was not King. Forbisher and Bunny's Case.
The Case betwixt Sir Martin Forbisher and one Bunny was, that the Queen made a
Lease of Duchy Land upon Condition, which was broken: It was holden, that here
there needs not any Office, for the Queen had those Lands severed from the
Crown by Parliament, and they passed by the Duchy Seal by Livery, and
attornment of the Tenants: The Queen leaseth for years, Proviso, that the
Lessee shall not alien; such alienation against such a Condition ought to be
found by Office: and therefore at this day, where a Forfeiture is given to the
King, etc. by Statute, the words are, That the King shall be seized without
Office: And as to the Relation of an Office, he said, That an Office may have a
Relation as to mean profits, but not as to vest the interest from the time of
the Title accrued. And although that in the Grant of the Queen to Sir Thomas
Henage there be these words, Non obstante, the not finding any Office, yet in
this case an Office is necessary, for the Queen cannot dispense with the Law,
so to alter or change the Law, as to make Lands in Borough-English descendable
at the common Law: So if the King make a Lease for years, with clause of
re-entry, and afterward grants the Reversion over to a Subject; and farther
grants, that if the Rent be behind, that the Lessor may re-enter without
demand; yet the Grantee ought to demand the Rent. And, as our case is here,
there needs not any Office to entitle the Queen to the Mean profits; for
although that the Rent was not paid at the day, yet it was paid after, and all
Rent due afterward, and Acquittances given for the same; which matter we have
specially pleaded to the intent aforesaid, upon which the other side have
demurred, and thereby have confessed it, etc. But this Office does not give any
interest to the Queen in the thing leased, for she has granted them over
before, by which she has disabled her self to take advantage of the Condition
aforesaid, for she has surceased her time: 8 H. 5. Traverse 47. Tenant for
life forfeits his Estate, and before the King seiseth, The Tenant for life
dies, he in the Reversion may enter, and the King shall not seize, for the
King has surceased his time. And if the Queen should have advantage of this
Condition, she should avoid her own Grant, which should be a great
inconvenience; The Queen leaseth for years, Proviso, that the Lessee shall not
do Waste; the Queen grants over the Reversion after Waste done, Office is
found, the Queen gains nothing by it. It was agreed in the Case betwixt Knight
and Beech, 28 Eliz. That the Grant of the Queen Mesn between the award of the
Commission, and the Retorn of it was good; for the Title of the Queen appears
of Record, although that the Commission was not returned before the Grant made:
And if an Office should relate unto the time of the Condition broken, it should
be in vain to argue that point: for in the said case it was holden a Record,
when the Jurors had put their Seals to it, before that it be enrolled: The
acceptance of the Rent, and the Acquittances thereof are pleaded, 1. To prove,
that there is no cause to find an Office in this case, for the Queen is
answered the Mean profits: 2. To prove, that the Queen has waved and refused
to take the benefit of the Condition, but not to conclude the Queen, and then
you cannot force her to take the benefit of the Condition: As the King, Lord,
and Tenant, the Tenant dies, his Heir within age, the King accepts of the
Services of the Heir, and afterward grants over the Seignory, after Office is
found, the King shall not have the Wardship, etc.

At another day it was argued by Popham, Attorney General, for the Plaintiff;
and he said, That upon not payment of the Rent, the Lease is ipso facto void,
without any Office found thereof, and that by reason of these words, [shall not
be void;] for he said, it is not a Condition, but rather a limitation: As if
the King make a Lease to three for eighty years, si tam diu vixerint, one of
them dies, the Lease is determined without Office: So a Lease made vy the
Queen for years, so long as the Lessee shall pay the Rent reserved, or so long
as the Lessee shall there inhabit: In these cases, upon a Lease made by a
common person, the Lessor before Entry might grant over, and the Grantee shall
have advantage of it, for it is a limitation, and by the limitation the Lease
is determined before the Grant; contrary, if it had been by words of re-entry.
A Lease for sixty years, Proviso, that if the Lessee shall die within the term,
that the Lease shall cease; the Lessor grants the Reversion over, the Grantee
shall take advantage thereof by the common Law: See the Case 11 H. 7. 17. it is
a limitation, and not a Condition. And he said, in this case an Office is
necessary, not to avoid the Lease, for that was void before; nor to punish the
Lessee as a Trespassor, or to fine him for the continuance of his wrongful
possession; but to make him responsable as an Accountant. In the Lease of a
common person, where the clause is, That the Lease shall cease; If after the
Rent behind, the Lessee continues his possession, yet the Lessor shall not
punish the Lessee as a Trespassor before his Entry, for the Lessee by his
continuance is but Tenant at sufferance, for his first Entry was lawful; And
he agreed the Books, 14 H. 8. and 2 H. 7. That such advantages that a common
person cannot have without Entry, the Queen cannot have without Office: But a
common person before Entry cannot punish another by way of Trespass, therefore
neither the Queen, without Office, shall punish one as an Intruder: And as to
the Case, now lately adjudged betwixt Knight and Beech, the same does not
extend to our Case; Knight and Beech's case.
for there an Office was requisite before the Grant of the Queen, because the
per-close of the Condition was, That the Prior should re-enter: and it is very
clear, That Chattels vest in the Queen without Office. And in this Case an
Office is necessary for two purposes: 1. To make the Grant good: 2. To make the
Occupier accountable for the Mean profits, and to give recompense, which the
Queen is not enabled unto without Office. And here the Patentee shall have
advantage of the cesser of this Lease: For, 1. He has the Inheritance
lawfully: and 2. The Lease is determined. If there were no Non obstante in the
Letters Patents, the said Lease ought to have been recited, if it had not been
determined; and if it be determined (as this case is) it ought to be recited,
if there were not a Non obstante; for non constat to the Queen, if it be
determined or not: And he said, That Leases which are of Record, are to be
recited in Patents of the King, but not those which are not of Record, for
Leases on Record may be easily found, but contrary of Leases in Fait: but in
our case all is helped by the Non obstante; for the words of the Letters
Patents are, Non obstante, That no office be thereof found, misrecital or
non-recital of the former Leases, etc. It has been objected, That because that
the Law of the Land is, That in Grants of the King, all former Estates ought to
be recited, the Non obstante of the Queen shall not help it: To that he said,
That where the Law makes for the Queen, there the Queen for a particular
respect may dispense with the Law. If the Queen be deceived by the not recital,
that makes the Letters Patents naught; but if the Queen be not deceived by the
not recital, the same shall not hurt. And it is clear, That the Queen may
dispense with a Statute Law, although perhaps not with the common Law; The
Queen grants upon suggestion, if the suggestion be false, the Patent is void,
because the Queen is deceived in her Grant: and if the suggestion rest in
Articles, and some of the Articles be false, the Patent for that is void: but
if in the Patent such clause be, That be the suggestion true or false, the
Patent shall be good: If the King seized of a Manor, to which an Advowson is
appendant, grant the Manor, cum pertinentii^, the Advowson shall not pass: But
if the Grant be in tam amplis modo and forma, etc. prout ipse Rex tenuit, the
Advowson shall pass. And he said, That the Office here is not necessary to
determine the Lease, but to enable the Queen to punish the Lessee for the
continuance of his possession: And if the conclusion of the Condition had been
by way of re-entry for non-payment of the Rent, and after the Rent is behind,
and afterward the Queen accepts the Rent due after, the Queen is not bounden
by that, but upon an Office found she shall avoid the Lease.

Drew, Sergeant, contrary; and he said, That here is a condition, but not a
limitation; for here is the natural word of a Condition, (scil.) Proviso. Some
Cases put by Popham are Conditions, and not limitations: As a Lease for years,
Proviso, that if the Lessee die within the term, that then the Lease shall be
void, the same is a Condition: And in many Cases many words (less apt than
these in our Case) shall make a Condition: As a Feoffment, dummodo solvat, etc.
And he said, That without an Office the Lease is not void: See 35 H. 6. 57. The
King gives to Religious use certain Lands, ad effectum, to find a certain
number of Monks, to hold in Frankalmoign: the King in that case cannot have
Cessavit, for the Services are not certain; but if it be found by Office, that
they have not their number, or do not make their Prayers, the King shall cease;
by Br. Tit. Offic. 4. And he said, that this was often done in the time of Hing
Henry the eighth; Lands given, Habend. pro erectione Collegii Cardinalis
Eborum, etc. Where the King is to have Lands but as a pledge, as for an
Alienation without license, Office ought to be found of such Alienation: So of
a Feoffment made to an Alien; otherwise it is in case of necessity, because the
Freehold cannot be in abeyance: Tenant of the King is attainted of Treason
before 33 H. 8. the King shall ha^^ ^^e Land in point of common Escheat until
Office be found, and afterward by force of the Attainder. So if the Tenant of
a Subject be attainted of Treason before Office found, the Land shall be in the
Lord, but after Office it shall be in the King: 7 H. 4. If the King's Tenant
dies, his Heir within age, the King may seize the Body, and grant it over
without Office, but not the Lands: See for the same 5 E. 6. Br. Office 55. in
the Case of Charles Brandon, 35 E. 3. Villainage 22. The Villein of the King
purchases Goods and Chattels, the property of them is in the King before
Office or seizure, but in the case of lands he ought to seize: If this had been
the case of a common person, the Lease should not be avoided without demand,
therefore neither in the Case of the King without Office: For as the Lease it
self was made by matter of Record, so it ought to be avoided by matter of
Record, otherwise it shall not be taken void in Law, notwithstanding that the
words are, That the lease shall be void. By the Statute of 11 H. 7. Alienations
and Discontinuances by Women are made void, the same ought not to be holden
altogether void as betwixt such Women and the Alienee, but only betwixt the
Woman and the Heir, the Statute of 1 Eliz. enacts, That all Leases made by a
Bishop above the term of twenty one years, shall be void; the same shall not be
construed to be void, but only as to the Successor, for it shall bind the
Lessor himself, as it was adjudged 5 Eliz. in the Case of the Bishop of Bath.
As unto the Office here in our case, the same shall not enure to avoid the
Lease, but only to enable the Queen to punish the party for the Mean profits
after the breaking of the Condition: But in our case, nothing is due to the
Queen for the Mean profits, for we have showed the payment of all the Rents,
and the Arrearages thereof, after the breach of the Condition, and before the
Grant of the King; and therefore this Office, being for no use, shall be void,
unless it had been found, that the Land was of more yearly value than the Rent,
etc. As in the case of common experience of Chantries, the Lands shall not be
intended to be of greater value than the Rent to be paid out of it, if not that
it be found by Office: When the Queen has after received the Rent, and granted
over the Reversion, now the Forfeiture is purged, not by way of conclusion, but
it amounts to as much as if the Queen had said, That she would not take benefit
of it: 4 H. 6. Champernoun's Case: The King, by taking in Ward of the Heir of
the Donee, has waved the Heir of the Donor: See Plow. in the Lord Barkley's
Case, 3 Eliz. 237. and F. N. B. 143. And here in our Case, when the Queen
grants over the Reversion, here the whole use of an Office is gone; for no
Office shall be found for the benefit of a Subject: and as to the Queen, no
benefit shall accrue unto her by such Office, for if she by such Office shall
be entitled to the possession, she should avoid her own Grant of the
Reversion; for she ought to have as great an Estate by the breach of the
Condition, as she had at the time of the Condition: And in this Case the Office
comes too late for the Queen, etc. as in the Lord Lovel's Case, Plow. 18 Eliz.
482. A Lease for years is made unto an Alien, upon condition, that if the Alien
pay such a sum of Money to the Lessor at any time during the Lease, that he
shall have Fee; the Alien is made a Denizen, the Money is paid, and all that is
found by Office: The Queen shall not have the Fee, for at the time of the
vesting of the Fee the Less was Denizen; and the Office shall not relate to
the time when the Fee vests, and no farther, but to avoid encumbrances: and so
in such Case the Office comes too late. And if the King's Villain purchases
Lands, and the King make him free, and afterward Office is found, the same
shall not entitle the King, but the Villain manumitted shall hold the Land: So
in our Case, the Queen after this Grant shall not take the benefit of this
Office, or breach of the Condition found by it.

And afterward, Manwood, chief Baron, gave order, That those who do argue
after, shall speak but to two points:

1. Where the Queen Leases for years, rendering Rent payable at the Receipt at
West. in which Lease there is a Proviso, That if the Rent be behind, the Lease
shall be void, If now the Rent not being paid, the Lease shall be void without
any Office?

2. To what effect an Office now shall be, being found after the Queen has
granted the Inheritance over.

At another day, Owen, Sergeant, argued to the contrary; and he said, the Lease
is void without any Office: for as a Lease for years may be made by contract,
so it may be avoided by words of contract, otherwise it is of Freehold; So that
a Lease shall be avoided without entry, 6 E. 6. 137, 138. Plow. Browning and
Beston's Case; Offices are of two sorts: First, entituling the Queen, as
purchase of an Alien, purchase of Villain, alienation in Mortmain; and Offices
informing the Queen, where she has interest in the Land before, as in our Case
here: Admit that the Office was necessary to find the breach of the Condition;
the Patentee shall take the benefit of it: for being found by Office, that the
Queen has made such a Lease with condition to be void for non-payment of Rent,
and that at such a day the Rent was behind, now, being of Record, every Subject
shall take advantage of it: As where a Husband makes a Feoffment in Fee upon
condition, of the Land of his Wife, and dies; If the Heir enter for the
Condition broken, now may the Wife enter upon him; for now the discontinuance
is avoided: See 11 H. 7. 17. Where the Grantee of the Reversion shall take
advantage of a condition, ut supra, concluding, That the Lease shall be void:
And see 136. Plowd. Browning and Beston's Case. And although after the default
of payment, the Rent due afterward was accepted, yet that shall not conclude
the Queen; for this acceptance is not under the great Seal, but only done by
the Office: Also the Lease being void, for the non-payment, cannot be made good
by acceptance afterward.

Atkinson, contrary, Although that the Lease be void, de facto, yet until it
appears to the Court, the Court cannot say it is void, or not void: therefore
Office is necessary to ascertain the Court: The Queen is a body Politic, and
the chief body Politic above others, because she is the Maker, Author and
Creator of all other Corporations; and that is the reason, that the King
cannot speak without writing; and this is the most solemn writing: i. Writing
of Record; So she cannot take but by Record: And in our Case, it does not
appear by any writing of Record, the Rent was behind; and it is agreeable to
the Majesty of a King to do nothing without matter of Record; which see 4 Eliz.
in the case of the Duchy: And he said there is no difference betwixt the Case
in 2 H. 7. and our Case: In each Case it is a Lease for years, Rent reserved,
in this only differing, that there is a clause of re-entry; and here the
conclusion of the Condition is that the Lease shall be void; but in both Cases,
none can say that the Rent is behind, until it be found by Office, therefore
none can say, that the Lease is void, until Office found: See by Thorp, 35 E.
3. Chattels personals of the King's Villains, are in the King without office,
for such things may be lost or worn, contrary of Chattels Reals, as a Lease for
years; for Land cannot but continue: and such things which may be in the King
without writing, he may grant without writing, as a chain of Gold, or a Horse,
Deodands, Felons goods, Wreck, etc. vest without Office, because Chattels
personals: See 20 E. 4. 11. contrary, when they are Chattels reals, and
permanent; for there an Office is necessary: In the Case of year, day and
waste, an Office ought to be found, Ergo, a multo fortiori, in case of a Lease
for years, which is a greater interest, etc. 49 E. 3. 11. There is a general
Rule, Quo modo quodque ligatur, eo modo dissolvitur: That which passes by
Livery ought to be reduced by re-entry, that which begins by Record, ought to
be determined by Record; and here in our Case, the Land cannot depart from the
King without Record, therefore it shall not revert without Record; although
that the breach of the condition be but matter of fact, yet the proof of that
ought to be of Record: And here in our Case, is a condition, and not a
limitation. And he said, that in the Case often cited before of 11 H. 7. 17. it
is a limitation, and not a condition; For if it were a condition, the Grantee
by the Law could not take advantage of it, because not privy: and he was clear
of opinion, that where the words are, That the Lease shall cease, or shall be
void; yet in such cases there ought to be an Office, for in Leases of the King
there needs no re-entry, because the King (to speak properly) cannot re-enter.
And the words, [That the Lease shall be void] do amount to words of re-entry,
and he said, That in the Case of a common person upon such a condition broken,
the Land shall not be in the Lessor, without re-entry, no more shall they be
here in the Case of the Queen without an Office: Also the Rent reserved upon
this Lease was behind, and the Lessee continuing the possession, the Queen by
acceptance of the Rent, has affirmed the party Tenant, and afterward granted
the Reversion over before any Office found of that matter; Now the Lessee is
discharged, and shall never be impeached for the said Rent behind; and the
Grant, Ex certa scientia, etc. after found, shall not defeat this Grant by any
relation. And the Queen by her Grant has included all the advantage which
accrued unto her by the breach of the Condition, and as to that which has been
objected, That in the Letters Patents there are these words, Notwithstanding
the not finding of any Office, etc. truly the same makes the matter more clear
for us; for by these words, it is apparent, that the Queen would not have an
Office found; and if so, then the Land passes as in Reversion, and the Queen
may dispense with a thing concerning her self: as of late it was adjudged in
the Case of one Michel. The Queen makes a Lease for years, rendering Rent, Si
petatur, It was holden in such case, that the Rent in such case, ought to be
demanded by the Queen's Officer; and in such case the Queen may well enough
dispense with her Prerogative; and here the Queen conceived, that she should
not have an Office, nor have her Title found by it. Manwood, chief Baron, The
Queen leaseth for years upon condition, That if the Lessee does not marry
within two years, that the Lease shall be void, whether here there ought to be
an Office or not. Atkinson said, That here ought to be an Office.

At another day, It was argued again by Godfrey, This Lease is not void, Ipso
facto, for the not payment of the Rent, which is but matter in fact: and as
this Lease has his beginning by matter of Record, so also his end shall be by
matter of Record: In cases of a common person there ought to be a demand,
therefore in case of the King an Office, Hob. 331. 3 Co.
as in the Case of a common person demand ought to be as well where the
Condition is by way of re-entry, as that the Lease shall be void; therefore in
both Cases, in the Case of the King there shall be an Office: and he said, That
if the Lease and the Condition be in the Case of a common person, that the
Lease shall be void, without any demand of that Rent, then there needs no
demand; for demand is a part of Contract: and here, before Office found, the
Lease is not merely void, for a Release unto the Lessee before Office, is good;
and the Queen is not entitled to the profits before office found; It was
argued by Coke to the contrary, The Lease is void without any demand, without
any Office, for it is parcel of the Contract to be so void, and he said, That
this Lease before Office is void in interest and property, but not in
possession: Where a common person shall not have the Land without Action, the
King shall not have it without Office, and Scire facias; as Cessavit, Wast.
contra formam donationis, etc. and where a common person shall not have before
Entry, the King shall not have before Office, for Office is in the place of
Entry, Wardship, Mortmain. It is clear, in the Case of a common person, That if
the Condition be, that the Lease shall be void without any demand, that there
demand is not requisite, therefore nor in the Case of the King: See Browning
and Beston's Case, Plowd. Com. 136.
That such a Lease with such a Condition, after the Rent behind, cannot be made
good: And it is a general rule, That where the certainty of the term appears by
Record, and the King is to have but a Chattel in it, there the King upon matter
in fait shall have it without Office; as the Temporalties of the Bishop upon
his death, which is matter in fait: See F. N. B. 174. The Widow of the King
marries her self without license of the King, the King shall seize the Lands,
and that without Office, and there the marriage is matter in fait: The King
leaseth for years upon condition, that if the Lessee marry, that then the Lease
shall be void, If the Lessee marry her self, the Lease is void without any
Office; and if so, then every stranger in the world shall have advantage of it,
as the Case is, 11 H. 7. as was the Case of Ralph Thomas; Ralph Thomas's Case.
The Husband seized of Land in the right of his Wife, leaseth for years, and
afterward he and his Wife levied a Fine to a stranger, the Husband dies, the
Conusee shall avoid the Lease, because it was merely void by the death of the
Husband: So of a Rent charge granted by the Husband, etc. But although this
Lease be merely void, yet a Bill of Intrusion does not lie against the Lessee
before Office, for in such case, a common person shall not have Trespass before
entry; but yet if the Lessee dies after the Rent behind, ut supra, the Lease
shall not be said Assets to the Executors, for the not payment of the Rent is a
nullity of the Lease by the intent of the original Contract: And also the
Lessee is not become Tenant at sufferance after the Condition broken, for
Tenant at sufferance takes the profits to his own use; also none can be Tenant
at sufferance to the Queen, for then he should have the profits of the Lands by
Laches, which shall never be imputed to the Queen: Now it is to see, To what
purpose this Office is? A common person makes a Lease upon condition, that if
the Lessee alien part, and that be found by Verdict, that the Lease shall be
void, the Lessee alieneth part, the Lessor grants the reversion over; after the
alienation is found by Verdict, the Grantee shall have advantage of it; if the
Case had been, That if the Rent be behind, and Office found of it, that the
Lease should be void, the Rent is arrear, and the King grants the reversion,
and afterward Office is found, now the Lease shall be void against the
Grantee: Also this Office shall have relation, and comes in as good time, as if
it were found before the Grant; Tenant of the King alieneth in Mortmain, the
King grants over the Seignory, Office is found, now by this Office, the King is
entitled, not unto the Land, but unto the profits before the Office: And
although the Queen has granted the reversion over, yet she has not granted
inclusive the mean profits: A common person has a Rent which is arrear, he
grants the Rent, the arrearages do not pass: As where the King is seized of an
Advowson which becomes void, and afterward grants the advowson to another, the
avoidance shall not pass thereby; Giles's Case.
and that was Giles's Case: See 16 H. 7. 7, 8. And in our Case, This Office
does not entitle the Grantee, for how can an Office entitle a common person? If
the Lease were but voidable, perhaps, so long as the Lease should continue
unavoided the Queen should not be answered the profits, contrary, where it is
void. And a common person shall have advantage of it.

Egerton, Solicitor general, to the same intent; And he said, that this Lease
is altogether void, in privity, property, right and term: In the Case of a
common person, after the Rent behind, in such case the Lessee should be Tenant
at sufferance, which cannot be in the King's Case; and if Tenant at sufferance,
then no privity; for a Release by the Lessor to the Lessee cannot enure, and
that for want of privity; Lit. 109. And such Lessee cannot attorn, and if the
Lessor after that accepts of the Rent, the same does not make the Lease good,
and all for want of privity; therefore here is no privity: As to property, such
a Lease shall not be said Assets in the hands of an Executor, nor shall be sold
upon an Extent, nor forfeited by outlawry; And here in this Case, the Queen
cannot be said to take any thing by the breach of the Condition, but has her
reversion discharged of the Lease; and he said, That the Office is found well
enough for time, and it shall relate to the time when the title accrued, that
is, when the Rent was behind, and the arrearages of the Rent do not pass by the
grant of the Land, or the reversion: The Queen has a Rentcharge out of Lands
which is behind, the Lands come to the Queen, and she grants the same over, yet
she shall charge the Lands with the said arrearages; but contrary, in case of
an injury done upon the Land of the Queen: As the Tenant of the King aliens
without license, and afterward the Lands so aliened came to the King's hands
who grants them over; the Grantee, nor the Land shall be charged, but only he
who was party to the alienation, his Lands, and his Executors; So of an
Intrusion: Tenant for life of the King makes a Feoffment in Fee, the King
grants over the reversion, and afterward the tortious Feoffment is found by
Office; this Office is soon enough for time, and the Grantee of the reversion
shall have advantage of it, and the King the mean profits from the time of the
alienation: and afterward in Mich. Term, 33 Eliz. the Case was argued by the
Barons.

Clark, Puisne Baron, The Lease is conditional, and with a limitation also; so
conditional and limitation mixed together, 3 Ass. 10. Land given to one until
he come from foreign parts; Lands given to one so long as he shall continue
sole, is an Estate for life with limitation upon her marriage; so during the
coverture, etc. and these limitations are not collateral, but begin with the
Estates, when the Estates are limited; but conditions always come when the
Estate is settled, as it is in our Case; yet if the intent and substance of the
Contract betwixt the King and the Subject be well considered, there shall not
be any difference, etc. Lands devised to one, Proviso, That if the Devisee
shall disturb the Executors of the Devisor, his Estate shall be void, and the
land remain over, etc. the same is a good remainder, for it is a limitation
conditional: See Scholastica's Case, Plowd. Com. 14 Eliz. 413. concerning an
Estate tail with a limitation: And Fitz. James Case there put by Dyer: See
Browning and Beston's Case before cited, and Martin Dockra's Case where a
condition is conceived in words of Covenant, etc. Gent, Baron, argued to the
same intent: Manwood, chief Baron, to the same intent. The Rents reserved upon
the Leases of the Queen, are to be paid to Receivors, Baileys, or at the
Receipt of the Exchequer: The Queen shall not make any demand of her rent, for
she has an infinite number of Farmors, and if demand be necessary, she were to
send an army of Receivors, or Baileys to receive and demand her rents. If the
Rent of the King be to be paid at the Exchequer, if the King's Fermor be there,
and tender the rent at due time, and none be there to receive it, he has saved
his Lease, for he has done his possible endeavor, although the words of the
Condition in the Lease be behind and unpaid, yet not tendered, shall be
understood: as in the common case of Mortgages and Obligations. But in all the
Record before us, there is no words of any tender, therefore, according to the
words of the condition, the Lease is merely void, and determined in right, in
privity, and in tenure; for so is the pleasure of the Prince expressed in her
Letters Patents under the great Seal of England, That it shall be then void,
and of no effect: Then, i. whenever the Rent shall happen to be behind; and
therefore as soon as the Rent was behind the Lease was determined: so that if
after the non-payment a stranger had entered upon him, (scil.) the Lessee, upon
which he brings Ejectione Firmae, the Defendant might have pleaded the special
matter against him, Judgment if Action: so as the Lease is void in Right: It is
also void in Privity and Tenure; for a Release to such Lessee, after the Rent
is behind, is altogether void; for he was not then Lessee, and so the privity
is gone, and no acceptance can make such Lease good. And if such a Lessee after
his Rent would surrender, and in consideration of such Surrender obtain a new
Lease from the Queen, this new Lease is also void, for here upon the matter is
no surrender: Also such a Lease is void in property; for if the Lessee in such
case dies, his interest, such as it is, shall not be accounted Assets in the
hands of his Executor: upon the breach of this Condition for the Rent, although
that the Lease be become void, yet the possession of the land is not resetled
in the Queen without Office: and although the Office does not make the Lease
void, which was void before for non-payment of the Rent, yet before Office
found the possession is not vested in the Queen; for before Office found we
cannot award Process against such a Lessee for his continuing the possession
after the Rent behind, and until Office found the Lessee cannot be found an
Intruder; and Tenant at Will he cannot be, for no other Will appears of the
Queen, but that in the Letters Patents, and that is to have the Lease void,
whenever the Rent shall be behind, and that Estate is gone because the Rent
is behind; Tenant at sufferance he cannot be in this case. In case of a common
person, when Lessee for years holds over his term, he is become Tenant at
sufferance, and such a Tenant shall not pay Rent, for it is the folly of his
Lessor to suffer his Lessee at sufferance to continue possession of the Land
after his term, so as every Tenancy at sufferance is made by the Laches of the
Lessor, which Laches cannot be imputed to the Queen: therefore here, this
Lessee, when the Condition is broken, is not a Tenant at sufferance, nor shall
have the profits of the Lands to his own use, but the Law shall account him to
be a Bailiff of his own wrong, and so be accountable to the Queen, but no
Intruder till Office be found: and that appears in our Books, 1 H. 7. 17. The
King's Tenant dies, his Heir within age, if any enters into the Land of the
Heir, he shall not be an Intruder until Office found, but the Heir or a
stranger who enters before Office, and takes the profits, shall be brought by
Process into the Exchequer to make their Accounts, and to answer the issues and
profits; but if he intermeddle after Office, he shall be an Intruder. Tenant of
the King alieneth without license, by that the King is to have the profits,
until he compound with the King, and purchases his pardon; and if the Feoffee
takes the profits after the Alienation, he is a Pernor of the profits, and
shall answer for them; but he is not an Intruder until Office found. Tenant of
the King is attainted of Felony, the King is entitled to the Land from the time
of the Felony committed, yet if he take the profits until Attainder, he is not
an Intruder, but he takes the profits without Title, therefore he is Bailiff
of his own wrong, and so accountable to the King. And it is not a new thing,
that a Conveyance or an Estate shall be void as to the Right only, and not as
unto the Possession. The Statute of Doms. West. 2. finis ipso jure sit nullus:
i. as to the right of the Entail; yet, as unto the possession, the issue in
tail is bound until he has recovered it by a Formedon: Upon the Statute of 21
H. 8. cap. 13. by acceptance of another Benefice against the said Statute, the
first Benefice shall be void, etc. yet the same shall not be construed so as to
possession, but that the same shall remain with him until it be taken away
from him: The Queen leaseth for years, Proviso, that if the Lessee commit
Waste, the Lease shall be void; when first Waste is done the Lease is
determined in Right, but not as to the possession before Office finding the
Waste: So if the Condition be for the building of a House, for by the breach of
the Condition, the Lease, as unto the right and interest, is determined, and
after Office found it shall revest the possession also: And if a Lease of the
King expire by effluction of time, and such effluction appears here of
Record, if the Lessee in such case continues his possession, he shall be an
Intruder. Sir Robert Chester's Case, Dyer 4. Eliz. 211. Sir Robert Chester was
Receivor of the King by Patent, upon condition to render Account yearly at such
a day, and before such a day to pay the arrearages; the condition is broken,
the Patent was void without Office thereof found, but yet it is not altogether
void, for a Scire facias shall be brought against the Patentee. The King
leaseth unto A. his Manor of D. and after he leaseth also to the said A. his
Manor of S. Proviso, that if the Lessee does not surrender his first Lease of
the Manor of D. at such a day, that then the latter Lease of the Manor of S.
shall be void: The Surrender is not made, now the Lessee, if he continue his
possession in the Manor of S. after, he is an Intruder. Now is to see of what
effect the Office is, not to make the Lease void, but to vest the possession in
the King again: It has been objected, That, as the case is, the Office is not
to any purpose, for the Queen has granted the inheritance over, so as the
possession cannot be revested in the Queen by that Office against her own
Grant, nor can the Queen punish the Lessee as an Intruder for his continuance
of the possession after the Office, nor can seize the Land by such Office, and
there is not any such Office for the benefit of a Subject, therefore the Office
is merely void. Let us compare our Case unto the Case of Cessavit; The Tenant
of the King cease for two years, the King grants the Seignory over in fee,
the Cesser is found by Office, the Grantee of the Seignory gains nothing by it;
but that is not like unto the Case in question, for there when the Office is
found, the Tenant may tender the arrearages, for the King is not absolutely
entitled by the Cesser, because by tender of the arrearages the Tenant may save
his Tenancy: But in this case, after the Condition is once broken, there is not
any means for the Tenant to save the Forfeiture: also the King by his Grant,
after the Cesser, has not granted the thing which accrued unto him by the
Cesser, (scil.) the Tenancy, but only the Seignory: but in our case the King
has granted the thing forfeited, i the land demised: and here is a full
forfeiture, contrary in the case of Cesser: And in our Case the King has
granted only the land demised, and not the profits encurred mean between the
breach of the Condition, and the Grant of the King, but these remain to the
Queen, and to that purpose the Office is good, (scil.) to entitle the Queen to
these profits. And as to that which has been objected, That the Lessee has
always paid the Rent unto the Queen after the Condition broken, and has an
Acquittance of the Receipt of it, therefore no profits due to the Queen, for
she has the Rent in lieu of the profits; and it is not reason, that the Lessee
shall pay an annual Rent, and also shall be accountable for the mean profits,
and so the Office, as unto the mean profits (which in truth upon the matter
aforesaid are not due unto the Queen) is void, and then altogether void, quia
nihil operatur, To that he answered, That the King shall not be bound off the
mean profits in that case by the payment of the said Rent, for by intendment
the true annual value of the Land is more than the Rent reserved; and it is not
reason but that the Queen shall be answered of the surplusage or overplus above
the Rent, and therefore the Office entituling the Queen to part of the profits
is good enough: Tenant of the King for life, or for years, makes a Feoffment in
Fee, although that by this Act he cannot pluck any thing out of the King, yet
because he has attempted to do such a wrong, it is a forfeiture, and the Lease
for years utterly extinct by it; for it cannot be in the Feoffor against his
own act, by which he has departed with all his Interest, etc. And the Feoffee
cannot have it, for if he has any thing, it ought to be a Fee-simple, or
nothing at all; and a Fee-simple he cannot have, for that remains in the King,
and so neither have Estate, then is all in the King, and the King has Title to
have the profits, etc. But put case, that after the Feoffment the King grant
over the Land in Fee, and after that tortious Feoffment is found by Office, he
who accupieth the Land after the forfeiture, until Office be found, shall be
occountable to the King for the issues and profits, etc. as Pernor of the
profits, or Baily of his own wrong, and he who occupies the Land after the
Office shall be punished as an Intruder. There was a Case very late in this
Court betwixt Sir Tho. Henage and one Hungate, which was thus; Sir Tho. Henage
and Hungate's Case.
the Queen leased for years unto Hungate, provided that he should not do Waste;
Waste is done, the Queen granted the Reversion to Sir Tho. Henage, Office is
found, the Grantee entered, and his entry was adjudged lawful, and that the
Queen should have the mean profits from the time of the Waste done until the
time of the Grant. Some say, Sir Walter Mildmay's Case.
that that case was not adjudged, but compounded: And he vouched Sir Walter
Mildmay's Case: The Lord Sturton held Lands of the Queen in Knights-service,
and was attainted of Felony, by which the Lands escheated to the Queen, who
granted those Lands; and it was holden, that the Queen should have the mean
profits betwixt the time of the Felony committed, and the Grant. And after in
the principal Case Judgment was given for the Plaintiff, (scil.) the Patentee
of the Queen against the Lessee; who cast in a Writ of Error, and by his
Council prayed, That the Writ of Error be not broken open until the Judgment
be entered. Manwood, The Judgment has reference and relation unto the first day
of this Term, and therefore do not doubt of that.

CLXXIX. Sted 's Case. Mich. 32 Eliz. In the Exchequer.
3 Len. 259.
STed, of Great Melton in the County of Oxford, was assessed to 7 s. for
Fifteens, and upon refusal to pay it, the Collectors distrained the Beasts of
Sted, and sold them: Sted brought Trespass thereupon in the King's Bench; and
the Collector exhibited his Bill into this Court against Sted, who showed by
his Council, That the Statute of 29 Eliz. which enacted this Fifteen,
provideth, That the said Fifteen shall be levied of the movable Goods and
Chattels, and other things usual to such Fifteens and Tenths, to be
contributary and chargeable; and showed farther, that the Cattle distrained
were tempore districtionis upon the Gleab Land of a Parsonage presentative,
which he had in Lease, which Gleab Land is not chargeable usually to Fifteens
granted by the Temporalty, nor the Chattels upon it. But it was the Opinion of
the whole Court, Although that the Parson himself pays Tenths to the King,
yet the Lay-Farmor shall pay Fifteens, and his Cattle are distrainable for it,
even upon the Gleab Land of the Parsonage; and therefore it was adjudged, that
in the principal Case the Distress and Sale were good and lawful.

CLXXX. The Dean and Chapter of Winsors Case. Mich. 32 Eliz. In the Exchequer.
3 Len. 258.
IN this Case it was moved, If one has a Rectory impropriate, and by the
Statute of 26 H. 8. cap. 3. is to pay an annual Rent for the same in the name
of a Tenth, and by that is discharged of Tenths and first fruits; If he shall
have the Privilege of the Exchequer? for he is to pay the same sum yearly: And
the Barons were of Opinion, that he should not; for so every one, who is to pay
any Tenths or first fruits, should draw another who sueth him into the
Exchequer, and so all Controversies concerning Tithes and Parsonages should be
drawn hither, which should be a great prejudice to the Spiritual Courts. But
Egerton, Conier's Case
Solicitor, vouched a Case, (scil.) Conier's Case, where the King gave a
Parsonage to a Priory in Frankalmoign, and the Tithes thereof being withdrawn,
the Prior impleaded him who withdrew his Tithes in the Exchequer; and in that
Case it was holden, that the Prior should have the Privilege, for the King is
in danger to lose his Patronage, or rather his Foundership, if the Rectory be
evicted. Gent, Baron, The Tenant of the King in chief, or he who pays first
fruits, or he who holds of the Queen in Fee-Farm, shall not have in such
respect the Privilege here. Quaere.

CLXXXI. Cony and Beveridge 's Case. Mich. 30 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
3 Len. 216.
IN Debt upon a Bond, the Case was, That the Plaintiff leased unto the Defendant
certain Lands lying in the County of Cambridge, rendering Rent; and afterward
the Defendant became bounden to the Plaintiff in a Bond for payment of the said
Rent: upon which Bond the Plaintiff brought an Action of Debt in the County of
Northampton, to which the Defendant pleaded payment of the Rent, without
showing the place of payment: and upon payment they were at issue, and found
for the Plaintiff by Nisi prius in the County of Northampton: In Arrest of
Judgment it was moved, that the issue was mis-tryed; for here the payment of
the Rent being pleaded, without showing the place of payment, it shall be
intended that the Rent was paid upon the Land, which is in the County of
Cambridge: See 44 E. 3. 42. Anderson was of opinion, that no Judgment should be
given for the cause aforesaid: Rhodes and Windham contrary; for it does not
appear that the issue is mis-tried, because that no place of payment is
pleaded; and it might be, for any thing is showed, that the Rent was paid in
the County of Northampton.

CLXXXII. Berry and Goodman 's Case. Trin. 30 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
IN an Ejectione Firmae, upon a special Verdict, the point was, Ow. 95, 96.
One intruded upon the possession of the Queen into Lands in Kisgrave in
Suffolk; and during this Intrusion, the Queen granted these Lands to A. B. by
her Letters Patents; and the Patentee, before any Entry made in the said Land,
granted the same over. Some held, that the Grant was good, for the Intruder had
gained nothing against the Queen, and by the Grant of the Queen, and the
assignment over, nothing accrued to him: and where a man has possession of
Lands, his continuance therein cannot gain to him any interest, or increase his
Estate, without some other act done of later time. If the Guardian do continue
in possession after the full age of the Heir, he is not a Disseisor, nor has
any greater Estate in the Lands: and upon the Book of 21 E. 3. 2. this Case was
collected; The Tenant of the King dies, his Heir within age, a stranger
intrudes, the Heir at full age sueth his Livery out of the King's hands, the
Intruder dies in possession; the same descent shall not take away Entry.

Coke contrary, The Intruder cannot be Tenant at sufferance, for at first he
enters by wrong, and none can be Tenant at sufferance but he who comes in by
Title: And it is clear, That the Intruder by his first Entry does not gain any
Estate in possession, upon which he can have an Action of Trespass, but after
the Grant of the Queen he has presently Fee by wrong: 8 H. 4. 129. A stranger
enters upon the King to which he has right in the right of the Ward, yet the
Freehold does remain in the Heir. And he said, that if A. levyeth a Fine to B.
sur Conusans de droit, etc. now the Conusee has possession in Law, but not in
fact; and if before the entry of the Conusee W. enters, and dies seized, he
has no remedy, for he had not possession in fact, so as he might have an
Assise, or an Action of Trespass: Antea 210, 1 Cro. 920. Ow. 96.
So the Law is now taken; A. devises his Lands to B. and dies, and a stranger
enters and dies seized before any Entry by the Devisee, now is the Devisee
without remedy: And here in our Case, the Intruder has not gained any
possession in the Lands by his intrusion, no more than if the King gives Lands
to one in Fee, and before the Patentee enters, a stranger enters, now cannot
the Patentee grant it over, if he does not reduce the Estate by Entry: See Dyer
9 and 10 Eliz. 266. P. 20 Eliz. in Curia Ward. Garbery's Case. acc.
The Queen seized of the Manor, of Beverley, a stranger erected a Shop in a
vacant plat of the Manor, and afterward took the profits of it, without paying
any Rent for the same to the Queen, and afterward the Queen granted the Manor
to the Earl of Leicester, and he never entered into the said Shop, nor took any
Rent for the same, and afterward the Occupier of the Shop, died in possession,
and his Son and Heir entered; and the better opinion was, that the same was not
a descent against the Patentee, because at the first it was not a disseisin
against the Queen: Another Question was moved, as to a pathway then in
question: And the Jury found that one side of the pathway was the Land of the
Parson of the Church, and the other side the Churchyard, and prayed the
opinion of the Court therein, to whom the interest of the pathway did belong;
to which it was said by the Court, That that ought to be found by the Verdict;
For although that both be the Freehold of the Parson, yet the soil of the
pathway might be conveyed by an express Grant unto another. But the Court
seemed to incline, that the soil of the pathway did belong to him who had the
Lands on both sides, and that is the Case, as well of a highway as of a
pathway; And it is also good Evidence to prove such matter, Who has used to
cut down the Trees, or to cleanse the way.

CLXXXIII. Wiseman 's Case. 24 Eliz. In the Court of Wards.
6 Co. Weeden and Baldwin's Case.
IN the Court of Wards, before the Lord Treasurer, Master of the Wards, Wray,
chief Justice, Anderson and Periam Assistants to him; the Case was, That
Wiseman was seized of certain Lands holden by Knight's-service in Capite, had
issue by a former Wife who died; and made a Feoffment in Fee to the use, of her
who should be his Wife, for life, and afterward to the use of himself and of
his issue of the body of such Wife to be begotten, the remainder over; Wiseman
took a Wife, and had issue, and died; If now, living the Wife, the issue shall
be in Ward, was the question? It was argued by Coke, That he shall not be in
Ward: And first, it was agreed of both sides, and also by the Justices, That it
was a remainder and not a reversion; and that at the Common Law, the descent of
a remainder, during the Estate for life, does not entitle the King unto
Wardship; and there we are to see, if upon the Statute of 32 H. 8. the last
branch of it; where two or more persons hold any Lands of the King by
Knights-service, jointly to them and the heirs of one of them, and he that has
the Inheritance thereof dies, his heir being within age, in every such Case,
the King shall have the Ward, and marriage of the body of such heir, so being
within age, the life of the Freeholder, or Freeholders of such Lands
notwithstanding: See 33 H. 6. 14. That the father, to prevent Wardship, may
alien, and take to him and his son, and the heirs of the father, which mischief
was intended to be remedied by the said Statute: But these words shall not in
construction thereof extend farther than the words especially, because they
cross the Common Law, and go to charge the Inheritance of others; and therefore
they shall be taken strictly, and not by equity: as the Statute of West. 2.
cap. 40. Cum quis alienat jus uxoris suae, concordat. est, Quod de cetero secta
mulieris aut ejus haeredis non differatur propter minorem aetatem haeredis, qui
warrantizare debuit, that Statute is taken strictly; for if the Vouchee
voucheth over, the second Vouchee shall have his age, Quod vide 18 E. 4. 16.
Also the Stat. of West. 1. enacts, That where the Disseisor dies seized, the
Disseisee shall have his Writ upon the Disseisin against the heir of the
Disseisor of what age soever he be: So the heirs of the Disseisee, yet it is
holden, 9 E. 3. If the Disseisor leaseth for life, and dies, and the Lessee be
impleaded, and makes default after default, upon which the heir of the
Disseisor prays to be received, being within age, he shall have his age,
notwithstanding the said Statute, which shall be taken strictly, because it
controlls the Common Law, and charge the Inheritance of the Subject: So upon
the Statute of West. 1. cap. 39. That none shall vouch out of the line upon
that Statute, although the Tenant to the Action against whom the Praecipe is
brought, is bound by the Statute, yet Tenant by receipt is at large, and he may
vouch at the Common Law: 2 H. 7. 2. 16 H. 7. 1. for these Statutes go in
abridgment of the Common Law, and therefore shall be taken strictly: Now,
according to this Statute, it is of the same nature as the other before
remembered, and therefore shall not be extended in construction beyond the
Letter. As Sir Rowland Hill's Case, Grandfather, father and son, the
grandfather seized of Land, ut supra, makes a Feoffment in Fee to the use of
himself for life, and afterward to the use of the son in Fee, The grandfather
dies, the father dies, the son shall not be in Ward, Causa qua supra, For
this Statute shall not be construed by equity, and by it the words thereof,
[Preferment of children] shall not extend unto the childrens children, but to
the children only of the King's Tenant, who makes the Conveyance: And the
words in this Statute [or otherwise] shall not be intended to other persons
than are remembered in the Statute. There was a Case late, where the Statute was
construed in such a manner, Quod vide 18 Eliz. 345. Thornton's Case; A Lady,
seized of Lands in chief, made Conveyance of her Lands, for the advancement of
her bastard-daughter, the same Conveyance is not within the Statute: See also
the Lord Powes's Case, 14 Eliz. Dyer 313. So in the Case of Sir Hugh Calverley,
the Law was taken, That where the Husband dies seized in the right of his
Wife, and they levy a Fine unto the use of the Husband and Wife, for the
advancement of the Husband; such Conveyance and disposition is not within the
Statute of 32 H. 8. Popham, contrary, And as to the Case of making this
Statute, it was not to overthrow a foundation, as it has been said; but it was
rather a gratuity of the Subjects to the King for his bounty toward them; for
whereas by the Statute of Uses, Uses were executed in possession, so as the
Subjects could not dispose of their Lands, by their Wills, as before the Uses:
Now, by this Statute, the King was pleased to give his Royal assent to an Act,
by which Lands might become devisable, in respect of which, the Subjects added
to this Act, the last clause, to give him Wardship, where it did not lie before
by the Common Law, and that as a recompense from the Subjects for the King's
bounty, and therefore it ought to be construed beneficially for the King. And
to prevent covin and fraud, was not the scope of this Statute; For if three
purchase Lands unto them, and to the heirs of two of them; now it is uncertain
whose heirs shall inherit, for non constat, which of them shall survive, and
therefore no covin is averrable in such case; and yet if the survivor of two to
whom the Fee is limited dies, his heir within age, such heir shall be in Ward:
So if such Lands be given to two, and to the heirs of him of those two who
shall first come to the Church of Paul; Now it is uncertain which of them shall
first come to the Church of Paul, yet if he who first comes to the Church of
Paul dies, his heir within age, he shall be in Ward; which Cases prove, that
covin and fraud were not the cause of making this Statute, but only the
thankfulness of the Subjects unto the King for his bounty, as abovesaid; for if
this Act had not been made, the Subjects should not have power to dispose of
their Lands for the advancement of their children, but all should descend: So
as now the King has lost the Wardship and Primer seisin of two parts of the
Lands of his Tenant, and has also lost the averment of covin, which he had by
the Common Law, where Estates were made by the King's Tenant for advancement of
their children. In respect of which losses, the Subjects gave unto the King
Wardship in case where the Lands continue in jointure: as to that which has
been said; That this Statute shall not be taken by equity, I conceive the
contrary; the words of the Statute are, In every such case, i. e. In every like
case, not only where two, or more persons hold jointly to them and the heirs
of one of them, but also in every the like Case; as the Case now in question,
and in every Case where the life of him who has the Freehold, is the sole
impediment, quo minus, the heir has not the Land by descent in Demesne: And it
may be resembled unto the Statute of Marlbridge of Collusion, which speaks of
Leases for years, Quas tradere voluerint ad terminum annorum; and yet a Lease
for life, or Lease for years is within the said Statute; for the Statute was
made in restraint of an ill liberty, that the Tenants had by the Common Law in
prejudice of their Lords, which see 4 E. 6. 53. and Plow. 59. And as to the
word [otherwise] that may be construed, for payment of his Legacies: And as to
equity enlarging, the Statute speaks [where many hold, and to the heirs of
one;] yet, if two hold, to them and the heirs of one of them, the same is
within the Statute: And as to Equity restraining, he puts this case; Land is
given to the Husband and Wife, and the heirs of the body of the Wife, who have
issue, the Wife dies, the issue within age, he shall not be in Ward; and yet
he is within the Letter of the Statute, but because that other matter, That the
Estate for life, in the Husband is an impediment, Quo minus, he shall be in
Ward: It is a maxim of the Common Law, That the father shall have the Wardship
of the son and heir apparent, therefore he shall not be within the meaning,
although he be within the Letter of the Statute: So, if Lands be given to my
Villain, and to another, and to the heirs of my Villain, who dies seized, his
heir within age, I seize the Villain, and claim the remainder, he shall not be
in Ward; and yet he is within the Letter of the Statute: But I conceive, in our
Case, the King shall have two Wards, Simul and semel, the heir general of
Wiseman, and the issue in tail; the heir general by the Common Law, by reason
that his father was the King's Tenant, who disposed of his Lands for the
advancement of his children; and therefore the Queen shall have the third part
in Ward: And also the heir special shall be in Ward, for that part of the
Statute. And it is no new thing to have two Wardships for one and the same
Lands: As 14 H. 8. of the heir of Cestuy quae use, and also of the Feoffee; and
if the Tenant dies seized, having issue a daughter, who is his heir, the Lord
seiseth the daughter, and marries her, and afterward a son is born; he shall
have the Wardship also of him: So of the heirs of the Disseisor and Disseisee;
and he said, If Lands holden in chief be leased for life, the remainder to A.
in Fee, A. dies, his heir within age, he shall be in Ward, and that by reason
of these words in the Statute, [In every such case] it is not the same Case,
but the like Case; for if he who has the Fee dies, so as the Freehold
survives to the other; now the Estate becomes as an Estate for life, the
remainder over. It was adjourned.

CLXXXIV. The Lord Howard and the Town of Walden 's Case. 24 Eliz. In the
Exchequer.
More Rep. 159. Post 162, 163.
BEtwixt the Lord Howard and the Town of Walden, the Case was, That the King
made a Feoffment in Fee of Lands, parcel of his Duchy of Lancaster, Tenend. in
feodi forma reddend. inde sibi, and haeredibus suis, aut illi cui de jure reddi
debet, 10 l. The question was, How, and of whom the Tenure should be? It was
argued by Plowden, That it should be holden of the King, as of his Duchy; he
said, The King is not bounden by the Statute of Quia emptores terrarum; but
here, upon this Feoffment, the Feoffee shall hold of the King, as of his
Duchy: All Grants of the King, notwithstanding that they be of Lands, yet they
savor of the person of the King and his Prerogative being wrapped up in his
person; shall guide the disposition of the land; and he said, that this Tenure
shall be employed by reason, and in respect of his person: And the Statute of
Quia emptores terrarum, extends to Tenants only, Libere tenentes magnatum and
aliorum; but the King is not Libere tenens alicujus magnat. 32 H. 6. 21, 22.
The King has an Advowson in the Right of his Duchy, to which being void, he
presents; he may repeal his presentment: and he vouched diverse presidents of
Grants of the King of such lands to hold of him, as of his Duchy, and
sometimes of others: And the King by his Duchy seal may give lands in
Mortmain; and the King under his Dutchy-seal, has made diverse Corporations
within his Duchy, And although this Rent be a new thing, never parcel of the
Duchy, yet, because it is issuing out of the Duchy lands, and reserved
thereout, shall be of the same nature, and accounted parcel of the possessions
of the Duchy: If before the Statute of West. 3. one seized of lands on the
part of his mother, made a Feoffment in Fee, Tenend. by such services, and
died, the Seignory should go to the heir on the part of his mother, and should
be descendable as the land it self, in lieu of which it came: And if Tenant in
tail: now after the Statute of 32 H. 8. makes a Lease for years according to
the Statute, rendering Rent to him and his heirs, it shall be expounded such
heirs which are inheritable to the land, according to the entail. Manwood,
chief Baron, Demanded of Plowden, this Question; The King makes a Feoffment in
Fee of lands of his Duchy, Is the same a matter of Record? who answered, yes,
Manwood, Truly no, for then there needed not any livery. Egerton, Solicitor,
argued to the contrary, and he argued much upon the Statute of 1 H. 4. and 1 H.
7. of the separation of the Duchy of Lancaster from the Crown, which see in
the Comment. 215. in the Case of the Duchy of Lancaster; by which Acts, the
possessions of the Duchy were divested out of the body Politic of the King,
and vested in his body natural, and are as their corporal holding in the King,
as they were in the Duke of Lancaster, being a Subject; who if he had made a
Feoffment, the Feoffee should not hold of him, but of the King; Ergo, so shall
it be in the case where the King himself makes a Feoffment: and he cited a
Case, put in the end of the Duchy Case, 4 Eliz. 223. The Queen made a
Feoffment of lands of the Duchy out of the County Palatine, to hold of her in
Capite; the Feoffee shall hold of her in Capite as of her Crown of England. The
case went farther; the King after this Feoffment, grants the Fee-farm, the
Question is, If the Rent reserved upon this Feoffment shall pass by such grant
or not: and he said, That this Rent is not parcel of the Fee-farm, but rather a
collateral charge upon the land; for in all cases where there is a Tenure
expressed in fait, or employed in Law, there the rent reserved after, shall not
be parcel of the Tenure, but a Rent in gross by it self: As in our case,
Tenend. in feod. firm. makes a Tenure; therefore the Reddend. after shall not
make the sum reserved parcel of it: 33 E. 3. Annuity 52. before the Statute of
Quia Emptores terrarum; a man makes a Feoffment in Fee, Tenend. de Dominis
Capital. rendering the rent of 20 l. that Rent is a Rent in gross and not parcel
of the Tenure. King E. 6. granted to Cranmer Archbishop, and his heirs, Tenend.
by the fifth part of a Knight's-fee, Reddend. 6 l. per ann. Cranmer in
Feoffment in Fee to the use of himself for life, the remainder to the use of
his son in tail, the remainder to the use of the right heirs of Cranmer made a
Fee, who is attainted of Treason, by which the remainder to his right heirs
Escheats to the King, and so the Seignory is extinct; but it was adjudged, That
the Rent was in esse, and not extinct by the Escheat of the remainder, for it
was not parcel of the Seignory: So here in our case. Another matter was moved;
If this Rent, being a new thing created, de novo, and not parcels of the
possessions of the Duchy, 1 H. 4. nor 1 H. 7. shall be accounted in Law in the
right of the Crown, or of the Duchy; and if of the Crown, then it cannot pass
by the Dutchy-seal: and the Statute of 1 H. 4. speaks of such Lands and
Tenements which were to his Ancestors, Dukes of Lancaster; but this Rent never
was in them, etc. and the Queen cannot enlarge the possessions of her Duchy by
her own Act; and therefore, if J. S. being Tenant in Fee-simple, be impleaded
in a Praecipe quod reddat, and says that he holds for life, the remainder to
the King in Fee in the right of his Duchy; now this remainder is vested in the
King in the right of his Crown, and not in the right of his Duchy; for it is
only an Estoppel: So the Villein of the King, in the right of his Duchy,
purchases lands, the King seiseth, he shall have the lands in the right of his
Crown, and not in the right of the Duchy: If the King gives Common out of his
lands, parcel of his Duchy, and afterward makes a Feoffment in Fee of the
lands out of which the Common is granted, and afterward the Commoner dies
without heir, the King shall have the same in the right of his Crown, and not
in the right of the Duchy: So, although the rent does follow the nature of the
lands out of which it is issuing, yet it is not so to all intents; and he said,
That by the Statute of 2 and 3 Phil. and Ma. the King could not enlarge the
possessions of the Duchy; and therefore by the said Act, authority is given
for to annex possession unto the Duchy by Letters Patents; And there is
another clause in the said Statute, That if any part of the possessions of the
Duchy have been aliened, or granted unto any subject, and are reverted to the
Crown by Escheat, attainder, forfeiture, purchase, etc. they shall be deemed
and accepted parcel of the Duchy; which case proves, That if the King makes a
Feoffment of such lands, the same is a Tenure in chief; for if it were a Tenure
of the Duchy, then upon Escheat, it should be parcel of the Duchy again,
without the help of that Statute. Now, this Rent being a Rent in gross, and not
parcel of the Seignory, Reddendo Domino Regi, haeredibus and successoribus
suis, aut Domino, aut Dominis feodi, when the King grants the Seignory to the
Lord Audley, it has been moved, that it was in the Election of the Feoffee, to
pay the Rent to the King, or to the Lord Audley; but that is not so, for
although the Law be so betwixt Subjects, yet in case of the King it is
otherwise; for the King shall never be overreached by an Election: and
therefore he shall pay the Rent to the King. It was adjourned.

CLXXXV. The Executors of Sir William Cordel and Clifton 's Case. Hill. 18
Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
3 Len. 59.
THE Case was, The Earl of Westmerland, seized of a Manor, whereof the Demeans
were usually let for three lives, by Copy, according to the custom of the
Manor, granted a Rentcharge to Sir William Cordel, 2 Roll, 157.
Pro concilio impendendo, for the term of his life; and afterward conveyed the
Manor to Sir William Clifton in tail; The Rent is behind, 12 Brownl. 208.
Sir William Cordel dies, Sir William Clifton dies, the Manor descends to
John Clifton, who grants a Copihold to Hempston: the Executors of Sir William
Cordel distrain for the Rent; It was agreed by the whole Court, Antea 109.
That the Copyholder should hold the land charged. Windham, Justice, It has
been adjudged, that the wife of the Lord shall not be endowed against the
Copyholder, Dyer 270.
which Periam granted, but gave the reason of it; for the Title of the Dower is
not consummated before the death of the husband; so as the Title of the
Copyholder is completed before the Title of Dower; More 94.
but the Title of the Grantee of the Rent is consummated before the Dower,
Fenner conceived, That the Executors could not distrain upon the possession of
the Copyholder, and he argued, that this case is not within the Statute of 32
H. 8. of Wills, For by the preface of the said Statute, he conceived, That the
said Statute did extend but to those cases for which by the Common Law no
remedy was provided; but in this case, the Executors by the Common Law, might
have an Action of debt, ergo: But Periam and Windham, contrary; For this
Statute does intend a farther remedy for that mischief, (scil.) not only an
action of debt, but also distress and avowry: See the words of the Statute,
Distrain for the arrearages, etc. upon the lands, etc. which were charged with
the payment of such rents, and chargeable to the Distress of the Testator; or
in the seisin or possession of any other person or persons claiming the said
lands, only by and from the same Tenant by purchase, gift, or descent, in like
manner and form as their Testator might or ought to have done in his life time:
And it was moved by Fenner, That here the said land charged, does not continue
in the seisin or possession of the Tenant; and here Sir John Clifton was issue
in tail, and therefore he does not claim only by the father, but per formam
Doni; and therefore he is not liable; therefore neither his Copyholder.

Shuttleworth, Sergeant, contrary, That Sir John Clifton was chargeable; and he
claims only from them who immediately ought to have paid the Rent, and the
Copyholder claims by purchase from Sir John Clifton, so he claims from Sir
William Clifton the Tenant, etc. although he does not claim immediately from
him: For if the Tenant ought to have paid it, and dies, and the land
descends to his heir, and the Heir makes a Feoffment in Fee, the Feoffee
shall be charged within this Statute, although he does not claim immediately:
so where land descends from the Tenant which ought to have paid it, and so from
Heir to Heir. The Statute of 1 R. 3. wills, that all grants, etc. shall be good
against the Donor, his Heirs, etc. claiming only as Heirs to Cestuy que use,
etc. Yet, if Cestuy que use grants a Rentcharge, and the Feoffees are
disseised, the Grant shall be good against the Disseisor; and yet he does not
claim only by Cestuy que use: And although Sir John Clifton be Tenant in tail,
and claims per formam Doni; Yet, because the Estate tail comes under the
Estate of him who grants the Rent, he shall be subject to the charge. And this
Statute extends not only to him who claims by the Tenant, but also to the Heir
of him who grants, etc. And by Windham and Rhodes, The Copyholder does not
claim only by the Lord, but he claims also by the custom; but the custom is
not any part of his Title, but only appoints the manner how he shall hold,
etc. The possession continues here in Sir John Clifton, for the possession of
his Copyholder is his possession; so as if the Copyholder be ousted, Sir John
Clifton shall have an Assise: And so the strict words of the Statute are
observed, for the seisin and possession continues in Sir John Clifton who
claims only by Sir William Clifton who was the Tenant in demean who ought to
pay the Rent. But Fenner said to that; that the seisin and possession intended
in the Statute, is the very actual possession, (scil.) Pedis dispositio, and
such a possession in which the distress may be taken and that cannot be taken
in a Freehold without an actual possession.

CLXXXVI. 19 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
3 Len. 65.
A. Seized of land in Fee, by his Will in writing, granted a Rentcharge of 5.
l. per an. out of it to his younger son, toward his Education and bringing up
in Learning, and if in pleading, the Devisee ought to aver that he was brought
up in Learning was the Question: And it was holden by Dyer, Manwood and
Mounson, that such averment needs not; for the Devise is not conditional; and
therefore, although he be not brought up in Learning, yet he shall have the
Rent: and the words of the Devise, are, Toward his bringing up; and he well
knew, that 5 l. per an. would not, nor could extend to maintain a Scholar in
Learning, Die. 329. a.
in diet, apparel, books, etc. and this Rent, although it be not sufficient to
such purpose, yet he shall have it; And Dyer said, That such a case was here:
Two were bound to stand to the award of certain persons, who awarded that the
one of them should pay unto the other 20 s. per an. during the term of six
years, toward the education and bringing up of such a one an Infant, and
within the two first years of the said term the Infant died, so as now there
needed not any supply toward his education; yet it was adjudged, that the
yearly sum ought to be paid for the whole term after; for the words [toward his
education] are but to show the intent and consideration of the payment of that
sum, and no word of condition, etc.

CLXXXVII. West and Stowel 's Case. Mich. 20 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
1 Cro. 870. Townsend. 17. 1 Roll 28. More 549. Sty. 353. a.
IN an Action upon the Case, by Thomas West against Sir John Stowell, The
Plaintiff Declared, That the Defendant, in consideration that the Plaintiff
promised to the Defendant, that if the Defendant shall win a certain match at
shooting, made between the Lord of Effingham and the Defendant, then the
Plaintiff should pay to the Defendant 10 l. and promised to the Plaintiff, That
if the said L. Effingham shall win the same match of the Defendant, that then
the Defendant would pay to the Plaintiff 10 l. And farther declared, That the
Lord Effingham won the match, for which the Action is brought. It was moved,
that here is not any sufficient consideration; for the promise of the Plaintiff
to the Defendant, Non parit actionem, for there is not any consideration upon
which it is conceived, but is only, Nudum pactum, upon which the Defendant
could not have an Action against the Plaintiff. And then here is not any
sufficient consideration for the promise of the Defendant. Mounson, Justice
conceived, that here the consideration is sufficient, for here this counter
promise is a reciprocal promise, and so a good consideration, for all the
communication ought to be taken together, Manwood, Such a reciprocal promise
betwixt the parties themselves at the match, is sufficient; for there is
consideration good enough to each, as the preparing of the Bows and Arrows, the
riding or coming to the place appointed to shoot, the labor in shooting, the
travel in going up and down between the marks: But for the Bettors by, there is
not any consideration, if the Bettor does not give aim: Mounson, A cast at Dice
alters the property, if the Dice be not false; wherefore then is there not here
a reciprocal Action? Manwood, At Dice the parties set down their moneys, and
speak words which do amount to a conditional gift; (scil.) If that the other
party cast such a cast he shall have the money.

CLXXXVIII. Dunne 's Case. 19 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
DUnne possessed of diverse goods in diverse Dioceses died intestate at Bristow;
The Bishop of Bristow committed administration to Jones and his Wife, who
administered; and afterward the Bishop of Canterbury, by reason of his
Prerogative, committed administration to Austen and Dunne, and they brought an
Action of Trespass against Jones and his Wife, for taking of the goods of the
intestate; It was holden by Wray and Southcote, 5 Co. 2, 30. 1 Cro. 283. 457.
that the Letters of administration granted by the Bishop of Bristow, were
void: Gaudy and Jeofreys, contrary; for the granting of Letters of
Administration, de mero jure, does belong to the Ordinary; and it might be that
neither the Ordinary, nor the parties to whom he granted the Letters of
Administration had notice that the Intestate had bona notabilia in another
Diocese, and therefore it should be hard to make the Defendants Trespassors;
Exception was taken to the Declaration, because it is showed that the
Archbishop of Canterbury, by reason of his Prerogative, committed
Administration, etc. without showing that the Intestate had bona notabilia,
etc. but the Exception was not allowed, for so are all the precedents, as the
Declaration is here, which all the Clerks in Court did affirm; and afterward
Exception was taken to the Bar, because it is there pleaded, that the Defendant
had paid a certain sum of Money to one A. to whom the Intestate was indebted by
Bond, and did not show how the Bond was discharged, as by Release, Acquittance,
cancelling of the Bond, etc. And that was holden to be a material Exception:
For the Defendants in such case, ought to show such discharge, which is
sufficient, and by which the Plaintiffs may be discharged; and for that cause
the Plaintiff had Judgment to recover.

CLXXXIX. Kingwell and Chapman 's Case. 19 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
IN an Action of Debt upon a Bond, by Kingwell against Chapman; 1 Cro. 10.
The Defendant pleaded, that it was endorsed upon condition, That where diverse
debates were betwixt the Plaintiff and one J. Brother of the Defendant, the
said Plaintiff and J. put themselves to the award of one Copston, and the
Defendant was bound by Bond to the Plaintiff, that his brother should perform
the award of the said Copston: And the award was, That the said J. should pay
to the Plaintiff 30 l. viz. at the Feast of the Annunciation 20 l. and at
Michaelmas after 10 l. and showed, that the said J. had paid the said 20 l. at
the Annunciation; and as to the 10 l. he pleaded, That the said J. died before
the said Feast of Michaelmas, upon which there was a demurrer: And by Wray,
Southcote and Gaudy, Justices, the Bond is forfeit. First, because the sum
awarded by the Arbitrament, is now become a duty; as if the condition of the
Bond had been for the payment of it: Secondly, day is appointed for the payment
of it, 10 H. 7. 18. Thirdly, the Executors cannot perform the condition. But if
I be bound by Bond to enfeoff the Obligee at such a day, and before the said
day I die, my Executors shall not be charged with it; for the Condition is
become impossible by the Act of God, for the Land is descended to the heir.

CXC. Lodge 's Case. 20 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
Syderf. Rep. 362.
LOdge, an Attorney of the Common Pleas, was indebted unto Booth in 34 l.
payable at a day to come, and Booth was indebted to Diggs in 40 l. Diggs,
according to the custom of London, attached in the hands of Lodge 34 l. to be
paid to him at the day, as part of his debt of 40 l. Lodge brought a Bill of
Privilege, directed to the Mayor and Sheriff of London, and that every person,
who had cause of Action against Lodge, Sequatur ad Com. Legem, etc. Si sibi
videbitur expedire, etc. At the retorn of which Writ, Bendloes prayed a
Procedendo. And by Harper, Justice, the privilege shall not be allowed, because
that this Attachment is by custom, and not allowable here; and if Lodge should
have the privilege, then is the other party without remedy: And if an Attorney
of this place be impleaded in London upon a Concessit solvere debit. alterius,
he shall not have the privilege. Manwood contrary; For according to the Common
Law, Lodge owed nothing to Diggs, but is his Debtor by a custom: And as to the
Case of Concessit solvere, there the promise was to the party himself, who
brought the Action; and he has no other remedy; but in the Case at Bar, Diggs,
who is a stranger, vexes Lodge, who ows him nothing, having remedy against his
proper Debtor, which Dyer granted, and farther said, That the privilege of this
Court ought not to be impeached by any custom: And the Prothonotaries cited a
Case adjudged in the point; That such a privilege was allowed in the Case of
one Underhil, and afterward in the principal Case the privilege was allowed.

CXCI. Segar and Bainton 's Case. 21 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
3 Len. 74.
IN an Action of Trespass, the Case was, That King Hen. 8. an. 27. of his reign,
gave the Manor of D. to Sir Edw. Bainton Knight, and to the heirs males of his
body; Sir Edw. Bainton had issue, Andrew his eldest son; and the now Defendant
his younger son, and died; Andrew Bainton covenanted by Indenture with the Lord
Seymore, That the said Andrew Bainton would assure the said Manor to the use of
himself for life, the Remainder to the use of the said Lord and his heirs; and
the said Lord in recompense thereof, should assure other Lands to the use of
himself for life, the remainder to the use of the said Andrew Bainton in tail,
who, 37 H. 8. levied a Fine of the said Manor without Proclamations to two
strangers, to the uses according to the said agreement, and before any
assurance made by the said Lord, the said Lord was attainted of Treason, by
which all his Lands were forfeited to the King: And afterward the said Andrew
Bainton made a suggestion to Queen Mary of all this matter; and upon his humble
Petition, the said Queen by her Letters Patents, reciting the said mischief,
etc. Et praemissa considerans, and annuens Petitioni illius, granted to him the
Manor aforesaid, and farther, De ampliori gratia sua, did release to the said
Andrew Bainton, all her right, possession, etc. which came to her, Ratione
attincturae praed. vel in manibus nostris existant, vel existere deberent;
after which, 5 Eliz. Andrew Bainton levied a Fine to the Plaintiff, with
Proclamations, and died without issue, and the Defendant, as issue in tail,
entered.

Puckering, Sergeant: First, it is to see, if by the words of the Patent of
Queen Mary; viz. De ampliori gratia, etc. the Reversion in Fee which the Queen
had, shall pass or not? Secondly, Admitting that the Reversion does not pass,
then if the Fine levied by Andrew Bainton, 5 Eliz. to the Plaintiff, the
Reversion being in the Queen, be a bar unto the issue in tail? For as unto the
first Fine levied, 37 H. 8. which was without Proclamations, the same shall not
bind the issue in tail, neither as to the right, nor as to the Entry, for it is
not any discontinuance, because the Reversion is in the King; as of things
which do not lie in discontinuance, as Rent, Common, etc. for such a Fine is a
Fine at the Common Law, and not within the Statute of 4 H. 7. and such Fine is
void against the issue: But if such a Fine without Proclamation be levied of a
thing which lies in discontinuance, then such a Fine is not void, but voidable
by Formedon: and therefore this Fine in the Case at Bar being levied without
Proclamation of Lands entailed, whereof the Reversion is in the King at the
time of the Fine levied, shall not bind the issue: and by such Fine the Conusee
has nothing but a Fee determinable upon the life of Tenant in tail, which Fee
was forfeited to the Queen by the Attainder of the Lord Seymore, and that the
Queen moved of pity, did restore the same to A. B. in recompense; for the
Indentures of themselves were not sufficient to raise any use: See 1 Mariae,
Dyer 96. As to the first point, it seems that nothing passed of the Reversion,
for the Grant has reference to the words, All her Right, Possession, etc.
which came to her ratione attincturae, and all the residue of the Grant ought
to have reference to that, to the ratione attincturae, which was the foundation
of the whole Grant: and here the intent of the Queen was not to any other
intent but only to restore A. B. to the said Manor, or to his former Estate in
it; and nothing appears in the Letters Patents, by which it may appear, that
the Queen was knowing of her Reversion which she had by descent, and therefore
the same cannot pass by general words. If the Queen grants the Goods and
Chattels of all those which have done any Trespass, for which vitam amittere
debent, the Goods of him who is attainted of Treason shall not be forfeited to
the Grantee by such general words: 8 H. 4. 2. The King grants omnia Catalla
Tenentium suorum, qualitercunque damnatorum, the same shall not extend to the
Goods of him who is condemned of Treason: See 22 Ass. 49. So in our Case the
Patent shall not serve to two intents, but to a restitution of the Manor, and
then nothing passed by this Patent but the Fee determinable, which was conveyed
to the Lord Seymore, and forfeited by his Attainder. Then we are to see, how
after this grant the said A. B. is seized. And he said, That he shall be in of
the said Fee determinable, and not of the Estate tail against his own Fine; and
then if he be not seized by force of the Entail at the time of the Fine levied,
5 Eliz. the same Fine cannot bind the tail: But admit that at the time of the
second Fine levied he was in of an Estate in tail, yet the same Fine shall not
bar his issue: For first, this Fine cannot make any discontinuance, because
that the Reversion in Fee is in the King, which is not touched by the Fine: See
the Case of Sanders, where A. makes a Lease to begin at a day to come, and
afterward levies a Fine to a stranger with Proclamations; the five years pass,
and afterward at the day of the Commencement of the Lease the Lessee enters,
his entry is lawful, and he shall not be bound by the non-claim. And so it was
adjudged 21 Eliz between Sanders and Starky. After the making of the Statute of
4 H. 7. of Fines, it was much doubted, if the issues of common Tenants in tail
should be bound by a Fine with Proclamation, forasmuch as upon the death of
their Ancestors they were as new purchasors per formam doni: and therefore it
was provided by the Statute of 32 H. 8. that the said Statute of 4 H. 7. should
extend to such common Entails; but there was no doubt of the Estate tail of the
Gift of the King: and see betwixt Jackson and Darcy, Mich. 15 and 16 Elizab.
Rot. 1747. in a Partitione facienda, the Case was, Tenant in tail, the
Remainder to the King after the Statute of 32 H. 8. levied a Fine with
Proclamations, and adjudged, that that should bind the issues: and the Act of
32 H. 8. does not extend, but where the Reversion is in the King, but no
mention is there of a Remainder, because the words of the said Act are general,
of all Tenants in tail, the makers of the said Act perceiving that it might be
a doubt, that the generality of the said words might exclude Estates tail of
the Gift of the King, they have restrained the words in a special manner, as
appears by the last words of the same Act: Nor to any Fines heretofore
levied, or hereafter to be levied by any person or persons of any Manors, etc.
before the levying of the said Fine to any of his or their Ancestors in tail by
Letters Patents, or Act of Parliament, the Reversion whereof, at the time of
the levying of such Fine, was in the King: and so such Estates are excepted,
and that in such Cases where such Fines are levied, they shall be of such force
as they should have been if the said Act had not been made; and therefore he
conceived, it appeared at the said Parliament, That such Estate tails of the
Gift of the King were not bound b^ 4 H. 7. for otherwise that Proviso or
Exception had been frivolous.

Walmsley, Sergeant, to the contrary; and he agreed, That the first Fine does
not make any discontinuance; and yet he conceived, it is not altogether void
against the issues before that they enter, for no Right remains in the Conusor
against his Fine: and he conceived also that this clause, ex uberiori gratia
nostra, did extend to pass more than passed before, for he conceived that the
Queen intended more liberally, viz. the Reversion, for this same is not any
matter of Prerogative, but this is a matter of interest which might even in the
Case of the King pass out of the King by general words: And see 3 H. 6. 6 and 7
Br. Patents; A Grant of the King ex insinuatione shall not hinder the force of
the words ex mero motu. And the opinion of the Court was, That the Reversion
which was in the King did not pass by this Grant: For the scope of the whole
Patent was, as was conceived, to grant the same only which the Queen had
ratione attincturae.

Anderson held the Patent insufficient, because that the Prohibition was not
full and certain: Also he said, That ex speciali gratia, etc. would not help
this Case, if it were well argued, for the Estate tail is not well recited, but
only that he was seized de Statu haereditario, etc. so as the Queen was
deceived. Periam, contrary; The Queen was apprised well of the mischief and
Grant aforesaid, viz. of such Estate, with which he departed by the Fine. And
as to the other point, it was the opinion of Walmsley, That the Fine with
Proclamation did bind the Entail. And as to the Objection which has been made,
That the Conusor, at the time of the Fine levied, was not seized by force of
the Entail, the same had been good matter to avoid a common Recovery, to
allege such matter in the Tenant to the Praecipe, but not to this purpose: for
if Tenant in tail levieth a Fine, although he was not seized at the time of the
Fine levied by force of the Entail, yet such a Fine shall bind the issues: So
if the Tenant in tail does discontinue, and disseiseth the Discontinuee, and so
levieth a Fine. And he conceived, That the issue in tail is bound by the
Statute of 4 H. 7. even of the Gift of the King. And see 19 H. 8. 6. and 7.
where it is holden, That the issue in tail is bound by the Act of 4 H. 7. And
whereas it has been objected, That it does not extend, but to such Fines which
make a discontinuance at the Common Law; the same is not so: for if Tenant in
tail of a Rent or Common levieth a Fine with Proclamation, it is very clear,
that the issues shall be barred thereby: And he relied much upon the Book of 29
H. 8. Dyer. 32. Tenant in tail of the Gift of the King levyeth a Fine, or
suffers a common Recovery, although it be not a discontinuance, because the
Reversion is in the King, yet it is a bar unto the issue. But note, That that
was before the Statute of 34 H. 8. And see now Wiseman's Case, 27 Eliz. Co. 2.
part. and see the Lord Stafford's Case, 7 Jacob. Co. 8 Reports, fo. 78.

CXCII. Pleadal 's Case. 21 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
THe Case was, That a man seized of Lands in fee, took a Lease by Indenture of
the Herbage and Pawnage of the same Land: It was the Opinion of the whole
Court, that the same was no Estoppel to him to claim the Soil or the Freehold:
And it was said by Plowden, and agreed by the Court, That if the Father and Son
be Ioint-tenants for an hundred years, and the Son takes a Lease of his Father
of the Lands for fifteen years, to begin, etc. the same shall conclude the Son
to claim the whole term or parcel of it by Survivor.

CXCIII. 21 Eliz. In the Star Chamber.
NOte, That in the Star Chamber it was resolved, by the Advice of many of the
Justices, That an Infant having levied a Fine, may declare the uses upon it,
and such Declaration is good, notwithstanding his Nonage: and Mr. Plowden
affirmed, 2 Co. 10, 42, 57.
that so it was adjudged in his own Case, by which he lost Lands of the yearly
value of 40 l. So a Declaration by a man in duresse is good, which Anderson
denied.

CXCIV. The Lord Awdley 's Case. 21 Eliz. In the Court of Chancery.
THE Lord Awdley, 12 H. 7. enfeoffed Hoddy and others of certain Lands in the
County of Sommerset, Die. 166, 324, 325.
and afterward by Indenture reciting the said Feoffment, and the date of it,
and also that it was to the intent that his Feoffees should perform his Will,
as follows in effect; viz. My Will is, 6 Co. Sir Ed. Cloer's Case.
That my said Feoffees shall stand seized to the use, That the said Hoddy shall
receive of the yearly Profits of the said Lands one hundred pounds, which he
had lent to the said Lord Awdley: and also stand seized to pay all his Debts
upon Bills signed with his Hand; and after the Debts paid, That the said
Feoffees shall make Estate of the said Lands unto him the said Lord Awdley, and
Joan his Wife, and to the Heirs of their Bodies, etc. with diverse Remainders
over. The said Lord had issue by the said Joan; and also had issue by a former
Wife a Daughter: The Feoffees never made any Estate to the said Lord and his
Wife. And it was the Opinion of diverse of the Justices and Sages of the Law,
That upon this matter no use was changed, for it is not a last Will, but an
intent. And although that the Feoffees shall be seized unto the use of the
Feoffor and his Heirs, because that no consideration was, for which they should
be seized to their own use; yet the same cannot make a new use unto the said
Lord and his wife in tail, without conveying an Estate; for the wife is a
stranger unto the land, and also to the other use. And it cannot be a Testament
or last Will; for the Estate mentioned in the said Writing, ought to be made to
the said Lord and his wife, who cannot take by his own Will. And this matter
was depending in the Chancery; and the advice of the Justices being there
required, they did deliver their opinions, That by this Writing, no use was
changed, nor any Estate vested in the said Lord and his wife; and a Decree was
made accordingly, until proof might be made of such an Estate made.

CXCV. Borough and Holcroft 's Case. 21 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
Co. 3. Inst. 31. 4 Co. 45.
IN an Appeal of Murder, by the son of the Lord Borough, of the death of his
elder brother, Henry Borough, against Thomas Holcroft, who pleaded, That
heretofore he had been indicted of the Murder of the said Henry Holcroft
before J. S. Coroner of the Verge, and also Coroner of the Country of
Middlesex, within which County the Verge was; and upon that indictment he was
arraigned, and confessed the indictment, and prayed his Clergy, etc. and
demanded Judgment; If the Plaintiff should have this appeal? The Plaintiff,
Replicando, said, by protestation, Null tiel record, and for plea did demur in
Law. Dalton, for the Plaintiff, took Exception to the plea, for the conclusion
of it, viz. Judgment if appeal; where it ought to be, Judgment, if he shall be
again put to answer: And he took a difference, where a matter is pleaded
against the Plaintiff, to which the Plaintiff is party: As where a man pleads a
Fine levied by the Plaintiff himself, there he shall conclude Judgment if
action; but where the Fine is pleaded levied by the Ancestors of the Plaintiff,
there he shall plead, Judgment, if against such Fine, etc. Vide, 9 H. 7. 19. At
the common Law before the Statute of 3 H. 7. such conviction at the suit of the
King did discharge the party convicted from farther trouble; but if the
indictment upon which he was arraigned be insufficient, then it is not any
plea. And here the indictment is insufficient; for by the Statute of Articuli
super Chartas, cap. 3. the Coroner of the County, together with the Coroner of
the King's Household shall do the Office which belongs to it, and send the roll,
to which Office two Coroners are requisite; but here, in the taking of this
inquisition there was but one person although two capacities, id est, Coroner
of the County, and also Coroner of the Verge; and so the indictment was taken,
Coram non Judice: See the Statute of the Star Chamber, which is, That the
Chancellor, etc. calling to them one Bishop, and one temporal Lord of the
King's Council, etc. If the Chancellor be a Bishop; yet another Bishop ought to
be called, etc. If I devise that my lands shall be sold by two Bishops, and J.
S. has two Bishoprics, yet his sale is not sufficient. Egerton, contrary,
Although here is but one person, yet there are two Coroners: Quando duo jura
concurrunt in una persona aequum est, ac si essent in diversis. At the common
Law, before the Statute, De Articulis super Chartas, The Coroner of the Verge
by himself might enquire of Murder; but because the Kings Court oftentimes
removed into another County, by reason whereof no enquiry could be made, for
the remedying thereof, that Statute was made, which is in the affirmative, and
does not abridge the common Law before, and therefore it shall have a
reasonable construction: See the Statute of West. 1. cap. 10, By which it is
enacted, that sufficient men shall be chosen Coroners, of the most loyal and
the most sage Knights, this Statute shall not be taken, Stricto sensu, that
none shall be chosen Coroners, but Knights; but the Statute requires, that
sufficient persons shall be chosen. As to the Statute of 3 H. 7. It is to be
known, That the common Law [before acquitted] was a good Plea, and the cause
was for the great regard that the common Law had to the life of a man; In which
case a great mischief, as the Statute recites, did ensue, that to save the
appeal of the party; they would not arraign the party within the year and day
after the murder, within which time, the offender did compound with the party
interessed; and so after the year expired, all the matter concerning the
prosecution, at the King's suit, was put in oblivion: wherefore it was enacted,
That such offender shall be within the year arraigned at the suit of the King;
and if the party be acquitted at the Kings suit, within the year and day, That
the Justices before whom, etc. should not set the party at large, but to remain
in prison, or to let him to bail, until the year and the day be past; and
within the said year and day, the wife, or next heir to the party slain may
take their appeal against the party so acquitted or attainted, the said
acquittal or attainder notwithstanding; and he said, that these words [person
attainted] did not extend to person convicted; for they are two distinct
conditions in Law; for attainder procures corruption of blood, but the same is
not wrought by conviction: and every Treason imports in it self Felony; but yet
notwithstanding they are distinct Offenses: See 22 E. 4. Coron. 44. where it
was ordered by all the Justices of England, That none should be arraigned of
the death of a man, at the suit of the King, within the year and day; so as the
suit of the party be saved. And the Justices counseled all men of Law so to
do, and that the same be executed as a Law without alteration, upon which rule
of the Justices, arose an inconvenience; for after that order of the Justices
was known, The offender would practice with the party to whom the appeal by the
Law belonged, to obtain from him a release for some sum of money, and then when
the year and day passed, the heinousness of the murder was out of memory; This
mischief being espied, was the occasion of the making of the Statute of 3 H. 7.
But the said Statute does not meet with our Case; but our Case is at the common
Law, for this Statute extends only unto persons attainted; but a person
convicted is not touched by it, and therefore being out of the words of the
Statute, it shall be also out of the meaning of it; for being a penal Law, it
shall be taken by equity, as all Statutes which give attaint shall be, Stricti
juris, and shall not be taken by equity. It has been objected, that the
Statute de Frangentibus prisonam, 4 E. 1. has been taken by equity, the same
is not so; for it is not any penal Law, but the same mitigates the rigor of the
common Law; for before that Statute, the breaking of the prison was Felony in
every case, but now it is not Felony, but where the party was committed to
prison for Felony, etc.

CXCVI. 21 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
IN a Formedon of a Manor, Dyer 291. 3 Len. 92.
the Tenant pleaded Ioynt-tenancy by Fine with J. S. The Demandant did aver the
Tenant sole Tenant, as the Writ does suppose, and upon that issue was taken,
and found for the Demandant; upon which, a Writ of Error was brought, and Error
assigned in this. That whereupon Ioynt-tenancy pleaded by Fine, the Writ ought
to abate without any averment by the Demandant against it, the averment has
been received against the Law, etc. Southcote, At the common Law, If the Tenant
had pleaded Ioynt-tenancy by Deed, the Writ should abate without any averment;
but that was remedied by 34 E. 1. but Ioynt-tenancy by Fine did remain as it
was at the common Law, for he has punishment enough in that by that plea, if
it be false, he has by way of conclusion given the moiety of the Land in
demand to him with whom he has pleaded Ioynt-tenancy; and the Law does not
intend that he would so slightly depart with his land for the abatement of a
Writ: As in a Praecipe quod reddat, the Tenant acknowledges himself to be
Villein to a stranger; the Writ shall abate without any averment, if Frank and
of Frank Estate; for the Law presumes, that the Tenant would not enthral his
condition. Wray, to the same intent: But the Demandant may confess and avoid
the Fine, as to say, That he that levied the Fine was his disseisor, upon whom
he had before entered, etc. And if Tenant in Fee-simple be impleaded, and he
says that he is Tenant for life, the remainder over to A. in Fee, and prays
in aid of A. the Demandant shall not take averment, that the Tenant, the day of
the Writ purchased, was seized in Fee. Note that in this fine Ioynt-tenancy was
pleaded but to parcel. It was holden by Wray and Southcot, that the whole Writ
should abate; As in a Writ the misnosmer of one shall abate the whole Writ
against all the Defendants: and so where the Demandant enters into parcel of
the land in demand, if the thing in demand be one entire thing, it shall abate
the whole Writ. In this Case, the Demandant ought to have in his Writ de
Forsprise of the land in demand, whereof the Ioynt-tenancy by Fine is pleaded,
per avail, and under the gift of which the Formedon is conceived, and
therefore in respect of the title of the Demandant, it remains in right, parcel
of the Manor, and therefore ought to be demanded accordingly with an Exception:
But if A. give to B. a Manor, except ten acres in tail, there if after upon any
discontinuance, the issue in tail have a Formedon, in such case there needs no
exception, for the said ten acres were never after the gift, parcel of the
Manor which was given in tail, for they were severed from the Manor upon the
gift; but if land in demand was several, as twenty acres except two, an
exception is not good, for he might demand eight acres: See E. 1. F. N. B. 866.
Praecipe unam bovat. terrae, except a Seleon, and the Writ was abated, for
every demand ought to be certain, but a Seleon is a parcel of land uncertain,
as to quantity, in some places an acre, in some more, in some less. Another
point was, That because the Tenant has admitted and accepted this averment,
(scil.) sole Tenant, as the Writ does suppose; If the Court notwithstanding the
admittance of the Tenant ought without exception of the party, Ex officio, to
abate the Writ; and Wray conceived, that they should, for it is a positive Law;
as if a woman brings an appeal of murder upon the death of her brother, and
the Defendant does admit it without challenge or exception, yet the Court shall
abate the appeal, 10 E. 4. 7. And see the principal Case there, Non ideo
puniatur Dominus; and if an Action be brought against an Hostler upon the
common custom of the Realm, and in the Writ he is not named common Hostler,
and the Defendant does accept of such Writ, without exception to it, yet the
Court shall abate the Writ, Ex officio, 11 H. 4. 198. and 38 H. 6. 30.

CXCVII. 24 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
Antea 150. More Rep. Saffron Walden's Case.
THE Case was this: King Henry the 8. seized of certain lands in the right of
his Duchy of Lancaster, Granted them unto another, Tenend. in Fee-farm,
Reddend, dicto Dom. Regi, and haeredibus suis, aut illi cui de jure reddi debet
10 l. And if this land should be holden of the King in Capite, or holden of the
Duchy, was the question? Egerton Solicitor general, argued much upon the
Statute of 1 H. 4. by which the Duchy and possessions thereof were severed
from the Crown: See Plowden in the Case of the Duchy of Lancaster, 213. And
see ibid. the Statute of 1 H. 4. Entitled, Charta Regis, Hen. 4. 1. De
separatione Ducatus Lancastr. a Corona; by which it is enacted, That the Duchy
of Lancaster, taliter and tali modo deducatur, gubernetur and pertractetur,
etc. ac si ad culmen dignitatis Regiae assumpti minime fuissemus: So as by that
Act the Duchy is dis-joined from the Crown, and in such point as to
possession, as it was in a common person. But the possession of the Duchy does
not bind the person of the King: as 10 H. 4. 7. The King brings an Action for
certain Lands to him descended from his Uncle, the Duke of Lancaster, and the
Writ was, Non omittas propter aliquam libertatem, and exception was taken to
the Writ, because that such clause ought not to be in the King's Writ, but
where the King sueth as King, but that Writ he sueth as Duke of Lancaster, but
the exception, was not allowed; The King cannot sue otherwise, but as King: for
the person of the King ought not to be measured according to his possession, so
as it was a severance in order, survey, government and process, and not in
respect of the person. But after the Statute of 1 H. 4. The said Act of
Separation was repealed; and farther enacted, that the said King should hold
the said Duchy to him and his heirs, Kings of England; so as thereby the
Duchy is settled in the politic Body of the King: afterward came the Statute
of 1 H. 7. by which it is enacted, That the King shall hold the said Duchy,
and the possessions thereof, in such manner and form, and so separated from the
Crown as King Henry the fourth and King Henry the fifth did hold the same, so
as the Duchy was divested out of the Body politic of the King where it was
settled, 1 H. 4. and vested in the Body natural of the King so as the possession
of the Duchy, as to their government, etc. are in the King, as they were in
the Duke of Lancaster before he was King: and if the Duke of Lancaster had made
a Feoffment, etc. the Feoffee should not hold of him, but of the King: So if
the King himself makes a Feoffment of Lands of the Duchy, the Feoffee shall
hold of the King, etc. which see in the Duchy of Lancaster's Case, in the end
of it: And he conceived, That notwithstanding the union of the Crown and the
Duchy, yet the privity of the Tenure does remain, being preserved by the said
Act of 1 H. 4. Another matter was, That here, the Tenure reserved is Tenend. in
feodi firma Reddend. 10 l. etc. And he said, that this Rent is not parcel of
the Tenure, but rather a Rentcharge collateral to the Tenure: For in all Cases
where there is a Tenure expressed in suit, or implied in Law before, there
Reddendo following shall not make the thing rendered parcel of the Tenure, 3
Cro. 210, 211.
but it shall be a Rent in gross; and here Tenend. in feodi firma, makes the
Tenure, etc. and the Reddendo after shall not make the Rent reserved parcel of
the Tenure: See the Case 33 E. 3. Annuity 52. before the Statute of Quia
Emptores terrarum, a man makes a Feoffment in Fee Tenend. de Dom. Capital.
Feod. etc. Reddend. 10 s. Rent; here, because that the Tenure was reserved,
Capital. Dom. feodi illius, this Rent reserved is not parcel of the Tenure,
but a Rent in gross: King Edward the sixth gave certain Lands to Cranmer,
Archbishop of Canterbury, Tenend. by the fifth part of a Knight's Fee, Reddend.
inde 6 l. per ann. Cranmer made a Feoffment in Fee to the use of himself for
life, and afterward to the use of his eldest son in tail, the remainder to the
right heirs of Cranmer, who is attainted of Treason, by which the remainder in
Fee escheated to the King, by which the Seignory is gone. But it was adjudged,
that notwithstanding that escheat, the Rent did remain, for the Rent was not
parcel of the Seignory. Now this Rent being a thing newly created, and not
parcel of the possessions of the Duchy in 1 H. 4. nor ever descended from any
Ancestor of the King, being Duke of Lancaster, shall be accounted to be in the
King in the right of his Crown, and so cannot pass by the Dutchy-seal: See the
said Statute of 1 H. 4. and the King cannot enlarge the said Duchy, nor the
possessions thereof beyond the possessions which were of the Duchy at the time
of the making of the said Acts: As if J. S. seized in Fee is impleaded, and he
says, that he holds the Lands in demand for life, the remainder to the King in
the right of his said Duchy; now the said remainder is vested in the King, not
in the right of the said Duchy, but in the right of his Crown. The Villain of
the King in the right of his Duchy of Lancaster, purchases Lands, the King
seizes, he shall be seized thereof in the right of his Crown, and not of the
Duchy: The King grants Common out of certain Lands parcel of his said Duchy,
and afterward makes a Feoffment of the said Lands to another, the Grantee of
the Common dies without heir, so as the Common escheats to him; now he shall
have the Common in the right of the Crown and not of the Duchy; so although it
is said, That the Rent shall follow the nature of the Land out of which, etc.
yet the same is but to some intents, and not to every intent: See the Statute
of 2 and 3 Phil. and Ma. cap. 20. by which it is enacted, That all the Lands
which have been granted or severed from the Duchy to any person or persons,
and after such grant, have come or reverted to the King in possession,
reversion or remainder, or otherwise by attainder, escheat, forfeiture, etc.
shall for ever be united to the said Duchy, and shall be adjudged and esteemed
as part and member of the same; which proves that such Lands were not holden of
the King, as Duke of Lancaster, but as King; for if they had been holden of the
Duchy upon the escheat, they should be parcel of the Duchy again, without
help of that Statute. See the special Reservation; Reddendo Domino Regi, and
haeredibus suis, aut illi cui de jure reddi debet, etc. Now, when the King
grants the Seignory to the Lord Audley, it was in the Election of the
Ter-tenant, to whom he would pay the Rent, if it had been in the Case of a
common person; but it is otherwise in the Case of the King: As if A. holds of
two several Lords by owel Feoffment, and dies, his heir within age; the Lord
which first gets the Ward shall have him; but in the Case of the King it is
otherwise: Plowden, The King is not bound by the Statute of West. 3. But in
this Case, in the making of this Feoffment with this Tenend. and Reddend. the
Feoffee shall hold of the King as of his Duchy; for all grants of the King
savor of the person of the King; and then his Prerogative wrapped in the person,
shall guide the same: and see the Statute of West. 3. extends to all who make
Feoffments, Tenend. de Feoffatoribus; but the King is not Tenant to any one.
And if the King be seized of an Advowson in the right of his Duchy, and the
same becomes void, and the King presents to the same, he may repeal his
presentation: and he vouched diverse precedents of Patents made to many great
Lords, to hold of the Duchy, and also to hold of others: And the King by his
Dutchy-seal may give Lands in Mortmain. And he argued, That this Rent, although
newly created, yet in so much as it came, and accrued in respect of the Land
which was parcel of the Duchy, it should be accounted also parcel of the
Duchy; as if before the Statute of West. 3. A. seized of Lands in Fee, of the
part of his father makes a Feoffment in Fee, Tenend. by such services, etc. the
same Seignory shall go to the heirs of the part of the father, in lieu of which
the Seignory is come: Tenant in tail after the Statute of 32 H. 8. makes a
Lease for years, according to the said Act, rendering Rent to him and his heirs,
it shall be intended, heirs in tail. It was adjourned.

CXCVIII. Forster and Walker 's Case. Pasch. 26 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
IN an Ejectione firmae, by Foster against Walker, the Case was, 3 Cro. 106.
Shepherd's Touch-ston^ of Conve^ances, 416.
That Richard Meager was seized of a house in London: and 6 E. 6. he devised
the same to his Wife for life, the remainder to John his son in tail, the
remainder to the Master and Wardens of the Cordwaynors in London, and died; the
Wife entered and died, John died, The Master, Wardens and Commonalty of the
Cordwaynors entered, and leased the Plaintiff upon whom the heir general of the
Devisor did enter. The only question was, inasmuch as the Cordwaynors of
London are incorporated by the name of Master and Wardens and Commonalty of
Cordwaynors, If this devise made to them by the name of Master and Wardens of
the Cordwaynors of London be good or not? It was argued by Daniel, that the
Devise by the manner was good enough; and he insisted much upon the favor
which the Law gives to Wills, and to Legatees in the Devises and construction
of them, even in Devises and Grants to Corporations: and as to Grants to
Corporations, he cited the Case of the Dean and Chapter of Norwich: Decanus and
Capitulum sanctae and individuae Trinit. and they make a Lease, leaving out
these words [sanctae and individuae] and yet held the Lease was good,
notwithstanding that, for the words left out, are not words of substance of the
name, but for the beauty and ornament of it: But in the Case of Devise, if the
name be mistaken in matter of substance, yet if upon the Devise the intent of
the Devisor sufficiently appears, it is good enough: for the intent of the
Devisor shall guide the Devise, and therefore by Devise, the Fee-simple shall
pass without the word [Heirs.] And he said, that the opinion of Wray, chief
Justice, was in the Case of the Dean of Paul's: If I devise that my Executors
shall assign my Lands to J. S. the same, implicative, is a Devise of the Lands
themselves to my Executors; for otherwise they could not assign. So, if I will
and devise, That A. shall pay yearly out of my Manor of D. to J. S. 10 l. the
same is a good Devise of the Lands to A. So if in the Case at Bar this house
had been devised to the Cordwaynors by the name of the Society of Cordwaynors,
such Devise had been good enough: Cooper contrary; and he said, That the intent
of the Devisor ought to agree with the Law, otherwise the Judges are not to
regard it in point of Judgment; and he put the Case of 39 H. 6. 10. 1 Rolls 616.
A. devises his Lands, and afterward is disseised, and before any entry
dies; now, notwithstanding the intent of the Devisor, the Devise is void; and
he said, The defect of a Will in words, in making of an Estate shall be
supplied by intent, but the defect in words, in naming of the Devisor or
Devisee shall never be supplied, See 49 E. 3. 3. and 4. the Case of Whitavers.
And he cited a Case, 25 H. 8. A stranger of the Low Countries being made a
Denizen in England, returned into his Country, and dwelling there became sick;
and in making of his Will, he was advised by Council, that by Devise of all his
goods, his lands deviseable would pass, and therefore by such words he declared
his Will with the intention aforesaid; (scil.) to pass his Lands, and died, and
afterward the States of the Low Countries wrote unto King Henry the 8.
acquainting him with the intention of the Devisor, and also of the opinion of
their Laws there upon the said Will, and all in favor of the Devisee;
whereupon the King referred the consideration of the matter to Norwick, then
Lord chief Justice, who declared his opinion to the King to be, That by that
Devise, the Lands did not pass, notwithstanding the intent of the Devisor.

CXCIX. Crabdell 's Case. Pasch. 26 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
CRabdell was bound by Recognizance to his good behavior; upon which the Queen
brought a Scire facias, and surmised, that after the Recognizance acknowledged,
the said Crabdell was arrested and taken by the Constable for suspicion of
Felony, and of his own wrong escaped: It was objected on the part of Crabdell,
because it is not alleged by matter in fact, that a Felony was committed. But
the whole Court was of a contrary opinion; For it is not material, if the
Felony were committed or not; for if a Subject be arrested by a lawful
Officer, it is not lawful for him to escape; but he ought to stand to the Law,
and to answer unto the matter with which he is charged. And so Crabdell was
forced to answer.

CC. Basset and Prowe 's Case. Pasch. 26 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
IN Debt upon a Bond, the Case was, That Basset was bound with Prowe as his
surety, to one Preston, in a Bond of 500 l. and that was upon a corrupt and
usurious contract against the Statute; and Prowe was bound unto the Plaintiff
in a Bond as a counter-bond, to save the Plaintiff harmless from the said Bond
of 500 l. Basset is sued by Preston upon the said Bond, and so damnified; and
thereupon sued Prowe upon the counter-bond, 1 Cro. 588, 642, 643. 3 Len. 63.
Goldsb. 174.
who pleaded against Basset, the Statute of Usury, pretending that all
assurances depending upon such usurious contract, as void by the Statute; but
by the opinion of Wray, chief Justice, the same is no Plea, for the Statute is,
That all Bonds, collateral assurances made for the payment of Money lent upon
usury, shall be utterly void; But the Bond here upon which the Action is
brought, was not for the payment of the Money lent, but for the indemnity of
the surety.

CCI. The Vicountess Bindon 's Case. Pasch. 26 Eliz. In the Exchequer.
More 213. 1 Cro. 250, 251, 252.
THE Executors of Thomas, late Viscount Bindon, brought Detinue in the Exchequer
against the Widow of the said Viscount, and declared upon the detainer of
certain Jewels, The Defendant did justify the detainer of them as her
Parophornalia: And it was said by Manwood, chief Baron, That Parophorn. ought
to be allowed unto a Widow having regard unto her degree; and here the Husband
of the Defendant being a Viscount, 500 Marks is a good allowance for such
matter.

CCII. Offley and Johnson 's Case. Pasch. 26 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
More 136.
OFfley and Johnson were bound as sureties with one A. to B. who recovered
against Johnson in London, and had Execution against him; and now Johnson sued
Offley, to have of him contribution to the said Execution, ut uterque eorum
oneretur pro rata, according to the custom of London: Offley removed the cause
by privilege into the King's Bench, whereupon came Johnson, and prayed a
Procedendo; and because upon this matter no Action lies by the course of the
Common Law, but only by custom in such cities, The cause was remanded; Hob.
264. More 135. 3 Len. 148.
for otherwise the Plaintiff should be without remedy: See the Book of Entries,
160.

CCIII. Litchfield and Cage 's Case. Pasch. 26 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
IN an Ejectione firmae, the parties were at issue; 3 Len. 100.
and by the order of the Court, the Trial was stayed, and yet the Plaintiff
against the Order, did privily obtain a Nisi prius, of which, Gaudy, Justice,
being informed of it after the Term, awarded a Supersedeas unto the Justices of
Assise, before whom, etc. and yet notwithstanding that, the Enquest at the
instance of the Plaintiff was taken, and found for the Plaintiff; and all this
matter was showed to the Court in the King's Bench, and there examined and
proved, and it was ordered by the Court, that the Verdict should not be entered
of Record, nor any Judgment upon it: And so it was put in ure in a Case between
Vernon and Fowler. And then the Plaintiffs Council took exception to the
Supersedeas, because it was not subscribed with the hand of Gaudy, but, non
allocatur; for the Seal is sufficient.

CCIV. Scott 's Case. Pasch. 26 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
WIlliam Scott was indicted upon the Statute of 23 Eliz. of Recusants, by the
name of William Scott of Southwark, Gent. and upon that Indictment Judgment
given for the Queen; upon which Scott brought a Writ of Error, and assigned for
Error: That in the Indictment Scott is not named of any Parish, but generally
of Southwark; for within Southward, there are diverse Parishes, and by the said
Statute it is ordained that the penalties accruing by the said Statute ought to
be divided in three parts, whereof one part is to be applied to the relief of
the poor resident in the Parish where the offense was committed, and therefore
it ought to appear upon the Indictment of what Parish the party Indicted is, or
otherwise, Non potest constare Curiae, to which Parish the third part of the
Penalty does belong, so that full execution may be made according to the
Statute: But the whole Court was clear of opinion, That the Indictment is good
enough, notwithstanding that Exception; for all the penalty which accrues by
the said Statute, belongs first to the Queen; viz. a third part thereof to her
own use, another third part for the relief, ut supra, to be delivered by
Warrant by the Officers of the Receipt of the Exchequer. And afterward the
Inhabitants of the Parish in which the offense was committed, are to sue in the
Exchequer for their third part of the penalty, and surmise in their Bill, that
the offense was committed within their Parish; and Rule was entered accordingly.

CCV. Gerrard 's Case. Pasch. 26 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
3 Len. 98.
GErrard, Master of the Rolls, presented Chatterton, Bishop of Chester, to the
Church of Bangor; to which Church, one Chamber's also presented his Clerk, by
which several presentiments the said Church became Litigious: The Archbishop of
York being loci illius Ordinarius, awarded a Jure Patronatus, etc. depending
which, the Archbishop admitted the said Bishop; whereupon Chambers Libelled in
the Spiritual Court against the said Bishop, because the said Archbishop, Dicto
Episcopo plus aequo favore admisit dictum Episcopum, pendente the Jure
Patronatus, in which case, by the Law of the Church, the admittance is void;
For, Lite pendente, nihil movetur: and now came the said Bishop, and prayed
upon that matter a Prohibition, which was granted because that the right of the
Patronage came in debate, after which came the said Chambers, and prayed a
consultation, because he did not meddle with the right of the Patronage, but
only with the tortious admittance. To which it was said by the Court, That the
awarding of the Jure Patronatus, is not a thing of necessity, but at the will
of the Ordinary, and so for his better instruction; but if he will at his
peril, take notice of the right of the Patronage, he may admit which of them he
will, without a Jure Patronatus awarded: And it may be in this Case, that after
the Jure Patronatus awarded, and before any Verdict given upon it, the
Archbishop was satisfied of the right of the now Plaintiff in the Prohibition
to the Patronage, and thereupon admitted the Clerk, etc. and if he was deceived
to subject himself unto a Quare Impedit, whereof he had discharged himself, if
he had attended the Verdict in the Jure Patronatus: and by the clear opinion of
the Court, the Consultation was denied.

CCVI. Barker and Tailor 's Case. Mich. 29 and 30 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
THE Case was; That a woman, Tenant in tail, within the Statute of 11 H. 7.
accepted of a Fine, Sur Conusans de droit come ceo, etc. and by the same Fine,
rendered back the lands to the Conusor for 100 years. It was moved, If this
conveyance and disposition be within the penalty of the said Statute; for the
Statute speaks of Discontinuances, etc. And it was the clear opinion of the
whole Court, That it is within the Statute; for by such practice, the meaning
of the Statute might be defeated: 3 Co. 51.
and if such a render for 100 years should be good, by the same reason, it
might be for 1000 years, which is like mischievous, and as dangerous unto him
in the reddition, as a Discontinuance: And by Rhodes, Justice, It has been
adjudged, That if a woman, who has Title of Dower, before that she be endowed,
will enter, and levy a Fine, that the same is within the said Statute, and yet
she is not Tenant in Dower: See Dyer, 5. Ma. 140. Penycock's Case; and see now,
36 Eliz. Sir George Brown's Case adjudged accordingly.

CCVII. Morris and Webber 's Case. Trin. 29 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
IN an Ejectione firmae, by George Morris against Webber, alias Turnor, 5 Co.
98.
the Plaintiff declared upon a Lease by Humphrey Bury, etc. And upon Not
guilty, the Jury found this special matter: That Hen. Bury was seized, Et cepit
in uxorem quandam Willmottam Gifford. 4 Mariae. And afterward: 1 Eliz. she
Libelled in the Spiritual Court against the said Henry, in causa divortii de
nullitate matrimonii; and found upon the Libel, In haec verba, and all the
sentence upon it; viz. In Dei Nomine, Amen. Per depositiones and examinationes
Medicorum, and aliorum fide dignorum, and honestarum, and expertarum matronarum
comperimus and invenimus: Quod praedict. Henr. and Willmotta legit. aetatis and
plenae pubert. exist. per duos annos integros simul cohabitaverunt, and in uno
lecto concubuerunt, and licet dict. Willmotta operam liberis dare cupierit,
nunquam tamen per carnalem copulam cum dicto Henrico conjungi, aut ab illo
cognosci potuit, aut potest, idque propter vitium perpetuae frigiditatis and
naturae impotentiae generandi, Quae nulla medicorum opera curari pot, idque
praedict. Humphrid. saepius confessus est, se nunquam cum praedicta Willmotta
tanquam virum cum uxore conjunctum fuisse, aut conjungi potuisse. Igitur
invocato primitus Dei nomine; Matrimonium praedict. irritari, cessari
quatenuscunque de facto processit, cassum, irritum, nullumque in Lege, Juribus
juris omnino carere, and carere debere decernimus, and declaramus, ipsosque
quatenus sunt de facto matrimonialiter ad invicem conjuncti a vinculo
Matrimonii separamus, etc. Humphry made a Feoffment in Fee unto the use of
himself for life, and after to the use of the first, or eldest son of the body
of the said Henry in tail. Willmot married Carry, Henry took to wife Phillippam
Mountjoy scientem Matrimonii praedict. and definitivae sententiae praedict. and
durantibus ambobus Matrimoniis, tam inter dict. Carry and Willmotta, quam inter
dictos Henricum and Phillippam, dicta Phillippa exitum habuit per dict.
Henricum, Humphrey the Lessor, upon which Lease the Plaintiff declared,
Humphrey died: Henry entered, and leased to the Plaintiff. Shuttleworth,
Sergeant, argued for the Plaintiff, That this Divorce not reversed or undone by
appeal, or otherwise, should stand in force, and according to it the Law of the
Land should judge: See 47 E. 3. 17. Casu ultimo. Five manner of Divorces are
mentioned: 1 Causa professionis: 2 Praecontractus: 3 Consanguinitatis: 4
Affinitatis: 5 Frigiditatis; upon a Divorce, Causa professionis, the wife shall
be endowed, and the heir shall inherit, but in the other not. And the principal
Cause is reported by the Lord Dyer, 2 Eliz. 179. where Carry and Willmott
levying a Fine of the lands of Willmott, as husband and wife; and it was moved,
That such Fine ought not to be engrossed, because that now the Divorce is
avoided; for Henry in his second marriage has issue, therefore there is no
perpetua frigiditas, etc. but at the last it was engrossed, because the
sentence of the Divorce does continue in its force, and then Humphrey, born in
the second marriage, is the first son of Henry lawfully begotten, and so
capable of the use to him limited upon the Feoffment of Henry 22 E. 4 Fitz.
Consultation, 51. by Catesby: where my father and mother are divorced without
lawful cause, and afterward they marry themselves elsewhere, and die, the
said Divorce, as long as it is in force shall bind me in point of inheritance,
and I cannot have an Action as heir, etc. during the Divorce, is in force: For
the Divorce being a spiritual Judgment shall not be reformed but in the
spiritual Court; and therefore this sentence of Divorce, Causa perpetuae
frigiditatis, as long as it is in force not repealed or reversed, shall bind
all persons: But in some cases, such a Divorce shall not disable the party to
sue; as if a man brings an Action, De muliere abducta cum bonis viri, where
after the trespass committed, the husband and wife are divorced, yet the Action
lies, for this Action is not in the right, but in possession only, and in
such Action, Never accoupled in legal Matrimony, is not any plea, but the
Defendant ought to answer to the possession, Not his wife; for although they
are divorced, yet the Action lies; and if Judgment is given in the spiritual
Courts, the Courts of the King shall receive and admit of them, as long as they
are in their force. The Abbat of Fountain's Case, 9 H. 6. 32. the custom of
the Abbey was, That at every vacation of the Abbat, the Monks should proceed to
a new Election, and that he who should be chosen by the greater number of the
Monks, should be Abbat: and the Case was, That upon such avoidance, one A. was
elected by the greater number of voices, (scil.) 22 Monks. And B. was chosen by
the lesser number, (scil.) 20 Monks; but notwithstanding that, B. entered and
carried himself as Abbat, by the Institution of the Visitor, and made a Deed by
consent of the Covent, and died; it was holden, That the said Deed should bind
the House: for here is a spiritual Act, (scil.) the Institution of the Visitor,
which being in force, shall bind us, and our Law, 34 H. 6. 38. upon contention
betwixt two Patrons, claiming the presentment unto a Church, the Bishop
awarded, jure Patronatus, which found for one of them, upon which the Bishop
admitted the Clerk of him for whom it was found by the jure Patronatus; and
afterward, the other party brought a Quare impedit, and it was found for him:
Now this judicial Act done by the Bishop, shall excuse the Bishop from any
disturbance. Fenner, Sergeant, contrary, Although that the sentence of this
Divorce be set down in peremptory and final terms, as matrimonium cassum,
irritum, nullum, yet our Law shall respect the cause and ground of it, (scil.)
Perpetua frigiditas, etc. and now it appears by the success of the second
marriage, (scil.) the issue Humphrey, that the cause and matter upon which the
Divorce was grounded, etc. was an offense of the time, and not of nature for he
is now recovered; and in as much as the Church has erred in the sentence of
this divorce, which error is now apparent; this Court shall adjudge according
to the truth of the matter, as the spiritual Law ought to have adjudged, and
not as they have adjudged: And he cited Fox's Case, 16 Eliz. The said Fox being
Parson of a Church, was deprived in the Parliament time for incontinency, and
by the same Parliament, all incontinencies were pardoned; Now upon the matter,
we are to adjudge this deprivation merely void without any other spiritual act.
At another day, the Case was argued by Walmsley Sergeant, That the sentence
definitive of the spiritual Court, in cause of divorce, causa frigiditatis,
should stand; and he argued much in what manner the Law of the Church, and the
Law of the Law should determine marriage: and he argued that the right of
marriage, was determinable by the spiritual Law; and he said, that such
sentences ought to be passed by our Law: and taken notice of; and therefore he
who pleads a Divorce, ought to show before what Judge the Divorce is had, to
the intent the Judges may know to what persons they shall write for the trial
of it; and it appears in our books, That our Law takes upon it the Conusance of
the competency of an Ecclesiastical Judge; which see, 2 E. 4. 15 and 16. The
Judges of the temporal Courts of the King, have determined, That the Pope is
not a competent Judge within this Realm: and it is true, the Common Law does
yield unto the Law of the Church the trial and determination of the right of
marriage; but the trial of the possession of the marriage retains to it self:
As if an Infant marries within the age of consent, and afterward at full age
of consent, does disagree, now the common Law shall determine that the same is
not any marriage: So 11 H. 4. 167. The temporal Court shall adjudge upon
marriage in fact and in possession, but if the party will plead, 1 Len. 53,
181. 3 Len. 129.
That they were never accoupled in lawful matrimony, a Writ shall go unto the
Bishop to certify the same; and in trespass, De muliere abducta cum bonis
viri, and in Cui in vita, etc. this issue, not his Wife, is to be tried by the
temporal Court of the King: for the right of the marriage is not in question,
but it is sufficient, if it were a marriage in fact and in possession: See 44
Ass. 12. and 13. and see 21 H. 7. 39. The temporal Court shall determine of the
marriage, if void or voidable: A Deacon marries a Wife, that marriage is not
void, so of a Priest; but if a man marries a Nun, the marriage is void: But in
our Case, here is a sentence definitive, in a cause of Divorce, in which Case
it does not belong to us to examine the cause, but be the Divorce right or
wrong, it shall stand, etc. 10 E. 3. Bar. 296. Nisi sit quoad thor. tantum, vel
causa castitatis: And see by Shelley, 28 H. 8. 13. If they of the spiritual
Court give Judgment in any cause, be it true or false, until it be defeated or
reversed, it shall bind all the world: See 22 E. 4. Fitz. Consultation 5.
Corbet's Case, 4 H. 7. 14. by Oxenbridge, 18 E. 4. 30. by Chock; and 9 E. 4.
24. He who pleads a Divorce, ought to show before what Judge the Divorce was
had; but that is not to examine the matter, but to know to what person the
Court shall write for the trial of it. It is true, that in case of Resignation
and Deprivation, but in case of Divorce, the cause thereof ought to be showed;
for some Divorces dissolve the marriage utterly, and do bastardize the issue,
and disable the Wife to be endowed; and some Divorces do not dissolve it: as
that which is but a thoro and mensa, 11 H. 7. 27. But generally, in spiritual
Judgments, the causes of them do not fall in Judgment in any temporal Court: 3
H. 4. 34. An Excommengement pleaded without showing of any cause; and although
in our Case, the cause of this Divorce being for Frigidity, Sublata jam causa
toleretur effectus; and now, the party in whom such frigidity is assigned, is
become whole, as appears by his success in his second marriage, having now
issue; yet we ought not to regard that, for then we should resort unto the
cause of the Divorce, with which we are not to meddle. Gaudy, Sergeant, to the
contrary: And first he confessed, that the determination of the right of
marriage does belong unto the spiritual Court; But as unto the Case in
question, (scil.) the Divorce in causa frigiditatis, it appears by 44 Ass.
13. by Knivet, That the party may receive his Nature, in which case he may have
again his Wife, and there need not in such case a new marriage; And because
that here it appears, That Bury has recovered his Nature forasmuch as he
has now issue by another Wife, the Divorce is become of no force, which see
Dyer 2 Eliz. 179. where the Case now at the Bar was in debate; Where a Woman
inheretrix took a Husband, from whom she was divorced, causa frigiditatis, the
Wife afterward was married to Carle, by whom she had issue, and gave all her
Inheritance to her said second Husband: and the first Husband also took a Wife,
of whom he had issue; in that Case, the opinion of the Doctors was, That the
first Husband and his Wife should be compelled to cohabite together as Man and
Wife, because Ecclesia decepta fuit in priore judicio. Anderson, That which we
have argued is very clear; (scil.) That the Ecclesiastical Court has authority
to determine the right of marriage; But the point of this Case is, if this
Judgment of Divorce being given for cause of Frigidity which was adjudged to be
perpetual; and now by matter subsequent it appears that the party is not
frigidus, but he has recovered his Nature, if the Divorce shall be accounted
ipso facto void, without other circumstance of the spiritual Law: and although
their sentence be definitive in terms, yet upon this special matter, ex post
facto, if the force thereof shall fail. And I have conferred with many learned
in the Canon Law, which are of such opinion; and of that opinion was Doctor
Dale; and therefore it is convenient, that your Clients, each of them do retain
one who is learned in the said Law, who can inform us what their Law is. And
Rhodes, Justice, agreed in this Case to what the Lord Anderson said, and put
the Case which was in the King's Bench, 16 Eliz. Foxe's Case, which is before
vouched, and it was adjourned. And after, at another day, by the appointment of
the Justices, the Case was argued in Court by the Civilians and Canonists:
Goldingham, on the part of the Plaintiff, and Steward on the part of the
Defendant: And first it was said on the Plaintiff's part, That by the sentence,
all the matter, transit in rem judicatam, and therefore we shall not resort to
the matter censured, the sentence being in its force. And as to that, it was
answered by Steward, That transit in rem judicatam, but not in case of
marriage, and in the like cases, where vertitur periculum animae; for in such
cases the sentences are subject to the success; as if after it appears,
Ecclesiam fuisse deceptam per errorem licet probabilem (ut illi loquuntur) for
then periculum animae vertitur, for then they should continue their Adultery,
unless the sentence of the Church be annulled. Goldingham, It transit in rem
judicatam, non quoad instantiam, non quoad causam: so that as long as the
sentence is in force, it is causa judicata; yet the cause is subject to the
censure of the Church. Steward, in our Case here, all our Books are,
Matrimonium sit nullum: Goldingham, The words are also in such, reparabitur
matrimonium, in which it is implied, that some solemnity of the holy Church is
requisite in such reparation of marriage. Steward, where a man is divorced,
causa frigiditatis, it is prohibited by such sentence that he shall not marry
again, and if he does marry, he is holden in our Law perjured, and an
Adulterer; and to that purpose he cited diverse authorities of the Canon Law.
Goldingham, This sentence is not properly a Divorce, for here was never
properly a marriage: as in Cases de praecontract. Divorce upon that cannot be
said properly a Divorce, but a sentence of the Church upon the error of the
parties: and he put many degrees of impositions in such cases, Perpetua
frigiditas, and naturalis impotentia generandi; frigiditas ex malefacio: i. e.
quoad unam aliquam personam, and many others, quae possunt matrimonium contrah,
and dirimere contractum: and the sentences which in our Law, are contra jus
constitutionis: as where there is not any Citation, Declaration, or that the
sentence is of another thing than that which is contained in the Libell, in
such cases the sentence is utterly void; but sentences there given, contra jus
partis, are voidable only; See Panormit. fraternitatis: Si notorie apparet
sententiam Divortii fuisse injustam, libet revocari, non obstante quod non
fuerit appellat. Sententia cessat cum notorie constat de injustitia: Et in
Institutionibus juris. Can. 189. Si vir causetur arctitudinem in muliere, per
quam non est habilis ad coeundum, and ex eo separatur, Si mulier postea aliquem
invenierit qui seras reserare possit, ad primum conjugium redire compellandi
sunt: vid. corpus Canon. 357. conjugium confirmatur officio, sed postquam
confirmatur officio non licet viro uxorem dimittere, nec uxori a viro discedere
nisi causa fornicationis, verum antequam confirmatur impossibilitas officii
solvit vinculum conjugii: And Panorm. fratern. propter Arctitudinem mulieris,
si apparet quod praeter divinum miraculum absque periculo corporis habilis
reddi non possit, seperentur: matrimonium tamen redintegrabitur si post
appareat Ecclesiam fuisse deceptam: Per matronarum visum datum fuit intelligi
quod nunquam potuit esse matter, and eam ob causam divortium inter eos celebrat.
fuit, mulier virum cepit, qui seras reseravit, sententiam divortii per errorem
licet probabilem novimus esse prolatam, cum patet ex post facto quod ipsa
cognoscibilis erat illi cujus semen commiscetur, and ideo inter ipsam and
primum virum matrimonium extitisse, Quare inter eam and secundum conjugem
matrimonium non esse, etc. Eosque praecipimus ab invicem seperari. Vid.
secundum partem Summae Sylvestrianae. Si Ecclesia sit decepta in hoc quod ille
in quo erat impedimentum carnalem copulam cum alia perfecerit, redintegrabitur
praecedens matrimonium, and dirimetur secundum, quamvis de sententia Ecclesiae
factam. Et alibi: Si Ecclesia se deceptam invenierit ex hoc quod impedimentum
quod judicavit perpetuum, apparet temporale, redintegrabitur primum
matrimonium, etc. And afterward the Case was adjourned.

Afterward, that is to say, Mich. 30 and 31 Eliz. the Case was moved again,
and Judgment was prayed for the Plaintiff; and then the Lord Anderson, Ex
assensu sociorum, commanded that Judgment should be entered for the Plaintiff;
and showed unto the Council of both parties, That about the Certificate, which
the four Doctors have showed unto us, of their opinions upon the point, we our
selves have conferred with the said Doctors, who have given us their answers,
That the said sentence of Divorce being yet in force, not reversed is
peremptory, and not subject to the success: and although in the examinations
and depositions taken in the Ecclesiastical Court, no matter appears, upon
which such peremptory Divorce might be granted, yet it might be, as we are
informed by the said Doctors, that upon the examination of Physicians and
Matrons, sufficient matter did appear to the said Ecclesiastical Judges, (which
for modesty sake ought not to be entered of Record) and that appears within
the sentence; i. Habito sermon cum matronis and medicis, which speech not
entered of Record (causa qua supra) might be the cause that induced the
Ecclesiastical Judges to give sentence for the Divorce, notwithstanding that
the matter within the Record be too general to prove, naturalem frigiditatem
generandi, but rather maleficium; and afterward Judgment was given for the
Plaintiff, and so the sentence is bound by the Divorce, as long as the sentence
does continue in force: See this Case in Coke, 5 Part. Where upon a Writ of
Error brought, 41 Eliz. the Judgment was affirmed.

CCVIII. Gittinson and Tyrrel 's Case. Trin. 29 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
GIttinson brought an Action of Debt against Tyrrel, Warden of the Fleet, by a
Bill of Privilege, but he would not appear; and the Court was in great doubt,
what remedy the Plaintiff has to compel the Defendant to appear. For he
cannot be fore-judged the Court, because he has an Estate of Inheritance in
the said Office; And afterward it was surmised to the Court, That the said
Tyrrel had made a Lease of his said Office to another for three years, and then
the Court was clear of opinion, That the said Tyrrel should not have the
Privilege; for now during the Lease, he is not Officer, but the Lessee.

CCIX. Harris and the Lord Mountjoy 's Case. Trin. 29 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
HArris affirmed a plaint of Debt in the Guildhall in London, Dalton's Off. of
Sher. 105.
against the Lord Mountjoy, and made an Attachment of the goods of the said
Lord in the hands of Sir Drew Drewrie; The Lord removed the matter into the
Common Pleas, by a Writ of Privilege; If now the said Lord shall find Bail was
the question, because that he is a Lord of the Parliament, etc. And the opinion
of the whole Court was, that he should find Bail, for that is the course of the
Court, whosoever is party. And by Anderson, admitting the Law to be, That the
Body of a Lord of Parliament shall not be taken in Execution (which I do not
believe) yet notwithstanding that Bail shall be found in such case: For the
condition of Bail does consist upon two points: First, that he render his Body
to Prison in Execution, if Judgment be given against him. Secondly, or to pay
the condemnation: And therefore if the Body of a Baron of Parliament is not
subject to Execution, yet the Bail shall stand for the second; i. e. to pay the
condemnation; and all the Justices were of clear opinion, That for Execution
upon a Statute-staple; Merchant, upon the Statute of Acton Burnel, or upon the
Statute of 23 H. 8. The Body of a Baron of Parliament shall be taken in
Execution; for by these Statutes, such persons were not exempted.

CCX. Trin. 29 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
NOTE, It was said, That the division of a great Meadow into many parcels, by
making of Ditches, is not waste; for the Meadow may be the better for it; and
it is for the profit and ease of the occupiers of it: Hob. 234.
And by Windham and Rhodes, Justices, If a Termor converteth a Meadow into a
Hop-garden, the same is not waste, for it is employed to a greater profit, and
it may be a Meadow again: Periam, Justice, Although it be a greater profit, yet
it is also with greater labor and charges; And the conversion of a Meadow into
an Orchard is waste, although it may be to the greater profit of the occupier.

CCXI. Mich. 29 and 30 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
IN a Replevin, the Defendant avowed for damage feasant, and upon issue joined,
it was found for the avowant, and damages assessed; and now issued a Retorno
habendo, upon which the Sheriff did retorn, Averia elongata, whereupon a
Withernam was awarded, and now came the Plaintiff and tendered in Court the
damages assessed by the Jury, and prayed stay of the Withernam, and threw the
Moneys into Court; but the whole Court was clear against it, for in this Case
the Plaintiff ought to pay a Fine, because he had essoigned the Cattle, which
is a contempt; wherefore the Court assessed a Fine of three shillings four
pence upon the Plaintiff, and then the Plaintiff had his Prayer.

CCXII. Shrewsbury and the Inhabitants of the Hundred of Ashton. Pasch. 29
Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
AN Action upon the Statute of Hue and Cry, was brought by Shrewsbury against
the Inhabitants of the Hundred, of the three Hundreds de Ashton in the County
of Bucks: It was moved on the part of the Defendants, That if upon such Hue and
Cry the Inhabitants do their endeavors, as much as in them is, to follow and
take the Malefactors, and yet they cannot apprehend them, that in reason they
ought not to be charged by the said Statute. But the whole Court was strongly
against it: And by Anderson, The Inhabitants of the Hundred, in which the
Robbery was done, are bound to apprehend the Felons, or satisfy the party
robbed. And the party robbed is not bound to give notice to the Inhabitants,
nor to direct them which way the Felons took their flight, but the Inhabitants
are bound to follow the Felons without any such instruction, and after the
Enquest was taken, and gave a Verdict in this manner: That whereas the
Plaintiff had declared, That the Robbery was done in the Parish of D. in the
Hundred aforesaid, the Jury found, that the place where the Robbery was done,
is a Lane within the said Hundred; and that the one side of the said Lane is
within the Parish of S. and the other side within the said Parish of D. and
that the Robbery was done in the side of the said Lane, which was in the Parish
of S. and prayed the opinion of the Court upon that matter. And the Court was
clear of opinion, That notwithstanding that Exception, the Plaintiff should
have Judgment; for here is the right Hundred which ought to be charged; and the
mistaking of the Parish is not to any purpose. But then it was moved on the
part of the Plaintiff; that for as much as the Verdict aforesaid was special,
by reason of the doubt which the Jurors conceived upon the mistaking of the
Parish, in the Plaintiff's Declaration, That the charges of the Jurors should
be indifferently born by both parties, as the course is in cases of special
Verdicts; but the whole Court was clear against that, and commanded that the
Plaintiff alone should pay the said charges, for the matter here found
specially is not any doubt; but out of all question, for it is clear that the
Action is well brought, for as much as the Hundred is charged, the mistaking of
the Parish shall not hurt.

CCXIII. Hellyard 's Case. Trin. 29 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
A Habeas Corpus was to the Warden of the Fleet, to bring the body of one
Hellyard, who returned the Writ, That the said Hellyard was committed to the
Fleet, Per mandatum Francisci Walsingham, Militis unius principalium
Secretariorum Dominae Reginae, etc. And because the Warden did not show in his
Retorn for what cause the said Hellyard was committed, the Court gave him day
to amend his Retorn, or otherwise the prisoner should be delivered.

CCXIV. Mich. 30 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
UPon a Recovery in a Writ of Entry, Sur disseisin of two acres of land, Habere
facias seisinam was awarded, The Sheriff as to one acre returned Habere feci;
as to the other tarde. And the Retorn was showed to the Court; and all the
Justices but Periam held, that the Sheriff should be amerced for that Retorn,
contrary and repugnant in it self; But by Periam, it may be, That the acre of
which no seisin is had, was so far distant from the other acre, whereof seisin
was, that the Sheriff, for want of time, could not make execution of both,
being so remote the one from the other. To which it was answered, That if the
truth of the Case was such, then might the Sheriff make execution in one acre
in the name of both acres. And if upon a Capias ad satisfaciend. against two,
the Sheriff does retorn as to one, Cepi, and to the other tarde, he shall be
amerced, for those several Retorns cannot stand together.

CCXV. Edgar and Crispe 's Case. Mich. 30 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
Edgar recovered against Crispe in Debt, and afterward released to Crispe, and
afterward, notwithstanding the release, Edgar sued for a Capias ad
satisfaciend. against Crispe, and pursued the same until Crispe was outlawed:
and it was the opinion of Anderson, chief Justice, That Crispe should have an
Audita Querela, notwithstanding the Outlawry; and if the Audita Querela passes
with Crispe, the Outlawry also should be avoided.

CCXVI. Frankwell 's Case. Trin. 30 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
IN Trespass for carrying away of Tithes, the Case was; That Frankwell, Parson
of the Church of D. was accused, in forma Juris, before the high Commissioners,
who pleaded, that the same cause and crime was prosecuted against him in the
Arches, and prayed that he might not be doubly vexed for one and the same
offense; and notwithstanding that he was deprived, and another Clerk presented
to the same Church by the Patron, and was admitted, instituted and inducted;
and upon entry, brought Trespass against the former Incumbent. And note, the
manner of the Deprivation, as it was found by Verdict: That the Bishop of
London, with the assent of the other Commissioners, gave sentence of
Deprivation against him; and it was showed, That the high Commissioners had not
power by 1 Eliz. to give sentence of any thing which is dependant in another
Court: For it was not the intent of the said Act, to take away the jurisdiction
of the other Ecclesiastical Courts; for then it is in vain to have such Courts:
It was also moved, because the pleading is, That the Bishop of London, ex
assensu of the other Commissioners, gave sentence, the same is a void sentence;
for it ought to be the sentence of all the Commissioners, for they shall have
equal authority: And to this purpose, he cited the Case, 29 H. 8. Dyer 40.
where a Lease is made of Lands, whereof the Dean and Chapter are seized, in
common, per nomen Decani ex assensu, and consensu totius Capitul. but it was
holden a void Lease; for the Chapter ought to be party to such Lease; contrary,
where the Lease is made of the Land which is the proper and peculiar
Inheritance of the Dean: But that Exception was not allowed; for the form of
Entries in all cases, has always been so. Coke, posito, That the Commissioners
ought not to proceed in this Case, yet, because they have so done, the same
ought not to be examined here; for the Judges here, ought to think that this
Deprivation was duly ma^e; for, cuique credend. in sua art, which Wrey
granted: And it was said by him, That the Court was created for two causes: 1
For the expedition of the causes depending in the spiritual Courts: Co. 4.
Inst. 326, 327.
2 To give to such Judges authority to punish offenses in more high degrees;
for before they could not but only excommunicate, but now they may imprison;
and if the party had Libelled against him in the spiritual Court of the Arches,
it is no reason but that the party for his own expedition, and for to procure
due punishment against the offender, may send the cause into the high Court;
and after Judgment was given according to the Deprivation: And afterward Error
was brought thereupon, and the Error assigned upon the matter in Law, whether
the said Deprivation was lawful or not? Coke, I remember the reason of the
Judgment given by the Court was, That admitting that the sentence of the high
Commissioners was erroneous; yet it shall bind until it be reversed by appeal,
Fenner, If the party grieved might be restored by appeal, I agree, that such
sentence should bind until it were reversed; but in our Case, no appeal lies
from the high Commissioners, wherefore we ought to be helped here; or otherwise
we are without remedy. Coke, If the Delegates give sentence, no appeal lies,
and yet the party grieved shall not be helped here. Fenner, 16 Eliz. One Fox
was deprived the last day of the Parliament for incontinency, which offense was
pardoned by the same Parliament, and that sentence of Deprivation was holden
void. Anderson, In your Case, the offense it self was pardoned and discharged:
Also it is against a general Statute, of which every one ought to take notice.
Periam, When the Case was in the Common Pleas, it was moved; If of a sentence
given by the high Commissioners, an Appeal did lie; and it was certified by
Clark, Doctor of the civil Law, that it did; for the Commissioners are as the
Delegates of the Queen: And as by the Canon Law one might appeal from the
Delegates of the Pope, unto the person of the Pope; so now, one may appeal from
the high Commissioners, to the person of the Queen: See for that, 24 H. 8. 12.
Another Error was assigned, because that the Commission gave authority to the
Commissioners, to adjudge upon confession of the party, or upon the witnesses;
but here none of these two ways is found by the Verdict; but sentence was given
upon his Plea, That he was sued in the Arches for the same cause, and so they
have not pursued their authority: for the Act is, That such Commissioners shall
have authority by virtue of the said Act, and of the said Letters Patents to
exercise, etc. And they are directed by the Letters Patents, that they shall
proceed upon due proof had by confession or true witness, to give sentence.
Periam, Although they have not observed the due form prescribed unto them by
the Letters Patents; yet such sentence is not void. Anderson, If the party
appears and will not answer, it shall be taken pro confesso, and he shall be
condemned.

CCXVII. Sir John Sand 's and Packsal Brocas 's Case. Trin. 38 Eliz. In the
Common Pleas.
SIR John Sands brought an Action upon the Case against Packsal Brocas, upon a
Trover of goods and household stuff; The Defendant pleaded as to parcel, that
they were fixed to his Freehold in S. in Hampshire, Absque hoc, that he found
them in other manner; as to the part, that the Plaintiff gave them to him at D.
in Hampshire, and as to the other part, he pleaded, Not guilty: For the first
part, the Plaintiff caused it to be entered, Non vult ulterius prosequi, and
took issue upon the two other; and it was found for the Plaintiff by several
Iuries, in several Counties, and damages and costs assessed by the Iuries: and
now the Defendant brought Error, and assigned Error i. because the Plaintiff as
to the first had entered, Non vult ulterius prosequi, which is a Nonsuit, and
Nonsuit in part, is Nonsuit in all. Anderson, It is a Question, if this be a
Nonsuit? The entry is, Querens venit, and gratis concessit, that as to the
goods mentioned in the first Pleas, Non vultulterius prosequi; Ideo,
consideratum est quod nihil de iisdem versus the Defendant fiat, est ille and
pleg. in miseric. and the Defendant eat inde sine die, Periam, A Nonsuit is,
when the Plaintiff is demanded and does not appear; but when he comes into
Court, and says, Quod non vult ulterius prosequi, the same is a Retraxit:
Nelson, Prothonotary, Nonsuit is upon default; but here the Plaintiff appears,
and this is the usual form of entry of a Retraxit. Another Error was assigned,
because both Iuries have assessed costs, and Judgment given according; whereas
the last Verdict ought to do it. And where two Iuries are to try the issue, the
form of the entry after the first Verdict is, Cesset executio, until the other
issue be tried: Vid. 21 H. 6. 51. 36 H. 6. 13. Anderson, Several issues cannot
sever the costs, although they may the damages, for it is but one suit;
therefore but one costs; and that is the reason that Judgment shall not be
given until the last issue be tried, because that costs shall be but once
assessed, which was granted by the whole Court: And by Periam, The first Jury
may assess costs for the whole suit, Quod fuit concessum. Coke, Here are
several Judgments for the costs; and although it be void for the later issue,
yet it is good for the first. Periam, How shall it appear unto us which Verdict
was the first, and which the last? although that the one Verdict be entered of
Record before the other, the same does not make that it was first given;
wherefore, the whole shall be reversed.

CCXVIII. Mich. 31 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
2 Len. 224.
A Man, 30 Eliz. made a Feoffment in Fee to the use of himself for life, and
afterward to the use of his first son, and his heirs; The father and the
Feoffees before issue, for money, by Deed, give, grant, and enfeoff J. S. and
his heirs, who has not notice of the use; The Tenant for life has issue, and
dies, the issue enters: Glanvile, The use limited to the first son is
destroyed; for without regress of the Feoffees, it cannot rise; and that the
same is gone by their Livery: See Plowden's Com. 340. And also he vouched the
case of the Earl of Kent, whereby the release of the surviving Feoffee, a
sleeping use was destroyed, and could not afterward be revived. Harris, The
use may rise without entry of the Feoffees: And he put a difference between
uses created before the Statute and uses created after; for in the first case,
they ought to enter; and if they be disabled by any Act, as in the case betwixt
Gascoign and the Earl of Kent, they shall never rise, but in the later case,
all the authority and confidence is by the Statute out of the Feoffees, and the
uses contingent shall rise without aid of the Feoffees by the operation of the
Law; for the land is bound to the uses, and charged with them: As upon a
Recovery in a Warrantia Chartae, the land of the Defendant is charged, pro loco
and tempore; and according to the common experience in Conveyances for the
payment of the Debts of the King: as in the case betwixt Breden and Dennis. The
Debtor of the King makes a Feoffment in Fee to the use of himself and his
heirs, until he makes default of payment of such a sum unto the King at such a
day, and upon default, to the use of the King and his heirs. Cooper, There
needs no entry of the Feoffees; and he put the difference put before by Harris,
betwixt an use created before and an use created after the Statute: And now the
Feoffees have not any power to revive or destroy such cases, but are only as
instruments to convey the uses; for the use is created upon the Livery, and is
transferred by the Statute, if the person to whom the use is limited be capable
thereof at the time of the limitation thereof; but if not, the Law shall
preserve the same, and it cannot by any means be prevented. And he put the case
of Bro. Feoff. to Uses, 50. 30 H. 8. And there is a great difference betwixt an
Use limited before the Statute and after the Statute; for now, after the
Statute, the Feoffees have not any seisin, whereof they may make a Feoffment:
And he put the case between Cheney and Oxenbridge; Cheney leased to Oxenbridge
for 60 years, and afterward enfeoffed Oxenbridge to the use of the said Cheney
and his wife for their lives, with diverse remainders over; and it was adjudged
in the Court of Wards, that by the Feoffment the term was not extinct: And he
put the case of the Lord Paget in the King's Bench adjudged. A Feoffment was
made unto the use of the Feoffor for life, the remainder to him whom the
Feoffor should name at his death, in Fee; the Feoffor and the Feoffees for good
consideration, levied a Fine unto a stranger, and afterward the Feoffor named
one and died, the party named by the Feoffor shall have the land,
notwithstanding the Fine. Beamount, The contingent use here, is utterly
destroyed by the Feoffment aforesaid; and it appears by the preamble of the
Act of 27 H. 8. That the makers of the Act did not favor Uses, but their
intent was utterly to extirpate Uses: And if contingent Uses which are not, nor
cannot be excused by the Statute should stand in force, The mischief would be,
That no purchasor should be secured and safe in his purchase, but should always
be in danger of a new born Use, not known before; and he grounded his farther
argument upon the reason of Manwood and Dyer, Where a man makes a Feoffment in
Fee to the use of himself and his Wife which shall be, and afterward he and
the Feoffees, and those in remainder, make a Feoffment to diverse new Feoffees,
and to new Uses; and afterward he takes another Wife, and dies: It was the
opinion of the said two Judges, That by that Feoffment, ut supra, the
contingent Uses are destroyed: For when the Estate which the Feoffees accept is
taken away, which was the root and foundation of the Uses which are the
branches and fruit of the body of the said Tree, it necessarily follows, That
they be also taken away; and because the Feoffees by their Livery, are barred
to enter to recontinue the Estate which should yield such Uses, they also are
gone and extinguished. Yelverton was of opinion, that notwithstanding the said
Feoffment, that the Use should rise in his due time according to the limitation
of it. It was adjourned.

CCXIX. The Lord North 's Case. Trin. 30 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
THE Queen granted unto the Lord North and his heirs, the Fines, pro licentia
concordandi, and one would not pay him the Fine; for which cause, the Lord
North brought an Action upon the Case against him, and declared upon
Indebitatus assumpsit, etc. Godfrey moved this matter to the Court, to know
their opinion, if such Action would lie for the matter or not. Fenner, For a
Fine in a Court Baron, or Court Leet, debt lies; but as he conceived, 1 Leon.
249, 250. 3 Len. 56. 234.
here this Action does not lie, for it is a real Fine, and there is no contract
betwixt the parties; but the same is given by the Law: and some were of
opinion, that debt lies for a relief, for there is a contract by Fealty. Gaudy
conceived, That the Action does well lie; for it is not any casual profit and
therefore debt lies for it, although it be an inheritance: And see Dyer 28 H.
8. 24. The heir shall have an Action of Debt upon a Nomine poenae reserved by
his Ancestour. Wray, I do not see that he has any other remedy, and therefore
I am of opinion that this Action will lie.

CCXX. Mrs. Paschall 's Case. Trin. 31 Eliz. In the Exchequer.
MIstress Paschall was bound with sureties, for her appearance before the high
Commissioners, that she should not depart without license under the hands of
three of them; and she pleaded the general Pardon at the last Parliament, in
which there is an Exception of all Bonds and Recognizances, except only such
Bonds and Recognizances as are for appearance: And Atkinson argued, That she
ought to be discharged, by the Exception; for although the departure without
license be not specially named, yet it is within the sense; for the not
departure without license, is no other thing, than to continue her appearance.
Popham contrary: For, The Non departure without license, was set down in the
Condition to this purpose, That she should not go into the Country to be
corrupted there, or to corrupt other, and receive Seminaries, etc. therefore it
is another thing than appearance: Between Hoar and Hare, the Case was, One was
bound to make his appearance at such a day, and in the mean time thrice every
Month to repair unto such a Preacher to be better informed in Religion,
although the Non appearance was pardoned; yet the other point, i. the resorting
to the Preacher, is to be answered. Atkinson, There the resorting to the
Preacher is collateral, and a several point from the appearance: But in the
Case at Bar, the not departure is pursuant to the appearance. And the opinion
of all the Barons was, That the pardon did not extend to the same.

CCXXI. Trin. 31 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
1 Len. 205.
AN Action was brought against an Executor, who pleaded, That he refused the
Executorship, upon which the parties were at issue. The Bishop certified, Quod
non recusavit, whereas in truth, he had refused before the Commissary of the
Bishop. Fenner, Sergeant, moved to have the advice of the Court upon this
matter, and argued, That the Court ought to write to the Commissary, which was
denied by the Court, for he is not the Officer to this Court as to that
purpose, but the Bishop himself is our Officer: and the party cannot have an
Averment against the Certificate of the Bishop, no more than against the Retorn
of the Sheriff: And the Court also held, That the only remedy for the
Defendant, was by an Action upon the Case against the Bishop for his false
Certificate: But it was moved, That the issue joined upon the refusal, ought to
be tried by the Country, and not by the Certificate of the Bishop; and such
was the opinion of Windham and Walmsley: Periam, Where the issue is, that the
Executor refused before such a day, or after, there the issue shall be tried by
the Country; contrary, Where the issue is upon the refusal generally, for the
refusal is before him as Judge, as also resignation is.

CCXXII. Giles 's Case. Mich. 28 and 29 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
A Writ of Error was brought in the King's Bench, to reverse a Judgment given
in an Action upon the Case, in the Court of Common Pleas; where the Writ
brought against the Defendant there in that Case, was, Quare exaltavit stagnum
per quod pratum of the Plaintiff was inundatum: The Defendant in the Action
there pleaded, Not guilty, and the Jury found, That the Defendant Erexit
stagnum; and they said, That if the Court shall judge, That Erectio and
Exaltatio be all one, then they find, that the Defendant is guilty; and
afterward Judgment was given in the said Court of Common Pleas for the
Plaintiff: Whereupon this Writ of Error is brought. And Glanvile, Sergeant, who
argued for the Plaintiff, in the Writ of Error alleged the general Error; viz.
That Judgment was given for the Plaintiff, where it ought to be found for the
Defendant: And he said, That Erigere stagnum est de novo facere, exaltare, is
erectum majoris altitudinis facere, Deexaltare est ad pristinam altitudinem
adducere: Prosternere stagnum, est penitus tollere: And in every Action upon
the Case, such apt and precise words are to be in the Writ, according as his
Case requires, unto the end that Judgment may in such Action be given to the
Plaintiff according to his plaint, and his damages, In 7 E. 3. 56. In Assise of
Nusans, Quare exaltavit stagnum ad nocumentum liberi tenementi sui: The
Defendant pleaded, that he had not inhanced it after it was levied; and there
it was said by Drew, Sergeant, That there is not any other Writ in the
Chancery, but Quare exaltavit stagnum. But that was denied by Herle: For that
he said that the Plaintiff might have a Writ out of the Chancery, Quare levavit
stagnum: And there by that Book it is assigned, That Levare stagnum, and
exaltare stagnum do differ: and therefore he said, that in this Case, the Writ
should abate for the using of one word for another, 8 E. 3. 21. Fitz. Nusans 5.
by Chauntrel, In a Writ of Nusans, Quare levavit, if it be found that he levied
it to the Nusans, etc. the whole shall be destroyed; but in a Writ Quare
exaltavit, nothing shall be pulled down, if it be found for the Plaintiff, but
that which is enhaunced only: So 8 Ass. 9. Br. Nusans 17. the same Case is
put. And see 16 E. 3. Fitz. Nusans, 11. If the Nusans be found in any other
form than the Plaintiff has declared, he shall not recover: And in 48 E. 3.
27. the Writ was, Quare divertit cursum aquae, etc. and the Plaintiff showed,
that the Defendant had set piles, and such other things in the water, by reason
whereof the course of the water was straitened; and because the Plaintiff might
have had a Writ, Quare coarctavit cursum aquae, the Writ was abated: Another
Exception was taken, viz. That the Assise of Nusans ought to be brought against
the Tenant of the Freehold, and therefore it would not lie in this Case; it not
being showed that the Defendant was Tenant of the soil: Vid. 33 H. 6. 26. by
Moile, If a way be straightened and impaired, an Action upon the Case lies; but
if it be altogether stopped up, then an Assise must be brought; But there it is
said by Prisoit, That if the stopping up of the way be done by the Tenant of
the Land, then an Assise lies; if by a stranger, then an Action upon the Case:
But for common Nusances no Action lies, but they ought to be presented in the
Court Leet or Turn, and there redressed: and such was the opinion of the whole
Court in this Case. Then it was moved, 6 Co. 25.
That one of the Plaintiffs in the Writ of Error had released; and the Question
was, whether that release should bar his companion? to which nothing was said:
At another day the Case was moved again, and Drew, Sergeant, said, That
Exaltare and Erigere, are all one; but all the Justices were against that; for
that Erigere is de novo facere, and Exaltare is in majorem altitudinem
attollere, and afterward judgment was affirmed.

CCXXIII. Freeman and Drew 's Case. Trin. 30 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
IN an Action upon the Case by Freeman against Drew, The Defendant pleaded,
That after the Assumpsit whereof the Plaintiff had declared, There was an
agreement betwixt them, That the Defendant and two others should be bound in a
Bond to the Plaintiff for the sum promised; and that they entered Bond
accordingly: The Plaintiff confessed the agreement, and that the Bond was made
according to the agreement, and that the parties bound did deliver the same as
their Deed, cuidam ignoto, to the Plaintiff; The Defendant said, That they did
deliver the Deed to one J. S. and gave notice thereof unto the servant of the
Plaintiff, and that they are now ready to deliver it to the Plaintiff, upon
which there was a Demurrer: Godfrey argued, That the said Plea of the agreement
specially executed, ut supra, was good, as in a Case lately adjudged between
Alford and Leigh, 1 Cro. 54. Ante 110.
Tr. 29 Eliz. Where the Arbitrament was made, That Leigh should release unto
Alford before the Feast Petri ad vincula, and before the said Feast, Leigh
sealed and delivered such a release unto the use of the said Alford, and after
the Feast, he tendered it to Alford, but he refused it, and brought Debt upon
the Bond for performance of the Arbitrament; and it was adjudged, That the
Action would not lie; for if he do recover upon that Action, he also should
take advantage of the release. Coke, In Alford's Case, a tender was to the
Plaintiff himself, which is not in this Case; and although that it was after
the Feast, yet it was before the suit commenced, and also in our Case the
tender is depending the suit. Gaudy, If the Plaintiff should recover in this
Action, he might plead the recovery in Bar of the suit upon the Obligation.
Wray, Let the Plaintiff release the Bond, and take Judgment here, which was
done accordingly.

CCXXIV. Summers and Sir Richard Buckley 's Case. 32 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
IN the Case betwixt Summers and Sir Rich, Buckley; Where the Plaintiff prayed a
Prohibition to the Court of Admiralty; The Case was, That the Defendant sued in
the Admiral Court for the moiety of a Ship and prize taken by them upon Letters
of Reprizal; 2 Inst. 205.
for the Civil Law is, That if two Ships meet at Sea together, although they do
not go forth as consorts, and the one Ship in the presence of the other takes
a Ship with goods in it, the other Ship which was present shall have the
moiety, 2 Roll. 205.
or one half of the Ship and goods taken; for although it did not take the
Ship, yet the presence thereof there at the time of the taking, was a terror
to the other Ship which was taken, Sine quo, the other Ship could not be so
easily taken: And now the Plaintiff for the Prohibition did surmise, That after
they were arrived in England, 2 Roll. 171.
they did agree amongst themselves, That the Plaintiff should have four parts
of the said Ship and goods so taken, and the other five parts: And the
Plaintiff said, that he had pleaded this matter in the Court of Admiralty, and
they would not allow the Plea, and thereupon he prayed a Prohibition, which was
granted; but afterward it was moved on the other side, That the said Court of
Admiralty would allow the Plea, and there try it; and thereupon a conditional
consultation was granted by the Court; so that that Court allow that Plea, and
try it there: And it was said, If the Court there should not allow the Plea,
that they should incur the offense of contempt of this Court, and the other
party should have a Prohibition.

CCXXV. Sir Richard Buckley 's Case. Mich. 32 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
SIR Richard Buckley was indicted upon the Statute of Praemunire of 13 and 15
R. 2. and the effect was, That whereas one Griffeth Matthew had murdered one
Robert Footman at Beaumarris; and whereas one Owen Wood prosecuted the said
Griffeth Matthew for the said murder; The said Griffeth Matthew, Praemissorum
non ignarus, sed intendens, the said murder, a Curia Dominae Reginae ad aliud
examen, etc. pro quodam supposito contemptu Curiae Admiralitatis traxit in
placitum: the said Owen Wood, coram Julio Caesar. in the Court of Admiralty
holden at Islington, supposing the said murder to be done upon the high Sea,
and thereupon caused him to be arrested, and being under arrest, to enter Bond
unto the Lord Admiral, that he should not prosecute the said murder against
the said Griffeth Matthew, nor examine any witnesses concerning the said
murder, and that the said Sir Richard Buckley was abettor and procurator of
the said Griff. Matthew therein. To this Indictment many Exceptions were taken
by Coke: In placitum pro quodam contemptu, and does not show the contempt in
certain; for it is too general, and so not good: See 18 Ass. for the stealing
of certain Sheep, without showing what Sheep they were, is not a good
Indictment. And here he does not say; concerning the said murder, or
concerning the premises: 2 Although that the matter of the Indictment be true;
yet the Stat. of Praemunire does not extend to it, for the Statute inflicts a
punishment as well upon the Judge, (scil.) the Admiral, as upon the party: See
10 H. 4. 164. If one Libelleth in the Court of Admiralty for a thing done upon
the Land, and it appears upon the Libel, that the thing was done upon the
Land, and they, notwithstanding that hold Plea of it; A Praemunire lies upon
it. But if the same does not appear within the Libel, then it is not within the
Statute; but a Prohibition shall only issue: So in the case of Tithes; If the
Parson sueth for Tithes severed from the nine parts, and that appears in the
Libel, the same suit is within the Statute of Praemunire; and that was Cardinal
Woolsey's Case: 3 It is alleged, That Sir Richard Buckley procured him to do
it, but it is not showed any place where the procurement was had: And that was
resolved in the Case of the Lord Paget, 1 Len. 5.
and the Bishop of Coventrey and Lichfield: where the Bishop was indicted, That
he commanded J. S. to enter into the Close of the Lord Paget, and to do a
trespass there, and because the place of the commandment was not set forth in
the Indictment, the Bishop was discharged. M. 25 and 26 Eliz. Another matter
was objected, because that the words are, That the said Sir Richard Buckley did
abet and procure, in hac part; without showing what thing. As to this last
Objection, The Court was of opinion, that the words (in hac part) did refer to
the whole offense contained in the Indictment: Wray, It is hard, That the
matter of the Indictment should be within the Statute of Praemunire; for by the
suit it is supposed, That the offense was done upon the sea; and the Admiral
has jurisdiction to punish murders committed upon the sea, so in some degree
the Admiral has Conusance to enquire of Murder; but if they hold plea of any
thing of which in no degree they have Conusance, it is otherwise. And as to the
place where the commandment was made, the Court was clear of opinion, that it
ought to be showed.

CCXXVI. Hooper 's Case. Mich. 32 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
JOhn Hooper, 1 Cro. 198.
alias Bartholomew of D. etc. was indicted upon the Statute of 8 H. 6. Of
forcible Entry, and Exception was taken to the Indictment in default of
addition of the place, etc. For the addition is here after the alias dict. and
so there is no addition; and therefore the party was discharged, and it was
holden in this Case, That Uxor is a good addition; and where the husband and
wife are indicted, and the husband be indicted of such a place, although the
wife has no addition of place, yet the same is good enough; but Ive said, That
in that case there needs not any place.

CCXXVII. Mich. 32 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
A. Was Indicted for not repairing of a Bridge lying in such a highway, which
A. is bound to repair by reason of his land adjoining; and the Indictment was,
That the Bridge was so ruinous, Ita quod Ligei Dominae Reginae per eam transire
non possunt, and concluded, ad nocumentum eorund. etc. and that was challenged,
because it does not say, Ad nocumentum omnium subditorum: for otherwise it may
be intended a private way, of which a man cannot be indicted, but the party
grieved shall have his Action upon the Case: But the Exception was not allowed,
but the Indictment is good enough; For the words of the Indictment are, Sic
quod Ligei Dominae Reginae illuc pertransire non possunt; i. e. all the Liege
people and Subjects of the Queen; and then, ad nocument. eorund. amounts to as
much as, ad commune nocumentum, etc. and for that cause the Indictment was
holden good enough.

CCXXVIII. Ashpernon 's Case. Mich. 32 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
ONE Ashpernon was Indicted at the Sessions, in the County of Sussex, for an
unlawful assembly and entry into the Close of one A. called, The Parsonage
land, before two Justices of Peace there, and exception was taken to it,
because it is not set down in the Indictment, that one of the Justices was of
the Quorum, but that the exception was disallowed; for the Indictment is
sufficient, if none of them be of the Quorum, for they may enquire, but not
determine: Another exception was, because the contents of the Close is not set
down in the Indictment; (scil.) the number of the acres, nor if it be arrable,
pasture, or Meadow; but that was disallowed also; for this is but an Indictment
of trespass, contrary, it is upon an Indictment upon the Statute of 8 H. 6.
Postea 186.
for there the party grieved is to have restitution, but so he is not here:
Another exception was taken, because that in the Indictment no time is set down
when the trespass was done, but only of the assembly; but that was disallowed
also; for both shall be taken to be done together all at one time.

CCXXIX. Leveret and Townsend 's Case. Mich. 32 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
1 Cro. 198. 3 Len. 263.
IN an Action upon the Case, for disturbing him of his common; The Plaintiff
declared, That he was seized in Fee of a Message and certain land, and that
he, and all those whose Estate, etc. have common of pasture in 16 acres of land
called D. from the time that the corn was reaped, until it be sowed again; and
also common of pasture in lands, called R. omni tempore anni, as appendant to
the said Message and land: and that the Defendant had plowed the said lands,
and so disturbed him of his common, and found for the Plaintiff, and it was
moved in stay of Judgment, That here it appears, that the Plaintiff was
seized in Fee, and so he ought to have an Assize, and not an action upon the
Case; but the exception was disallowed per Curiam, See 2 H. 4. 11. 8 Eliz.
Dyer, 250. 11 H. 2. Action upon the Case, 36.

CCXXX. Hoar and Wridlesworth 's Case. Mich. 32. Eliz. In the King's Bench.
Hoar brought an Action of trespass against Wridlesworth, Quare clausum and
domum suam fregit. The Defendant pleaded, and put the Plaintiff to a new
assignment: i. a House called a Stable, a Barn, and another house called a
Carthouse and Garnier, and that was assigned for Error, for that Assignment is
not warranted by the Declaration. Gaudy, The same is good enough; for Domus in
the Declaration, contains all things contained in the new Assignment. But if
the Declaration had been of a Close, and the new Assignment of a Barn, it had
not been good. Wray, Domus est nomen collectivum, and contains many buildings,
as Barns, Stables, etc. and so was the opinion of the whole Court.

CCXXXI. Savacre 's Case. Mich. 32 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
A Writ of Error, Ante 4.
was brought by Savacre and the Bishop of Gloucester, M. 31 and 32 Eliz. upon a
Judgment given in a Quare Impedit, for the Queen. And Error assigned: 1. An
Attachment was awarded against the Defendant in the Quare Impedit; retornable
Quind. Pasch. at which Savacre appeared, and cast an Essoin; and
notwithstanding that, a Distringas was awarded against them both, returned,
Crast. Trin. and the awarding the Distringas was erroneous; for the Essoin was
as an appearance for to save, etc. and therefore against him no Distringas
ought to have been awarded: And upon alleging of Diminution, the Record of the
Essoin was certified; for the same did not appear upon the Plea Roll. 2 The
Record is, Ipsi in Misericord. and so both of the Defendants are amerced for
the default of appearance, Quind. Pasch. whereas Savacre was then Essoined, and
so no cause of amerciment of him. Coke, The original Writ was here sued, Mic.
26 Eliz. retornable Quind. Hillar. and then both the Defendants made default,
for which an Attachment was awarded retornable, 15 Pas. and then Savacre
appeared, and Judgment was given, Quod ipsi sint in Misericord. in which point
the Error is assigned: But I conceive, that it is not Error; for upon the
Attachment, the parties ought to put in sureties for their appearance: and the
said sureties took upon them, that the Defendants, and each of them should
appear, and if they, or one of them makes default, the sureties should be
amerced; and so here, this Judgment, Ideo ipsi in Misericord. shall refer to
the sureties, not to the parties: for the Defendants shall not be amerced
until the end of the suit, and but once only in one action, which see, Book
of Entries, 464. where there was but one Defendant; and therefore, If the
amerciment shall refer to the Defendant, then it should be, Ideo ipse, not
ipsi, etc. and that is the reason, wherefore neither the Queen nor an Infant
shall find pledges, for no amerciament shall be upon their default, therefore
in vain for them to find pledges, etc. And if the pledges be amerced where they
ought not to be amerced by the Law, yet the Defendant shall not have Error upon
it, for he is not the party grieved by that amerciament. And upon this reason
it is, That in a Scire facias against the bail, if erroneous Judgment be given
against him, the Defendant in the Action shall not have a Writ of Error, The
awarding of the Distress upon the Roll against both, where the one of them
only makes default, is not error, especially as this case is; for though that
one of them was Essoined until the day aforesaid, yet at the said day they
make default, and so the Distress is well awarded against him; and although
that the Writ were ill awarded; yet when they appear, Cr. Trinit. at the day of
the retorn of the Distress, all mean defaults in the Process are saved, and so
the misawarding of the Distress, by appearance afterward is supplied: As 39 E.
3. 7. The Law requires that in an action grounded upon the Statute of
Praemunire, 27 E. 3. the Defendant has warning by two Months; yet if the
Defendant having not had such warning appears, the Process is well enough: So
9 E. 4. 18. Where, upon any Process the Defendant appears, although the day
of appearance be not lawful, yet the parties shall be put to answer: and see
many cases there to the same purpose: and such was the opinion of the Court in
the principal Case. And as to the second Error, that the Judgment, Ideo ipsi in
Miseric. shall be referred to the sureties only, and not unto the party; and
that the Defendant shall be but once amerced in one action, the same is true,
that he shall be but once amerced for one default; but if many defaults be, the
Defendant shall be severally amerced for every default: And it should be
unreasonable that the sureties should be amerced, and that the Defendant who is
as principal should go free: See the Book of Entries, 193. Ipsi and plegii sui
in Misericordia, etc.

CCXXXII. Farnam 's Case. Mich. 32 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
FArnam, Schoolmaster, and others, were Indicted upon the Statute of 8 H. 6.
for entering, In domum Rectoriae de Putney, ac in cert. terras eidem domui part.
jacen. in Putney, etc. Exception was taken to the Indictment, because it
recited the two parts of the Statute: 1 Expulsion and Disseisin with Force: 2
Holding out; and there is not any offense in it contained as to one of them;
(scil.) Holding out; and although it was not necessary to recite the Statute,
yet the party meddles with it, and does not apply it to the special matter, the
same is naught: See for that the Case between Strange and Partridge, Plow. Com.
2 The entry is supposed, In domum and certas terras eidem domui pertinen.
jacen. in Putney; which is uncertain, as to the lands, and it is naught for the
house also; for it is not showed in what Town the house is, for this clause, ac
certas-terras eidem domui pertin. jacen. in Putney, is a distinct clause by it
self, and refers only to the lands, and does not extend to the house: As to
the first exception, is was disallowed; for it is not like unto Partridge's
Case, for there the Statute is recited, which needs not, and therefore, being
misrecited, made the Indictment insufficient; but here the Statute is well
recited, and therefore as unto that matter, the Indictment is sufficient: As to
the second exception, the Justices were of opinion, That the Indictment in that
respect, Antea 184.
was too general and uncertain: The third exception was not allowed; for the
latter words, i. e. in Putney, do refer to the whole, and extend as well unto
the house as unto the lands: But as to these words, Lands to the said house
belonging. See the Case between Partridge and Croker, 7 E. 6. 85. where it is
good enough, because that the number of the acres is set uncertain. And it was
holden by the Court, That a Schoolmaster is a good addition, for it is a
mystery, as a Scrivener; and afterward the Indictment for the house only was
holden good.

CCXXXIII. Gray a Bencher of the Temple 's Case. Mich. 32 Eliz. In the Chancery.
GRay, a Bencher of the Temple's Case, was this; It was found by Office, That
one H. was seized in Fee of certain lands called Drayners, and Codred, alias
Codreth, in the County of Hertford, in his Demesne as of Fee, and thereof
enfeoffed certain persons, unto the use of himself, and Anne Capel, with whom
he afterward intermarried, and of the heirs of their two bodies begotten, and
of such Estate died seized; and farther it was found, that the said H. was also
seized of other Lands, in Barmesden in his Demesne as of Fee, and therefore
died seized; and now came Gray into the Chancery, and showed that the said H.
was seized of the said Land, called Drayners, in his Demesne as of Fee, and
thereof enfeoffed certain persons unto the use of himself, and the said Anne
Capel, for the term of their lives, and afterward, by his Indenture, dated the
23. of December. and enrolled, bargained and sold the Reversion thereof to the
said Gray, etc. by force whereof, etc. Absque hoc, that he was seized in tail,
and absque hoc, that he thereof died seized in his Demesne, as of Fee-tail, as
it is found by the said Office: and for the Land in Barmesden, he said, that
the Lady Judde was seized thereof for the term of her life, the Reversion to
the said H. in Fee, who granted to him the said Reversion in Fee, etc. absque
hoc, that he died seized in his Demesne as of Fee, etc. And upon that, the
Queen's Attorney joined issue, and the Venire facias issued, De Cottred and
Barmesden; and the Jury found, That H. did not make the Feoffment to the use of
himself and Anne his Wife in tail; and farther found for Gray in all, etc. And
it was objected here, That the same is not a good and lawful trial: For the
Land is alleged to be in Codrett, and the Venire facias is of Codred, etc. And
although the Venire facias be well awarded, as unto Barmesden, yet being naught
in part, it is naught in all, which was granted by the whole Court; And then a
new Venire facias shall issue forth for the whole. Another Objection was,
because he pleads that the Lady Judde was seized of that Land for the term of
her life, in which Case Gray, who is in Reversion, ought not to be admitted to
this Traverse, because that Tenant for life, for any thing that is pleaded to
the contrary, is yet alive; and it is clear, that none shall be put to his
Traverse, but the party grieved; and here he in the Reversion upon an Estate
for life, cannot be restored to the possession, and by consequence shall not
have Traverse: See for that, 6 H. 7. 15. and 37. Ass. 11. etc. 2. The seisin in
tail ought to be traversed, and not the descent, or dying seized; for if they
were seized and disseised, and so died, the Queen shall have the Ward. Coke,
contrary, For Codred and Cottered, idem sonant, etc. And although that it be
found by Office, that H. was seized of Lands in Codred, alias Codreth, yet the
Defendant supplies the said matter; for he says thus as unto the Land in
Codred praedicta; which words import that the said Land was known by the one
name or the other; for this word praedicta, is as an Averment: which see 33 H.
8. Br. Averm. 42. And so here, this word praedicta is an Averment, that
Cottered and Codred are one: And if so, then the Venire facias is well awarded.
The Statute of 18 H. 6. gives Traverse to those who find themselves grieved by
such Offices, or which are put out of their Lands or Tenements; and we are
within the words of it, for upon the whole matter, we are out of possession, as
it was ruled in the Case of one Stukely in the Court of Wards the last Term. If
it be found by Office, That A. died seized of my Manor, and that he held the
said Manor of the Queen: Now I am out of possession; and for that cause, the
bargain and sale of Dorrel to Sir Francis Walsingham was holden void by the
whole Court: And 4 H. 6. 12. Traverse is given in lieu of Petition, but he in
the reversion may have Petition, therefore he shall be also admitted to
Traverse: and this Case may be resembled to the Case of 2 E. 3. 23. where a
Praecipe was brought against Tenant for life, and he in the Reversion for life
prayed to be received: It was said by Thorp, That is not within the Case of the
Statute, for he is Tenant only in the Remainder, and it is possible that
neither shall have any thing; and the Statute speaks only of Reversion: and
yet it was awarded, That he should be received, otherwise great prejudice would
follow. And here we are at prejudice; for now, by reason of this Office, we
cannot have our Action of Waste: Also here we need not to Traverse the dying
seized in tail, but it is sufficient to Traverse the gift in tail; for if there
be not a gift in tail it is not possible that he should die seized in tail,
which see 2 E. 4. 15. by Laicon. Gaudy, Justice, conceived, that the trial is
not good; for the Venire facias is not from the place where the Land is; and
this word (praedicta) does not amount to an Averment; and the Case cited before
is but the opinion of Brook. Wray said, That as to the first exception, that it
was good enough, for both the names, idem sonant; and as to the Office, by that
the Queen has gained possession; so as he who traverseth cannot have an Action
of Waste: and so he is prejudiced by the Office, etc.

CCXXXIV. Perchall 's Case. Mich. 32 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
PErchall was Indicted upon the Statute of 5 E. 6. cap. 4. for drawing of his
Dagger in the Church, against J. S. without saying, That he drawed it to the
intent to stick the Plaintiff, and therefore the Indictment was holden void as
to the Statute; and it was moved, If it should not be a good Indictment for the
assault, so as he might be fined for it? and by Sands, Clerk of the Crown, and
the whole Court, The Indictment is void for the whole; for the conclusion of
the Indictment is, contra formam Statuti, and there the Jury cannot enquire at
the Common Law.

CCXXXV. Mead and Cheney 's Case. Mich. 32 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
MEad brought an Action of Debt upon a Bond against Cheney, Executor of one
Skipwith, and recovered; and upon a Fieri facias, the Sheriff did retorn
Devastavit: and it was moved to have an Elegit, and the Justices would advise
of it: and afterward, at another day, a Precedent was showed to the Court of
17 Eliz. and thereupon the Elegit was granted.

CCXXXVI. Tompson and Trafford 's Case. Trin. 32 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
Rot. 910.
Poph. 8, 9.
IN an Ejectione firmae, the Case was, That the Warden and Fellows of New
College in Oxford, 8 Eliz. leased a Mansion house in the Borough of Southwark,
to one Standish, for 21 years, and afterward, 25 October. 21 Eliz. they demised
the same Mansion house to the said Standish for 21 years, to commence the
Michaelmas after: And the Stat. of 14 Eliz. cap. 11. and 18 Eliz. cap. 11. were
also found: And if this second Lease shall be said a Lease in Reversion, and so
be void by the Statute of 14 Eliz. was the Question. Foster moved, That it is a
Lease in Reversion; for the first Lease does continue until Michaelmas; and so
was the opinion of the Justices of Assise at the trial. Towse contrary: For
when Standish accepts the second Lease, the same is presently a surrender of
the former Lease; for he gives power unto the Lessor for to contract for the
house presently; and to that purpose he cited Corbet's Case, 8 Eliz. Coke, It
is a surrender presently, for you cannot apportion the Term. It was adjourned.

CCXXXVII. Wood and Avery 's Case. Mich. 32 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
DEBT upon a Bond by Wood against Avery; the Condition was, That where the
Plaintiff had demised to the Defendant for term of years, two Messuages, etc.
If the Defendant at all times, during the term, shall maintain, sustain and
repair the said two Messuages with good and sufficient reparations, that then,
etc. And the Defendant pleaded, That he had performed the Conditions in all,
but as to one Kitchen, which was so ruinous at the time of the Demise, that he
could not maintain or repair, and therefore he took it down, and rebuilt it
again, in so short a time as he could possible, in the same place, so large,
and so sufficient in breadth, length and height as the other Kitchen was; and
that the said Kitchen all times after the re-edifying of it, he had sustained
and maintained, and well repaired, and demanded Judgment, etc. upon which Plea
the Plaintiff did demurr in Law; and by the Court, the Plea were a good Plea if
it were in an Action of Waste, but here where he has by his own Act tied
himself to an inconvenience, he ought at his peril to provide for it: And here
it was said, That if the Condition be impossible the Bond is single: contrary,
where a man is charged by an Act in Law.

CCXXXVIII. Bostwick and Bostwick 's Case. Mich. 32 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
DOrothy Bostwick brought Dower against Bostwick an Infant, Ante 59.
and the Case was, That the Husband of the Demandant was seized of certain
Lands holden by Knight's-service of M. C. and by his last Will, devised two
parts of the Premises to his Executors, during the nonage of his heir, and
died, his heir within age; after whose death M. C. entered into the third part,
descended as Guardian in Knight's-service, and the Executors into the other two
parts, upon which the Demandant brought one Writ of Dower against the Guardian,
to be endowed of the third part; and another Writ of Dower against the heir
within age, in whom the Freehold of the two parts was; The heir appearing by
Attorney, pleaded to issue, which was found for the Demandant; but the Judgment
was afterward reversed, because the heir, being within age, did not appear by
Guardian but by Attorney; for which cause she again brought a Writ of Dower
against the heir, and the Sheriff did retorn him summoned, but the heir made
default; for which cause the Court was moved in the behalf of the Demandant, to
have the aid of the Court in this Case: for if upon default of the Tenant, a
Grand Cape should issue forth, and so a Recovery by default should follow; the
same would be Error: which see 6 H. 8. Br. Liver. Defaul. 50. And therefore it
was prayed, that some person be appointed Guardian to the heir, who may appear
and plead for him, for otherwise the Demandant is at great mischief; for the
Guardian now will not suffer the heir to appear in person: And if the Widow now
Demandant should stay for her Dower until the heir should come of full age, it
would be a great mischief: But by Walmesley, Periam and Windham, We cannot
appoint a Guardian to the heir for his appearance here, unless the heir be here
in person in Court before us; and he was appointed to be brought in person into
Court.

CCXXXIX. Sir Anthony Denny 's Case. Mich. 32 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
SIR Anthony Denny, seized in Fee of the Manor of Chessam, extending into
Chessam, and in the Town of Hertford, and also of other Lands in Hertford, by
his last Will, devised the Manor of Chessam to Henry Denny his son and heir in
tail; and his Lands in Hertford, to Edward Denny his younger son, etc. It was
holden by Walmsley, Periam and Windham, (absent. Anderson) That the younger son
should have that part of the Manor of Chessam, which lies in the Town of
Hertford. Another point in the Case was, That upon the death of Sir Anthony,
and Office was found without any mention of this Devise; for which cause, the
Queen seized, and leased all the Lands so devised to a stranger, during the
minority of the heir; The heir comes of full age, and has Livery of the whole,
and without any express entry, leaseth the Lands for years, rendering Rent; the
Lessee enters, and pays the Rent to the heir, the heir dies, the Lessee
assigns over his term, and the Rent is yearly paid to the right heir of Sir
Anthony: And how Edward Denny entered, and per Curiam his entry is lawful; for
if the heir enters in this Case, and many descents follow; yet the Devisee may
enter at any time, for his entry does not make any abatement or wrong, but may
well stand with the Devise; for if the Devise be waved, or the Devise does
defer the execution of the Devisee; 1 Inst. 111. a. 240. b. 3 Cro. 145. Ow. 86,
87.
it is reason that the heir enter and take the profits, until the Devisee
enters: But if a stranger abateth after the death of the Devisor, and dies
seized, the same shall take away the descent.

CCXL. The Case of the Town of Leicester for Toll. Trin. 28 Eliz. In the
King's Bench.
2 Inst.
AN Action of Trespass, Tam pro Domina Regina, quam pro seipso; and showed, That
the Town of Leicester is an ancient Town, and ancient Demesne, and the
Inhabitants there have used to be discharged of Toll; and that the Queen by her
Letters Patents, gave command to all Bailiffs, Sheriffs, Mayors, etc. That
those of Leicester should be discharged of Toll; and notwithstanding that, That
the Defendant took Toll, etc. Exception was taken, because that the suit was
prosecuted, Tam pro Domina Regina, quam pro seipso: whereas the party grieved
was only to have the information. See the Case, 49 E. 36. Where the Writ is,
ad respondend. tam pro nobis, quam, etc. and no exception is taken to it:
Another exception, The Plaintiff declares, That Leicester is an ancient Town,
and ancient Demesne, and does not show that it is parcel of a Manor: See 20 E.
3. Ancient Demes. 25. such exception is taken, but after, the Defendant pleads,
That all such Towns, whereof the Land in question is parcel, is ancient
Demesne; and such plea was holden good: See 30 E. 3. 12. parcel of a Manor,
which is ancient Demesne; and the Plaintiff replied, Absque hoc, that it is
parcel of the Manor: Another exception, That Lands holden in Socage only, and
no other ought to be discharged of Toll; and here it is not showed in the
Declaration, that the place where, etc. is holden in Socage, To which it was
answered, That the same needs not to be set down in the Declaration; for that
is implied in these words, Ancient Demesne. for otherwise it cannot be but
Socage Land only, and of no other Tenure: A fourth Exception, The Letters
Patents here showed in discharge, are of no value; for the King by his Letters
Patents cannot disinherit any one, Erg. nor discharge one of Toll which is a
kind of disinheritance; To which it was said, That the Plaintiff does not
declare of any Grant, but of an usage or custom, for those of ancient Demesne;
and farther, has commanded by the said Letters Patents, that such customs and
usages should hold place; and upon the custom, and the contempt, this Action
is grounded: A fifth exception, because the Plaintiff has not showed, that the
Toll whereof the Plaintiff has counted, was concerning things for provision
for their houses, manurance of their lands, etc. 7 H. 4. 111. In an Action upon
the Case for not paying of Toll, The Defendant said, That he held certain lands
of R. Lord of the Manor of H. which Manor is ancient Demesne, of which Manor all
the Tenants have been free, to sell or buy beasts or other things, for the
manurance of their lands, and maintenance of their houses, without paying Toll
in any Market or Fair, etc. And so justifies, that he came to the same Market,
and bought certain beasts, as the Plaintiff had declared, and that some of them
he used about his manurance of his lands, and some of them he put into pasture
to make them fat, and more fit to be sold, and afterward, he sold them at such
a Fair, etc. and the opinion of the Court was with the Defendant: And by
Godfrey and Coke, Such Tenants shall be discharged of Toll, not only for
buying of things which concern their sustenance, provision, and manurance of
their lands, but also for all things bought, as common merchandises: 28 Ass.
ult. by Thorp, Green and Seton, of all things bought by any for his own use,
they shall be quit of Toll: and then, If the privilege of Tenants in ancient
Demesne, shall not be quit of Toll, but for things bought for their sustenance,
provision and manurance of their lands, they have no more favor than ordinary
Subjects: See 19 H. 6.66. Some are of opinion, That such Tenants shall not pay
Toll for things sold and bought, coming upon their lands, and touching their
sustenance: See F. N. B. 228. D. such Tenants are discharged of Toll for all
things by them sold and bought, by way of merchandise; as also of things of
necessity, as sustenance: And see Crook, in the cases of Itiner. 138. he
conceives, that such Tenants for merchandises shall pay Toll as other
merchants; but see the Writ of F. N. B. 228. the words are De bonis, and rebus
suis, And Coke said, That he had found the reason wherefore such Tenants should
be quit of Toll throughout the Realm, in an ancient Reading, viz. That all the
lands in the hands of Edw. the Confessor and Will. the Conqueror set down in the
Book of Doomsday were ancient Demesne, and so called Terrae Regis, and they were
to provide victuals for the Kings Garrisons, for then they were troublsome
times; and for those causes, and because they made provisions for others, they
had many privileges, amongst which this one; Ut quietius aratra sua exercerent,
and terram excolerent: The Lord himself, in ancient Demesne shall not have such
privilege, for his Seignory is pleadable at the Common Law: Vid. F. N. B. 228.
B. And he said, That the Plaintiff ought to allege, that his lands are parcel
of such a Manor; for there cannot be ancient Demesne, if there be not a Court
and Suitors, etc. And he granted, that such a Town might be ancient Demesne of
the Crown, but yet they shall not have the privileges and liberties which the
Tenants in ancient Demesne have. Towns were before Manors: London has the name
of ancient Demesne, and yet they have not such liberties, nor the lands in it
pleadable by Writ of right Close. 7 H. 6. 31, 32. Shute, Justice, was of
opinion, That an Inhabitant within ancient Demesne, although he be not Tenant
shall have the privileges: See for that, F. N. B. 228. B. Tenants at will in
ancient Demesne shall be discharged of Toll, as well as Tenants of the Freehold
for life, or for years, 37 H. 6. 27. by Moile. London is ancient Demesne; for
they prescribe, that a Villein who has there dwelt, etc. shall not be taken
from thence by Capias, or Attachment, Billing. London is not in the Book of
Doomsday. Moile, They make their Protestation in a Writ of Right Patent.
Littleton, That is used in diverse places, and at this day in Exeter. And by
Clench, If a Tenant in ancient Demesne levyeth a Fine of his lands, then he
shall not have the privilege, until the Fine be reversed, Quod fuit concessum:
If the Lord of a Manor in ancient Demesne, purchases all the Tenancies, the
whole privilege is gone, which Coke denied. The Case was adjorned.

CCXLI. Lennard 's Case. Trin. 28 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
2 Roll. 787. 3 Len. 128.
IN the Case of Lennard, Custos Brevium, who was Plaintiff in an Action of
Trespass for breaking of his Close; The Defendant pleaded, That William Heydon
was seized of the lands, and enfeoffed him: And upon Ne enfeoffa pas, the
parties were at issue; and it was found by special Verdict, That the said
William Heydon was seized, and leased the Lands to the Defendant for years; and
afterward he made a Deed of Feoffment to the same Lessee of the same Lands in
Fee, by the words of Dedi and concessi, with a Letter of Attorney within the
said Deed, to make Livery to the Lessee; and the Deed of Feoffment was
delivered to J. to deliver the same to the said Lessee, who delivered the same
accordingly: The Lessee delivered the same to the Attorney named in the Deed,
who made Livery accordingly: And it was moved by the Council of the Plaintiff,
That upon all this matter, here is not any Feoffment: And by Walmesly,
Sergeant, This Deed so delivered took its effect presently as a confirmation;
and then the Livery and Seisin comes too late; for as soon as the said Deed was
delivered to the Lessee for years, the Law gave to it, its operation to this
effect, To vest the Fee and the Freehold in the Lessee by way of confirmation:
See for that, Littl. 532, 533. But the whole Court was of a contrary opinion;
for it is in the election of the Lessee to take the Conveyance as a Feoffment,
or as a confirmation: And here it appears upon the Deed, that the intent of
both parties was, That the Lessee should take by way of Feoffment, and not of
confirmation; for otherwise, to what use should be a Letter of Attorney
inserted in the Deed? And here the Lessee has liberty to make his election how
he will take; either by Feoffment, or by confirmation, which election he has
determined by the acceptance of the Livery: And by Anderson, If tenant in tail
be disseised, and makes a Charter of Feoffment, and delivers the same to the
Disseisor, who delivers the same to the Attorney, named in the Charter, who
makes Livery accordingly: here is a good Feoffment, and a discontinuance; and
afterward, after many motions made, and day given to show cause, Judgment was
given, that the Plaintiff should be barred.

CCXLII. Rooke and Denny 's Case. Trin. 28 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
IN an Action upon the Case, by Rooke against Dennis, for misusing of the
Plaintiff's Horse, by occasion of which misuse, the said Horse became blind of
one eye, and gall-back'd. The Plaintiff counted, That the said Horse was stolen
by three Felons, after whom the Plaintiff made fresh suit, and that the Felons
were apprehended, and attainted at his suit because Justice Windham: Hetley's
Rep. 64. Rolls 809. More 572. Hetley's Rep. 64.
and that the said Horse came unto the hands of the Defendant, who misused it,
Ut supra: The Defendant said, that before that, and the said Attainder of the
said Felons, the said Felons had waived the said Horse within his Manor; in
which Manor he had waife and estray, etc. And it was holden by the Court, that
the same was no Plea, without traversing the fresh suit, whereof the Plaintiff
has declared; for by the fresh suit, the property of the Plaintiff in the said
Horse was preserved; and so upon that misuser of the Horse by the Defendant, an
Action well lies: and Judgment was given for the Plaintiff accordingly.

CCXLIII. Pretiman and Cook 's Case. Hill. 29 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
IN Ejectione firmae, The Case was, Ante 129. 1 Cro. 52. 3 Len. 180.
That one Hawkins was seized of three Messuages in Bury, and had issue, Robert,
a son, and Christian and Joan, daughters; and by his Will, devised his three
Messuages to his wife for life, the remainder of one of them to Robert his son
and his heirs, and the remainder of another of them to Christian his daughter,
and her heirs; and the remainder of the third Message, to Joan his daughter,
and her heirs: And farther wills, That if any of his said three issues should
die without issue, of his, or her body, that then the other surviving, shall
have, Totam illam partem, betwixt them equally to be divided; The Devisor died,
the wife died, one of the daughters died, having issue; the son died without
issue, the sister surviving, entered into the whole part of Robert, the son, and
died; her husband held in the land as tenant by the Courtesy; and the question
was, If the surviving daughter should have all the part of him that died
without issue, or she and the issue of the other daughter? Coke, The survivor
shall have the whole: And he said, that the Devisees have an Estate in tail,
for the Fee does not vest in them, for it is uncertain which of them shall
survive; but when one surviveth, then he shall not have for life, but in Fee;
for the words, Totam illam partem, go as well to all the Estate, as to all the
things. A. tenant for life, the remainder to B. in tail, the remainder to the
right heirs of A. A. grants, Totum statum suum, both the Estates pass, and the
Grant includes the whole; See 41 E. 3. Fitz. Br. 541. In Ravishment of Ward,
supposing the ravishment of two daughters, Quarum maritagium ad ipsum pertinet,
and it was challenged, because he does not say Maritagia, but the challenge was
not allowed; and he said, That if a man devises his land wholly to A. that he
has a Fee-simple: See the Case, H. 28 Eliz. the Case between Higham and
Harwood: And Coke said, That they had by this Devise a Fee-tail, with a
Fee-simple Expectant, each of them severally in the Message to them limited:
Golding, Each of the Devisees has an Estate-tail in the Message, to them
devised, and but an Estate for life in the Message which is to accrue upon the
death without issue, etc. For no Estate is limited expressly, nor what Estate
the survivor shall have; for here are not any words which do import a
Fee-simple, as (according to Littleton) imperpetuum; or to do what he will
with, etc. See for that 22 E. 3. ad Terminum qui praeteriit: but here are only
bare words, of which no farther construction can be made, but for life: And as
to the words, Totam illam partem, the same does not extend farther, than if he
said, Partem suam: And he said, that nothing vests in him who survives; for
there ought to be two to take by the survivor, or otherwise nothing shall
accrue to the survivor; for the words of the Devise are aequaliter inter eos
dividend and that which accrues by survivor shall be divided betwixt two,
otherwise nothing shall accrue. And if it cannot survive to two, then it shall
descend to the issue of the sister who is dead, and to the surviving daughter,
and they shall be tenants in common, and not joint-tenants. Clench, These
words, Totam illam partem, go only to the house, and not to the Estate in it,
which Shute granted: If both the daughters had survived Robert, they should
have Fee in the house of Robert not by the Will, but by descent; and this
Devise shall not take effect otherwise, and the Devise as to that is void, and
then the Common Law shall hold place, and that is, to descend to the issue of
the one sister, and the surviving sister: And here the survivor has but an
Estate for life in the house of Robert, and then by the death of Robert, the
Fee-simple accruing to the surviving sister, the moiety of her Estate for life
is extinct. And if one of the daughters had died without issue before Robert,
the house of such daughter had come to Robert and the other sister, as
coparceners; for the son is to have all the Fee, and a moiety of the same
executed, and a moiety expectant, and the other sister should have a moiety for
life, and so the Devise not void. And afterward Judgment was given against the
husband of the surviving daughter.

CCXLIV. Hurlston 's Case. Hill. 29 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
4 Len. 160.
HUrlston brought a Writ of Error against the Queen, upon a Judgment given for
the Queen, in the County Palatine of Chester; It was moved by Gaudy, the Queens
Sergeant, that the Writ did not lie; for he ought to sue to the Queen by
Petition, which see 23 E. 3. 22. A Writ of Error cannot be granted, Absque
speciali gratia Dom. Regis: See also 22 E. 3. 3. And the case was, That
Judgment was given for the Queen in a Scire facias, to reverse the Patent of
the Constableship of the Castle of Chester, and by him in Chester, there are
many Courts; King's Bench, Common Pleas, Exchequer, Chancery: And here a
Judgment or Decree in the Chancery cannot be reversed, but by Parliament; and
so he conceived of a Judgment given in the Chancery at Chester, and it cannot
be reversed in the King's Bench: Also they have a custom in Chester, that they
may reverse within certain Months the Judgment before. Clench, There needs no
Petition, for both the Patentees claim from the Queen; and whether there be
Error or not, the Queen is not prejudiced: Coke, There needs no Petition, for
it is now past, for the Queens Attorney's hand is to it; 11 Eliz. In one
Haunce's case, a Writ of Error was brought against the Queen, and they were
compelled to sue to the Queen by Petition: Coke, In the Exchequer, If an
erroneous Judgment be given for the Queen in a Bill of Intrusion, the party
shall have a Writ of Error against the Queen without any Petition. It was the
case of one Eliz. Mordant, 15 Eliz. she brought a Writ of Error to reverse a
Fine, levied by her, during her minority, against the Queen, and the proceeding
in it was stayed, because she had not sued to the Queen by Petition first:
Wray, Many Outlawries have been reversed by Error without any Petition, and yet
in such case the Queen has an immediate interest.

CCXLV. Gomersall and Gomersall 's Case. Mich. 29 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
IN an Account, The Plaintiff charged the Defendant as Bailiff of his Shop,
Curam habens, and administrationem bonorum: The Defendant answered to the goods
only, and said nothing to the Shop: Tanfield moved the same matter for Error
in arrest of Judgment: As 14. H. 4. 309, 310. One charged another as Bailiff of
his house, Et curam habens bonorum in eo existen. the traverse was, That he was
not Bailiff of the house, Pro ut: that is good, and goes to all, but he cannot
answer to the goods, and say nothing to the house: See 49 E. 3. 7. Br. Accomp.
21. A man brought an Account against one as Bailiff of his Manor, Habens curam
of twenty Oxen and Cows, and certain quarters of Corn: And by Belknap, If he
have the Manor and no goods, yet he shall account for the Manor, and it shall
be no Plea, to say that the Plaintiff sold him the goods without traversing,
without that, that he was his Bailiff to account render: And as to the Manor,
he may say, that the Plaintiff leased the same to himself for years, without
that, that he was his Bailiff: Another exception was taken by him, That the
Plaintiff charge him with moneys, Ad merchandizandum; And he traverseth, that
he was not his Receivor denarior. ad computandum pro ut: and so he does not
meet with the Plaintiff, and so it is no issue. And it is not helped by the
Statute of Jeofailes, 32 H. 8. but mis-joining of issue is helped by that
Statute, 19 Eliz. W. an Attorney of the Common Pleas, did charge another
Attorney of the same Court, with a Covenant to have three years board in
marriage with the Defendant's daughter; and he pleaded that he did not promise
two years board, and so issue was joined and tried, and the same could not be
helped by the Statute, because it was no issue, and did not meet with the
Plaintiff: So if one charge in the Debet and detinet, and he answers to the
Detinet only, it is no issue; and therefore it is not helped by the Statute.
In 29 H. 6. in trespass for entering into his house, and taking of his goods,
the Defendant pleaded, Non intravit, and the issue was tried, and damages
given; and because the taking of the goods was not also in issue, all was void,
4 E. 3. One shall not account by parcels, because the Action is entire: See 3
E. 3. 8. and Book of Entries, 202. A Precedent, 14 H. 7. That the Verdict was
not full, and did not go to the whole, and therefore was void. Hele, Sergeant,
contrary: And as to the first point he said, That there is a Case in 9 E. 3.
Account. 35. where the Plaintiff charge the Defendant in account as Bailiff
of his house, and that he had the administration of his goods; viz. Forty sacks
of wool; and upon issue joined, the Jury found, that he was not Bailiff of his
house; but they farther find, that he had received the forty sacks of wool, to
render account of the same; and the Plaintiff in that Case had Judgment for the
sacks of wool; although there was no Verdict found for the house: See 5 H. 7.
24. Where if a Jury be charged with several issues, and the one of the issues
is found, and the other not; that the same makes no discontinuance: or if one
of the issues be discontinued, yet it is no discontinuance as to the whole. But
admit the same be not helped by the Common Law, yet he said it is helped by the
Statute of 32 H. 8. of Jeofailes; which is, Non obstant. discontinuance or
miscontinuance. Daniel, to the same purpose: And he said that the Books before
cited of 14 H. 4. and 49 E. 3. are not ruled, nor the Cases there adjudged; in
the one Book the Defendant pleaded, That the Plaintiff gave the goods unto him,
and in the other Book, that he sold the said goods unto him, and demanded
Judgment of the Action: And he said, That it is no good answer; for they are
Pleas only before the Auditors, and not in an Action upon Account: and farther
he said, That although the Verdict be found but for part, yet it is good; for
no damages are to be recovered in an Account: In trespass, it is true, if one
issue be found, and not the other, and joint-damages be given; the Verdict is
not good for any part, but if several damages be given, then it is good, as it
is ruled in 21 H. 6. Coke, 26 H. 8. is, That the Plaintiff cannot declare
generally of an house, Curam habens, and administrationem bonorum; but he must
farther say: Twenty quarters of Corn, or the like, etc. In the principal Case,
it is a joint-charge and but one for the shop and goods; and he answers unto
one only, but he ought to answer to all, or else it is no answer at all. But
Coke found out another thing, viz. That there is a thing put in issue which is
not in the Verdict, nor found, nor touched in the Verdict, and that was the
Verdict of all which is found not to be good, and it is not helped by the
Statute of 32 H. 8. of Jeofailes. I grant, that discontinuances are helped by
the Statute of 32 H. 8. but imperfect Verdicts are not helped thereby: Vid. 205.
It was a great Case argued in the Exchequer Chamber, and it was Brache's Case:
An information was against Brache, for entering into a house, and an hundred
Acres of Lands in Stepney; He pleaded, not guilty, The Jury found him guilty
for the hundred acres, but said nothing as to the house; upon which a Writ of
Error was brought, and Judgment was reversed: and he said, it was not a
discontinuance, but no verdict for part. Daniel, That was the default of the
Clerks who did not enter it, and it has been the usage to amend the defaults
done by the Clerks in another Term: All the Justices said, That is true, if the
Postea be brought in and not entered; but here it is entered in the Roll in this
form. Daniel, Where I charge one in Account with so much by the hands of such a
one, and so much by the hands of such a one, although there be but one Absque
hoc to them all, yet they are as several issues. The Court answered, Not so,
unless there be several issues joined to every one of them. But by Gaudy,
Justice, If there be several issues, and the one be found, and the other not,
no Judgment shall be given: Clench, Justice, In the principal Case, It is not a
charge of the goods, but in respect of the shop, therefore that ought to be
traversed: Shute, Justice, The Traverse of the shop alone is not good: Egerton
the Queen's Solicitor said, That the Books might be reconciled, and that there
needed not a Traverse to the goods, for the Traverse of the shop, Prout, is an
answer to all: But now he takes issue upon the goods only, which issue is not
warranted by the Declaration; and he said, That if one charge me as Bailiff of
his goods, ad Merchandizandum, I shall answer for the increase, and shall be
punished for my negligence; But if he charge me as his Receiver, ad
computandum, I shall not be answerable, but for the bare money, or thing which
was delivered.

CCXLVI. Mich. 29 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
Postea 215.
IN Trespass for taking of goods, the Defendant justified, as Bailiff to J. S.
The Plaintiff by Replication says, That the Defendant pressed his Cattle of his
own wrong, Absque hoc, that he is Bailiff to J. S. And by Anderson, 1 Leon. 50.
If one has good cause to distrain my Cattle, and a stranger of his own head,
without any warrant or authority takes my goods, not as servant or Bailiff to
another, and I bring Trespass against him, he cannot excuse himself by saying,
that he did it as Bailiff, etc. for once he was a Trespassor; but if one do
distrain as Bailiff, although that in truth he be not Bailiff, if afterward,
he in whose right he justifies, assents to it, he shall not be punished as a
Trespassor; for this assent shall have relation unto the time of the distress
taken, which Periam concessit, and also Rhodes. A. distrains, and being asked
for what cause he distrains, and he assigns a cause which is not sufficient,
and afterward an Action is brought against him, 3 Co. 26.
he may avow the distress for another cause.

CCXLVII. Mich. 29 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
THE Case was, That the Queen gave Lands in tail to hold in Capite, and
afterward granted the Reversion: Windham, In this Case the Tenure is not
incident to the Reversion, but is in respect of the person; and therefore the
Tenure in Capite does remain; and the Donee shall hold of the Queen as in
gross: And also the Grantee of the Reversion, shall hold of the Queen in
Capite; and so two Tenures in Capite for the same Lands: See 30 H. 8. Dyer 45.
If the Queen in this cause had reserved a Rent upon the Gift in tail, the same
should go with the Reversion.

CCXLVIII. Dighton and Clark 's Case. Mich. 29 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
DIghton brought Debt upon a Bond, the Condition of which was, That whereas the
Plaintiff was in quiet possession of such lands, If now neither J. S. nor J. B.
nor J. G. did not disturb the Plaintiff in his possession of the said lands by
any indirect means, but by due course of Law, That then, etc. that Defendant
pleaded, That neither J. S. nor J. D. or J. G. did disturb the Plaintiff by any
indirect means, but by due course of Law; upon which there was a demurrer.
Godfrey, The Plea in Bar is not good; for there is a Negativa pregnans, (scil.)
a Negative which implies an Affirmative: See 21 H. 6.9. In a Writ of Entry, Sur
Disseisin, the Defendant says, That the Demandant by his Deed, after the
Darrein continuance, did confirm and ratify the possession of the Tenant, etc.
The Demandant said, Not his Deed after the Darrein continuance; and the same
was holden to be, Negativa pregnans; See more there, and see also 5 H. 7. 7.
And see farther, 39 H. 6. 8, 9. Another Exception was taken to the Plea in Bar,
because he has pleaded, That neque J. S. neque J. D. neque J. G. had disturbed
the Demandant by any indirect means, but only by due course of Law; and that
issue cannot be tried; not by the Country, for they cannot know what is a due
course of Law; and by the Court it cannot be tried, for the Defendant has not
certainly showed by what due course of Law the Demandant has been disturbed,
which see 22 E. 4. 40, 41, etc. The Lord Lisle's Case. In Debt upon a Bond, the
Condition was, That if the Defendant before such a day, or any other for him,
and in his name, come to B. and there show unto the Plaintiff, or one of his
Council, by him assigned, a sufficient and lawful discharge of an annual Rent
which the Plaintiff claims out of two houses of the Defendant in B. aforesaid,
That then the said Bond shall be void; and the Defendant said, That he at the
day assigned, contained in the Condition, that A. and B. by assignment of the
Defendant came to B. and tendered to show to N. and W. of the Plaintiff's
Council, a sufficient discharge of the said annual Rent, and that they did
refuse to see it, upon which there was a demurrer in Law: and Judgment was
given for the Plaintiff, and that the Plea was no Plea; for the Defendant ought
to have showed in his Plea, what manner of discharge he would have showed, as a
release, unity of possession, etc. But as the Case is here; If the Plaintiff
shall traverse the Plea in Bar, the issue joined upon it cannot be tried, for
the Jury cannot know which is a lawful and sufficient discharge, but the same
shall be tried by the Court; for if the Defendant had tendered to the Plaintiff
a discharge by unity of possession, the Jury cannot know if it be a sufficient
discharge: and as the Plea is here, he has not showed what discharge he would
have showed to the said Council; and therefore we cannot judge of the same: If
one be bound to plead a sufficient Plea before such a day, in such a Court, in
such an Action, it is not sufficient that he has pleaded a sufficient Plea,
but he ought to show what Plea he has pleaded, otherwise the Court cannot
judge if the Plea be sufficient or not: Vid. 35 H. 6. 19. and 37 H. 8. Br.
Cand. 16. where a man will plead that he has saved the party harmless, he
ought to show how. Shute, Justice, and Clench, Justice, If the Defendant had
pleaded, not disturbed by any indirect means, such a Plea had been good enough:
Gaudy, Justice, If he had pleaded, not disturbed contra formam Conditionis
praed. it had been a good Plea; In a Writ of Entry, Ne entra pas, contra formam
Statuti, He did not alien within age, is a Negative pregnant: but the party may
say, he did not alien, Modo and forma; all the part to this Plea which comes
after the But, is surplusage, and Negation: Gaudy, It is a Plea which is
pleaded with all the words of the Condition entirely. Clench, The Case put by
Godfrey, 22 E. 4. differs from the Case at Bar: For there he pleaded all in the
affirmative, therefore in such a Case he ought to plead specially; but in the
Case at Bar all is in the Negative, in which Case such special pleading is not
necessary. If I be bounden that I shall not go out of Westminster Hall until
night, but tarry in the Hall till night, In an Action against me upon that
Bond, I may plead in iisdem verbis: If I be bound upon Condition, That I will
not return to Serjeant's-Inn the direct way, but by St. Giles, I shall plead,
in totidem verbis: Godfrey, I agree those Cases, for the matter which comes
after the But, is triable by the Country, but so it is not in the principal
Case: Clench, But is but a word of surplusage, and if that, and all which
follows had been left out, it had been well enough. It was adjourned.

CCXLIX. Courtney and Kelloway 's Case. Mich. 26 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
COurtney brought an Action upon the Statute of 5 Eliz. concerning Perjury,
against Kelloway, and declared, That where Sir Gawen Carew had heretofore
brought an Action upon the Case against the now Plaintiff for slanderous words,
viz. because that the said now Plaintiff had affirmed, that the said Sir Gawen
had had the Pocks, To which Declaration, the now Plaintiff had pleaded, that
Kelloway, the now Defendant, reported to the said now Plaintiff, That he
himself, i. e. Kelloway, had heretofore healed the said Sir Gawen of the Pocks,
Absque hoc, that he spoke them simply of his own head; upon which they were at
issue, and the said Kelloway was produced as a witness on the part of the said
Courtney; and the said Kelloway, upon his oath, deposed at the Trial of the
said issue, That he never had reported to the now Plaintiff, That he himself
had healed the said Sir Gawen of the Pocks; for which the Jury found for Gawen,
and also assessed greater damages in respect that they found, That Courtney
spoke the said words of his own head, etc. and not of the report of Kelloway.
It was the opinion of the whole Court, that the now Plaintiff should have this
Action; For notwithstanding that that oath does not trench much unto the proof
or disproof of the issue, yet because that by reason of the oath the Jury have
aggravated the damages, the Action does lie, as in case of Trespass of breaking
his Close, and spoiling his grass, the Defendant pleads, Not guilty; and at the
trial of the issue a witness is produced on the Plaintiff's part, who deposes
upon his oath, That the Land where, etc. was so rich in grass, that it was
ready to be mowed whereas in truth none, or very little grass was there
growing, yet if the Jury find upon other evidence the Defendant guilty, it is
an occasion to induce the Jury to tax the greater damages: all which the Court
granted.

CCL. Holland and Drake 's Case. Mich. 26 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
IN an Ejectione firmae, brought by Holland against Drake, and five others;
Drake pleaded, Not guilty; the other five, Quoad 20 acres, pleaded Not guilty
also; and as to the residue, that long time before that, Andrews (Lessor of the
Plaintiff) had any thing in the land; That Hen. Lord Cromwell was seized, and
leased the same to them for two years, and afterward granted the Reversion to
Andrews, to whom they attorned; Andrews within the said term, entered upon them,
and leased to the Plaintiff upon whom they re-entred, as was lawful for them
to do, The Plaintiff by Replication, said, That long time before the said Lord
Cromwell had any thing, etc. Andrews himself was seized, until by the said Lord
Cromwell disseised, and leased to the Defendants, Ut supra, and granted the
Reversion to the said Andrews with attornment, who entered, and leased to the
Plaintiff, who entered, and was possessed, until by the said Defendants
ejected, Modo and forma, pro ut, etc. And upon this Replication, the said five
Defendants did demur in Law. It was argued, That the Plaintiff in his
Replication, has departed from his Declaration; for by his Declaration, he
has supposed himself to be ejected by all the six Defendants; and in the
Replication he says, That he was possessed until by the said five Defendants,
who plead in Bar he was ejected; so he has departed from his Declaration in
the number of the Ejectors; for he ought to have said, until he by the said
five, and also by the said Drake was ejected: as 12 E. 4. 6. in trespass upon
Entry upon the Statute of 5 R. 2. against J. and E. J. died pendant the Writ,
and E. pleaded in Bar, and the Plaintiff did reply and conclude, and so was he
seized until the said E. Simul cum dicto: J. named in the Writ, entered upon
the Plaintiff, etc. But the opinion of the whole Court was clear to the
contrary; for here in the case at Bar, Drake, by his several issue, which he
has joined with the Plaintiff, upon Not guilty, is severed from the other five
Defendants; and then when they plead in Bar, The Plaintiff ought to reply to
them without meddling with Drake, who upon his several Plea, and issue joined
upon it, is a stranger to them; as if the said five had been the only
Defendants: But if he had not replied to Drake, as if Drake had made default,
or had died after the Writ brought; as in the case before cited of 28 E. 4.
there he ought to have replied, as it is objected: So in an Ejectione firmae of
twenty acres, The Defendant, as to ten acres pleads, Not guilty; upon which
they are at issue; and the Plaintiff replies, and says, as to the other ten
acres, and so was he possessed, until by the Defendant of the said ten acres
he was ejected; this is good without speaking of the other ten acres, upon
which the general issue is joined. And the Court was ready to have given
Judgment for the Plaintiff; but they looked upon the Record, and seeing that
one issue in this Action was to be tried between the Plaintiff and the said
Drake: And although the Plaintiff offered to release his damages, and the issue
joined, and to have Judgment against the five Defendants who had demurred; Vid.
antea 41.
yet the Court was clear of opinion, that no Judgment should be given upon the
said Demurrer, until the said issue was tried; for the Action is an Ejectione
firmae, in which Case the possession of the land is to be recovered; and it may
be, for any thing that appears, That Drake, who has pleaded the general
issue, has Title to the land, etc. But if this Action had been an Action of
Trespass, there in such case, Ut supra, upon release of damages, and the issue
joined, the Plaintiff should have Judgment presently.

CCLI. French 's Case. Mich. 26 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
IT was presented before the Coroner, That John French was, Felo de se, and
that certain goods of the said John French, were in the possession of J. S. and
this presentment was certified into the King's Bench; upon which Process issued
forth against the said J. S. and continued until he was Outlawed. And now came
J. S. and cast in his Writ of Error, to reverse the said Outlawry, and assigned
for Error, because that in the presentment upon which he was Outlawed, there is
not any addition given to the said J. S. And at the first, it was doubted; If
upon that presentment Process of Outlawry did lie: and Ive, one of the chief
Clerks of the Crown-Office, said to the Court, That such Process in such case
did lie; and that he could show five hundred precedents to that purpose.
Another matter was moved upon the Statute of 1 H. 5. 5. of Additions: If this
Outlawry by the Statute aforesaid, ought to be reversed by default of Addition;
for as much as the said Statute speaks only of Outlawries upon original Writs
in personal Actions, Appeals and Indictments; But it was agreed by the whole
Court, That as to this purpose, the presentment should be accounted in Law as
an Indictment, and afterward the Outlawry against French was reversed.

CCLII. Mich. 26 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
A Lease for thirty years was made by Husband and Wife, if they so long should
live, and if they die, etc. That the land should remain to A. their son, during
the term aforesaid. And it was holden by Wray, Justice, That if the Husband and
Wife do die within the term, that the son should have the land, De novo for
thirty years: But Gaudy was of opinion, that he shall have it for so many
years, which after their death should be expired.

CCLIII. Cooper 's Case. Mich. 26 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
IN an Ejectionefirmae, The Case was, That the Husband and Wife had right to
enter into certain lands in the right of the wife; and a Deed of Lease for
years is written in the name of the Husband and Wife, to one A. for to try the
Title; and also a Letter of Attorney to B. to enter into the land, and to
deliver the said Deed of Lease to the said A. in the name of the Husband and
Wife, 3 Cro. 118. 2 Cro. 617. Yel.
and as well the Letter of Attorney as the said Deed of Lease are sealed by the
said Husband and Wife with their seals, and entry and delivery is made
accordingly; the said A. enters, and upon Ejectment, brings an Ejectione
firmae, and the whole matter aforesaid was found by special Verdict; and the
Plaintiff had Judgment to recover, for the special matter found by Verdict, i.
e. the Deed of Lease, and the Letter of Attorney, do maintain the Declaration
well enough; and here is a Lease made by Husband and Wife, according to that,
the Plaintiff has declared.

CCLIV. Mich. 29 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
IN an Action of Trespass for breaking of the Plaintiff's Close, Owen 114. 1
Cro. 876. 2 Cro. 195. 229. Godb. 123.
and killing of eighteen Conies there; the Defendant, as to all the Trespass,
but to the killing of the Conies, pleaded, Not guilty: and as to the killing of
the said Conies, He said that the place Where, is a Heath, in which he has
common of pasture, and that he found the Conies eating the grass there, and he
killed them, and carried them away, as it was lawful for him to do: Cowper,
Although Conies be, Ferae naturae, yet when they are in in-grounds, they are
reduced to such a property, that if they be killed or carried away, I shall
have an Action of trespass, Vid. 43 E. 3. 24. And if a Deer be hunted by the
Plaintiff in a Forest, and afterward in hunting it be driven out of the
Forest, and the Forrester does follow the chase, and the Plaintiff kill the
Deer in his own grounds, yet the Forrester may enter into the land of the
Plaintiff, and re-take the Deer, 12 H. 8. 9. And although the Defendant has
common in the soil; yet he cannot meddle with the wood there, nor with the
land, nor with the grass, otherwise than with the feeding of his cattle, for he
has but a faint interest; And if he who has the Freehold in the land,
brings an Action of trespass against such a commoner for entering into his
land, and the Defendant plead, Not guilty, he cannot give in evidence that he
has common there: And it has been late adjudged, That where commoners
prescribe, Godb. 123.
That the Lord has used to put in such a pasture but so many beasts, that such
a prescription is a void prescription: It was argued on the other side, That
the owner of the soil, has not the true property of the Conies in him, but a
kind of property: And see F.N. B. 86 and 87. Quare clausum fregit, and 20
Cuniculos cepit: Against a stranger he may have an Action, but not against the
commoner, because he has wrong in his common by the feeding of the Conies
there; for although he has not an interest in the soil, yet he has an
interest in the profits of it, and a commoner may distrain the beasts of him
who has not right of common for damage-feasance, as the books are, 4 H. 7. 3.
15 H. 7. 15. and there the commoner has not any remedy, if he cannot enter and
kill the Conies, for he cannot take them damage-feasance, nor can impound them;
for no Replevin lies of them: if the owner of the soil ploweth the lands, yet
the commoner may put in his cattle, claiming his common, and he may well
justify the same, because the wrong begins in the owner of the soil. At
another day, the Case was moved again; and then it was argued by Coke, and he
said, The point is; Whether a commoner having common of pasture, may kill the
Conies which are upon the ground; and he argued, That he might not. And first,
he said, It is to be considered, what interest he who has the Freehold may
have in such things as are, Ferae naturae; and then what authority a commoner
has in the ground in which he has common. As to the first point, he said,
That although such beasts are, Ferae naturae, yet they are reduced to such a
property when they are in my ground by reason of my possession which I then
have of them, that I may have an Action of trespass against him who takes them
away: as in the book in, 42 E. 3. If one has Deer in his Park, and another
takes them away, he may have an Action of Trespass for the taking of them: See
12 H. 8. If a Keeper or Forrester follow a Buck which is chase out of the Park
or Forest, although he who hunteth him kills the Buck in his own ground, yet
the Keeper or Forrester may enter into his ground, and seize the Deer, because
the property and possession of the Deer is yet in them by their persuit: In 7
H. 6. It is holden, That if a wild beast does go out of the Park, the owner of
the soil has lost his property in it; but upon the said book, it may be well
collected, that whilst it remains in the Park, That the owner of the Park
has property in it; for 18 E. 4. 14. It is doubted, whether a man can have
property in such things, which are, Ferae naturae: But in 10 H. 7. 6. it is
holden, That an action of Account lies for things which are, Ferae naturae:
and see 14 H. 8. 1. In the Bishop of London's Case, and 22 H. 6. 59. That as
long as such things are in the parties ground, they are in his possession, and
he has a property in them; and in an Action brought for them; The Writ shall
be, Quare damas suas cepit, by Newton; And see in the Register, fol. 102. where
an Action was brought, Quare ducent. Cuniculos suos pretii, etc. cepit. It has
been objected on the other side, That the Defendant has common there; To that
I answer, Admit he has common, yet he has not an interest in the soil; for he
cannot meddle with the wood, grass, or other profit arising of the soil, but
the interest which the commoner has, is only the feeding of the grass with
^he mouths of his cattle: and if he who has the Freehold in the ground, does
bring an Action against the commoner for entering into his land; If the
Defendant pleads, Not guilty, he cannot give evidence that he has common
there; for such evidence will not maintain the issue: See 22 Ass. A commoner
cannot take in the cattle of a stranger to agist upon the common; and therewith
agrees the book of 12 H. 8. and so it has been adjudged in this Court.
Godfrey, contrary: And he argued, That it is lawful for the commoner to kill
the Conies feeding in the common: And he agreed all the cases which were put by
Coke; and farther he said, That the owner of the ground had not an absolute,
but a kind of a qualified property in the Conies; and therefore see the Book of
3 H. 6. and F.N. B. If a Writ of Trespass be brought, Quare Cuniculas suas
cepit, the Writ shall abate; and yet he has a kind of property, or a
possession rather in them. I grant that against a stranger the Plaintiff might
have his Action for killing of his Conies, but not against the commoner,
because the commoner has a wrong done unto him by the Conies, eating of his
common, and therefore he may kill them; and although the commoner may not
meddle with the land, because he has not an interest in it; yet in some cases
he may meddle with the profits of it, and he may distrain the cattle of a
stranger there, damage-feasance; as the Book is in 15 H. 7. I grant that it is
not lawful for Tenant for life to kill the Conies of him who has free warren
in the land. For if a man brings an Action of Trespass, Quare warrenam suam
intravit, and Cuniculos suos cepit: It is no Plea for the Defendant to say,
That it is his Freehold. See 43. E. 3. accordingly. In L. 5 E. 4. In Trespass,
Quare clausum fregit, and Cuniculos suos cepit: The Defendant said, That the
Plaintiff made a Lease at will to J. S. of the land, and that he, as servant to
the said J. S. did kill the Conies there, and it was holden a good Plea; and
yet it is there said, That by the grant of the land, the Conies do not pass;
but the reason of the book might be, as I conceive, because the feeding on the
land with the Conies, is to his damage, and therefore, that he might justify
the killing of them: and so are the Books of 2 H. 7. and 4 E. 4. If I have
common of pasture in lands, and the Tenant ploweth up the land, I shall have an
action upon the Case in the nature of a Quod permittat. And in 9 E. 4. If one
has lands adjoining to my land, and levyeth a Nuisance, I may enter upon the
land, and abate the Nuisance: So if a man takes my goods and carries them unto
his own lands, I may enter therein, and seize my goods: So if a Tenant of the
Freehold plows the land and sows it with corn, the commoner may put in his
cattle, and therewith eat the corn growing upon the land: So if a man do falsely
imprison me, and put me in his house, I may justify the breaking open of his
house to get forth. In 21 H. 6. All the Inhabitants of a Town do prescribe to
have common in such a field every year after Harvest, If one particular man who
has Freehold land, with the said field sowed, will not within convenient time
gather in his Corn, but suffer the same to continue there of purpose to bar the
Inhabitants of their Common, The Inhabitants of the Town may put in their
Cattle into the said field, and therewith eat his Corn, and he shall have no
remedy for their so doing; and he put the Question, What remedy the Commoner
should have for the eating and destroying of his Common which his Cattle should
have, for that he can neither distrain them damage-feasance, nor impound them:
for a Replevin does not lie of Conies; and therefore he said, he has no other
remedy but to kill and destroy the Conies. See 19 E. 3. and F. N. B. If the
Lord does surcharge the Common, the Commoner may have an Action against him;
but in this Case he can have no Action: Gaudy, Justice, The Commoner cannot
destroy or kill the Conies, because he may have other remedy: Shute, Justice, A
Commoner cannot take or distrain the beasts of the Tenant of the land for
damage-feasance, therefore he cannot take or destroy the Conies which are upon
the land, because he may have other remedy; for he may have an Action upon the
Case, or an Assize for putting of the Conies upon the land, if the owner of the
land leave not sufficient Common for the Cattle of the Commoner; and afterward
Judgment was given for the Plaintiff.

CCLV. Manwood and Burston 's Case. Hill. 29 Eliz. In the Exchequer-Chamber.
MAnwood, chief Baron of the Exchequer, brought an Action upon the Case against
Burston, and declared, That whereas Agnes Griffin was possessed of the third
part of the Manor and Rectory of Higham: for term of years, by Demise of the
Master and Fellows of St. John's College in Cambridge, made to Worthington; and
whereas John Sutton was possessed of another third part of the said Manor and
Rectory by the same Demise; and whereas John Palmer was possessed of another
third part of the said Manor and Rectory for the same term, The said Burston,
20 Aprilis, 28 Eliz. in consideration that the said Plaintiff, Obtinuisset de
praed. Agnet. totum terminum suum assurari ipsis Rogero Manwood, and the
Defendant; (scil.) Unam medietatem dictae tertiae partis dicto Rogero, and
alteram medietatem, unto the said Defendant, apud London, in such a Ward,
Assumpsit eidem querent. Quod si idem querens procuraret dictam Johannem
Palmer, to assent and sell his third part, the one moiety to the Plaintiff, and
the other to the Defendant for 320 l. That the Defendant solveret aequam
portionem inde, (scil.) 160 l. And licet, the Plaintiff, had procured the said
Palmer, 22 Aprilis, an. supradict. to assent and sell the third part for 320 l.
to be paid 3 Maii, the same year, and the rest at another day; and licet, the
said Plaintiff was ready to pay his part, and offered the same, (scil.) 160 l.
And licet the said Palmer was ready and offered to sell and convey his term
aforesaid, etc. yet the said Defendant, solvere aequam partem suam, (scil.) 160
l. Non fuit paratus sed recusavit. for which the said Palmer, Noluit vendere
his part or interest, by which the Plaintiff was damnified, etc. The Defendant
pleaded, That after the Assumpsit, the Plaintiff did discharge the Defendant of
the said promise; upon which they were at issue; and it was found for the
Plaintiff, who had Judgment to recover. Upon which Burston brought a Writ of
Error in the Exchequer Chamber. And diverse Errors were assigned: 1. It is not
showed at what time the term of Agnes Griffin did begin: 2. The Lease of the
College is not showed to be by writing: 3. It is not showed for what term
Palmer was possessed: 4. It is not showed at what time the Plaintiff had
obtained the part of Agnes: 5. The Assumpsit is laid to be, apud London, in
Warda de Farrington extra, and so apud London; and extra London, which is
repugnant: 6. The Plaintiff has declared, That the College had leased to
Worthington; and that A. and B. were possessed, Virtute dimissionis praed. To
these Errors, the chief Baron put in his answer in writing: As to the two
first, they are in the recital, and but matter of induction to the
consideration, and not traversable, nor otherwise material to be alleged for
the commencement of them, or for the Rent, but only the ending of the term to
come is sufficient: As in an Action upon the Case; That whereas the Defendant
was indebted unto the Plaintiff in diverse sums of money, amounting to 40 l. the
Defendant, in consideration thereof, promised, etc. the Plaintiff needs not to
show any certainty of the Contract, or other circumstance, how, or in what
manner the Debt did accrue, or begin: As in an Action upon the Case, The
Plaintiff declares, That whereas he has married the daughter of the Defendant,
the Defendant in consideration that the Plaintiff would assure to his said
Wife, Land to the yearly value of 20 l. for her jointure, as shall be advised
by the Council of the Defendant, That he will pay unto the Plaintiff 100 l. And
licet the Plaintiff has made such a jointure of Land in S. unto such yearly
value for the use of his Wife, by the advice of the Council of the Defendant,
etc. Here the Plaintiff needs not to show what manner of Conveyance, or
Assurance was advised; for it is sufficient, if the consideration recited be
proved in evidence with the circumstances; but in pleading, it is not
traversable nor issuable. The third Error is mistaken: The fourth is answered
as the two first; for it is but matter of recital; and the consideration past
and executed before the Assumpsit, and not at the time of the Assumpsit, and
but an Induction or conveyance to the Promise: The fifth matter is
mis-construed; for there are two Wards of Farrington, infra, and extra: infra
the Walls, and extra the Walls, and yet both, apud London, and extra is to be
referred to Farrington, and not to London; and there ought to be made a point
after extra; as Farrington extra; London. The sixth is mistaken; for there is
no Error in that: for the Assignee is possessed, Virtute dimissionis; for the
original Lease is the virtue and strength of the possession of the Assignee:
But if these exceptions had been material, yet forasmuch as the issue is not
upon the Assumpsit, for that is confessed by the Defendant, and by that the
recital, consideration, and all the special matters confessed to be true: But
the Defendant has pleaded a new matter after the Assumpsit, in discharge of
the Assumpsit, which discharge is found against him, all the particulars in
which the Errors are assigned, are out of the Book; and now the matter of
discharge is only material: As in debt for arrearages of Rent reserved on a
Lease for years, if the time and place of the making of the Lease be not set
forth in the Declaration, the Declaration is not good. But if the Defendant
plead a collateral matter; as release of the arrearages, or other such matter,
now all the imperfections of the Declaration are waved, etc. At another day the
matter was argued again. There are three manner of considerations upon which an
Assumpsit may be grounded: 1 A debt precedent: 2 Where he to whom such a
promise is made, is damnified by doing any thing, or spends his labor at the
instance of the Promiser, although no benefit comes to the Promiser: As I
agree with a Surgeon to cure a poor man (who is a stranger unto me) of a sore,
who does it accordingly, he shall have an Action: 3 Or there is a present
consideration, etc. The first Exception was, because the Assumpsit being laid
to procure such a Lease which another had, i. e. one A. it is not showed in the
Declaration, in facto, That A. had such a Lease, and if he had not any such
Lease, then there cannot be any consideration to procure it: For, Ex nihilo,
nihil fit. Secondly, the Declaration is, That A. was possessed of a Lease for
years, to be ended and determined in An. 1606. without showing any beginning of
it; and although that Lease be but matter of Conveyance and inducement, yet,
because it is the ground of the Action, it ought to be certainly and
sufficiently set forth. Thirdly, the Lease to be procured, is laid to be made
by a College in Cambridge, and it is not showed for what term of years, i. e.
for 21 years or under; for if it be above, then such Lease is void. Fourthly,
It is not laid in the Declaration, that the Lease was by writing, and then
void; for a College cannot make a Lease without writing; and it shall be
intended it was made without Deed, because it is not laid to be by Deed: As if
a Corporation makes a Lease for life, and afterward grants the Reversion for
years, he that will entitle himself to the said Reversion, ought to say in
pleading That he made the Lease for life by Deed, although the Lease for life
in such case be but matter of Conveyance: Fifthly, It is not laid in the
Declaration, That the Lease to be assured was in esse, and had continuance at
the time it was to be assured; for although it be laid to be in esse, at the
time of the promise, yet being a particular interest, it shall not be intended
to continue, if it be not specially showed: As 10 H. 7. 26. Sixthly, Here the
Plaintiff has not cause of Action, but Palmer, for the Assumpsit upon which
the Action is grounded, the money is to be payable to Palmer, not to the
Plaintiff, 2 E. 4. 5. My Bailiff lets my Land to Farm, rendering Rent, he shall
not have an Action for the Rent, but I my self, in whose right he leased: 25
Eliz. It was the Case of one Crewe, I promised unto J. S. 25 Eliz. Crew's Case.
That in consideration that he will make unto me a Lease for years of such
Lands, I will assign the same to his servant. If he will not make the Lease,
not J. S. but his servant shall have Action upon the promise: and although the
Defendant has pleaded collateral matter, by which the promise is confessed,
yet the same does not amend the matter; for if the Declaration be insufficient,
the Court, ex Officio, ought to stay Judgment: As 6 H. 7. 10. In trespass, the
Defendant pleads, That there was an Accord betwixt them, that in satisfaction
of the said Trespass, he should pay to the Plaintiff such a sum, and make two
Windows, the which sum he had paid, before the day, without speaking any thing
of the Windows, The Plaintiff pleaded, No such Accord, and it was found for the
Plaintiff; and although the Plaintiff does admit the Plea as good, yet the
Court, ex Officio, shall stay the Judgment: See the Book of Entries 4. A
Carpenter brought an Action upon the Case, and declared generally upon the
Assumpsit, Pro diversis rebus vocat. Carpenters wares, and pro diversis
laboribus per querent. at the instance of the Defendant, in art lignaria, etc.
and holden good without any particulars. It was adjourned.

CCLVI. Pain 's Case. Mich. 29 Eliz. In the Exchequer-Chamber.
A Writ of Error was brought by Pain, 3 Len. 144.
Treasurer of the Records of the King's Bench, in the Exchequer-Chamber, upon a
Judgment given in the Court of Exchequer, upon an assignment of a Lease for
years, by the Earl of Oxford, to the Queen: One Error is assigned, That whereas
the issue was joined upon intrusion, in taking of the profits, and so two
matters put in issue; The Jury have found Pain guilty of intrusion; but have
said nothing of the taking of the profits, and so the verdict does not fully
meet with the issue: But the great matter of the Ease was upon this point; The
Information is, That the Assignment to the Queen was 16 Maii, the Intrusion, 17
Maii, the Inrollment of the Deed of Assignment, the 18. of May. So it appears
upon the Record, That the intrusion is supposed to be done before the Queen
have any interest in the Lands, in which the intrusion is supposed, for nothing
was in the Queen before the Inrollment; For the Queen is a Corporation of
State, of such prerogative and excellency, that she cannot give or take
interest in any Lands without matter of Record; and this Lease is a Chattel
Real, and interest in Lands: See as to the Inrollment, 1 H. 7. 30, 31. 5 E. 4.
7. 7 E. 4. 16. But I grant that if the Lessee for years be outlawed, the Lease
shall be in the King, without Office, for the Outlawry it self is a sufficient
Record to entitle the King to it: If the Queen makes a Lease for years of Land,
rendering Rent, with clause, That if the Rent be behind, that the Lease shall
cease if the Rent be not paid, it was agreed here in Sir Moile Finche's Case,
Sir Moile Finches Case.
That the Lessee continuing his possession, shall not be accounted an intruder
before Office thereof found; but he shall be accountant to the Queen for the
profits, as Bailiff of his own wrong. But here we are charged with intrusion:
It has been doubted, if personal things be in the King without Office, 37 H.
6. but now it is clear that it is: as 35 E. 3. Br. Praerogat. 113. The Villain
of the the King purchases goods, the property thereof is in the King without
seizure, and so of all personal Chattels, because transitory, 1 H. 7. 17. 4 H.
7. 1. 39 H. 6. 26. And here it appears upon Record, that this Deed of
Assignment, was delivered to Baron Clark, the 16 of May, at Westminster: and to
that we say, That the said day was, Dies Ascentionis, and sic non juridicus,
and so no Court there then holden, and then the said Deed was not delivered in
Court of Record, and then not delivered unto him as a Judge, but as a private
person, although it was delivered to the use of the Queen: But in 37 H. 6.
there is some opinion, That if such a Deed be delivered in Court to one of the
Barons, or be put into the King's Coffers, that then it is a Record. Atkinson
contrary, And as to the first Exception; It is to be known, That in every Plea,
where a contempt is laid to the charge of the Defendant; he ought first to
excuse or clear the contempt: and therefore here, the Exordium of the Plea is,
Quoad venire vi and armis, and quicquid est in contemptum dominae Reginae, nec
non de tota ulteriore transgressione and contemptu per ipsos fieri supposit.
ipse in nullo est inde culpabilis: and afterward plead over; and so it is in
an Action of trespass: and also upon the Statute of 8 H. 6. of Forcible entry;
and here the issue upon the contempt follows the other issue: for if the one
issue be found against the Defendant, so also is the other. As to the other
point, I grant, That a Corporation cannot take, or speak without writing: And
the King being the Corporation of Corporations, and the chief of Corporations,
and who makes all Corporations, cannot take without a writing of as high a
nature: (scil.) Record. And we have a Record here, (as it is granted of the
other side) being enrolled the 18. of May, which was delivered the 16. of May;
and then Pain, upon the whole matter, was the 17. of May an intruder, by
relation of the Deed to the time of the first delivery; And an intruder by his
entry cannot gain any thing out of the Queen; and therefore the information
upon the intrusion is, diversis diebus, and vicibus intrusit: although it be
but one continued possession; and therefore at every instant, during his
possession, he is an intruder: As unto the delivery of the Deed of Assignment
upon the day of the Ascension, which is not dies juridicus, the same is not
material, as is 12 E. 4. 8. by Pigot: If the day of the Retorn of a Writ, i. e.
quarto die falls out in die Dominica, yet it is good enough, although no Court
can then be holden, but the day following, and the Plea is not discontinued;
And this delivery of the Deed of Assignment, might be out of Term, and
therefore at any day within the Term, which is not dies juridicus, but
contrary, of a thing which is necessarily to be done within the Term: as in the
Case between Fish and Broket, of Proclamations made upon a Fine; for a man may
acknowledge a Recognizance, or a Deed to be enrolled in the time of Vacation,
etc. Tanfield: As to the interest, the inrolment has relation, but not as to
the profits; for Pain cannot be an intruder, the 17 of May by any relation.
Popham, the Queens Attorney, When an information upon intrusion and taking of
the profits is here exhibited, the Defendant ought to justify his entry; and
if the entry be found against him, so as his entry is an intrusion, then the
unlawful taking of the profits is found also; and he said, That the Deed
acknowledged, and delivered to the Baron, is a Record, although it be not
enrolled, be the acknowledgment thereof either out of Court, or in Court: If an
information upon a Penal Statute be exhibited unto a Baron of the Exchequer out
of Court, and afterward another informer exhibits another information upon the
same Statute for the same offense against the same person, and that is brought
into the Court before the first, the first information shall be preferred, and
the Defendant shall answer to that, and not to the other, and for the
exhibiting of it in Court, or out of Eourt, it is not material: And the
Assignment, when it is enrolled, has relation unto the acknowledgment of it: A
Reversion is granted to one for life, the Remainder to the King, the particular
Tenant Attorns, the Remainder is not in the King by the Attornment, but if the
Deed be afterward enrolled it shall be said to be in the King from the time of
the Attornment, and the King shall have the benefit of the whole mean profits
from the time of the Attornment: A Lease for years is made by the King
reserving Rent, with clause of distress; That if the Rent be not paid, that the
Lease shall be void, the Rent is not paid, ten years after an Office is found,
the King shall be answered all the profits from the time of the default of
payment of the Rent; and although no intrusion can be laid on the information,
17 Maii, yet it shall be for the 18 day of May. Coke, The Judgment for the
Queen upon an information of intrusion, Quod defend. de intrusione,
transgressione, and contemptu praedict convincantur, etc. and afterward a
Commission shall issue forth, to enquire of the mean profits, and there the
Defendant may show the matter for to mitigate the damages; and if the intrusion
be at any time in the information, it is well enough to have Judgment; and in
our Case, the continuance is laid 18 Maii. Egerton, Solicitor General, The
Record does warrant the Judgment given upon it; for possession laid in the
Queen is sufficient to maintain this information; and here Pain does not
answer to the title of the Queen, but traverseth the intrusion, and therefore
being found an intruder by Verdict, Judgment ought to be given upon it, for the
Jury have found the intrusion generally, and not specially, the 17 of May, and
that cannot be assigned for Error, for it is part of the Verdict of which Error
does not lie, but attaint, for if any Error was, the same was in the Jury and
not in the Court; which Manwood granted: Tanfield, As unto the Case of
continuance of an intrusion, it is clear, that every continuance ought to have
a beginning; for a thing which has not a beginning, cannot be continued; and
here is not any beginning; for the beginning which is laid in the information,
is pretended to be, 17 Maii, and that cannot be for the Cause aforesaid:
Popham, If an information be brought of intrusion, as appears in many
Memorandums in the Exchequer, where, in truth, there is not any Record to prove
it, and the Jury find the intrusion: Will you have a Writ of Error upon it? And
every continuance of intrusion, is intrusion: Anderson, The same matter had
been good evidence, Sed non habet locum hic.

CCLVII. Beale and Langley 's Case. Trin. 29 Eliz. In the Common Pleas. Int.
Hill. Rot. 1544.
JOhn Beale was Plaintiff in a Replevin, against Robert Langley and Roger Hill:
The Case was, That Henry, Earl of Arundel was seized of the Manor of Bury in
his Demesne as of Fee, whereof the place in which, was parcel demised and
demiseable, according to the custom of the said Manor by Copy in Fee, whereof
Langley was a Copiholder in Fee, etc. and the said Earl so seized, enfeoffed
diverse persons of the said Manor unto the use of himself for life, and
afterward to the use of the Lord Lumley, and Elizabeth his wife, daughter of
the said Earl, and the heirs of their two bodies begotten, who made a Lease of
the said Customary lands by Indenture unto the Plaintiff for 100 years; and the
question was, If by this Lease, the lands be so severed from the Manor, that
the Copihold is extinct: Walmesly took exception to the pleading; for that
Langley pleads, That the custom within the Manor is, That if any Copiholder
seized of Customary lands of the said Manor dies thereof seized, having many
sons, That the youngest son shall inherit; and he shows, That the Lord of the
said Manor granted to his father and his mother the said customary lands, by
Copy, to have to his said father and mother, and the heirs of his father, etc.
And that his father died, and that his mother survived him and died, and he as
youngest son, according to the custom entered, and he said, That this custom,
set forth by the Defendant, does not maintain his entry; For the custom
intends but a general and immediate descent upon a Copy made unto a man, and
to his heirs, but such is not the descent here, for the wife surviveth; during
whose life, the heir cannot enter; nor is there here such Estate in the father
of the Defendant unto whom the custom set forth in the Avowry can extend: For
the custom is alleged, Where a Copyholder has a Copyhold Estate to him and
his heirs. And here the Title of the Defendant is, That a customary Estate was
granted to the father and the mother, and the heirs of the father, so as this
Estate is not within the Letter of the custom; And to that purpose he cited
the Case of Sir John Savage, Sir John Savage's Case. ante 109.
late adjudged, Where one entitled himself to a Copihold in this manner; That
within the Manor, there is such a custom, that if one takes to wife any
customary Tenant of the said Manor in Fee, and has issue by her, he, if he
over-live such wife, should be Tenant by the Courtesy, and the Case in truth
was. That he married a woman, who at the time of the marriage, had not any
Copihold, but afterward, during the coverture, a Copihold descended to her. In
that Case, it was holden, That no Tenancy by the Courtesy did accrue by that
custom, which did not extend, but where the wife is a Copiholder at the
marriage; and a custom shall be in construction taken strictly, and shall not
be extended beyond the words of it. And as to the matter in Law, he said, That
by this Lease, the custom was gone, and then by consequence, the customary
Tenancy, as to that land is determined; for the Estate of the Copiholder is,
Secundum consuetudinem Manerii, ad voluntatem Dom. And now by the Lease,
Langley cannot hold, Secundum consuetudinem Manerii; for now the services
reserved upon the Copy, and the advantages of Waste, and other forfeitures, are
extinct; so that if notwithstanding the Lease, the customary interest should
endure, then such a Copiholder should hold this land, discharged of all
services, etc. in better Estate than any Freeholder at the Common Law, and
because the services in Law are discharge, and cannot be recovered, for that
cause the customary interest is determined: For the Case is, 7 E. 4. 19. by
Danby, That the Copiholder shall have remedy against his Lord, if he put him
out, for he pays a Fine when he enters; but here, during this Lease, no Fine
can be paid upon any descent, etc. and the Fine is the cause, for which the
Copiholder shall maintain his possession against the Lord: But here no descent
or surrender can be presented; for there is not any Tenant who can do it: See
21 E. 4. 80. by Brian, As long as the Copiholder pays unto the Lord the
customs and services, If the Lord puts him out, he shall have an Action of
Trespass: 42 E. 3. 25. If the Copiholder will not do his services, the Lord
shall seize the lands: Dyer 100. 1 Cro. 35.
And he resembled this Case, to the case where the King grants lands, probis
hominibus de D. the same is a good Grant, and that only in respect of the
Rent, and for the reason of that, it is a good Corporation: But if the King
releaseth the Rent, the Corporation is dissolved, and the Grant is become void:
Fenner, Sergeant, contrary; and he said, That by this Lease, being the act of
the Lord himself, the customary interest is not determined, etc. And the whole
Court was of clear opinion with Fenner, That the Copihold did remain, for
otherwise, by such practices of the Lords, all the Copiholders in England might
be defeated; and if any prejudice be grown to the Lord by this act, it is of
his own doing, and against his own act he shall not be relieved: And by Periam,
Justice, The Lord by his act, i. e. the making of the Lease, has destroyed his
Seignory, and lost the services, as to this land: And Windham, Justice said,
That the Lord himself had destroyed the custom as to the services, but not as
to the customary interest of the Tenant; but the Lord Anderson was of opinion,
That the Rents and services do remain; and if the Copiholder, after such Lease
commits Waste, that it is a forfeiture to the Lord; and that will fall in
evidence upon a trial, although such Waste cannot be found by an ordinary
presentment: and the same Law which allows the Copiholder his Copihold
interest against this Lease, will allow unto the Lord his Rents and services:
and he said, That the Lord shall have the Rents and services, and not the
Lessee, Quod mirum, against his own Lease; See 33 Eliz. between Murrel and
Smith now reported by the Lord Coke in his 4 Report. fol. 20.

CCLVIII. Russel and Broker 's Case. Trin. 29 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
RUssel brought Trespass against Broker, 3 Len. 218.
for cutting down of four Oaks. The Defendant pleaded, That the place where,
etc. and that he is seized of a Message in D. And that he, and all those whose
Estate he has, etc. Habere consuerunt rationabile estoverium suum, for fuel,
ad libitum suum capiendum in boscis, subboscis, and arboribus, ibidem
crescentibus: and that, in quolibet tempore anni, but in fawning time; The
Plaintiff by Replication, said, That the place where, is within the Forest of,
etc. and that the Defendant, and all those whose Estate, etc. Habere
consueverunt rationabile estoverium suum de boscis, etc. per liberationem
Forrestarii, vel ejus Deputati, prout boscus pati potest, and non ad exigentiam
petentis: And upon that Replication, the Defendant did demur in Law: and the
opinion of the whole Court was, That Judgment should be given against the
Plaintiff; for if he should oust the Defendant of his prescription by the Law
of the Forest, he ought to have pleaded the Law of the Forest in such case;
viz. Lex Forrestae est, etc. for the Law of the Forest is not the common Law
of the Land, and we are not bound to take notice of it, but it ought to be
pleaded, or otherwise the Plaintiff ought to have traversed the prescription of
the Defendant, for here are two prescriptions; one pleaded by the Defendant by
way of Bar, the other set forth by the Plaintiff in his Replication without any
traverse of that with is alleged in the Bar, which cannot be good; but if the
Plaintiff had showed in his Replication, Lex Forrestae talis est, etc. then the
prescription of the Defendant had been answered without any more; for none can
prescribe against a Statute. Exception was taken to the Bar, because the
Defendant had justified the cutting down of Oaks, without alleging, that there
was not any underwood, but the Exception was not allowed; for he has choice,
ad libitum suum. Another Exception was taken, because he has not showed, that
at the time of the cutting, it was not fawning time; Poph. 158. 2 Cro. 637, 679.
for at the fawning time his prescription did not extend to it and that was
holden a good material exception; but because the Plaintiff had replied; and
upon this Replication, the Defendant demurred; the Court would not resort to
the Bar, but gave Judgment upon the Replication against the Plaintiff.

CCLIX. Mich. 29 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
A Blacksmith of South-Mims, in the County of Middlesex, took a Bond of
another Blacksmith of the same Town, that he should not exercise his Trade or
Art of a Blacksmith within the same Town, nor within a certain precinct of it;
and upon that Obligation, the Obligee brought an Action of Debt in the
Common Pleas, depending which, the Obligor complained to the Justices of Peace
of the said County upon the matter against the Obligee, upon which the matter
being found by examination, the Justices committed the Obligee to prison; and
now, upon the whole matter, Puckering, Sergeant, prayed a Habeas Corpus for the
said Obligee to the Sheriff of Middlesex, and it was granted: and Fleetwood,
Recorder of London, being at the Bar, the Court told him openly of this matter,
That by the Laws, Justices of Peace have not Conusance of such offenses, nor
could meddle with them; for their power is limited by their commission and the
Statutes; and the Recorder did much rely upon the opinion of Hull, 2 H. 5. 5.
But by the clear opinion of the whole Court, although this Court, being a high
Court, Owen 143. 2 Cro. 596.
might punish such offenses appearing before them on Record, yet it did not
follow. That the Justices of Peace might so do: But as to the Bond, the Court
was clear of opinion, that it was void because it was against Law.

Ante 34.
CCLX. Trin. 29 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
A Justicies issued forth to the Sheriff of H. for the Debt of 40 l. and the
Plea was determined before the Undersheriff in the absence of the Sheriff, and
it was now moved by Puckering, Sergeant, If a Writ of Error, or a Writ of false
Judgment did lie in that Case: And first, the opinion of the Justices was, That
the Sheriff himself in his person ought to hold Plea of a Justicies; and if he
makes a Precept or Deputation to another, the same is merely void: 34 H. 6.
48. And see the said Case abridged; Fitz. Bar. 161. and it was said, That a
Justicies is not an Original Writ, but a Commission to the Sheriff, to hold
Plea, ultra 40 s. and upon a Judgment given upon a Justicies, a Writ of false
Judgment lies, and not a Writ of Error: See for that, 7 E. 4. 23. And it was
the opinion of Anderson, chief Justice, That such Judgment is utterly void, and
Coram non Judice.

CCLXI. Trin. 29 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
NOTE, by Anderson, chief Justice, That if Cestuy que use, 3 Len. 196. 4 Inst.
85. Kel. 41.
after the Statute of 1 R. 3. leaseth for years, and afterward the Feoffees
release unto the Lessee and his heirs, having notice of the Use, that this
release is unto the first Use: But where the Feffees are disseised, and they
release unto the Disseisor, although they have notice of the Use, the same is
to the use of the Disseisor, and that was the Case of the Lord Compton; and
that no Subpoena lies against such a Disseisor: See 11 E. 4. 8.

CCLXII. Hamper 's Case. Hill. 31 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
HAmper was indicted upon the Statute of 5 Eliz. of Perjury, 1 Cr. 147. 3 Len.
230.
and in the body of the Indictment, The Record was, That he, Falsa deceptive
deposuit; whereas the Statute is, Wilfully; and although in the perclose of the
Indictment, the conclusion is, Et sic commisit voluntarium perjurium: Yet the
opinion of the Court was, that the same does not help the matter; and for that
cause, the party was discharged: For, contra formam Statuti, will not help the
matter, nor supply it; and yet it was moved and urged, That contra formam
Statuti would help it; and it was holden in this Case, That if a witness does
depose falsely, but the Jury does not give credit to it, nor give their Verdict
against his oath, although the party grieved cannot sue him: yet he may be
punished at the King's suit.

CCLXIII. Moulton 's Case. Hill. 31 Eliz. In the King 's-Bench.
IT was moved by Coke, That one Robert Moulton, Tenant in tail, 1 Cro. 151.
having issue two sons, Robert and John, died seized, and that Robert his son
and heir, levied a Fine thereof, and afterward levied another Fine, and died
without issue; and John brought two several Writs of Error to reverse both the
Fines; and the Tenant, to the Writ of Error, brought upon the first Fine,
pleaded the second Fine in Bar of it; and in Bar upon a Writ of Error brought
upon the second Fine, he pleaded the first Fine; and the Court advised him to
plead, That the Fine pleaded in Bar was erroneous: 7 H. 4. 107. where a man is
to annul an Outlawry, his person shall not be disabled by any other Outlawry.

CCLXIV. Broccus 's Case. Trin. 30 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
BRoccus, Lord of a Manor, covenanted with his Copiholder, 1 Roll. 15. Pordage
versus Cole, 20 Car. 2. B. R.
to assure to him and his heirs, the Freehold and Inheritance of the Copihold,
and the Copiholder in consideration of the same performed, did covenant to pay
such a sum. And it was the opinion of the whole Court, That the Copiholder is
not tied to pay the money before the Assurance made, and the Covenant
performed: But if the words had been in consideration of the said Covenant to
be performed, then he had been bound to pay the money presently, and he should
have his remedy by Covenant.

CCLXV. Foster 's Case. Trin. 30 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
NOTE, It was said, and holden by the whole Court in this Case, That in Debt
brought against Executors, If the Defendants plead, That the Testator was bound
in a Recognizance, in such a sum, beyond which they have not any thing in their
hands; That it is a good Replication to say, That the Recognizance was entered
into for performance of Covenants contained in certain Indentures, of which
Covenants none are yet broken.

CCLXVI. Partridge 's Case. Trin. 30 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
A Quo Warranto was brought against Partridge, in which Case, It was holden by
all the Justices, That a man may prescribe to hold a Leet oftener than twice in
one year, and at other days than are set in the Statute of Magna Charta, cap.
35. because the said Statute is in the Affirmative; But Popham said, That one
cannot prescribe against a Statute, See for the same, Book of Entries, 13 E. 3.
Leet 12. and he said, That the want of a Tunbrel and Pillory, is a good cause
of forfeiture of the Liberty: which Coke denied. And it was farther moved by
Popham, That if a general pardon be granted with general exceptions in it, he
that will take advantage of the same, ought to plead it, and show that he is
not any person excepted; for otherwise the Judges cannot allow him the benefit
of it, because they do not know if he be a person excepted or not; But if there
were special persons excepted by name, and none other excepted, but only those
persons, there the party needs not to plead it, for the Court may discern J. B.
from J. D. See 8 E. 3. 7. and 26 H. 8. 7. If a man commits Felony, and also
Treason, and afterward comes a general pardon for the Felony, but Treason is
excepted, and the party is arraigned of Felony: by Coke, he shall have the
benefit of the pardon; but Popham contrary, for he is disabled by the Treason.
And it was agreed by the whole Court, That in a Quo Warranto, It is not
sufficient for the Defendant to say, That such a Subject has lawful interest
to hold a Leet, without making Title to himself; for the Writ is, Quo Warranto
he claims, etc. And afterward Judgment was given for the Queen.

CCLXVII. Wiggen and Arscot 's Case. Trin. 30 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
IN a Prohibition, the surmise was, That the Exposition of Statutes does belong
unto the Queen's temporal Courts; and Arscot had sued in the spiritual Court
for Tithes, whereas in truth, for not reading of the Articles according to the
Statute of 13 Eliz. he was deprived, ipso facto, and so he was not Parson: for
which cause, Gaudy prayed a Prohibition; for he said, that the surmise was good
and sufficient: For the Question is, Parson, or not Parson? and that shall be
tried here by the Common Law. And I do not know that it has ever been ruled
here to the contrary before. Clench, Justice, It has not been ruled to the
contrary; yet because great inconvenience may arise upon the admitting of it,
The Court has taken order, That no Prohibition shall be granted upon such a
surmise, without great probability of the truth of the surmise: Where a
Prohibition is awarded upon such a surmise, the party needs not to prove his
surmise according to the Statute of 2 E. 6. cap. 13. for this surmise is
conceived upon a cause of later time, since the said Statute, and was not any
cause to have a Prohibition at the time of the said Statute.

CCLXVIII. Winter and Loveday 's Case. Trin. 31 Eliz. In the King's Bench. Rot.
759.
IN an Action of Covenant by Winter against Loveday; It was found by special
Verdict, That Winter, by Deed indented Mortgaged to Loveday, a certain Lease
upon condition to pay 400 l. to Loveday at a day certain, at the porch of such
a Church; and upon such payment, Winter to have back his Lease; and Loveday
covenanted, That upon repayment of the money he should have back all his
Evidences concerning the same: and it was farther found, That at the day of
payment one Cornwallys sent unto Loveday to know if Loveday would receive the
money which Winter owed to him, at his house, who answered that he was content,
and he came there, and the money was told and delivered in bags to Loveday; but
afterward some contention did arise between Winter and Loveday for certain
Writings; for which cause Cornwallys said, That if they would not agree betwixt
them, That they should not have his money. Whereupon Winter requested
Cornwallis, that he might have the money to carry to the said porch of the said
Parish Church, who was contented, and there Loveday came to receive it, and
Winter would not pay it. Tanfield moved, That the same was a good payment to
discharge the Mortgage; for the money was told in the house of Cornwallis, and
Loveday there put it up into bags; and the same is a good payment and receipt:
Coke contrary, Here is not any payment, for it was not the money of Winter, but
of Cornwallis, as appears by the words of Cornwallis; (scil.) If they could
not agree they should not have his money: Also Winter requested Cornwallis,
that he might have the money to carry to the porch of the Parish Church
aforesaid, by which it appears, that it was not Winter's money. And for that
cause, it was also the opinion of the Court, that the same was not any
sufficient tender. See for this, 1 Len. 34, 35.
the Case of Watkins and Astwick, Hill. 28 Eliz.

CCLXIX. Ordway and Parrot 's Case. Trin. 30 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
ORdway brought a Scire facias against Parrot and Hallsey, who were Bail in a
Bill of Debt, for one Bennet; and they pleaded, That the said Bennet had paid
the money recovered, to the Plaintiff, according to the condition of the
Recognizance; and it was the opinion of the whole Court, that it was no Plea
without alleging payment upon Record; for if this should be suffered, every
man should be enforced twice to try his Action; wherefore the Plea was
disallowed.

CCLXX. Coniers and Holland 's Case. Trin. 30 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
3 Cro. 279. 2 Cro. 483. and 620.
IN an Action upon the Case upon Assumpsit, by Coniers against Holland, The
Defendant pleaded, That after the promise, that the Plaintiff had discharged
him of it: And by Wray, chief Justice, It is a good Plea, and so it has been
often ruled, and it was late the Case of the Lord chief Baron, against whom in
such an Action, such a Plea was pleaded, and he moved us to declare our
opinions in Serjeant's-Inn: and there, by the greater opinion, it was holden to
be a good Plea; for which cause, The Court said to Buckley, who moved the Case,
That the Plea is good, and Judgment was entered accordingly.

CCLXXI. Richmond and Butcher 's Case. Mich. 33 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
1 Cro. 217.
IN a Replevin, the Case was this; A man made a Lease for years, reserving Rent
to the Lessor, his Executors and Assigns, where the Lessor had a Fee-simple in
the Lands; it was holden by the Court, That the Rent should go to the heir,
notwithstanding the special Reservation, because the words of the Reservation
are, During the term, and the other words, To his Executors and Assigns, shall
be void, and then the Rent shall go with the Reversion to the heir, which see,
27 H. 8. 19. by Awdley: And it was said by some, That a Rent reserved during
the term shall go to the heir with the Reversion: and 12 E. 4. was cited, where
a Rent reserved to the Lessor and his Assigns, should not go to the heir; and
that these words, During the term, did not mend the matter; for the Lessor
might well overlive the term. But in the principal Case, it was said by Periam,
Justice, That the Executors should not have the Rent, for they have not the
Reversion; but if the Lessor grants over the reversion, the Grantee shall have
the Rent. And afterward Judgment was given against the Plaintiff; for it was
in a Replevin, and Judgment was given for the Avowant, who was heir to the
Lessor.

CCLXXII. Mich. 30 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
IN an Action of Trespass brought by a poor woman for breaking of her Close;
she declared of a Continuando of the Trespass, by six years and upon Nihil
dicit pleaded, she had Judgment to recover; upon which issued forth a Writ of
Enquiry of Damages; and now came the poor woman, and showed to the Court, That
the Jury had found too little damages, i. e. but 10 s. whereas the Land is
worth 4 l. per ann. and the Trespass had continued by six years together, and
prayed that the said Writ might not be received, and that the Court would grant
her another Writ to have a Melius inquirendum of the damages, but the whole
Court denied to grant any such Writ, for so there might be infinite enquiries:
But sometimes, at the prayer of the Defendant, when excessive damages are
found, or any misdemeanors alleged in the Plaintiff, procuring or using such a
Writ of Enquiry of damages, we use to relieve the Defendant, by granting and
issuing forth of a new Writ, but to the Plaintiff never, because the suing
forth of the Writ is his own act: And by Rhodes, Justice, The late Countess of
Darby brought a Writ of Dower, and had Judgment to recover; and she surmised
that her husband died seized, and prayed a Writ of Enquiry of damages, and had
it granted unto her; and because too small damages were found, she would have
suppressed the said Writ, and procured a new Writ, but she could not obtain it;
and at last she was driven to bring in the first Writ, and so it was done.

CCLXXIII. Scrog 's and Griffin 's Case. Hill. 30 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
IN an Action upon the Case, upon a promise by Scrogs, against Griffin; The
Plaintiff declared, That whereas such a day, one Brown and another, did run for
a wager, from Saint-John-Street, to High-gate, That he of the said two, that
first got thither, and came again, should have 5 l. which wager, the said Brown
did win; and whereas after the said match so performed, the said Plaintiff
affirmed, that there was deceit and covin in the performance of the said match,
upon which the Defendant, in consideration of twelve pence, to him delivered by
the Plaintiff, promised, that if the Plaintiff can prove, that any deceit or
covin was used, or practiced in the performance of the said match, that then
upon request, he should pay to the Plaintiff 5 l. And upon Non Assumpsit
pleaded, it was found for the Plaintiff, and it was moved by Foster, in arrest
of Judgment, That here is not any request set forth in the Declaration: and
also, that this deceit is enquired of in London, whereas it ought to be in
Middlesex where the Race was run: and it was agreed by all the Justices, That
the proof ought to be made in this Action, as in the common Cases of voyages:
and that request now is but matter of conformity, and not of necessity. Wray,
Justice, It is clear, That always proof ought to be as it is here; if not, that
the matter be referred to a special proof, before a person certain. And as to
the trial, The deceit is not in issue, but only the promise; and therefore the
issue is well tried in London: Also this Action here includes proof and
request: for there cannot be made any other proof, and the proof is the effect;
for which cause he concluded, that Judgment should be entered for the Plaintiff,
which was done accordingly.

CCLXXIV. Fuller and Trimwell 's Case. Pasch. 29 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
IN a Replevin by Fuller, against Trimwell, who made Conusance, 1 Roll 46.^
as Bailiff to one house for damage fesance, The Plaintiff in Bar of the
Conusance showed, That one A. T. did pretend right to the land where, etc. and
the Defendant, in the right of the said A. T. took the cattle, etc. Absque hoc,
that he took them as Bailiff to the said House, upon which the Defendant did
demur in Law; and it was argued by Shuttleworth, Sergeant, That the traverse is
not good, which see, 26 H. 8. 8. 5 H. 7. 2. Not his Bailiff; but if the truth
of the Case be so, he may plead of his own wrong, without such cause, etc. And
see also, 28 H. 6. 4. The Commandment is not traverseable, but in special
Cases, where the Commandment determines the interest of the other party, which
see, 13 H. 7. 12, 13. Antea 196.
in the Case of the Earl of Suffolk in Trespass, the Defendant pleaded. That
before the trespass, the Plaintiff was seized, and thereof enfeoffed one B. by
whose commandment he entered, to which the Plaintiff said, That after the
Feoffment, and before the trespass, the said B. leased to the Plaintiff, to
hold at will, Absque hoc, that the said B. did command him; and that was holden
a good traverse; for the commandment determines that Lease at will; and in the
principal Case, all the Justices were of clear opinion, That the traverse is
good; and they all said, That the Custos Brevium had showed to them many
presidents thereof, See 15 H. 7. 17. and see also, 7 H. 4. 101, 102. In
trespass for taking of cattle, the Defendant did justify as servant to such a
one for Rent arrere, due to his Master; The Plaintiff, Replicando said, That
the Defendant was not Bailiff at the time of the taking, where it is said by
Gascoigne, That if the Defendant takes the cattle, claiming property, as a
Heriot due to himself, although that afterward the Lord agrees to the
distress, as taken for Rent arrere; yet he cannot be said his Bailiff at the
time of the distress, which was granted by Rhodes, Periam and Windham: and as
to that which has been objected, That if this traverse be allowed, the meaning
of the party shall be drawn in question; i. e. the meaning of him who took the
cattle, the same is not any mischief, for so it is in other cases; as in the
case of Recaption, See 9 H. 6. 1. 45 E. 3, 4.

CCLXXV. Humphreston 's Case. Pasch. 16 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
More 103. 1 Anders. 40. Dyer 337. Owen 64. Sty. 293.
IN an Ejectione firmae, It was found by special Verdict, That W. Humphreston
seized of the Manor of Humphreston, suffered a common Recovery to be had
thereof by Kinnersley and Fowk in the Writ of Entry in the Post, to the intent
that they should make an Estate to the said W. Humphreston, and Elionar his
wife for their lives, the remainder, Seniori puero dicti W. and to the heirs of
the body dicti senioris pueri legitime procreat. the remainder to the heirs of
the body of the said W. Humphreston, with diverse remainders over. And
afterward the Recoverers, in December following, by Indenture made an Estate
accordingly, and made Livery to W. Humphreston and his wife; and afterward, in
November, 2 E. 6. by Indenture between the said W. Humphreston of the one
party, and Kinnersley on the other part, The said W. Humphreston did covenant
with the said Kinnersley, to do all such lawful and reasonable things for to
assure the said lands unto the use of the said W. Humphreston and Elionar his
wife for their lives, and afterward, to the use of the eldest child of the
body of the said W. Humphreston lawfully begotten, and to the heirs of the body
of the said eldest child of the body of the said W. Humphreston; and after to
diverse other uses over; and afterward, Ter. Pasch. 2 E. 6. W. Humphreston and
Elionar his wife, levied a Fine of the said land to C. and B. in Fee, to the
use of the said Indenture; Elionar died, W. Humphreston married another wife,
and had issue a daughter, named Frances, and afterward had issue a son, named
William, and died. William the son, being of the age of six years, entered into
the lands, and leased the same to the Plaintiff for years, who being ejected by
the Defendant, brought the Ejectione firmae: And this special Verdict. And the
points moved upon it were argued by Atkins, Phetiplace, Fenner, Fleetwood,
Plowden and Bromley, and afterward this Case was argued by the Justices: And
Gaudy, puisne Justice conceived, That Judgment ought to be given for the
Plaintiff: First, he conceived, that this Lease for years made by the Infant,
without Deed and without Rent reserved is not void; so as every stranger shall
take advantage of it, but only voidable; for an Infant may make a Bond, and a
Contract for his commodity and profit, and the same shall bind him; as for his
meat and drink, apparel, etc. But if upon such Lease he had reserved a small
Rent, as one penny, where the land was worth 100 l. per ann. such a Lease had
been void; and in our Case, this Lease was made upon the land, and was made for
to try the title to it, which is a good consideration, and to the profit of the
Infant, and for his advancement, and then the Lease is not void. It has been
objected, That here the Recovery being suffered to the intent that the
Recoverers should make an Estate, ut supra, etc. that the use shall rise
presently upon the Recovery to him who suffered the Recovery, and then the
Recoverers could not make Livery unto him; he held strongly, That the use and
the possession should be adjudged in the Recoverers, until they made the
Estates, etc. for they otherwise could not make the Estates, etc. 2 Roll 789.
and these words [To the intent] shallbe construed, that they shall have the
lands, until they made the Estates, etc. And he held, that the remainder
limited, Seniori puero, where there is not any, in rerum natura, is good
enough: as a remainder limited to him who shall first come to Paul's. And he
conceived, that the son should take this remainder, and not the daughter: and
he conceived, that the Estate tail here, was not executed, i. e. the second
intail; Diverse Authors of Grammar, have been produced to prove, that Puer, may
be taken both ways, Tam puer, quam puella, Desporterius, Calapine, Melancthon,
and the Grammar allowed, but I conceive, that Puer is a word proper for a Boy,
and Puella for a Maid; and where we have proper words, we ought not to judge
but according to them; and because the word is doubtful, we ought to consider
the cause upon the circumstances, and therefore it is to be intended, that W.
Humphreston had a greater desire that his son should have his Inheritance, than
his daughter, if there be not some special matter to prove that the intent of
the father was for his daughter. Southcote, Justice, agreed with Gaudy in the
first point; and also that the Recoverers have convenient time to make the
Estates; and that they are to make the same without request for the benefit of
the wife, who is a stranger to it, and is to have the lands for her ioynture;
and he cited the Case of the Abbat of York, 44 E. 3. 8. and 9. where the
difference is taken between a Feoffment made upon condition to re-enfeoff the
Feoffor, or to enfeoff a stranger: And here in our Case the Feoffment is made
in convenient time, and here is sufficient consideration, That the Recoverers
shall be seized to their own uses, until, etc. And these words, Roll supra
Roll 407.
[Ea intentione] shall be taken for a Condition: And also that this remainder
limited, Seniori puero, is good notwithstanding that there be not any Senior
puer alive at the time. And as to the word (puer) he held, that it did extend
to both Sexes indifferently; and because it is doubtful what Sex the father
intended, we are to construe the same upon the circumstances, which appear upon
the parts of the Indentures: and here it appears upon the Indenture, that he
has explained his mind, (scil.) Eldest child, be it Male or Female: As if I
have two sons, named J. and I devise my lands, or limit a remainder to J. my
son, the Law shall construe this Devise to extend to my younger son; for
without devise or limitation my eldest son should have it. But if J. S. has
two sons, known by the names of A. and I Devise lands to A. son of J.S. there I
ought to explain my meaning openly: And he conceived, That the Estate tail is
executed defeasiable in W. Humphreston, upon issue afterward had; and that the
daughter should have the lands, and not the son; and if the Fine destroy the
remainder in abeyance limited to the eldest child, then the said eldest child
shall have it, de novo, by the later conveyance. And as to the Warranty of the
Fine, because the possession of the Conusees is removed by the Statute of 27 H.
8. to the daughter, she shall not have the benefit of the Warranty as to vouch,
but she shall Rebutt: as 22 Ass. 37. 69. Where a Feoffment in Fee is made to my
Villein with Warranty and before that the Feoffor dies, I enter upon my
Villein, so as the Warranty upon the death of the Warrantor is not attached
upon the possession of my Villein, I shall not have advantage of that Warranty:
A Disseisor makes a Feoffment in Fee upon Condition, the Disseisee re-leaseth
the Feoffee with Warranty, the Disseisor enters for the condition broken; now
the Disseisor shall Rebutt by that Warranty, but not vouch. And here in our
Case, the Fine is a discontinuance, so as the son is put to his Action, if he
had right, and then the Warranty shall bind him; but contrary, if his entry be
lawful. And as to the Lease made by the Infant, he conceived, that it being
made without Rent, it was merely void, for it was without consideration. Wray,
chief Justice, As to the first point, he was of opinion, That the Recoverers
shall be seized to their own use, until they make the Estate for that was the
use implied, for all uses are directed and ruled by the intent implied or
expressed of him, to whom the land is; and his intent was, that such Estates
should be made, and to such purpose the Recovery was suffered: As if I enfeoff
A. unto the use of B. for his life, there it is implied, That B. shall be
seized of the Fee to my use, I covenant, That J. S. shall take the profits of
my lands for his life, this is a good use of the lands for his life; and he
held, that the Recoverors should be seized to their own use, until, etc. And
the Recoverers ought to make the Estates within convenient time, or otherwise
the use should be revested again in him who suffered the Recovery; and here the
Estate was made within convenient time: And he said, That in every Case where a
remainder is limited in abeyance to one by a proper name, the same is not good,
but by a general name it is good enough if the party be in esse when the
remainder falls: as a remainder limited upon an Estate for life unto the first
son, or daughter of J. S. where J. S. at the time has not any son or daughter,
the same is good, if such person shall be in esse, at the time of the death of
the Tenant for life, 17 E. 3. A remainder limited Filio primo genito, etc. and
3 E. 3. Fitz. Tail. 8. Land given to J. S. Et uxori quam primo matrimonio
duxerit in uxorem, and afterward he takes a wife, she shall take by the same
Conveyance. And as to the Warranty, This Fine with Warranty was levied to C.
and B. unto the use of himself for life, the remainder to the use of the eldest
child, etc. and he intended, That the daughter should not have the benefit of
this Warranty; for by the Statute, the possession is removed, and transferred
in the Post before the Warranty could attach; and therefore the same shall not
bind the son, neither by Voucher, nor by Rebutter: But Tenant by the Courtesy
shall have benefit of the Warranty; for although he be in the Post, yet he
continues the Estate which was made to the wife. And as to the point in
question, we ought to consider, that the Statute of 27 H. 8. of Uses is, That
Cestuy que use shall have the lands in such plight as he had the use, which was
without Warranty; and therefore it shall be transferred into possession without
Warranty: As to the Lease made by the Infant without rent, profit, or other
recompense, he conceived the same to be utterly void; as if he grant a Rent, or
an Advowson, he may say, that he did not grant, etc. for the thing included in
the Deed, does not pass, although he delivers the Deed of Grant, with his own
hand: Two ioynt-tenants within age, one makes a Lease of years, and dies, the
other shall avoid it; for the Lease is utterly void, of which every stranger
may take advantage; but of acts voidable, it is otherwise: As two Infants
joynt-tenants, the one Leaseth for life, and makes Livery in person, and dies,
the other shall not avoid it: Two joynt-tenants, the one makes a Feoffment
upon condition, and dies, the other shall not take benefit of the condition:
But here the Lease is merely void, of which every stranger shall take
advantage, and therefore upon this point the Plaintiff shall be barred. And
also he was of opinion, That this remainder in abeyance limited, Seniori puero,
was not destroyed by the Fine, for it is in the consideration of the Law, and
so preserved by the Law; and therefore a descent in the time of vacation of an
Abbat, shall not bind the successor; and so where the party is beyond the seas;
for such persons and their estates, the Law privilegeth and preserves: So a
remainder limited to the right heirs of J. S. And where the King seiseth by
reason of a Ward, and during such seisin of the King, a descent is cast, the
same shall not bind him who has right; for he could not enter upon the
possession of the King: and by the Statute of 32 H. 8. A Recovery had against
Tenant for life, the remainder unto the right heirs of J. S. who is alive at
the time of the Recovery, is not helped by the Statute of 32 H. 8. For the
words of the Statute are, To whom the reversion or remainder shall then
appertain: See 11 R. 2. Fitz. Detin. 46. and so he concluded, because that this
remainder is in the custody of the Law, and not in esse, it is privileged and
preserved and not destroyed by the Fine; and upon issue had, the remainder
shall be executed, notwithstanding the said act done by the father; and without
any entry to be made by the Conusees to raise the use, for the remainder
limited, Seniori puero, neither was, nor could be discontinued: As to the
principal point of the Case, viz. How these words, Seniori puero, shall be
expounded, although diverse authorities have been cited out of Latin Authors,
That this word (puer) shall be taken for the Male or Female; yet I conceive,
That more commonly, it shall be taken for the Male than for the Female, and we
ought to judge according to the intent of the parties, and not according to the
strict signification of the word in Latin, especially where it is doubtful
how it shall be expounded: 9 H. 7. 16. A. was bound in a Bond upon condition to
pay, december libras auri puri; although there be not any such phrase in Latin,
yet because it appears so to be the meaning of the Obligee to have fine gold,
it was so taken: 39 H. 6. 10. and 11. The word (uterque) id est, quilibet pro
part sua, See the Book: so it was lately adjudged in the Court of
Common Pleas, where three were bounden, Et eorum uterque, which was construed
to be, Quilibet, for we ought always in construction of Deeds, to have regard
to the meaning of the parties, and not to argue the aptness of the Latin word.
And I conceive, That if a Lease be made for life, the remainder puero of J. S.
who has a son and a daughter, the son shall have the land, etc. for the most
worthy shall be preferred; and therefore, if a Freeman marries a Neife, she is
enfranchised for ever, according to the opinion of Fitzherbert, which I hold to
be good Law, for the husband is the more worthy: So if the Lease for life be
made (...) J. S. the remainder to the right heirs of A. B. who has issue three
daughters, and dies, the eldest shall have the remainder, and not the other
with her, because she is the more worthy; and so a remainder upon an Estate for
life of lands in Gavelkind limited to the right heirs of J. S. who has issue
two sons, the eldest shall have it: So here in the principal Case, (Puer) shall
be expounded son, because he is the more worthy: But here are other
circumstances, which give occasion of another construction; for this doubtful
word (Puer) is explained by the English Indenture, which the father, W.
Humphreston, caused to be made; [Unto the use of the eldest Child] which is a
good exposition of the former Conveyance: and I am of opinion, that the same
ought to be meant of the daughter, for so soon as she is born, the remainder
vests in her, and by the birth of the son after shall not be divested: Land is
leased to A. for life, the remainder to T. son of A. who has two sons of the
same name, the eldest shall have it, because the more worthy; but, if
afterward the Donor declares his meaning to the contrary, the same shall
stand, etc. And afterward Judgment was given against the Plaintiff, and that
the daughter should have the Lands.

CCLXXVI. Pasch. 16 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
Poph. 182. Hughs Abr. Tit. Devise. 657. Case 5. Savile 72, 73. Die. 371. b.
Shep. Touch. 449. 15 H. 7. 12. Ante 43. Perk. 547.
A Man devised his Lands to his Wife for life, and because he was in doubt
whether he should have issue or no, he farther willed by his Will, That if he
should not have any issue by his Wife, that then after the death of his Wife,
the lands should be sold, and the money thereof coming, distributed to three of
his blood, and made his Wife and another his Executors, and died; The Executors
proved the Will, The other Executor died, and the Wife sold the lands; and it
was the opinion of Wray and Southcote, Justices, That the sale was good,
although it be not expressed in the Will, by whom the Lands should be sold; for
the moneys coming of the sale, are to be distributed by his Executors, to
persons certain, as Legacies, and it appertains to Executors to pay the
Legacies, and therefore they shall sell, etc. As if a man wills, That his
lands shall be sold, and that the moneys coming thereof, shall be disposed of
for the payment of his debts; now the Executors shall sell the Lands, for to
them it belongs to pay debts: Also they held, 3 Cro. 278. 3. More 341. 1 Inst.
113. a. 1 And. 145.
that the Lands should be sold in the life of the Wife, otherwise it could
never be sold; and also the surviving Executor shall sell the lands, because
the authority does survive.

CCLXXVII. Pasch. 16 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
THree men were bounden by Recognizance, jointly and severally, against all
which the Conusee sued forth Execution by Scire facias; and upon issue joined,
it was found for the Plaintiff in the King's Bench, and Execution awarded by
Capias ad Satisfaciend. And because the same erronice emanavit, being upon a
Recognizance, it was drawn off the File; and now the Conusee brought an Action
of debt upon the Judgment against one of them, and the opinion of the whole
Court was, that it would not lie, because the Judgment was joint against them
all three.

CCLXXVIII. Pasch. 16 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
A. Brought an Action upon the Case, and declared, That the Dean and Chapter of
Westminster, did lease unto him a house for years by Deed indented, of which
Indenture he was possessed, and afterward lost it, and by Trover it came to
the hands of the Defendant, who sold it, and converted the money thereof coming
to his own use; The Defendant pleaded, Not guilty; and the Plaintiff gave in
evidence, That the said Lease was made to him, and to one B. and that the said
Indenture was delivered to the said B. (And that was agreed to be the
possession of them both) and afterward B. died, and afterward A. the
Plaintiff, was the sole owner of it: and that was holdden to be good Evidence
on the part of the Plaintiff; and if the Plaintiff can prove the other part of
his Declaration; i. e. that the Indenture came unto the hands of the Defendant,
and that he sold it, that then he should recover. But it was given in Evidence
on the Defendants parts, that the said B. sold to the said Defendant his part
and interest in the said Lease, and also the said indenture; so as now he is
become Tenant in common with the Plaintiff, and then his sale does not give any
cause of Action to the Plaintiff and that was holden by the whole Court to be
good evidence without pleading of it; The Case went farther; That A. being
within age, his father leased the lands for 20 years, and afterward the son at
his full age upon the back of the Indenture did release to the Defendant all
his right; and it was holden by Wray, Justice, That when the father leased, he
did it as Guardian to his son; and it was not any Ejectment of the son, but it
was a Lease in the behalf of the son, although the son might avoid it, and then
when the endorsment is ut supra, the same is a good assignment; and afterward
the Plaintiff was Nonsuit.

CCLXXIX. Pasch. 16 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
IN an Action upon the Case, the Plaintiff declared, That B. by his Will did
devise to each of his daughters, he having two daughters, 200 l. and that the
survivor should have the whole; and showed farther, that one of his two
daughters died, and that B. made his Wife his Executrix, and that the said wife
took to husband the Defendant; and farther declared, That the Defendant in
consideration of all that, and that the Defendant should take the surviving
daughter to wife, and in consideration that the Defendant had Assets to pay all
Debts and Legacies, etc. did promise to pay to the Plaintiff 400 l. at four
several days: The first day of payment incurred, and no money was paid,
whereupon the Plaintiff brought the Action; the Defendant pleaded, That he made
no such promise; and it was found for the Plaintiff, and damages were assessed
for the default of payment at the first day; and that was moved in arrest of
Judgment, because the Assumpsit was entire, and the Plaintiff ought to have
forborne his suit until all the days of payment were past, and then to have one
entire Action for the whole; but the opinion of the whole Court was against
that; for they said, It is not like unto a Debt upon a Contract, or a Bill,
where the debt is to be paid at several days; for here no debt is to be
recovered but only damages for the debt; and this default of payment is a
wrong, and therefore the Action will well lie, and so it was adjudged.

CCLXXX. Pasch. 16 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
A. Devised, that his lands should descend to his son, but he willed, 1 Cro.
252. Hob. 285. Dyer. 251. a. Die. 210. a. 3 Len. 9. 79. Yel. en Ayleff and
Choppins Case. Vaugh. 184.
That his wife should take the profits thereof until the full age of his son,
for his education and bringing up, and died; the wife married another husband,
and died before the full age of the son; and it was the opinion of Wray and
Southcote, Justices, That the second husband should not have the profits of the
lands until the full age of the son; for nothing is devised to the wife but a
confidence, and she is as Guardian, or Bailiff for to help the Infant, which by
her death is determined; and the same confidence cannot be transferred to the
husband; but contrary, if he had devised the profits of the land unto his wife
until the age of the Infant to bring him up and educate him, for that is a
Devise of the land it self.

CCLXXXI. Bawell and Lucas 's Case. Pasch. 16 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
IN a Replevin by Bawell against Lucas; It was agreed by all the Justices, viz.
Mounson, Manwood, Harper and Dyer, That if a man seized of a Manor, leased part
of the Demeans for years, or for life, That the reversion does remain parcel of
the Manor, but such a Reversion by the Grant of the Manor, does not pass
without Attornment of the Lessee: And where a Manor is granted by Feoffment
unto another, and afterward the Tenants attorn, the services pass by the
Livery and not by any Grant; and although in the first Grant the Lessee does
not attorn, but a long time after, yet the Reversion is not severed from the
Manor; for the Attornment, as to that intent, shall have relation to the Livery
to make the Reversion to pass from the time of the Grant, but not to charge the
Lessee with Waste: and Dyer said, That if a Feoffment in Fee be made of a
Manor, with an Advowson appendant, and the Tenants do not attorn, yet the
Feoffee shall have the Advowson; for the Advowson is appendant to the principal
part of the Manor, (scil.) the Demeans, and cannot be appendant to the
services: and Dyer said, That if A. makes a Feoffment in Fee of a Manor, part
of which is in Lease for years, Habendum to the Feoffee and his heirs, to the
use of the Feoffee and his heirs upon condition that the Feoffee shall pay to
the Feoffor within ten days, 1000 l. and if he fail, then to the use of the
Feoffor for life, the remainder to the use of his son in tail, and the money is
not paid, the Lessee attorns after the ten days to the Feoffee, 2 Leon. 265,
266.
the same is a good Attornment to raise secondary uses, although that the first
uses did not take effect; for the condition is not annexed to the Estate of the
Land but unto the use only: and the meaning was, that the Feoffor should never
have again the Inheritance: A Feoffment is upon condition, that the Feoffee
shall give the Land in tail to a stranger, who refuses the gift, there the
Feoffor may re-enter; but a Feoffment upon condition to enfeoff a stranger, or
to grant a Rentcharge, if the stranger refuses, there the Feoffor shall not
re-enter, for his intent was not, that the Land should revert, etc.

CCLXXXII. Vavasor 's Case. Hill. 16 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
THE Case was, That Nicholas Ellis seized of the Manor of Woodhall, leased the
same to William Vavasor and his wife, for the life of the wife, the remainder
to the right heirs of the husband: The husband made a Feoffment in Fee to the
use of himself and his wife for their lives, the remainder to his right heirs,
the husband died, the wife held in, and committed waste in a Park, parcel of
the Manor; It was moved, If the Writ of Waste shall suppose that the wife
holds in, Ex dimissione Nichol. Ellis, or Ex dimissione viri: and the opinion
of all the Justices was, That the Writ upon this matter ought to be general;
viz. That she holds in, de haereditate, J. S. haeredis, etc. without saying, ex
dimissione hujus, vel illius, for she is not in by the Lessor, nor by the
Feoffees, but by the Statute of Uses; and therefore the Writ shall be, Ex
haereditate, etc. And also the opinion of the Justices was, That the wife in
this case, is not remitted, but that she is in according to the form of the
Feoffment: Dyer, The Formedon brought against Manures, rehearsed in the Writ, a
Will and diverse Conveyances, by reason of which, the Writ was of exceeding
length; and in such cases the Writ is good; yet if the Writ be general, it is
sufficient. Note in this Case, That the Plaintiff assigned the waste in
destroying of Deer in the Park: And Mead, Sergeant, said, That waste cannot be
assigned in the Deer, unless the Defendant has destroyed all the Deer, and of
that opinion was Dyer: Manwood, If the Lessee of a Pigeon-house destroy all the
old Pigeons but one or two couple, the same is waste; and if the Keeper does
destroy all the Deer, so as the ground is become not Parkable, the same is
waste, although he has not destroyed the whole: See 8 R. 2. Fitz. Wast. 97. If
there be a sufficient store left in a Park; Pond, etc. it is well enough, etc.

CCLXXXIII. Mutton 's Case. Hill. 16 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
JAne Mutton brought a Writ of Entry, Sur disseisin, 1 Anders. 42. More 96.
against Anne Mutton who pleaded, That one John Mutton was seized, and levied a
Fine to the use of himself, and such wife and wives as the said John should
after marry, by what name or names they should be called, for term of their
lives, and afterward to the use of the same Jane, now Demandant in tail, the
remainder over to the right heirs of the said John Mutton, and afterward the
said John Mutton took to wife, the now Tenant, upon which Bar the Demandant did
demur in Law. And it was argued by Jeofries, Sergeant, 13 Co. 48, 49 and 54,
55, 56. 1 Co. 101. 3 Len. 253.
That here the wife takes nothing by this limitation, because she was not
capable thereof at the time of the limitation; But if the use had been limited
especially to John Mutton, until he took a wife, and then unto the use of him
and his wife for their lives, the same had been a good use to the wife; But in
our Case, the use is limited to the wife in praesenti, and not upon a
contingent; and because the wife at the time of the limitation was not capable,
she shall never take after; and yet it may be said, That a joint Estate may be
in esse, and yet to begin at several times: as 18 E. 4. 12. A Feoffment is made
to three, and Livery is made to one of them; and first one of them agrees to
the Livery, and a year after, another agrees, and afterward the third;
although they take nothing until agreement, yet when they have agreed, the
agreement shall have relation to the time of the Livery; but in truth, the
reason thereof is, because the Freehold shall be adjudged in them all, until
they have disagreed. And if a disseisin be to the use of A. B. and C. And first
A. agrees to it, and afterward B. and after C. although they took nothing
until agreement, yet when they have agreed, their agreement shall have
relation to the time of the first disseisin; and if in such case the Disseisor
had made a Lease before agreement, the party to whose use after agreeing, shall
avoid such Lease.

CCLXXXIV. Stamford 's Case. Hill. 16 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
THE Case was, A. took a wife, and afterward married Elizabeth Stamford,
living his first wife, and by Deed gave part of his goods to the said
Elizabeth; and as to the residue of his goods, being but of small value, he
made the said Elizabeth his Executrix, and died; she refused the Executorship,
for which the Ordinary committed Adminstration to B. Gaudy, Sergeant, asked the
advice of the Court, against whom the Action of Debt should lie? for, if the
Creditor impleadeth the Administrator, he has not Assets; if the Executrix her
self, she will plead that she has renounced the Cxecutorship, and that
Administration is committed to B. And the opinion of Dyer, Justice, was, That
the Gift is void by the Common Law, and also by the Statute of 13 Eliz. and
then, if the Gift be void any way, the Creditor may have an Action of Debt
against the said Elizabeth as Executor of her own wrong: And see that such a
Gift is void by the Common Law, 43 E. 3. 2. And by Manwood, Justice, He who
takes the goods of the dead, shall not be charged as executor of his own wrong,
unless he does something as Executor: as to pay Debts, make Acquittances, etc.
See 41 E. 3. 31. 32 H. 6. 7. Dyer, If one takes the goods of the dead, and
converteth them to his own use, he is chargeable as Executor, and so it has
been adjudged in the time of this Queen, in the Case of one Stokes, which was
affirmed by Bendloes and Harper: See now Co. 2 Part. 53. Reade's Case; where no
lawful Executor, or Administrator is, there, if a stranger takes the goods of
the dead into his possession, the same is a good Administration to charge him
as Executor of his own wrong.

CCLXXXV. Hill. 19 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
Ante 178.
THE Case was, A man made a Feoffment in Fee to the use of himself for life, and
afterward to the use of his eldest son in tail; and after, to the use of his
right heirs, not having at the time of the Feoffment any son; afterward he
suffered a common Recovery, had issue a son, who died in the life of his
father, having issue a son, and afterward he himself died; It was holden by
the Justices in this Case, That the son and heir of the son should not avoid
this Recovery by the Statute of 32 H. 8. for there was not any remainder in him
at the time of the Recovery had, and the words of the said Statute are; That
such Recovery shall be void against such persons to whom the reversion, or
remainder shall then appertain, i. e. at the time of such Recovery. And it was
said by one of the Sergeants at Bar; That if lands be given to E. for life, the
remainder to B. in tail, the remainder to C. in Fee, B. dies, his wife young
with child, with a son; a Recovery is had against E. with the issue of C. and
afterward the son is born, he shall not be helped by this Statute of 32 H. 8.
for that remainder was not in esse, at the time of the Recovery. But it was
holden in the principal Case, That the heir might avoid the said Recovery by
the Common Law; for the recompense cannot extend to such a remainder, which is
not in esse.

CCLXXXVI. Sidenham and Worlington 's Case. Pasch. 27 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
1 Cro. 42.
IN an Action upon the Case upon a Promise, the Plaintiff declared, That he at
the request of the Defendant, was surety and bail for J. S. who was arrested in
the King's Bench, upon an Action of 30 l. and that afterward, for the default
of J. S. he was constrained to pay the 30 l. after which, the Defendant meeting
with the Plaintiff, promised him for the same consideration, That he would
repay that 30 l. which he did not pay, upon which the Plaintiff brought the
Action; the Defendant pleaded, Non assumpsit, upon which issue was joined,
which was found for the Plaintiff. Walmsley, Sergeant, for the Defendant, moved
the Court, That this consideration will not maintain the Action, because the
consideration and promise did not concur and go together; for the consideration
was long before executed, so as now it cannot be intended that the promise was
for the same consideration, As if one gives me a Horse, and a Month after, I
promise him 10 l. for the said Horse, he shall never have Debt for the 10 l.
nor Assumpsit upon that promise; for there is neither contract, nor
consideration, because the same is executed: Anderson, This Action will not
lie; for it is but a bare agreement, and nudum pactum, because the contract was
determined, and not in esse at the time of the promise; But he said, it is
otherwise upon a consideration of marriage of one of his cosins; for marriage
is always a present consideration: Windham agreed with Anderson, and he put the
Case in 3 H. 7. If one sells a Horse unto another, and at another day he will
warrant him to be sound of limb and member, it is a void warrant, for that such
warranty ought to have been made or given at such time as the Horse was sold:
Periam, Justice, conceived, That the Action did well lie; and he said, That
this Case is not like unto the Cases which have been put of the other side: For
there is a great difference betwixt Contracts and this Case, for in Contracts
upon sale, the consideration, and the promise, and the sale, ought to meet
together, for a Contract is derived from con and trahere, which is a drawing
together, so as in Contracts every thing which is requisite, ought to concur
and meet together, viz. the consideration of the one side, and the sale or the
promise on the other side; But to maintain an Action upon an Assumpsit, the
same is not requisite, for it is sufficient, if there be a moving cause or
consideration precedent, for which cause or consideration the promise was made,
and such is the common practice at this day: For in an Action upon the Case,
upon a promise, The Declaration is laid* That the Defendant, for, and in
consider action of 20 l. to him paid, (posted scil.) that is to say, at a day
after super se assumpsit, and that is good, and yet there the consideration is
said to be Executed; And he said, that the Case in Dyer, 10 Eliz. ^72. would
prove the Case; For there the Case was, That the Apprentize of one Hunt, was
arrested when his Master Hunt was in the Country, and one Baker, one of the
neighbors of Hunt, to keep the said Apprentize out of prison, became his ball,
and paid the Debt; afterward Hunt the Master, returning out of the Country,
thanked Baker for his neighbourly kindness to his Apprentize, and promised him,
that he would repay him the sum which he had paid for his servant and
Apprentize: And afterward, upon that promise, Baker brought an Action upon the
Case against Hunt, and it was adjudged in that Case, that the Action would not
lie, because the consideration was precedent to the promise, because it was
executed and determined long before. But in that Case, it was holden by all the
Justices, That if Hunt had requested Baker to have been surety or bail, and
afterward Hunt had made the promise for the same consideration, the same had
been good, for that the consideration did precede, and was at the instance and
request of the Defendant. Rhodes, Justice, agreed with Periam; and he said,
That if one serve me for a year, and has nothing for his service, and
afterward, at the end of the year, I promise him 20 l. for his good and faith
full service ended, he may have and maintain an Action upon the Case upon the
same promise, for it is made upon a good consideration; but if a servant has
wages given him, and his Master, ex abundanti does promise him 10 l. more after
his service ended, he shall not maintain an Action for that 10 l. upon the said
promise; for there is not any new cause or consideration preceding the promise;
which difference was agreed by all the Justices, and afterward, upon good and
long advice, and consideration had of the principal Case, Judgment was given
for the Plaintiff, and they much relied upon the Case of Hunt, and Baker, 10
Eliz. Dyer, 272. See the Case there.

CCLXXXVII. Higham 's Case. Trin. 25 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
1 Cro. 15. More 221. 3 Len. 130.
IT was found by special Verdict, That Thomas Higham was seized of 100 Acres of
Lands, called Jacks, usually occupied with a House; and that he let the said
House, and 40 of the said 100 Acres to J. S. for life, and made his Will, by
which he devised the said House, and all his Lands called Jacks, then in the
occupation of the said J. S. unto his Wife for life, and that after the decease
of his Wife, the remainder thereof, and of all his other Lands belonging to
Jacks, should be to R. his second son, etc. And by Mead, The Wife shall not
have by implication the residue of Jacks; for she had an express Estate in the
House and 40 Acres of Lands, and having expressed his Will concerning the same,
it shall not be extended by implication; and he said, It had been adjudged
between Glover and Tracy, That if Lands be devised to one, and the heirs Males
of his body, and if he die without heirs of his body, that then the Land shall
remain over, that the Donee has but an Estate in tail to the heirs Males of
his body: Anderson, 1 Roll. 839.
in the time of Sir Anthony Brown, it was holden that if a man seized of two
Acres of Lands, devises one of them to his Wife for life, and that J. S. shall
have the other Acre after the death of his Wife, that the Wife has not any
Estate in the latter Acre. It was also moved, What thing shall pass to his
second son by this Devise? and by the Lord Anderson, The words, usually
occupied with it, amount to the words, the Lands let with it; but these 60
Acres are not let with it, therefore they shall not pass: Windham contrary;
Although they do not pass by the words, occupied with it, yet they shall pass
by the name of Jacks, or belonging to Jacks; and afterward, Anderson, mutata
opinine, agred with him.

A TABLE OF THE Matters in this Book.
A
ASsise, 11 55 94 Action upon the Statute of 5 Eliz. for Perjury, 18 Abatement
of Writs, 18 64 Action upon the Statute of 13 E. 1. of Winchester, 19 109 212
Actions of Slander, 34 74 120 127 146 Assignment of a duty to the Queen for a
Debt if good, 79 Account, 91 245 Appeal of Burglary, 111 Award, where good, and
where not, 130 145 Action not good upon a Lease, until the whole term be
expired, 137 In Appeal of Robbery, one shall not have restitution without fresh
suit, 183 Attaint of Felony, 169 Appeal of Murder, 195 Action against an
Executor who refused the Executorship, 221 Assumpsit upon an agreement to
become bound in a Bond for the sum promised, 223 Action upon the Statute of 5
Eliz. concerning Perjury. 249
C
COvenant, 5 17 60 153 155 164 237 268 Covenant to levy a Fine, 114 Custom, 10
140 Costs none, upon Nonsuit in an Action upon an escape, 12 Conversion by the
Executors of the goods of the Testator, 42 Challenge of Jurors, 53 141 Common
Recovery, 61 89 169 170 275 Costs upon the Statute of 28 H. 8. not allowed, 71
Copiholds and Copiholders, 97 142 264 Capias ad satisfaciendum sued out, and
not prosecuted within a year and a day, if Scire facias must be sued out, 101
Condition in a Lease void, if repugnant to the Demise, 176 Conveyance of Lands
to Feoffees with condition, etc. 175 Capias ad satisfaciendum sued out after a
Release: an Audita quaerela lies, 215 Case, for disturbing him of his Common,
229 Case, for Toll, 240 Case, for misusing of the Plaintiff's Horse, to which
the Defendant pleaded, that the Horse was waved within his Manor, etc. 242 Case
upon a promise, whereas one became surety and bail to J. S. and afterward, for
default of J. S. he was constrained to pay the money: J. S. promised for the
same consideration to repay the money. 286
D
DIminution, 3 Distress for Rent, 8 Debt, 10 26 33 49 88 90 122 126 136 150 153
162 163 172 181 189 200 208 248 Debt for Rent, 14 28 67 121 Dower, 15 85 174
238 Devise, 16 92 123 165 171 198 239 243 276 279 280 287 Debt upon
Recognizance 24 Descent no plea, nor any title against the Queen, 37 Debts of
the King by the Statute of 33 H. 8. 39 Disseisin, 80 Distress, 179 Detinue, 201
Discharge of a promise a good plea upon an Assumpsit, 270
E
ERror, 2 3 4 77 86 100 115 132 135 160 161 222 231 244 251 255 256 263 Entry
of Records, 3 Estopell, 3 17 Extent, 20 75 167 Exceptions to a Writ, 47 Extendi
facias sued out, and the Liberate not returned, if good, 65 Escape, an Action
of Debt brought upon it, 112 Execution upon a Statute, and the Sheriff
voluntarily sets him at large, 117 Execution, 202 Enquest taken at the instance
of the Plaintiff, 203 Ejectione firm, 250 Exposition of Statutes do belong
unto the Queen's temporal Courts, 267
F
FEoffments to Uses, 7 25 118 183 194 218 233 257 282 285 False imprisonment,
43 Fine, 38 73 139 169 191 206 263 Formedon, 84 196 Feoffment in Fee of Lands
parcel of the Duchy of Lancaster, how, and of whom the Tenure shall be, 184
Fines in Courts, 219
G
GRant, de Advocatione Ecclesiae, what passes, 106 Grant of Lands of the
Duchy of Lancaster by the King unto another, Tenend. in Fee-farm if this Land
shall be holden of the King in Capite, or holden of the Duchy, 197 Gift, where
void, both by Common Law and the Statute of 13 Eliz. 284
H
HEriot, 10 Habeas Corpus not well returned, day given to amend it, 213
I
JUdgment against Bail, 2 Indictment upon the Statute of 23 Eliz. of Recusancy,
6 Justicies no Original, but a Commission to the Sheriff, 41 260 Information
upon the Statute of 18 H. 6. cap. 17. concerning the gaging of vessels of wine,
52 In consideration that the Plaintiff would stay an intended suit in Chancery,
promised, that if the Plaintiff can prove, that the father of the Defendant
took the profits of the Lands in question, that he would pay to him for all the
said profits, 133 Information upon the Statute of Usury, 144 In consideration
of marriage, the Defendant promised to pay to the Plaintiff 100 l. 146
Joint-tenants in Fee, grant a Lease for years, rendering Rent, and one dies, how
the Rent shall be divided, 148 In consideration that the Testator would forbear
the payment of a sum of money for a week, he promised to pay him within a week,
if the Action will lie for the Executors, 149 Judgment not to be reversed but
by Error or Attaint 154 Information upon the Statute of 27 Eliz. cap. 4. by the
party grieved, The Plaintiff was nonsuit; yet shall not pay costs and damages,
156 Indenture delivered at another day, and not the day of the date 157
Indictment for enclosing of Common vi and armis, etc. not good, 159 Intruder
dying in possession; the same descent takes not away an Entry, 182 Indictment
upon the Statute of 23 Eliz. of Recusants, 204 Indictment upon the Statute of
Praemunire of 13 and 15 R. 2. 225 Indictment upon the Statute of 8 H. 6. of
forcible entry, 226 232 Indictment for not repairing of a Bridge, 227
Indictment for an unlawful assembly and entry, 228 Indictment upon the Statute
of 5 E. 6. cap. 4. for drawing of his dagger in the Church, 234 Indictment upon
the Statute of 5 Eliz. of Perjury, 262 Judgment joint against three, will not
lie against one of them in particular, 277
L
LEases, 1 40 78 96 102 110 116 119 131 134 169 178 192 207 236 252 253 261
Leet, how holden, 31 98 266 Love is no consideration upon which to ground an
Action, 35 Letters Patents, Bona and Catalla felonum, etc. 81 Letters Patents
of Offices not to be repealed after the death of the Grantor, 128 Limitation
and Condition with their difference, 52
M
MAintenance in returning a partial Jury, 177
N
Nuisance, for stopping a River with earth, by which land was drowned, 129 222
Nudum pactum quid, 187
O
OUtlawry, 23 166 Obligation for appearance upon a Latitat, where void, 103 220
Office found, 169 Obligation that the Obligor shall not exercise his Trade
within a Town, nor within a certain precinct of it, void, and against Law, 259
P
PArtition, 3 Prescription, 13 Property, 35 113 Partitione facienda, 69
Privilege is not for an Attorney against an Attachment by the custom of
London, 190 Presentiments several, make the Church litigious, 205 Privilege
pleaded for a Lord of Parliament, 209 Prohibition prayed to the Court of
Admiralty, 224 Payment no good Plea without alleging it upon Record, 269
Proof, how to be made, 273
Q
QVare Impedit, ^^ 83 Quo Warranto, 266
R
Receipt of the wife, 11 Rectory, Quid, 13 Rent charge, 21 185 186 Replevin, 29
58 82 87 107 158 168 170 211 274 281 Rents and Services, 57 Reparations, 72
Replicando, of his own wrong, how construed, 108 Remainder in tail, who was
attainted of Felony, 169 Recognizance of good behavior, 199 Recovery in a Writ
of Entry, 214 Return of a Devastavit upon a Fieri facias, a motion to have an
Elegit, 235 Replication, where good by Executors, 265
S
SEals, 27 Special Plea to an English Bill, if it may be relinquished, 38
Sheriff must deliver all the prisoners in his custody over to his successor, 76
Scire facias against the bail in an action of Debt, to which was pleaded the
death of the Defendant before Judgment given against him, 125
T
TEnancy several, where no good Plea, 9 Trover and conversion, 22 50 217 278
Tithes, 30 32 93 95 98 105 124 180 216 Tail. 51 54 63 170 247 Trespass against
the Warden of the Fleet brought in the King's Bench, 56 Tenant per auter vye,
after the death of Cestuy que use holds over, if he be a Disseisor, 59 Tenant
at will, if he may grant Copihold Estates to Copiholders, 59 Trespass upon the
Statute of 8 H. 6. of forcible entry, 70 Trespass for an assault and battery,
104 Tender of rent if refused, where good and where not, 173 Trespass by one
Administrator against another for taking away the goods of the intestate, 188
Trespass Quare clausum fregit, and new assignment pleaded, 230 Toll, no lands
to be discharged of it, but lands Socage only, 240 Trespass, Quare clausum
fregit, 241 Trespass for taking of goods, and the Defendant justifies as
Bailiff to J. S. 246 Trespass for breaking of the Plaintiffs close, and for
killing his Conies, 254 Trespass for cutting down of four Oaks, and the
Defendant pleads, that he, and all those whose Estate he has, etc. Habere
consueverunt rationabile estoverium suum, for fuel, etc. 258
W
WRit of entry in the Per, 9 Will of the Request of Land, and the name of the
Devisor not in it, if good, 44 Waste, 45 46 62 210 282 Writ of Annuity, 68
Wager of Law, 143 Writ of Inquiry of damages, if too little damages be found;
no other Writ, pro meliore Enquir. can be granted, 272 Writ of Entry Sur
Disseisin, 283
FINIS.

