Israel's TROUBLES AND TRIUMPH. OR, The History of their dangers in, and
deliverance out of EGYPT. AS It is recorded by Moses in Exodus AND Turned into
English Verse.

By GEORGE LESLY, M. A. Minister of Olney. Bucks.

Discite Justitiam Moniti
Virg. Hearken to a Verser, who may chance
Rhyme thee to good, and make a bait of pleasure.
Herbert LONDON, Printed for the Author, and sold by Nicholas Woolf, at his
House in Star Court, Cheapside. 1699.

THE PRINTER TO THE READER.
THE Author makes no apology for what he has here offered, being fully
persuaded, that he has injured no man; but in the room of that, or a prolix
Preface, he desires me to inform you (if you be strangers in our Israel, and
know not) that since the lowest of the people daily invade the Ministerial
Office, he thinks that for harmless humor, and innocent diversion, an ancient
Preacher may turn Religious Poet; because Rhimes (as he says) were of old the
common Theology, and why they may not be subservient to it yet he knows not.
However, taking it for granted, he was resolved, with the Great Apostle, to
become all things to all men, etc. If any true Son of the Muses seem to be
dissatisfied, he says to such (as Gideon did to the angry Ephramites) what
have I done now in comparison of you? Is not the gleaning of the Grapes of
Ephraim, better than the Vintage of Abiezer, etc.

Farewell.
ERRATA.
PAge 5. line 19. r. them: p. 13. l. 13. r. Isacides: p. 18. l. 20. r. Sire: l.
30. r. your: p. 19. l. 24. r. your: p. 20. l. 23. r. armies: p. 21. l. 10. r.
Sire: p. 26. l. 20. leave out A grant: p. 36. l. 7. r. hear: p. 38. l. 7. r.
those: p. 39. l. 3. r. yet: p. 44. l. 1. r. Sun: p. 51. l. 10. r. Remote: p.
55. l. 12. r. were: p. 36. l. 31. r. deluding: p. 61. l. 3. add great: l. 6.
dele their: p. 63. l. 17. r. God: p. 69. l. 8. r. to: p. 72. l. 19. r. descrie:
p. 75. l. 25. r. dear: p. 78. l. 7. r. May: l. 26. add himself: p. 81. l. 7. r.
never: p. 85. l. 28. r. not: p. 87. l. 11. add then.

These, and what others are not taken notice of, the Reader is requested to do
it as he reads.

Israel's TROUBLES AND TRIUMPH.
I Sing the Almighty's Friend and Israel's guide,
His birth and rescue from the impetuous tide
Of rapid Nile, I sing his Mother's care:
His Royal Nurse; and how Heaven's mercies are.
Like himself boundless; his own acts I sing,
Whose growing greatness, grieved the grumbling King,
And all his Subjects: who combined to have
His guiltless blood; how he was forced to leave
A Princely Court: where every thing looked brave;
His wand'rings, and his happy Residence
At last, with Jethro, Midian Priest, and Prince,
His Nuptials, Trade, and of the great content
He had in hours on Mathematics spent,
Astronomy was pleasant, but Gods Law
Delighted most: since by its light he saw
His change of State, his enemies pride and fall,
He saw himself made Heaven's General,
The flaming Bush and Voice confirmed all.
This Province, Lord, a greater light requires
Than can be kindled by Promethean fires.
The way's unbeaten, slippery, dark and strange,
Conduct thy Servant, that he may not range
Too high 'bove what is written, nor too low,
It Is truth, not fancy, I desire to show;
Truth, to convince the world of Pharaoh's sins
And punishments, with thee my Muse begins.
Joseph, the great, the good, the just and wise,
Removed from Memphis unto Paradise,
And Pharaoh to that fair Elizian grove,
To perfect and perpetuate their love:
Left Israel blessed with all the happiness
Their King and Brother could by deeds express:
Which they in peace profound for many years
Possessed, never harb'ring jealousies nor fears,
Admired, caressed, and loved by every one,
From the rude Cottage, to the Royal Throne.
But (ah!) where time is named, there is nothing sure,
All have Convulsions, Cramps, or Calenture;
Earth has strong Palsies that do shake its frame;
Man accidents, ten thousand without name,
Sent from the Throne Celestial, or Abyss,
To show how vain a thing is humane bliss.
Their day's o'recast, and stormy Clouds appear,
When a strange heir sat in the Imperial Chair:
Whose haughty humor taught him to despise
His Predecessors Laws, tho Just and Wise.
Our Gods themselves, count it a saucy thing,
Said he, in Vassals to advise their King.
A Monarchy that is absolute I Will have,
I Will change the name of Subject into Slave.
To reign one day is much more glorious
Without control: than ages curbed thus
With endless Counsels. I will ^e alone;
By borrowed light the former Pharaohs shone;
I must Eclipse that. Turning to his Court,
You see, said he, the great, the often resort
Of all sorts daily to our Goshenites,
This chills my blood, this checks my active spirits.
Ah me, oppressed! My thoughts I cannot relate,
My apprehensions of our falling state
Are black and dismal, my night dreams foretell
Our overthrow by them that with us dwell.
And here he stopped: tho more he would have said,
Leaving the rest to tears, which craved their aid:
Tears! that like torrents from his eyes distilled,
All the beholders with amazement filled,
Whose sympathizing eyes and hearts condole,
The torturing torments of his troubled soul,
With pickled sighs; which over, they bow and say,
Dread Sovereign, do you propose the way,
Your sorrow's ours: if that be its true rise,
The common Foe at once well sacrifice;
Which is soon done, if we right measures take,
That Is vent'ring all for King and Country's sake.
This brisk resolve revived the drooping King,
So as the aged Winter's by the Spring;
His centered blood resumed its circ'lar course,
The briny streams are stopped at their source;
All parts are changed, clarified his eyes,
His tongue's untied, with which he magnifies
Their Love and Courage. Daring souls, said he,
This undertaking calls for secrecy,
Since they we must attack most subtle be.
If it takes air, they will quickly trace the scent,
Destroy our Persons and our Government.
Once more invade; then we must bow the head
(As heretofore) with prayers and tears for bread:
Or if a Foreign Foe should us infest,
They Would join with them, and prove worse than the rest.
They know our Strength, they know our Houses well,
They know our Closets, where we Money tell:
Which they would rifle, and from us be gone,
Against this I know no Remedy but one,
(They live in wealth and ease, as if their Land
Was not by Grace, but by a conquering hand.
This irritates their wild and wealthy Souls,
To publish Israel wise, and us kind Fools.)
I must an Edict frame, that may suppress
Their pride and power, and all our wrongs redress;
Which must run thus. Our Countries open'lye,
To every one that has a wishing eye,
On us such may make Inroads when they please,
Destroy our State, our Fruits, disturb our ease,
And stop our Traffic both by Land and Seas.
In every Town I Will raise a Citadel,
That Foreign Force I may with Force repel,
And keep these under, lest they should rebel.
Then for Provisions, Store houses I Will build
To these: for their own safety they will yield.
Wi^h ravished ears the Egyptians heard this thing,
And said, what Nation e're had such a King.
He Is wise as Phoebus, valiant, yet kind,
This seeming favor will the Hebrews bind
To own this new design, and to employ
Themselves in it, tho it themselves destroy,
Make them our slaves, and us their wealth enjoy.
'Loyalty shuts its eyes to every thing,
'That may its King into suspicion bring,
'And theirs is such, (for any thing we know)
'A God above they own, but you below,
'Confirm it, Sir --
This black design is now so closely laid
That no eye saw't, nor ear heard what they said,
But Hell's and theirs, thus Israel was betrayed.
'Rage, Malice, Fury, Blood, Revenge, till now,
'Ne're seized the heart, nor sat upon the brow
'Of any former Pharaoh, Meekness, Love,
'Adorn'd their Temples, blessings from above.
'Blest Souls such virtues made, their Kingdom great
'Then loved by Friends, their Foes for peace to treat,
'And of their plenty Foreigners did eat.
Their Conference into a Law is past,
And Proclamations issued out in haste
Through all the Tribes, to let them understand
That none must be Freeholders in that Land.
All must do suit and service, pay quit-rent,
Or else be forced into banishment.
This our just Law, if any does despise,
Him we to our Revenge will sacrifice.
There Is no appeal, I Am absolute you know,
I kill and save, my Subjects all must bow
At my sole beck -- Your answers quickly give,
Obedience is the only way to live,
If I condemn, there is none can you reprieve.
With fault'ring tongues, faint hearts, the Tribes reply,
(It is well known) we never did deny
Our King's commands, we do not think it strange
To see new Monarchs make in Laws a change.
We will obey, we know submission's due
First to our Fathers God, and then to you.
What must we do -- Some thousands you must take,
Who for defense of us and you must make
Brick for our buildings, and what else we lack.
Our winged haste admits of no delay,
The act (you know) commenced this very day,
That some of them make Brick, some oversee
The rest, and give a just account when we
The same require --
'When peremptory Acts come from the State
'There is no time given to deliberate
'On what is right, if not, none must debate.
The Laborers are chosen by the best,
Who with smooth words encourage all the rest:
Fear nothing, Sirs, this sudden storm will over,
And we enjoy our Freedom as before.
This said, the Egyptian Taskmasters appear,
Whose furious frowns gave them just cause to fear
'Twas otherwise. Come, Sparks, where are, your Tools?
See! how they gaze, and stare, they think we are Fools.
Take you this Spade, and you that Pickaxe take,
Bind you that Leather Budget to your back.
What else is wanting? Here, take up this Trowel:
The day comes on. All whisper, this is cruel.
Thus rigged, they travel to the Slimy Pits,
Where some are dampt with fumes, some had strong fits,
Some choked in mud, others with cold are killed,
Most swoon with fear, the rest with Sorrow filled,
Cry out, Alas! now, now we see (tho late)
Approaching ruin --
Haste, haste away, you see it is in vain
To fret and murmur, or of us complain,
It is decreed, and we your Guides expect
That you shall always act as we direct.
If you incense your Monarch, or our wrath,
Your punishment will be a lingering death.
Compliance is the only way to please
Both him and us --
'He that can form the Idea of a fair,
'A glorious Princess in a Royal Chair,
'Adorn'd with all the wonders of the East,
'Whose common fare is not a common feast;
'One, whose Attendants could exceed the train
'Of Philip's Son, or that of Charlemaign,
'Cast down from honors top to dark disgrace,
'Amongst the baser sort of Human Race,
'Wrapt up in Rags, black, wrinkled, and half dead,
'May in her Face poor Israel's Fortune read,
Such was their grief, and such their mis'ries were,
Hard was their work, and harder much their fare:
Yet had they still a numerous Offspring,
Which gave new wounds to the fresh-bleeding King.
Where shall I turn, said he? where shall I go?
The more I seek their fall, the more they grow.
Speak boldly, brave Egyptians, let your breath
Condemn them, let your Swords give present death
To all their Males: This will appease my wrath.
If Infant blood can cure your hearts disease,
Their Infants all shall bleed to give you ease:
We are agreed, that Nile's deep watery Tomb,
Shall swallow up their Children from the Womb,
There every Male as soon as born shall lie;
Which will in time destroy their progeny,
Defeat their Counsels, Plots and Policies,
Complete our Joys, complete their Miseries,
For in the Childrens murders Parents dye,
They only live to sing their obsequy*
Bravely resolved! but who can do a thing
So cruel? Heaven and Earth of us will ring,
To our eternal shame if we miscarry,
He that is most Loyal, ought to be most wary.
Fear nothing, Sir, this project will succeed
As you desire, our Midwives are agreed
Jointly, as one to act as we command --
They Are merciful, and dare not lift a hand
Against a Gasping Infant: but will save
Not kill, nor drown them in that Liquid Grave.
'Let Tyrants thirst for blood, and measures take
'Against Heavens will, such measures he will break,
'No Weapon formed against his Friends can prove
'Deadly, for they are shielded with his love.
This pious act soon sounds in Pharaoh's ears,
Bringing new woes, new jealousies, new fears;
To which he gives vent by Sighs and Tears.
Did I not foresee what the Queans would do,
Tho they Commission had from me and you,
(They who State secrets do commit to Women,
Deserve to lose their honor, and turn Yeomen)
It Is manifest, you did with them combine
To cross my lawful, cross my just design;
Call in the Strumpets, they must show the cause
Of their contempt of me and of my Laws;
By suffering those little Foes to live.
Whom I had doomed to death without reprieve.
Call them I say -- They trembling do appear,
His Visage changed often, as they drew near,
Sure signs the women had just cause to fear.
Then said, Unhappy and ungrateful fools,
Yet more blameworthy they, who used such tools,
In things of so great weight and secrecy,
You are made up of lies and flattery.
Had you been wise and just in that affair
That was entrusted to your (only) care,
My woes had ended, and that cursed race
Been razed or buried in the fertile place
They now enjoy, -- Speak.
Great, Sir, if Oaths be sacred, we are true,
Who never meant good to them, nor ill to you.
In this affair we not blameworthy are,
To drown their Infants was our greatest care.
But Hebrew Women, stronger much than ours,
Have painless labor, they say higher powers
Assist them; and if so, their God is kind,
'Twas both against our interest and mind.
Our search of late can find no birth of theirs,
Nor nothing like it, only them at prayers.
Yet Pharaoh swore by Sacred Moon and Sun,
That he would finish what he had begun;
In spite of all (said he) their Blood I Will have,
Although in Blood I wallow to my Grave.
He frowned, Heaven smiled, and said, I Will interpose,
I Will show my power, love, will, in saving those
Whom I long since for my own Servants chose.
I am resolved out of that hated race
To raise up one shall dare him to his face;
And this he knows, tho I have made him blind
To all the Scourges are for him designed;
His close Cabals my Wisdom shall defeat,
Whom I destroy I first infatuate.
This spoke, 'twas done, for Amram did espouse
A Wife of his own Tribe, of his own House,
Who had by him before this Edict came
A hopeful pair, Aaron and Miriam;
Her third Conception which she did bring forth
A Son of Beauty was, who promised worth,
Whom she (afraid) hid in a secret place,
And there him suckled for full three months space
At last, true Faith and Fear in her did strive,
This bid her drown, and that keep him alive.
Faith urged, that she a Levite's Daughter holy,
Should not be guilty of so great a folly,
So great a crime as to destroy her Son,
But choose to dye, say'ng Heavens will be done.
To which her timorous Tongue made this reply,
The King's command is urgent, then if I
Be apprehended in this Fact, all, all
The Hebrew Nation for my fault will fall.
No, I will trust the Babe with providence,
When I have used means for his defense,
Such are the care even of omnipotence.
She said, and reached her hand unto the Flags,
Of which a Boat-like Cradle lined with Rags
She made, and cork'd with slimy Pitch all over,
Lest it should sink, if driven from the shore,
And placed him there as if he went to sleep,
Committing both to Heaven and to the deep.
'Hid Rocks, roughs Seas, fierce Pirates, Shelves and Sand,
'The Merchants fear, and yet come safe to Land.
Now Horrour-struck, in haste she Miriam calls,
Come, come my dear, see thou not yonder walls.
Haste, haste thee thither, if thou love thy Mother,
And see the last of my dear Boy, thy Brother.
Stand at a distance, grieve not, shed no tear,
Look pleasantly on all, then nothing fear.
It Is easier to give Counsel than to take,
'The burthen's light that is on another's back.
She had not long been a Spectator there,
When Pharaoh's Daughter, through the Almighty's care,
Was brought 'bout Sunset to the calmed Creek,
Where the Infant lay, his life or death to seek,
Who saw the Ark, and to her Ladies said,
Draw up this toy, if any thing be laid
In it I Will see; when opend, she espied
A lovely Child, who hung the Lip and cried.
O Girl! said she, this is a glor'ous thing,
I read in's face the Fortunes of a King.
Come, come, my dear, I Am ravished with thy charms,
Come, come and grasp a Princess in thy arms!
I have no Heir, Dear, thou shall be my Son,
Dear unto me, as if my Flesh and Bone.
The Sister buoyed with this Spring-Tyde of joy,
This unexpected rescue of the Boy,
With much assurance to the Princess bows,
Say'ng, Great Madam, in that Neighboring house
There is a Woman who is neat and tall,
Of fair complexion, the Graces all:
Sit on her brow in purest red and white,
Perhaps her beauty may the Prince delight,
She loves your Grace, although an Israelite.
Egyptian or Hebrew, said the Queen,
I like the character, when I have seen.
The person, her I for his Nurse will ^ake,
And show her kindness for my Darlings sake.
Call her. She came in haste; the Queen of Love
Sent her half dressed and left the rest to J'ove:
Who placed such Graces on her humble heart,
As made her much more beautiful than Art
Could ever boast; her mein, his words, her gate,
Bespoke her Mistress of a better state,
And now it is come, prosperity never comes late.
Whom when the Princess saw, she lift her eyes
And hands aloft, blessing her Deities
For this unlooked for kindness, then her hand
She gripped, and said, I thought that Goshen-Land,
Had not been blessed with Beauties such as you.
To which she (blushing) answered, my brow,
Great Madam, once was fair, alas! but now,
It Is tanned with grief --
Such Sun-burn'd faces I am pleased to see,
Replied the Princess, take this Boy from me;
I did a Nurse for him intend before,
Whom he despised, try you my Knave once more.
Her Snow-like Breasts exposed, their veins display,
By which, tho young, he knows the milky way,
Then smiling, capers, snatches, sighs and draws
The Pipes that drain the Nectar from those Spaws:
This Infant toil the Queen beholds with joy,
And smiling said, your face has caught the Boy;
Keep him, fair Nurse, he is yours and mine, I Will pay.
This heard to Heaven, she silently did say,
Thou great Protector of the Istiades,
For this high favor I will ever bless
Thy Sacred name, and daily pay the vow
I made to thee, when my Estate was low.
Then to the Princess she made this reply,
Your Goddess-like Commands I will obey,
My life, and all that is dear I Will sacrifice
For you and yours, and for this Heaven given prize.
'If Providence and beauty do unite,
'They make the Egyptian love the Isra'lite.
'When winged Chemists made, and gave the charm
'Nor Nile, nor Egypt could the Infant harm.
'The Mothers fear by Heaven was made the key,
'T' unlock the Providential mystery.
Raptures of joy, tho violent and strong,
Admit allays, when mixed with the throng
Of future events, and as quickly gone
As was her bliss, when she receiv^ ^er Son;
Not from a Fishes womb, dead, and decayed,
But from the hand half Egypt's Scepter swayed,
To whom he must return when he is weaned,
(Such Princely Nurs'ries cannot be detained)
Not to make Bricks, but for a Diadem,
'Twas to that end the Princess gave the name,
By Heavens appointment, Moses, as if she
From Abraham had drawn her Pedigree:
A fatal blow to Pharaoh's Tyranny.
Weaned, and returned, his lively looks and sport
Are now the common subject of the Court:
None like young Moses, none has equal share
With him in Pharaoh's love, in's Daughters care.
Mars and Apollo his chief Tutors are,
To teach him Wisdom, and the art of War;
Wisdom to rule, and Conduct to defend
His Subjects well, from ill his helpless friend.
Now he is thought fit to sit above the best
Of Egypt's Peers, and yet is not at rest.
The reason of his name when called to mind,
He knew it Hebrew, this his Soul inclined
To do some great thing for his Country's ease,
Yet loath his 'doptive Mother to displease:
He sees, and hears their Miseries and cries,
Without concern, Court Gaudy Butterflies
Dazzled his youthful Eyes, the silken Nets
Of honor wreath him so, that he forgets
Himself, his name, and for some time confined
His heart and hands from that he had designed;
But all those charms were loathsome when he spied
A wounded Hebrew, (of which wound he died)
Bathed in Blood. What? Slave, said he, (none by)
Must these men work, and yet your Victims lie:
Thy life shall pay for his; this fatal Dart
Thrown by my hand, shall pierce thy env'ous heart,
And shall expel thy Soul, that all may see
The just reward of this thy cruelty.
Returned to Court, his grief next night did break
His wonted rest, he must rise and go back
To see his friends, and to suppress their foes.
Thus did commence his hardships and his woes.
Night-Tapers were not yet extinguished,
Nor Titan started from his watery bed,
When he in haste unto the Kilns repairs,
With pensive mind, and head perplexed with cares,
About his Brethrens usage, Bondage snares.
He comes and sees, a sad amazing sight,
Two Jews in hot dispute and fiercer fight,
With whom he mildly did expostulate
About the rise of their unkind debate.
Say'ng, is it not enough that enemies beat,
Kill, and abuse you? this unnat'ral heat
Will work your ruin. He that gave the cause
Said, you begin too soon to frame new Laws.
What? must a beardless stripling be our Judge,
Who is more fit with us to be a drudge,
If that suffice to expiate his crime,
Committed yesterday about this time.
'When Heaven designs for men, things great and good,
'They are despised, because not understood.
' Moses is sent to free them from their woes,
'Yet they are the first proclaim themselves his foes;
'That scorn his Counsel: threatening to declare
'How Pharaoh's Servants by him treated are.
This like a rapid Cataract o'reflow'd
His Soul with fear: which his sad countenance showed
Who sighing (from a bleeding heart) thus said,
The thing is known, alas! I am betrayed,
Pharaoh will hear't: who me already hates
I will not fall into his hands, the fates
Shall guide my wandering steps; none knows what he
(Who only knows events will do with me.
His Providence may find a safer place
With Foreigners (perhaps) of milder Race:
Whose pity will preserve me from disgrace.
Egypt Farewell -- He is no sooner gone
But his escape unto the King is flown,
And cause assigned: which they thus aggravate,
This is the fruit of pity; our poor State
Will quickly dwindle to an empty name,
Unless you find out means to quench this flame,
It is unsufferable! Our great Monarch's blood
Will be as cheap if they be not withstood,
And we their slaves. The King enraged said,
Hark! foolish Girl, your Son so magnified,
Is turned already Traitor to my Crown,
Slights your Relation, Favors does disown,
My Subjects he has killed for their care
No man can tell what his pretensions are,
But I Will prevent him, lest he go too far.
His death (when found) shall let the Hebrews see
That dreams are vain, their visions fallacy,
And that their famed God may sometimes lie.
Strict search is made for him about the Court,
City and Suburbs where he did resort,
But all in vain; his Angel-Providence
Before next light, conveyed him far from thence,
And made him strange, invisible to all
Who sought his blood, who sought his Nations fall.
The Desert now is his Inn, the Rocks his Bed,
He must no more with delicates be fed;
But travel hard, and eat such natural fare,
As by kind Sol and Earth produced are:
Lemmons and Chase-nuts, Mellons, Mangoes, Rice,
Oranges, Almonds, Nutmegs and their Spice.
His Drink the Milk of Coco's mixed with Wine,
That through Earth's bosom secretly does twine.
'A generous Breast is equally content
'With Plenty, Poverty or Banishment.
He sings of his adventures by the Well,
Near unto which the Midian Priest did dwell.
He sings his Birth, his Cradle, Rapid Nile,
He sings his rescue with a pleasant smile,
The Princess fondness, and her Father's care,
He sings the cause why all these blasted were;
And then the quiet of a Hermit-life
Free from the cares at Court, and Country strife,
The joys accruing by a virtuous wife.
This Jethro's Daughter heard, whose daily care
Was that their Herds and Flocks well watered were.
Tho to their grief, they often were constrained
To wait the rising of the Well, when drained
By surly Swains, who with their Cattle came,
Because that water had the praise of fame.
'Twixt frown and smile (this noble Soul disdained
To see the daily wrongs the Maids sustained)
He said, dull Souls, is this your carriage
To these fair Nymphs? Does neither Sex nor Age,
Nor beauty charm you? Will you never be brave,
And show that Shepherds scorn both Clown and Knave?
Cold Mists and Dews their florid beauties break,
When Frost and Hail your Faces fairer make;
For shame forbear, if you be Great Pan's race,
Fill up the Troughs, and give these Maidens place.
Sir we are yours: since they with you find grace,
The Shepherdesses soon dispatched are,
Who hastening home, the first that did appear
Was the old Priest, whose fears dispersed were.
What! come so early? are the Flocks all well?
You look as if you hadsome News to tell.
Yes Reverend Sir, a noble Personage,
Of aspect fair, courteous above his Age,
By's Habit (nothing else) Egyptian,
Drew all our water after we began,
And curbed our Rivals for their insolence.
Where is the Hero stood in your defense?
'He's great and good, the Gods themselves you know,
'Have Human Shapes and Actions when below.
Haste to the Well, he may ^em thence remove,
And say, our Parents must requite his love.
Armed with Command, they ran in winged haste
To their deliverer, and him thus addressed.
Fair stranger, we such favors thought was due
From every Swain, much more from such as you:
Who for the matchless Glories of your face,
Your sprightly looks, your grave and graceful pace,
My justly claim precedence of your race.
We homebred, bashful wenches went away,
Without thanks given, not knowing what to say.
But coming timely home, we did relate
To our old Father Raguel, our fate,
How you our quarrel boldly did debate;
Watered our Flocks, and bid us all adieu.
Who said, I blush to hear such things from you,
Ingratitude makes all things black you know.
Go, say I Am restless till I see his face,
TO excuse your rudeness, know his name and race.
'The Rosy morn such Beauties never displayed,
'Such blushes and such smiles, as did the Maid
'And Stranger, who reciprocally dart
'Equal desires, as if they would had on heart.
Bold with the charm, he took and kissed her hand,
Say'ng Fair Nymph since you have received command
To offer me this honor, I will go,
As they desire, my name and race I Will show,
That, and much more I to you beauty owe.
'The sighs, the smiles, and the endearing strains,
'Past 'twixt our Lovers, as they crossed the plains,
'Are thoughts too high for any but such Souls,
'As Venus softens with Circean Bowls.
He comes, salutes, and soon acquaintance had
With Raguel, Jethro and Zipporah, who said
Blushing, Dear Sir, I love this stranger well,
Persuade him (if you can) with us to dwell.
Heaven rules the Stars, the Stars our Actions guide,
All which portend that I shall be his Bride;
And if my judgment fail not, you will see
Him prop and glory of our Family,
He has in's Face such Beams of Majesty.
Your pardon, Sir, with your consent I crave
To be his wife, for he a wife will have.
How know thou that, fond Girl? Sir, at the Well
I heard him sing (unseen) and he sung well.
Most of the Subject mystical but this,
He ended with the praise of Marriage bliss.
Be not too forward, he may change his mind,
And after all, prove peevish or unkind;
It Is rare a constant Courtier to find.
Some time is spent in viewing of the place,
The Herds, the Flocks, the Buildings and the Grass;
The manner of their Living, and their Laws,
Sacred and Civil, their sweet Springs and Spaws.
The stranger showed his great content in all,
And wished himself the woolly General
Of Jethro's bleating arms, and that he
Might be a Servant in that Family.
'Had you seen Venus in her Robes Divine,
'Or Helen in Corinthian bravery shine;
'Young Paris's love, but now the sport of fame,
'The Greeks disturber, and the Trojans shame:
'Or Rachel fair, when in her natural dress,
'Whom at the Well the Patriarch did caress,
'Then at our Zipporah's Beauty you might guess.
When she appeared in splendor like love's Queen,
All on a flame, and yet would not be seen
To be her Martyr. Jethro must make way,
Who to our Gallant (smiling) thus did say.
Sir, does our Country please? Can any thing
Within my reach to you contentment bring?
Speak freely, all is yours, my joy, my life,
My eldest Daughter you may have to wife.
Dear Zipp. what say thou to this choice of mine.
My dearest, Sir, said she, this great design
May be above my Merits; yet since yours,
I do submit. O! may the higher Powers
Direct us all. --
'When brave Leander boldly ventured,
'O're Hell espont by fatal Torches led;
'When mighty Jove came down in Golden Showers,
'Nor Hero^s charms, nor Danae's, had more Powers
'Than Zipp'ra's eyes, and Jethro's well-tuned breath.
'The stranger (blushing) said, I Am yours to death.
Joint promise given, and rites all consummate,
Our Lovers, now, are in a fearless state,
Bashful and coy no more, their Bed is one,
Till pregnant Zipporah had a hopeful Son.
Whom Moses Gershom named, himself to mind
Of the entertainment he on earth should find.
A stranger there, he was; tho loved and known,
Tho Jethro's House and Flocks were as his own.
Where he abode until the time was come
That Pharaoh from the fates must have his doom.
Tho Kings be Gods, they cannot escape the Tomb.
Whose unlamented fall the Hebrews cheered,
Who said, by our new King we may be heard;
But all their hopes and wishes proved vain,
Their Tasks are doubled, and the Lab'rers slain.
This made them sigh, this made them pray and cry
To Heaven, that he no longer would deny
His promised aid, who called his word to mind,
And said, I must to Israel be kind;
For Abra'm, Isaac, and for Jacob's sake,
Their Fetters I Will knock off, their Chains I Will break.
Now, I think fit to ease, and set them free
From their heartbreaking sorrows, slavery.
''Twas I that suffered Joseph to be sold,
'Imprison'd and released; 'twas I enrolled
'His name with Egypt's Worthies, it was I
'That gave the wisdom, him did dignify;
'I moved Pharaoh to send for the Father,
'I taught the Son all Egypt's Corn to gather
'Before the Famine; I gave Israel grace
'With Egyt's King, and chose for him a place:
' Goshen (the fair) where he in wealth did flourish,
''Twas I his numerous Family did nourish
'(When dead); 'twas I his Bones to Canaan sent,
'A pledge of's Children's future settlement.
'It is for reasons to me only known,
'They have not yet enjoyed it, tho their own.
'But now they shall the best of Lands inherit,
'Because I love them, not because they Merit.
The fodder spent, and Midian Pastures bare,
Religious Moses doubleth his care
To find out Grass; at last his Flocks he brings
Unto the back of Horeb, where the Springs
Are limpid, salutiferous, and where
The Pastures good, and Sky is always clear,
And gladsome Spirits have famed dwellings there.
Here, he with patience waits the accomplishment
Of Heavens promise, and what else Heaven meant.
The Angel-God, to hasten his design
Appear^d as man, but clothed with Light Divine:
A bush surrounding with Celest'al fire,
This sight mad^ Moses discomposed, retire.
The flame was hot and fierce, yet frighted more,
Because the Shrubs stood verdant as before.
With pensive thoughts moved, he looked backed to see
The end of this (yet unknown) mystery,
Taking it for a sign of victory
Over some Great Prince --
Heaven sees, and calls him twice,
Moses, Moses be curious, take advice;
Look to thy Feet, and make no rash advance,
This place is holy, sign of importance.
I Am no deceitful, nor fictitious Jove,
Tho in this bush, I am the God of Love.
He in whom Abra'm trusted, Isaac feared,
And for whose honor Jacob Altars reared.
That seen, this heard, the trembling Shepherd bows,
Just sentiments of both in's face he shows,
With veiled Eyes, not daring more to see,
Suc^ w^ful beams of splendid majesty
As had the Author of this prodigy.
Whilst he in this dejected posture lay,
(His senses locked) not knowing what to say,
A sweet, refreshing, soft, melodious voice,
Revives his Spirits, and bids him rejoice,
Say'ng, the promised time is fully come
Of Israel's freedom, and the Egyptian's doom.
It was not my forgetfulness that did
Protract their Bondage, my eyes were not hid,
Nor bowels hard, my Providence required
That they should first with Egypt's fare be tired,
And worship too --
I must now for my ancient promise sake,
For which Truth, Justice, Goodness, are at stake,
Use such sure methods as shall bring them back.
All their opposers shall before them fall,
That brutish Nation shall no more enthral
The Offspring of my Friends, I Have heard their cry,
And am come down their wrongs to rectify;
Their Sorrows to remove, their State to change,
From making Bricks, to cultivate a Grange
That Is large and fruitful, whose Inhabitants
(Their cup now full) shall be exposed to wants.
My Peoples plaints I cannot longer bear,
Without redress, revenge on them that tear
Their Hearts with Tongues and Hands, it is my will,
Go thou to Pharaoh, and bid him fulfill,
The Lords commands and send his Friends away,
Doubt not the event, I Egypt's Scepter sway.
To this the bashful Shepherd answer made,
Great God, thou know the meanness of my Trade,
And rural dress, make me unfit to speak
With Pharaoh of a business so great,
For it is to spoil a Tyrant of his prey,
Who threat'neth death to all that disobey
His absolute commands, I know long since
No good can be expected from that Prince.
Courage my Friend, look great, the work is mine,
Let Pharaoh frown, and Hell with him combine;
Thou by my power, shall finish this design,
And when my people thou do from him take,
See, on this Mountain thou an Altar make,
For their deliverance, and mine honors sake.
Lord, said the Shepherd, this great prodigy
Confirms my feeble faith, which yields to thee;
Yet when I unto them this Message carry,
They Will scoff and say, this mad man makes us merry,
Who sent thee hither? tell us what is his name?
Or own thy self a Fool, and blush for shame.
What answer must I give to this demand,
Let me obtain this favor at thy hand,
If I must go? -- My being is immence,
I am, I was, I will be, get thee hence;
By this I to their Fathers was well known,
And they the same (if theirs) will likewise own,
But if they scruple at this Mystic name,
Say, you from me, the God of Abra'm came,
Who long since, unto him a promise gave,
(His prov'dence served by Israel's being slave
In Egypt) he would them in Canaan place,
This is my name to all the Jewish race.
Thou must be chief in this great enterprise,
Haste unto Egypt, call the grave and wise
Amongst the Tribes, and thy commission show,
By its contents the author they will know;
No circumstance of that thou must withold
Has been transacted here by me, be bold;
Relate the place, the Person, words and sign,
By which they will know it is no mock design,
Tell them, that now I with a melting eye,
Behold their sorrows, burdens, misery,
And by a powerful hand will bring them forth
From Egypt's bondage, publishing their worth
To Canaanites and Hittites, who shall give
The Houses unto them in which they live.
The Amorites and Perizites shall say,
The Land's not ours, arise, we must away;
The Hivites and the Jebusites shall haste
Out of their place; saying, it is the Almighti's waste,
Which he on his own Friends will now bestow,
Where most, and best, of Fruits shall ever grow,
And Milk and Honey like the Waters flow.
When they hear this all quickly will agree
To act as they directed are by thee,
Then lose no time, but haste unto that King,
And say, you tidings from Jehovah bring:
Who charges all the Tribes on pain of Death,
By Sacrifices, to appease his wrath;
Entreat that he may grant a grant a gracious ear
Unto his Servants, who their God do fear:
Three days no more, you beg for this affair,
Which ended, they shall back to him repair.
The Wilderness is near, the fittest place
To sue for Pardon, Pity, and for Grace,
Renew their vows, and see his blessed Face.
Tho I am sure the refractory King
Will give no leave, nor credit to the thing.
He will not let them go, your prayers their tears,
Will have repulse from his vindictive ears,
Yet be not daunted, his vain boasts shall tend
To Egypt's utter ruin in the end,
The wonders I will work shall soon incline
His towering Sp'rit to favor my design,
And make his Subjects give their helping hand,
(With all they have) to send you from the Land.
With all their Gold, and Jewels they will part,
Silver and Clothes, all which with willing heart
They Will give your Children, that they may depart:
So you shall be requited for your toil,
In Egypts's furnace, with Egyptian spoil.
'Heav'n sits at Helm in weather foul and fair,
'The Living Cargo's his peculiar care,
'The Sails may split, and Masts come by the board,
'The Ship may leak, and Pumps no help afford,
'The Master, Mates, and Saylors may complain,
'Of Ship and lofty Winds; but all in vain;
'The Waves must swell and bulge the Ship, or stave
'The cutting keel, if Mighty Jove give leave.
'But Prayers and Tears that Heaven do always please,
'Make the Storm cease, and smooth the foaming Seas,
'Bringing all safe to Land, with joy and ease.
Great Lord, said Moses, I well knew the men,
To my great grief, forty years since, for then
By secret instinct (sure it was from thee)
I made a step to their delivery,
Which early act they for injustice took,
And make me leave a Scepter for this hook,
This ancient odium still alive, I fear
Will harden their proud hearts, and stop their ear,
Their Unbelief that is heightened by their grief,
Has from them banished all thoughts of relief,
So that my words (I Am sure) they will not believe,
Unless some sign from thee I to them give,
Their Souls are dead, it is thou must make them live.
If I give signs, think thou that signs will do?
Go, show them signs from me, and wonders too,
What Is in thine hand? My Lord a Shepherds Crook,
Throw't on the Ground, and on it sharply look,
What is it now? A Dragon, horrid, great,
All men such creatures mortally do hate.
Fear not, lay hold upon its twisting tail,
Tho it look fierce its sting shall not prevail,
But to the former form it shall return.
The Bush of late which flamed did not burn.
Now put thy hand into thy bosom, where
It may be free from hurt, infectious air,
Haste take it out. Ah! Lord I am undone,
This Leprosy will cleave unto the bone.
What! Faithless still? put in thy hand again,
Behold, it is well and free from scurf or stain,
Distrust no more. -- If they will not credit give
To the first sign, the second they will believe,
If neither does their faithless hearts affect,
So as to hear thee, I will then direct
Another way, by which thou may persuade
That you from me this grand commission had,
Out of famed Nile fair water thou shall take,
Which poured upon the ground, my power shall make,
Great cakes of clotted blood, shall terrify
The King and them, then all shall yield to thee,
'Let Earth with Earth, Mortal with Mortal strive,
'Like Wasps and Bees, when fighting for the Hive,
'Let men contend with men, and let them dare
'Each other as they list, yet take great care,
'They fight not him, whose creatures they are;
'His powerful Justice can soon animate
'A Rod that is dry into a Serpent great,
'Make Water Blood, and what else he thinks fit,
'To overthrow their policies and wit.
This is not all, Dear God, my stamm'ring tongue
(For want of Elquence may do much wrong,
Unto this cause thou orderst me to plead,
(Not with with the Vulgar, but) with those that lead
The rest, with whom nothing will relish well,
But what with art, and florid words does swell.
A weak excuse, since thou well know that I
Have made man's mouth, his heart, his ear, his eye,
If dumb men speak, deaf hear, or blind men see,
No cause for these can be assigned but me:
Up then, and with undaunted courage go,
I will be always with thy mouth; if so,
Thy Tongue shall like a ready Writers Pen,
Such reasons give all shall convince all men.
This burden, Lord's to heavy for my back,
And thou have many stronger, some one take
This service to perform; let me still keep,
The tender Flocks of Jethro, Kids and Sheep,
As heretofore. --
Look on this bush, ungrateful, fearful man,
Leprosy, Serpent, Blood, then (if you can)
Deny obedience to his just commands,
Who promises to guide thy mouth and hands.
It is thy Wisdom, not thy Lisping Tongue,
I choose for this transaction; one is sprung
From the same stock with thee, who shall declare,
With art Divine, what my intentions are,
And how I think to order this affair.
He Is on the road, and big with expectation,
Since I informed him, how the Hebrew nation
Should by my power, his word, thy hand, be freed,
And bloody measures broke, that were decreed,
By Egypt for their ruin. --
Give this in charge, when he does first appear,
That when to Goshen he does back repair,
He may, nor art, nor words, nor labor spare,
Both of you shall be strengthened from above,
To show that I afflicted Israel Love,
And shall have joint commission, he thy mouth
Shall be, and thou to him as God of truth:
This Rod's the instrument that you must use
This Vengeance working Rod, on those refuse
TO 'bey my will, that mighty Monarch shall
By this dry Wand despised be, and fall,
I say be gone --
'Heav'n could not be, nor in that Heaven a Jove,
'If Earth could scan the secrets of his Love;
'How he contrives, deliberates, decrees,
'The fates of private Men and Monarchies;
'His wisdom is a Sea, that has no bottom,
'His providence a depth that none can fathom;
'His Wills a Law none ought to disobey,
'In Heaven and Earth, he does the Scepter sway;
'To Friends he is kind, to enemies austere,
'Yet Justice holds the balance here and there.
'He wants not agents to effect his will,
'That Fishermen or Shepherds can fulfill;
'If men were wanting, Water, Earth, dry Rods,
'Can force the stubborn to obey the Gods.
This new post does not Moses elevate
Above the thoughts of his (late) low estate,
Tho he be chose Heavens Envoy, he does go
First unto Midian that his friends may know,
Their Shepherd must on Embassy be sent
To Eyypt, whence he came in Banishment,
His Kindreds burden to condole and try,
(Once more) his Fate for their delivery.
The news when Jethro heard, he sighing said,
My dearest Son I wish my feeble aid
Could any way assist you in this task,
It should be given before you could it ask,
My Prayers and Tears shall be that God direct
And grant the success you from him expect.
'The enemies of God and of his Laws,
'Submit for secret, not for open cause;
' Jethro is willing with his Son to part,
'The staff of's Life, the joy of's Daughters heart,
'Tho for that loss he afterward may smart.
Night had no sooner shut the Shepherds eye,
Than he a splendid Vision did espy,
Of form divine; who thus itself expressed,
Sleep on, my Friend, sleep on, and take thy rest;
Then up, and haste to Egypt, for its strife
Against thee is ended with that Monarch's life.
'When Angels guard, and give the opiate,
'Men rest secure, nothing can hurt or hate.
Before next light gilded that Hemisphere
The Shepherd waked, said Zipporah, my Dear,
I Have for thy love, and for our livelihoods
In Deserts lived, in Mountains, and in Woods
These forty years, where my integrity
Was known to all, my greatest love to thee:
Now, Heaven resolved to alter my condition,
Sends me to Egypt: Dear, let no suspicion
Of fraud or hatred harbor in thy breast,
My God commands, and his commands are best.
I Am wholly yours, said she, Heavens will be done,
Tho Nature bids me grieve when left alone;
You know that Man and Wife are flesh and bone.
Life of my Soul, nothing can us two part,
Thou know I ever had a tender heart
Since first I saw, and helped thee at the Well.
True, true, my Dear, I am content to dwell
Where you think fit. What must we take from hence?
Only the Boys, the rest to Providence
I will commit, except this holy Wand,
Which I must always carry in my hand,
And wonders work with it in that cursed land.
'None but the Lover knows the grief to part
'With that is loved, since both have but one heart.
Heaven calls again, and bids him when he sees
The faithless King, make fair discoveries
Of his Intentions, and the fearful end
He for his stubbornness will on him send.
I know he will raging say, think that I will
Dismiss my Slaves, thy humor to fulfill?
No, they have sworn to be mine for ever,
In this opinion I will persevere.
To this reply, when they came first, it is true,
They said their Lives and Fortunes were your due,
Ingratitude they scorned whilst you was kind,
Fresh obligations them anew did bind,
And they are the same, tho you have changed your mind,
But now their God commands, who has a right
Over them, and you, whose wisdom, valor, might,
None can oppose, when he is resolved to fight.
He says, that Israel was his firstborn Son,
And must (tho now your Slave) in haste be gone,
If thou persist in disobedience,
Thy first born killed, he will force his people hence.
'Good Kings are Heavens beloved, mankinds joy,
'Whilst they their time and counsels do employ
'To rule with justice, clemency and love,
'In imitation of their King above,
'Whilst they resolve their conduct to confine
'Within the limits of the Law Divine,
'Which give them ease, and firmly fix their Crown,
'Procure men's favor, bring new blessings down
'Upon their heads and hearts, but when their will
'Is restless as the Sea, that never lies still,
'But beats the adjacent Rocks, and plows the Sands,
'Threat'ning a Deluge over the fertile Lands,
'Smiting the great, and blasting those below,
'With subtle Lightning slighting friend and foe,
'Such Jehu's, cursed, are their own overthrow.
Away he goes, not fearing ill success,
Since potent Heaven espoused his business,
And travels hard till mid-day's scorching Sun
Be at on his head, which forced him to sit down
Under a shady Beech, where angry J'ove
Appeared again, not as before in love,
His aspect threat'ned death, which had ensued,
If Zipp'rah had not softened the cloud,
Who run in haste unto her younger Son,
And cut his foreskin with a flinty Stone,
Then took the same, and threw't at Moses feet,
With unbecoming words she did him greet.
Is your just God with human blood atoned,
Must Kings for his displeasure be dethroned?
Must Women to their darlings Tigers prove,
TO oblige a cruel God? Is this his Love?
Hard hearted man, hard hearted as thy God,
I cannot, will not longer bear this load,
That you call Superstition pleases me,
I will return, yet let me hear from thee.
'Mixt matches often prove unfortunate
'To private men, and always to the State.
'Love, multitudes of Nuptial faults can cover,
'But when Religion's one, all are past over,
'One God^s enough; more make all disagree,
'Religious Brawls put out Religions eye.
Aaron, who many years had grieved to see
His brethrens bondage, burdens, misery,
Received command from Heaven to walk abroad,
To meet his Brother Moses on the road,
Returning home, and bids him listen well
To all such matters as he should reveal.
This news like Balsome, his chilled heart did warm,
His Spirits revive, and all his Senses charm,
He cared not what, or whom he left behind,
O'rejoy'd, he should his exil^d Brother find
Alive. He hastes unto the Mount of God
To meet him (for he there some time abode.)
The Salutations past, and tears distilled,
Expressions of the joy, their hearts that filled,
Moses to his, gives vent by this discourse,
Is Jochebed alive, my Mother, Nurse?
Are Amram, Mirian, and the rest all well?
Yes, dearest Brother; as when you did dwell
In Pharaoh's Court, this one exception made,
Our burdens are increased, tho Pharaoh's dead.
This I well know, the rest I Am joy'd to hear,
Said Moses, but I Have wonders to declare,
Israel must be released from Egypt's woe,
I have command from Heaven to tell you so.
See! here is my sealed Commission in my hand
And Weapon too, that Memphis must command,
With thy assistance, I will work such signs,
As shall that King destroy and his designs.
This is the business, thou art eloquent,
Show thine the cause why I am hither sent.
Up, let us go, we must the Elders call,
Publish our freedom and our enemies fall.
'To Caleb once God gave another Spirit,
' Elisha did Elijah's gift inherit.
' David did wisely play, Saul prophecy,
'When they command received from God on high.
'So banished Moses after forty years,
'Returns with power to ease his brethrens fears,
'Their groans, their sighs, and their heartbreaking tears,
'And Aaron who did work or oversee,
'Is Trumpet made for their delivery.
Who thus began -- My dearest brethren here,
(If Liberty you love, or your God fear)
What Heaven by Moses has bid me reveal
The wonders must be done, that he may heal
All your diseases. If you signs must have,
Time shall bring forth as many as you crave.
This said, the Tribes rejoicing, answered all,
We do believe our rise, and Egypt's fall,
And since our sad affliction Heaven has 'spy'd,
Our Song shall be, let Heaven be magnified.
'When Tempests rise, and Clouds pour down their Rain,
'The faint and feebled Footmen cry amain,
'Help kindest Heaven, and send us Halcyon days,
'There is no walking in such dirty ways.
'He hears, the storm's allayed, and clouds appear
'Serene, a blessing to the traveller,
'Such were these tidings to each Jewish ear.
The Council up, and all the Elders gone,
They leave the Brothers to consult alone,
Whose next conclusion's to inform the King
Of what for him, they from Jehovah bring,
Great Sir, said they, the King of Kings commands
You his Viceroy to slacken Isreal's bands,
That they a just, a pious people, may
Rest from their tasks, to sacrifice and pray:
We will no tumult make, when we remove
Into the Desert, let us beg your love.
'The sacrifices of a broken heart,
'The prayers and vows men unto Heaven impart,
'Need neither pompous shows, nor glozing art,
'He hears in secret in the Wilderness,
'In Mountains Christ himself made his address,
'Who never prayed without his wished success.
Impudence! Treason! cried the Heathen King,
Fairies, not Men, from their black Pluto bring
Such freakish fancies. Who Is your Lord, that I
At such a disadvantage should obey,
To set my Slaves, my drudging Vassals free;
I know him not, and there is no such decree
In my Archieves; Vile vagabonds be gone,
You speak as if you would attempt my Throne,
I will not let them go --
They add, the Hebrews God us hither sent,
The God of Order and of Government,
By whom Kings Reign, it is his prerogative
At pleasure to recall what he does give,
Who now requires, that you forthwith release
His friends from slavery to their wonted ease,
With leave to go unto the Wilderness.
Dismiss the men we pray, for three days space,
We are destroyed if you deny this grace.
To which the incensed King made this reply,
Moses and Aaron why do ye defy
Great Pharaoh's Edicts, you are more than mad,
To cheat these people, and destroy my trade,
Give over, and let them work, it is my will,
They must and shall their former tasks fulfill.
Think you that I such numbers can maintain
In idleness and sloth, you must abstain,
Else your grave plot will quickly prove a sham,
And they repent that you unto them came:
Call the Task masters of these Slaves* I Will know
The reason why my work goes on so slow.
Unnatural Rogues, did I not strictly charge
That you their wonted burdens should enlarge,
It Is your connivance, that is worthy blame,
It makes them think the Embassy that came
Was by divine appointment, but I Will see
What God they shall adore, if it be not me.
Double their Tasks, ye Dogs, let no supply
Be given for their assistance, Straw nor Hay,
Yet still demand full tale as heretofore,
When they had their materials from my store.
Go, tell the Zealots that (of late) they are Idle.
Go, lash their backs, I Will make them bite the Bridle,
Must I be rivaled by I know not who?
Or by two Knaves cajoled to let them go.
No, they shall know I rule --
'Court Parasites as soon as they receive
'A royal Nod, they will swear that Caesar gave
'Them power by Inuendo to confound
' Babel with Bethel, vile with holy ground,
'Their Will's their Law, prerogative pretense,
'To act a against Religion, Reason, Sense.
Thus armed, these Officers away do fly,
From Pharaoh's presence, piercing the wide Sky,
And Isra'ls Hearts with their blood-thirsting cry.
Religious Fops, Pharaoh will give no Straw,
Since you deny obedience to his Law,
And ye from you full tasks of Bricks will draw,
Or we must beat you dead, there is no reprieve,
Unless your nameless God does you relieve.
It Is Harvest now, haste you unto the Fields,
The new reapt grounds this year much stubble yields,
That gather, and fulfill your work as when
The Straw was given. Expect it not again.
They tried, but all in vain, to do the thing,
Which on their heads another storm did bring
From the enraged Taskmasters who say,
Why have you not made up your tale this day,
Nor yesterday, as you have done before,
Think on your Bricks, and play the fool no more.
If you are moved with our harsh discourse,
To Pharaoh you may have your next recourse,
Perhaps your treatment may be worse than ours.
Like drowning men who grasp at every reed,
This feigned affection their faint hopes does feed.
They ran and said, Dread Sovereign we know
That we our selves are yours, and labors owe
Unto this State. We trust therefore that ye
For pities sake will alter the decree,
Published against us by your royal will,
That without Straw, our tasks we should fulfill.
If this be in our power, Great Sir, be judge,
(Tho use and hardship have taught us to drudge)
We Are beaten without fault, they are the cause
Who counsel first, and then desire that Laws
May be enacted, on pretense of good
To Egypt, but we know it is for our blood,
For which they long have thirsted, and expect
By your command that murder to effect,
Prevent them Sir. No, no, you idle be
I cannot, will not alter my Decree,
Your new devotion made you over-quick,
Go hence and work, I Will show you trick for trick,
'As long besieged Castles when they see
'A bloody Flag hung out, when Soldiers be
'Decoy'd to Ambuscade, when Seamen fling
'Their Masts over board, Bale, Goods and every thing:
'Or when the nighted Trav'ller falls in pit,
'And men condemned in darkest Dungeons sit,
Overwhelmed with endless grief, such was the state
Of Pharoah's bondmen, when the knew their fate,
'One swounds, one cries, one tears his hairs and breast,
'Another rages, desperate the rest.
What shall we do, said they? See! Moses comes,
Let Us meet him, and relate our fearful dooms
Now past on us, upbraid him, he is the cause
Of our destruction, by these bloody Laws.
Ah! cruel man, ran thy Commission thus,
Thou said Heaven bid thee publish unto us?
We'd better much never have seen thy face,
Than suffer thus, by work, stripes and disgrace.
If just such methods are, let Heaven be judge,
Before thou came we wrought, we did not drudge;
But thy ungrateful message to the King
Has made us loathsome unto every thing
That is in Egypt; thy bold, bitter words
Sharpen their hearts against us, as their Swords,
This they, with fury in their looks express,
Would thou had stayed yet in the Wilderness,
We at our burdens then, we might have had
The Egyptian's love; with Straw for our Brick trade,
Both now are lost, and we our selves in danger
To be destroyed in our Monarch's anger.
Moses distrusting what might be the event
Of this harsh menace, highly discontent,
Looked pale and trembled, grief so seized his heart,
That neither Aaron's love nor Aaron's art,
Could cure those wounds (tho green) they did so smart,
This made him have recourse unto the Lord,
And peremptor'ly say, who can thy word
Believe hereafter; since our first attempt
Is shamefully repulsed with scorn, contempt,
This was my fear, when thou to me did say,
Go unto Egypt, bring my Sons away,
Thy promises to us increase our pain,
Why did thou send me? I Will return again
To Midian; since I see thy providence
Promotes our sorrows, not deliverance,
The Tribes despair of (ever) going hence.
'Tho Providence be beautiful and bright,
'And brings things that most hidden are to light.
'It often works by means that contrary are
'To Human Reason (for it Reason far
'Exceedeth) yet it has the wished end,
'Good to the good man, and the good man's friend.
''Twas providence that made young Joseph dream,
'His Parents and his brethren were the theme,
'By which his future fortunes were displayed,
'Tho he knew neither what he dreamt or said,
'Yet for that dream was envied, sold, betrayed,
Falsely accused, condemned to prison fast;
Strange steps! to make him Egypt's Lord at last.
What! Faithless Moses? fearful, do thou fret?
Why stumblest in the Porch? the time's not yet
Fulfilled for the work, wait, thou shall see
What I will do against Pharaoh, what, for thee.
I Will call my thundering Legions from above,
To force your passage, that you may remove,
In spite of your opposers, Egypt's King
Shall willingly to you assistance bring.
It is to me a wonder that you should
Dispute my promises since Abra^m could
Without such, firmly rest upon my power,
For all he had from's his birth to's his dying hour
El-shaddaj to him was sufficient,
And to his children whitherso'er they went;
They scarce the name Jehovah ever did spell,
But of Adonia talked, and liked that well.
When I to them of Canaan promise made,
They trusted in my power and always said,
What! tho we strangers be? Our God can give
This and much more: although we may not live
To see it done, it is enough that ours
Shall of that Land be the inheritors.
The time is come, my patience is abused,
My Servants by proud Pharaoh so ill used,
That their sad groans, which I seemed to despise,
Have moved my justice, now I must arise
To vindicate my truth, revenge the spite
Acted on every suffering Israelite.
Hope still in me, my promise I Will not break,
I will redeem you for my promise's sake.
Go to the Tribes, and say, I am the Lord,
I cannot falsify, recall my word.
I Will bring them forth from under Egypt's yoke,
And gently lead them; they are my tender flock,
To Canaanitish pastures where they may
In safety sleep, wake, sacrifice and pray,
Without disturbance, Pharaoh nor his land,
Shall take them out of the Almighty's hand,
My formidable actions when they see
Their might and rage shall truckle under me.
Then I with mine my Covenant will renew,
My Love is great although they be but few.
I will go with them to the wilderness,
Where with my presence I Will begin their bliss,
If they obstruct not their own happiness.
They Canaan shall possess, it shall be theirs,
By firm entail for them and for their Heirs.
I will make good whatever I have said,
Because that God, who the first promise made,
Which you will own, when I the Egyptian King,
With all his Subjects to destruction bring.
Then be no more shame-fac'd, of fearful heart,
Go, all these tidings to the Jews impart
I know they are vexed, and will not believe
That I the Almighty can give a Reprieve
From their hard bondage. Go unto the King,
Who (peevishly) will ask what news ye bring?
To which, with boldness you shall answer make,
Thy Slaves are Freemen now, they must go back
From whence they came --
'Who would not be Religious, and fears
'The wonder-worker; whose great mercies are
'Fixt as the Winters Moon, and Summer Son
'(Lasting when both are scorched up and done)
'His promises, his favor, and his grace,
'Were ever such to the Isacides.
Moses revolving his late reprimand
Received from Pharaoh, (with a palsied hand
And trembling tongue) said, Lord, it is in vain
To offer this unto the Tribes again:
Since Aaron's words, nor my great signs they have
Regarded hitherto, why should I crave
That of a wrathful King which they will deny?
Since I can neither of them gratify.
-- Are these your thoughts? you better things might know,
-- Your fear makes you thus scrupulously slow,
-- How dares man stay, when Heavens bids him go.
Distrust no more, your God does undertake
This wondrous task, and for that end will make
Thy powerful signs bring down great Pharaoh^s heart,
When Aaron, as thy mouth, shall act his part.
Exceed not thy commission, say no more
To him, than I to thee have said before.
This bid him freely unto Pharaoh say,
Heavens chosen Servants must not longer stay
In his Dominions; their increased woe
Is at an end, they must to Canaan go.
I know his rage, his fury he will deny
Thy God, or thee in this to gratify,
From's hardened heart my spirit I Will remove,
His Conscience him shall no more warnings give
Of my displeasure, nor his future state;
The Devil shall him deceive till it is too late,
I Will blind his judgment so, that he shall be
The chiefest actor in's own tragedy.
'Like Fish unwary plunged into the Net,
'The more they strike, the faster in they get,
'So he (while all my wonders I have spent.
'Not dreaming that his own destruction^s meant)
Shall boldly with enchanting Witch-crafts dare,
'The signs by thee and Aaron acted are.
I know he will strive my Outguards to defeat,
Not knowing that I have more wonders yet
At my command; whole Armies that can dye
His waters Crimson; darken his bright Sky.
My word shall bring poor vermin from their Cells
Will him despise, and all his Magi's spells.
The winged. Troops I Have ready at my beck,
His ruin, Israel's rescue to effect.
That tawny King and all his swarthy crew,
Shall that with vengeance learn, they never knew.
I will the Winds let loose, and Seas adjure
With him to make the fatal overture,
For bringing Israel out by my great power.
I know when you before him (next) appear
Your persons he will scorn, yet say draw near,
You, who pretend a message from above,
Must it confirm by Miracles; or prove
Your selves Impostors, Rebels to my Crown.
Most willingly, say you, and then throw down
This pregnant Rod; which turning to a Snake,
Shall twist, unfold and crawl, and strive to take
The Royal Scepter out of Pharaoh's hand,
At which he (much affrighted) mute will stand,
Nodding and sighing, for his Sophi-band.
They come. He said, what think my Priests of this?
Can you such Serpents turn, and make them hiss;
Alas! great Sir, said they, this fellow's art
Was learned from us, before he did depart
Thy Predecessors Court, and now he brings
Owls into Athens, we know better things.
Look on our Rods, Great Sir, which we command
By all our Deities, to turn from our hand
(As that of his) to many Serpents great
And when all is done, both his and ours are cheat.
Legerdemain can make false things appear
To the ignorant, as if they real were.
But here is more, said he, his swalloweth yours,
This) if a trick) I Am sure's beyond your powers.
Well, Moses this is fine, but yet I must
See more and greater things, before I trust
That you commission have from any God
To rob me of my Subjects; Aaron's Rod
And all your charms for this will prove in vain,
Once more be gone, and from these slights abstain,
This will not ease, but more increase your pain.
Then turned and frowned, and said disdainfully,
I Am King of Egypt, I your God defy!
I scorn to think of a superior,
Who can make Gods. I Will hear of him no more
'This heard, in haste the flaming Seraphs came
'To pay their homage, Cherubs did the same,
'Say'ng Holy, Holy, Holy Lord and true!
'How long have we blessed Spirits honored you,
'Both night and day, not daring once to pry
'Into the secrets of such Majesty?
'Yet in our tarvels at your beck, we hear
'Proud Mortals talk as they your Rivals were.
'Your patience we have experienced in our selves,
'Whom you confirmed in grace: but that such elves
'As they should sharers of this goodness be
'Is unto us next to a prodigy;
'Since nobler beings for one single fault,
'When they attempt your honor to assault,
'Receiv'd a present Mittimus to go
'From bliss eternal, to eternal woe.
'Have you so long domestics been to me
'And count one single Act a prodigy,
'Look back on former ages, there you will find
'Greater, and more done by me of that kind,
'My mercy's great, and cannot be confined.
'When all the Sons of men like Pharaoh spoke
'Reproachfully of me, and did provoke
'My Justice, then I took a fixed time
'To vindicate my self, correct that crime,
'And so I will do now. --
Take speedy wing
To Moses saying, you a message bring
From me. It Is best to see him in the night,
That he may be prepared when it is light,
To wait on vexed Pharaoh at the River,
Whose heart is hard and faithless yet as ever,
And in that state resolves to persevere.
Tell him from me, that when the Monarch views
Himself, and Aaron, coming with fresh news,
That sight will so exasperate his wrath,
He Will threaten both of them with present death,
Command him not to fear, but take his Rod,
And say once more to him, the Hebrews God
Scorns his repulses in the business
Of Isra'l's going to the Wilderness
At his command. -- Shall vile Earthworms deny
Their maker, and refuse to gratify
His just demands? his power will make thee know
That thou allegiance unto him do owe
With full obedience. Pray, Great Sir, believe
For God commands that I a sign shall give.
These limpid streams that he made for thy good
By this small Rod shall turned be to blood,
Blood, that to thee may fearful, loathsome be,
And all its sinned inhab'tants stupify,
Thy Rivers shall with blood and fish so stink,
That thine (tho fainting) may not of it drink.
This said, the winged Herald took his flight,
Leaving his Friend in bed curtain'd with night,
Whose sleep was broke by the awful Messenger,
Who left his errand and did disappear;
The message Moses must to Pharaoh bear.
Confused slumbers did again invade
The Prophets temples, no sound sleep he had,
Till lofty Titan, Earth's Ethereal eye,
Nights sables tinged with a Rosy dye,
Which showed him that the King was passed by.
He dressed and blushed, his thoughts were on the River,
The Almighty speaks, (whose mercy fails never,
Whose Judgments slumber not, when he begins
To bare his arm, and punish crying sins,)
Friend Moses, do my will, it is not hid
From thee, I Have by my self, and Angel bid
That thou in this affair should fearless be
As Aaron, both direction from me
From time to time shall have, go hand in hand,
While you have brought my Sons out of the Land.
Let Aaron take the Rod, and shake it over
Their Rivers and their Ponds which waters cover,
And all their Vessels, wherein they keep sweet;
That which they draw for drink, and dressing meat.
For I will turn those waters into blood,
Because they have hitherto my power withstood
And slain my subjects, for this cruel deed
They in this punishment their sin shall read.
As blood was their delight, so blood shall be
The first sad sign of their Catastrophe:
My Infants tears I cannot longer smother,
The griefs and groans of each distressed Mother,
The Fathers loss I do with him condole,
Infanticide does vex my very Soul,
My Justice must this cruelty control.
The harmless waters that did suffocate
Those half-liv'd babes, shall show my power, my hate,
By painted blushes, tho this Livery
Will not yet work the wished delivery
Of their surviving parents. Go and try,
Tho he will not me by this yet gratify.
Thus authorized, the Brethren haste to Nile,
Whose early coming made the Monarch smile,
Stood there before: who said, come Moses, tell
Us news from Heaven, are all things settled well
In that Utopean Territory? say,
Have you command to take my Slaves away?
Yes Sir we have, as you're long shall know,
None can distrust those good credentials show.
These waters we will in your presence smite,
Waters that bring to Egypt wealth, delight,
Because in them you drown the Israelite.
They strike, the Flood put on a crimson blush,
Died by the hand that saved the flaming bush:
Which quickly turned to nauseous putrid blood,
Dazzling the Fishes, tho their sight was good,
They could not see to swim, nor gather food.
But, wondering at the change of the Element,
Struggle for life, until their life was spent.
The Crocodil's feigned tears do real grow,
Because they could not rest above, below,
The waters running bloody, thick and slow.
The Tortoises crawl from their warmer Sand,
To lay and hatch their Eggs upon the Land,
All showing Pharaoh 'twas the Almighty's hand.
Tho he the prodigy with indignation
Beholds, and calls the wise men of the Nation;
Saying, have you this new trick never done?
Are they the Wonder workers, they alone?
Call up your Demons, and their aid implore,
Or else be gone. I Will be Priest-rid no more.
Most Sacred Sir, you know to us your will
Is dearer than our Souls, we will fulfill
All your desires, when we clear water find,
We'^l do as they have done, and ease your mind,
That Egypt, you, and all the world may see,
It is not fit such Fops to gratify.
Believe your Priests, great Sir, your doubt is over!
Well, now my heart is hardened as before,
Let us go home -- My Lord what shall we do?
Cried the Egyptians, (with a triple bow)
Our thirst is great, the Water none can drink,
Nor eat the Fish (now dead) for both do stink,
We are undone what're the wise men think.
Remove from Nile, deep Wells you may prepare
Where Moses, nor his Brother Aaron were,
The subterraneal streams, I hope, are free
From Incantation, Jewish Sorcery.
Try, it is but sev'n days wonder, when that is over,
Nile will be sweet, and clear as heretofore.
When they are wearied we shall have a Truce,
With satisfaction for the loss, abuse,
Done to our sacred person, to our state.
Elohim frowning, cries obliterate
The name of that proud Prince, his crimes require
Both temp'ral Judgments, and eternal Fire.
Tell him, my Justice (since he will not mend)
Designs far greater plagues on him to send;
His cleared sweet water shall for smell and taste,
Be worse than when the blood did it infest;
For I will call from thence a croaking host,
That cover shall the Earth with Spawn, his Coast
Shall be discolored, no place shall be free,
His House and Bed will both infested be.
His Servants, who have yet scarce trouble had,
Shall eat the loathsome slime amongst their bread.
These Frogs, so fast, so numerous will come
On him and his, that there shall be no Room
Unhaunted left -- I say go tell the King,
Then with your (hallowed) Rod perform the thing.
The Brothers go, who after honors made,
Informed the King of what Jehovah said.
He seemed secure and frowned, they urged the case,
And with a Frog-plague dared him to his face.
Think not, said they, that menaces will do,
We have command to act and menace too.
The Wand stretched over the stream, a hideous noise
Was heard, an uncouth croak, harsh-sounding voice
Of new made Frogs, such as the world's eye
Never yet beheld -- A loathsome Majesty.
Sat on their over grown bulks, and made them dare
TO invade their Houses, Temples, without fear,
Tho newly raised, they trained and valiant were.
The trembling King and Country strove to oppose
The inroads of those (unknown) warlike Foes;
But all in vain -- the more of them they kill
The more they grew, the more their Houses fill.
The Palace is not freed; the King must bear
The greatest burden while they quarter there.
Heaven gave the Billets, made the Court of Guard
In Pharaoh's House; this him from sleep debarred,
Who thought each Frog a dying Child, whose cries
Pierced his heart, as theirs had pierced the Skies;
And brought the Judgment under which he groans,
Because his cruel heart despised their moans.
Bloodshed and Cruelty make empty Thrones.
Choked with faint fulsome smells, he left his bed,
Shaking his Locks with Frogs-spawn overspread,
Then sighs and shrieks, and weeps, and calls who is there?
To those lay by; but they oppressed with fear,
Made no return. At last great Jambres speaks.
My Lord, why are you troubled at such freaks?
I Will make such vermin, if you say I shall.
No, such delusions do but haste my fall.
Call Heavens Envoys, Moses and his Brother,
There is a God, I cannot longer smother
My sentiments of this great truth, I see
That not your art, nor love, can comfort me;
You have increased my Sorrows, but relief
Transcends your power. This, this augments my grief.
This said, shame, paleness seized on every face,
To see the insolence, impet'ousness
Of Titan's spurious brood, base watery race.
But most of all of the Wizards, who begin
To shrivel up their Noses, Cheeks, and Chin,
Mutter and howl, because they cannot awe
Pharaoh, as formerly. He does withdraw.
They gawn and yell than Cerberus more loud,
And so expire, Hell gaping for their blood.
Moses appears, to whom the King with tears
Said, you are not insensible what fears,
What horrors, and what miseries attend,
The man's abused and cheated by his friend.
This is my case, you know I have withstood
At their desire, that Heaven meant for my good
Peace, tho I drowned his Servants in the flood.
Now, now alas! my Land and Conscience feel
The worst of woes, think not that Heaven may deal
More mildly with me, since his mercy's great,
Beg thou that he remove from my poor state
This loathsome fry -- I will no more contend,
But willingly his loved people send
To offer sacrifice. Make this thy care.
I Am now convinced he is a God of prayer,
And thou his Servant. -- This with grave accent
He uttered, as tho he did repent.
'Grand Rebels, Murderers, and Thieves, when come
'Before the Bench, expecting their last doom
'Have mourning on, and with a pitious tone
'Complain of their misfortunes, every one
'Doth beg for mercy; yet if Jur' or Judge,
'Or Clement King, give them from law refuge,
'They grow more bold, and act as if they had
'A Royal Lease to follow their old Trade.
'Or like a Miser, who (through age) does feel,
'His seared Soul within its house to reel,
'Cries, O this ill-got Gold! What shall I do?
'It has destroyed my Soul and Body too.
'Yet for prevention I will Almshouse rear,
'Or Chapel build, to which men may repair,
'As I have ofton done, my crimes to hallow,
'Straining at Gnats, that I might Camels swallow.
'If none of these, I to the poor will give
'A mighty sum, that so my Soul may live.
'But, if of that disease he does recover,
'O! how he frets, and acts his tricks all over,
'With more industry, craft, and perjury,
'Say'ng now, I am no more afraid to die.
-- So Pharaoh grieved with Blood, and with the Frogs,
-- Calls out for Moses, flatters, lies and coggs,
-- As if he would not been settled on the lees,
-- But racked and fined by these discoveries,
-- And fit with them to offer sacrifice.
-- Heaven condescends, and Moses is content
-- With his fair words, tho the ^y^w falsely meant.
'Thus Nineveh's repentance, tho a flash,
'Kept from its back, the Prophets threatened lash,
'And Ahab's humbling did for Judah's King
'Obtain reprieve, tho not for his offspring,
'So Phaaroh for a feign^d acknowledgement,
'Had half the plague removed, Heaven on him sent.
Tho thou have now left off self-glorying,
Said Moses, thou may glory in this thing,
That God in mercy will grant thy request,
And send these Vermin from thy land in haste,
Commanding them henceforth to make abode
Within Nile's banks. -- Contend no more with God,
But pray and wait. To morrow thy shall see,
This plague removed, from off thy land and thee,
If to thy words thou add sincerity,
Then thou shall know, that none is like the Lord,
Whose power will quickly ease to thee afford,
We shall no sooner ask than 'twill be done.
They pray, Heaven hears, the daring Frogs are gone
In shoals to Nile, or perished by the way,
When God says go, his creatures must not stay.
As soon as Pharaoh had the news received,
He smiling said, your friend may be deceived.
Kings can not by their promises be bound
To Jove himself, their Counselors have found
Salvo's from his own word, than can oppose
The faint assaults of every Monarch's foes,
And I Will believe them, tho I lose my Crown,
My promise lately made I will not own,
Nor let them go. -- This the Almighty knew,
Who called the brethren, and obedience due
To his commands required, which they give,
And he commands, that scattered Dust may live,
Turning to Lice, both upon man and beast,
That might make Pharaoh shuck, and all the rest.
This done, the Itching Monarch calls aloud,
To Jannes, Jambres, all the Sophi brood,
Can you make Lice, said he? No cried the Wizard,
To counterfeit this thing we will not hazard,
Lest fire consume us, or a worser thing
That after this, Heaven may upon us bring
For what is already done, for here we see
The print of's Fingers, Power and Majesty,
Which does confound us, and our Foppery.
'A fair confession; but Hypocrisy
'Will speak the truth when it thinks the same a lie,
'When a duluding Sp'rit infatuates
'Prince, Priest or people to despise the fates
'Their policy is madness, and their pride
'Such insolence as God and men deride.
Thus fared it with Pharaoh, his release
From Blood, Frogs, Lice, presage a fourth disease,
The God of Miracles could not behold,
But must subdue the proud, suppress the bold.
Go, Moses, then said he, by morning light,
Stand before Pharaoh in his peoples sight,
And let him know, it is Jehovah's will,
That he with speed his just commands fulfill,
In letting Israel go, that they may pay
Their Homage; if he make them longer stay
Through his refusal, by my next alarm
A fearful Host, great swarms of Flies shall arm,
Which will molest him more than Frogs or Lice,
And all his Servants bid him take advice.
Say, it is no cheat, Goshen shall make thee know,
That I my people love, and to them owe
(By promise) freedom from the noisome beast,
With every thing, the greatest and the least,
That may infest them. Tho they dwell by thee,
Their Habitations shall no shelter be
To thee, and thine, from stinging, stinking Fly.
Observe this warning, since I speak in love,
Mercy, not Judgment, it is I most approve.
Consider well, the sign will be to morrow,
And will to thee beginning be of sorrow.
'Who can such charms of love and goodness hear
'Unless 't be Pharaoh, and not shed a tear?
'But ah! his Heart, his Bowels hardened are.
He will not let Heaven convenanted go,
But leave to sacrifice at home, (if so)
He gives. To which Moses made this reply
Who gives but half, he does the whole deny,
Because that half is given unwillingly.
Our God commands us to the wilderness,
And he best knows which is the fittest place.
If among you we stay, then we must offer
Such things as you, which our God will not suffer;
If ours, it will be said we innovate
Your sacred Rites and your Decrees of State;
Both these may on us sudden ruin being,
And therefore we must plainly tell the King,
That since our God has fixed the time, the place,
And Sacrifice, we must with thee find grace.
When he perceived excuses were in vain,
That obstinacy did increase his pain,
The next resolve was feigned obedience
To God and Moses: thus, you may from hence
Remove, with my free leave, if you will swear
Not to go far, and let me quickly hear
That you have begged of him to set me free,
From the proud insects all, and loathsome Fly.
Moses replied. If thou do keep thy word;
At thy desire we will entreat the Lord,
Who (I am sure) will order the retreat
Of these wing^d troops, tho noisome, fierce and great.
To morrow they shall every one remove
From thee and thine, thy gratitude to prove.
The thing is done, yet Pharaoh still denies
The people License to do sacrifice.
Nor Blood, nor Frogs, nor Lice, nor Flies can awe
The stubborn Prince, nor to obedience draw
His callous heart; that self-deceiving cheat,
Must be outwitted by a plague as great
As any of the former. Heaven once more
Calls unto Moses as he did before;
Saying, go to the Palace and declare
To him again, what my intentions are
I am his, and the Hebrews God, tho he
Knows not my name, nor his own destiny.
If he refuse to hearken to this word,
I will lift up my hand, with flaming Swor^
O'er's Cattle, Horses, Asses, Camels, Sheep
And Oxen, which he does in Pastures keep.
Pestilent fogs shall from the earth arise,
Malignant vapors, from the starry Skies.
These shall their blood corrupt, whence putrid hearts,
Shall scorch with piercing pains and shivering sweats.
So that the Ox shall fall beneath the yoke,
The sacrifice shall die before the stroke.
The Horse shall leave his prancing, and his head
Shall giddy turn, run round, and fall down dead.
Asses shall bray, and Camels breathe their last,
And dizzy'd Sheep themselves in Ditches cast.
The nimble Dogs shall howl, forget their meat,
And teaming Ewes for pain their Breasts will beat,
All which will his unhappiness complete.
He acts as if he knew not what I meant,
This shall not be a general punishment.
His only shall it feel, my people's Beasts
Must be exempted from these (carrion) Feasts,
They shall continue healthy, fat as ever,
Mercy shall be the Skreen, by which I Will sever
Their Herds and Flocks from thine, that thou may see,
He must be loser that opposes me.
All Is done, and yet his heart does harder grow,
Heaven must him wonders more, and greater show.
'If Soldiers when their Breaches open lie,
'Can neither them defend nor fortify;
'Do still refuse to make a fair surrender
'On honorable terms, despise the tender
'Of Lives and Arms, or what else is thought fit
'To grant, the next resolve is storming it
'With res'lute bravery, so that they may know
From Justice, what they did to Mercy owe.
Thus Heaven proceeds against him when secure,
Moses nor Aaron must make overture,
But suddenly call out a fixed Brigade
Of Granadiers, who never yet mercy had
Where Justice was Commander, Water, Earth,
Are both too mild, the Tyrants settled wrath
To mittigate, the fiery element
Must act its part in Pharaoh's punishment.
I Will give no warning, Go, and Cinders take
Out of the Furnace, of which you shall make
Large Hand granado's, and them upward throw,
Which kindling there shall ashes turn below,
Ashes, that may breed Boils on Beast and Man,
Then let his wise men cure them (if they can)
They throw, it is done, the dusty ashes fell,
The Magi cry, we never saw such a spell,
For they like Causticks such Blisters made
Such Boils and Blains as Egypt never had
The Sorcerers for shame pulled in their Crests,
Because their Boils grew on their Heads, Hands, and Breasts,
By which their Monarch might most plainly see
That it was no enchantment, but decree
For their destruction. Yet the blinded man
(Acted by God) persists as he began.
Not moved by Blood, Frogs, Lice, nor Flies, nor Murrain,
The Boils and Scabs do not his pride restrain,
This angry Heaven resents, and gives command
To Moses, saying, Early rise, and stand
Before the King to morrow, 'nd let him know
That Jacobs God will have his Servants go
To sacrifice. Bid him look to his State,
I will no more with him Capitulate,
But one great plague after another send,
Until his pride with his life is at an end,
And Kingdom ruined, that the world may see,
There Is none on Earth, has equal power with me.
The Murrain I will turn to pestilence.
That he and his may death receive from thence,
His stubborness admits of no suspense:
My first plague could his pride have conquered,
Second or third, but all by me forbid,
Struck gently, that his case might warning be
To all are haughty, stubborn, false as he,
Each Tyrant shall receive this Tyrants doom,
Either in this or in the world to come.
Tell him, he holds of me his Crown. His rise
Was to inform the faithful, and the wise
Of my great power and mercy, that they may
Tremble at that, and for this ever pray.
Thinks he (fond man) that I can always see
(And not redress) my peoples misery?
No, he shall find about this time to morrow
The Heavens arm to magnify his sorrow,
Clouds dark and pregnant, fortified with Thunder,
A stormy shower shall hurl down to his wonder,
Hail of such unknown bigness and such weight,
As him and his, with present Death will fright.
Bid him his Wise men call to assign the cause
Of such a rupture in great Nature's Laws.
Ask if they can at once raise such a shower,
As may begin such day, and end such hour,
And in that time surround the Egyptian Coasts,
Then bid defiance to the Lord of Hosts.
Go now proud Pharaoh, try thy utmost skill,
To save thy people from this threatened ill.
If thou will yet be wise thy Cattle gather
Out of the Fields, since thou art Egypt's Father,
Pity thy Children with their Herds and Flocks,
Afford them shelter from the frozen Rocks,
Else by this plague such Slaughters will be seen
Through all thy Land as never yet has been.
'Behold the natures of the obdurate!
'Tho all of them slight mercy, yet ill fate
'Makes some distinction, fear of punishment,
'Forceth a few into acknowledgment
'Of power divine, and for their safety cry,
'Whilst others feared and mad, do still deny
'Obedience to their great superior,
'Hush 'twill be over, said they, it is but a shower.
Impending woe moved such as yet had sense,
To view the Fields in haste, and bring from thence
Shepherds and Herdsmen, saying, quickly fly
Home with your herds and flocks, or all must die.
Moses has said it, and we do believe
That he from God, not Satan, did receive
His Rod, his fearful Rod has such things done,
As show they were not wrought by him alone*
However, we will for our safety try,
It Is no great trouble, if we live or dye.
Others, who no regard had for his word,
Said, what! Egyptians believe the Lord,
Faint-hearted Fools, unworthy such a King,
Who laughs at all the Messages they bring
From their famed Gods, our herds shall stay and graze,
And so like men, we'll dare him to his face.
Unheard of boldness, said the Thunderer
Unto his Servant, now, my mercy's ear
Is shut for ever. Therefore lift thy hand
To Heaven, I must send down a starry band
Of Bow-men, with such Bullets as shall beat
Out of their hearts this irreligious heat.
Man, Beast and Herbs, through all the Land shall feel
The weighty Stones, the keenness of my Steel.
Make no delay, to Heaven thy Rod stretch forth,
That I may send from the East, West, South and North
Thunder, and Hail, and Fire, these all around
Shall fly aloft, and run upon the ground,
With so great fury, that the Waters face
Bright horror shall adorn, and every place
Look like it self, transparent, as the Fire
And mixed Hail, as if they were entire
One body bright, yet terrible to see,
Two el'ments joined that never did agree.
The Rod's lift up, then from the Clouds a voice
Rendeth the Sky with such a dreadful noise,
That Earth (tho heavy) cannot longer stand,
But reels and staggers, when it feels the hand
Omnipotent, who gave it its first base,
It gapes and opens so, that there is no place
For Pasture, Corn, for Cattle, Herbs and Trees,
All sink away unto their destinies.
Only in Goshen all-wise Providence
Against this storm makes a stout defense.
He that the troubled Ocean commands,
Forbid the Hail to fall upon those Lands.
This unlooked for, this great discrimination
Betwixt the Egyptian, and the Hebrew Nation,
Made the King serious, who does now begin
With forced expressions, to confess his sin
To Moses and to Aaron; saying thus,
Egypt is wicked, Heaven is Righteous.
Good men! entreat your God once more for me
To cease the Thund^rings, let the Hail storm be
Abated, then what you desire I Will give,
It is enough if I and mine may live.
I Would better lose such Subjects than to hire
Them at so dear a rate; they shall retire.
To which the Prophet makes this reply,
I must go hence, before I lift on high.
My heart and hands for thee, unto the Lord,
That the Hail and Thunder may cease at my word,
And turn to their own elements, to show
That the Heavens above are Gods, and the Earth below.
But I am sure when this great plague is over,
Thy thoughts will be the same as heretofore,
Faithless and froward, and thy sottish crew
Of slavish Subjects will their rage renew.
The damage done by this seventh plague's so great,
That with dry Eyes no man can it repeat.
The Flax now ripe, from whence the Staple trade
Of Egypt had its rise, and Linen made,
By subtle corruscations withered,
The ponderous Hail its bolls (knopt off) interred,
And bowing Barley, calling for the hand
Of nimble Sythe-man, buried in the Sand.
The Wheat and Rye that did not yet appear,
Were only saved from this great Massacre.
'The Judgment must be great, all must confess,
'When Eden's turned into a Wilderness.
This Pharaoh saw; but when through Moses's prayer,
The Sun dispersed the Clouds, and made all fair:
When Thunder, Rain and Hail, were called in,
He waxed worse, and added sin to sin,
Whose ill example was so prevalent
With all his Subjects, that they likewise bent
Their minds on future mischief, and deny
Their punisher to please or gratify:
Who now resolved on Egypt's desolation,
And the deliv'ry of the Hebrew Nation,
Said Moses, Go unto the King, yet know
That I his heart have hardened, he will not bow,
To make my wisdom, power and glory shine,
For ages after in the eyes of thine,
By thy instruction, and may often repeat
With joy and gratitude, the wonders great
For their redemption wrought, and constant prove
To thee their Leader, me their great Jehove.
Away in haste unto the faithless King,
And say, the Hebrews God remembering
His Servants slavery, and thy peevishness,
Resolves thy ruin, this is the Express:
He wonders at thy refractory Spirit
Which will not humble, after thy just merit
Has brought seven plagues; it is time his friends were gone,
The eighth is near, a great and grievous one,
A dreadful host sent by a scorching wind
From the South west, will eat that is left behind,
That will disrobe thy new-cloath'd Fields and Trees
Of all their Summer Glories, Liveries,
And such a Famine bring as heretofore
When Jacob's Sons to Egypt first came over,
And greater much, because the Hebrew Prince,
Joseph your Savior is forgot long since,
Who (like a father) furnished you with Corn,
When faint through hunger you did daily mourn
Before his Gate. His wise, his melting heart,
Found out new measures by a divine art,
That might your wants supply, and you relieve,
Not dreaming then that you his race would grieve,
With stripes, disgrace, with burdens, and with death,
Revenge implacable, and endless wrath.
These are your crimes, and this your punishment.
To morrow Locusts will from Heaven be sent;
Locusts, so strange, so great, so numerous,
They Will cover all the Land, and fill each House,
The Land that promised you a small supply,
After the Hail and Rain shall putrify,
The fruitful Trees shall shake their Leaves, and bare
Meadows shall look, as Winter had been there;
Whatever proud Nile, and the attracting Sun
Has forced from the Earth shall be undone;
Nor shall your Bodies from them be excused,
Such measures you shall have as you have used,
Your Tongues and Hands were sharpened, and your Swords
Destroyed my people; your most pleasant words
Like Serpents, Vipers, and like Wasps did bite,
The fainting, feeble, famisht Israelite.
Their poisoned stings shall pierce your trembling veins,
Opening their Sluices, as you did the Drains
Through Nile's great banks, to vex my Servants hearts,
That when you feel the fury of their Darts,
You may bind up, not chaff the wound that smarts.
This when the angry Prophet had expressed,
Without farewell, he leaves him, and the rest
Unspoken -- All his Counselors dismayed,
Seeing Moses to their King no reverence paid
At his departure, but with high disdain,
Showed by his looks, charged him once more on pain
Of Death in haste to let the people go,
Cry, it is of God, now we must own it so,
We must submit unto their God's decree,
And not of our own ruin authors be.
Tho we could flatter when all things went well,
We must give over now, and frankly tell*
The King that he, not we, began this (...),
In which we are daily worsted, better far
It is to yield, than wait the unknown event,
We see their Magazines cannot be spent.
They are not men we fight with, when the powers
Of Heaven and Earth are raised, what are ours?
A loathsome Louse, a Frog, a Fly can bring
Destruction on us, and on our King.
Come, lets not dally; here! the Monarch comes
Chaff^d with the late affront, he stares, he foams,
Who dares accost him in this furious mood?
His trembling shows the thirsts after blood.
But we must t^y before it be too late
With him about this matter to debate.
Great Sir, our grief, not boldness, makes us offer
The Nations state, our troubles will not suffer
^onger connivance, speedy remedy
Must be consulted on 'twixt us and thee.
Earth, Water, Fire and Air do all agree,
(Against our Counsels) to set Israel free:
It must be done, necessity has no Law,
Pray Sir be wise, and let the men withdraw.
My Lords, it is not strange that loss and fear,
Give you occasion to accost my ear
With such surprising Language. But I wonder
That Jannes, Jambres, who so often did Thunder
Another Dialect, should cringe and truckle
Against the rules of their own art, and buckle
To foreign fancies. Yet it grieves me most
That this grave Priest should too himself be lost,
Who Pharaoh wished the fondling brat to kill,
His Daughters joy, before he had done ill.
All made returns, the mighty Lords begin.
Great Sir, the loss is yours, we would not sin
Against a Prince so glorious, so great,
Against a fertile Land, and potent State,
Of all we must be guilty, if we do
Our eyes hoodwink, our senses, brains forego.
It is the glory of a Courtier
First to foresee, and then prevent the shower;
This is our Province, time lost to recover
Is full of hazard. Pray, Great Sir give over.
The Sorcerers in order next appear,
Blushing with shame, and stupifi'd with fear,
Dread Sovereign (say they) our mortal state
Admits of changes, while this grand debate
'Twixt Heaven and you lay dormant, our Ally's
Taught us both God and Men how to despise.
You, you, great Sir, excepted, now they fly,
They dare not ape Heavens smallest prodigy,
Nor us encourage you to gratify.
The aged Father last of all comes forth,
With Mitred head, gray hairs of famed worth,
Who said, O King! your great experience
Of my fidelity, and vast expense,
Deserves of you a better recompense.
I told that King before the Child was born,
That he would be the cause of Egypt's scorn,
If then his Death by him had been decreed,
As I requested, Egypt had been freed
From all these plagues. For he himself presaged
In Childish sports, what he would do when aged.
Pharaoh his Infant Temples did adorn
With Egypt's Crown, which he pulled off in scorn,
By which most just suspicion he gave,
That he would force the Scepter, not receive
It from his hands. Then, it was my advice,
That death should pay him for the enterprise.
But now 't's too late, he is King, you his Viceroy,
Which (I forsee) you will not long enjoy,
He threatens, kills, commands, and which is more,
Destroys our Lands, their Fruits, and all our store,
There is but one way left us to preserve
Egyyt from ruin, that we may not starve,
To let them go, that they may serve the Lord,
Perhaps this Moses may perform his word.
He says Heaven's merciful, and will repent,
Of his fierce anger, if ill men relent.
You have o'rcome me, said the raging King,
Go out in haste, Moses and Aaron bring.
A Monarch is no Monarch when alone,
(His Subjects ruined) let the men be gone,
To do as they have said, yet I must see
The extent of this great Jail-delivery.
Moses, Heaven's fury acted by thy hand,
I am no longer able to withstand.
Tell me, but who must go? Let modesty
Bound your demands, and they shall granted be,
Who asks too much his own denial craves,
I will not part at once with all my Slaves.
You are not ignorant, great Sir, I know
By this time, that my Message from below
Came not, just Heaven me often did command
The Tribes to carry out of Egypt's land,
And they must go Men, Children, Herds and Sheep,
None must be absent, when our Feasts we keep
Unto Jehovah --
Is this the justice of your famed Jehove?
Is this the kindness of your God of love
To his Vicegerents? said the angry King,
Must they submit to every idle thing
That he requires? Must every Slave have power
To spoil their goods, and honors to deflow'r?
No, this great point I will dispute and try,
Who must be here obeyed he or I,
Your little ones as pledges I will keep
Till you return, Go you with Herds and Sheep,
If this will not content you, look you to it,
I Will punish you with stripes and Death to boot,
The present losses I through you sustain,
My honor shall repair, which I Will regain,
By conquering him, in you his Subjects slain,
Go then I say, and let your Children stay.
What! Murmur? Sergeants drive the fools away.
The General omnipotent, who far
Or near, never yet made one false step in War,
Laughed at the indiscretion of his foe,
And said to his Lieutenant, you must go
With new raised Troops to curb the insolence
Of this unwary, this bewitched Prince,
Let Eurus be the Trumpeter, whose breath
Shall animate the Army, threatening Death,
Death unto Men and Beasts, that they may see
I do demand this Jail-delivery.
He spoke no sooner than he was obeyed
The hand is stretched forth, and Rod displayed
Over Egypt Land, then the East Wind does call
The Catterpillers, Locusts, Insects all,
Out of their slimy dust, who buz and fly
About the ears of every stander by,
Seizing on all the Fruits they could destroy.
The Earth was covered with the numerous swarms,
No Tree, no Fruit, no Herb, escaped their harms,
Their Eyes, their Mouths, their Stings were merciless,
This made the Prince with tears, his grief express
Unto the Brethren, with heartbreaking voice,
I cannot longer hear this dreadful noise.
'O! that Heaven had not brought me to the Throne,
'O! that I Would Hermit been, and lived alone
'In unfrequented Groves, in Woods and Caves,
'Careless of Crowns, Lands, Subjects, or of Slaves.
'If Heaven had been my Canopy, my Bed
'The Flowery Earth, the Pillow for my Head
'A bundle of Vi'lets, Pinks or Cammomile,
'Rose-buds with Lillies, and sweat smelling Dill;
'My meat wild Fruits, with quintessence of Bees,
'My Drink sweet Liquors from the juicy Trees;
'My recreation hunting of the Hare,
'The vacant hours I could from Study spare,
'Or Fox or Deer, or what I liked best,
'I had not then by Heaven been thus oppressed:
'But so Jehove would have it, he did raise
'Me to this shame, for his immortal praise,
'That Kings may learn true wisdom, and their Subjects
'Dread even in thought, such great, such fearful objects,
'As high ambition, Diabolick pride
'Will bring on all, like Pharaoh stupifi'd,
'My heinous crimes and grievous punishment
'Will fright the worst, and force them to repent,
'As I begin (O! may't not be too late)
'I grieve, I mourn, Alas! -- my cursed fate
'Made me offend your God, his Sons and you,
'For which I pardon crave with tears and vow,
'My Life I see is threat'ned, yet spare
'This once, that I may see what is mercies are;
'Forgive, forgive, my friends, and you shall see
'That weeping Pharaoh will not falsify.
Moses, the God-like Moses, judged his heart
By his expressions, knew no wheedling art,
Whose Sympathy with tears made him depart,
And thus accost his maker, I have proved
The King, who begs this plague may be removed
At my request, my God, let it be so
Since he has vowed that the men shall go
Without delay, yet be that as it will,
Omnipotence has Armies that can kill,
As these have done such wonders, more, when shown,
The more men will thy Justice, Mercy own.
It shall be done, I Will call a Western Wind
Shall clear the Land, (tho you him falfe will find)
That all those living Clouds shall headlong bear
To the Arabic watery Sepulcher,
Whose purple waves will quickly overflow,
And send them to the fish that dwell below,
A Feast that heretofore they did not know:
I will not leave one Locust on his Coasts,
That he may know I am the Lord of Hosts.
This done, the Hypocrite forgets his woe,
His solemn vow, and will not let them go.
Moses, said God, the blindness of this man,
Has still increased since the War began
With us, since wonders will not open his eyes,
The Sun, the Moon, the Air, shall him despise.
Stretch out thy Rod to Heaven and damp the Fires,
Give light and heat to the Earth, and men's desires
With pleasure gratify, and let no Star
Our Enemies guide, it is a time of War,
Make the Air thick and black, for three days space,
That none of them may see another face,
But fixed sit, not rising from his place,
Yet let my Servants have their wonted joy,
In Goshen light to see, that I employ
My wisdom, power, and justice, armed with might
On their behalf, that they are my hearts delight.
Day put's on mourning, the night birds appear
At noon, the Hemisphere waxed black with fear,
Thinking that Phoebus would come no more there.
Cynthia (for shame) creeps behind the Earth,
Castor and Pollux weeping, cease to breath
Their flaming Vapors, all the rest do wrap
Their drowsy heads in troubled Thetis's lap.
Thousands of terrors through the darkness fled,
The Ghosts complained, the Spirits murmured,
Then Egypt (like the damned) did howl and cry,
For glo'worm-light, which Heaven does them deny.
This made the King again for Moses call,
Say'ng you may go, your little ones and all,
Except your Flocks and Herds, they must remain
With me in safety till you come again.
'Ah! Moses, Moses, was not thou the boy;
'Drawn out of Nile to be the Princess joy
'In Flaggen boat? Did not that King pass by
'Thy Childish faults, and crimes of deeper dye.
'Of all his Armies thou wast General;
'Peer unto him and Daughter, dear to all,
'All was committed to thy prudent care,
'Then be not, be not executioner
'To their successor. -- speak yet to thy friend,
Whose mercies (as you say) do never end,
Your Cattle leaving for my proper use,
The rest may go, I will no more refuse.
Sir, your fair promise would prevail with me,
If I was Master of my Liberty.
When I was banished first from Pharoah's Court,
I with my Flocks to Horeb did resort,
Horeb, much famed for Spirits habitation,
I chose for pasture and for meditation,
Where I continued, till one Summer-day
I sought a Sheep that from the rest did stray
Amongst the Thickets, one of which did show
Like Flames above, and yet unburn'd below,
A voice from thence came to my trembling ear,
Which (I am sure) said Moses, come not near,
The place where thou do stand is holy ground,
This double wonder cast me in a swound,
From which revived, appeared to my sight
A form divine, than Cherubin more bright,
With charming Language, such as Seraphs use
In courting Mortals, who by craft refuse
Heavens favors, and the best inheritance.
By this roused up I made a small advance,
Whom he perceiving, readily did meet,
And (with a Godlike smile) thus did me greet.
Moses in Egypt born, thou know it well,
Its King, and all the Strangers in it dwell,
They Are mine, tho poor, afflicted and distressed,
That King and people have them long oppressed,
Thou must be first Ambassador, then Guide,
To bring them over to the other side
Of Jordan. -- Great Sir; this was my Commission,
I must not alter it without permission.
Pray urge no more, this is a fond device
Without our Flocks, we cannot Sacrifice,
Nor offerings make. It is Jehovah's mind,
That we in Egypt leave no hoof behind,
This general command we must obey;
Yet know not when we come, what he will say
Unto us more. Devotion chiefly tends
To Heaven's praise, with many other ends,
Unknown to thee. --
The more I do comply, the more I treat
In love and calmness, your new zeal and he at
Increases, I must leave the whole debate,
Moses be gone, look to thy self, if I
Again behold thy face, you are sure to die.
Thou have well spoken, this is Prophecy,
For one act more compleats thy Tragedy;
A plague to which the rest shall seem but small,
Shall not upon thy Flocks and Cattle fall
Alone, as heretofore, but shall destroy
The oldest pledges of your loves and joy.
This for a time shall move thy stubborn heart,
To favor Israel, force them to depart,
And when resistance thou shall after make,
What the Sword leaves, the foaming Sea shall take.
Know then, proud King, when all are fast asleep,
This night, when thee thy doubled Guards do keep,
Michael, famed for strength and warlike power,
By Heaven's warrant, shall break open each door
In thy unhallowed Country, and shall kill
From Egypt's heir, that next the Throne should fill,
To hers that grindeth in the Bridewel Mill,
None of the firstborn shall alive remain
Of Men, of Women, Beasts, all shall be slain,
Whose dying shrieks and groans shall pierce thy Soul,
And make their frighted Parents cry and howl,
Unheard of woes thy fearful heart shall seize,
While they in Goshen live in health and ease,
Each of their doors shall have a Sentinel,
The grand destroyers hand that my repel.
The Crimsoned Posts and Lintels shall reveal
Heavens secret will to him that bears the Steel.
When thou do see this great discrimination
Betwixt the Hebrew and Egyptian Nation,
Thy Menaces thou will repent, and send
The best of all thy subjects, who will bend
To me and say, be gone with all ye have,
To whom I Will answer; Now, no leave I crave,
But in despite of you, and of your King,
At Heaven's command, we will make offering,
Do what thou can, I Will see thy face no more,
The Death thou threat'nest is at thy own door,
Thy hardened heart Heaven's hand will quickly break,
When he on thee, and thine does vengeance take.
'Ah! Pharaoh, what a dismal change is this?
'Must I deprived be of all my bliss?
'Upbraided, scorned, and slighted by a Slave,
'Who holds his life of me, yet does behave
'As King over us, and all we have?
'My feeble Gods, whose Altars I have smoak't
'With best Perfumes, your Deities invok't,
'Why stand you gazing on my misery?
'Hath a poor Shepherd greater power than ye?
'And you, infernal Spirits, whose great boasts,
'Perswaded me there was no Lord of Hosts,
'Have you no Philtre, no Enchanted Spell,
'Or is there no experiment in Hell,
'Against this Moses, and against his Rod,
'Alas! I fear you think there is a God;
'If so, I am undone, I Will not submit,
'Destruction is the worst can come of it.
By this time night, the dreadful night drew on,
For Egypt's first-born's execution.
An Angel through the Air came flying down,
With speedy wing o'r Egypt's Memphis Town,
Who without sight or noise, viewed all the Towers
Of Pharaoh's lofty house, and's Subjects Bowers;
Finds out the Victims, and on them does try,
The keenness of his Sword, by which they die,
And dying, with their groans do pierce the Sky,
For each, his eldest Child saw gasping out
Its tender Soul, with blood which flew about,
From Wound, and Mouth, and Nostrils with great pain,
And heard their cries to Heaven for help in vain,
This made a doleful sound over Egypt's plain.
' Rachel mourned not so long, so loud as they;
'When Benjamin to his enemies was a prey,
'Nor when the Fox her Children all did slay;
'To theirs the mourning in Megiddo's vale,
'For good Josiah was no parallel.
Here every House sobb'd out the same complaint,
My eldest's dead! never was such punishment:
The King himself awaked with this alarm,
Cried out, O Heaven! has this destroyer's arm,
Bereaved me of my Successor in State,
I see I must repent when it is too late,
Let none (like me) again with Heaven debate.
Call in the Brothers quickly, (tho it is night)
They shall go hence before next morning light;
With Flocks and Herds, and all they can desire,
For which great favor I will naught require,
But faithful prayers to God for me and mine,
Who knows? He may repent, his ear incline
To pity me, and haste his own design?
This heard, his Subjects all do beg and pray
Moses to hasten Israel away.
Haste, haste, say they, if any thing you lack,
We Are readier to give than you're to take,
Our lives are more to us than what we give,
When you are gone, we and our Babes may live.
This (like melodious Music to their ears)
Warmed their chilled blood, and banished all their fears,
They had full wages for four hundred years.
The signal given, our torn and helpless crew
(Like forward spring) their Liveries renew,
And furnished with new garments, and their Slaves,
Bid them farewell. Their Victuals dressed to halves.
Yet their old foes enraged to see them go,
(Tho with consent) said, it must not be so.
Now we are miserable! what have we done?
The Slaves with all our Treasures hence are gone.
Good news to Pharaoh, who a Council calls,
Saying, my friends, we must find Generals,
Horses and Chariots, Men and Ammunition
In haste, you know the intended expedition.
My eyes are opened, I cannot behold
Those Slaves enriched with our Clothes and Gold,
They took and wear, they ^re Trophies of our Shame
And Cowardice, which very things to name
Are worse than death to him, whom Gods above
Nor men below, could ever yet remove
From his intended purposes till now,
Of which the reason yet I do not know,
Heaven (sure) 's appeased since I Have let them go.
Tho I perceive, they have no mind to leave
My borders while they have paid for what they have.
Their God repents him of the Violence
Offered to us before they went from hence;
This makes them go about, and not pursue
The beaten roads they heretofore well knew;
When they for Corn to Egypt came, and when
With Jacob's Corpse they back returned again.
Their late rebellion proves to them a snare,
Since they a lazy unarmed people are,
They cannot fight, their flight we need not fear.
Up, let us follow, and cut off their Rear.
Dread Sir, said they, your thoughts were always great,
Nor Gods, nor men, your courage could abate,
Pray be advised before this enterprise
You undertake, lest you prove after-wise.
In vain you sought to hinder them when here,
And we your subjects all about you were.
Our threats, our blows, and what we could invent,
Wrought for their good, and for our punishment,
Heaven always does protect the innocent.
Behold the ruins of your shattered state,
The murdered Heirs of Egypt, small and great.
Think on the threatenings you did calmly bear,
Think on your darling offspring, then declare
What hopes you have to catch them in a snare,
Their God's the same, their Leader constant, wise,
Therefore, great Sir, leave off this enterprise,
It will prove fatal, if our dream be true;
Last night, O King! we saw our selves with you
In warlike posture, following the men
We lately forced to go from us, and then
We likewise saw Heaven opened, whence came down
An Host most terrible 'bout Succoth Town,
Of Giant stature, and of stern aspect,
Who seemed their Swords to brandish, and direct
To our proud Throats, while we did stupid stand,
Not daring to resist, move tongue nor hand.
Away with dreams! haste, up and let us show
Our selves Heavens rivals, and his peoples too.
It Is now or never that we must attack
The wandering Slaves; and kill or bring them back,
Their God himself (it seems) does them forsake;
Their way was smooth and short, nor Seas, nor Rocks,
Could stop the passage of themselves or Flocks,
But missing that, they have no way to 'scape,
The Hills they cannot climb, nor over Seas leap,
That are before them, Wilderness and Rocks
On each side, we behind, whose deadly strokes
Will soon reduce them to their Slavery,
Since they can neither fight, nor from us fly.
This said, they mount their Chariots in haste,
The Horse and Infantry scarce take repast,
Who by their doubled marches soon overtake
The ftighted Jews, whose hearts began to ache,
Together run in heaps, like fearful Sheep
Attacked by Dogs or Wolves, (when those should keep
Are either absent, or are fast asleep;
Who pat and stare, the harmless dialect
Of their just fear, as if that would effect
Their rescue -- So the Tribes with direful tone
Cry unto God and Moses (whom they stone)
Would both of you had let us still alone
To serve in Egypt, then if we had died
We might like men have there been buried,
Whereas we must be drowned now or slain,
We will beg pardon, and return again.
Moses, who all this time was grieved to see
The peoples rudeness, infidelity,
Does first expostulate, and then entreat
Them to forbear their blasphemy and heat,
And wait with patience a successful end
Of all their troubles. What if you be penned
Up in this Creek? What tho the Rocks and Waves
Conspire your death? What if these Hell-born Slaves
Resolve your future thraldom and your Death?
Shakeoff all fear, there is hope as long as breath.
'Twas Heaven that brought you hither, and not I,
To show his power in your delivery,
Which you should not distrust, but magnify,
Since he is faithful, who has promised,
And by this work will show that you are freed
Beyond your expectation. Stand but still,
Whatever Pharaoh thinks, it is Gods will
That you escape this danger, and your foes,
The outmost feel of their (late) feared woes.
Stand still. Heaven bids me say, you have no cause
To grieve, they must submit unto his Laws,
While you look on, and with triumphant Tongues
Sing his due praise, who has redressed your wrongs.
All silent, and the Prophet gone to pray,
Heavens hears, commands, that Israel make his way
Unto the foamy shore, where they must stand
Fearless, and wait the ebb, when Moses's hand
Shall smite the Waves, and bid them bare the Sand,
To make a way pal'd on each side with glass,
On which the fainting Tribes might safely pass,
Beyond the reach of any Enemy
May them infest, or make discovery
Of their night-march, until it was too late,
With God or Moses friendship to create,
Who will behonour'd on all those that know
Him, or shall read of this great overthrow.
They move, the Egyptians laugh and say aloud,
We thought the Hebrews God had understood
What was most proper for his peoples good;
But now we plainly see they are led by chance,
Which cannot work their wished deliverance,
They Are safe enough. -- Halt, let the Infantry
Refresh themselves, and sing the Victory,
To morrow will be soon enough to drive
The fools into the Sea; or keep alive
Such as will quarter crave, and say, they are
(At our disposal) Prisoners of war.
Their Arms grounded, the Horses Provender
Eat, Chariots serve for Tents in sudden War,
Where they betook themselves to free repose,
And did conclude, tho Heaven was to dispose
Of both the Armies, who his Angel sent
To guards his friends when through the Sea they went,
By spreading of a dark and dismal Cloud
Over Egypt's Host, while lighted Torches stood,
By the transparent walls to fright the Flood,
And light his Servants to the other shore,
That they might see their enemies no more
Alive. -- The sign given, Heaven raised the wind,
That made the Sea contract it self, and bind
Its furious waves, that they might not overflow
The Walls above, nor the new way below.
Israel trod safe, the Egyptians pursue,
Nor knowing where they were till morning dew
Was by the Sun exhaled, and they o^erthrew.
The Foot and Horse sink in the slimy Sands,
The Chariots cast their Wheels, the Riders hands
Were feeble, when they saw themselves surrounded
By the impetuous Ocean that rebounded
With swelling, forced by Thunder and by Rain,
While they sought to retire, but all in vain,
Heaven fights for them; said they, why should we strive
Against the stream? Is Pharaoh yet alive?
He was the author of this Tragedy.
Oh! dye we must, we cannot longer fly
Vengeance Divine, which we have justly brought
Upon our selves, and this destruction wrought:
Winds have no ears, the Seas are merciless,
When Heaven by Men or Angels sends the express.
Farewell dear Egypt, farewell happiness.
'Let Tyrants tremble where my pen relates
'Th' Almighty's fury, and the Egyptian fates.
'They fight, he wards, till that unhappy war
'Wax'd so intense that justice could not spare.
'Small parties foiled, he called the Arieaban,
'Armies too fierce, too numerous for man,
'The Serpent leads the Van. Their waters fry
'Themselves in blood, and took its crimson dye,
'Blood, that their Streams with stench did putrify,
'The drowsy Insects all strong poison speak,
'Frogs haunt the Palace as the watery creek.
'Lice there without an optic might be seen
'On the Kings Carpets, and the Peasants Skreen.
'The mystie Clouds forbad the healthful Sun,
'Sucking their poison while the work was done.
'He likewise blushed to see the insolence
'Offer'd to wisdom and omnipotence.
'The Stars danced up into a higher sphere,
'To bath themselves in the Crystal waters there.
'Hell stormed the lower orbs, and left its hue
'Black as Egyptian, and then withdrew.
'At last a Prince of great fidelity
'In Heavens guards, the first Majestic high,
'With veiled face, his humble honors made
'To his adored Sovereign thus said.
'Holy of Holies, it is your patience
'Procures you all this trouble and expense.
'Give me command, and this great debate
'Shall soon be ended with their first born's fate.
'Your power, my hand, the Rebels seed shall kill,
'As they the infant blood of yours did spill.
'He goes with armed Pestilence and Sword,
'Two edged, sharp, for both were Heaven's word,
'And smote the first of all their Beasts and Men,
'The sottish crew (too late) believed then.
'So Heaven would have't, that by this overthrow
'Of theirs a false presumptuous world might know
'That first or last he would proud mortals bow.
'Who hastes his out with all things necessar'e
'For their intended journey and their fare.
'But ah! the wicked's mercies cruel are,
'For they like Bears robbed of their Whelps when young,
'With furious haste after Heavens Freemen throng,
'Resolving to make one attempt for all,
'Return Victorious, or for ever fall.
'And so it was, for they no sooner charge
'The Rear of those he did intend to enlarge,
'Than the great Angel of the Covenant came,
'(As after in the Flesh) and quenched their flame:
'He was the guide, who led them to the shore,
'A place made by his power fit to pass over,
'A Cloud gave light to them that went before.
'He viewed the Rear, and made the Cloud opac
'To 'maze the Egyptians, and to keep them back,
'Commanding Moses to divide the stream,
'While they all night lay in a Golden dream.
'Pleas'd with the hopes of Conquest, while the Sun
'Show'd them the Nest, from whence the Birds were gone:
'The way they thought was pleasant, smooth and plain,
'Not knowing that that way would them enshrine,
'And so march boldly till a furious Wind
'Rais'd by Jehovah, did the Walls unbind,
'That railed the path to guide his people safe
'To the other side. This did the Egyptians chafe,
'For untamed surges swell and fill the place,
'Where Israel dry-shod walked, no empty space
'Was left. The Quicksands rise, they sink below,
'The billows did their Chariots overthrow,
'Teaching them by experience Heaven to know.
'Half dead, some backward and some forward strive,
'Tho Neptune vowed none should go out alive.
'Prayers were their last shift, but they prayed in vain,
'Men of deserved ills must not complain.
'Their King they blame for his ill conduct had,
'He blames himself for all his insults made
Against God and Israel, the last words he said.
'His Standards fallen, and all his daring blades,
'Drunk with the Sea, he tumbled to the shades.
THE SONG of MOSES After the VICTORY. EXODUS XV.
'AWake my Soul and sing Jehovah's praise,
'O! may Jehovah my dull Spirits raise,
'May Heaven's Arch-Flamine give me light and heat,
'That I with Zeal may on this subject treat.
'O! that I might that double portion have,
' Eijah once to his Elisha gave.
'May Choires of Angels from the sacred Throne,
'Help me to sing this Epinicion.
Great God! our lives, our all, we owe to thee,
For thou alone have got this Victory,
By drowning all our enemies in the Sea.
Sing Hallelujah.
Horses are vain things to be trusted in,
Char'ots tho Iron, by the Riders sin,
Will drown and sink when Justice does begin.
Sing Hallelujah.
No battle ever so unequal known,
Never was host so easily overthrown,
The Winds and Sea this wondrous work have done.
Sing Hallelujah.
We, we faint-hearted Foreigners stood still,
(Trembling and scolding) tho against our will,
Until we saw our enemies case was ill.
Sing Hallelujah.
Then we some prospect had of Victory,
When thou for us a path made through the Sea,
'Twas thou, not we triumphed gloriously.
Sing Hallelujah.
We through thy strength do stand upon this shore,
And see our enemies floating dead, nay, more,
Their Horse and Chariots tossed the flood all over.
Sing Hallelujah.
He is my strength, my song, and my salvation,
He has relieved the hated Hebrew Nation,
Therefore I will build him an habitation.
Sing Hallelujah.
His Covenant with faithful Abra'm made,
What he to Isaac and to Jacob said,
Is all fulfilled by this our present aid.
Sing Hallelujah.
What Men of War do for those in distress,
His power for (feeble) us has done no less,
His name's Jehovah whom we'll ever bless.
Sing Hallelujah.
The proud Kings Host was utterly destroyed,
When they our Lives and Land thought to have enjoyed,
And us (as formerly) in Bricks employed.
Sing Hallelujah.
His chosen men not able to withstand,
The watery Troops unhors'd, and on the Land
Are cast or buried in the slimy Sand.
Sing Hallelujah.
This unknown way was made for us alone,
Soft for our feet, the Rocks upon us shone,
Which they attempting, sunk down like a Stone.
Sing Hallelujah.
We have exper'ence of thy wondrous power,
Thy glor'ous right hand did our foes devour,
Saving us at our last and fatal hour.
Sing Hallelujah.
Thou did but blow upon them, yet that wind
Gathered the floods together, and did bind
Them up in heaps, that we a way might find.
Sing Hallelujah.
The en'my said, pursuing we will take
These fugitives, and kill or bring them back,
Dividing all the spoil we from them take.
Sing Hallelujah.
Lord! who among the Gods is like to thee?
Spotless and Holy, full of Majesty,
Thy praises fearful, wonders many be.
Sing Hallelujah.
Thy mercy we believe will save and lead
Thy Sons redeemed unto a fertile meed,
Where they may safely rest and freely feed.
Sing Hallelujah.
They that inhabit Palestine shall hear,
Approaching sorrow will increase their fear,
With all their Neigbouring Countries far or near.
Sing Hallelujah.
The lofty Dukes of Edom shall be then
Greatly amazed, Moab's mighty men
Losing their courage, tremble shall with pain.
Sing Hallelujah.
The Canaanites (tho strong) with grief oppressed,
With trembling hearts and voice will say, it is best
To leave the Land, that Israel may have rest.
Sing Hallelujah.
Such dread shall fall upon them by thine arm,
As will their mouths stop, lest they offer harm
To us when we do over Jordan swarm.
Sing Hallelujah.
Then to the place of thy great holiness
Thou shall us bring, and we with joy express
In all our Songs this weighty business.
Sing Hallelujah.
Say'ng, O Lord, thou shall for ever reign,
Since Pharaoh and his Host, who caused our pain
Are drowned, and we on dry Land see them slain.
Sing Hallelujah.
It is our turn, said Miriam now to sing,
The weaker Sex by praise may honor bring
Unto Jehovah Nissi, our great King.
Sing Hallelujah.
Our instruments of all sorts let us take
Harps, Flutes, with Timbrels and sweet Music make
To him, who has wrought wonders for our sake.
Sing Hallelujah.
Great God! our lives, our all we owe to thee,
Since thou alone have wrought this Victory,
By drowning all our enemies in the Sea.
Sing Hallelujah.
FINIS.

