THE BLESSING OF IVDAH Explained, and applied to the present times, in a Sermon
preached at S. MARY'S OXFORD, March 27. 1644.

Being the Anniversary of His Majesty's Inauguration to His Crown.

Before some of the Lords, and the Honorable Members of the House of Commons
there assembled.

Wherein amongst other things, is strongly proved, that the King is immediately
dependent from God, and receives not His power from the people.

By HENRY LESLIE Bishop of Down. Published by Command of Authority.

And King David sent to Zadok, and to Abiathar the Priests, saying, Speak unto
the Elders of Judah, saying, Why are ye the last, to bring the King back to
his house. 2 SAMUEL 19.11. OXFORD, Printed by LEONARD LICHFIELD, Printer to the
University, 1644.

DEUTERONOMY. 33.7. And this is the blessing of Judah: and he said, hear, Lord, the
voice of Judah, and bring him unto his People: Let his hands be sufficient for
him, and be thou an help to him from his enemies.


THe first words of this Text, contain the Title, and stand as it were an
Inscription, written over the head of the Verse: And this is the blessing of
Judah, touching which blessing three things are expressed. 1. Quis, the Person
blessing, and that is Moses, And he said. 2. Cui, the Person to whom the
blessing is given, is Judah. 3. Quid, the blessing it self: it is a Prayer
unto God for Judah, consisting of four Petitions: the first is, that God would
hear the Prayer of Judah, Hear, Lord, the voice of Judah. 2. That God would
set Judah as King over his People, and establish a firm union between him and
them; And bring him unto his People. 3. That he would grant him strength and
wealth: Let his hands be sufficient for him. 4. That God would give him Victory
in the day of Battle; And be thou an help to him from his Enemies.

The Person who blesses is Moses, and he said: even he who is mentioned in the
first verse of this Chapter; And this is the blessing wherewith Moses the Man
of God blessed the Children of Israel before his death. The Apostle says,
without all contradiction the less is blessed of the greater, Heb. 7.7. which
is to be understood of that blessing which is ex authoritate; for there is also
a blessing ex Devotione, wherewith an inferior may bless his Superior; a
Subject does bless his Prince, and man does bless God in hearty devotion: But
the blessing which is ex authoritate, comes always from the greater. And
such was Moses his blessing, a blessing with authority; for he blesses them in
the name of the Lord, beginning his blessing after this manner; The Lord came
from Sinai, etc. verse. 2. He blesses the Sons of Jacob, in the name of the
God of Jacob. And he had good authority to bless in Gods name, if we do but
consider what he was: Moses, the man of God, verse. 1. The servant of the Lord,
Josh. 1.1. Gods chosen one, Psalm. 106.23. Gods Secretary, who spoke with God
face to face, Exodus 33.11. and saw him who is invisible. Heb. 11.27. Moses the
leader of Gods People out of Egypt and his Lawgiver, as it is verse. 4. Moses
commanded us a Law. Moses a Prophet, and the greatest amongst Prophets before
Christ came: Chap. 18.15. and not only a Prophet, but a King also, as it is in
the fifth verse, He was a King in Iesurun. In all these respects Moses had good
right to bless, especially before his death, it being the custom of the
Patriarchs to bless their Children on their deathbed.

The Party blessed is Judah. Judah was the fourth son of Jacob, unto whom by
the forfeiture of Ruben, the birthright did descend, and in whose posterity the
Crown was established, according to the prophecy of Jacob, Judah, Thou art he
whom thy Brethren shall praise -- Thy Fathers Children shall bow down before
thee -- The Scepter shall not depart from Judah, Genesis 49.8. and 10. And God
himself says, Judah is my Lawgiver, Psalm. 108.8. The like you have, 1.
Chron. 5.2. Judah prevailed above his Brethren, and of him came the chief
rulers. So David acknowledges, 1. Chron. 28.4. The Lord God of Israel chose me
before all the house of my Father to be King over Israel for ever, for he has
chosen Judah to be the ruler. And Psalm. 78.67. He refused the Tabernacle of
Joseph, and chose not the Tribe of Ephraim: But chose the Tribe of Judah. Judah
in all their Battles had the Vanguard by Gods own direction, and was to go up
first against the Enemy, as you will find, Number. 11.3. Chap. 10.14. Judge. 1.2.
Chap. 20.18. The first Judge whom God raised to deliver the Children of Israel,
was Othoniel of the Tribe of Judah, Iud. 3.9. And the first King, in whose line
the Kingdom was established, was of Judah, and when the ten Tribes made
defection after Jeroboam, there was none that followed the house of David, but
the Tribe of Judah only, 1. King. 12.20. so that by Judah here we shall
understand the Kings Tribe, his Family and Person too; for in the words
following in my Text, he is distinguished from his People, introduc eum ad
populum suum.

In the third place we come unto the blessing it self, which is a prayer for
Judah: and indeed we can bless no other ways, but by praying God to bless:
our Benedicere is bene-precari. When God is said to bless us, his blessing is
Operative, making us blessed indeed: when we are said to bless God, our
blessing is Declarative, pronouncing him to be blessed: and when we bless
others, our blessing is Optative, wishing blessedness unto them. And yet this
blessing of Moses, is not only a prayer, but also a prophecy, as was the
blessing of Jacob, Genesis 49.1. And Jacob called unto his sons, and said,
gather your selves together, that I may tell you that which shall befall you in
the last days. So Moses here shows unto them those things, which should
befall them in the last days: that which he prays for unto Judah, he foretells
shall happen unto him; namely, that God shall hear his voice, bring him unto
his people, make his hands sufficient for him, and help him against his
enemies.

The first petition is, Hear, Lord, the voice of Judah; that is, the prayer of
Judah, (as the Chaldee Paraphrase translates it.) But shall Judah need to pray?
Yes, Judah signifies Confession or Praise, and there is no man has more need
to call upon God, than Judah has; for the strength of Judah lies in his God.
In this short petition, three things are implied. 1. That Judah shall be in
distress. 2. That in his distress he shall utter his voice, and call upon
God. 3. That God shall hear his prayer. First, I say, Judah shall be in
distress: for albeit he be exalted far above the rank of other men, yet is
he not exempted from the common condition of mortals. Nebuchadnezzars Image may
teach us that the feet of every Empire are of clay; Dan. 2.33.
that is, very brittle. Kings are indeed the Treasures of their people; but
Treasures in earthen vessels. And therefore when God honors Kings with his own
name, Psalm. 82.6.
I have said ye are gods: to show that they are but gods of earth, he
subjoynes; but ye shall die like men. And to the same purpose the son of
Syrach, Eccles. 10.10. He who to day is a King, to morrow shall die. So that
even Judah must confess with Solomon's wisdom: I my self also am a mortal
man, like to all, and the offspring of him that was first made of the earth.
And in my mothers womb was fashioned to be flesh in the time of ten months,
being compacted in blood of the seed of man, and of the pleasure that came by
sleep. And when I was borne, I drew in the common air, and fell upon the earth
which is of like nature, and the first voice which I uttered was crying, as all
others do. I was nursed in swaddling clothes, and that with cares. For there is
no King that had any other beginning of birth. Wisdom. 7.1. etc. The
flatterers of Alexander would have him believe that he was the son of
Jupiter, and not of Philip; but being wounded in Battle, he was taught by
experience that he was the mortal son of a mortal Father, and so smiling
upon his flatterers, he said unto them, this blood seems to me not to be
(...) but (...); that is, not like the strong blood of God, but the blood of
man. And as Kings are not exempted from mortality, so neither from cares nor
crosses, innumerable troubles and afflictions in this life. David was the first
and best King of Judah, and yet his life almost a perpetual suffering: He was
persecuted by Saul, by his unnatural son Absalom, Psalm. 119.109.
by Sheba, by Shimei. He was even hunted like a Partridge from mountain to
mountain, so that carrying his soul in his hand, he said, Verily, 1. Sam.
20.3.
there is but a step betwixt me and death. And (which is the second thing
employed in these words) David in his distress called upon God, and cried unto
him even out of the deepes, as we read often in the Psalms. So did Abijah
against Israel. Notable is that prayer of Asa going against the Ethiopians,
help us, 2. Chron. 14.11.
O Lord our God, for we rest on thee, and in thy name we go against this
multitude. So Jehosophat, 2. Chron. 20.12.
going against the Ammonites; Oh our God, wilt not thou judge them, we know not
what to do, but our eyes are toward thee. And the same Iehosophat, being
pursued hard by the Army of the Syrians, cried unto the Lord, 1. Kings, 22. The
like did Hezekiah against the Assyrians. 2. Kings, 19. and so will every good
King, cry unto him who is the King of Kings. And, as it follows, God will
hear the prayer of Judah. God hears the prayers of all his servants, much
more of Judah, who is nearest and dearest unto him: he heard the voice of
David, as he professes often in the Psalms, I cried unto the Lord and he
heard me. So he heard Abijah, Asa, Iehosophat, Hezekiah, and the rest: when
Moses hands were lifted up, Israel prevailed. And let it be our prayer, that
God may still hear the voice of Judah. This is the first part of the blessing,
and contains more blessings then one, both that Judah should have the grace to
call upon God, and that God should have the mercy to hear the voice of Judah.

I come unto the second Petition, which is the maine thing I intended, as being
most proper for the service of this day: And bring him unto his people. Where
three things are employed: 1. That Judah has a people, and so he must; for Rex
and Grex are relatives: we may as easily imagine a head to subsist without a
body, as a King without People. Acts 9.
And it is Populus not Turba: not a confused Assembly like that of Demetrius;
but an orderly People, subject to government. 2. That this People is his own
people, Populus suus: a people unto whom he has right, and over whom he has
power: such a people as do adheere unto him, serve him, and follow him as he
goes out and in before them. 3. That it is God who brings Judah unto his
people: in which words, Expositors have either found, or made some difficulty.
I will not trouble you with impertinent glosses; but labor to take up the full
sense of the words, in these three propositions. 1. Bring Judah unto his Crown,
and set him as King over his people. 2. If Judah at any time be driven from his
people, bring him back again unto them. 3. Establish a firm union between
Judah and his people.

First, I say, Bring Judah unto his People; that is, bring him unto his Crown,
and set him upon his throne as King over his people. This is God's proper
work, the advancing of Kings. There has been a writ of Quo warranto brought
against Kings to know how and from whom they hold their authority, and this
action formerly intended against them, is now more hotly pursued then ever
before. The Canonists, and other Romish Parasites, say, they hold their
authority from the Pope, who is universal Monarch of the whole world, and all
Kings but his deputies: this plea is cast over the bar, and almost forsaken:
but there is a worse plea set on foot by the Jesuits, and followed more
eagerly by the rebellious Schismatickes, namely, that Kings receive their power
from the people, and are advanced by them. But, I say, that Kings are neither
from Pope nor People, because God himself says Per me, by me Kings Reign,
Prove. 8.15. He that spoke that, is the uncreated wisdom of God, the very same
person of whom S. John says, per ipsum omnia facta sunt. John, 1.3. So that
unless the Pope or the People made the world, they can neither make nor unmake
Kings. To make this yet more evident, I will show unto you, first, that the
office of Kings, is not the invention of Man; but the ordinance of the Eternal
wisdom of God. And Secondly, that it is God who advances the person of the
King unto that Office.

The office of Kings is not the invention of man, but the Ordinance of God, so
called by the Apostle thrice with one breath, Romans 13.1, 2. For there is no
power but of God. The powers that be, are ordained of God. Whosoever therefore
resists the power, resists the Ordinance of God. Where the Apostle speaks
not of Government in General; but of Kings in particular: for in the first
verse he calls them Higher powers, such as excel all others in dignity: now
only these powers are (...), higher, supreme, or supereminent, which have none
in earth above them. The Apostle speaks of these powers which then were in the
world, and particularly over the Romans: but at that time there was no
supreme power known, but only the regal: and therefore certainly he speaks
particularly of Kings, and styles them the ordinance of God. And yet I
confess that the equity of the Apostles reason, does bind us by analogy to be
subject unto other Governors, and to our spiritual rulers: but only Kings
are there spoken of in the Text. This I desire may be observed, because of a
false principle that is laid, and taken for granted, namely, that Government in
general is the Ordinance of God, because the edict of nature, for that men
cannot live without society, and no society can be safe or durable, without
Laws, and Laws are improfitable without Magistrates: but, (say they) the
determination of the government, and the several kinds of it, whether by one,
or by few, or by many, is the invention of men; so that Monarchy is no
otherwise the ordinance of God, then is Democracie and Aristocracie. This is an
unsure foundation which they lay: for the Apostle speaking of Kings calls them
the Ordinance of God, 1. Pet. 2.13.
and St Peter requires subjection unto them, For the Lords sake: and he knew of
no other governors but such as were sent by the King, and in that respect to
be obeyed. Yea in the whole volume of Gods Book, there is not one word to
commend, or that does so much as favor, either Aristocracie or Democracie.

Here, if the time would permit me, and if so large a discourse could be
contained within the compass of a Sermon, I would prove unto you, first, that
the government of Kings, is Ductu naturae, there being in all things a natural
propension unto the government of one. Secondly, that it is Exemplo Divino, it
being the government which God established over his own People: he being their
King, never derived the supreme power over them, immediately from himself,
unto many, nor settled it in any body collective; but still in the Person of
one, and more then one successively was never designed by God to be the Prince
and Ruler of his People. Thirdly, that it is Institutione divina: Almighty God
did institute the government of one in the Creation of mankind; for he made all
mankind of one, Hom. 34. in 1. ad Corin. 13.
that there might be (says St Chrysostom) not a Democracie, but a Kingdom.
If God had created at first more men then one, all these equally should have
had rule over their posterity: but he created only one, and in the Person of
that one, he fixed a Sovereignty, not only over the Beasts of the field, but
also over his Wife and Children, which before his death grew unto a great
number, and prospered even into a Kingdom. So that albeit Adam had continued
in the State of innocence, there should have been government, order and
superiority, as there is amongst the Angels, and this had been the government
of one: but if sin had never entered into the world, Democracie nor
Aristocracie had never been known: it was sin that gave occasion to these
governments; and it was the corruption of Monarchy that produced them in the
world, or rather the perverse and fickle disposition of the People, who are
impatient of subjection, prone to change, and desirous of innovation; wherein
they were stirred up too, by the instigation of ambitious men, who sought to
raise fortunes unto themselves, (as they now do) by changing of the
government. That it is so, may evidently appear by this, that we know the
first original of all Republickes; the first founders of them in Greece, and
other parts where they were most ancient, are recorded in histories: But there
is none of those histories can tell us who were the first Kings, nor what was
the very original of Regal power. The reason is this, all popular governments
came late, within the memory and knowledge of ancient writers; and their
beginning could not but be observed, it being an innovation, and defection from
the ancient and natural way of government: but the first Kings were long
before there were any writers, and it was not easy to observe the beginning of
their power, because it did naturally and insensibly flow from that power which
was paternall. The power of a Father by the increase of his Family, his
Children and Childrens Children multiplying, and many servants being bought and
borne unto him, did grow unto the power of a King, and that Ex vi juris
naturae: when Fatherly authority could not reach them, in regard of their
number and extent, nor command them, because of their unrulinesse; it enlarged
it self into a Kingly power; and as by the law of nature, they did at first
obey him as a Father and Master of the Family; so the People growing into a
full body, and perfect community, that subjection was continued, and they did
obey him as a King. I could further show unto you, that this government of
Kings is of all other most ancient and universal; that it is most perfect, as
carrying a resemblance of the government of the whole World by one God; that it
is best for order; best for Peace; best for strength; best for stability and
duration; and finally best for facility of administration. But I have pressed
these things formerly in another place; In a Sermon before the King, which
hereafter may be published in a full Treatise.
and will not repeat them here, but proceed unto the next point, which is;

As the Office of Kings is from God, so the advancement of men unto that Office
is from him: it is he who brings Judah unto his people. We are told thrice by
Daniel in one Chapter, That the Kingdoms be Gods, Chap. 4. verse. 24, 25, 32.
and he gives them to whomsoever he will. And this is said to be Sententia
vigilum, and sermo sanctorum. So that they are neither holy, nor well awake,
who hold the contrary. The same Prophet Chap. 2.20. says, Blessed be the name
of God for ever, for wisdom and might are his: he changes the times and the
seasons: he removes Kings, and sets up Kings: he gives wisdom and
knowledge: he reveals secret things. Where the advancement of Kings is
ascribed unto God, no less then infinite wisdom and power, which are his
Attributes incommunicable; and it is made as proper unto God, to set up Kings
and remove Kings, as it is to change the times and seasons, to give wisdom
and understanding, and to reveal secret things; which none but God only can
do. To this purpose speak the rest of the Prophets; I say says, The royal
Diadem is in Gods hand, Chap. 62.3. God sets it upon his head, says David,
Psalm. 21.3. Their Scepter is his, and Gods rod is in their hand, Exodus 17.9.
Their Thrones be Gods; Solomon sat upon the Throne of God, 1. Chron. 29.23.
They have their commission from God, Ioh. 10.35. He called them gods unto whom
the word of God came; that is, a commission from God: the power which they
exercise is Gods; so our Savior acknowledged to Pilate, Ioh. 19.11.
that Power was given him from above: but if he had received his power from the
people, Christ should have said, De subter, not De super. The judgment which
they execute is Gods, says Moses, Deuteronomy. 1.17. and they judge not for man, but
for the Lord, that is, in the Lords place; says Iehosaphat 2 Chronicles. 19.6. They
are Gods Ministers, even (...), Romans 13.4. which is a name peculiar to
Church Officers, so termed, because they are Gods Deputies or Lieutenants upon
earth, appointed to procure not only the temporal, but also the eternal
happiness of the People, by planting and preserving the true service of God.
This was acknowledged by Popes in ancient times; for Pope Eleutherius writing
to Lucius, the first Christian King in Britain, termed him, Gods Vicar within
his Kingdom; so did Pope Anastasius style Anastasius Caesar: but it is not my
purpose at this time to speak of the Kings Power in Causes Ecclesiastical,
but only to prove that they are advanced by God, and receive their power from
him, for which I have yet a cloud of witnesses to produce.

The making of a King is ascribed to God, 1 Kings 3.7. And now, O Lord my God,
(says Solomon) thou have made thy servant King instead of David my father. The
providing of a King is ascribed unto God, 1 Samuel 16.1. For I have provided me a
King. The setting up of a King belongs unto God; for this Moses prayed before
his death, Numb. 27.16. Let the Lord, the God of the spirits of all flesh, set
a man over the congregation: where we shall do well to mark the style which is
given to God, The God of the spirits of all flesh: as he is the God of the
spirits of all flesh, that is, of the souls of all men; so is he the God who
sets a man over the Congregation; now God is the Author of the soul of man
immediately by creation and infusion, albeit an humane act do intervene; so is
he the Author of regal power immediately, though some humane acts do
intervene to the investing of the King with that power. So God after Moses
death set Joshua over the Congregation, and all that succeeded him in that
charge; Samuel said of Saul, Behold the Lord has set a king over you, 1. Sam.
12.13. where he uses the same phrase which is used of Christ and of his
kingdom, Psalm. 2.6. I have set my king upon my holy hill of Sion. We know that
no man had a hand in constituting Christ King over his Church; so the
advancement of Saul, was not from men, but from God. And least you should
think, that this was peculiar unto the Kings of the Jews, who were Gods own
People, and he their King in a special manner: I must show unto you, that all
other Kings, as well as they, are advanced by God. He anointed Hazael to be
King over Syria, 1 Kings 19.15. He gave unto Cyrus all the kingdoms of the
earth, as he himself confesses, 2. Chron. 36.23. Ezra 1.2. As God gave these
kingdoms to Cyrus, so before he had given them unto Nebuchadnezzar, as the
Lord himself testifies, Ier. 27.6. And now have I given all these lands into
the hand of Nebuchadnezzar, etc. And Ezech. 29.19. Behold, I will give the land
of Egypt unto Nebuchadnezzar. Nebuchadnezzar not knowing s^ (...) was ^^^ed to
converse with beasts, until he (...) this lesson, that he had received the
kingdom, dominion, and power from God, Dan. 4. Kings in Scripture are called
Gods Kings, and the Lord's Anointed; Christi Domini, and Christi eius above
twenty times; but we no where read Christi Populi, nor Christi Pontificis; to
show that they are dependent from none, but from God only; and that style is
given unto Heathen Kings, as well as to the Kings of Judah, as namely unto
Cyrus, Isay 45.1. Yea, that all Kings are advanced by God, and receive their
power from him, is fully declared by God in that message which he sent to the
Kings of Edom, Moab, Ammon, Tyrus, and Zidon, by the hand of the messengers;
Thus says the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel, thus shall ye say unto your
Masters; I have made the earth, the man, and the beast that are upon the
ground, by my great power, and by my outstretched arm, and have given it unto
whom it seemed meet unto me, Ier. 27. verse. 3, 4, 5. The son of Syrach speaks
universally of all Kings, Ecclus. 17.17. In the division of the Nations of the
whole earth, he set a ruler over every People. He says nor, that he set
Rulers, but a Ruler; for God did not institute a Democracy, nor Aristocracy,
but a Monarchy; and it was not the People who set a Ruler over them, but God
set a Ruler over the People; and this was universal, over every People, in the
division of the Nations of the whole earth; only Israel is excepted, whom God
reserved to be under his own immediate command, as it follows in that Text;
But Israel is the Lords portion. In a word, it is God that gives Kings, that
chooses them, that anoints them, that adopts them, that exalts them; we have
them all in the Psalm 89. And therefore Solomon's wisdom exhorts Kings after
this manner, Chap. 6.1. Hear, O ye Kings, understand ye that be Judges of
the ends of the earth; give ear you that rule the People: -- for power is
given you of the Lord, and Sovereignty from the highest. By all these
testimonies which I have produced, it will appear, that there is no truth more
fully, more clearly revealed in Scripture, then this, that Kings are from God,
receive their power from him; and neither from the Pope nor from the People.

This was the Divinity of the Primitive Church, for at least eight hundred
years. Tertullian says, In Apologetico.
Inde est imperator, unde and homo antequam imperator: inde potestas illi, unde
and spiritus. And before him, Irenaus, Lib. 5. adver. Haeres.
Cujus jussu homines nascuntur, hujus jussu and Reges constituuntur. Now it is
certain that Kings, as men, are created by God, receive their breath from him,
(neither from the Pope nor from the People:) as by Gods appointment they are
borne, so by his appointment they reign. St Austin speaks fully to this
purpose in many places; so does St Gregory and the rest of the Fathers. Let
this suffice, that it was never heard of in the Church of Christ, that the
people had any power to dispose of the Kings Crown, before Pope Zachary:
Eginhart. in Princie histori.
when the French were resolved to dethrone Childericke, and to set up Pipin in
his place, they sent to the Pope to be resolved touching the lawfulness of
that act, and he like a bad Divine, gave them an advice to their own mind,
that they might do it, for that the People have power to make him King who
manageth the affairs of the Kingdom. Such a Papal determination, and a worse
too, is given by Buquanan, Populo jus est, De jure Regni. P. 15.
ut imperium cui velit deferat. He has now many followers, and it is a wonder
to see, how that these men who profess that they will banish all Popery, root
and branch, are yet drawing in Popery by head and shoulders; for I know no
point of doctrine, which can with better reason be termed Popery, then that
which had a Pope for the first author of it, and which in it self is so false,
as being contrary unto the Scriptures, to the doctrine of the ancient Church,
and even contrary to the confession of many of the wisest amongst the Heathen:
for Homer terms Kings, the sons and offspring of Jupiter, Anal. Lib. 3.
so does Callimachus, and the wise Tacitus says, Principes imperium a Deo
habent. Therefore some Emperors did stamp't their Coin, with an hand coming
out of the Clouds, holding a Crown, and setting it on their heads, and
accordingly did style themselves (...), Crowned by God.

And yet for all this the Jesuits and Puritanes pretend that the Scripture is
for them, because forsooth, Deuteronomy. 17.15. the constitution of a King seems to
be left unto the People: Constitues eum Regem super te, thou shall set him King
over thee, whom the Lord thy God shall choose. So the choosing of the King is
ascribed unto the people. 1. Sam. 8.18. And ye shall cry out in that day,
because of your King which ye have chosen: the like is Chap. 12.13. Behold the
King whom ye have chosen. The making of the King is ascribed unto the People.
1. Sam. 11.15. And all the People went to Gilgall, and there they made Saul
King before the Lord. The anointing of the King is ascribed unto the People. 2.
Sam. 2.4. And the men of Judah came to Hebron and there they anointed David
King over the house of Judah. And Chap. 5.3. So all the Elders of Israel came
to the King to Hebron: -- and they anointed David King over Israel. So it is
said of Solomon. 1. Chron. 29.22. And they made Solomon King the second time,
and anointed him unto the Lord. Of Rehoboam. 1. Kings. 12.1. All Israel were
come to Sechem to make him King. Of Ioash. 2. Kings. 11.12. That when Iehojada
had showed unto the Captains and the Guard, the Kings Son and put the Crown
upon him, and given him the testimony, that they made him King, and anointid
him. Of Azariah, 2. Kings. 14.21. And all the People of Judah took Azariah, and
made him King instead of his Father Amaziah. Of Josiah, when his Father Ammon
was slain. 2. Kings. 21.24. And the People of the Land made Josiah his son
King in his stead. Of Iehoahaz, 2. Kings. 23.30. And the People of the Land
took Iehoahaz the son of Josiah, and anointed him, and made him King in his
Fathers stead. And yet for all this, it is certain, that the constituting, the
choosing, the making, the anointing of the King, did not properly belong unto
the people: For in that place, Deuteronomy. 17.15. the choice of the King is plainly
reserved unto God: Thou shall in any wise set him King over thee, whom the Lord
thy God shall choose. And so God did choose Saul first, as Samuel told them,
1. Sam. 12.13. The Lord has set a King over you. God designed him unto Samuel,
commanded him to anoint him, without the consent or privity of the People, he
caused the lot to fall upon him: and therefore albeit it be said, that the
People went to Gilgall, and there made Saul King; yet we know that Saul was
King before that, chosen at Mizpech by the Lord, as Samuel says, 1. Sam.
10.24. See ye him whom the Lord has chosen: he was there publicly
acknowledged and received with acclamations: And all the People shouted, and
said God save the King: ibid. The men also whose hearts God had touched, went
with him and gave him presents, verse. 26, 27. He had also done the Office of a
King, raising Arms, and fighting against their Enemies, Chap. 11.4. So that,
that act of the People in Gilgall, of making him King, was only a renewing of
the Kingdom, as Samuel terms it in the words going before, Let us go to
Gilgall, and renew the Kingdom there: verse. 14. They did renew it, by a
solemn inauguration. And when God had rejected Saul for his disobedience, it
is manifest that he only did choose David, and establish the Kingdom in his
line: no man did contribute any thing to his advancement; for if Samuel might
have had his will, Eliab had been King and not David. So God choose Solomon
among all the Sons of David to succeed him, as David tells us, 1. Chron. 28.5.
And of all my sons, he has chosen Solomon my son, to sit upon the throne
of the Kingdom: and when David was upon his death bed, and all the People,
together with Abiathar the High Priest, and Joab the General of the Army, had
set their eyes upon Adonijah to make him King; David commanded Zadocke the
Priest, and Nathan the Prophet, to anoint Solomon King. 1. King. 1.34. All the
rest succeeded by the right of inheritance. God having now settled the Crown in
his line; insomuch that albeit it be said, that all Israel went to Sechem to
make Rehoboam King; yet in the words immediately going before, we read, that
Solomon slept with his Fathers, and Rehoboam his son reigned in his stead. 1.
King. 11.43. So that Rehoboam reigned, before the People went to Sechem to make
him King. And therefore the constituting, choosing, making, anointing of the
King, which is ascribed unto the People, must be understood only of their
Solemn Declaration, and acceptance of their King: otherwise the Scripture
shall be contrary unto it self, which we may not in any wise admit. That this
is the true meaning of these phrases, may further appear, because, as the
People are said to make Saul King; so Samuel is said to make him King. 1 Samuel
12.1. And Samuel said unto all Israel, behold, I have hearkened unto your voice
in all that you said unto me, and have made a King over you. Now it is certain,
that Samuel did nothing, but only powered a box of oil upon him, by Gods
direction; yet for performing of that Ceremony, he is said to make him King; so
the People, for performing another part of the solemnity, are said to make him
King. Again, as the People are said to make the King, so they are said to
anoint him; they anointed David in Hebron; they anointed Solomon unto the Lord:
we know it never belonged unto the People to anoint; that Office was ever
performed by Priest or Prophet; yet are the People said to anoint the King,
because they were present when he was anointed, did concur to make up the
solemnity, testifying their approbation of that act. And as they are said to
anoint the King, so are they said to anoint the Priest, 1 Chronicles. 29.22. They
anointed Solomon unto the Lord to be the chief governor, and Zadock to be
Priest. No man can say that the People had any power to anoint or make a
Priest, Heb. 5.4.
For no man takes upon him this honor, but he that is called of God, as was
Aaron; God having called Aaron to that high Ministration, settled the
Priesthood in his Line, so that afterward they did succeed by Birthright: so
that albeit the People are said to anoint Zadock to be Priest; yet they did no
more but receive him being anointed, and acknowledge his just Right and Title
unto the Priesthood. As they anointed the Priest, so they anointed the King;
and in that sense, that they are said to anoint the King, in the same sense,
and in no other, are they said to make the King; because of their public
acknowledgement of his Right and Title. This sense is not unusual in
Scripture, for the Apostle says, The Saints shall judge the world: 1. Cor. 6.2.
now the Saints cannot be said to judge the world, in any other sense, but
because they shall approve of the righteous sentence pronounced by Christ; as
the Saints judge the world, so do the people make the King, namely, in regard
of their declaration, approbation, and acceptance.

To make this yet more evident, and that all men may see what power, or rather,
what no power, the People have in making of a King, we shall distinguish three
things, which in themselves are distinct; the designation of the person to be
King; the collation of the regal power; and the solemn declaration, and
signification of his power, place, and dignity. This last belongs unto the
People; but it is only a ceremony, 2. King. 9.
of no absolute necessity: for we know that Iehu being anointed by a Prophet,
in a most secret manner, immediately took upon him the Office of a King,
without ever craving any further consent or approbation from the People. And I
pray you what solemnity was used at the Coronation of King James in Scotland?
for he was crowned in the cradle, and by a People who had profanely banished
all manner of ceremonies. I know it is very meet that there should be a
solemnity used at the Kings Coronation; but it is only a Ceremony, and such a
Ceremony as does not any thing, only it declares what is done; the King was
King before it, as much as he is after it; only by it he is declared to be,
what he was before, and what he should have been still, though he had not been
so declared: for you must think, that the People at the Coronation have no
power to reject or refuse him, who is the lawful Heir of the Crown; he
claims no Title from his Coronation, but from his Birthright. When Watson and
Clerk conspired against King James, in the beginning of his Reign here, at
their Arraignment, they pleaded it was no Treason, because the King was not
Crowned, but the learned Judges told them, that in England there is no
inter-regnum, for the King never dies, and that the Coronation is but a
Ceremony, to show the King unto the People. The time was, when the Pope was
master of the Ceremony, the Emperors being crowned by him; and as he was
master of the Ceremony, he did claim to be master of the substance too, and
that they held their Crown of him; but the Emperors were not so simple, as to
believe that; for we read that Pope Adrian having written unto the Emperor
Frederick, That he had willingly bestowed upon him, the royal Crown of the
Empire; and the Emperor being offended at the Popes sauciness, the Pope
corrected himself in his second Letters, after this manner; J wrote that I
willingly bestowed upon you the royal Crown, meaning only, that I set it
upon your head, or Crowned you with it. So that from this Ceremony of the
Coronation, or public Inauguration, no claim will grow, either to the Pope,
or to the People, to dispose of the Kings Crown.

In the next place we are to consider of the designation of the Person to be
King, and to whom that belongs. The designation of the Person to be King over
the Jews, God reserved unto himself, saying, Thou shall in any wise set him
King over thee whom the Lord thy God shall choose. And the People knew this
very well; otherwise, when they were in that mad fit, to have a King over them,
like other Nations, the Lord their God being their King, even in regard of
immediate administration; it is not likely that they would have gone to Samuel,
and desired him to give them a King; but as their fathers in the wilderness
called one another, saying, Number. 14.4.
Let us make us a guide to bring us back into Egypt. So would they have said,
Let us make us a King, that we may be like unto other Nations; yet they did not
so, but went unto Samuel, that he, as a Prophet and Interpreter of Gods will,
might do that which they knew they themselves could not do. That the Kings of
the Jews were of Gods own choice is acknowledged not only by the Jesuits,
but also by Buquanan; but they think that other kings are not so; and it
cannot be denied, but that in elective kingdoms, the designation of the person
is by the People; and so we find that some kings have been chosen by the
Senate, others by the Soldiers, others by the body of the People, others by
Lots, and some have made themselves kings by force, hewing out a way to the
Throne by the Sword; and yet in all these actions, God is the Pilot and supreme
Directer, men are only instruments and secondary agents. If a King be chosen
by voices, we know that God has the hearts of all men in his hand, and
inclines them which way they shall give their voice: if a King be chosen by
Lots, Solomon tells us, The lot is cast into the lap, Prove. 16.73. Psalm. 44.6.
and 20.7. Prove. 11.31. 2. Chron. 20.15.
but the whole disposing thereof is of the Lord: if a King come in by Conquest,
we are told by David, by Solomon, by Iehosaphat, That it is neither sword nor
bow, it is neither chariot nor horse, it is neither multitude nor valor of an
host will serve; but that the battle is Gods, and he gives the victory. But
when a King comes to his Crown by lawful Succession, as here with us, I do not
see what the People can pretend; for it is God who gives children, he makes
heirs, as in a private family, so in a kingdom, and it is his blessing that
does perpetuate that happy Line. So that, which way soever a King comes to his
Crown, we must confess with the Fathers of the Council of Paris, Non actu,
non voto, Lib. c. 5.
neque brachio fortitudinis humanae, sed occulto judicio dispositionis divinae,
regnum confertur terrenum. An earthly Crown is not obtained by any humane act
or endeavor, nor by the arm of flesh, but by the secret disposing of the
overruling providence of God.

In the last place, we shall consider of the collation of regal power; and
certainly that is from none, but from God, even where the Person of the King is
designed by man; for all power of Rule is Gods, and none but he can give it; he
only can say unto kings, Ego dixi, dit estis; but if the People gave them
their power, then they might say, Nos diximus, dii estis; Psalm. 82.6.
and if they should say so, I am sure it were no better than blasphemy. It is
therefore a damnable doctrine of the Jesuits, taken up by the Puritans, (who
out-stripe the Jesuits in all treasonable doctrines and practices) that God
gives the power of rule first unto the community, and that this power is in the
body of the people immediately, as in its proper subject, and that by them it
is transferred unto the King, yet so as they habitually retain it in
themselves, and in some cases may actually resume it. They are the words of
Bellarmine, out of Navar and Almayn. This is a fond imagination, which has no
ground either in Scripture or in Nature. There is no revelation to propound it
as a doctrine to be believed; for the Scripture teaches us, that Kings are
from God, receive their power from him; there is not one word in all the
Scripture, that does so much as imply, that the power is first given unto the
people, and by them unto the King; but the contrary may be easily concluded
from holy Writ; for if this Jesuitical doctrine were true, I do not see how
God could say, Per me Reges regnant; he should rather have said, A me, and per
Populum Reges regnant; for the particle per denotates the instrument and
immediate cause: neither do I see how the Apostle could say, There is no power
but of God, which implies as much, as that all power, namely, supreme power
(whereof only he speaks) is from God only; and if it be from God only, it
is not from the People, nor from God, mediante Populo. Paraeus was no good
friend of Kings, and for that justly censured by this famous University, yet he
resolves that proposition after this manner, into a double universal
affirmation; Non est potestas, nisi a Deo, id est, omnis potestas est a solo
Deo; he styles the King, the Minister of God; but if his power were immediately
given him by the People, he should rather be styled Minister Populi, as being
their Minister immediately, and Gods only mediately. Nor could Kings be said
to judge in Gods place, if the power whereby they judge be given them by the
People, and that only in trust. As this treasonable doctrine has no warrant in
Scripture, so neither has it any ground in Nature; for natural reason does
only dictate, that it is of necessity that the multitude be ruled; natural
reason does convince and compel men to consent to be governed by some; but
there is nothing in Nature that does prove that the People have this power in
themselves; but reason teaches us the contrary; for the power of life, and
death, belongs unto Sovereignty, by the Law of Nature, and by Gods own
institution, Genesis 9.6. Who so shedeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be
shed, now we know, no man has this power over himself; Ostensio erros^f swar.
c. 3. S. 12.
therefore the learned Spalatto says well, Populus est naturaliter regibilis,
non rectivus. Nature inclines the People to be ruled, not to rule: the People
were never invested with sovereign power, and therefore howsoever the King be
sometimes chosen by them, and always inaugured by them; yet his power, his
commission is not from them, but from God: for it is a maxim in the Law, Nemo
plus iuris in alium transfer potest, quam ipse habet. The people cannot
transfer unto the King that power which they never had. Man did receive from
God immediately power and dominion over the beasts of the field; and can we then
imagine, that the more noble command which a King has over his Subjects,
should be given him any otherwise, then from God immediately? The Jesuits
acknowledge that in a Democracy, they who have the supreme power, receive it
immediately from God, and shall we not think that it is so also in a Monarchy?
If this Doctrine of the Jesuits were true, then would it follow, that
Democracy is by the Law of nature; Monarchy and Aristocracy, only by positive
humane Law: so shall God be the author and institutor of that Government, which
by all wise men is acknowledged to be the worst and most imperfect. That which
misled the first authors of this opinion, (the Parisian Doctors) was, that they
did not distinguish between the disignation of the Person, and the collation of
the Power; but thought that the one act is included in the other; and yet in
the Ecclesiastical power, they can distinguish these two; for they will
acknowledge that the designation of a person to be a Bishop, is by man, and yet
he receives his Episcopal power immediately from God; as Mathias did receive
his Apostleship from God, being propounded by the Disciples, and chosen by
lots. Now there is no reason in the world, but that they should acknowledge the
same of the regal power, that, albeit the person who is to be King, be
designed by man, yet he receives his power and Commission from God immediately;
And then the people do not so much apply the power unto the person, as the
person unto the power; even as if a man should go into a dark Cell, and there
amongst many looking-glasses, choose one, bring it out, and set it before the
light of the sun, whereby it becomes resplendent; that man cannot be said
to apply the light of the sun unto the glass, but to apply the glass unto
the light of the sun: even so when the people designs a person to be their
King, they cannot be said to apply the Regal Power unto the person, but the
person unto the power; For they having designed the person, God immediately
gives him the power. This was signified by the anointing of Kings; for they
were not anointed by a Praetor, nor by a Captain of the Army, nor by an Officer
of State, who yet had been the fittest person to convey a power from the people
unto the King; but the King was always anointed by Priest or Prophet, to show
that the power given by that anointing was from God only; for Priests are
appointed to Minister in things pertaining to God. Again, the Oil wherewith
they were anointed, was not bought from Merchants or Apothecaries, but brought
out of the sanctuary, compounded by Gods own direction, and therefore holy
Oil, to signify that the power given by that anointing is sacred too, such as
the King did receive, not from Millo (a place of secular assemblies) but from
Mount Sion. In all Christian Kingdoms, it has been a custom at the
Coronation of a King, to set the Crown upon the Altar, and from thence to take
it and set it upon his head, to show that power is given him of the Lord, and
Sovereignty from the most High. And so much all Kings do profess, stiling
themselves in their Writs, Dei Gratia; but now Jesuits and Puritants will teach
them to change their style, and for Dei Gratia, to write Favore populi. From
all this that I have said, I may safely conclude, that Kings are from God,
receive their power from him only, and are no way dependant from the people.
Now if God give them their authority, if it be God only who puts them in
Commission; then it is only God who can turn them out: for in Law,
Institution and Destitution belong both to one, are both done by the same
power. And therefore for people, even the whole representative body of the
Kingdom, to take upon them, to depose their King, or to dispose of these
things, that are his, is a sacrilegious usurping of Gods prerogative, who only
is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords: he removes Kings, and sets up Kings:
he only brings Judah unto his people, and he only can take Judah from his
people.

And now to return to my text: you have yet heard but the first part of the
meaning of these words, bring him unto his People, that is, set him as King
over his people. In the next place, I will show you, that the words will bear
a further sense, namely, that if Judah at any time be driven from his people,
it would please God to bring him back unto them again: So Tremelius reads it,
Reduc eum ad populum Suum. It was David's case; he was banished from his
kingdom by his unnatural Son Absalom; for the treason was so great, that he
was forced to fly from Jerusalem with his family, and the Priests: (for the
Priests did suffer in that Rebellion with their King, as they do at this day)
and after a time God brought him back again in peace, according to that trust
which he put in God in his greatest distress: for when he commanded Zadock to
carry back again the Arc unto Jerusalem, 2. Sam. 15.25.
he said, if I shall find favor in the eyes of the Lord, he will bring me
again, and show me both it, and his habitation.

In the last place, to make up the full sense of the words, I say, Moses
prays that God would establish a firm union between Judah and his People:
this is indeed to bring the King unto his People, and his People unto him,
wherein consists the safety and security of a Kingdom: for unity is the
perfection of all things: Salust.
Concordia res parvae crescant, discordia maximae dilabuntur: without concord
Peace cannot continue, War cannot prosper. In the natural body, the Spirit
holds the members together; if they be separated and divided one from another,
the Spirit cannot animate them, as we are taught by Ezechiels vision of
scattered bones, which were to be revived: first the bones came together, every
bone to his bone, then the sinews grew and knit them, after the flesh and skin
covered them; Ezech. 37.7, 9.
and when they were thus united, and not before, he called for the Spirit from
the four winds, to enter into them, and give them life. It is so in the body
Politic, if the members be separated and divided amongst themselves, and from
their head, there is little life in that Kingdom: Math. 12.25.
for every Kingdom divided against it self is brought to desolation: and
every City and house divided against it self, shall not stand. Unity is that
which both makes and preserves a City; for Civitas est civium vnitas. Plaeto
says this is the strength of the Republicke; Rempub. facit firmissimam Civium
inter se concordia and consensus. Lib. 3. de repub.
Agesilaus being asked a reason, why the City of Sparta was not walled about,
he pointed at the Citizens all in their armor, and well agreeing among
themselves, Lo these be the walls of our City, says he, Plut. in Apoph.
Lacon.
signifying thereby, that Cities and Kingdoms, are not safer by any walls and
Bull-warkes, then by the mutual consent and concord of the Citizens. The
Psalmist commends Jerusalem for her unity, Psalm. 122.3.4.
Jerusalem is builded as a City that is compact together, whither the Tribes
go up, the Tribes of the Lord. And therefore he exhorts us to pray for her
Peace: Pray for the Peace of Jerusalem, they shall prosper that love thee.
Silurus taught his sons what great strength is in unity, by delivering unto
them a bundle of arrows which no man was able to break, while they were fast
bound up together; but being taken asunder it was an easy matter to break
them, one by one, wherein he taught his sons by the light of nature, that
lesson which the Psalmist has taught us by the Spirit of God, Behold how good,
Psalm. 133.1.
and how pleasant it is for brethren to dwell together in unity, etc. And as it
is in the body natural and politic: So it is likewise in Christ's mystical
body, the Church. Unless there be an union of the members amongst themselves,
there can be no union of the members with the head. The Church is not Babel but
Jerusalem. It is not a number of straggling sheep, but a Communion of Saints. A
flock united under one shepherd, having but one Lord, Ephesians. 4.5. Act. 4.32.
one Faith, one Baptism, one God and Father of all; yea and but one heart too.
Thus were the Disciples prepared for the receiving of the holy Ghost. They were
all (...), Act. 2.1.
with one accord in one place. And afterward it is noted of the company of
Believers, that when they prayed, Act. 4.24, Act. 8.6. Act. 2.46.
they prayed altogether: when they heard the word they heard altogether: when
they brake bread, they did it altogether. It was the legacy that Christ left
in his last will, to his Disciples, Peace I leave with you, my peace I give
unto you, Ioh. 14.27.
not as the world gives, give I unto you. But who so considers, what little
Peace is now amongst us, may justly suspect, that Christ's will is not proved,
his legacy is not paid. And indeed it is our own fault, who have driven Peace
from us: we were weary of our Peace, and loathed it as the Israelites did their
Manna, so that it is no wonder we have lost it. And yet it is certain that
unity is necessary for all societies, especially unity between the King and
his Subjects, as being that which preserves Peace, both in Church and
Commonwealth. And this union is from God: It is he who brings Judah unto his
people, and his people unto him: for God is the author of Peace, and lover of
concord: (as the Church has taught us to pray) he makes men to dwell together
in one house, to speak the same thing, and to be all of one mind. In such God
does delight; Psalm. 76.2.
For in Salem is his tabernacle: In Salem, that is, where Peace is; for so the
Fathers read it, In pace fastus est locus ejus. But where division and discord
is, there God can have no Tabernacle. And therefore the Brethren of the
Separation, in their present Schism and Rebellion, are not lead by the Spirit
of God, who is love it self; Galath. 5.20.
but by the lusts of the flesh, ingendring hatred, variance, emulations, wrath,
strife, seditions, heresies, envyings. These as they are not Iudahs People, so
neither are they Gods.

I have now done with my Text; (for the time will not permit me to speak of
the other two Petitions) but the Service of this day, and your expectation, do
require that I say something by way of application. This day was this Scripture
fulfilled in your ears; Luke 4.21.
for upon this day, full nineteen years ago, Almighty God brought Judah
unto his people: he set our gracious Sovereign that now is, upon the throne of
his Father, which unto us was no small blessing, if we had known our own
happiness. For to have a King, though he be none of the best, is a great
blessing unto a Land: Moses tells us, Number. 27.16, 17.
that unless God set a man over the Congregation, which may go out and in
before them; the Congregation of the Lord will be as Sheep without a
Shepherd. And we are often told in the Book of Judges, that when there was no
King in Israel, every man did that which was right in his own eyes.
Experience also has taught all men, that tyranny is nothing so bad, as
Anarchie. Saul was no good King, yet his advancement was counted a great favor
unto the people; for of it Samuel said, 1. Sam. 12.24.
Consider how great things the Lord has done for you. By his government they
reaped diverse benefits; for he saved them often from their Enemies: Saul did
slay his Thousands: 1. Sam. 18.7. C. 28. 9. C. 22. 7.
he destroyed the Sorcerers out of the Land: he gave them Fields and Vineyards,
he made them Captains over Thousands and over Hundreds: insomuch that after
his death, David ascribed all their wealth unto him, saying, Ye daughters of
Israel, 2. Sam. 9.24.
weep for Saul which clothed you in scarlet, with pleasures, and hanged
Ornaments of gold upon your apparel. Such benefits came by the government of a
Tyrant: but when they had no King at all, all manner of evil did ensue. Whence
came it, that the People in the wilderness, did worship the golden Calfe, but
that Moses their Prince and keeper of Religion, was absent, and Aaron the
Priest was too weak to withstand the importunity of the People? and whence was
it, that a little after they were seated in the land of promise, the state of
Religion became so corrupt; and all manner of iniquity so to abound, that it is
often said in the book of Judges, the Children of Israel did wickedly in the
sight of the lord? the cause appears plainly in the text: Joshua their godly
Prince was dead, and either they had no chief Governor, or at least not one
armed with sufficient power to restrain them; for it is said, they would not
obey their Judges, Iud. 2.17.
but went a whoring after other Gods. So it came to pass that every man did
what seemed good in his own eyes. And so it will ever be, when there is not
authority strong enough to control our unruly desires: therefore the want of
a King is threatened as the greatest of judgments, Hos. 3.4. the children of
Israel shall abide many days without a King, and without a Prince, and
without a Sacrifice. Certainly these were miserable days, in which there were
neither justice, nor religion. But if there be a King set upon the throne of
power, his fear will restrain the wicked, as Solomon says, Prove. 20.8. A king
that sits in the throne of judgment, chaseth away all evil with his eyes.
And verse. 26. A wise king scatters the wicked, and causes the wheel to
turn over them. So that upon the King depends the safety of the people: and
therefore in the book of Judges the chief governor whom God raised up, is
still called a Savior, because by him, God did procure the Salvation of the
people. The Scripture uses this as a motive to pray for the King, Ps. 20.10.
Lord save thou the King: then follows the reason, he answer us in the day we
call. (For that I take to be the true reading of the text.) In the Ps. 144. at
the 10. verse. there is a thanksgiving for the deliverance of Kings: it is he
that gives deliverance to Kings: at the 11. verse. there is a prayer for King
David's safety; Rescue me and deliver me from the hand of strange children, and
in the verses following, he shows what great good comes unto all from his
safety; that our sons may be as Plants: -- Our daughters as the corner
stones: -- that our garners may be full etc. Eight temporal blessings they be
in all, yea, that which is above all the rest, is added in the conclusion,
Blessed are the people whose God is Iehova: for even that too, that the Lord be
our God, that the true religion and worship of God be preserved amongst us,
does in a great part, depend upon the King. But some will say though these
blessings come by such a King as David, and we are to pray for him, yet not for
every King? yes, for every King: the Jews in captivity were commanded to pray
for the King of Babel: 1. Tim. 2.1, 2.
and St Paul at that time when Kings were none of the best, enjoined us to pray
for them, and the reason which he uses, shows, that upon their safety does
depend the safety of the people. Therefore for Kings, that under them we may
lead a peaceable life in all Godliness and honesty: as if he should say, if
the King be safe, the peace will be safe; by peace comes the knowledge of
God, from the knowledge of God, a Godly and honest life.

Thus, to have a King is a blessing unto a Land; but to have a good King, is
the greatest blessing which God can vouchsafe unto a Kingdom. And such a King
has God given us, He has not dealt so with any other Nation, nor yet with
this Nation, at other times: When God set him over us, it might have been said
of England, as the Queen of Sheba said of Israel, when Solomon was King: 1.
Kings. 10.9.
Because the Lord loved Israel, therefore made he him King, to do Judgment
and Justice. Here I need not to fear the aspersion of flattery; for he who
flatters the King, can expect no reward; there is indeed on the other side, a
reward for Traitors and Libellors, and therefore flatterers now speak against
the King, not for him, they blaspheam the Lord and his anointed. And truth
never stands more in need of an advocate, then when it is spoken against. Give
me leave therefore, out of the duty which I owe unto this day, to make some
acknowledgement, of those manifold graces, wherewith God has endued His
Majesty and therein blessed us: and I shall entreat you in the phrase of Philo,
to behold the image of a great mountain in a small ring: to conceive the worth
of a good King in the narrow words of an unskilful speaker; for I freely
confess, the mercies of God bestowed on us, in and by him, are higher and
greater then I can measure. Turn over all your Chronicles, and tell me, what
King was there ever in this Land, so free from vice, so eminent for virtue,
whose life was so Religious and exemplary, as His? Pliny says, there be three
virtues which especially commend a Prince, Paneg.
namely, Piety, Temperance, and Meekness: and I believe, that these are hardly
to be found in a more eminent measure, in any man living, then in Him. His
Piety is seen in His frequenr acts of devotion, and great reverence in Gods
worship, which I wish were recommended unto all His Subjects, as a pattern for
imitation. His Temperance is such as may be in some sort compared with that of
the ancient Philosophers. And this is no small blessing unto the Land; Eccles.
10.17.
for says Solomon, blessed art thou, O Land, when thy King is the son of
Nobles, and thy Princes eat in due season, for strength and not for
drunkenesse. His Meekness, mercy, and clemency, is so great, that his greatest
enemies, and most perfidious Traitors, do not despair of his pardon. I should
come far short, if I should only apply unto him the commendation of Augustus,
Quo nihil immensus mitius orbis habet.

He goes far beyond that, and has learned the hardest lesson in
Christianity, not only to forgive his enemies, but also, to render good for
evil. Unto these I might add, His great Justice and Integrity, which is such,
that He may make Samuels testament, and say, 1. Sam. 12.3.
witness against me before the Lord: -- whom have I defrauded? whom have I
oppressed? or of whose hand have I received any bribe to blind mine eyes?
Surely when God gave us such a King, as he Crowned him with a Crown of Gold, so
he Crowned us with a Garland of Peace; every man did sit under his own vine,
and did eat the fruit of his own labors; Religion and Justice did flourish;
there was great plenty in the Land; there was no leading into captivity, no
complaining in our streets.

But alas! we did not know our own happiness; but were weary of his
government, as the Israelites were of Samuels, so that for a long time he has
been driven from his People. But it may be now, we will learn to prize the
blessing of a good King, Carendo magis quam fruendo, by the miseries which we
have endured, since he was driven from his people. Since our gracious
Sovereign has been kept in Wardship, under Tutors and Governors; these
Egyptian taskmaisters, have not only usurped the rights of his Crown; but with
more then Spanish cruelty, Tyrannized over the Goods, Lives and Liberties of
the Subjects; yea, and over their Consciencies too, forceing men to forswear
themselves, and to forsake the true Religion wherein they were bred. The time
was when there was no King in Israel, and these were very bad days; Iud. 17.
for in these days every man did that which was good in his own eyes. In
these days Micha made him an Image, set up a new Religion, and got him a
Chaplain for the purpose: In these days, the men of Dan, did rob, kill, and
burn: Iud. 18.
In these days the men of Gibeah ravished a Woman, Iud. 19.
a Levites wife, and that unto death. And the censure which the holy Ghost
passes upon all these facts, is this, In these days there was no King in
Jsrael, but every man did that which was right in his own eyes. Almighty God,
because of our sins, and especially, for not acknowledging the blessing of a
good and peaceable King, has caused these days to return upon us. There are
many Michas, who will have a new Religion by themselves; for one image which
Macha made, they have set up an hundred fond imaginations, so that they have
already more Religions in London, then ever was in Amsterdam. Others kill,
burn, and spoil, a thousand times more, then the men of Dan did. Women also
are ravished, and much more wrong done to the Levites now, then that which was
done by the men of Gibeah. So that one would think, that even in these days
there is no King in Israel. Yet (praised be God) we have a King, the best of
Kings, of whom I may truly say, as a late Historian says of Henry 6th
(against whom there was such a Treasonable combination, Speed. Page 856.
as is against our King) That he has no fault, but that he is too good to live
amongst such Subjects. But for all this every man does what is right in his own
eyes; because the sons of Belial have risen up against him, and taken from
him that power whereby he should control the wickedness of men, and execute
vengeance on him that does evil. And a King who is thus robbed of his power,
Romans 13.4.
bears the sword in vain, which ought not to be, if we may believe the
Apostle, or if you will take Solomon's word for it, Eccles. 8.4.
who says, Where the word of a King is, there is power, and who shall say unto
him, what do thou? If Solomon did live now, he needed not to ask that
question, Who shall say unto the King, what do thou? For now every one
questions the King for his doings, they charge him with many things which he
never did, and accuse him even for these things which he did aright: with these
men the Kings word has no power, and so with them he is no King. The same
Solomon amongst the three or four comely things, that order well their going;
reckons as the chief, in the last place, Prove. 30.29.31.
A King against whom there is no rising up. If a King who is so powerful, that
against him there is no rising up, be a comely thing; then certainly, to take
Power from a King, and to rise up against him, is a thing very uncomely. But it
may be the Close Committee is wiser then Solomon, and they think it comely and
decent, to curb a King, to keep Him in bondage, to rise up against him, and to
take all Power from him: howsoever I believe Solomon, and I know, that to deal
thus with a King, is not only uncomely but most unjust and impious. It is
unjustice to rob any man of his right; much more to rob a King, whom God has
privileged, and exempted from humane touch. When there was only a conspiracy
intended against Henry the 3d, the Traitor was put to most cruel death; and
the historian says it was well done, Speed. 616.
for that a Traitor is guilty of homicide, of parricide, of Christicide, nay of
Deicide. And long before, Tully said, that in punishing Treason, no Judge can
be too cruel. We read of a great King, who going in his Barge, his Crown fell
into the water: the Barge-man swumme after it, and having recovered it, Niceph.
Greg.
put it on his head, only that he might have the use of his hands to swim
unto the Barge: the King gave him a Talent of silver for saving it, but cut off
his head for wearing it. What then should be done to these Traitors, who
forceably usurp the Kings Crown, and all rights of Majesty? they grant
Commissions, place and displace Officers, have made them a new Seal, possessed
the Kings Revenues, Castles, Ships, raised Arms, pressed the Kings Subjects to
fight against Himself, given away a great part of the Land to Srangers, to
assist them; and indeed they have done whatsoever belongs unto the King to
do, and a great deal more. And they wear the Kings Crown, not as the
Bargeman did, to save it for him; but to deprive him, and his, of it for ever.
These traitorous attempts contrived in Hell, have brought such miserable
Calamities upon our Kingdoms, as would minister occasion and matter to write a
new book of Lamentations: for the Land is filled with blood and uncivil
Wars; the Church with Schism, confusion, and profanation of Gods worship,
the Cities with poverty and want; every house with skrikes and lamentations for
their dead; the grave with bodies; and hell with souls. And all this since
Judah was driven from his people, by this most horrid, groundless, and
unnatural Rebellion.

I am not able to express in lively colors, the horrible deformity of this
Rebellion: that will require a better pen, and the best will come short and
want words to describe it. Only this I will say, that all the Rebellions that
ever were since the fall of Adam, cannot match it. And yet our Kings case in
some sort, is like unto David's. David was the best of Kings; yet he found more
thorns in his Crown, then Achab did; for it pleased God, that he might humble
David, and every way fit him for his service; to train him up in the School
of afflictions. First, 2. Sam. 15.
his unnatural son Absalom, under the color of a vow, 2. Sam. 16.
caused a great Rebellion against him: then Shimei cursed and reviled him,
calling him, a man of blood: after this there fell out a difference between
the men of Israel, and the men of Judah, 2. Sam. 19.
about the bringing of the King home to his house: whereupon Sheba (in whose
heart Treason had long lurked) took an opportunity to blow a Trumpet to
Rebellion, saying, we have no part in David, neither have we inheritance in the
son of Iesse. 2. Sam. 20.1.
Such has been the lot of our most gracious Sovereign: first many unnatural
Absoloms in the Kingdom of Scotland, pretending a vow, (which they called a
Covenant with God, but was indeed a Covenant against the Lord, and against his
Anointed) raised great Forces against him: when he was thus weakened, many a
wicked Shimei in this Kingdom, reviled his government as impious and
tyrannical. In the mean time there arises a difference amongst the Nobles
and Commons, touching the establishing of the Kingdom: (a thing called
Militia, but has proved Malitia) this gave the hint to many a Sheba, first in
Ireland, and presently after in England and Scotland, to blow the Trumpet to
Rebellion, saying, we have no part in David, nor Inheritance in the son of
James. As God has made His Majesty like David in suffering, so may he make him
like in overcomming. David at last was victorious, his end peaceable and
glorious: all his Enemies were put to shame and confusion. Absalom was brought
to his deserved end, Shimei, though reprived for a time, yet his hoary head was
brought down to the grave with blood: Sheba had his head thrown over the
wall. Even so let all thine Enemies perish, O Lord: but upon the Kings head let
his Crown flourish.

That the Kings Enemies be subdued, and he brought back again unto his house,
as David was, and set upon his throne, must be your special care. Give me
leave therefore to exhort you in the words of my Text, hear the voice of
Judah, and bring him unto his People. I told you before that this blessing is
not only a Prayer, but also a Prophecy: he foretells that God will hear the
voice of Judah, and bring him unto his People. Now you must think, that God
ordinarily works by means; and it is by you he will relieve Judah, and to
that effect does even at this time call for your help. And therefore that
which Moses powered out as a Prayer unto God, give me leave to present as a
Petition unto you, who are the Princes of Judah: that you will be pleased now
to hear the voice of Judah, to bring him unto his People, to make his hands
sufficient for him, and to help him against his Enemies. And first, hear the
voice of Judah: for now Judah utters his voice unto you, crying, as Moses did,
who is on the Lords side, Exodus 32.26.
let him come unto me. Now it will be known whether you be the People of
Judah: for as Christ discerned his Sheep by this mark, John. 10.27.
my Sheep hear my voice: so by this same mark, may Judah discern his people.
And think it not strange that I should presume to exhort you unto this duty:
for when David, after his banishment, was to return, he appointed the Priests
to speak unto the People to bring him home: and King David sent to Zadock and
Abiathar the Priests, 2. Sam. 19.11.
saying, speak unto the Elders of Judah, and say, why are ye the last to bring
the King back unto his house? and when Zadock had thus spoken, it is said,
Verse. 14.
he bowed the heart of all the men of Judah, even as the heart of one man. I
wish my speech could be so powerful with you: for never was there so great
need of help to bring the King back unto his house as now; in regard that at
this time many of his People have rebelliously withdrawn themselves from him,
and risen up in Arms against him; not like those two hundred men, who followed
Absalom in the simplicity of their hearts; 2. Sam. 15.11.
but like Sheba with malice, and obstinate resolution against the King. They
refuse all offers of Peace made by our gracious Sovereign, whereof you are
witnesses. They demand as hard conditions of Peace from us, as Nahash did from
Iabesh-Gilead. 1. Sam. 11.2. He would grant them no Peace, but upon condition,
that he might thrust out all their right eyes: These men will grant no Peace
unto the King and Kingdom, but upon that condition that they may be allowed to
thrust out both our eyes, the eye of Learning, and the eye of Religion. So that
the King may say with David, Psalm. 120.6, 7.
My soul has long dwelt with him that hates Peace: I am for Peace; but when
I speak, they are for War. I can best compare them (though it be hard to
find any to match them in villainy) with that Rebellious rout of the Jews, who
called themselves Zelators; they under color of fighting for Religion and
Liberty, Rebelled against Caesar: and when Vespasian, Lieutenant General to
Nero, who was sent to suppress them, offered them all terms of Peace, Joseph.
de bell. Iud. L. 4. C. 5. and L. 7.
by the mouth of Josephus; they would not hear of it. Titus so much pitied
them, that he earnestly entreated them to accept of Peace, and save themselves
from destruction; but they scorned him, ^ailed at him, and endeavored from the
walls to kill him; yet that mild Prince, seeing the number of their slain, did
lift up his eyes to Heaven, and say, It Is well known to thee, O Lord of
Heaven, that I am not the cause of these evils, for I desired to be at Peace
with them oftener then once, but the Seditious evermore would nothing but War,
War. I am sure our King may make the like Protestation. And that you may see
in how many things, our Rebels do resemble them, I will note some other
passages out of the history: They hated Peace so much, that it was death to
move for it, yea, they killed one, only for praying God to send Peace and
concord amongst them. Howsoever in their Rebellion, they pretended the Lords
Cause, and that they fought for the Law and Religion of their God, which the
Romans had no purpose to debar them of; yet there was no Religion in their
hearts; for they choosed for their Chieftaines, the grand Captains of
wickedness; they committed cruelties and outrages of all sorts; they invited
to come unto them, whosoever desired to be rid of his Master, or desired to be
revenged on him who had done him wrong, or who could not abide to be ruled by
any, or who had shed blood, or was in debt and danger of the Law, or who was
disposed to rob, steal, murder, and eat and drink freely at other men's
cost. (And is it not so now with our Zelots?) They had their lying Prophets,
who encouraged the People to stand out in Rebellion: (yet certainly neither so
many, nor so impudent as there are now at London.) They made one Pavi the son
of Peniel a Carter, (as good as a Coachman) High Priest: for says the story,
they held the Priesthood and service of God, but as gaudie toys. (The like
esteem have our Zelots of the Ministry, Liturgy, and administration of the
Sacraments.) They accused such as were rich, to be friends to Caesar, and to
have an intent to betray the City to Vespasian, and so (to use the phrase of
this age,) they pronounced them Malignants, and plundered them of all their
goods. These goodly Zelators (I had almost said Puritans) at last set the
Temple on fire, (as our Zelots have set the Church of God on fire, and defaced
many material Temples) and brought utter ruin upon themselves, with the death
of a million of men. Some of them escaped unto Alexandria, and there causing
commotions for recovering their liberty were apprehended, to the number of six
hundred; whose obstinacy (says Josephus) was to be admired: L. 7. de Bell.
Iud. cap. 29.
for they endured all the torments that could be devised, rather then they
would acknowledge Caesar to be their Lord.

They were not, they could not be more obstinate and spiteful against Caesar,
then are the Rebels now against their gracious, and Native King; and therefore
the greater zeal, courage, and resolution, will be required in you to bring the
King back unto his house. When David was to return after his flight from
Absalom, the people did strive who should be most forward to bring him back,
and the men of Israel did hotly expostulate with the men of Judah, 2. Sam
19.41. etc.
for preventing them in the honor of that service. I wish the like
forwardness in you, that in this you strive, to bring Judah unto his people;
and in nothing else: for if you should be divided in other things, and every
man have his own ends, and several ways, there will be little hope of any
good to be done. I told you in the explication, that to bring Judah unto his
people, imports an union between him and his people: and now I shall add only
this, that where there is a fracture and a breach, (as there is now a great
one) there is no way to salve it, and to bring Judah back again unto his
people, except that you, who adhere unto Judah, be united amongst your selves.
Consider therefore, I beseech you, that there is no strength in divided forces,
as Menenius Agrippa, Live. L. 1.
shows in an oration to the people of Rome, by a parable of the Members of a
man's body disagreeing amongst themselves. Consider likewise that it was
division which gave the Romans advantage against the Ancient Brittons: Nec enim
aliud (says Tacitus) adversus validissimas gentes pro nobis utilius, quam, In
vit. Agric.
quod in commune non consulunt, rarus ad propulsandum commune periculum convent
us: ita dum singuli pugnant, uniuersi vincuntur. and specially consider how the
enemies of Judah in both Kingdoms are united amongst themselves, united with
the bond of an Oath, or rather a Covenant of perjury. So that I may say, as it
is in the Psalm, Psalm 2.2, 3.
The rulers take counsel together against the Lord, and against his anointed:
(therefore against the Lord, because against his anointed) Saying, let us break
their bands asunder. What bands? why, all the bands of Allegiance. The like we
read, Psalm. 83. They have taken crafty counsel against thy People, and
consulted against thy hidden ones -- they have consulted together with one
consent; they are confederate against thee. The tabernacles of Edom and the
Ishmaelites; of Moab, and the Hagarens: Geball and Ammon, and Amalek, the
Philistines with the inhabitants of Tire. In Psa. 140.
Assure also is joined with them. Here is an unity in evil, which St Hilary
will not have called union, but combination. St Basil calls it Concors odium
unity in hatred. However, I wish that in the point of agreement, we may even
follow their example; (albeit it be strange, that any President of Peace should
come from Schismatics) and that we may be as firmly united for Judah, as they
are against him; for there is most need of unity against united forces. Put
away therefore all divisive motions, and look unto the Weal-publique, and not
every man to his own particular ends. And truly such is my hope of you, that
you will deserve the commendation of the sons of Judah, Ezra. 3.9.
when they went about the rebuilding of the temple; of whom it is said, Et
filij Judah quasi vir unus: that you will be like the children of Israel, going
against the Tribe of Benjamin; for of them it is said; And all the people arose
as one man; and again, Judge. 20.8.11.
So all the men of Israel arose against the City, knit together as one man. And
that you will imitate the men of Judah, when Hezekiah appointed the Passover
to be kept: it is said, 2. Chron. 30.12.
Also in Judah the hand of God was to give them one heart to do the commandment
of the King. I confess that in this, your forwardness has prevented me, and
given me occasion to bless God for you, and I shall do it in the words of
Deborah, Praise the Lord for the avenging of Israel, when the people willingly
offered themselves. Judge. 5.2.9.2.9.
My heart is toward the governors of Israel, that offered themselves
willingly among the people. It is said, 1. Chron. 12.18. Then the spirit came
upon Amasa, and he said, thine are we, O David, and on thy side thou son of
Iesse: Peace, Peace be unto thee, and to thy helpers; for the Lord thy God
helps thee. Such a spirit God has sent upon you, and if you continue to be
thus affected, it will be an easy matter to bring Judah unto his people. Yea,
God Almighty helps him, as he did David; he has begun to bring him unto his
people, and to let him upon his throne; he has made his enemies to fly before
him. As this day requires from us a thankful comemoration of his Majesty's
first Inauguration unto his Crown: so God has given us a fresh occasion to
praise him on this day, for that great victory which he has lately given unto
his Majesty's Forces, At Newarke.
against the Rebels. This should be unto us an earnest, that God in his own
time will perfect that work which he has begun, and, Give great deliverances
unto the King, Psalm. 18.51. Psa. 1.32.1. Psa. 134.11.
and show mercy unto his Anointed. In the mean time I shall pray, That God
would remember our David in all his Troubles; that he would rescue him and
deliver him out of the hands of strange children: that his arm may strengthen
him, so that the son of wickedness do not afflict him: Psalm. 89.21, 22, 23.
that he would beat down his foes before his face, and plague them that hate
him. Psalm. 83.11, 12, 13.
Make their Nobles like Oreb, and like Zeob; yea all their Princes as Zebah,
and as Zelmunah: Who said, let us take to our selves the houses of God in
possession. O my God, make them like a wheel, and as the stubble before the
wind. Make them like a wheel, says the Prophet; you know a wheel is made to
turn round, so will God make all their devices turn Round in their Heads; he
will bring the Counsels of Achitophel to nothing, and scatter the people that
delight in War, so that their sword shall be sheathed in their own sides. 1.
Sam. 2.10.
But he will give strength unto his King, and exalt the horn of his anointed.
And unto his people he will yet give the blessing of Peace: which Almighty God
of his infinite mercy grant, etc.

FINIS.

