THE PARASYNAGOGUE PARAGORIZED.

OR A Parenetical confutation of the Epidemical Error, which asserteth
Separation from Parochial Church Communion.

Demonstrating Their practice, who on the Lords day neglect the public
Exercises of Divine Worship in their Parochial Congregations, and frequent
(caeteris paribus) other Churches, to be Anti-scriptural.

By John Lesly; Minister of the Gospel at St. Michaels, near St. Albans in
Hertfordshire.

London, Printed by Thomas Maxey, in Thames Street. 1655.

1 Cor. 3.4. While one says, I am of Paul; and another, I am of Apollo; are
ye not carnal?

Clemens Romans (...).

Cyprian. de Lapsis. Non jungitur Ecclesiae, qui ab Evangelio separatur.

Basil. ad Amphiloch. (...).

To the Honorable, WILLIAM LENTHALL Esquire, Master of the Rolls, etc.
Honorable, and Honored Sir.
A Sufficient Apology for my bold adventure of presenting this part of my poor
endeavors unto the public view, may be an observation of the heathen; that
when the Lord is pleased to visit a Nation with the sword, or the like
judgment, Eurip. apud Sarah l. 11 page 498.
then (...); the worship of God is weakened, and men will not honor him as they
should. Not so much for your particular inclination toward me do I make
mention of your Name before this Treatise: as for that general Concession and
Homologie, That the public inferres the private benefit: In the peace of the
City, Jerem 29 7
ye shall have peace: For I feel my self no senseless member of those
bodies, which out of diverse experiences challenge an interest in your Honors
most favorable Integrity and Love, which you have always borne to Gods Glory,
Christ's Gospel, and all good Causes, wherein you may be charitable. The
greatest greatness has no greater Honor belonging to it, then to be an
Abrech to Persons, Books, Genesis 41.43
and Causes of this Nature. Such Cedars have their spreadth and tallnesse to
shelter such Fowls of the Heaven under their shadow. It was the pious
resolution of Luther in one of his Epistles; Inveniar sane Superbus, Avarus,
Luther ad. Stanpit.
Adulter, Homicida, Antipapa, and omnium vitiarum reus, modo impij silentij non
arguar, dum Dominus patitur: That he had rather be counted any thing, then be
accused of wicked silence in Gods cause. And we know, that the more
dishonored and trampled upon any cause of God 's is, the more he expects that
we should appeate for it. Now lest any man should bring a bloud-shot eye, to
make all appear of a wrong color; that I have made no particular Person my
Aim or Adversary, my witness is in heaven, Job 16 19
and my record on high. But because loss of Salvation follows obstinacy in
Error, Camero p. 286. in folio.
I have done my poor endeavor to proclaim Gods will. If any do demurre, or
obstinately persist, or resist, they may remember they err not without warning.

Common Ingenuity commands me thankfully to acknowledge, what you have done
for one, that has no witty Insinuations for extracting of your favors, nor
Impudency enough to return them in flatteries: yea, who had such obstructions
between his heart and his tongue, that he could scarce express the least
part of his Thankfulness, much less is he able to make you a requital.

But the Lord of Lords grant, that you may find all favor in the eyes of God
and Man, that all true Happiness may be multiplied upon you and yours, and
crown you with eternity. So prays,

Your Honors obliged and humble Servant in the Lord, JOHN LESLY.

The CONTENTS.
Chap. 1.THere is a necessity of opposing Errors: and a special necessity of
opposing the Error of Indetermined Church Communion. 2.The late Original of
this Error. Some mschiefes of it are indigitated. A Motive to resist them.
3.Parochial Church Communion is a duty implanted by Nature, and a Moral and
Solemn part of Divine Worship. 4.All Christians are to join themselves to some
particular visible Church, when the Lord offers occasion. 5.We are bound to
hearing in our own determined Congregations, Necessitate praecepti. 6.God
assigns unto every ordinary Pastor a portion of his people, to be instructed
by him. 7.Separation from determined Church Communion is reproved, 1 Cor. 1.12.
and 3. ver. 4. 8.The Lord commands to worship him Orderly: which is not
observed in Indetermined Church Communion. 9.We are bound to hearing in our
particular Congregations, by Christ's Doctrine and Example. 10.We are bound to
the duty of Determined Church Communion, by the custom of Apostolic and
primitive times. 11.Reason teaches that Indetermined Church Communion is
carnal glorying in the worthiness or excellency of other Pastors. 12.Some
sinful effects and consequents of Parochial or Congregational
Church-separation. The causes which men pretend for Separation from Parochial
Church Communion, are frivolous and invalid. And, 13.First, indetermined
Church Communion, is no part, but an abuse of Christian Liberty. 14.Secondly,
Separation from Church Communion for the Pastors known insufficiency, or
Scandalous life, may be lawful. Otherwise it is lamentable, if not intolerable
and impious. 15.Thirdly, Other imaginary, and imaginated pretenses are
answered. 16.Serious and frequent admonition ought to be inculcated against
this error. 17.Some Antidotes against the Infection of Separation from
Parochial Church Communion. 18.The Conclusion.
ERRATA.
IN the Book. page 4. lin. 26. for Cannons, read Canons. p. 5. l. 16 for (...).
read (...). p. 6. l. 9. for (...) read (...). p. 9. l. 10. for were read went.
In Marg. l. 24 for Arm. de, read Ames. de. p. 10. in Marg. l. 16. Jer. 2.14. is
wanting. p. 13. in Marg. l. 10. for Ceserens, read Cestrens. p. 15. l. 6. for
livng, read living. p 16. l. 8 put out and. l. 22. for exacteth, read
enacteth. p. 31. l. 4. put out the. p. 44 l. penult, for Ceristians, read
Christians. p. 47. l. 4. are is wanting. l. 5 for allay, read alloy. p. 73. l.
22. for Orthadox, r. Orthodox: for Hetorodox, r. Heterodox. p. 80. l. 4. for
apprehend, read apprehended. l. 27. this is wanting. p. 105. l. 15. not is
wanting. p. 111. l. 18. the is wanting. p. 124. l. 7. put out not. lin. 22. for
Meditaion read Mediation. p. 139. l. 11. for nulla, read nulli.

The Parasynagogue Paragorized. OR, A Parenetical Confutation of the Epidemical
Error, which asserteth, Separation from Parochial Church Communion.
CHAP. I. There is a Necessity of opposing Errors: and a special Necessity of
opposing the Error of indetermined Church Communion.
. 1. IT is the infinite Goodness of the Lord, that in wrath he remembers
mercy: For my part, Hab. 3.^.
I look upon it as a special mercy, that although we live in times, in which
the Truth is opposed and blasphemed more then ever before; yet the Faithful
have liberty to speak and write in defense thereof. I wish that all orthodox
Christians (who have more leisure, greater helps and endowments then their
Brethren) had more zeal to improve this liberty for the advantage of the Truth;
and to remember that it is wretched, Tertull. de Cor. Mil. c 1 Ruff. Hist. l.
2. c. 11. Sozom. l. 1. c. 14. Rev. 21.8 Rav. in voce Timidus Matthew. 10.28, 33
in time of peace to be fierce as Lions, but in the combat to be fearful like
Hearts. Ambrose, as well as St Paul, had a great conflict for the Church of
Christ. Alexander Bishop of Alexandria was blamed by many for his too slow
confuting Arius his Heresy. The Fearful, who are threatened to have their part
in the lake that burns with fire and brimstone, are they, Qui veritatem
Evangelii agnitam abnegant, aut profitero nolunt, metu mortis vel amittendarum
facultatum; says Ravanel. Who deny the known Truth of the Gospel, or will not
profess it: Or, who at any time do evil, or omit good against the light of
Conscience, for fear of danger; say our learned English Annotators. The Authors
of most of these Errors and Blasphemies which bewitch the souls of our people,
are but little more to be blamed, then they that do profess the Truth, (being
endowed with gifts and helps) who suffer them to walk abroad without check or
control: It is but a slender discharge of our Duty, Mal. 2.1, 2 Jude 3. Tit.
1.9, 11
to cry out against Errors and Heresies, and never to contend, nor convince men
what Truth and Error is.

. 2. Though I meddle with no Controversy but with great reluctancie and
distaste; Intellectus dominatur Appetitui. Scot. in 3. d. 33. aed. 4.
yet now I am in a manner constrained, upon two considerations: which may be my
Apology for the publication of this imperfect Piece: First, As man's Intellect
naturally abhors Error, and a sanctified man does doubly abhor Error in
things Divine; so does he most of all abhor the corruption of the Vitals, and
those Errors which have a potent influence upon the Heart and Life, as this
which I oppose most evidently has: Mistakes we all have, and shall have; but
the more they stop the motions of the heart and hand, the more dangerous are
they: The second is, Doctrina est species Eleemosynae, Camero p. 90.
The common excuse or argument of the Times, Necessity, and Providence: which
how far they may justify me, I must leave to the Judge of all men; being
obliged as a Pastor, as a Friend, as a Christian, to tender my best assistance
for relief of the Truth.

Though the crudity and weakness of this writing be such then, as should
prohibit the publication, yet it may he useful to Country People, who most
commonly are subject to this Error. Had I writ it for the use of the Learned, I
would have tried to make it fitter for their use; and if I could not, I would
have suppressed it.

Conc. Melevit. 2. cap. 24, 25. anno 416
. 3. The Shepherds part and duty is, to defend his Flock from Dogs, Wolves,
Thieves; which if he neglected to do, he incurred the loss of his Office;
according to the public and ancient Cannons of the Church. Rev. 22.11
1 Cor. 14.38.
But if the Flock despising their Shepherd, do miscarry, they must thank
themselves for it. Ezekiel. 3.27
When the beautiful Order of the Church is broken, Zech. 11.10
then the Flock cannot but be endangered by Seducers; who ever corrupt the
purity of Doctrine and Dicipline, and mar the beautiful face of the Church.
The words of the Lord. Ezech. 1.38. When I say unto the wicked, Thou shall
surely die, and thou give him not warning, nor speak to warn the wicked
from his wicked way to save his life, the same wicked man shall die in his
iniquity, but his blood will I require at thine hand: These words should seem
to Pastor and People, not so much words, as thunderbolts; Homer Iliad. 2
and therefore unto the obstinate, (...), this Text will one day be terrible.
For the Lord applies this threatening, not only to every particular impenitent
person, but every negligent Pastor in the person of Ezechiel, that he may take
to heart his duty, and his danger. The same charge is iterated, Ezech. 33.6.
Signifying that Separatists from Church Communion in their proper and
Parrochial Congregations (in which they should take warning from their
appointed Pastor) shall not escape punishment, though the Watchman be
negligent; but if the Watchman blow the trumpet, and the Flock or Sinner will
not then come, and hear, and obey, he shall incur double punishment. The
Watchman then must answer for his part, for the blood of all that perish
through his default and negligence, to whom I say, Homer Iliad. 2.
as he in the Poet; (...); Wretched man, thou should not fear to tell men of
their evil doing, and by consequence of their Church-separation.

. 4. Sinners are hardly brought to the sight and sense of their sins: And
therefore Pastors must bring the sins of their people upon the Stage, Hos. 4.2.
1 Timothy 5.20 Hos. 6.10. Heb. 10.31.
that they cannot deny them: as did the Prophets and Apostles. Better so, then
for the people, (not knowing their sin, that it is an horrible thing) to find
how fearful a thing it is to fall into the hands of the living God. A
Christian, Mat. 5.13.
that has not grace in him to reprove sinners, is like Salt that has lost his
savor: (...), he is become foolish. For the unsavourinesse of salt is (as
Euthymius says) Debilitas mordacitatis ipsius; The weakness of its accrimony.
We have many examples of the Lords severe justice against them that swerve
aside in the least things, 2 Samuel 6.7. Levit. 10.1. Act. 5.4. etc,
from the strict rule of his Word, that concern his Worship, and follow their
own wills and inventions; though they have never so good a pretense for it:
Tender hearts by judgments on others, are brought the more to fear God, lest
the same Judgments should befall them: and to discern, how failing about
heavenly things (chiefly in his Worship) does much incense Gods wrath.

CHAP. II. The late original of this Error: Some mischiefs of it are
indigitated. A Motive to resist them.
. 1 FIrst it is to be understood, That the judgment and practice of some men of
special account in the Church of God, has been, that Separatists are unworthy
the honor of any set Conflict, 1 Cor. 11.16 etc.
and public Confutation; But Saint Paul in many places knew Satan's method
better: Satan seems somewhat shamefaced at first, asks but some small trifle;
give him but that, he will be ready for greater points. If he win ground in
the Ceremonies, then he will abuse the Sacrament. For when the Corinthians had
sit covered at Prayer a while, they grew even as unreverent at the Sacrament,
which the Apostle was fain to rebuke. Then we are to reprove lesser Errors at
first, as the Apostle did: We are to think the Wise man's counsel worth the
following, Ne sit tibi minimum, Seneca.
non negligere minima. Count it no small matter, not to neglect small matters.
What so small as an hair? When these small hairs went from Samson, Judge. 16.19
his strength left him. Moreover, lest overmuch silence should be interpreted,
Consent, or beget too great confidence in men of the goodness of their cause,
and others should stumble at their vaunts; Came. p. 322. in fol. Mares. Coll.
Theol. d. 17. Sect. 9. Ved. Arc. Arm. part 1 l. 2. c. 1. A^mes. de Consc. l. 5.
c. 12. Ruth. Due Right p. 220 etc. Blake Cov c. 31.
I would desire the Reader, for his full satisfaction to peruse learned Camero,
Maresius, Vedelius, Dr. Ames, Mr. Rutherford, Mr. Blake, and other reverend
Divines: by whom he may be informed of his Duty in the danger of this sin. For
it is not my purpose at this time to discourse, in what cases it is lawful to
separate from a Church: much less is it my business to speak of the
incredible and detestable Church separation, practiced by Atheists, Epicures,
Heretics, Libertines, etc. in these times, Who walk after their own ungodly
lusts, Jude 19.
and separate themselves, being sensual, having not the Spirit: Whose judgment
lingreth not, Pro. 13.13.
nor their damnation slumber. But my business is to admonish those, who
profess they know God; 2 Timothy 3.5.
Having a form of godliness, but in this deny the power thereof: That the Lord
might give them repentance to the acknowledgment of the truth.

. 2. This premised: This Error of Church separation, is by birth and Original,
like unto Israel in her worst condition: even (...), Jer. 2.14.
a Home-borne slave; called by the Latins, Verna; i. e. Vere vilis natas, of a
vile Original. Among the Heathen it was a reproachful disgrace, to worship
their gods with any new Adoration. And for that very thing the Athenians (...),
were bitterly jeered by their Comicks; and particularly Demosthenes reproved
Aeschines, Strabo Geogr. l. 10 p. 471.
says Strabo. We then should fear, that vengeance denounced against the final
impenitency of Revolters in Religion, does not only concern Apostates, openly
denying Christ; but, as Fulgentius well notes, Fulgent. ad Thras. l. 1.
him also, Qui silentio firmat errorem, who by silence confirms any Error,
and by holding his peace does not confirm the Truth: Divinam contumeliam qui
non refutavit, acumulat: He that repelleth not Gods dishonor, Luke 9.26.
(what he possibly can) adds to it. The negligent or sleepy Sentinel
betrayeth his Princes Tent. And now, lest here I should seem singular, I will
express the degenerate Birth and Nativity of it, in the words of learned
Honorius Reggius, Honor. Reg. de Statu Ecclesiae in Anglia. p. 95.
who has collected a hundred and eighty Errors (out of Mr. Edwards his
Gangrene, and other late Writers) practiced in England, since the year 1640,
and communicated them unto foreign Nations: of which this is the 125 Error;
Partem Libertatis Christianae esse, non audire proprium Ministrum; sed ubi
libeat, and a quo plus commodi speretur: That it is a part of Christian
Liberty, not to hear our own Minister; but to hear where one likes best, and
from whom we hope for most profit.

3 The mischief of the practice I here oppose, lies not in the bare error of
judgment, but in the unchristian Division and Alienation which thence sloweth,
contrary to the Humility and Love, which is the visible character of
Christians. Evagr. Hist l. 3. c. 14. in Henotico Zenon. Imp.
Alas, the hideous Doctrines, the contemned Ordinances, the unheard of
wickedness that this Doctrine has produced! the reproached and slandred
Ministers, the weak that are scandalized, the Professors apostatized, the
Profane hardened, the Enemy insulting; all these do describe it more plainly to
us, then words can do, and cry aloud in the ears of God and good men. Hence is
all this Atheism amongst us, in denying or not having a God; this Apostasy,
Ephesians. 2.12. Heb. 10.38 Hebr. 12.16
in drawing back and estranging our selves from God: this Profaneness, in
refusing the Creator, that we may enjoy the Creature. How fruitful are we in
monstrous sins, from the lowest step of Semi-separatism, to the highest pitch
of Rantism? Which should produce all manner of Attestations to the Truth of
Christ, against the Errors and Blasphemies occasioned by this practice. But if
we cannot see it at home, we may hear of it from abroad; from the pens of
Protestant Divines, making observation of the state of the Church in England,
Honor. Reg. de St. Eccl. in Angl. p. 1 Theologi Cestrens. in Attestatione sua,
Excusa Anno 1648. Marc. in Disp. aliquot. etc.
who give this sad, yet true report unto the world, That England in four years
space is become an heap and sink of all Errors, Sects; no Province from the
beginning of the world, ever brought forth in so short a space, so many
monstrous Heresies, as this. Can any man name any age since the Apostles, among
all the odious Heresies that still invaded the Church, that ever had such open
Maligners of the Ministry in general, and that struck so ragingly at the very
standing of the Gospel, as the Church-Separatists in this age have done, and
still do? and that in such numbers? Nay, has Christ any thing that he may
enjoy unquestioned among us? As he may not have a Minister, so he must not an
Ordinance; not a Day, not a Duty, not so much as his Deity among us. For
Opinion once seeded in Error, shoots out into Heresy, and after some growth,
in time into Blasphemy.

4 What then? Must a true Christian stand by, and see the Cause of Christ, like
a Football in the midst of a crowd of Boys, tossed about in contention, from
one to another; and spurned about in the dirt, driving it on to the goal of
their private interests and deluded fancies? Truly, it is not so easy for
gracious dispositions to turn off the public calamities of Gods Church. Where
is the policy (I say not Christianity) of our times? Socrat. Hist. l. 5. Praer^,
Which should mind us, that, Calamitatum Reip. and Ecclesiae est communio and
vicissitudo. No man can do other, then lose his private felicities in the
common distresses of the Church. To avoid then all occasions of public Service
for the Church under pretense of Humility or Redusenesse, speaks (too broadly)
the deliquent Refractory. Your Anchoret, that digs his grave in Speculation
merely, and your Mole that is earthed wholly in an affected solitariness, are
not liable so properly to obscurity, as death. And we find an Apoplexy and
Sleep no less on their endeavors, then in their names. Indeed such Silkworms
spin themselves into Flies, disanimate, heartlesse Flies, livng neither for
Church nor Commonwealth. So that he that retreats at any Alarm or Summons of
God for the common affairs of the Church, to enjoy himself in his solitary
ends, runs himself on the shelves of that rough censure of Athanasius;
Athanasius ad Dracont Part 2 Edit. ult.
Vereor ne dum propter te fugis; propter alios sis in periculo apud Dominum: To
stand by, and to give aim only whilst others shoot, proclaims thy laziness,
if not thy impotency. If therefore this thy mother implore thy aid (so
Augustine counsels his Eudoxius) on the one side, hand not with Ambition;
August. Epist. 81.
on the other, lean not to a lazy refusal: Weigh not thine own idleness with
the necessities and greatness of her burdens, to which (whilst she is in
travel) if no good men will administer their help, Certe quomodo nasceremini
non inveniretis, God must then invent new ways for our new birth.

CHAP. III Parochial Church Communion is a Duty implanted by Nature, and a
Moral and Solemn part of Divine Worship.
1 AND here I profess, and I would not say any thing, in which I am singular:
I have so much childish fear, as scarce to dare to walk in public where I am
alone. The Topic therefore whence I intend (God willing) to raise my Reasons,
for a due and dutiful observation of Parochial Church Communion, shall be the
same threefold cord, with which Tertullian prosecuted another Subject: Eccles.
4.12
that is, according to Scripture, Nature, and Discipline. By these three I hope
to demonstrate, that Scripture enacteth this Duty for a Law, Nature
establishes it, and Discipline exacteth Obedience to it. As Nature, Tertul. de
Veland. Virg. c. 16.
Scripture and Discipline are the Lords, (says Tertullian) so whatever is
contrary to them is not the Lords. Let that be unto thee Scripture, Nature and
Discipline, which thou find ratified by God; as thou art commanded, 1 These.
5.21
To prove all things, and to hold fast that which is good. Cui ex his
consuctudo opinionis profit, vel quis diversa sententiae color est? What can
custom of opinion profit any of these, or what pretense is there for any
contrary judgment? says that Father.

And first I begin with the Testimony of Nature, because God has premised
Nature to be thy Teacher, Tertul. de Resurrect. Carn. c. 12. Tertul. de Cor.
Milit. c. 5.
being afterward about to send the Scripture, that thou might the more
easily believe the Scripture, being first Natures Scholar; and whatsoever is
against Nature, deserves by all men to be called a Monster: but we will call
it Sacrilege against God, the Lord and Author of Nature.

2. That Honor and Reverence, which is the proper Act of Religion, Ames. de
Consc. lib. 4 cap 1.
is due only to God, Nature teaches.

1. Because it is the greatest Honor that can be given to him.

2. It is the honor that is due to the sole Lord of Life and Everlasting
Felicity.

3 Religious honor directly submits, and subjecteth the soul and conscience
to the Lord alone.

4 In Religious honor God only is acknowledged to be our absolute Lord, and to
have absolute right to require our Obedience.

Thus Nature teaching us that every Religious Act is due unto God; then
Parochial Church Communion, being a Religious Act, is a Natural or Moral Duty
commanded by the Law of Nature. Now Moral or Perpetual (relating to a Law)
signifies (in the Notation of the word) any Precept serving to regulate the
Manners of men.

Sabbatum Redivivum part 1. page 9
There are two kinds of Moral Laws,; Moral-Natural, and Motal-Positive: which
agreeing in Perpetuity, do differ in their distinct Properties, as may appear
by their several descriptions; which are these.

1 A Law Moral-Natural, is a Law of things necessary to be done or forborne
toward God or Man, our selves or others; which the nature of man now (though
corrupt) cither does acknowledge or may at least be convinced of to be such
(even without Scripture) by Arguments drawn from those Principles, which are
now in the hearts of all men generally.

2 Laws Moral-Positive, are Laws clearly laid down in Scripture (in words
express, Naturae majestatem recogitare, nulli frivolum videre potest. Tertul.
de Testim. Animae. c. 5.
or certain consequence) which Nature, though corrupted, cannot reasonably deny
to be Just, Good, and so convenient to be perpetuated, according to the
Lawgivers pleasure: though antecedent to his will, some way revealed to them,
it would not, nor could have judged them to be of themselves altogether
necessary.

The distinction of Moral Laws into Natural and Positive being clear in their
descriptions, their agreement is manifest in two things, besides perpetuity.

1 In their Authority and force of Obligation; a Positive Law in force does as
strongly bind the conscience, as a Natural; aeque, though not aequaliter.

2 In their independance, both depend upon God, and not upon the will of man;
and so are indispensable by humane Authority. These things premised, I
conclude, that as all Solemn and Religious worship of God is Natural-Moral, so
Parochial Church Communion is a Duty implanted by nature.

. 3. But lest I should be thought to neglect (in effect) any other Solemn
Worship, beside this public Worship in Church Communion; (which the Ancients
in severest manner did prescribe and require) I will briefly declare, Council.
Gangren. cap. 5. and 6
that all Solemn Worship is Moral-Natural, in all the parts thereof; and so,
by consequence, this Worship in Church Communion. Though the nature of man be
much defaced by the Fall of Adam, yet are there (as all men do acknowledge) some
Principles of Religion found in every soul, which can never be blotted out:
Among which there are these two most legibly upon the Tables of the heart.

1 That there is a God: which even the most barbarous people in all ages, and
the worst of Atheists have been forced to acknowledge.

2 That this God must be worshipped by all reasonable Creatures, Romans 1.20
capable of his divine knowledge. This is that natural Homage and Alegeance due
to God from all mankind, by the very law of Nature in their Creation; 1 Cor.
6.20
whereby they are bound to perform all Duties that he prescribes to them, both
with soul and body. Our life then regulated by nature, is the honor of nature;
but things done against Nature do hinder the Solemn Worship of God, Eusebius. Orat
ad Caet. Sanct. c. 1.
said Constantine the great.

4 The Worship of God may be distinguished into Ejaculatory and Solemn.
Ejaculatory Worship is that which a man may tender unto God, either with the
Heart alone, or with the Tongue also, in Prayer and Praises, even in the midst
of worldly employments. To this kind of Worship every one is undoubtedly bound,
as much as it is possible for us to perform it; and that, by those general
precepts which bind Semper, Psalm. 1.2. and 62.8 1 These. 5.16 17, 18
(as the Schools speak) that is, ^n all opportunities; though not, ad semper,
at all moments, without intermission. But indeed it is both our sin and our
misery, that in our ordinary Callings we seldom remember God, as we might and
should: it being too true of all in a degree, To forget God, Psalm 10.4
and not to have him in our thoughts. Solemn Worship is the presenting the
whole man, soul and body together unto God. Now this Solemn Worship, is
distinguished into solitary, and conjoined worship; which usually, though not
properly, is expressed by the terms of Private and Public Worship; but we had
rather call it Solitary, or Conjoined, because it is presented to God, either
by any one singular person alone, or by diverse joining together in the tendering
of it.

That Solitary Worship is a necessary Duty, Sabbat. Red part 1. c. 6. Sect. 12.
appears from the grounds of Nature.

1 It is altogether unreasonable to imagine that God should lose any of his
honor from any man single, because there is none other company to join with
him in the Solemnity of Worship.

2 It is likewise unreasonable to think, that a man is not bound to seek the
recovery of his souls lost happiness, in his enjoying God induties of Worship,
because he is alone.

Next, Solemn Conjoined Worship, is Domestical or Ecclesiastical.

That the Lord requires Domestical Worship from all such jointly as live in
Families, appears to be Moral-Natural, because it being the Lord that has
placed men in a Community, it cannot be justly conceived, that he should do
this merely for their worldly conveniences; but rather chiefly, that they
should improve their Society one with another to his Glory, Psalm. 68.6 Zech.
12.12 Esth. 4.16 Exodus 12.3
who is the Lord of them altogether, as well as of every one of them single;
and so that they should worship him jointly together as well as each of them
apart.

5 Now all Ecclesiastical Worship is so assuredly of the Law of Nature, that
all Nations, that have ever been heard of, have had their joint Public Solemn
Worship; and have had Persons set apart purposely for it. No man denies this,
for no man is ignorant of that which nature freely does suggest, Tertul. de
Spectac. c. 2.
says Tertullian. Moreover, Reason and Experience declare, that the good of
souls calls for Solemn Ecclesiastical Worship, and commends it, as absolutely
necessary and profitable: not only in that men are hereby yet more affected by
a more general example, Sabbat. Rediv. part 1 c. 6. Sect. 15.
recommending the Worship of God; but also because by the solemn Ordinances of
Prayer, Preaching, Sacraments, Sabbaths, etc. multitudes are at once taught,
minded of, and provoked to many Duties they owe to God and Man, better then
their own solitary thoughts or endeavors could ordinarily have attained to.
And this so much the rather, because of the gifts, which God to this purpose
has endued his Ministers with (who by his appointment are set apart mainly for
the Public Worship) exceeding those which others have usually or ordinarily:
yet by the advantage of Public Worship every particular person present enjoyes
the benefit of the Ministers gifts, 2 Cor. 4.23.
for the Edification and Consolation of every one, from whom it is not hid; and
so may reap in one hour the strength of that which has been growing diverse
years, and feed upon that which has been gathering many days. This
Ecclesiastic Worship is so natural to man, that Tertullian wondreth, Tert. de
Cor Milit. cap. 6.
How any man can ask for Gods Law, seeing it is written openly in the
Creatures, and naturally in the Tables of Hearts, unto which the Apostle does
appeal, 1 Cor. 11.14. Romans 2.14. and 1.26, 27.

. 6. This Ecclesiastical Worship, is either determined or indetermined.

That thing is said to be Determined, which has bounds and limits prescribed.
Determinare, Deuteronomy. 19.14 Job 14.13.
est terminos constituere, says Ravanel.

As that Worship then may be said to be Determined, which is limited with
certain Circumstances, and circumscribed: so that may be said to be
indetermined, whose Administration and Performance, is Casual, Occasional,
Arist. Eth. l. 3. c. 1.
Accidental. The Philosopher tells us, That Circumstances are the particular
Conditions of singular Acts. Now circumstances are determined in Scripture but
in general, and left to Humane determination in specie. Therefore Aquinas
concludes, That the consideration of circumstances, Aquin. 12.7, 2.0. and
12.18.3.0.
does chiefly belong unto Divines; and that they make any Action either good or
bad. And Scotus teaches, Scot. Sent. l. 1. d. 28 quaes 4. n. 12.
That the Determination of a thing is twofold (opposite unto a twofold
Indetermination) namely, a Determination unto Contradictories, or Positive
Diversities: and thence concludes, that Determinatio ad alteram partem
Contradictionis stat cum indeterminatione ad diversa. And therefore the
determination of Solemn Worship to Parochial Church Communion on the Lords Day,
does consist with his Indetermined Worship at other times and places on
certain occasions.

The sum of all is, That Determined and Parochial Church Communion, is a Duty
implanted by Nature, otherwise it were not absolutely a Moral-Natural Duty to
worship God solemnly at all; for every such Duty, which we by the Law of Nature
owe unto God, cannot but be perpetually and universally possible to all; he
being perpetually existent and present with us, and we with him. And so by the
Law of Nature it is sacriledg against God, to separate from determined
Church Communion, chiefly without cause. But I pass from Nature to Scripture.

CHAP. IV. All Christians are to join themselves to some particular visible
Church, when the Lord offers Occasion.
1. MY second sort or kind of Reasoning against the Practice I oppose, is
deduced from plain Scripture. And here, though I might plead, as Tertullian
did, Tert. de Monogam. c. 4.
Scriptura negat, quod non notat; That the Scripture denies that which it
teaches not: And seeing this practice has no Scripture-warrant (for any thing
that I ever yet saw or heard) the Practisers of it should fear that Woe
denounced, not only against them that add or diminish, but likewise that
adulterate the sense of Scripture. Tertull. de Praescr. c. 17
For according to Tertullians Rule, the Scripture is as much wronged by
perverting the sense, as by corrupting the words of it. But to deal with them
with their own weapons: Where is it said, That you are not to join in a
determined Church Communion, to hear your own Pastor? Where are those words
written? If they answer, Negatives cannot be proved, To this we reply, And
where is that said? for we find it no where in Scripture, Luke 24.39. Matthew. 4.7
that Negatives cannot be proved. Yea, we find that Christ proved Negatives;
for he proved, that himself was not a Spirit, That God was not to be tempted,
etc. If Negatives are not to be proved, then Negatives are not to be believed.
Ours is an Affirmative, Hooker Eccles. Politic. l. 2. Sect. 6.
which they yield may be proved; theirs is a Negative, which they say cannot be
proved: We then have the better of it; there is hope of proof on our side;
theirs is desperate. But though I might desire them to prove their Practice by
Scripture, yet because with Tertullian, Contra Hermog. c. 22.
I adore the fullness of the Scripture, I will show their practice, who on the
Lords Day neglect the public exercises of Divine Worship in their determined
Parochial Congregations, and frequent (cateris paribus) other Churches, to be
Anti-scriptural. Thus:

2. First, all are to join themselves to a visible Church; either Formally to
be a member thereof, or Materially by confessing the Faith of the true visible
Church, when God offers occasion.

1 Because we ought to be ready to give an answer or confession to every one
that asks, 1 Pet. 3.15.

2 Because he who denies Christ before men, him also will Christ deny before
his Father, and the holy Angels, Mat. 10.33.

3 Because Christ has promised his presence to his Churches, as he walked in
the midst of the golden candlesticks, Rev. 2.1.

4 Because Faith comes by hearing a sent Preacher, Romans 10.24.

5 Because separation from a visible Church is condemned, Hebr. 10.24. Jude 19.
1 John 2.19.

6 Because the godly ever esteemed it a rich favor of God, to lay hold on the
skirt of a Jew; that is, to have any communion, Zech. 8.3. Psalm. 27.4. et 42.1.
etc et 63.1, 2.
even as a doorkeeper in the House of (...) God, and have desired it
exceedingly, and complained of the want thereof, Psalm. 84.1, 2, 10.

3 Yet if any die without the Church, having faith in Christ, and want
opportunity to confess him before men, as repenting at the hour of death,
their salvation is sure, because they are within the Church. So is that Maxim
to be taken, Came. de Ecc. p. 272. in sol
Extra Ecclesiam non est Salas; None can be saved who are every way without tho
Church, Visible and Invisible; as all perished who were not in Noah's Ark. Mr.
Blake Cov. cap. 30 in sinc.
As for those who deny any being of a Church universal visible, I would learn
of them into what particular Church the Eunuch was received, and by Baptism
actually and solemnly admitted; or whether he was still no Churchmember, but
an alien and stranger to the Commonwealth of Israel, not admitted to the
Church? And to what particular Congregation the Prophets, Apostles and
Evangelists joined themselves by Covenant?

4 There is then a necessity of joining our selves to some particular visible
Church; but it is not Necessitas medii, sed praecepti; It is not such a
necessity that all are damned who are not within some visible Church. August.
For Augustine truly says, There be many Wolves within the Church, and many
Sheep without. But if the Lord offer opportunity, all are obliged by his
Commandment of confessing Christ before men, to join themselves to some
Visible-church: for all Denying, is Idolatry, Tert. de Idolol. c. 22.
in Tertullians judgment. And he denies Christ, that is not with him, or for
him. So our Savior teaches, Luke 11.23. He that is not with me, is against
me; and he that gathers not with me, scatters; that is, He that declares
not himself to be on my side, is against me. There are no Neuters; for there is
no man but he is either Christ's or Satan's. Eng. Annot on Mat. 12.30.
As in war, he that sighteth not for his Prince is an enemy. As they which are
to gather in their Masters harvest, if they neglect it, are scatterers and
destroyers; so they that will not defend Christ's honor, at least profess and
confess it (wherein they can) betray his cause, and are enemies. Yet there is
a fellowship with the visible church internal, of hidden Believers. In the
Romish Babel this is sufficient for salvation, Necessitate medii. Rutherford
Due Right of Presbytery. c. 5. Sect 5. p. 78
But they want opportunity to join themselves to the reformed visible
churches; yet do they sin in the want of profession of the Truth, and in not
witnessing against the Antichrist; which is answerable to an adjoining
themselves to a visible church. And so those who do not profess the faith of
the true visible church (the Lord affording opportunity) deny Christ before
men. And this external fellowship is necessary to all, Necessitate Praecepti:
though the Lord graciously pardon this, as an infirmity in his own, who for
fear of cruel persecution, often dare not confess Christ.

CHAP. V. We are bound to Hearing in our own determined Congregations,
Necessitate Praecepti.
1. SEcondly, Howsoever we be not bound unto hearing in our own Congregations,
Necessitate Medii, as if Gods grace were tied to the Means this way: Yet
Necessitate Praecepti, we are, if we consider Gods Commandment: In no other way
can we expect the Lords ordinary presence, promise, and acceptance: See Heb.
13.17. 1 Thessalonians. 5.12. It is a curse, to be as Sheep having no shepherd, Matthew.
9.36. that is, scattered abroad, not knowing where to get food, and exposed to
many Seducers, Ps. 119.176 Jer. 50.17. Zach. 13.7
as people without a Pastor. The^ (...) ^^deed a Scattering enforc^ (...) men
are driven by viol^ (...) Gods service, but that is not the scattering meant by
our Savior; but a voluntary straying, when people are not willing only, but
love to wander; as Jer. 14.10. a wandering out of self-will; not a corporal, but
a spiritual straying, by which men of themselves wander from God, Psalm. 58.3
and go astray from the way of Truth and Life; from those ways and courses
that God has prescribed them in his Word, and directed them unto by his
Spirit: as they, Psalm. 14.3.

2. It is the Duty of all conscientious Christians to set themselves under some
particular Minister as their Pastor, and to hear him constantly. Ames. de
Consc. l. 4. c. 24. quaes. 1
Dr. Ames proves that this Ordinance of the Lord is the Duty of all Christians;
namely, to settle themselves under some one particular Pastor, and to join
themselves to a determined or particular Church.

1 Because it is Christ's institution, Matthew. 18.17. in which there is a
necessity, Non Praecepti tantum, sed and Medii: He adds five Reasons more,
which for brovitice sake I omit.

2. Because every Flock must be under an Overseer, Acts 20.28. and 18.23. If we
be the flock of Christ, we must have a shepherd, who shall feed us in Christ's
stead.

3 Because our perfection and edification depends ordinarily upon our
particular Teacher, to which end Pastors were given, Ephesians. 4.11, 12. and
particular Guides, as Philip to the Eunuch.

4. Because Pastors are to preach constantly, 2 Timothy 4, 2. especially on the
Lords Day they should not omit to preach Forenoon and Afternoon. Ames. de
Consc. l. 4. c. 33. quaest. 4.
Dr. Ames notes, that to the Sanctification of that Day, exercises of public
Worship in a Church, well constituted, and enjoying her Liberty, ought to be
held forth forenoon and afternoon. Half the Lords Day spent in Religion will
not suffice to discharge from the second due attendance on that Day: Sabb. Red.
part 1 c. 11. Sect. 5.
For if the Law of Nature determine for every worky-day of man's life, at least
a double attendance upon God, as necessary unto all men, much more on the Lords
day. The continuance being not here determined, the service may be so suddenly
dispatched, as nothing but want of will and Devotion can be assigned, as the
cause of not tendering that double proportion on the most busy day, that any
man has in his whole life.

3. Furthermore, reverend Mr. Collings proves by four Arguments, Vindiciae
Minist. Evang. quaest. 5. p. 82.
that it is the duty of private Christians, who have set themselves under
particular Pastors, not to neglect them when they do preach. For,

1. To what purpose made they choice of him?

2. He has a particular oversight over them committed to him, Act. 20.28. 1
Pet. 5.2. 1 Thessalonians. 5.12 Hebr. 13.17, 14.

3 A Pastors more especial tie to his own Flock then another, ( Act. 20.28. 1
Pet. 5.2.) argues that they are more especially tied to him, and that he is
appointed to feed them.

4 Christians own Pastors have a more special dispensation of the grace of God
given them to themward, Ephesians. 3.2. Of which more fully, Chap. 6.

Now then, lay these together; Is it the duty of private Christians, who have
set themselves under their particular Pastors, to attend divine Ordinances on
the Lords day, delivered forenoon and afternoon? But see the times, Dr. Harrie,
Peter's Enlargm. in Prefat.
Reader! It is lamentable to consider the little use that is made of Gods
Ordinances in most places; Preachers too often (I tremble to speak it, or write
it) be used like Posthorses, spurred on till they be spent, and then a fresh
is called for; in the mean time the world sits still, and thinks to be saved for
hearing. Reader, mourn for this, weep for this; for this boads a Judgment; the
Lord will surely reckon for the blood of his servants, spent, Nazian. ad Bas.
as well as shed. See Nazianzen his complaint, Epist. 31.

CHAP. VI. God assigns unto every ordinary Pastor a portion of his people, to
be instructed by him.
1. THirdly, Rav. in voce Gratia. number. 3. did. 3.
A Ministers Calling is termed in Scripture, The Grace of God; as Romans 1.5.
Ephesians. 3.2. And it is so termed in a twofold respect:

1. Because the designing to the Ministerial Calling is of grace.

2. And the faculty qualifying us for it, is from the free favor of God.

The Ministerial Function then has these two properties:

1 It is founded in the free pleasure of God, Gal. 1.15.

2. All the sufficiency which enableth any man to dispense the mysteries of the
Gospel, it is the mere grace of God, 1 Cor. 15.10. From these premises I
infer, That as God gives Ministers their Calling, so also their people, toward
whom he will bless their labors. It is true, the care of all the Churches was
laid on the Apostle; 2 Cor. 11.28
but not so now: for wheresoever God now gives a Ministerial Calling, there he
gives a people, of whom the Minister may say, Toward you grace is given me of
God.

Bains ad locum.
This is Mr. Bains his observation on Ephesians. 3.2. That Christians own Pastors
have a more special dispensation of the grace of God given them to them-ward.
Whence he concludes; This should instruct people to depend especially on those
who are set over them, for those are they who are furnished from God in an
eminent manner with grace toward them: They are foolish Pigeons that know not
their own Lockers; and foolish sheep that know not their shepherds voice; and
foolish people that know not their Minister.

2. Hence then it is evident, That God assigns to every ordinary Minister a
portion of his people. This is the difference between Ordinary and
Extraordinary Pastors. For ordinary Ministers, the Lord commanded to fasten
them to certain places; Ordain Elders in every City, Tit. 1.5. Conc. Chalce. l.
c. 6. An. 451. Epaunen. c. 2. An. 515. Megunt. c. 22. An. 829. Tribur. c. 27
An. 895.
And in the Council of Chalcedon it is decreed, Nemo ordinetur absolute; Let
none be Ordained at large, lest he prove a wandering Jonathan. Caranza adds
three other Councels, that decreed a wandering Levite not to be admitted into
communion: the reason is rendered by the Canonists, Ne dicatur, Mendicat in
palaestra infelix Clericus. Every Minister then must be separated, authorized,
and have allotted to him a certain portion of people, which may be instructed
by him: which the diminutive (...), not (...), may seem to insinuate in the
Scripture. Now as God gives to every Pastor his several Flock, so he will that
we take pains in leading them. We must not (...), be Bishops in other men's
Diocesses, lest God say, Who requires this at your hand? When the Lord
lights Candles, he finds candlesticks on which to set them; and when he
gives a Calling, he gives a people amongst whom this Function should be
exercised, in whose consciences (unless they be scared) he gives his Minister
a peculiar report.

3. Indeed if any come to our Congregations, as wanting their spiritual food by
the Word and Sacraments, then it is good for a Minister to be like a young
woman (says Mr. Bains) so full brested that she can both feed her own child
fat, Bains ubi supra.
and lend a draught to her neighbors. Ruther. Due Right of Presbyt. c. 4.
Sect. 5. p. 185
Especially the Seals of the Covenant are not to be denied to approved
Professors of another Congregation: for we hold, all who profess the Faith of
Christ to be Members of the Visible Church, though they be not members of a
visible congregation; and that the Seals of the Covenant should not be denied
them. But to let an itch of vain glory carry us so far, as to affect this that
comes from without, and be cold at home; this is to forget where our grace
principally lies. Ministers are Stars, and the best shine is in our own
Sphere. This I say not, as if it were not lawful in some cases, to lend our
labor elsewhere. For (due circumstances considered) we may say as he, Act. 16.9
Come help us in Macedonia. And it was a custom in the Primitive times (as
Clemens testifies) that if any Presbyter or Bishop came to another, Constit.
l. 2. c. 48.
they shall be entreated to preach, because it falls out, as Christ says,
Mat. 13.57
A Prophet is not without honor, save in his own Country, and in his own house.

Pastors then do warrantably perform Pastoral Acts in other Congregations
beside their own: Mr. Rutherford ubi supra. p. 204.


1 Because we hold, that by Calling or Ordination, a Minister is made a
Pastor; by Election only he is restrained to be ordinarily the Pastor of his
Flock.

2 A Pastor is a Pastor of the Catholic Church, though he be not a Catholic
Pastor of the Catholic Church, as were the Apostles.

4. Neither must this be taken, as if we would clack you (as reverend Bains
phraseth it) altogether under our wings, or sought further property, then we
have from the Lord; but it is your good that does enforce us to speak it; for
till you know your Pastors set over you, the Wolf does threaten you. And look,
that as it is in Marriage: it is not the having of a husband, which makes a
wife free from all underminers of chastity, but the loving her husband: So in
this Marriage of Pastor and People; it is not the having of a Preacher, which
does secure you from sin, satan, or seducement; but the acknowledging of him,
and depending on him in the Lord. So much did the Heathen by the light of
Nature reverence their Musties of old, the Slaves of their Idol Gods, that
sometimes they called their Priests by the name of Gods, Strabo Geogr. l. 10 p.
471 d.
as Strabo reports. And among Christians, I never read nor heard of an happy
Church without a good Guide, and a dependence on him, and obedience to him. It
is a far less sin to be unlearned then unteachable, says Agustine. August.
contra Academ lib. 3. c. 7.
O be taught then, not to depart from your determined place of worshipping the
Lord; for in it, God has the highest honor, and returns unto you the highest
blessings, by the dispensation of the grace of God, which is given your Pastor
to you-ward. Ephesians. 3.2.
Be not wilful: for the more wilful, especially upon deliberation, the more
wicked.

CHAP. VII. Separation from determined Church Communion, is reproved, 1 Cor.
1.12. and 3.4.
1. FOurthly, This practice is evidently reproved, 1 Cor. 1.12. For in the
church of Corinth, which Paul had planted, Apollos had watered, and which God
had blessed, and given increase unto; yet even here is church-separation. One
stands for Paul, another for Apollos, another for Cephas. Weeds, they will
spring up, though Paul never planted them, nor Apollos watered them, to be sure
God never blessed them; and yet they will find an increase. And 1 Cor. 3.4. the
Apostle tacitly insinuates an Argument a Minori ad Majus: Culverw. of Schism.
If it were a gross and carnal thing to side with Paul, or to glory in
Apollos, then much more to side with such as of ordinary or inferior alloy. You
may see how he makes it his (...), to beat down this over-high thought which
they had of such as indeed deserved esteem and double honor. For to say, I am
of Paul, I am of Apollos, they are the words of such as gloried in the several
gifts and diversity of excellencies which they had in preaching the Gospel: and
thus it was, one likes the powerful plainness of Paul, another the ample
plenty and variety of Apollos, a third the solidity and perspicuity of Cephas.

2. You see then the Corinthians vanity, and in it our propensity to glory in
men for their gifts, and that because we are carnal, which is the Apostles
censure, painted with a stinging Interrogation, Are ye not carnal? In so much
that the Apostle, 1 Cor. 1.13. gives three Reasons why such church-separation
should be shunned.

1 Because Christ seems by that means to be divided and torn in pieces, Eng.
Ann. in loc.
who cannot be the head of two diverse and disagreeing bodies, himself being
but one. Is Christ divided?

2 Because they cannot without injury to God, so depend on men, as on Christ;
which thing, no doubt they do, who allow whatsoever some man speaks, even for
his person sake; approving one selfsame Gospel, being uttered by one man, and
disliking it being uttered by another man; Was Paul crucified for you?

3 Because it is the form and end of Baptism to make a promise to Christ alone,
calling on also the Name of the Father and the Holy Ghost; therefore if a man
depend on some certain Teachers, and despise others, he forsakes Christ: for
if he held Christ his only Master, he would hear him teaching by whomsoever:
Were ye baptized in the name of Paul?

3 Overmuch dotage then upon any conceived excellency of Holiness, Learning,
Eloquence, or the like, without a special eye to Gods commandment, has ever
been the occasion of greatest Errors in the world. Mr. Mede on Genesis 3.13
Satan under this mask uses to blear our eyes, and with this bait to inveigle
our hearts, that he might securely bring us to his lure. Genesis 3.1.
It was the mask of the Serpents Wisdom and Sagacity above the rest of the
beasts of the field, whereby he brought to pass our first parents ruin. The
admirable wisdom of the long lived Fathers of the elder world, having been for
so many Ages as Oracles to their Offspring, grown even to a People and Nation
while they yet lived, was the ground of the ancient Idolatry of Mankind, whilst
they supposed that those, to whom for wisdom they had recourse, being living,
could not but help them being dead. This we may learn out of Hesiod: Hesiod.
Oper and Dic^, l. ^ ver. 123.
The men (says he) of the golden age, being once dead, became, -- (...).
(...).
They became Godlings and Patrons of mortal men, as if they knew their good and
evil works. So the opinion of the blessed Martyrs superlative glory in heaven,
was made the occasion of the new found Idolatry of Christians, wherewith they
are for the greater part yet overwhelmed. And the esteem which Peter had above
the rest of the Apostles in regard of Chiefdome, even in the Apostles times,
was abused by the old Deceiver to install the Man of sin. This made Saint Paul
to say, The Mystery of iniquity was even then working: 2 These. 2.7. Gal. 2.11.
etc.
and therefore labored, as fat as he could to prevent it, by as much
depressing Peter, as others exalted him. Nay, he puts us all in mind of the
story of the Serpents beguiling Eve, that her mis-hap might be a warning to
all, 2 Corinthians 11.2, 3.

And to conclude, Have not Papists, when they would get Disciples, learned this
of the Devil, to possess them first with an opinion of superlative Learning,
Holiness, and other Gifts, in their Doctors, surpassing any of ours? I will
say no more of this, but that we ought so to prize and admire the Gifts and
Abilities, which God has bestowed upon men, that the Pole Star of his sacred
Word may ever be in our eye.

CHAP. VIII. The Lord commands to worship him orderly: which is not observed
in indermined Church Communion.
1. FIfthly, Order is a thing so highly pleasing the Lord, as the three Persons
in the blessed Trinity have put themselves in Order, to show how well they love
it: And order is a thing so nearly concerning us, Mat. 28.19. 1 John 5.7. Zech.
10.7
as break Order once, and break both your Staves (says God in Zachary) both
that of Beauty, and that of Bands. The Staff of Beauty; for no (...), no
manner of decency or comeliness without it, but all out of fashion. The staff
of Bands; for no (...), no kind of Steadiness or constancy, but all loose
without it: Genesis 1.2. (...)
All falls back to the first Tohu and Bohu; for all is Toha (empty and void) if
God fill not in Order; all is Bohu, a disordered rude chaos of confusion, if
Christ order it not. Every body falls to be doing with every thing, and so
nothing done; nothing well done, I am sure. Every man then should, whatever his
Gifts be, order his Place and Standing in Divine Worship by Christ assigned
him. This is judged needful even in secular matters. Write one never so fair an
hand, if he have not Orderly the Calling of a public Notary, his Writing is
not authentical: Be one never so good a Lawyer, if he be not ordered to be a
Judge, he can give no definitive Sentence. Scot. l. 2. Sent. d. 2. q. 12. n. 3.
Aquin. 22.26.1.0.
The Order of Nature is prefixed by God, and is necessarily to be observed by
every Natural cause, says one Schoolman: And wheresoever there is a beginning,
there must be some Order, says another.

2. Ignorance of the Truth, as Lactantius notes well, makes incertam
labentemque sententiam, an uncertain and slippery assertion. Will Worship is no
Religious Act, because it is not directed by Divine Order. Neither are good
Intentions enough. John 4.23
We must be certain of Gods revealed will to order us in his Worship, otherwise
we cannot do it in faith. Now this is Will Worship, to make any thing answer
for Gods Worship, to our selves, of our selves, without Order from God, and
warrant of his Word. Amos 5.26. Colos. 2.22. 2. Sam. 16.16
We must be Passive, not Active here. Man's Devise and Self-wisdome at the best,
pretend what he will, is no warrant for Gods Worship; especially Amphibolies,
Equivocations, Mental Reservations, or the like: for howsoever they may silence
the cry of a carnal conscience, yet they are but shifts and shuffles, which
have no ground from Gods Word. Though Israel had builded Temples in Dan and
Bethel, Hos. 8.14.
to the memory of God, yet the Lord calls it, a forgetting of him their Maker.
God will be worshipped only by the rule of his Word. Notwithstanding the
dignity of Adams excellent condition in Innocence, the variety and plenty of
provision he had without any cost or pains of his own, he was not to live an
idle life, and without order. And though he were to work on the Week days
without sweat or weariness, yet on the Sabbath (by Gods example, if not by his
command) he was to rest from that work, to give himself more intentively to the
Worship of God, and communion with God; which he could not so well do, if he
did any thing else at the same time. It is not then as Anaxagoras said, Lactan.
l. 3 c. 9
(and our Atheists and Epicures do) Man was born to see the Sun, and look unto
the Heavens; but to seek, know, and serve the Lord his Master. He not only
gives life, but means also, by which we may orderly, distinctly, Act. 17.27.
observing due cicumstances, come to know him.

. 3. A thing then may be good in the substance, and yet in the Circumstances
(Time, Place, Person, etc.) unwarrantable. 2 Kin. 12.3 Deuteronomy. 12.11
As the Israelites worshipping in the High Places; the Duty was good, but the
place where it was performed, was prohibited: so the Duty of Will Worship in
the Indeterminate Service of God, in a Church enjoying her freedom, the
Schoolman tells us, Aquin. 12.73.7.0.
That the Circumstance aggravateth the Sin. In matters that concern God, who
is so fit to be consulted with, as he whom God sets over us, and ordains
for the self-same purpose? In the order of the Universe, not only is the Kind
or Species intended, but also the individuals in the principal parts thereof,
says Scotus. Scot. in Sent l. 2. d. 3. q. 7. ad 5. Aquin. 1.47.3.0, and 1
106.3.2 ^.
And all things created by God, have an order to God, and mutually to
themselves, says Aquinas: His reason is, Because all Order depends on the
Will of God. Hence I infer, That oftentimes the circumstance of an Action marrs
the substance; and that in divine matters, we must not only look that the body
of our service be sound, but that the clothes be sit. The Princes of the
Philistines had before given their voices what should be done with the Ark of
God, 1 Samuel 5.10
yet nothing is done without the direction and assent of those whom they
accounted Sacred. Nature it self sends us in divine things to those persons
whose Calling is divine. It is either distrust, or presumption, or contempt
that carries us our own ways in spiritual matters, without advising with them,
whose lips God has appointed to preserve knowledge. The Philistines desired to
be directed by their Priests and Diviners in the matter of their Oblation; 1 Samuel 6.4
What shall be the Trespass Offering (say they) which we shall return unto
God? They knew well that it were bootlesse for them to offer what they listed.
Pagans can teach us, how unsafe it is to walk in the ways of Religion without
a determined and certain Guide. This is likewise confirmed by the custom and
Canons of the ancient Church: For it was decreed in the Council at Eliberin,
about the year 310. Conc. Eliber. cap. 21.
That if any man (without a lawful cause) stayed three Lords Days from his
Parish Church, his punishment was, that he should be so long time excluded from
Christian Assemblies. Moreover Coriolanus cites out of Burchard another Canon
of the same Council, in which it was determined, That they who came seldom to
their Parish Church, should not at their approach to death, be admitted into
Communion, before they brought forth fruits meet for repentance.

4 In vain is comfort expected from God, Be Hall, Contemp. 81
if we consult not with his particular Vicegerent, that has oversight over
us: For David in his distress for Ziklag, 1 Samuel 30.7
spoiled by the Amalekites, called for Abiather; he could not live in the Court
of Achish a Heathen King, without his Seer and overseer. Hence Gad is called
David's Seer, 2 Samuel 24.11. Ravanel. in Videre.
Heman the Kings Secr, 1 Chronicles. 25.5. Jeduthun the Kings Seer, 2 Chronicles. 35.15.
because they put their Kings principally and particularly in mind of those
things which appertained to the service and worship of the Lord. And if David a
Prophet, a man after Gods own heart, had need of a particular Seer; should not
mean and ordinary Christians much more attend to the directions and
instructions of their particular Guides, allotted to them, and allowed by the
Lord, who is the God of Order, See English Annotat. in 1 Cor. 14.40.
and not the Author of Confusion; and has commanded all things to be done
decently and in order?

CHAP. IX. We are bound to hearing in our particular Congregations by Christ's
Doctrine and Example.
1. SIxthly, Gods covenant indeed is general with all his Creatures; Genesis
9.9.18 Jer. 33.30
more particular with Man, yet more with his Church, most special with his
Elect; and in his Church with his Ministers, Mal. 2.5 Now this Covenant with
Gods Ministers and Messengers is everlasting, in all ages and generations. Yet
God, Covenant abrogates not his own Right, Power and Sovereignty; nor abates
the role and Authority of his Law, nor their deviations and corruptions; nay,
his Curse upon sinful Priests and Pastors does not annihilate or evacuate that
Covenant. In regard of this Covenant it is, Mat. 23.2.
that our Savior intimates that all Teachers sit in Moses Seat, as Expounders
of Gods Will, no less then the Scribes and Pharisees. Engl. Ann. in locum.
For (...) imports the Office of a Teaching the Word of God, Law and Gospel;
because while men taught, they were wont to sit. Suidas therefore interprets
(...) by (...), a sitting or tarrying; because God appointed Teachers of the
Law, therefore Christ would have them to be heard, though their Persons were
wicked. All whatsoever they bid you observe, that observe and do. While Pastors
have a Calling to preach and deliver the Truth, Mal. 2.7
they must be heard, though not imitated, where they practice not. Chrysostom. Hom.
73.
Thus our Savior speaks (says Chrysostom) All whatsoever they bid you
observe, that observe and do, lest he should leave the Hearers any occasion of
Disobedience, to their greater condemnation, or contempt of their Ministry whom
he should send after. In the Ministry the Ordinance of God is to be considered;
Sive Paulus, sive Judas baptizet, Christus peccatum lavat, absolvit, and delet.
De Bapt. Christi. Inter opera Cypr.
Whether Paul or Judas baptize, Christ washes away, forgiveth, and puts
away sin. De Bapt. Chr. Cypr.

2 Our Savior when he had cleansed the ten Lepers, commanded them to show
themselves to the Priests, Luke 17.14. which should teach us Humility and
subjection toward our Pastors, Cypr. l. 3 Ep. 9.
Sacerdotem adhuc appellabat, quem scicbat esse sacrilegum: For Christ yet
called him Priest, whom he knew to be sacrilegious, says Cyprian. Our Savior
likewise, who could as easily have taught Paul immediately what he would have
him to do, Act. 9.10. etc.
would yet send him to Ananias (Ananias as ignorant of Gods will herein, as
Saul at present, and starting at, and declining the office enjoined him) to
cofirm the particular authority of the Ministry of particular men set over us
in the Lord; Romans 1.16
and to teach all Hearers to attend unto it, as the very Ordinance and power of
God unto salvation. Christ could likewise, cadem opera, have instructed the
Centurion by the Angel; Act. 10.3. etc.
but he caused him to send (nominatim) for Peter to Joppa, to come and enform
him for the same end, and left him not to the instruction (...), of one at
random.

3. But here once for all, lest we should be misunderstood: We abhor the
Doctrine of Bellarmine, Bellarm. de Cleric. l. 2. c. 8.
who teaches, Cum Pastor ordinarius and aliquis alias qui praedicat non
Vocatus, contraria docent, debet omnino populus Pastorem suum potias sequi,
quam illum alterum qui non est Pastor; etiamsi forte contingeret, ut Pastor
erraret: When an ordinary Pastor and another who is not called to be a Pastor,
do teach things contrary, the people ought rather to follow their own Pastor
then the other who is no Pastor, though it fall out that the Pastor do err.

In like manner we detest the Doctrine of Tolet the Jesuit, Tolet. de
Instruct. Sacerd. l. 4. c. 3 Sect. 6
who says, Si Rusticus citra articulos credat suo Episcopo proponenti aliquod
Dogma Haereticum, meretur credendo, licet sit error: If a Country man, beside
Christian Articles, do believe his Bishop broaching an Heresy, he meriteth by
believing, though it be an Error.

Furthermore, Bellarm. de Romans Pont. l. 4. c. 5
it is a fearful Doctrine which Bellarmine teaches, Si autem Papa erraret
praecipiendo vitia, vel prohibendo virtutes, teneretur Ecclesia credere vitia
esse bona, and virtutes malas: If the Pope should err by commanding Vices, and
forbidding Virtues, the Church were bound to believe, that Vices were good, and
Virtues evil.

And we condemn the intolerable presumption of the Council of Trent, that
seals up their Canons with so many Anathema's to them who dissent from their
Errors. Yet not only did their Schoolman, William of Occam, Occam part 1. l.
5. c. 28.
each the contrary in effect to all these, Si Papa and maxim celebres Episcopi
incidant in Haeresin, ad Catholicos divoluta est potestas omnis judicandi; if
the Pope and the principal Bishops of the Christian world do fall into Heresy,
the power of all Ecclesiastical judgment is divolved to the remaining Catholic
Clergy: but also Cyprian, Cecili^s, Cypr. Ep. 68
Polycarpus, and others, writing to the Clergy in Spain, persuade them to
separate themselves from those Bishops who fell in time of persecution, and
denied the Faith.

4. Now, it is much to be admired, that it should be confessed in Thesi, but
denied by the world in Hypothesi, that whosoever opposes, despises, or
persecuteth the servants of Christ, they rise up to oppose Christ himself.
Luke 10.16 Acts 9.4 1 These. 4.8
What has the particular opposed Pastor done contrary to the general confessed
Thesis or Divine Position? What has he assumed what the Lord has not put upon
him? If ye take offense at the discharge of his Office, it is Gods doing, who
fearfully and frequently threatens his neglect. But men think they are not so
silly and unreasonable as their Minister would make them. God does not reveal
his Truth (say they) only or chiefly to the Learned: They have the teaching of
the Spirit as well as their Pastors. But alas, that men should be so ignorant
against both Scripture and Experience! Indeed God changes the Will on a
sudden, but he does not infuse knowledge, especially of difficult points, on a
sudden. If he do, John 5.39. Act. 17.2.11 Psalm 1.2.
why are we commanded to search and study the Scriptures, and meditate on them
day and night? Did they ever know any that was suddenly made so wise, except it
were only in his own conceit? O cursed pride, that will not suffer one godly
man of many, to know that he is so ignorant; and that knowledge cannot be had
so easily! But I expect not that the more silly ignorant Professors should
apprehend this or any other Truth, though it be delivered never so plainly or
evidently. August. de Trin. l. 6. c. 1
It is Augustines ruled case, Nullus hominum ita locutus est, ut in omnibus ab
omnibus intelligeretur: No man spoke so plain, that in all things he was
understood by all men. Pride ever thinks it cannot err, and that rather all the
world is dark, then it self blind. The proud Pharisees would not admit that
Christ should preach any thing worthy of admiration; John 7.47. 1 John 3 12
therefore they concluded, that their Officers were deceived. Pride makes men
so blind and stupid, that they cannot be sensible of any the most excellent
graces in those they hate. It was the Pharisees proud opinion of themselves,
that caused them to despise others, dissenting from their Impiety and
unbelief. Aug. Conf. lib. 10. c. 12
Rideat me ista dicentem, qui illa non sentit, and ego doleam ridentem me.

CHAP. X. We are bound to the Duty of determined Church Communion by the
custom of Apostolic and Pimitive times.
. 1. SEventhly; And yet we have for the same Point, the churches customs clear
enough, which has ever been counted to have solid Authority. Every Society,
besides their Laws in Books, have their customs also in practice; and these
not to be taken up or laid down at every man's pleasure. We may not reject that
custom: Tertul. de Vel. Virgin. c. 2 Pandect. 1. Tit. 3. de Lege 35.
which we cannot condemn, says Tertullian. The civil Law says, Imo magnae
authoritatis hoc jus habetur; quod in tantum probatum est, ut non fuerit
scripto comprehendere necesse. Customs are of so great authority, that men
remember them without book, and writ them not as they do their Laws or
Statutes. Now as every Society, so the Church, besides her Laws, has her
customs too. I add, that the Apostles and their chuches had their customs. For
about thirty years after Christ's Ascension, the Apostle pleads custom; We
(that is, the Apostles) have no such custom, 1 Cor. 11.16
neither the Churches of God. If so few years were enough to make a custom,
shall it not much more be a custom after above Sixteen hundred and fifty years?
A custom is susceptible of more and less; the longer it runs, the more
strength it gathers. Consuetudo etiam in civilibus rebus pro Lege suscipitur,
Tertull. de Cor. Milit. c. 4.
cum desicit Lex; it is Tertullians Rule: Custom is received for a Law, even
in civil businesses, where there is no Law. Moreover, as the church has
customs, so stands upon them, and fears not to repeat them. Moses, as a
Lawgiver, one would think, would be all for Law, yet he is positive full for
custom too. Deuteronomy. 4.32.
Ask now of the days that are past which were before thee, since the day that
God created man upon the earth; and ask from the one side of heaven unto the
other, whether there has been any such thing. Job is for it too; Enquire of
the former age, Job 8.8, etc.
and prepare thy self to the search of their fathers (for we are but of
yesterday) shall not they teach thee? The Prophets do the same; for Jeremy
says, Stand ye in the ways, and see, Jer. 6.16.
and ask for the old paths, where is the good way, and walk therein. To all
these agreeable is that of the Fathers, took up in the first Nicene Council,
and which ever since has been the churches cry, (...), Let old customs
prevail. Thus you see custom has been counted a sound allegation, from the
beginning of the world.

2 Now, that determined church communion was the custom of the Primitive
christians, appears,

First, The servants of God were all with one accord in Solomon's porch, Act.
5.12. Diodat. in loc.
There was their appointed place or ordinary meeting, there to preach to the
People. None among them presumed to go to any other place to hear any other
Teachers: Engl. Ann. in locum
None among them presumed to forsake their own public Assembly; or in neglect
thereof, to frequent other Congregations; much less any private Conventicle.
Yea, the place of their meeting showed their constant resolution, to testify
the truth of Jesus, from which no fear or danger could then deterr them. The
Rulers of the Synagogue, Act. 13.15, sent to desire Paul and his company to
speak a word of exhortation, before the Apostle opened his mouth. For as no man
might presume in those days to preach without lawful Authority, and calling
thereto by the Governors by God appointed; it being the Doctrine and practice
of the Gnostics (the most hateful of all Heretics) that the Ministeral
function might be exercised by any man: Iren. l. 4 c. 5
So neither were Congregations then without some Government; for in every
Synagogue it appears there were some Rulers, Eng. Ann. on Jer. 2.39
who restrained extravagant gadders, that did so god to and fro, that like
backsliding Israel, they often took a new way in Gods service. Anarchical
licentiousness is a late sprung up Mushroom.

3 Next, hear how Clemens Romanus, Clem. Romans Ep. ad Corinth. p. 2. and 73.
the ancientest (and therefore a faithful Witness) of all those whom we call
Fathers, confirms this custom. The main scope of his Epistle is to exhort the
Corinthians, a Factious people, to submit themselves to their own Pastors,
(...). His Argument whereby he persuades them to this Duty, is, beside other,
Page 57.
(...): Lawful and laborious (for of such he speaks) Ministers cannot be
rejected, but wrongfully and injuriously. Thereafter he asks this Question,
What kind of men are they that forsake or despise their Overseers and
Ministers? Page 59
He answers, (...); only the abominable, and full of all wickedness. Then he
adds, Page 61
(...); Your separation from him perverted many. Whereas on the contrary he
tells his Corinthians; That the height (of grace and glory) unto which love
(toward their own overseers) advances, Page 64
(...), it is unexpressible. Now all this, and much more, he alleges to
confirm his former propoposition, Page 2 ct 73
(...). Submit your selves obediently unto your own Ministers.

Has then this ill custom of forsaking our Ministers, in the discharge of
their function, lasted long? Be Hall Vows cent. 2. Sect. 98.
I say as our English Seneca, it is more then time it were abrogated; age is an
aggravation to sin. Heresy or abuse, if it be gray headed, deserves sharper
opposition. To say, I will do ill, because I have done so, is perilous and
impious presumption. Continuance can no more make any wickedness safe, then
the Author of sin, no Devil.

Sozom. Hist l. 1. c. 14. in fin.
4. Lastly, Sozomen writes, that it was a custom in Alexandria, that though
one Pastor had the oversight of the rest, yet every particular Pastor did
govern their particular churches, and gathered their people unto their several
Congregations. Eus. de vit. Co^. l. 3. c. 63 Soz. lib. 2. c. 30.
Eusebius reports, that Constantine the Great, published a Law, that no
Separatists, and heretics should assemble themselves or meet together either
publicly or privately in any place, but in their Parochial churches, and with
their appointed and ordinary Pastor: and that Historian says, that by that Law
the very memory of most of those Sectaries was forgotten and extinguished. This
noble Act of Constantine is in effect mentioned also by Sozomen. The same
Sozomen reports, that Theodosius the Great decreed (having first torn the
Petitions of Sectaries) that they should not assemble together, Sozo. lib. 7.
cap. 12.
but in the Orthodoxe congregations; much less that they should profess their
Het^rodoxe Doctrine, or Ordain Pastors: but should be banished from their
habitations, disgraced by some Infamy, and not be partakers of common
privileges and Favors with others. In that Panegyrical Speech, Eusebius. Hist.
l. 10. cap. 4. circ. med.
mentioned by Eusebius, this custom is not only confirmed, but hyperbolically
demonstrated, to be immediately subordinate to the power of the High Priest of
our profession Christ Jesus; so that I need not any more to commemorate the
power that a faithful ordinary Pastor has over his charge and people. This I
have so briefly intimated, not only because they that are in Authority may, and
must occasionally mention their Authority; 1 Cor. 9.1
for so did the Apostles: but also that the Revilers of the Ministers of
Christ, with whom this vicious age abounds, may know what power Ministers
had, both in the Apostles time, and for many hundred years after (as they may
read in holy Cyprian and others) even when Ministerial censures were far more
rigid then now they are, Mr Baxters Rest, part 2 ^ 6.
and when no Magistrate did second them; yea when it was an hazard to their
lives to be known christians: And yet now, when christianity is in credit, even
those that seem Religious, do judge Christ's discipline to be Tyranny and proud
domination.

5. Custom then may be alleged against them that contend against Parochial
church communion. No reasoning with the contentious; it will be to small
purpose. None so ready a way to stop their mouths, as custom. The Apostle
using it against the contentious [If any man seem to be contentious] teaches
us to use it against the like: Specially, 1 Cor. 11.16
if the Matter be by nature (as this is) of circumstance and outward Order; for
a wrangling wit will elude all use of Reason. It is well observed of the
Philosopher, Arist. phys. l. 2. c. 2 and aliis sape
that in Moral Matters, men may not look for Mathematical proofs; the nature of
the Subject will not bear them. If not in moral, much less in Ritual; they of
all other, are least susceptible of a demonstrative Reason. The Apostle saw
this, and therefore resolves all into the churches practice, by custom
confirmed in this kind: enough of it self, to show that the Churches custom
shall ever be of force, to overrule such as are conten^ious. Yet we do not
compare customs, much less, oppose them to Scripture. We say as Cyprian,
Cypr. Ep. 63
We must not follow the custom of man, but the Verity of God. Exodus 23.2 Jer.
10.3.
Yea, Woe to him that follows a multitude to do Evil. For the customs of the
people are vain. Never any custom against Scripture. Nay, Consuetudo sinc
Veritate, vetustas Erroris est, Cyp. Ep. 74.
says Cyprian again: Custom without Verity, is the oldnesse of Error. By
this then we may see, we have a ground for what we do in Parochial
Church Communion. We do no more then the churches of God. So our ears may here
the voice in Esaias, Isa. 30.21.
behind us, This is the way, walk in it; As you do, you are in the right, and
there hold you.

6. But we do commonly much mistake in one evil custom, concerning the
different Gifts and Qualifications of our Ministers. Now, if unto every one of
us Grace be given according to the measure of the gift of Christ: if all
diversity of grace proceed from the measure of Christ's gift, Ephesians. 4.7.
none ought to repine at another gifts, nor be proud of his own. Council.
Diosp. Can. 6. and 12.
For that were to imagine as Pelagians affirmed, that grace is given according
to Merit of condignity or congruity. But hear what Nazianzene says concerning
this: Naz. Orat. 40. p. 556.
Enquire not what the Authority is, or Dignity of thy Teacher; Any one is
sufficient to instruct thee, who is approved, who is not openly condemned, nor
rejected from the church. Thou who have need to be healed, judge not thy
Judges, nor vilify the dignity of them, by whom thou art cleansed; neither
make a difference between them that beget thee in Christ. One indeed is better
then another, and one is inferior to another; but consider: If two Sealing
Rings, the one of Gold, the other of Iron, each of them having engraven the
Emperors Image, do imprint the Wax; what does the one Seal differ from the
other? No thing at all: Discern then the matter in the Wax, how witty soever
thou art. Thus holy Nazianzen. Ministers indeed have their particular Gifts
given them: To one thus, to another thus. One measure fitteth not every
Minister; 1 Cor. 12.4
but of these some are more Excellent, some less. Paul and Barnabas were not
alike gifted. Act. 14.12
As there are Metals, some of Gold, some of Silver; so gifts in Ministers. Mr
Bain on Ephesians. 3.7.
I conclude this in the words of Mr Bayne: Now, to make no difference, but to
embark all in one bottom, has more good affection, then sound judgment.
Though there be diversities of Gifts in Ministers, some more, some less
excellent, yet we must neither immoderately admire the one, nor underprize the
other. There are people affected both ways; some that think it enough to give
their names to such a man, and to cry down others in comparison of him who has
the most parts; these persons have no true taste of the gifts of him whom they
extol; for the wondering at their person keep^th from tasting the Gifts: As if
a cup of wine were set down, while we look at the curious workmanship of the
cup; so they. Others think so basely of them, as if they could say nothing
worth the hearing. Some on the other hand, because God does all in all, they
make no distinction in the Instrument; but are offend^d with them, that look
more at one then another. Now between these, there is the true way; neither so
to love those who have the greatest, as to despise the other; nor to love the
lesser, so as not to love there more, where God loves more; and to bless him
more (though we do it in all) where he has distributed more Grace and favor.

CHAP. XI. Reason teaches that Indetermined Church Communion is a Carnal
Glorying in the worthiness or Excellency of other Pastors, above their own.
1. EIghthly and lastly. I will add some Reasons: For Faith is a rational Act
of a rational creature. And that is the strongest Faith, which has the
strongest Reasons to prove the Testimony to be valid upon which it rests, and
the clearest apprehension and use of those Reasons. Yea, M. Baxters Rest, part
2 p. 207.
that is the truest Faith which has the truest Reasons truly apprehend and
used. Reason rectified is the Eye of the Soul, and the Guide of our Life. The
use of the Word, and all Ordinances and Providence, is first to rectify
Reason, and thereby the Will, and thereby the Life. I say again, Faith it self
is an Act of Reason: or else it is a brutish Act, and not humane. He that has
the rightest Reason, has the most Grace, Sincerity (and consequently our
Salvation) lies in the strength and prevalency of rectified Reason over the
Flesh, and its interest and desires. I do then resolve my Parenetical
confutation into this Rational conclusion: It is a gross and carnal thing to
glory in the worthiness and excellency of them that dispense the Mysteries of
Salvation. Now, that separation from Parochial Church Communion is guilty of
gross error, apppeareth by these Reasons.

2. First, It seeks to eclipse and obscure the glory of God. God has appointed
all Means and creatures to illustrate and brighten his Glory. He that dares
set it upon the creatures head must needs be guilty of lose Majesty, in an high
degree. This is all the honor left to us, Obsequii Gloria, the honor to obey,
Isa. 42.8. Jer. 9.23.
to be wholly subject to so great and good a God, and to give all glory to him.
Now he that made us, and knows our mold, and fashioned the weakness and
frailty of our Nature, chose to himself so weak an Instrument, that by the few
words of a frail and ignorant man a precious and immortal Soul should be
eternally saved; which most Divines make a greater work, then that of creation:
that so we might be necessitated to look higher, to the powerful hand of God,
that brings so great things to pass. Thus has he chosen, 1 Cor. 1.27, 28.
not only foolish things, and weak things, but things that are not, to bring to
naught things that are. A strange Paradox: and enough to amaze an Aristotle, to
hear of a Non Ens annihilating an Ens. Yet, the things which are not at all in
men's apprehension, do give the light of the glory of God in the face of Jesus
Christ. 2 Cor. 4.6, 7
The Lord could have made his Seraphim, or other Angels, Hebr. 1.24.
even in this sense Ministering Spirits, for the good of them that should be
Heirs of Salvation: but then we should have been took up too much with the
glittering brightness of the creature. Why then do we gaze on Paul, he does
but plant? or glory in Apollos, he does but water? Why do we run to others of
inferior parts in other Congregations? What is this but to oppose the Almighty,
and to counterplot Wisdom it self? Now judge you, whether this be not a gross
and carnal Error, or not.

3. Secondly, It detracts from the Word of God: from its Majesty, and from its
Efficacy. 1. From its Majesty; in that the Word of God is made to stoop to man's
fancy. It is a sign, men never received the love of the Truth, when plain
Truth cannot please them; but it must be set out in such attire, as may best
satisfy their Eye. And unless the Word of God, as the Jews tell us of the
Manna, though fabulously (that whatsoever character or Idea of taste a man shapt
to himself in his fancy, Wisd. 6.20, 21. Ainsw. on Exodus
when he was eating the Manna, it served to the Appetite of the Eater, and was
tempered to every ones liking) have so many several relishes agreeable to every
ones liking, even this, though Angels food, shall be loathed. And surely this
argues a carnal heart. Though Paul and Apollos were of admirable endowments,
yet the Word of God is embraced by some, when coming from one; and neglected,
when published by the other. It was the same Truth, 2 Cor. 1.12
but not in the same dress. Chrysostom tells us of two in his time, a Greek,
Chrysostom.
and a Christian, that were very hot in dispute, whether Paul, or Plato, were
the better Scholar. The Christian he amplifies St. Paul's Wisdom and
Excellency; the Greek scorns him as rude and simple, and his writings not
comparable to Plato's Philosophical and lofty style. The Father he comes in as
it were to moderate; and when he had magnified St. Paul's learning, he seems to
chide the Christian, that he did not yield the other what he would have. Grant
indeed that Paul came in a more plain and unlearned way, (...). That aspertion
was the praise, not the disgrace, but the honor of the Apostles. What! Must
the Royal Law bow to man? Must the Word, which must search the conscience,
tickle the Fancy? Are not these men of itching Ears. And judge you, whether
these be not carnal. 2. From its Efficacy. The Gospel shines with it own
beams, and needs not borrow light from any man; for it is gloriously clothed
with such ornaments as Christ has put upon it: when God had once writ with his
own finger upon the Tables of Stone, they need no humane polishing. But then,
the quickening power of the Spirit must go along with it. Unless the arm of
the Lord be revealed, there is none will believe our report. Esa. 53.1. 1 Cor.
2.4.
The Apostle tells us of a demonstration of the Spirit. Now a demonstration (as
the Philosopher has it) is (...), a native gloss of Truth; which clearly
shows it, Aristot. Analytic. Poster. l. 1. c. 2.
and presently convinces a man, there is no disputing against a Demonstration.
Why then do men attribute so much unto man, as if the Word were a dead letter,
till quickened by his endowments? As if Paul did not only plant, but bless; And
Apollos not only water, but gave the increase; and God in the mean while did
nothing, but stood as a Spectator. When as indeed, Paul is but at the best, the
Lords Echo, that never speaks till it be spoken unto. And are not these
carnal, that glorying in the Endowments of Teachers, take from the Word of God
the Efficacy of it, as well as the Majesty of it.

4. Thirdly, It breeds Schisms and Divisions in the Church. Now,

First, Schisms do hinder the Communion of Saints. For all communion flows
from Union: And Division destroys Union. Some make Unity, the very Form of
being, but sure it tends to the well being of the Church. But when one shall
say, I am of Calvin, and another I am of Luther; when as they might both meet
in the Name of Christian: Nay, when by most ridiculous Dissension (for we have
heard of such a (...)) when one shall say, Culverwel of Schism.
I am of Martin; and another, I am of Luther; whereas they did but divide
Martin Luther, for they were both of his Religion; What must this needs bring,
but a deformity and confusion upon the face of the Church, enough to make up a
Chaos?

Secondly, These schisms and divisions stop the progress of the Gospel. If
Christians would do but as the Cretians custom was, (whence Syncretismus) to
join their divisions against some common enemy, then there would be an happy
Synchristianismus: When the hearts, and tongues, and pens of all them that
profess the same faith in sincerity, would agree among themselves, and wholly
oppose the main adversary; How quickly would the Gospel then flourish, and
every mountain amongst us become a plain, the seven hills amongst the rest? How
should every one, Eunap. in John 8.56
in consideration of so happy a time, have (...), as Eunapius speaks, a sweet
chorus or company of well tuned affections? and a Spirit tripudiating for joy,
as Abraham did (...), when he foresaw Christ's day. But until we forget to say,
I am of Paul, and I am of Apollos, we are not like to hear the joyful
acclamation of Grace, Zech. 4.7.
Grace, in the progress of the Gospel.

Thirdly, Schisms and divisions give great advantage to our enemies to set up
the Kingdom of Satan. Soz. l. 1. cap. 18.
It was the saying of Constantine the Great, Dissension in the Church a is
greater evil then any other. The Church thus becomes militant against herself,
and the Enemy becomes triumphant. The Church then for peace has great
bitterness; Isa. 38.17
Whereupon Bernard plays no less elegantly then morally: Bern. in Cantic.
Ser. 35.
Amaritudo mea amara prius in nece Martyrum; amarior post in conflictu
Haereticorum; amarissima nunc in moribus domesticorum: The bitterness of the
Church first was bitter in the death of Martyrs; next more bitter in her
conflict against Heretics; but most bitter then, when her children have a form
of godliness, 2. Tim. 3.5. Luke 16.8.
but deny the power of it in their lives. Oh that we could learn of Satan, and
his agents subordinate to him; to have a strict union and confederacy among our
selves; as that in Job is usually allegorized, Job. 41.15.
The scales of Leviathan are shut together as with a close seal; in respect of
their secrecy and combinations.

But further, as it gives this general advantage, so more specially, it is the
original of all Errors, and inlet of all Heresies: When men by a strange
(...), or respect of persons, shall set up some one as an Oracle; if such a one
broach an Error, oh how greedily do they drink it, as if it were some saving
Truth! The Devil thus serves many, as Agrippina did Claudius; Tacit. Annal. l.
12. in sinc.
he mingles poison in their delicate meat, and they fall to it with an
appetite. So long then as men glory in other Teachers, besides their ordinary
Pastors, are they not carnal? for this glorying breeds Schisms, which stops the
progress of the Gospel, hinders the communion of Saints, and gives great
advantage to the Enemies, and original to all Erours.

CHAP. XII. Some sinful Effects and Consequents of Parochial Church-Separation.
. 1. AS it is most agreeable to the dictates of Reason, that a people in a
vicinity or neighborhood dwelling together, ought to join with those of that
neighborhood, according to their best convenience, for participation of divine
Ordinances: So Christians by Providence seated among those that are in covenant
by a visible Profession, and joining in Ordinances, must much rather make it
their business to reform abuses that are found in their Congregations, then by
any means withdraw from their Parochial Churches. M. Baxters Ans. to Mr. Air.
p. 35.
For whosoever does deny that the Parishes in England are true Churches, he
does more then judge a particular brother, and more then he is able to make
good, and more then the Brethren of New England would affirm. And this is the
Third and last part of my Task, to show that the practice I oppose, Tertull. de
Praesc. c. 43
is contrary to Discipline; which is Doctrinae Index, the truest discoverer of
Doctrine: so that the quality of Faith is valued according to the conversation.
And first,

2. That we might shun the fearful Effects and consequences of
Church-Separation, we find frequent advice in Scripture, Heb. 10.24. and 3.13.
To consider one another, provoking to love, and to good works: To exhort one
another daily: To comfort our selves together, 1 These 5.11
and edify one another: Jam. 5.20.
To warn them that are unruly, to comfort feeble minded, to support the weak:
To convert Sinners from the error of their ways. All these precepts do argue
an holy zeal for God, and hatred of Sin in our selves, and bowels of compassion
toward others. We read of Separation from Sin and fleshly defilements, 2. Cor.
6.17. Jam. 1.27. But we read not of any Separation from Church Communion, and
fellowship in Ordinances given thus in charge, nor of any presidents going
before us in it: Jude 19.
But we read of an heavy brand laid upon Separatists. As it is against all
dictates of Reason, that a people scattered at a great distance should combine
themselves in a church way for Sacred Ordinances; so it is clear against the
Scriptures. I grant that Cohabitation or dwelling together makes not up a
congregational church; for Infidels and Pagans may cohabit, and may make an
Idol-church, but not a Church of God: Yet cohabitation is one Ingredient.
Saints cohabitating, that is (in the New Testament language) people separated
for God, not Jews nor Infidels, b^ Christians, and joining in Ordinances (as
in duty they ought) are a Congregational church. Rev. 2 et 3
We find seven several Epistles in the Revelation, written from Heaven to seven
several churches; all which had their abode at the place, where the church bore
its Name: these are Scripture churches. Now, if any one church be made up of
christians, some inhabiting at one of these places, some at another, some at a
third place, scarce three of one Town, no more then of one mind; here is not
Scripture Order, which is of God, but Apocryphal confusion. Act. 20.28. Heb.
13.17.
As then a Pastor ought to watch over his people, and his people ought to obey
and attend to their Pastor; so this is impossible to be done by confused
running to hear as every one likes, in a distracted church-Separation,
contrary to the Ordinnances of God and good Magistrates. Exceptions indeed may
be taken at the overlarge extent and disordered situation of diverse Parochial
congregations: But Parochial Assemblies (not the name but the thing) is the way
that comes up to the Rule of Scripture, Light of Reason, and the Presidents of
Primitive times. Our congregational Brethren will have the limit of a
Particular Mr. Blakc. Cov. Cap. 3.
church, to be within that number of persons, that may congregate in one place
for Ordinances: If this be yielded, then it will easily be proved, that
Parish-congregations are of Divine Institution; and then it will consequently
be true, that peoples Separation from Parochial Church Communion has this
Sinful Effect, to be a Disorderly confusion, contrary to Divine Institution.
For, Contiguas pictas jussit habere domos: Saints that made up a church, were
still Saints in cohabitation; they were as in faith, so in Habitation joined
together.

3. It were easy to relate the abundant fearful Effects and sinful
consequents, which this Practice of Church-Separation does produce; as the
disorderly confusion, which of necessity it does occasion: the weakening of the
work of the Lord in the place where providence has seated them, Mr. Blake,
loco supra citato.
and conferred many Mercies upon them: the depriving of Pastors of their Flock,
Spiritual Parents of their Children: the animosity of Spirit, that is wrought
in those that withdraw themselves, judging them whom they leave as scarce
Ministers of Christ, nor their congregations as churches of Christ; withdrawing
then and thence, when and where Christ is pleased to reside. I do only urge
this, that it is without all Scripture precept or president, to depart from the
solemn and public worship of God, to which his special providence has bound
us. It was accounted dangerous, not only to estimate one Apostle above another,
as Papists do Saint Peter; contrary to the ancient practice and doctrine of the
church in Tertullians time; Ter. de praescrip. c. 24.
Non mihi tam been est, imo non mihi tam male est, ut Apostolos inter se
committam; I am not so wise (says he;) nay, I am not so foolish, as to value
one Apostle above another: But it was thought dangerous also to esteem one
Father or Teacher (in the Greek or Latin church) as if he had the mind of
Christ above another, 1 Cor. 2.16
as the Apostle speaks. The Greek Menologie mentions a Division (like that
among the Corinthians) in the Greek church, in the days of the Emperor
Alexius: In which one preferred Basil, An. 1103.
another gloried in Nazianzone, a third extolled Chrysostom, until they heard
this voice from heaven, (...), We are all one before God. It is dangerous then,
to extol one of the servants of Christ, who speaks according to the Spirit of
Christ, Doroth. Bilioth. Patr. Tom. 2.
above another: lest (as the Historian reports) such Admirers become
Miriones; that is, like to the man, who first magnified Zosimus, next Macarius,
then the Apostles Peter and Paul, lastly the Blessed Trinity, which also
(blinded through Inconstancy) he renounced totally and finally. This is our
fear, this is our complaint.

4. This Error of Indetermined church communion was of old taken for a
consequent, yea, a symptom of Luxury and Wantonness. It was observed of the
Corinthians, that they were rich and luxurious; and therefore proud and
contentious; (...) and so on, as Strabo describes them. Strab. Geor. l. 8.
We should therefore beware of such Separation, as a Mark of Spiritual
Wantonness. And we find in Hesychius, that (...) is no better then (...). Thus
you may see the Genius or Inclination of what people is strongly bent unto this
Sin. And though it be true that Grace does not only polish Nature (Morality
knows how to do that) but even subdue it, and change the very frame and
constitution of it; yet being that it is not wholly conquered in this life, it
is like, it will show it self most in some domineering corruptions, Ball
against Can.
which generally reign among Christians. This Error tends to the renting of
the church, the disgrace of Religion, the advancement of pride, Ignorance,
contention, Offense of the Weak, Grief of the Godly, Hardening of the Wicked,
and rising again of Antichristianisme. For they that voluntarily depart from
their determined congregations, if in words they do not maintain Antichrist,
really they do him more credit, then his chief upholders. Seeing of necessity
they must confess, that in other churches, (which may be Antichristian, for
any thing they know) the pure Faith may be entirely professed, the Doctrine of
Salvation plentifully preached, the Seals of the Covenant rightly administered,
for substance; and by the blessing of God upon his own Means, Christian Souls
ordinarily converted and nourished unto eternal Life: Which is more then all
the Factors for Antichrist shall ever be able to make good. Upon this account
it seems the Council held at Nantes, decreed, Conc. Nannat. c. 1. et. 2 Anno.
800. Great. causa 9. qu. 2. Can In Dominicis.
that no Pastor should admit unto Divine Ordinances, any man of another
congregation, that willingly despised the Dvine Exercise of his Ordinary
Minister. And Gratian reports, that to the same effect and purpose one Canon
was established in Concilio Meldensi.

5. Unto all these I could add Musculus his judgment, who relates five
dangerous consequents of this Error.

1. That it casts the Soul into danger of its Salvation, while as it
departs from communion with the appointed and approved Congregation.

Museu. Loc. Comm. de ^^hismate.
2. That it divides (as much as in it lies) the whole and entire body of
Christ.

3. That it despises not one or two christians, but the whole congregation,
which it forsakes.

4. That it does not only despise, but condemn that congregation, as not
genuine, but adulterate.

5. That it violates the bond of Peace, which is charity, in that it not only
departs, but seduceth others to depart from their proper and peculiar
congregation. All which are confirmed and amplified by that Pious Divine. How
dangerous this Error is, may further be declared by many testimonies of
Judicious Calvin: Calv. Instit. l. 4. c. 1. per totum. praesertim. 4. 10.
Who often tells us, that so highly does the Lord regard the communion of his
church, that he counts them Traitors and Fugitives, who contumaciously
separate from any Society or congregation, which maintains the true Ministry
of the Word and Sacraments. And that so highly the Lord esteems his church,
That whosoever wrongeth her authority, he judges it derogatory to his own
Honor, etc. But I study brevity.

CHAP. XIII. The causes which men pretend for Separation from Parochial
Church Communion, are frivolous and invalid. And First, Indetermined
Church Communion is no part, but an Abuse of Christian Liberty.
1. CHristian Liberty, as it is agreed upon by the learned, is either of the
Will, or of the Person. Liberty of the Person is that which we call christian;
and it may be thus described: Christian Liberty is a Spiritual manumission,
whereby the Faithful are by Christ delivered from the Tyranny of Sin, the curse
of the Law, Til^n Syntag. part. 2. disput. 44. Th 1.
and Wrath of God; from the yoke of Moses; and from the bondage of things
Indifferent; that they might freely, willingly, and cheerfully serve God, to
his Glory, the Edifying of their Brethren, and Salvation of their own Souls.
Here are three parts of this Liberty. 1. From Sin and Eternal Death: 2. From
the Levitical ceremonies: 3. From the obligation of the conscience in things
Indifferent. This last alone belongs to this Discourse: which is called
christian, to distinguish it from civil Liberty, and from the Licentiousness
which many bad christians use, being a Liberty of the Flesh, and not of the
Spirit. Concerning this Liberty, we may observe two General Rules.

Synop. Par. Theol. disp. 35. Th. 33. etc.
1. That all Indifferent things (in themselves) are free and lawful for
christians to use or not to use, at their pleasure.

2. That a Believer must not always use and practice his christian Liberty; M.
Parr. on Romans 14.21
but that he ought sometimes to refrain from it, and to moderate it.

Now, there are two Moderaters of this Liberty; the one is General, the other
is Special.

The General Moderators are Faith and charity; which direct when, where, and
how it is to be used.

The Special is, Lawful Authority, by Sanctions, civil and Ecclesiastical: for
the civil Magistrate may abridge our Liberties in things Indifferent, for the
common good: and the church has power to determine the use of Indifferent
Rites and ceremonies in Gods public Worship for the maintaining of good Order
and Uniformity.

. 2. And now, I hope a weak christian may perceive, that this practice of
Indetermined church communion is a Scandalizing by abuse of christian Liberty:
because a Woe belongs to them that Scandalize others by Abuse of their Liberty
in things Indifferent against charity. Our Savior ( Luke 17. Eng. Annot in
locum.
1, 2.) discovers as the Sin of those times (which was, to think it little or
no sin, by their pride, and Imperious importunity to scandal or grieve an
infirm, poor, or inferior Brother) so also the punishment of Scandals Given,
whether by Word or Deed. For otherwise Offenses are often taken, by perverse
and ignorant souls, from good and laudable things done or spoken, because they
cross their blind and corrupt Opinions: Mat. 5.12. Math. 11.6.
so were the Scribes and Pharisees scandaled and offended at Christ's Doctrine
and Works of Mercy. Their Punishment is, It were better for him, that a
Millstone were hanged about his neck, and he cast into the Sea, then that he
should offend one of these little ones: that is, it were better for a man thus
Scandaling one of the meanest of Gods children, to be cast into the most
desperate or helpless condition in this life, then to endure the Eternal
torments which await him in Hell. There be then some Actions Indifferent, such
as in their own nature be no sin, Pareus in Romans 14.
but may be done or omitted without fault; that is, As there be somethings
simply or absolutely good, which be commanded or forbidden in the Word; so some
be neither good nor evil, in respect of the things done, but be of middle
quality. 1 Cor. 10.30. Mat. 5.16. Rom 11.36. C^o 3.16, 17
Yet in all indifferent things, the honor of God ought to be our mark to aim
at, no less then in actions necessary and commanded; and that for these
reasons.

3. First, Because it is against the Commandment of God, that any man should be
a just occasion of sinning to any other man, either by Word or Deed, to hurt
the salvation of any, 1 Cor. 8, 9, 10. and 10 32
or by building them up unto sin, by evil example in Sayings, or Doings.

Secondly, Mat. 18.8.
It pulls down heavy judgments on the scandalizing persons, temporal and
eternal, without speedy Repentance.

Thirdly, It is against the example of the Apostle, If meat make my brother to
offend, 1 Cor. 8.13
(says he) I will eat no flesh while the world stands, lest I make my
brother to offend.

Fourthly, We break the rule of Charity, Romans 14.15
which is ever careful not to trouble, or to do the least harm to the soul of
any Christian.

Fifthly, We wound our neighbors weak conscience (which is great cruelty)
procuring him by our example to allow, 1 Cor. 8.12
or do something whereof in his conscience he was never resolved, or which he
knew he ought not to do, had not we made him to stumble: Nay by our Offense
we destroy our brother, Romans 14.15
so much as lies in us, and murder his soul (either wholly driving him from
the faith, or discouraging him) for so slender a thing, as is a thing
indifferent.

Sixthly, It reaches not to our brother alone, 1 Co. r. 8.12 Mat. 25.45 Act.
9.4.
and to his destruction, but even to Christ himself, against whom we sin, in
wounding any member of his; for so strait is the conjunction between Christ
and the Faithful, that the good or evil offered to them, redounds to him. We
see then by all these Arguments, that such things as in their own Nature be not
evil, Romans 14.20
and which otherwise we might do; yet if they prove offenses to our brethren,
we ought to shun them as things sinful and unlawful.

. 4. These things considered, I thus argue: A duty absolutely necessary is not
an indifferent duty: but Parochial Church Communion is a duty absolutely
necessary: Therefore etc. I mean, Necessitate praecepti. The Major Proposition
though obvious to many Absurdities, I confirm thus.

1. To imagine that a necessary duty, is (or can be) an indifferent duty, is
the hight of impiety: this was to fetch power and advantage from any ordinance
of God, to commit sin. 1 Samuel 2.17 Jer. 23.25. 1 King. 22.11 Isa. 36.10.
This was the iniquity of Elies sons, of false prophet, of Rabshekah.

2. This is the only thing that makes us like the Prophets Cake, not turned,
Hosh. 7.8. neither raw not roasted; Fish nor flesh, in regard of our mixtures
and differences in Religion: as it was in Ahabs time, when they halted between
God and Baal, 1 King. 18.21. as in Samaria, when they feared the Lord, and yet
served the gods of the Nations, 2 King. 17.33. as in Judah, when they swear by
the Lord, and by Malcham, Zeph. 1.5. as in Laodicea, neither hot not cold, Rev
3.15.

3. This was the reason of the Lords severe proceeding in judgment against the
Jews, Isa. 29.13. their indifferency caused their mere formality, in Gods
necessary service and worship, which they frequented and performed only in
regard of humane, either Tradition teaching, Math. 15.8. Mark 7.6.
or Authority maintaining or enjoining it.

4. This was the Jews end of their Fasting and Humiliation, Isa. 58.4. to
expiate their former sinful and injurious courses, that they might return to
them more freely again. As Papists in some places are reported to have a common
saying in their mouths; We must sin, that we may be shriven, and we must be
shriven that we may sin. The Minor I have proved above by Scripture Arguments;
namely, that Parochial Church Communion is a duty absolutely necessary,
implanted by nature, because all Christians are to join themselves to some
particular Church visible, when the Lord offers occasion: That we are bound
to hearing in our determined Congregations, Necessitate praecepti: because God
assigns unto every ordinary Pastor a portion of his people, to be instructed
by him: because separation from determined Church Communion is reproved, 1 Cor.
1.12. Because the Lord commands to worship him orderly, which is not observed
in indertermined Church Communion: Because we are bound to hearing in our
particular Congregations by Christ's doctrine and example; by the custom of
Apostolic and primitive times; and by rectified reason, etc. Unto these I
could have added Tradition: but I omitted that, because that way is subject to
corruption and exception; and at long running, the stream of the channel
carries with it many dregs of erroneous Innovations, Additions, etc.

. 5. And now I hope, it is manifest, that this error is to far from being any
part of our Christian Liberty, (as the practices of it do pretend, confirming
Honorius Reggias his authentic and above mentioned Proposition) that it is
opposite unto it, at least a shameful abuse of it, and a licentious liberty for
an occasion to the flesh, Gal. 5.13. Jude 4.
turning the grace of God into lasciviousness. Only with Augustine, writing on
the same occasion, I conclude, that it cannot be any part of Christian liberty;
August. Tom. 4. Quest. Ves. and Novi Test. q. 61.
Illud autem quod omnino non licet, nec aliqua necessitate mitigatur, ut
admissum non obsit, est semper illicitum: For that which may not any way be
done, nor can by any necessity be so qualified, that it may not be hurtful
after it be done, is always unlawful to be done. Therefore, to worship God on
the Lords day Afternoon and Forenoone, is according to Scripture a necessary
duty, in our Parochial Churches; and no indifferent matter: And therefore no
man should be suffered openly to make this known plain Sin his practice and
profession. The Kings that suffered the people to worship at the high places, 1
King. 22.43.
are reproved; though the Text says, 2 Chronicles. 33 17.
that yet they worshipped only the God of their fathers: and though it was also
a controverted point; our fathers say in this mountain, and you say in
Jerusalem men ought to worship, said the woman of Samaria, John 4.20.

CHAP. XIV. Secondly, Separation from Church Communion, for the Pastors known
Insufficiency or Scandalous life, may be lawful: otherwise it is lamentable,
if not intolerable and impious.
. 1. IT is true, Men pretend many causes of their separation from
Church Communion, that they may not seem to unreasonable as the Arians; Sozom.
l. 4. c. 16.
whose violent and virulent endeavor was, that their odious error might be
received without any search or trial.

But above all other causes, they do aggravate the ignorance and scandalous
Life of their Minister. Though such Accusers should know, that by all Laws,
civil and Ecclesiastical, they that are ignorant, scandalous, or of known
Insufficiently in the main work, are to be rejected. This should give them full
satisfaction. For what men of any conscience or face of common Honesty, will
withdraw from a Society, merely because of the presence of such, whom he never
accused to that society, or proved sit to be rejected? It may be these men do
fear in their hearts, just punishment of Detractors, mentioned in the ancient
Canon of the church: Council. Elibert. Cap. 75. An. 305.
If any man do accuse any Bishop, Pastor or Deacon, of any false Crime which he
can not prove, he should not be admitted into christian communion before his
death. Furthermore; let him know, that objecteth his Pastors Infirmities, that
he is bound to search his own heart and ways, and remember what may be said
against himself, and cast the beam out of his own eyes; at least, to censure
others, as an humble christian, that is sensible of his own miscarriges, and
imperfections: and how much allowance the best men must have, that they may
pass for current. They who will be Accusers of others, should begin at home:
For as says Nazianzen; Nazia. Ep. 26. Caesar.
How shall they reprove the sin of others who have not (...), confidence in
their own Innocence. But, as the most ravenous and hurtful birds, are commonly
most quick-sighted, so are the most wicked men, most ready and skilful to find
faults in others. The Eye sees not it self, nor any thing which is too near
it; so neither see we our own faults, except set at some distance, and in
another person: so David saw his fault, in the person of the rich Oppressor, 2.
Sam. 12.2. etc.
till then he could not in himself. We ought not to despise one another for
Natural or common infirmities, when we are daily groaning under them our
selves, and in the hands of the same Physician. (...) (...): It is the property
of God alone to be faultlesse and perfect. If Christ would not take us with all
our faults, and distinguish between his own and ours, between us and our sins,
we were lost. It much concerns us therefore to have a good opinion of our
Teachers. For in this our Savior examineth his Disciples, not concerning his
Doctrine, but concerning his Person; Whom do men say, that I the Son of man am?
Mat. 16.13. And yet, as Christ loves our sins never the more, for all his
incomprehensible love to us, no more will he allow us to love the sins of
Insufficient and scandalous Ministers. And as we must nor think well of them,
so neither must I speak well of them. Therefore.

2. If Ministers be insufficient or scandalous, all conscionable people should
endeavor speedily to cast them out. Neither should any man plead compassion to
them: For it is cruel compassion, which for fear of bringing a man and his
Family to poverty, will both connive at his proceeding in such heinous guilt,
and at the starving and everlasting Damnation of men's souls. The devil loves
such Mercy as this. In the Primitive times, if any Pastor (of what degree or
quality soever) did fall away from the Doctrine of the Orthodoxe Church,
Secrat. l. 1. c. 6. Sozom. l. 1. c. 14. Eusebius l. 10. c. 4. Theod. l. 1. c. 9.
Editionis Latinae Grynaei. Ann. 1570.
into any schism, or heresy, or lewdness of Life, he was degraded and
deprived of all Ecclesiastical Liberties, privileges and endowments. This is
not only witnessed by Socrates in the Synodical Epistle of the first council at
Nice; but also recorded by Eusebius, Sozomen, and Theodoret. Neither may they
be forborne or tolerated in their Office upon their Repentance. For as
Repentance will never cure their Insufficiency: So it must be a very notable
Repentance, that must at all (much less suddenly) readmit a scandalous person
into the Ministry. In the Primitive Church, after such heinous sinning, they
would admit him to the Ministry no more, were he never so penitent, though
they did admit him, ad Laicam Communionem, with the people. Conc. Car. Anno
258. et conc. To. 3.487.
As for their maintenance, it is forfeited by all law, Divine and humane,
seeing it was given them only, as unto Pastors, for the work of Christ, and
service of the Church only, Quamdiu ^e been gesserint; therefore so far as
they are able (says a Pious, Judicious, Mr. Baxter concord. p. 107.
and learned late Writer) they should make the Church restitution of the
profits and emolumets, which for so many years they have so unjustly received:
it being before God but plain robbery, and one of the most hateful kinds of
robbery that can be imagined, to starve and destroy men's souls, and thus to
takes hire for it.

Moreover, seeing the sincere keeping Covenant with God in Christ, is a chief
part of our Christian Religion, and a matter of absolute necessity to our
salvation; It is as hard trusting the guidance of that man again, who has
once betrayed us and the Church unto sin and superstition; as it is to trust
a Commander who once turned traitor, and would deliver up his Army to the power
of the Enemy. Nature teaches to forsake such Commanders, in obedience to
their Supreme Sovereign, and for safety of our selves. Eng. Ann. en Eccl.
19.22.
Lastly, An ignorant or scandalous Pastor, is so far from being a gracious
Mediator between God and his people (as he should be) that he is like to draw
rather wrath upon himself, then procure favor for them. Yea, the Poet tells
us, that they endanger their flocks; Homer. Odys. l. 17.
(...), Evil shepherds infect their flocks. They who sin in Gods House or
Sanctuary, Isa. 65.3.
are said to provoke the Lord to his face, and to do evil before his eyes; as
if a Servant should do things directly cross to his Masters mind and command,
to his face. Now as when the fear or knowledge of man is removed, for a man
freely to indulge himself a liberty of sinning, is a high provocation, and to
make a practice of it, would argue a desperate case; So when their sin comes
to be public, it is the more grievous, being committed by them who should have
been exemplary for Piety and Religion, do suffer in their sin, for want of
sincerity. If so notable a Prophet as Moses escaped not punishment (for the
Psalmist says, Psalm. 106.32
It went evil with him for the Israelites sake,) though others provoked him to
sin; how much shall they be subject to Gods judgment, who by Ignorance or
Scandal, cause Gods children to sin?

3. But howsoever an Ignorant or Scandalous Pastor ought to be cashiered; yet
it is not in the peoples power to reject or relinquish one that is already
their Teacher, and separate from Church Communion with him, except when he is
utterly intolerable, and all orderly means for his ejection do fail. It
cannot be proved from Scripture that any people may reject or depose their
Ministers: much less a lesser part of a Church may do it, when the greater
dissenteth: No, nor a greater; because it tends to confusion. Mr. Baine
tells you, that Pastor and people are as individually joined together, as
husband and wife: That as no cause can separate husband and wife, but Adultery,
so nothing beside insufficiency (through ignorance or scandalous living) can
separate Pastor and people. For as he is sacred in his first instalment, so in
the performance of his office he was honorable in the times of the Heathen.
Tertullian tells us, Tert. de Cor. Mil. c. 10.
that heathen Priests were crowned: A symbol that they could not be degraded,
nor cashiered. And the first Crown which the Romans used, was their Spicea
Corona, given as a Religious Ensign in honor of their Priests. Honosque is non
nisi vita sinitur, Plinius Not. Hist. lib. 18. c. 2.
and exules etiam, captosque comitatur, says Pliny: naught but death could
terminate this honor; which was their companion both in exile and captivity.
Council. Laodic. cap. 13 Anno. 320
Sure I am, that it was decreed in an ancient Council, That the people must not
be permitted to elect (and therefore not to reject) their Pastor. If your
Minister then be unable to teach you, do not admit him at first: But if he be
able to teach you, and guide you, be ruled by him, even in things that to you
are doubtful; except he teach you any singular points; and then take the advice
of other Ministers in trying it. Expect not that he should humor you, and
please your fancies, and say and do as you would have him. It is contrary, not
only to all examples in any age of the Church, but to the office of Pastors,
and Duties of the people (in Scripture) to guide their Pastors, and not to be
guided by them, but to join with other Congregations on the Lords day, either
in the forenoon or afternoon, as much as with their determined Parish or
Congregation. Yet Nazianzen teaches us, Naz. Ep. 26
That he that thus despises his Pastor, is a vain man, and by reason of his
presumption, a new Dathan or Abiram. And we complain to the Lord in the words
of the same holy Father; that it all our sufferings this thing is the most
ridiculous, Naz. Ep. 31
and yet most to be pityed; that we are the same men that are injured and
accused: For some men object one thing against us, others another, according as
their either mind, or manners, or mischievous passions so suggest; and the most
favorable men to us, do neglect or contemn us; and after we have spent our
strength and spirits for their good, they cast us aside as vile and dishonest
vessels. Thus Nazianzen, with whom we again do complain, Naz. Or. 32 Iren.
Praes. l. 1. n. 18.
that the world seeks not Pastors, but Orators. And Irenaeus before him,
shows us, that it is the duty of a faithful Pastor to study the Truth, and
not Eloquence. I remember that Sozomen writes that Aetius (the Eunomian
Atheist) his Eloquence was to matchless, Soz. l. 4. c. 22. Eus. l. 7. c. 31
that it made his error impregnable. And Eusebius reports, that Meletius the
Heretic, for his eloquence was called, Mel Atticum, The honey of Greece. This I
write, not for any evil eye I bear to them, that are graced with that gift of
God: but that we must not with Moses refuse the message from heaven, because we
are (...), and have not men so glib a tongue as others: nor with Jonah turn our
back because the work may seem ungrateful. If he send us to labor among thorns,
yet have we a gracious Master; his work is good, his end will satisfy us: We
shall then have the grapes and figs, Jerem. 11.22.
which thorns and thistles would not yield us. Only I beseech every one to
remember, that the complaints of Gods Messengers, though proceeding somewhat
from heat of passion, 2 King. 2.24.
are often seconded with dismal and dreadful effects. The childhood of the
children that contemned Elisha his Ministry, exempted them not from punishment,
because it restrained them not from sin.

. 4. Hence it may appear, that the tying of our selves to the observation of
Parochial Church Communion, does not force any man to submit to a weak
Minister, when he might have a better. Christ has taught us to seek after
knowledge without the quenching of zeal; and to maintain zeal, without
despising knowledge: To seek after truth in the way of Peace, and after Peace
in the way of Truth; as knowing how near they dwell together. Contra Acad. l.
3. c. 7. Christian Concord. p. 35. and 36.
And in the practice of this duty Augustine says Divinely, It is a far less
sin to be unlearned then unteachable.

But for confirmation of this Assertion, I desire the Reader to peruse the
discourse of Reverend Mr. Baxter, whose words as my intended brevity does not
permit me to transcribe; So I note,

1. That the public welfare and unity of Christian Churches, is to be
preferred before the pleasure, yea, or edifying of any single member; and what
confusion will follow the plucking up of Christ's, and the Magistrates, and the
Churches bounds.

2. If all the people may freely and lawfully join themselves with that Church
that has the ablest Teacher, then almost all the world must go to a few men,
and leave the rest; Act. 14.12.
then Barnabas may be forsoken, if Paul be the chief speaker; and then able
men's Churches will grow to that bigness that they will be no Churches, the
Matter being too big for the End and Form.

3. That Ministers are Freemen as well as the people; and therefore every man's
desire must not deprive them of their Freedom; besides that, the Lord
assigns to every Pastor a freedom to instruct a portion of his people: Gods
work must be done before our own; and the saving of souls and propagation of
the Gospel, be preferred before our private comforts.

4. God has more means then Ministerial abilities, to increase men's graces,
and procure their salvation: for he that keeps in Gods order under a meaner
honest Minister, is like to be a more humble thriving Christian, then he that
will break that order, under pretense of edification: but God usually
chastises men for such disorders, as we may see in daily experience. For God
suffers the same professors (to our great hearts grief) to turn unto
doctrinal or practical evils, for their breaking Gods Order, and the Churches
Unity. The special work and duty required of every Minister, Isa. 62.6. Ephesians.
1.16 Phil. 1.3.4.
is to mind their people of their duty to God, and constantly to mind God, and
solicit him for his people. And for this purpose, the Pastor (if faithful) is
not like the sword-fish, which carries a weapon, but no heart: nor like the
children of Ephraim, who being harnessed and carrying bows, wanted (...)
courage, and turned back in the day of battle. O what readiness and
promptitude should there be in people to have communion with such Watchmen! The
unwearied Minister of Christ, Cant. 4.11
travels through all the Gardens of Learning, and sucks something from every
slower, that he may bring his vessels and treasures full of knowledge for the
comfort of his hearers, but they will not hear. Naz. Orat. 1.
Not only is his service and office sacred (for it is (...), a Medi^aion
between God and man) but his person, Basil. l. 1 in Psalm. 44. Romans 10.15
his very lips, which Basil styles (...), the Lips of Christ, as the Apostle
terms his feet beautiful.

. 5. Address your selves then in the Armor of God, all you messengers of God,
to sight hereafter with the enemies of God. Event has sealed Saint Paul's
prophecy; 2 Timothy 4.3.
The time is already come, men still not suffer wholesome Doctrine.
Uncharitable censures of style, of method, of voice, of phrase, of pasture, are
but senseless imputations of the profane multitude; far inferior (if they
were true) to the first Pourishes of a combat in earnest. The worldlings heavy
censure condemns down-^ight, both manner and matter, and the whole substance
of your preaching. And for your persons, you are not greater than John the
Baptist and our Savior; sooner therefore shall ye want a World, then a Theater,
wherein, though the best do favor you, by most be sure to be counted, (...), 1
Cor. 4.12 13
what not? piacular, pestilential, execrable fellows. All the filthy scoffs
and slanders that Satan's Scavengers can take out of the sinkes of all
professions, are thought over-clean to throw in their faces, 2 Cor. 4 4
who would make the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ to shine unto them.
Jerome said truly, Hieron. Epist. ad Demetriadem.
Semper virtutibus contradicitur, virtues are still contradicted. Pretend the
world what the world can, here is the head and the heart of the controversy:
Contrariety breeds Enmity, Enmity causes Separation, and Separation supposes
danger (from the party avoided) of infection.

. 6. But thou, O man of God, Tu ne cede malis, sed contra audentior ito: Romans
12.21
be not overcome of evil, but overcome evil with good. Such an Antiperistasis
must increase and enkindle zeal, if thy profession depend not upon fashion,
and thy conscience upon company. For though Gods powerful Spirit should suspend
his operation, yet can thou not forget the reason of a man, and bruitishly be
driven with the drove, much less abandon common sense; and without any motion
of thine own, like a nail in a wheel, only move as thou art moved, and turn as
thou art turned. They who never once dreamed of salvation by Christ, held it
not the least part of their glory to stir a course like Antipodes, clean
opposite to the liking of the multitude. Phocion apad Plut. Lacri. in Antist.
He in Plutarch applauded, suspected his speech; (...); Has any bad speech
fallen from my mouth without my knowledge? And Antisthenes commended, was
afraid of his Deeds; (...): I am in agony, lest I have done some mischief.
What in them without the law was voluntary, the same the law of Christ (if we
belive Augustine) imposes upon us as necessary; Recusas esse in corpore,
August. in Joan. tract. 87.
si non vis odium mundi sustinere cum Capite: thou refusest to be in the body,
if thou will not suffer the hatred of the world with thy Head. Sure the current
credit of the godly in Gregory his time, Greg. in Ezekiel. Homil. 9.
was, perversorum rogatio, vitae nostrae approbatio: Wicked men's detraction, is
the approbation of our lives. And in all times the rebuke of Christ, was the
Religion of Christians. Heb. 11. per totum.
And as for our way of preaching, the Reverend Provincial Assembly of London,
Vindication set forth Nov. 2. 1649. page 82
does piously and judiciously complain, that though we are far from
justifying any indiscreet or passionate expressions, yet we conceive it to be
very hard measure, to have our integrity arraigned and condemned for humane
infirmities. And we hope, we may without boasting, say thus much; That the
settled Ministry of England was never more censured, molested, impoverished, and
yet never more pious, peaceable, and painful. Wherefore, that I may not number
up numberless encouragements, stand upon your guard within the limits of your
daily warfare with the world; since faith is the victory that overcomes the
world. 1 John 5.4
Only consider him that endured such contradiction of sinners. Heb. 12 3
Deus Pater Agonoth^tes, Tertul. ad Martyras, cap. 3.
Xystarches Spiritus sanctus, Epistates Jesus Christus; Corona aeternitatis,
bravium; Angelicae substantiae politia in coelis, gloria in secula seculorum.
He that has said, Be of good cheer, I have overcome the world, John 16.33. He
is both Commander and spectator of your combat, He is both Judge and Rewarder
of your courage, and conqueror of your enemy; He will give you the Crown of
glory that fades not away.

CHAP. XI. Thirdly, Other imaginary, and imaginated Pretenses are answered.
. 1. ALthough all Divine Truths be precious, yet controversies are so
distastefull to me, that I resolved against them. But he that made us, must
rule us: and he that puts us into the Vineyard, must measure out our work:
and commands me to speak briefly to the subsequent objections. For this is
another Office of holy discipline: Non solum bona ostendere, sed mala refutare:
Tert. Apolog. c. 39.
Not only by sound doctrine to exhort, but likewise to convince the gainsayers,
Tit. 1.9.

. 2. First, Some say, they separate from a determined Church Communion, because
of diversity of doctrine; as if they knew not where to find the truth. It is
true, Eccles. 7. ult.
Solomon complains, That men have sought many inventions or imaginations; as
in other things, so likewise in Doctrine, whereby men are drawn from the
simplicity of their Creation. The Apostle likewise complains of a wind of
doctrine, Ephesians. 4.14.
whereby Christians began to be blown from the steadfastness of the Truth.
August. de civ. Dei lib. 18. cap. Heb. 13.9. 2 Cor. 2.17
Augustine says, that Satan seeing that Idolatrous images would down, he bent
his whole device in place of them to erect diverse imaginations; that people in
stead of images, might bow down to these, and worship them. Since which, it
has been his daily practice, either to broach diverse and strange doctrines
never heard of before: or to revive the old, and new dress them; and to mingle
them (for that by themselves they will not utter) with the Apostolical doctrine,
that so he might vent them. And this indeed is the disease of our age; and the
just complaint we make of it. There has good dispatch been made of images; but
imaginations in their stead, are deified and worshipped, carrying the Name and
Credit of Apostolic Doctrine. To prevent this mischief, We are no where
commanded to Separate from Church Communion; 1 John 4.1. 1 These 5.21
but to try the spirits; to prove all things; to hold fast that which is good:
and that we may do that, we are to pray, that he would open our eyes, that we
may behold wondrous things out of his Law; Psalm. 119.18 Heb. 5.14.
and to pray for knowledge and understanding, and to endeavor to have our
senses exercised to discern both good and evil. The advice that Sysinnius
presented to the Emperor Theodosius (studying how to put an end to the
differences in diversity of Doctrine, Sozom. l. 7. c. 12.
that then troubled the Church) was to avoid all disputations with Sectaries,
and to demand of them (when they petitioned him) whether they would stand to
the judgment of such as were Teachers in the Church, before it was divided?
especially, where their judgment dissented not from the Scriptures. Bp.
Andrews Ser. Worship imaginat.
Ancient Fathers thought it meet, that they that would take upon them to
interpret the Scriptures, should put in sureties, that the senses they gave,
should be no other then the Church in former time had acknowledged. All that
came after the Apostles, are commanded to labor for knowledge and learning, 1
These. 5 12 1 Timothy 5 17 1 Cor. 9.8.
and not to utter their own imaginations, or do desire to be believed upon then
bare word: for that were to have dominion of their Auditors Faith. Say I this
of my self? (says the Apostle) says not the Law this also? Give I this sense
of mine own head, or has not Christ's Church heretofore given the like? Which
one course if it were strictly kept, would rid our Church of many false
imaginations, which now are stamped daily, because every man upon his own
single bond is trusted to deliver the meaning of any Scripture.

. 3. Secondly, Others pretend, that they separate from Church Communion for
neglects and corruption in discipline. For answer to this: I would they read
what their own Mr. Cotton of New England writes: that the many notorious
scandalous persons that were found in the Churches of Israel, Mr. Cottons
Holiness of Church Members p. 21.
did only argue the neglect of Ecclesiastical discipline, in the toleration of
such public scandals in the Church. And thus none of the men of God (who could
not be ignorant of the Churches duty, and their sin in such neglects) ever
attempted to Separate from that which was in this sort faulty. All was not
right in the exercise of discipline, in the Churches, planted by the Apostles.
The Church of Corinth was censured as very faulty, 1 Cor. 5.2. So was the
Church of Smyrna, Revel. 2.14. No less faulty was the Church of Thyatyra, Rev.
2.20. Neither could the Church of Sardis be free, seeing the greatest part were
openly bad, there being but a few that had not defiled their garments, Rev.
3.4. And yet nothing heard by way of advice for any to make separation, nor
reproof for their holding up Communion, nor any one instance of a separatist
given. And here Mr. Blake shows, Mr. Blake Covenant c. 31. p. 238.
that the godly nonconformist in England, who had a low opinion of the
discipline then exercised, were so zealous against Church-separation, that Mr.
Parker, Mr. Paget, Mr. Ball, Mr. Brightman, and others, have left behind them
large evidences of their zeal against separation from Parochial Church
Assemblies. It is more then strange, that when the Apostles had by commission
from Christ planted Churches, and were to leave them to be propagated in future
ages, yet would wholly be silent of this separation, but leave us by our dark
imaginations to discover it. In which, we are in danger to set our threshold by
Gods threshold (of which he sadly complains;) or rather, Ezekiel. 43 8.
justle out Gods threshold with ours.

4. Thirdly, Others pretend that they separate from Parochial Church Communion
for profaneness of the people, and corruption in conversation. But neither
does this admit of separation provided that Doctrine be such in which men may
have communion for Edification. If we look upon the people of Israel throughout
the revolution of all times, we may find high Titles given them, even when they
lived in all kind of sin and Disobedience. They had Titles given them of
singular glory, by reason of privileges, Deuteronomy. 14.12. et 32.9. Zach. 2.9. Romans
9.4. Deuteronomy. 9.6. et 32.6. Isa. 1.4. et 48.4. Ezech. 32.16.
which they enjoyed by their call into church fellowship, as, children of God,
Gods peculiar ones, his portion, his heritage, the apple of his eye, and many
the like Elogies; In the mean time their Qualifications were as low, as their
Titles high; their conversation no ways answering their calling, but branded
to be stiff-necked, of an Iron sinew, an Adulterous, a Sinful Nation, a People
foolish and unwise, as Sodom and Gomorrah unto the Lord: And yet the Prophets
and righteous persons keep their residence among them, held communion with
them, and saw no ground of separation from them. It seems a great
contradiction to some, to name men at all believers, Saints, or Professors,
when their lives evidence an unsutablenesse to such a glory; yet we know the
churches to whom Epistles are directed in Scripture, 1 Cor. 3.3. et. 6.7. 2
Cor. 12.20 Rev. 3.1.16
are so honored, as we may see in their frontispieces: and the most upright
hearted among them, had communion with them, when yet they did wrong and
defraud one another, when they profaned the Lords Table, where Fornicators,
Idolaters, Lukewarm, etc. And yet the Apostles did not leave them, but made
it their business to reclaim them. The advice that was sometime given to a
Maid, that for Religions sake would retire her self to a solitary life; she
was told, Aut de fatuis Virginibus es, aut de prudentibus: si de fatuis,
Congregatio tibi necessaria est; si de prudentibus, tu Congregationi: If she
were bad, she need the city to better her; if good, the city needed her: So we
may say to the separatists from Parochial-Congregations; either they stand in
need of the Church, or the necessities of the Church call for their help and
assistance.

. 5. As for all other pretended causes of separation, Learned Zanchius at
length proves, Zanch. t. 7. part 2. col. 74 etc.
that so great is the Authority of the Church visible (whether Universal or
Particular) that none may with hope of impunity, despise her Doctrine or
Discipline, much less separate from her Communion: because to despise the
Church, is to despise Christ; to divide the unity of the Church, is to divide
Christ, and to crucify him a fresh; and to separate from the Church, is to
separate from Christ; for extra Ecclesiam non est Salus; out of the Church
there is no salvation. Lastly, if any do pretend the practice of foreign
reformed Churches for Church separation. I answer,

1. That the piety and prudence of the Worthies of this Nation, was much more
admirably valiant for the Lord, in establishing Laws with Penalties against
this profane licentiousness, then the practice of the contrary can be imitable
or warrantable. Jer. 9.3.


See Blond. Honor. Reg. etc.
2. Foreign Churches were never so sensible of, nor had occasion to bewail this
profaneness, so much, as we in these last seven or eight years; wherein all
the Ghosts of the miscreants of former ages, have been let loose from hell, in
full swarms to infest this Nation, more then ever the locusts did the Land of
Egypt.

3. We ought to follow others, no further then they are followers of Christ and
his Gospel. Non vivendum exemplit, sed Legibus: And therefore I will not say
again what Orthodox Divines have in this point, Seneca.
until our adversaries shall make it their ta^k to prove some infirmity or
insufficiency, in that which they have written.

CHAP. XVI. Serious and frequent Admonition ought to be inculcated against
this Error.
. 1. IT is very true, Nunquam sine quercla, Sen. de Ira c 10. Salv. de G. D. l.
8 initio.
tanguntur aegra, you can never touch the sore, without the grief of the
Patient. All would be pleased, Nulli grata reprehensio est, says Salvian; None
love reproof, none but the wise, Prove. 9.8. And that which is worse; the most
wicked castaway would rather hear his own false praises, then true
reprehension; and be deceived with jeering applause, then saved by wholesome
Admonition. And yet Separatists from determined Congregations, must no less be
admonished, then other sinners; so long as there is any hope they will amend.
That charge given to the Prophet, Isa. 6.9, 10. is six times alleged in the
New Testament, to warn them, that if they turn not, God will what his sword,
Psalm. 7.12
and be glorified in his justice upon them, who made no account of his mercy.
And it is a just thing with God, when men wilfully wink, and shut their eyes
against the light, to strike them stark blind, 2 King. 6 18 Genesis 19.11.
as he did the Assyrians, and the Sodomites, and Elymas the Sorcerer, and to
dash out their eyes, Deuteronomy. 28.28. It is true, Gods primary intention in sending
his messengers, Jer. 3.15.
is for the good of his people; for he gives them Pastors according to his own
heart, which do feed them with, knowlede and understanding: yet in a secundary
place, it is for to leave the wicked inexcusable, and to justify his
proceeding toward them. See 2 Cor. 2.15, 16. John 9.39. Thus the Pastor must do
his duty, and refer the issue or success unto the Lord: yea, he must deal
plainly and roundly, as the Lord himself does, Ezekiel. 2.3, etc. Matthew. 10.14.
But chiefly with public and common sins (as this of Church-separation is) lest
he seem to allow of them, and so become guilty of them by his allowance. For,

. 2 Though Saul acted not in the murder and Martyrdom of Steven, yet his
consent spoke him guilty of the same crime. Act. 8.1.
A mind to tolerate evil, is sin in the seed, which time brings forth, Jam.
1.14, 15. God esteems the evil we would do, as done, though we have not done
it, and so justly punishes it. There is an adultery of the heart, Mat. 5.28.
and 22 7.
and murder of the heart: Merito autem malus punitur Affectus, etiam cui non
succedit Effectus, says Augustine; deservedly is an evil Affection punished,
August. de civ. Dei lib. 16. c. 4.
though the Effect (or Deed) thereof follow not. They that allow of the evil
which others do, become guilty of the same sin by their allowance. So were the
Jews guilty of all the blood shed by their Fathers from Abel, Mat. 23.35
so many years before they had any being in the world: because in shedding
innocent blood they showed their consent with them, who first did so. O that
we would consider their estate, who are now pleased with all the injuries done
to Gods servants; Acts 18.17 Theod. in Jerem.
like Gallio. But above all men, Duces esse principes erroris, est prophanum;
It is most profane for Princes to be leaders into error, says Theodoret. For
the chief among the people to be ringleaders of this error is desperate. In
regard of others, magnates sunt magnetes, Great men have an attractive virtue,
like the loadstone, and therefore Potentes Patenter tormenta patientur, says
Jerome often: The mighty shall be mightily tormented. Oh that we could
remember, Job 32.9
that great men are not always wise!

. 3. It is a dangerous thing once to err from the truth. Arnob. advers. Gent.
lib. 6
There is in man a mischievous self-love, putting him on to defend his errors,
by erring more. Arnobius notes well, Quod semel sine ratione fecistis, etc.
That which ye have once done without reason, ye defend, lest ye should seem to
have once been ignorant: Ye think it is better non vinci, not to be overcome,
then to yield to a confessed truth. But a true Christian will rejoice and say,
Ut ille mei Victor est, Cecilius apud Minut. Felic.
ita ego mei Triumphator erroris: as my adversary has conquered me, so I
triumph over my error. Contempt of our Ministry in this Church-separation,
produces a wilful shutting the eyes against the light of the Gospel, and
takes away all ability of believing to salvation. They could not believe (
John 12.39.) that is, say Chrysostom and Theophylact; They would not. They
will not indeed believe: Nor is it in such a man's power to be willing to
believe. Ephesians. 2.8. Mat. 5.6.
For as Faith is the gift of God, so is a true and hearty desire thereof, which
God bestows on them only, whom he will therein satisfy and make blessed:
and justly gives not unto those who undervalue his mercies, and despise
appointed Ordinances. Oh be not then like those obstinate men, who will not
hear their appointed Pastor, bur wilfully stop their ears, and shut their eyes,
that they may the more securely run upon their own destruction, and neither
hear nor see that which might stay them, and make for their conversion and
safety. Hippocr. Aphor.
Deafness in a sharp Fever (say Physicians) is a sign of madness: more
miserable are obstinate sinners. The lunatic have some excuse; the Will is not
in the fault, where men are not themselves, says Salvian. The more condemnable
are those, Salv. de g. D. lib. 6.
Qui sani insaniunt, who are wittingly mad. Where there is wilful
maliciousness, (...), there is absence of Grace, says Cyril Hierisolymit.
Cyril. Hier. Catech. 6.
Therefore God justly deserteth those, who unjustly first desert him, following
their obstinacy, by giving them up to spiritual blindness, withdrawing the
common light which he had given them. His judgments ever follow, never precede
men's sins: where his external decree and omniscience precede, it is to
appoint impenitent sinners to punishment, not to sin.

CHAP. XVII. Some Antidotes against the Infection of Parochial Church
Separation.
. 1. IT has ever been Satan's policy to begin in persuading men to
Worldliness, Flesh-pleasing, Security, Presumption, and utter neglect of God
and their souls, at least by preferring their bodies and worldly things: but
where this will not take, but God awakeneth men effectually, he next sets
them on a Religion not commanded; and would make poor souls believe, they do
nothing, Mr. Ba^^. direct. 26. page 352.
if they do not more then God has commanded them; and unless they separate
from their appointed and determined Church Communion. When Satan has no other
way to destroy Religion and Godliness, he will pretend to be Religious and
Godly himself; and then he is always over-religious, and over-godly in his
materials. It is true, a man cannot serve God too much, formally and strictly
considering his service, much less love him too much: but we may do too much
materially, intending thereby to serve God; which though it be not true
Rigteousnesse, yet being intended for Righteousness, and done as a service
unto God, is by Solomon called Overmuch Righteousness: Eccles. 7.16 Eng. Ann.
in loc.
where Interpreters conceive, the Name of the mean, is given to the extreme.
For a man may many times do a thing consciensciously, and upon an opinion of
duty, and thereby involve himself in much sin, and sorrow: when indeed there
was no necessity so to do: As 1 Samuel 15.21. Acts 26.9.

2 I know it is stark madness in the profane secure world, to think the doing
of no more then God has commanded us, is doing too much, and more then needs:
but this is to blaspheme the most high, Luke 17.10.
by denying his Goodness, his Wisdom, his just Government; to blaspheme his
Laws, as too strict or precise; and to reproach his holy ways, as if they
were grievous, intolerable or unnecessary. Much more is their madness, in
charging the godly with being too pure, and making too great a stir for heaven,
and that merely for godliness and obedience; when (alas) the best fall too
short of what Gods Word, and the necessity of their own souls do require; that
their consciences do more grievously accuse them of negligence, then the
barking world does of being too diligent. Yet much more mad are worldlings, to
lay out so much time, Mark 8.36
and care, and labor for earthly vanities, and to think that heaven and
eternal happiness, and the escaping of everlasting damnation, are matters not
worth so much ado: but may be had with a few cold wishes; that no labor
should be thought too much for the world, flesh, and the devil, and every
little is enough for God. Yet Quisquis plus justo non sapit, ille sapit: that
is, in our Saviors phrase; Mat. 10.16.
We are as sheep in the midst of Wolves, we had need then be wise as Serpents,
and harmless as Doves. It was the commendation of Agricola in Tacitus;
Retinuit (quod est difficillimum) ex Sapientia modum: He kept a mediocritie in
his Wisdom. Lactant. l. 4. c. 2.
Lactantius says, Neque Religio ulla sine sapientia suscipienda est, neque
ulla sine Religione probanda sapientia: no Religion should be undertaken
without wisdom, neither should any wisdom be allowed without Religion. For all
overdoing in Gods work is undoing, as says a late redoubted Warrier of the
Lord: Mr. Baxt. Direct. 26. page 352.
And whoever you meet with that would overdo, suspect him either a subtle
destroyer, or one deluded by the destroyer, Oh what a Tragedy could I here show
you of the devils acting! And what a mystery of the Hellish art of deceiving
could I open! By occasion of our present quarrels with heretics, the Old
Serpent steps in, and will needs be a spirit of zeal, in causing many
professors to separate from their appointed congregations; and inducing them
(or rather seducing them) to overdo. O that God would open the eyes of his
churches in England to see this Satanical stratageme.

. 3 Then let us not be too much bent on a thing, Romans 12.3.
nor just in our own opinion: but let us temper our zeal with godly wisdom,
advise with others, lean not on our own understanding, flatter not our selves in
any opinionative confidence of our own abilities to judge of all that is fit to
be done: but think soberly of our selves. The more humble thou are, the more
wary and circumspect thou will be; and the more wary, the more safe. Now for
the avoiding of overdoing, in the point in hand, let us constantly practice
these few Directions.

First, Labor for knowledge and a sound understanding: 2 Timothy 1.7.
a sound Judgment is a most precious mercy, and much conduces to the
soundness of Heart and Life. Aug. de C. D. l. 5. c. 10.
Male vivitur si de Deo non been creditur. A weak Judgment is easily corrupted:
And if it be once corrupted, the will and conversation will quickly follow. Our
understandings are inlets of entrance to the whole soul. The moral Philosopher
has well concluded, Derodon. disp. 1. in Ethicis. 4
Omnis malus est ignorans, and solus ignorans malus est; ignorance is virtually
every error.

Secondly, Be sure you make conscience of the great duties you are to perform
in your families: Teach your children and servants the Knowledge and fear of
God: pray with them daily and fervently: Read the Scriptures and good books to
them: Keep them from sin; especially see that the Lords day be wholly spent in
these exercises, and not in sports or idleness.

Thirdly, Remember always that ye are bound to be followers of Peace and
unity: He that is not a son of peace, is not the son of God. All other sins
destroy church communion consequentially, Dial cum Trapertit. page 265.
but division and separation demolish it directly. Justin Martyr professes,
that if a Jew should keep the ceremonial Law (so he did not persuade the
Gentiles to it as necessary) yet if he acknowledge Christ, he judges that he
may be saved, and he would have communion with him as a brother. And I
profess, that I believe, that professors which disturb the peace of the
church, and separate from their brethren; nay I fear, lest they should prove a
firebrand in hell, for being a firebrand in the church.

Fourthly, Keep the mastery over your flesh and senses. Few fall from God, but
flesh-pleasing is the cause; Remember who has said, If ye live after the
flesh, Romans 8.5, 6, 7 and 13, 14
ye shall die. Think of this when ye are tempted, not only to lust,
drunkenness, worldliness, etc. but also when ye are tempted to separate from
your Parochial Assemblies: for the Apostles has pronounced such to be carnal.
You little think what a sin it is, even to please your flesh further then it
tends to help you in the service of God. Seneca I. p. 14.
Multis enim servict, qui corpori servit; He has many masters, that serves his
flesh; and after Honestum ei vile est, cui corpus charum est; Honesty is vile
to him that endeareth his body. Happy, were many a Christian, if they had
learned this lesson, which an infidel teaches them; then would they beware,
lest conscience lose its tenderness; then would they live in a constant
readiness and expectation of death, having their conversation in heaven, while
they live upon earth.

Fifthly, Look upon all present actions or conditions with a remembrance of
their end. Plutar. de Adulat. and Ambit.
Solon desired Croesus, (...), to behold the end. Desire not a share in their
prosperity, who must pay as dear for it, as the loss of their souls: Be not
ambitious of that honor which must end in confusion: nor of the favor of
those that God will call enemies. Fear not that man that must shortly tremble
before God, whom all must fear.

Sixthly, Deal faithfully with every truth you receive; take heed of subjecting
it to carnal interest. If once you have affections that can master your
understandings, you understand not the Truth. This changes Christians into
Males or Asses: Soz l. 6. c. 5.
as Antony the Hermit dreamed of the Arians. For when you have a resolution to
cast off any duty (as Parochial Church Communion) you will first believe it is
not duty. And when you must change you judgment for carnal advantages, you will
make the change seem reasonable and right. And evil shall be proved good, when
you have a mind to follow it.

Lastly, Apprehended and necessity and usefulness of Christ's Officers, Order,
and Ordinances for the prosperity of his Church. Tell your Archippus that he
fulfill his ministry, Council. Milev. 2. c. 24 25. Anno 416.
as in abandoning all sin in conversation, so all errors in doctrine: otherwise
by the ancient canons of the Church he has forfeited his ministry. Pastors
must guide you, not seduce you, or lead you Jesuitically blindfolded caeca
obedientia Pray for you Minister that utterance may be given him, Ephesians. 6.19
that he may open his mouth boldly to make known the mystery of the Gospel.
Watch carefully, that no weakness of the Minister draw you to a disesteeme of
the Ordinances of God, nor any of the sad miscarriages of Professors should
cause you to set less by Truth or Godliness: Wrong not Christ more, because
other men have so wronged him; Quarrel more with your own unfitness and
unworthiness in Ordinances, then with other men's. It is the frame of your own
heart, that does more to help or hinder your edification, then the quality of
those whom you join with.

4 But the sad experience of these times of separation from determined
church communion, has much abated the confidence of the godly, that Antidotes
will prevail with the vulgar or ordinary Christian: and caused them to have
lower thoughts of men's docility and tractability, then sometimes they have had,
and do look on man as a distempered inconstant creature, Arist. Eth. lib. 7.
c. 14. in sine.
of a natural mutability in his apprehensions and Affections: though God, who
knows the heart, and knows his own decrees, may know his sincerity, and
foreknow his perseverance. The fruit of Church-separation, appeareath, that now
when Satan has a design to burn up the Nurseries of Learning and Religion, how
few are watering Gods plants? when the greedy mouth of sacriledg is gaping for
their maintenance, how few are voluntarily adding for the supply of its defect!
when the Gospel is so undermined, the Ministry so maligned, and their
maintenance so envied; how few are they that appear for them? How few are like
that Noble man, who publicly tore and rent the impious Edict of Dioclesian the
Emperor against Cristians? Eusebius. l. 8. c. 5
What God will yet do with us, we cannot tell: but if he will continue his
Gospel to us, these few may have the greater comfort in it: if he will forsake
a proud and unworthy people, yet may these few souls have comfort of their
sincere endeavors, they may escape the gnawings of conscience, and the public
curse and reproach which the hystory of this age may fasten upon them who would
either in ignorant fury, or malicious subtilty, or base temporizing cowardice,
oppunge or undermine the Gospel; or in perfidious silence look on, whilst it is
destroyed.

CHAP. XVIII. The Conclusion.
1. HAving taken the boldness to deliver my Reasons against this common Sin
and Error: I humbly crave, that if ever Christians would have their souls
converted, they would labor to frequent Divine Ordinances in their due
circumstances. If we look to the quality of the Action, 1 Samuel 13.18 Arn.
contra Serapien.
Saul did well (says Arnobius) when he offered Sacrifice unto God: But we must
not consider the quality of the Fact, but the Pride of the contemner; for there
are many Duties, Quae cum bona fint opera, perniciem pariunt, cum non eo
ordine, quo sunt constituta, peraguntur: Which, though they be good works,
bring damnation, when they are not done in that order as they should. No man
will be much wrought on by that which he despises. The great causes of this
contempt are, a Perverted Judgment, and a graceless Heart. It is no more
wonder for a Soul to loath Divine Ordinances, that savoureth not their
Spiritual Nature, then it is for a sick man to loath his food. Where a
sanctified Judgment is wanting, the most hellish Vice may seem a Virtue, and
the most sacred Ordinance of Divine Institution may seem as the waters of
Jordan to Naaman. Oh! How many Souls may curse those wretches in Hell fire for
ever, that have by them been brought to contemn the Means that should save
them! And let the greatest that are guilty in this crime, Cyprian Epist. 72.
read Cyprian his words, and tremble. What greater crime can there be (says
he) then to have stood up against Christ (In his Officers and Ordinances)? Then
to have scattered the church of Christ, which he has purchased with his blood?
Then to have fought by the fury of hostile Discord against the unanimously
agreeing people of God? Who though themselves should repent, and turn to the
church, yet can they not recover and bring back with them, those seduced by
their Example; or those that being by death prevented, are dead without the
church, whose Souls at the day of Judgment shall be required at their hands,
who were the Leaders of them to Perdition, etc.

2. And now I have given you my best advice, for the avoiding this Error. The
manner of it is imperfect, and too much mine own: but for the main matter, I
dare say, I received it from God, in his Holy Scriptures. And from him I
deliver it to his People, and his charge I lay upon them, that they entertain
and practice it. Yet I know there is a remnant of Paganism and Infidelity in
the best of christians concerning the Divine Authority of the Sacred
Scriptures. August. de Fide and Op. c. 4.
The chief cause (besides many others) which perverteth the Understandings of
men in this point, in my poor observation, is this. When men have deeply
wounded their consciences by sinning against Knowledge, and given the Victory
to their fleshly Lusts, so that they must either deeply accuse and condemn
themselves, or deny the Scriptures; they choose that which seems the more
tolerable and desirable to them: and so, rather condemn the Scriptures, then
themselves. These are, Lucifuga Scripturarum (as Tertullian calls them) Owls
or Bats; Tert. de Resur. Carn. c. 47.
which can no more take heed unto that light that is the Life of the World,
then Bats do unto the light of the Sun. And what Malefactor would not do the
like, and except against the Law that does condemn him, if that would serve his
turn? And when men, that are engaged in a sinful course, do see that the Word
of God does speak so terribly against it, they dare not live in that sin,
while they believe the Scripture, because it is still wakning and galling their
guilty consciences: but when they have either cast away their Belief of the
Scriptures, or otherwise mistaken them through misinterpretation,
misapplication, etc. then conscience will let them sin with more quietness.
The like may be expected from those I oppose. For these men refuse their
Physic, because it is unpleasant, and not because it is unwholesome: yet at
last their Appetite so mastereth their Reason, that they will not believe any
thing can be wholesome, which goes so much against their stomach. Ahab believed
not the message of Micajah; not because he spoke falsely, 1 King. 22.8.18.
but because he spoke no good of him, but evil. Men will easily be drawn to
believe that to be true, which they would feign have to be true; and that to be
false, which they desire should be false. But alas! how short and silly a cure
is this for a guilty Soul? And how soon will it leave them in uncurable
Misery!

3. Only I must crave this of the Reader, that my confessed weakness be no
prejudice to Gods Truth: and that he will not judge of the cause by the Person,
nor take the Name or Person for a Fault: Which is the thing that the ancient
christians did so deprecate of the Pagans; and therefore I hope every Christian
will grant. For in regard of the churches present necessities, I dare not give
over, for all my Imperfections. Though I have ever been of a Spirit too easily
discouraged, and ready to say as the Prophet, I will speak no more in his Name:
Jer. 20.9.
yet God has so suited his Providence to my Infirmities and Necessities, as
not only to cure my backwardness, but also to convince me of the pleasantness
of his Work. I am assured that it was the Lord that sent me into his Vineyard,
and without him none shall force me out. Mat. 25.16.
He that gave me fewer Talents then others, will Expect but an answerable
Improvement at my hands: but be they never so small, I dare not hide them. He
that calls for two Mites, will accept them: Mat. 11.25. Zech. 4.10.
He despises not the day of small things. He sometime reveals that to
babes, which he hides from the wise and prudent: For the Wisdom of the World
is foolishness with God, 1 Cor. 1.25.
and the foolishness of God is wiser then men: and no flesh shall glony in his
sight. The Lord grant, that I may so use the small abilities that I have, that
I be not condemned as an unprofitable and unfaithful Servant: and then I do not
fear being condemned for their smalness.

4. More I would say, but I fear to spoil the elegancy or learned Camero, in
his Epistle ad Theologos Leidenses, Can. page 720. folio.
by Englishing it: wherein is the sum of what I would say, and thither I
refer the Reader. In the mean time, look upon my aberrations, where you find
them, with pity and Pardon; And where you show me that I have erred (as a man)
you shall see that as a Christian, it was not my want of love to the Truth, but
want of light to discover it, that has misled me from it My Prayer is, that
the Lord would save his People from that spirit of Pride, hypocrisy,
separation, and Giddiness, which is of late gone forth, and is now destroying
and making havoc of millions of Souls in England. And that the Lord would
keep his People unspotted of the guilt of those Sins, which in these days
have been the shame of our Religion, and have made us a Scandal and Scorn to
the World.

And pardon, O Lord, thy Servants Sin,: for I do daily dishonor thy Holiness,
and disgrace thy Work and Service by my weakness and unworthiness. I bewail
from my heart, that my Apprehensions are so dull, my Affections so stupid, and
my Expressions so law and unbeseeming thy Service. Remember with whom thou have
to do. What can thou expect from dust, but levity? or from corruption, but
defilement? I know thou will be sainctified in them that come nigh thee. And
before all the people thou will be glorified. But though weakness and
irreverence be the fruit of mine own Corruption; yet the fire is from thy
Altar, and the work is of thy commanding. Oh therefore wash away all my Sins
with the blood of the Lamb, which takes away the Sin of the world. Imperfect
or none, must be they Service here. Oh take thy Sons excuse; The Spirit is
willing, but the Flesh is weak.

Gratias tibi Domine Jesu.

