THE Emperor's Concessions TO HIS Protestant Subjects OF HUNGARY, As they were
sent from VIENNA in Latin, and are now Translated out of the Original Copy, as
follows.
The most Gracious Resolution of His Sacred Imperial Majesty, our most benign
Lord, in the Matters of Religion; obtained by the Mediation of His Excellency
the Palatin of Hungary, the Eighth of this present Month of October, 1681.
Exhibited by the Vice-Palatin to the Noble and Magnificent Lord, representing
the Royal Person, and to all the Illustrious States and Orders of the Realm, in
the State-house of that Kingdom: Viz.
I. THat all and singular the States and Orders within that Kingdom, whether
they be Peers, or Gentlemen, or Free Cities, and Privileged Towns, that
immediately relate to the Crown, shall remain in their Faith and Religion.

II. That all the Hungarian Soldiers that inhabit on the Frontiers of the
Kingdom shall enjoy the same Freedom of Religion.

III. That not only the aforesaid Liberty in Religion shall be granted to them,
but also the free Use and Exercise thereof; saving to the several Lords of the
Soil their Rights and Properties.

IV. That it shall not be lawful for either Party hereafter to remove or expel
the Ministers of the Church, for Religion, in such Places where the Exercise of
their Religion is practiced.

V. That there shall be no more Seizures of Churches.

VI. That those Churches which, in the time of the late Troubles, from 1670.
till now, have been seized, shall remain to the present Possessors.

VII. That in every County those of the Augustan Confession, and all such as
are comprehended under that Name, shall have liberty to build a Church for the
Exercise of their Religion, if there be none there already.

VIII. That if they have any Churches there already, they shall be left to
them, together with the Revenues thereunto belonging.

IX. That it shall be lawful for the Peers and Gentlemen in the said Counties
to erect and endow Chapels, or Places of Worship for the Exercise of their
Religion, within their respective Castles.

X. That all things contained in the First Article of the Pacification at
Vienna shall be in force.

XI. That in all Parts of the Kingdom of Hungary belonging to the Emperor, the
Catholics shall have the free Use and Exercise of their Religion.

XII. That particularly those of Posnia that are of the Augustan Confession
shall have power to build one Church, in a convenient Place to be appointed for
that purpose; Also that those of the City of Sopronia shall remain undisturbed
in the Possession of the Exercise of their Religion which they now enjoy.

XIII. That the Grievances which hereafter arise in Matters of Religion, shall
not be determined by force of Arms, but by the King only, after he has heard
both Parties: And that the Eighth Article of the Sixth Decree of King Ladislaus
shall be revived and observed.

XIV. That all the Inhabitants of the Kingdom, of what Rank, Order or Degree
soever, shall abstain from reviling and reproaching each others Religion, or
the Professors thereof, upon pain of incurring His Majesty's highest
Displeasure.

Letters which came by the same Post with the foregoing Concessions, add, That
the Diet at Odenburg were then upon the point of restoring the Goods and
Estates which had been taken from the Malcontents, and to make Satisfaction
for Damages sustained by them: And that there was no doubt but the Grand Affair
of Religion being adjusted, this and other Points would soon be determined.
Also that the Peace between the Emperor and the Grand Seignior would be
continued Ten Years longer. So that it was hoped that His Imperial Majesty,
together with the States of Hungary, and the Princes and States of the Empire,
would speedily unite against the French, whom they now look upon as the Common
Enemy of Christendom, rather than the Turk.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Baldwin, 1681.


