A RELATION Of the most memorable things IN THE TABERNACLE of MOSES, AND THE
TEMPLE of SOLOMON, According to Text of Scripture.

By JACOB JEHUDAH LEON, HEBR. Author of the Model of Salomons Temple.

At AMSTERDAM, Printed by Peter Messchaert, in the Stoof-steech, 1675.

A PRAYER For the Prosperity of his ROYAL MAJESTY.
HE that sends deliverance to Kings, and gives Dominion to Princes, whose
Kingdom and Dominion is everlasting: He that delivered David his servant from
the Perilous sword, And he who made a way through the Red Sea, and Paths
through the River Jordan: He himself bless, preserve, assist, make great, and
more and more Exalt our Gracious Lord CHARLES the II. King and Protector of
England, Scotland, France and Yreland, The King of Kings by his Merciful
Benevolence preserve, Vivifie, and deliver him from all trouble and danger. The
King of Kings increase and highten the Star of his Constellation, to prolong
his days over his glorious Kingdom. The King of Kings put it into his heart,
and into the hearts of his Nobles and Princes, to use benign Clemency toward
Us, and to the Israel of God, our brethren under his Dominion: Amen.

TO THE High and Mighty PRINCE CHARLES, By the Grace of God KING of ENGLAND,
SCOTLAND, FRANCE, and YRELAND, Defender of the Faith.
May it please your Sacred MAJESTY,
PYRAMIDES and Sumptuous Aedifices were wont of Old to be Dedicated to the
Princes of this World, ignorant of the things of God, which though in show
splendid and Royal, yet Exceeded not the Bounds of nature, as savouring merely
things Corporeal, not Spiritual. Neither did the Virtue of these Princes
mount higher, being altogether taken up with wordly matters. Fitly therefore
were such temporal things Dedicated to them, who were not acquainted with
Celestial; But the love of the Divine worship, that imparalel Piety of your
Majesty, Known not only to your Britains, but to all Europe, calls for the
Protection, not of the most magnificent structures of this World, but of a
building, though made with hands, yet that has God Himself for the Architect
thereof; Vouchsafe therefore, most Potent Prince, Great Britains Protector and
Defender of the things of God, to cast a Benign eye upon what is here
represented to your Sacred Majesty, it being the Exact form of the
Tabernacle, so as it was in the Wilderness, with the structure of Salomons
Temple, the Holy Vessels, Garments and Utensils thereof delineated and set
forth to the life. The which as it was graciously owned with devote affection
30 years ago and upwards, by that Serene Queen, your Majesty's Mother, so be
pleased most noble Prince, to imitate her Piety: The Lord God of the whole
earth preserve your Majesty for the Good of your great Empire; which is the
prayer of him thal in all humility casts himself at your Majesty's Feet.

JACOB JEHUDAH LEON, HEBREW.

A RELATION Of the most memorable things IN THE TABERNACLE of MOSES, And the
TEMPLE of SOLOMON, According to Text of Scripture.
THE I. CHAPTER. Relating the order or station of the Tempel or Camp of the
Israelites rownde about the Tabernacle.
THe wonderful Army of the Israelites entering into Egypt with seaventy souls
only, Deuteron. 10:22.
by the powerful Command, Genes. 15.13.
which God revealed to (their first father) Abraham; this generation sojourned,
there 210 years, until the 430 years were fulfilled, Exodus 12:40.
from that time which God foretold Abraham. That blessed people of God, Exodus
12.37.
did there, in that short time increasse to 60000 men of the age from 20 to 60
years, Exodus 12.38.
but if all the women, and all the persons as well men as women, which were
under 20 and above 60 years of Age, should be thereunto adjoind, the same
would then be found to be twoe Millions, and four hundred thousand people
besides the Egiptians, who went away with them (as the holy Scripture says)
and their innumerable Cattle, which they took with them; some, others are of
opinion that there were in this great Camp or host 876 millions 9 hundred and
96 thousand persons.

Number. 10.11.
After the first year of their departure, the work of the Tabernacle was made
ready or finished, at which time God caused them to be divided into twelve
parts, Number. 2.2.
each with their several Standard or Banner, in the which each of their Arms
or ensign, was wrought, like as their father Jacob had blessed each Child or
Tribe, Genes 49.3.
also the color of each Standard or Flagge agreed with the color of the Stones
(in the breastplate of Aaron the Highpriest) upon which its own Tribes name
was written and These twelve Tribes were divided into four parts, each part
had three Banners or Ensigns. Three stood on the Eastside, three on the West,
three on the South, and three on the Northside; all these twelve Tribes
encompassed the Tabernacle: 1. Chron. 5:2.
the Prince Jehuda (as Captain, and Leader of his brethren) stood on the East,
between Isachar, and Zabulon: Ruben stood with Simeon and Gad toward the
South: Ephraim placed himself toward the West with Menasse and Benjamin: Dan
toward the North with Asser and Naphthali. These twelve Tribes thus placed in
order, fouresquare, do take up 12 miles in compass, or 24 thousand paces: the
fouresquare thwart over, each of these twelve Tribes, took up by it self a
foursquare place of 4000 paces, between the one and other tribe were 2000
paces, between the said Camp, or host thorough all the four sides, and
between the building of the Tabernacle, were 8000 paces. The outermost 4000 of
the 8000 served for the feeding of their Cattle, Number. 3.35.
the 2000 innermost paces toward the East served for the whole householding or
familyes of Moses and Aaron, and the other 2000 paces, of the three remaining
sides, round about, served for the whole housekeeping of the Children of Levi,
Gerson, Kohath, Merari; Those of Kohath set themselves in three partitions
(according to their three families or generations) toward the South as the
Chief, the twoe divisions of Gerson were toward the North, according to
their family, also the twoe families of Merari were in twoe divisions toward
the West; then there remained in the heart or very middle of this host or Camp
4000 paces in the which the above mentioned Tabernacle was placed, Exodus 26.18.
the foremostpart toward the East, 30 cubits long, 10 cubits broad, 10 cubits
high, encompassed with an outermost Court round about raised with Bases or
Sockets and Pillars, Exodus 27.9,
the Curtains hung on the Pillars, to take up the place or space of the
outermost Court, that outermost Court was 100 cubits long, 50 broad, 5 high, it
was so placed, as that against the East in that outmost Court, an empty or void
space of 50 cubits remained, each of the three sides round about 20 cubits, the
middelmost space was taken up with the building of the Tabernacle; And this is
the whole space of the host, where they pitched or rested.

By the Gate of the outmost Court of the Tabernacle was an overflowing
fountain which with its springing abundantly refreshed the whole host, where
it lay, even as by the mighty hand of God Manna rained down from heaven, where
the host pitched or rested, Exodus 16.4.
first of all their water encompassed the building of the Tabernacle round
about, by certain dug Channels or Trenches made by the Command of the
Rulers of the Tribes; Number. 21.19.
in these flow four rivers out of their four Corners, that water
encompasseth the host of the Levites, and did likewise separare their familyes
one from another, and did make certain pitts between them, and the twelve
Tribes of Israel, from thence flowed that water by the Southside toward the
East, and sprung to the host of the Israelites, and encompassed them round
about without, and divided the place or station of each Tribe, one from
another, to the end, that each one might know and discern, his own Tribe.

When this host would proceed their intended journey, he that led or
conducted the same was God all sufficient the Lord of host, Number. 10.2.
who had revealed to Moses, that the people should depart: Exodus 40.36.
By the Children of Aaron the Highpriest were twoe silver Trumpetts blown,
thereby to warn or raise the people, Deuteronomy. 31.15.
then let God his royal Standard (like a pillar) arise from the holy Cloud,
which by day covered the Tabernacle and by night with its shining beams or
glance imprinted the Tabernacle with his wonderful fire and glory, this went
before them, Deuteronomy. 1.33.
between heaven and earth, as a Guide to show them the way which they must
go, the beams of that divine fire within the Pillar, enlightened them in the
dark night, to the end that they should not wander out of their way, and by
day the said pillar covered the whole host, and did likewise preserve them
from the heat of the Sun, from wicked enemies, Number. 10.34.
and devouring beasts.

The Tribe of Judah with his twoe Brethren Isachar, and Zabulon followed 2000
paces behind the holy Standard, which went before them: at the same distance
followed them, the twoe Companies of Levites, Gerson, and Merari, they carried
the basements, or sockets, pillars, boards, coverings, curtains, cords, and
pinnes, of the Tabernacle, and all the appurtenances or necessaryes thereof,
the same were all carried on six wagons or carriages, which were given by the
Cheiftaines of the Tribes, to the consecration of the Tabernacle: those wagons
were drawn by twelve Kine or Heifers then also followed the families of the
Levites, Number. 7.3.
with all their necessaries.

After these followed Ruben with his twoe Brethren Simeon and Gad; Afterward
followed in the middle of the whole host Moses and Aaron, with their children
(amongst the children of Kohath) conducting the Arc of the Covenant with the
other golden Instruments which must be borne or carried upon the shoulders of
the abovenamed Kohathites, after the same were covered with the Covernigs,
although in the beginning of their Journey (when they were departed form Mount
Sinai) the Arc was in the same manner before the Host, Number. 10.33.
until they had passed the River Jordan. In the third place folloved Ephraim,
with his Companion tribes Manasse and Benjamin: and at last followed Dan with
his adjoined Tribes Asser, and Naphthali, under whom were the weak of the
host, also the Companies of Egiptians, who went with them.

Deuteronomy. 1.19.
In this manner travailed that wonderful host thorough wild and unpathed,
unknown ways, the space of forty years, without suffernig any lack of any
necessaries; Deuteronomy. 29.4.
this did the mighty hand of God. Deuteronomy. 2.7.
This host did, there, forty and twoe several times take up several resting
places in some for twoe days space; in some one day, alone, Number 33.3.
or from the evening till the morning, and some, some mouths, and some,
certain years, Number. 9.20.
for they rested 19 yaares in Kades, which was one of their resting places.

II. CHAPTER. Concerning Moses his Tabernacle.
THe work of the holy Tabernacle was in such a holy estimation, Exo. 36.2.
that all those who were permitted to work thereon, from amongst the
Israelites, were thereunto qualifyed, and incited by the Spirit of God.

The Materials which were used in this building, were gold, silver, brass,
woll, Exo. 35.3.
dyed shy-colour, purple, scarlet (according to offerings) silk, pure Linen,
rich goats hair, Ramskins dyed red, curious spotted Badgers skins, shittim
wood, pure and clear oil of olives, the principal Aromatical druggs, and
precious stones, all in very great quantities, in so much that the gold alone
amounted to 29 Talents, 739 Sheckles, (as the holy Scripture says) which
being reduced and compared to and with the weight of our pounds at sixteen
ounces each pound, and half an ounce for each sheckle, Exodus 24.38.
and 3000 sheckles for each Talent, which make 93 pounds and 12 ounces, do
amount unto 2741 pound and 9 ounces weight; the value whereof being accounted
at 12300 ducats for each Talent make together 368918 Spanish ducats, and
reduced into Hollands gilders (each gilder being about two shillings English
money) make one Million one hundred and six thousand 745 gilders, (each duckat
being three gilders.) The Talents of silver (as the Scripture says) were one
hundred, and one thousand 730 shikles, being reduced into the same pounds,
does amount unto 9429 pounds, and one ounce, the value thereof being
calculated, at one thousand and twelve ducats for each Talent, does make one
hundred and one thousand 783 ducats, and in gilders does make three hundred,
five thousand, 315 gilders, 15 stivers, 3 pennings, and all together, as well
gold als silver, does amount unto 460700 ducats, and in gilders does make 14
tunns of gold 12 thousand 104 gilders 15 stivers, three pennings Hollands
money, each tun of gold being at least 10000 pounds starling, and each
gilder 2 shillings sterling.

The principal persons who were indewed by God, and made this work were
Besaleel and Aholiab, and the workmen (whose number is unknouwne) did with
diligence fully finish the said work in the space of six months.

The Vessels or instruments, with which the holy Tabernacle was served, were of
gold and silver, whereof we hereafter shall discourse.

The Levites who served the Tabernacle were 8580 persons from thirty to fifty
years, who were divided into three Companyes, according to Levies three
sons, Gerson, Kohath, Merari, the Kohathites were 2750, these, when the host
took their journey, carried (as the chief) with golden handbars upon their
shoulders, the most holy and precious instruments, namely the Arc of the
Covenant, The golden Table, the golden Candlestick, with the seven Lamps, the
Altar of Incense, the great Brass Altar of Burnt offerings: when they were
first covered with their coverings, the Gersonites were 2630, they conducted on
twoe wagons or Carriages (which they had of the abovenamed six wagons) the
Curtains of the Tabernacle, the Courtaines of the Court round about, the
coverings, cords, brass pots with all the appurtenantes. The Merarites were
3200, they conducted the other four wagons or carriages, in the which were 48
gilded boards: for the building of the Tabernacle were nine gilded Columns or
Pillars, and one hundred silver bases or Sockets, which belonged thereunto,
with the 36 Columns or Pillars of the Court of the Tabernacle, and their
brass Bases or Sockets, upon which the pillars were raised.

Concerning the Priests, who served the Tabernacle, they were not more then
four, namely Moses, Aaron, and his twoe Sons Eleazar and Ithamar, as the
principal persons in the Congregation.

The place where in the Tabernacle was raised was in the heart or middelmost
place of the host of the Levites, which was encompassed by the host of the
Israelites, where they pitched, but the host was separated from the Levites 400
paces.

The manner how the Tabernacle was reared or raised, and again taken down is a
most sweet and curious speculation but because that matter does require much
writeing we refer the reader to the treatise of the Tabernacle of Moses,
which we have published, where you shall find all the same at large.

III. CHAPTER. Concerning the Glorious Temple of Solomon.
IN stead of the holy Tabernacle, Number. 2.15.
king Solomon did in Jerusalem, on the very top of Mount Moria (where Abraham
offered up his Son unto God) build the holy Temple which was fully finished
in the 487 year after Isreal's departure out of Egypt. ^. Chron. 3:1.
About the said Temple did work seven years long 163600 persons, of the
which were 3300 Master workmen, and 300 Commanders over them all (according
to others the number was 4100900) king Solomon did frame this building,
according to the order, Command and draught, 1. King. 6.1. and 5.15.
which his father David (according to the Command of the Prophet Samuel) had
given him. 1. Chron. 28.11.
He prepared for that building an infinite Number of all kind of Materials,
the gold alone was 108000 Talents and ten thousand drachmas, which being
accounted at 93 pounds and 12 ounces weight for each Talent, will weigh a
hundred thousand and 25 thousand and 78 pound, and for every talent 12300
ducats, will amount unto 1328 Millions and 410000 and 220 ducats, and in
gilders 5977 (Holland) millions 846 thousand 123 gilders, at 4 gilders and a
half each duckat according to their valuation in Holland and those Lands. 1.
Chron. 22.14.
This gold being computed into tuns of gold (each tun of gold at 1000 pound
starling at least) do arise to 59 thousand, 766 tuns of gold and 46123 gilders.

The silver which he prepared thereunto was a thousand times a thousand and
17000 talents, which accounted by our pounds at 18 pieces or reals of eight to
each pound, and 93 pounds and 13 ounces weight for each talent do arise to 95
millions 343 thousand 753 pounds weight, which being accounted at the rate of
1012 ducats for each talent, do make a thousand and 29 millions, 700 and 12
thousand and 500 ducats as above, making in gilders four thousand, six
hundred, 33 millions, seven hundred and six thousand 250 gilders, this makes
46000 and 337 tuns of gold and 250 gilders, the whole quantity of gold and
silver being now valued, does make ten thousand, six hundred and seaventy
millions, 518 thousand 750 gilders. In weight it is 26 thousand 367 lasts, and
828 pounds accounting 4000 pound weight to each last, in so much that to carry
this gold and silver over the seas there must be a thousand ships, each ship
of the burden of 26 lasts: or else 53 East India ships, each ship of five
hundred lasts burden, being reduced into tuns of gold, you shall find it to
be, one hundred and six thousand, one hundred and fifteen tuns of gold, and
52372 gilders.

1. Chron. 22.14.
You must note, that this gold and silver was prepared alone by King David,
besides that which King Solomon added thereunto, out of his treasuries (by
command of his father) which in comparison of his great treasure and glory,
should be at least as much more which being added to the former, would fully
lade one hundred and six great East India ships, in so much that the
Scripture says that gold and silver (in Salomons time) was accounted as
stones, Josep. Anti. Jo. of Jew. Wars. L. 6. 6.
and elsewhere, that silver was that time not at all esteemed.

1. King. 10.27. and 11.21.
The form of the Temple was just fouresquare, made of very large white marbre,
very precious, yea some say, so large, that out of one a fair house might be
built: the mount or hill, whereon the Temple stood (by the neat and forace
whiteness and well compactnesse of that building) did afar of seem to be a
snowy hill, and the glittering gould beweene, Mid. 2 1. Jo. Jew. Wars. 6. 6.
did shine and reflect as the dazeling Sun; the greateneste of the building was
four Stadium, or furlongs in compass; within the Portalls it was 500 cubits,
the height was 300 cubits, in some places 400, makes 800 foot high, Midot.
2.4.
each foot of 12 inches round about environed with very deep dales, to
separate the Temple from the City: this piece of work was divided into three
principal parts, namely the Court of the Heathens or People was the outermost
part, 500 cubits foursquare, and encompassed with four admirable and stately
Portals, each resting upon three rows of Pillars, of the fashion of leaf
work, each Pillar, hewn out of one marble stone, alone, was 25 cubits or 50
foot high: by the opening of the windows at the 4 Galleryes or Walks, were
the Railes of pure Silver, and the five doors of the Gates were covered, or
drawn over with silver plates.

The second part was within the 4 Galleries placed against the North, Abarb.
1. King 6.
in twoe outermost Courts, Jew. Wars. 6. 6. Josep. 6. 6. Antiqui. 1. 15. 14.
Midot. 1. 3. and 5. 1.
the Court of the Israelites toward the east 135 cubits foursquare, the Court
of the Priests toward the West, in which the sacrifices were offered, was
broad 135 cubits, and 187 cubits long, round about within and without
encompassed with certain Halls or Chambers, in which the three Principalities
assembled, and also therein to perform all the services of the Temple, in the
middle of the Outmost Court, was the Palace of the Lord God, covered with massy
gold plates within, and over the roof, the length was 100 cubits, and likewise
as broad, 120 cubits high; it had three principal parts, the Entrance, the
Sanctuary, and the Holy of Holies, or most holy place, cituate toward the West;
the Halls or Chambers of the Treasures of the Temple round about, were 38
Chambers; The hidden Sollerings or Chambers, in which were laid up all the
materials of the Tabernacle which were packt up, the same took up one third
part, and under the Temple in the Cellars were the Bathes, wherein the Priests
bathed themselves: the persons which watched every night were 240, Midot. 1. 3.
divided into 24 bands or Companyes, each Company at least ten men, three
Companyes of Preistes and 21 Levites, which were divided and placed at all the
Cornets, gates, and Courts of the Temple round about. Concerning the other
appendences of this building so wonderful, so precious, and so holy, I
refer you to the Treatise concerning the Pourtraicture of the Temple, where I
have laid forth every thing most plain.

III. CHAPTER. Concerning the Vessels and Instruments of the Temple.
THe wonderful great multitude of holy Vessels used in the service of the
holy Temple of God, does take up abundance of gold and silver, the golden
Vessels were 340 thousand, the silver were 470 thousand, making together 810
thousand, the principal were for Ornament to the holy Temple, Jem. Wars. 6. 6.
and of the Tabernacle at their set times: but the most glorious were for the
Arc of the Covenant, that was wholly covered with Gold, with the twoe golden
Cherubims: the Arc was twoe cubits and a half long, and the breath thereof
one cubit and a half, and so much was also the hight thereof, and did weigh
with the Cherubims 200 pound weight of pure Gold, besides the Boards the 10
Golden Tables, upon which the shewbread was placed, were each of them twoe
cubits long, one cubit broad, and one cubit and a half high, after the fashion
of Moses, and contained one hundred pounds in weight. Midot 2.5. Antiq. 8.2.
The 10 golden Candlesticks (by each whereof were 7 golden Lamps) the height of
each was three cubits, the breadth above twoe cubits, (after the manner of
Moses) the gold of each weighed 100 pound weight: the Altar of Incense or
sweet perfume was also 100 pounds weigt in gold, which was in height twoe
cubits, and one cubit fouresquare: the Altar of burnt offerings was brass,
twenty cubits fouresquare, the height 10 cubits, did weigh 7000 Arobas (each
Aroba containing 25 pounds weight.) The ten brass Lavers with their arriages,
Midot 2. 5. and. 5. 1.
or bases on which they were placed or set, were each four cubits
fouresquare, and three cubits high, one Base weighed 2000 Talents, each Talent
of 93 pounds and upwards; the brazen sea, out of which the Priest cleansed or
purified themselves, was 10 cubits large fouresquare, five cubits high, the
Compass thereof was thirty cubits, the mettle or brass thereof weighed 1000
and 800 Arobas, (as above mentioned.) But with the 12 Bullocks (whereon the sea
stood) weighed 32500 Arobas, so that the holy Scripture says, that the
abundance of mettle or brass was not to be numbered.

V. CHAPTER. Of the Garments of the Priests.
TWoe several sorts of Garments were the Priests wont to use, when they served
in the holy Temple: the one used by the Common Priests in general, which
consisted of 4 pieces or parcells: the first was a very pure linen pair of
breeches or drawers, which reached from the loins to below the knees which was
worn to cover their nakedness: the Breeches upon the naked body, was threfore
close as a purse when it is shutt, which was drawn together with strings about
the Loins: the second piece was a certain dubble shirt woven after the manner
of Checkerworke, which opened along the shoulders, so much that the head
could go thorough, which openings were afterward closed together with loopes,
thereby to keep the breast with reverence covered: this Coat hung down to
the heels: the sleeves were wooven apart, but of the same stuff, and sewed
unto the said shirts: the sleeves were not wide, their length was to the joint
of the hand that so their service might not be hindered: the third was a
linen Girdle made as a swaddling band, the breadth three inches, the length 32
cubits, wrought with leaf work, with wool, or silk, purple and scarlet: the
said girdling being girded under the Armepirts, swathd the shirt close about
the body and breast, the twoe loose ends of the Girdle hung from the loins
downwards for ornament: the fourth was a vesture made of a linen swaddling
Band, of the fashion of a Cap, and was sewed round about like a Cap, with a
Border: this Cap (some say) was, covered over with Tiffany, Cypres or the like,
because no stitches should be seen bare; this Cap covered the least part of
the forehead; and behind the ears there were strings made fast to the Cap
which were tied fast under te Chin, to the end, that the Cap should not fall of
in their service.

Besides the said four garments, (which were also used by the Highpriest) the
Highpriest did also use four other Garments, (which first parts are already
mentioned:) the first was a stately woolen coat (but as others say) of silk,
of askie color, wholly woven all of one piece, without seame, without sleeves,
parted into twoe skirtes in the sides, with a hole for the head above, which
reached from before to behind, thorough which, the Highpriest thrust his head:
this shirt or coat had armeholes, without sleeves, and under the hemme of the
twoe shirts hung 72 golden Bells, with as many Buttons made of wool or silk
like Pomegranates of skiecolour purple and scarlet the half of the buttons or
Pomegranates and Bells upon each schirt, a Pomegranate between twoe Bells, a
and Bell between twoe Pomegranates: the lowermost ends of the Bells and
Pomegranates hung even with the hemme of the under Coat.

The second was a garment made in fashion as a wastcoate, which covered the
back, hanging from the neck to the Loins, the breadth covered the back and
the sides, but not the breast, for there it was open about a span in length
fouresquare, therein to place the breast plate with was just fitted thereunto:
at the lowermost corner of their garment there were twoe long strings,
wherewith the Priests loins were begirt, to the end that the garments might
fit close to the body, and also to the end that the breastplate might rest
thereupon; this garment was woven of gould and the purest linen and woollen
(some say) of silk, the color was skiecolour, purple, and scarlet, it had on
ecah side above, a shoulder piece in the manner of a band or swaddling band,
which took up the breadth from the neck to the shoulder, which was joined and
laced thorough gold loop inholes to the uppermost edge of the uppergarment:
upon each shoulderband was a precious stone laid or set in gold, on those twoe
stones were written or engraved the names of the twelve Tribes, on each stone
six names according to their birth. The third was a certain piece of twoe
spans length, being once foulded together just a span fouresquare, being of
the same stuff as the abovenamed garment: this was called the breastpiece,
heart piece or breastplate: within the fouldings thereof was placed the great
name of the LORD GOD, (which name God himself had revealed to Moses) by virtue
and power whereof those holy letters (with which he would answer) which were
graven in the stones of the breastplate, gave a pure and plain glance from
themselves, in clear plain and glistering beams: the breastplate was covered
over with a plate of gould in the which were wrought 12 fouresquare holes,
which were made fit upon the upriseing stones, which stones were very rare all
af one bigness, set in four rows, three deep, equally fitting one another,
so artificially set in gold, that those 12 Stones did seem to be one stone.
In the twoe uppermost Corners of the breastplate were twoe gould rings,
thorough which with twoe gold chains the twoe shoulderpieces of the
after-garment were fastened to the golden loopes, and stones: the undermost
corners of the breastplate had twoe gold ringes, thorough which skiecolourd
strings did run, which were fastened by the twoe lowermost goldrings of the
aftergarment, because the same might be put on the girdles upon the edges of
the aftergarment. The fourth was the Highpriests golden forehead plate, twoe
inches broad, the length was from the one side of the head to the other: the
oppermost edge of the forehead plate had points, as flower points or such as
crowns have, upon this golden plate were driven or beaten out letters to be
read, namely, Kodes Laadonnai, which is interpred, Holiness to the Lord. To
this golden forehead plate were fastened three-skie color strings, at each end
one, and one in the middle of the uppermost edge: the strings were bound fast
behind the head, the middlemost whereof went thwart over the middle of the
cap: but others say, that this threefold stringe or three skiecolourd strings
or bands, were wreathed one withinaother according to the breadth of the said
golden plate, and were made fast to the edges of the plate, and that the same
was (without being tied) put upon the Highpriests cap, standing in the form
of a crown upon the Highpriest head This was the form and nature of the eight
sacerdotall or priestly garments, wherewith the Temple was served, even as the
holy Scripture declares unto us.

END.

