THE HISTORY OF THE Rites, Customs, and Manner of Life, of the Present JEWS,
throughout the WORLD.

Written in Italian, by LEO MODENA, A Rabbine of Venice.

Translated into English, by Edmund Chilmead, Mr. of Arts, and Chaplain of
Christ-Church Oxon.

LONDON* Printed for Jo: Martin, and Jo: Ridley, at the Castle in Fleet Street,
by Ram-Alley, 1650.

TO THE Most Illustrious, and his most Honored Lord, and Patron, CLAVDE
MALLIER, Counselor to the most Christian King, and His Majesty's Ambassador
to the most Flourishing STATE of Venice.
THe Fame of your Lordships Gallantry having already spread it self throughout
all Italy, The Authors first Epistle Dedicatory, in the Parls Edition,
published by J. Gaffarel.
by reason of the report of your Lordships being chosen his Majesty's
Ambassador, as the most Prudent Person, to the most Prudent State of Venice:
whilst all others, that are any whit addicted to the Crown of France, applaud
this Election; and all persons of Worth, and Learning, earnestly expect your
Lordships Entrance upon this Charge; give Me leave also, as one of the least of
your Lordships Servants, to Congratulate this your Honor. And, since None
might appear before the Lord, Empty-handed; I have also made bold to present
your Lorship with this small Gift; which is, The History of the Manner of Life,
Rites, and Customs of my own Nation, at this Present: Which being dispersed
throughout the whole World, the Subject is therefore so much the more
Proportionate to the Vastness of your Lordships Knowledge, and Employment,
which pretends to a General Insight in Humane Affairs. Neither do I despair of
being Favorably received by your Lordship, since I perceive, that all the
Muses of Italy are of the same Judgment with Me; and all, with one Consent,
strive to proclaim your Lordships Praises to the World, in making Dedications
of the Choicest Fruits that the most Learned Academies have ever yet brought
forth: Beseeching your Lordship courteously to entertain, not the Gift only,
but the Perpetual Service also of the Doner; whose continual Prayer shall be,
that your Lordship may be crowned, with all, both Earthly, and Heavenly
Blessings.

Venice, Jan. 12. 1637. Your Lordships most Devoted Servant, Leo Modena.

TO THE Most Illustrious, and his most Honored Lord, and Patron, the Lord
President of HOVSSAY, Counselor to the most Christian King, and his Majesty's
Ambassador to the most Honorable STATE of VENICE.
My Lord,
THat Oblation, The Author's Second Epistle Dedicatory, in the second Edition,
published by Himself, at Venice.
which was once presented at one Altar, could not by any, but a sacrilegious
hand, be brought to any other: and therefore This Piece, which came formerly
forth at Paris, under the Patronage of your Lordships Name, ought not to seek
any Other, for this Second Edition, at Venice. Fame, the Trumpeter of Truth,
was, at that time, the Guide, that led me to direct my Pen, and my Affections,
toward your Lordship, so soon as I had received the report of your Lordships
being designed for the Charge of the Royal Interest: so that, having now the
Happiness of paying my Personal Devotions, and Services to your Lordship, I
ought not, by any means, to change my purpose. And seeing your Lordship was
pleased Favorably to receive your Servant, when he had no Opportunity of
making his Desires to serve your Lordship known, but by Writing only: I cannot
but hope, that your Lordship, having now read in my Countenance also, my Hearty
Affections, and Devotion to your Service, will confirm me in your Lordships
favor, and give me the Liberty of ever Professing myself

Your Lordships most Humble, and Devoted Servant, Leo Modena.

TO His most Learned, and Knowing Friend, LEO MODENA, A Rabbine of Venice.
James Gaffarel wishes all Health.
SIR,
I Have at length sent you, though not so soon as I should have done, your
History, of the Rites, and Customs of the Jewish Nation, which I have caused
to be Printed. And this I should have done much sooner, had not my own
continued Travells throughout almost all parts of France, together with the
Troubled Condition of our Kingdom, (wherein Mars had so frighted the Muses,
that they have scarcely yet put off their Trembling, and returned to their
Peaceful Cells again,) hindered me. For I ought not at all to have delayed, but
should have speedily returned you very great Thanks, upon the Receipt of your
Letter; in that, among so many, and so great Persons of Worth, and Learning,
that France affords, you were pleased to do Me so much honor, as to make
choice of Me, to be the Only man, to whose Censure you thought fittest to
submit this your Learned History. Not that I shall ever suffer my self to be
drawn into your Persuasion, and to believe, that, to undergo my Censure, is all
one, as to receive (...), the Height, and Crown of Approbation. But seeing
that you are pleased to have so great an Esteem of me, as that you have not
ceased by frequent Letters, to solicit me to give my Judgment, such as it is,
upon this your Learned Piece; I conceived it did not become me to deny you any
longer. For, that I may here give you your Just Praises, what Glory soever all
those Authors that have written of the Rites, and Customs, of the Jews, (who
were sometime called, The Holy Nation) can have deserved, it is all (I speak it
seriously, and without Flattery,) due to your Excellent History. For, the
greatest part of those other Writers, were, either not sufficiently acquainted
with the Secrets of the Jewish Religion; or else, were carried away with their
own Choler, and a burning Hatred against Them: or perhaps they were not very
skillful in the Hebrew Tongue, or were too much addicted to Dreams, and
Trifles* or lastly, were perhaps not so Faithful in their Writings, as they
should have been: Since Rashness it self is Ingenious enough in Lying; and a
Haughty Spirit cares not to inform himself sufficiently, in what he undertakes.
But, I must needs confess, you are free from all these Crimes: so that all
things, here, are Perfect, and every way Absolute: neither can I find where to
complain of any thing, unless it be, (pardon the Liberty I take, to speak
freely,) of the too much Brevity therein observed; so that, by this means, you
have omitted to say any thing, concerning the Origination, and Ground of the
Divine Precepts, to which you so strictly keep your selves: though this,
perhaps, you have done willingly, and of set purpose; lest otherwise you should
be forced, in relating the most Prodigious Allegories of those of Your Nation,
either to defend, or else condemn them. For they do so shamefully stuff up
their Writings with These; that a man would take them rather for horrid
Monsters, then for serious Stories; and, such as scarce Hercules himself would
ever be able to overcome. And yet I do protest seriously, that I could wish,
you had not past by with so quiet a Silence, that so infinite a Number of other
things, which do not a little puzzle, and perplex the most Learned of us
Christians: as namely, that of your Lilith; concerning which, it is a wonder to
observe, how many, Various Mysteries are delivered by the Rabbines: as
likewise, touching their Vestments, called (...), Zizith, or Tephilim: of their
Divination of Dreams: of the Modesty to be observed in their Easements: of the
Cock, offered for (...), Caparah, or, the Redemption of Sins: of the Mystical
Kindling of the Sabbath Lights: of the Closing up of all the Passages of a Dead
Man's Body: of the manner of making the Knot, wherewith they bind up the Jaws
of their Dead: of their Looking upon, and Cutting off their Nails: What their
Powder at present is, in Punishing Malefactors: of the Purging of Souls by
Fire; and the like. For, as concerning Lilith, whom they, in their Writings,
affirm to have been Adam's First, though Dis-obedient Wife; if we look but on
the Bare Letter only of these things; there is hardly any one so stupid, or
senseless, as not to perceive how justly all those things, which are frequenly
brought in, by the greatest Masters in the Secrets of your Religion* deserve to
be scorned, and hissed at. But if we but look higher, into the most Hidden, and
Mysterious Points, delivered by Your Writers; we shall not be able any where to
discover more Deep, and Profound Theology; as may appear to any one, that will
but take the pains, diligently to consider that Book of yours, which you call
Pardes tract. 21. cap. 5. And as concerning the Divination of Dreams, you might
perhaps forbear to say any thing here, because you had been before informed by
our Learned Countryman Naudaeus, that I had already, in a just Volume, written
upon the same subject, discovered whatsoever, in a manner, is to be found,
concerning the Observation of Dreams, both among the Hebrews, Egyptians, and
Chaldeans: and had also in another Work of Mine, spoken largely of the placing
of your Beds from North to South; which is one of your most Famous, and Sacred
Rites: Namely, in my Notes upon the Learned Nachman's Epistola Sacra, or, De
Sacro Conbitu: which having Translated into Latin, and illustrated with
Annotations, I promised to send to you, in a late Letter of mine, wherein I
desired to be informed by you, concerning the Mysterious manner of Making your
Tephilim, and the true Use of them; though you returned me not anything in
Answer. For, I earnestly desired to know the reason, why your Borders must
consist, each of them, of Five Knots, and Eight Threads: for I profess, I am
no whit satisfied with the Applying this, to the Five Books of Moses; and to
the Commandments of the most Glorious and Eternal Deity: as I neither am in
those other Subtle, Quaint Niceties, concerning the Easing of the Belly; where
you say, that Those that make water, Naked; in a Porch, or Entry of any House,
shall be Poor men: and that whosoever uses the Name of God, in any Stinking
Place, shall die shortly after. Neither am I satisfied any whit at all in the
Reason, which is given, for your stoping up all the Passages of a Dead Body,
after the Breath is gone out of it: and therefore the Wise Ben Maimon did very
discreetly forbear to say any thing of it, where he gives us the Plain Manner
of Ordering the Dead, in the beginning of his Halaca Ebhet, cap. 4. in these
words: (...) that is to say; The manner of the Hebrews Ordering their Dead, is
thus: They close their Eyes, and bind up their Jaws, if their Mouth chance to
gape; and stop up all the Passages of the Body, and anoint it with diverse kinds
of sweet Spices. Where he makes not the least Mention at all of That
Superstitious manner of stopping these Passages; lest he should seem to heap
Trifles upon Trifles. He likewise slightly passes over their Binding up of the
Jaws; and has not one syllable, of the Figure of that Maxillary Knot: which
yet I should have taken very Unkindly at his hands, but that the Author of the
Additions to Eleazar Metensis his Book, entitled (...), Jereim, has relieved
us herein, and preserved this Piece of Antiquity from being lost: For in the
17. Maamar, he says thus: (...). that is to say: They cover their Dead with
Winding-sheets, sewed together with White Thread: and if the Mouth gape never
so little, they bind it up with a Knot, the ends whereof represent the Figure
of the Letter (...). This Knot is made of Black Strings; which Sorcerers also
afterward make use of, in their Enchantments. I could wish, that you had
likewise furnished us, with some other such Passages as this, either out of the
Gamarah, or other Writings of the Rabbines; which might assisted Us in the
Understanding of those things, which you have delivered: Or, at leastwise, that
you had given us some Information, concerning your Power of Punishing
Malefactors, and your Ways of Punishments. For seeing you have, at present, no
True Power of Sentencing Offenders, you do not put any Criminal Person to
Death; but inflict some Other kind of Punishment upon him, which the Roman Law
is unacquainted with: as for Example, Your making them stand in Cold Water:
your Banishing them, and causing the Banished person to wear upon his back, an
Inscription, declaring the Cause of his Banishment: yonr causing them to sit,
Naked, upon an Ant-hill: Your making them to stand, Naked, among Swarms of
Bees, and to endure their Stings: Your enjoining them Tedious, and Restless
Watchings, and Perpetual Wanderings from place to place: Your forcing them to
submit themselves to be Trod upon, and Kicked by others; and to wear Iron
Chains about their Neck, either for ever, or for a certain time only; and
likewise your Binding their hands behind their Back, with Bonds of Iron: and
lastly, your so Long, and Irksome Fasts; by which your Penetentiaries have
become so stinking, and Ill-savoured, as that they have been rendered a Scorn,
and become Loathsome to all other Nations; and have been a fit subject, for the
most Witty, and Tart Epigrammatist to play upon. And these Fasts of yours are
so Rigid, as that they are called, in the Language of your most Secret
Theology, (...), Malcuth, that is to say, The Kingdom; intimating hereby,
Regnum Severitatis, The Kingdom of Severity. They are also called by the Name
of (...), Haiabascha, signifying, Dry, and Withered; as we are informed at
large, by the Zohar, the Treasury of the Mecubalists; and by R. Meir Gaun Ben
Gabbai, upon the (...), Derek Emunah. or, The Way of Faith; as also, by Abraham
Ben David, upon the (...), Jetzirah, cap. 1. Com. 40. Of this kind are your
Sabbatarian Fasts also, which they were Anciently wont to begin, by Looking
upon their Nails, and Paring them: for no other reason, as I conceive, but to
intimate thereby, the Prodigious Multiplying of the Children of Israel; who,
though they were cut off, as it were, like the Nails of a Man's Hand, in that
most heavy Bondage of theirs in Egypt; yet did their Nation still spring up
plentifully, and Multiply, in spite of their Egyptian Oppressors. The Learned
Rabbi Bechai conceives the Reason of this Custom to be; (...) that is to say;
That a man should think of the Excellency of the First Man, Adam, whose Garment
before his Fall, was like a Man's Nail, that is to say, of a White and Ruddy
color. Whence the Bride, being Sick of Love, Calls her Bridegroom, White and
Ruddy. But I shall omit to speak any more of this Particular, here; as having
elsewhere discoursed of it more largely. Their Sabbatarian Fasts were begun
then, by their Looking upon, and Paring their Nailss; and were ended with a
Doleful Hymn; which they, even to this day, are wont to prolong, (as you very
well note) after Sunset, every Sabbath day at Even, that the Souls of the
Wicked, (which they conceive, are free from their Torments all that day) may
return again unto them so much the later, by how much the longer this Doleful
Song is drawn forth in length. In the mean time the Pious Women take especial
care of the Lights, which they set up, on the Eve before the Sabbath, that they
may burn clearly: of which Ancient Superstition of theirs, you have, very
discreetly, forborne to make any mention: Namely, how they were of old, and at
this day are wont to promise to themselves Good, or Evil Fortune, according as
they find these Lights, to burn, either clearly, or dimly: which, certainly,
is, a a kind of Pyromancy. These women are very careful also, to see that these
Lights be every way Pellucid, and shine with an Equal Flame: which is the True
Reason also, as I conceive, why they do so much abhor (...), Levanah, the Noon,
when it is Horned; and also forbear to do any manner of Business, or Work, in
the New-Moones, when as but a Part of it is enlightened, toward us: and this
was the Reason, that there was Anciently a Propitiatory Sacrifice used to be
offered, in the Temple, at this time, which was supposed might be a means of
diverting the bad Influences of the New Moons from them. So that it may hence
appear, how much some of your Rabbines, (who are herein, though upon no very
good grounds, followed also by one of our Christian Divines; a man otherwise
very knowing in the Jewish Affairs) are wide of the truth; where they affirm,
that the Jewish women keep this day holy, because that it was upon the same
time, that they refused to give up their Golden Earrings, Chains, and other
Precious Ornaments, toward the making of the Golden Calf. And thus you may see,
that there are no sick men's Dreams so gross, but that some of the Wise ones,
may chance, sometimes, to take them up, and maintain them for Truth. The New
Moons then were accounted Unfortunate, by the Jewish Women, unless they
chanced to happen upon the Monday: upon which day, Rabbi Chomer, a Learned Jew,
and a very great Astronomer, accounts them to be most Fortunate; especially if
they happened after Sunrising: although neither He gives any Reason, why it
should be so; nor any other Author, that I ever remember to have seen. Not but
that I know very well, that the Talmudists have delivered in Bava Kama, cap. 7.
that the Divine Lawgiver went up into the Mount Sinah, to receive the Law,
upon a Thursday; and, having received it, he came down again upon a Monday;
which was the Reason perhaps (say They) why the Women have ever since kept this
Day Holy. But why should it not then be so kept, by the men also? But these
are Trifles. If a man might have liberty to give a guess at the reason, why
they accounted the New Mood, falling upon a Monday, to be Fortunate, I should
conceive this to be the most probable; namely, because that the Generation of
Mankind being much governed by Moisture, This day having a Moderate proportion
of it, is therefore thought the more Fortunate: and also, because it is the
second day of the week; which number the Pythagoreans conceive to be, etc.
Primus generans, the First in Generation: and therefore, it being so Fortunate,
and of so good Omen, to the business of Generation, which Women, by reason of
the Blessing promised by God upon it, do so much desire; they observe every New
Moon, falling upon a Monday, as a Holy day; and celebrate it, as being a
Fortunate day, as to the business of procreation of Children; that so, by this
means, they may be fruitful and happy in Childbearing. However the truth of
this be, it has been an Ancient Custom, both for Men, as well as Women, to
Fast upon Thursdaies, and Mondaies: yet not every week throughout the Year, as
Ben Caspi informs us, but only upon those weeks, which they called,
Sabbaticall. But, what those weeks were, I do not very well understand: and
therefore I conceive it would be more consonant to Truth, and to History too,
to say; that, Anciently, each several Week, throughout the Year, was called by
the name of (...), Sabbath; whence that boasting Speech of the Proud Pharisee
may receive no small light, when he says, in the Holy Gospel of our Savior
Christ, Jejuno bis in Sabbatho; I fast twice every Sabbath: that is to say, Two
days in every week; namely Mondaies, and Thursdaies: upon which days they yet
use, with the most vehement affection of mind that can be, to say a certain
prayer, which begins with these words, (...), Vehurachum; by the secret Virtue
whereof they believe, that those Three ships which were filled with the
chiefest of their Nation, and sent into Banishment by the Emperor Vespasian,
without either Oar, or Sail, about them, were delivered from most evident
peril of shipwreck: the first of which, they say, landed safe at a place,
called Lovanda; the second, at Arlada; and the third, at a place called
Burdela. Which names, though Buxdorfe say, are no where to be found; yet I
conceive, the two last of them may, without any absurdity, be understood of
Bordeaux, and Arles, or Orleans, two Cities of good Note, in France. But I
shall here forbear to prosecute these things any further, as you have done;
least while I endeavor to take away all scruples out of the Reader's way, and
to bring forth such Novel Points of Learning, as he must needs be pleased
withal; I should much exceed the Bounds of an Epistle, and offend him* with a
courtesy. I shall therefore, ( Learned Sir,) take my leave of you at present;
wishing you all the True health, which is to be found, only, in the Faith of
Christ; and beseeching God, that he would at length bring you home to the
sacred Banner of our Mediator, and Savior Christ; without which, the holy
Scriptures proclaim, that there is no way, or Passage to Heaven, and the Joys
thereof.

From Paris, Mart. 31. An. Dom. 1637.
The AVTHORS Answer, to the former Epistle.
SIR,
I Should think my self to have offended, beyond all excuse, if being now about
to to reprint my History of the Rights of the Jews, I should not say
something, in Answer to your Learned Epistle, wherewith you were pleased the
last year, to grace the First Edition of it. And indeed, what Return is not
due, from Me, to those Many Favors you have been pleased to show Me? seeing
that, when I sent this my History unto you, to be examined, and corrected; you
so courteously took this Trouble upon you, as that I cannot say, whither of the
Two took the greater Pleasure in it; You, in Conferring; or, my self, in
Receiving this Favor. And I must needs here confess, that it was a point of
my Cunning, to make choice of your self, in the perusing of my Book; the Fame
of whose Worth, and Learning, had long since, like the Sunbeams, broken forth,
and appeared even in our Horizon. For, you are as a Second Sun, in Learning;
and your Worth shines forth more eminently, then any others. For as all Ways,
and secret Paths, lie open, and are exposed to the Sun's View; in like manner
are the Entrances into all the Opinions, and most hidden Rites of all Nations,
open to you; who, having the Keys of all the chiefest Languages in your power,
do, at your pleasure, bring to light all the choicest Treasures, not only of
the Greeks, and Latins, but which is more strange, even of the Hebrews too:
That I may not say any thing of your Abundant Goodness, which moved you to
heap so many Praises upon Me, undeservedly: although, I confess, I dare own
That, of being a faithful Relator, as it was fit I should be; and my Style, I
confess, is also very concise. The Former of these owo Qualities I have been
endewed with, even from my Childhood; and the Later I have learnt, from my
observation of other Historians: neither could I ever endure, I confess, to
express my Conceptions, in a Copious, Flourishing Style. Yet I must needs
profess, that I see not any cause, why you should accuse me, in your Epistle,
of having omitted any thing. For, as I intimated in my Preface to my History,
though I set my self so narrow Bounds, and affected so great Brevity: yet I am
confident, I have not omitted any Rite, or Custom, now observed by the Present
Jews, (which was the Subject I proposed to my self) but only such things, as
I thought I was not bound to mention, as having been now a long time out of
Use, and neglected by them. Such as, for example, are, that Doleful Hymn,
etc. Their Story of Lilith: the so Superstitious Ordering of their Dead; the
Paring of their Nails; their Sabbatarian Fasts, and the like: all which
Customs are now quite out of Use among them. But, as concerning their Zizit,
and their Tephilim, I have discoursed of them, Par. 1. cap. 11. Of their
Dreams, Par. 1. cap. 4. Of their Modesty in their Evacuations, Par. 1. cap. 6.
Of the Cock, given for Caparah, Par. 3. cap. 6. Of the kindling of their
Sabbath Lights, Par. 3. cap. 1. and Par. 5. cap. 5. Of their Placing their
Beds, North and South, Par. 1. cap. 4. Of Malcuth, Par. 3. cap. 5. Of their
observing of Monday, and Thursday, Par. 1. cap. 1^. Of the Purging of Souls by
Fire, Par. 5. cap. 10. All which things, since they have undergone your Learned
Censure, and have also, by your Care, and Goodness, been committed to the
Press, I cannot possibly doubt, but that you have very diligently read over,
and considered. But perhaps, Learned Sir, you expected from me an Account of
the Reasons, and Grounds, of these Rites, and Customs, of Theirs: But this was
wholly besides my purpose; who never intended any thing at all, save only to
give my Reader a Bare Historical Narration of them: and to show only their,
Quod sunt, and not the Propter Quod sunt: as the Philosophers use to speak:
That these Customs Are, but not, Why they are: least, while I pretend to be a
mere Relater only, I should appear to be a Perswader. If there be any thing
you find wanting here, you need not go abroad for it, hoving so rich a Magazine
of Learning at home, within your own Breast; whence, I am confident, you are
able to bring forth, whatsoever the vast body of the Hidden Learning of the
Hebrews can afford. It remains, Sir, that I commit you to the protection of
God, the Great Creator, and Former of All things; beseeching Him, that he would
preserve you in Health, and bless you with Long Life, for the Common Benefit
of the Learned, and the more full Increase of Learning; for your own
Expectation of the deserved Rewards, due to your Worth; and, lastly, for my own
Particular Interest, in your Noble Patronage.

The AVTHOR'S Preface.
Courteous Reader,
IF the Curiosity of the Wisest Men has sometime raised a Desire in them, of
having knowledge of the Laws, and Customs, even of the very Gentiles
themselves, who were Worshippers of False Gods; that so they might draw thence
That Benefit, which a wise man knows how to gather from a Fool: what marvel is
it, if some very learned Christians have also long since had a desire, to have
some Account given them, of the Rites, and Customs, of the present Jews: the
Ground whereof cannot be denied to have been, once, derived from the true
Fountain of all Wisdom? and that they were disposed, by means, proportionable
to that end. I having therefore had my continual Conversation with, and been
brought up in the Service of Christian Prelates, and Persons of Honor; it has
been often moved unto Me, that I would write a short, and true account, of the
Manner of life, Customs, and Rites, observed by the Jews, at this day,
throughout the World. Which I having performed, some years since, and showed to
some of my Friends; I have bin since solicited, by some others, to enlarge it,
and publish it to the world, for a more public satisfaction to All, that
desire information herein. But I, refusing so to do, gave in these Reasons for
my denial: First, that it was needless; and secondly, that the Thing must
needs be suspected, from Me. It might be thought needless; because the
Business has bin already done by many Christians; and it would be suspected,
because it came from a Jew; of whom it might be very well doubted, that he
would either co^ceal, or change such things, as he should conceive not so fit
to be published, when he should consider better of them. But, to the first of
these my Objections, it was answered; that they were not so very well
satisfied, in what ever they had yet seen written of this Subject; their
discourses being either lame, and imperfect, or else, too copious in things of
least concernment; and written, rather in derision of this Nation, and to make
the Reader merry, then to inform him: wherein they have often lashed out so
much, as that they have wandered very far out of the way, and left their Reader
very much unsatisfied, in what they ought to have informed him. To the second
Objection it was answered, that very many persons of great Learning, and
Quality, were, after long experience, confirmed in so good an Opinion of Me,
and of my Integrity; as that it would not be questioned by Any, but that I
would deal ingeniously, and sincerely, in my Narration: So that, they could not
see any just reason that should hinder me, from complying with their desires.
Now I, that have bin always, naturally, easy to be entreated by my friends,
and obedient to the Commands of my Superiors, could not deny them any longer;
but have endeavored to satisfy their desires. Take here, therefore, Courteous
Reader, a Short Abridgment of the Rites, and Customs of the Jews: wherein
notwithstanding there is not any the least circumstance omitted; unless it be
such, as are not at all observed now, or regarded by them. I have divided this
History into Five Parts; according to the Number of the Books of the Law,
written by Moses. And, in my Writing, I have kept my self exactly to the Truth,
remembering my self to be a Jew, and have therefore taken upon Me the Person of
a Plain, Neutral Relater only. I do not deny, but that I have endeavored to
avoid the giving occasion to the Reader of deriding the Jews, for their so many
Ceremonies: neither yet have I at all taken upon me to defend, or maintain
them: for as much as my whole Purpose is to give a bare Relation of them only,
and no way to persuade any to the observing of them. However, very observable
is the saying of That Great Person, though not by many rightly understood,
(which yet is Agreeable to that of the Prophet Hosea, cap. 11.) Lex Judaeorum,
Lex Puerorum: that is, the Law of the Jews, is a Law of Children.

A Table of the Chapters, contained in this Book.
PART. I.
CHAP. I. OF the Division, and Original, of all the Jewish Rites; and, wherein
they differ among themselves. Page 1. II. Of their Houses, and Places of
dwelling, page 4. III. Of their Utensils, and Vessels in their Houses, p. 7.
IV. Of their Manner of Preparing to Bed; and their Esteem of Dreams, p. 9. V.
Of their Habits, and Vestments; and of their Fringes, and Frontlets, p. 12. VI.
Of their Modesty in Evacuation, p. 18. VII. Of the Manner of their Washing in
the Morning, p. 21. VIII. Of Uncleanness, p. 22. IX. Of their Benedictions, of
Laudatory Prayers, p. 23. X. Of the Form of their Synagogues, or Schools, p.
26. XI. Of their Prayers, Square Vestment, called Taleth; their Frontlets, and
Book of the Pentateuch, p. 32. XII. Of their Priests, and Levites, and of their
Wives, and Tithes, p. 43. XIII. Of their Flocks, and Tillage of the Ground. p.
46. XIV. Of their Charity to the poor, and their tenderness showed to their
very Beasts. p. 50.
PART. II.
CHAP. I. What Language they use, in their Ordinary Speech, Writings, and
Preaching, p. 56. III. Of their Academies, and Studies: and of the Original,
and Continuation of the Gemara, p. 62. III. Of the manner how their Rabbines
are created; and of their Authority, and power of Excommunication, p. 68. IV.
Of their Oaths and Vows. p. 71 V. Of their Dealing in Worldly Affairs, and of
their Usury, p. 73. VI. Of their Contracts, Evidences, Witnesses, Judges, and
Judgments, p. 77. VII. Of Meats that are Forbidden them: and how they eat their
Flesh. p. 80. VIII. Of their Drink, p. 98. IX. Of their making their Bread, p.
100. X. Of their manner of sitting at Meat. p. 101.
PART. III.
CHAP. I. OF the Feast of the Sabbath, p. 104. II. Of the Beginning of their
Months, and of their Order, and Names: and of the Thirteenth Month. p 119.
III. Of the Feast of the Passover, p. 124. IV. Of the Feast of Weeks, or
Pentecost, p. 134. V. Of their Caput Anni, or Beginning of the year: and of the
first Month, called, Elul, p. 137. VI. Of the Day of pardon of Sins, or
expiation, called Chipur, p. 143. VII. Of the Feast of Booths, or Tabernacles,
p. 148. VIII. Of their Fasts, Commanded, and Voluntary, p. 154. IX. Of the
Feast of Lights, called also, Chanucha, p. 161. X. Of the Feast of Purim, or
Lots, p. 164.
PART. IV.
CHAP. I. OF the several kinds, and degrees of Adultery, and Fornication, page
167. II. Of their Marriages, p. 171. III. Of their Contracts, and manner of
marrying. p. 174. IV. Of the Liberty a Woman, that was married Young, has, to
refuse her Husband: and of the Penalty of Forcing, or Deflowring a Virgin, p.
181. V. How their Women behave themselves, during the Time of their Courses,
and after Childbirth, p. 183. VI. Of the manner of Putting away their wives:
and of Jealousy, p. 186. VII. Of their Ibum, and Calitzah; that is to say, of
the Next Kinsman's Taking, or Refusing the Relict of his Deceased Kinsman, p.
193. VIII. Of their Circumcision, p. 201. IX. Of the Redemption of their
Firstborn, p. 209. X. Of the Manner of their Education of their Children, and
bringing them up in Learning, p. 212. XI. Of the Honor they account due to
their Parents, Tutors, Rabbines, and Ancient Persons, page 215.
PART. V.
CHAP. I. OF the Jewish Heretics: and particularly, of the Karraim, page 218.
II. Of the Manner of being made a Jew, p. 222. III. Of their Opinion concerning
all Magic, Divination, and Augury, p. 223. IV. Of their Slaves, p. 225. V.
What Precepts the Jewish Women are bound to observe, p. 236. VI. Of their
manner of Confessing their Sins, and Doing Penance, p. 228. VII. Of their Sick,
and Dead, p. 230. VIII. Of their Manner of Ordering their Dead, and Burying
them, p. 233. IX. Of their Mourning Praying for, and Commemorating of the Dead,
p. 239. X. Of their Paradise, Hell, and Purgatory, p. 243. XI, Of their Belief
of the Transmigration of Souls, the Resurrection, and Day of Judgment, p. 245.
XII. Of the Thirteen Articles of their Faith, page 246.
Faults escaped.
THe last Page of the first sheet, l. 16. read Power. B. p. 2. line 1. r.
Concubitu, B. 4. l. 22. r. have assisted. B. p. 8. l. 24. r. the Moon. B. p.
11. l. 7. r. to be, Primus. Page 43. l. 11. r. Tithes. p. 48. l. 12. r.
Untilled. p. 53. l. 7. r. called. p. 92. l. 10. r. within it. p. 97. l. 16. r.
it is unwholesome. p. 111. l. 16. r. uses. p. 112. l. 22. r. not say. p. 117.
l. 9. r. Sabbath's being. p. 118. l. 14. r. hands, p. 122. l. 19. r.
commemorate. p. 130. l. 21. r. take out. p. 146. l. 7. r. or not. Ib. l. 16. r.
consist. p. 149. l. 4. r. Wattelling. p. 153. l. 9. r. Sponsus Legis. p. 161.
l. 7. r. Wisemen. p. 162. l. 24. r. of Business. p. 178. l. 3. r. is done.
lb. l. 22. r. before,) they. p. 180. l. 13. r. brought her. p. 188. l. 18. read
this means. p. 198. l. 15. r. Planke. p. 202. l. 4. r. no Precept. p. 214. l.
2. r. to. p. 220. l. 7. r. acknowledge this. p. 226. l. 18. r. Three Precepts.
p. 239. l. 11. r. and then. p. 247. l. 16. r. Incorporeal. lb. l. 17. r.
Corporeal.

PART. I.
CHAP. I.
Of the Division, and Original of all the Jewish Rites; and, wherein they
differ among themselves.
THe Rites which are at this day observed, and in Use, among the Jews, are not
all of them of equal Authority, nor equally practiced by all, after one and
the same Manner. For we are to understand, that they are divided into three
Sorts: The first, are Precepts of the Written Law, (as they use to speak,)
namely, such as are contained in the Pentateuch, or Five Books of Moses; which
are in all 613. in number; that is to say, 248. Affirmative; and 365. Negative:
and these they call (...) Mizuoth de Oraita, that is to say, Praecepta Legis,
Precepts of the Law. The second sort are, of the Law given by Word of Mouth; by
which they understand all the Declarations and Expositions, which have been
given by the Rabbines, and Doctors, in all ages, upon that which was written by
Moses; besides many other of their Ordinances, and Institutions, which are not
to be numbered: and these they call (...), Mizuoth de Rabbanan, Praecepta
Sapientum, Precepts of the Wise men: all which are collected together in a
large Volume; a more particular Account whereof, we shall give you, in the
second Part, cap. 2. The third sort are, certain things, which at diverse times,
and in diverse places, have been brought into Use; or else have been any where
lately introduced; and are therefore called (...), Minhaghim Consuetudines;
Usances, or Customs. Now as these Usances have sprung from the Dispersion of
the Jews into diverse and several Countries, and have consequently borrowed the
Name, and Manner of Use, from the several Inhabitants: so on the other side we
are to take notice, that as well in the Particulars of the Law Written by
Moses; as in that other, received from the Mouth of the Wise men, there is very
little, or no difference at all, betwixt any Nation of the Jews, how remote, or
far distant soever their habitations be: Only in those things, that are of the
third sort, concerning Usances, and Customs, there is no small Variety to be
observed amongst them. And that chiefly, amongst these Three; the Levantines,
or Eastern Jews, the Dutch, and the Italian: comprehending under the Levantine,
not only all those that inhabit Eastwardly from us; but those of Barbary also,
Moors, Greeks, and those of Spain: as, under the title of Dutch, we understand
those of Bohemia, Moravia, Poland, Russia, and others. I am here therefore to
advertise the Reader, that as I shall endeavor, in this Discourse, to give a
touch at whatsoever is observed by the Jews, both from the Written Law, and
that of the Rabbines, and that other of Usance only; wheresoever any diversity
of Usage is mentioned, it is not to be understood either of the first, or
second sort of Precepts, which they account Essential, and wherein they All
agree; but only in those of the Third sort, to which the name of Precept
agrees not at all.

CHAP. II.
Of their Houses, and Places of Dwelling.
WHen any one builds a House, the Rabbines say, that he is to leave one part
of it unfinished, and lying rude: and this, in remembrance that Jerusalem, and
the Temple, are at present Desolate: and he must also use some expression of
sorrow; as it is in the Psalm 137. Si oblitus fuero Jerusalem, etc. If I forget
thee, O Jerusalem, let my right hand forget her cunning. Or at least, they use
to leave about a yard square of the wall of the house unplaistered; on which
they write, either the forementioned Verse of the Psalmist, in great letters;
or else these words, (...), zecher lachorban, that is to say, the memory of the
Desolation.

2. At the doors of their houses, and of each particular Room in them, and in
every part thereof, where they either dwell, or work, they write with very
great diligence, in Parchment prepared for the same purpose, these words out of
Deuteronomy, cap. 6. ver. 4. Audi Israel, Dominus Deus Noster unus est, etc.
Hear, O Israel, the Lord our God is one Lord: unto the 9. ver. Scribesque ea in
limine, etc. And thou shall write them upon the Posts of thy House, and on thy
Gates: and to this they add that other passage of Deuteronomy, cap. 11. ver.
13. Si ergo obedieritis, etc. If therefore you shall hearken diligently unto my
Commandments which I command you this day, etc. unto ver. 20. And thou shall
write them upon the door-posts of thine house, and upon thy gates: then rolling
this Parchment up together, and writing upon it the name (...), Shaddai, they
put it either into a Cane, or else into the like hollow piece of wood; and so
fasten it to the wall, on the posts of the door, at the right hand of entrance:
and thus, as often as they go in and out, they make it a part of their devotion
to touch this Parchment, and kiss it: and this they call (...), Mezuzah, that
is, The Post.

3. They have neither Figures, Images, nor Statues, in their houses; much less
in their Synagogues, and Holy places; observing that which is written, Exodus
20. Non facies tibi sculptile, etc. Thou shall not make to thy self any graven
Image, nor the likeness of any thing that is in heaven above, or in the Earth
beneath, or in the waters under the Earth: and also in many other places.
Notwithstanding, in Italy, many take the liberty of having Pictures and Images
in their houses; especially if they be not with Releif, or Imbossed work, nor
the Bodies at large.

CHAP. III.
Of their Utensils, and Vessels, in their houses.
THe Utensils of their houses, that is to say, the Vessels wherewith they
dress their Meat, and serve it in, must all be bought new. For if they should
have been used by any, besides Jews; or if they be of Earth, or Wood, that has
been made use of in heating any thing; a Jew can by no means use them: And this
they observe, from the prohibition of eating diverse kinds of Meats: as we shall
show in the 2. Part, cap. 6. for they presume, that some or other of these
forbidden Meats may have been dressed, or put into them, and so the fume of
them have pierced into the very substance of the Vessel. But if it be of
Metal, or of Stone, which do not suck so much, and receive in Vapors, they
may then make use of it; provided they first put it into the fire, or into
seething water.

2. When they buy any new, if they be of Glass, Earth, or Metal, they wash it
first thoroughly, plunging it under water, either in some River, Well, Bath, or
Sea: and this out of the Abundant Cleanness, which is enjoined them, Numb. 31.
23. Every thing that may abide the fire, ye shall make it go through the fire,
and it shall be clean: nevertheless it shall be purified with the water of
separation.

3. They have different Vessels, for the use of the Kitchen, and of the Table;
and, one dish for Cheese, and white-meats, and another for Flesh: it being
unlawful for them to eat either Cheese, or Milk, with Flesh; as we shall show
in the second Part, cap. 6.

4. In like manner have they different Vessels also for the Passover; such as
have not touched any Leavened Bread: as shall be said in the Third Part, cap. 3.

CHAP. IV.
Of their manner of preparing to Bed, and their esteem of Dreams.
THe Counsel of the Rabbines is, that there should care be taken, that the
Bed's head be placed toward the North, and the feet toward the South, or else
the contrary way; but it must not stand from East to West; out of Reverence to
Jerusalem, and to the Temple, which was endued with a greater measure of
Holiness in both those parts: but there are few that take any heed to this.

2. When they are lying down to rest, they use to say some certain Prayers to
God; beseeching him, that he would preserve them from all perils of the Night,
and that he would give them comfortable Rest, that they may rise alive, and in
health the next morning; saying moreover the aforenamed Verses out of
Deuteronomy, cap. 6. and the 91. Psalm. Whosoever dwells under the defense of the
most High, shall abide under the shadow of the Almighty, etc. and the 121.
Psalm. I will lift up mine eyes unto the Hills, from whence comes my help, etc.
and the 5. verse. Psalm. 31. Into thy hands I commend my spirit. Some add
moreover some other the like Prayers; every one, according to his own custom,
and fancy.

3. They take very great heed to dreams; induced thereto by the Examples, which
are found written in the Scripture, of Jacob, Joseph, Pharaoh, Nabuchadonosor,
Daniel, and others; and by that passage in Job, chap. 3. 14, 15, 16. For God
speaks once, yea twice; yet man perceives it not: In a Dream, in a Vision of
the Night, when deep sleep falls upon men, in slumberings upon the bed: Then
he opens the ears of men, and seals their instruction.

4. And so great is the regard they have to Dreams, that if any one dream of
any Ill, so that it causes him to be sad, and melancholy; particularly, if it
be any of the Four kinds of Dreams, which are specified by the Rabbis; they
Bless themselves; and so Fast all that day, as the manner is in all other
Fasts; as shall be declared hereafter. Insomuch, that, even upon the Sabbath
day also, whereon it is forbidden to Fast, for any other cause whatsoever, in
this Case of a Dream it is lawful to Fast, as well on It, as on any other Feast
day.

5. And in the Evening, when he has ended his Fast, before he eareth any
thing, he calls unto him three friends: to whom he says, seven times thus:
May the Dream which I have seen be fortunate; and they answer him every time;
May it be Fortunate; and God make it Fortunate. And then, repeating some
certain Verses out of the Prophets; wherein are Promises of Life, Redemption,
and Peace, they say unto him that of Ecclesiastes, chap. 9. 7. Vade ergo, et
comede in laetitia panem tuum, etc. Go thy way, eat thy bread with Joy, etc.
and so he goes to Meat.

CHAP. V.
Of their Habits, and Vestments; and of their Fringes, and Frontlets.
IT is unlawful for a Jew to wear any Garment, that is mixed of Linen and
Woollen together; according to that of Levit. chap. 19. ver. 19. Vest quae ex
duobus texta est, non induer is: Neither shall a garment ming led with linen
and woollen come upon thee: and also in Deuteronomy. 22. 11. And hence also they
observe, not to sewe a Woollen garment with Linen thread; nor contrariwise.

2. Likewise the man may not wear the woman garment; nor the woman the man's: as
it is said, Deuteronomy. 22. 5. Non induetur mulier vest virili, nec vir utetur vest
foeminea, etc. The woman shall not wear that which pertains unto a man;
neither shall a man put on a woman's garment: for all that do so, are
abomination unto the Lord thy God. And hence also all effeminate Acts, as, to
paint the face, to cause the hair to fall from the Privy parts, are forbidden
to the man; and so likewise are those of the Man, to the Woman.

3. And perhaps it was from hence, that the Jews were forbidden to shave the
Corners of their Beard; which they understand of the hair beneath the Temples,
as well as the Beard it self: from that place in Leviticus, cap. 19. ver. 27.
Nec radetis barbam, etc. Ye shall not round the Corners of your heads; neither
shall thou mar the Corners of thy beard.

4. They do not willingly imitate any other Nation in the fashion of their
Apparel; unless their own make them there seem very deformed. Neither may
they shave their Crown, nor wear Locks of hair upon their head; nor any the
like things. And, in what Country soever they are, they generally affect the
long garment, or Gown.

5. The Women also apparel themselves, in the habit of the Countries where
they inhabit. But when they are married, upon their Wedding Day they cover
their own hair, wearing either a Perruke, or Dressing of some other hair, or
something else that may counterfeit Natural Hair, according to the Custom of
the Women of that place: but they are never to appear in their own hair more.

6. The men also have no very good opinion of going Bare-headed; neither do
they use it, one to another, as an Act of Reverence; as, not esteeming it to be
so: neither yet are they uncovered in their Schools, or Synagogues.
Notwithstanding, living as they do, among Christians, where this Custom is
used in showing Reverence to ones Superiors, they also use the same.

7. Every garment they wear, if it have Four Corners, that is to say, four
distinct sides, they are bound to fasten to each of these Corners a Pendant, or
Tassel, which they call (...), Zizitt; so that there must be four of these
also: and they use to make them eight threads broad, each of them being knit,
to the middle, with five knots; and of Wool, spun of purpose for this use:
this they do according to that Command in the Book of Numbers, cap. 15. ver.
38. Speak unto the Children of Israel, that they make them Fringes in the
Borders of their garments throughout their generations; and that they put upon
the Fringe of the borders a Ribband of blue; and also in Deuteronomy. cap. 22. 12.

8. This Injunction reaches only to the Men, and not the Women; neither is
there any of them, which use it.

9. Now forasmuch as at present this Four-cornerd garment is not any where in
common use among them, because it would make them a scorn, and Laughingstock to
the Nations among whom they live; they, instead thereof, wear only under their
other Garments a kind of square Frock, with the aforesaid Pendants, or Tassels
fastened to it; and this they call (...), Arbancanfod: and this they do, in
remembrance of the Commandments of the Lord, as it is enjoined them in the
above cited place of Numb. ver. 40. Quas cum viderint, recordentur omnium
mandatorum Domini, etc. That ye may remember, and do all my Commandments, and
be holy unto your God. Notwithstanding in their Schools, at the time of their
Prayers, they put on a certain square Woollen Vestment, with the said Pendants
fastened at each Corner of it; and this they call (...), Taleth; as we shall
show hereafter, cap. 11.

10. The men also ought to wear continually their Frontlets, which the
Scripture calls (...), Totafot, and are named by them, (...), Tephilin:
commanded them, Deuteron. cap. 6. ver. 8. and cap. 11. ver. 18. Et ligabis ea
quasi signum in manu tua, etc. Therefore shall ye lay up these my words in your
heart, and in your soul, and bind them for a sign upon your hand, that they may
be as Frontlets between your eyes: the manner, and form of these, you shall
have described, cap. 11. Notwithstanding at present, partly to avoid the
scoffs of the Nations where they live, and also because they account of these,
as of a Holy thing, and such as ought to be used with great Discretion, and not
upon every Trivial Occasion, they neither put on These, but only in the time
of Prayer.

11. Some of them observe in dressing themselves in the Morning, to put on the
Right stocking, and Right shoe first, without tying it; then afterward to put
on the Left, and so to return to the Right; that so they may begin, and end
with the Right side; which they account to be the most Fortunate.

12. They hold it also an unbeseeming thing, for a man to make himself ready,
without putting on a Girdle; or something, that may divide the Lower part of
the body, from the Upper.

CHAP. VI.
Of their Modesty in Evacuation.
THe Rabbis have delivered very many Circumstances to be observed, in
Evacuation, or Easing the body, concerning the place, and manner how they are
to order themselves in the Act; all which are tending to health, civility, and
modesty. And they have been the more easily induced to treat of this
Particular, because they found it specified also in the Law, Deuteron. cap. 23.
ver. 12. etc. Habebis locum extra castra, ad quem egrediaris ad requisita
Naturae, gerens paxillum, etc. Thou shall have a place also without the Camp,
whither thou shall go forth abroad. And thou shall have a Paddle upon thy
weapon: and it shall be, when thou will ease thy self abroad, thou shall dig
therewith, and shall turn back and cover that which comes from thee. For the
Lord thy God walks in the midst of thy Camp, etc. therefore shall thy Camp be
holy, that he see no unclean thing in thee, etc.

2. And first They say, that they must accustom themselves to do this business
in the Morning, as soon as they are up; and afterward to wash their hands,
that so they may go clean to their Prayers.

3. Whenever a man feels himself moved toward this business, he must not
hold it: for in so doing, he should render himself willingly abominable;
against the Command given Levit. cap. 11. ver. 44. Nolite contaminare animas
vestras, etc.

4. If the place be such, as that they may be seen by any, they must then use
all possible Honesty, and Modesty. In Ancient times, when they had not the
Conveniencie of doing this business within doors, but were fain to go abroad,
they observed very many points, tending toward the Modesty of the Act: and
because the place might sometimes not be so safe, and free from dangers, they
used a certain form of Prayer, or Invocation, to their Tutelar Angels, that
they would defend them from all dangers: but at this time there is no such
thing used.

5. After they have done, they must wash their hands, and give praise to God;
acknowledging his great Goodness, and Wisdom, in that he has made Man in so
Wonderful a manner, and so preserves him: Whereas if the passages for the
Evacuating the superfluities of the body should be stopped up never so little a
while, he would die. And this Benediction they use to repeat, as often in the
day, as their Necessity calls them to this Act.

CHAP. VII.
Of the manner of their Washing in the Morning.
THey wash their Hands, and Face, every Morning, as soon as they are up: and
before they have so done, they take special care that they touch not either
Bread, or any thing that is to be eaten; neither any Book, or Holy thing.

2. As concerning the Quality of the Water, and the manner of Washing, the
Rabbines have written, and enjoined many Subtilties, and nice Circumstances:
and they also say, that the water must not be cast upon the ground; nor may
they tread upon it; because they account it an Unclean thing.

3. While they are Wiping their hands, and face, they say a Benediction: as we
shall see in the 9. Chapter following.

CHAP. VIII.
Of Uncleanness.
IT was ordained in the Law, as appears out of Leviticus, that whosoever
touched a Dead body, or the Carcass of any Creeping thing, or a Leaper, or
Menstruous person, and the like, should be Unclean: but for as much as the
reason of this was, because such persons were forbidden to enter into the
Temple: now that the Temple is destroyed, They say, that all these Precepts of
Uncleanness are ceased also. Only this one remained some time in force, by the
Appointment of Esdra; namely, that he, whose seed of Copulation has gone from
him, should be Unclean: as it is commanded Levit. 15. 16. Vir de quo egredietur
semen Coitus, etc. And if any man's seed of Copulation go out from him, then he
shall wash all his flesh in Water, and be Unclean until the Even. But this
being afterward found to be too full of trouble, and difficulty, to be
observed, by reason of the frequent Commerce betwixt Man and Wife, it was at
length wholly dispensed withal.

CHAP. IX.
Of their Benedictions, or Laudatory Prayers.
WE are here to understand, that it is ordained by the Rabbines, that they
should say a Benediction, and render particular praise and thanks to God, not
only for every Benefit that they receive, and in all their Prayers; but even
upon every Extraordinary Accident also that befalls them, and in every action
that they do; and likewise for every Meat they eat, and every Liquor they
drink, and every Good Smell; for all the Precepts of the Law, and of the
Rabbines that they observe; for every New thing, and every Strange thing that
happens: and for each of these particulars, they have a Proper Benediction, and
which is fitted, and appropriated to such, or such a thing. But seeing these
several Benedictions are so many, as that it would be too tedious a business
here to rehearse them, I shall only touch at some of them, referring you to
the Writings of the Rabbines, for fuller satisfaction herein.

2. In the Morning then, as soon as they are up, they say this; Blessed be thou
O Lord our God, who raisest the Dead to life; who give sight to the blind;
who stretchest forth the earth upon the waters: and many other the like. If
they Wash, according to the Precept, they use this Benediction: Blessed be thou
O Lord our God, King of the World; who have sanctified it in thy Precepts, and
commanded us to wash our hands: if it be for the Study of the Law, they say;
Blessed, etc. who have given us the Law: If in rejoicing, when they Eat Bread;
Blessed, etc. who bring bread out of the Earth: if in Drinking; Blessed,
etc. that have created the fruit of the Vine: for the Fruit of other Trees;
Blessed, etc. that have created the Fruit of the Trees: for the Fruits of the
Earth; Blessed, etc. that have created the Fruits of the Earth: for any
pleasant Smell; Blessed, etc. who have created such an odoriferous thing: when
they behold the high Mountains, or the Vast Sea; Blessed, etc. who have created
all things from the beginning: when they see, eat, or put on, any New thing; and
likewise, at the beginning of every Solemn Feast; Blessed, etc. who have given
me life, preserved me, and brought me up to see this day: if any one die;
Blessed, etc. thou Judge of Truth. In a word, both in all Things, and Actions
whatsoever, either before, or after; and in some, both before, and after, they
say some Benediction to God: accounting it a high point of Ingratitude, if they
should enjoy, and make use of any thing in the world, without having first made
a Thankful Acknowledgment of it to God, the Creator of all Things.

3. And they are bound to say, at least, a Hundred Benedictions, every day: and
because they use to say the most of them in the morning, when they go to their
Devotions in the School; these first morning Benedictions are therefore called,
(...) Meah Beracoth; that is to say, The Hundred Benedictions.

CHAP. X.
Of the Form of their Synagogues, or Schools.
THey make their Synagogues, which are called by them, Schools, either little,
or great, on the ground, or above stairs, standing by themselves, or in part
of another house, according as their best opportunities will give them leave:
it being Impossible for them now to erect any starelie, or sumptuous Fabrics.

2. The Walls within are only whited, or else wainscoted, or lined with
boards: and round about them are written certain Verses, or Sentences,
exhorting to Attention in Prayer. And round about the School are Benches made,
to sit on; and, in some, there are also certain Chests, to lay books, cloaks,
and other things in. Over head are many Lamps, Candles, and Lights, both of
Wax, and of Oil, to enlighten the place. At the doors are Boxes, or little
Chests, into which, who so pleases, puts in Money; which is afterward
distributed to the Poor.

3. In the East part is placed an Ark, or Chest, which they call (...) Aron; in
Imitation of the Ark of the Covenant, that was in the Temple: and herein is
laid up the Pentateuch, that is to say, the Five first books of Moses, written
most exactly, in Parchment, and with Ink prepared for the same purpose, in a
large square letter, which they call (...), Merubaath, Majuscula, in imitation
of one of those Books, which was written by the hand of Esdra, (whereof such a
one is said to be at Cairo,) who copied out that which was written by Moses his
own hand; as we read in the Cap. 8. of Esdra. And there must be so much
exactness used in the Writing of this book; as that if there should chance to
be but one of the least letters, as a Vau, or a Jod, more or less, then the
just number, it must be thrown aside, as useless, and not fit to be read at
all: and many other Particulars there be, wherein the Transcriber may thus
dangerously err; which are all set down at large by the Rabbines. Now this
Book is not made up in the form of other books now in use, but in manner of a
Roll, as all books were anciently used to be made; that is to say, Large pieces
of Parchment are sewed together at length, with Thongs made of the skin of some
Clean Beast, and not with Thread; which they roll up, and unrowl at pleasure,
upon two staves of Wood. For the better preserving of this Book, it is always
covered with a Case of Linen, or of Silk, which the Women use to beautify
with Needlework, and Imbroyderie, with all the art they can, and so present it;
and also with another Silken cover about it, by way of Ornament. And he that is
of ability, will cover the Ends of the Two Staves, whereon his book is rolled
up, which are called (...), Etz chaijim, Ligna vitae, with something of silver,
either in the form of Pomegranats, which they yet for this reason call (...),
Rimonim; Pomegranats; or of Bells, or some other the like: or else they
encompasse them about at the top with a Coronet of silver, either that goes
round about them, or else hanges as it were in the midst before them: and this
they call (...) Chatarath, or (...)* Cheder torah, Corona legis, The Crown of
the Law: according to the Use and manner of the place, and the Fancy of the
Owner of the Book. And there are in this Ark, or Chest, sometimes Two,
sometimes Four, Ten, Twenty, or more, of these Books: and they are called all
of them (...), Sepher torah, The Book of the Law: and out of These, they read,
on every Festival day, and other set Times; as we shall show hereafter in its
proper place.

4. In the Midst, or else at the Upper End, there is a kind of Wooden Table
raised up something high, on which they lay the said Book, when they read in
it; and on which they lean, when they either preach, or otherwise speak to the
Congregation upon any Occasion.

5. There is also a place either above the rest of the Congregation, or on one
side of it, separated from the rest by Lattises of wood, for the Women; who
there stand at their Devotions, and see whatever is done in the School, though
they are themselves unseen of any man, neither do they at all mix with them;
that by this Means, their Minds may not be led aside by any Sinful Thought,
during the time of Prayer.

6. Notwithstanding, the Situation, and Ordering of all these Particulars is
diverse, according to the different Customs of the several Countries,
Nations, and places where they inhabit.

7. There is One, that sings out the Prayers louder then the rest, whom they
call (...), Cazan; and Another, that has the charge of looking to the School,
and keeping it Clean, and Orderly, to set up Lights, and to attend all other
needful Offices that may occur, during the time of Prayers; and he also
keeps the Keys of the School. This Officer is called (...), Schamash, that is
to say, a Minister, or serving Officer. And both of these, as well the Cazan,
as the Shamas, have stipends allowed them, out of the Common stock of the
School they are of.

8. Of these Synagogues, or Schools, there are perhaps one, two, six, ten, or
More, in a City; according to the Proportion of the Jews there inhabiting:
allotting to each School such a number of persons, as it will receive; and
according to the different customs of the Levantines, Dutch, and Italians:
because there is more Diversity found amongst them, in this Particular, and in
what else relates to their Prayers, then in any other thing whatsoever; every
Nation following herein its own particular Fancy.

CHAP. XI.
Of their Prayers, square Vestment called Taleth, their Frontlets, and Book of
the Pentateuch.
THey repair to their Devotions in their Synagogues, or Schools, three times a
day; that is to say, in the Morning, from Sunrising, till about the Fourth
hour of the day; and this they call (...), Schacrith: in the Afternoon, about
the Ninth hour; which they call (...), Minchah: and in the Evening, at the
beginning of the Night; and this is called (...), Arbith. But in many places,
except it be upon Festival days, they say their Afternoon Prayers, and their
Evening, all together, about the time of Sunset, as being the more convenient
time.

2. They always wash their hands, before they enter into the School: and in
the Morning, they must neither eat nor drink any thing before they go, nor do
any manner of business, nor so much as go to salute any friend, nor do any
reverence to any.

3. In the Morning, as soon as they are entered, they put on each man his
Taleth, or square Vestment, mentioned before, chap. 5. 7. 8. and 9. saying the
Benediction, Blessed be thou, etc. which is used, when they put on their
Zizith, or Pendants. And some put it only on their head; others turn it back
about their neck, that so they may be the more attentive at their Prayers,
without looking aside any way.

4. After this they put on their (...), Tephilin, mentioned before, chap. 5.
paragr. 10. Which are made after this manner: They write upon two pieces of
Parchment, with Ink prepared for the same purpose, and with very great
exactness, in a fair square letter, in each of them these Four passages out of
the Law. The First is out of the Chap. 6. Deuteron. ver. 4. Hear O Israel, the
Lord our God is one Lord, etc. the Second out of the 11. Chapt. ver. 13. And it
shall come to pass, if you shall hearken diligently unto my Commandments which
I command you this day, etc. the Third out of Exodus, Chap. 13. ver. 1. And the
Lord spoke unto Moses, saying; Sanctify unto me all the First born, etc. and
the Fourth, out of the same Chapter, ver. 11. And it shall be, when the Lord
shall bring thee into the land of the Canaanites, etc. And these they roll up
in a black piece of Calves skin; that is to say, in One of them they put all
the aforesaid passages of Scripture together in one Roll, made up pointed at
the end, which they fasten to a square piece of the said Calves skin, in the
hardest part of it; out of which skin there comes a certain String, or Thong of
the same Leather, being an Inch broad, and about a yard and a half long: so
that it may be tied upon the Brawnie part of the Left Arm; and the said string,
after a small knot made up, in the fashion of a Jod, may be turned round about
the Arm, and so reach down to the middle Finger of the Hand: and this they call
(...), Tephilah shel jad, that is to say, The Pendant of the Hand. In the
other, the aforesaid four places of Scripture are divided into four several
parts, each from other; and being afterward fastened together again, they make
a kind of square, with the figure of the letter Schin upon it: and then
fastening it to the like square piece of hard Leather, as the other was, there
are cut out of it two such Strings, or Thongs, as the other had: and so the
said Square is to be placed upon the midst of the Forehead, the two strings
encompassing the head, and being tied in a knot behind, in the figure of a
Daleth, and the rest of them hanging down before, upon the Breast: And this
they call (...), Tephilah shel roseh, The Pendant of the Head. These are the
Frontlers, which together with the Taleth they generally put on every Morning,
and only then: although there are some of the more Devout among them, that put
them on at the Afternoon Prayers also: but there are not many that do so;
unless it be the Cazan, or Chaunter, who always puts on the Taleth, or Square
Vestment.

5. When they see, that there are Ten men, of the age of Thirteen years and a
day, assembled together, (for if they be under the number of Ten persons, they
may not begin to sing Prayers solemnly:) the Cazan, or Chaunter goes then to
the Table, or Wooden Altar before spoken of; and there begins the Prayers in a
loud voice, all the rest of the Congregation saying after him, in a softer Tone.

6. The Manner of saying their Prayers is very different among the Three
several Nations above specified: and indeed there is not any thing wherein they
differ more, then in this; as was intimated before. In their singing, the Dutch
far exceed all the rest: the Levantines, and Spaniards, use a certain singing
Tone, much after the Turkish manner; and the Italians affect a more plain, and
quiet way, in their devotions. The forms and words are more, or less,
according to the day, whether it be a Festival, or otherwise; and yet there is
some difference among them, on their Festivals also.

7. Nevertheless the main Body, and substance of their Prayers, wherein all
in a manner agree, is this. In the morning they say certain Psalms, especially
the 145. Exaltabo te Deus meus Rex, etc. I will magnify thee O God my King,
etc. to the end: and all those following Hallelujahs: then a certain Collection
of Praises to God, which is often repeated in all the Prayers, and at all
times: a short prayer called (...), Cadisch, that is to say, Holiness: a
Prayer of Thanksgiving to the Creator of the Light, and of the Day; which they
call, Jozer: that of Deuteron. Audi Israel, etc. Si ergo Obedieritis, etc.
diverse times mentioned before: together with those words out of Number. cap. 15.
Loquere filiis Israel, ut faciant sibi fimbrias, etc, These three Lessons are
called Chiriat Scheman: then follows the Veiaziu, etc. the Nineteen
Benedictions to God: the Schemonah Asre, wherein giving praise to God, they
crave at his hands all things that are most necessary for them, as Food,
Health, Understanding, Liberty, Forgiveness of sins, etc. which they first say
in a low voice, and is afterward repeated aloud by the Cazan; adding thereto
the 145. Psalm, and some certain verses out of the Prophets; and that of
Isaiah, cap. 6. Sanctus, Sanctus, Sanctus, Dominus Deus exercituum: Holy, Holy,
Holy, Lord God of hosts, etc. with the interpretation of the said words in
Chaldee: and after all this is said, there follows one Lesson more; and in the
last place they give thanks to God, who has enlightened them to do him
service; beseeching him, that he would be pleased to bring all men unanimously
to the knowledge, and worship of Him: And so saying, the Haleno lesabeah, they
make an end of their Morning Prayers.

8. On Mundayes, and Thursdays, they add in their Prayers, after the Schemonah
Asre, certain Confessions, and Penitential Prayers. And these two days they
account the fittest of the whole week, for a man to indict himself either a
Fast, or any manner of Abstinence; calling these two days, Days of Justice:
because that Anciently, the Magistrates, and Ministers of Justice were wont in
their several Cities; to sit on these days, and administer justice; and the
Villages, and places adjacent, came all in, as to a Market, to the chief City,
or Town, as it were in a kind of relation to the divine Justice.

9. In their Afternoon Prayers, they begin with the 145. Psalm; then the
Cadisch; the Nineteen Benedictions; the Schemona Asre, first in a low voice,
and afterward aloud: and so repeating the Cadisch again, they make an end.

10. In the Evening they say certain Praises to God, who brings on the Night;
and, who loving Israel, gave them his Precepts: then the Three Lessons, called
Chiriath Scheman: an acknowledgment of his mercy, in bringing them up out of
Egypt; after that, a prayer, that he would vouchsafe to preserve them that
Night from dangers: then 18. verses out of the Prophets, the Nineteen
Benedictions, the Schemona Asre, in a plain Tone only, the Haleno Leschabeah;
and lastly, the Cadisch, with which they end their Evening Service.

11. These are the principal parts, of which their three daily Services do
consist always: and although that on their Solemn and Feastival days, there are
certain other pieces added, suitable to the day, and the present occasion, as
shall be declared in its proper place; yet is this the Base and Groundwork of
the business, both for the Order, and substance of the whole. And thus far
there is no great difference, betwixt the three principal Nations above
specified; but they do, in a manner, all conform to this Method in their
Devotions.

12. The whole Pentateuch they divide into 48. or 52. Lessons, which they call
(...), Paraschoth, that is to say, Divisions: and one of these is read every
week in the School; so that by this means, throughout the whole Year, though
it should have thirteenth Months in it, it will notwithstanding all be read.
On Mondaies, and Thursdaies, after the penitential prayers, they take the
Sepher Torah, or Book of the Law before spoken of, chap. 10. out of the Chest
or Ark; and saying the Third verse of the 34. Psalm; O magnify the Lord with
me, and let us exalt his name together; and some others the like, they lay it
upon the Table, or wooden Alter: and then taking it out of the Covers, and
opening it, there are three persons invited up, to read the beginning of the
Parascha, or Lesson for the day; One, one piece; and another, another: and
these say a Benediction, at the beginning, and another at the end. Then the
Cazan, or Chanter, gives a blessing upon them; and so each of them promises
to give something, either to the Poor, or to the use of the School; or else to
the Chanter himself, or to the Schamas, or Ministering Officer. After this, the
said Sepher Torah is lifted up on high, open, and the Holy Scripture, contained
in it, is showed to all the Congregation; saying these words out of Deuter.
cap. 4. ver. 44. Ista est Lex, quam proposuit Moses coram filiis Israel, etc.
This is the Law, which Moses set before the Children of Israel, etc. But the
Levantines use to hold up the Book, in the sight of the People, before they
begin to read in it. After this is done, they shut it up, and put it into its
Covers, and so lay it up in the Chest again.

13. This Ceremony, of Reading in This Book, and of Inviting, in this manner,
more, or fewer, up to the Reading in it, is said to have been ordained by
Esdra; and it is done every Feastival, and every Fast day; as shall be
hereafter declared in order.

14. And because every one desires, out of Devotion, to have a hand in some or
other of these Religious Acts, either of taking forth, or laying up the Book
again, or other the like Occurrences, during the time of Prayers; these Favors
are therefore bought of the Chaunter; and he that bids most, shall have a
share in them: and the Money, which comes in this way, goes either to the use
of the School, or else to the Poor man's Box.

CHAP. XII.
Of their Priests, and Levites; and of their Wives, and Titles.
IN Ancient Times, while the Temple stood, their Priests were only such as
were descended from the stock of Aaron; as we read in Exodus, chap. 29. and in
other places. And these served at the Altar, in offering all their Sacrifices
and Oblations, burning Incense, and whatever other Religious Duties were to be
performed: and to them was given, not only those Portions of the Sacrifices
there set down; but, of every Beast also that was killed, they were to have the
Shoulder, the Head, and the Inwards and likewise the Firstlings of all their
Flocks, and Herds; the Price of Redeeming the Firstborn of their Sons; the
First Shearing of their Sheep; Two in the Hundred, at the Gathering in of all
their Fruits; a Piece of Dough, when they made their Bread; and all other
things, set down at large in the Scriptures.

2. The Levites were to sing, at the times appointed, in the Temple: and their
Portion was, the Tithe of their Fruits; which they gathered up, going from
place to place, throughout the several Villages.

3. But now that they are no longer bound to the payment of these Gifts, except
those Jews only, that inhabit within the Territory of Jerusalem, and other
parts of Judaea; and also because there are very few of them that have either
Lands, or Flocks; it is hence come to pass, that notwithstanding there are
many among them, that pretend to have it delivered over unto them by Infallible
Tradition, that they are descended of the Stock of the Ancient Priests, and
Levites; yet since the Transmigration has been so long, and so Universal,
these men have no Privilege at all above the rest: save only, that the Price
of Redeeming the Firstborn of their Sons, belongs to Them; and besides, they
have the Privilege of being the First in Reading in the Pentateuch, when they
are invited up to it among others: as was declared in the Precedent Chapter,
Part 12. They also Bless the People, upon solemn Feastival days, saying those
words out of Numb. chap. 6. verse. 24. Benedicat tibi Dominus, and custodiatte,
etc. The Lord bless thee, and keep thee, etc.

4. They may not touch, not stand under any Roof, or Covered place, where any
Dead Person is. The Firstborn of their Males are also redeemed from Them: as
we shall show, Part. 4. Chap. 9.

5. A Priest may not take to wife any woman that has been put away by a former
Husband; nor any Kinswoman, that has had the Caliza, or been refused by her
Husbands Brother: as shall be declared, Part. 4. cap. 7.

6. Lastly, in some few Cases, the Levites follow in their order, next after
th^^ Priests.

CHAP. XIII.
Of their Flocks, and Tillage of the Ground.
THey may by no means sow two sorts of seed together, as Wheat and Barley; and
the like: much less may they sow them together with the stones of Grapes: as
it is written, Levit. chap. 19. ver. 19. Agrum tuum non sere^ diverso semine,
etc. Thou shall not sow thy field with Mingled Seed, etc. Neither may they
Graffe any Tree, or Plant; as a Nut-tree upon a Peach-tree; or an Apple Tree
upon an Orenge-tree; and the like: neither may they plant young Graffes among
their Ploughed Lands: notwithstanding it is lawful for them to eat of the fruit
that grows upon the said Graffes, or Trees.

2. If a Man plant any Tree that bears fruit, he may not eat of the fruit of
it, till after the Third year that it had been planted: notwithstanding that
Anciently it was the Fourth year also to be brought unto the Temple: and Now it
is redeemed, with some little Ceremony. And this they observe, out of the said
Levit. 19. 23.

3. They may not put together any Beast with another, that is not of the same
kind; as an Ass and a Cow, or the like, that they may engender one upon the
other: as it is said, Levit. chap. 19. ver. 19. Jumentum tuum non facies coire
cum alterius generis animantibus, etc. Thou shall not let thy cattle gender
with a diverse kind. Neither may they yoke them together, either in plowing
their Land, or drawing a Cart: as it is enjoined, Deuter. cap. 22. ver. 10. Non
arabis in Bove simul, and asino, etc. Thou shall not plow with an Ox, and an
Ass together.

4. In reaping their Corn, they were to leave a part of their field uncut: and
so likewise in gathering in their Vintage, they were commanded to leave some
Grapes behind them.

5. Every Seventh year their land was left Untilied; and whatsoever sprung up
of it self that year, went to the Poor: as we find, Levit. cap. 25.

6. The Firstlings of the Males of every Clean Beast, as of Cow, Sheep, and the
like, if they be without blemish, they may neither eat nor keep for their own
use; because Anciently they were to be given to the Priest, or else they were
to be redeemed of him. And so, at this time, they may not make any use of them,
neither for food, nor any other service, except they should chance to be some
way Defective. An Ass must be redeemed with a Lamb, given to the Priest; as it
is written, Exodus 13. 13.

7. If any one find a Nest, in the field, of Clean Birds, that is to say, such
as it is lawful for them to eat, and the Damme sitting either upon the Eggs,
or the young ones, he may not take the Damme with the young; but if he will
take away the Eggs, or the young ones, he must let the Dam fly. And this is
commanded in the Chap. 22. ver. 6. Deuteron. Si nidum avis inveneris, etc. If a
Birds nest chance to be before thee in the way, in any tree, or on the ground,
whether they be young ones, or Eggs, and the Dam sitting upon the Young, or upon
the Eggs, thou shall not take the Dam with the Young.

CHAP. XIV.
Of their Charity to the Poor, and their Tenderness showed to their very
Beasts.
IT cannot be denied, but that this Nation is very full of Pity, and
Compassion, toward all people in want whatsoever: seeing that, notwithstanding
there must necessarily a very great number of them be such; the greatest part
of them being Poor, and the whole Nation exposed to more Misfortunes, then any
other People in the world; and besides, those few Rich men, that are found
amongst them, having neither any Revenues, or Possessions, which are only
properly to be called Riches: yet notwithstanding do they relieve all their Own
Poor, principally; and besides these, what other Person soever they find to be
in want; and that upon all occasions.

2. In great Cities, the Poor go every Friday, and on the Eves of every solemn
Feastival, to the houses of the Richer sort, and of others also that are but of
Indifferent Fortunes, collecting their Benevolence; and to all of them is given
something, according to each man's Ability: besides, that there are the (...)
Parnassin, or (...), Memunim, men that are deputed to be Overseers of the Poor,
and which send their Allowances home to their houses; especially to such as
have been men of Esteem, as also to those that are ashamed to ask, to the sick,
and to poor Widows, who do not so much as stir abroad all the week long.

3. In each School, or Synagogue, all the Offerings are put together, and Part
of That also, which is given for the Favor of being an Assistant in any of the
Religious Ceremonies before mentioned, cap. 11. paragr. 14. and that which is
cast into the Poor man's Box: and all this is distributed among the Poor.

4. But in case of any extraordinary Occasion; as when any Poor man, either of
that City, or a Stranger, is to marry a daughter, or to ransom slaves, or the
like; the aforesaid Overseers procure a Promise to be made him, from each
particular man in the Congregation; that is to say, the Chaunter upon the
Sabbath day goes about the School, and says to each particular person; The
Blessing of God be upon the man; that shall give so much, to such a Charitable
Work. And because it is unlawful so much as to touch any money upon the Sabbath
day, therefore every man in particular makes a Promise to give what he
pleases; and this is called (...), Nedabah, Oblatio Voluntaria, a Voluntary
Offering, or Free Gift: which each man very willingly pays, the week
following, according to the sum which he had formerly made Promise of. And so,
all the Particular Sums, being put together, are delivered to the Poor man, for
whom they were collected.

5. There are moreover, in every Great City, several Fraternities, or
Companies of select Officers, who have the charge of many Works of Charity: as
for example, some that take care of the sick; and for the Burial of the Dead;
and this is commonly called, (...), Ghemiluth hassadim: Others, for Simple
Alms, cailed (...), Zedacah: Others, for the Redeeming of Slaves, called (...),
(...) Pidion Shebim; and some, that have the Charge of marrying Poor Virgins,
called (...), Hassi betuloth: and many others; either more, or less, according
to the number of the Jews, that inhabit in the said City.

6. If any Poor man have any Extraordinary Necessity, greater then the
Inhabitants of the City where he lives are able to supply; he then goes to the
Principal Rabbines of the City, and they give him a Testimonial under their
hands, that he is an Honest man, and one that deserves their Charity; and
withal entreat, that every one would lend him his assistance. Then goes He,
with this Testimonial, to all places where any Jews dwell; and whether it be a
Castle, Village, or other small place, he is there entertained, a day, or two,
with Meat, Drink, and Lodging; and money, at his departing. And if he come to
any great City, he there procures a Confirmation of his Testimonial, by the
Subscriptions of the Rabbines of that place; and so is sent to the School, from
the Parnassim, or the Public Officers, that have the charge for the Relief of
the Poor in that place; and thus, in some one of the forementioned Manners of
Collection, he is Relieved, and receives their Assistance.

7. The Jews send their Alms yearly, from all parts wheresoever they inhabit,
to Jerusalem, for the Maintenance of the Poor that live there, and spend their
time Praying for the Welfare of the Whole Nation: as they also do to other
Parts of Judea; as namely to Saffet, Tiberias, and to Hebron, where the
Sepulchers are of the Patriarks, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and of their Wives.

8. Each man in particular may, besides all this, give Alms, when, and how much
he pleases, according as he shall think fit.

9. They account it also a Work of Piety, to relieve any one whatsoever that
is in Misery, although he be no Jew; and especially those of the City, or
place, where they inhabit: esteeming it an Act of Charity due to all Mankind,
Indifferently; the Rabbines having also expressly enjoined them so to do.

10. And the Greatness of their Charity, and Pity, appears in this; that they
are very careful not to torment, or abuse, or put to any cruel death, any Brute
Beast; for as much as, they are all of them created of God: according to the
Psalmist, Psalm. 145. ver. 9. Et Miserationes ejus super omnia Opera ejus: And
his mercy is over all his Works.

PART II.
CHAP. I.
What Language they use in their Ordinary Speech, Writings, and Preaching.
THere are at this time very few among them, that are able to discourse
Perfectly in the Hebrew, or Holy Tongue, which they call (...) Laschion
hacodesch, wherein the Twenty four Books of the Old Testament are written: nor
yet in Chaldee, which is the Language of the (...) Targum, or Chaldee
Paraphrase of the Bible, and which they commonly spoke before their Dispersion:
because they all generally learn, and are brought up in the Language of the
Countries, where they are born: So that, in Italy, they speak Italian: in
Germany, Dutch: in the Eastern Parts, and in Barbary, they speak the Language
of the Turks, and Moors; and so of the rest. And they have made these Strange
Languages so much their Own, as that Many of them that have gone out of
Germany, into Poland, Hungary, and Russia, to inhabit, have notwithstanding
preserved the Dutch Tongue in their Families, and made it their Mother Tongue
to all their Posterities: as likewise those that have gone out of Spain into
the Eastern parts, for the most part speak the Spanish Language: But in Italy
they use both the one, and the other; according to the place, from whence the
Fathers are descended. So that the Common people every where conform themselves
to the Language of the Nations, where they inhabit; only mixing now and then a
broken Hebrew word, or two, in their discourse one with another: although the
Learneder sort among them are somewhat more Perfect in the Language of the
Scripture, and have it, as it were, by heart. Notwithstanding it is a very rare
thing to meet with any among them, except they be their Rabbines, who are able
to maintain a Continued Discourse in Hebrew, Elegantly, and according to the
Propriety of the Language.

2. And besides, in the Pronunciation of the Hebrew, they are so different
among themselves, that a Dutch Jew can hardly be understood by an Italian, or
an Eastern Jew: neither is there any among them that speak more clearly, and
exactly according to the Rules of Grammar, which they call (...), Dikduk, then
the Italian does.

3. And indeed the Pure Hebrew Tongue being of little extent, and very barren
of words, there being no other Books, anciently written, to be found now, save
only the aforenamed Twenty four Books of the Old Testament, whence the whole
Language was to be fetched; the Rabbines have since thought good to enlarge it,
by borrowing many words from the Chaldee, and some few from the Greek, and
other Languages, and inventing also several words for the names of things; in
like manner as Writers in all Ages have done, fitting Terms of Art, for the
better Understanding of their Philosophy, and other Sciences.

4. This Language is still in use among them, in writing of Books; in all kinds
of Contracts; in Bills, either Private, or Public, and the like. But their
Ordinary Letters of Complement, or Business, are written, for the most part,
in the Vulgar Language of the place where they are; although sometimes they use
the Hebrew Character: Only those of Morea still retain the Hebrew Tongue also,
and use it in their Familiar Letters.

5. In their Preaching they likewise use the Language of the Country, that
they may be understood by All; that is to say, they cite the Texts of
Scripture, and sayings of the Rabbis in Hebrew; and afterward interpret the
same in the Vulgar Tongue.

6. Their manner of Preaching, or making Sermons is thus: the Whole
Congregation sitting quietly in the School, He that has a Mind to Preach,
(which is easily granted to any that desire it,) either putting on the
aforenamed Taleth, or else going, without it, up to the Wooden Alter, or Table,
spoken of Par. 1. cap. 8. begins his Speech there, repeating some Verse or
other, out of the Lesson for the day, and this is called (...), Nose: that is
to say, the Text, or Subject, whereof he intends to treat: adding after it some
Sentence out of the Wisemen, or Rabbis; and this is called (...) Maamar: and
so making a kind of Preface, and proposing some certain Subject, suitable to
the sense of the aforesaid Passage out of the Lesson for the Day, he proceeds
on to his Sermon; alleging Texts of Scripture, and the Authority of the
Rabbines in his Discourse, every man as he is able, both for the Style, and
Method: which is very different, among the several Nations.

7. And this is done every Sabbath day, and at all the chief Feastivals, for
the most part, and only then: unless there be some Funeral Sermon to be made,
at the death of any Person of Note, which uses to be done upon any of the Week
days, or working days, according as the Occasion requires.

CHAP. II.
Of their Academies, and Studies, and of the Original, and Continuation of the
Gemara.
THey account it the most Pious work that may be, to study either the Holy
Scripture it self, or any Expositions of it: having regard to that Command,
Deuteron. cap. 6. ver. 7. Et Meditaberis sedens in domo tua, and ambulans in
itinere, etc. Thou shall teach (these words) diligently unto thy children, and
shall talk of them when thou sit in thine house, and when thou walk by
the way, and when thou lie down, and when thou risest up.

2. Some few among them study the (...), Cabalah, that is to say, Revealed
Speculation, and the Secret Theology of the Scripture: Others study
Philosophy, and other Sciences, both Natural, and Moral; notwithstanding
applying all of them to the Understanding of the Scripture: for otherwise they
would account the study of these points of Learning a most Dangerous, and
Pernicious thing: unless it were in reference to the study of Physic, which
some of them profess. But the most usual, and Common study among them, is,
that of the (...), Gemara, which was properly, and Originally called the (...),
Talmud, where the use of it is permitted them; or, where it is forbidden them,
they study the Writings of the Wisemen, or Paraphrases, and Abridgments of the
Talmud.

3. And for this cause have they their Academies also, called by them (...),
Jesiboth, where they meet together to Dispute, the Rabbines with their
Scholars; but talking all together confusedly, and without any Order at all:
and this is usually done in the Mornings, after prayers are ended, every day of
the week, except Fridaies, the Sabbath day, and their Feastival days, and
their Eves.

4. And because that all the Rites, Precepts, and Customs of the Jews, and
their Authority, are all grounded upon This Book of the Talmud, I shall here
give the Reader a short Account of the Original, Order, and Continuation of it.

5. In the first Chapter then of this Book is declared, how that the Written
Law, which they call (...), Tora Shebichthab, Lex quae in Scripto, was given by
Moses: and the Exposition of this Written Law, and Other of their Ordinances,
they have received from the Mouth of their Rabbines. Now no Part of this Later
was to be put into Writing, so long as the Temple stood: and it was therefore
called (...), Torah Schebeal peh, Lex quae per os, The Law delivered by word of
Mouth, because it was Traditional, and delivered over from one to another, by
word of Mouth only.

6. But afterward about one Hundred and Twenty Years after our Savior
Christ, when the Temple was now destroyed, there was a certain Rabbine, named
Rabbi Juda, who, for his sanctity, and Holiness of Life, was honored by the
Jews with the Title of (...), Rabbenu haccadosch, Magister noster sanctus, Our
Holy Master, who was very intimate with, and greatly respected by Antoninus
Pius the Emperor, and was also a very Richman. This Rabbi Jehuda, perceiving,
that since the Transmigration, and Dispersion of the Jews, the Traditionall
Law began by degrees to be lost, and to be in danger of being quite forgotten;
he makes a Collection, in Writing, of all the Decrees, Opinions, and Traditions
of all the Rabbines, that had ever been, down to his own time; and this
Collection, being made in as good a Method, and as short as he could, he called
(...) Mishnah, that is to say, Lex secundaria, or a Repeating of the Law: and
he divided it into Six Tracts, or Parts. The first of which treated of Seeds,
and of Tillage: The second, of the Feastivall days: The third, of Marriages,
and things appertaining to Women: The Fourth, of Damages, and Suites of Law,
and all Civil Matters: Ths Fifth, of Sacrifices: The Sixth, of Cleanness, and
Uncleanness. And because this Collection of his was so very brief, and
therefore the harder to be understood, in so much that it gave occasion of many
Disputes, and Controversies, which were raised upon It; therefore about some
Three Hundred and Fifty Years after Him, there were two other Rabbines,
dwelling in Babylon, the one of them named Ravena, the other Ravasce, which
collected together all the Expositions, Disputes, and Additions, that had been
made upon the Mischnah, down to their own time; adding besides many Reports,
Sentences, and sayings of their own, which they found to make any thing to the
business in hand, and thus making, as it were, the Mischnah to be the Text,
and all the rest to serve as a Comment, or Exposition upon It, they made all up
into a Book, which they called (...), Talmud Baveli, the Talmud of Babylon, or
the (...) Gomarah, which they divided into Sixty Sections, called (...),
Massactoth; but following the Order, and Method of the forementioned First Six
Tracts. And although that one Rabbi Jochanan had, not many Years before, made
the like Collection, at Jerusalem, which Book is therefore in like manner
called (...), Talmud Jerusalmi, the Jerusalem Talmud; Yet by reason of its
being too Compendious, and also because of the Roughness, and Uneavennesse of
the Style, That of Babylon has only obtained, and is now in use; as being
both the Larger, and the easier to be understood. Upon this Later there is a
Comment made, by one Rabbi Solomon Jarchi, called also (...), Raschi, by way of
Abbreviation: and there are also extant upon it the Disputations of a certain
Academie of Rabbines, which they call (...), Tossaphoth: and many are the
Extracts that have been made out of this Book; especially Three of the
aforesaid Six Tracts; those other Three, concerning Seeds, Sacrifices, and of
Cleannesses, being at this day not to be found any where.

7. This Talmud, we have here described, was afterward prohibited to the
Jews, by some certain Popes; and then again the use of it was permitted them,
by some others: but now it at length continues utterly prohibited; and, in
Italy especially, it is not read, nor so much as any where to be found.

CHAP. III.
Of the Manner how their Rabbines are created; and of their Authority; and
Power of Excommunication.
THe Rabbines use not to make any means, for the Procurement of the Title of
Doctor; yea they rather account it an Argument of Pride, and a shameful thing,
to endeavor any such thing; and therefore neither do they put themselves upon
the Examination of any. But, when any one is known to be of sufficient
knowledge, and an Apt Person for the Dignity of a Rabbine, that is to say, such
a one as is sufficiently well skilled in the Traditional Law, or that which was
delivered by Word of Mouth, how little knowledge soever he has of the other
Humane Sciences; he is by a Common Consent of all, in the Eastern parts,
accounted a Rabbine, and called by the name of (...), Cacham, that is to say, a
Wiseman. But in Germany, and Italy, they are to be honored by the Ancientest
Rabbines, (and that either in Writing, or by calling them so,) with the Title
either of (...), Caber di Rab, that is to say, a Master's Fellow; which is a
kind of a Middle Title of Dignity, and is usually given to Young Men, or to
such persons as are not thoroughly versed in the Law; or ese of (...), Morenu,
or (...), Rab, that is to say, Master, or Doctor; and so are they from
thenceforth called.

2. These men, that is to say, the Cacham, Rab, or Morenu, decide all
Controversies concerning the Things that are either Lawful, or Prohibited, and
all other Differences; they execute the Office of Public Notaries, and give
Sentence also in Civil Controversies; they Marry, and give Bills of Divorce;
they Preach also, if they can; and are the Chief men in the Academies before
mentioned; they have the uppermost Seats in their Synagogues, and in all
Assemblies; and they punish those, that are Disobedient, with Excommunication:
and there is generally great Respect showed unto them in all things.

3. When they Excommunicate any one, they Curse him, and declare him Openly to
be Excommunicate; and in this case it is not lawful for any other Jew, either
to speak to him, or come within Four Yards of him: neither may He come within
the Synagogue, or School; but he is to sit upon the Ground with his shoes off,
as if he mourned for some of his dead Kindred; and this must he do, till such
time as he shall have been absolved by the Rabbine, or Rabbines, and shall have
received their Benediction.

4. And if it be the Solemn, and Grand Excommunication, then do the People all
repair to the School, and lighting Black Torches, and sounding Horns, they
Curse Him that shall do, or that has done such, or such a thing. And all the
Children and the People answer, and say, Amen.

CHAP. IV.
Of their Oaths, and Vows.
THey are utterly forbidden to swear in Vain; or, so much as to name, without
special occasion, any one of the Many several Names of God: according to that
Commandment in the Decalogue, Exodus Cap. 20. ver. 8. and Deuteron. cap. 5. ver.
11. How much more unlawful then is it, to swear Falsely by it, and to defraud
any thereby: as it is written Levit. 19. ver. 12. Non perjurabis in nomine meo,
etc. Thou shall not swear by my Name falsely; neither shall thou profane the
name of thy God.

2. Neither are Vows very Commendable, in their Esteem; yet when they are
made, they ought to be kept. Nevertheless the Husband may dispense with, or
break any Vow of Abstinence, that his Wife shall have made, and that without
her Consent too; provided he do it within the space of 24. hours, after he
heard of it. And the Father may in like Manner break, or dispense with a Vow
made by his Daughter that is a Virgin: according to that of Number. 30. where
these things are spoken of at large.

3. They have a Tradition also, that, if a Man, or a Woman, make a Vow, or take
any Oath whatsoever; if it be not to the Prejudice of of any Third Person, that
it should be broken; and if it may, upon any tolerable pretense, or reason, be
wished unmade again; in this Case any one of the Principal Rabbines, or any
other Three men, though they have not any Title of Dignity, may absolve, and
discharge them from it. So that, He that would be absolved from any Vow, by him
made, goes either to a Rabbine, or to any Three other Men; and they, hearing
his reasons why he repents himself of having made such, or such a Vow, if the
thing seem but Reasonable, they say unto him thrice, Be thou absolved from this
Vow, etc. and so he is discharged.

CHAP. V.
Of their dealing in Worldly Affairs, and of their Usury.
THey are commanded, both by the Law of Moses, as also by that of the Rabbines,
or the Traditionall Law, to carry themselves most Uprightly in their Dealings,
and to defraud, or cozen no man, neither Jew, nor other: observing always, and
with all sorts of men, those Just Ways of Dealing, which are commanded them in
many places of the Scripture; and particularly in Levit. cap. 19. ver. 11, 13,
15, and 33. to the end of the Chapter.

2. And those men, that have given out, of Them, some in Speeches, and others
in Writing, that they swear every day, (and account it a godly work,) to
endeavor to defraud, and cheat the Christians, is a most Gross Untruth, and
scattered abroad by these men, only to render them more Odious among the
Nations, then they are. Whereas, in truth, many of the Rabbines have commanded
them the clean contrary, in their Writings: out of which, Rabbi Bechai has
made a full Collection of the passages, that concern this particular, in his
Book Entitled, Cad hachemah, under the Letter, Ghimel Ghezelah: where he
says, that it is a far greater sin, to defraud one that is not a Jew, then to
defraud a Jew; in respect of the scandal, which by this means is given; besides
the wickedness of the Act it self: and this they call (...), Chillul haschem,
To profane the Name (of God.) which is one of the Greatest sins that can be. So
that if there chance to be found any among them, who is a Fraudulent, Cheating
person; it must be imputed to the Dishonestie, and Baseness of that Particular
man's Disposition; and not, that he is any way prompted thereto, by any
Encouragements, either found in the Law, or any way given him by the Rabbines.

3. True it is, that by reason of the Distress, into which their so Long
Captivity has brought them, and their not being suffered to enjoy any Lands,
or Possessions at all, or to exercise many other kinds of Merchandisings, and
ways of Traffic, that are of Reputation, and Profit; they are at length
become much abased in Spirit, and have degenerated from the Ancient Israelitish
Uprightness, and Sincerity.

4. In like manner as, for the same reason, they have made it Lawful to take
Use-money: notwithstanding that which is said, Deuter. 23. ver. 19, and 20.
Extraneo foenerabis, and fratri tuo non foenerabis, etc. Thou shall not lend
upon Usury to thy Brother, etc. Unto a Stranger thou may lend upon Usury,
etc. Where, by the word Stranger, it is clear, that no other could be meant,
but only those Seven Nations, of the Hittites, Amorites, Jebusites, etc. from
whom God commanded them to take even their Lives also. But for as much as, Now,
they have no other way of Livelihood left them, but only this of Usury; they
allege it to be Lawful for Them to do this, as well as for the rest of their
Brethren by Nature.

5. And These Seven Nations are only meant, in all those places, where ever
the Rabbines permit any Usurie, or any Extortion to be used; seeing that the
same is so often permitted unto them in the Holy Scripture, and, without all
doubt, none of those Nations, among whom they are at this Present dispersed,
and suffered to inhabit; and do likewise receive all Courteous Usage, from the
Princes of the several Nations; especially among the Christians: seeing that,
This would be a Crime, not only against the Written Law, but against that of
Nature also.

CHAP. VI.
Of their Contracts, Evidences, Witnesses, Judges, and Judgments.
EVery Contract, or Agreement, is concluded by each of the Parties touching the
skirt of a Garment, or other Cloth of Witness: and this is done, as it were,
in form of an Oath, and is called, (...), Kinian Sudar, Possessio per Sudarium,
(sive Pannum:) a Bargain by a Cloth, or Handkercheif.

2. The Writings drawn by a Public Notary, are of no Authority at all among
Them, unless they are subscribed by One Witness: and any writings whatsoever,
either of Bargains, Wills, Marriage, Divorce, and whatever other Business
Imaginable, if they be signed by Two Witnesses, they are of Force and Validity.

3. If any man would have his Writings to be of Force, for ever after, and in
all places whatsoever; he then adds, a Confirmation to them, by adding Three
Others, to the Former; and These are called Judges of that Case.

4. When any Witnesses are, in any business, to be examined, their examinations
must be taken, in the presence of the person Accused, or of the Adverse party.

5. When any Differences, or Controversies of what nature so ever, do arise,
the principal Rabbines are the Judges of them, in most parts of the World: or
else, they refer the Business to Arbitration, putting it into the hands of Two
or Three of their Friends, that are Indifferently engaged to both parties.

6. Their manner of Giving Judgments is agreeable to the Rules set down by the
Rabbines at large, in many of their Books: and particularly in a Book called by
them, (...), Chosen hammischpat, Pectorale Judicij, The Breast Plate of
Judgment: and in many of their Resolutions of Cases Proposed, which they call,
(...), Scheeloth, Teschivoth; Questions and Answers: which are taken, for the
most part, out of Exodus cap. 21. Haec sunt Judicia, etc. Now these are the
Judgments, which thou shall set before them: and the following, cap. 22. and
23. and Deuter. cap. 22. 23. 24. 25. and lastly, according as the Judge, in
Reason, shall think meet, who is to have regard both to the Person, the Case in
Controversy, and the Circumstance of Time.

7. In Criminal matters they, in all places, submit themselves wholly to the
Punishment of the Prince, under whose subjection they live. Only in Case of
offending against any Rites of their own Law, they are liable to
Excommunication by their Rabbines, as has been formerly said, chap 3.

CHAP. VII.
Of Meats that are Forbidden them; and how they eat their Flesh.
THey may not eat of any Beast, that is not Cloven-hoofed, and which cheweth
not the Cud; as Oxen, and Sheep do: but not either Conies, Hares, or Hogs.
Neither may they eat any Fish, that has not Skales, and Fins: nor, that is
covered with a shell: Nor any Birds of prey, nor any creeping thing: as is
specified at large, Levitic. cap. 11.

2. And for this reason, they eat not any thing that is dressed by any other,
then of their Own Nation: nor use any of their Vessels, or Kitchen Implements:
least happily they might have been formerly used, in the Cooking of some or other
of the Meats Forbidden them: as has been formerly touched, Part. i. Cap. 3.
Neither do they use any other bodies Knife.

3. They eat not the Fat, either of an Ox, Lamb, or Goat: according to the
Command given Them, Levit. cap. 3. ver. 17. Nec sanguinem, nec adipem omnino
comedetis, etc. It shall be a perpetual Statute for your Generations,
throughout your dwellings, that ye eat neither Fat, nor Blood. Neither do they
eat of the Sinew of the thigh: observing that which is written, Genes. 32. ver.
32. Quamobrem non comedunt nervum filii Israel, etc. Therefore the Children of
Israel eat not of the Sinew which shrank, which is upon the Hollow of the Thigh
unto this day, etc. and therefore of what Beast soever they eat, they are very
careful to take away all the Fat, and the aforesaid Sinew. And hence it is,
that in many places of Italy, and especially in Germany, they eat not at all of
the Hinder Quarters of the aforenamed Beasts: because there is, in these parts
of the Beast, both very much Fat, and also the Forbidden Sinew; and it asks
so much care to cleanse the parts of these, that there are few that are able to
do it, or dare undertake it.

4. They may not eat the Blood of any Beast of the Earth: as it is written,
Levit. cap. 17. Repleatur omnis anima ex vobis, non comedet sanguinem, etc. and
in many other places: neither yet will they eat an Egg, least happily there
should be some string, or small thread of Blood within eat. And perhaps it was
for this reason, that they were forbidden to eat any Beast of the Earth, or any
Bird of the Air, except they first cut the Throat of it, that so the Blood
might go out.

5. This Act of Cutting the Throat, or Sticking of any Beast, must be performed
by the hands of one that is very well versed in it, and skilled in all the
Necessary Circumstances that belong hereto: for example, he must slit the
Gullet, with a sharp Knife, that has no Notches, or Cracks in the Edge of it,
thrusting it nimbly in, as far as needs, that so the Blood may issue out in a
free Uninterrupted stream: which Blood is poured upon some dry part of the
Ground, or into Ashes; and afterward covered with the said Ashes, or part of
the Earth: as it is commanded, Levit. cap. 17. ver. 13. Fundat sanguinem ejus,
and operiat illum torr'd* He shall pour out the Blood thereof, and cover it
with dust.

6. They may not cut off a Joint of any Living Beast, and eat it, either
Boiled, or Raw.

7. They may not kill, in the same day, a Cow, and her Calf; nor an Ewe, and
her Lamb; nor a Shee-goat, and her Kid; nor the Sire of any Beast, with the
Young, if they know it: as it is commanded, Levit. cap. 22. ver. 28. Sive illa
bos, sive ovis, non immolabuntur una die cum foetibus suis: And whether it be
Cow, or Ewe, ye shall not kill it, and her young, both in one day.

8. If any Beast, or Bird, of the number of those which it is lawful to eat,
die of it self, or were killed in any other manner, then has been said, they
may by no means eat of it.

9. And if by chance it should have had any Bone broken in its Lifetime, in
certain parts of the Body, which are specified by the Rabbines; or if it were
any way hurt, so that it might have died of That hurt, they must not eat of it.

10. So likewise, if in the Bowels of any Bird, there should chance to be found
any Thorn, or sharp Prick, that had got into the Body of it; or, in the Body
of any Four-footed Beast, any Impostumation, or Swelling, or that the Lungs
grew to the sides, (all which Particulars they very diligently search into,
after they have killed it:) they must not eat of it: Observing all these
Circumstances, from that which is written, Exodus cap. 23. toward the End of the
Chapter; and likewise in other places.

11. From this Prohibition of Eating of Blood it is, that they put all their
Flesh into Salt, letting it lie in it for the space of an Hour, before they put
it into the Pot, or Pipkin, to be boiled; that so it may be the more thoroughly
cleansed from the Blood: for, otherwise they may not eat of it, unless it be
roasted. And for this reason also they never boil the Liver, because it is
wholly made of Blood: but they either broil it upon a Gridiron, or upon the
Coals; or else they roast it thoroughly.

12. But in the several Kinds of Fishes which it is Lawful for them to eat,
they observe none of all these things aforesaid: because they are not forbidden
to eat these in their Blood; or to eat them, though they die of themselves, or
otherwise.

13. They may not eat Flesh, and Cheese, or Milk-meats, together: observing
this, from what is delivered Exodus 23. ver. 19. Non coques haedum in Lacte
Matris suae, etc. Thou shall not sees a Kid in his Mothers Milk: that is to
say, Thou shall not sees Any Beast, in Any Milk. Whence it is, that they not
only observe, not to eat them together, either boiled, or otherwise; but they
also forbear to eat them, at the same Meal; nor yet will they eat Chief within
an hour, after they have eaten Flesh: because they conceive, that happily some of
the Flesh may stick betwixt their Teeth, and so may chance to mix together
with the Cheese: But if they eat Cheese first, by it self, they may afterward
eat Flesh, if they please.

14. And for this reason every one has several Vessels, for the dressing, and
serving in of their Meat; and likewise several Knives; one for Cheese, and
another for Flesh; which have their different Marks too, that they may be known
by: as has been formerly said, Par. 1. cap. 3. And if by Mistake any one
chance to dress either of These in the Vessels appointed for the other; or in
case it should be put into it while it is Hot, they may not eat thereof; and
the Vessel, or Dish, if it be of Earth, must not be used any more.

15. They eat not any Cheese, which is not of their own Making, or which they
have not seen made, and with their Own Rennet too: lest by chance there should
be mingled together in it, the Milk of some Forbidden Beast, or that some of
the Skin had been mixed together with the Rennet; and so there would be both
Flesh, and Cheese, in one: or else lest it might have been boiled in a Kettle
wherein some Forbidden thing had formerly been dressed. And That Cheese, which
they have seen the Making of, they set a Mark upon; that so they may know it
again.

16. The Rabbines have delivered also in their Traditions, that it is not
Lawful to eat Fish, and Flesh, together; because it is not unwholesome so to
do: but, now, there are very few that observe this.

CHAP. VIII.
Of their Drink.
THere are some, who observing an Ancient Tradition of the Rabbines, hold it
unlawful for a Jew, to Drink any Wine that is made, or ordered by any, but a
Jew: and this is still observed, amongst the Dutch, and Eastern Jews. But in
Italy, they observe no such thing; alleging for themselves, that happily This
might have been an Ordinance made by some of those Rabbines, who lived among
Idolatrous Nations; that by this means they might avoid all Commerce with Them:
but it cannot have respect unto the People, amongst whom They live; whom
Themselves confess, to be no such Men.

2. There are Many Ceremonies used, in their Drinking; as namely, at the
Beginning, and End of their Feasts, at their Marriages, Circumcisions, and at
other times: at which times they use a Certain Thanksgiving, over a Vessel of
Wine, and so Drink of it: and every time that they Drink, both before, and
after they have drunk, they say a Benediction: as having this Liquor in grert
Veneration, of which it is said, Psalm. 104. ver. 15. Et Vinum quod laetificat
cor hominis, etc. And Wine that makes glad the heart of Man, etc. and in the
book of Judges, cap. 9. ver. 13. Vinum meum, quod laetificat Deum, and homines.
And the Vine said unto them; Should I leave my Wine, which cheareth God and
Man? etc.

CHAP. IX.
Of their Making their Bread.
WHen they have made any Bread, that is to say, any Lump of Dough, of the
Bigness of Forty Eggs; they first take a Cake out of it; as it is commanded,
Number. cap. 15. ver. 20, and. 21. De primitiis pastarum vestrarum dabitis Domino,
etc. Ye shall offer up a Cake of the First of your Dough, for an
Heave Offering, etc.

2. This Cake was Anciently given to the Priest: but Now, they take and cast it
into the Fire, and burn it.

3. And This is one of the Three Precepts, which the Women are enjoined to
observe; because They commonly make the Bread,

CHAP. X.
Of their Manner of sitting at Meat.
BEfore they sit-down to Meat* they are bound to Wash their Hands very
carefully; wherein the Rabbines have delivered very many Subtilties, and nice
Circumstances to be observed: as they have likewise done, about the Washing of
Hands every Morning; as has been before touched, Part. 1. cap. 7.

2. After they are sat down, they use to say, for the most part, the 23.
Psalm, Dominus regit me, etc. The Lord is my Shepherd, therefore can I lack
nothing, etc. and afterward the Master of the House takes a Loaf of Bread* and
faies a Benediction over it; which having done, he breaks it, and gives to each
person at the Table, a piece of it, about the bigness of a great Olive: and
afterward, every one eats, as much as he pleases. And so, the first time that
any one drinks, he says the Benediction before set down, Part. 1. cap. 9.

3. The Rabbines have delivered many particular Circumstances, relating to
Civilitie, and Modesty, which are to be observed, during the time of sitting
at Meat: and in particular, that they must not cast upon the ground, nor
trample under feet, any Bread, or other Meat, that they seem not to despise
Gods gifts.

4. When they have done Eating, they Wash their Hands, and take up their Knives
from off the Table: because, say They, the Table represents the Altar, upon
which no Iron Tool was to come: and many use to say the Psalm, that was used to
be said by the Devites in the Temple, on that day of the Week: and likewise the
67. Psalm, Deus misereatur nostri, etc. God be merciful unto us, and bless
us, and cause his face to shine upon us, etc. And if they be Three, or More,
that eat together; then does one of them command a Glass to be Washed, and
filling it with Wine, he takes it up from off the Table, saying with a Loud
voice; Sirs, let us Bless his Name, of whose good things we have been filled:
and they answer him, and say, Blessed be his Name; who has filled us with his
good things, and by whose goodness we live. And thus they proceed, in giving
Thanks to God, who gives Food to everything: who gave the Land of Promise to
the Ancient Fathers: beseeching him, that He would again build up Jerusalem.
After this, the Master of the House blesses them, and prays for Peace: and
having so done, he gives to each of them a little of that wine, which he has
in his Glass; and he himself also drinks of it: and so they rise from Table.

PART III.
CHAP. I.
Of the Feast of the Sabbath.
THe Jews have the Sabbath in very great. Veneration, and far above all the
Other Feastivals; as being in so many several places of the Scripture made
mention of, and commanded to be kept, even from the very Creation of the World:
as namely in Genesis cap. 2. and Twice, in the Decalogue; besides very many other
places; where the doing of any manner of Work is forbidden, and a Rest upon
that day enjoined to All.

2. The several Works, forbidden upon that day, are reduced by the Rabbines to
Thirty Nine Heads; under which are comprehended all kinds of Work whatsoever.
And the Heads are these; to Plough, to Sow, to Mow, to bind up in Sheaves, to
Thresh the Corn, to Winnow it, to Try it, to Grind it, to sift the Meal, to
Knead dough, to Boil, to Lop or Shread, to Whiten any thing, to Card, to
Spain, to Wind in Scaines, to Warp, to Weave, to Die, to Tie, to Untie, to
Sewe, to Tear asunder, to Build, to Break down, to Use a Hammer, to Chase any
Beast, to Kill it, to Flea it, to Dress it, to Fetch off the Hair of the Skin
of it, to Cut it out into Joints, to Write, to Cancel, to Rule Paper, or the
like, to Kindle a Fire, to Quench it, and to Carry any thing from a Private
place to a Public. These are the General Heads, under which are comprised all
the particular Kinds, that are Reducible to these Generals: as for Example; To
Use a File upon any thing, is comprehended under the Title of Grinding of Corn:
because that, in Both these, One Body is reduced into Many. So likewise to make
any thing to Coagulate, or to gather into a Curd, is comprised under the. Title
of Building: because that in both these, One Body is made up of Many: and so in
all the rest. And all these things, that are herein to be observed, are with
very great Subtlety, and Punctualitie delivered by the Rabbines; who have
declared at large, how, and in what manner these Particulars are to be observed.

3. They may not either Kindle, or Put out a Fire: according to that which is
commanded, Exodus cap. 35. ver. 3. Non succendetis ignem in omnibus habitaculis
vestris, die Sabbati: Ye shall kindle no Fire throughout your habitations, upon
the Sabbath day: and therefore neither do they meddle with any Fire, nor touch
any Wood that is on fire, nor Kindle any, nor put it out; nor do they so much
as Light a Candle upon the Sabbath day. And if the place be Cold, where they
dwell, except they have any Stowes, or Hot-houses; or else, have some one that
is no Jew, to kindle a Fire for them; or, had so ordered the matter aforehand,
that the Fire should kindle of it self at such a time; they must even be
content to sit in the cold all that day.

4. And therefore they Dress not any Meat upon the Sabbath day themselves,
neither do they cause any others to do it for them: neither may they eat any
thing that is either Dressed, brought forth into the World, or any Fruit
gathered in, upon that day.

5. They may not carry any Burden upon that day; and therefore no man is to
have upon his back anything, that is not of his Necessary Apparel, and tied
on: for otherwise, they say, it is to be accounted as a Burden, or Load. And
the same is observed by the Women, in their Dressings, and in that of their
Children, and Servants; and even of their Beasts also: seeing it is so
commanded, Exodus cap. 20. and likewise Deuter. cap. 5. ver. 14. Non facies in
eiquicquam operis, etc. In it thou shall not do any work, Thou, nor thy Son,
nor thy Daughter, nor thy Manservant, nor nor thy Maid servant, thine Ox, nor
thine Ass, nor any of thy Cattle, etc.

6. It is not lawful to treat upon any Public Affairs, or to make any
Bargain, or to make any Order, touching Buying, Selling, Giving, or Taking into
Possession: as it is written, Isaiah, cap. 58. ver. 13. Si averteris a Sabbato,
etc. If thou turn away thy foot from the Sabbath, from doing thy pleasure on my
Holy day, and call the Sabbath a delight, the Holy of the Lord, Honorable; and
shall honor Him, not doing Thine Own ways, nor finding thine Own pleasure, nor
speaking thine Own words, etc.

7. They may not touch, or handle, any thing of Weight, or burden, nor any
Tool, or Instrument, of any Act, or Work, that may not be done upon the Sabbath.

8. They may not walk above a mile from the City, or place where they dwell,
that is to say, Two Thousand Yards.

9. There are besides these things, many other Particulars, Forbidden by the
Rabbines, for the more certain avoiding of all manner of Business, or Work of
Handicrafts to be done that day: as for example, The handling of any Money,
which is the Cause, and Occasion of all manner of Trading: as likewise Riding
on Horseback, Going by Water, Playing upon any Musical Instrument, or Bathing.

10. In case of any Persons being Ill or Diseased; if the Grief require only
the Surgeons hand, there are many, and severe Restraints laid upon them by
the Rabbines. But if the Physicians help be necessary, if he esteem it a
sickness of any danger, although it be not great, and so likewise in Case of
any Woman being newly brought to bed, the Physician has Liberty to do any
thing.

11. On Friday then, every one provides himself of whatsoever he shall need the
day following: as the Children of Israel did of old, in gathering their Manna:
as it is written, Exodus cap. 16. ver. 5. Die autem sexto, parent, quod
inferant, etc. And it shall come to pass, that on the sixth day they shall
prepare that which they bring in; and it shall be twice as much as they gather
daily. And they account it a Good Work, to spend Liberally that day, in honor
of the Feast: as it is written in Isaiah, cap. 58. ver. 13. Et glorificaveris
eum etc. and shall honor Him, etc. and they willingly employ themselves, even
in the Meanest Offices, that are any whit tending to the Honor of the Sabbath.

12. They do not begin any kind of business, or work, upon the Friday, unless
they are very well able to finish it fully, some while before the Evening comes
on: and when it is now within an hour of Sunset, they set their Meat on the
Fire in the best manner they can, that so it may be ready to eat, against the
next day: and having done this, they make an end of working any more, till the
Sabbath be over. In many Cities there is one that is appointed to go about, and
proclaim the Approaching of the Sabbath, about some half an hour before the
time that it is to begin: that so they may dispatch, and quit their hands of
all manner of business whatsoever, before the beginning of the Feast.

13. When the 23. hour then of Friday is now come, about half an hour before
Sunset, the Feast is understood to be begun; and then also the Forbearing from
all Works that are Forbidden, begins to take place. And now the Women are bound
to set up a Lamp in the house lighted, which used to carry Four, or Six Lights
at least: and this Lamp burns the greatest part of the Night. They also
spread the Table with a Clean Tablecloath, and set bread upon it; and over the
Bread, they spread a long narrow Towel, which covers it all over: and this is
done, say They, in Memory of the Manna in the Wilderness, which in like
manner descended upon the Earth, being covered beneath, and having a Dew on the
top of it; and on the Sabbath, it fell not at all.

14. There are many that shift themselves at that time, putting on clean
shirts, and washing their Hands and Face; and so go to the School, where they
say the 92. Psalm: Bonum est confiteri Domino, etc. It is a good thing to give
thanks unto the Lord, and to sing praises unto thy name, O Thou most High, etc.
together with the accustomed Prayers; withal, naming the Sabbath in their
Prayers: and rehearsing those Verses of Genesis, cap. 2. Igitur perfecti sunt
Coeli, and Terra, etc. Thus the Heavens, and the Earth were finished, and all
the Host of them. And on the seventh day God ended his Work, which he had made,
etc. And God blessed the seventh day, and sanctified it, etc.

15. Then do they return, each man to his home; and if they salute any one that
night, they do dot say unto him, Good Even; Nor the next day, Good Morrow; but
always their salutation is, A good Sabbath to you: and so the Fathers bless
their Children, and the Masters their Scholars; and some use to say certain
Verses, in Praise of the Sabbath, either before, or after Meat, according as
the Custom of the place is.

16. When they are set down to Meat, the Master of the Family takes a Bowl of
wine in his hand, and saying the afore-cited Verses of Genesis cap. 2. Igitur
perfecti sunt Coeli, and terra, etc. he gives thanks to God, who has given
them the Commandment of keeping the Sabbath: and so he blesses the Wine, and
drinks of it; and afterward gives a little of it to each person at the Table
with him. Then does he rehearse the 23. Psalm: Dominus regit me, etc. The Lord
is my Shepherd, therefore can I lack nothing, etc. and so blesses the Bread,
and gives of it to all: and after this they eat, every one as much as
suffices him: as they likewise do, each Meal the day following. When they have
done, then do they wash their hands; and so perform all those other ceremonies,
that we have before set down, Par. 2. cap. 9. speaking of their Manner of
sitting at Meat. Some use to say, after Meat, the 104. Psalm. Benedic anima mea
domino, etc. Bless the Lord, O my Soul, etc.

17. The next Morning they rise later, then they usuallie do on the Week days,
and go to the School; where, after the singing of many Psalms, and the
Accustomed Prayers, together with certain Laudatory Prayers, in honor of the
Sabbath, they take out the Book of the Law, before spoken of, and read the
Lessons, or Portion of it, appointed for that day; and this is done by seven
persons: after this, they read some place or other, out of the Prophets, which
they find to be most suitable to the Ordinary Lesson for the day: and this is
called (...), Haphtarah, Lectio Dimissoria, a Dimissory Lesson: and this is
read by some Child, for the most part, to exercise him in Reading the Scripture.

18. After this, they take the said Book, and holding it up on high, that it
may be seen by all, they bless all the Assistants.

19. Then is there a solemn Benediction said, for the Prince of that State,
under which they live; wherein they pray to God, that he would preserve Him in
Peace, and Quietness, and that he would prosper Him, and make Him Great, and
Powerful, and that he would also make Him Favorable and Kind to their Nation:
observing to do thus, from that Passage in Jerem. cap. 29. ver. 7. Et quaerite
pacem Civitatis, etc. And seek the peace of the City, whither I have caused you
to be carried away Captives; and pray unto the Lord for it: for, in the peace
thereof, shall ye have peace. After this, they say another Prayer, called
(...), Musaph, Additamentum, an Additional Prayer; wherein is read the
sacrifice that was wont to be offered in the Temple: and thus is their Morning
Prayer ended.

20. They have their Sermons also, or Preaching; which is performed, either in
the the Morning, or in the Afternoon, in the School, or some other place
designed for that purpose: wherein they treat of Good Manners, and reprove
Vices, fitting their Discourse to the Ordinary Lesson for the day, that was
taken out of the Pentateuch, and citing many Sentences out of the Rabbines: as
has been formerly declared, Par. 2. cap. 1.

21. In the Evening they repair to the School again; where, after the Ordinary
Prayers are said, there is added a Commemoration of the Sabbath; and the
Beginning of the Lesson for the Week following is read, out of the Pentateuch,
by three persons.

22. They use to make three Meals, that is to say, they sit down to meat three
times, during the time that the Sabbath lasts: namely once, on Friday night,
and twice the day following: doing this, in Honor of the Feast. And the
Tablecloth continues laid all the day long.

23. In the Evening, when the time is come that they can now see three stars of
the middle Magnitude, they account the Sabbath to be at an end; and it is now
lawful to do any manner of work, so soon as ever the Evening Prayer is begun;
to which they make the less haste, that they may not seem to Anticipate, or
end the Sabbath before the due time.

24. They add, to the Ordinary Evening Prayers, a certain Commemoration, or
Acknowledgment of the Sabbaths, being a day distinguished, and set apart, from
the Week-daies: saying also the 91. Psalm. Qui habitat in Adjutorio Altissimi,
etc. He that dwells in the secret place of the most High, shall abide under
the shadow of the Almighty, etc. and many other Verses out of the Scripture,
treating of Blessings, and Prosperity, and the like.

25. Then returning, each man to his own home, they light a Torch, or Lamp,
with two wicks in it at least; and taking a Bowl of Wine in one hand, and sweet
spices in the other, they say certain verses out of the Prophets, touching
Prosperity and Blessings; and also out of the 116. Psalm. Calicem salutis
accipiam, etc. I will take the Cup of Salvation, and call upon the name of the
Lord: and likewise out of Esther, cap. 8. ver, 16. Judaeis autem nova lux, etc.
The Jews had Light, and gladness, and joy and honor: and the like; praying
withal, that the week following may be prosperous unto them. After this they
bless the wine, and the sweet spices, withal smelling to them, that so they
may seem to begin the week with delight, and pleasure: then do they also bless
the Light of the Fire, which as yet has not been made any use of; withal
looking upon their own heads, because now they may fall to their work again.
And all these things are, with them, of very mysterious signification. Now the
meaning of all this is, to signify, that the Sabbath is now ended, and that
that Instant of time divides it from the Workingdaies: and having so said, it
is quite finished. Now all this Ceremony is, for the same Reason, called
(...), Habdalah; which is as much as to say, Distinction: which being now
ended, they cast a little of the wine upon the ground, in token of joy, and
gladness; and some use to sing certain songs, and verses, Ominating
Prosperity, and good Fortune the week following. And from henceforth it is
lawful for them to do any work.

26. When they salute one another that night, they do not say, God give you a
good Night; but, God send you a good week.

CHAP. II.
Of the Beginning of their Months; and of their Order, and Names: and of the
Thirteenth Month.
THe Jews reckon their Months, according to the Revolution of the Moon: so
that every Month contains 29 days, and the third part of a day: and every
New Mood is the Beginning of a month.

2. Heretofore in Ancient times, they were used to send forth two, out of the
Sanhedrim, that is to say, the Judges of Jerusalem, to be Witnesses of the New
Moon's Appearance: which as soon as they had discovered, they presently
returned, and gave notice thereof to the rest of the Judges; who immediately
appointed, and published that day to be, Caput Mensis, the Head, or Beginning
of the Month: and in this manner did they Order the business, for the finding
out the Times, that all their Feastivals were to be kept at. But now since the
destruction of the Temple, it is done by Computation; and there is Yearly a
Calendar, or Monthly Almanac made, and Printed, by which they may find out
the Age of the Moon, together with the time of its Change, and the four
Quarters, with all the Feastival days throughout the Year, and all other the
like things. And they Now set down in their Kalendars, the Feastival days of
the Christians also, for the better Ordering of their business, and Affairs,
wherein they have to deal with Them.

3. Their Caput Mensis, which sometimes is two days together, that is to say,
the End of One Month, and the Beginning of the Next, is a Feastival Time with
them. as it is commanded, Number. 10. ver. 10. Also in the day of your gladness,
and in your solemn days, and in the Beginnings of your Months, ye shall blow
with the Trumpets over your Burnt-Offerings, etc. and also because there was
then a New Sacrifice to be Offered: as is enjoined in the 28. Chap. ver. 11.
And in the beginnings of your Months, ye shall offer a Burnt-Offering unto the
Lord; Two Young Bullocks, and One Ram, etc. But yet it is Lawful, on these
Days, to do any manner of Work, or Business: Only the Women use to abstain
from working, on these days. The Solemnity of these Feasts is showed, chiefly
in Feeding more Plentifully, and being more Frolic at their Meat.

4. At the time of Prayers, there is notice given to all, that That day is the
Beginning of the Month: and so they say certain Psalms, from the 113. unto
the 118. Then do they take Out the Book of the Law; and the Lesson is read by
Four persons. After this they add the Musaph; wherein they make mention of the
Sacrifice, that was wont to be offered upon that day.

5. The next Sabbath Eve, after the Change of the Moon; or else, the next
Evening after the New Moon has first appeared, they all meet together, and say
a Laudatorie Prayer to God, who has created the Planers, and that renews the
Light of the Moon: and leaping uptowards Heaven, they pray that they may be
defended from their Enemies, repeating that Verse out of Exodus cap. 15. Fear
and Dread shall fall upon them, etc. and they commemorated the Prophet David:
and so saluting each other, they depart, each man to his several home.

6. The Names of the Months are these, (...) Tisri, Hassuan, Kisleu, Tebeth,
Schebath, Adar, Nisan, Jiar, Sivan; Tamuz, Ab, Elul: answering to our Months,
September, October, November, December, January, February, March, April, May,
June, July, August: beginning to reckon them, from Tisri, that is, September:
as we shall show hereafter more fully, Chap. 5. when we come to speak of their
Caput Anni, or Beginning of the Year.

7. Now that they may make the Solar, and Lunar Year Equal; every Revolution of
Nineteen Years, they make seven to consist of thirteen Months; that is to say,
every second, or third Year, one: and this they call (...), Meubar, or (...)
Schanah Meubereth, Annus Intercalaris, or a Leap-Year: and they make the month
Adar, which falls betwixt our February, and March, to be Double, the First
Adar, and the Second Adar; and this Later they call, (...), Veadar.

CHAP. III.
Of the Feast of the Passover.
UPon the 15. of the Month Nisan, which is, for the most part, of our April,
the Feast of the Passover, called (...), Pesach, begins; which was instituted,
in memory of their Comeing forth our of Egypt; and was commanded to be kept
Seven days together: But they keep it Eight days, all those Jews that
inhabit not in Jerusalem, and the Country thereabout; following the Ancient
Custom of Keeping it, which was in Use, before they had any Calendar, or Way
of Computation, to be directed by; but were informed by the Sanhedrim, when the
Beginning of each month was to be kept; as we have showed, in the Precedent
Chapter. This Feast is commanded to be kept, Exodus cap. 12. ver. 14. which
Command is also repeated in many other places, where they are continually put
in mind of it, and urged to the Keeping thereof.

2. The two First days, and the two Last, are Solemn Feastivals; insomuch,
that, upon these days, it is Unlawful to do any manner of Work, or Business;
in like manner, as it is on the Sabbath: Only they are permitted to kindle
Fires, and to Dress Meat; and likewise to carry any thing from one place to
another: and as for the Four middlemost days, they are only in them forbidden
to Labor; but they may handle money: and there are only some few other
things, wherein they are different from the rest.

3. In all the time of these Eight days, they may not either eat, or have in
their House, or in their Power, any Leavened Bread, or Leaven; but they are to
eat Unleavened Bread only: as they are commanded, Exodus cap. 12. ver. 15, 16,
17, 18, 19. Septem diebus fermentatum non invenietur in domibus vestris, etc.
Seven days ye shall eat Unleavened Bread; even the first day you shall put
away Leaven out of your houses, etc. For whosoever eats that which is
Leavened, even that Soul shall be cut off from the Congregation of Israel, etc.

4. And therefore they begin, before the Passover, with all the diligence, and
care they can, to put away all Leaven, or any thing that has had Leaven in it,
out of their Houses, and out of their Power; searching all their Cupboards, and
Bins, and cleansing the whole house, and whiteing it all over: and they provide
themselves also of New Utensils for their Kitchen, and Table; or else they
Newmake the Old again, and scowr them well* or else they have a select number
of Vessels, set apart for the Use of the Passover only: that so they may be
certainly assured, that they use not any thing, during those Eight days, that
has had Leaven in it. And for this cause also, the evening before the Vigil,
or Eve of the Passover, do they use to lay, up and down, in certain places of
the house, little pieces of Bread; which the Master of the Family, having a
Wax Light in his hand, is to go about searching after; to see, if by this
means, he may chance to light upon any other Morsels, or Scraps of Bread, lost
in some Hole or other: which pieces of bread they take, about the Fifth hour of
the day following, and cast into the Fire, and burn it: in token that the
Prohibition of eating Leavened Bread now begins to be in force; saying withal
some certain words, Intimating the putting away of all Leaven out of their
houses, and out of their Power; if not Effectually, yet at least Intentionally,
and to the utmost of their Power.

5. And now do they begin to make such a Quantity of Unleavened Bread, which
they call (...) Matzoth, as may serve for their whole Household to eat, during
those Eight days; having an especial care of their Meal, so soon as ever it
comes from the Mill, that it neither take Wet, nor be overheated; least by
this means it should chance to rise, or prove Leavened: But when they make
their Unleavened Bread, they mix Water and Meal together, and so Kneading it
into Dough, they make it up into Flat Cakes, of diverse forms, and shapes, and
immediately put them into the Oven to be baked: and these Cakes they keep, as
neat and clean as they can; eating them instead of bread, so long as the Feast
of the Passover lasts. They also make, for those that are Dainty, and of
Tender Stomachs, and such as are sick, a Richer sort of Cakes, with Eggs, and
Sugar mixed amongst it; but these Cakes are to be Unleavened also: and these
are called (...), Matzah aschirah, Rich Unleavened Bread.

6. Upon the Vigil, or Eve of the Passever, which is on the 14. day of the
Month Nisan, all their Firstborn use to fast; in Memory, that, the Night
following, God smote all the Firstborn of Egypt.

7. In the Evening they all repair to the School, to Prayers; which being
ended, they return home to their houses, and sit down to Meat, the Table having
been laid before, in the day time, and furnished with the greatest Variety,
and Pomp, that possibly they can. And instead of those Ceremonies that were
Anciently to be used, at the eating of the Pascall Lamb, expressly set down,
Exodus cap. 12. where they are commanded to eat it with Bitter Herbs; Et edent,
etc. et Azymos panes, cum lactucis agrestibus, etc. And they shall eat the
flesh in that night, roast with fire, and Unleavened Bread, and with Bitter
Herbs shall they eat it, etc. they have now only some part of a Lamb, or a
Kid, brought in, in a Dish, with certain Bitter Herbs about it, as Smallage,
Endive, Lettice, and the like; together with another little Vessel, with a
certain Sauce in it: in memory of the Brick, which they were forced to make
for the Egyptians. And so the Master of the House, taking a Bowl of Wine in his
hand, makes a certain Narration, called (...), Agadah, wherein are reckoned up
all the Miseries they underwent; and all the Miracles, with which God brought
them up out of Egypt; giving Thanks to God for the many Great Benefits, which
they had received at his hands: and then do they begin the 113. and all the
five following Psalms, which they call (...), Hallel; and so they fall to
their Meat. After Supper they say the rest of the forementioned Psalms,
together with some certain Praises, and Songs, tending to the same purpose; and
so they go to bed: doing all the same things, the day following.

8. The Prayers in the Morning, are Here, as in all the other Feastivals, Only
the Ordinary, Daily Prayers; adding withal some certain passages, that are
Pertinent to the Present Occasion; and repeating the aforesaid Psalms, from
the 113. to the 119. Then do they out take the Book of the Pentateuch, and Five
Persons read in Exodus, cap. 12. and in other places where mention is made of
the Sacrifices which were to be performed at the Passover, as in Number. cap. 28.
and these they afterward repeat over again, in their Musaph, or Additional
Prayer: and then do they read, out of the Prophets, some Passage, which is
suitable to the Ordinary Lesson for the day, which was taken out of the
Pentateuch, called the (...) Haphtarah, as they use to do on the Sabbath: and
they likewise do the same in the Afternoon, making withal a Commemoration of
the Feast; and they also bless the Prince, under whom they live; as upon the
Sabbath.

9. The very same things are done, the two last days of the Feast: save only;
that they do not, on the Last Evening, do the same, which they did on the First.

10. At the End of the Feast, they use the same Ceremonies, which they do on
the Sabbath, which they call Habdalah; of which we have formerly spoken. Only
they use the Words barely, without the Ceremony of Smelling to any sweet
spices; and so they return to their Eating of Leavened Bread again.

11. From the Second Evening of the said Passover, they begin to reckon 49.
days, unto the Feast of Weeks, which then follows; accounting from the day,
whereon they Offered the Sheaf of Wheat, called (...), Omer, Manipulus, a
Sheaf: and therefore this they called, Numerare Omer; To reckon Omer; or, the
Days before Harvest: as it is commanded, Levit. cap. 23. ver. 10, and 15.
Numerabis Ergo ab altero die Sabbathi, in quo Obtulisti Manipulum Primitiarum,
septem hebdomadas plenas, etc. And ye shall account unto you from the Morrow
after the Sabbath, from the day that ye brought the Sheaf of the Wave-Offering;
Seven Sabbaths shall be complete, etc. And every Evening following, after they
have said a Benediction to God, for giving them This Precept, they say, To day
are so many days past of the Omer.

12. And during the space of the first 33. days of the Omer, they make show of
a kind of sadness in their Countenances; neither does any of them either marry
a Wife, or make himself any New Clothes, or cut his hair, or publicly make
show of any Mirth at all: because they have a Tradition, that at this time,
that is to say, betwixt the second day of the Passover, and the 33. day after,
there was a very great Mortality happened, among the Disciples of a Great
Person, named Rabbi Hachiba, wherein some Thousands of them died: and that on
the 33. day, it ceased: and therefore they call This day, (...), Chag, Dies
Festus, a Feastivall day; wherefore they make Good Cheer upon it, and are
merry; neither do they any longer show any tokens of sorrow, as they did before.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Feast of Weeks, or Pentecost.
WHen the Fiftieth day of the aforesaid Account is come, which falls out to be
upon the sixth of the Month of Sivan, they then celebrate the Feast of Weeks,
called (...), Schebuoth: which is so called, because it is kept, at the End of
seven full Weeks, accounted from the Passover, as has been formerly said. It
is also called in the Scripture Festum Primitiarum, The Feast of the First
Fruits: because at this time they were commanded to bring an Offering, to the
Temple, of the First of their Fruits: as you may see, Deuteronomy. cap. 26. It is also
called Festum Messis, or, the Feast of Harvest; because they now first began to
put the Sickle into their Corn. This Feast is commanded to be observed, Exodus
cap. 23. and Levit. 23. and in Number. cap. 28. and in diverse other places, where
it is mentioned, under several names. At this time, they keep it Two days
together.

2. These Two days they keep Holy, in like manner, as at the Passover;
abstaining from all manner of Work, or Business, as they do upon the Sabbath:
Only they may make Fires, and dress Meat; and also carry any thing from one
place to another.

3. They have a Tradition, that, at this very time, the Law was given, upon
Mount Sinai: according as it is delivered Exodus cap. 19. And therefore they use
to adorn, and trim up their Schools, and places where they read the Law, and
their houses also, with Roses, Flowers, Garlands, and all manner of Flourishing
Boughs, and the like.

4. Their Prayers they use, are the same that at other Feasts: and they also
take out the Book of the Law, reading the Sacrifice, that was to be done at
this Feast; then the Haphtarah, out of the Prophets; adding a Benediction, for
the Prince under whom they live: and in the Afternoon there is a Sermon made,
in Praise of the Law.

5. When the Evening of the Second Day is come, they use the Ceremony of the
Habdalah* as has been said, touching the End of the Passover; in token, that
the Feast is now ended.

CHAP. V.
Of their Caput Anni, or Beginning of the Year; and of the First Month, called
Elul.
IT was once a Great Controversy among the Talmudists, at what time of the
Year the World was created: some of them said, it was in the Month Nisan, or
March; that is to say, in the Spring: Others again maintained, that it was
rather in the Month Tisri, or Saptember; because Autumn then begins. And this
Opinion prevailed, so that it was thenceforth concluded, that the World began
in the Autumn, on the month Tisri: which Month they also ordained to be
accounted the Beginning of the Year. So that notwithstanding that we find in
the Holy Scripture, that they were commanded by God, to account Nisan, the
First month of the Year: as appears plainly out of Exodus cap. 12. ver. 2.
Mensis iste vobis principium Mensium, etc. This Month shall be unto you the
Beginning of Months; it shall be the First Month of the Year to you, etc. and
so, following this Order of reckoning Nisan the First, they would end with
Adar, which would be the Twelfth, and Last Month of the Year: Yet
notwithstanding it was afterward decreed, that Tisri, or September, should be
the First month, and the Beginning of the Year.

2. The First, and Second days then of the month Tisri, are a Feastival to
them, which they call (...), Rosch haschanah, Caput Anni, the Head, or
Beginning of the Year: as it is enjoined Livit. cap. 23. ver. 24. Mense
septimo, prima die Mensis, erit Vobis Sabbatum, etc. Speak unto the Children of
Israel, saying; In the Seventh Month, in the First day of the Month, shall ye
have a Sabbath, etc. and all manner of Work, or Business, is prohibited, in
like manner, as at the Passover, and the Feast of Weeks: as has been declared
in the Precedent Chapters.

3. And for as much as they have a kind of Ancient Tradition, that God, at this
time especially, judges all the Works of Men, that they have done the Year
passed; and also disposes of, and Orders all that is to happen the year
following; as if, This Day being, as it were, the Natalitium, or Birthday of
the World, He at this time Examined, and considered more strictly, of all the
Accidents that had come to pass: Therefore do they begin, on the first day of
Elul, which is the month immediately going before, to think of Acts of
Penance; and, in some places, they rise before day, and say Prayers, make
Confession of their Sins, and rehearse the Penitential Psalms. And there are
many among them, that Indict themselves Fasts, do Penance, and give Alms to the
Poor; continuing on this Course, till the Day of Pardon comes, which we shall
speak of in the following Chapter; that is to say, for the space of Forty
days. And on the first day of the month Elul, they sound a horn; for the
reasons, which shall be hereafter specified.

4. But these things are generally done by All of them, at least a Week before
the Feast, and especially upon the Vigil, or Day before the said Feast begins:
at which time many among them wash themselves, and cause themselves to be
beaten, and whipped; observing, not to exceed the Number of Scripes, set down,
Deuter, cap. 25. ver. 3. Et plagarum Modus ita dunta^at, ut qua^r agenarium
numerum non excedat, etc. Forty stripes he may give him, and not exceed, etc.
and therefore in whipping one another, they give but 39. Stripes* and this they
call (...), Malcuth, Regnum, The Kingdom of severity.

5. The Eve before the first day of this Feast, they go to the School, where
saluting each other, they say, one to another, Be thou written into a Good
year* and the other answers; And thou also. And they use, at this Feast, to
have always upon the Table, Honey, Leaven, and diverse other things to
signify Increasing, and growth, and to ominate a sweet, and a happy year to
follow; and many the like Ceremonies do they use, all to the same end.

6. The morning of the first of these Two days, they go to the School, and
many of them apparel themselves all in white, in token of Cleanness, and as a
sign of Penitence: and many also, especially of the Dutch Jews, apparel
themselves in the same habit now, that they have provided for their Funerals,
and intend to be buried in: and they do this, in sign of the Greater
Contrition. When they are met together in the School, they say a greater number
of Prayers, then ordinarily they use to do; praying that the succeeding Year
may be prosperous unto them, and begging pardon of all their sins. Then is the
Book of the Pentateuch taken out, and the Lesson for the Day is read by five
persons: then the Sacrifice that was wont to be performed on that day,
described, Number. cap. 28. after this, the Haphtarah out of the Prophets is read,
and so they say a Benediction for the Prince.

7. After this, they blow a horn, which is to be a Goats Horn, giving with it
Thirty Blasts in all; of which, some are to be held out in length, and others
to be short Broken ones. This they observe, from that passage in Levit. cap.
23. ver. 23. repeated also, Number. cap. 29. ver. 1. And in the seventh Month on
the First day of the Month, ye shall have an holy Convocation, ye shall do no
servil work; it is a day of Blowing the Trumpets unto you. And this is done,
They say, to strike a Terror into themselves, and to put themselves in mind of
the Judgment of God, and to induce them to repent them of their sins. After
this, they say the Musaph, or Additionall Prayer: and many other things they
add, which are proper to the day, and the business in hand: and then, lastly,
they sound the Horn again, in the same manner as before. Then returning home
each man to his house, they sit down to meat; and so spend the rest of the day
in hearing Sermons, and other Religious Exercises: And all these things are in
the same manner done over again, the day following. And upon the second day, in
the Evening, when the Feast is now ended, they say the Habdalah; as in all the
Other Feasts, beforementioned.

CHAP. VI.
Of the day of Pardon of sins, or Expiation, called Chipur.
IMmediately after the Two days of the Feast of the Beginning of the Year,
they fall to doing of Penance, rising to Prayers before daylight: and this
they continue doing, until the Tenth day of the said Month Tisri: Which Tenth
day is a Fast, for the obtaining Pardon of their Sins, and is called (...),
(...) Jom hachipur, Dies Expiationis, The Day of Expiation, or Pardon of Sins:
as we find written, Levit. cap. 23. ver. 27. Decimo die mensis hujus septimi
dies Expiationum erit, etc. Also on the Tenth day of this seventh Month there
shall be a day of Atonement, it shall be an Holy Convocation unto you: and ye
shall afflict your souls, and offer an Offering made by fire unto the Lord,
etc. And they are prohibited from doing any manner of Work, or Business, as
upon the Sabbath: and they Fast all day without Eating or Drinking any thing.

2. The Vigil, or Evening before this Fast, they were wont heretofore to use a
certain Ceremony with a Cock, swinging it about their Head, and giving it up
in Exchange of Themselves, and this they called (...), Caparah, or
Reconciliation. But this Custom is now left off, both in the East, and in
Italy, as being a thing both Superstitious, and Groundless.

3. On this day they feed very plentifully, considering that they are to Fast
all the next: and many go into Bathes, and wash themselves; and they cause
themselves to be whipped also, undergoing the aforementioned Discipline, of the
39. Stripes, called Malchuth. And there are some among them so conscionable, as
that if they have wronged any one in any thing, they make Restitution; and ask
Pardon of all that they have offended; and also pardon all persons whatsoever,
that have injured Them at all. They also give Alms to the Poor: in a word, they
do all things whatsoever, that can be required to True and Hearty Repentance.

4. Two or three hours before Night, they go to their Afternoon Prayers; and
after this, to Supper: and they make an End of Eating before Sunset.
Afterward, many of them put on white Garments, or else the Habit they intend
to be buried in, as has been said before: and so they go, Barefooted, to the
School, which on this day is all hung about with several Lights, as Lamps of
Oil, and Wax Tapers: and now do they say many Penitentia Prayers, and make
Confession of their sins; Every Nation according to their own Custom, and
Usage; but these Devotions last for the space of three hours, at the least: and
thus having finished here, they go home to bed. Yet some there are, that stir
not out of the School all night long, but continue saying their Prayers, and
now and then Psalms, sleeping very little, nor not at all.

5. In the morning following, as soon as it is daylight, they all repair to
the School again, in the aforesaid habits; and there they stay till night,
continually praving and saying of Psalms, and making their Confessions, and
craving pardon of God, of the sins they have committed. The Devotions of this
day consists of Four Parts: the first, is, that of the morning, which they call
(...), Shackrith: the second, the Additional Prayers, called (...), Musaph: the
third, the Afternoon Service, called (...), Mincha: and the fourth and last,
the Evening Prayers, which they call. (...), Nehilah. At the Schakrith, and
Mincha, they take out the Book of the Law; and in the morning, six persons are
invited to read in it; but in the Afternoon, they call but Three to it: and
after this, they read the Haphtarah, or Lesson out of the Prophets.

6. At the Musaph, or Additional Prayers, they read the Sacrifice of that day;
and then do they make a Commemoration of the Great Solemnity that was wont to
be celebrated by the High Priest on that day; at which time only, throughout
the whole Year, it was lawful for him to enter into the Sanctum Sanctorum, or
Holy Place, to burn Incense, and to cast Lots upon the Two Goats; one Lot for
the Lord, and the other Lot for (...), Azazel, the Scapegoat: as it is
commanded, Levit. cap. 16.

7. When it is now Night, and that they can see the stars appear, they then
blow the Horn, as they did at the Feast of the Beginning of the Year; to
signify, that the Fast is ended: and so going out of the School, they salute
one another, wishing each other that they may live many Years: and then do they
bless the New Moon; as has been touched before, Par. 3. cap. 3. and so going
home to their houses, they say the Habdalah, and so go to their meat.

CHAP. VII.
Of the Feast of Boothes, or Tabernacles.
Upon the Fifteenth day of the said month Tisri, is the Feast of Boothes,
Tabernacles, or Tents, called (...), Succoth, Tuguria: in memory, that the
Children of Israel, at their coming up out of Egypt, made use of such, in the
Wilderness: as you may find, Levit. cap. 23. ver. 42, and 43. Habitabit is in
Umbraculis Septem diebus, etc. Ye shall dwell in Boothes seven days: all that
are Israelites born, shall dwell in Boothes: that your Generations may know,
that I made the Children of Israel to dwell in Booths, when I brought them out
of the land of Egypt. And therefore every man makes him one of those Boothes,
in some place about his house, in the Open Air, covering it at the top with
Green Boughs, and walling it about, and trimming it up as handsomely as he
can. There are many nice Circumstances set down by the Rabbines, to be
observed, concerning the Height, Bigness, and Form, or Manner how they are to
be made: which we shall here omit. In these Boothes they Eat and Drink, and
some there are that sleep in them, and keep altogether in them, (during the
eight days of the Feast) as at other times they do in their houses.

2. This Feast continues Nine days, that is to say, seven days, which are
commanded in the Law; and One more, which they add, out of an Ancient Custom:
as has been formerly said, in the Feast of the Passover. Par. 3. cap. 1. and
One more, commanded Number. 29. to be a more Solemn Assembly, then any of the
seven. Dies quoque Octavus erit celeberrimus, etc. On the eighth day ye shall
have a Solemn Assemble: ye shall do no servil work. The two first, and the two
last days, are solemn Feastivals; but the five Intermediate are not so: like
as has been formerlie said, in the Feast of the Passover.

3. The Form of Prayers is the same, that upon Other Days; only there is some
Commemoration made, of the Reason of the Feast, and Its Original: they also say
the six Psalms, from the 113. to the 119. called Hallel: then do they take
forth the Book of the Pentateuch, and read in it; afterward they say the
Haphtarah, and say a Benediction for the Prince, under whom they live: then the
Additionall Prayer, called Musaph, wherein they Commemorate the Sacrifice, that
was wont to be Offered that day, described, Numb. cap. 29. namely, on the First
day 13. Bullocks; on the Second, 12. on the Third, 11. etc. till it came to 70.
in number, throughout the whole Seven days: and on the Eighth, they sacrificed
One Bullock only.

4. They also take a Branch of Palmetree, and three Boughs of Myrtle, and two
of Willow, and a Citron which must be a fair one, and every way Perfect: and
binding all these Boughs together, when in their Prayers at the School they
come to the aforesaid Psalms, called Hallel, holding the Boughs in their Right
hand, and the Citron in their Left, clapping them together, they shake them
about, holding them forth toward the four Quarters of the World, and moving
them Upwards, and Downwards: this they do, observing the Command given, Levit.
cap. 23. S^metisque vobis die primo fructus arboris pulcherrimae, etc. And ye
shall take you on the First day the Heb. Fruit.
Boughs of Goodly Trees, Branches of Palm Trees, and Boughs of Thick Trees,
and Willowes of the brook, and ye shall rejoice before the Lord your God seven
days. Then do they all go round about the Table, or Wooden Altar, whereon
they use to lay the book of the Law, when they read in it, every day Once;
singing withal certain Hymns, and swinging their Boughet about in one hand,
and the Citron in the other: because, thus they were of old used to do in the
Temple, round about the Altar.

5. On the Seventh day, which they call (...), Hos^anah rabbah, the Great
Hosanna, they add to their Former bundle of Boughs, other branches of Willow,
and go round about the School seven times, and say the 29. Psalm, Afferte
Domino fidei Israel, etc. Give unto the Lord, (Oye sons of the Mighty.) give
unto the Lord glory and strength. And they keep That day somewhat more
solemnly, then they do the Five Intermediate days.

6. The Ninth, and Last day of the Feast, is called (...), Shimchah Torah,
Laetitia propter Legem; that is to say, Their Joy for having finished the Law:
because that at this time they make an End of reading over all the Pentateuch,
according to the Division of it into so many Lessons, or Sections, as there be
weeks in the year: as has been formerly said, Part. 1. Cap. 11. it being so
ordered, that the Reading over of the whole Pentateuch, should be finished, at
the same time that the year also ends.

7. There are at this time, chosen, in every School, Two, which are called
Sponsi Legis, Bridegrooms of the Law: One of which, is to read the End of it,
called (...), Kathan torah, Sponsus The Bridegroom of the Law (ended:) and the
Other is presently to begin it again; and He is called (...), Kath^^
Beres^hith, Sponsus Principi; the Bridegroom of the Beginning (of the Law.)
Which Two persons are to express some tokens of Joy; and thus they do, in all
the several Schools: and so this Whole day, is a Day of Rejoicing.

CHAP. VIII.
Of their Fasts; Commanded, and Voluntary.
Upon the 17. day of the Month Tamuz, or June, they observe a Fast; in Memory
of certain Disasters, that have befallen the City Jerusalem upon That Day: and
particularly, because they have a Tradition, that it was upon This Day, that
the First Tables were broken in pieces by Moses, upon the Children of Israel's
making to themselves the Golden Calf.

2. All their Ordinary, Commanded, Fasts begin upon One Evening, and end upon
the Evening following; during which space of time, they neither Eat, nor Drink
any thing, little or much; till such time as the Stars begin to appear.

3. In the Morning, at their Prayers in the School, they add to the Usual
Prayers of the day, certain Confessions of sins, and withal make a sad
Rehearsal of the Disasters that had befallen them upon This Day: then do they
take out the Book of the Law, and read in Exodus cap. 32. ver. 12. etc. Et
Oravit Moses, etc. And Moses besought the Lord his God, and said: Lord why does
thy wrath wax hot against thy People, etc. In the Afternoon, at the Mincha, or
Afternoon Service, they read the same things again: and for the Haphtarah, or
Lesson, out of the Prophets, they read that Place in Isaiah, cap. 55. ver. 6.
Quaerite Dominum, dum inveniri potest, etc. Seek ye the Lord, while he may be
found: call ye upon him while he is near.

4. There are some, that will neither eat Flesh, nor drink Wine, from the said
17. day of Tamuz, or June, till the 9. of the Month Ab, or July; that is to
say, for three full weeks together: but this is more then they are bound to do:
and they do it, because that All These Days have been Unfortunate to the House
of Israel.

5. Upon the 9. of the said month Ab, or July, they observe a more severe Fast
then Ordinary; and they call it, by the name of the Day of the month, (...)
Tischah beab, Nona Mensis Julii, The Ninth of July; because that, upon This
Day, the Temple was twice burnt down, at the Taking of Jerusalem; the First
time by Nabuchadonozar, and the second time by Titus, Son to the Emperor
Vespasian. They begin This Fast, an hour before Sunset, or thereabout; and
neither eat, nor drink any thing, but go Barefooted, and forbear also to Wash
themselves, till the Evening following, when the Stars now begin to appear.

6. At Night they repair to the School, at the Ordinary time of Evening
Prayers: and there, they all sitting upon the ground, the Lamentations of
Jeremy are read: and the Morning following they do the like, adding withal many
other Passages, tending all to Sorrow, and Lamentation. And thus they continue
all that day; neither may they any way refresh, or recreate themselves, nor so
much as study, or read the Law, nor any other book; except it be the Book of
Job, or Jeremy, or the like Melancholy, Sorrowful Discourses.

7. The Next Sabbath after This Fast, is called (...), Nachamu, that is to say,
a Day of Consolation; and therefore reading the 40. Chapter of Isaiah, for the
Haphtarah; Consolamini, consolamini Popule meus, etc. Comfort ye, comfort ye my
People, says your God: Speak ye comfortably to Jerusalem, etc. they go on,
comforting one another with the Hopes, that they shall yet see Jerusalem, and
the Temple, built up again.

7. On the Third day of the Month Tisri, or September, which is the next day
after the Feast of the Beginning of the year, they have another Fast, keeping
it after the Usual manner, from Evening to Evening: And the Reason of their
observing this Fast, is, because that this is the day, on which Gedaliah, the
son of Ahikam, who was only left remaining for the Defense of the Residue of
the House of Israel, and was a Just man, was slain. And because it is one of
the Days of Penance; which happen at this time of the Year, therefore do they
take occasion, in their Prayers, to make a solemn Commemoration of this Just
Person; and keep a Fast: calling the day (...), Tzom Gadaliah, Jejunium
Gadaliae, The Fast of Gedaliah.

9. After this, follows the Fast of Chipur, or Day of Expiation: spoken of,
formerly, Chap. 6. where it is described at large.

10. Upon the 10. of Tebeth, or December, there is another Yearly Fast; because
that, upon that day, Nebuchadnezzar began to lay siege to Jerusalem, and
afterward took it.

11. On the 13. of Adar, or March, which is the day before the Feast of (...),
Purim, which is kept in Memory of the Things which Queen Esther did for the
Jewish Nation, they observe also a Yearly Fast; because that Esther her self
Fasted also, at that time; as you find it written in the book of Esther.

12. And these are all the Fasts that are Commanded them in the Law: but they
have besides, Other, which the several Nations use to observe: as the Dutch,
for example, after the Feast of the Passover, and that of Tabernacles, make
Three Fasting-daies; one Monday, one Thursday, and another Monday again: and
the reason they give, for so doing, is, because the Precedent Feast being Eight
days long, they might happily have committed some sin or other, during that
space of time. And so they likewise Fast, the Eve before the Feast of the
Beginning of the Year: and some there are among them, that keep a Fast the Day
before the Beginning of every Month.

13. And if any man have a mind, out of particular Devotion, or Penance, to
Indict himself a Fast, besides all these; he then, on the Evening before the
day he intends to Fast, before the going down of the Sun, (except it be, in
Case of Fasting upon any Dream; as has been formerly declared, Part. 1. cap.
4.) says thus: I take upon my self to fast to morrow. And having so said, he
continues, without eating, or drinking, till the Evening following; as the
Usual manner of Fasting is: and in his Devotions, he adds a Prayer to God, that
he would be pleased to accept This Fast of his, instead of Sacrifice.

CHAP. IX.
Of the Feast of Lights, called also Chanucha.
Upon the 25. day of the Month Kislein, which is our November, by an Ancient
Ordinance of the Wiseman, is kept the Feast of the Dedication of the Altar,
which is celebrated for the space of eight days together; and at Evening, upon
each of these eight days, they set up Lights; One, upon the First day: Two,
upon the Second: Three upon the Third, and so forward, till the Eighth. And
this Feast is observed in Commemoration of a Great Victory obtained by the
Maccabees, against the Greeks, who had possessed themselves of the City of
Jerusalem, and had entered into the Temple, and profaned it: but were afterward
overcome by Judas, and his Brethren, and driven out again. Now, there being no
Pure Oil, which had not been defiled by the Heathen, to be found, for the
lighting of the Lamps that were to be set up of Course in the Temple, they at
last found by chance a small Vessel sealed up, wherein was Oil hid, but only as
much as was sufficient for Lights one Night only; which Oil notwithstanding
miraculously lasted for Eight whole Nights: and therefore, for this reason, it
was decreed, that the said Feast of Lights, should ever afterward be observed.
They have a Tradition also, that in Ordaining this Feast to be kept, they had
an Eye also upon that famous Exploit, performed by Judith, upon Holofernes:
although many are of opinion, that this happened not at this time of the Year;
and that they make a Commemoration of that piece of Gallantrie of Hers, Now,
because she was of the stock of the Maccabees.

2. During the time of these eight days, it is lawful for them to do any
manner Business, or Work: neither is there any kind of solemnity observed at
this time, save only of the said Lights; and that, at their Prayers, there is
added a Panegyric, or Laudatorie Oration, in memory of that Great Victory
obtained by Them against the Heathen; and besides, every morning they say the
six Psalms, called Hallel, beginning at the 113. Psalm: and likewise the 30.
Psalm. Exaltabo te Domine, etc. I will extol thee O Lord, for thou have lifted
me up, and have not made my foes to rejoice over me, etc. and they also use
some certain Ceremonies, more then Ordinary, at their Meat.

3. This Feast is called (...), Chanucah, which is as much as to say, The Feast
of Dedication, or Initiation, and their being restored to the Exercise of their
Religion again; having now purified the Temple again anew, which had been
defiled by the Heathen.

CHAP. X.
Of the Feast of Purim, or Lots.
Upon the 14. day of the Month Adar, or March, they celebrate Yearly the feast
of (...), Purim: in memory of what we read in the book of Esther, concerning
the children of Isreal's escaping the danger of a Total Extirpation, by the
Machination, and subtle Devices of Haman, who was afterward hanged together
with his ten Sons. This feast is called the feast of Purim, or Lots, for the
reason set down, cap. 9. of the said book of Esther: Dies isti appellati sunt
Purim, etc. Because Haman the Son of Hammadetha the Agagite, etc. had devised
against the Jews to destroy them, and had cast Pur, (that is the Lot) to
consume them, etc. Therefore they called These days Purim, after the name of
Pur.

2. This Feast continues two days, although they keep the first only,
solemnly; fasting the day before it, as has been formerly said. And
notwithstanding that they are not forbidden to do any manner of Business, or
Work, upon the aforesaid two days of the Feast: yet do they voluntarily
forbear, upon the first of the two days, and make it a solemn Feastival.

3. Upon the first Evening they all repair to the School, where saying the
Ordinary Prayers, they add also a Commemoration of the great deliverance at
that time, when they were now at the Jaws of Death: and then do they read the
whole story of their Escape, that is to say, the whole book of Esther; which
they have in their Schools, fairly written in Parchmet, in a long Roll, as the
Pentateuch is: and this they call (...), Meghillah, that is to say, Volumen, a
Volume, or Roll. And while this is reading, there are some, that, as often as
they hear Haman named, they beat the ground, and make a great murmuring noise,
in token of Cursing him, and execrating his memory: and they do the like at
their Morning Prayers also: and withal read out of the Pentateuch, Exodus cap.
17. ver. 8. Venit autem Amalech, etc. Then came Amalek, and fought with Israel
in Rephidim, etc.

4. On this day they give much Alms to the Poor, publicly: and they likewise
send Dishes of Meat one to another, every friend, and kinsman, to each other,
and Scholars send Presents to their Masters, or Tutors, and Masters give to
their Servants; and generally, all Superiors to their Inferiors. And they use
all expressions of Mirth, and Joy, that may be; inviting, and feasting one
another: as it is commanded, Esth. cap. 9. Essentque dies isti Epularum, etc.
That they should make them days of Feasting, and Joy, and of sending portions
one to another, and gifts to the Poor.

5. And this they observe chiefly upon the second Evening; at which time every
one makes as great a Feast, as he is able; eating, and drinking more freely,
then at other times. And after supper, they go on visiting one another,
entertaining their friends with Banquets, Pastimes, and all manner of
Jollities, and Entertainments of mirth.

6. They do not make so great Cheer, or Expressions of Joy, upon the second
Day: nor is any thing read in the school: yet do they on This Day also make
show of some kind of joy.

7. When there are thirteen Months in the Year, that is to say, when the
Month Adar is doubled, or there are two Months of March, as has been touched
formerly, Par. 3. cap. 2. they call the 14. of the first Adar, the lesser
Purim. Notwithstanding they, at this time, observe nothing at all, that is
essential to the said Feast: neither have these Days any thing in Common
betwixt them, save only the bare Name.

PART IV.
CHAP. I.
Of the several Kinds, and Degrees of Adultery, and Fornication.
THe Several Degrees of Adultery, and Fornication, are these that follow: The
First, is, to Lie with Another Man's Wife; or, with any Woman, that is but
only Betroathed to Another man. And This is, among the Jews, accounted for one
of the Greatest, and most Heinous Crimes, that can be committed. The Next to
this is, to Lie with any of ones Kindred, that is to say, with any of those
specified, Levit. cap. 20. and the Children, that are begotten by any such
Unlawful Copulation, are to be esteemed Bastards, whom they call (...), Mamzer,
Spurious: neither may they acknowledge, or make Alliances with them: according
to that which is written, Deuter. 23. ver. 2. Non ingredietur Mamzer, hoc est,
Spurium, in Ecclesiam Domini, etc. A Bastard shall not enter into the
Congregation of the Lord: even unto his tenth generation shall he not enter
into the Congregation of the Lord. Next to the aforesaid Degrees of Adultery,
follows the Having Carnal Knowledge of a Woman, that is not a Jew; because,
they say, this was Forbidden by Esdra: or to Lie with any Strumpet, that is a
Jew; the Public Toleration of which kind of People is not in reason to be
thought of, amongst the Jews; seeing it is against the Express Text of the
Scripture, in the aforesaid Deuteronomy. 23. ver. 17. Non erit Meretrix de filiabus
Israel, etc. There shall be no Whore of the Daughters of Israel, etc.

2. It is also a Sin, to have to do with any Woman whatsoever, although she be
free from all the aforesaid Particulars; unless she be a Man's own Wife; or to
deflowr any Virgin, unless he afterward marry her: because all these things
are accounted Fornication.

3. They may not lie with any Menstruous Woman: as you may find written, Levit.
cap. 18. ver. 19. Ad mulierem quae patitur menstrua non accedes, etc. Also thou
shall not approach unto a Woman to uncover her Nakedness, as long she is put
apart for her Uncleanness: neither may they have knowledge so much as of their
own Wives, so long as they are in this Condition; as we shall show hereafter.

CHAP. II.
Of their Marriages.
Every Jew is bound by the Law to Marry: and the most Convenient time to do
this, is determined by the Rabbines to be, at Eighteen Years of Age: But they
must by no means live Unmarried, after Twenty: and what man soever is not
Married, after he is of This Age, he is accounted as One that lives in Sin. The
reasons of this are: First, because all men are bound to Endeavor the
Procreation of Children; according as God Commanded Adam, Genesis cap. 1. ver. 28.
Crescite and Multiplicamini, et replete terram, etc. And God said unto them, Be
fruitful, and Multiply, and replenish the Earth, etc. and they conceive
themselves not to have fulfilled this Precept here given, till they have
begotten One Son, and One Daughter, at least. And besides, they say, they are
bound to marry, that by having Wives of their own, they may by this means the
easier avoid all Occasions of falling into the sins of Adultery, or
Fornication; which, if they should live Unmarried, they would be apt to fall
into.

2. They may marry as many Wives, as they please, as we find practiced by the
Ancient Hebrews: Examples whereof, we frequently meet withal in the
Scriptures: and this Custom is in Use still, among the Levantines, or Eastern
Jews: But the Having of Many Wives is not at all, either permitted, or
practiced, among the Dutch: and among the Italians also it is very Rare; and
seldom, or never used; save only, in case that a man has lived many Years
with his Wife, and has not been able to have any Children by Her.

3. A man may marry his Niece; that is to say, the Daughter of his Brother, or
Sister: and yet a man may not Marry his Aunt, to whom he is Nephew. In like
manner may Cousen-Germans marry; that is to say, Brothers and Sister's
Children, both by Father and Mother. All the Other Degrees of Alliances,
specified Levit. cap. 20. are Prohibited, from marrying with each other.

4. There are many among them, that will not Marry a Woman, that has had Two,
or More Husbands before; calling Her, a Husband-killer: but however, This is
not any where Forbidden. And the like is to be understood of a man, that has
had more then Two Wives.

5. A Widow, or a Woman, that has been put away by a Former Husband, cannot
marry, within the space of Ninety days, after the Death of her Husband, or of
her Divorce: to the end, that it may be known, whether or no she be with Child
by her Former Husband; and, that there may not be any Controversy, whose the
Child is.

6. If a man die, and leave behind him a Young Child, sucking at the Mothers
breast; his Widow may not marry again, till the Child be full Two years old.
And this is so Ordered by the Rabbines, that the Infant might be sure not to be
neglected, till it should come to be of some strength.

CHAP. III.
Of their Contracts, and Manner of Marrying.
THe Manner of their making of Contracts, or Espousalls, is thus: There is a
Writing drawn betwixt the Man, and the Kindred of the Woman; and then does the
Man take the Woman by the Hand, and acknowledges Her for his Spouse: and the
business is done, as to the Matter of Contract. In some places they use, at
this time, to put a Ring upon her finger, and so betroath her: but in Italy,
and in Germany, they do not use this Ceremony, for the most part, when they are
Contracted only. Afterward they continue thus, Promised; some, a Year;
others, Two, Four, Six Months; more, or less, as they please themselves, and
according as they conceive it to be most Convenient for them: during which
time, the Man has liberty to visit, and to sport and toy with his betroathed
Mistress; but he must not know her Carnally.

2. When the time of their Marriage approaches, and the Day is now set, (which
uses to be in the Increase of the Moon; and for Virgins, on Wednesday, or
Friday; and for Widows, on Thursday:) if the Bride has passed the time of her
Monthly Courses, she then goes to a Bath, and washes her self: as we shall
show more fully hereafter, Chap. 5. Otherwise, she may not lie with her
Bridegroom, although the Marriage may however be solemnized betwixt them; till
such time as she shall be in case to go, and wash her self.

3. It is a Custom with many, that the Bridegroom and his Bride should both
fast, upon their Wedding day, till such time as the Ceremony of the
Benediction is finished.

4. Upon the Marriage day, the Parties to be married are brought into some
large Hall, or Chamber; and there placing themselves under a kind of Canopie,
they have Music brought before them: and in some places they have little
Boys, with lighted Torches in their hands, that sing before them. When the
people are now gathered together in the place where the Wedding is to be
celebrated, there is one of the aforementioned Square Vestments, called
Taleth, with the Pendants about it, put over the head of the Bridegroom, and
the Bride together. Then does the Rabbine of the place, or the Cazan, or
Chaunter of the School, or else some one that is the nearest of their kin, take
a Bowl of Wine in his hand, and saying a Benediction to God, Who has created
the Man, and the Woman, and has ordained Marriage, etc. he gives the
Bridegroom, and the Bride, of this Wine to drink. After this, the Bridegroom
puts a Ring upon her finger, in the presence of Two Witnesses, which
commonly use to be the Rabbines, saying withal unto her: Behold, Thou art my
Espoused Wife, according to the Custom of Moses, and of Israel. Then is the
Writing of her Dowry produced, and read; wherein the Bridegroom is bound, in
lieu of her Dowry by Him received, both to feed, cloth, and cherish her, etc.
and he binds himself to the performance of all these things. After this, they
take another Bowl of wine, and sing six other Benedictions, making up the
number of Seven in all: and then do they give of this Wine also to the New
married couple to drink: and having so done, they pour out the rest of the Wine
upon the Ground, in token of Joy, and Gladness: and the empty Vessel being
delivered into the Bridegrooms hand, He takes and dasheth it with all his might
against the Ground, and so breaks it all to pieces: signifying hereby, that in
the midst of all their mirth, and jollitie, they are to remember Death, that
destroies, and breaks us in pieces, like Glass: that so we grow not proud.
And when this done, then does all the people with a loud voice cry out, (...),
Mazal tob, which is as much as to say, Good fortune to them. And so they all
depart.

5. In the Evening they make a Feast, and invite their kindred, and friends:
and the Custom in some places is, that after supper is ended, the Guests
present the Bride with several Gifts, some with Gold, others with Silver, etc.
and some do this before Supper. Afterward they again sing over the seven
Benedictions, before spoken of, at the Solemnity of the Marriage; having first
said the Ordinary Benediction, used after meat: and so they rise from Table.

6. After this, if the Bride has found her Monthly Courses to be over, and
has washed her self, (as we have touched before) if they go to Bed together:
and if she were a Virgin before, so soon as ever he has made her a Woman, he
rises from her, and may not touch her any more, till such time as she has
fulfilled the time required in married women for their continuing Clean, and
has washed her self again in a Bath: as shall be showed, Chap. 5.

7. The Sabbath following, at Morning Prayers, the Bridegroom goes to the
School, as his Bride also does, accompanied with other women. And when the book
of the Pentateuch is now taken forth, the New-Married man is invited up to read
in it: who presently makes a Promise of giving Great Alms to the Poor; as
likewise do all the Invited Persons after him in Order. And when Prayers are
ended, the men accompany the Bridegroom, and the women the Bride, home to
their house: where after Complements passed betwixt them, they take their
leave, and depart.

In some places they have a Custom, that the Bridegroom is to keep within
doors, seven days after the Espousals, or Contract, made betwixt both parties:
during which time he is visited by his friends and acquaintance; among whom he
entertaineth the Time with Pastimes, and pleasing Recreations.

8. And this is the most usual manner of their making Contracts of Marriage,
and celebrating of Nuptials among them: although the Customs of the several
Countries are herein, though not very much, yet something different.

9. If the Bride should chance to die, after the Marriage, without having
brought forth any Children, the Dowry which she brought, her husband must in
this case be disposed of, according to the Agreements before made betwixt both
Parties: which are very different, according as the Customs, and Usages, of
the several Countries are.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Liberty a Woman that was Married young has, to refuse her Husband: and
of the Penalty of Forcing, or Deflowring a Virgin.
IF a young Girl, under the age of ten Years old, (being an Orphan, or
Fatherless: or though she had a Father then, who is now dead) be espoused by
the consent of her mother, or of her brothers, to a man that she likes not;
after that she has the Tokens of Womanhood upon her, and has now arrived to
the age of Twelve Years, and a day, she may refuse this man for a Husband: And
so making Open Protestation, that she will not have him, before two Witnesses,
they are bound to testify this her Renunciation, in Writing. And having so
done, it is lawful for her to leave him, and to marry whom she pleases.

2. Whosoever, either by Force, or by any Enticements, or fair Promises, so far
prevails upon a Virgin, as that he know her Carnally; if her Father, and she
be so pleased, the Judges must force him either to marry her, (neither may he
ever after be Divorced from her: as it is expressly commanded, Deuteronomy. cap. 22.)
or else they must make him give her Reparations, for her Honor, and the
Injury he has done her, in robbing her of her Virginity.

CHAP. V.
How their Women behave themselves, during the time of their Courses, and after
Childbirth.
WHen a woman perceives, that her Monthly Courses are now upon her, she is
bound to give notice of it to her Husband: who immediately separateth himself
from her, and touches her not any more: neither may he deliver any thing into
her hand, nor receive any thing from her, nor sit near her, nor eat with her in
the same dish, nor drink with her in the same cup.

2. And thus she continues, during the time that her Courses are upon her;
which lasts, in most women, for the space of five days: but in case this
Flux should continue upon Her longer, she must expect, till it stops. At which
time, she changes her smock, and the sheets of the bed; and thus continuing
clean, for seven other days, she cutteth her Nails, and cleanses them
thoroughly, and washes her self in a Bathing Tub, and also combeth her Head.
After this she goes to a Bath, made for the same purpose; which is to be,
either of Springing Water, or of Rainwater, (but it must not, by any means,
have been brought thither by Man's hand:) and the water must be at least Three
Yards deep, and one Yard over; for otherwise, the washing in it, would be
Insufficient, and of no force. But in those places, where they have not any
such Bathes, made for the Purpose, they in this case go, either to some River,
Well, Sea, or Pond: and there must they duck themselves in, all over head and
ears, stark naked; so that, there may not the least part of their body escape
being washed by the water. In so much that, if they should chance to have a
Ring upon any of their Fingers, that sat close to their Flesh, so that the
water could not perhaps get under it, their washing is utterly to no purpose;
and they must even return, and bath again. And while she is at her work, she
must have another woman to stand by her; who is to see, that she be wholly
covered over with water: and having thus done, she puts on her clothes
again; and so returning home, she may lie with her Husband again, till such
time as her Courses return again upon her: at which time, she must cleanse her
self as formerly; and so as often as Occasion requires.

3. When a woman has been delivered of a Child, she is to continue, separated
from her husband, in the like manner, as has been declared: and if she has
brought forth a Male-child, her husband may not touch her for the space of
seven weeks; but if it be a Female, for Three Months space: although in some
places they continue separated a less while, according as the Custom of the
place is. And thus, seven days before the said time of Separation is expired,
the woman uses to shift her self; and on the Eight day she washes her self,
in the manner before delivered: and having so done, she may accompany with her
Husband again.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Manner of Putting away their Wives, and of Jealousy.
IN Ancient times, when a Husband was Jealous of his wife, he brought her to
the Priest; who, giving her a certain water to drink, if she were Innocent, it
did her no harm; but if she was Guilty of the Offense she was suspected for,
she then presently had a swelling in her belly, and her flesh rotted; as we
find it written, Number. cap. 5. But now, if a Man have forbidden his wife, and
charged her, saying; Let me not see Thee any more in such a Man's Company: if
He afterward find, that she still keeps the said person company; or if there
be a public Fame abroad, that she is dishonest; or if there be any sufficient
Arguments, to prove that she is naught; and especially if she be taken in the
act; the Rabbines have power to force him, whether he will or no, to put her
away, and never more to have to do with her: the manner of which Divorse, or
putting away a Man's wife, is hereafter set down. And a woman that is thus
Repudiated, or put away, has liberty afterward to marry with any other man
whatsoever, save only with him, for suspicion, or certain knowledge of too
much Familiarity with whom she had before been put away by her husband.

2. A man has power, according to the strict Letter of the Law, to put away
his wife, not in case of Adultery only, but for any other dislike that he
has toward her: as it is said, Deuter cap. 24. ver. 1. Si acceperit uxorem,
etc. When a Man has taken a Wife, and married her, and it come to pass that
she find no favor in his Eyes, because he has found some Uncleanness in her;
then let him write her a Bill of Divorcement, and give it in her hand, and send
her out of his house. Howbeit a Man should not take hold of the bare Letter of
the Law, so as to put away his wife, upon any slight Dislike, but only in the
aforementioned case of Jealousy; or else, for some other notorious
wickedness, that he has found in her. And to the end that this business of
Divorce, and putting away of a Man's wife, may not so easily be put in
practice, upon every light Occasion: therefore have the Rabbines so entangled
it with difficulties, and brought in so many nice Circumstances, to be observed
both in the Writing, and the Delivering of this Bill of Divorce to the woman;
that by his means the time being protracted, the Husband may have opportunity
to repent himself of what he is going about, and so may happily return, and be
reconciled to his wife.

3. Now the manner of putting away a man's wife, is this. There is a Notary
called in the presence of one, or more of the chiefest Rabbines: then does the
Husband require, that a Bill of Divorce, which they call (...), Ghet, be
written, for such a woman, his wife. This Bill of Divorce must be written in
Parchment, exactly Ruled, and in a large square Letter: and it must not consist
of either more, or fewer, then just Twelve Lines: and many other Puntilios, and
Nice Circumstances are there to be observed, both in the Character, and the
manner of writing it; and in the name and surname of the Husband, and of the
Wife. And it is necessary also, that neither the Notary, nor the Rabbines, nor
the Witnesses be any whit of Kin, either to the Man, or to the Woman; nor yet
among themselves: Neither may any one of all the aforesaid witnesses, that were
present at the Delivery of this Bill of Divorce, afterward marry, and take to
wife the woman thus Repudiated before Them.

4. The Form of this Ghet, or Bill of Divorce, is Briefly This: On such a day,
of such a Month, Year, and place, etc. I such a One, do Voluntarily Repudiate,
put away, and set free, Thee, such a One, Who wast formerly My Wife; so that
Thou may henceforth marry Whomsoever Thou please, etc.

5. When this is written, in the Manner as has been formerly delivered; then
does the Rabbine ask the Husband very Formally, whether or no he does this
Voluntarily, and Freely; and whether he has made any Vow, or Oath to do this:
if so, He is ready to dispense with him, and Absolve him from it: Or whether he
has made any Protestation to her, against her Keeping Company with such a man:
and many Other the like Trifling Questions are put to Him.

6. There must be Ten persons at least present, at the making of this Bill: and
the Names of the Witnesses must be subscribed to it; and there must also be Two
other Witnesses of the Delivery of it: to whom the Rabbine proposes this
Question: Whether or no, there be any of them that knows any Impediment, why
this Divorce should not go forward: if so, they must now speak.

7. After this, the Rabbine commands the Woman to take her Rings off her
fingers, and to open both her Hands, and to join them together, that she may
receive this Writing, and that it fall not to the Ground: and then asking some
other Questions of them, the Husband gives the woman the Writing in her hand,
and says; Take here thy Bill of Divorce; behold thou art now put away from Me,
and have liberty to marry any other man. Then the woman taking the Writing in
her hand, delivers it to the Rabbine, who reads it over again: which being
done, She is from thenceforth, a Free Woman. There are many other Ceremonies,
and Nice Circumstances to be observed, which are purposely made so Numerous by
the Rabbines, to render the business of Divorce the more Difficult, and hard
to be exactly performed; as has been formerly touched: a more particular
Enumeration of all which Circumstances, I have not here set down, that I might
not be too Prolixe, and tedious to the Reader.

8. After this, the Rabbine gives the woman notice, that she is not to marry,
for the space of Ninety days; for the reason before given, concerning a Woman
that buries her Husband, who may happily have left her with Child by him. And
from this time forward, it is not Lawful for that Man and that Woman to be
together Alone in any place; and either of them has thenceforth liberty to
marry again.

CHAP. VII.
Of their Ibum, and Calitzah; that is to say, of the Next Kinsman's Taking, or
Refusing the Relict of his Deceased Kinsman.
IF a man die, without leaving any Children by his Wife which he last had, or
by any Former, and has any Brother surviving; the VVidow of the person
Deceased must then come to the Next of Kin; who is either to take her to Wife,
or else to release her, and set her Free; as it is written, Deuteronomy. cap. 25.
Quando habitaverint fratres simul, etc. If Brethren dwell together, and one of
them die, and have no Child, the Wife of the Dead shall not marry without unto
a stranger: her husbands Brother shall go in unto her, and take her to him to
Wife, etc. And if the person deceased, chanced to leave behind him more Wives
then One; if his Brother Take, or Release One of them, he is Free from all the
rest. And if the Deceased had many Brothers, they must begin with the Eldest,
and so down in Order: and if any one of them either Take, or Release the woman,
it serves the Turn.

2. To take to Wife a Brothers Relict, is called (...), Ibem; that is to say,
to take to wife a Kinsman's VVidow: and if any one resolve so to do, it is
sufficient that he take her home to him, without any Formalitie of Nuptials, or
the like: although the Rabbines have Ordained, that a man in this case is to
make a new Marriage of it. And if he take her to him, all the Goods of his
Deceased Brother, and his Wives Dowry are His; and she becomes to him, as any
other Wife.

3. It was Anciently accounted the more Laudable thing to Take her, then to
Release her: but now the Corruption of the times, and the Hardness of Men's
Hearts is such, as that they only look after worldly Ends, either of Riches,
or of the Beauty of the woman: so that there are very Few, that in this case
will marry a Brother's VVidow; especially among the Dutch, and Italian Jews;
but they always Release her.

4. To Release her, is called (...), Chalitzah, that is to say, The Taking off
the Shoe: as it is described, in the aforementioned Chapter of Deuteron. where
it is said, that if a man refuse to take his Brothers Wife, she is to take off
his shoe, and to spit in his Face, in the Presence of the Elders. Accedet
mulier ad eum coram senioribus, and tollet calceamentum de pede ejus, spuetque
in faciem illius, etc. The manner of this Ceremony, is thus: Three Rabbines,
and Two other, who are to stand as Witnesses, are to go the Evening before, and
appoint the place, where this business is to be done: which being agreed upon,
they say: In this place do we intend to morrow, God willing, to perform the
Chalitza: Then do they give notice to the Woman, that she must Fast on the
morrow, and not eat any thing, till This be done. They also inform themselves
by Other women, if the signs of VVomanhood do not manifestly appear upon her,
whether she be of that Age, which is required, or not.

5. The next morning, when they come from the School, all the People gather
together to the Place appointed: and there the Rabbines, and the Two Witnesses,
placing themselves upon their Seats, the Kinsman comes before them, with his
Right Foot Unshod, and Washed, and with some cloth wrapped about it: and the
Kinswoman also comes, being covered with a Mantle; and they both sit before
the Rabbines. Then does the Senior Rabbine gravely demand of them; What
business have you in this place? Then the man answers: I am come to perform
the Chalitza; and to Release this my Kinswoman. Then says he to the Woman:
And will you, Mistress, be released? She answers, Yes, Sir. Then says the
Rabbine unto them, Stand up then; and so turning himself to the VVitnesses, he
asks them, whether This be the Woman, and This Man her next Kinsman; and
whether it be Ninety days, since her husband died; and whether he had not any
Children by Her; and many other the like Questions. After this, he tells the
man, that if he will take his Kinswoman to wife, he shall do very well in it;
and withal, exhorts him so to do: which the man utterly refusing: He then says
unto him: Will thou Release her then? he answers, Yes Sir. After this he
asks them both, whether they have either of them made any Oath, or
Protestation to this purpose; telling them, if they have so done, that they
ought not to keep it, but should be absolved from it: but they deny, that they
have done any such thing. Then do they set up a Plank or Board, against the
wall, and they take a certain Shoe, which the Rabbines use to have, made for
the same purpose, in such a manner, that it may be made wider, or Straighter,
by certain buttons, and strings, fastened to it, as Occasion shall require.
This shoe they give to the Kinsman; and then does the Rabbine ask them again,
saying; Are you still of the same mind you were? and they answer him, Yes. Let
us proceed then to the Chalitza, says the Rabbine. And so taking heed that
the man put it not on, upon the Left foot, instead of the Right: nor, that the
Woman use the Left Hand, instead of the Right, the Man puts the said Shoe
upon his foot: which when it is well fitted on to his foot, and tied with the
aforesaid Strings, then does He walk Four Paces forward, and so returns to
his place again: where leaning against the aforesaid Planks, or Board, and the
Woman being commanded to stand before him face to face, the Rabbine repeats
those words out of the above named Chapter of Deuteronomy. ver. 7. My Husbands Brother
refuses to raise up unto his Brother a name in Israel: he will not perform the
duty of my Husbands Brother: the Woman saying it after him, Word for word.
Then does He speak to the Man; who answers him, as it follows, ver. 8. I
like not to take her. Then does the Woman stoop down, and with her Right Hand
untyeth, and takes off the shoe from off the man's foot; and lifting it up on
high, she throws it against the Ground, before the place where the Rabbines
sit; who presently command her to Spit in his face: then does she spit upon
Him: as it follows, ver. 9. Then shall his Brothers Wife come unto him in the
Presence of the Elders, and loose his Shoe from off his foot, and Spit in his
face: and the Rabbine saying the words before Her, she goes on, and says; So
shall it be done unto that man, that will not build up his Brothers house. And
his name shall be called in Israel; The house of him that has his Shoe loosed:
repeating these last words three times; and at every several time, all the
People with a loud voice answer, and call Him, One that has had his Shoe
loosed. Then does the Rabbine tell the man that he is at Liberty now to marry
when he please: and if he desire a Certificate from them, of this setting Free
his Kinswoman, they presently give him one: and if there be found any Writing,
or Contract about her Dowry, it is presently torn in pieces. And as the people
depart, many of them use to pray, and say: May it please the Lord, that the
Daughters of Israel come not any more to such Acts as these. All these
Circumstances, and many other the like petty Ceremonies, which they use to
observe in this case, are grounded upon the aforecited passage, Deuteronomy. cap. 25.
as may appear to any, that mark well the place.

6. And for as much as, when the Case of this Ibum happens, a Woman cannot
have her Dowry, nor marry again, without this Release, or being set at Liberty;
therefore do many of these Kinsmen, hold them off, and bear them in hand a long
while, that so they may vex them, and get money of them for their Release. Many
therefore, when they marry their Daughter to a man that has Brothers, do get
the Brothers to enter into Bond, that if need require, they will give her a
Release. Others there are, that cause the Husband to bind himself, that in case
at any time he should be sick, if the Physicians conceive his sickness to be
of any danger, he shall be bound to give his Wife a Bill of Divorce, that so
she may be Dis-engaged from the next Kinsman.

CHAP. VIII.
Of their Circumcision.
WHen a Male Child is born to any one, his friends come to him, and make merry
with him, wishing him much joy in it. Some of them use to set up certain
Scrols, or Billets, in the four quarters of the Chamber, where the woman lies
in, with these Four Words written in Hebrew: (...) Adam, Chavah: Chutz Lilith:
that is to say: Adam, Eve: Out Lilith. And they also write the Names of Three
Angels: conceiving this to be a means of defending the Child from the Strix, or
Night-Witch. But they that please, may choose whether they will do this, or not;
it being grounded upon no Precept at all, but looks rather like an Act of
Vanity and Superstition.

2. Upon the Eight day they are bound to circumcise the Child, according to the
Command given to Abraham, Genesis cap. 17. Infans octo dierum circumcidetur in
vobis, etc. He that is eight days old shall be circumcised among you: which is
also reiterated, Levit. cap. 12. Et die octavo circumcidetur infantulum, etc.
And in the eight day, the flesh of his foreskin shall be circumcised. This may
not be done before the Eight day: and in case the Child should be sick, or very
weak, it may be deferred longer, till such time as he shall be in health, and
able to endure it.

3. The Night before the Day of Circumcision they call The Watching-Night:
because that all the People of the house watch all that Night, to guard the
young Infant: and in the Evening the Friends of the Father of the Child go to
visit him; as the women likewise do to the Mother, and there they spend that
Evening in Feasting and Mirth.

4. They are to be provided beforehand of a Godfather, who is to hold the
Infant in his arms, while it is circumcised; and also of a God-mother, who is
to carry it from the House to the School, and to bring it home again; which for
the most part use to be some Man and his Wife, of the Parents Kindred. They
also use to make choice of a Circumciser, which they call (...), Mohel; which
may be whomsoever they please, so he be but an Expert, skillful man at the
business: and they account it to be the most meritorious thing that can be, to
be a Circumciser. And if by chance the Father of the Infant be one of These, he
then circumciseth his own Child himself.

5. On the morrow morning there are Two Seats made ready in the School, or if
they please, at Home, where they sometimes use to circumcise them: These Seats
are covered with Cushions of silk; and are provided, the one for the Godfather
to sit upon, while he holds the Child to be circumcised: the other, as some
say, for the Prophet Elijah, whom they believe to be always Invisibly present
at All Circumcisions; as having been very jealous for the Observation of the
Covenant of Israel: as it is written, Reg. 3. cap. 19. ver. 14. And he said: I
have been very Jealous for the Lord God of Hosts, because the Children of
Israel have forsaken thy covenant, etc. At this time there uses to be a great
Congregation of People together; and then comes the Circumciser, with a Charger
in his hand, wherein are the Instruments, and other Necessaries for the present
Business; as Namely, a Razor, Restringent Powders, with little clouts dipped in
Oil of Roses; and some also use to provide ready a dish full of Sand, to put
the foreskin into, when it is cut off: then do they begin a certain Hymn, till
such time as the God-mother, accompanied with a Train of women, brings the
Child in her arms: where the Godfather meets her at the School door, and
receives it of her: then do all the People present cry aloud, (...), Baruch
haba, Benedictus qui venit: Blessed be he that coneth.

6. The Godfather sits upon the seat, provided for him; and so taking the
child in his arms, and fitly placing him upon his knees, the Circumciser
unswathes him; and some use to have silver Pincers, with which they take up, as
much as they mean to cut of the foreskin. Then does he take his Razor, and
says: Blessed be thou O Lord, etc. who have commanded Circumcision: then does
he cut off that Thicker skin of the Prepuce; and afterward with his Thumb Nail
he rends in pieces that other Thinner skin that remains. In the mean while
the Father of the Infant gives Thanks unto Almighty God, for giving them this
Precept of Circumcision and the people that are present forthwith presage unto
him, that this will be much Advantageous to his Marriage: in the mean time, the
Circumciser going on in his business, with his mouth sucketh the Blood, which
abundantly flows from the wound, doing thus two or three times, and so
spitteth it forth into a Bowl of wine. Then does he clap upon the wound some
Sanguis Draconis, Powder of Coral, and other Restringent things, wrapping it
about with plasters of Oil of Roses; and so binding it up close, the Child is
swathed again.

7. Then does he take a Bowl of wine in his hand, and blessing it, he says
another Benediction also upon the child, and so gives him his Name, that the
Father will have him called by; adding withal those words out of Ezekiel, cap.
16. ver. 6. Et dixi tibi, cum esses in sanguine tuo, Vive, etc. I said unto
thee, when thou wast in thy Blood, Live: and having so said, he takes of the
wine, into which he had spit the Blood of the Infant, and besprinkleth the face
of the Child. After this, they say over the whole 128. Psalm. Beati omnes qui
timent Dominum, etc. Blessed are all they that fear the Lord, and walk in his
ways, etc. which being ended, the Godfather delivers the child again to the
God-mother, to carry it home to the Mother: and then do all the People depart;
and taking leave of the Father of the child, they wish that He may live to see
his Marriage, as he has now seen his Circumcision.

8. After this, the Circumciser sends a Present of Smeet-meats, or the like,
to the woman that lies in; and so does the Godfather also, and the
God-mother, and all their Kindred, and Acquaintance: and if the Parents of the
Child chance to be Poor People, they then send them Money, or what else they
think best.

9. At noon the Father makes a Collation, or Feast, for the Circumciser, and
the Godfather, and God-mother, and the rest of his Kindred, and Friends,
according as the ability of the person is: and when they have dined, there is
added to the Benediction a certain Prayer for the Child, that he may become
Great and Prosperous, and one that fears God.

10. The Child uses to have his wound healed in a short space, and it is never
above 24. hours in healing: and therefore some use, the third day after the
Circumcision, to send to their Friends, and Kindred, some Present of
Sweetmeats, or the like, in token of joy.

11. When a Girl is born, there is no Ceremony used at all about her; saving
that at the Beginning of the Month, when the Mother of it is now up, and goes
to the School, the Cazan, or Chaunter, says a Benediction over the child, and
puts a Name upon it, such as the Father pleases. It is the Custom in
Germany, that the Cazan goes home to the Parents house, and lifting up the
child's Cradle on high, he Blesses it, and so gives it the Name. If an Infant
chance to die before the Eight day, and Uncircumcised, some use to circumcise
it at the Grave, with a Reed.

CHAP. IX.
Of the Redemption of their Firstborn.
IF a Mother bring forth at first a Male child, that is to say, if she never
had any child before, although the Father might have had, or has other Sons
besides this; this Firstborn Male-Child falls to the Priest: as has been
touched formerly, Par. 1. cap. 12. and as it is specified, Exodus cap. 13.
Sanctifica mihi omne primogenitum, etc. Sanctify unto me all the Firstborn,
etc. and again, Omne autem primogenitum hominis, etc. All the Firstborn of Man
amongst thy Children shall thou redeem.

2. This Redemption is performed after this manner: Thirty days being expired,
after the Birth of the Child, they call a Priest unto them, that is to say, one
that is descended of the stock of Aaron, whom the Father of the child pleases:
and so, many people being gathered together at the time appointed, the Father
of the child brings before the Priest in a Bowl, or Basin, a good quantity of
Gold and Silver; and then they give him the child into his arms. The Priest
then calling the Mother of it before him, says unto her: Mistress, is this your
Son? She answers, Yes: then replieth He, Have you never had any Child before,
either Male, or Female, or have Aborted, or Miscarryed any way? She says unto
him, No. Then does the Priest say, This Child is mine, as being the Firstborn:
then turning himself toward the Father, he asks him, whether he will redeem
it, or not? who answers him, saying: See, here is Gold, and Silver; take your
own price: then says the Priest unto him, You will redeem it then? the Father
answers, I will redeem it. It shall be so then; says the Priest; and so
turning about to the people assembled, he says with a loud voice: This Child
is mine, as being the Firstborn: as it is written, Number. cap. 18. ver. 16. And
those that are to be redeemed, from a Month old shall thou redeem, according
to thine Estimation, for the Money of five Shekels, etc. I therefore take this
in Exchange, etc. and so he takes the sum of two French Crowns, or thereabout,
as he thinks good, and then delivers the child to his Father and Mother again:
And this day they make a Feasting day.

3. If either the Father, or the Mother of the child, be descended from the
stock either of the Priests, or of the Levites, they shall not need then to
redeem it.

CHAP. X.
Of the manner of their Education of their Children, and bringing them up in
Learning.
WHen a Child has now learnt to speak well, his Father puts him forth to
School to learn to read; and afterward he is taught to render the Bible, in
the Language of the Country, where he lives: and thus he is Initiated, and
entered into points of Learning, without any Grammatical way, which they call
Dichduch. And if he have any mind to it, when he is come to be about ten years
of Age, he then sets him to learn his Grammar. But now, in these days, there
are very few, throughout the Whole Nation of the Jews, that take so much care,
about the Education of their Children, as to make them so Learned: and, for the
most part, they use to read, speak, write, and compose, whatsoever businesses
they have to do, merely out of Practice, and use; and especially the Dutch.

2. After this, they begin to read some Expositions upon the Bible, as, for
example, Rabbe Solomon, and the like: and also certain Compendious Authors, who
treat of Morality, and the Rules of Virtuous Life; as namely, Rabbenu Moseh,
and others of the same kind: all which books being printed, and written without
Pricks, which are instead of Vowels; and the Phrase of these books also being
very different from that of the Scripture of the Bible, and therefore not to be
learnt, without much pains, and practice; it renders the reading of these
Books, the much more difficult.

3. Notwithstanding, some among them, that are more quick-witted, and of better
Parts then ordinary, go on, from these books, to the Misnah, and to study the
Talmud: which they account for the Groundwork of all Knowledge, and the best
study they can betake themselves too: for, very few of them apply themselves to
the study of any other Sciences: as has been said before, Part. 2. Cap. 2.

4. When a Son is now come to be Thirteen years, and a day old, he is then
accounted a Man, and becomes bound to the Observation of All the Precepts of
the Law: and therefore he is now called, (...), Bar mitzvah, that is to say,
Filius Mandati, a Son of the Commandment: although some call him (...). Bar de
minian; that is to say, one that is of age to do any business, and may make
One, in the number of the Ten, that are required to be present at any of their
Public Acts of Devotion. And whatever Contracts he makes, they are of force;
and if he were formerly under Tutors, he is now Freed from their Jurisdiction
over him: and, in a word, both in Spiritual, and Temporal Affairs, he is
Absolute Lord and Master of Himself.

5. A Girl, when she is come to the age of 12. years and a half, is called a
Woman.

CHAP. XI.
Of the Honor they account due to their Parents, Tutors, Rabbines, and Ancient
persons.
THe Obligation is great, that they hold a Son has, to honor his Father and
Mother: observing the Command, given Exodus cap. 20. Honora patrem tuum, and
Matrem tuam: Honor thy Father, and thy Mother, etc. And the Particulars of
this Duty are at large set down by the Rabbines; who affirm, that we must
honor them, not only while they are Living, but when they are Dead also.

2. They also instruct Fathers, how they ought to carry themselves toward
their Sons; and especially when they now begin to be of years: that so they
give them not Occasion to despise them.

3. They conclude also, from the aforesaid passage in Exodus, That every man is
bound to honor his Elder Brother, and his Stepmother also: and for his
Master, or Tutor, who has instructed him in the Principles of Religion, they
account him worthy of more respect, and observance, then his Father that begot
him: for, they say, that He has given him only his Being; but the other, his
well-being. After these, they have respect to all Religious, and Learned
Persons, doing them all honor, both in their words, and actions. They also
reverence all ancient persons; as they are commanded to do, Levit. cap. 19. And
the Rabbines say, that Honor is likewise due to any Ancient person whatsoever,
or of what Nation, or Religion so ever; as being one, that has a long while
been a Citizen of the World, and has seen many Occurrences, and consequently
must have much Knowledge, and Experience, in things of this World: as it is
written, Job, cap. 12. In antiquis est sapientia, and in multo tempore
prudentia: With the Ancient is Wisdom, and in Length of Days Understanding.

PART V.
CHAP. I.
Of the Jewish Heretics; and particularly of the Karraim.
THere were, toward the later end of the second Temple standing, diverse Sects
of Heretics among the Jews: of which we shall not here discourse; it being
besides our purpose in hand, to give an Account, in this place, of any thing,
save the present condition of things amongst them. And therefore the Reader is
to take notice, that of all the ancient Kinds of Heretics, there is at this
time only, one Sect remaining; who, though they are Jews, and observe the Law
of Moses, are yet accounted amongst the rest of that Nation as Heretics, and
are commonly called (...), Karraim: which Name is derived from (...), Karah,
Legere, to Read; whence (...), Mikrah, Lectura, Scil. Sacra: that is to say,
the Holy Scripture, or Writings: because these men keep themselves so strictly
to the bare Text of the Bible, as that they hold, that we ought only to
observe the Pentateuch, as it lies in the bare Letter: neither do they admit,
or will they hear of any Interpretation, Gloss, or Exposition of the Rabbines
whatsoever.

2. These are questionless some of the old stock of the Sadduces, though
somewhat Reformed; because they follow their Doctrine, in rejecting all things,
save only the Literal sense of the Scripture: Only, whereas the Sadduces
denied the Immortality of the Soul, and so consequently both Hell, and
Paradise, and Purgatory, and the Resurrection of the Dead, and the like these
men therefore considering, that in holding these Opinions, they should stand at
a distance with all the Religions in the World besides; seeing that, not only
the Jews, but also all other Religions generally acknowledge. This Truth, they
have taken it into their Belief: as they have also admitted of some of the most
Ancient Traditions; that so, by this their compliance, they might render
themselves not so odious even to their own Nation of the Jews; under which
Name they also pass; although it is most certain, that they are, in truth,
descended from, and really are Sadduces.

3. There are many of them in Constantinople, in Cairo, and in other Parts of
the East; as likewise in Russia, where they live, according to their own Rules,
having Synagogues, and certain Rites of their own; but under the name of
Hebrews, or Jews: and, which is more, they pretend themselves to be the only,
True Observers of the Mosaicall Law.

4. In all places wheresoever they live, they are beyond measure hated by the
rest of the Jews; whom these men, by way of Reproach, call (...) Rabbanim, that
is to say, Observers of the Rabbis. And the Hatred they bear to those men is
so great, as that they will not contract any alliance with them, nor willingly
have any manner of conversation with them at all; as conceiving them to be
(...), Ma^^zerim, that is to say, Bastards: because that in the business of
their Marriages, and Divorces, and in the Purification of their Menstruous
women, they do not observe the Ordinances of the Rabbis: And, which is more
then all this, if any one of These men should be converted, and desire to be
admitted into the number of the Rabbanim, that is to say, of the Other Jews,
they would not by any means accept of him.

CHAP. II.
Of the manner of being made a Jew.
IF any have a mind to be made a Jew, he must first be examined strictly, by
Three Rabbis, or other Persons in Authority, what it is, that has moved him
to take up this Resolution; and, particularly, he is to give an account,
whether it be any Worldly End, or no: and this they must be satisfied in,
before he can be received. After this, they in very serious manner give him to
understand, that the Mosaicall Law is a most strict, and severe Law; and that
the Jewish Nation is, at present, in a very Low, and Abject Condition, and the
General Scorn of Mankind: and therefore they give him the most Earnest
Exhortations that they can, that he would continue in the state he now is in.

2. If, after this their strict Examination, and their Earnest dehorting him
from his purpose, he still continue steadfast in it; they then take, and
Circumcise him: and, as soon as He is well of his Sore, He is to wash himself
all over in water: and this is to be done, in the presence of the Three
Rabbis, or other Persons in Authority before specified: and so, from
thenceforth, he becomes as a Natural Jew.

CHAP. III.
Of their Opinion, concerning all manner of Magic, Divination, and Augury.
THey account it a very great sin, to give any Credit to, or have any Faith in
any Kind of Divination whatsoever, or to Judiciary Astrology, Geomancy,
Chiromancy, or to any Fortune Tellers; or the like.

2. Much more do they abhor the Practice of any Necromancy, or receiving
Answers from the Dead, Magic, Witchcraft, Consuration of Devils, or of Angels,
and the like: all which particulars are expressed, Deuteronomy. cap. 18. Nec
inveniatur in te, etc. There shall not be found among you any one that makes
his Son, or his Daughter, to pass through the fire, or that uses Divination,
or an Observer of Times, or an Inchanter, or a Witch, or a Charmer, or a
Consulter with Familiar Spirits, or a Wizard, or a Necromancer, etc.

3. It is unlawful for them to cut their Flesh, or to make any Figures in it
with Ink, or any other Color: as it is commanded them, Levit. cap. 19. ver.
28. Neque figuras aliquas, aut Stigmata facietis vobis, etc. Ye shall not make
any Cuttings in your Flesh, for the Dead, nor print any Marks upon you, etc.

4. Many other things are forbidden them by the Rabbis, which were
superstiously used to be put in Practice by the Idolatrous Ammorites, which
they call, (...), Darche Aemori: that is to say, The ways of the Ammorites.

CHAP. IV.
Of their Slaves.
THere were many Particular Circumstances to be observed, concerning the
Slaves, which a Jew should chance to have; whether it were an Hebrew Slave, or
a Canaanitish: but now if any among the Eastern, or Barbary Jews chance to buy
any Slaves, they keep them such; and either make use of them Themselves, or
else sell them away to others; according as the Custom of that Particular
place is, where they inhabit. And, in case a Slave should desire to be made a
Jew, they circumcise him, and wash him all over in water, and so make him Free.

CHAP. V.
What Precepts the Jewish Women are bound to observe.
THe Jewish Women are prohibited all things, whatsoever the men are, by virtue
of the Negative Precepts: but as concerning the Affirmative, the Rabbis have
determined, that the women are not bound to the Observance of any of all those,
that have any Prefixed Time upon them: and the Reason they give of this, is, the
Weakness, and Imbecility of their Sex; and also the Obedience they owe to
their Husbands, and the Necessity of their being employed in this Duty, of
doing them service.

2. And therefore there are only There Precepts, which they are particularly
enjoined to observe. The first is, to keep themselves with all diligence from
their Husbands company, during the time of their Monthly Flux, till they are
in a condition to wash themselves: as has formerly been said, Par. 4. cap. 5.
The second is, to take forth a Cake out of their dough, when they make any
bread: which cake was heretofore to be given to the Priest, as an Offering; as
has been said, Par. 2. Cap. 7. The third, and last, is, to set upon Light in
the house every Friday night, on the Eve of the Sabbath: as has been declared
formerly, Par. 3. Cap. 1.

3. Notwithstanding there are many women among them, that are much more devout,
and pious, then the men; and who not only endeavor to bring up their children
in all manner of Virtuous Education; but are a means also of restraining their
husbands from their Vicious Courses, they would otherwise take, and of
inclining them to a more Godly way of Life.

CHAP. VI.
Of their manner of Confessing their sins, and doing Penance.
THey observe no other manner of making Confession of their sins, save only in
their prayers to God: and they have a certain Form of Confession composed
Alphabetically, which they call (...), Viddui: which proceeding in order of the
Letters, comprehends, under every particular Letter, some one of the most
principal sins, which men usually commit. But, those that can do so, are wont
to specify the particular sin of such, or such a kind, which they remember
they have committed.

2. This Confession they use to say every Monday, and Thursday, and every
Fast Day, repeating it over many times, particularly at the Fast of Expiation,
as has been showed, Par. 3. Cap. 6. and in all cases of sicknesses, or of
eminent danger: and there are some, that use to say it, every morning, when
they rise; and every night when they go to bed.

3. The ordinary days, appointed for the doing of Penance, are from the first
of Elul, to the aforenamed day of Expiation: but most people begin it, at the
beginning of the year, and so continue it till the time aforesaid: and indeed,
any time is convenient enough for this business, if a man find any thing to
lie heavy upon his conscience. If he be an illiterate man, he has Recourse to
some Rabbine, whose Counsel he desires in the business: but if he be a man of
any Learning, he may then examine the Writings of the Rabbines, where he shall
find some kind of Directions delivered, for the proportioning his Penance, to
the quality, and greatness of his sins; whether he mean to exercise himself
either in Fasting, Whipping, Abstinence, Almes-giving, Prayer, Works of
Charity, or the like; as he shall conceive to be most suitable, and proper to
the sin he has committed.

CHAP. VII.
Of their Sick, and Dead.
THey hold it for a very Great Work of Piety, to Visit the Sick, and to lend
them all manner of Assistance that Possibly they can, and as the Necessity of
the Person shall require.

2. When any one thinks he shall die, he then desires, that Ten, or more
Persons may be called unto him; among which, there is to be one Rabbine: yet
sometimes they do not desire to have so great a Company called. When they are
all met together, that are sent for, the sick Man begins then to say that
General Confession before spoken of, in the hearing of these persons; and
after this, he makes a Prayer to God, beseeching Him to restore him to his
former health: or if it be His pleasure to deal otherwise with him, and to take
him out of this World, he then beseeches Him, that He would be merciful unto
his Soul, and take it into His Protection; entreating withal, that this Bodily
Death may serve as an Expiation of all his sins. If he have any desire to
confer Privately with the Rabbine, or to ask his Counsel about any thing, or
commit any Secret to his trust, he has liberty so to do: Then does he ask
Pardon of God, and of all men, whomsoever he has at any time offended; and he
himself also pardons all his Enemies, and all those, that have ever offended,
or injured Him. And if he be the Father of a Family, and have Children, he
calls them to his Bedside, and so gives them his Blessing: or if He himself
have either a Father, or Mother living; he then desires Their Blessing. After
all this is done, if he be a Person of Estate, and has any thing to dispose of
by Will, and Testament, he causes one to be made; and so distributeth his
Goods among his Friends, and Kindred, as he thinks best.

3. Some of them, when they are Sick, desire that there may be Public Prayers
said for them in the School by the whole Congregation: and they also at the
same time change their Names, and cause themselves to be called by New; in
token of Changing their manner of Life, if it should please God to restore
them: and they promise also to give Alms to the School, and to the Poor.

4. When the Sick man is now at the point of Death, and that he perceives he
cannot live long; he is not then to be left alone, without some company by him;
and there is some one to be by his beds side, Night and Day: and they account
it a very great Blessing to be present at the Departure of a Dying person;
especially if it were a man of Learning, and an Honest man: observing that
Passage, Psalm. 49. Non videbit interitum, cum viderit sapientes morientes, etc.
and he that is present, at the Departure of any Dying person, is to rent his
clothes in some part, or other; according to an Ancient Custom they have.

5. They have a Custom also, that when any one dies out of a house, the people
of that house, and all the Neighbors also of the same place, or Village, throw
away all the Water, that they have in their houses: it being conceived, that
this they were Anciently wont to do, to give notice, that there was a Dead
Person in that place, or Village.

CHAP. VIII.
Of their manner of Ordering their Dead, and Burying them.
WHen the Breath is now gone out of the Body, they take and lay the Corpse upon
the ground, wrapping it about with a sheet, and covering the face; and so
having placed the Feet of it toward the Chamber door, they set up, at the Head,
a Wax Light, placed in an Earthen Pitcher, or Vessel, full of Ashes.

2. Then do they presently prepare to shift the Corpse, and put it in Clean
Linen; and therefore they call in some friend to assist them in the business;
and most women esteem it a very Charitable Work, to help in such a Case. Then
do they Wash the Dead body with warm water, with Camomil, and Dried Roses in
it: and having so done, they put a clean shirt upon his back, and other
shifting garments; and many use also to put upon him a long Linen garment; and
over all, his Taleth, or Square Vestment, with the four Pendants annexed to it;
and lastly, a white Nightcap upon his head. Having thus apparelled him, they
then take measure of his body, and make a Coffin for him accordingly: and
putting into it a sheet, or other white Linen, they lay him in it, and cover
him all over with the same. If the Person Deceased were a man of Note, they
then usually make his Coffin sharp-pointed: and if he were a Rabbine, they use
to lay many Books upon his Coffin; which having covered all over with Black,
they forthwith carry it out of the house: and as soon as ever they are gone
with him, One of the people of the house, that stays behind at home, takes a
Broom, and sweeps all the house after them, even to the very door.

3. When any one is to be buried, all the Jews of that place meet together, and
accompany the Corpse to the grave. And forasmuch as they account it a very
Meritorious Work, to attend any of their Dead Brethren, and bear him to his
Grave; you shall therefore have them endeavoring, every one of them, to put
his shoulder under the Coffin: and thus, taking their Turns all of them, One
after another, they bring him to his Grave. In some places they use to carry
Lighted Torches, after the Hearse, and to sing certain Hymns of Lamentation:
but in other places they use it not. And as the Corpse is carried to the Grave,
the Kindred of the Deceased person follow after it, making expressions of
Lamentation, and Mourning.

4. And in this manner is he brought to the place of Burial, which uses to be
in some field, appointed only for the same purpose: which Burial-place they
call (...), Beth hachaijm, that is to say, The house of the Living: calling the
Dead here, by the name of the Living, in respect of the Soul, which never dies:
when they have now set down the Corpse, if he were a Person of Note, or Quality,
they use to have one that makes a certain Funeral Oration, in Praise of the
Party deceased: and after this, they say a certain Prayer, that begins with
those words out of Deuteronomy. cap. 32. ver. 4. Dei perfecta sunt opera, etc. He is
the Rock; his Work is perfect: for, all his ways are judgment, etc. which
Prayer they call, (...), Tzidduck, haddin, that is to say, Just Judgment. And
so, laying a little bag of Earth under his head, and nailing up the Coffin, he
is carried to the Grave, which uses to be, a pit dug up, according to the
length of the Corpse: and they take what care they can, to lay him as near the
rest of his dead kindred, as may be. In some places they have a Custom, that,
as soon as the Coffin is set down near the Grave, if it be a man that is dead,
Ten persons are to go round about the Coffin seven times, saying a certain
Prayer for the Soul of their Deceased Brother: but this is not used in all
places. This being done, the nearest Kinsman is to rent his clothes a little;
and so letting the coffin down into the Grave, they cover it with earth, every
one of them casting a shovel-full, or a handful of earth upon it, till it is
wholly covered over.

5. It is a sin for any of them, either men, or women, to scratch themselves,
or tear their flesh, or to pull their hair off, in their mourning, or lamenting
for the Dead, as well while the Corpse is present, as after it is buried:
observing the Text of Scripture, Deuteronomy. cap. 14. ver. 2. Ye shall not cut your
selves, nor make any baldness between your eyes, for the Dead.

6. As they return from the Grave, every one of them plucks up grass from off
the ground, twice, or thrice, and casts it over his head behind him, saying
withal those words of the Psalmist, Psalm. 92. ver. 16. Et Florebunt de
civitate sicut foenum terrae, etc. And they of the city shall flourish like
grass of the earth: and this they do, to signify their hopes of the
Resurrection of the Dead. After this, they wash their hands, and sit down, and
rise up from their places again, nine times, saying withal the 91. Psalm. Qui
habitat in adjutorio Altissimi, etc. He that dwells in the secret place of
the most High, shall abide under the shadow of the Almighty: And having done
all this, they return home to their houses. And this is the most usual manner
of Burying the Dead in most places; although there may be, here and there, some
little diversity found, as the Customs of the several countries, and places
are.

CHAP. IX.
Of their Mourning, Praying for, and Commemorating of the Dead.
THe nearest Kindred of the Party deceased, that is to say, the Father, Mother,
Sons, Husband, Wife, Brothers, and Sisters, when they are returned to their
house, sit down all together upon the ground, without shoes upon their feet;
any then is there sent them in, from their Friends, Wine, and Bread, and Hard
Eggs; and so they eat, and drink: according to that which is written, Prove.
cap. 31. Date Sichera morientibus, etc. Give strong drink unto him that is
ready to perish, and wine unto those that be of heavy hearts. Let him drink and
forget his poverty, and remember his misery no more: one of them first saying
the Ordinary Benediction, which is used to be said at meat; adding withal,
certain consolatory speeches, and comfortable Sentences. In the Eastern parts,
and many other places, their kindred, and friends, use to send in, to the
Mourners, every Evenin, and Morning, during the whole seven days of Mourning,
Dishes of Meat, and good cheer, and go in and feast with them, and comfort them
up.

2. The Bed, whereon the sick person died, as soon as ever he is carried out of
the house, they take and roll up together doubling up the coverlet also, and
laying it all in a heap together, upon the same Bedstead: and, close by the
Beds head, they set up a Lamp of Oil, which is to burn continually, during the
whole seven days following. They also set a Basin of Water, and a clean Towel,
near the Bed's head.

3. Those that are nearest of Kin to the deceased, as has formerly been said,
are to continue in the house seven days together, sitting upon the ground all
the day long, and eating their meat in the same posture. Only, upon the
Sabbath, they go to the School, being accompanied by other of their friends;
upon which day also they are more visited, and comforted by them, then upon any
other. During the time of these seven days of Mourning, they may not do any
manner of work, or business; neither may the husband lie with his wife. And
every Evening and Morning during the said seven days, there are to meet Ten
persons together at the house of Mourning, to say the usual Prayers by the
Mourners, who are not, during this time, to go out of the house, (save only on
the Sabbath) and some use to add, after the ordinary Prayers, the 49. Psalm,
Audite haec omnes gentes, etc. Hear this all ye people, give ear all ye
inhabitanns of the world, etc. and they also pray for the Soul of the party
deceased.

4. All Mourners apparel themselves in black; but they do this, following the
use of the Countries where they inhabit, and not from any Precept.

5. When the seven days of Mourning are now ended, they go abroad; and many
use to set up Lights in the School, and have Speeches made, and promise to give
Alms for the Soul of their Dead Friend: And this they also do, at the Month's,
and at the years end; and if he were a Rabbine that is dead, or a person of
quality, they then have Sermons, and Funeral Orations, which they call (...),
Hesped, made for him.

6. They have a Custom, that the Son uses always to say in the School, for
his Father and Mother, that Prayer which they call the Cadisch, every Evening
and Morning, for the space of eleven Months together; and this he does, for
the Soul of his Deceased Father, or Mother. And some use to Fast every Year,
upon that day that their Father, or Mother died.

7. In many places they lay a Marble stone, upon their graves, writing Epitaphs
upon them of diverse kinds, some in Prose, and some in Verse: expressing the
name of the person that lies buried there; and recounting withal his Praises,
together with the Day, Month, and Year, of his Decease.

CHAP. X.
Of their Paradise, Hell, and Purgatory.
THere are some that have written, that for the space of Three days together,
after a Dead body is buried, it is tormented by a certain Angel, or Spirit; the
Soul returning again to the body, that so it may become sensible of these
Torments: and this they call, (...), Chibut hakeber, Percussio Sepulchri: and
this is believed too, by the simpler sort of people.

2. They hold, that there is a place, which they call, Paradise, for the Souls
of Good men: and this they call, (...), Began Heden: where the Souls of the
Blessed enjoy the Beatifical Vision: and also, a Hell, which they call (...),
Gehinam, for the Wicked; where their Souls are Tormented with Fire, and other
sorts of Punishments: But they are of opinion, that some are condemned to
Perpetual Torments in this place, and shall never be released from hence: but,
that some are to continue here, only till a certain time prefixed. And this is
that they call Purgatory; being not distinguished, in respect of Place, but of
continuance of Time.

3. They believe also, that no Jew that is not guilty of Heresy, or of some
certain other of the like Crimes, specified by the Rabbines, does stay in
Purgatory, above a Twelve-moneth: and they conceive that the greatest part of
those that die, are of this Rank, and Number; and that there are very few of
them, that, for those aforementioned sins, are condemned to everlasting
Torments in Hell.

CHAP. XI.
Of their Belief of the Transmigration of Souls, the Resurrection, and day of
Judgment.
THere are many among the Jews, that are of that Pythagorical Opinion, of the
Transmigration of souls, and its passing from one Body, into Another,
believing, that after a man is departed, his soul returns again into the World,
and informs other bodies: and this they call (...), Ghilgul, that is to say,
Revolutio; a Revolution, or coming about in a Circle. And to confirm this their
opinion, they bring many passages of Scripture; and particularly out of
Ecclesiastes, and Job: but there are very many also of them, that do not
believe this; it being no Article of their Creed, that so, he that believes it
not, should be accounted an Heretic.

2. The Resurrection of the Dead is indeed one of the Thirteen Articles of
their Belief, (as we shall presently show) which all are bound to believe: and
therefore they expect, that at the end of the World, all the Dead shall be
raised up to Life again, and that God shall judge, both the Souls, and Bodies;
as it is written, Dan. cap. 12. ver. 2. Et multi de his qui dormiunt in terra,
etc. And many of them that sleep in the dust of the Earth shall awake, some to
everlasting life, and some to shame, and everlasting contempt.

CHAP. XII.
Of the Thirteen Articles of their Faith.
Seeing that we have now gone through all the Particular Rites, and Customs of
the Jews, and have showed their whole Manner of Life, we shall here in the
Last place give the Reader a view of the Thirteen Articles of their Belief, as
it is delivered by Rabbi Moses Egyptius, in his Exposition upon the Mischna, in
sanedrin, cap. Helech: which Articles are generally believed by All of them,
without any Contradiction. And they are These.

I. I believe that there is one God, the Creator of all things; the First Cause
of of all Beings, who can subsist of himself, without the whole World; but that
Nothing can, without Him.

II. I believe that this God, the Creator, is One, Indivisible, and of a Unity,
different from all other Unities.

III. I believe that He is Incorporall, and that no Corporal Quality can
possibly be imagined to be in Him.

IV. I believe that He was, from all Eternity; and that all other things,
besides Him, had a Beginning at some time.

V. I believe that He only is to be worshipped, and served; and that we ought
not to worship, or serve any other, either as Mediators, or Intercessours.

VI. I believe that there have formerly been, and may yet be Men, so disposed,
as to be fit to receive Divine Influence; such as the Prophets were.

VII. I believe that Moses was the Greatest Prophet, that ever has been; and
that He was endued with a Different, and Higher Degree of Prophecy, then any
other.

VIII. I believe that the Law, which was given by Moses, was wholly Dictated by
God; and that Moses put not one syllable in, of Himself; and so likewise, that
That which we have by Tradition, by way of Explication of the Precepts of that
Other, has all of it proceeded from the Mouth of God, delivering it to Moses.

IX. I believe that this Law is Immutable, and that nothing is to be added to,
or taken from it.

X. I believe that God has knowledge of, and observes all Humane Actions.

XI. I believe that this God rewards those that keep his Law; and punishes
those, that are Transgressors of it; and also, that the Greatest Reward is to
be expected, in the World to come; and, that the Greatest Punishment, is the
Damnation of a Man's Soul.

XII. I believe that the Messiah is yet to come; who is to be Greater then any
King, that has ever been throughout the whole World: who, though he be long in
coming, yet we ought not to doubt, but that he will come at last; neither may
we prefixe a time for his coming, or endeavor to collect, when it shall be,
out of the Scriptures: Believing withal, that there never more ought to be any
King in Israel, that is not of the Stock of David, and of Solomon.

XIII. I believe that God will raise the Dead to Life again.

These are the Fundamental points of their Belief: with which I shall conclude
this my History of the whole Manner of life, and Points of Faith, of the Jews.

FINIS.

