crucifixion scene Ecce gui tollit peccata Mundi.

PIOUS INSTRUCTIONS, IN MEETER.

FITTED TO THE WEAKER CAPACITIES.

Thy Iustifications were sung by me, in the place of my Peregrination. Ps.

118. v. 54. PRINTED in the year 1693.

With license of Superiors.

ADVERTISEMENTS.
1. COnsidering that those for whom I chiefly made these Verses, are not
skilled in the reading of Abbreviations, which sometimes are pronounced
otherwise than they are written; to avoid the confusion that might follow, if I
should write them as usually words which are abbreviated ending in D. and are
pronounced with a T. I have written them with T. as pronounced.

2. Complying with the desires of some friends, I have noted in the Margent
several Texts, which are related unto in this book, and commonly but one in a
place; although there be many more relating to the same subject: the Margent not
being capable to contain all.

3. And note, that in the Verses, are not always the very same words of the
Text, but sometimes only the substance, or allusions to the Text.

4. Again, observe that the Catholic Bible names four Books of Kings, whereas
the Protestants call the two first, the Books of Samuel. And whereas the
Protestants divide the 9th. Psalm, and join the 146. and 147. Psalms in one,
which the Catholic Bible upon better Authority does not; in all my Citations I
follow the Catholic Bible: and therefore the Psalms which I cite between the
9th. Psalm, and the 147. are always the Psalms following, in the Protestant
Bible. As for example; when I cite the 136. Psalm, Upon the rivers of Babylon:
it is the 137. in the Protestant Bible: and so of the rest.

THE PREFACE.
HAving been conversant above three and thirty years with the poor, whom to
assist has been my employ; I find a docile spirit amongst them: and that many
of them are hungry, as I may term it, and eager after Instructions, not so much
in curiosity, as to be informed of their duty. But, I fear, this of holy Jeremy
is too much verified in these days. The little ones have asked bread, and there
was none that brake it to them. Lament. c. 4. v. 4. Not but that there are many
excellent Sermons made, many pious and learned Books writ: but that men of this
age being grown so curious, and of itching ears after eloquence of speech,
quaint and refined language in Prose, Poetical fancies, and conceits, in
Verse: that where these are not found, the Sermon, or Book, takes not, let the
subject be never so pious: which makes most Preachers, and Writers, incline to
dress up, what they render, in such sort that it may be grateful to those who
esteem themselves the Wits of the Age. And perhaps all the profit they reap
from them, is this Elogium: The man spoke well; he has writ good language, and
is full of witty conceits: and in the mean time, those who seek more after the
virtue, than the curiosity of the word, are deprived of their desires: the
language, or conceits, so exceeding their capacities, that they cannot attain
unto the sense: and so make little or no advantage.

I speak not this as condemning such Preachers, or writers: for certainly, when
Piety, Learning, Wit, and Eloquence, are joined together, that is the most
complete Work. But I rather make an Apology for these plain Verses, which I
dedicate unto the Poor, who indeed stand most in need of Instructions, which
must be given to them in an humble and low style, befitting their capacities.
Wherefore, I hope, no pious person will carp at them, which are beneath a Poets
censure: since I pretend not to Poetry in them: but only have put such
Instructions, as I think needful to the Poor People, in Meeter, fitted for
tunes: such manner of reading being most delightful to young People, sooner
learned, and better retained: which they may learn to sing, and so prevent the
great abuse that is now a days among many, in singing profane and lascivious
songs. And I doubt not but some will say, that these exceed the length of
songs. I grant it: but since I make them for Instructions, commonly the subject
I treat of, (considering the capacities they are fitted to) cannot be fully
explicated in shorter, to their advantage. And they may serve the good man to
sing working at his trade; thereby to edify his family. Receive then, you
little ones of Christ's flock, and my dearly beloved, these my small endeavors
for you, and make that use of them which I hoped for, when I made them: that
knowing what is evil, you may avoid it: and what is good you may embrace, and
put it into practice: that so Christ's coming may not be in vain to you: who
came not only to redeem you from sin, but also to teach you Virtue. And if this
Book may happily advantage you in this, (as I hope it will) I have what I aimed
at and as I ever had a love for, and desire to serve you, so I hope you will be
mindful, in your prayers, of

Your true friend in Christ, B. Leo of S. Mary Magdalen.

THE TABLE OF THE CONTENTS.
A Devout Prayer. p. 1 Christ's Thirst of man's salvation. p. 5 The Seven
Sacraments. p. 14 Baptism and Penance. p. 21 The Sacrament of love. p. 34 The
Sacrifice of the Mass. p. 45 The Israelits Lamentation. p. 52 The 2. part. A
sinners Lamentation. p. 61 The World's glory is Vanity. p. 63 The 2. part. True
joy in Virtue. p. 71 The fruits of Drunkenness. p. 76 Death and Life in the
Tongue. p. 82 Take not God's name in vain. p. 89 A Liar to be excluded human
society. p. 97 The true Art of loving well. p. 102 Of Pride. p. 111 2. Part. Of
Humility. p. 115 Of Patience, and the contrary. p. 120 Of Obedience, and the
contrary. p. 127 Of Poverty, and the contrary. p. 138 Of Chastity, and the
contrary. p. 146 Do Penance. p. 153 Of Prayer. p. 162 Our Father. p. 171 Hail
Mary. p. 178 Of Fasting, and the contrary. p. 185 Of Alms-deeds and the
contrary. p. 193 The Angel Guardians advice. p. 200 Liberty and Mortification.
p. 209 Hope and Despair. p. 213 Of Death. p. 222 Of Judgment. p. 229 Of Hell.
p. 238 Of Purgatory. p. 244 Of Heaven. p. 252 S. Mary Magdalens Life. p. 261 S.
Francis his Life. p. 278 The Books Address to the Reader. p. 315
A PIOUS HYMN, OR PRAYER IN HONOR OF CHRIST AND HIS B. MOTHER.
HAil MARY, hope of all mankind;
Hail pious, pure, and meek of mind;
Hail full of grace; Luk 1. v. 28.
God's holy spouse:
Of all that is good the Treasure house.
Hail Virgin chaste, Luke 2. v 7.
Christ's Parent dear,
Thou who alone did merit here
Luke 1^ v 35^ Isai 7. v. 14.
Without a father to have child,
To be a Mother undefiled.
Empress of Angels, queen above,
Poor sinners comfort, for Christ's love
Pity my tears: let joy begin
In my poor heart defiled with sin.
Comfort a Sinner in distress,
And give not to the merciless
The honor which is due to thee:
O Heavenly queen, my Helper be,
And plead my case before thy son,
Isai. 59. v. 2. Wisd 1. v. 3.
From whom by sin I Have basely run:
Whose rage and fury I do fear,
And without thee dare not appear.
Ps. 50. v. 6.
For unto him I Have sinned alone.
My tears present unto his Throne,
And do not turn away thy face,
O Holy Mary, full of grace.
Be thou my sad hearts keeper here,
Prove. 1. v. 7.
Imprint in me God's holy fear,
Obtain for me pureness of life,
In actions good, and void of strife.
Eccli. 21. v. 1.2.
Obtain that I may sin detest,
To love what is just, and there to rest.
O Virgin sweet, my heart's delight,
None has or ere shall shine so bright
Like thee, among the femal Kind,
Luke 7. v. 28.
Whom God alone did worthy find
To bear his son, who pardon gave
To Mary sinner, Luke 7. v. 48.
satan's slave.
O pardon beg of him for me,
Ps. 37. v. 5.
From sin's great load that he will free
My doleful soul: lest at the last,
In Hell with devils it should be cast.
O pious Rose without a thorn:
(Their help who here in sin are born.)
Pray unto Christ for me each hour,
That he will free me from the power
Of tempting Flesh, the world, Revel. 12. v. 12.1.10.2. v. 16. Gal. 5. v. 17.19.
and Devil,
Who sorely press me unto evil,
On every side, in sense, and soul:
Dear Mother help, and keep me whole.
Christ, 10.3. v. 16.
only son to God above,
I beg for thy dear Mother's love,
Luke 11. v. 27.
In whose blesst womb thou did take Flesh,
Whose sweet breasts milk did thee refresh.
By her on bended knee I crave
Thy mercy Lord: Luke 2. v. 1 ^. 1.10. ^. v. 14 Coloss. 2. v. 14.
who once did save
The world, and souls which are therein,
Paying the debt of Adam's sin.
Tho I in conscience guilty be,
Yet mercy beg, o God, Ps. 50 v. 1. Mark. 10. v. 47.
of thee.
Have mercy, Christ, God's only son,
Pardon the evil I have don.
Mercy it self; show it to me,
My sinful soul from satan free:
Blot out my sins, Ps. 50. v. 11.12.
by mercies art,
Create in me a new clean heart.
Grant lively Faith and Hope to me,
In perfect Love that I may be:
And that at death my soul may rest, Revel. 14. v. 13.

which is a gift of all the best.
Grant that my heart so grieved be
For sin, Ps 50. v. 19.
that I be joined with thee:
Make me so worthily receive
Thy Body, as all sin to leave.
Withdraw thy anger, Christ my dear;
Let thy pure Blood wash me so clear, Ps. 50. v. 4.

Without in body, and within,
My heart so clear from filth of sin,
That when grim death does seize me here,
The Angel strong may then appear, Ps. 90. v. 11.

Who is my Custos, by thy grace,
And me among the Just may place.
While death my body paineth much,
Let second death me no way touch; Rev. 2. v. 11.

Although my flesh do putrify,
My soul let in thy bosom ly.
That when I rise my Judge to see, 2. Macchab. v. 9.

I always may remain with thee,
And never from thee parted be,
But praise thee for Eternity. Ps. 83 v. ^.

Hear us, o Lady, for thy son
Does honor thee: all that is don
Which of him thou do crave.
Sweet JESUS, by thy Mother dear,
Who prays for us poor Sinners here,
We beg our souls to save.
CHRIST'S THIRST OF MAN'S SALVATION.
JESUS said, I thirst.

Jo. c. 19. v. 28.
OUr corporal substance has original birth,
And is composed of four Elements;
The fire, and air, cold water, ponderous earth;
All natural bodies have these four contents.
Their qualities, drought, moisture, cold, and heat,
By consequence, they do participate.
The Body healthful is, while these remain
Even proportioned: but if one prevail,
It generates sickness, bitter grief, and pain,
And causes stomach, health, and strength to fail,
Creati^g death, and does dissolve the whole,
Except by Physic you the same control.
As fire more active is of all the four,
So heat its quality exceeds the rest;
The thirsty man is crucified much more,
Than who with cold or hunger is oppressed.
By sickness hunger's less than, it was before,
But burning thirst increases more and more.
Christ therefore used this word, Thirst, to declare
The great desire he had of man's salvation:
His loss in grace, and virtue to repair,
To die for sin, and free him from damnation.
Thrice he did thirst; in Heaven poor Man to be:
On Earth made man; and dying on the Tree.
The Prophet David, who in many things
Prefigur'd Christ, Redeemer of mankind,
As is recorded in the Book of Kings, 3. Kings. 23. v. 15.

To drink of Bethleem's water had a mind.
Of Bethleem's cistern water who will give me
To drink, 1 Chronicles. 11. v. 17.
that my great thirst allayed may be?
No other water, wine, or pleasant drink,
Could satisfy or please this holy King:
He of the living water then did think,
Which out of Bethleem's Cistern was to spring,
That was Christ, Math. 2. v. 1.
the Messiah, who was born
In Bethleem, to save man, who was forlorn.
So God, the King of Kings, in joys above
Seemed not content; he had a burning thirst,
Proceeding from the passion of his love, Io. 3. v. 16.

Man to redeem, who was by sin accursed,
To take our flesh, Io. 1. v. 14.
and wrap his Deity
Within the robes of our humanity.
In Bethleem he was born, and man became, Mat. 2. v. 1.

To taste our bitter water which does spring,
From tribulation, sorrow, pain and shame,
And purchase for us that which life does bring. John 4. v. 13.

He who does drink the water I shall give,
Nere more shall thirst, but with me every live.
This water's Grace, which that we may obtain,
As Pattern Christ Example to us gave,
To practice Virtue while we here remain,
Whom we must imitate, if Grace we will have.
I here on Earth do you example give, Ioh. 13. v. 15.

That you may imitate me while you live.
But since he found all men defiled with sin, Romans 5. v. 12.

Before they could be capable of grace,
They were with tears and sorrow to begin,
First to lament, and grieve their sinful case.
These tears he thirsted from man's heart and eye,
That man might drink this water, and nere die.
When Christ did thirsty sit at Jacobs well,
He craved of the Samaritan to drink, Ioh. 4. v. 7.

What drink he meant this woman could not tell,
Of that well-water she did only think.
Why do thou water ask of me, V. 9.
since Jews
Samaritan's assistance do refuse?
To show what sort of water 'twas he meant
Christ openly declares her sinful state, Ibid. v. 17.

Desiring that she should the same repent,
And give him tears proceeding from sin's hate. Ibid. v. 10.

If thou did know me, water thou would give,
And water beg, which makes the soul to live.
This tear-probatick water heals all
Infirmities of soul, John. 5. v. 4.
when being moved
By contrite heart, Ps. 50. v. 19.
and from the eyes does fall,
It still prevails with God, as has been proved
In David, Peter, Magdalen, who gained
Sin's pardon, and God's holy grace obtained.
Since Christ this water craves, his Thirst allay,
Shed tears proceeding from true love and grief;
Let these be bread unto you night and day: Ps. 41. v. 4.

And doubt not they will bring your soul relief.
For Magdalen's caused God, Io. 11. v 35. v. 44
made man, to weep,
And raise her brother from his deadly sleep.
Christ also thirsted our perfection here,
That we might our Creator imitate, Math. 5. v. 48.

And therefore did like us on Earth appear, Coloss. 1 v. 28.

To teach us Virtues love, and sin's true hate
Before he came Virtue was little known, Genesis 6. v. 5.12.

Less practiced: nature was to vice so prone.
Reason obscured by sin, and Will depraved, Ephesians. 4. v. 18.

The careless Soul seemed to be ignorant
Of future life: and what corrupt Flesh craved
She granted, not consid'ring her own want,
And giving scope to sensuality, v. 19.

Made that her Heaven, with wordly Vanity.
But when Christ came, he taught us to deny
The Belly-God, and Idol-Wealth to hate, Phil. 3. v. 19. Coloss. 3. v. 5.

Which teach the soul the true God to defy,
And place her Joy in Lust, and worldly state.
With the true God these Dagons cannot stand, 1. Kings. 5. v. 3.

Their base desires still thwarting his command.
Against the Flesh Christ war did here declare,
By Fasting, Watching, Travels, Cold, and Heat.
Thus teaching us our Flesh still to beware, 1. Pet. 2. v. 11.

And as our greatest Enemy to treat.
Riches, and Honors he did also fly:
To teach the World's contempt, would naked die.
Christ also taught profound Humility,
Joined with Obedience, even unto death; Philip. 2. v. 8.

All injuries he suffered patiently,
And prayed for Foe to his expiring breath. Luke 23. v. 34.

These Virtues, with the rest, that we might learn,
He thirsted: since they are our chief concern.
Did this allay the Thirst of Christ? no, no.
He more and more still thirsted our soul's good,
That he might Grace and life on us bestow,
He thirsted death, and shedding of his blood.
Luke 12. v. 50
A bloody baptism is for me behind,
Till it be don, how much I Am pressed in mind.
The great desire Christ had of man's salvation
Math. 21. v. 7.8.9.
Made him with joy and Triumph to ascend
And to admit this (...) Accl^mation,
Hosanna from those who did him attend,
They also strewn Palm branches in his way;
Thus representing his victorious day.
When Christ the Law of Moses had co^pleated
Math. 26. v. 28.
A Sacrament of Love he did ordain,
Where his beloved with his Flesh he treated,
Math. 28. v. 20.
Resolving thus on Earth still to remain.
Did this as yet allay his loving thirst?
No: it was still as great as at the first.
Nothing this burning thirst could satisfy,
Love's fever had so much enflamed his heart,
But shedding blood, and on the Cross to die;
He was so deeply wounded with Love's dart.
He therefore rises, Math. 2^. v. 46.
and in have does go
To meet with Judas, now his mortal foe,
Who had betrayed him to the wicked Jews;
Math. 26. v. 15.
For thirty pence a compact he did make;
Knowing the place of Prayer, which christ did use,
Resolved him there with armed host to take.
Math. 26. v. 23.
Christ knew his heart, and treacherous design:
Yet Love would not permit him to decline.
Ioh 18. v. 1.
But to the Garden cheerfully he went,
And to declare that he was passible;
As God, he did to Nature represent
His future pains, which were so terrible
Luke 22. v. 44.
To the inferior part, which was to die,
That he fell in a bloody Agony.
The sense rejected what the soul approved,
Accepting all that did advance our good:
The sense at this with fear was so much moved,
That Christ was bathed in a sweat of blood.
Luke 22. v. 42.
He prayed he might be freed, yet did resign,
Thy will be done, o Father, and not mine.
Great was the fear and ter^our; yet his Love
1. Ioh. 4. v. 18
Transcended, and at last expelled all fear.
Our soul's salvation he preferred above
His life, and ease, as after did appear.
Math 26 v 46 Mark 14
This made him boldly meet his enemies:
His Love all pain, and torment now defies.
This made him take scoffs, v. 42. Math 26.27. Mark 15. L^k. 22.23. Io. 19.
blows, rebukes and scorns,
False accusations, and nere to reply;
His Whips at Pillar, and his Crown of Thorns:
And Sentence that as guilty he must die.
This made him bear his Cross till he did fall,
This nayl'd him to it: this made him taste the gall.
This made him, Luke 23. v. 34.
hanging on the Cross, to pray
For those that put him to this shameful death:
Their malice still with love he did repay,
Which love was constant to his dying breath,
His thirst could not be quenched until he dv'd,
Io. 19. v. 34.
And they with lance had pierct his sacred side.
His victory could not his thirst allay,
But, Sampson like, who had a thousand killed,
With a jaw bone, Judge. 15. v. 19.
in that victorious day,
With burning thirst had dyed in the field,
But that God caused a fountain clear to spring
Out of that bone, which sweet allays did bring:
Thus Christ, tho, by his Cross, he had subdued,
And overcome our mortal enemy,
Thirsted on the Cross, and to his Father su'd
On our behalf, to gain a Legacy,
Which was the seven sacraments, that be
Life-giving fountains, flowing from that Tree.
I thirst. O Father, from my Wounds let flow
Those sacraments, which may Ma^s wants supply,
And by them you in mercy may bestow,
Grace to their souls that they may never die:
And thus preserve, what I so dearly bought,
And make them practice, what on Earth I taught.
These were the Foutai^s, which the Prophet saw
In spirit, when he did the same foretell.
Out of your savior's Fountains you shall draw
Isai. 12. v. 3.
Water in joy, while here on earth you dwell.
Isai. 55. v. 1.
Come, come, make have, all you who thirsty be,
Drink at these Fountains, which to all are free.
Behold the good, God's thirst brought to ma^ki^d,
It made him man, and here on Earth to dwell;
The way to virtue it caused us to find:
It purchased Heaven, and preserved from Hell.
O let us thirst his pleasure to fulfill,
That we may never act against his will*
Let this thirst last, whilst here on Earth we are,
Which will preserve us from Eternal thirst;
And teach us those vain pleasures to beware,
Which make the soul eternally accursed.
Let Us Grace and Virtue thirst, until we die,
That we may quench it in God's deity.
Amen.

THE SEVEN SACRAMENTS.
I saw seven golden Candlesticks and in the midst of them one like the son of
Man

Apoc. c. 1. v. 12. and 13.
The sun gives light unto the eye,
Io. 1. v. 9.
So does God's grace unto the soul,
That man may walk secure thereby,
And from sin's wound preserve it whole.
But if this light should be put out,
The soul would perish without doubt.
For nature is so weak and frail,
And flesh and blood to sin so prone,
The enemy would soon prevail,
Io. 15. v. 5.
If God should leave poor man alone.
Grace is the soul's security,
Against her mortal enemy.
This grace Christ purchased on the Tree,
And that it might with us remain,
The Sacraments ordained be,
Which also do lost grace regain.
These are the conduits, which conveigh
Gods grace to souls, which him obey.
These from the side of Christ did flow;
These with his blood and death were bought:
By their right use God does bestow
His gracious gifts, as we are taught.
These signs Christ in his Church did place,
Still in themselves conferring grace.
Rev. 1. v. 13.
S. John the shape of one did see,
Midst seven candlesticks of gold,
Who seemed the son of man to be;
And seven stars in's hand did hold:
v. 16.
Which shows the Sacraments receive
From Christ, the grace they in us leave.
In Exodus we are also told,
Moses commanded was to frame
Exodus 25. v. 31.37.
A Candlestick of purest gold,
And place seav'n Lamps upon the same,
Which were to burn, and to give light
In the Tabernacle day and night.
This Candlestick did signify
Christ's Church: The seven lamps declare
The Sacraments, wherein does ly
Prove. 8. v. 31.
The oil of Grace, and true lights are,
Illuminating, with God's grace,
The soul of man, his resting place.
Seav'n things our bodies do require
To their beginning and support;
When they are born they food desire,
But yet not of the strongest sort:
Breast-milk feeds them while they are young,
And grosser meat when they are strong.
Physick's required when Health does fail,
Salves are applied to wounded parts:
When Physic seems naught to prevail,
Rich Cordialls must revive their hearts.
Superiors they are governed by:
By Marriage they do multiply.
These seven things most needful are,
To give us life, and it maintain.
Seav'n Sacraments Christ did prepare
For souls, whilst here they do remain.
Baptism the first, Tit. 3. v. 5. Io 3. v. 5.
regenerates
By water, souls, which God creates.
For tho the soul is innocent,
Yet when it is in the Body placed
United, Ps. 50. v. 7.
it is incontinent
Guilty, and in it is self defaced.
Romans 5. v 12 Tit. 3.
By Adam's sin it dead remains,
Baptismall grace it is life regains.
By Confirmation it is fed
With milky grace; till it be strong,
It must not taste that living Bread:
To the adult this does belong.
Act ^. v. 17.
This gives to it the Holy Ghost,
To strengthen it against Hell's Host,
Who seek the soul's first fruit to gain,
When use of reason does appear.
By Confirmation do remain
In us God's Spirit, Love, and Fear,
It does enable us to fight,
That we may put the devilish to flight.
Let no one then this Sacrament
Neglect. You Parents still take care,
That you to Bishop do present
Your children; but first them prepare,
To this great gift of Confirmation,
That it may prove to their Salvation;
When reason's ripe, a stronger food
Christ in his love did here ordain,
His precious Body, MarK. 14. v. 22.23. Io. 6, V. 56.
and his Blood,
That he with us might still remain,
And we not fear the greatest evil,
Being dreadful made unto the devil.
Of this transcendent act of love,
I shall not now pretend to treat,
Nor how much it does us behove,
Often to receive this Heavenly Meat.
There, and the rest, I do reserve
To treat alone, as they deserve:
Job. 7. v. ^.
Man's life on Earth a Warfare is,
Against devil, World, and Flesh he fights:
James. 3. v. 2.
He often erres and does amiss,
And wounded is by satan's sleights.
A soverain Salve Christ did prepare,
To heal, and keep him from despair.
This Sacramental Penance is,
Which, Io. 20. v. 23.
right applied, does heal the soul,
Where God gives to it Peace's Kiss,
And grace, all passions to control,
To root out all inord'nate Love,
And six it is joys on God above.
What requisites most needful are,
That Penance may work these effects,
J shall hereafter full declare,
And also what are the defects,
Which hinder Sacramental grace,
And hateful sin set in its place.
When sickness does so much prevail,
That you expect your Friend to die,
And usual Physic seems to fail,
Rich Cordialls then you must apply,
Life to preserve, till Nature's spent,
Which also death sometimes prevent.
Thus Extreme Unction does apply
The Churches Prayer, Iam. 5. v. 14.
if death appear
To those who agonizing ly:
Which God is often pleased to hear,
And longer life grant, V. 15.
to this end
That they their former may amend.
Or else it does prepare to death,
V. 15.
By full remission of their sin,
That when they yield their vital breath,
Life everlasting may begin.
O! always beg, you never may die
Without this sacred remedy.
Judges and Magistrates we need,
The Body Politic to guide:
So Priests, and Prelates, Act. 20. v. 28.
rule and feed
All such as in the Church abide.
Luc. 22. v. 19.
Hence it is that such might still remain,
Christ Holy Order did ordain.
Io. 20. v. 22. Act. 13. v. 3 etc. 6. v. 6. 1. Tim. 4. v. 14. 2. Tim 1. v. 6.
These have their power from above,
The Holy Ghost Christ to them gave,
Those they ordain Christ does approve,
And they the self same power have.
They are the Guides unto our soul,
Good to promote, and Vice control.
Priests consecrate the Sacrament,
Of the most Holy Eucharist;
They do absolve the Penitent,
As being authorized by Christ:
Io. 20. v. 23.
Whose sins you quit the same do I;
And whose you bind the same I ty.
By Wedlock Bodies multiply,
And souls, which God in them creates.
The Sacrament does grace apply,
Mat 19. v 6.
And God this Contract consecrates.
Who grace to Man and Wife does give,
Ephesians 5. v. 33.
That they in mutual love may live,
That they their duty may fulfill,
Breeding their Children in God's fear,
To love him and fulfill his will:
That, when at Judgment they appear,
They may not bear their Children's blame*
As being Authors of the same.
Here you compendiously do see
The virtue of the Sacraments,
As also why they seven be;
Which sacred number represents
The seav'nfold grace of God's bles't Spirit,
Which we by Sacraments do merit.
These seven stars are our true Guide,
That we may shun the Gulf of sin:
By these we in God's grace abide,
And glory at our death do win.
Let Us all praise Christ, by joint consents,
Who purchased us these Sacraments.
Amen.

THE TWO TABLES AFTER SHIPWRECK, BAPTISM AND PENANCE.
Baptize in the Name of the Father

Math. 28. v. 19.
Great ships, which seem to dare the seas,
Are often stav'd on a Rock:
Which careful Pilot might with ease,
Have saved from fatal knock,
If he Land mark, or Beacon had,
With care kept in his eye,
In storms and tempests ere so bad,
He might have steered by.
But now, alas! it is too late,
The Ship is broke, and all
The goods are lost: O doleful fate!
That often does befall
The Negligent. Now all his care
Must be, his life to save,
Since Ship is lost, and all its ware,
Lest Sea should prove his grave.
And to do this he finds small hope,
No other ship is nigh,
To lend him boat, or cast him rope,
To save his life thereby.
Till laying hold of plank, or table,
He passes through the waves,
At length finds footing, firm and stable;
Whereby his life he saves.
A stately ship God once did place
On this World's dangerous waves;
This fraighted was with holy grace,
Which here from shipwack saves.
This ship was Man, the Pilot soul,
^en 4 v. (...). Eccli. 5. v. 17.
His Guide was reason's light:
His will had power to control,
And make him steer aright.
The crafty Pirat, who did see
That Man would sail secure,
Until this Light extinguih't be,
The same did strait procure.
Genesis 3. v. 4.
With lies he tempts, and does prevail,
The right way not to steer:
Poor man believes, secure does sail,
The Rock he does not fear.
Genesis 2. v. 17.
This Rock was the forbidden Tree,
Which he was not to touch:
If so, death's prize he was to be,
God's Pact with him was such.
Genesis 3. v. 6.
The devil tempts, with Eve his wife,
He eats and fears no blame;
Thus sense deprived his soul of life,
And we partake the same.
Genesis 3. v. 15. c. 22. v. 18. Ps. 131. v. 11. Math 27. v. 26.
For all were lost, and still had been,
Had not God, in his love,
Promised Redemption from this sin,
And all guilt to remove.
Christ by his death did this fulfill,
And Sacraments ordain,
As helps for us to do his will,
And favors here obtain.
Of these, Baptism, and Penance are
Those, which we Tables call:
Ordained our losses to repair,
And save us after fall,
Romans 5. v. 12. Genesis 3. v. 19.
The first shipwreck that Men sustained,
Was by Original Sin:
From this, by death, Christ them regained,
Or else all damned had been.
Tho Christ from pains of Hell did save,
Romans 5. v. 8 9.10. Io 3. v. 5.
By shedding of his Blood:
Yet joys of Heaven no one shall have,
But by Baptismall flood.
This Christ ordained, that so his merit
Math. 8. v. 19.
Might be to Man applied:
And that he now, new born in spirit,
Might in his grace abide.
Hence it is, that Children christ'ned be;
Christ died for all: 2. Cor. 5. v. 16. Marc. 10. v. 14.
who says
The little ones let come to me,
Although they have not faith:
The Parents faith may here suffice,
As well as Parents fall,
Did cast them out of Paradise,
And purchased Hell withal.
When Christ'ning Font cannot be had,
Desire and Love supply:
Or else some Saints case had been bad,
Who did without it die.
Of Baptism, several sorts there be:
Water, Love's Fire, and Blood.
If th'first to have man is not free,
The other are as good.
The fruits of this great Sacrament,
Tit. 3. v. 3.
Are Justifying grace:
The sin which we have by descent,
That does our soul deface,
And actual are remitted; but
Act. 2. v. 38. Io. 3. v. 5 Marc. 16. v. 16.
Here grief is still required;
Heaven gates are opened, which were shut,
Where Is all can be desired.
After this Sacrament received,
Esaias. 59. v. 2.
Who in great sin does fall;
His soul of this grace has bereaved,
Romans 6. v. 25.
And purchased Hell withal.
This second shipwreck we do name,
From which the soul to save,
Hebr. 6. v. 4.5.6.
No one can twice baptize the same,
What help then can he have?
Our merciful Redeemer has
Left us a second Table,
Which, joined with a perfect Faith,
Grace to restore is able.
This Sacrament of Penance is,
The soul's security;
Which if the soul does willing miss,
It Is lost eternally.
THE SECOND PART OF PENANCE
Whose sins you remit they are remitted.

Jo. 2^. v. 23.
CHrist, Math. 9. v. 13.
who came sinners frail to save,
As we read in Saint John,
Io. 20. v. 23.
Absolving Power in his Church gave,
And this to Priest alone.
Ibid.
Whose sins on Earth you do remit,
And whose you do retain,
The first in Heaven I also quit,
The other shall remain.
We sin, in thought, in word, or deed;
All sin comes from these three.
Three ways to satisfy there is need,
That sin remitted be.
So Penance, that is the Sacrament,
Contains a triple part.
Confess the fault; I am. 5. v. 16. Math. 5. v. 25.
the wronged content,
With sorrow from the heart.
2. Cor. v. 10.
These three, when as they perfect be,
And joined with Absolution:
As Sacrament impart to thee
Of grace a distribution.
Where God is reconciled again
To thee, in perfect love,
From Hell you are freed, and do remain,
God's Heir to Heaven above.
Let no one here this doubt admit,
Suggested by his foe,
How can this Penance small acquit
Of sin? when all men Know,
Sin does deserve Eternal pains;
And what proportion's this?
Penance is but while life remains,
And that for ever is.
It Is true: Math. 5. v. 27.
God's Justice seeks severe
Proportion to the debt;
And these two equal ballanc't were,
Ps. 84. v. 11.
When Mercy Justice met.
That was, when Christ, Man to regain,
Upon the Cross did die;
This Sacrament he did ordain,
His merits to apply,
To sinful soul, that is gone astray:
And Baptism does the same.
Let none deny then but man may
Remit sin, in Christ's name.
John. 20. v. 23.
If you believe Christ's God and Man,
Believe he cannot ly,
And by this Sacrament he can
His Justice satisfy.
And tho Christ's merits did supply
Our inability;
Think not, because he once did die,
You are so quit and free,
Luke 13. v. 3. Romans 2. v. 6.
That you may Penance now neglect,
And good works set apart:
As tho our savior would protect
A wicked sinful heart,
No: Christ will not encourage Sin,
Ps. 44. v. 8. Heb. 1. v. 9.
Which odious is to God.
Be sure if you do fall therein,
You Will feel his scourging rod.
Luke 13. v. 3.
Except in heart you do repent,
And, as Christ has ordained,
Make use of Penance Sacrament
Where pardon is obtained.
First see that you true sorrow have,
For sins you have committed:
Your soul you cannot without this save,
Nor of sin be acquitted.
To have this grief, consider well,
Romans 6. v. 23.
What fruit by sin you gain,
With loss of Heaven you purchase Hell,
And devil's slave remain.
For what is sin, but a privation
Of your act's rectitude?
Contempt of God, and your salvation,
And all ill does intrude:
Your soul's possessed by the devil,
Where he does rule and reign,
Compelling it to what is evil,
This is a sinners gain.
This well considered, must needs move,
1. John. 3. v. 8.
Your soul sin to repent:
But chiefly loss of your God's love,
In heart you must lament;
This most of all let soul resent,
Isay 59. v 2. Ier. 17. v. 13. Osee. 4. v. 12.
That God is from her parted,
(Who is her Center of content.)
Because she proved false hearted.
Here let your soul grieve bitterly,
With sorrow from the heart:
Hence forth resolve you will rather die,
Than from your Lord depart.
If he will be reconciled again,
Zach. 1. v 3. Isai. 1. v. 18.
Such sorrow will him win,
To come to you, and there remain,
Remitting all past sin.
Next, Act. 19. v. 18.
all the sins you do recall
To mind, you must confess,
Their nature, circumstance, and all
What Is doubtful still express:
If you conceal but one great sin,
Or what much aggravates,
Act. 5. v. 4.
A greater evil you fall in;
Such sacrilege God hates.
It makes void your whole Confession,
And no sin there is quitted,
When Priest absolves; but new trangression
And mortal sin's committed:
And all sins after, while you live,
Tho you confess them plain,
And Priest does Absolution give,
Unpardoned still remain.
For till the first sin be confess't,
That once you did conceal,
God pardons none of all the rest:
Be sure then it reveal,
With all, which you since that committed,
How often confess't, received;
That sacrilege may be remitted,
And Conscience be relieved.
When you to Priest your sins confess,
Let neither shame, or fear,
You hinder: but still truth express,
And make Confession clear:
Fear not the Priest will them disclose,
For he is sure of this,
If ever he discovers those
His soul condemned is.
Thirdly; this Sacrament requires
You satisfy for wrongs:
And this as Priest of you desires,
To Penance this belongs.
Exodus 22. v 1 Luke 19. v. 8.
Your neighbor satisfaction make,
Restoring what is his due;
And ask his pardon for God's sake,
That God may pardon you.
To God, your satisfaction is
Ps. 50. v. 19.
A contrite humble heart,
To mend what you have don amiss:
No more from him to part,
By sinful thought, Esaias. 59. v. 2.
by word, or deed;
Be sure you this intend.
Math. 10. v. 22.
Pray him to help in time of need,
Persever to the end.
Tho all this cannot strait be done,
Yet really resolve,
This to perform, when you are gone,
That Priest may you absolve;
Thus Sacrament works it is effect,
Io. 20. v. 23.
Which is your sins Remission,
And grace of God, which will direct,
To mend your life's condition.
Be sure avoid this great abuse,
Which I fear some fall in,
To make this sacramental use,
An instrument to sin.
Because Christ left this help for all,
Who truly do repent,
They little care how often they fall,
And lost grace less resent.
For Who presumes to sin, because
He may here find salvation;
Directly runs into the jaws
Of Hell, to his damnation.
For, to confess thus, without doubt
He never is absolved;
Till he does also cast this out,
And better is resolved.
This Sacrament was not ordained,
T'embolden you in sin;
But that, when grace is here regained,
You may abide therein.
Luk 7. v. 38.
With Magdalen past sins lament,
And follow Christ your Lord;
Thus you will find true hearts content,
When Christ and you accord.
All praise and glory to Christ's Name,
Mark 2. v. 10.11.
Who sin did here remit,
As Man: and to men gave the same,
Full power to acquit.
As Father me to Earth did send,
John. 20. v. 21.
I also do send you;
Absolve poor Sinners, to this end
That they good life renew.
Amen.

THE SACRAMENT OF LOVE, OR THE SACRAMENT OF SACRAMENTS.
This is my Body. This is my Blood.

Math. 26. v. 26.28.
Mosaic Sacraments Adieu;
To this you must resign the place.
You were but Figures, Hebr. 10. v. 1.
here is the true
Fountain, and source of heavenly grace.
Io. 6. v. 49.51.
You did prefigure what is here,
True God and Man, our JESUS dear.
Not oxen, Levit. 1. v. 2. c. 7. v. 9. Gal. 2. v. 19. c. 5. v. 2.
sheep, nor calves, or bread,
Are off'red here, as in that Law.
Those types and figures now are dead;
Aaron like sacrifice nere saw;
True God and Man's our Sacrifice,
And here upon our Altar lies.
He Is Sacrifice, Hebr. 9. v. 28. Hebr. 9. v. 12.14.
and Sacrament,
And first did offer-Sacrifice,
The Priest by his Commandment,
The Consecrating Words applies.
By death he sacrificed on the Cross,
It Is offered here without life's loss.
Io. 1. v. 14.
God's son for Man's sake did descend
From Heaven, took flesh, and man became,
And practiced virtue, to this end,
Io. 13. v. 15. Math. 16. v. 24. Luk 9. v. 23.
That Man might learn to do the same.
If you will my Disciple be,
Deny your self, and follow me.
Io. 19. v. 28.
And when the scriptures were fulfilled,
And what of him was writ completed,
Tho innocent, the Jews him killed,
Whom they before had vilely treated.
His Love nailed him unto the Cross,
Man to redeem, and his great loss.
He died but once: yet still does die,
Revel. 13. v. 8.
And shall as long as world does last,
As to the effect, not really:
His suffering state is gone, Romans 6. v. 9.
and past.
That memory of this remain,
A Sacrifice he did ordain.
In the last Supper, he did make
With his Disciples, he took seat,
And Blessing Bread and Wine said, Math. 26. v. 26.28.
Take,
This is my Body which you eat;
This is my Blood: Luk 22. v. 19.
do you the same,
As a Memorial in my Name.
Thus, Phaenix-like, he still revives,
Tho for our sins he once was dead,
Like Pelican, to save our lives,
Io. 6. v. 55.58.
His children with his flesh he fed.
What Mother ever did, in stead
Of Milk, with her blood children feed?
Here did he perfectly fulfill,
What Solomon of him did write;
The sons of men, who do my will,
Prove. 8. v. 31.
To be with them is my delight.
Whom by my Death I did revive,
With my own flesh, I keep alive.
And this I do, that they may be
Raised up from their poor humble state,
2. Petr. 1. v. 4.
And that they may be one with me,
By perfect love, and sin's true hate.
Io. 6. v. 56.
Who eats my Flesh abides in me,
And to him I Will united be.
Mercy and Love did me incline,
To leave my Father's glorious Throne,
That I might Man's frail Nature join
To my divine, and make them one.
I took his flesh, and do hereby
Return it, with my Deity.
O sacred Banquet, Revel. 19. v. 9.
The Angels treat,
Supper of Lamb, and Wedding Feast!
On Earth become poor Man's true Meat,
That he while here may find true rest,
Io. 6. v. 56.
And to his Spouse Christ wedded be,
And join him for Eternity.
Behold here God's transcending Love,
Which, if it were consid'red well,
The hardest heart to love would move,
And make it in God's love excel.
Love made God man, Io. 3. v. 16.
on the cross to die,
And in this Sacrament to ly.
The Paschall Lamb prefigur'd this,
Which also was men to remind,
Exodus 12. v. 13.
How striking Angel doors did miss,
Where Lamb's Blood sprinkled he did find,
When Egypts firstborn all were slain,
And Hebrews did alive remain.
1. Pet. 1. v 19. Revel. 5. v. 9.
By this Blood all men were set free,
From the deserved pains of Hell:
And by the same preserved be
From Devilish, while on the Earth they dwell;
Who goes about Souls to devour;
1. Petr. 5. v. 8.
But where this Blood is ^ath no power.
The Brazen serpent did make whole
From Desart's serpents poisonous bite,
Numb 21. v. 8.
All that beheld it on the Pole;
So does this Lamb, where Faith is right;
This nailed once upon the Tree,
From serpent's bite set all men free.
Genesis 2. v. 9.
A Tree was placed in Paradise,
Life Giving those who should it taste.
This Sacrament was Christ's deaths price,
And in his Church by him was placed.
Io. 6. v. 50.
Who eats of this shall never die,
But live with Christ eternally.
Exodus 16. v. 4.15.
With Manna God his children fed,
In Desert, it was their only meat,
Which place supplied of Flesh, and Bread,
Thus God did his Beloved treat;
Wisd. 16. v. 20.
All pleasant tastes it did contain,
In health, and strength, they did remain.
True Manna is this Sacrament,
Which does contain all heavenly grace,
And fills the Soul with all content,
Till it in joy beholds God's face.
Io. 6. v. 49.50.
Who eat that Manna now are dead;
He nere shall die that is with this fed.
See how all types and figures are
Completed in this Sacrament,
Which grace gives with all virtues rare,
To feed here is the soul's content.
Yet soul that is in wicked state,
This Sacrament does nauseate.
A stomach weak and disaffected
Rejectes the best meat that it takes:
And if by Physic not corrected,
What Is good the cause of Death it makes.
Who this receive unworthily,
Of Death and Judgment guilty ly.
THE SECOND PART OF DUE PREPARATION.
Who receives unworthily receives Judgment to himself.

1. Cor. 21.
THE counsel of S. Paul then take,
Before you do approach this Feast,
1. Cor. 11. v. 28.
Examen strict in Conscience make,
Of what is sinful in the least:
If Charity, and Faith be true,
And naught in Conscience trouble you.
As Body by the soul does live,
Which separated strait does die:
So Faith life to the Soul does give,
And to the works of Charity.
Romans 3. v. 20. Iac 2. v. 26.
Without Faith works are truly dead,
Without works Faith is quite misled.
A lively Faith, when you receive,
Is the first thing that God requires:
Of this the poor soul to bereave,
The devil of all things desires.
Io. 6. v. 52.
How can a Man Christ's true flesh eat?
Thus did the Jews our Savior treat.
Their Query was, how can this Man
Give us his flesh? They did not own
That Christ was God, who all things can,
At pleasure do with word alone;
Who made all things of naught, cannot he
By word make Bread his Body be!
The Jews had never doubted this,
Had they believed him God to be,
So when Man doubts, most clear it is,
He doubts of his Divinity.
Think this not much; believe Christ can
Do all things, Io. 1. v. 14.
who is God and Man.
Believe you then this verity,
Confirmed by Christ's repeated word;
The Fathers with S. Paul agree;
The Church and Councills all accord,
When lawful Priests christ's word pronounce,
That Is Flesh of Christ which Bread was once.
What wine was also is made Blood,
Of neither substance does remain,
True Faith is here misunderstood
By those, that teach that doctrine vain.
Christ's under signs of Bread and Wine:
No Bread remains, or fruit of vine.
And since his Body's glorified,
It is against the Christian Faith,
His Flesh and Blood here to divide:
Who one receives the other has.
If these you part, then Christ can die
Once more, Romans 6. v. 9.
which makes the scriptures ly.
Christ consecrated Wine, and Bread
And Priests the same commanded were,
To mind us that when Christ was dead,
His Flesh and Blood were parted there.
But now his Body's glorified,
Blood in his Body does abide.
When sacred Host the Priest divides,
Your senses then be sure control:
Believe Christ still entire abides,
In part as much as in the whole.
The Priest breaks but the signs you see,
In each his Blood and Body be.
Next prove if you have Conscience clear:
For if in mortal sin you be,
At this great Feast do not appear;
For then you are Christ's enemy.
Marc 14. v. 14.
With my Disciples I Pasch make,
Be sure the same no Judas take.
If you find sin's wound in your soul,
Make use of Penance Sacrament,
Which Christ ordained to make it whole:
Where sin with grief you must resent,
Confess; resolve it to amend:
The Priest absolves you to this end.
Then see you are in Charity,
Math. 5. v. 25.
With those who ever you offended,
And let your love united be,
To other virtues, or intended.
Thus take this Sacrament of Love,
That you may live with Christ above.
See that you Wedding Garment have,
Pure in your Soul, with virtues dressed.
For want of this, rebuke Christ gave,
To one who was at wedding Feast.
How came Thou here? Math. 22 v. 12.13.
to Hell be gone,
Not having wedding Garment on.
When from this Feast you do depart,
Be sure this great abuse you fly,
To cast all sorrow from your heart,
And lead your life as formerly.
Luk 11.2.26.
This does your sin increase ten fold,
Often to resolve, and nere to hold,
When you depart, straitway begin
Your promises to execute,
Avoiding what does lead to sin;
Embrace what yields virtues fruit,
Be on your guard, 1. Petr. 5. v. 8.
and ready stand,
Believe your Enemy's at hand,
To try if he can separate
Christ from your Soul, by sinful act.
Ps. 118. v. 128. Romans 12. v. 9.
Increase in you sin's perfect hate,
And often renew the late compact,
Which you with God have made: and die,
Rather than from it basely fly.
Fear not, but fig^t courageously,
Chrysostom. Homil. 65
You are made dreadful by loves fire,
To this your mortal enemy,
To quench it is all his desire,
Breath forth this fire in satan's face,
He cannot stand, but soon gives place.
Then turn unto your JESUS dear,
Embrace him with a loving heart,
Desire he will take his lodging here,
And never from you to depart.
Remain, O Lord, for night draws on
Of sins Temptation, Luc 24. v. 29.
be not gone:
How senseless are men to refrain,
Receiving this blessed Sacrament:
Since that it does all grace contain,
And fills the Soul with true content.
The cause of this is liberty,
Eccls. 12. v. 12.
The Flesh would not restrained be.
All honor, praise, and glory be
To Christ, for this great sign of love.
That you may for Eternity
Live, joy, and reign with him above,
Often humbly take this Sacrament,
In soul to God, and virtue bent.
Amen.

THE SACRIFICE OF THE MASS.
Do this in remembrance of me.

Luc 22. v. 19.
THE light of reason dictates this,
That there is a God from whence we came:
It also dictates, that there is
A Sacrifice, due to the same,
By which we do him Homage pay,
And our true Lord and Master own,
And for his blessings daily pray;
This honor's due to him alone.
The Heathens, by the self same light,
Did own a God, and sacrifice:
But yet their judgment was not right*
They many owned, and did devise
Horrid Oblations, to express
Their duty to the Gods they owned:
They sacrificed, Ps. 105. v. 37.
as merciless,
Their children, not the least bemoaned.
In Natures Law, as we are taught,
Genesis 4. v 34.
Man Sacrifice to God did yield:
Thus duty paid and Blessings sought;
Cain gave to him fruits of the field,
And Abell of his flocks, v. 5. v. 4.
as due.
But Cain's Oblation God rejected:
God knew that Cain's heart was not true;
Just Abel's offering was accepted.
In Moyse's Law commanded were,
Four Sacrifices, for salvation;
Burned Offerings, Levit. ^. v. 9.
which consumed all there;
The second was of Expiation.
Exodus 29 v. 36. Lev. 7. v. 12. Lev. 15. v. 15. Numb. 16 v. 47.
The third Thanksgiving they did call.
The fourth preferred their just petition.
To these the Law obliged all,
God's grace to gain, and sin's remission.
The first did own God's Deity,
And that from him we have our Creation.
The next did purge iniquity,
And thus preserved from damnation.
The third for blessings gave God praise.
The fourth for favors made request,
These Sacrifices of those days,
Romans 7. v. 6.
Christ did abolish with the rest,
And in the new Law did ordain
Luk 22. v. 19.
One great unbloudy Sacrifice,
Which in effect does all contain,
Where he himself concealed lies:
v. 19.
Which he commanded should be don,
And now it is without life's loss,
In memory how he God's son,
Made man, did die upon the Cross,
Where he for sin did satisfy,
Romans 9. v. 11. and 18.
And by his merits purchase grace.
We to our souls must them apply,
That grace of sin may here take place,
Heb. 13. v. 15.
Which by this Sacrifice we do,
Where of Christ's Death we God remind,
And for his grace and pardon sue,
Which through his merits we do find.
This Sacrifice the Mass we call,
From the word Mitto, that is to send:
For here by Christ God sends to all
His grace, who with true faith attend,
And we by Christ return again,
Our prayer and thanks to God above.
And thus the faithful do remain,
By this Oblation in God's love.
When first from Satan Man was freed,
2. Pet^. 1. v. 19.
Upon the Cross by meek Lamb's Blood,
That we might still this loving deed
Bear in our minds, and for our good,
A Sacrifice Christ did ordain,
Wherein himself would offered be:
And thus on Earth with us remain,
From Death of sin to keep us free.
By this great Sacrifice we own,
That God, made Man, died on the Cross:
And that Christ able was, alone,
Man to redeem, and his great loss:
This now does expiate our sin:
By this we thanks for favors give:
Io. 6 v. 56.57.
By this we beg and graces win:
By this, made one with Christ, we live,
Here Is Sacrifice and Sacrament,
The same that is offered we receive:
This by Oblation's to God sent,
Which Christ for our relief did leave.
This Sacrifice, in full, contains
What all the old prefigured;
The Author of them all remains
Here, under signs of Wine and Bread.
How can we think God will deny,
What here we ask in JESUS Name?
Since Christ, that we might satisfy
His Justice, did ordain the same.
As he by Death did satisfy
The Debt, Coloss. 2. v. 14.
that to our sins was due:
So we by Mass his Death apply
To us, and forth our pardon sue.
No fast, no Prayer or other act,
Does God so please, as does the Mass.
No Sin, no Crime, or horrid fact,
In their demerits can surpass
The merits of our savior dear,
Which are in virtue infinite,
And for our souls are off'red here.
All men to Mass let this invite;
Since that for those who present are,
It Is offered in a special sort,
And they above the rest do share
In the effects, who there resort;
But most of all, who with the Priest
The same do offer with pure heart:
For they by this are joynd with Christ,
And void of grace shall nere depart.
The Angels here on Christ attend;
Be sure with reverence to remain:
Lest Christ and them you should offend,
Io. 2. v. 15.
And Curse instead of Blessing gain.
We read that Christ with his own hand
Chastised those which the Church abused:
Io. 9. v. 31.
All Church-profaners guilty stand,
The Prayers of such will be refused.
If by just let you cannot be by
In person, when the Mass is said;
Devoutly still the same apply
Unto your soul, where you are stayed:
Make you an Altar of your heart,
With sorrow pierced; Ps. 50. v. 18.
heat with love's fire;
By Prayer devout act you the part
Of Priest, 2. Cor. 8. v. 12.
and you will have your desire.
For Dead, as well as Living, we
Do offer up this Sacrifice:
And surely they partakers be,
Since Holy scriptures do advise
To pray for them: ^. Macch. ^2. v. 46.
so when you here,
Or absent, do your prayers say,
Still let your Charity appear,
And for those Souls devoutly pray.
1. Cor. 11. v. 26.
Since Mass does Christ's Death represent,
Devoutly on it meditate:
All your past evils there repent,
Raise in your soul sin's perfect hate;
With tears reflect upon the pain,
Which he for sin did once endure,
That he to God your soul might gain,
And heavenly joys for you ensure.
And as Christ is the Mass-Oblation,
Doubt not God's wrath to pacify,
And through his merits have Salvation,
Who for your sake vouchsaf't to die:
If you devout with Priest do join,
And offer up this Sacrifice,
Where under signs of Bread and Wine,
True God and Man obscured lies.
In all your wants devoutly go
Coloss. 11 v. 19.20,
Unto this Treasure-house with speed,
Where God does freely grace bestow,
Supplying us in all our need;
When you are tempted unto evil,
To this great Sanctuary fly,
Where you will be shielded from the devil,
And under God's Protection ly.
Numb. 28 v 3. Ezech. 46. v. 13.
The Jews did daily Sacrifice
A Lamb, and thus their duty paid:
The same does holy Church advise,
And therefore Mass is daily said,
That you to God may honor give,
And keep your soul still in his grace,
To Mass devout be while you live,
That with the Just you may have place.
Amen.

THE ISRAELITES LAMENTATION IN THEIR CAPTIVITY.
THE FIRST PART.
Upon the rivers of Babylon there we sat, and wept whilst we remembered Sion.

Ps. 136. v. 1.
THE Prophets, by internal light,
Of future things have such foresight,
That what is to come they tell as past,
And often what is first put last.
Thus David did, in spirit, see,
The Israelites Captivity:
Their bitter sighs, and Lamentation,
For holy Sion's Desolation.
Upon the Riv'rs of Babylon,
See the whole. Psalm. 136.
We sat, and wept, and made our moan,
In this our doleful, and sad state,
On Sion we did meditate.
How we sometime were happy there,
4. Kings. 22. v. 16.17.
But for our sins exiled were;
City and Temple are destroyed,
All desolate does ly, Isai. 64. v. 10.11.
and void.
Ps. 106. v. 13.
How often did God patiently
Bear with our sins, and sweetly try,
By less chastisements, if he could
Win us, and if return we would?
Ps. 106. v. 12.13. Ps. 77. v. 34.41.
When he chastised we promis't fair,
When he withdrew we took no care.
Thus often tried we nere amended,
Our crying sins to God ascended.
We often did our God deny,
And fell into Idolatry.
Ps. 105. v. 37.
We sacrificed our children dear,
To Idols: God we did not fear.
The holy Temple we abused,
And Holy Sacrifice misused,
Would not Gods holy Law obey,
Regarded not what Priest did say.
Isay. Jeremy. Ezech. Joel ande.
The Prophets warnings we still slighted,
In vice and wickedness delighted:
Our Heaven was Wealth, and Carnal Pleasure,
Which we affected without measure.
Ier 25. v. 10 11. Ps. 105. v. 43 Ier. 32 v. 28 29.30.
Thus we provoked our loving God,
To lay upon us Justice rod.
As we his Mercy often abused,
To show us Mercy he refused.
4. Kings 25. v. 21. v. 3. Ier. Lament. 2* v. 20. Baruch. 2. v 3. Ezech. 5. v.
18. 4. Kings. 24. v 24 4. King. 25. v 9.13.14.15.
Our dearest friends by th'sword lay dead,
Our Wives and Children famished.
O doleful day! for want of meat
The Parents did their Children eat.
The fierce Chaldeans, who did take
Our City, did us Prisoners make,
They Sion burnt, and Temple sacked,
Our sins did cause this horrid fact.
To Babylon, their chiefest City,
They brought us slaves, 4. King. 24. v. 15.16. 1. Chron. 9. v. 1.
where void of pity,
They used us with a cruelty,
Exceeding Egypts slavery,
Our Bread was short, our Drink was scant;
Ier. Lam. 1. v 11. ^. 5. v. 4.
Who can with tongue express our want?
The labors we did undergo,
For others forced to plow and sow.
Ier. Lam. 5. v. 5.
Our enemies did domineer,
And keep us in such aw and fear,
Like Slaves, we under foot were trod,
Chastized with the Whip and Rod.
This ill exceeded all the rest,
And our poor souls with grief oppressed,
To serve our God we were not free,
But pressed unto Idolatry.
Barud. 6. v 3 Ier. Lam. 1. v. 4.
Their Temples, Altars, Sacrifice,
Reminding us how Sion lies,
In ashes, and the Temple torn,
With all the Altars now forlorn.
This caused such grief, v. 16.17.
no pleasant thing
Could any pleasure to us bring.
But more increas't our tears and grief,
Our sorrows could find no relief.
Ps. 136. v. 1.
They placed us by the river side,
Where whispering stream did curling glide,
The banks were set with sallow trees,
About them pleasant notes of bees.
This did increase our Melancholy,
To meditate on our past folly;
Deuteronomy. ^^ v. 13^
How with true joy we once abounded,
And with God's blessings were surrounded.
How, v. 14.
of all nations, we were blessed,
Our Temple did excel the rest;
2. Chron. 7. v. 13.14.15.
By sacrifice we did obtain,
All spirit' all good, and did remain,
God's chosen people: Deuteronomy. 7. v. 6.
till by sin
To leave his laws we did begin,
And sacrifice to Idols, which
Our hearts with folly did bewitch.
For this allowed of liberty,
In carnal pseasure we might ly,
Without control, and Heaven make
On earth: which freedom we did take.
Ierem. etc.
And tho the Prophets did foretell
Those ills, which for our sins befell;
Their preaching we would not believe,
But freedom to our senses give:
Ps. 144. v. 18.
Which justly brought us in this thrall,
Which when into our mind we call,
No music, voice, or pleasant thing,
Can to our sad hearts comfort bring.
Ps. 136. v. 2.
We therefore hanged our Organs by,
Than play, we had more mind to cry;
And when they scoffing bid us sing,
This grief unto our hearts did bring.
Reminding us, tho now too late,
Of our lost joys and pleasant state:
v. 3.
Sing unto us of Sion's songs;
Joy to this pleasant place belongs.
Leave of your melancholy thought,
Live cheerfully, where you are brought,
Conform to us, and think not on
Jerusalem, from whence you're gone.
4. King. 25. v. 24.
And you shall live with us in peace,
All slavish cruelty shall cease;
To gather Wealth you shall be free,
And joy with us in liberty.
No: tho our slavery be great,
And us so cruelly you treat,
Jerusalem we will nere forget,
Nor love on Babylon will set.
Baruch. 4. v. 1.
For, tho our sins deserved this,
We now repent what is done amiss,
Ezech. 33 v. 12.16.
And hope God will be pacified,
Who Penitents nere yet denied.
This is a place more fit to use
Sighs, holy songs we will not abuse,
Ps. 136. v. 4.
To sing them in this wicked land,
Lest we should with you guilty stand.
In this, some comfort we do find,
To keep Jerusalem in mind:
Which if we ever do forget,
Let this our Penalty be set;
v. 5.
That our right hand forgotten be,
That Is what is dearest let us see
Forsook by God; nay let him cause
v. 6.
Our Tongues to cleave unto our jaws.
If she have not the chiefest place
Still in our joy: and with God's grace,
We hope to see her walls rebuilt,
The Temple purged where blood was spilt.
New Altars made, and sacrifice
Offered, which God will not despise,
But pardon give, with a cessation
Of his just wrath, and indignation.
This we will pray for while we live here,
And from this time live in God's fear,
With hope expecting our recall,
When we will praise him, great and small.
Their Penance did with God prevail,
1. Esdr. 1. v. 1. c. 2. v. 1.
And of their hope they did not fail:
But God recalled them back again,
In Joy and peace they did remain.
A SINNERS LAMENTATION IN THE DEVIL'S BONDAGE.
THE SECOND PART.
Many are the scourges of a sinner.

Ps. 3^. v. 10.
O You, Ier. Lam. 1. v. 12.
that do pass by this way,
Stop here, and make some little stay;
Attend and lend to me your ear,
That you my doleful case may hear:
Ezeck. 14. v. 8.
Which may a warning to you be;
And also make you pity me,
Eccles. 1. v. 14.
Who on these pleasant banks can find,
No object to content my mind.
The murmuring waters music make,
Wherein the Ear may pleasure take,
The streams, reflected by the sun,
Delight the eyes to see them run:
A fragrant smell the flowers cast,
The fruit's delicious to the taste,
All Is here that may the senses please,
Refresh the Body, and give ease.
Eccles. 2. v. 1.11.
Yet all these bring no joy to me,
But objects of my sorrow be;
Reminding me what I have lost,
By hateful Sin how dear it cost.
Sion is still within my mind,
Christ's holy Church, where I did find
Those inward joys and consolations,
That far excelled these recreations.
Prove. 15. v. 15.
A Conscience clear was my great feast,
Where I still fed on what was best:
Christ's Body was my daily bread,
His Blood my drink: thus was I fed.
Wherein I found all true delight.
Faith gave my Understanding light;
True Charity my Heart inflamed;
The sweets I felt cannot be named.
No eye ere saw, 1. Cor. 2. v. 9.
or ear heard tell,
Nor can Man's Heart conceive it well,
What God for man does here provide,
While he does in his love abide.
Love does his Heart secure from fear,
1. Io. 4. v. 18.
Hope makes his future joys appear
As present: thus he does possess,
In part, Ps. 15. v. 9.
his future happiness.
This happy state was I once in,
Eccli. 40. v. 9.10.
Till I consented unto sin.
Which in a trice robbed me of all,
And turned my sweets to bitter gall.
The World, the Dev'll, and flattering Flesh,
Numb. 21. v. 5. c. 11. v. 5.
Promised my Sad heart to refresh.
Like those with Manna surfited,
I sought with onions to be fed.
Math. 12. v. 45.
And granted what the Flesh desired,
And yielded what the World required.
These Idols I adored, in place
Of God: and so I lost his grace.
And then the Devilish did soon possess
My heart, and to all wickedness
Did tempt it: thus to sin I fell,
Without the fear of God or Hell.
The Sacraments I little used,
And when received, I them abused;
Math 6. v. 5.
My Prayer was hypocritical,
I little read, or none at all.
I slighted counsel; except bad,
Prove. 18. v. 3.
All good adivce did make me sad.
The Flesh did live without control;
She domineered, and not the Soul.
What Senses willed, Ephesians. 2. v. 3.
the Will did grant,
She used not the least restraint,
Jude 1. v. 4.
Which made me live worse than a beast,
In filth of Sin I kept my Feast.
The Devil toss't me like a ball,
Eccli 27. v. 12.
From this unto the other wall:
From one sin to another press't,
That I could find no kind of rest.
My conscience, Prove. 12. v. 18.
now and then, would bite,
My Reason had some little light,
^h^^^ only served to torment:
My Heart was hard, would not relent.
What frights and fears did me possess,
Prove. 28. v. 1.
Whilst I lived in this wickedness?
The thought of God was like a dart,
With horrid fear it pierced my heart.
This to expel, my mortal foe
Would tempt me, here and there, to go,
To this, and that lewd company,
That all good thoughts might in me die.
Ps. 54. v. 6.
Yet these great fears in me nere ceased,
But daily more and more increased,
My Reason now began to clear,
Which made me more and more to fear.
Heb 10. v. 31.
God's Judgments now were in my eye,
And Hell, my due, when I should die:
The doubtful hour of corporal Death,
Each moment might expire my breath.
Wisd. 17 v. 9.10.
All sudden noise, that I did hear,
Did make me tremble, quake and fear;
My very shadow made me start.
Ps. 114. v. 3.
O what a Hell's a sinful Heart!
When I, on Sion, cast my thought,
How once my soul with joy was fraught,
Ps. 41. v. 4
The brackish tears ran down my eyes,
Ps. 37. v. 9.
I filled the air with sighs and cries.
To think how happy I had been,
How miserable, now, by sin.
This made me Music cast away, Eccli. 22. v. 6.

More mind to weep I had than play.
My crafty foe did bid me sing,
That he again my heart might bring
In love with these deceitful joys,
1. Io. 2. v. 16.17.
Which now appeared to me but toys.
How can I sing in this strange land,
Afflicted by a cruel hand?
Rev. 18. v. 7.
Where pleasures are my grief's increase,
And purchase pains without release.
Where Flesh, indeed, may pleasure take,
1. Petr. 2 v 11. Romans 8. v. 13.
But for her self a Hell does make;
Where she in fire shall ever ly,
Still wishing but shall never die.
No, Romans 5. v. 5.
no. I hope, I yet shall see
Jerusalem, it is dear to me;
Where my good God does live and reign;
I hope he will be pleased again.
Iam. 4. v. 9.
And me into his mercy take,
Who now am willing for his sake
In grief and sorrow still to ly,
v. 10.
So I for sin may satisfy.
2. King. 12. v. 13.
And this hope to my soul does bring,
To think how sometimes Israel's King
Had been a sinner, yet regained
God's love, and in his grace remained.
The Israelites were also sent,
Often, for their sins, to banishment;
Yet, by Repentance, did obtain,
1. Esdr. 2. v. 2. etc.
That they were called back again.
I will not therefore settle here
My joy, as if it Heaven were;
But will with bitter grief lament
My wickedness, and time misspent.
Ps. 6. v. 7. Ps 41. v. 4 Ps. 50. v. 19.
With tears, I Will wash my couch, and bed,
They shall be day and night my bread:
A contrite heart J'll offer God,
To beg that he will withdraw his rod.
If he at first my Prayer does slight
J'le own it is but just and right,
Numb. 15. v. 30.31.
Since I did slight and him contemn,
He justly may my soul condemn.
Ps. 33. v. 5.
I will persever, and not fear,
But he my Prayer at last will hear,
Ezech. 33. v. 11.
Since he desires not the loss,
Of Man, redeemed by the Cross.
Like the good Father he will receive
The Prodigal, Luke 15. v. 22.
when he will leave
His wickedness, and home return,
With fire of love his heart will burn.
With tears of joy he will him embrace;
Luke 15. v. 7.
And to his soul restore his grace;
He Will feast, and with his friends rejoice,
With Music, dance and singing voice.
This happy hour I will expect,
J'l never tears and Prayers neglect,
Ps. 15. v. 9.
Being confident he will hear my cry,
And mercy show before I die.
Amen.

THE WORLD'S GLORY IS VANITY. TRUE JOY IN VIRTUE.
All things that are done under the sun are vanity and affliction of spirit.

Ecclesiastes. 1. v. 14.
WHat is this World, and all therein,
But Vanity, producing sin?
Except the soul withdraw her love,
And Eagle-like take flight above,
And there in contemplation high,
On God does fix her piercing eye.
Where she in God will clear behold
Her self, her worth, and does unfold
The fallacies the World does use,
To win men's love, and them abuse,
By representing that for good,
Which proves disguised, when understood.
She takes the Titles that declare
God's attributes, and Symbols are
Of Heavenly Bliss, to name her toys,
That they may seem to us true joys.
But when you once do them detect,
As vain, you slight, contemn, neglect.
By honor, power and Majesty
She raises some to that degree
As Gods on Earth, Dan. 3. v. 5.
they will be treated,
As tho their Thrones with God's were seated.
Riches and Pleasures have some blinded,
That other Heaven they never minded.
Some did in Beauty so excel,
Like Goddesses on Earth did dwell,
Puff't up with Pride, adored by Men,
And Deify'd by Poets pen
This glory now in dust does ly,
All Is vanished in the twinkl'of eye.
And if ought here of them remains,
It is their soul's most sinful stains,
Which in God's Justice may require,
The flame of Hell's Eternal fire,
Of Worldly Joy this is the end,
To which she brings her dearest friend.
Are here her joys from sorrows free?
No, they are mixed with misery.
Honor does meet with emulation,
Hest. 7. v. 10.
Which often causes great vexation;
And when it seems past Fortunes frown,
Proud Aman-like, it is cast down.
With labors great men riches gain.
What frights and fears do they sustain?
Lest they should lose their Idol Wealth,
They often hazard life and Health.
And when death comes they no more have,
Than a poor Coffin, Shroud, and Grave.
Great Alexander in his Throne
Was not content, tho he alone
The world possessed: he often did weep,
His soul found want, disturbing sleep.
Nothing the soul can satisfy,
That is beneath a Deity.
The Epicure and Sodomit,
Whom name of Beast does most befit,
Ephesians. 4. v. 18 19.
Like swine in carnal puddle ly,
By this obscuring Reason's Eye:
They shame's disease, and sickness find,
With lost repute, true grief of mind.
Behold a drunkard in his cups,
What comes to hand, clear off he sups,
With hellish smoke he fumes his brains,
Till void of reason he remains:
He curses, swears, he damn's his soul,
He spews, like swine in it does roll.
Wisd 2. v. 6. etc.
These are the joys, and glory great,
With which the world her friends does treat;
This course of life considered well,
To men of sense seems but a Hell,
Romans 6. v. 21.23.
Leading poor Souls to that infernal,
Where devils are and flames Eternal.
Base world, who here false joys for true
Do give thy Lovers, now Adieu.
No longer shall thou Tyrannize
On sense, and soul, to make thy prize,
No longer joy I Will seek in thee,
Hence shall my joy in Virtue be.
THE SECOND PART. HEAVEN UPON EARTH. OR TRUE JOY IN VIRTUE.
A secure mind is as it were a continual Feast.

Prove. 15. v. 15.
TO stop a flood does pains require;
Small hopes with oil to quench a fire:
So flood of Vice, it is hard to turn,
Where Carnal love the Heart does burn.
Yet burns assuage by greater heat,
So Virtues love, makes that retreat.
To win Man's Heart to Virtues love,
Is properly God's work above,
Especially where sin is placed,
And sense Man's Reason has defaced:
Yet Virtue known, is of that force,
It gains the Heart, and changes course.
The cause is known by its effect:
So I will Virtue here detect,
Not by defining, as the use,
But by the fruits it does produce:
The which Man's Reason will so please,
They Will steal his Heart, and love with ease.
Health, Honor, Riches, to possess,
May termed be World's happiness:
But since in Heart Fear does remain,
That what it gives' twill take again.
They cannot be deemed felicity;
Where Fear's, 1. Ioh. 4. v. 18.
true Joy can never be.
A Man that is in Conscience clear,
Is void of sorrow, fright, and fear;
He fears naught the World can take;
It Is Joy to him, Rom 5. v. 3.
if for God's sake
He loses all, and pains endure,
Rewards above he knows are sure.
Math. 9. v. 29.
Christ's promise of an hundred fold,
For what is lost, makes him so bold,
That Persecution he don't fly,
But runs into it courageously.
If he is possessed with any fear,
It Is lest he may not suffer here.
The greatest honors here on Earth
Bestowed by Man, or due by Birth,
He slights, as mean, and Vanity:
When he above does cast his eye,
To be God's son, his Spouse, Io. 1. v. 12. 1. Io. 3. v. 1.
his friend,
Are honors which do those transcend.
On Earth was Alexander great,
Who sat in h^^ Imperial seat;
To judge the World seems glory high;
Math. 19. v 28. 1. Cor. 6. v. 3.
Compared to his he does deny,
Since by Christ's promise judge he shall
The Angles, and the World with all.
Croesus with riches did abound,
Which do command on Earth what is found,
These he contemns, Math. 19. v 24. Mat. 5 v. 3. Iam. 2. v. 5.
since it is a venture,
If ever they shall Heaven enter.
He blessed calls his Poverty,
which from that doubt does set him free.
King Solomon, Eccli. 2. v. 10.
who did possess
All what was pleasant, did confess
It Was Vanity, v. 11.
and grief of mind:
True joy therein he could not find,
But Man from these withdrawing love,
Does taste the lasting joys above.
Hence it is, no worldly Crosses can
Disturb the soul of Virtuous Man:
Since he all here as vain does flight,
And sufferings are his great delight.
For if with Christ, 2. Cor. 1. v. 7.
says Sacred story,
He shares in pain, he shall in glory.
Gal. 6. v. 14.
This makes him pains and Crosses thirst,
Th'unsuffring state he deems the worst.
If others do'nt him mortify,
He makes himself his enemy,
With hunger, cold, and labors great,
And Discipline, Gal. 5. v. 2.
his Flesh does treat.
To all affronts he will open ly,
What Is Will requires he will deny:
Still saying, Luk 22. v. 42.
Father, with God's son,
Not mine but thy bles't will be don:
2. Tim. 2. v. 4.
Who as he came all men to save,
So he them glorified would have.
All Virtues are his great delight,
To practice them both day and night,
For they to soul do glory bring,
And wed her to the heavenly King,
Where she in joy shall still remain;
What price too great for so great gain?
Here you the reason clearly see,
Why virtuous Man from grief is free.
For ought on Earth he has no love,
Therefore no loss his heart does move.
Cursed Envy's reach he does not fear,
His soul's above, Phil. 3. v. 20.
tho Body here;
Where he does daily take a taste
Of Heavenly joys, as if there placed.
On Love's smeet Manna he does feed,
Which all supplys in time of need.
1. Io. 4. v. 16.
He still grows more and more divine,
And thus by Love his God does join.
Here you the Worldly joys may see,
Compared to Virtues nothing be.
Betwixt them there is no parallel,
More than's of Heaven and cursed Hell.
Make you your choice; Romans 6. v. 23.
yet take advice,
To choose what end in Paradise. Amen.
Woe to you who are mighty to drink wine and stout men in drunkenness.

Esaias 5. v. 22.
VAin Ovids Metamorphoses forbear
Admiring, here you greater have than there:
The Gods their own work cha^g'd in Heaven placed,
By Man on Earth God's work is here defaced.
Noah's Flood is still a wonder to Mankind,
en. 7. v. 18.
Observe and you shall here a greater find;
Heaven's Floudgates ope^'d and great showers fell;
v. 11.
But this great Deluge is produced by Hell.
That, many bodies did of life bereave.
Here Sentence of Damnation Souls receive:
Genesis 9. v. 11.
God promis't that should never be again:
Men, and the Devil, will have this remain.
We read the Giants with the Gods made war;
Twixt God and man this makes a real jarr.
Here Man blasphemes, and does his God defy,
Nay that there is a God he dares deny.
Dan. 4. v. 30.
Nabuchodonosor was turned a Beast:
These men, like swine in Wash, do make their Feast,
Until t^eir Reason they have overthrown,
And only by their shape from beasts are known.
That Man might glorious be, God Reason gave,
Prove. 20. v. 1. Ps. 81. v. 6.1. Io. 3. v. 8.10.
This Man destroys to be the Devils slave.
A blessed Exehange! of all the greatest evil,
Of God's true son to be the child of Devil.
These changes great, and more are made in man
By devilish Flood of liquour, pipe and Can.
The Poets feign a River runs in Hell;
This has broke bounds, and flows on the earth. we dwell
Genesis 8. v. 16.
No man revived after Noah's great Flood;
From this vast Deluge few return to good.
Men other vice are gained to leave and hate;
A Man is rarely stayed at this Flood gate,
Which broken down lets in all sort of sin,
All God's Commands man boldly breaks therein.
No wonder; Os. 4. v. 11.
since his Weapon, Reason's light,
The Devil gains; disarmed how can he fight?
The first Command, One God thou shall adore,
The Drunkard slights, he loves his belly more.
He curses, Phil. 3. v. 19.
damn's; he takes God's Name invain;
This Ale house Music sounds while Cups remain.
God's Sabbath he contemns and Holydays
He breaks, at Cards, and Dice, with others plays,
He Will honor neither Parent, or Superior,
While he is in's Cups, each man is his Inferior.
His Idoll-Will all men must then adore.
Prove. 20. v. 1. Gen 19. v. 33.35.
Denied he kills or dies in bloody gore.
In Wine does brutish Luxury abound, found.
Lot-like his Daughter serves, when Wife's not
Eccli. 49. v. 1. Prove. 21. v. 17.
By Drunkenness he does a Beggar grow,
The^ cheats, the^ robbs, and steals from friend or foe.
He lies by course, and tells detracting story,
Unjust desires do share his sinful glory.
The Church Commands he does as little keep,
Fasting, and Prayer shall nere disturb his sleep.
Let soul be damned so please the Flesh he can.
What state's so bad as this of Drunken Man?
Many more sins the drunkard does commit;
To name them to chaste ears it is not fit.
For liquors strong are fuel to the fire
Of Luxury, Prove 23. v. 31.33.
and heart's unchaste desire.
Eccli. 31. v. 38.
Of all sins drunkenness you see's the Mother,
The devil Father, who wed one another
In Alehouse, where they drunken children get,
By Pipe, and Pot, and other snares there set.
Behold how drunkard does his soul defile,
Prove. 12. v. 11.
And of all good the same he does beguile,
Besides his soul, he Reputation stains,
On earth short life and scorn are all his gains.
Genesis 9. v. 22.
Noah when drunk disclosed his nakedness;
So drunken Man his folly does express,
His words and actions men to laughter move;
What Man of Reason such a life can love?
Since Reason's lost by Vice of Drunkenness,
Men who invite unto it, do express
A seeming grief, that God has made them men,
And wish, like Beasts, that they were made again.
If change in them God will not what is man,
They Will make themselves Brute Beasts in wc they can.
Come let us taste the pleasures of the Beast,
To Brutish men this is the pleasantest Feast.
Isa. 56. v. 12.
Drink and be merry, sorrow cast avay,
Enjoy your selves while in this house you stay.
Come here is a Health, be sure this Glass go round;
Job. 21. v. 13.
All grief and care in this good Liquor's drowned.
Devilish advice; taught by the Prince of Hell,
Lest man should glory have from whence he fell.
Be merry: Prove. 23. v 29.30.
what in sin and God's abuse?
Drink Healths, which Death unto the soul produce?
If you will not sorrow, and for sin grieve here,
Sorrows of Hell and just Damnation fear;
Where, wit the drunken damned Society,
You shall drink healths in flames Eternally.
They slight the joy that is in Virtue found,
with God and Heaven, when their Heads turn round.
O Beastly Men! by men of sense avoided,
As enemies to God and men exploded:
Judith. 13. v. 10.
And to themselves the greatest enemy,
Who seeming would like Holophernes die;
At least they hazard limbs and neck to break;
O sad account to God which they shall make!
Of lost time also, and their money spent,
In sin, which for their good to them was lent.
The Liquor also which they vainly wast,
Consuming all, so they may please the taste.
Isai. 5. v. 11 Luc 16. v. 24.
O cursed Pallat which brings souls to Hell,
In glutton Dives fiery place to dwell:
Where floods of flames shall pour down thy throat
Which will produce this vain repenting note;
O would to God in time I had been wise!
And sense had never blinded Reasons Eyes!
My boon Companions can give no relief;
Here ly I must, encompassed with grief.
The cursed devils are my company,
On whom in cups I called, Math. 25. v. 41. Revel. 16. v. 4.
with them I ly
In fiery Bed, which my old note renews,
Blasphemous curses, Music which we use.
Beyond this fire, Isay. 26. v. 10.
it is torturing grief to me,
That I the face of God shall never see,
But feel his scourge, 'cause I his Law conte^n'd,
With Rebel Angels justly here condemned.
I wish all men would timely warning take,
This brutish Vice of drinking to forsake,
Isay. 28. v. 7.
Which is the inrode to all sort of sin,
And hard to leave, when once they fall therein.
Feed not your Bellies, swine-like, Iam. 5. v. 5.
to the knife;
Seek not joys here, but in the other life.
Hence fly your drinking friends society,
Mind you were made to join a Deity.
Cast not away this Counsel, as they use.
Away! its Melancholy: Here Is abuse.
Dan. 5. v. 5.
Beware Balthasar's hand upon the wall,
W^ch while he is drinking writes his great downfall.
Luke 21. v. 34.
That night he lost his life: do you beware,
God's eye above does see, and will not spare
The least of faults, but note it down by hand
Severe: much more shall drunkard guilty stand,
Who hundreds has made partners in his sin,
Poor sottish soul! henceforth do thou begin
A Reformation: leave this Mother Vice;
Attendants all will vanish in a trice.
Fix thought on Heaven; Phil. 3. v. 20.
let thy converse be
With Angels: that is the society
God made thee for, and there with him to dwell,
While brutish drunkards buried are in Hell.
DEATH AND LIFE
Are in the hands of the tongue.

Prove. 18. v. 21.
THe soul, tho active, yet while here
Within the Body s^^^s confined,
Math. 12. v. 34.
In this defective does appear,
Not able to declare her mind,
Without the use of instruments,
Of which the Tongue is always chief,
In the revealing her intents,
Her love, her hate, her joy, her grief.
Hence it is the Tongue participates
In her soul's actions, good or ill,
So do the lips, which are the gates,
That shut and open at her will,
Thus death and life are said to be
In the Tongues power (...) her hands,
Although the sin's formality
Is in the Will, which all commands.
But yet from fault the Tongue's not free:
Some Tongues so ready are to speak,
Eecli. 4. v. 34 Eccli. 32. v. 10.11.
Like Fancy they as nimble be,
Let fly at all, and thus they break
The Laws of Reason, God and Man:
With evil words they wound the soul,
They speak before their Reason can
Well judge what is right, and them control.
Hence it is, Saint James declares, that he
Who to Religion does pretend,
And leaves his Tongue at liberty,
Of his Religion there is an end;
Iam. 1. v. 26.
Except a Man his Tongue refrain,
And make of it Religious use,
Ps. 139. v. 12.
He does pretend to it in vain,
It Is not Religion, but abuse.
A Tongue that is let at liberty,
Iam 3. v. 8.
Saint James does call a restless evil,
Abounding with iniquity,
And brings the soul unto the Devil.
It swears, it curses, v. 9.10.
it blasphemes,
It lies, detracts, and causes strife,
It treats men with injurious Names,
Which often occasions loss of life.
It does the innocent defame,
By telling stories too and fro;
Iam. 3. v. 6.
It puts the whole World in a flame.
Such Tongue to' escape, what man does know?
Ps. 56. v 5. Ps 13. v. 3.
David compares it to a sword,
Under its lips Asp's poison is,
Hundreds sometimes, but with a word,
Infecting, or with whispe^ing hiss.
Detracting words it does let fly,
Prove 24 v. 9 21 Eccli 20. v. 28.30.
To th'loss of others Reputation:
Thus wounds the souls of standers by,
And many times to their Damnation.
For they do often too much attend,
And credit the Detractours speech:
When they the absent should defend,
Math. 7. v. 12.
As Christian Charity does teach.
And thus they guilty do become,
Romans 1. v. 32 Lev. 5. v. 1.
By Silence seem to give consent,
In their defense are wholly dumb,
And lend their ear with much content.
Hear, what Saint Bernard says of this,
Men to detract, or others hear,
Which of these two more wicked is,
It does not plain to me appear.
Again, the Tongue by words impure,
1. Cor. 15. v. 33.
Provokes the Hearers unto Lust:
For which one day, let man be sure,
A strict account he render must,
As isntrumental to their evil,
As envying their dear soul's salvation,
Against his God, he joins the devil,
And brings their souls unto damnation.
O fie lascivious Man! for shame,
Beware your Tongue, Eccli 27. v. 7. Math. 12, v. 34.
for it does show,
You are in heart the very same,
Since by his Tongue Man's Heart we know:
Let then your Tongue be chaste and pure,
And Heart convert from that great Vice;
Rev. 21. v. 27.
For no uncleanness we are sure,
Shall ever enter Paradise.
See what great evils men run in,
By their unchaste detracting Tongue:
Besides their own most wicked sin,
All hearers sins to them belong.
Coloss. 3. v. 8.
Beware this Vice then from this day,
And of your Tongue most careful be:
Ps. 18. v. 14.
Still with King David humbly pray,
From others sins, O Lord spare me.
Some Tongues are good, and Life do give,
By Godly counsel, Prayer, and Preaching;
They gain from sin, and win to live
In virtue, by their pious Teaching;
Souls to convert, of all good works
(Saint Denis calls) the most divine.
Let them be with the Jews, or Turks,
Dan. 12. v. 3.
Such Teachers shall with glory shine.
Choice silver, says wise Solomon,
That pure Tongue is, Prove. 10. v. 20.
which many teaches,
To worship God, and call upon
His Holy Name, and if it preaches
Good doctrine, from all errors quit,
He truly names it, Prove. 15. v. 4.
Wood of life,
Reviving all that taste of it:
Such Tongues are always void of strife.
To injuries they make reply,
With meek, with mild, with humble spirit:
They always speak with charity,
Which pleases God, and grace does merit.
They pray, they sing, they praise God's Name,
If grateful office they can do,
They still are ready for the same;
True Charity prompts thereunto.
Such blessed Tongues, are instruments
Eccli. 37. v 21.22.26.
To do themselves and others good:
They cross the Devil's cursed intents,
Christ's Death to frustrate, and his Blood:
Which he by wicked Tongues often gains,
Destroying Christian Charity:
Well knowing Christ's most bitter pains,
For such will ineffectuall be.
The nature of the Tongue you see:
It is the best, and wor^^ of things,
As you do use it, certainly
Death to the soul, Eccli. 37. v. 21. Ps 100. v 6 Ephesians 4. v. 29.
or life it brings.
Of others tongues do you beware,
Lest you be partner in their sin:
And of your own take equal care,
That you the same Gulf fall not in.
Come Children, hear, Ps. 33. v. 12.
and credit me,
Says David, I Will teach you God's fear:
Who with long life would blessed be,
And see good days, while he is here,
v. 14.
Let him his Tongue refrain from ill,
His lips let not deceitful be:
Thus he will perform his Makers will,
Long Life and happy days shall see.
But since it does to God belong,
Prove. 16. v. 1.
As Solomon the Wise declares,
To govern, and to rule the Tongue,
Ps. 140. v. 3.
With David let us make our Prayers,
Put to my Mouth, O Lord, a Keeper,
To lips a door of circumstance,
Before I speak, Eccli. 11. v. 8.
that I may deeper
Weigh, if it does my good advance.
For if by words no good accrews,
To you, or to your neighbors soul,
To speak it is better to refuse,
Than let your Tongue so idle roll.
Prove. 10. v. 19. Man. 12. v. 6. Eccli. 20. v. 8.
For since in many words there is sin,
And we for words account must give,
From idle words your Tongue keep in,
So you will in Peace and quiet live.
When you would speak, take care it be,
Still to God's honor, praise, and glory:
Your words inflame with charity,
Abhor unchaste, detracting story:
Math. 5. v. 9.
Employ your Tongue in making Peace,
Instructing others, and in Prayer.
Thus will the Tongue your good increase,
And after in your glory share.
Thrice happy are such Tongues as these,
They give life to themselves and others:
Who seek both God and Man to please,
Without offense unto their brothers.
Such Tongues, while others are condemned
To Fire, for all Eternity,
Ps. ^3. v. 5.
In Heaven shall praise God without end,
In the celestial Hierarchy.
Amen.

Thou shall not take God's Name in vain.

Exodus 20. v. 7.
WHen God Man's Body made of Earth,
Gen 2. v. 7.
He breathed a soul into that clay,
And gave to him a noble birth;
Who was, to love him and obey;
Genesis 1. v. 28.
Whom as their Lord all Creatures here,
Were to obey, to love, and fear.
Gen 3. v. 3.
And God descended from above,
In Paradise with him to walk,
To manifest to him his love,
Familiarly with him would talk:
His person man was to adore,
Respect, and honor ever more.
But, when to sin Man did not fear,
He was averted in his heart,
And hid himself, Gen 3. v. 8.
durst not appear:
Thus from God's presence he did part,
v. 19.
And had this for his Penalty,
With brutish beasts to live and die.
Man being thus estranged by sin
From God, and his blessed conversation,
Idolatry he strait fell in,
To Creatures gave God's Adoration.
O strange Exchange! The Lord of all
To subject here does prostrate fall.
And this, because he did contemn
His Makers Precept, love, and grace,
To Brutes his Lord did him condemn,
No more to see his blessed face:
And as he now convers't with Beasts,
Their beastly Pleasures were his Feasts.
Thus Man in Reason blinded lay,
Forgetting God, and to what end
He was created; went astray
From Natures Law, till God did send
Him ten Commands; Exodus 20. v. 1 etc. Mat. 19. v. 17.
which do contain,
What Is needful Heaven to regain.
Where first, Exodus 20. v. 1.2.3. v. 7.
he does reveal again
Himself, one God to be adored.
Next, that Man shall not take in vain,
The Name of him, his dreadful Lord:
Which he will have honored by all here,
As much, as if he did appear.
And this the Israelites well knew,
That Holy Name they durst not speak:
But gave to it the honor due,
Burgens. ad dit to Lyra, on. the 3 c. of. Exodus
Least God's Command'ment they should break.
None but the Priest in Church alone,
Might name the Tetragrammaton;
Which holy Name does signify,
The same as God, Exodus 3. v. 14. Exodus 6. v. 3.
in our tongue,
The Essence of the Deity:
And only did to God belong.
Names of his attributes they used,
Which also must not be abused.
Much less our dear Redeemers Name,
JESUS; which all men must adore:
Which signifies much like the same,
That Name does which we named before:
Phil. 2. v. 10.
At JESUS Name let all knees bow,
In Heaven, on Earth, and Hell below.
The very Dev'ls in Hell do tremble,
When Men these Names devoutly use;
And God their sins will not dissemble,
Who boldly do the same abuse.
Exodus 20. v. 7. Deuteronomy. 5. v. 11.
Who take God's Name in vain they shall
Be guilty, and condemned withal.
Much more, if they shall by it swear,
As now a days too many do,
Setting aside God's love and fear,
And headlong to the Devil go:
With him in fire for ere to ly,
Still wishing, Rev. 9. v. 6.
but shall never die.
Of sins, rash swearing is most vain:
It is a Sin of pure contempt;
It brings no pleasure, or rich gain;
Of swearing Man had never dreamed,
If God the same had not forbid,
The Vice of swearing had lay hid.
Hence it is the swearing vice God hates,
And lays on Man this punishment.
Deprived of grace, his soul creates
New sins, to vice being wholly bent.
This, with the Wise Man, we must yield,
Who swears much, Eccli 23. v. 12.
with Vice is filled.
The same affirms, the Plagues of God,
And punishments, v. 12.
shall nere depart
The swearer's house: of whose just Rod,
He, while on Earth, shall find the smart.
It Is feared this swearing vice alone,
The World with Plagues has overflown.
To take an Oath, when Law requires,
Ier. 4. v. 2.
Is counted a Religious act:
To execute what God inspires,
I bind my self by Vows compact.
Thy Law, says David, Ps. 118. v. 106.
I did swear
To keep, O Lord, and thee to fear.
When you make Oath, says Jeremy,
Be sure in it these three are found
Judgment, Justice, Ier. 4. v. 2.
and verity,
And that to swear you' re also bound;
For who, says Wiseman, Eccli. 23. v. 14.
vainly swear,
Not justified, but guilty are.
From sin, in Oath, if you will be free,
Swear not at all, Math. ^. v. 35. I am. 5. v. 12.
as Christ commands;
Let Yea, and Nay, your answer be,
Which, with the just, as firmly stands.
Who false will prove, and tell a Ly,
By Oath you never shall him ty.
Who swears often, is much the same,
No Oath his heart to Truth shall bind.
Who fears not to abuse God's Name,
To ly you will as ready find.
Who Will swear, will ly, who will ly, will steal,
Who with a swearer then dares deal?
Besides this Vice, there is another,
Which equally breaks this Command:
Blasphemous Cursing is its brother,
Levit. 24. v. 16.
Which makes men equal guilty stand;
Which sin is greater I cannot tell,
Since both condemn the soul to Hell.
I shall not speak of Blasphemy,
Against God immediately directed,
But of that which seems hid to ly,
Little regarded, till detected.
Your curse to Creature, does reflect
On God, and shows your disrespect.
God all things made, and they were good,
Genesis 1. v. 31.
All were created for man's use;
If this were rightly understood,
How durst Man offer this abuse?
To curse the Gift, and Giver slight,
O desperate Rebel, filled with spite!
Saint Jude relates, Iud. 1. v. 9.
that Michael,
Contending stiffly with the Devil,
Durst not him curse, he knew full well,
Blaspheming was the greatest evil:
Tho sin his Nature had depraved,
God's hand-work there was still engraved.
But many men, if they are cross't,
By stick or stone, by wind, or beast,
As if their reason they had lost,
They will not suffer in the least;
They curse, blaspheme, not fearing God,
Nor his severe chastizing rod.
Nay, Man, God's Image, they fear not,
To curse, blaspheme, and wish all evil,
As tho their God they had forgot,
They sacrifice Man to the Devil:
Wishing the Devil him to take,
Tho God, made Man, died for his sake.
Genesis 4. v. 3.4.
To own God, Man did Sacrifice,
And give to him still of the best;
By cursing, Man his God defies,
Gives man to the Devil, with the rest.
Who often upon the Devil calls,
To him by cursing prostrate falls.
O bold affront! O dread contempt
Of our great God, and King of Kings!
Vile rebel Man, who dares thus tempt
The Lord, and Maker of all things!
When thou call'st on the Devil, fear,
He may thee strait in pieces tear.
Tho God does the Blasphemer spare,
Permitting him still here to live,
Yet he and his the worse do fare,
For wicked curses he does give. Wisd. 1 v. 6.

No wonder, since he often does call,
For Pox, and Plague they should befall.
And if this Vice he will not mend,
But in the same perversely die,
Hellfire, most sure, will be his end,
There with his Devill-God to ly,
In fiery bed, and ever shall
With curses on the Devil call.
Let all men then, in time beware,
And this good scripture-counsell take,
Not once to curse, or vainly swear,
Which enemies to God them make;
Who such does leave, and when he parts,
The Dev'd does soon possess their hearts.
Hear then the Wiseman: Eccli. 23. v. 10.
seldom name
God, or his Saints in conversation;
And when you do pronounce the same,
Show great respect and veneration:
Thus you this Precept will not break,
Tho you their Names should often speak.
Still Honor, Praise, Ps. 95. v. 8.
and Glory give
To God's blessed Name, while you are here:
Love, fear, and serve him, while you live,
And then to die you will not fear.
With the Profane you will not ly,
But praise God's Name Eternally.
Amen.

A LIAR TO BE EXCLUDED,
Lying Lips are abomination to our Lord.

Prove. 12. v. 22.
IF Man did think on his once happy state,
A Ly of all things in the World he would hate:
Since by a Ly the Devil did deceive Genesis 3. v. 4.

His Father Adam, and his Mother Eve,
And by it brought them into God's displeasure,
With justice loss, of all the greatest treasure. v. 7.

Besides, they were cast out of Paradise,
To toil for Bread: v. 23.
this was sins d^adly price;
With blinded reason and depraved will,
Heaven's loss, Hells gains, who ca^ co^ceive the ill?
And shall a Liar heavenly joys regain!
No: He in Hell for ever must remain.
Heavens King is Truth; there naught but Truth shall enter:
Liars desce^d into the lowest Center. Io. 14. v. 6. Io. 8. v. 44.

To Lying Devil, Father of all Lies,
Brought forth by envy, which the Truth defyes.
These are the Parents of a Lying Man;
A baser offspring bring me if you can?
A Liar, of all creatures, is the worst:
By God and Man deservedly accursed, Prove. 6. v. 17. Ibid. 12. v. 22.

Since, Angel-like, by thought men cannot declare
Their minds, by Tongue, as instrument, they are
To tell their thoughts, that me^ might know their mind,
And freely deal with them in every kind.
This ordinance of God is by a Ly
Orethrown, and all human society
Destroyed: for since a Liar no one can
Believe, who dares converse with such a Man?
All Trade is stopped; discourse, Ma^'s great delight,
Is silenced, by this accursed wight.
Who name of Man does not deserve, but rather
Of Devil, in man's shape; for he is his Father. Io. 8. v. 44.

Dumb Beasts will not allow his company,
They make true signs: his Tongue does aways ly.
Where shall we then find place for him? I Will tell.
In lonely Desert, till he goes to Hell.
Or that he may repent, and poor soul save,
Cut out his Tongue, let him go to his grave
Speechless, since of it he made such bad use,
That Hell is due to him for the abuse.
Without eye, hand, or tongue, Math 2^. v. 8.5.
it is better go
To God, than with them to our mortal foe.
It is no wonder that God hates a Ly,
Since that it strikes at his blessed Deity.
Truth is God's Essence; this a Ly denies:
All Verity, and God, it still defies.
Beware; for Ananias, and his wife,
For telling Ly were both deprived of life. Act. 5. v. 5.10.

For la^d they sold they brought short of ye price,
And gave Saint Peter: this was Hell's advice.
He asked: They boldly told him, this is all.
At his rebuke, for lies, they dead did fall.
Who taught you to the holy Ghost to ly? v. 3.

To God and man, you do the truth deny.
Great reason also Men have to despise
A liar, Prove. 24. v. 9.
who, by his detracting Lies,
Defames their Credit, and does cause such strife,
That Love destroys, and many times Man's life,
By quarrels he does raise. Yea Lies alone
Kingdoms and Families have overthrown.
Who is there living that has yet forgot,
The horrid Oatish Presbyterian plot?
Where Oats, and Bedloe, with hell's cursed crew,
Vented their Lies, and still invented new.
How many men did they send to the grave?
When Royal family 'twas hard to save.
Then Lying devils did break Pale of Hell,
And ever since with men on Earth do dwell;
Who seem to have possessed the greatest part
Of this poor Nation, lodging in man's heart.
To dispossess them, and to Hell confine,
By loving Truth let every true Heart join. Zach 8. v. 16.

A Liar then, Eccli. 28. v. 15.
is enemy accursed,
To God and Man; and to himself the worst.
For Lying mouth, Wisd. 1. v. 11.
says Solomon, does kill,
The souls of them who bear this wicked will.
O monstrous Man! Io. 8. v. 44.
that is for nothing good;
Not Man but devil, if right understood.
That hissing serpent, which Man first deceived,
Teaches to whisper words of Truth bereaved; Eccls. 10. v 11. Romans 1. v 30.
Prove. 5. v. 13. Iam. 3. v. 6.

I Will tell you this; but look you do not tell
The Man concerned: O cursed Firebrand of Hell!
Who with thy tongue do put the world in fla^es,
Cursed serpent devil fits thee of all Names.
Besides detraction, Lying does produce
Many more sins: This Proverb is in use,
Give me a Liar, I Will give thee a Thief.
By Lying, he does think to gain belief,
Theft to conceal: but if he will not amend,
Hell, by the Gallows, soon will be his end.
A man that is to cursed Lying bent,
While here, in part, receives his punishment.
This is his Plague, when he speaks Truth, as just,
No one believes him, or his word will trust.
See here how useless Liar is on Earth:
He had been happy, stifled in birth.
You Parents, to whom God does children give,
Teach them by Truth in love of God to live.
Let not the Lying devil them deceive,
By Lies, of joys their dear souls to bereave.
O wicked Parents, who, while young, neglect
This devilish Vice in children to correct!
You Liars, guilty of this deadly crime,
Leave off, Repent, amend, while you have time,
Speak what is just, Ephesians. 4. v. 25.
do not the truth deny,
The Lying devil and his Lies defy.
Love, and serve God, his just Laws still attend:
Thus, once a Liar, may make happy end.
THE TRUE ART OF LOVING WELL.
Thou shall love the Lord thy God.

Math. 22. v. 37.
I Shall not here, like Ovid, teach
The Art of brutish Carnal Love:
But that which did exceed his reach,
Practiced by Seraphins above:
Which God, Io. 13. v. 34.
made man, did teach to men,
To join them to their God again.
To love those only who love you,
Or objects, that your senses please,
Math 5. v. 46.
What do you more then Heathens do?
Or brutes, ^ho Belly love and ease?
Your God above, whom you don't see,
I Will teach to love, and Enemy.
This Christ did teach, v. 44.
while he was here,
By words, Luk 23. v. 34.
and his most rare example;
The same to follow do not fear;
Romans 5. v. 15.
He for you grace has purchas't ample;
He has raised Man unto this state;
He can love those, Act 7. v. 60.
who do him hate.
To do this, cast your eye above,
Contemplate God's most lovely features,
Then for his sake you will learn to love,
In him, all his beloved creatures:
And most of all, Genesis 1. v. 26.
his Image dear,
Which wrapped in flesh is placed here.
The Elements to Center tend,
As Water, Earth, the Air, and Fire,
Where they do rest, as in their end,
To hold them back, does force require.
The iron does to Loadstone cleave,
That it may virtue thence receive.
Ps 72. v. 26.
God Center is to soul of man,
Which here to Body is confined;
And, without him, there is nothing can
Give satisfaction to her mind.
He is the Loadstone, where she gains
Perfection, and content remains.
For, what are objects of Man's love,
Wealth, Power, Beauty, Riches, Glory,
All these are found in God above,
In high degree, says sacred story.
Wisd. 1. v. 7.1. Ioh 4. v. 19.
God all perfections does contain:
Since he loves you, love him again.
He loves you, not for interest,
As if you could him profit bring;
But that you may with him have rest,
In glory of your heavenly King:
Where you, with Angels, shall always
In joy sing forth his glorious praise.
Love makes the consort of the Quire;
For all their Notes are tuned by Love:
And Love is all their hearts desire,
Their God is Love, 1. Ioh 4. v. 16.
that reigns above:
By Love you do him perfect join;
To love him truly then incline.
To gain your loving heart's consent,
Genesis 1. v. 26. 1. Ioh 4. v. 9 Ioh 1. v. 14. Ioh. 20. v. 17.
Behold what here on Earth is don;
All creatures made for your content:
Nay, he has sent his only son,
To take your flesh and Brother be,
From sin and Hell to set you free.
All objects of true Love are here,
Laid open to your corp'rall view,
Since all that is perfect does appear,
In Christ, who God and Man is true.
Ps. 44. v. 5.
He is the beauty of Mankind,
In Body, features, grace, and mind.
He is not only amiable
In body, but likewise in heart;
His love to you was firm, and stable,
Ioh. 13. v. 1.
Till Death did soul and Body part;
While here on Earth, for your souls sake,
No pains did he refuse to take.
He fasted, prayed, he watch't, he taught,
Cold, Hunger, Thirst, he did endure:
Salvation for your soul he sought,
And to make future Glory sure,
To. 5. v. 8.
By bitter pains he died on the tree;
Thus much thy JESUS loved thee.
Now, he to heaven is ascended,
Io. 14. v. 2.1. Io. 2. v. 2. Romans ^. v. 34. Heb. 7. v. 25.
Beholding Father face to face,
His Love to you is still extended,
He has prepared you a place;
That it may be your final home,
He is your Advocate become.
Love this your God-Man, who loves you,
And for your sake has done all this;
In all your ways prove to him true;
Against his Laws nere do amiss:
His blessed will be sure obey,
Math. 19. v. 17.
To Heaven it is the only way.
THE SECOND PART.
I say to you, love your Enemies.

Math. 5. v. 44.
If you love me, Ioh. 14. v. 15.
says Christ our Lord,
Be sure you keep this my command:
Ioh. 15. v. 12. Math. 22. v 39 1 Ioh. 4. v. 20.
With one another still accord;
Your Brother love as your right hand;
Who does not here his Brother love,
Loves not his God who is above.
Not only love him, who loves you,
For blindest Heathen does the same,
But love your Enemy, Math. 5. v. 44.
as true;
Tender his life, his goods, his fame;
So you, who Enemies have been
To me, Math. 6 v. 12.14.
shall love and pardon win.
God made man's soul his image dear,
To live with him eternally,
And tho to sin he did not fear,
And thus became his Enemy,
Revenge on him he did not take,
But, taking flesh, died for his sake.
Here learn of God, Math. 5. v. 45.
your Heavenly Father,
Who sinner feeds, as well as just,
To feed your Enemy; yea rather
Than friend: so you may humbly trust,
Luke 6. v. 38.
That God your soul with grace will feed,
Since you fed Foe in time of need.
You cannot love his wickedness,
But as God's Image you must love,
1. Ioh. 4. v. 20.
To's Pattern Kindness here express;
If Peace you love, that is above,
Then merciful to you he will be,
Who for his sake loved Enemy.
The Just do lesser stand in need
Of love, Rom 8. v. 2.
than he who is in sin;
From satan's power the first is freed,
While this, 2. Timi 2. v. 26.
his slavery lies in.
O pray that God will set him free,
Then God will mercy show to thee.
But if Revenge thou seek'st to take,
Math. 18. v. 32 33.
For injury that is gone and past:
Thou liable thy self do make,
To guilt forgiven, and at last,
As cruel, damned thy soul will be;
Not showing Mercy, showed to thee.
With joy forgive then Man's offense;
Since Christ our Lord has promis't you,
Mark 11. v 25 Eccli 28. v 2. Mark. 4. v. 24.
For sin it shall make recompense,
And debt remit, which to it is due.
What measure you give to your Brother,
The same shall you have, and no other.
His loss is most, when he wrongs thee,
In body, goods, or reputation:
Without Repentance, his will be
The loss of God, and soul's salvation.
Pray you the Father, as the Son,
Forgive; Luke 23. v. 34.
he knows not what h'as don.
If you saw Beast in danger great,
You strait would run his life to save,
And enemy away would beat;
Yet you here no compassion have,
^^. Pet. 5.^.8.
Where Devilish has got man in his power
And soul is ready to devour.
Again, if JESUS thou do love,
Reflect for sinners he did die:
And see thou his Disciple prove,
Who prayed for his Enemy.
If thou do hate the tempting D^vill,
2. Tim. 2. v. 25.26.
Pray for thy Brother, drawn to evil.
Lest God should for thy cruelty,
Let thee fall into sinful state:
And in thy wickedness to die,
And then Repent but when too late,
O that I had my Brother loved;
Then God had not his Grace removed.
Besides, remember, that thy Foe,
Isay 38. v. 7.
Is also thy own flesh and blood;
If he chance evil way to go,
Endeavor thou to make him good:
Let Us all in love united be,
Against our common Enemy.
Thus for God's love, and JESUS sake,
As also bound by Nature's Law,
Compassion on thy Brother take;
All rancour from thy heart withdraw,
Exodus 32. v 32. Romans 9. v. ^.
God's Image love, bewail his loss,
Since Christ redeemed him by the Cross.
Revenge and Envy came from Devil,
Who envied God and our blessed state,
Beware this, Coloss 3. v. 8. Eccl. 28. v, 1,
as the greatest evil,
Which against Man shuts Heavens gate.
There all do burn like Seraphin,
No Envy-fire can enter in.
God came from Heaven, Luk 12. v. 49.
to cast fire
Upon the Earth, that is Man's Heart,
And that it burn is his desire,
That he may never from him part.
Deuteronomy. 4 v. 24. Heb 12. v. 29.
God is this fire of Charity,
By love Man joins him perfectly.
Love then your God who did you make,
That you may live Eternally:
And love your Brother for his sake,
Not only Friend, Math. 5. v. 44.
but Enemy.
So you will do that for which he came,
Join Heaven and Earth in love's great flame.
OF PRIDE.
God resists the proud: to the humble he gives grace.

1. Petr. 5. v. 5.
PRoud Lucifer, like Morning star,
All other Angels did excel,
Till he by Pride with God made war,
Luk 10. v. 18. Isai 14. v. 14.
And thus from Heavenly Glory fell.
Within the Sun I Will place my seat,
As God himself I will be great.
He looked on his capacity,
Which by Creation he received,
And this forgetting would not be
To God beholding, but deceived
By Pride, Isai 14. v. 13.
to Glory did intend
By his own power to ascend:
He others tempts with this proud thought;
Rveal. 12. v. 7.
But Michael did him resist;
At last to his consent he brought
One whole third part, which glory mis't.
The third part of the stars I saw,
v. 4.
The Dragon down with his Tail to draw.
When this Temptation once had past,
And tried the nine Angelick Quires;
God did confirm the good; but cast
v. 9.
The proud into Eternal fires.
Who Is like to God? says Michael,
Proud Lucifer be gone to Hell.
He after finds, in Paradise,
Poor Man, created for his place,
And gives to him the same advice,
God's Image in him to deface:
Eat but the fruit of this fair Tree,
Genesis 3. v. 5.
And like to God thou strait shall be.
Proud Eve desirous to be great,
The fruit, Genesis 3. v. 6.
being pleasant to the eye,
Took, and persuades Adam to eat,
And both lost Paradise thereby.
As dust thou art, v. 19.
to dust return.
And in Hell fire hereafter burn.
Behold, here our first Parents fall,
And had not God, made Man, once died;
Romans 5. v. 12.18.
The Devi'l by this had gained us all:
The cursed effect of hateful Pride;
And tho we are redeemed, in part,
Still of that sin we find the smart.
For we are still to Pride so prone,
That our best actions scarce are free:
So had we that to tempt alone,
In danger great our souls would be.
Eccli, 10. v. 14. Dan. 3. v. 5.
How many have rebelled by Pride,
And would on Earth be deify'd?
Nabuchodonosor, we read,
On Earth as God would be adored;
His lot was fire, who ere did dread
The true God, v. 6.
and this act abhorred:
God for his Pride made him a Beast,
Dan 4. v. 30.
With brutes to live, and make his feast.
And what are all the proud of heart,
But senseless Brutes and void of reason;
To arrogate what is God's part,
Unto themselves, which is high Treason?
1. Cor. 4. v. 7.
What has Man but what God did give?
Humble, and grateful let him live.
For when he once does glory in
What he received, as tho his own,
It is a sacrilegious sin,
Which seeks the Giver to dethrone.
He would have men adore him here,
For his great parts, which do appear.
And if his will they will not obey,
His Heart with fiery Fury burns,
He seeks their life to take away,
Or prejudice in life-concerns.
O child of Lucifer! beware,
This Pride in thee God will not spare.
God does resist, 1. Pet. 5. v. 5 etc.
and hate the Proud,
And does withdraw his helping grace,
Without which, it is by all allowed,
No one shall see his blessed face.
Without Grace no one can do good,
Ioh. 15. v. 5.
Which was the purchase of Christ's blood.
Pride, Eccl. 10. v. ^. v. 15.
which both God and Man do hate,
Is root of sin, and all that is evil.
v. 14. v. Job 41. v. 25. Eccli. 10. v. 15. Ibid.
It makes Man to Apostatate,
Withdraws his Heart, to join the devil.
From curses he shall nere be free,
And in the end subverted be.
All virtues Pride does overthrow,
Genesis 3. v, 5, 6,
All vice came from this Cursed Tree;
It seeks its Glory here below,
With Lucifer its place shall be:
Who does himself on Earth exalt,
Shall humbled be for this default.
Isay 2. v. 12. Math. 23. v. 12 Math. 5. v. 3.
And who is Humble in this life,
With humble Christ shall reign above;
While here he lives is void of strife,
And gains of every Man true love.
Blessed Virtue of Humility,
Which does from Hell, and Devil free.
THE SECOND PART.
God gives grace to the Humble.
PRoud Lucifer had gained such footing
In soul of Man, by Adam's Sin,
Genesis 3. v. 7.
And Pride in Nature had such rooting,
Whose Slave poor Man long time had been,
Humility without God's grace,
Had never more regained place.
And no small grace was here required,
Man's Nature now to innovate:
Since to be great most men desired,
And did abhor the humble state.
Example no less than divine,
Could make Men to the same incline.
God therefore, who did reign above,
In power, and great Majesty,
Would Man become, for poor Man's love,
And teach him true Humility.
Luke 2. v. 7.
Humility made him poor born;
The same his Life did here adorn.
Scorn, and Contempt he still endured,
With humble death, Phil. 2. v. 8.
upon the Cross;
That we might all be well assured,
This way we must redeem our loss.
I gave example; Math 11. v. 29.
learn of me,
Humble in Heart, and Meek to be.
Besides his own example rare,
To win us to this virtue great,
An humble Virgin he took care
To choose, for his Incarnate seat.
When, Hail God's Mother, Gabriel said,
Behold, Luk 1. v. 38.
says she, the Lord's Handmaid.
What greater trial could you have
Of any Man's Humility?
The answer she to Angel gave,
Deserves praise to Eternity.
And certain 'twas Humility,
That caused her Mother of God to be.
My soul, says she, v. 46.47. etc.
does magnify
The Lord, and in my God rejoice,
Regarding my Humility,
Henceforth shall every human voice
Me Blessed call: Here you may see
The way, how you may Blessed be.
Again, if you consider well,
Ioh. 3. v. 23.
You Will find that all great Saints did still,
In this rare Virtue most excel;
Thereby with grace their souls to fill.
The waters to the valleys flow;
1. Petr. 5. v. 3.
God does on the humble grace bestow.
This Virtue also is the Mother
Of all the rest, which we should love:
Phil 2. v. 7.
Since it made God become our Brother,
And makes us sons of God above.
Math 48. v. 4.
The lower in Humility,
The higher you will exalted be.
Eccli. 23. v. 20.1.
This from all vice secures the soul,
Where this is, Satan has no power,
This checks his Pride, and does control
This Lion, 1. Pet. 5. v. 8.
who does souls devour:
Who Is like to God? breath in his face,
He flies away, and leaves the place.
To gain this Virtue often reflect
Upon the Sins you have committed,
And of your duties great neglect,
Which God has oftentimes acquitted.
How often you have abused your God,
And under foot his graces trod.
Then you will think, you are the worst
Of all God's Creatures on the Earth;
That you deserve to be accursed,
As heinous Sinner from your birth.
Wisd. 5. v. 21.
Against Sinners shall all Creatures fight,
In their God's cause: This is but right.
If then it chance that any Man
Does slight, and undervalue you,
With all your force strive what you can
To own, and answer, it is true,
I have deserved this, and much more,
Who have thus slighted God before.
And tho your Brother, who does this.
Does not consider your demerit,
And doing this may do amiss,
Forgive him, Math. 18 v. 34.
and with humble spirit
Cry out, O God, this is my due,
Because I have offended you.
Then God will pardon your offense;
Ps. 33. v. 19.
The humble-hearted he still loves:
This for past sins shall recompense,
Such satisfaction he approves.
For humble Penitents Christ died,
And for their Sins has satisfied.
Besides, Luke 18. v. 14.
the Humble he exalts,
To places whence Proud Angels fell,
Proud-hearted Men, for their defaults,
With Devils proud he casts to Hell.
Embrace profound Humility,
Which raises to so high degree.
Dear humble JESUS, who did give
Phil. 2. v. 8.
Of this great Virtue rare example,
Grant of thy Mercy while we live,
Pride under foot we still may trample;
And that, by true Humility,
We join thee for Eternity.
Amen.

OF PATIENCE, AND THE CONTRARY.
In your Patience you shall possess your souls.

Luk 21. v. 19.
WEre Men of reason void, like Beast,
This Sacred Doctrine would be vain,
In Patience you shall find true rest,
And Master of your self remain.
For Beast will spurn, he will bite, and cry,
If you his flesh do lance, or burn,
Although without it he should die,
Not sensible of that good turn.
But Man of reason, who does know
What Is good for Body, for health's sake
Most bitter pains will undergo,
And most unpleasant Potion take,
Life to prolong: tho he is sure,
This Mortal Body once must die.
What pains then should not man endure,
That Is soul may live Eternally?
Had Man not sinned, he had no pain
Of Body felt, nor was to die, Romans 5. v. 12.

But here in pleasure to remain,
Till called by God to live on high.
But since he sinned, and did contemn
His Maker, for unlawful pleasure,
To pains and Death God did condemn Gen 3. v. 19. v. 7.

His soul, deprived of heavenly Treasure.
To free his Soul from future pain,
And Heaven also to regain,
Afflictions here he must sustain, Act. 14. v. 21.

And Patient still in them remain:
For Christ did not redeem Man so,
As from all sufferings to acquit,
That he should nothing undergo,
And yet with him in glory sit.
If you will my Disciple be,
Says Christ, and with m'in Heaven reign, Mat. 16. v. 24.

Take up your Cross, and follow me,
By sufferings, while you here remain. 2. Cor. 4. v. 4.5.

For Men do often Sins commit,
Which do deserve the pains of Hell:
And if from them they will be quit,
They suffer must while here they dwell.
Who does for Justice suffer here,
Christ blessed calls; Mat. 5. v. 10.
with promise great,
That he to Heaven shall be Heir,
With Angels there shall have his seat.
But yet no sufferings grateful be,
To him, or any grace do merit,
Except he takes them Patiently,
With humble and resigned spirit.
Saint Paul affirms none crowned shall be,
But those who lawfully have fought; 2. Tim. 2. v. 5.

That is who suffer Patiently,
As Christ by word and deed has taught.
Hence it is the scriptures also say,
That Patience needful is to men, Heb. 10. v. 36.

Christ promises to bear away,
And Glory to regain again.
For Patience satisfies for Sin,
Preserving also from the same,
And grace here for the soul does win,
And Glory promis't in Christ's Name.
If Patiently you suffer here, Romans 8. v. 17.

With Christ, you shall be glorified,
Who for your sake no pain did fear,
But Patiently did all abide. 1. Pet. 2. v. 23.

This Patience is a blessed Treasure,
Which to us so much good does bring;
It keeps the soul from God's displeasure, Prove. 14. v. 29.

And wed's it to her Heavenly King.
With wedding Garment she adorns,
For of most Virtues she is the Mother;
Tho in this life her Crown's of thorns, Romans 8. v. 17.

It will be glorious in the other.
But furious Man with Sin abounds,
His Weapon, that is, Reason's Light,
Is laid aside: he it confounds
With Rage. Disarmed how can he sight?
Thus he lies open to his Foe,
Ready to do his wicked will,
At beck he brings him to his bow, Eccli. 28. v. 13.

To swear, to curse, to wound, to kill.
Like raging Beast he seems mad,
He stares, he foames, he tears his hair;
Fears not to do what is ere so bad;
Of all things, Fury then beware, Ps. 36. v. 8 Eccli. 27. v. 33.

For such are odious unto God,
Who in the meek and mild does dwell:
But those shall feel his scourging rod,
Among the Furies cast in Hell.
For furious Man flies in God's face,
When he is cross't, or aim does miss,
He will not bear the least disgrace, Prove. 27. v. 4.

By word, or deed, or childish hiss,
He Will suffer nothing for past sin,
Nor Cross abide for Glory's gain.
New Sins he daily does run in,
Good counsel's given him in vain.
Hate Fury then, as Enemy
To grace, Iam 1. v. 20.
and Virtue of the Soul:
Your Will in all things still deny,
All Passions thus you will control.
Believe there is nothing comes by chance. Prove 46. v. 33.

But God permits it for your good.
Thus what befalls will still advance
This Virtue, rightly understood.
When God afflicts think not he hates,
But Check the Passions of your Mind;
For sufferings open Heaven gates,
Where you Rewards for them shall find.
Whom God does love he does chastise; Heb. 12. v. 6.

There are two reasons for the same,
Learn these and you will be truly wise,
Receiving all in's holy Name.
First Father-like he does correct,
When you in any thing offend,
That for your evil being checked,
You after may your life amend;
And for your past Sins satisfy
His Justice, while you here remain:
So reconciled to him, hereby
Lost Grace, and Glory you will regain.
Next: tho you were no Sinner great,
Yet God does oftentimes afflict,
And place, with Job, on Dunghill Seat, Job. 2. v. 8.

Obliging unto Penance strict,
That he may thus your Patience try,
And here your Soul with Grace may fill,
And give you Glory when you die,
For Resignation to his Will.
Here you the fruits of Patience see,
How advantageous it is to soul;
From future sufferings it sets free,
From Sins dread wound it Keeps you whole; Iam. 1. v. 4.

It merits Grace, while you are here,
And when at Judgment you shall stand,
The loss of Heaven you will not fear, Math. 5. v. 4.

Since Meek, and Mild possess the Land.
If therefore any Cross befall,
Take it as from God's holy hand,
And say, Thy Will be done in all:
Against Anger always ready stand.
The Lord does give, Job. 1. v. 21.
the Lord does take,
The Lord's most holy Name be blessed,
With thanks and Patience, for his sake,
Your Cross receive; then you will find rest.
Prove. 16. v. 32.
Thrice happy is the Patient Man,
Who does his Soul thus full possess,
Prove. 15. v. 8.
To Anger nothing move him can,
Or with vain grief his Heart oppress;
So that on Earth he has begun
His Heaven, Ps. 9. v. 19.
and is assured of this,
He shall, when here his glass is run,
With God live in Eternal bliss.
To JESUS dear all Honor be,
who patiently died on the Cross,
Lamb-like he suffered, Ier. 11. v. 19.
us to free
From Hell, and Heavens eternal loss.
Dear JESUS, grant for thy love's sake,
That while on Earth we here do live,
We cheerfully may Crosses take,
That Joys Eternal thou may give.
Amen.

OF OBEDIENCE.
Obedience is better then Sacrifice.

Eccl. 4. v. 17.
MAn's Reason dictates that to obey,
Is Nature's obligation,
By which our duty we do pay,
To God for our Creation.
Dumb Brutes, and Creatures void of sense,
Do teach the very same;
The Vice of Disobedience,
First from the Devil came.
All Creatures tend to do God's Will,
By natural Inclination:
That Man might not the same fulfill,
The Devil by Temptation
Prevailed, and thus made him abuse
Genesis 4. v. 7. Eccli. 15. v. 17.
The Freedom of his will,
Which God did give him, to refuse
And fly from what is ill.
When Christ this World did leave, he gave
Act. 20. v. 28. Heb. 13. v. 17.
Us Pastors to obey:
Which are his Flock to guide and save,
Lest they should go astray:
Those who hear you, Luk 10. v. 16.
the same hear me,
And those who you contemn,
Do me despise, and Rebels be,
And such I shall condemn.
The Church to slight, and not to hear,
Math. 18. v. 17.
Is Excommunication,
Pronounced by Christ; and it is most clear,
Unto the souls Damnation.
Io. 16. v 13.
To hear the Church is most secure,
Which God does still direct,
1. Tim. 3. v. 15.
Which is of Truth a Pillar sure,
All Errors to detect.
As we are bound, by our Creation,
God's pleasure to fulfill:
Ephesians 6. v. 1. Eccli. 3. v. 8.
So we are bound by Generation,
To do our Parents will.
That Is when their will does not gainsay
God, our Creatour's, will;
Whom we must honor and obey,
Above the Creature still.
But next to God, Exodus 20. v. 12. Deuteronomy. 5. v. 16. Eccli. 3. v 15.
we them must fear,
Love, honor, and respect,
Relieve their wants while they are here,
And gratefully reflect,
What care and pains they underwent,
In our past Infancy;
v. 14.
And still endeavor their content,
Or else we guilty be.
That Men on Earth might quiet live,
In Peace and Unity,
God unto them a King did give,
1. King. 8. v. 22.
Approving Monarchy:
Commanding them still to obey
Him, honor, love, and fear,
1. Pet. 2. v. 17. Math. 22. v. 21.
And to him their just Tribute pay,
As his Vicegerent here.
Kings sacred are by God appointed,
To whom we must submit:
Ps. 104. v. 15.
Not daring to touch his Anointed,
Who on his Throne do sit,
To Rule and Govern here below,
The wicked to correct,
Romans 13. v. 4.
And on the good Rewards bestow,
And Father-like Protect.
If they should not do what is right,
v. 2.
We may not yet rebel.
To seek our due by Arms and Might,
v. 2.
Directly leads to Hell:
We patiently must all endure,
And humbly daily pray,
That God from sin will us secure,
And guide them in the way.
1. Cor. 7. v. 3.
A mutual Obedience,
'Twixt Man and Wife is due,
There Is little danger of offense,
Where Faith and Love are true.
Ephesians. 5. v. 23.
Let wife remember Man's her Head,
To honor, and obey:
1. Cor. 7. v. 39.
Which Tie does last till she be dead,
Or God takes him away.
When you your selves do servants make
To Masters here on Earth;
And for your service Wages take,
Tho they should be: by birth,
Inferior, Colos. 3. v. 22.
yet you must obey
Them, in their just desire,
And never what is their will gainsay:
This, Justice does require.
You servants, says Saint Paul, Ephesians. ^. v. 5.
be sure
You faithfully fulfill
Your work, while service you endure,
Perform your Masters will.
v. 6. and 7. Colos. 3. v. 24.
Do not your service to the eye,
But serve, as to the Lord:
That you God's grace may gain thereby,
1. Io. 3. v. 18.
Let words and deeds accord.
Let Masters, Kings; Colos. 4. v. 1.
and Prelates know,
They Master have above,
Who Power did on them bestow,
Their subjects to improve:
Heb. 13. v. 17.
To whom account they once must render,
How they have governed here;
If they their subjects good did tender,
And taught God's Love and Fear.
You see that God ordained, that all
Shall in Obedience live:
That they may be secure from fall,
And him Just Tribute give.
For proper Judgment, and self-will,
Against God do often rebel:
And are the Authors of all ill,
And plunge the Soul in Hell.
Saint Austin says, that nothing burns
In Hell, but Man's self-will;
Who this denies, and humbly learns,
His Master's to fulfill,
By his Obedience is secure,
(Where no Sin is intended)
Colos. 3. v. 24.
And of Rewards from God is sure,
When this short life is ended.
But, who Superiors disobey,
And slight their just desires,
Will be condemned, Colos. 3. v. 25.
in th'latter day,
Unto Eternal fires.
Romans 13. v. 1.
For as all Power is from God,
So those who it resist,
v. 2.
Shall surely feel his scourging Rod,
If they in it persist.
The World would in confusion be,
Without state-government:
The like in Church you soon would see,
If Laws did not prevent:
Except on Earth men had a Law,
To govern them thereby;
Of no one they would stand in a^^
But set up Anarchy.
What is the cause of Heresy,
Eccli. 10. v. 14.
But disobedient Pride?
Men will not on the Church rely,
Iud. 1. v. 18.
But take themselves for Guide:
And thus they into errors run,
And stubbornly defend,
The Heresy they have begun,
Mat. 1^. v. 17.
Until they are condemned.
Rebellion also is a Child
Of disobedient Heart;
Those men who are with this defiled,
From God's just Law depart.
Against God and Man they do rebel,
Whom God does reprobate:
Thus headlong they run on to Hell,
Repenting when too late.
Hence Murders, Rapes, hence Fire, and sword;
This lays all desolate:
This brings to slight God, and his Word,
New Doctrins to create.
Rev. 12. v. 7. v. 9.
As Lucifer rebelling fought,
And into Hell was cast:
So those who have Rebellion taught,
Will perish at the last.
Exodus 20. v. 12.
Long life is promis't unto those,
Who Parents do obey,
But death their eyes shall sooner close,
Who do not duty pay.
Where Father blesses, Eccli. 13. v. 11.
without doubt,
God blessing does bestow:
v. 11.
When Mothers Curses do root out,
Whole Families we know.
Here we do see the sad effects,
Of this unnat'rall Vice:
The stubborn Heart God nere directs.
Take then Saint Paul's advice:
Romans 13. v. 5.
To higher Powers subject be,
And this for Conscience sake,
Thus from God's Curse you will be free,
And happy end will make.
For since all sinful acts proceed,
From disobedient will;
Deny your will, and you will be freed,
From Sin, and God's fulfill.
Hence: that our own wills we submit,
The Scriptures do advise;
1. King. 15. v. 22.
Affirming that the same to quit,
Excells our Sacrifice.
By word, and deed, Luke 2. v. 51.
Christ taught the same;
His Mother still obeying:
And to Saint Joseph, bearing name
Of Father, duty paying.
I came not here, Job. 6. v. 38.
by Father sent,
To seek and do my will;
But mine, while here, is always bent,
His pleasure to fulfill.
Christ, full of grief, in bloody sweat,
Math. 26. v. 44.
Desirous to be quit;
Three times his Prayer did repeat,
Yet always did submit:
Father, not mine, Luke 22. v. 42.
but thy blessed will,
Be now and ever don:
To imitate be ready still,
This most obedient son.
Since Christ, as Man, would subject be,
And his own will deny,
Tho it were good: much less ought we,
On self-will to rely.
Genesis ^. v. 21.
For since our will to Sin is prone,
And from the Truth to slide:
It Is dangerous to act alone;
Much safer with a Guide.
We read that Abram, to fulfill
God's pleasure, and command,
Genesis 22. v. 10.
Was ready on the Mount to kill
His son, with his own hand;
This so pleased God, above the rest,
He promised, v. 18.
in his seed
All Generations should be blessed,
By Christ, from Devil freed.
God does esteem Free-wills submission,
Above all Sacrifice,
Conjoined with the Hearts Contrition.
For from the Heart arise
All human actions; then give this,
And you give all you have:
And you can never do amiss,
But Soul at Death will save.
Except to God you give your Will,
No Sacrifice is grateful:
Tho you should fast, and pray, yet still
Your Works are to him hateful.
The People pleaded, they had fasted;
Esai. 58. v. 3.
The Prophet answered well,
Your self-Will with your Fast still lasted,
Which brings the Soul to Hell.
Let all men be, while here they live,
Obedient to Superious:
And also never let them give,
Romans 12. v. 10.
Affront to their Inferiors.
Thus Pride of Heart will be subdued;
And self-Will overthrown;
The Soul with grace will be indu'd,
And made with God all one.
Dear JESUS, Phil. 2. v. 8.
since Obedience laid
Thee dead upon the Tree,
And thus for Disobedience paid;
We humbly beg of Thee,
Math. 16. v. 24. Luk 9. v. v. 23.
That we may be obedient still,
And our own will deny,
Conforming to thy blessed will,
That we may never die.
Amen.

OF POVERTY, AND THE CONTRARY.
Blessed are you poor, for yours is the Kingdom of God.

Luke 6. v. 20.
IF Cicero the Eloquent,
Or Aristotle that great Wit,
Had taught, or Angel hither sent,
In golden letters had this writ,
The Poor are blessed, they would not have gained
Disciples, but alone remained.
For since Dame Nature this does teach,
To lay up for a Winters day;
It had been vain for them to preach
The contrary, or to gainsay
The Emmets, Prove. 6. v. 6.8.
who in summer hide
Corn, and for Winter do provide.
And since God's greatest friends on Earth,
With riches were by him rewarded,
This Doctrine had died in its birth,
And never would have been recorded,
Than Rich the Poor more happy are;
Such new Divines men would beware.
Job. 1. v. 3. Gen 12. v. 7. c. 22. v. 17.
Was not just Job with riches fraught,
And Abram promis't Chanaan's Land?
The Israelites from want were brought,
Through Desert, by God's mighty hand:
And to a rich Land, Iosue. 3. v. 17.
which did flow
With Milk, and Honey, they did go.
While Adam's Sin had men enslaved,
And light of Reason had so blinded, Ephesians. 4 v. 18.19.

That they like Beasts themselves behaved,
And future joys but little minded:
They followed what did please the sense,
And little thought of going hence.
Or that they had a Soul to save,
Denying th'Immortality
Thereof: but when Flesh to the Grave
Did go, the Soul did also die.
This made them seek their Heaven here,
And nothing more, than Want, to fear.
And our good God did so comply,
With human frailty Man lay in:
That he did not immediately
Command Perfection: but from Sin
To keep, Levit. 20. v. 22.24.
and in his fear to live,
And he would temp'rall Blessings give.
Io. 1. v. 14.
But when the Plenitude of Grace,
God's Son, from Heaven did descend,
What did before seem vile and base,
He took upon him, to this end,
That we might still convinced be,
What World esteems is Vanity.
He Flesh would take of poorest Mother,
In stable born, Luk* 2. v. 7. Math. 4 v 19.21. Luke 6. v. 20.
and Manger laid:
He chose Poor Men, would have no other
For his Disciples: to them said,
Blessed are you, who here are Poor,
Of Heavenly joys you may be sure.
When one did ask how he might gain
Heaven, Math. 19. v. 16. v. 17.
Keep the Commands:
But if Perfection you will attain,
Sell all you have, and with your hands
Give to the Poor, v. 21.
and follow me:
This doing you will perfect be.
Who Heaven and Earth possessed, Ier. 12. v. 7.
and All,
Seemed All to leave, Poor Man to be.
To raise Man from his deadly fall,
And free him of his misery.
He lived Poor, Ps. 87.16.
and naked died:
And must Men rich on Earth abide?
Mark, of himself what he did say:
The Fox has holes, Luke 9. v. 58.
but Son of Man
Has no place, where his head to lay:
Or Worldly Treasures, Prove. 17. v. 5.
that he can
Say, This is mine: and shall men scorn
Those who are Poor, or Poorly born?
Let Rich Men judge it not a folly
All to forsake, and imitate
Christ: Of all states this is most holy,
The World with all its Wealth to hate.
We have left all, Math. 19. v. 27.
and followed Thee,
Says Peter; What Reward shall be?
Amen I say to you, that when
The son of Man in Majesty
Shall sit, v. 28.
you all shall rise again,
And Judges ore twelve Tribes shall be:
v. 29.
And who for me shall Riches leave,
For one an Hundred shall receive.
This makes so many Men forsake
Their Father, Mother, House, v. 29.
and Land,
Religious Lives to undertake,
And be at other men's command,
Their Cross to take, Math. 16. v. 24.
and Will deny,
To live with Christ Eternally.
And for this reason they refuse
Riches on Earth, tho they be good,
If rightly used; but most abuse
Them: and it is hard, if understood,
To keep them, Math. 19. v. 24.
and to Heaven go;
They are to Virtue such a Foe.
They are the Ministers to Vice,
They purchase all for sinful Heart,
What it desires, all in a trice,
They bring, and Men will freely part
With them, to purchase hateful Sin,
But not that they may glory win.
They nat'rally do so bewitch
Men's Hearts, Eccls. 4. v. 8. Eccls. 5. v. 9.
as still to desire more;
Their fingers to receive still itch,
But will give nothing to the Poor;
What they part with for any good,
Comes from their Heart like drops of blood.
This is the Idol they adore,
Avarice is the Root of evil: Colos 3. v 3 1. Tim. 6. v. 10 Luke 12 v. 15.
Eccli. 10. v. 9.

Set not your Heart on it therefore,
For certain it brings to the Devil.
More souls by Wealth have gone astray
From God, than any other way.
Our Savior Christ affirms this:
Math. 19. v. 24.
A Camel can as easy pass
Through eye of needle, as in Bliss
A rich Man enter. Yet, alas!
Most Men do Riches here desire,
Which brought rich Dives to Hell fire.
What then? cannot Rich Man saved be?
Yes; if he will dispense his Wealth,
Dan. 4. v. 24.
And to the Poor in Alms be free,
He may preserve his soul in health,
And friends of this his Mammon make; Luke 16. v. 9.

At death, to joys his soul they will take.
But since it is so hard a thing,
Wealth to possess, and not to set
Your Heart upon it; from you fling
What is superfluous, and thus get
Claim to this Promise; Luke 6. v. 20.
Blessed are you
In spirit Poor, Heaven is your due.
O blessed Exchange! Luke 6. v. 38.
for Worldly Pelf,
To be partaker of God's glory:
If you will give gold, he will give himself,
If we may credit sacred story.
Mat. 6. v. 29.
Then send your Riches there before,
Where you shall live for evermore,
And you, who Poor are, don't repine,
But be contented with your state:
Be Poor in spirit, Math. 5. v. 3.
and in fine
Your wants will open Heaven's Gate.
God's Just, and will reward you there,
For Wants you patient suffer here.
Be not sollicitous, Mat. 6. v. 25.
or fear,
That you shall want cloths, meat, or drink,
To God your wants do all appear:
Be not mistrustfull, or once think
That he, v. 26.
who Birds and Beasts does feed,
Will you neglect in time of need.
Mark 10. v. 38.
You know not what is for you best;
Health, sickness, Wealth, or Poverty.
Trust him with Life, and all the rest,
Obedient still unto him be;
Be confident and never fear,
What Is best for Soul, he will give you here.
Most certain it is true Poverty
Is here on Earth the greatest Treasure:
From Sin it keeps the Soul most free,
Increasing Virtue in great measure:
It frees a Man from fear of loss,
And joins with Christ upon the Cross.
He suffers Hunger, Thirst, 1. Cor. 4. v. 11.
and cold,
Which when received with Resignation,
Do purchase Heaven more than gold,
And more secure him from Damnation.
Blessed Poverty, which Soul does bring,
And weds her to its Heavenly King.
Yet all who Poor are be not blessed,
For some are Poor against their will,
And in desires do never rest,
But still contrive them to fulfill:
Their Hearts are so much set on wealth,
It often brings them unto stealth.
Those Poor are blessed, who in spirit
Are humbly with their state content:
Such daily do increase their merit,
By wants and Crosses, to them sent.
Luke 6. v. 21.
These shall in Heaven have their fill,
For Resignation to God's will.
Let Rich and Poor then warning take,
Ps. 61. v. 11.
On Riches let no'ne set his heart,
But freely give them for God's sake:
And when his soul shall hence depart,
He shall from his God mercy find,
Since to the Poor he was so Kind.
You Poor, deem not your lot the worst,
Nor greedily seek after gain;
Luke 6. v. 24.
Which makes so many Souls accursed,
But patiently your wants sustain.
Then they from Sin will keep you free,
And Rich in Heaven with Christ you will be.
Amen.

OF CHASTITY.
He that can take it, let him take it.

Math. 19.12.
SInce God was pleased, not to make
All Men at once, but did decree,
One flesh should of another take,
And thus in blood related be:
That they might one another love,
In heart, and all division hate,
As Natures instinct does them move,
God to this end did them create:
A Lawful Union is required,
Betwixt the Male, and Female King:
Which, Mat. 19. v. 5.
as in Flesh, so its desired,
They both united be in mind.
Genesis 1. v. 28. Ephesians. 6. v. 4.
To Increase is God's Commandment,
And breed up Children in his Fear;
This must be Wedlock's chief intent,
As by the Scripture does appear.
So that before the World was filled,
The Marriage-Precept had great force;
If all, Genesis 9. v. 1.
but few, again were killed,
Men would be bound to take that course:
But since no want of Men we have,
Our great God when he Man became,
Of single Life example gave:
Mat. 19. v. 12.
Exhorting us unto the same.
Yet since a single Life to live
Is hard, 1. Cor. 7. v. 25.
now Nature's prone to ill,
Command of this he would not give,
But left all men to their free will:
He did commend those, who for Heaven
Mat. 19. v. 12.
Themselves on Earth did Eunuchs make,
To whom a special glory's given:
He that can take it, let him take.
Saint Paul says, of Virginity
I have no Precept, yet do give
This counsel: If you will be free
From many cares, chaste, like me, 1. Cor. 7. v 32.
live.
Wedlock is good but Single Life
Is better: v. 38.
Wedlock trouble brings.
v. 34.
The Virgin's void of Worldly strife,
Wedded unto the King of Kings.
This Virtue is Angelical;
The Angels live in purity.
But Men, Since their First Parents Fall,
Genesis 6.2* v. 12.
Inclined are to Luxury.
Virginity like God does make,
Who all impurity does Fly:
By Luxury men do partake
With Brutes, in Bestiality.
This Virtue is to Flesh and blood
So hard, that, till the Law of grace.
It was by few right understood,
Virginity few did embrace:
Yet Some there were the Same approved.
Elias single Life embraced,
For which he was by God removed
From Men, in fiery Chariot placed.
Among the Gentiles it is recorded,
The Sibyls Kept Virginity:
4. King. 2. v. 11.
For which they were by God rewarded,
With the rare Gift of Prophesy;
Foretelling Christ's Nativity,
Who was all Mankind to redeem.
Since God rewards Virginity,
What Man will not the same esteem?
When God descended from above,
Took Flesh, and so became our Brother;
To show how much he this did love,
Luke 2^ v. 27. Io. 19. v. 27.
He chose a Virgin for his Mother:
And when upon the Cross he died,
His Mother to a Virgin gave,
Saint John: who while she did abide,
Took care of her unto the grave.
And now to Heaven he is ascended,
This his beloved Virgin says,
Revel. 14. v. 4.
By Troops of Virgins he is attended,
Who follow him the Lamb always.
By all this you may plainly see,
That those who pure and chaste live here,
Above the rest beloved be,
And with him always do appear.
If you hereafter would be great,
While here on Earth, a Virgin live,
That you with Virgins may have seat,
To Whom Christ does a Garland give.
But if it chance you wedded be,
Genesis 6. v. 3.
Abstain from all unlawful Lust:
For lustful Men shall never see
The Face of God, as it is but just:
For he does Heaven, and God contemn,
For Flesh-delights, and Carnal Love:
And God to Hell will him condemn,
Gal. 5. v. 19.21.
Nere to possess true joys above.
As he loved Flesh-Concupiscence,
In fire of Lust took his delight,
In fire he shall make recompense,
With Dev'ls condemned, which is his right,
This Vice of Lust does so deface
The soul, consenting to the same,
That it falls wholly in disgrace,
With God, who for it Man became.
My Spir't, Genesis 6. v. 3.
said God, shall not abide
In Man, because he is Flesh that is,
The Flesh his soul does wholly guide,
Still leading it to what is amiss.
Young Men, and all who single are,
And you who are in wedded state,
Romans 13. v. 13.
The Vice of Luxury beware;
This sin of all sins truly hate:
Ephesians 4. v. 18.
For this does so much Reason blind,
The sense does seem to govern all:
That by their lives, v. 19.
if you will but mind,
Not Men, but Beasts you may them call.
Men, who are in just Wedlock tied,
1 Thessalonians. 4. v. 5.
May not enjoy all sort of pleasure:
They always careful must abide,
Lest they lose grace the soul's great Treasure.
They are not to all actions free,
Nor to all words, or lustful thought:
Many of these may sinful be,
As by our Reason we are taught.
To keep true Purity of mind,
Men still must be upon their guard:
Rebellious motions when they find,
They must suppress, tho it he hard.
The best way is, the occasion fly,
Eccli. 5. v. 27.
Avoid the Objects which do move,
The Touch, the Tongue, the Ear, the Eye,
And what the sense is prone to love.
The Eye 's the casement of the soul,
The Ear's the door that lets all in;
The Touch, with Lust, inflames the whole;
The Tongue does strongly tempt to sin;
If sense and Member you will not check,
But yield to their unjust desire,
The Devil has you at his beck,
With Lust to set your Heart on fire.
David, we read, did Sin contract,
By cast of eye on Bersabee, 2. King 11. v. 2.4.

This to prevent Job made compact
With His eyes, Job. 31. v. 1. Eccli. 13. v. 1.
lest they should Virgin see.
If you touch pitch, it will defile;
So when you touch a femall kind,
Sense does the Soul of grace beguile,
Corrupting thus the chastest mind.
Words have great force, and tempting are,
Since they the state of mind express. Mat. 12. v 34.

Of Toungue, in all your ways, take care,
Lest it plunge Soul in wickedness.
And Since by Ear the word does move
The Heart, and takes lodging there,
Which blows the Fire of Carnal Love,
Against words unchaste still stop your Ear. Eccli. 28. v. 28.

These counsels take, and always pray,
To God, for Purity of mind: Wisd. 8. v. 21.

That Flesh the Spirit may obey,
That he may lodging in you find,
Who does delight in the chaste Soul:
His Spirit there does take its rest, 1 Cor. 6. v. 19.

From sinful wounds to keep it whole.
How much is chaste and clean Heart blessed?
Dear Author of all Purity,
Sweet JESUS, born of Mother-maid,
Grant, that with all sincerity,
I may acknowledge what is said;
And also use my best endeavor,
To keep my Soul, and Body pure;
That I may live with thee for ever, Mat. 5 v. 8 Reu. 14 v. 4.

In joys, which always shall endure.
Amen.

DO PENANCE,
Or you shall all perish.

Luc 13. v. 5.
THrice happy state that Man was in,
Before he had committed Sin:
Lord-like on Earth he did all sway; Genesis 1. v. 28.

All Creatures were him to obey.
Delightful fruits the Earth did yield, v. 11.

With pleasant Flowers in every field;
There was no need of spade or plow,
No labor, care, or sweat of brow.
The Air was always temperate,
No piercing cold, or parching heat;
No change of weather Man did fear,
'Twas pleasant Springtime all the year. Genesis 2. v. 8.

There was no Sickness, or Disease;
Nothing could hurt, but all did please:
If strength decayed, or youth did fade,
By the Tree of Life all new was made. v. 9.

So Man, Wisd. 2. v. 23.
tho Mortal, nere had died,
But here in pleasure was to abide.
Till God to joys had him translated
In Heaven, for which he was created.
Had he not eat of Knowledge-Tree,
From grief and pain he had been free.
Do Penance, he had never heard,
If he his God had loved and feared.
By sin he lost all, Genesis 3. v. 6.7. v. 24. v. 18. v, 19,
in a trice,
And was cast out of Paradise:
The Earth must yield no Bread to eat,
But what he gets with toil and sweat.
Birds, Beasts, and Fish, did from him fly,
Would not obey God's enemy;
Against him the Elements rebel,
Sickness and death, v, 19,
now due, with Hell.
He, and his, Heaven were then excluded,
With dev'ls in fire to be detruded.
In this sad state they must remain,
What lost not able to regain,
Till God, made Man, for Man did die,
And for Sin did so satisfy,
That, with his Grace, we able are
Our greatest losses to repair. Phil. 4. v. 13.

That is, lost Heaven to regain,
And Keep us from Eternal pain.
By Penance this is to be don,
If you will credit Christ, God's son:
Who, when on Earth, to Men did preach,
This sacred Doctrine he did teach;
Do Penance, and see it be true,
Or else you will perish, as your due.
His blessed Forerunner, when he came,
Preached to the Jews the very same:
Do Fruits of Penance, ready Stand; Math. 3. v. 2.8.

God's Kingdom now is nigh at hand.
The Ax is laid unto the Tree; v. 10.

What Tree's unfruitful, it shall be
Cut down, and cast into the fire,
As God's great Justice does require.
Not by words only, but by deeds,
While here, Christ sowed true Penance seeds. Math 11. v. 29. Math. 16. v. 24.

That we the same may imitate,
And not Repent when it is too late.
He fasted, watch't, he wept, he prayed,
He suffered all upon him laid, Isai. 53. v. 7. Math 26. v. 27 Mat. 14. v. 15.
Luk 22. v 23. Io 18 v. 19. Isai 53. v. 5.

With buffets, whips, with Crown of Thorn,
His sacred Flesh was rent and torn.
Nailed to the Cross, he meekly died,
With cruel Lance they pierced his Side:
He suffered, what was due to sin,
As if a sinner he had been.
Whose Life, from sin, like Christ's, so pure?
Of glory who is so secure?
His Flesh had joined the Deity:
To sin it could not subject be.
Yet, as we read in sacred story,
That he might enter into glory,
He was to suffer thus and die, Luke 24. v. 26.

To Rise, and to Ascend thereby.
None then can plead, that they are free
From doing Penance, tho they be
Not Sinners great: For this is sure,
Who Will Glory have, Act. 14. v. 21.
must Pains endure.
Two reasons why, I shall here give,
Men must do Penance while they live.
First that they satisfy for Sin;
Next that they may not fall therein.
All know that sin deserves Hell Fire, Math. 25. v. 41.46.

And that God's Justice does require
We satisfy here for the debts,
Or else the Sin he will not forget.
For we could never satisfy,
Tho in Hell Torments we should ly,
If Christ had not our want supplied,
And by his Death once satisfied.
But now Poor Man can satisfy,
If he, by Penance, Romans 8. Ps. 17.
will apply
Christ's merits to his sinful Soul:
From Sin 'twill purge and keep it whole.
Saint Austin says, that every Man,
Must satisfy in what he can:
Without our help God did us make,
But to be saved, we share must take.
And if we do what in us lies,
Christ by his Death our want supplies:
And thus we Satisfaction make,
By Penal Acts we undertake. Act. 26. v. 20.

But he who will nothing suffer here,
For Sin committed, let him fear;
Tho Christ on the Cross did for him die,
He perish shall Eternally.
And with the Damned Repent for ever,
That here he used not his endeavor,
By Penance strict to satisfy
God's Justice, and his friend to die.
Who has in scripture past his word,
That he will sheath his Revenging Sword;
If Sinners will do Penance, Isai. 1. v. 18.
he
Will pardon, and in Friendship be.
Sinners, he says, Return to me,
In your whole Hearts converted be:
By Fasts, Joel 2. v. 12.
and Tears, your Sins lament:
Your Hearts, and not your Garments rent:
Isai. 1. v. 18.
And tho your Sins in Blood were died,
As Snow they shall be purified:
And I Will, Ier. 31. v. 34. Ezech 33. v. 15.16.
bear them no more in mind,
But you shall my free Pardon find.
This is the force of Penance true,
It quits from all to Sin that is due:
But if here Penance be neglected,
In Hell the Soul must be corrected.
Now, that your Penance may be right,
Look in what Sins you did delight,
And Penance let proportioned be,
In quality, Mat 3. v. 8.
and quantity.
If you to Wealth enslaved your self,
Give to the Poor your Worldly pelf:
If you have sinned in Glutony,
By Fasting you must satisfy.
If your Offense were Brutish Lust,
Chastize your Body, Gal. 5. v. 24.
it is but just:
With Hunger, Thirst, with cold, with heat,
With Whip and Scourge the Rebel treat.
If you have been puffed up with Pride,
Contempt, Disgrace, and Scorn abide:
If Passion has been your Offense,
Let Patient sufferings recompense.
Do you the like, in all the rest;
That satisfaction is the best,
When in the Member, or the sense
You did offend, you recompense.
Besides your Penance quality,
Observe the like in quantity;
If your offenses have been great,
Your self with equal Penance treat. Mat. 3. v. 8.

Think not great sins, and small, require
But equal grief, or purging sire,
Or what for one, the same for more,
Will satisfy, and grace restore.
God by his Prophet does declare,
Some more, than others, punished are.
Revel* 18 v. 7.
How much in pleasures she did live,
So much of torment to her give.
To bring forth Penance worthy fruit,
Let it with your Offenses suit:
And doubt not God will it approve,
And you receive into his love.
And do not think Sinners alone,
While here, have Penance undergone.
No, no: You Will find that the most just,
Durst not unto their Justice trust;
Except by Penance they did tame
Their Flesh, Romans 8. v. 13.
lest they should lose their aim,
Of heavenly joys, which are not gained
But by great sufferings, here sustained.
Besides this they did know full well,
That Pleasures draw to Sin and Hell:
But Acts of Penance do secure
The Soul from Sin, and joys ensure.
This made Saint John his life begin
In Penance, Mark. 1. v. 6.
not due to his Sin:
For he in Womb was sanctified,
Without great Sin he lived and died: Luke 1. v. 25.

Yet would in lonely Desert live,
No pleasures to his Flesh would give,
Mat. 3. v. 4.
But clothed himself in Camel's hair;
Honey and Locusts were his fare.
The great Saint Paul, Vessel elect,
His Flesh by Penance did subject, 1. Cor. 9. v. 27.

Lest whilst he taught Men Sin to hate,
Himself might be a Reprobate.
If these great Saints were not secure,
Except they Penance did endure,
Believe our Savior's words are true,
Do Penance, or else Death's your due.
Let every Man then be content,
To live and die a Penitent;
To grieve the loss by Adam's Sin,
To grieve his own: thus Heaven win.
Theophy lact.
Its said that after Adam's fall,
That he with grief to mind might call
In Paradise his happy state,
God placed him just before the Gate;
That so he might his fault repent,
And never more to Sin consent.
Like reason have the Just, while here,
To grieve, lament, and Sin to fear.
How needful Penance is, you see,
To every man in his degree;
It satisfies for Sinners Sin;
If Just, it does preserve therein.
Let no one then true Penance fly,
But in it live, and in it die:
That suffering with Christ crucified, 2. Cor. 1. v. 7.

With him he may be glorified.
Amen.

OF PRAYER.
Prayer is good, with Fasting, and Alms deeds.

Tob. 12.8.
GOd made Man's Soul, in some degree,
An Image of his glorious feature: Genesis 1. v. 26. Wisd. 2. v. 23.

As he is a Spirit one and three,
So did he make this noble creature,
One Spirit, which has Will commanding,
With Memory, and Understanding.
This Image is to imitate
Its Maker, and thus perfect be;
Thus glory to participate,
When from the Body it is free.
As God my Father's perfect, Mat. 5. v. 48.
see
You perfect be, and follow me.
The soul is placed in Body here,
To govern it by Reasons light:
To live in God's true Love and Fear,
To keep his Laws and live upright.
If you will live Eternally,
Mat. 19. v. 17.
Keep my commands and evil fly.
I Will be your God, and you shall be,
My People, and my servants true;
TO obey, to love, and worship Me,
In all subjection, as is due:
But mark the fatal consequence,
Of Adam's disobedience.
Before Man did God's law transgress,
The Flesh was subject to the spirit:
But, after sin, it was no less
Gal. 5. v. 17. Romans 7. v. 23.
Rebellious, as the soul did merit.
The soul that would be like to God,
By vile Flesh under foot was trod,
Which did so rule and domineer,
That sense had Reason wholly blinded.
Thus soul had cast away God's Fear, Romans 8. v 7.8.

And Flesh to please was wholly minded.
Romans 6. v. 6.
Till our Redeemer purchas't Grace,
Which soul reseated in her place.
And gave her power to control
Her nature's Passions, prone to evil,
From wound of Sin to keep it whole,
To love her God, and hate the devil.
But yet this labor did require,
Gal. 5. v. 17.
Her Flesh still thwarting her desire.
Ephesians. 2. v. 23. Ephesians. 6. v. 12.
Against her likewise the World and Devil,
Both with the Flesh confederated,
To plunge her in all sort of evil,
And joys, for which she was created,
To make her forfeit, and to ly
In fire, with Dev'ls, Eternally.
These three are cause of all offense,
1. Io. 2. v. 16.
And bring unto the soul all strife:
The Flesh, and Eyes-Concupiscence,
Conjoined with the Pride of Life:
Against these the soul three Weapons has,
Fasting, Almsdeeds, and Prayer in faith.
By Fasting we the Flesh subdue,
Luke 11. v. 4.
By Alms we lessen Worldly love:
By Prayer for Pardon we do sue,
To our good God who reigns above.
Prayer, Luke 22. v. 46.
buckler-like, the soul defends,
From fiery darts the Devil sends.
The Devilish, who is a spirit'all foe,
And our first Parents did deceive,
How to resist, Man would not know,
Io. 15. v. 5.
If with his Grace God should him leave.
Obscuring Reason he does fight;
We him discover by grace's light.
Grace is God's gift unto the soul, Ephesians. 3. v. 7.

You're prone to Virtue while in grace:
It helps you Passions to control,
Preserves from sin, makes Devilish give place:
Romans 6. v. 23. Mark. 11. v. 24.
By Grace God's friend you do remain,
By Prayer devout this Grace you gain.
Luke 11. v. 13.
True Prayer to God is thus defined,
Not only a set form of Words,
But Elevation of the mind,
Where, with the Word, the Thought accords.
Mat. 6. v. ^.
By Prayer the soul with God does treat,
Addressing to his Mercies seat.
Prayer devout's a Work divine,
Teaching the Soul, tho it is placed here,
Mat. 7. v. 11.
How she may her Creator join:
In whom she lives secure from Pear,
As Child, in want to Mother cries,
So Soul to her dear Father flies.
Two sorts of Prayer to God we use,
The one with mouth the other in mind:
The Orall you do much abuse,
When other thoughts in heart you find;
Let Tongue and Heart in Prayer agree,
That your Request may granted be.
Besides, to gain your Prayers Request,
Be sure it tends to your Souls good,
With sorrow, faith, and Virtues dressed,
Conjoined with th'merits of Christ's Blood.
Io. 16.13.
Such Prayer as this God nere denies,
It Is still a grateful Sacrifice.
First you must Sin detest, and grieve
In heart, resolving to amend:
The Penitent he does relieve,
When to reform he does intend.
Prove. 28. v. 9. Ps 108. v. 7.
But who will abide in sinful state,
His Prayer, says Wiseman, God does hate.
But virtuous soul nothing requires,
That Is to God's honor, and her good,
Mat. 21. v. 22.
But God ^ill grants what she desires.
Yet this is to be understood,
Luke 11. v. 8.9 10
If she in faith to God does bend,
With true Persev'rance to the end.
When you make Prayer for temporal things,
Mark. 10. v. 38.
Not knowing what is for you best,
Resign your self to the King of Kings,
Who will, if good, grant your Request.
Thus still conclude; O Father dear, Mat. 6. v. 10.

Thy Will be done, while we are here.
The humble Prayer, with confidence
In God, (who ready is to give)
Does gain release of sins offense,
And Grace for soul, Eccli. 35. v 19 1. Pet. 5. v. 5.
while here you live.
Such prayers the Heavens do penetrate,
The Proud Man's prayer God still does hate.
Prove 28. v. 9. Luke 11. v. 8.9.
Again let Prayer persev'rant be;
God often does your Patience try,
Not granting strait, that he may see,
If you with Hope on him rely;
Math. 10. v. 22.
Who does persever to the end,
To hear, and save him I intend.
Let Prayer devout, and fervent be,
From heart inflamed with God's true Love,
Mat. 5. v. 25.
And reconciled to Enemy:
Such Prayer God always does approve.
My Meditation set on fire
My heart, says David, Ps. 38. v. 4.
with desire.
Such Prayer does always Grace obtain,
Preserving likewise from all evil:
By this victorious you remain,
Against your Enemy the Devil.
Io. 14. v. 13.
What ere you ask God in my Name,
Be sure, says Christ, i will do the same.
Tob. 12. v. 12.14.
Old Tobies Prayer did mercy find,
God sent the Angel Raphael,
To heal him, who before was blind:
And Devilish from Sara to expel.
Pray'r's good, v. 8.
said Raph'el, When It conjoyns
Fasting, and Alms, it Mercy finds.
Elias prayed it might not rain,
3. king. 17. v. 1. c. 18. v. 45.
And no rain did for three years fall:
He prayed that it might rain again:
Sweet showr's fell down, reviving all.
By Prayer the Heavens did open, and shut,
As tho all power in Prayer were put.
Stout Josue's victorious hand
Fighting, he feared the approaching night;
Iosue 10. v. 12.13.
By Prayer commands the Sun to stand:
It stood, and gave him more daylight.
No wonder Creatures Prayer obey,
Since the Creator it did sway.
The Jews in Desert often rebelled,
And God to Anger did provoke:
But Moyse's Prayer his hands fast held,
From giving the Revenging stroke.
Permit my Anger, God did say, Exodus 32. v. 10.11.

Which is restrained while thou do pray.
Behold the force of fervent Prayer,
Attended with due circumstance:
All losses past it does repair,
The Soul in grace it does advance,
Until by Love she does God join, 1. Io. 4. v. 16.

And thus in him become divine.
In all temptations still be sure,
To use this Buckler of Defense:
As Bull-work this will you secure,
From Dev'ls, and your great God's offense.
Lest in temptation you should fall, Mat. 26. v. 41.

By Prayer upon your Father call.
And as the Devilish does go about,
Still watching whom he may devour; 1. Pet. 5. v. 8.

So, says S. Paul, still pray devout,
That God will free you from his power: 1. Tessal. 5. v. 17.

He does not mean, that you shall be
Always in Prayer upon your knee:
All men may follow their Vocation,
As he declares; 1. Cor. 7. v. 20.
but then be sure,
You have in it communication
With God, by word and thought most pure:
Colos. 3. v. 17.
Do what you do in the Lords Name,
Then this with Prayer will be the same.
Thus, who is at work, or in the Quire,
Will still be praying in effect,
Offering their hearts, with pure desire,
To God, that he may them protect.
Thus they will remain without all fear,
Of Satan's snares, while they live here.
And at their Deaths, they will surely find
God present, helping in that hour;
If they by Prayer will him remind,
He will protect them by his power,
And take their Soul, still to remain
In joys: By Prayer this you obtain.
Amen.

OUR FATHER.
When you pray, pray thus, Our Father.

Math. 6. v. 10.
WHen God came down, our Flesh to take,
Io. 3. v. 17. Mat. 11. v. 29.
Two reasons moved him thereunto;
That he might die for poor Man's sake,
And also teach him what to do;
For Men by Sin were grown so blind,
That Virtues path they could not find.
Christ did not then, as formerly,
Command men this and that to do:
Threatening, if not, Exodus 21 v. 12.16.17. Act. 1. v. 1.
they sure should die:
In Virtues path he first did go.
Christ by Example first did teach,
And then he did begin to preach.
This is the best of ways in teaching,
When deeds the words associate:
It far excells all other preaching,
And brings a man to imitate.
Luk* 6. v. 12.
Christ day and night did often pray,
And afterward taught us the way.
Son; Eccli. 18. v. 23.
says the Wise, before you pray,
Prepare your heart, tempt not the Lord:
All worldly cares cast clear away,
Let tongue and mind in Prayer accord;
With reverence still your Prayer begin,
v. 23.
Lest that it should be turned to sin.
The like Christ teaches in this Prayer,
By Preface, which does us remind
Our thoughts to Heaven must repair,
If any favor we will find.
These words do also cheer the heart;
Our Father which in Heaven art.
Christ does call God our Father here,
For he to us a Being gave;
And names himself our Brother dear,
Who took our Flesh our Souls to save.
Tell my dear Brothers, Io. 20. v. 17.
I intend,
To God our Father to ascend.
What can give greater confidence,
That we shall gain our just desire?
Though It were release of great offense,
Since we of Father it require.
Luke 15. v. 20.
The Father spend-thrift did receive:
The like he will do when Sin we leave.
This also does our Hope increase,
That Christ, God's Son, our Brother is;
Who, tho in Heaven, Romans 3. v. 34.
does never cease
To mediate for what is amiss.
O Father, life for all I gave,
Those who return receive, and save.
Thus, b'ing encouraged, humbly kneel,
Before your God, prepared in heart:
And whenever you do feel,
That he good motions does impart,
Be sure you do them prosecute,
That they in time may bring forth fruit.
Then Cross your self: say, In the Name,
Of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost;
The Devils tremble at the same,
It guards you from that Hellish Host,
It shows one God and Persons three,
That God, made Man, died on the Tree,
Thus armed with faith, devoutly say,
Our Father which in Heaven art:
And also with Devotion pray,
Iam. 1. v. 5.
That he will grace to you impart,
Then make this sevenfold great request,
Which of all Prayers is the best.
Hallowed be thy Name always;
Of all Requests first let this be,
That all may honor, and obey
God, their Creator, one and three.
Exodus 33. v. 20.
But since none can see him and live,
To his blessed Name this honor give.
Thy Kingdom come. God's pleased to say,
Revel. 21. v. 3. Prove. 8 v. 31.
With Men my Tabernacle is.
I take delight with them to stay,
And guide them to Eternal bliss.
For their sakes I took flesh and died,
Mat. 28. v. 20.
And still on Earth with them abide.
O let him reign in you by love,
Let his Loves Scepter in you sway,
By sinful Act him nere remove,
Isai. 59. v. 2. Wisd 1 v. 3.4.
Like Subject true his Word obey:
Thy Kingdom come; Lord govern here,
My Heart keep in thy love and fear.
Thy Kingdom come; Lord grant to me,
That while I live I do thy Will,
That I may thy Disciple be,
Mat. 25. v 41. v. 34.
And pleasure in all things fulfill:
That I may escape thy dreadful frown,
And hear, come blessed, receive a Crown.
Thy Will be done: for that is best,
In Earth as it is in Heaven, still:
What ere befalls, still quiet rest,
Job. 1.21 1 King. 3. v. 18.
Conforming to his pleasing Will.
What you command, O God, or send,
Let me subscribe to, to the end.
Genesis 4. v 7. Mat 23. v. 37.
God given has Free Will to man,
Which Lady-like does domineer,
Reject, accept, at list she can,
She governs Flesh, while she is here;
Water's before thee set, Eccli 5. v. 17.
and Fire,
To choose what is best be sure aspire.
But since our Reason is so blind,
That often it knows not what is best,
And will to Flesh is so inclined,
It yields to Flesh and Bloud's Request:
Beg God to work in you his will,
That, like the Saints, you do it still.
Give us this day our daily bread,
Ps. 144. v. 17.
Who with thy blessing all do fill;
As hitherto we have been fed,
Be pleased the same continue still.
1. Cor. 3.7.
Tho we for Corn do plow and sow,
Without thy gift we nothing mow.
And chiefly give thy holy grace,
Which is the soul's true spirit'all Bread:
That she with thee may find a place,
In Heaven, when as the Body's dead.
Often give to us the Sacrament,
Containing thee, and all content.
And forgive us our Trespasses,
As we offenders do forgive:
This is the chief way to appease
God's Wrath, in Charity to live.
Mat. 6. v. 12.14.15.
As you do Brother's fault remit,
So God will your offenses quit.
But if in Anger you thus pray,
You beg a curse instead of Blessing.
No more forgive me you do say,
Then I do Enemy transgressing.
If you will revenge on Enemy,
You beg Revenge, v. 15.
and guilty ly.
Before this Prayer you do begin,
Examine if you are in Love
With all men, Prove. 8. v 29.
lest it turn to Sin,
And Curse instead of Prayer prove;
Mat. 18. v. 34.
If you forgive not from your Heart,
Of your Offense you will find the smart.
And lead us not into Temptation,
But sent us help when we are tempted;
Lest that it prove to our Damnation.
We do not beg to be exempted,
From all assaults; Wisd, 3, v, 6,
We must be tried,
Before we can be justified.
None shall be crowned, 2, Tim, 2, v, 5,
says Saint Paul,
But he who lawfully has fought:
Who Is tempted, I am, 1, v, 12.
bles't Saint James does call,
For by Temptation glory's bought.
When he shall overcome, says he,
With glory he shall crowned be.
But us deliver from all evil,
In soul and Body we thee pray:
From Enemy, from sin, and Devil,
Protect us Lord, while here we stay.
When soul returns to thee ag^^n,
That it be saved, Lord say,
Amen.

HAIL MARY.
Hail full of grace, our Lord is with thee.

Luke 1. v. 28.
GOd seeing from Eternity,
Man's fall from his thrice happy state:
That he again revived might be,
And Heavenly joys participate,
Io. 1, v: 14, Luk, 1, v, 31. Isa, 7, v, 14,
His Flesh would take, and Man become,
Conceived in a Virgin's Womb.
And that his Mother might not be
Polluted, with her Parents Sin,
By merits of his Death was she
Preserved: which otherwise had been.
That Christ's Flesh taken of her might be,
Not tainted, but from Sin most free.
And when in Womb she was conceived,
She was replenish't with God's grace,
Of which she never was bereaved;
To Sin she never did give place.
But in God's grace she still remained,
Unspotted, pure, and never stained.
To this pure Virgin Gabriel said,
Hail full of grace, our Lord's with thee:
Tho you are now, and shall be Maid,
God's Mother also, Luke 1. v. 35.
you shall be.
Let Us all respect this happy Mother,
Heb. 2 v. 11.12.
Since God by her became our Brother.
What malice has some men possessed,
To speak against Christ's blessed Mother?
Like Enemies to her profes't:
This comes from Satan, and no other.
He hates her, who has helping been
To conquer Devil, Death, and Sin.
When Man did eat of Knowledge Tree,
Gen 3. v. 15.
And Satan gloried in his prey,
God said, I will put Enmity
'Twixt thee and Woman, from this day.
v. 15.
The Woman yet shall bruise thy head,
Tho thou a Woman have misled,
And since proud Satan cannot reach
The Queen, who does in Heaven reign,
He craftily poor Man does teach,
Her honor here on Earth to stain.
So who blaspheme her join the Devil,
Who is the Author of this evil.
But let all men forewarned be,
Luk 1. v. 28.
Remembering what the Angel said;
Mary fear not, our Lord's with thee:
Let wicked men then be afraid,
To speak against her, lest that God,
Should make them feel his scourging Rod.
Our Lord's with thee: thou shall conceive
v. 35.
By holy Ghost, true God and Man:
Consent, O Mary, and give leave;
Doubt not, Mat 19. v 26. Luk 1. v. 38.
God this and all things can.
Behold, says she, the Lord's Handmaid,
Let it be done as thou have said.
v. 28. Luke 11. v. 27.
Among all women blessed thou art;
That is, above all others blessed:
Fullness of grace God did impart
To thee, but not so to the rest.
Colos. 1. v. 19. Io. 1. v. 14.
Thy blessed Womb was lodging place
Of Christ, the Plenitude of grace.
Thou Morning Star were to our Day
Of happiness: thou gav'st the light,
That graces Banner did display,
And brought us out of sinful night.
Thou fair, Cantic. 6 v 9. Revel. 12. (...),
like Moon, as Sun elect,
With Crown of Stars thy head is decked.
Thy chaste Soul does in purity,
Excel the nine Angelick Quires;
The greatest Saints in sanctity:
Thou have all that thy heart desires;
More knowledge than the Cherubins,
More flaming love than Seraphins.
The Fruit is blessed of thy Womb;
Luke 1. v. 28.
From this all glory came to thee:
All men, past, present, and to come,
By this Fruit were, and blessed be:
Whose name was JESUS; that is a Savior,
Who cleans'd our Souls in bloody Laver.
This Name of JESUS comfort brings,
To us poor sinners whilst we live.
Io. 14. v. 16. c. 16. v. 23 S. Bernard.
What ere we ask the King of Kings,
In this blessed Name, he will freely give.
JESUS is Music to the Ear,
Honey to mouth, and Heart does cheer.
This Name is our security,
Act. 4. v. 12. Phil. 2. v 10.
Against the power and fear of Devil.
Who, when it sounds, away does fly,
And leaves off tempting us to evil:
When he does tempt, Romans 10. v. 13.
you need not fear,
If you call on your JESUS dear.
Besides this Name, there is another,
Which by us all must hon'red be,
The Name of God's most blessed Mother,
Who Man became to set us free.
That Is Holy Mary; Mother of God,
Genesis 3. v. 15.
Who on the Serpent's Head has trod.
This holy Name does signify
Lady, or one who domineers,
As she does ore our Enemy.
Let us then say, with sighs and tears,
O Holy Mary, for us pray,
Now, and upon our dying day.
Beware your Soul you do not stain,
With misbelief, as some do say,
To beg Saints Prayers is but in vain,
And God's true honor's cast away.
As tho God's honor less'ned were,
By seeking Intercessours there.
Come unto me, Mat. 11. v. 28.
the Lord does say,
He bids you not go to his Mother:
As tho she Sin's grief could allay,
Saint Peter, Paul, or any other;
Since they are dead, how can they hear
Our Prayers, who now do not appear?
Iam. 5. v. 16.
To those who labor Christ did say,
I Will you refresh, come unto me.
That Saints will Grace give we nere pray,
To do this heinous Sin would be.
Yet since Prayers of the Just prevail,
We beg to pray they will not fail.
Job. 42. v. 8.
God sent Job's friends, who had offended,
To beg that he would for them pray.
v. 8.
To grant what Job asked he intended,
Tho their Request he cast away.
Rev. 5. v. 8.
Thus Saints by Prayer our wants relieve,
Tho to us Grace they cannot give.
And doubt not but our Prayers they hear,
For they our thoughts in God do know,
In whom, as in a Crystal clear,
They see all things which are below.
If Angels know not Sin is quit,
Luke 15. v. 7.
How can they'n Heaven rejoice at it.
And since the Saints for friends might pray,
When here; I am. 5. v. 16.
why not now they are gone?
Will God this Privilege take away,
That they shall leave their friends alone?
If here't was counted Charity,
Shall they in Heaven less loving be?
This doctrine false from Devils came,
1. Tim. 4. v. 1.
Who are to Saints and Sinners foes:
To lessen Saints honor is their aim,
That we may this advantage lose:
If tempting Dev'ls may here assault,
Why not Saints praying defend from fault?
In all your life time, night and day,
Make Prayer to God, become your Brother,
The blessed Saints desire to pray
For you, and chiefly your dear Mother.
Io. 19. v. 27.
Christ gave her Mother unto Saint John,
So she is the same to every one.
Beg that she will your Mother be,
And next to God of you take care,
To pray for your felicity,
And that all Sin you may beware,
Now, and in the hour of your Death,
When you must yield your vital breath.
For on that hour all does depend:
It Sorrow brings, or lasting joy:
Beg her by Prayer, you to defend,
That Satan may you not annoy.
Pray, Mother, that I die in love,
To live with you and God above.
Amen.

OF FASTING, AND THE CONTRARY.
JESUS fasted forty days and forty nights.

Math. 4.2.
YOu see that our first Enemy,
The Devilish, by Prayer is overthrown:
How Flesh the next subdued may be,
I shall endeavor to make known.
Hest. 14. v. 2.1. Cor. 9. v. 27.
Prayer does prevent the Devil's aim,
Fasting rebellious Flesh does tame.
Yet it is most certain, that, without
Fasting, your Prayer does little avail:
When Flesh is pampered, Romans 8. v. 5.7.8.13.1. Pet. 2. v. 11.
there is no doubt,
The Devilish will soon with you prevail;
The Flesh is his chief Instrument,
By which he gains the soul's consent:
For Stomach, full with meat and drink,
Obscures the poor soul's Understanding:
That she on God can little think,
And thus she leaves the sense commanding,
Consenting to what Flesh requires,
Sleep, Sloth, Gal. 5. v. 19.20.
and all unchaste desires.
Hence 'twas, that when God Laws did give,
To Man, he grounded them on Fasting,
That he might still obedient live,
And thus obtain Life everlasting.
Phil. 3. v. 19.
The Belly-God you must deny,
Which does the true God still defy.
To Man God's first Law was, that he
Should keep strict Fast, and to abstain:
Genesis 2. v. 17.
Eat not the fruit of this fair Tree,
And in my love thou shall remain.
The Fruit was fair, Genesis 3. v. 6.
and pleased the Eye;
Man eat; lost all by Gluttony.
And we his children, from that time,
Of Gluttony do feel the smart:
By this our Parents heinous crime,
From God averted in our heart,
1. Cor. 15. v. 50. Gal, 5, v, 17,
Inclined unto Flesh-Liberty,
The Soul's most Mortal Enemy.
The second Law, which God did give,
Was to great Moses, in the Mount:
If by that Law we justly live,
To God we once must give account.
Exodus, 23, v, 16,
T'approach God there he had not dared,
Had he not been by Fast prepared.
v. 18. Exodus 31. v, 18.
He fasted forty days and nights,
And then received the ten Commands,
Which guide our Reason like ten Lights,
v. 18.
And written were by God's own hands,
In stony Tables, to declare
The people Stony-hearted were.
For tho the Wonders were so great,
God wrought for them by Moyse's hand,
Ungratefully they him did treat,
Ps. 104.
And often in Rebellion stand.
While Moses fasts in their behalf,
Exodus 32. v. 4.
They make themselves a golden calf.
v. 6. v. 19. v. 4.
They eat, they drink, about it dance,
The God of Heaven they deny,
This Idol's honor to advance:
This was the fruit of Gluttony.
When Moyse's zeal this evil saw,
v. 19,
He broke the Tables of the Law.
Here in a trice one Gluttonous Act,
Made void the Fast of forty days;
Exodus 33. v. 4 Exodus 32. v. 31. Exodus 34. v. 28. v. 29.
Moses makes them this Sin retract,
And for this wicked people prays,
And by like Fast he did obtain,
The Tables of the Law again.
Our Savior when he did intend,
Mat. 4. v. 2.
To give to us the Law of grace,
Kept forty days Fast, to this end,
That we this Virtue might embrace:
Without this, Gal. 5. v. 24.
we pretend in vain,
God's Law to keep, or Grace obtain.
You see in Fasting God did give
The Laws of Nature, Moyse's, Grace:
To show, if blameless you will live,
And have your Reason still take place,
Romans 8. v. 13.1. Cor. 15. v. 50.
By Fasting you the Flesh must tame,
Or doubtless you will miss your aim.
1. Cor. 9. v. 27.
Fasting does curb the Flesh delights,
And leaves the Soul to domineer,
Who freed from Flesh courageous fights,
Against the Devilish, and does not fear,
Who of his Weapon, Flesh, disarmed,
Can little do, by Fasting charmed.
The Soul by Fasting here does live,
Like Angel, ruled by Reasons light:
To whom God Grace does freely give,
Prove. 8. v. 31. 3. King. 19, v, 8, 4, King. 2, v, 11.
To be with her is his delight.
Elias day and night did fast,
And hence in fiery Chariot passed.
The force of Fasting's very great,
God threatening Ninives overthrow,
Jonas 3. v. 4. v. 5. v. 10.
Their Fast approach't his Mercy seat,
And Grace on them he did bestow.
What power has Fasting here you see,
Which made God change his first Decree.
Genesis 3. v. 7. Genesis 9. v. 22. Genesis 19. v. 33. Numb. 11. v. 33. Ps. 77. v. 30.31.
By eating, Man lost Innocence,
By drinking Noah's shame did appear,
By drinking Lot lost Continency.
Who God in th'desart did not fear,
But eat, and drank, and Belly filled,
When they were fat fed, God them killed.
Luke 16. v. 19. v. 22.
Rich Dives feasted gorgeously,
Nothing was wanting to his Taste:
Hungry, in Hell, now he does ly,
In Fire among the devils placed.
v. 21.
Poor Laz'rus Begged Bread at his door,
v. 22.
Who feasts with God for evermore.
Feasting, if you consider well,
Is Man's most mortal Enemy:
Blindfold it leads the soul to Hell,
When Reason's blind it does not see,
v. 24.
Of Gluttony what is the fate;
Till damned it does repent too late.
Fasting of Chastity's the Mother;
S. Basil. Hom de Iejunio
In keeps the soul to Virtue bent,
It does preserve Grace, and to other
Rare Virtues makes her full intent.
The fruits of Feasting are Hell's gain:
By Fasting Man does just remain.
This made the Saints so much esteem
The Virtue of true Abstinence:
Themselves secure they did not deem,
Without this Buckler of defense.
It shields from Fiesh and Devil's dart,
That it shall never wound the heart.
Saint John, Christ's great Forerunner fasted;
Luke 1. v. 15. Mark. 1. v. 6.
He no delicious meat would eat,
What Desert yields he only tasted,
With Penance strict, he Flesh did treat.
Thus kept the Grace he was born in,
And never did consent to Sin.
Saint Paul, tho by God's choice elected,
While here, did seem his Flesh to hate,
By Penance strict he it corrected,
1, Cor 9, v. 27.
Lest that he might prove Reprobate.
If you examine you will find,
The Saints were all of this Saint's mind.
If therefore you will be secure,
From tempting Flesh, and Devil fell:
By Fast God's grace you must procure,
To guard you while on Earty you dwell.
Fasting preserves from new offense,
Joel. 2. v. 12.
And for past Sins makes recompense.
Hence it is the Church commands to Fast,
Yet this is to be understood,
As long as health and strength does last,
She seeks hereby her Childrens good.
Three sorts of Fasts in Church there are,
Which I will briefly here declare.
The first is called natural,
And broke by crum, or drop we take.
The next Ecclesiastical,
One meal a day in this we make:
The third is abstinence, when we,
Excepting flesh, to eat are free.
Unto the first the Church does bind,
When We receive the Sacrament.
Lent, Fridays, Eves, where Fast we find,
We must with one meal be content.
On Saturdays we do abstain,
When only Flesh we do refrain.
Behold what profit does accrue
To us by Fasting? then besure
To give Obedience, what is due,
To Holy Church, while you endure.
Who hears the Church, Luke 10. v. 16.
the same hears me;
Who Will not, as Heathen let him be.
The meat hurts not which enters in
When it is took with moderation:
Your Disobedience is the Sin,
Which makes you guilty of Damnation.
Genesis 1. v. 31. Genesis 3. v. 11.
Good was the Apple Adam eat,
Yet eating his offense was great.
As Satan tempted him, so here
He tempts to Disobedience:
The Flesh bids eat, and never fear,
The Soul yields to Concupiscence.
Thus, not regarding Church command,
Man boldly eats what comes to hand.
But let us still obedient be,
To holy Church, Mat. 18. v. 17.
in all our ways:
That from Christ's curse we may be free
Remembering what Saint Austin says:
Who Will not the Church his Mother call,
Have God for Father never shall.
Let no Flesh-Devill then prevail,
Phil. 3. v. 19.
To make you Belly-God adore:
To feast now, what will it avail,
Luke 16. v. 24.
When you must hunger evermore?
From Sin preserve your Soul by Fast,
Rev. 19. v. 9.
That you may Feast with God at last,
Amen.

OF ALMSDEEDS.
Make to your selves friends of the Mammon of iniquity.

Luke 16. v. 9.
IN the beginning, God did give
All things in common here below:
That men might still united live,
No one his Portion then did know;
God did not parts to men assign,
29.
No one could say, this Land is mine.
When Men on Earth did multiply,
Genesis 13. v. 9.
The Earth in parts they did divide,
Who had most power, gained most thereby,
The weakest poorest did abide.
Thus Avarice did first begin,
1. Tim. 6. v. 10.
Which Scripture calls the Root of Sin.
By Property their hearts were set,
On greedy gain, and Worldly Love:
Their aim was worldly Wealth to get,
They little minded joys above;
They were to Flesh and Blood so bent,
Iam. 5. v. 5.
Their Heaven was this World's content.
Ps. 16. v. 15.
The Soul's desire's nere satisfied,
Till she joins God her final End:
She having with the Flesh complied,
To her desires does wholly bend:
So men their Heaven seek in this life,
Which is the cause of Worldly strife.
For they to greatness do aspire,
And Wealth's increase, Prove. 28. (...). 22.
which all commands:
They grieve to see another higher,
In honor, riches, or in lands.
This makes them plot, both day and night,
How they may gain by wrong or right.
Hence it is they cheat, they rob, they kill,
To gain a little worldly wealth:
To satisfy their greedy will,
They often hazard life, and Health.
The Idol-Riches they adore;
Give these, and they will ask no more.
Prove. 1^. v. 20. Eccli 13. v. 24. Eccli. 4. v 4.5.6. Eccli. 13. v. 24.
They are no friends unto the Poor,
Their wants they will not the least supply:
But harshly drive them from the door,
As their Wealth's greatest Enemy.
Let them consider how unjust
They are hereby, unto their trust.
For tho God some men did permit,
To have more than some others have:
Yet his decree he does not quit,
Deuteronomy. 14. v. 29. Eccli. 4. v. 1.2.3.4.
By which the Earth he common gave.
All Men are by her Fruits to live:
To Poor the Rich are bound to give.
For since they do the Land possess,
Which food unto the Body yields:
To those which only Trades profess,
To till and sow who have no fields,
Eccli. 29. v. 12.
In want they are bound to give them bread,
Or give account when they are dead.
For God has placed the Rich man here,
Not only his own flesh to feed,
But to be his true Dispenseer,
Luke 16. v. 11.
Distributing where he sees need.
Account of this he once must give,
If bad, it is Death; if good, he will live.
Our Savior's counsel here then take,
And freely give unto the Poor:
Luke 16. v. 9.
Thus wicked Mammon friends will make,
Of whose assistance you will be sure;
Your Soul, when it does Body leave,
The Poor shall into joys receive.
Isai. 58. v. 7. Prove. 17. v. 5.
The Prophet bids you to refresh
Who hungry are, and naked cloth,
And not despise them, your own flesh,
Nor their infirmities to leath.
Tob. 4. v. 8.
Do still as you would be done by,
To all in great necessity.
Christ's counsel here Command becomes;
Sell what you have, Luke 12. v. 33.
and Alms bestow:
The Saints in Alms have spent great sum's,
Before the Poor should naked go:
These words of Christ made them so free,
What you give them, Mat. 25. v. 40.
you give to me.
Alms, Eccli. 29. v. 17.
says the Wiseman, do defend,
More than the strong man's shield, or spear,
Against assaults our foes intend:
The Soul, thus armed, does not fear:
Alms reinforce her so with grace,
They raise the Siege, and leave the place
And tho you should be Sinners great,
True Charity hides all your Sins,
v. 16. Tob 4. v. 11 Luke 6. v. 38.
And pleads before God's Mercy seat,
And of him Pardon for you wins.
Who gives to him, he will give grace,
And Heaven shall be his resting place.
Alms, Avarice from heart remove,
Extinguishing its raging heat;
They also lessen Worldly Love,
Tob. 4 v. 12. Eccli. 3. v. 33.
And bring the Soul with God to treat:
As waters do extinguish fires,
So Alms resist what Sin requires.
Alms, says the Angel Raphael,
Do free from Death, Tob. 12. v. 9. Tob. 4. v. 10.11. Ps. 111, v. 10.
and purge from Sin,
They purchase Mercy, keep from Hell,
As if we Sinners had not been.
They life obtain with God above;
So much does God our Alms-deeds love.
The Wise man does this counsel give,
Eccli 20. v. 15.
Lay up your Alms in th'Poor Man's heart,
These will preserve you while you live,
From ill: and when you hence depart,
Tob. 4. v. 11.
Will help you in that dangerous hour,
And shield you from the Devil's power.
This Virtue, seems by Daniel,
With God to be the most prevailing:
In winning grace it does excel,
And of God's Mercy seldom failing;
Dan 4. v. 24.
Thy sins with Alms, O King redeem,
Of all ways, this I most esteem.
An Angel to Cornelius said,
Act. 10 v. 4.
Thy Prayer and Alms-deeds are ascended
To God, and shall be well appay'd:
Go unto Peter, who is descended
To Joppen, credit what he says,
He shall instruct thee in the Faith.
The praise of Alms-deeds is to long,
For me at present to rehearse,
Exceeding limits of a song;
So I Will conclude all in this Verse;
Give Alms, Luke 11. v. 41.
says JESUS, and behold,
All things are pure to you, as Gold.
Besides the Alms which Body feeds,
There is another you must give;
Instruct your Brother, Eccli. 18. v. 13.
where it needs,
To love God, and in's Fear to live;
As Soul the Body does excel,
So does this Alms, which keeps from Hell.
A third Alms yet you must bestow,
Without which God you cannot please,
To pardon and forgive your Foe:
From sin thus you will have release:
If you do, Luke 6. v. 37.38. Mat. 18. v. 340.
God will pardon give:
If not: you still shall guilty live.
Remember what you daily say,
Math. 6. v. 11.
Give us this day our daily Bread:
Feed you the hungry, then thus pray,
And your soul shall with grace be fed.
Luc. 6. v. 38.
For as you do to others give,
So God your wants will still relieve.
We say, Mat. 6. v. v. 12.
Our trespasses forgive,
O gracious Lord, and them forget;
As we offenders do relieve:
And freely pardon them their debt:
v. 14.
If you do pardon heartily,
He Will pardon you, his Enemy.
And this will quit your soul of Fear,
In the last dreadful Judgment day:
When you these thundering words shall hear,
Which to the Wicked Christ will say:
You Would not forgive, Mat. 25. v. 41.
to Hell be gone;
Nor give: so Glory you will have none.
But then Christ to the Merciful
Shall say, Come, Mercy you shall find,
v. 34.
Since you to Poor were pitiful,
And to your Enemy as kind.
Possess the Crown prepared for you,
Which is to Alms and Mercy due.
Amen.

THE ANGEL GUARDIAN'S ADVICE TO HIS PUPIL.
He has given his Angels charge of thee.

Psalm. 90. v. 11.
THe charge of Men to Angels here
God gave, them to direct,
In all their ways, Ps. 90. v. 11.
in Love, and Fear
Of him: and to detect
Temptations of their Enemy,
To keep them from all evil:
To win their hearts to God on high,
From Flesh, the World, and Devil.
Give ear to me, my Pupil dear,
Who am your Angel-Keeper;
Tob. 5. v. 20.21.
Who day and night do guard you here,
Fear not, I am no sleeper,
But always watchful, you to mind
Of good, and when your Foe
Does tempt, to ill, in any kind,
That you may it forgo.
Consider, Man, your dignity,
How high your Natur's flown;
Above the highest Hierarchy
Of Angels, Mark. 16. v. 19.
to God's Throne.
Whose Love to you was not confined,
Making one part, your Soul,
His Image: Genesis 1. v. 27.
'twas then in his mind,
To honor more the whole.
Io. 1. v. 14.
From Heaven to Earth he did descend,
Your Nature to unite,
To his divine, Romans 5. v. 18.19.
unto this end,
That he might make that right,
Which Adam's Sin depraved; this great
Work by his Death he wrought:
At God's right hand it now has seat,
As by the Creed you're taught.
No wonder then, that God commands,
Ps. 90. v. 12.
His Angels to make care
Of Mortal Men, and in their hands,
Them to support and bear;
Lest Satan hurt them any way,
Since they thus honored be.
And we, as readily obey,
And them do serve as free.
Since then you are thus dignified,
Scorn basely to descend,
To worldly love; Deuteronomy. 6. v. 5. Mat. 22. v. 37. Luke 10. v. 27.
let yours abide
In Heaven, unto the end.
Let Satan cursed you not deceive,
And stoop you down to Sin,
Since what he lost you shall receive,
The place he once sat in.
By Sin he fell, and you must rise
By Virtue, to his place:
Hate Sin; Eccli. 21. v. 2. Romans 6. v. 23.
love Virtue; thus be wise,
In keeping of God's grace.
What Is Sin? but pleasure of the Flesh,
That Is common to the Beast,
Which does the soul no whit refresh;
God is her only feast.
1. Pet. 5. v. 5.
The pound of heart God does resist,
The humble he does call,
To heavenly Thrones, the Angels mist,
Whose Pride was their downfall.
Hence comes the Mortal Enmity,
Of them unto Mankind,
That Men to Glory raised should be,
Does sore perplex their mind.
Mat. 26. v. 15,
'Twas greedy gain made Judas sell
His Savior, and his Soul.
Mat. 19. v. 29.
The world's Contempt does make men dwell
With God, above the Pole.
Genesis 19. v. 24.
Foul Lust caused Sodom to be fired;
Chaste Souls wed God above:
Genesis 4. v. 11.
Cain's Envy curse from God required;
Man's one with God by Love.
Luke 16. v. 22.
'Twas Gluttony that Dives rich,
Did bury deep in Hell:
v. 22.
'Twas Laz'rus want and hunger which
Made him in Heaven to dwell.
The furious Man abounds with sin;
Mark. 5. v. 4.
The Meek possess the Land;
The Idle Heaven shall never win;
2. Tim. 2. v. 5.
Who fights shall crowned stand.
In fine all Vice does separate
'Twixt God, Isai. 59. v. 2.
and Man's Soul here,
And only this can make him hate,
That which he loves so dear.
This Virtue that does reunite
The Soul again to God,
When she the Flesh and World's delight,
Both under foot has trod.
Mat. 4. v. 35. Rev. 12. v. 9.
As Devils tempt you unto Sin,
So I to Virtue move:
Malice moves them the Prize to win,
In me it is only Love.
To follow them the Flesh does please,
To which my counsell's grief:
This Heaven does bring, the Soul's true case,
That Hell, where is no relief.
Attend and hearken night and day,
Job. 32. v. 8 Heb. 1. v. 14.
Unto God's inspirations,
Which I inspire, and them obey,
Repelling all Temptations,
Which come from Satan, and to know
The good, from bad, ask me,
Who am to teach you here below,
And your Instructor be.
God says, Exodus 23. v. 20.
My Angel shall precede,
And keep you in the way:
Contemn him not, v. 21.
who you does lead,
But do his voice obey.
v. 22.
And I an Enemy will be
To yours, and will chastize
Those who do any hurt to thee,
In goods, or otherwise.
As Gabriel, Luke 1. v. 26.
I Message bring
To you, from God above,
To love and practice every thing
That Is good, I do you move.
Like Raphael, Tob. 12. v. 14.
J'm sent to thee,
That I may make thee whole,
When serpent's bite has made thee see,
What ill Sin brings the Soul.
4. Esdr. 4. Antiph. at. Bened. in the office of the Angel Guardian Act. 12. v.
7. I am. 4. v. 7.
As Uriell is Shepherd chief,
Ore God's beloved Flock:
So I from you do chase the Thief,
Awaking like a Cock.
When he assaults, I put in mind,
What ill comes by consent:
If you resist, here you shall find
Relief, with Soul's content.
And thus, like Michael, I fight,
Rev. 12 v. 7. Rev. 12 v. 9.
Against the Dragon fell,
Who would rob you of Grace's light,
And plunge your Soul in Hell.
I check, I move, I pray to God,
I leave no way untried,
That you may escape God's heavy rod,
And in his love abide.
Be mindful then often in the day,
Of me, Tob. 5. v. 15. Genesis 48. v. 16.
your loving Guide,
And me as often devoutly pray,
With you still to abide.
Sin not, and thus your self deceive,
Because Men do not see;
What Is hid from others I perceive,
And nothing's hid from me.
Set guard on the Tongue, Prove. 18. v. 21 Mat. 12. v. 34.
for in its hands,
Is life and death of Soul;
It test fies how your heart stands:
And if you will keep it whole,
Shut Eyes, and Ears against Objects bad,
Which by them enter in;
And cause the Heart to be full sad,
When they have made it sin.
Genesis 9.21. Coloss. 3. v. 5.
Take equal care of all your senses,
And Members, guard them well:
Raise up against them these strong fences,
The Fear of God, and Hell.
Romans 6. v. 13.
Make them to serve your Maker dear,
As Virtues Instrument;
To purchase Heaven with them here,
This was your God's intent.
Receive all Crosses cheerfully,
From hand of your good God;
Math 16. v 24. Prove. 3. v 12. Heb. 12. v 6. Rev. 3. v. 19.
With them you must your glory buy,
And kiss his scourging Rod.
Who does in life chastize you here,
To spare you afterward,
And keep you in his Love and fear,
The Soul's securest guard.
In all distress, Ps. 9. v. 11. Ps. 17. v. 31.
put confidence
In God, your Father above,
And in dear JESUS, tho gone hence,
Since he died for your Love.
The presence of the Holy Ghost,
Wisd. 1. v. 4.
With clean heart seek to have,
The Prayers beg of the Heavenly Host,
That God your soul will save.
With good thoughts I Will you often inspire,
Comply then with the least,
Nourish't, spark-like, 'twill set on fire,
Your Soul to act what is best.
But if first motion you neglect,
And that be not attended,
Your heart God leaves then to direct:
When slighted, he is offended.
When you do pray, with Faith attend,
Mat. 21. v. 22.
And God in Heaven adore;
Devout persever to the end,
Christ's Mother's help implore.
Such Prayers with joy I do present
To God, and with you crave,
What you do ask with due intent,
In due time you may have.
These counsels take, and still obey
My holy Inspiration:
Thus shall I teach you Virtues way,
Which leads unto Salvation:
And at your Death with joy present
Your Soul unto God's Throne,
Where we for ere, in joys content,
Shall praise him, Three, and One.
Honor, Pup.
and Praise to God above,
Who does his Angels send;
Thanks to you, Custos, for your Love,
Who do your Charge attend.
I vow that I will you obey,
When I your voice do know:
That I may not deceived be, pray,
Or in my duty slow.
Amen.

A DIALOGUE BETWEEN LIBERTY AND MORTIFICATION.
Mortify your Members, which are upon the Earth.

Coloss. 3. v. 5.
Lib. AS slumbering I lay,
Me thought I saw a Man,
His hair was turned gray,
His color waxed wan,
Lean-fac'd, and hollow-ey'd,
His Body skin and bone:
I ask't; He thus replied,

Mor. J'm Mortification.


Lib. Where do you live? and why
Do you the Flesh thus treat?

Mor. I live in Monastery,
Where I do little eat;
My sleep the like; my Flesh
With Discipline I tear,
Mat. 11. v. 29.30.
And this does me refresh,
Christ's painful Cross to bear.
All this I do, to keep
1. Cor. 9. v* 27. Ps 6. v* 7.
Flesh subject to the spirit;
For past Sins I do weep,
And to increase my merit.
The hardest Virtues I
Do practice, and thus stand
Prepared, Phil. 1. v. 20.21.23.
for Christ to die,
When Faith and Love command.

Lib. What needs this strict Life? now
Coloss. 1. v. 20. Act* 1* v. 10. c. 7. v. 55.
Christ has Sin's debt full paid,
And this you must allow,
Heaven Gates are open laid.
Enjoy what pleasure's here,
While God you life does send,
Believe, and never fear,
But Heaven shall be your end.
God pleasant things did make
On Earth, 3. Esd^. 8. v. 44.
for men to use:
And pleasures you to take,
As sinful, do refuse.
Are you than God more wise,
To judge what is good and evil?
1. Tim. 2. v. 4.
Do You think he will Sin disguise,
To cheat you to the Devil?

Mor. It Is true when God did make
The World, and Man therein,
Genesis 1. v. 29 Genesis 2. v. 17.
He made all for his sake,
To use: and without Sin,
Excepting Knowledge Tree,
Which, tho its fruit was good,
To eat forbid was he.
He eat, Genesis 3. v. 6.7.
and guilty stood.
And thus did he, by Sin,
Forfeit his right to all
Pleasures; and grace must win,
Luke 13. v. 3.
By taste of bitter gall.
I grant Christ's Death did free
From Hell: yet that of Heaven
Man might possessor be,
Many commands are given.
Io 3. v. 5.
He first baptized must be,
And when has use of reason,
Mat. 19. v. 17.
God's ten Commands must he
Keep strict: break them it is Treason;
Condemning (...) to die,
His Justice to appease,
Mat. 3. v. 8.10.^
He must here satisfy,
By works which may him please.
Gal. 5. v. 24.
That Is corporal affliction,
With sorrow from the heart,
Joined with the contradiction
Of his rebellious part,
Mark. 8. v. 34.
And Christ to follow right,
He must himself deny;
Bear Crosses, 2. Cor. 4. v. 17.
and thus fight,
To live Eternally.
For Christ, tho God's dear Son,
Luke 24. v. 26.
Could not in glory be,
But by pains undergon,
And dying on the Tree.
His Saints sought their Salvation,
The self-same way, Ps. 33. v. 20.
as best,
And by much Tribulation,
They ent'red into rest
And he, who will glorious be,
Romans 8. v. 17.
With Christ must suffer here:
From Hell pains if be free,
He must not Penance fear.
Math. 7. v. 13.14.
Narrow is Heavens way,
Broad is the way to Hell;
Few love in that to stay:
In this do many dwell.

Lib. Since all you say is true,
As Scriptures testify,
1. Pet. 2. v. 11.
Pleasures I bid Adieu,
In Penance I will die.
Rom 8.. v. 13. Ps. 118. v. 59 Romans 8. v. 13.
No longer Liberty,
Let that cursed name be gone;
I will your Convert be,
Blessed Mortification.

A DIALOGUE BETWIXT HOPE AND DESPAIR. OR HOPE CONVERTING A DESPAIRING MAN.
Although he should kill me I will trust in him.

Job. 13. v. 13.
Hope. WHat fruitless sighs and sobs are these,
Which Echo in my ear?
Distrustful thoughts do never please;
Hope must be joined with Fear;
That tears to Soul may fruitful be,
And sorrow comfort bring.
These joined, with love of God, do free
The Conscience of guilt's sting.

Desp. It Is I, poor Soul, who sigh and weep,
To think what joys are past,
Wisd 17. v. 10.
What frights do now possess my sleep,
In Hell strait to be cast.
The good I Have lost, the ill I Have gaind,
Do sore perplex my mind,
How I my Soul with Sin have stained,
That I no joy can find.
When once I lived in Conscience clear,
And service of my God:
1. Io. 4. v. 18.
Love had secured my heart from fear,
Of his chastizing Rod.
All creatures me afforded joy,
God's praises I did sing,
My Flesh my Spirit did obey,
My Soul, my heavenly King.
Cursed Satan, 1. Pet. 5. v. 8.
envy'ng my good hap,
With his, sought my downfall;
My careless Soul he did entrap;
And brought it in Sin's thrall.
Now all things that I see, Wisd. 17. v 9.
or hear,
Add sorrow to my grief,
My Sins in Conscience still appear,
And I despair relief.
Romans 7. v. 23. Gal. 5. v. 17.
For now my senses all rebel,
And war against my Soul:
God's grace, my help, I base did sell,
For Sin. How to control,
Or them restrain, I do not know,
They Reason do so blind,
They't pleasure bring her to their bow,
And thus corrupt the mind.

Hope. Poor Soul, consid'ring your sad state,
Ps. 41. v. 4.
You reason have to weep,
To sigh, and to lament your fate,
With grief of heart most deep:
For on the Earth no state's so bad,
Ps. 5. v. 7. Ps. 10. v. 7.
As that of sinful heart,
Which once God's grace, and favor had,
And from it did depart.
Ps. 44. v. 3. Eccl. 12. v. 7. Ephesians. 2. v. 8. Tit. 3. v 7. Rom 6. v. 23. Ps. 93.
v. 19. Mat. 8. v. 12. Eccli. 39. v 35.36.
Grace keeps Man's Soul in God's true Love,
By Sin God him does hate;
By Grace he is heir to joys above,
By Sin in damned state.
While he is in grace, God does him greet
With heavenly consolation:
In Sin with Hell's food he does meet,
Sad grief and desolation.
What grief has Father child to leave,
Who loves him tenderly?
Who can the Mother's grief conceive,
Who sees her children die?
For loving friends to part for ever,
Is grief beyond expression.
Exiled from all, to come back never,
How sad in this condition?
For loving Man and Wife to part,
Is little less than Death.
Of all griefs, Eccli. 41. v. 1.
this destroys the heart,
Our life's expiring breath.
All these are griefs, in high degree,
Yet join them all in one,
Equal they cannot the misery,
That Is found in sin alone.
For God, who bears all Titles dear,
Of pleasure and of Love;
From soul is separated here,
By sin, Isai. 59. v. 2. Mat. 25. v. 29. Ezech. 16. v. 27. Mat. 12. v. 45.
and does remove
All Is Blessings from her, and does give
Possession to the Devil,
Where Tyrannizing he does live,
Enslaving her in evil.
The forenam'd sorrows have release,
By time, and do expire:
Wisd 17. v. 10.
The Conscience-grief does still increase,
Till it brings to Hellfire.
Where it is nere dying worm does feed
On the soul, Isai. 66. v. 24. Wisd. 5. v. 3.
to think what is lost:
Which vain remorse does in it breed,
To think how dear sin cost.

Desp. What you have said, I own for Truth,
Being sensible in soul,
Of much: Had I took care in youth,
I had preserved it whole.
Man's frailty, once I would not own,
But scorned those were in sin:
And thus by Pride, Ps. 1^7. v. 67.
was overthrown;
Same state I now live in.

Hop. Tho God, in you, has punished Pride,
Ps. 118. v. 71.
And left you without grace,
That falling, humble you abide,
With shame's blush in your face;
Ps. 31. v. 10.
Yet by no means you must despair,
But on his Mercies call;
Which in your God transcending are,
Man's Refuge after fall.
How many sinners found relief,
In Heaven now are Saints?
When they for sin mixed tears with grief,
God heard their doleful plaints.
And he has promis't, Isai. 1. v. 8. Ezech. 33. v. 14 16.
he will receive,
Sinners, at their return,
If they their sinful course will leave,
In Hell they shall not burn.

Des. Cain he was sorry, yet was cursed,
Genesis 4. v. 1^. Mat. 27. v. 5.
And Judas hanged himself:
Of greatest sinners, I Am the worst,
Poor, weak, a graceless Elf:
Mine Is greater then the sin of Cain;
Christ had not shed his blood.
Wisd. 16. v. 29.
I more ungrateful here remain,
Than Cain, pay'ng ill for good.
I, Mat. 26. v. 15.
Judas-like, who is Lord did sell,
And still his grace abused,
When Christ by grace in me would dwell,
I basely him refused:
Io. 8. v. 44.
Adjoined his Enemy in fight,
Against him, and thus ungrateful,
His precious Blood, and death did slight;
A sin of all most hateful.

Hop. Enough Despair: no more of this:
Men plunged as deep in sin,
And as ungrateful, did not miss,
But often have pardoned been.
If Cain, and Judas did lament,
And yet grace did not find;
They did not truly sin repent,
And were not right in mind.
Cain seemed sad, yet we do'nt read,
Because he had don ill:
Or did repent that wicked deed,
Genesis 4. v. 14.
But feared men would him kill.
Judas repented, what was don,
Yet wanted Mercy's hope,
And Faith in Christ, Mat. 27. v. 3.
God's only son,
So hanged in a rope.
2. King. 11. v. 4. v. 15.24. 1. King. 16. v. 1.12. Io 21. v. 17. Mat. 26. v.
74. Io. 19. v. 34.
David Adult'ry did commit,
And murder; after, he
Was chose by God in Throne to sit,
Prophet and King to be.
Peter, of all made chief, when tried,
His Master did forswear:
With spear Longinus pierced Christ's side,
Yet all these pardoned were.
What greater sins can you conceive,
Or more ungrate full Men?
Yet those, when they did evil leave,
And did return again,
With tears of Eyes, Joel. 2. v. 12.
and grief of heart,
With hope and Faith conjoined,
By fervent Prayer and Penance smart,
v. 13.
To Mercy God inclined.
Who did receive them in his love,
And grace on them bestow,
Ezech. 18 v. 22. Romans 5. v. 20.
The guilt of sin he did remove;
Where Vice, now Virtues grow.
Thus they, with many more, became
Great Saints, and reign above:
Remitted sins, Luk 7. v. 47.
increase the flame
Of Gratitude and Love.
If any sin he will not forgive,
It Is that which you are in:
Despairing Mercy, 1. Io. 5. v. 16. Ier. 18. v. 12.13.
while you live,
The greatest of all sin.
By this, you do deny in him,
Ps. 144. v. 9. Ephesians. 4. v. 19.
His greatest Attribute;
Which leads the soul unto Hell's brim,
Despair's accursed fruit.
God's Mercy's greater, than Man's Sin;
So is the Price Christ gave,
Upon the Cross, his Soul to win,
And from Damnation save:
Put trust in God, Ps. 90. v. 14.15.
and in the merit
Of Christ, thy Savior dear:
Leave Sin; Ezech. 18. v. 32.
by Faith raise up your spirit,
And pardon never fear.

Des. I grant, all is true, that you do say,
But yet this Mercy, I,
Who Sinner am, know not the way
To gain, or to apply
Christ's merits to my Soul: I fear,
Prove. 28. v. 9.
While J'm in state of Sin,
My sighs and Prayers God will not hear:
This often has proved been.

Hope. That is, while Heart remains perverse,
Ready to sin again:
Eccli. 34. v. 31.
But when Man grieves his sinful course,
And does from sin refrain,
By Sacraments, let him apply
Christ's merit to his soul:
Christ promis't, who can never ly,
Io. 20. v. 23.
That he will make it whole.

Desp. Sweet Hope; Romans 8. v. 24.
which do to Heaven bring,
Your Convert I will be:
Devilish Despair away I Will fling,
And hearken unto thee.
I Will weep, I Will grievee, I Will leave all sin,
By Sacraments will I
God's Mercy seek, his grace to win,
Eccli 2. v. 11.
And thus in Hope will die.

Amen.

OF DEATH.
Remember thy last Ends, and thou will not sin for ever.

Eccl. 7. v. 40. It is appointed for all men once to die.

Hebr. 9. v. 27.
THe soul of Man, since Adam's fall,
Ephesians. 4. v. 18, 19.
Is so obscured by Flesh and Blood,
The senses seem to govern all,
As if the soul naught understood.
Men to this life do so attend,
They little think upon their End.
The whole Earth, says Jeremy,
Ier. 12. v. 11.
With desolation's desolate,
And he declares the reason why,
That we may mend before too late.
No one considers deep in heart,
That from this life he must depart.
Much less, 2. Cor. 5. v. 10.
that he account must give,
Of all what ever he has done;
And that he must for ever live
In joys, or sorrow, when he is gone;
This want of true consideration,
Is chiefest cause of Man's damnation.
The Wiseman therefore does advise,
That in your ways you mindful are
Of your last things: Eccli. 7. v 40.
thus you will be wise,
And for a happy death prepare.
You Will never sin, or do amiss,
While this your Meditation is.
What is grim Death, in picture made
With Dead-Man's skull, and standing by
Hourglass, with crooked Sith, and spade,
Arm, and Leg-bones, that cross do ly?
Death nothing is, but Life's privation,
The soul and Body's separation.
But yet how sad that hour will prove;
When Flesh and soul must separate;
Which were so firmly joined in love,
No tongue is able to relate.
S. Denis. Ps. 54. v. 5.
Among all other dreadful things,
That day to Man most terror brings.
That puts an end to carnal pleasures,
Which then to Soul cause bitter grief:
That separates from Worldly treasures,
Luke 12. v. 20.
Which then afford men no relief:
That parts from Children, Wife, and Friend;
To Worldly joys that puts an end.
That quells the spirit of the proud,
And stubborn disobedient heart;
That makes the Sinner cry aloud,
His guilty Soul's loath to depart.
Wealth, honor, Power will not prevail,
When Death arrests, he takes no Bail.
Your Life to mend he will grant no space,
But to the Judge your Soul present;
Where bribes, or friendship, find no place:
To late 'twill be then to repent.
Eccl. 11. v. 3.
As at that hour you're found to be,
So you will be for Eternity.
Delights and Pleasures, wanton Love,
Which were, before, your heart's content,
In that most dreadful hour, Wisd. 5. v. 3.
will prove
Grief to your Soul, which will lament,
To think how for these pleasing toys,
She is deprived of real joys.
Those then will pass, and leave behind
A strict account for her to make:
Why she let them possess her mind,
And Pleasure with the Flesh did take.
Since she was made for joys above,
And to contemn all Carnal Love.
Then Glory, Honor, Power, Wealth,
In which vain Men do put their trust,
Youth, Beauty, Valor, Courage, Health,
Will all be buried in the dust.
That Man will vile to God appear,
Who seemed so great and glorious here.
Eccls. 1 v. 8.
All these you will own then to be vain,
On which before you placed your love:
Despairing then you will remain,


Who did, for these, his Laws contemn.
Ps. 33. v. 22.
O dreadful day, to wicked Soul!
Which here in body did neglect,
Her sense, and passions to control,
And crooked Nature to correct:
Still yielding with depraved will,
Her Flesh-desires here to fulfill.
Whereas in Body she was placed,
Corrupted Nature to restrain,
And what she found in it defaced,
By grace and Virtue to regain:
But she let senses govern all,
By which the Devilish procured her fall.
Mat. 25. v 7.
The Prudent Virgins imitate,
With oil in Lamp, prepared remain,
Not with the foolish, v. 8.
when too late,
To seek, v. 10.
and knock, but all in vain.
The gate is shut, you are forgot,
The Bridegroom says: v. 12.
I know you not.
Have oil of works in Lamps of Faith,
Against midnight-Death: ^^^l. 5.6. ^^^m. 2. (...) 4.24.
thus ready stand,
And glory not (as scripture says)
In Faith alone, lest Spouse command,
You, Ec^^^ ^^at. 22. v. v. 12.13.
not adorned with works, to ly
In fire, yet dark, and nere to die.
Take warning then, before too late,
Deuteronomy. 32. v. 29.
And that your life you may amend,
On your departure meditate:
That Worldly pleasures will have end:
That Riches you must leave behind,
Which will at Death perplex the mind.
O Death! Eccli 41. v. 1.
how bitter is the thought
Of thee, to those who do possess
Peace in their Riches, which have brought
Their Soul to Sin, and Wickedness.
To leave their Idols is their grief,
Which now can yield them no relief.
These thoughts will draw your love from wealth;
From carnal pleasures still refrain,
If you will keep your Soul in health;
Think what, at Death, by them you will gain;
Rev. 18. v. 7.
How much you lived in pleasures here,
So much of torments you may fear.
Since then the pleasures of the Flesh,
Wealth, Honor, Glory, are but vain,
Phil. 3. v. 8. Eccli 2. v. 10.11. Isai. 40. v. 6.
And at Death cannot Your soul refresh,
As base and vile do you disdain;
Esteem them all mere Vanity,
Which pass away immediately.
James. 1. v. 10. Coloss. 3. v. 1.2.
And fix your love upon those pleasures,
Which are prepared for you above:
Those Honors, Glory, Joys, and Treasures,
Which will both true and lasting prove:
Love nothing, but in God; Ps. 41. v. 3. Luke 2. v. 29.
and he
From fear of Death will set you free.
While you live here, be enemy
To Flesh and Blood: Gal. 5. v. 24.
Fast, Watch, and Pray,
Relieve the Poor in Charity:
Be Humble, Patient, and Obey.
Still Virtue practice, and Sin fly,
Thus you will stand prepared to die.
Besides that Death does put an end,
To all those Worldly Vanities:
It does the soul from Body send,
To lasting Joys, Mat. 25. v. 13.
or Miseries.
And there is not any certainty,
When this great Day, or Hour, shall be.
God does the Hour of Death conceal,
That we may always ready stand:
1 Thessalonians. 5. v. 2. Mat. 24. v. 44.
Thief-like it does upon us steal,
Believe it then to be at hand.
In Conscience clear with Virtues dressed,
That when you die, your Soul may rest.
What Madness it is, but for an Hour,
To ly in sin, and hazard all:
1. Io. 3. v. 8.
To keep within the Devil's power,
And not to God for Mercy call.
If in that Hour you chance to die,
Your soul is damned Eternally.
Fear Death before it comes, and be
Mat. 24. v. 44.
Upon your guard, against that Hour:
Love God, and be assured, he
Will you defend from Satan's power.
Eccl. 8. v. 12. c. 12. v. 24. Prove. 28. v. 14.
Thrice happy man, that lives here,
Replenish't with God's Love, and Fear.
Then come Death early, come it late,
Foreseen, or sudden; when you die.
Prove. 14. v. 26. Eccli. 33. v. 26. 1. Io. 4. v. 16. Job. 14. v. 14.
Fear has secured you from Hell's gate,
Love joined you to the Deity.
Let Death be always in your mind,
That you these blessed effects may find.
Amen.

OF JUDGMENT.
After Death follows Judgment.

Hebr. 9. v. 27.
AS we are servants, placed here,
Our Masters pleasure to fulfill:
2. Cor. 5. v. 10.
So we before him must appear,
To prove if we have done his Will:
Where every one reward shall have,
As here he did himself behave.
Death's only Messenger, to cite
All Souls before God's dreadful Throne:
Where he will pass a Judgment right,
And Justice do to every one.
Twice God will Judge: at Death, the Soul;
When Bodies rise, he will Judge the whole.
Dan. 7. v. 10. Rev. 20. v. 12.
As soon as Soul from Body parts,
All Is opened to the Conscience view:
Who knows the secrets of Men's Hearts,
Will pass a Sentence, just and true.
The Soul, that moment, knows its doom;
Go thou Accurs't, or Blessed come.
Yet God will have one General day,
When soul and Body shall appear:
The Bodies, 1 Thessalonians. 4. v 16. v. 17.
which before dead lay,
Shall rise with horrid dread and Fear.
All must appear at Trumpet's sound:
To that Assize all men are bound.
Rom 2. v. 5 6. Mat. 7. v. 15.
God will have all men public tried,
Who good and bad were, shall appear;
God's Judgments will be justified,
Tho some Men were disguised here:
Wolves, sheepskins then must lay aside,
No one, Hebr. 4. v. 13.
that day, his fault can hide,
As Bodies did with souls partake,
And share with them in sinful acts:
They also here account must make,
And judged be of all their facts.
If good, with soul they will happy be;
If bad, condemned to misery.
Again, this Judgment-day must be,
That Christ, who here was vilify'd,
Mat. 24. v. 30.
May then appear in Majesty:
By who all Causes must be tried.
2. Tim. 4. v. 1.
Hen then shall Judge the Quick and Dead,
Who, Thief-like, to the Judge was lead.
Before this Dreadful day, there shall
Luke 21. v. 25. Math. 24. v. 7.
Strange signs in Sun and Moon be seen:
Great Earthquakes also shall befall,
Great Wars and Tumults rise, between
Father and Son, Brother, and Brother;
v. 7.
All Nations fighting one another.
Besides the Antichristian cheat,
Mat. 24. v. 24.
With sword and Wonders shall compel
Most Men, from Christ's Faith to retreat,
And draw them with himself to Hell.
2 Thessalonians. 2. v. 8.
He shall be killed by JESUS Spirit,
And cast in fire, as he shall merit.
Ose. 3. v. 5. Isai. 10. v. 21. Math. 24. v. 29.
Then the hardhearted faithless Jew,
Shall be converted to Christ's Faith:
Soon after these things will ensue,
The Judgment-Day, as Scripture Says,
Before which there will yet appear
More dreadful Signs, recounted here.
The sun shall be obscured: v. 29. Act. 2. v. 20. Mat. 24. v 29 Luk 21. v. 26.
Rev. 6. v. 14.
the Moon
Shall lose her light, like Blood appear:
As dark, as Midnight, shall be Noon,
Which shall fill Men with Dread and Fear.
The Stars shall fall; the Heavens moved,
By Earthquakes Mountains be removed.
From Heaven most dreadful fire shall fall,
Luke 21. v. 25 Rev. 6. v. 16.
The sea most horrid noise shall make;
Sinners shall on the Mountains call,
To hide them, and with Terror quake.
With Fear they will dry, Luk 21. v. 26.
and wither away;
How Dreadful then will be that Day?
The Ensign of the Son of Man,
The Cross, Mat. 24. v. 30.
shall in the Sky appear:
They Will tremble, who here from it ran,
Who loved it, Dan. 7. v. 9 Mat. 25. v. 31.
shall with joy draw near
Then shall be placed the Judgment Seat,
And Christ appear in glory great.
Dan. 7. v. 10. v. 10. Ps. 96. v. 3. Mat. 24. v. 31. Mat. 25. v. 6.
Millions of Angels shall attend
Him: Fire shall run before his face,
He then his Angels forth will send,
To summon all unto that place:
At Midnight they will the Trumpet sound,
Which will throughout the World resound.
Arise you Dead; 1 Thessalonians. 4. v. 16.17.
come out of Grave;
You also, who alive remain,
Appear, that you may sentence have,
Of Joys, or Everlasting Pain.
The Dead shall rise, Rev. 20. v. 12. Math 24. v. 12.
and all shall stand
Astonished, at this great Command.
Souls shall their Bodies repossess;
11.
The Just with joy shall enter in;
But those who lived in wickedness,
With grief, Rev. 2^. v. 13.
reflecting on their sin;
As Bodies good, or wicked are,
They shall receive their sentence there.
When they before the Judge appear,
v. 12.
The Conscience-Book will opened be,
Wherein, as in a Crystal clear,
Each Man his good and ill shall see.
All, what lay hid before, 1. Cor. 4. v. 5.
shall then
Be open laid, to the view of men.
All what in dark, Eccli 23. v. 26.
or private place,
Was done, or what was unconfes't,
With great confusion, and disgrace,
Shall open ly, Math. 10. v. 26. Eccli. 25. v. 27.
with all the rest.
Then all shall own, there was an Eye,
From which no secret hid could ly.
The Devilish, Rev. 12. v. 10.
who is Man's great Accuser,
Will vent his Malice at that day,
As of Man's life the strict peruser,
Our faults before the Judge will lay.
All thoughts, words, deeds, which ere have been
Less virtuous, he will accuse of sin.
Thrice happy he, who has applied,
By Sacraments, Christ's precious merits,
Unto his soul, before he died:
He will not dread these wicked Spirits.
Whose tears have washed, Luke 7. v. 38, 1. Pet. 4. v. 8.
and Charity
Covered his Faults, secure shall be.
Iam 5. v 20. Luke 13. v. 5. Dan. 4. v. 24.
But he who Penance did neglect,
And with Alms did not sin redeem,
Will nothing find, him to protect,
Against the Dev'ls; but then will seem
Wholly dejected, and mute stand,
At what God shall of him demand.
It is not Power, or Eloquence,
That with the Judge will then prevail:
An humble and clear conscience,
Is then a friend that will not fail.
A virtuous Beggar, Luk 16. v. 22.
here contemned,
Will be preferred. and Kings condemned.
The Liar there shall not prevail,
The Swearer's Oath will be in vain;
All craft and Policy will fail;
Heb. 4. v. 12.13.
Deceitful Tongue will nothing gain,
Their Truth will naked open ly,
Which none shall dare then to deny.
Great Honor, Power, Prove. 11. v. 4.
and Majesty,
Wealth, Beauty, Valor, Strength, and Wit,
Will not at all regarded be;
Nothing but Virtue then shall quit.
This shall advance to high degree;
And those, will prove but Vanity.
Wisd. 5. v. 1.
The Just shall in great constancy,
Against their Persecutours stand:
v. 3.
Who sighing then most bitterly,
Will their past follies understand:
How dearly worldly Pleasures cost,
For which Eternal Joys are lost.
We, v. 4.
mad Men, did the Saints lives deem
Great madness, and their end disgrace;
Behold how God does them esteem, v. 5.

And with his dearest children place.
What does our glory now avail, v. 8.

Since of Eternal we do fail?
The Sheep, then parted from the Goats,
Shall placed be at God's right hand: Mat. 25. v. 32. v. 33.

Those pleasant, these with doleful notes,
Shall at the left with Devils stand,
Expecting Sentence, which shall sever
Them from the Just, and God for ever.
Then God unto the Just shall say,
When I was hungry, or in need, v. 35.

You Ghospell-Counsell did obey;
And, in the poor, you did me feed:
What unto them, to me you gave, v. 45.

And from me your reward shall have.
Come Blessed, v. 34.
glory now possess.
Go you Accursed to Hell fire: v. 41. v. 42.

As you on Earth were merciless,
And as your horrid Sins require, Iam 2. v. 13. Mat. 25. v. 46.

Your Lot with Dev'ls in Fire shall be;
But these shall live for ever with me.
I wish all Men would often reflect,
Upon this dreadful Judgment-Day:
Then Virtue they would not neglect,
Nor for vain pleasures go astray:
Since they account for all must give, 2. Cor. 5. v. 10.

They would be careful how they live.
This was Saint Jerome's Meditation, Hieron. de Reg. Monachor. c. 20

what e're I do, write, eat, or drink,
Upon that great day's desolation,
And God's strict Judgment I do think:
This Trumpet still sounds in my ear,
Arise you Dead, make answer here.
Thrice happy Man, who does prepare
For that most horrid dreadful day: 2. Pet. 3. v. 11.14.

Who God does serve, and sin beware,
And Penance do without delay:
While others fear, he shall rejoice,
At Trumpet sound, and Iudge's Voice.
Amen.

OF HELL.
Go ye accursed into Everlasting fire.

Math. 25. v. 41.
AS Man in part Corporeal is,
He of necessity must die: Genesis 3. v. 19. Wisd. 7. v. 1. 1. Cor. 15. v. 5^.

But when this part from grave is ris',
He Will live again Eternally.
In joy, or grief, in Heaven, or Hell;
Judgment decides where he shall dwell.
Who lived and died in wickedness,
With piercing Fire shall then be tried;
No Tongue is able to express,
What he with Dev'ls shall there abide.
What grief in soul, what pain in sense,
What knawing worm of Conscience. Isai. 66. v 24.

For as his Body shared in sin,
So shall the sense afflicted be: 2 Cor 5. v. 10.

The soul, as Actor chief therein,
Shall undergo most misery.
The pain of sense no Tongue can tell;
The pain of Loss will that excel.
God, by the Wise Man, does declare, Eccli. 39. v. 33.

In Hell there are Tormenting Spirits:
Which to revenge created are,
And punish justly to demerits:
Who have in fury fortified
Their Torments. Who shall then abide?
His fury, who has them created, v. 34.

They shall power forth without restraint:
No pain shall ever be abated,
God will not mind their sad complaint.
Hail, Fire, Famine, Death, and Scorpions, v. 35. v. 36.

Beasts teeth, and Serpents, are their Portions.
The Fire will pierce in that degree,
And so excessively torment;
That they will so enraged be,
As their own Flesh to gnaw and rent; Rev. 16. v. 10.

They Will curse the hour, which life first gave,
And wish the Womb had been their Grave. Mat. 26. v. 24.

The Lord's great Day, says Malachy, Malae ^. v. 1.

Shall like a fiery furnace flame;
When all the Proud, like straw, shall be,
Consumed to ashes, in the same: v. 3.

The Humble shall tread them in fire,
Who did on Earth so high aspire.
The wanton and Luxurious Man,
Shall fiery Serpents there embrace; Eccli. 39. v. 36.

Who greedy after Riches ran,
Shall come to want, shame, and disgrace.
The Envious Man shall pine away,
To think of others happy day.
The Furious Man the Fire shall tame,
His Oaths and Curses none shall dread;
The Lving Tongue shall come to Shame,
The Slothful shall with Want be fed.
The Glutton there, Luk 16. v. 24.
through burning Thirst,
Shall judge his case to be the worst.
The Atheist, then a God will find;
So also will the Temporiser,
Who held belief of any kind,
To save his Wealth; true Faith's despiser.
All then shall own, what Scripture says,
There Is but one God, Ephesians. 4. v. 5.
and one true Faith.
Themselves in vain they will condemn, Wisd. 5. v. 7.8.13.

That for vain Honor, Riches, Wealth,
The Laws of God they did contemn,
With virtue, Isai 66. v. 24. Mark. 9. v. 44.46.48.
and their ghostly Health.
These thoughts, like Worm, will knawingly,
In Conscience, and shall never die.
They Will also think upon their loss
Of Heaven, and Vision of their God;
How for vain pleasures, pelf, and dross,
They under foot true Riches trod.
Virtue and Grace, with Glory here,
As base, by them contemned were.
They Will envy then the happiness,
The Riches, Glory, and the Joys,
Which the Blessed Saints with God possess:
All which they lost for childish toys.
Against themselves they will complain, Wisd. 5. v. 3.4.

Most bitterly: but all in vain.
We spent our lives in Vanity,
The thought of God we cast away;
We followed base Iniquity, Isai. 22. v. 13.

And nere thought on this dreadful Day:
The way of God we still did slight,
Of future Glory we made light.
Then will the Devils them upbraid,
With their perverse and wicked will,
Which God contemned, and them obeyed,
Their pleasures ready to fulfill.
Their service now they will requite,
With Torments, Malice, Envy, Spite.
This thought will most of all torment,
That this sad state must always last:
And after many Ages spent,
There Is not an Hour with them yet past.
Rev. 20. v. 10.
Their Term is long Eternity,
Which never will diminisht be.
Eternity who can conceive?
It neither Middle has, nor End:
It Is still beginning, nere does leave
That station, tho it seems to tend
Forwards, it stands still at a stay;
And nere diminishes a day.
If those damned Souls could be but sure,
That, after forty thousand years,
The Torments, which they do endure,
Should end, it would abate their tears,
And comfort bring amidst their pain,
To think it would not still remain.
But when this comes into their minds,
Mat. 25. v 46. Rev. 14. v 11. Revel. 20. v. 10.
They fuffer must Eternally:
No ease, or comfort they can find,
But unto one another cry,
How long must we endure? For ever.
When will our Surrows end? Oh never.
No, no. As long as God is God,
So long in sorrows they must stay:
And feel the fury of his Rod,
Heb. 10. v. 31. Romans 2. v. 6.
Because they would not here obey.
It Is dreadful in God's hand to fall,
Whose Justice spares none at all.
Wisd. 19. v. 1.
No pity then can move his heart,
All Mercy there is laid aside:
And Justice plays its rigorous part:
Oh! what must Sinners then abide:
Thrice happy is that Man, who here
Does Mercy seek, and Justice fear.
Prove. 8. v. 13. Eccl. 1. v. 27.28.
This Fear will keep the soul from sin,
And if you should chance to offend,
Repentance will God's Mercy win:
Thus sinners may make happy End.
Prayer, Fasting, Tob. 12. v. 8.
Alms-deeds sin redeem,
And bring the soul in God's esteem.
It Is not because you Sinners are,
You must in Hell with Devils ly:
But that, while here, you take no care,
To seek God's Mercy ere you die.
Do Penance, Ezech. 33. v. 15 16.
while on Earth you dwell:
Mercy will save your soul from Hell.
Amen.

OF PURGATORY.
The Fire shall try every man's work; whose work burns, he shall suffer loss:
yet shall be saved, as by fire.

1. Cor. 3.13.15.
GOd, just and strict account will take,
Mat. 12. v. 16.
Of every idle Word we speak:
And we account to him must make,
Of the least Precept we do break.
Some sins are greater, Mat. 5. v. 23.
some are less;
There are degrees in wickedness.
Which damn the soul, we Mortal call;
But those, which kill not, Venial are:
There Is punishment for great and small;
But all do not bear equal share:
For Mortal, pains will ever last:
For Venial, pains will once be past.
The place to punish Mortal sin
Is Hell, Math. 25. v. 46.
from whence there is no Redemption;
What Is Venial, also's purged in
Like fire; but yet with this exemption,
1. Cor. 3. v. 15.
Souls here will be no longer stayed,
Than they have their last Farthing paid,
Besides the Pain for Venial Sin,
Men Satisfaction here must make,
Far greater, who have careless been,
Penance on Earth to undertake.
For ofttimes when the Sin's remitted,
All temp'rall Punishment's not quitted.
2. King. 12. v. 13.
To David God did pardon give,
Yet he received this Punishment:
Thy Child, says Nathan, v. 14.
shall not live,
God did his Sin so much resent.
v. 10.
The Sword shall plague thy Family,
This shall thy temp'rall Penance be.
Ps 6. v. 7.
King David wept both day and night,
And so on Earth did satisfy;
But who does here true Penance slight,
Must there in Fire and Torments ly.
Mat. 5. v. 26.27.
And he so long must there abide,
Till Justice be full satisfied.
Not all who there are purged, shall
Continue equal time in the fire:
But some, according to Saint Paul,
Less time than others shall require;
As they have greater Sinners been,
So they will be detained therein.
Some, 1. Cor. 3. v. 12.
says this Saint, do raise their building,
With silver, gold, and precious stone;
Some others, to Temptation yielding,
With wood, v. 12.
hay, stubble: which does own,
Some Sins require less Purging may,
As stubble's sooner burnt then hay.
But yet, Upon the 37. Psalm
Saint Austin does advise,
No one to slight this Fire, because,
It Is said that he who purging lies,
His Sins shall be consumed like straws.
For tho that Fire's not so extensive,
Yet as Hellfire it is intensive;
Equally piercing, tho its shorter.
Yet were the Torment, but one day,
Less painful were the greatest torture,
That ever on the Martyrs lay:
For join together all Torments here,
As nothing, they will to those appear.
Our Fire, thar's dreadful unto all,
Compared to that, would but appear
Like painted fire upon the wall,
Which Men of Reason do not fear.
Here, Minutes short, long days do seem,
And every Hour, an Age they deem.
Besides the Fire, like Torments are
To those which punish Sin in Hell,
Excepting, here they have no Despair,
Like those which there for ever dwell.
This keeps them from Blaspheming Rage,
God's pleasure is in this their gage.
If those refining torments are
So great: whose pity can permit
Poor souls to suffer? since by Prayer,
And other Works, they may be quit;
Which, daily off'red, do not fail,
But with God's Mercy do prevail.
This made, as sacred Scripture says,
2. Macch. 12. v. 43.
Great Judas send to the Holy City,
To pray for those, who died in Faith,
Fearing their case required pity.
It is a wholesome, v. 46.
and good thought,
To pray for the Dead, as there is taught.
Who then can so ungodly be,
Them not to help, in what he may.
If any one a dog should see,
In such like pains, if any way
He could relieve him, he would try.
Shall souls in Fire then help-less ly?
In Job consider their sad cry:
Job. 19. v. 21.
Have mercy you who Friends have been,
Be^old how we in Fire do ly,
For small neglect, and Venial Sin.
The Lord's just hand afflicts thus,
Have mercy Friends, and pray for us.
You Children, v. 22.
who feed on our Flesh,
Whom we brought up by sweat of brow.
You Poor also, our souls refresh,
We pitty'd you; Pray for us now.
v. 22.
Why do you persecute like God?
He whips: you will not withold the Rod.
Have mercy on us, for God's sake,
Whose Friends we are; tho now in pain,
And for your own sakes pity take;
By Prayer our freedom seek to gain,
And when before God we appear,
We Will pray for you, who helped us here.
Dear Friends, great love you did profess,
As living; now be to us kind,
And help us in our great distress;
Lest out of sight, prove out of mind:
Prove. 17. v. 17.
Remember that a Friend in need,
Does prove himself a Friend in deed.
O Children dear, have you forgot,
That you are our own Flesh and Blood?
That we did still contrive and plot,
How to advance your Wealth and good.
And now, when we are in distress,
Will you prove to us comfortless?
We suffer, for your sakes, in part,
That we through your excessive love,
Eccls. 2. v* 19.
Too much on gain did set our heart:
And will you now nngratefull prove?
Oh help us in our sufferings here,
Or else God's Judgments justly fear.
All you, who taste our Charity,
And Alms receive from us, or Friend,
In justice you obliged be,
To pray for us: for to that end,
You do receive, Luk 16. v. 9.
and we it gave,
That we your helping Prayer might have.
Do not, as too much is the use,
Our alms receive, and only say
Lord help him: This is an abuse.
You for us often are bound to pray.
Of this God strict account will take*
And you must satisfaction make.
All faithful Christians pity take,
Upon us, in our misery;
And for us intercession make:
For thus you're bound in Charity;
Luk^ 16. v. 9.
Then when you suffer in this kind,
You helping friends will also find.
Io. 9. v. 4.
We can not now our selves relieve,
That state with us is come and past,
But you may to us comfort give,
By Prayer, Alms, and holy Fast.
God's Justice thus you will appease,
And through his Mercy give us ease.
Kindly receive admonishment,
From us, before it is too late:
Your sins, on Earth, truly repent,
Do works, which open Heaven's gate,
Make satisfaction, and nere fear,
That you shall be confined here.
And since sin's malice is so great,
As contradicting God's blessed will:
Mat. 5. v. 27. Luke 12. v. 59.
That Venial sins God thus does treat,
His pleasure in the least fulfill.
Slight not, and say the sin's but small,
What brings you here, don't little call.
Do not, as some will vainly say,
Would I in Purgatory were.
You cannot conceive, what we do pay
For small offense in Torments here.
Which justly may compared be,
To Hell's: except Eternity.
If you so choice, and tender are,
That when you chance to burn your hand,
You roar, and after do beware
The Fire; by this you understand,
What Pain 'twould be, if, for a day,
The whole in fiery furnace lay.
What would you give your self to free?
Whole Kingdoms, if 'twere in your power,
The Pains would be in that degree,
That tho they were but for an hour,
To quit your self, you would keep a Fast,
In bread and water to the last.
Why do you then so slight set by
These Torments? which, without compare,
Exceed those: which none can deny,
And yet in time will not beware;
But, for a little Flesh-delight,
Will venture this, come wrong, come right.
And rather than to undergo
A little Penance, while you're here,
Will be to Soul so great a Foe,
To cast it in those Torments there.
Be wise, Ps. 118. v. 59.
take warning, here repent,
Lest in that Fire your soul relent.
While you are here, Fast, Watch, and Pray,
Give Alms; at Crosses don't repine:
With tears of grief wash sin away,
With Fire of Love, your soul refine.
Thus you will to God pass, through this Fire,
Like gold, 1. Cor. 3. v. 14.
and will no Purge require.
Amen.

OF HEAVEN.
Come ye Blessed of my Father, possess a Kingdom.

Math. 25.34.
THe final End of Man's Creation,
Was his Creator God to join:
To whom in soul he has relation,
Which does his Love to him incline.
He Is like to him, in some degree,
One soul; in Powers a Trinity.
Genesis 1. v. 27.
This soul God does in Body place,
Corrupted Nature to correct.
To which he gives the light of grace,
In way of Virtue to direct.
Iud. 1. v. 4. 1. Cor. 15. v. 10.
Some do this grace most vainly slight,
Some use it for a guiding light.
The first, for want of light, do fall,
Into the precipice of Hell.
The other, God at Death does call
To Heaven, with him in joys to dwell.
Come bless't, possess a Kingdom here,
Repleat with joy, and void of Fear.
How great these lasting joys will be,
1. Cor. 2 v. 9.
No Tongue is able to express,
No Ear ere heard, or Eye did see
The like, which they do there possess.
No Heart of Man can full conceive,
The glory which the Saints receive.
This Kingdom, in the Revelations,
Rev. 21 v. 18. v. 19.
Is termed a City of pure gold,
Where precious Stones are twelve foundations,
That do a glorious Wall uphold.
Which Wall is made of precious Stone,
Twelve Gates, v. 21.
a Margarite each one.
The streets with purest gold are paved,
Which is inlayd with precious stone:
Christ in the midst, c. 22. v. 1.
who Mankind saved,
Does sit upon a glorious Throne,
From whence does run a River clear,
Which does refresh all living here.
v. 2.
A Tree of Life does by it grow,
Which brings forth most delicious fruit,
c. 21. v. 27.
That place does no uncleaness know,
No jars; or strife do with it suit.
All there in Peace and Love do live,
To the Meek, Mat. 5. v. 4.
God does this Kingdom give.
It Is always day, Rev. 21. v. 25. c 22. v. 5. v. 23.
they fear no night,
It Is pleasant Springtime all the year:
The Holy Lamb's their shining light,
Who gloriously does there appear.
Although, on Earth, he was obscured,
By scorn, and Death, which he endured.
Even so his Saints, who here endured
Shame, Want, Disgrace, and bitter Pain,
Are there of like Rewards assured:
As were their suffr'ings, so's their Gain.
Romans 8. v. 17
As they for Christ did suffer here,
So they will be rewarded there.
The Apostles, who in Charity,
Their lives in labors spent and pain,
To bring men from Idolatry,
And Souls from Satan's flock did gain;
Mat. 13. v. 43.
In Heaven shall like the Sun appear,
Who were such lights to Sinners here.
The Martyrs here, in Bloody die,
Who covered were with Wounds and scars,
Shall there appear triumphantly,
Like glorious Champions come from Wars
Rev. 7. v. 9. ^
With Palms in hands, and Laurel boughs,
Wreathed like Crowns upon their brows.
Those Wounds, like Rubies, then shall shine,
And glorious in their Flesh appear,
4. Esd. 7. v. 55.
Their faces then will seem divine,
To Christ their Captain they will draw near,
Rev. 4. v. 10.11.
And praises sing Eternally,
To him who gave them Victory.
The pure chaste Virgins, clothed in white,
Rev. 14. v. 4.
Shall still upon the Lamb attend;
Their Bodies chaste, with glory bright,
A fragant savor forth will send,
They Will there wear Crowns of Victory,
Obtained against Carnality.
Iam. 1. v. 12.
All shall with glory crowned be,
And placed among the Angels there,
Io. 14. v. 2. Rev. 19. v. 1.
Each Man shall sit in his degree,
According as his Merits were.
where they shall with the Angels sing.
Praise be to God, our Heavenly King.
Above the rest, in glory great,
Resplendent as the sun shall sit,
The Queen of Heaven, in glorious seat,
At Christ's right hand, as does befit.
Since he from her his Flesh did take,
In glory he will her Part'ner make.
As they their Bodies did chastize,
With Watching Labor, 2. Cor. 4. v 8 9.10. c 6. v. 5. 2. Tim. 4. v. 8.
Pains, and Fasting,
They glorious shall from Death arise,
And share in glory Everlasting.
What joy will soul and Body have,
When she rejoyns it from the Grave.
This Mortal Body, says Saint Paul,
1. Cor 15. v. 54.
Shall put on Immortality,
Tho here it suff'red, then it shall
Put on impassibility.
Mat. 13. v. 43. Wisd. 3. v. 7.
With Beauty it will glorious shine,
What Is Earthly, God will then refine.
Agility will make it quick,
And, Sampson-like it will be strong,
Still healthful, it will nere be sick,
Rev. 21. v. 4.
Pain will no more to it belong.
And it shall have security,
Of a most blessed Eternity.
Esaias declares, c. 25. v. 6. Luke 22. v. 29.
that God will make
A sumptuous Feast in this great day.
Where all delights, they will partake,
Which he shall there before them lay.
Rev. 19. v. 9. Luke 12. v. 37.
Saint John does this, Lamb's supper call,
Where Christ himself shall serve them all.
No pleasant thing shall wanting be,
Unto the very Body's senses:
God's hand to them will be so free,
And lib rall in his recompenses.
Mat. 19. v. 29.
An hundred -- fold they shall receive,
For any Pleasure they did leave,
This joy and glory of the Flesh,
Divines do Accidental call,
But that which does the soul refresh,
1. Cor. 13. v. 12. Mat. 25. v. 21.
Divines do term Essential.
This does consist in the clear Vision
Of God, and in his full Fruition.
By that we do, with Cherubins,
The Essence of God clearly see:
By this we are with Seraphins,
Inflamed with love, and charity:
This Love Divines Fruition name;
Ps. 35. v. 9.
God does absorp them in the same.
By this their Vision, they do see
Not only all that God did make,
But also the Divinity,
And of his knowledge they partake.
They see how God is Three, 1. Io. 3. v. 2.
and One,
This is Beatitude alone.
Coloss. 1.^.16.17.
As God does in himself contain
All things created here below,
He represents them again;
And thus the Saints do come to know,
What we desire in heart, or say,
And then for us Poor Sinners Pray.
Besides their Knowledge, they possess
All pleasure, Isai. 64. v. 4.
that their heart can crave:
Knowledge alone were comfortless,
If they Fruition should not have.
Yet no one God can clearly see,
But must him join in charity.
True Honor, Power, Glory, Wealth,
In God, as in their Fountain, be,
Peace, Pleasure, Joy, Content, and Health,
He is their full Felicity.
They cannot wish for ought in mind,
Romans 11. v. 3.
Which in their God they do not find.
Tho some in glory greater be,
Io. 14. v. 2. 1 Cor. 15. v. 41.
Yet none does envy others state,
Each one's content in his degree.
There all do love, and none do hate.
Who Is placed in lowest seat,
Is joy'd to see the other great.
Luke 6. v. 38.
All Souls have there o'reflowing measure,
As they are capable they are filled.
For there is an Ocean of true pleasure.
All Is granted there, what ere is willed.
If you will be capable of more,
Gal. 6. v. 9.10.
While here, be sure you lay up store.
Ps. 35. v. 9.
The Powers of the Soul, all three,
Are satisfied: the Understanding
Is filled with light, and Verity:
The Will, which here is still commanding,
Shall be content: and Memory
Filled with secure Eternity.
As this the Damned does most torment,
That their Pains ended will be never:
So this the Saints does most content,
To think their Joys shall last for ever.
To them a Hell's Eternity;
To these their great Felicity.
Since God has put these in our power,
Eccli. 15. v. 17.
And Life and Death before us set;
Let us be wise, and, every hour,
Endeavor to discharge Sin's debt.
That we grim Death may never fear,
Nor to the Judge then to appear.
It is neglect, and want of care,
Ier. 12. v. 11. ^. Esdr. ^. v. 16.
That brings so many to the Devil;
While living, men will not beware,
Sin to avoid, and what is evil.
Much less do they attend to good,
As if they nothing understood.
Take then the counsel, Eccli. 7. v. 40. Deuteronomy. 32. v. 29.
that I gave,
Your four last Ends still bear in mind.
This will secure you to the Grave,
At Judgment you shall comfort find,
You will avoid the Pains of Hell,
And with your God in Heaven shall dwell.
Amen.

SAINT MARY MAGDALEN'S LIFE.
The First Part, to her Conversion.
WHen God the World did first create,
Genesis 1. v. 14.
And parted Night from Day:
Two great and glorious Lights he made,
To guide Men in their way.
The greater Light was called the Sun,
Which to the Day gave light:
The lesser, that is the Moon, v. 16.
was made
To guide Men in the Night.
The Sun's great light does men direct,
That they may danger fly:
The Moon gives light in darksom Night,
That who in danger ly,
May by her light escape the same,
And thus be freed from fears,
Which do the dark, and Night attend,
Until the Sun appears.
Thus when God re-created Man,
From Death of Sin set free:
Two Lights he placed in's Holy Church,
Guides for poor Man to be.
The first is Christ, Zach. 3. v. 8.
that Orient Sun,
Who, by his conversation,
Gave light, Io 8. v. 12.
and taught the perfect way,
Which leads to Salvation.
The second for poor Sinners was,
Who erring from the first,
In danger of Damnation lay,
A state of all the worst.
For Sin, Job. 15. v. 16.
tho it seems sweet at first,
While it is short joy does last,
It leaves grief, sorrow, and remorse,
When that delight is past.
Which often lead into Despair,
Rom 6. v. 23.
And so unto the Devil;
Except the Soul be taught the Art,
To draw good out of evil.
This lesser Light was Magdalen;
To Moon compared: and she
Was once Eclips't by Sin, and thus,
Did not the danger see.
For as the Moon from Sun has light,
So when the Earth's between,
The Moon's obscured, because she is
By Sun no longer seen.
So God, the Light of Mary's Soul,
By earthly Carnal Love,
Was parted from her, and through Sin,
Did grace's light remove.
But when the Sun of Justice rose,
Malac. 4. v 1. Luke 1. v. 78.
And in this World appeared,
With Mercy he did her behold,
And from Sin's darkness cleared:
And set her up a Light to be,
To all in sinful state:
That they by her example might
Repent, before too late.
And never more return to Sin.
But perfectly Christ join:
As she did, after, lead on Earth
A pure Life, and divine.
No one of Pardon may despair,
Or to recover grace:
Since Magdalen a Sinner great
In glory has a place.
Although their Night be perfect dark,
And danger great appears;
When this full Moon reflects her light,
'Twill free the heart from fears.
For tho the first part of her life
With Sin was dark as Night:
The other part Moon-like does give
To Sinners guiding light.
Which if they follow, it will bring
Them out of darksom Sin,
To Christ, the Sun of Justice bright,
A new life to begin.
Saint Luke, c. 7. v. 37.
who her Conversion writ,
Calls her the City-Sinner,
Who touched with sorrow ran to Christ,
v. 36.
Where he was sat at dinner.
Who, Mark. 16 v. 9.
as Saint Mark affirms, did cast
Out of her seven Devils:
For she had been addicted much
Unto all sorts of evils.
Saint Gregory does call these Devils
The seven Deadly Sins:
To which she long time slave had been,
But now her freedom wins.
And now, Romans 5. v. 20.
where Sin did once abound,
Grace also does abound;
She makes Vice Virtue's Instrument,
She Pardon sought, and found.
On Sin she once had placed her love,
To Christ she now it gave:
Love was her Death, Love was her Life,
Thus freed was Sathan's Slave.
Her Senses, and her Members too,
Which she to Sin did use,
She now makes Instruments to grace,
And forth her Pardon sues.
Her Ears, which unto lewd discourse
Before were wholly bent,
She now lends to Christ's words most sweet,
Which made her heart relent.
Her Feet, which ran before to sin,
She does employ to find
Her now beloved and dear Lord,
That she may ease her mind.
And hearing where at Meat he sat, Luke 7. v. 37.

She boldly did appear:
And feared not expelled to be, 1. Io. 4. v. 18.

Love had expelled and Fear.
She who did use to take first place,
Now humbly stands behind
Her Lord, and, with tears in her Eyes, Luk 7. v. 38.

Unto his Feet inclined.
Those Eyes, which with their wanton looks,
Lament. 3. v. 51.
Of Grace had robbed her soul,
Shed Flood, which washed her Saviors Feet,
Who was to make her whole.
Her golden Locks, which had enslaved
Poor souls in Cupid's snare,
Luk 7. v. 38.
To wipe the Feet of her dear Lord,
She used as Towell rare.
Her Lips, which had sin's poison sucked,
And placed it in her Heart,
v. 38.
Continued kissing Christ's chaste Feet,
And from them would not part.
Until she had on them poured forth
Her ointments rich and sweet,
Which caused her Lord most merciful,
With Mercy her to greet.
Woman, v. 50.
thy sins I do remit.
Go: homeward now repair,
Because thou love much, v. 47.
thy sins,
Tho many, pard'ned are.
What Joy these words did cause in her,
No Tongue can well express,
Nor Heart conceive, except her own,
It was to that excess.
Learn here, Poor Soul, of Magdalen,
How to return to God,
To free thy self from Sin's great load,
And Justice heavy Rod.
First Ear give unto Gospel word,
Inspired or taught by Tongue:
With Mary run thy Lord to seek,
And Penance not prolong.
Hate Sin, love JESUS, and declare
The Sorrow that is within,
By outward Tears, pressed from the Heart,
Through thy deep sense of Sin.
Employ thy hair, that is, thy goods,
Christ's Feet, the Poor, to feed,
Tob. 12. v. 9.
Fear not, but Alms will thee relieve,
And help in time of need.
Pour forth thy ointments, that is, cast out
True Virtue's fragrant Smell,
Which will raise up thy Soul above,
In Heavenly Joys to dwell.
Give Kiss of Peace to Christ, that is,
Hate Sin, commit no more,
And Christ will thee his Blessing give,
Luke 7. v. 50.
And Peace to thee restore.
Grant, JESU, that we Magdalen's
Steps of Repentance trace,
And as we followed her in Sin,
May follow her to grace.
Dear Magdalen, for JESU'S sake,
Pray unto him for me,
That in this life, in all distress,
My Helper thou may be.
THE SECOND PART.
Containing her life after her conversion unto Christ's Ascension.
BEhold the change of Mary's Life,
Which first to Sin was bent.
In service of her Master dear,
Was after wholly spent.
We never read she sinned again,
But followed her dear Lord,
Administering to him, Mark. 15. v. 41. Luk 10. v. 39.
and his,
Attending to his word.
Luke 10. v. 39. v. 40.
Which sitting at his Feet to hear,
Her Sister did complain
Of her, as idle: but her Lord
Would have her there remain.
Say'ng Martha, thou art busied much,
v. 41.
And do declare thy Heart,
Dressing my Meat, but Mary here,
v. 42.
Has chose the better part.
Her brother being sick, she sent
Io. 11. v. 3.
To let Christ know the same;
Say'ing; whom thou love is sick; and he
v. 7.
With his Disciples came.
She met him, and, as she did use,
v. 32.
Fell down before his Feet,
With Kisses from a loving Heart,
She did her dear Lord greet.
Where she renewed her Tears again,
And so much did lament;
That Christ shed Tears with her, v. 35.
and thence
Unto the Grave he went.
Say'ng, Lazarus, arise, v 43.
come forth;
He rose up suddenly,
To the great joy of sisters both,
And all the standers by.
Dear Mary, shed these tears for me,
That I in Bliss may rest,
Since they prevailed with God to weep,
And grant thee thy request.
In gratitude, before Christ's Death,
She brought rich ointments, Io. 12. v. 3. v. 5.
worth
Three hundred pence: and as he sat,
On's Head she poured them forth.
At this the Traitor Judas grieved;
And said, v. 4. Mark. 14. v. 4.
why this excess?
What she deemed little, he thought much,
Who prized his Master less,
Mat. 26. v. 15.
When he sold him for thirty pence:
O Judas! tell me why
Thou did not ask her, who'ld give more
Before her Lord should die?
When Christ was nailed unto the Cross,
And all his friends were fled,
Io. 19. v. 25.
Mary stood constant weeping by,
With sorrow almost dead.
When dead, she helped to take him down,
And in the Tomb to lay:
Then marking well the Tomb, Mark. 15. v. 47.
she went
To keep the Sabbath Day.
But little rest sad Mary found,
Reflecting on her Lord.
No meat, no drink, or sleep, I judge,
She did her self afford.
Early, next morn, Mark. 16. v. 1.
with Marys two,
She took her ointments dear:
To give her Lord the last farewell,
The Guards she did not fear.
Nor who should roll away the stone,
v. 4.
Which passed much their strength.
Love gave her wings, Love gave her will,
Love brought her joy at length.
But lo, Mary, a second grief!
Lik. 24. v. 3.
The Body is not here;
The Tomb is open: some have stolen
Away my Lord I fear.
Cheer up, Mary, An Angel asks,
Woman, Io. 20. v. 13.
why do thou weep?
I know not where they have laid my Lord,
Which wounds my heart full deep.
v. 2.
She runs and tells his Brethren this,
Peter and John ran fast,
And found what she had said was true,
And back again they past.
But Mary still stood weeping at
The Tomb: v. 11.
would not depart,
Where her Lord's Body last was laid,
She had entombed her heart.
No longer could Christ's clemency
Forbear, but did appear.
v. 15.
Say'ng Woman why do you thus weep,
And whom do you seek here?
She took him for a Gardener, by
His habit, v. 15.
and replies:
If thou him took'st, I Will fetch him back,
Tell me but where he lies.
Christ seeing Mary's loving tears,
No longer could conceal
Himself, but opened Mary's eyes,
And did himself reveal.
MARY, v. 16.
says Christ. She knew him then,
And, Rabby, she replied:
She saw he was no Gardener, but
Her Lord, who for her died.
And fell down at her usual place,
His Feet to kiss: but see!
New grief! Her Lord denies her this,
Say'ng; v. 17.
Woman, touch not me:
v. 17.
But go and tell my Brothers dear,
That I again do live;
Mat. 28. v. 7.10.
In Galily they shall me see,
Where I will blessing give.
Mary obeys, and in the way,
v. 9.
Christ lets her kiss his feet.
Love made him first appear to her,
Her Love with Love did meet.
How often to her Christ did appear,
The Scripture does not tell;
10. 11. v. 5.
But we may judge it often was,
For he loved Mary well.
And when to Heaven he did ascend,
Act. 1. v. 14.
Mary was with the rest,
When Holy Ghost he promis't them,
And his Beloved Bless't.
Behold how Mary served her Lord,
And never did depart
From him, in Joy, or Misery:
So constant was her Heart.
Grant, JESUS dear, for Magd'len's sake,
That I adhere to Thee,
In Life, and Death, and that her Prayr's
True Joy may bring to me.
Dear Mother, Look in the old Hymn at Lauds.
beg this of your Lord,
As you did for your Brother;
That in this Life he will give me grace,
And glory in the other.
THE THIRD PART.
Containing the rest of her life, after Christ's Ascension to her death.
You Will say. While Christ was here on Earth,
Mary was led in hand.
Now he is gone, and out of sight,
Let Us see how she does stand.
Io. 11. v. 44.
Christ raising Laz'rus up from Death,
Confirmed his doctrine so,
How to defame, and blast the same,
The Jews no longer know.
Io. 12. v. 10.
To kill him therefore they resolve,
But God permitting not;
How to destroy the family,
They next contrive and plot.
The brother, sisters, and some more,
They put into a boat,
Without Sails, Oars, or any guide,
Upon the Sea to float.
Intending to destroy them thus,
of humane help deprived
But, by God's Providence, they all
Safe at Marselles arrived
Where Magdalen began to preach,
One God and Savior dear:
Such Doctrine these poor Heathens blind
Before did never hear.
From Idols many turned were,
By word, and works, she wrought.
Till at the last they would adore
Her, for the God she taught.
Which made her beg of God, to take
Her from the praise of men.
Conveyed she was by Angels hands,
Into a lonely Den.
Where never Man, or Woman, she
Beheld for thirty years:
Her meat was what the Mount did yield,
Her drink was wrought by tears.
For shedding tears for her past sins,
And Death of Master; here,
Immediately at her request,
Sprung up a Fountain clear.
To keep fresh in her memory,
Her dear Lord's death, and loss,
She begs some Instrument of God:
An Angel brings a Cross.
She spent her life in tears of love,
And heavenly Contemplation:
Her Heart curs't Satan nere could move,
With any vain Temptation.
Christ, her dear Lord, could nere forget,
This his dear Penitent:
But to her, seven times a day,
His glorious Angels sent.
Who by their virtue raised her up,
Into the air so high;
That with a ravished Soul she heard,
The Heavenly Harmony.
And in that space of thirty years,
As Mary lived there,
Her Lord an hundred and ten times,
Did gloriously appear.
What ravishments he gave her then
Of Joy, and what excess,
Excells Man's fancy to conceive,
Or Tongue well to express.
God, willing now that Magdalen,
In soul, this World should leave,
Revealed her: who, from Maximin,
Christ's Body did receive.
And being thus prepared for Death,
Her Soul left presently
Her Mortal Body, and, with wings
Of Love, to God did fly.
Where now with him she does remain,
In joy of Heavenly Bliss,
Become a Patroness for those,
Who here have done amiss.
Behold the Soul of Magdalen,
At first defiled with sin,
Refined by Love, and purged by tears,
At last did Heaven win.
Let no poor Sinner then despair,
Of Mercy here, and Grace,
If Mary's Life he will imitate,
And her rare Virtues trace.
This let him beg of God, in faith
Of JESUS Passion dear,
And merits of this glorious Saint,
Whose Prayers he will ever hear.
Blessed Mary, my poor love accept,
And be to me a Mother;
Pray, in this Life, God's Grace I have,
And Glory in the other.
Amen.

THE LIFE OF THE SERAPHICALL FATHER S. FRANCIS, IN VERSE. DIVIDED INTO THREE
PARTS.
The First Part, to the making of his Rule.
GOd made Man's nature innocent,
Adorned with Free Will,
Gen 4. v. 7. Eccli. 15. v. 17. Genesis 2. v. 17.
And gave him one Commandment,
His pleasure to fulfill.
To break it Death, to keep it Life,
Was, for Eternity:
And while on Earth, void of all strife,
And human misery.
Luke 10. v. 18. Rev. 12. v. 9.12.
Curs't Satan, who from glory fell,
Did hate Man's happy state,
Made for his place in joy to dwell,
Where once this proud Fiend sat.
Wisd. 2. v. 24. Genesis 3. v. 4.
And to deprive him of his Bliss,
He tempts the fruit to take.
Thou shall not die: it is not amiss;
Do but experience make.
Man, yielding to his Wife's desire,
v. 6. Romans 5. v. 12.
Made that unhappy taste,
Incurred for him, and his, Hellfire,
Who here on Earth were placed,
Environed with misery,
In Reason blinded so;
They fell into Idolatry,
Their God they did not know.
For this, and many other sins,
Gen 6. v. 7. v. 8.
God thought all men to kill:
Just Noah, for his, God's Mercy wins,
Who always did his will.
Genesis 15. v. 13. Exodus 1. v. 14. Exodus 3. v. 10.
Soon after they returned to sin,
The Egyptians them inthrall'd:
God Moses sent their hearts to win,
For Mercy they then called.
Exodus 14. v. 2^. Exodus 20. Exodus ^6. v. 4 13.
By the Red sea they all were freed;
Commands he gave them ten:
Whom Moses did in Desert feed,
And brought them back again,
Unto the Land of Promise, which
Iosue. 3. v. 17.
With milk and honey flowed,
Where they became a Nation rich,
In blessings there bestowed.
Here they did oftentimes rebel,
Against their God most high:
Judge 2. v. 12.17.
And by the Serpents craft they fell,
Into Idolatry:
They often for this chastized were,
4. King. 25. v. 11.
And into Bondage led;
Some were corrected by dread fear,
Ps. 77. v. 14.
When others were struck dead.
But Vice with men did still renew,
Till our Redeemer came;
And laid it open to the view,
Which caused in men a shame.
And by his Virtues rare did win
Them Virtue here to love,
Which drew their hearts from filthy Sin,
Now fixed on God above.
And when for Adam's fault he died;
And freed from sin and Hell;
He formed a Church out of his side,
Where Men secure might dwell:
Not fearing Sathan's strength, 1. Tim. 3. v. 15.
or sleights,
Again them to deceive,
He left therein such guiding Lights,
If they would to them cleave.
The Ark of Noah prefigur'd this,
Genesis 7. v. 1.23.
Which saved all Souls within;
But who to enter here did miss,
Did perish in their sin.
v. 23.
So those who in God's Church abide,
Pure in their conversation,
1. Tim. 3. v. 15.
And from that Faith do never slide,
Find therein true salvation.
But after Christ was gone, Alas!
And his Apostles dead:
2. Petr. 2. v. 1.2. v. 13. v. 10.18. Iud. v. 19. v. 12.
He and the Truth blasphemed was;
Men, by their senses led,
Forsook their Faith, and doing good,
And running to all vice,
Trod under foot Christ's precious Blood,
Which was their Soul's great price.
At this God was offended sore;
Saint John reveals the same,
Rev. 7. v. 1.
He power gave to Angels four,
Whom he sent in his Name,
To punish men, by sea, and Land,
Destroying all therein,
For Man's offense, who now did stand
Defiled with heinous sin.
But God, who is still to Mercy bent,
Once more was pacified:
Another Moses here was sent,
Among us to abide.
Who by his Life was to renew
Christ's Passion in our mind:
And lay his Life unto our view,
That we might Virtue find.
Another Angel, v. 2.
says Saint John,
I saw come from the East,
Who cried unto the four, hurt none,
Sea, Earth, Trees, Fish, or Beast,
Until in the forehead, with the Cross,
v. 3.
I Have signed God's servants dear:
Teaching by sin what heavy loss,
What comfort's in God's fear.
Poor Francis of Assise was he,
Born rich, a Merchants son,
With other youth at first too free,
In pleasures he did run.
Yet to the Poor in charity,
He always did increase:
Which caused him to elected be,
God's Anger to appease.
Lo! How God, Sinners, of all Men
Chose, Sinners to recall.
King David, Peter, Magdalen,
And Francis last of all.
As fittest Patterns here to win
Them to Repentance by:
Assuring them, Ezech 13. v. 15.16.
if they will leave Sin,
They in his Love shall die.
You may him well an Angel call;
For his chaste Life and pure:
From which he never more did fall,
It always did endure.
Seraphicall, for his great Love,
Does Holy Church him name,
From Seraphins, who burn above,
Absorp't in Love's great flame.
He had the Sign of God above,
Rev. 7. v. 2.
As after did appear,
The Wounds that Christ had for our love,
He in his Flesh did bear.
He signed all men in th'forehead deep,
Renewing in their mind
Christ's Passion; and his deadly sleep,
He suffered for Mankind.
While yet a Merchants Life he led,
An Alms was begged, but he
Denied to give, as busied,
Tho other times most free.
Lo! he runs after speedily,
(As pity did him move)
And gave, with Vow nere to deny,
Ought asked for God's Love.
Another begs, who was full bare,
He knew him nobly born;
He gave the clothes which he did wear,
And put on his all torn.
These acts of pity moved God so,
That Francis Mercy wins,
For Charity conceals, 1. Petr. 4. v. 8.
you know,
A multitude of Sins.
Next night in sleep, Christ did appear,
And showed where Jewels were.
Says: These are for my soldiers here,
Who Holy Cross do bear.
He strait prepares for The Holy Land,
Where Soldiers wore a Cross;
He did not Visions understand,
And thus was at a loss.
Till Christ revealed to him again,
He meant not that Warfare,
But that to suffer, and take pain,
With him he must prepare;
By his example to recall,
Sinners from their sad state,
To save them from Eternal thrall,
And cause them Sin to hate:
To teach them Virtue, and true way
To Heaven, Gal. 5 v. 24. Phil. 3. v. 18.19.
by the Cross:
Which glory gives in the latter day,
When Sinners shall find loss.
With tears he prays both day and night,
To know God's holy will:
And how to do this work he might,
His pleasure to fulfill.
Christ from a Cross to Francis spoke,
Go thou my Church repair,
Which falling is. He care did take;
All things prepared are.
Saint Damians Church (wherein he prayed)
He did intend to mend,
Great Sums of money that were paid,
He saved unto this end.
And gave them to the Pastor free,
The same work to complete;
Who did refuse to take them, he
Did fear his Father's heat.
But Francis left the money there,
Which when his Father knew;
He ready was his hair to tear,
So high in rage he flew.
And presently in have did run,
Money and Son to find;
To punish him who had this don,
He was resolved in mind.
Poor Francis, but a Proselyte,
For fear hid in a cave,
Not yet arrived to virtue's height;
Resolved himself to save.
The Priest showed to his Father then
Colos. 3. v. 5.
Where his God-mony lay;
He taking it was pleased again,
And quiet went away.
But Francis seemed to be ashamed,
At this his cowardice:
And his small Love to Christ he blamed,
And begged of God advice.
Who gave him grace, and courage too:
He strait to the City went:
Resolved for Christ to undergo
What malice could invent.
By Fasting pale, and poorly clad,
He sadly walked along,
The people thought he had been mad,
With cries about him throng.
His Fathers hears, goes forth to see,
Lays on him violent hands,
Brings home, a Prisoner close to be,
Locked up, and bound in bands.
His Mother, more inclined to pity,
Watch't opportunity,
When Is Father was gone out of the City,
And set her dear Son free.
He missing him at his return,
Seeking at last did find:
With Avarice his heart did burn,
Which made him thus unkind.
While he in Vice his money spent,
His Father minded not:
But now to Virtue he is bent,
He deems him but a Sot.
To the Bishop he must with him go,
His Birthright to resign;
Tim. ^. v. 9.
Francis deemed Riches now a Foe,
And therefore don't repine:
But strips off all his clothes withal,
And gives them altogether,
And says: I now may truly call,
Not you, but God, my Father.
At this the Bishop wept: with heart
Embraced him in his arms,
And clothed him, who in joy did part,
Revived with heavenly charms.
He goes poor Lepers now to tend,
He wipes their sores with kiss,
What did him highly first offend,
He now esteems a bliss.
But all this while did Francis see
Himself at loss, which way
The Church-repairer he might be;
And Christ thus to obey
He could not tell, or yet did know,
What Rule he should walk by;
Which did perplex and grieve him so,
That he wept bitterly.
Fearing that for his past sins, still
God was with him offended,
And would not plain declare his will,
Till something were amended.
He therefore wept, fasted, and prayed,
Wither other acts austere,
Offering Christ's merits, which once paid
A Price for Sin most dear.
All this does teach how hard a thing,
It Is Justice to appease;
God's Mercy to our Souls to bring,
Ezech 33. v. 11.12. Ps 90. v. 15.
Sin's burden here to ease.
Yet if with Francis we persever,
In Love, in tears, in grief;
With Francis we shall find God ever
At hand to our relief.
SAINT FRANCIS.
THE SECOND PART OF HIS LIFE.
From the making of his Rule unto the receiving of the Stygmes, a little before
his Death.
TO God Man's duty twofold is,
As David does record. Ps. 36. v. 27. 1. Pet. 3. v. 11.

Do good, decline from what is amiss,
So thou shall please thy Lord.
The latter Francis had fulfilled,
To good he was inspired,
The way he knew not, tho he willed,
To do what was required.
But entering in the Church one day,
He heard that Gospel preaching,
Which does relate what Christ did say,
When he sent his to teaching.
Take neither money, Mark. 6. v. ^.8. Luk 10. v. 7. 1. Cor. 9 v. 13.14.
purse, or meat,
Shoo's, Staff, two coats with you,
What Is set before you freely eat,
It is the Preachers due.
These words, as from Christ to him said,
He takes, and goes away;
Says: Here my Rule's before me laid,
And I will it obey.
The Life of Christ to imitate,
Must I and mine begin,
Which surely is the perfect state, Mark. 10. v. 21.

For Mortals to live in.
Christ came, Io. 8. v. 12.
and taught all men the way
Which leads unto Salvation:
Soon after men did from it stray;
I Am sent for Reformation.
Not only my own soul to feed,
With heavenly Contemplation:
But also to instruct where need,
And preach to every Nation.
His secular garments laid aside, Heb. 4. v. 12.

He clothed himself in gray
Course cloth, his nakedness to hide,
His shoo's he cast away.
He made a Girdle of a Cord,
His Habit like a Cross:
To mind the Passion of his Lord,
Who had redeemed Man's loss.
He presently began to preach,
With words that pierced full deep:
And all poor Sinners he did teach,
To sorrow, sigh, and weep.
With confidence in God's great love,
If they will new Life begin,
And crave his Mercy, Jonas. 3. v. 10.
that is above
The malice of Man's Sin.
His words were simple, plain, inflamed
With fervor of the spirit:
The Converts number cannot be named,
To gain which he did merit.
Many did Penance for their ill,
Forsook the World: would have
Him teach them how to do God's will:
To whom a Rule he gave.
Not made by him, but from above,
Revealed, as he declares;
Teaching to hate what Flesh does love:
Freeing from Worldly cares;
Obedienee true, pure Chastity,
He vows to keep always:
And also such strict Poverty,
Not used in those days.
His Lents were many, lodging hard,
No linen he did wear:
No shoo's his feet from thorns to guard,
Which often his Felsh did tear.
With discipline he did chastise 1. Cor. 9. v. 27.

His Body, that the Spirit
Might rule: and still he did devise
How to increase his merit.
The Apostles Life, he thus trac't out,
Who twelve were sent to teach Luk 9. v. ^.2.

Perfection, and, the World about,
The Faith of Christ to preach.
So he, when twelve, divided his,
And sent them to this end,
To preach the Faith, and what amiss
In manners to amend.
And after, when they met again,
He found that many were
Converted, and that not in vain
They preached God's love, and fear.
Their fervent words, their humble looks,
With faces pale and thin;
Their Habit poor, were Christian books,
To read perfection in.
Now, that his Rule more force might have,
With it to Rome he went,
To be confirmed, and there he gave
It to Pope Innocent.
Who thought it hard, and did deny
The same Rule to approve.
There were Rules many to walk by,
Made to increase God's love.
But lo! To rest when sleep did call,
This Vision he did see,
The Lat'ran Church began to fall,
And to supported be,
By one poor man; and he did know
That Francis was the same:
He then approved it: bid him go,
And teach it in God's Name.
And said to those, who by him stood,
That Francis would repair
God's Church decayed, by doctrine good,
And his example rare.
Poor Francis strait made his Profession,
There, in Christ's Vicar's hand,
To keep the Rule without transgression,
And what it did command.
And after the Pope's blessing had,
He humbly went away;
Praised God, and in his heart full glad,
For his success that day.
And so returned unto Assise,
Where Monks did to him give,
A Church, which he did highly prize,
And there resolved to live.
He loved this Church because 'twas small,
The sitter for Poor Friars,
Lady of Angels they it call,
Because Angelick Quires
Were here often heard, and he therefore,
Commands, when he is dead,
This Church be counted, evermore,
Of all his Order^s head.
Moreover his desire was much,
This place should honor have,
Of all: Christ did appear, and such
A boon unto him gave,
That whosoever enters in,
And right confessed be,
Shall Pardon have, and also win
Indulgence Plenary.
Was Francis's Love with this content,
Who Rule had made for Men?
No, no. He knew that he was sent
Each sex to bring again,
From way of Vice to Virtue's path,
And therefore made another,
For Women, which same strictness has,
And made Saint Clare their Mother.
And as he knew that all were not
Of like ability,
And Wedlock was some others lot,
Which makes a worldly ty;
He made a third Rule, for all kinds,
Rich, Poor, Wedded, and free,
Leading to Virtue, yet not binds,
Under sin's Penalty.
As our Redeemer, when he came,
Did teach by word and deed;
So did Saint Francis do the same,
And sowed Example's seed.
Not only by his words, but deeds,
He moved to Imitation,
Which are indeed the best of seeds,
To spring up Reformation.
Transcending was his Poverty,
(Which quits of worldly cares)
Admitting of no Property:
And this the Heart prepares,
To fix it self on Heavenly gain,
All Earthly to despise,
Which at the last does prove but vain,
Dress't up in false disguise.
He so much loved pure Chastity,
Of Body, and of Mind,
That if he felt the contrary,
Allays he strait did find.
He disciplined his Flesh full sore,
In thorns he tumbled so,
Until his very flesh they tore;
Or rolled in the snow.
Francis, the Humble, Men him call,
He did excel in this.
The place whence Lucifer did fall,
Is thought now to be his.
This Virtue he did recommend,
To his, and 'twas his pleasure,
To name them Minors, to this end,
That they might seek this Treasure.
1. King. 15. v. 22.
Obedience he well knew to be
Better than Sacrifice.
Tho Father of them all was he,
Yet still he did devise,
Subject to be unto another:
And therefore on the way,
Obedience strict unto his brother,
He promis't, and did pay.
And as he, the Creator still
Humbly obeyed in all,
So did dumb Creatures do his will,
Still ready at his call.
Brothers, and Sisters, he them named,
To all he was so sweet:
That Fish, the Fire, and Beast he tamed,
Who did him kindly greet.
Our Works are crowned with Patience*
Iam. 1. v. 4 Mat. 10. v. 22.
That our reward does merit;
For all the Pains we feel in sense,
Or anguish of the Spirit;
With Christ to suffer he desired,
In Pain, Mat. 16. v. ^4. Mark 8. v. 34.
or any loss.
To imitate, what he required,
In bearing of the Cross.
The Queen of Virtues, 1. Co.* 13. v. 13.
Charity,
His heart had so inflamed:
That it would almost melted be,
When God's Love was but named.
Mat. 22. v. 39.
His Neighbor's Love possessed him so,
That for his dear Soul's good,
The hardest things he would undergo,
To 'th shedding of his blood.
This caused him journey to begin,
To Egypt's King, that he
Might to Christ's Church those faithless win,
Or else a Martyr be.
In sweetness he did so excel,
The Sultan freely gave
Him leave to preach, where he thought well,
And no disturbance have.
Missing his aim, which was to die,
For the Faith of JESUS dear:
And finding no great profit by
His Preaching Christ's Faith here;
He does return with weeping eyes,
Bewailing his great loss,
Resolves his Love to Sacrifice,
To Christ, upon the Cross.
Devotion great he had to all
God's Saints, in chief his Mother:
Whom he did his dear Lady call.
But yet above all other,
He prized the Passion of his Lord,
As Treasure -- house of Grace,
Which does to souls good thoughts afford,
And ill away does chase.
Io. 3. v. 16. Ephesians. 6. v. 2.
This is a Glass, wherein we see
Our God's great Love to us;
Who rather than we damned should be,
Chose to be treated thus.
And also how he Sin did hate,
That he would rather die,
Than see men live in sinful state,
Void of Felicity.
This teaches us to love God here,
As also to hate Sin:
And as we love him, still to fear,
Lest we, should fall therein.
And if by Sin we 've lost God's Love,
Here it is restored again:
Romans 5. v. 9.10.11.
Offering our tears to him above,
Joined with Christ's bitter pain.
This Passion Francis preached to all,
And thus their, Ezech. ^^. v. 4. Rev. 7. v. 3.
Foreheads cross't,
Imprinting how for Adam's fall,
Our Savior's Life was lost.
That they to him be grateful still,
Prove. 23.26.
And to him give their heart,
Abhorring Sin, to do his will,
And never from him part.
All Virtues, that Christ taught Mankind,
Appeared in Francis clear.
To print them deep in others mind,
His labor was, while here.
But now grown weak, that Death draws nigh,
He knows by Revelation:
And does employ his thoughts solely,
In Heavenly Contemplation.
Let all learn here, how to prepare
For Death, while they do live:
To love God still, Deuteronomy. 6 v. 5. Rev. 14 v. 7.
and sin beware,
And thus due honor give.
To teach us this, Christ gave example,
Which he does now renew,
In Francis, who in manner ample,
Has laid it to our view.
THE THIRD PART.
Containing the remainder of his life, from the receiving of the holy Stygmes,
to his Death.
PRetend I shall not to recount,
The Miracles he wrought:
Which were so many, they surmount,
In number, frail man's thought.
The actions of his whole life were,
But one continued wonder:
To whom all things, while be was here,
Obedience prompt did render.
Before his Death, I Will only tell
How JESUS did him grace,
With Privilege, that did excel,
And worthily takes place,
Of all yet given unto any,
Which clearly does declare,
His merits were both great and many,
Which thus rewarded were.
He being on the Mount Alvern,
In contemplation high,
Of JESUS'S Passion; did so burn
In Love, that he must die,
For his dear Lord, or undergo
Like pain, our sins, him gave.
Christ heard his Prayer, and yielded so,
His Wounds that he should have.
Behold a glorious Seraphin,
Descending from above,
As tho he crucified had been,
Which did inflame his love.
Isai. 6. v. 2.
Six-wing'd he was: two veiled his head;
His feet two; two did fly;
And while Saint Francis marveled,
The Seraphin draws nigh.
And on the Cross there did appear,
His dear Lord Crucified.
Fast nailed upon it as once when here,
He for all Mankind dy^d.
This grieved him, and did so inflame
His heart, with Love's great fire,
That to be nailed unto the same,
Was now his whole desire.
Lo! from hands, feet, and side, did stream
Five clear, but bloody rays,
Which pierced like places as they came,
Where marks remained always,
In hands, and feet, like Nails, were plain,
In's Side the Wound of Spear;
Which bled, and put him to such pain,
As tho he should die here.
Having received these stygmes there,
He now might truly say,
Let no one molestation bear,
Gal. 6 v. 17.
But readily obey:
Since thus with Wounds my Body's signed,
Of my Redeemer dear.
The example, which in me you find,
To follow do not fear.
To him this may be well applied,
I live; Gal. 2. v. 20.
tho now not I,
But JESUS Christ, my Crucified,
Does live, and in me ly.
O marv'lous Man! true friend of God,
Phil. 3. v. ^. Genesis 28.12.
Than Man an Angel rather,
Who under foot the World have trod,
And mounted Jacob's ladder.
By Vice's hate, and Virtue's love,
Thou walkedst without blame;
And thus Poor Sinners thou did move,
While here, to do the same.
Obtain that we may imitate
Thy footsteps in true Love,
That we may Sin as truly hate,
And live with thee above.
Those sacred Wounds he did receive,
Two years or thereabout,
Before this frail Life he did leave,
Which cleared Men of all doubt.
For they did oftentimes appear,
Tho his humility,
Endeavored to conceal them here,
Till he should buried be.
They often did bleed with such great pain,
That he had died thereby,
But that God would have him remain,
The World to edify.
His Body now with labor spent,
Made weak for JESUS'S sake,
And he to Contemplation bent,
But little food did take.
And tho, by Sword, as he desired,
He could not Martyr die:
Yet greater pains, as God required,
He suff'red patiently.
And off'red up in flames of Love,
His Soul an Holocaust,
Which daily did ascend above,
To him he loved most.
Knowing his Death was near at hand,
Not able now to go:
That he be carried does command,
To Portiunculo,
Our Lady's Church, from Angels named,
The place that he loved best:
And here to die he ever aimed,
And take his final rest.
To show his love to Poverty,
Mat 27. v. 35.
And Christ to imitate,
He naked on the ground would die,
So stripped him as be sat:
The same, in his last Testament,
He does his Brothers give;
For he by JESUS dear was sent,
Poor, Ps. 87. v. 16.
like him, here to live.
Mat. 18. v. 17.
He recommends Obedience
Most strict, unto Christ's Church,
That Heresy, on no pretense,
Among his Brothers lurch:
True Patience, and Humility,
With other Virtues rare,
He leaves them, as a Legacy,
And does for Death prepare.
He gives his blessing to his Brothers,
To live in Love and Peace:
The same he recommends to others,
Here, after his decease.
His soul to JESUS recommending,
Replenish't with great merit,
By hands of Angels, there attending,
To God resigns his Spirit.
He being dead, his sacred Flesh,
Withered before and hard,
Became most limber, soft, and fresh,
To youth might be compared.
Which with his Wounds, like Rubies dress't,
Was glorious to behold.
Assisium Men would have it rest
With them: more prized than gold.
A stately Church they for it build,
And in a Vault it lay,
Which incorrupt, and fresh, does yield
Delights, unto this day.
The World's great wonder it remains,
The Wounds appear therein.
What favors great, and immense gains,
Did his true Penance win!
Thus did Christ's Church-Repairer die,
When he had thousands gained,
From Worldly Love, Flesh-liberty,
Which had true Faith so stained.
He in his Order lives again,
Which to Perfection guides;
And, as Revealed, shall still remain,
As long as World abides.
Great Saints this Order has brought forth,
As to the World is known:
But what is the number, or their worth,
Is known to God alone.
The Rule does so to Virtue bind,
That if Men well keep it;
Not one among them they shall find,
Who Will not in glory sit.
OF THE CONFRATERNITY OF THE CORD.
In the cords of Adam, I will draw them in the Cords of Charity.

Ose. 11. v. 4.
BEsides his Holy Orders three,
The Pope, of his accord,
Confirmed a Confraternity,
Where Girdle is a Cord;
For those who cannot undergo
Those strict Rules, yet desire,
By this blessed Cord, men should them know,
Related to the Friar.
Saint Francis made choice of a Cord,
For Girdle, as the best
Memorial of his dying Lord,
In all his sorrows dress't
For, if you mind it, all along,
Throughout his Passion still,
They led him, bound in Cords full strong,
Wherever was their will.
This Passion in men's hearts to print,
Was always his desire:
Which soften can a heart of flint,
And set it all on fire,
With love unto its Savior dear,
(Who for Man thus did die.)
And never any pains to fear,
His love to show thereby.
Saint Dominick poor Francis loved,
And would his Rule embrace:
But since by him 'twas not approved,
He begged his Cord in the place.
That tho he could not of that be,
He would have some relation
To him, by this: a Memory
Of Christ's most bitter Passion.
Persons of greatest quality,
Which this World does afford,
Have thought it a great dignity,
To be girt with this Cord:
That they might be related to
This Order while they live:
The great Indults to gain also,
Which Holy Church does give.
Which are as great as any be,
Continually confirmed,
Unto this Confraternity,
And all therein concerned.
Which has not any obligation,
Men binding under Sin:
But minds us of Christ's bitter Passion,
That we may glory win.
Five Paters and five Ave's more,
You daily are to say:
To mind how Christ was wounded sore,
Upon that doleful day.
In hands, and feet, and in his Side,
These five you must salute,
And there, with confidence, abide,
Till you obtain your suit.
For what can God the Father here
Deny his only Son?
When in his sight his Wounds appear,
Which he has undergon;
To reconcile a sinful soul,
Unto his Justice great,
And to dispense rich Grace's dole,
From his great Mercy's seat.
With arms spread forth the Friars say
These Prayers, and make a Cross:
And thus Saint Francis used to pray,
Reminding that our loss
Repaired was upon the Tree,
When Christ' shands, feet, and side,
Were pierced: Which wounds effectual be,
When thus by faith applied.
When Amaleck the Hebrews fought,
Exodus 17 v. 11.
Moses his arms stretched out,
And praying thus, success he brought,
But when they fell, was doubt
Of Victory: which did foreshow,
How Christ for man should die:
And, now he is dead, we praying so,
His Death do signify.
Upon the Cross, five Virtues rare
Christ practiced, to teach us,
Daily to beg, and take like care,
To imitate him thus;
In Patience, and Humility,
Which he does recommend;
Obedience, and strict Poverty,
With Love unto the end.
More pious Practices are there,
Belonging to the Cord:
Which by this Saint ordained were,
To bind men to their Lord,
In bonds of true Obedience,
And perfect Charity:
That when the Soul departs hence,
It live Eternally.
Behold how Francis's Life was spent,
In Mankind's Reformation:
Christ's seamless Garment, that was rent,
And much defaced in fashion;
That is the Church, with Heresy,
And vicious life distained,
He brought unto its Purity,
Thousands of Souls regained.
Thus, Moyses-like, he did bring back
Pharao's, the Devils, Exodus 3. v. 10.
Slaves.
Their Souls, with filth of Sin made black,
c. 14. v. 29.
He by the Red Sea saves.
Reminding what Christ did endure,
On the Cross, to free from Sin:
And by example leads secure,
Through the Desert we are in, Deuteronomy. ^. v. 2.

Unto the rich Land promised,
That Is Heaven, Iosue. 3. v. 17. Exodus 3. v. 8.
the place of Bliss,
Where with sweet Milk and Honey fed,
The chaste and pure Soul is:
That is the Vision of God clear,
And of his full Fruition,
Of losing it void of all fear.
How happy's this condition!
Dear Father, pray unto thy Lord.
My life, while I am here,
With thine in all things may accord,
That Hell I may not fear.
Dear JESUS, grant, for Francis sake,
That I thee always love:
And my life's Pattern by his take,
So reign with thee above.
Amen.

THE BOOKS ADDRESS TO THE READER.
YOu, gentle Reader, who have read me ore,
Grant this Request, to read me yet once more.
If curious Fancy to the first did move,
Let now your Motive be, Devotion's love.
And that your reading may advantage bring,
Attend not to the Verse, but to the thing.
The sense consider: deeply in your mind
Imprint the same: then you will surely find
A hidden Treasure, which does rarely ly,
Within the bosom of Dame Poetry.
Virtue's discovered, Vice laid to your view;
That this you fly: that, eagerly pursue.
Read not, as Pilat ask't: What Is Verity?
And then went forth. Io. 18. v. 38.
He did not really
Seek Knowledge: and much less did he intend
To act: he would be Jews and Cesar's friend.
He would not know, lest conscience should approve
What Christ should say, Io. 19. v. 12.
and he lose Cesar's love.
that young Man, who ask't of christ to know,
Which way to Heaven he might securely go,
When Christ bid hi^ the world and Riches leave,
This wholesome counsel he would not receive: v. 21.

He would no more discourse with him, v. 22.
and why?
To The World, and Flesh, he had too strong a ty.
Beware the like; when you have read this Book,
Lay't not aside, no more on it to look,
Because it pleases not the Flesh, and Blood:
But be assured when its right understood,
It will your Soul to Virtue's Practice win,
With ravishments to that, and hate to Sin.
Remember, only Beast that cud did chew,
Was clean esteemed, ^ev. 11.3. ^eut. 14.8. ^en. 8 v. ^. ^^k. 3. v. ^.55.
and sacrificed; to show,
That if by reading you will God's love obtain,
You must reflect, and in the sense remain
Of what you read: and thus you will reap gain.
Or else your reading will but prove in vain.
Expect no Finis to this Book.

FOr, as Man's Life a Warfare is, Job. 7. v. 1. Gal. 5. v. 17.

Against Vice^ and Virtue undertook
Is hard (...) you miss
The Crown (...) promis't only those,
Who do persev^^ to the end, Mat 10. v. 22. Mat. 25. v. 13.

You must be watchful till Death close
Your eyes: hence you will want a friend,
Often to consult as virtuous Guide.
This Book will prove unto you such,
If in its reading you will abide,
'Twill give your heart a zealous touch.
Then daily here take your repast;
And let the End begin again:
Thus do as long as Life does last,
That you may here secure remain.
Amen.


