THE FOURTH PART OF THE REPORTS OF SEVERAL CASES OF LAW, Argued and Adjudged in
the several COURTS at WESTMINSTER, In the Time of the late Queen ELIZABETH'S
Reign.

Collected by a Learned Professor of the Law, WILLIAM LEONARD Esquire Then of the
Honorable Society of GRAYES-INN: PUBLISHED BY WILLIAM HVGHES of Grayes-Inn Esquire

With TABLES of the Names of the CASES, and of the Matters contained in the
BOOK.

LONDON, Printed by the Assigns of Richard and Edward Atkins Esquires; For
Henry Herringman, Ben. Griffin, Charles Harper, and Samuel Keble. MDCLXXXVII.

Cum Gratia and Privilegio Regiae Majestatis.

THE NAMES OF THE Principal Cases Reported in this BOOK.
A.
ACton and Pitcher. Page 51 Anderson and Heywood. 30 Applethwaite and Nertley.
56 The Scholars of All Souls and Tamworth. 178 Archbishop of York's case. 168,
214 Arden and Goads. 243 Ashpoole and the Inhabitants of Weringham. 218 Lord
Audleys case. 166, 210
B.
BAbingtons case. 123 Bakers case. 122 Barkers case. 60 Barlow and Pearson. 102
Barnard and Trusser. 186 Barton and Edmund. 5 Bartace and Hind. 185 Baspoells
case. 35 Baxter and Bartlet. 156 Bedfield and Rouse. 198 Bedingfields case. 89
Beechers case. 190 Bell and Langley. 230 Bettuans case. 22 Bills Case. 238
Bingham and Squire. 61 Bishop of Rochesters Case. 23 Bishop of Londons Case.
80, 214 Bishop of Exeter and Sir Henry Wallop. 247 Blaby and Estwick. 15 Blithe
and Colegate. 88 Bluets Case. 18 Bluet and Cook. 241 Box and Mounslowe. 230
Brookhouses Case. 3 Brasiers Case. 104 Broom and St. John's Case. 96 Brown and
Stulsbye. 43 Brown and Peter's. 144 Brown and Tucker. 241 Buckhursts Case. 2
Bulwer and Smith. 52 Burgess and Foster. 215 Bussey and Milfield. 61 Butler and
Lightfoot. 9
C.
CAnnon and Osborn. 49 Capells Case. 150 Chomley and Conges. 88 Christian and
Adams. 54 Clemp and Clemp. 8 Clark and Kempton. 91 Clarks Case. 11 Sir Gervaise
Cliftons Case. 199 Clinton and Bridges. 79 Cook and Sengate. 31 Cooks Case. 245
Collier and Collier. 194 Connies Case. 37 Connies Case. 20 Lord Cromwell and
Townsend. 203 Crane and Parkins. 249 Cursons Case. 10 Curtis's Case. 51 Corpus
Christi College Case. 223
D.
LOrd Dacres and Fines. 97 Daubney and Gores. 194 Dean and Chapter of
Christ-Church. 190 Doylies Case. 101 Dolemans Case. 86 Doughty and Prideaux.
101 Dowhall and Catesby. 113 Duke and Smith. 238 Duffams Case. 86 Duncombs
Case. 293 Duchess of Suffolks Case. 196
E.
EArl of Derby's Case. 42 Earl of Northumberlands Case. 91 Earl of Huntington
and the Lord Mountjoyes case. 147 Earl of Rutland and Spencer. 243 Earl of
Arundel and Bradstock. 186 Edwards and Watton. 240 Egertons case 249
Englefields case. 135, 169
F.
FItch and Pierce. 121 Foles and Griffin. 94 Frice and Foster. 14 Fullers case.
4 Fullers case. 208
G.
GArdians of the Monastery of Otleries case. 117 Germies case. 82 Germin and
Ascott. 83 Gerrards case. 7 Sir Henry Gilfords case. 156 Glascocks case. 238
Glover and Archer. 247 Godboults case. 33 Goram and Fowkes. 150 Goore and
Winkfield. 208 Greens case. 85 Greindall and Archbishop of Yorks case. 182 Gray
and Edwards. 110 Grenden and Albany's case. 133 Grubhams case. 246
H.
HAltens case. 8, 184 Harris and Whiting. 91 Harris and Coverley. 98 Harris's
case. 112 Harvy and Harvy. 12 Harvy and Thomas. 15 Haselwoods case. 114 Hawkins
and Chapman. 9 Hern and Crow. 122 Hegger and Helston. 111 Hide and Hill. 110
Higham and Cook. 144 Hills case. 187 Hinds case. 21 Sir Baptist Hix and
Fleetwood. 248 Holland and Hopkins, 8 Hobbies case. 5 Hoar and Bridleworth. 15
Hoo and Hoo. 78 Sir William Hollis's Case. 119 Hollingshead and King. 182
Houtiers case. 106 Hoven and Gerrard. ibid. Hodges case. ibid. Hunt and Sim's.
13 Hunt and Gonnel. 24 Hungerford and Watts. 181
J.
JAckson and Darcy. 40 Jerons case. 149 Johnsons case. 193 Josselin and
Josselin. 19
K.
KEenes case. 121 Sir Thomas Kemp and Windsor. 41 The King and Cotton. 7, 39
Kirkman and Reignot. 3 Knevit and Cope. 59 Knightly and Knightly. 102
L.
LAuntons case. 1 Sir Richard Lee and Arnold. 27 Sir Francis Leake and Hollis.
24 Lees and Lord Stafford. 58 Sir Rich. Lewknors case. 162, 225 Limver and
Ivery. 68 Long and Hemoning. 216 Lukes case. 32
M.
MAnning and Andrews. 2 Mayes case. 7 Mansors case. 62 Megett and Davis. 60
Michel and Norden. 201 Milborne and the Inhabitants of Dunmore. 191 Morgen and
Cox. 40 Morris's case. 92 The Lord Mountjoy and Barker. 73 Mounjoy and Andrews.
150, 194
N.
NEals case. 96, 219 Newman and Sheriff. 25 Marquess of Northamtons case. 17
O.
OGnell and Underhill, 115 Onions Case, 36 Old and Cony, 7 Owen and Morgan, 26,
93, 222
P.
LOrd Pagetts Case, 6 Par Marquess of Northamptons Case, 17 Parry and Herbert,
5 Paston and Townsend. 97 Pelhams Case, 33 Sir William Pelham, 114, 123 Peake
and Pollert, 121 Peirs and Levesuch, 48 Penhalls Case, 49 Penson and Higbed, 99
Pophams Case, 4 Pouley and Siers, 208 Prowes Case, 47 Provost of Queens
College Case, 85 President of Corpus Christi College Case, 223 Price and
Atmore, 246
Q.
QUeen and Earl of Shrewsbury, 19 Queen and Lord Vaux, 26 Queen and Painter, 32
Queen and Pain, 81 Queen and Bishop of Lincoln, 95 Queen and Sir John Savile,
104 Queen and Feign Archbishop of Canterbury, 107 Queen and Due, 197 Queen and
Bishop of Norwich, 217
R.
RAtcliff and Shirley, 121 Ratcliff and Chaplain, 242 Rawlins and Somerford,
116 Robinsons Case, 55 Sir Henry Rolls and Osborne, 250 Ropers Case, 47 Rowson
and Brown, 3 Ruithbrooke and Pusaine, 16 Russels Case, 24, 197 Russel and
Pratt, 44
S.
SAer and Bland, 24 Sandersons Case, 12 Sapland and Ridler, 238 Savages Case,
88 Savage and Knight, 78 Lord St. John and Sir John Gray, 22 Scotts Case, 51
Scott and Scott, 39, 70 Seamar and Browning, 122 Seixtbank and Peirces, 85
Shrewsbury and Inhabitants, etc. 18 Smith and Babb, 193 Spring and Lawson, 77
Starkeys Case, 61 Mark Stewards Case; 106 Lord Stafford and Sir Rowland
Haywood, 55 Strangborough and Warner, 3 Strangdon and Burnett, 4, 106 Stroads
Case, 40 Countess of Sussex and Wroth, 65
T.
Tailors Case, 31 Tailors Case, 22, 186, 209 Terrets Case, 51 Thetford and
Thetford, 50 Townsend and Pastor, 52 Trecarham and Friendship, 64 Trivilians
Case, 195 Tutor and Norton, 6 Tyrells Case, 92
V.
VErney and Verney, 207 Vernon and Sir Tho. Savile, 191
W.
Wait and Cooper, 207 Sir Walter Wallers Case, 44 William Wallers Case, 169
Walsgrave and Somerset, 167 Wards Case, 239 Wards Case, 241 Wath and King, 57
Webbs Case, 110 Weshbournes Case, 49 Wheelers Case 240 Willet and Wilkinson, 7
Windham and Meede, 96 Wingate and Sands, 202 Wood and Chivers, 179 Wroth and
Capell, 197
Y.
YOung and Tailor, 94
THE FOURTH PART OF THE REPORTS OF SEVERAL Excellent Cases, Argued and Adjudged
in the several COURTS of Law at WESTMINSTER. In the time of the Late Queen
Elizabeth's Reign.
Hill. 20 Eliz.
I. Launtons Case.
A. Is bound in an Obligation, Emblements.
that B. shall enjoy a Lease of black Acre immediately after his death: The
Land being sown, the Executors of A. take the Corn; it was holden, the
Obligation was not forfeited, for that by the Laws the Corn did belong to the
Executors.

II. Pasc. 23 Eliz.
A Man possessed of a Term devised the same to his Son when he came to the age
of 18 years, Devise.
and that his Wife should have it in the mean time, and made his Wife his
Executrix, and died before the Son came to the age of 18 years the Wife took
Husband: It was holden that she should have the Term as Executrix, till the Son
came of the age of 18 years.

III. Mich. 23 Eliz.
A Man made a Feoffment in Fee sub Condition, ea intention, that his Wife
should have the Land for her life, the remainder to his younger Son in Fee: The
Feoffee died without making such an Estate; the Heir of the Feoffor entered; it
was resolved, that it was not a Condition, but an Estate, which was executed
presently according to the intent.

Trin. 8 Eliz.
IV. Manning and Andrews Case.
Vide 1 Leon. 256. 1 Leon. 345. Fine levied a Bar.
Husband and Wife Donees in special tail, the Husband levied a Fine of the
Lands. It was holden if the proclamations pass in his life time, or before the
Wife by her entry had avoided the Fine, the Issue should be barred: otherwise,
if the Husband had died before the proclamation had passed.

27 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
V. Buckhursts Case.
Extinguishment.
LEssee for 10 years granted a Rent Charge to his Lessor for the said years, the
Lessor granted the remainder in Fee to the Lessee for years: It was the opinion
of the Justices, that the rent was gone, because the Lessor, who had the rent,
was Party to the destruction of the Lease, which is the ground of the rent.

26 Eliz.
VI. Pulmants Case.
Assumpsit.
ONe who is indebted promises to pay it upon request, in an Action upon the
Case upon that Promise, the Party needs not to express the Assumpsit with the
request, it being an old debt, but otherwise it is, where there is such a
promise, without any duty precedent.

VII. Hill. 26 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
Assumpsit.
A Man in consideration of 20 l. paid him, promises to assign to J. S. the
Lease of a Stranger: It was adjudged, that an Action would lie upon such a
promise, because the Assumor might purchase the House and then assign it.

Hill. 26 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
VIII. Rawson and Browns Case.
A. Being in prison at the suit of B upon an account, Assumpsit.
and in custodia Marescalli. The Marshal suffers him to escape: A. being at
liberty promises to B. that if he will permit him to be at large, and further,
if he do such an act, that he will pay to him 10 l. which he does not pay:
whereupon B. brings Assumpsit against him, it was adjudged that the Action
would not lie; for that both the considerations ought to be proved, and A. was
at large before.

31 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
IX. Strangborough and Warners Case.
NOte, Assumpsit.
That a Promise against a Promise will maintain an Action upon the Case, as in
consideration that you do give to me 10 l. on such a day, I promise to give you
10 l. such a day after.

31 Eliz.
X. Escrigs Case.
IF an Executor promises to a Creditor, Assumpsit.
that if he will forbear to sue him until such a time, that then he will
satisfy the Creditor his debt; in that case the Execuor is liable to pay the
debt of his own goods; adjudged.

30 Eliz. In the Kings Bench, Rot. 30.
XI. Kirkman and Reignotts Case.
A Lease was made to two, Habendum to them, Occupant.
and to two others for their four lives, and the longer liver of them: It was
resolved, that the two named in the Habendum should not take any thing, and
that if the two first die, there should be no Occupancy, for the lives of the
two in the Habendum, was intended an Estate to them, and not a Limitation of
the Estate of the first two.

Pasc. 30 Eliz.
XII. Barkhouse Case.
DEbt against Lessee for years for rent: Forfeiture.
The Defendant claimed Fee in the Land whereas he had no Fee: It was resolved
that it was a forfeiture.

XIII. Pasc. 31 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
Avowry.
IT was resolved by the Justices, that an Avowry might be for part of a Rent.

Mich. 28 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
XIV. Strangden and Burnets Case.
IN an Action of Trover and Conversion of Goods to his proper use in Ipswich:
The Defendant pleaded that the Goods came to hands in Dunwich in the same
County, and that the Plaintiff gave unto him all Goods which came to his hands
in Dunwich, Pleadings.
absque hoc that he is guilty of any Trover or Conversion in Ipswich: It was
ruled to be a good manner of pleading, by reason of the special Justification,
Vide 27 H. 6. But where a Justification is general, the County is not
traversable at this day, Vide 19 H. 6, 7.

24 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
XV.
Infant.
AN Infant made a Lease for years rendering rent, and when he came to his full
age, he said to his Lessee, God give you joy of it: It was holden by Mead
Justice, that thereby the Lease was affirmed and made good.

Pasc. 25 Eliz.
XVI. Fullers Case.
ONe is bound to pay his rent at a day certain, payment before the day,
adjudged, does not discharge him.

29 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
XVII. Carter and Martens Case.
Payment.
TWo are bound for a Debt, the Principal makes the Surety his Executor who pays
the Debt generally: Quaere if it shall be as Executor or as Obligor.

XVIII. Pophams Case.
Bargain and Sale.
LAnd was bargained and sold, the Bargainee levies a Fine of the Lands, and
afterward within the six months the Deed is enrolled. It shall pass by the
Fine, and the Conusee shall have the Land, for the Enrollment shall relate to
the time of the bargain and sale.

18 Eliz.
XIX. Henninghams Case.
IT was adjudged in this Case, that he who is special Heir by the Custom, as of
Borough English Land, shall have the Writ of Error, and not the Heir at the
Common Law.

Hill. 19 Eliz. Adjudge.
XX. Parry and Herberts Case.
LEssee for years upon Condition that he shall not grant over the Land by Will
or otherwise, Condition.
and he devises the same to his Executors, who except it only as Executors,
and not as Devisees: It was holden, that the Condition was broken: because he
had done as much as in him lay to have granted it over.

In the Exchequer.
XXI. Sir Thomas Hobbies Case.
A Man has issue two Sons, and is attainted, Heirs.
the eldest Son purchases Land, and dies without issue, the second Son shall
inherit the Land as Heir to him, notwithstanding the attainder of the Father,
because the blood is not corrupted between the two Sons.

Mich. 29 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
XXII. Barton and Edmunds Case.
AN Infant and another were bound for the debt of the Infant, Infant.
the Infant at his full age promised to save the other harmless, the Infant
died; It was adjudged, that upon this Assumpsit, Assumpsit.
an Action upon the Case did lie against his Executors.

XXIII. Mich. 36 Eliz. In the Kings Bench, adjudged.
IF an Executor promise to pay a Debt when he has not Assets; It was the
Opinion of all the Justices; that no Action upon the Case lies against him;
but if he has assets, then it is otherwise: And the Heir if he has nothing by
descent, is not subject to an Action upon such a promise.

Mich. 28 Eliz.
XXIV. The Lord Pagets Case.
Indictments.
AN Indictment was Quare vi and armis clausam A. B. apud D. fregit, whereas A.
B. then had a Lease at Will of the land, the matter was for digging of Turfs:
the Indictment was holden to be good.

XXV. 25 Eliz In the Kings Bench.
Indictments.
INdictment De uno Equo, where it was a Gelding, holden not good: But otherwise
it is, where Trespass was brought de Equo castrato, and the Jury found a
Gelding, and adjudged for the Plaintiff.

26 Eliz.
XXVI. Tucker and Nortons Case.
Execution.
AN Infant in Execution upon condemnation in Debt sued a Writ of Error, his
Father and Brother bailed him: It was said the Recognisance shall be by them
two only that the Infant shall appear, and if the Judgment be affirmed, that
they pay the money, and not that they shall render his body to prison, for when
he is once discharged out of Execution, he shall never be in Execution again.

XXVII. Mich. 29 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
Nobleman. Recognizance.
IT was holden by the Justices, That a Nobleman shall be bounden with his bail
in a Recognizance, that he shall render his body, and that upon the Statute of
13 E. 1. If he has not goods or lands, his body shall be taken in execution,
for the Law in such case excepts only Clarks.

XXVIII. Hill. 26 Eliz. In the Exchequer.
Felo de se.
THe Queen granted to one Catalla utlagatorum and felonum de se within such a
Precinct, One indebted to the Queen having Goods is felo de se, within the
Precinct: Resolved the Queen should have the Goods to satisfy her debt.

26 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
XXIX. King and Cottons Case.
LEssee for life, the remainder in tail, the remainder in fee, Disseisin.
Lessee for life makes a Deed of Feoffment of the Land, and delivers it, and
makes a Letter of Attorney to another to deliver Seisin, who enters and makes
Livery accordingly; adjudged that the Attorney is a Disseisor.

26 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
XXX. Gerrards Case.
THe Owner of the Lands severed his Tithes, Prohibition.
and a stranger took them and carried them away. The Parson libelled in the
Spiritual Court against the Owner of the Land for the Tithes; who thereupon
prayed a Prohibition. It was adjudged no Prohibition should issue in this Case;
for that he might plead the same matter in Bar in the Spiritual Court.

Hill. 31 Eliz.
XXXI. Willet and Wilkinsons Case.
NOte, it was adjudged, Surrender.
that if Lessee for years take another Lease from the Guardian in Soccage, that
the same is a Surrender of his first Lease: Note, the second Lease was made in
the name of the Guardian.

Trin. 26 Eliz.
XXXII. Old and Conyes Case.
IT was adjudged, Commoner, Conies.
that a Commoner cannot kill Conies which destroy his Common, though he has
not any other remedy.

Trin. 29 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
XXXIII. Mayes Case.
ONe sent a Letter by a Carrier to a Merchant for certain Merchandises to send
them to him, receiving a certain sum of money, the Merchant sent the
Merchandises by the Carrier, without receiving the money: It was the opinion of
the Justices, that the Buyer should not be charged for the money, for it was a
conditional bargain, and it was the folly of the Merchant to trust the Carrier
with the Wares.

Mich. 30 Eliz.
XXXIV. Haltons Case.
A Recognizance was acknowledged before Sir N. Read one of the Masters of the
Chancery, Recognizance. Inrollment.
and the Recognizor died before it was enrolled, it was doubted, if it might be
enrolled at the Petition of his Executors; it was agreed by the Justices that
it might be well enough, for it is like to a Conusans of a Fine before a Judge,
which may be removed out of the hands of the Judge by Certiorari, and yet it is
not a Record till the perfection of it: At the same time it was doubted also,
if the Chancery would aid a man, when there wanted the words (Heirs) in a Deed
where the land was sold for money. Chancery compel Attornment.
But it was agreed that after a Fine levied the Chancery might compel the
Tenant to Attorn.

Hill. 27 Eliz.
XXXV. Holland and Hopkins Case.
IN Ejectione firmae it was agreed by the Court, that if a Disseisor be of an
100 Acres, and he lets the same to diverse for Years, that the entry into one
Acre by the Disseisee is an entry against them all; but if they had been
Tenants for life, Quaere, for that then he might have his Action against them:
And it was said, Enter congeable.
that if one makes a Lease for years, rendering for the first two years 10 l.
and afterward 30 l. every year, with condition, if the rent of 30 l. or any
part of it be behind, that the Lessor enter; The Lessor enters for not payment
of the 10 l. that his entry is lawful, for the 10 l. was parcel of the rent,
for it was but one rent.

Trin. 29 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
XXXVI. Clamp and Clamps Case.
Copyholder Surrender.
A Copyholder in possession surrendered the Reversion of his land post mortem
suam to the Lord to an use, etc. It was adjudged, that thereby nothing passed.

XXXVII. Trin. 21 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
A Lease was made of a Manor, with all Gardens, Orchards, Yards, etc. and with
all the profits of a Wood, except to the Lessor forty Trees to take at his
pleasure: It was a Question, if the Lessee should have the Wood: It was the
opinion of Dyer, That the Wood was not comprised within the Lease, but the
Lessee should only have the profits, as pawnage, Leases.
herbage, etc. And he said it was a Case adjudged; a man made a Lease of a Wood
ad faciendum maximum proficuum meliori modo quo poterit, that the Lessee
thereby could not cut the Trees, nor do waste.

Mich. 33 Eliz. In the Exchequer.
XXXVIII. Butler and Lightfoots Case.
IT was holden by the Barons, Copyholder Surrender. 3 Leon. 239.
That if Tenant for life be of a Copyhold, the Remainder over in Fee to
another, he in the Remainder, may surrender his Estate, if there be no custom
to the contrary; for the Estate of Tenant for life, and he in the Remainder,
are but one Estate, and the admittance of the particular Tenant is the
admittance of him in the Remainder.

XXXIX. Mich. 33 Eliz. In the Exchequer.
IN an Information upon the Statute of 5 Eliz. cap. 4. Upon Statute of 5 Eliz.
Apprentices.
against one for exercising the Trade of a Chandler, not having been an
Apprentice to the same by the space of 7 years: It was holden by the Justices,
That for as much as he had been Apprentice to a Tailor for 7 years, which is
one of the Trades mentioned in the said Statute, that the penalty thereof did
not extend to him, but Judgment was given against the Informer: For it was
holden clearly upon the said Statute, That if one has been an Apprentice for 7
years at any Trade mentioned within the said Statute, he may exercise any Trade
named in the said Statute, although he has not been an Apprentice to it. --

Mich. 33 Eliz. In the Exchequer.
XL. Sir John Hawkins and Chapmans Case.
IF A. be bounden to B. by Obligation with Condition for the performance of
Covenants although the Covenants, Assignment of Bonds to the Queen.
or some of them, be for payment of money, yet the assignment of such Bonds to
the Queen shall not be received, and if it be assigned, it shall be put out of
the Court; For no Bonds shall be assigned ut supra, but such which are made for
payment of money.

XLI. Mich. 33 Eliz. In the Exchequer.
A. Lessee for years, the remainder to B for years; the term of A. came to the
Queen and afterward the Reversion. Clark Baron said, That the Lease of B.
should begin presently, and cited the Case 1 Eliz between Wortesly and Adams,
where a Lease for years is made to A. and afterward a Lease in Reversion is
made to B. for years. A. obtains an Estate for life from him in the reversion;
the Lease of B. shall begin presently: But Manwood Chief Baron held that the
first Lease was not extinct.

XLII. Mich. 33 Eliz. In the Exchequer.
Upon Stat. 31 Eliz. of Inmates.
UPon the Statute 31 Eliz. cap. 7. the Case was this: A Woman having a great
Message, viz. a Brewhouse allotted to her for her Dower, let the same to
another, reserving to her self two or three Rooms of it, and now an Information
was exhibited against the Lessee upon the said Statute. Clark Baron, A Cottage
proprie loquendo, is where a poor man inhabits, and this being a great Message
cannot be said a Cottage; Inmates are, where there are more Families than one.
Manwood, Be it a Message or a Cottage, for more Families than one makes a
Message a Cottage, as to this Statute. Gent. The words of the Statute are,
There shall not be more Families than one in any Cottage made, or to be made,
and I conceive it ought to be a Cottage accounted in Law, before the
inhabitations of the Inmates. Clark, If I grant to you all my Cottages in D. my
Messuages shall not pass: If I marry my Daughter, and she and her Husband
inhabit with me in the same house, are these Inmates? Manwood. An Inmate is
such an one who is at his own finding, and therefore if the Husband and Wife
are entertained there at the charge of the Father of the Daughter, they are not
Inmates: And if in our Case any Inmate be, the same is the Woman, for she has
the lesser part of the Message.

Mich. 33 Eliz. In the Exchequer.
XLIII. Cursons Case.
3 Leon: 239. Execution of a Statute binds the King.
CUrson acknowledged a Statute to Alderman Starkey of London, and afterward he
acknowledged another Statute to one Hampden, who assigned the same to Fitton,
who assigned the same to the Queen: Starkey sued forth Execution upon his
Statute, and the Lands of Curson are Extended, and he has a Liberate of it:
Assignment to the Queen.
It was agreed by all the Barons, if Starkey had Execution upon his Statute
before the Queen, the Execution shall stand against the Queen, and the Queen
should not put him out. A. recovers Debt in the Kings Bench, so as he has
Title to sue Execution by Elegit. The Defendant sold his Lands, and afterward
A. assigned his Execution to the Queen: It was holden, that the Queen should
not have Prerogative against the Feoffee, to have Execution of the whole Land;
and it was holden by Manwood Chief Baron, If Execution be had upon a puisne
Statute, and that is afterward avoided by an elder Statute, and the elder
Statute is satisfied by the Execution, now the younger Recognizee shall enter
without suing forth a new Execution.

Trin. 26 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
XLIV. Clarks Case.
IN Ejectione firmae, The Case was, the Master. Brothers, Leases by
Corporations. Misnosm.
and Sisters of the Hospital of the blessed Mariae Virginis, by Indenture, by
the name of the Hospital Beatae Mariae, etc. leaving out the word (Virginis)
leased the Land: It was resolved, that notwithstanding the want of the word
(Virginis) that the Lease was good: Then it was moved, that the words of the
Indenture are, Haec Indentura inter Magistrum, Fratres, and Sorores Hospital.
Beatae Mariae, etc. Testatur; that the said Master, with the assent of the
Brothers and Sisters aforesaid, had leased to A. in cujus rei testimonium, the
said Master, with the assent of the Brothers and Sisters aforesaid had put
their common Seal: Ayliffe and Clench Justices, held that the Lease was void,
for here the Brothers and Sisters, being one entire Body with the Master, are
not parties to the Indenture, but give their consent only: And it is not like
to the Case, where Abbot or Prior makes a Lease for years, with the assent of
their Covent, for the Monks and Friars, being dead persons in Law, cannot be
parties to the Lease; but here in the Case at Bar, the Brothers and Sisters are
persons able in Law: And it is not like to the Case of Parson, Patron, and
Ordinary, where the Parson with the assent of the Patron and Ordinary, grant a
Kent-charge, for there the Parson is the principal Grantor, and the others have
not any express interest in the Land charged: Gaudy Justice contrary, It is
more honorable for Judges to maintain Leases made by Corporations, than for to
permit them to avoid the same: And he said for law, If two Ioyntenants be of
Lands, and they make the like Indenture, viz. Testatur, that one of them with
the assent of the other devises the Land, Leases,
in witness whereof he, with the assent of the other, has put his Seal, it is
a good demise by them both: But Clench said, that is not like our Case, for the
two Ioyntenants are distinct persons and the one of them may assent to the
other; but in our Case, the Master, Brothers, and Sisters are but one person in
Law, and a Body cannot be distinct, so as one can consent to the other: which
Ayliffe concessit: Wray Chief Justice was absent in the Star Chamber.

Trin. 26 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
XLV. Harvey and Harveys Case.
Suit for Legacies. Prohibition.
CLare Harvey libelled against Sebastian Harvey, the Executor of Sir James
Harvey their Father, for a legacy bequeathed to him by his Father in his Will.
By which he willed, that after his death his Goods should be divided and parted
betwixt his Children, according to the laudable custom of London, and averred
in his libel that the Goods and Chattels whereof the Testator died possessed,
amounts to such a sum, and that it belonged unto him, being one of his
children, to demand so much, Virtute Legationis praedict. The Defendant came
and prayed a Prohibition, and Wray Chief Justice conceived he ought to have it,
for here is not any legacy, but the Testator sets forth his meaning, that
his pleasure is that the custom of London should be observed in the disposition
of his Goods; and the said Clare is put to his Writ de rationabili part
Bonorum. But yet afterward, a special Consultation was granted.

Pasc. 27 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
XLVI. Sandersons Case.
Leet.
NOte, It was adjudged by the Court, that Pound-breach is not inquirable in a
Leet, for it is not a common Nusans: But Rhodes Sergeant said that excessive
Toll is inquirable in a Leet. Vide Book of Entries 390.

XLVII. Pasc. 37 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
Abatement of Writ.
IN a Quare Impedit by the Queen, exception was taken to the Writ, because the
words were quod permittat ipsam praesentare ad Rectoriam de D. where it ought
to be ad Ecclesiam: the Court awarded that the Writ should be openly amended in
Court by a Clerk of the Chancery. Amendment.


XLVIII. Pasc. 27 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
Pleadings.
IN a Writ of Entry for Disseisin, the Tenant said, that the House in demand is
within the City of London, and that the said City is an ancient City, and that
King Henry 3. concessit Civibus Civitatis praedict quod non implacitentur de
terris, and tenementis suis, etc. extra Muros Civitatis praedict. and said that
he himself is a Citizen of London, and demanded judgment of the Writ; and to
the Pleading he further said, Sed illis rectum teneatur infra Civitatem
praedictam secundum Consuetudinem Civitatis praedict. Exception was taken to
the Plea, because the Tenant did not show before that by their custom they
ought to be impleaded: And by the Opinion of the whole Court, the Tenant ought
to have showed, that the Citizens for their lands there ought to be impleaded
in the Hustings, etc. And the general words in the Plea Sed illis rectum
reneatur infra Civitatem praedictam secundum consuetudinem Civitatis praedict.
do not supply the defect aforesaid: And afterward it was awarded that the
Tenant plead Ouster.

Mich. 21 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
XLIX. Hunt and Sons Case.
AN Action upon the Case by W. Hunt against W. Sone. Assumpsit. 2 Leon. 107.
Owen 42. 3 Cro. 118. 1 Roll. 29. and 30. ibid.
The Plaintiff declared, Quod cum idem Hunt was seized in his Demesne as of Fee,
of certain lands, and showed the same in certain; praedict. Sone in
consideration that the said Hunt permit the said Sone occupare terras praedict.
ab eodem die. 20 Julij 27 Eliz. usque ad secundum diem Novembris, which should
be in Anno 1589. assumed and promised, that he the said William Sone ad festum
omnium Sanctorum proxime sequend. 10 l. 2 s. 6 d. ac ab inde annuatim durante
dict. termino. 20 l. 5 s. ad festa Annunciationis Beatae Mariae, ac omnium
Sanctorum, per aequales portiones solvend eidem Hunt been and fideliter
contentare vellet, at licet praedict. W. Hunt permisit praefat. Sone occupare
terras praedict. a dict. 20 die Julij 27 Eliz. Usque ad secundum diem November.
28 Eliz. Licetque etiam post dict. 20 diem Julij 27 Eliz. and ante praedict.
diem secund. November. An 28 Eliz. dict. fest. omnium Sanctorum An. 27.
Supradict. ac fest. Annunciationis Beatae Mariae Virginis, ac fest. omnium
Sanctorum 28 Eliz. praeterierunt, praedict. tamen W. Sone dict. 10 l. 2 s. 6 d.
ad praedict. fest. omnium Sanctorum proxime sequend. post permissionem and
assumptionem praedict, ac aliam 10 l. 2 s. 6 d. ad fest. Annunciationis 28
Eliz. ac alia 10 l. 2 s. 6 d. ad fest. omnium Sanctorum An. 28. Eliz.
superdict. nondum solvit. The Defendant pleaded, that the Plaintiff entered into
parcel of the Premises 6 October 28 Eliz. and eadem occupare eundem Sone non
permisit; upon which they were at Issue, and it was found for the Plaintiff; it
was moved in stay of Judgment, that the Plaintiff had no cause of Action before
that all the Term was expired; for it is an entire Assumpsit, and cannot be
severed by action, and therefore it was said, that if I promise to pay you 10
l. viz. at such a Feast 5 l. and at such a Feast other 5 l. there before the
last day of payment no Action lies, for the sum of 20 l. is one sum entire:
But if I promise to pay another, at Easter next 10 l. and at Midsummer as much,
here they are several Assumpsits, and upon default of payment of the first sum
an Action will lie without excepting the latter payment. But at last the Court
agreed, That Judgment, notwithstanding that exception should be given for the
Plaintiff, and that the Declaration was good enough, as well in respect of the
Exception aforesaid, as also that the word (Licet) was effectual enough to set
forth the permission.

L. Hill. 31 and 32 Eliz, In the Common Pleas.
A. Disseised B. of two Acres of Land and leased one of them to C. at will, and
the other Acre to D. at will, and they entered accordingly: B the Disseisee by
Lease leased both Acres to E. for years, and entered into one of the Acres in
the name of both, and sealed and delivered the Lease to E. It was holden by the
Court to be a good Lease to maintain an Ejectione firmae of both Acres.

LI. Mich. 32 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
2 Cro. 655, 656 plus. 2 Roll. 416. Johnson versus Smart. cont.
A. Seized of certain Lands and having two Sons, devised part of his Lands to
his eldest Son in tail: and the other part of his Lands to his younger Son in
tail, with this clause in the Will, that if any of his Sons dyed without Issue,
that then the whole Land should remain to a stranger in Fee, and dyed the Sons
entered into the Lands devised to them respectively, and the younger Son died
without issue, and he to whom the Fee was devised entered: It was adjudged, That
this Entry was not lawful, and that the eldest Son should have the Land by the
implicative devise.

Mich. 32 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
LII. Frice and Fosters Case.
IN Ejectione firmae, the Plaintiff declared upon a Lease made 14 Jan. 30 Eliz.
to have from the Feast of Christmas then last before, for three years; and upon
the Evidence the Plaintiff showed a Lease, bearing date the 13 day of January
the same year, and it was found by Witnesses, that the Lease was sealed and
delivered upon the Land the 13 day of January: Variance.
Whereupon Puckering and Cowper Sergeants moved on the part of the Defendant,
that for that variance between the Declaration and the Evidence of the
Plaintiff, that the Jury might be discharged: Evidence good to maintain Issue.
But Anderson Chief Justice said, that the Evidence was good enough to maintain
the Declaration, for if the Lease was sealed and delivered the 13 of January,
it was then a Lease 14 January, Quod caeteri Justiciarii concesserunt.

LIII. Mich. 32 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
IN a Quare Impedit against the Bishop of Coventry and Lichfield: The Case was,
that A. seized of an Advowson in Fee, Quare Impedit by Executors.
the Church voided, the Bishop collated wrongfully, A. dyed, Collation.
it was holden that his Executors might have a Quare Impedit upon that
disturbance, and that by the equity of the Statute, which gave an Action of
Trespass to Executors of Goods carried away in the life of the Testator, 4 E.
3. cap. 7. and that the Clerk should be removed at the suit of the Executors.

Mich. 32 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
LIVE. Harvey and Thomas Case.
THe Case was that the Husband seized of Land in the right of his Wife, made a
Lease of it for years, Fine by the Husband where avoids a Lease and e contra 1
Roll. tit. Charge in Marg. 389. Plow. Quaer. 31. 261. ib. plus.
and afterward he and his Wife conveyed the Land to a stranger by Fine, the
Husband died. Wray Chief Justice was of opinion that the Conusee should hold
the Land discharged of the Lease. Gaudy, contrary, In case of a Rent granted,
or a Recognizance acknowledged by the Husband, the Conusee of the Fine shall
avoid any of them; But in this Case the Conusee meddles with the Land it self,
and an Estate in the Land is conveyed by the Husband, which none but the Wife
or her Heirs shall avoid; and if the Wife, after the death of her Husband,
accept the Rent upon such a Lease, by that the Lease is confirmed.

Mich. 33 Eliz. In the Kings Bench,
LV. Blaby and Estwicks Case.
IN Assumpsit, It was moved in stay of Judgment, Assumpsit.
that one of the Defendants was dead after verdict; but notwithstanding that
Allegation, Judgment was given, Attornment.
for the Court cannot take Notice of it judicially, nor any of the Parties has
day in Court to plead it, and therefore the Court is not to have regard to such
Informations. Wray, It is not honorable for us upon such surmises, which
cannot be tried, to delay Judgment; and also the Party is not without remedy,
for he may have a Writ of Error.

33 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
LVI. Hoar and Briddleworths Case.
Hoar brought Trespass against Briddlesworth, Quare clausum and Domum suam
fregit; the Defendant pleaded, and put the Plaintiff to a new Assignment, i. e.
a House called a Stable, a Barn; and another House called a Carthouse and
Garnier: And that was assigned for Error for that Assignment is not warranted
by the Declaration. Gaudy said it was good enough, for Domus in the Declaration
contains all things contained in the new Assignment; but if the Declaration had
been of a Close, and the new Assignment of a Barn, it had not been good. Wray
Chief Justice, Domus est nomen collectivum, and contains many Buildings, as
Barns, Stables, etc. And such was the Opinion of the Court.

Mich 33 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
LVII. Man's Case.
Prohibition.
MAn was sued before the Commissioners in Ecclesiastical Causes, for an
Incestuous Marriage, viz. for marrying his Wives Sisters Daughter, and although
it be not expressly within the Levitical degrees, yet because more farther
degrees are prohibited the Archbishop of Canterbury, and other the
Commissioners gave Sentence against him, Consultation.
upon which he sued a Prohibition upon the Stat. of 32 H. 8. c. 38. The
Prohibition was general where it ought to be special, that it be not within the
Levitical degrees, and therefore a Consultation was granted.

Trin. 26 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
LVIII. Doylies Case.
Appeals.
IN an Appeal de Roberie against Doyly; It was agreed by the Justices that the
Party robbed shall have an Appeal of Robbery 20 years after the Robbery
committed, and shall not be bound to bring it within a year and a day, as in
the Case of an Appeal of Murder: Vide contr. 22 Ass. 97. vide Stamford 62.

Trin. 26 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
LIX. Ruishbrook and Pusanies Case.
THe Plaintiff brought Trespass for pulling down his Hurdles in his Close: The
Defendant justified, by reason that one Beddingfield was Lord of the Manor of
D. and that the said Beddingfield, and all those whose Estate he had in the
said Manor, had had a free course for their sheep in the place where etc. And
that the Tenant of the said Close could not there erect Hurdles without the
leave of the Lord of the Manor, and that the said Beddingfield let to the
Defendant the said Manor, and because the Plaintiff erected Hurdles without
leave, etc. in the said Close, he cast them down, as it was lawful for him to
do: The Plaintiff replied of his own wrong without cause, etc. It was holden by
the Justices to be an ill Plea, Traverse.
for the Plaintiff ought to have traversed the Prescription.

19 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
LX. Par Marquess of Northamptons Case.
PAr Marquess of Northampton took to Wife the Lady Bourchier, Heir of the Earl
of Essex: Leases, by a Baron contrary to Act of Parliament, void. 3 Leon. 71.
who levied a Fine of the Lands of the Lady sur Conusans de Droit, etc. with a
Grant and Render to them for Life, the remainder to the right Heirs of the body
of the said Lady. And afterward by Act of Parliament ^5 H. 8. It was enacted.
That the said Lady should retain part of her Inheritance, and dispose thereof
as a Feme sole, and that the said Marquess should have the residue, and that he
might lease the same by himself without the Wife for 21 years, or lesser term,
yielding the ancient Rent, being Land which had been usually demised, etc. The
Marquess leased the same for 21 years, and afterward durante termino praedict.
he let the same Land to another for 21 years, to begin after the determination
of the former Lease. It was moved that the last Lease was void, for three
Causes; 1. Because the Marquess had but for Life, and then it cannot be
intended, that the Statute would enable one, who had an Estate so determinable
to make such a Lease, which peradventure could not begin in his Life. 2. The
Letter of the Act is 21 years or under; and the word (under) strongly expounds
the meaning of the Act to be not to extend to such an Estate, for hereupon the
matter is a Lease for 40 years. 3. Because the Land leased is the Inheritance
of the Wife; and it was said that in the Case of one Heydon such a private Act
of Parliament was strictly construed, Acts of Parliament.
It was enacted that all Copies for three Lives granted by the Lord Admiral, of
the Lands of his Wife which was Queen Katherine should be good: The Admiral
granted in Reversion for three Lives. It was holden that the Grant was void,
and not warranted by the said private Act of Parliament. Dyer, The words are
general, omnes dimissiones, therefore not to be restrained to special Leases.
Manwood, A Feme covert by duress joins in a Lease with her Husband, it shall
bind her. The Case was adjourned.

LXI. Mich. 19 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
THe Queen leased for years rendering 10 l. Rent; the Lessee granted the Land
over to A. rendering 20 l. Rent: A. granted the Land over to B. who surrendered
to the Queen, and took a new Lease: And Manwood said, that the first Lessee
should have an Action of Debt for the Rent of 20 l. against him, Debt for Rent.
who was possessed of the Land, and not against A. his Assignee, for it is a
Rent issuing out of the Land, and he who has the possession of the Land shall
pay it, and no other; for if any part of the Land be evicted, the Rent shall be
apportioned; and because it is merely a Rent, and ensues the privtiy real, viz.
the possession of the Land, and not the privity personal, the Person of him who
was party or privy to the Contract; and he said, If the first Lessee, who
reserved the Rent, entered upon the Land, the Rent is suspended. Dyer, The first
Lessee has Election which of them he will sue, 18 H. 6. 1. in Debt, against
Lessee for years, for the Arrearages of Rent reserved upon it, he needs not
declare that the Lessee had entered, for the Contract is the ground of the
Action 44 Eliz. 3. 5. Debt against the Lessee, notwithstanding the Assignment.

Mich. 26 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
LXII. Bluets Case.
BLuet granted the next Avoidance to Stell and Brooks, and was bound to Brooks
in an Obligation that he should enjoy the said Presentment without any
disturbance or claim of the said Bluet: Stell released to Bluet his Interest on
the said Advowson; The Church became void, Bluet* offered to join with Brook,
Obligation forfeited.
in presenting to the Avoydance: It was holden in this Case, that the
Obligation was forfeited, although that Bluet had a puisne Title to it, after
the Obligation was entered into.

Mich. 32 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
LXIII. Shrewsbury and the Inhabitants of Ashtons Case.
Action upon Statute of Huy and Cry.
AN Action was brought by Shrewsbury against the Inhabitants of the Hundred of
Ashton in the County of Bucks, upon the Statute of Huy and Cry: It was moved by
Fleetwood Sergeant, for the Defendants That if upon such Huy and Cry the
Inhabitants do their endeavors as much as in them is, to pursue and take the
Malefactors, and yet they cannot apprehend them, that in reason they ought not
to be charged: But the whole was very strongly against him: For Anderson Chief
Justice said that the Inhabitants of the Hundred in which the Robbery is done
are bound to apprehend the Felons, or to satisfy the Party robbed: and the
Party robbed is not bound to give notice to the Inhabitants, nor to direct them
which way the Felons took their flight, but the Inhabitants are bound to pursue
the Felons without any such instruction. And afterward the Inquest was taken,
and gave a Verdict in this manner: That where the Plaintiff had declared that
the Robbery was done in the Parish of D. in the Hundred aforesaid, the Jury
found, that the place where the Robbery was done was a Lane within the said
Hundred and that the one side of the said Lane was within the Parish of S. and
the other side within the said Parish of D. and that the Robbery was done on
the side of the said Lane, which was in the Parish of S. and prayed the Opinion
of the Court upon the matter: And the whole Court was clear of Opinion. That
notwithstanding the Exception, the Plaintiff should have Judgment, for here is
the right Hundred, which ought to be charged, and the mistaking of the Parish
was not to the purpose.

Mich. 32 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
LXIV. Josselin and Josselins Case.
IN Debt; the Plaintiff declared, That he let certain Lands for years to the
Defendant, rendering Rent payable at the Feasts of the Annunciation and St.
Michael, or within forty days after every of the said Feasts, and that the Rent
was behind at the Feast of St. Michael last past, unde actio accrevit: The
Defendant pleaded, Nihil debet; upon which they were at Issue: It was showed to
the Court that here upon the Pleading is a Ieofail, for the Rent is reserved
payable at the said Feasts, Jeofails.
or within forty days after; and he declares that the said Rent, upon which the
Action was brought, was behind at St. Michael, without respect to the forty
days after, which cannot be; for before the forty days after each Feast, no
Action did lie; whereupon the Court awarded a Repleader.

Mich. 32 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
LXV. The Queen and the Earl of Shrewsburies Case.
THe Queen granted to George Earl of Shrewsbury, Grants of the King. Office of
Marshal of the Kings Bench.
An. 15 Eliz. the Office of Earl Marshal of England, and now came the said Earl
and prayed that J. N. one of his Servants, to whom he had granted the Office of
Marshal of the Kings Bench, might be admitted to it, because that the same is
an Office incident to his Office, and in his power to grant; and that Knowles,
to whom the Queen had granted the same Office of Marshal of the Kings Bench,
which she had by the Attainder of Thomas Duke of Norf. might be removed. And a
President was showed M. 14 and 15 Eliz. between Gaudy and Verney, where it is
agreed, That the said Office was a several Office from the said great Office,
and not incident to it; And as to the Case of 39 H. 6. 33 and 34. the truth is,
that the said Marshal of the Kings Bench was granted expressly to the Duke, and
so he had it, not as incident to his Office of Marshal of England: On the other
side were three Presidents showed; In the time of Edward 2. That the Office of
Marshal of the Kings Bench was appendant to the said Office of Marshal of
England. And 8 H. 2. when the said Great Office was in the King, he granted the
said Office of Marshal of the Kings Bench: But 26 R. 2. both Offices were
rejoyned by Parliament as they were in ancient time before; and there was also
showed one Patent of 4 E. 4. and another of 19 H. 8. by which it appeared that
the said inferior Office had ever been part of the Grand Office; Then it was
moved, That when the said Office is in the Kings hands, and the King grants the
said Under Office, If the same was for ever severed from the Grand Office. Wray
Chief Justice, It is a severance of it; for the chief Office is an Office of
Dignity, which remains in the King; but the under Office is an Office of
Necessity, and the King himself cannot execute it, wherefore of necessity he
ought to grant it. Another matter was moved, Recital in Grants of the King.
If the Grant of the King to the Earl of Shrewsbury was good, because in the
Grant to Verney of the Under Office, it is not recited according to the Statute
of 6 H. 8. cap. 9. As 20 Ass. 6. the King seized of the Honor of Pickering, to
which a Forest was appendant: The Bailywick of which Forest he granted in Fee
rendering Rent, and afterward he granted the Honor with the Appurtenances, and
afterward the Baily committed a forfeiture, and the same was found in Air,
for which the Office of Bailywick was forfeited; the Grantee of the Honor
seized it; yet it was holden that the King should have the Rent: And here in
this Case, the Earl of Shrewsbury shall have this Office in his power to grant
it, and so much the rather, for that it was granted but for life.

Mich. 32 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
LXVI. Conies Case.
Roll. Abrig. 894. Sale of Goods by the Sheriff upon Execution, where good,
where not.
IN Debt; It was holden, that if the Sheriff upon the Fieri facias makes sale of
the Goods of the Party, and afterward does not return his Writ, yet the Sale
is good: The Case went further: That upon the Fieri facias, the Sheriff
returned, That he had seized Goods of the Party to such a value, Sed non
invenit Emptores, and afterward before sale of them, he is discharged, and
afterward a Distringas issued to the new Sheriff, to cause the ancient Sheriff
to sell the said Goods; who did so: It was holden, that the said sale of them
was void, for the new Sheriff ought to have sold them: Vide 34 H. 6. 36. A
Distringas to the old Sheriff to sell and deliver the Goods to the new Sheriff.

Mich. 19 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
LXVII.
NOte, by Dyer and Manwood, A. leaseth to B for years, Remainder where void.
the remainder to the right Heirs of the said B. and makes Livery. That the
remainder is void, because there is not any person in esse, who can take
presently by the Livery, and every Livery ought to have its operation
presently: But where a Lease is made to B. for life, the remainder to his right
Heirs, there he has a Fee executed; and it shall not be in Abeyance, for there
he takes the Freehold by the Livery.

Mich. 19 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
LXVIII. Hindes Case.
UPon an Habeas Corpus for one Hind, Habeas Corpus.
the Warden of the Fleet returned, That Hind was committed to the said Prison
by the commandment of the Commissioners in Causes Ecclesiastical. It was
holden, that the Warden in his return, Cause of commitment, where must be
returned, where not.
ought to certify the cause for which he was committed; and then upon the
return the Court ought to examine the cause if it be sufficient or not. But if
one be committed to Prison, by the commandment of the Queens Privy Council,
there the cause needs not to be showed in the return, because it may concern
the state of the Realm, which ought not to be published.

LXIX. Hill. 31 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
IN a Writ of Dower the Demandant recovered by default; Whereupon a Writ issued
to Enquire, if the Husband died seized, and of the damages, and the Sheriff
took an Enquest of Office, by which it was found, that the Baron did not die
seized, prout eis constare poterit, and that Inquisition was returned by the
Sheriff, and filed: It was moved, Return of the Sheriff, where void.
That the said Inquisition and Office was not good, for the Office ought to
find expressly, that the Husband died seized, or not; and not doubtfully as it
is here, prout eis constare poterit; and for that cause the Award of the Court
was, That the return should be taken off the File, because it was insufficient,
and a new Writ was awarded.

Mich. 19 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
LXX. The Lord St. John and Sir John Grays Case.
Grants of Omnia bona, by an Executor, what passes.
NOte, by Dyer and Manwood, upon an Evidence unto a Jury, in Debt, brought
against the Defendant, as Executor of his own wrong: That if an Executor gives
omnia bona sua, the Goods which he has as Executor shall not pass, which vide
10 E. 4. 1. by Danby; But the contrary of that was holden by Wray Chief Justice
of the Kings Bench: And Plowden in the Case of Bracebridge, 18 Eliz. and they
said that the said Case of 10 E. 4. was not Law; for by such grant made by
Executors the Goods of the Testator should pass.

Mich. 18 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
LXXI. Tailors Case.
Outlawry, how to be avoided.
Tailor was Outlawed in debt, where a Supersedeas of Record was delivered to
the Sheriff before the awarding of the Exigent: It was holden, that the Party
should avoid the same by Plea: Then it was moved, if the Plea should be pleaded
by Attorney, or in Person, to which it was said by Manwood Justice, that where
Matter in Fact is pleaded in avoiding of an Outlawry, it ought to be pleaded in
person; but a matter of Record might be by Attorney. And so it was said by Ford
Prothonotary, it was agreed in Sir Tho. Chamberlains Case, 7 Eliz. and so it
was agreed in the Principal Case.

18 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
LXXII. Bettuans Case.
IN Ejectione firmae. The Case was, A Fine was levied to Cook and three others;
and by an Indenture between the Parties to the Fine it was declared, that the
said Fine was levied ea intention, That the Conusees should make an Estate of
the said Land to such a person, which the Conusor should name, and in the end
of the said Indenture was a Proviso, that the Conusees should not be seized to
any other use, but to that which was specified before, and that the Conusees
should not incumber the said Lands. And the Opinion of all the Justices of the
Kings Bench was, Fines levied to uses.
That upon the said Indenture, the Conusees are seized to their own use until
the Conusor has made nomination; and if he dies without any nomination, then
the use should vest in his Heir: It was further given in Evidence, that the
Conusor named the said Cook one of the Conusees, and willed that the other
three Conusees should release to him. Gaudy Justice held, That that by
nomination, the use did vest in Cook, for he said, it had been adjudged, that
where before the Statute of 27 H. 8. One infeoffed diverse persons to his use;
Feoffment to Uses.
and the Feoffor willed that his Feoffees should make estate to such person as
his Son and Heir should name, and died; the Son and Heir named one of the
Feoffees; that the same was a good nomination, etc. Wray and Jefferies to the
contrary; for after this release Cook is in the whole by the Conusor, and not
by his Co-Feoffees, and by this limitation the Conusor ought to name such a
person which ought to take the estate: and so cannot one Ioyntenant from his
Companion, etc. And also the words are so that they four shall take the estate.

14 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
LXXIII. The Bishop of Rochesters Case.
IN Ejectione firmae the Case upon Evidence was, Grant of a Reversion by a
Bishop. Attornment.
the Bishop of Rochester, 4 E. 6. made a lease for years to B. rendering rent,
and afterward granted the Reversion to C. for 99 years, rendering the ancient
rent, Habend. from the day of the Lease without impeachment of waste, which
Grant was confirmed by the Dean and Chapter: But B. the Lessee did not attorn;
and in default of Attornment it was holden by the whole Court, that the Lease
was void, for it is made by way of Grant of the Reversion: But by Catlin, if
the Bishop had granted the Reversion and also demised the Land for 99 years, it
should pass as a Lease to begin first after the former Lease determined. And as
to the Attornment, it was given in Evidence, that B. after the notice of the
Grant to C. had speech with C. to have a new Lease from him, because he had
then in his Lease but 8 years to come, but they could not agree upon the price:
And the Justices conceived that that was an Attornment, because he had admitted
the said C to have power to make a new Lease: Also the said B. being in company
with one R. and seeing the said C. coming toward him, said to the said R. See
my Landlord meaning the said C. Bromely Solicitor, Attornment.
the same is no Attornment being spoken to a stranger, Barham contrary, because
he was present: It was holden by the whole Court that it was a good Attornment:
But if the Attornment was not before the Bishop was translated to Winchester
the Lease should be void; and although the confirmation of the Dean and Chapter
was before the Attornment, so as no estate was vested in C yet it was good
enough: for the assent of the Dean and Chapter is sufficient, be it before or
after, by Catlin, Southcoat, and Whiddar Justices, but Wray held the contrary.

Pasc. 26 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
LXXIV. Russels Case.
Execution, where not good upon a Capias without a Scire Facias.
RUssel was condemned in an Action of Debt, and after the year and day, the
Plaintiff sued a Capias ad Satisfaciend. against him, and by force thereof he
was taken, and committed to the Marshal, as in Execution: It was the Opinion of
the Justices that it was a void Execution, and not only voidable by Error, and
therefore the Defendant was discharged; for it is not any Execution at all; and
the Plaintiff may have a Scire facias when he pleases.

Pasc. 26 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
LXXV. Bluet and Cooks Case.
Action for Words.
IN an Action upon the Case, the Plaintiff declared for scandalous words; viz.
Lambert. is a Thief, and Bluet innuendo the Plaintiff, is his Partaker. It was
the Opinion of the whole Court that the words were not actionable, because they
were too general, for it may be that the Plaintiff is his Partaker in other
Matters. But if the words had been. That Bluet, knowing Lambert to be a Thief,
was his Partaker, there the Action would have lain. Judgment was given against
the Plaintiff.

Trin. 33 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
LXXVI. Hunt and Gonnels Case.
Bail.
HUnt recovered in Debt against Gonnel, and procured against him a Capias ad
Satisfaciend. upon which Non est inventus is returned, Execution,
but the Writ is not filed. Hunt sued a Capias against the Mainpernors, who are
taken in Execution: It was the Opinion of the Justices, that they should avoid
this Execution by Error, and not by Plea or Surmise, etc. But if the Capias
returned against Gonnel had been filed, and after imbezelled. Quaere of the
Error, for the Court conceived that the matter shall be examined, but Quaere to
what intent. Wray said to punish the Deceit, but not to maintain the Execution
against the Mainpernors.

Trin. 26 Eliz. In the Kings Bench,
LXXVII. Saer and Blands Case.
SAer Parson of the Church of D. libelled in the Spiritual Court against Bland
for Tithes; Bland came to the Kings Bench and showed, that within the said
Parish of D. there is a Hamlet in which the said Bland inhabited, and the said
Inhabitants within the said Hamlet, time out of mind, had had a Chapel of Ease
within the said Hamlet, because the said Hamlet was distant from the Church of
the said Parish, and with part of their Tithes have found a Clark to do Divine
Service within the said Chapel, and also had paid a certain sum of money to
Saer, Prohibition. Prescription.
and his Predecessors for all manner of Tithes; and prayed a Prohibition, and
had it; and it was holden a good Prescription.

LXXVIII. Pasc. 29 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
A Copyholder with license of the Lord made a Lease for years and afterward
surrendered the Reversion with the rent to the use of a Stranger, who is
admitted accordingly. Attornment.
It was moved if there needed any Attornment: It was the opinion of Rhodes and
Windham Justices, that the Surrender and Admittance ut supra, are in the nature
of an Attornment, and so amount to an Attornment, or at least supply the want
of it.

Mich. 29 Eliz. In the Star Chamber.
LXXIX. The Lady Newman and Shyriffes Case.
THe Lady Newman, Sister of James Wingfield, 3 Leon. 170.
lately deceased, exhibited a Bill of Complaint in the Star Chamber, against
one Shyriffe dwelling in Dublin in Ireland, and two others, complaining, That
the said Shyriffe had forged a Deed, purporting that the said James had by that
Deed given unto him all his Goods, and also that the said James had by that
Deed assigned to the said Shyriffe a Lease for years of Lands in Ireland, and
also the said Shyriffe had procured the two other Defendants to depose upon
their Oaths before the Town Clerk of London, That the said Deed was Sealed and
Delivered by the said James as his Deed. It was moved by the Counsel of the
Defendant, that these Matters of Forgery were not within the Statute of 5 Eliz.
nor also the Perjury, or the procurement thereof, upon which the Lords of the
Council there, Upon the Statute of 5 Eliz. of Perjury.
referred the consideration of the said Statute to both the Chief Justices: who
at the next day in Court declared their Opinions upon the said Matters, i. e
That the said Matters did not extend to the Forgery of a Deed containing a gift
of Chattels personals, which see clearly by the Statute which as to that
purpose extends but to Obligations, Bills Obligatorie, Acquittances, Releases
or other Discharges, and that also a Deed of Assignment of a Lease of Lands in
Ireland is not within the said Statute; and also they were of opinion, that the
said Perjury, and the procurement of it was not punishable by the said Statute,
because the Oath was taken coram non Judice, for the Town Clerk of London could
not take an Oath in such a case, Note.
no more than a private person. But because that the Bill in the perclose and
conclusion of it was, (contrary to the Laws and Statutes of this Realm) the two
Chief Justices were of Opinion, That the said Court might punish these Offenses
as Misdemeanors at the Common Law, but not according to the Statute; and
afterward Shyriffe was fined, and by Order of the Court to stand upon the
Pillory.

Mich. 29 Eliz. In the Exchequer Chamber.
LXXX. The Queen and Lord Vauxes Case.
Bills.
IN the Exchequer Chamber before the Chancellor, etc. the Lord Vaux brought a
Writ of Error upon a Judgment given against him in the Court of Exchequer, and
assigned for Error that a Bill was exhibited against him, that the Lord Vaux
had taken certain goods of the Queen at Westminster in the County of Middlesex,
and also had intruded into the Rectory of Ethelborough in the County of
Northampton; whereas the Queen ought to have brought several Bills being for
several causes, arising within several Counties. But it was resolved by the
whole Court, That the Bill of the Queen was good enough, and here is no
mischief; for if the Defendant will plead Not Guilty, two several Venire Facias
shall be awarded, one into Middlesex, the other into the County of Northampton.

Mich. 27 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
LXXXI. Owen and Morgans Case.
GEorge Owen brought a Scire Facias against Morgan to have Execution of a Fine
levied 8 Eliz. by which Fine the land was given to the Conusee and his heirs;
the Conusee rendered the same to the husband and wife, and to the heirs of the
body of the husband, (Note that the husband was the Conusor) the remainder in
Fee to the now Demandant; and note that the Writ of Covenant was between the
Conusee Plaintiff and the husband Deforceant, without naming the wife. And
afterward the husband suffered a common Recovery without naming of the wife;
Common Recovery.
the hushand and wife died without Issue, and now Owen, to whom the remainder
was limited by the Fine, brought a Scire Facias; in bar of which the Recovery
was pleaded. It was argued by Shuttleworth Sergeant, That the said Recovery had
against the husband was a good bar, Feme not party to the Writ of Covenant not
bound by a Recovery.
and should bar the remainder; and the wife ought not to be named in, or party
to the Recovery, for that nothing accrued to her by the Fine, because she was
not party to the Writ of Covenant, and to the Conusans, vide 32 H. 8. Fines
108. None can take by the Fine but those who are named in the Writ of Covenant,
but every Stranger may take by way of Remainder, Vide etiam 7 E. 3. Br. Fines
114. 6 E. 3. Fitz. Fines 117. 7 E. 3. Fitz. Scire Facias 136. It is said by
Herle, if such a Fine ut supra be taken, it is good as long as it is in force.

LXXXII. Sir Richard Lee and Arnolds Case. Post 93.

SIr Richard Lee Knight. seized of three Manors, made a lease of them to Sir
Nicholas Arnold for certain years, reserving for the one Manor 5 l. and for the
other Manor 10 l. and for the third Manor 10 l. upon condition that if the said
rents, or any of them, or any part, etc. be behind, a re-entry into all the
Manors; and afterward he bargained and sold the reversion of one of the said
Manors to William Winter in Fee: and afterward by Deed indented and enrolled,
bargained and sold the two other Manors, and for the rent of one of the said
Manors, the Vendee did re-enter into all the Manors. Manwood, Here are several
reservations, Reservation of Rents upon a joint Lease.
several rents, and several leases; for although that the words are joint, yet
by construction they are become several; as Land given to an Abbot and a
Secular man, although here be joint words, yet they are Tenants in Common,
Litt. 296. And if I sell to you two Horses, the one for 5 l. and the other for
5 l. here are two several contracts; the Parties to whom these reversions are
assured, ut supra, are Assignees within the Statute of 32 H. 8. by which it is
enacted, that Assignees may take advantage of Conditions; for such an Assignee
is not merely in by act of law, as the Lord by Escheat, and he is not such an
Assignee; but is in by conveyance: The Lessor enters upon his Lessee, Assigns.
and makes his Feoffment, and the Lessee reenters, now the Feoffee is an
Assignee; and this condition is destroyed in part and continued in part:
Condition destroyed in part good in part.
If one has Common in the land of another for 20 beasts, and releases his
Common for 10 beasts, the Common for the residue remains; but if he purchases
part of the land in which he has Common, the whole Common is destroyed: A
Feoffment to two with warranty, and one of them releases the warranty, all the
warranty is gone: As to the condition for as much as it is not collateral, but
incident to the reversion, it may be severed and is of the same nature as the
rent and reversion. A man possessed of lands for 20 years, and seized of other
lands in Fee, Conditions divided.
leaseth all the land for 10 years, reserving rent, with clause of re-entry,
and dies, now the Heir has a reversion for the land in fee, and the executor
for the other land, and so the condition is divided according to the reversion;
so if lands were given to one in general tail and others in special tail and he
thereof makes a lease rendering rent, and dies, having several Issues
inheritable to each tail, now the condition shall go according to the rent: and
he conceived, that the Grantee of parcel of the reversion is an Assignee within
the said Statute, Grantee of parcel of the Reversion is an Assignee within 32
H. 8. Of Conditions.
as if a Lease for years be made rendering rent, with clause of re-entry. The
Lessor grants the Reversion for life, such a Grantee is an Assignee within the
said Statute. Jefferies, The Condition is gone: A. leaseth two Acres for years,
rendering rent with clause of re-entry: the Lessor accepts a surrender of one
Acre, the whole Condition is gone, but the rent shall be apportioned. A Parson
leaseth land, whereof he is seized in his own right, and land whereof he is
seized in the right of his Church, for years rendering rent, with clause of
re-entry, and dies, the rent shall go according to his respective capacity and
the Condition divided: Condition ap^^^^^^ned.
So if part of the land so demised be evicted, the Rent shall be apportioned,
and the Condition also: And he said that the Bargainee is not an Assignee
within the Statute. Barham, If the Reservation does not make the lease several,
yet it shall make the Reversion several, etc. Mead, 6 Eliz. The Court was moved
in this Case: A. leased for years rendering rent, with clause of re-entry, and
afterward became bound to another by Recognizance the Recognizee extended the
moiety of the rent and Reversion in Execution; Condition suspended.
and the clear Opinion of the Court was, that the Condition was suspended: If
A. let lands for years rendering rent, with clause of re-entry to a Man and to a
Feme sole, and afterward the Lessor intermarries with the Feme, the Condition
is suspended. Mounson Justice, The Demise is joint, although that the
Reservation be several. Cestuy que use is seized of an Acre in possession, and
of another in reversion, and makes a Lease for years of both rendering rent,
Severance.
here are several rents. 13 E. 3. A. seized of two Acres of lands before the
Statute of Westminster 3. made a Feoffment thereof to hold the one Acre by
Knight Service and the other in Socage; the Tenancy in such case is several, 9
Ass. 24. a lease is made of a Mill. and of a Wood, rendering for the Mill 10 s
and for the Wood 20 s. these are several rents: and so here they are several
rents and several conditions: Two Tenants in Common make a lease for years
rendering rent upon clause of re-entry, the condition is several according to
the reversion, for joint words in the Letter have sometimes as the matter
requires constructions in the severalty. As A and B covenant by Indenture, and
are reciprocally bound the one to the other to perform all Covenants contained
in the said Indenture, the same is to be construed such Covenants, which on the
part of A. are to be performed, and so of the other part B. And he conceived
that by the distracting of the reversion the condition was gone: a condition by
an act in law may be divided but not by the act of the party. Conditions by act
in Law divided not by act of the Party.
As a man makes a lease for years rendering rent, with clause of re-entry, takes
a Wife and dies; The Wife recovers the third part of the land devised for her
Dower, now that third part is discharged of the condition during the estate in
Dower, but the residue is subject to the condition; and vide F. N. B. 21 the
Heir at Common Law shall have a writ of Error for his part; and the Heir in
Borough English for his part: two Ioyntenants make a lease for life upon
condition and one releaseth the condition, Statute of 32 H. 8. of Conditions
taken by Equity.
the same barred the condition. And he conceived that the Bargainee is an
Assignee: for the Statute of 32 H. 8. shall be taken by Equity, etc. As if a
man leaseth lands for years to begin at Michaelmas next, and before Michaelmas
he makes a Feoffment, and at Mich. the Lessee enters, the Feoffee is an
Assignee within the Statute: two Ioyntenants make a lease for years rendering
rent with clause of re-entry, and the one releaseth to his companion, he is an
Assignee within the Statute. Manwood, He is an Assignee and in by the
Bargainor; The words of the Statute of 32 H. 8. are, Grantees or Assignees to
or by any Person or Persons, and here the Bargainee is an Assignee to the
Bargainor as to the use; and for the possession he is an Assignee by him: He
who is in by a common recovery is not an Assignee, although the recovery was to
his use, for the Writ disaffirms his possession: if Tenant for llfe be
disseised and he in the reversion confirms the estate of the Disseisor, and the
Tenant for life reenters, the Disseisor is now an Assignee, but otherwise it
is if he in the reversion does release to the Disseisor: and he conceived, that
the Lessor should recover part of the land in an action of Waste, or enter in
part of the land for a forfeiture, for an alienation in fee, that the condition
remains. Harper, Several reservations do not make several leases, for the
reservation is not of the essence of the lease, for it is good without any
reservation: and whereas it has been said, that a Lease is a contract, I say,
Difference between a Reservation and a Contract.
that there is a great diversity between a reservation and a contract: for if I
sell to you a Horse for 40 s. and afterward I take this Horse out of your
possession; yet I shall have an action of Debt for the 40 s. But if I lease
land to you reserving rent, and afterward enter into parcel of the land
demised, I shall not have the rent: and if I lease two Acres for years with
several reservations, I shall have but one action of waste, but several
Avowries according to the several reservations. And here if any part of any of
the said rents be behind, the party may re-enter into the whole, therefore the
lease is but una and eadem. And I conceive, that the Assignee of the Assignee
is by the Statute to take advantage of the condition even to the twentieth
degree, as a warranty to one of his Heirs and Assigns, extends to the
twentieth Assignee. But here in our case, he is not such an Assignee that shall
take advantage, etc. for he is in by the Statute, scil. in the Post, but not in
the Per, and here the Bargainee has but an use by the act of the Party, and
the possession of the Statute of 27 H. 8. But admitting that he is an Assignee,
yet he is an Assignee but of part, and therefore shall not have advantage,
Condition suspended in part is suspended in all.
etc. When a condition is suspended in part, it is suspended in all. A. leaseth
lands for years upon condition, and afterward the lessor confirms his Estate
in part for life, the condition is gone. Dyer, The Lease is one and entire,
although there be several reservations, for here are not several capacities,
nor several interests. 42 Ass. Two Ioyntenants lease for life, rendering rent to
one of them, yet the rent and reversion shall be to both of them; but if it be
by Deed indented, the rent shall go to one only, according to the literal
reservation, Vide Litt. 80. 346. But if the Lease had been made by several
Limitations, as Habendum one Manor for 20 s. and the other Manor for 10 s. then
the Lease and the Reversion had been several; but here the rent shall not rule
the reversion, but the reversion the rent, and the rent shall be of the same
nature as the reversion. Tenant for life makes a Feoffment in Fee upon
condition, and reenters for the condition broken, now by that re-entry the
Freehold is reduced to the Lessee for life, and the Fee unto the Lessor; but
the Forfeiture remains. Two Ioyntenants, one of them makes a Feoffment in Fee
of his Moiety upon condition, and for the breach of the condition reenters,
the Joint Estate is revived: And he conceived that the Grantee of part of the
Estate, or part of the Land should not take advantage of the condition; and he
said that the Bargainor is an Assignee within the Statute: If Tenant in Tail
makes a Lease for years, and afterward bargains and sells the reversion, the
Vendee has a Fee simple determinable, and may enter for the condition broken:
If a reversion be granted to two, and to the Heirs of one of them, they are
Assignees within the Statute, and if he, who has but an estate for life,
surviveth, he also is an Assignee, for the entire reversion passes out of the
Grantor, and that is my Rule. Judgment was given against the Re-entry.

LXXXIII. Pasc. 30 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
Surrender.
LEssee for 21 years took a Lease of the same Lands for 40 years to begin
immediately after the death of J. S. It was holden in this case, that the same
was not any present Surrender of the first term; but if J. S. dye within the
term, then it is a Surrender, for it may be that J. S. shall survive the first
term.

Pasc. 30 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
LXXXIV. Anderson and Heywoods Case.
Copyholder.
A Copyholder of an Inheritance of a Manor which is in the hands of the King is
ousted of his Copyhold. It was holden that he has not gained any Estate, so as
he may make a lease for years, upon which the Lessee may maintain Ejectione
firmae; but he has but a possession against all Strangers: And it was holden
in this case, that if a Copyholder dies, 1 Leon. 100. Rumny and Eves.
his heir within age, he is not bound to come to any Court during his Nonage,
to pray admittance, or to tender his Fine; also if the death of his Ancestor be
not presented, nor proclamations made, he is not at any mischief, although he
be at full age.

Pasc. 30 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
LXXXV. Cook and Songates Case.
IN Assumpsit, Assumpsit.
the Plaintiff declared whereas Lis and controversia had been moved between the
Plaintiff Lord of the Manor, etc. and the Defendant, claiming certain Lands
parcel of the said Manor, to hold the same by Copy, etc. And both the said
parties submitted themselves to the Judgment and Arbitrament of Mr. Godfrey, a
man learned in the Law. concerning the said Land, and the title of the
Defendant to the same: The Defendant in consideration that the Plaintiff
promised to the Defendant, that if the said Mr. Godfrey should adjudge the said
Copy to be good and sufficient for the title of the Defendant, that then he
would suffer the said Defendant to enjoy the said Land accordingly without
molestation, the Defendant reciprocally promised to the Plaintiff that if the
said Mr. Godfrey should adjudge the said Copy not to be sufficient to maintain
the title of the Defendant, that then he would deliver and surrender the
possession of the Land to the Plaintiff without any Suit. And showed further
that the said Mr. Godfrey did award the said Copy utterly to be insufficient,
etc. Yet the Defendant continued the possession of the said Land: It was moved
that the same was not a good and sufficient consideration to ground an
Assumpsit. But Gaudy Justice, said it was a good and sufficient consideration,
because it was to avoid Controversies and Suits: And afterward Judgment was
given for the Plaintiff.

Trin. 26 Eliz. In the Kings Bench,
LXXXVI. Tailors Case.
IN Assumpsit, the Case was: Assumpsit.
That the Defendant promised to carry certain Apples for the Plaintiff by Boat
from Greenwich, in the County of Kent, to London; and the Apples being in the
Boat, the Boat in which they were, by a great and violent Tempest was sunk in
the River of Thames, so as the said Apples perished, etc. It was holden to be
no Plea in discharge of the Assumpsit, by which the Plaintiff had subjected
himself to all adventures.

LXXXVII. Trin. 26 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
Devise.
A. Seized of Lands in Fee, and having Issue two Sons, Richard and Gilbert, by
his Will willed, That if his Son Richard dye before Issue, so that the Land
descend to my Son Gilbert, then I will that my Overseers shall have the
Government of my Lands and of my Son Gilbert. Richard took a wife and dyed, she
being young with Child with a Daughter, the Devisor died, the Daughter was
born. It was adjudged in this Case, that by this Devise the Daughter was
excluded from the Inheritance, and that Gilbert should have the Land.

Trin. 32 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
LXXXVIII. Lukes Case.
LUke Esquire of Tedcaster, was Indicted upon the Statute of 13 Eliz. cap 8. for
being a Broker in a Usurious Contract; for which he encurred a Praemunire. Who
pleaded Not Guilty, upon which they were at Issue, and at the day of the Return
of the Distringas, the Jurors appeared, and the same day that the Jury was to
be taken, Popham Attorney General sent for the Distringas, and for certain
causes for the Queen, would not proceed. Note that the Attorney was informed,
that the Jury was partial. It was moved by Cook that the Attorney could not
stay the Proceedings, the Writ being returned, and the Jury appearing, he could
not stay the Trial, for no President is thereof. Popham, The Entry shall be in
this case. Vicecomes non misit breve. Cook, That is false, and the Sheriff is
sworn to make a true return; but by consent of the Parties, such a thing may be
done, for Consensus tollit Errorem, Quaere.

33 Eliz. In the Exchequer.
LXXXIX. The Queen and Painters Case.
Account of the King against a Stranger.
SIr William Pelham was Surveyor of the Ordnance, and delivered the money of the
King to Painter, Clerk of the Ordnance. It was holden in this case, That for
the said money the Queen might have Account against Painter, although he wanted
a privity, which cannot be so in case of a common person; for if any Receiver
make one his Deputy, I shall not have an Account against him. Popham Attorney
General, If one of the Exchequer lend unto another 500 l. of the Queens money,
and takes a Bond for it in his own name, yet the Queen shall have an Account
against the Borrower.

Mich. 29 Eliz. In the Exchequer.
XC. Pelhams Case.
IN the Exchequer Chamber, before the Chancellor, Treasurer, Savile Rep 43.
Grant of Office of Sheriff.
and Barons there, in the Case of Pelham, the Case was, That the Queen had
granted by her Letters Patents, that Pelham should not be Bailiff, Constable,
nor other Officer or Minister, Licet eligatur; yet it was holden that the Queen
might make him Sheriff for that Grant does not extend to Officers Royal, as
Grants of Amercements do not extend to Amercements Royal; and also the Office
of Sheriff does not lie in Election; but if the words had been, Licet eligatur
per nos, then it should have been otherwise: And such was the Opinion of
Bromley then Lord Chancellor.

Trin. 19 Eliz. In the Kings Bench,
XCI. Godbolts Case.
IN the Case of one Godbolt, It was agreed, Sales*
that the sale of a Bailywick of a Hundred, was not within the Statute of 5 E.
6. cap. 16. For such an Office does not concern the Administration of Justice;
nor is it an Office of Trust.

XCII. In Temps Eliz.
A. Granted to B. a Rentcharge out of his Lands, to begin when J. S. died
without Issue of his Body, J. S. dies having Issue, which Issue dies without
Issue. Dyer held that the Grant shall not take effect, for J. S. at the time of
his death had Issue, and therefore from thence the Grant shall not begin, and
if not then, then not at all. And Manwood said, that if the words had been, to
begin when J. S. is dead without Issue of his Body then such a Grant shall take
effect when the Issue of J. S. dies without Issue, etc. If Donee in Tail has
Issue which dies without Issue, the Formedon in the Reverter shall suppose that
the Donee himself died without Issue, for there is an Interest, Difference
between an Interest and a Limitation.
and there is a diversity between an Interest and a Limitation; for if I give
Land between A. and B. for term of their lives, if any of them dye, the
Survivor shall hold the whole; but if I give Lands to A. for the lives of B.
and C. now if B. and C dye, the whole Estate is determined, because it is but a
Limitation, and B. and C. have not any Interest. Vide to this purpose 34 Eliz.
Brudnels Case in Cook 5. p. 9.

XCIII. Temps Roign Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
A. Seized of a Manor, leased the same for years, rendering rent, with clause of
re-entry; and afterward levied a Fine Sur Conusans de droit, etc. to the use
of himself and his Heirs the rent being demanded is behind. Dyer, A. cannot
re-enter, for although the rent in right passes without Attornment, yet he is
without remedy for the same without Attornment, and it would be hard without
Attornment to re-enter; It was here moved further, if the Conusor be an
Assignee within the Statute of 32 H. 8. Manwood, The reversion of a Termor is
granted by Fine, there wants Privity for an Action of Debt, Waste and Re
entries: But if the Conusee dies without Heir, although that in right it was
in the Conusee, yet the Lord by Escheat shall make Avowry, and yet the Conusee
by whom he claims could not: And in the Case at Bar, the Conusee himself could
not; but the Conusor being Cestuy que use, who is in by Act of Law, shall Avow,
and re-enter without Attornment, for the Conusor is in by the Statute of 20 H.
8. Harper, The Heir of the Conusee shall Avow and re-enter before Attornment.
Dyer, 13 H. 4. The Father leaseth for years rendering rent, with clause of
re-entry, the Father demands the rent which is not paid, the Father dies, the
Son cannot re-enter, for the rent does not belong unto him; and therefore in
the Case at Bar, the Conusor cannot Avow for the rent before Attornment,
therefore not re-enter: And in Case of Bargain and Sale, the Bargainee is
Assignee within the Statute, but not the Conusor in this Case.

Temps Roign Eliz.
XCIV. 15 Eliz. Sir Francis Leak and Sir Walter Hollis.
Upon Attainder of Treason, who shall seize the Goods for the Queen.
AT the Assizes, the Opinion of Dyer and Stamford was demanded upon this matter:
One seized of Lands and Tenements, and possessed of Goods within the Duchy of
Lancaster, was Attainted of High Treason, and a great Question arose between
Sir Francis Lake Knight. Bailiff of the Duchy, and Sir Walter Hollis Sheriff, which
of them ought to seize for the Queen; and their Opinion then was, that the same
did appertain to the Office of the Sheriff, if in the Patent of the Sheriff
there were not special words to the contrary.

XCV. 15 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
TEnant at Will made a Lease from year to year, Lease by Tenant at Will if a
Disseisin.
Dyer conceived that it was not a Disseisin but the Lease was void; and he
said, that the Book of 12 E. 4. 12. was not Law. For he who disseiseth a man
ought to claim Inheritance in the land, whereof the disseisin is done. Harper
conceived that the said Book of 12 E 4. 12. was good Law, for a Lease at Will
is a Lease at the will of both parties, and therefore when the Lessee makes a
Lease for years, his will is determined, and he will not hold at will. Manwood
agreed with Dyer; for if Tenant at Will lease for years, rendering rent, before
that the Lessee for years enters, the Tenant at Will shall not have any rent
for it was not a perfect contract; otherwise it is where a man seized of Lands
leaseth the same, ut supra. If one enters into my land, and occupies the same
of his own head, claiming to hold the same at my will, and afterward I demand
of him a certain rent for the occupation of my land, he is now my Tenant at
Will; which all the Justices granted.

Mich. 30 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
XCVI. Cutter and Dixwels Case.
ACtion upon the Case, for that the Defendant exhibited a Bill to the Justices
of Peace against the Plaintiff, containing and complaining, That the Plaintiff
is an enemy to all quietness, seeking by all means to disquiet his neighbors,
and has used himself as a lawless person, and having Process to serve upon one
in the Parish, (scil. J. S.) did keep the Process, and would not serve it but
on the Sunday in the time of divine Service, not having regard to her Majesty's
laws or the quiet of his neighbors. Upon which Bill the Justices to whom it was
exhibited awarded Process against the Plaintiff to find Sureties for his good
behavior, by virtue of which he was taken and imprisoned. It was the Opinion
of all the Justices in this Case, that upon this Matter, an Action upon the
Case would not lie.

Mich. 27 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
XCVII. Baspoles Case.
THe Father seized of Lands is bound in an Obligation, 3 Leon. 118. 2 Leon. 10
1. Styles 148 Devise to his Son and Heir.
and devised his Land to his Wife until his Son shall come to the age of 21
years, the remainder to the Son in Fee; and no other Land descends to the Son
from his Father. It was moved, that the Heir in this case at his Election might
wave the Devise, and take by descent, or e contra, Vide 9 E. 4. 18. per
Needham. It was the Opinion of Gaudy and Fenner Justices, that the Son should
be adjudged in by descent: Clench held the contrary.

Mich. 27 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
XCVIII. Onions Case.
IN an Action upon the Statute of 5 Eliz. for hunting in his Park, the Statute
gives treble damages: It was the Opinion of the Justices, that notwithstanding
that the Statute gives treble damages, Costs.
that the Plaintiff should have Costs also.

XCIX. Mich. 27 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
IN Debt the Plaintiff had Judgment to recover, and a Scire Facias issued
against the Bail before any Capias issued against the Principal, Bail.
and the Bail was taken; and now they came and showed this matter to the Court,
and prayed to be discharged. Wray Justice said, They shall be put to their writ
of Error, for being but Error in Process, we may reverse our own Judgment.

C. Mich. 14 Eliz In the Common Pleas.
A Man seized of a Pasture, within which are two great Groves and Wood, known
by the name of a Wood, leased the same by Indenture for years, and also in the
same Pasture were certain Hedgrows and Trees there growing sparsim, and by the
same Indenture bargained and sold to the Lessee all Woods and Underwoods in and
upon the Premises; and further, that it shall and may be lawful to the Lessee
to cut down and carry away the same at all times during the term. Harper said
the Hedgrows did not pass by these words, for they are not known by the name of
Woods, 14 H. 8. 2. Manwood held the contrary. Mounson contrary to Manwood for
the words of the Grant may be supplied by other in it, viz. Woods. Dyer held
that these Hedgrows should pass, for the Grant is general. It was further
moved, if by these words the Lessee might again cut them etc. or but once.
Harper, Manwood and Mounson, three of the Justices held. That he might cut them
but once. But Dyer held the contrary and said so it should be, if the words had
been (growing upon the Premises) and this word (growing) although it sounds in
the present tense yet it shall be taken also in the future tense: if not that
the word tunc be laid, for that is a word of restraint. The case which was
argued in the Chancery, 27 H. 8. where I was present, was this, The Prior of
St. John's let a Commandry; Provided that if the said Prior, or any of his
Brethren there being Commanders, will dwell thereupon, then the said Lease to
be void. And it was doubted if that Proviso did extend to the Successor; for
this word (being) in the present tense, and yet it was holden by Fitzherbert,
that it should be taken in the future tense, and so to extend to the Successor,
but otherwise if the words had been (nunc) being.

15 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
CI. Conies Case.
A Man seized of Lands in Fee devised, Devises.
that his wife should take the profits of his Lands, until Mary his daughter
and Heir should come to the age of sixteen years; and if the said Mary died,
that J.S. should be his Heir. Manwood said, Tail.
That the daughter, after she had attained the age of sixteen years, should
have the Lands in Tail, for Devises shall be construed, according to the
interest of the Devisor; if they have any certainty or reason; but no intent
shall be taken against reason and certainty. It is certain the daughter shall
not have Fee-simple, for that should have descended to her without any Devise;
and these words (if she dye) cannot be intended a condition, for it is certain
that she shall dye; but if the words had been, If she dye before the age of
sixteen years, J. S. should be his Heir, that had been a condition; and if the
words had been, That after the death of Mary, J. S. should be his Heir: So as
the Estate Tail remains in the daughter. Mounson and Harper contrary. And that
she shall have but for life; Mounson said, That if Mary had been a Stranger to
the Devisor, she had taken nothing: Devisee, who shall first take.
And this case was put by Barham Sergeant, A man devised 100 l. to his youngest
daughter, and 100 l. to his middle daughter, and 100 l. to his eldest daughter,
and that all these sums should be levied of the Profits of his Lands, It was
holden by the better Opinion, that the youngest daughter should be first paid,
and then the middle, and then the eldest daughter, etc. and that he said was
Conies Case.

CII. 6 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
A Man made a Lease for life, and afterward made a Lease to another for years
to begin after the death of the Tenant for life: the Lessee for years died
intestate, the Ordinary committed Letters of Administration to A. the Tenant
for life and A. joined in the Purchase of the Fee-simple of the Land demised;
It was holden by the Justices in this Case, that the Fee was executed for one
Moiety, for the remainder for years, Estate executed.
was not any impediment to the execution of it. Manwood conceived that the Term
was not extinct, for the same is not properly a term, Extinguishment.
but only an Interest of a Term, which cannot be surrendered. Mounson, He has
the Term in auter droit as Administrator, and therefore it cannot be extinct.
Dyer, If an Executor has a Term, and purchases the Fee-simple, the Term is
determined. A woman Termor for years takes Husband, who purchases the Fee, the
Term is extinct by Manwood, for the Husband has done an act, which destroys
the Term, scil. the Purchase. But if a woman being a Termor, marries with him
in the Remainder, the Term continues; for here it is not the act of the
Husband, but the act of Law. It was the Opinion of Dyer, Tenants in Common.
that in this case the Tenant for Life and the Administrators should be Tenants
in Common of the Fee.

CIII. Mich. 17 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
THe husband is seized in right of his wife of certain customary lands in Fee,
and he and his wife, by license of the Lord make a Lease for years by
Indenture, rendering rent, have Issue two daughters, and the husband dies the
wife takes another husband, and they have Issue a son and a daughter, the
husband and wife dye, the son is admitted to the Reversion, and dies without
Issue; and by Manwood, that Reversion shall descend to all the daughters,
notwithstanding the half blood, for the Estate for years which is made by
Indenture by license of the Lord is a demise, and a Lease according to the
order of the Common Law, and according to the nature of the demise the
Possession shall be adjudged, which possession cannot be said possession of the
Copyholder, for his possession is customary, and the other is mere contrary,
therefore the possession of the one shall not be the possession of the other,
therefore there shall be no Possessio Fratris in this case: Possesso Fratris.
But if one had been the Guardian by custom, or the Lease had been made by
Surrender, there the Sister of the half blood should not inherit. And Mead said
the Case of the Guardian had been adjudged. Mounson agreed: And it was said,
that if a Copyhold does descend to the Son, he is not a Copyholder before
admittance, but he may take the profits, and punish a Trespass before
admittance.

CIV. Pasc. 19 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
A Parson let his Rectory for three years, and covenanted, that the Lessee
shall have and enjoy it during the said term, without expulsion, or any thing
done or to be done by the Lessor, and is also bound in an Obligation to the
Lessee to perform the said Covenant. Forfeiture. Quaere.
Afterward for not reading of the Articles he was deprived ipso facto, by the
Statute of 13 Eliz. The Patron presented another, who being inducted ousted the
Lessee; wherefore an Action was brought upon the Obligation. It was the Opinion
of all the Justices, That this matter is not any cause of Action; for the
Lessee was not ousted by any Act done by the Lessor, but rather for Non
feasans; and so out of the compass of the Covenant aforesaid; as if a man be
bound that he shall not do any waste, permissive waste is not within the danger
of it.

Pasc. 26 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
CV. King and Cottons Case.
IN Ejectione firmae, the Case was: Lessee for years, the Remainder for life,
the Remainder in Tail to Lessee for years, Lessee for years made a Feoffment in
Fee with warranty, and dyed, he in the Remainder for life dyed, the Issue in
Tail entered, and made a Lease to the Plaintiff. It was clearly resolved by the
Court in this Case, Enter Congeable.
That the entry of the Issue in Tail was lawful, notwithstanding that the
disseisin was done to another Estate than that which was to be bound by the
warranty, scil. to the Estate for life, Vide 50 E. 3. 12* and 13, 46 E. 3. 6.
Fitz. Garr. 28.

Pasc. 26 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
CVI. Scot and Scots Case.
BArtholomew Scot brought a Writ of Account against Thomas Scot: Account.
Thomas Scot sum' fuit ad respondend. Barth. Scot quod reddat ei rationabilem
computum suum de tempore quo fuit receptor denariorum, etc. And declared quod
cum the said Thomas Scot fuit receptor denariorum, etc. and recepisset, so much
by the hands of such a one, etc. Cumque idem Thomas habuisset and recepi^^et
diversa bona. and showed what, ad merchandizand. etc. Exception was taken to
the Declaration, because the Writ and Declaration is general against the
Defendant as Receiver, whereas for such goods as the Defendant had received ad
merchandizand. he ought to have been charged as Bailiff, Quod Curia concessit,
Vide Book Entries 19. 46 E. 3. 9. and afterward the Defendant traversed
severally both the Charges, whereupon several Issues were joined, and both
found for the Plaintiff: And as to the moneys, with the Receipt of which he was
charged as Receiver, the Plaintiff had Judgment; and as to the others,
Abatement of Writ.
which he received ad Merchandizandum, the Writ abated. And it was said by the
Court, That the Writ should have abated in the whole, unless the several Issues
had helped the matter, because the Plaintiff might have had an Action for part
in other manner, Vide 9 H. 7. 4. by Brian.

17 Eliz. In the Star Chamber.
CVII. Morgan and Coxes Case.
MOrgan exhibited a Bill of Perjury in the Star Chamber, against one Cox,
setting forth, that whereas he was bound to his good behavior by Recognizance
acknowledged in the Kings bench, and he in discharge of the said Recognizance
had obtained a Writ De Fama and gestu, to enquire of his Conversation, and
therefore at the Sessions in the County of Devon, where the said Morgan was
dwelling, the grand Jury charged with the said Matter, the said Cox gave
Evidence to the said grand Jury in maintenance and continuance of the said
Recognizance, and upon the Evidence given by Cox the said Bill was conceived.
It was moved by the Counsel of the Defendant, That that Bill upon the matter
did not lie, for that the Evidence in the Bill for the Perjury was given for
the Queen in maintenance of the Recognizance, and that to the grand Jury which
was charged for the Queen: But as to that it was said, by the Lord Chancellor
and both the Chief Justices, that the Writ De fama and gestu, Brief de Fama and
gestu.
is an especial Writ at the Suit of the Party, and not of the Queen, and the
Court cannot deny it to him who asks it; and the grand Jury, as to that
matter, shall be accounted a special Jury, etc.

Mich. 16 Eliz In the Common Pleas.
CVIII. Jackson and Darcys Case.
Tail barred by a Fine. 3 Leon. 57.
IN a Writ of Partition betwixt Jackson and Darcy, the Case was, Tenant in Tail,
the Remainder to the King, levied a Fine, had Issue and dyed, it was adjudged
that the Issue was barred, and yet the Remainder to the Queen was not
discontinued; for by the Fine an Estate in Fee-simple determinable upon the
Estate in Tail, passed to the Conusee.

Trin. 17 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
CIX. Stroads Case.
Tenures.
IN a Replevin, the Case was, Lands holden of a Subject came to the possession
of the King by the Statute of 1 E. 6. of Chauntries. The King granted the Lands
over unto another: it was holden in this Case that the Patentee should hold of
the King according to his Patent, and not of the ancient Lord; but the Patentee
should pay the rent, by which the said Land was before holden, as a Rent-seck
distrainable of Common right to the Lord and his Heirs, of whom the Land was
before holden.

CX. Mich. 19 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
A. Seized of Lands in Fee devised them to his Wife for life, and after her
decease, Estate.
she to give the same to whom she will: He had Issue two daughters, and died;
Devises. Leon. 121^
the wife granted the Reversion to a Stranger and committed waste, and the two
daughters brought an Action of waste. In this Case it was holden, that by that
Devise the wife had but an Estate for life, but she had also an authority of
giving the Reversion by her Will to whom she pleased; and such a Grantee shall
be in by A. and his Will; for A. has given expressly to his wife for life, and
therefore by Implication she shall not have any further Estate: But if an
express Estate had not been appointed to the wife; by the other words an Estate
in Fee should have passed.

Mich. 19 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
CXI. Sir Thomas Kemp and Windsors Case.
SIr Thomas Kemp was outlawed at the Suit of one Windsor, who had against him
four Capias utlagat', and none of them were served, and afterward he sued out
a fifth Capias: It was moved by Mead, that the said Sir Thomas keeps open
House, and yet the Sheriff had not served the Capias. Dyer, The Sheriff may
justify to break the House to take his body, and seize his Goods for the
Queen, for this Process is in Law at the Suit of the Queen; but contrary where
the Process is sued at the Suit of a Subject: And the Justices commanded Ford
Prothonotary to make a special Capias for Body and Goods; and a pain in the
Writ of 100 l. upon the Sheriff to execute the Writ accordingly.

CXII. Mich. 19 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
THis Case was moved by Anderson Sergeant at Law, Improvement of Common.
if in case of Common appurtenant by Prescription without number, the Lord of
the waste might improve, for it is not admeasurable, therefore not improveable,
for the Common being without number, the sufficiency cannot be proved. Dyer and
Manwood Justices, although it be without number, yet it may be reduced to a
certainty being by Prescription; as the number of the Cattle, and the best and
most substantial Tenant of the said Tenement at any time within time of memory
had kept upon the said waste, and then the Plaintiff the Lord might improve
leaving sufficient, according to such Rate.

Mich. 19 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
CXIII. The Earl of Derbys Case.
Debt not against the Husband upon a Contract by the Wife.
DEbt by a Merchant of London against the Earl of Derby and his Wife, and
declared upon a Contract for Silks, and it appeared upon the Evidence, that the
Countess during the Coverture had bought of the Plaintiff certain Silks for her
own wearing; and for the money, which the Countess agreed to pay for the same,
the Action was brought. It was the Opinion of Dyer, Manwood, and Mounion, that
the contract by the Wife, during the Coverture, should not bind the Husband;
but admit that the Husband should be bound yet this Action is not well brought
against the Wife, for she ought not to be mentioned in the Writ.

CXIV. Mich. 19 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
Indictments.
ONe was indicted in the Country, because he commanded J.S. to take up a Bridge,
being in Regia via, leading from such a Town to such a Town; and also the said
J. S. was indicted for executing the command of the other: Exception was taken
to the first Indictment, because no place of the commandment is alleged in the
Indictment, and for that cause the Indictment was taken insufficient, although
Mr. Plowden strongly insisted upon the contrary, as in Trespass the Defendant
justifies by the commandment of J. S. the same is good without any place of the
commandment, for in the first Case the commandment is traversable, but contrary
put by Mr. Plowden, Vide 3 H. 7. 11. Markenfields Case. Another Exception was
taken to the Indictment, because it is not there alleged, that the Bridge was
a common Bridge, but because there was other words in the Indictment which
supplied the same, scil. in via Regia, the Indictment was holden good enough.

CXV. 19 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
IN a writ of Partition between Tenants in common upon the Statute, of 20 Acres
of Land; the Defendant as to part, scil. 10 Acres, pleaded Non tenet pro
indiviso, and as to the residue confessed the Partition; and by Manwood, and
Ford chief Prothonotary, the confession ought to be in the beginning of the
Plea, and Non tenet pro indiviso, in the second place last, so as that part of
the Plea which agrees with the Demand, ought to preceed the part which denies
demand: And the truth of the Case was, that the Defendant had but 10 Acres in
all, and of them was sole seized. Manwood, If your Case be such you may safely
plead to the whole Non tenet pro indiviso.

20 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
CXVI. Duffams Case.
A Man made a Lease by Deed indented for 20 years to begin after the expiration
of a former Lease thereof made to one Duffam, in an Action brought by the
second Lessee against the Lessor; the Lessor said there was no such Duffam in
rerum natura at the time of the supposed Lease made to Duffam. It was said that
such a Plea did not lie for the Lessor, Estoppel.
for he is estopped to say against the Indenture, that no such Duffam was, etc.
And also, if no such person was, then the first Lease was void, and the second
Lease should begin presently, which Mounson and Manwood concesserunt And
Manwood said that the Defendant should be estopped by the recital of the first
Lease, to say that no such Duffam was; and although that the common ground is,
that a recital is not any estoppel, yet where the recital is not material, as
it is here. for the second Lease is to be begun upon the expiration of the
Lease recited, there is an estoppel. Recital.


Trin. 29 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
CXVII. Brown and Fulsbyes Case.
UPon the Statute of 5 Eliz. of Usury, the Case was this, Stat. 5 Eliz. of
Usury.
A. borrowed of B. 80 l. and was bound in an Obligation to pay to him. 90 l. at
the end of the year: It was the Opinion of the Justices, that although the 90
l. was tendered, and B. the Lender did tell the same, yet if he take and except
but of 80 l. it is not Usury within the Statute to make a treble forfeiture;
but yet in that Case the Obligation it self is void.

CXVIII. Trin. 29 Eliz. In the Exchequer.
NOte in the Case of the Tenants of Owning and Northmaston. It was holden by
Manwood Chief Baron, That he who has vesturam terrae cannot dig the Land. And
Gent Baron said, where many have Lot-Meadow to be divided, every year by lot,
who shall have the Grass of such an Acre, and who of such an Acre, etc. and so
change every year according to Lots, they have not any Freehold therein, but
only Vesturam terrae.

Trin. 32 Eliz. In the Exchequer.
CXIX. Sir Walter Wallers Case.
3 Leon. 259. Execution. a Leon. 77.
IN the Case of Sir Walter Waller, it was moved, if one has Judgment in Debt,
and thereupon within the year and day sueth a Capias ad satisfaciend. although
he does not prosecute the same in two or three years, yet when he pleases he
may proceed upon it, and shall not be put to a Scire facias, and of that
Opinion was Philips. Manwood Chief Baron, I agree that if one has sued a Writ
of Execution, and the same be continued two or three years by Vicecomes non
misit breve, yet the Plaintiff may proceed upon it, Discontinuance of Suit.
and shall not be put to a Scire facias. But if such Writ be sued forth, but
not continued, but discontinued for a year and a day, he shall be put to a
Scire facias, for it is the negligence of the Plaintiff not to continue it,
which within the year and day he might do without Order of the Court; but not
after the year by any Order of the Court.

32 Eliz. In the Exchequer Chamber.
CXX. Russel and Prats Case.
RUssel as Executor of Russel brought an action upon the Case against Prat and
his Wife, of Trover and Conversion of Goods and 700 l. in money, and declared
that the Testator was possessed of these Goods, 6 Feb. 1 Eliz. at which day
they came to the hands of the Defendant dum ipsa sola fuit, and converted them,
etc. and Licer the Wife dum sola fuit was required and the said Prat and she
after their marriage, to deliver them, yet they not only refused so to do, but
knowing the said Goods and Money de jure to belong to the Testator in his life,
and to his Executors after his death machinantes ^psum inde call^de decipere
and defraudare, the said Wife dum ipsa sola fuit converted them to her use the
said 6 day of February. And Error was assigned in the Declaration, because it
is not alleged there, whether the said conversion was in the Life of the
Testator, or after his death, for that ought to be showed certainly; for if it
was in the life of the Testator, then it was not punishable by the Common Law
or Statute Law, and the conversion is the principal point of the action. This
action is personal and moritur cum persona; for it is grounded upon a personal
wrong, and arises upon a disceit and wrong, and if there was no conversion,
then an Action of Detinue should lie 7 E. 3. Replevin by Executors of Goods
taken in the time of the Testator, Fitz. Exec. 106. And it was said that this
Action here does not lie upon the Statute of 4 E. 3. which gives to Executors
an Action of Trespass De bonis asportatis in vita Testatoris, for the said
Statute gives remedy in Cases, where there was no remedy before, but here the
Plaintiff might have Detinue. And in our Case it appears not whether the
Conversion was in the life of the Testator, or after his death, therefore for
the incertainty it is not good. Also here is a repugnance in the Declaration,
scil. Sciences the said Goods de jure pertinere to the Testator, in his life,
and after his death to his Executors, and machinantes ipsum inde decipere and
defraudare, the said wife dum ipsa sola fuit, converted them to her use, which
cannot be, etc. Popham Attorney General contrary. And he agreed, that the
Executor should not have an account against one who was accomptable to the
Testator, because the privity was gone. But it has been granted on the other
side, that here upon the matter Detinue lies, and if, etc. then also this
Action lies, for this is the nature of it. If the Testator lends a Horse to a
special purpose, scil. to ride to such a place, and the party rides further,
and the Testator dies, the Executor may have Detinue, or this Action, be the
Conversion in the life, or after the death of the Testator; and yet the damages
recovered, for the Goods converted shall be Assets. Two Ioyntenants possessed
of Goods, lose them and they come to A. by Trover, who converts them to his
use, be it in life, or after the death of one of them, is all one. Anderson,
The Conversion may be well intended after the death; and as to the Exception
for the Repugnancy, it was said by the Justices, that the words ^ciente^, etc.
are but surplusage, and not traversable. Cook. If I deliver Goods to a Carrier,
being in a Chest, and he breaks it and takes them out, in that Case Trespass
lies vi and armis, notwithstanding the delivery. Anderson, praedicta tamen; i.
e. Non obstante, that the Testator was dead, did not redeliver them, etc. which
proves that the Testator was dead: Periam, praedicta tamen, refers to the Non
deli^eravit, not to the Conversion. Cook, I find your Goods and use them, the
same is a Conversion: and in the Case of Knight against Vinchcomb, it was
holden that a Conversion is traversable, therefore it ought to be certainly
alleged: and in our Case the Executor might have detinue or Trespass for the
personal wrong; where the thing it self certain is to be recovered, there the
Executor is sure to have an Action, as Detinue, Replevin, etc. but where
damages only, or things uncertain, there the Executors shall not have Action;
and that difference was in a manner agreed by all. Anderson, Where it is said,
That upon the Assumpsit of the Testator, the Executor shall have an Action upon
the Case, the reason is, because the duty upon the Assumpsit is certain: and
the Statute of 4 E. 3. shall not be taken by Equity; for by the said Statute,
the Executor of an Executor shall not have an Action before the Statute of 25
E. 3. Also there is not any wrong, for then moritur cum Persona: If one finds
my Goods, and denies the having of them, the same is not Trespass. Periam, This
Case is not within the Statute of 4 E. 3. for the Statute is to be intended,
where Goods are taken vi and armis, and if it be at all within the Statute, it
must be within the Equity of it. Manwood, Where one takes my Horse and dies, I
shall not charge his Executor, and that is our Case. At another day some held,
That the Action did not lie against Executors, therefore not for Executors: And
Executors of Executors shall not be charged with a Devastavit made by the first
Executors. Manwood, The Executor of the Jailer shall not be charged in an
Escape. Anderson, It is not within the Equity of the Statute of 4 E. 3. Cook. A
Smith pricks my Horse, my Executors shall not have an Action for it. Anderson,
If one takes my Goods, I shall have Detinue for it, therefore this Action.
Cook, If one take my Goods he is a Trespasser, and I shall have Detinue, for
that affirms a property. Manwood, If my Goods be taken from me, I cannot give
them to a stranger, but if my Goods come to another by Trover, I may give them
over to another.

CXXI. Trin. 32 Eliz. In the Exchequer.
Attaint.
IT was holden by all the Barons, That where the Queen is sole Party against the
Subject, and the Jury find for the Queen, no Attaint lies; contrary where the
Suit is Tam pro Domina Regina, quam pro seipso.

CXXII. Trin. 32 Eliz. In the Exchequer.
Debt:
IF Rent-corn be reserved upon a Lease for years, and it is behind for two or
three years, the Lessor may have Debt for the Corn, and shall declare of so
much Corn, and it shall be in the Detinet, but yet he shall not have Judgment
to have Corn, but so much money as the Corn was worth, every several year being
accounted. Clark Baron doubted if he shall recover the price of the Corn, as it
was at the time when it was payable, or it was at the time of the Action
brought. Manwood, The Law is clear, that the Lessee shall pay according to the
price it was at the time of the payment and delivery limited by the Lease.
Clark said, A is bound to pay and deliver to the Obligee 10 Bushels of Wheat,
and no place is appointed where the payment shall be made, the Obligor is not
bound to seek the Obligee in what place soever as it is in Case of payment of
money, for that the importableness therefore shall excuse him, which Manwood
granted.

CXXIII. Trin. 27 Eliz. In the Exchequer.
NOte, It was holden by the Barons, Fine for Alienation without License.
that for Fines for Alienation without license, not only the Land aliened, but
the other Lands of the Alienor shall be chargeable.

Mich. 30 Eliz. In the Exchequer.
CXXIV. Prowses Case.
IT was holden in the Case of one Prowse by Egerton Solicitor, Tithes.
upon the Statute of 31 H. 8. where an Abbot had a Rectory impropriate, and
also Land within the same Parish, etc. and so paid no Tithes, because he could
not pay them to himself, and for no other cause was discharged; and after the
Dissolution, the Rectory is granted to one, and the Land to another, that in
such Case the King nor his Patentees should not be discharged of Tithes, for
the Lands were not discharged in Right; but if the Lands in the hands of the
Abbot were discharged in Right, as by composition or lawful means, there the
King and his Patentee should be discharged from payment of Tithes. And it was
said by Burliegh Lord Treasurer, that if the Composition or Custom was that the
Abbot and his Successors should be discharged without extending to Farmors or
Lessees, if the Abbot made a Lease, and the Lessee paid Tithes, as he ought;
and after the Reversion comes to the King, the Lessee should pay Tithes during
his Lease, but after the Lease determined, the King and his Patentee should not
pay, but should be discharged by the said Statute; and said, the like matter
was in the Chancery. Trin. 30 Eliz. The Abbot of Tewkesbury having the Rectory
impropriate of Tewkesbury, 11 H. 7. purchased Lands within the said Parish to
him and his Successors, Unity no discharge of Tithes.
after the dissolution the King granted to G. the Rectory, and to W. the Lands;
and if W. should pay Tithes, was referred to Manwood and Periam, who gave their
Resolution, that Tithes were payable.

Trin. 30 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
CXXV. Ropers Case.
ROper was robbed by Smith, and within a week after the Robbery, he preferred
an Indictment against him, and within a month after the Robbery, he sued an
Appeal against Smith, and prosecuted it until he was outlawed, and thereupon
Cook moved to have Restitution, and they of the Crown Office, said that the
Fresh-suit was not enquired, for upon an Appeal one shall not have Restitution
without Fresh-suit. Restitution.
Cook, The Books are, if the Defendant in the Appeal of Robbery be attainted by
Verdict, Fresh Suit.
the Fresh-suit shall be enquired of: But here he was attainted by Outlary, and
not by Verdict, and so the Fresh-suit could not be enquired of; and here the
Indictment is within a week, and the Appeal within a month after the Robbery,
is a Fresh-suit. Wray Chief Justice, In our Law he is to pursue the Felon from
Town to Town; but the suing of the Appeal is no Fresh-suit, vide 21 F. 4.16.
Restitution grounded upon Outlawry, and Appeal of Robbery without Fresh-suit
enquired of 1 H. 4. 5. if he confess the Felony, and so is 2 R. 3. 13.

Trin. 30 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
CXXVI Piers and Leversuches Case.
IN Ejectione firmae by Piers against Leversuch. It was found by Verdict that
one Robert Leversuch, Grandfather of the Defendant, was Tenant in Tail of the
Land whereof, etc. and made Lease for years to Purn, who assigned it over to
Piers the Plaintiffs Father. Robert Leversuch died, W. his Son entered upon
Piers, who re-entred; W. demised the Lands without other words to P. for life,
the remainder to Joan his wife for life, the remainder to the Son of P. for
life, with warranty, and made a Letter of Attorney to re-enter and deliver
seisin accordingly. P. died before that the Livery was executed, and afterward
the Attorney made Livery to Joan, W. died, Edward his Son and Heir entered upon
his Wife, she re-entred and let the Land to the Plaintiff, who upon an Ouster
brought the Action. Heal Sergeant, When P. entered upon W. Leversuch, the Issue
in Tail, he was a Disseisor, and by his death the Land descending to his Heir,
the entry was taken away of W. Leversuch. Cook contrary, P. by his entry was
not a Disseisor, but at the Election of W. for when P. accepted such a Deed of
W. it appeared that his intent was not to enter as a Disseisor; and it is not
found that the said P. had any Son and Heir at the time of his death, and if
not, then no descent, and there is not any disseisin found that P. expulit
Leversuch out of the Land, and Judgment was given against the Plaintiff. And
Cook cited a Case which was adjudged in the Common Pleas; it was Skipwiths
Case. Grandfather Tenant in Tail, Father, and Son, the Grandfather died, the
Father entered and paid the rent to the Lessor, and died in possession, and it
was adjudged the same was not any descent, for the paying of the rent explained
by what title he entered, and so shall not be a Disseisor, but at the Election
of another.

Trin. 33 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
CXXVII. Penhalls Case.
PEnhall was indicted upon the Statute of 5 E. 6. for drawing his Dagger in the
Church against J. S. without saying, that he drew it with intent to strike the
Party, and for that cause the Indictment was holden void, as to the Statute. It
was moved, if it should not be a good Indictment for the Assault, so as he
should be fined for the same: By Sands Clerk of the Crown, and the whole Court,
the Indictment is void in all; for the conclusion of the Indictment is contra
formam Statuti, and then the Jury cannot enquire at the Common Law.

Trin. 33 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
CXXVIII. Weshbourns Case.
WEshbourn and Brown were Indicted upon the Statute of 8 H. 6. and exception
was taken to it, because in the Margent was written Middlesex, and in the
Indictment they both were named of London, and afterward in the proceedings
the words are, That Weshbourn and Brown entered in such manner in Com. praedict.
and that is uncertain what County is intended, Middlesex or London; but the
Exception was not allowed, for London before is not expressed to be accounted,
but only employed. Another Exception was, because they had not any addition; but
it was not allowed, for it appeared to the Court. And after it was moved upon
the Statute of 31 Eliz. cap. 11 that no Restitution upon such Indictment should
be granted if ^he party indeed had had the Occupation, or had been in quiet
possession for three years next before the day of the Indictment, and in the
Case at Bar the Master has been in possession by three years, but the Parties
indicted being his Servants, had been with him but for one year; it was thereby
holden by the Court, that upon the matter Restitution should not be granted,
for the possession of the Master in this Case, takes away all Restitution, and
that by the Statute.

Mich. 32 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
CXXIX. Canons and Osborns Case.
A. Seized of a Rent in Fee, granted the same by Fine to B. to the use of C. It
was moved to whom the Ter-tenant should attorn. And by Walmesly, Periam, and
Windham, there needs not any Attornment to the Conusee, because all the right
of the Rent is out of the Conusor, Attornment.
and transferred to Cestuy que use instantly: And Walmesly cited this Case to
have been lately adjudged. A Reversion in Fee upon a Lease for years was
granted by Fine to A. to the use of B. B. without Attornment brought an Action
of Waste, and it was adjudged that the Action did well lie.

CXXX. Mich. 32 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
A Lease for years is made by Deed Indented rendering Rent, and the Lessor
covenants that the Lessee paying his Rent shall enjoy the Land demised for the
whole term, the Lessee did not pay the Rent, and afterward is ejected by a
Title peramount: By Walmesly and Windham Justices, that the Covenant is
conditional, and that the Lessee should not have advantage of it, if he did not
perform the Condition, which is created by this word (paying.) Periam Justice,
was strongly to the contrary, viz. that the word (paying) did not create a
Condition.

Mich. 32 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
CXXXI. Thetford and Thetfords Case.
THe Case was an Action of Debt for Rent reserved upon a Lease for years; the
Plaintiff declared that Land was given to A. and B. his Wife, Leases.
and the Heirs of their Bodies, and that he and his Wife leased for years to
the Defendant, Baron and Feme.
and that the Donees were dead, and that the Plaintiff as Heir, etc. for Rent
behind, etc. And upon Non dimiserunt, the Jury found, that the Husband and Wife
dimiserunt by Indenture, and that after the Husband died, and the Wife entered
and within the term died: Agreement. Disagreement.
Now upon this matter, Anderson Justice, conceived clearly that the Jury have
found for the Defendant, scil. Non dimiserunt, for it is now no Lease ab
initio, because the Plaintiff has not declared upon a Deed, and also the Wife
by her disagreement to it, and Occupation of the Land after the Death of her
Husband, had made it to be the Lease of her Husband only.

Trin. 31 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
CXXXII. Acton and Pitchers Case.
IN a Writ of second Deliverance by Acton against Pitcher. Leases within 32 H.
8.
It was moved, if a Lease made by a Prebendary were within the Statute of 32 H.
8. cap. 28. because the said Statute speaks of men seized in the right of their
Churches, and a Prebendary is seized in right of his Prebend, and not in right
of the Church: But it is the Opinion of the whole Court, that he was within the
Equity of the Statute.

Trin. 32 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
CXXXIII. Curtises Case.
IN a Writ of Error it was holden in the Common Pleas, Amendment.
that if a Writ of Error be brought and delivered to the Chief Justice de
Communi Banco, and allowed by him under his hand; that afterward the Record
cannot be amended by Prothonotary, Attorney, or Clerk of the Court, although
that no Record be entered upon the Roll, upon which the Writ of Error is brought.

Mich. 31 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
CXXXIV. Scots Case.
SCot brought a Formedon against A. who made default after default, Resceit.
Anders. 133.
and now came B. and surmised to the Court that C. was seized of the Land in
Demand, and gave the same to A. in Tail, the remainder to the said B. in Fee,
and prayed to be received; and afterward the Court, upon advice, ousted him of
the Resceit.

28 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
CXXXV. Terrets and the Hundred of etc. Case.
IN an Action upon the Statute of Huy and Cry against the Hundred of, etc. the
Defendants pleaded Not Guilty: Action upon Statute of Huy and Cry.
And in Evidence, the Plaintiff to prove that he was robbed, offered to the
Jury his Oath in verifying his Declaration, which Anderson and Periam utterly
refused to accept of; but Windham Justice affirmed, that such an Oath had been
accepted of in the Case of one Harrington, Oaths.
where the Plaintiff could not have other Evidence to prove the Cause in
respect of secrecy; for those who have occasion to travel about their
occasions, would not acquaint another, what moneys or other things, which they
have in their journey: and we see that the Law does admit of the Oath of the
Party in his own cause where the Oath shall make an end of the cause, as in
Debt, where the Defendant wageth his Law. Periam, That Is an ancient Law; but we
will not make new Presidents, for if such an Oath be accepted of us in this
case, by the same reason in all causes where is secrecy and no external proof,
whereupon would follow great inconvenience; and although such an Oath has been
accepted of, and allowed here, yet the same does not move us, and we do not see
any reason to multiply such Presidents. The Declaration is, that the Plaintiff
was robbed of 10 l. de Denariis ipsius querentis, and upon the Evidence it
appears that the Plaintiff was Receivor of the Lady Rich, and had received
the said money for the use of the said Lady: And Exception was taken to the same
by Shuttleworth, but it was not allowed of, for the Plaintiff is accomptable to
the Lady Rich for the said money. And it was agreed, that if he which was robbed
after he had made Huy and Cry, does not further pursue the Felons, yet his
Action lies.

Mich. 26 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
CXXXVI. Townsend and Pastors Case.
Feoffment by Coparceners Cestuy que uses.
NOte, It was holden in the Common Pleas by all the Justices in the Case
between Townsend and Pastor, two Coparceners are in the use of a Manor after
the Statute of 1 R. 3. the one of them enters and makes a Feoffment in Fee of
the whole Manor, that this Feoffment is not only of the moiety of the Manor,
whereof she might lawfully, and by the said Statute make a Feoffment, but also
of another moiety by disseisin.

Mich. 26 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
CXXXVII. Bulwer and Smiths Case.
BUlwer brought an Action upon the Case against Smith, and declared, how that
H. H. had recovered against the Plaintiff in the Common Pleas 20 l. and before
Execution died, and that the Defendant knowing that, at D. in the County of
Norfolk, malitiose and deceptive machinans, to Outlaw the Plaintiff upon the
said Judgment, in the name of the said H.H. etc. in performance of his said
purpose, at W. in the County of Middlesex, took out a Capias ad satisfaciend.
in the name of the said H.H. against the now Plaintiff upon the said Judgment
directed to the Sheriff of London, and Non est inventus being returned upon
that, took out an Exigent, in the name of the said H.H. which Writ by the
procurement of the Defendant was returned, and then the Plaintiff was Outlawed,
and afterward the Defendant in the name of the said H. H. took out a Capias
utlagatum against the Plaintiff directed to the Sheriff of Norfolk; by force of
which the Plaintiff was arrested and imprisoned for two months, until he had
gotten his Charter of Pardon, by reason of which Outlawries the Plaintiff had
forfeited all his Goods and Chattels: and upon the said Declaration, the
Defendant did demur in Law, and the principal cause of the demurrer was because
that the Action might have been laid in Middlesex, where the wrong began, scil.
the Capias ad satisfaciend, the Outlawry for this imagination at D. in the
County of Norfolk, set forth in the Declaration, cannot give to the Plaintiff
this Action: But if diverse conspire in one County for to indite one, and they
put the same in Execution in another County, the Party aggrieved may lay his
Action in which of the said two Counties he pleases 22 E. 4. 14. for a
Conspiracy is more notorious, than an imagination, imaginatio est unius,
conspiratio plurimorum: And in this Case the Deliverance of the Capias at D. in
Norfolk is but accessory, and the suing of the Process aforesaid at Westminster
is the principal: upon the part of the Plaintiff it was said, that such an
action might be laid in the County, where the Plaintiff was wronged and the
Plaintiff is not tied to lay his Action in the County where the original
matter, which was but conveyance to the said wrong, was done. A imprisoned upon
a Capias ad satisfaciend. in Middlesex escapes into Surrey, the Action upon the
escape shall be laid in Surrey. Reteiner of a Servant in one County, who
departs in another County, the Master shall lay his Action in which of the said
Counties he will, 15 E. 4. 18, 19. 41 E. 3. 1. A Writ of Disceit was brought in
the County of York, and the Case was, that in a Praecipe quod reddat of Land,
the Tenant showed forth a Protection at Westminster, the which was allowed for
a year, and within the year the Tenant stayed in the County of York upon his
own occasions, the said Writ of Disceit was holden to be well laid, for there
the wrong began, notwithstanding that the Original: i. e. the casting of the
Protection was in Middlesex; for the disceit is, that the Tenant contrary to
the pretense of the Protection continued at York, for the Protection was quia
Moraturus. And always where the cause of the Action consists of two things,
whereof the one is matter of Record, and the other is matter of Fact: there the
Action shall be laid in such County, where the matter in fact may be more
properly tried, Vide 11 R. 2. Fitz. Action sur le Case 36 Br. Lieu 84. in the
principal Case at Bar, the Court was of Opinion, that the Action was well
brought in the County of Norfolk. Another Exception was taken to the
Declaration, because the Plaintiff has there set forth whereas his true name
is John Bulwer, by which name he now sues, he was sued and outlawed by the name
of John Buller, and then the now Plaintiff upon that matter was never sued, nor
outlawed, and then is not grieved by the Defendant, but John Buller; for here
in his Declaration there is not any averment that John Bulwer and John Buller
are one and the same, and not diverse Persons: But the Exception was disallowed,
for the whole Court held, that for As much as the Plaintiff has declared that
he, by the name of John Buller, was sued and Outlawed, the same is an averment
in Law, etc. and amounts to so much. Another matter was objected, because it
appears in the Declaration that H. H. was dead before this Process was sued,
and then the Outlawry was erroneous, and so the Plaintiff is not at any
mischief, but that he may reverse the Outlawry by Error; as in Conspiracy, the
Defendant pleads, that the Indictment upon which the Plaintiff is arraigned is
vicious and erroneous and so his life was never in jeopardy. But as to that, it
was said by the Court, that the erroneous proceedings of the Defendant shall
not give advantage to himself, but because the Plaintiff was vexed by color
and reason of the Outlawry, and put to his Writ of Error, which cannot
recompense the loss and damage by him sustained by reason of the Outlawry
aforesaid, it is reason that the Plaintiff have his Action; wherefore Wray
Chief Justice, ex assensu Sociorum, gave Judgment for the Plaintiff.

CXXXVIII. Mich. 27 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
Upon the Statute of 23 Eliz. of Recusancy.
CErtain Persons were indicted upon the Statute 23 Eliz. for refusing to come to
the Church, and upon the same were Outlawed, and now they came to the Kings
Bench ready to make their submission, and to conform themselves according to
the said Statute; and thereupon they prayed to be discharged. But the Court
would not receive such Submission, but advised them to purchase their Pardon
for the Outlawry, and then to tender their Submission, which they did
accordingly, and at another day came again, and showed to the Court their
Pardon; whereupon the Clerk of the Court asked them if they would conform
themselves according to the said Statute; who said they would, wherefore they
were discharged.

Mich. 27 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
CXXXIX. Christian and Adams Case.
Action for words.
AN Action upon the Case was brought for speaking these scandalous words of the
Plaintiff, scil. the Plaintiff did conspire the death of the Defendant; it was
found for the Plaintiff, and moved in Arrest of Judgment, that upon the matter
the Action did not lie; for the bare conspiring of the death of a man is not
punishable by the Law of the Land, no more than if many conspire to indict one,
but do not put it in Execution it is not punishable; but if A. says that B.
lies in wait to kill him, or rob him, there an Action lies, for insidiatores
viarum are punishable. But the Opinion of the whole Court was, that because
these words sound in great discredit of the Plaintiff, it is reason he have his
Action, and so Judgment was given for the Plaintiff.

Mich. 27 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
CXL. The Lord Stafford and Sir Rowland Heywoods Case.
THe Lord Stafford brought an Action upon the Case against Sir Rowland Heywood
Knight. Abatement of Writ.
Exception was taken to the original Writ, viz. ad respondend. etc. Quare
colloquium, quoddam habebatur, inter Dominum Stafford and Row. Heywood de
assurando Castrum, to the said Lord Stafford by the said Sir Rowland, etc.
Dictus Rowlandus Castrum illud non assuravit, etc. where the said Writ said cum
colloquium quoddam habebatur; for the cause of the Action is not colloquium
habitum, but the not assurance of the Castle according to the promise made
super colloquium praedictum; and for that cause the Writ was abated.

CXLI. Mich. 27 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
NOte, by the Court, If one who is not a common Informer, be barred in any
Information or Action upon a penal Statute, he shall pay costs, notwithstanding
the Preamble of the Statute of 18 Eliz. cap. 5. be, for the redressing of
diverse Disorders in common Informers; but if pars gravata be barred, in such
case he shall not pay costs.

Trin. 32 Eliz. In the Exchequer.
CXLII. Robinsons Case.
GEorge Robinson Lessee for years of the Manor of Drayton Basset, the Reversion
to the King, devised his term to his wife, as long as she should keep her self
a Widow, with the Remainder over, if she married or died, and made his Wife and
his Son William his Executors, the said William being within age, and therefore
the administration was committed to the Wife alone, and she only proved the
Will, and afterward the Wife granted all her Interest to the said William, and
dyed; And by Cook nothing passed by this Grant, for William had the same
before, for every Executor has the whole Interest. Popham contrary; for at the
time of the Grant the Son was within age, and had not administered nor proved
the Will, therefore in effect the wife was sole Executrix; and by Egerton
Solicitor, if during the said Executorship by the wife, one does trespass upon
the Lands, the wife only shall have the Action of Trespass without naming her
Co-Executor, which Cook denied; and he cited the Case 10 H. 7. 4 where two
Executors are, and the one only is possessed of goods of the Testator and a
Stranger takes them our of his Possession, to whom the other Executor
releaseth, and after the Executor, out of whose possession the goods were
taken, brings an Action of Trespass against the Trespasser, who pleads the
Release of the other Executor, and it was holden a good Plea, for the
possession of the Plaintiff was also the possession of his Companion: The Case
was further, that Thomas Robinson in pleading, showing that G. Robinson was
possessed, and the same devised to his wife, who granted to William Robinson,
who devised it to the Defendant: And the other side showed, that the said
Thomas granted the said term to Paramour, and upon that grant they were at
Issue; if now against his own pleading Thomas might give in evidence, that
Thomas could not grant, for that he had not any thing to grant; for if the gift
made by the wife to William was void, and he had the term as Executor, then he
could not devise it, but his devise to Thomas was void, and then Thomas could
not grant it, and so Ne grant pas. It was also showed, that the said Thomas
granted the same to Paramour by Indenture; if now against that Indenture he
might give in evidence such special matter; ut supra; and if the Party shall be
concluded, if the Jury shall be concluded to give the Verdict Secundum
veritatem facti, for they are sworn to say the truth, and by Popham and
Egerton, as well the Jurors, as the Parties, are bound and concluded by the
confession of the Parties on the Record; and here all confess that William
devised to him, virtute cujus he was possessed. The Queens Attorney to that
said, That true it is that Thomas Robinson was possessed; but further said,
that the said Thomas granted it to Paramour, and so the Interest of Thomas is
confessed on both sides. Therefore the Jury shall not be received to say the
contrary. And by Manwood Chief Baron, if the Parties admit a thing by not
gainsaying it, Jurors, where bound by confession of the parties, where not.
the Jury is not bound by it; but where upon the pleading a special matter is
confessed, the Jury shall be bound thereby. And afterward the Issue was found
against Robinson the Defendant.

33 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
CXLIII. Applethwait and Nertleys Case.
IN an Action upon the Case, the Plaintiff declared, that the Defendant
promised in consideration that the Plaintiff at the request of the Defendant
would marry his Daughter, to give to the Plaintiff 40 l. and said he had
married his Daughter, and yet the Defendant Licet saepius requisitus would not
pay it. It was moved by Cook in stay of Judgment, that the Declaration is
vicious because there is not set forth the place and time, when the request was
made, for the Assumpsit being general, it is by Law to be paid upon request.
Fenner, If the promise was expressly to be paid upon request, the Declaration
was not good. And afterward Judgment was given for the Plaintiff.

Hill. 30 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
CXLIV. Wats and Kings Case.
SAmuel Wats Plaintiff in Ejectione firmae against W. King, upon a Special
Verdict it was found that W. Wallshot was seized in Fee, and he with one Oliver
Shuttleworth Octab. Mich. 3 and 4 Phil. and Mary, levied a Fine Sur Conusans de
droit, etc. to John Hooper, who granted and rendered by the same Fine to Oliver
for a month, the remainder to the said W. Wallshot, and to one Anne Cook, and
the heirs of their bodies, etc. the remainder to the right heirs of the said W.
Wallshot in Fee, and that with Proclamation. William and Anne intermarry, have
issue John now alive: W. Wallshot 4 and 5 Phil. and Mary, levy a Fine with
Proclamation to Edward Popham Esquire to the use of the said Edward and his heirs:
W. Wallshot 18 Eliz. died, Anne took to husband Richard Stephens, and they in
the right of the said Anne entered, and by Indenture demised the said Land to
Richard Hoose the Father, Richard the Son, and Mary his wife, for the term of
their lives, rendering to the said Richard Stephens and Anne his wife, and to
the heirs of the body of the said Anne, and of the right heirs of the same W.
Wallshot. Anne died; and if this Lease should bind the Conusee was the
question, for it was agreed by all that the Issue in Tail was bound by the
Fine, Quaere; the Case was only put, but not resolved.

CXLV. Trin. 30 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
UPon a recovery in a writ of Entry sur disseisin of two Acres of Lands, an
Habere facias seisinam was awarded; the Sheriff as to one Acre returned Habere
feci, and as to the other tarde. And that return was showed to the Court,
Amercement of the Sheriff.
and all the Justices but Periam held that the Sheriff should be amerced for
that return, being contrary and repugnant in it self; but Periam said, it may
be that the Acre of which no seisin is had was so distant from the other Acre
whereof the seisin was had, that the Sheriff in time could not make execution
of both being so remote the one from the other. To which it was answered, That
if the truth of the case was such, Then might the Sheriff make Execution in one
Acre in the name of both Acres. And if upon a Capias ad satisfaciend. against
two, the Sheriff retorn as to one a Cepi, and as to the other Tarde, he shall
be amerced, for his several retorns cannot stand together.

Mich. 29 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
CXLVI. Lees and Lord Staffords Case.
COmpton made Conusans as Bailiff to Edward Lord Stafford, and showed that
Henry Lord Stafford, Father of the said Edward, and Ursula his Wife, were
seized of the place where, and let the same for years to Edward Lees the
Plaintiff, Robert Lees, and Elizabeth Atwood, upon Condition they, nor any of
them, should alien the said Term, nor any part of the same without the leave of
the Lord or his Heirs. Henry Lord Stafford and Ursula died, and that the
Reversion thereof descended to Edward Lord Stafford; and showed further, that
the said Edward Lees the Plaintiff had aliened: To which the Plaintiff in bar
of the Conusans said, that the said Edward now Lord Stafford gave License, that
the said Edward Lees, Robert, or Elizabeth might alien, and that was without
Deed. It was conceived by some, that this License was not of any force to
dispense with the Condition, because it is uncertain and doubtful in the
disjunctive; and it was resembled to the Case of 11 H. 7. 13. where a man gives
a thing to J. S. or A. B. it is void for the incertainty: But all the Court was
to the contrary. For here the thing which is given is but a Liberty, and is not
to be resembled to a Gift or Interest; and the intent of the Lord Stafford was,
that one of them might alien, but not all of them, and afterward Judgment was
given for the Plaintiff.

Trin. 31 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
CXLVII. Limver and Evories Case.
LImver as Administrator of one A. brought Debt against Evory, and the case
was, F. made G. his Executor, and G. made H. an Infant his Executor and died,
and during the minority, Administration was granted to the Plaintiff, who as
Administrator of G brought an Action of Debt upon a Bond made to the first
Testator, and that was assigned for Error, for the Plaintiff ought to bring his
Action as Administrator of the first Testator, vide 10 E. 4. 1. 26 H. 8. 7. and
for that Cause the Judgment was reversed,

Mich. 33 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
CXLVIII. Knevit and Copes Case.
KKnevit brought Ejectione firmae against Cope, and declared, 3 Leon. 266.
whereas John Hopkins by his Deed bearing date the 20 of May, 32 Eliz. had let
to him a House and two yard Lands, containing forty Acres of Land, Meadow, and
Pasture, at Tithingham de forecomb, in the Parish of Steep, etc. and upon Not
Guilty, the Visne was of Tithingham de Forecomb: Exception was taken by Cook,
that the Declaration had not certainty; for it is not showed certain, how much
Meadow Land, and how much Pasture is contained in the said two yard Lands, and
the Jury may find the Defendant Guilty, as to so much Land, but not to the
residue; also he has not showed in the Declaration when the Lease was made,
but only says, that by Indenture bearing date 20 May, etc. but does not show
any day of delivery of the Indenture, for then is the demise. To which
Exception it was said by the Justices, That the Declaration as to that was good
enough, for it shall be intended to be delivered at the day of the date.
Another Exception was taken to the Visne, because that the Visne ought to have
been from the Parish, and not from Tithingham, 11 H. 7. 23, 24. Forcible Entry
in the Manor of B. in B. the Visne shall not be from the Manor of B. but of B.
Gaudy, You shall never have a Visne of the Parish, for diverse Towns may be in
one Parish; but here the Visne is well of Tithingham, for it may be that it is
a Town. Cook, It is but a Vill conus, from which a Visne cannot come.

CXLIX. Trin. 28 Eliz. In the Common Pleas. Rot. 1027.
MIlbourn brought an Action upon the Statute of Winchester, against the
Inhabitants within the Hundred of Dunmow in the County of Essex, it was found
by Special Verdict that the Plaintiff was robbed 23 Aprilis, inter horam
secundam and matutinam tempore nocturno, and ante Lucem ejusdem diei; and the
Opinion of the Court was clear, that the Plaintiff should be barred, for the
said Statute provided for ordinary Travel: as in the Case of Archpool, who came
to his Inn post Sunset and ante noctem in tempore diurno, which is an usual
time for traveling to come to his Inn; but the Law does not receive any in
protection of this Stat. who travel in extraordinary hours, for it is the folly
of the Traveller to take his journey so out of season, and the Inhabitants are
not bound to leave their Houses, and to attend the ways tempore nocturno: and
another reason was alleged by the Justices, because the said Statute appoints
watch to be kept in the time of night, a Festo Ascensionis usque ad Festum
Sancti Michaelis, and this Robbery was done the 23 of April, so as it was out
of that time; and afterward Judgment was given against the Plaintiff.

Mich. 26 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
CL. Barkers Case.
Estrepement in Partition.
A Writ of Partition by Barker heir of Gertrude, Marquess of Exceter, who
devised all her Lands to Blunt; by which the third part was descended to the
Plaintiff, and he prayed a Writ of Estrepement; and it was the Opinion of the
Court, that the Writ ought not to be granted, for that the Plaintiff might have
a more proper remedy upon the Statute cum duo and tres, etc. and in a Writ of
Partition, no Land is demanded.

Trin. 29 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
CLI. Megot and Davies Case.
Assumpsit.
MEgot brought an Action upon the Case against Broughton and Davy upon
Assumpsit; and it was found by Nisi Prius for the Plaintiff, and afterward
before the day in Bank Broughton dyed; and after Judgment given, Davy the other
Defendant brought a Writ of Error in the said Court, scil. in the Kings Bench,
where Judgment was given, and assigned an Error in fact, scil. the death of
Broughton depending, the Writ, vide 2 R. 3. 21. and this Case is not like to
Trespass; for Trespass done by many are several Trespasses, but every Assumpsit
is joint: If the Court may reverse their own Judgment.
and if the Court upon this matter might reverse their own Judgment, was the
Question; the Case was not resolved, but adjourned.

CLII. Trin. 31 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
IT was found by Office, that J. S. held by the Queen, and dyed without Heir,
whereas in truth he had an Heir, scil. A. S. who leased the Lands for an
hundred years, and afterward traversed the Office, Office trove.
and had an Ouster le main le Roy. Now the matter was moved in the Common
Pleas by Fenner, in behalf of the Sheriffs of London, before whom the matter
depended, to whom it was said by Anderson Chief Justice, Conveyance by the
Heir; upon Entrusion.
That where the King is entitled by an Office to a Chattel, as to a wardship*
etc. there if the Heir without any intrusion bargain and sell, levy a Fine, or
lease for years during the possession of the King, it is void against the King,
but shall bind the Heir; but where the King is entitled to the Fee-simple, as
in this Case, such a Conveyance is merely void.

Hill. 31 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
CLIII. Samuel Starkeys Case.
HOmine replegiando by Samuel Starkey to the Sheriffs of London. Who returned,
that the said Starkey was indicted to be de mala fama and deceptione Domini
Regis, with diverse other general words, and namely that he had deceived J. S. a
Clothier, and that he was a common Cozener; and thereof being found guilty,
Judgment was given by the Mayor and Recorder, That he should be disfranchized
of his Freedom, and should be fined and imprisoned for a year; and further
said, that he had not paid his Fine, nor the year expired. Cook, Such Return
has not been seen, and it is directly against the Statute of Magna Charta.
Wray Chief Justice gave a Rule that the Sheriffs should make their Return at
their perils before such a day.

Hill. 31 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
CLIV. Bushy and Milfeilds Case.
IN Error brought by Bushy and Milfeild, It was assigned for Error, that where
in the first Action the Jury gave four pence Costs, and the Court gave de
incremento three and twenty shillings, that in the Judgment the four pence was
omitted. Error.
It was the Opinion of the Court, That for that Cause the Judgment should be
reversed, although it be for the advantage of the Party, so where the Judgment
is quod sit in misericordia, where it ought to be Capiatur.

Hill. 29 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
CLV. Bingham and Squires Case.
BIngham brought Debt upon an Obligation against Squire. Obligation. 3 Leon.
151.
The Condition was, If Squire did procure a Grant of the next Avoidance of the
Archdeaconry of Stafford to be made to the said Bingham, so as the said
Bingham, at the said next Avoidance may present, that then, etc. The Case was,
That afterward by the means and endeavor of Squire, the Grant of the next
Avoidance was made to Bingham: but before the next Avoidance, the present
Archdeacon was created a Bishop, so as the presentment of that Avoidance
belonged to the Queen: It was adjudged in this Case, that the Condition was not
performed, and that by reason of these words, scil. So that Bingham may
present. And afterward Judgment was given that the Plaintiff should recover.

Hill. 26 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
CLVI. Mansors Case.
A. Man bound himself in an Obligation to make an Assurance of Lands the first
day of Jan. and the last day of December, he to whom the Assurance was to be
made, scil. the Obligee, the said last day before Sunsetting, came to the
Obligor with a Deed ready to be sealed, and prayed him to seal it; who said to
him that he was a man unlearned, and said he would show the same to his
Counsel, and then he would seal it. And if the Obligation was forfeited or not,
because he did not seal it presently* was the question: And Fenner argued that
it was not; for when a thing is to be done upon request, then he who makes the
request, ought to give sufficient and convenient time to perform the Condition.
I agree, That where the Condition is absolute, there if the Condition be not
performed, he shall not be excused by the default of another. As if a man be
bounden to marry A.S. and she will not marry him; or to enfeoff J. S. and he
refuses, as 3 H. 6. is, the Obligation is forfeited; Yet in these Cases if the
Obligee himself be the cause that J. S. will not take the Feoffment, or he will
not marry A. S. the Obligation is not forfeited: So in our Case, for by his
late request it is impossible for me to perform the condition; for before my
Counsel shall have perused it, the time will be past. If a man be bound to
enfeoff one of Lands in Barwick, request ought to be made so long time before,
that after that he may go to Barwick. So if one be bounden to pay 1000 l. to
J.S. he ought to make his Tender so long time before the last instant of the
last day, that the money may conveniently be told. This Case was in question. A
man made a Feoffment of the Manor of D. with the Appurtenances, to which an
Advowson was appendant, and covenanted that the Manor upon request should be
discharged of all manner of Encumbrances, and before that the Feoffor had
granted the next Avoidance to J. S. the Incumbent died, the Clark of the
Grantee was instituted and inducted, the Feoffee requested the Feoffor to
discharge the Encumbrance. The opinion of many Sages of the Law was, that he
had not made his request within convenient time. So if a man be bounden to
infeoff the Obligee to have and to hold to him and his Heirs as long as J. S.
shall have Issue of his Body; If the Obligee demand Assurance after the death
of J. S. without Issue, yet the Obligation is not forfeited. In 22 E. 4. if
Lessee for the life of another continues possession for two or three weeks
after the death of Cestuy que use, where he could not have more speedy notice
of his death, he shall not be a Trespassor. In 15 Eliz it was holden in Wottons
Case, That where he was bound to make a Feoffment to J. B. and J. B. came to
him in Westminster Hall, and tendered to him a Writing, and prayed him to seal
it. And Wotton said that he would not, that the Obligation was forfeited;
contrary if he had not denied to seal it, but had showed the same to his
Counsel, as in our Case. But the Opinion of the Justices was, that the
Obligation was forfeited. For when he knew the last instant of the time, he
ought to have had his Counsel there ready with him. Vide the Case of
Arbitrament 18 E. 4. 21. At another day the Case was argued again by Andrews,
and he said that the Obligation was not forfeited; For he said it is a Rule in
Law, Sic utere tuo, ut alienum non laedas, and in E. 4. a man was bound upon
request to relinquish and renounce Administration* and there it was holden,
that after the request he ought to have convenient time to go to the Ordinary,
before it shall be said that he had forfeited his Obligation. In 33 E. 3. it is
said that if J. S. be bound, That if A B infeoff C. that then he shall pay to
the Obligee 10 l. Now if the Feoffment be made after Sunsetting as it well may
be, yet it is sufficient to save his Obligation, if he pay the money the next
day: And 19 H. 6. an Annuity was granted to an Infant until he was promoted to
a Benefice, if a Benefice be offered unto him before he be of sufficient age,
and he refuses it, the Obligation is not forfeited. If a man be bound to
enfeoff and make Livery and Seisin of the Manor of D to one upon request, and
afterward the Party is made King, in which Case he cannot take Livery, now if
upon request the Party refuses, yet it is no Forfeiture: And it has been
holden here by you all, That if a man unlearned seals a Deed which is written
contrary to the intent of the Parties, the same not being read unto him, by
that he shall not be bound for ever. But the Opinion of the Court was as
before, That the Obligation was forfeited.

CLVII. Pasc. 26 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
NOte that Mead and Windham (the other Justices being absent) were of Opinion,
That a Copyholder in Fee, who by Custom may surrender in Fee, may make a
surrender in Tail, without any Special Custom to warrant it; and he who may
prescribe to make a Feoffment in Fee, may make a Lease for Life, and it shall
be good, because Omne majus continet in se minus.

Trin. 27 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
CLVIII. Trecarram and Friendships Case.
1 Leon. 287.
TRecarram made a Demise by these words: This Indenture between Trecarram, etc.
of the one part, and Friendship his W^^e, and their Children lawfully begotten,
at the Assignment of the said Friendship of the other part. The Question was,
if L. the Daughter, which the Husband and Wife had at the time of the Lease
made, was Party to the said Indenture, and so took by it. Or if another Son of
Friendship, which after he made his Executor, should have the Term. Hamon, 30
E. 3. If a Gift be made to Infants of such a man, it is a good Name of
purchase, and if he has but one Infant, it is good to him: and so in our Case,
where Friendship had Issue a Daughter, at the time of the Lease, that she
should take only; otherwise where he had many. And the words, viz. at the
Assignment of Friendship, are mere surplusage, as 20 Ass. where a man gave
twenty loads of Wood in such a Wood (whereof fourteen he has of the gift of
such a one,) these words (whereof he has of the gift of such a one,) are
surplusage. Cook conceived that the Daughter, who was in esse at the time of
the demise, should have the Term: For if a man make a grant to two, as the one
of them is not Capax, he who is capable shall have the whole. As a Feoffment to
J. S. and the right Heirs of J. D. J. D. being alive, J. S. shall have the
whole. So Ass. a gift to a man, and to such a wife which he shall have he shall
have the whole, and the wife nothing: The words At the Assignment, etc. are
void, for there is not a Person able to take at the time of the grant,
therefore he shall not take afterward; and because the Daughter is able, she
shall. Wray Justice, conceived that these words, At the Ass^gnment of
Friendship were not void, but that he had reserved to him liberty to make his
Son party, or not; and because he had not assigned him, that he took nothing.
Ayliffe, If Lands be leased to me, my Wife, and William my Son, whereas his
Name is John, it is void as to the Son for the Misnomer, but if he had said
Son, without more, it had been good to the Son: and so here if he had not
mentioned any Assignment, then the Daughter should have had it; but contrary by
the words of the Assignment. Clench, The intent of the parties is to be
considered: As if I grant to you Common within my Manor of D. it shall be
construed to be within my Lands commonable, and not in my Orchard: And here it
shall be intended those Children which he shall name when the sealing was; and
if he name others after, it shall be void; as a Lease to you, and to her who
you shall take to wife, is void, for there ought to be such a person at the
time of the commencement of the Deed, which might take. And the Opinion of the
whole Court was, That the Defendant, who claimed by the Executor, should have
the term, and not the Plaintiff who claimed by the Daughter, and therefore
Judgment was entered, that the Plaintiff nihil capiat per Billam.

Pasc. 24 Eliz.
CLIX. The Countess of Sussex and Worths Case.
IN 4 and 5 Phil. and Mary, 1 Leon 35. ^ 3 Leon. 132. Co. 6 Rep. 33.
Fitz-williams Case.
a private Statute was made by which the Manor of Barnham was assured to the
Countess of Sussex for her Ioynture. Proviso that it should be lawful for the
Earl of Sussex to make a Lease, or Leases for 21 years. The Earl made a lease
for 21 years, and afterward he made another lease for 21 years, within a year
before the first lease ended and the second lease was to begin at the end of
the first lease, and if the second lease was good, and within the intent of the
Act, was the question. Popham Attorney, That it was not: 1. Because it is to
begin at a day to come. 2. Because it is made during the first lease. But it
may be objected, that it is said (lease or leases): It is not the sense of the
Act, for by it he might only make leases in possession, and not in futuro, and
so he might make a lease for 21 years, to begin after his death, which should
be a great prejudice to the Countess, and against the intent of the Act, which
was made for her advantage. The Lord Treasurer and W. Mildmay had a Commission
to make leases for 21 years of the Lands of the Queen, because the Queen should
not be troubled with it: They could not make leases but in possession only by
virtue of their Commission; but all others which exceed 21 years, and in
Reversion passed by the hands of the Attorney of the Queen, and not by them
only by their Commission. 2. Because he cannot make a lease upon a lease, for
by the same reason that he might make one future lease, he might also make 20
leases in ruturo, and so make void the Act: It was Marshals Case upon the
Statute of 1 Eliz. of leases to be made by Bishops. The Bishop of Canterbury
made a lease for one and twenty years, and afterward he made another Lease for
21 years to begin at the end of the first Lease. It was holden that the second
Lease was not good. Leases by spiritual persons, as Bishops, etc.
But in the great Case upon that point in the Exchequer Chamber, there the
second Lease was in possession, and to begin presently, and ran with the other;
and therefore it was adjudged a good Lease, because the Land was not charged
with more than with 21 years in the whole; and if it had been so done here, it
had been good. Wray said that if the second lease had been made two or three
years before the expiration of the first lease, then clearly it had been void,
but because, but one, two, or three days, or a month before, he doubted if it
should be void, or not. The Statute of 32 H. 8. Leases made for one and twenty
years to be good from the day of the date thereof, and one makes a lease to
begin at a day to come, and by two of the Justices of the Common Pleas it is
good; but the two other Justices held the contrary. Clench Justice, There is no
difference, if it be by one Deed or several Deeds; and therefore he held, that
if the Earl had made a lease for one and twenty years, and within a year
another, it is a void Lease, whether it be by one Deed or two Deeds, for he
exceeds his Authority: And so in the principal Case; If there had been no
Proviso, he could not have made any lease, therefore the Proviso which gave him
Authority ought precisely to be performed. At another day it was argued by
Daniel for the Lessee in Reversion to begin at a day to come, and by him words
only are not to be taken or considered in a Statute, but the meaning of them,
and they are not to be severed: Also Statute Law is to be expounded by the
Common Law, and by the Common Law if one give Authority to another to make
leases of his Lands, he may make leases in Reversion, because an Authority
shall be taken most beneficially for them for whom it was given. So if one
grant an Authority to make Estates of his Lands, by that general word, he may
make leases for years or life, or gifts in tail, Feoffments, or other Estates
whatsoever. If one gives a Commission to another to make leases for One and
twenty years of his lands, he may make a lease in Reversion: and that Case was
in the Duchy between Alcock and Hicks. Leases.
2. It is good by Statute Law: For the Statute of Richard 2. which gives
Authority to Cestuy que use, to make leases, he may thereby make leases in
Reversion. The Statute of 27 H. 8. which gives Authority to the chief Officer
of the Court of Surveyors to make leases, if it had stayed there he might have
made leases in Reversion, but the said Statute goes further, and says, Proviso
that he shall not make a lease in Reversion, vide 19 H. 8. Dyer 357. The
Statute of 32 H. 8. of leases to be made by Husbands of the lands of their
Wives by the general words of the said Statute, they might make Leases in
Reversion. But the Statute goes further Proviso, that there shall not be any
former Lease in being above 21 years before the making of the said Leases. In
all Cases of Statutes which are with Provisoes, the Law upon them shall be
taken generally, if not in such particulars which are restrained by the
Proviso, as here, the Proviso goes to the ancient Rent to be reserved, that the
Countess shall have remedy against the Lessees for the said Rent, etc.
therefore it is at large in all other points but in these: As if the Wife be
within age, and she and her Husband join in a Lease, yet this Lease is good by
the Statute of 32 H. 8. because the Law is general, and does not restrain these
Imperfections expressly: So a Feoffment in Fee with warranty, Proviso that he
shall not Vouch; yet that is a restraint as to the Voucher only, and he is at
large to Rebutt or have warrantia Chartae: A Lease for life, Proviso he shall
not do voluntary waste, he is at large to do other waste, but otherwise it were
if there were no Proviso. Therefore a Proviso makes the words precedent to be
expounded more liberally. The words of the Statute of 33 H. 8. cap. 39. of
Surveyors, which gives authority to the chief Officer to devise, set, or let
for 21 years, he might have made a Lease for 21 years in Reversion, if the
Proviso had not been. But the words of the Act in our Case are demise; demises
therefore shall be taken most liberally. 3. As to the intent of the Act, this
Lease is within it, for the intent is to be collected out of the words, and
shall not be drawn to any private intent against the words which should be done
here; for by such Exposition the Earl, his Heirs, Executors, etc. should be
prejudiced, and the Countess only should be benefited: Also Remedy is given to
the Countess by this Act against such Lessees, that she should have the Rent by
Debt or Distress, as it she had been party or privy, therefore it is reason via
versa, that they have remedy against her for their Leases: Also he said that
the same remedy should be for them as against the Earl himself if he had lived,
therefore they shall have remedy against her, who might have had it against the
Earl in his life. Also the Statute is to be expounded according to the words,
where such Exposition is not rigorous nor mischievous. Also private Laws are to
be expounded by the Letter and strictly, as the Deed of the party, as 14 E. 4.
1. Br. Parliament 16. a particular Act was made that the Chancellor, calling to
him one of the Justices, might award a Subpoena between A. and B. and end the
matter between them; there, by all the Justices but Littleton, he shall not
award a Subpoena general, but a Subpoena making mention of the Act, for he
shall pursue the particular Act strictly, and a common Act for the common
profit shall be construed largely. Also a Statute shall not be construed
largely by Equity to the overthrow of an Estate; as the Statute which gives,
That if a Woman consent to a Ravisher, that the next Heir shall enter, if the
Daughter enters, and afterward a Son is born, he shall not put out the
Daughter, because the Statute shall not be drawn to a private intent to the
overthrow of an Estate vested before lawfully in the Daughter: Therefore
neither in our Case the Act shall not be drawn to a private sense for the
benefit of the Countess to overthrow the Lease for years; and it is not like to
the Case which has been put: If he make a Lease for twenty years, and for
other twenty years, the same is not good by the Act, which Case I agree, for
that is a Lease for forty years. Egerton Solicitor contrary: 1. As to the word
Demise from dismission, the same is nothing else but a letting of the Land. Lo
Lease is from (Laiser) a French word, and such a Demise at a day to come is an
Interest of a Lease, and not a Lease it self, for he has not let the Land: As
if I say, I let you my Land for 21 years: When shall you have my Land? Shall
you have my Land at a day to come, or presently? If I fell you Land, and
Covenant that it is discharged of all other Encumbrances than Leases for 21
years, and there is a Lease to begin afterward for 21 years. I have broken my
Covenant. If I am bound to make you a Lease for 21 years, and I say to you, I
make a Lease to you to begin 200 years after, I have forfeited my Obligation.
If the custom of a Manor be that Dominus pro tempore may make Leases for 21
years, may he make a Lease to begin 20 years after? Truly not, if there be not
a Special Custom to make it good. If I give authority to my Steward to make
Leases of my Lands for 21 years, he cannot make a Lease to begin at 100 years
hereafter. As to the Case of the Duchy, there the Condition is that he shall
make Leases according to his discretion, therefore there he may make such
Leases as he pleases. As to the Statute of Richard 2. which enables Cestuy que
use, it is not like to our Act or Statute, for that is, that Feoffments,
Estates, etc. therefore he may make such Leases without doubt. If I devise that
my Executor shall make Leases of my Lands for 21 years, he cannot make a Lease
for to commence 100 years after; and if they do not make them within convenient
time, the Heir shall avoid their Authority: So the Statute Law has such
Exposition that the precise time ought to be observed, as the Statute of 14 E.
3. Cap. 18. 1. Receipt to Voucher, 8. If the Tenant vouch to warranty a dead
man, and the Demandant will aver that the Vouchee is dead, or that there is
none such, there the Averment shall be received without more delay. Upon that
Statute the Case in 21 E. 3. where one vouched to warranty, and a Summoneas ad
Warrantizandum issued, and then came the Demandant, and would have averred that
the Vouchee is dead, the Tenant said he ought to aver the same upon the Voucher
to warranty, and that now he had surceased his time to take advantage of the
time; and the Demandant said, That the Statute did not bind him to that, nor
prescribed any time, but left the same generally, yet by the Court it was
awarded that he should have the Averment the time of the Voucher, or not at
all. So the Statute of 11 H. 7. cap 20. If a woman who has a Ioynture for life
or in Tail, and suffers a Common Recovery, according to the Statute of 11 H. 7.
cap. 20. and afterward the Issue in Tail, releaseth all his right by Fine and
dies, his Issue may enter, for the assent ought to be by Voucher in the same
Action, and the like, for if there be a mean instance between the Recovery and
the Assent, then any Assent after is nothing to the purpose; for the Recovery
being once void by the Statute, it cannot be made good by assent afterward,
Vide Dr. and Student 54. and yet the Statute says, Provided that the Act shall
not extend to any such Recovery, Discontinuance, etc. if the next heir be
assenting to the same Recovery, etc. so as the same Assent or Agreement is of
Record or enrolled; and does not say, If the Assent ought to be at one time, or
at another. But to come to Leases upon Statutes. Before the Statute of 2 E. 6.
cap. 8. if Leases were not found by Offices, they should be ousted and put to
their Traverse. But put case that after that Statute a Lease to begin at a day
to come is not found by Office, shall it be aided by that Statute? No truly,
and so it is holden in the Court of Wards at this day. And the Lord Chief
Justice of England so held in his Reading at Lincolns Inn: The Statute of 1
Eliz. of Leases to be made by Bishops is, that Leases other then for 21 years
from the time that they begin, that is, when they take effect as a Deed, and
when they take effect not to be executed; for so they might make infinite
Leases: Quaere the further part of Egertons Argument in this Case; And vide in
Cooks 1 part of his Reports, where this Case is reported to be adjudged; that
the Lease made in Reversion by the Earl was a void Lease.

Mich. 29 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
DEbt brought upon an Escape in L. the Defendant said, That he suffered him to
escape in C. by the commandment of the Plaintiff, without that, that he escaped
in L. It was holden to be no Plea. But in an Action upon a false imprisonment
in L. he may justify, That he was Sheriff of C. and took him by force of a
Writ, without that, that he imprisoned him in L. Rodes Justice. One brings an
Action upon an Escape in L. and in truth he never was in L. after the Escape,
in an Action he shall recover. Periam and Rhodes, Where the matter of
Justification is tied to a place there the place is traversable. And Rhodes
said, There was a Case adjudged, in an Action, by Davage, against the Mayor of
Lynn, where the Defendant justified as a special Justice within the Town, and
traversed the place alleged by the Plaintiff.

Mich. 29 and 30 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
CLXI. Scot and Scots Case.
Common Recovery. 2 Leon. 128. 3 Leon. 225. 1 Cro. 73.
GEorge Scot the Elder sued a Replevin against George Scot the Younger: The
Case was this, One Georgo Scot 20 H. 8. being Tenant in Tail of certain Lands,
suffered a Recovery to the use of his last Will, and 25 H. 8 by his Will
declared. That he willed that the Recoverers make a good and favorable Lease
to Hugh Scot his younger Brother, and 25 H. 8. they make a Lease to Hugh Scot
for ninety nine years, reserving 11 l. 5 s. 8 d. rent payable at the
Annunciation and Michaelmas by equal portions, and that to the Recoverers,
their Heirs and Assigns. And further it was covenanted, that after the death of
the Recoverers, the rent should be paid to Cestuy que use, and his Heirs and
Assigns, any thing in the Indenture to the contrary notwithstanding. Proviso
that if the Lessee make his Heir-male his Assignee of the Term, that then he
pay the rent to the Recoverers, their Heirs and Assigns, and he did not pay the
rent to the Heirs of Cestuy que use, and thereupon was a Distress and a
Replevin. Drew argued for the Plaintiff; and first he spoke to the performance
of the Condition, and when a Condition is created, the Law says it shall be
taken favorable for him who is to perform it, Conditions.
as 3 H. 7. One is to make Appropriation of such a Church, and he grants a rent
out of it, and then makes the appropriation, it was holden that he had
performed the Condition. So 27 H. 8. a Lease upon condition to scowre the
Ditches; if he once does it, it is sufficient, and he cited another Case out of
37 H. 6. As to the creating of a condition, there are some words which are
conditional of themselves, as in Litt: Ita quod, sub condition, Ad effectum,
38 H. 6. 34. in Case of the King: In some Case (Pro) makes a condition, in some
Cases not. Proviso also sometimes makes a condition, sometimes it is taken for
the enlargement of an Estate, 45 E. 3. 8. One had the ward of Land, and of the
Body, and granted the same to W. P. his Servant, Pro bono servitio, and he
departed from his service, the other may enter in the wardship and land
therefore, (Pro) makes a condition. 41 Eliz. One granted an Annuity to another
Pro concilio inpendendo, if he does not give counsel, the Annuity is forfeited
for he has no means to compel him to give counsel, and therefore it is a
condition: But in some cases (Pro) does not make a condition, as if before the
Statute of Quia emptores terrarum, one makes a Feoffment of lands pro homagio
suo, there if the homage be not done, he may distrain for it. 9 E. 4. 21. Where
Tithes are exchanged for Annuity, or Annuity for Tithes, there it is not a
condition. (Si) in the Case of Colthirst is a condition, in some other Cases no
condition. (Proviso) in our Case does not make a condition. 7 H. 6.44. A man
made a Feoffment with warranty, Proviso semper, that he should not vouch him
nor his heirs. So a grant of a rent, Proviso that he shall not charge his
person: these are not conditions but foreprises. 9 H. 6. a Lease was made
without impeachment, Proviso that he should not do voluntary Waste; this
Proviso went to a Covenant, and not to the overthrowing of the Estate. So if
one granted a Manor, Proviso that his grant shall not extend to a Wood upon the
Manor, the same is not a condition but a foreprise or exception. 35 H. 8. Br.
Conditions 195. Note for Law, Proviso Condition.
That Proviso semper put on the part of the Lessee, upon the words of the
Habendum, makes a condition, but contrary of a Proviso on the part of the
Lessor; As it is covenanted after the Habendum and after the Reddendum, that
the Lessee shall scowre the Ditches, Proviso that the Lessee carry the Dung to
such a place or field, the same is not a condition to forfeit the lease for not
doing of it. Contrary if the Proviso be put immediately upon the Habendum,
which makes the Estate, or after the Reddendum. The Case 27 H. 8. of Martin
Dockery is left at large. In 5 Eliz. there was a Case of one Etherel, where the
Bishop of York made a lease for years reserving rent to him and his Successors,
Proviso that during the time of every vacation, the rent should be paid to the
Dean and Chapter of York, and it was not paid to them after the death of the
Bishop, during the vacation: It was holden to be no condition, but a
limitation. Also if the Proviso here shall be a condition, then it is a
favorable lease according to the will, for a conditional lease is not a
favorable lease. 2. Point. If it be a Condition; yet the Plaintiff ought to
recover the rent for which the demand shall be, where the Entry is only the
moiety of an annual rent, and he demands the whole, therefore his demand is not
good; for if a Feoffment be pleaded made by one, and the Deed is showed, by
which it appears that it was made by many, although he was one of them, yet
it is not good, nor warranted by it. Also the conclusion which they make does
destroy the whole, for it is, Et quia praedict. redditus was not paid, etc.
Which was that? the rent of the whole year, scil. 11 l. 6 s. 8 d. and that is
false; for if the moiety was paid, he had no cause to enter; but by their
conclusion, if all was paid but a penny, yet they might enter, and therefore
the Rejoinder is not good. Cook contrary, for the Avowant: he said, It is a
condition, and he put this as a general Rule, That where a Proviso is parcel of
the sentence which contains Covenant, or abridgeth parcel of the Covenant, that
it does not make a Condition, but an Exception. As Litt. a rent granted,
Proviso that he shall not charge his person, the same is not a Condition,
because it abridgeth parcel of the Grant, and controuls the Sentence precedent.
So 9 H. 6. Proviso that he shall not do voluntary Waste, for it abridgeth the
first impeachment of Waste. So a Feoffment with warranty, Proviso that he shall
not vouch, abridgeth parcel of the force of the warranty; for by warranty he
may rebut, vouch, or have Warrantia Chartae: Therefore there where it is parcel
of the Sentence which contains Covenant, it is not a Condition: and that
difference was holden and agreed in the Lord Mountjoyes Case. But in our Case
there is not a qualification of the Sentence, or Covenant contained in the
Sentence, nor participant at all with the Sentence, but it stands substantive,
for there was a full Sentence before, and therefore it is not parcel of it.
Also it varies from the Sentence precedent in the person who shall pay the
rent, and to whom it shall be paid, and therefore it is a new Sentence, and
strange to the first: and it is not like to the Case of 9 H. 6. before, Br.
Warranty, he shall not vouch, for there it controuls the precedent Sentence:
But if I make a Feoffment in Fee with warranty, that he shall not vouch J. S.
who is a stranger, there it is a Condition; but if it is that he shall not
vouch the Feoffor, there it is not a Condition. And the Case of the Bishop of
York, was Pasc. 4 Eliz. Rot. 460. Com. Banc. he conceived, that during the
vacation, the rent should go to the King, and therefore perhaps he especially
limited it to be paid to the Dean and Chapter of York, and there the Proviso
did not make a Condition: For although it was limited to be paid to the Dean
and Chapter in the time of the vacation, with a Proviso, or by way of Promise,
yet there it is a Condition, for all is one Corporation; for the Dean and
Chapter are part of the Corporation to whom it was reserved before for it was
reserved before to the Bishop and his Successors. But 15 and 16 Eliz. Andrews
and Cromwells Case, where John Blunt sold a Manor to Andrews, and his Heirs,
and Blunt covenanted to suffer a Common Recovery for the better assurance
thereof, and afterward there was a Proviso, Provided always, That Andrews
re-grant the Advowson which was appendant to the Manor to Blunt for his life;
and because there it stands substantive by it self, therefore it was holden to
be a Condition; and yet truly it was not the meaning, that for not granting of
a pelting Advowson, that the whole former Estate of the Manor being of great
value, should be defeated; yet notwithstanding, it was holden to be a
Condition: and there also the Opinion of Br. 35 H. 8. is controuled, That where
also the Opinion of Br. 35 H. 8. is controuled; that where a Proviso is jumbled
amongst Covenants, that it does not make a Condition: Proviso never makes a
Covenant, therefore, either the Sentence shall be void, or it shall be a
Condition. As if a Lease for years be made, Proviso that the Lessee for years
do not commit Waste, it is no covenant. He said as to the second point, that
the same was adjudged between Andrews and Cromwell, where a rent was payable
every half year, and there, as here, the whole rent was demanded, and it was
good, for he is not to pay the one moiety; and he is at his peril to pay the
one moiety; and he who denies the whole, denies every part; Et quicquid dicitur
de toto, dicitur de partibus. It was adjourned.

Hill. 29 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
CLXII. The Lord Mountjoyes and Barkers Case.
IN an Ejectione firmae upon a Special Verdict, the Case was this, King Ed. 6.
granted the Manor and Hundred of Tremington in Fee, rendering rent, to hold of
the Manor of East Greenwich in Socage, reddendo annuatim 136 l. Queen Mary
reciting the first Grant; in the first year of her reign, granted the rent and
fealty and the Manors of Cauford, D. S. Et etiam Manerium nostrum, and
Hundredum de Tremington (although she had not the Manor) to the Marquess of
Exceter; after which the Marchioness being seized of the Manor of Cauford
holden in Capite, and of other Lands 4 and 5 Philip and Mary, devised the Manor
of Cauford, D. S. and whereas she had nothing in the Manor of Tremington, but
the rent and fealty out of it; she devised the same with the others to the Lord
Mountjoy: and also she devised diverse Legacies and Annuities to her Servants
and others. And devised by the same Will, that they should be levied of the
Manor of Tremington, and of the Manors of D. S. whereas D. S. were not Manors
but Farms. And one Barker was found Heir to the Devisor, who claimed to have
the third part: The first question was. If the rent and fealty here holden in
Capite, passed by the name of the Manor, or not; and if they passed, what
quantity passed. Walmsley, They do not pass by that name; for this rent, nec in
rei veritate, nec in reputatione, was ever taken for a Manor. Also she has
named it in her Will, between those which are very Manors, by which it
appears, that her intent was not to pass it, unless it was a Manor, as the
other, which sense is also fortified that they shall be levied, parcelled, and
taken; by which I conceive her meaning was, that there should be some place to
which the Devisees might resort to levy it. Further, It is taken for Law in
Wills; that a thing employed shall not destroy a thing expressed: But if by
implication, the Rent should pass, then the Manor of Cauford should not pass,
which was her express will to pass. As 16 Eliz. Dyer 330. where a man devises
his Lands to one and his Heirs Males, and if he dye without Heir of his Body,
etc. Here he shall not have Tail general to the Heirs of his Body, but to the
Heirs males of his body, for that was the express limitation, and the other
after but implication. So 16 Eliz. Dyer 333. in Chapmans Case: But our Case is
better, for that there are not words sufficient to warrant any implication, for
nec in veritate, nor in common speech was it ever taken for a Manor. 27 H. 6.
2. 22 H. 6. 39. Green Acre may pass by the name of a Manor, although it be but
an Acre of Land, because it is known by such name. In 27 H. 8. a man having
suffered a common Recovery to his use, willed that his Feoffees should sell,
etc. So in Chapmans Case, a man in his Will limited a Remainder to his Family,
there it is taken, the same is a Remainder to those which are his next of
Blood. So 41 E. 3. a man devises Land to A. his Daughter, in truth she being a
Bastard, she shall have it, because she is known by the name of Daughter. So if
there be Grandfather, Father and Son, the Father dies and the Son gives Lands
to his Father and his Heirs, the Grandfather shall have it, for that the Son so
called him. 19 H. 8. Lands are devised to the right Heirs of J. S. who is
attainted, having Issue a Son, the Son shall not have the Land, for the word
(Heir) intends one who may inherit, but he cannot, because a man attainted
cannot have an Heir: And that is a stronger Case than our Case, in which there
is not any affinity with a Manor, for it is but a sum in gross, but if it had
been an Acre of Land, peradventure it should have passed, but being Rent,
Common, Estovers, or other Profits, they cannot pass, for they have not any
resemblance to the Manor; but peradventure a man having a Manor parcel in
Demesne, and parcel in Services if he alieneth his Demesns, and afterward
devises his Manor, the Services will pass. Gaudy, All the difficulty of the
Case is this, If by the Devise, the rent out of Tremington shall pass, for if
not, then the third part thereof comes to Barker. And I conceive clearly, That
the rent shall pass; for Wills shall have a favorable construction according
to the intent of the Devisor, and no part thereof shall be void, if by any
means it may be made good; for intent then appears, that something should
pass out of the Manor of Tremington, for otherwise a Clause in her Will would
be frivolous. For it is precisely found by the Jury, that neither at the time
of the Will, nor at the time of her death, she had nothing of the said Manor of
Tremington, but the said Rent of one hundred thirty and six pounds. Also it may
be taken that she who devised was ignorant of the Law, and conceived that it
was a Manor when she had Rents and Services out thereof, notwithstanding that,
those who are learned in the Law know, that a Manor could not pass without
there was two Suitors at the least, 21 R. 2. Devise 27. Lands are devised to
one for life, the remainder Ecclesiae Sancti Andreae in Holborn, there it is
holden in an Ex gravi Querela, that the Parson should recover, for otherwise
the Devise should be void, if the Parson should not have the Lands; and in
Wills, shall subserve and give place to the intent of the Party; and therefore
if a man devises, that his Lands shall be sold for the payment of his debts,
his Executors shall sell them, and to that intent the naming of them Executors
is sufficient. Plow. Com. 523. in Weldens Case it is vouched to be adjudged;
that if one after the Statute of 27 H. 8. devises that his Feoffees shall be
seized to the use of A. in Fee, that it was a good Devise of the Lands to A.
and yet then he had not, nor could have any Feoffees, etc. But the Party was
ignorant of the Statute, and his intent to pass the Land was apparent, in that
Case the words were as much impertinent to the matter, as in our Case, for
there he had not any Feoffees, as here she has not any Manor. Br. recites,
That in 38 H. 8. it was holden by Baldwin, Shelly, and Morgan, that if a man
who had Feoffees to his use would, after the Statute of 27 H. 8. that his
Feoffees should make an Estate to J. S. that the Land should pass to J. S. 26
H. 8. Feoffments and Faits 12. Land cannot pass by the Deed of an House, for it
cannot be parcel of an House; but an Acre of Land may be given by the name of a
Carve, and a Carve of Land by the name of a Manor; and yet a Carve can be no
more a Manor, than this rent: yea, Rents and Services more resemble a Manor,
than a Carve of Land. It cannot be intended that her Will was here to pass the
Manor it self, which was not in her, but in another. Also she by four years
before had the rent, and therefore it shall be intended, that it was her
meaning to pass the same, which she her self received, and no other thing: and
although in the Devise the rent be specially named, and the Manor also yet the
same shall not alter the Case; for if a man grant the Reversion upon an Estate
for life, and by the said Deed grants the Land, and the Tenant attorns, and the
Grantee devises all his Land, the Reversion shall pass without all question.
If a man grant the Advowson of D. and in the same Deed, the Church and Rectory
of D. and the Grantee devises the Rectory of D. the Advowson shall pass. In
Adams Case, Plow. Com. 195. a man leaseth his Capital Message rendering rent,
there the question is, If the Reversion or Rent shall pass: It was adjudged,
That all which he had passed. As to that, that it cannot be levied out of the
Rent, for that no place is therein of Distress; I say, that she did not know
whether a lesser rent might be paid out of a greater rent, and 1 H 4. Multure
was granted reserving rent, and the Grant was good. The words of the Will are,
All which Manors, Lands, and Tenements, etc. she devised to the Lord Mountjoy,
and these words expound her meaning, for although the word (Rent) be not within
the word (Manor) yet the words (Lands and Tenements) do comprehend it, and
words subsequent in Wills may express the Premises. As 16 Eliz. Dyer 333.
Chapman seized in Fee of two Houses, having three Brothers, devised the House
in which A. inhabited to his three Brethren, and A. to dwell there, and they
not to raise the rent, and devised the House in which B. his Brother dwelt to
him, and that he pay to C. his Brother 3 l. for to find him at School, and
otherwise to remain to the House; Proviso that the Houses shall not be sold,
but shall go to the next of the Name and Blood which are Male, and dyed. B. his
brother dyed without Issue, the eldest of the two middle brothers entered, and
had Issue a Son and dyed. It was a Question, If the Son or the middle brother
should have the House: And it was holden that the Son of the eldest should have
it in Tail, which Exposition was by reason of the words in the Proviso, that it
should not be Sold, and that it should go to the Heirs Males. Shuttleworth, The
rent shall not pass by the Devise, for the construction of a Will ought to be
according to the words, or according to the intent collected out of the words,
and not by a thing out of the Will; for then a stranger shall be the maker of
the Will of another: And 19 H. 8. if a Will be doubtful it ought to be
expounded for the Heir at the Common Law. And if the rent ought to pass, it
ought to have apt words, and not the name of a Manor. And thereupon he put the
Case, that where one devises certain Lands to one, and afterward his Goods,
Leases, and other things to another: All his Goods and Terms shall pass, but
not his Lands, for that there wants apt words to pass them, for the word
(other things) shall not pass them, and this set order ought to be observed,
for the avoiding of confusion: And the Rent and Services shall not pass for the
two parts, admitting the words sufficient, for they cannot be divided: But
Periam said, That the rent might be divided. Anderson said, That it should be
but a Rent-seck: Periam said it was a Rent distrainable of Common Right, but
Anderson doubted of it; but they all agreed that it might be divided, but there
should not be two Tenures. Fenner, The Rent should pass by the Devise of the
Manor, for there is do difference betwixt a Manor and a Seigniory in gross
amongst Laymen; and then their intent shall be taken, although it was not
written by apt words; for in Grants a Reversion shall be taken for a Remainder,
and a Fortiori a Devise. And 7 E. 3. a Manor shall pass by the name of a
Knights Fee; and 19 H. 8. a Wood shall pass by the name of Land, and 38 E. 3.
by grant of totam terram which A. held in dower, the Reversion shall pass.
Afterward in Mich. Term the Plaintiff discontinued his Ation. And Periam told
me, I being at his House, that the Opinion of the Court was against the
Plaintiff, and if it had not been discontinued, they would have given Judgment
accordingly: Now this was the intent of the Lord Mountjoy. The Marchioness had
devised all her Lands, and had not left any thing to her Heir, for which Case
the Heir of the Marchioness entered into the third part of the Manor of Cauford
(of which the Lease upon which the Ejectione firmae was brought, was made by
the Lord Mountjoy to Insley) and into the third part of the residue of the
whole land, now his meaning was, That if the rent was not well passed by the
name of the Manor, then the same descended to the Heir, which was sufficient
for him: For the Special Verdict found also, That the rent was the third part
of the value of the whole Land of the Marquess: So that thereupon it may be
collected, That if a man has three Manors, some of them holden in Capite, and
of equal value, and he devises two of them, and suffers the third to
descend, that the Devise is good for every part of the two Manors, and the Heir
shall not have the third part of each Manor.

Pasc. 28 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
CLXIII. Spring and Lawsons Case.
ONe recovered in an Ejectione firmae, and afterward the Defendant made a new
Lease for years, and he who recovered ousted him, and he brought an Ejectione
firmae: and the other pleaded the former Recovery. It was holden a good bar by
all the Justices, but Windham and Periam, and by them the same is no Estoppel,
for the Conclusion shall be Judgment if Action, and not Judgment if he shall be
answered: And although that it be an Action personal, and in the nature of a
Trespass, yet the Judgment is quod habeat possessionem termini sui, during
which Term the Judgment is in force, it is not reason that he should be ousted
by him against whom he recovered, for so Suits should be infinite; and by
Rhodes an Entry pendent the Writ shall abate it.

CLXIV. Hill. 29 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
AN Action of Covenant was brought against one who had been his Apprentice; The
Defendant pleaded that he was within age: The Plaintiff maintained his Action
by the Custom of London, where one by Covenant may bind himself within age:
Exception was taken to it, that that was a Departure: For 18 R. 2. an Infant
brought an Action against his Guardian in Socage, who pleaded that the
Plaintiff was within age. The Plaintiff did maintain his Declaration, That by
the Custom of such a place an Infant of 18 years might bring account against
his Guardian in Soccage, and it was there holden to be no departure. Wray Chief
Justice was of Opinion, that it was no departure; for he said, It should be
frivolous, to show the whole matter in his Declaration: viz. That he was an
Infant, and that by the Custom he might make a Covenant which should bind him.
But Quaere of the Matter, and of his Opinion, for that many learned Lawyers
doubted much of it. And vide the Case in 19 R. 2. of the Guardian in Soccage.

Mich. 29 and 30 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
CLXV. Savage and Knights Case.
ERror was brought upon a Judgment given in Leicester in Debt; Tanfeild
assigned Error, because in that Suit there was not any Plaint, for in all
Inferior Courts the Plaint is as the Original at the Common Law, and without it
no Process can Issue forth, and here upon this Record nothing is entered; but
only that the Defendant Summonitus fuit, etc. and because the first entry ought
to be A. B. Queritur versus C. Clench, a Plaint ought to be before any Process
issues; and the Summons which is entered here is not a Plaint, and for that
Cause the Judgment was reversed: It was said, That after the Defendant
appeared, a Plaint was entered: But it was answered, That that did not help the
matter, for there ought to be a Plaint out of which Process shall issue, as in
the Sovereign Courts out of the Original Writs.

28 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
CLXVI. Grindal Bishop of Yorks Case.
GRindal Archbishop of York made a Lease for one and twenty years, another
Lease for years of the same Land being in being, not expired by four years and
dyed; and in time of vacation, the Dean and Chapter confirmed it. Clench, It is
a good confirmation: A Bishop makes a Lease for years, reserving the ancient
rent but where it was payable at four Feasts of the year, it is now reserved
payable once in the year, the same is within the Letter of the Statute, but not
within the intent; the same Law, if the Rent before was usually reserved to be
paid upon the Land, now it is reserved to be paid at any far remote place. And
he said, that although his lease was in possession, yet not to take effect
before the four years of the former Lease are expired, cannot be said an Estate
within the Statute of 1 Eliz. whereby any Estate may pass before the
commencement of it; for he to whom it was made, had but a right to have the
Land; and he could not surrender. And he held that the second Lessee should pay
the rent as well by the Contract as by the Estoppel. Periam, At the Common Law
a Bishop, with the Confirmation of the Dean and Chapter, might have made a
Feoffment Gift in Tail, and a Lease for any Term of years; and he spoke much,
What shall be said the Possessions of a Bishop: And therefore, if a Bishop
disseiseth another of certain Lands, and makes a Lease thereof under the Seal
of his Bishopric, it shall be now his Seal and it shall be his election in
what capacity he will take, and then this Land is to be reputed parcel of the
Possession of his Bishopric.

Mich. 29 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
CLXVII. Hoo and Hoes Case.
JOhn Hoo brought a Writ of Intrusion against Richard Hoo, depending which
Writ, the Demandant prayed Estrepement, and had it, and declared upon it, scil.
That the Tenant after the Prohibition fecit Vastum, Estrepementum, in
prosternendo, etc. To which the Tenant pleaded, Not Guilty: But the Plea was
not allowed by the Court, for there is no Issue in this Case; but he might to
plead Quod non fecit vastum, etc. after the Prohibition.

29 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
CLXVIII. Clinton and Bridges Case.
DEbt; The Condition was for performance of an Award, which was to pay 10 l. to
the Plaintiff, and to do diverse other things: The Defendant pleaded Quod
perimplevit Arbitrium, and showed how the Plaintiff assigned for a Breach, that
the Defendant had not paid the 10 l. The Defendant rejoyned that he rendered it
to the Plaintiff, and he refused it. It was the Opinion of Dyer, that the same
is a Departure, for in the Bar, the Defendant pleads that he has performed the
Award, and shows how; and now in the Rejoinder a Tender and Refusal, which is
not a performance of the Award, although it is not any Breach of it.

29 Eliz. In the Exchequer.
CLXIX. The Bishop of L's Case.
Tenures.
THe Case of the Bishop of L. the King Lord, Mesne and Tenant, the Mesnalty is
holden in chief, and the Tenancy by Knights Service; the Manor escheats by
Attainder: If the Tenancy should be holden in Chief was the question. Manwood,
It has been holden, that no Tenure in Capite may be, if not by the creation of
the King: And he said, that if before the Statute of Westminster 3. the Kings
Tenant in Capite had made a Feoffment to hold of him, so as now there is Lord
Mesne and Tenant; and afterward the Mesnalty came to the Crown by Attainder,
etc. If by the coming of the Mesnalty to the Crown the Seignory Paramount be
extinct, then the Tenancy is not holden in Capite; but they have taken a
difference where the Mesnalty comes to the Seignory, and where the Seignory
comes to the Mesnalty. But he said it was a good Case.

29 Eliz. In the Exchequer.
CLXX. Pigotts Case.
Assignment of Debts to the King.
PIgott Collector of the Subsidy granted by Parliament holden 28 Eliz. and by
reason thereof endebted to the Queen, (one B. being indebted to him) assigned
the said debt to the Queen for parcel of her debt: upon which Process issued
out against B. and now, at the return of the Process, Cooper Sergeant, moved in
the behalf of B. that the Assignment was not good. 1. There was no such
Parliament holden 28 Eliz. 2. No assignment of Debt to the Queen is effectual,
where the Goods and Lands of the Queens debtor are sufficient, but here constat
de claro, that Pigott is sufficient: As to the matter of the Parliament, the
truth is, that the Parliament was begun in October 28. But no Session was then
holden, but it was adjourned to Newbury 29 Eliz. But if a Session had been
holden, one ought to say it was Prorogued. Fenner, There is not any Authority
in our Law for such assignments of Debt to the Queen. Manwood, The Parliament
is October 28 Eliz. and so is the Roll, and the Record of the Parliament: The
Writs of Parliament were returned in October 28 Eliz. But then the Queen
adjourned the Parliament; for there was no Session: and although it was
adjourned, yet the first day of the Parliament was in October: And such was the
Opinion of all the Justices.

29 Eliz. In the Exchequer.
CLXXI. The Queen and Pains Case.
AN Information was exhibited against Pain Treasurer of the Records in the
Kings Bench, Privilege.
upon the Statute made against the buying of Cattle, and he came and demanded
Privilege. Manwood, It has never been seen, that such Privilege has been
granted against the Queen, Vide 21 H. 6.22. in a Decies tantum. by the better
Opinion the Party shall have the Privilege. Some said that this is not like to
the Case where the Queen only is Party, for in such Case Attaint does not lie
against the Jury which have found for the Queen; contrary where the Suit is tam
pro Domina Regina quam, etc. Manwood, The Law is not so, for an Attaint lies
where the Queen alone is Party. Tanfield, who was of Counsel with Pain, showed
to the Court a President 29 Eliz. where one tam pro Domina Regina quam, etc.
prosecuted a Suit in the City of Oxford, upon a penal Statute, and the
Defendant claimed the Privilege of the Common Pleas, being an Officer there,
and by the Award of the Court, the Privilege was allowed him. Manwood, The
Suit upon the penal Statute was in an Inferior Court. But show to us a
President where the Courts are equal.

CLXXII. Mich. 30 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
A Poor man was ready at the Bar to wage his Law; and upon examination it was
found, that the Defendant was indebted to the Plaintiff ten pounds, to be paid
at the Feast of Christmas; and that upon communication between them it was
agreed, that the Defendant should pay to the Plaintiff at the said Feast 5 l.
in satisfaction of all the Debt due to the Plaintiff; and as to the other 5 l.
that he should be acquitted of it: Upon this matter the Justices were clear of
Opinion, that the Defendant ought not to be admitted to wage his Law, for
notwithstanding that bare communication, the whole Debt remained due not
extinguished by the communication; for 5 l. cannot be a satisfaction for 10 l.
but contrary of a collateral thing in recompense of it, etc. And satisfaction
and agreement, to pay 5 l. before the said Feast of Christmas in satisfaction
of the whole 10 l. Upon such matter showed, the Court was of opinion, that the
Defendant might be admitted to wage his Law.

CLXXIII. Mich. 30 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
IN a Replevin, the Defendant avowed for damage feasant: Upon which Issue was
joined and found for the Advowant: and Damages assessed, and a Retorno Habendo
issued, upon which the Sheriff returned Elongata: upon which a Withernam was
awarded. And now the Plaintiff came into Court, and tendered in Court the
Damages assessed by the Jury, Withernam.
and prayed a stay of the Withernam, and cast the money into Court. But the
whole Court was clear of Opinion for the stay of the Withernam upon that matter
only: because in this Case the Plaintiff ought to be fined, Fine for Contempt.
because he had essoigned his Cattle, which is a contempt, wherefore the Court
assessed a Fine upon him of 3 s. 4 d. and then the Plaintiff had his prayer and
request.

Mich. 37 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
CLXXIV. Germies Case.
2 Leon. 119. 1 Leon. 87. Assets.
IN Debt upon an Obligation against A. as Executor, the Case was, That the
Testator of A. by his Will appointed certain Lands, and named which should be
sold by his Executors, and that the money thereof arising should be distributed
amongst his Daughters, when they had accomplished the age of one and twenty
years; the Lands are sold accordingly, and if the moneys thereof coming being
in the hands of the Executor, should be Assets to pay the Debts of the
Testator, was the question. It was the clear Opinion of the whole Court, that
it was not Assets, for that that money is limited to a special use.

CLXXV. Mich. 29 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
Alien Purchaser.
THis Case was moved to the Court; An Alien purchased Lands in Fee, the Queen
confirmed them to the Alien, etc. Office is found, if the Confirmation should
bind the Queen was the Question. Some conceived it should: For by Anderson
Chief Justice, when an Alien is enfeoffed, he takes by the Livery the
Fee-simple, of which he shall be seized until Office found, and a Praecipe quod
reddat lies against him. Fenner, An Alien and Denizen Ioyntenants are
disseized, they shall both join in an Assize, vide 11 H. 4.26. And he said that
the wife of the King takes a Husband being an Inheretrix, they have Issue,
Office is found, the Husband shall be Tenant by the Courtesy, which see 33 E.
3. Fitz. Traverse 36. It was argued on the other side, That the Estate of the
Alien is so weak, that a confirmation cannot enure upon it for an Alien cannot
take, but to the use of the King, and cannot be infeoffed to another use, and
if he be, such use is void. For there is not a sufficient seisin in an Alien to
carry an use. And it has been adjudged on Forset Case: Where an Alien and the
said Forset were Ioynt-Purchasers, and the Alien dyed, that Forset should not
have the whole by Survivour, but that upon Office found the Queen should have
the moiety, Vide 11 Eliz. Dyer 283.

Mich. 30 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
CLXXVI. Jermine and Arscots Case.
THe Case between Jermine and Arscot was this: A seized of Lands in Fee, had
Issue six Sons and one Daughter, and devised the Manor of, etc. parcel of his
said Lands to J. S. for ninety years, if the said J. S. and G. his Wife, or any
of them should so long live, the remainder to P. his eldest Son, and the Heirs
males of his Body, the remainder to his other Sons in tail, the remainder to
his Daughter. Provided, That if the said P. his Son, or any of the Sons of the
Devisor, or any of the heirs males of their bodies, should endeavor by any Act
or Thing to alien, bargain, or discontinue, etc. that then after such attempt
or endeavor, and before such Bargain and Sale, etc. were executed, that the
estate of such Person attempting, should cease, as if he were naturally dead,
and that then the premises should remain and come to such person to whom the
same ought to come, remain, or be by the intent and meaning of his Will, and
died: P. levied a Fine of the Manor, he in the next remainder entered, and
claimed the Land by force of the Devise. This Case was this Term argued by
Walmesly Sergeant, that an Estate tail cannot cease, for it is an Estate of
Inheritance; and here is not any limitation, for the Estate tail by the meaning
of the Devisor shall remain revivable upon the death of the Offender, but a
Limitation determines the Estate utterly, which is not here: but here it
appears as well by the meaning of the Devisor, as by the words of the Devise,
that the Estate tail upon such act should be suspended, and it cannot be
resembled to the Case cited on the other side 22 E. 3. A Rent granted to one in
Fee, and that it shall cease during the Nonage of every Heir, the Rent is but
suspended between the Parties and Privies to the Gift; as in the Case of
Littleton of Re-entry and Retainer quousque; but that a Stranger should
re-enter and retain quousque, that cannot be: And in the Case of Scholastica
reported by Plowden, the Estate tail by such Offense is determined by the
limitation: But in our Case by the meaning of the Devisor only suspended, so
our Case is not like to that Case. Shuttleworth to the contrary; The purpose of
the Devisor appears to be, the continuance of the Land in the name and Family
of the Caries; and as to the difference of ceasing and suspending of an Estate
tail, the same is not to the purpose, for the Tenant in tail himself may
suspend his Estate tail, therefore a fortiori the Donor upon the Creation of
the Estate tail: As by Littleton: Tenant in Tail grants totum statum suum, the
Estate tail is thereby suspended; and by Anderson, if in such a Case, after
such a grant, Tenant in tail levy a Fine in our Case, If Tenant in tail offend:
and the party to whom the next interest is limited enters, and after the
Offender levies a Fine to a Stranger, there, although his Estate was determined
by the offense, yet the Estate tail is bound by the Fine. Ad quod caeteri
Justiciarii murmurabant. Tenant in tail has Issue two Sons, the eldest in the
life of his Father levieth a Fine, and after the Father dies, the Estate tail
is bound; contrary if the Father had survived his eldest Son: And afterward in
the end of this Term Judgment was given against the Plaintiff, for by the Will
here is a good limitation, and an estate to cease upon an act, and upon another
contingent to be revived, is good enough, Vide 30 E. 3. 7. A Lease for life
rendering rent, and if the rent he behind, that the Lessor shall return quousque
agreement be made; so as a Freehold may cease and rise again according as the
same is limited: And all this was agreed by Rhodes, Periam, and Windham; and
afterward Walmsley for the Plaintiff, took an Exception to the Bar, for that
the Defendant pleaded Quod Petrus Carry tempore levationis finis praedict. non
habet exitum, and does not say, that tempore quo ipse Henricus clamabat
reversionem praedict. the said Peter had not Issue; for he said if Peter had
Issue, when Henry claimed the Reversion, nothing had vested on him by the said
claim: But all the Court besides Anderson, said, that needed not be, but if the
matter had been such, the same should come on the part of the Plaintiff. Also
they said, That the Estate was vested in Henry without claim, and although
after the Offense committed, and before claim Peter have Issue, yet Henry
should retain the Land during the life of the Offender against such Issue born
after the Fine levied: for by the Fine levied the Reversion vested in Henry
without any claim by force of the said limitation.

CLXXVII. Mich. 30 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
Alien suffers a common Recovery. 9 Co. 141.
LAnd was given to an Alien in tail, the Remainder over to another in Fee, the
Alien suffered a common Recovery, and died without Issue: All this matter was
found by Office. It was moved, That this Office should have return, so as upon
the matter, the Alien was not Tenant of the Land at the time of the Recovery
suffered: But the whole Court held the contrary, and that the Recovery was
good, and should bind him in the Remainder.

Mich. 30 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
CLXXVIII. Seixtbark and Percies Case.
EJectione firmae of Lands in Knolton and Woodland; the Parties were at Issue,
and the Venire facias was of Knolton only, and it was found for the Plaintiff.
It was showed in stay of Judgment, that the Venire facias was not well awarded,
for it ought to have been De vicineto de Knolton and Woodland, which was
granted by the Court: And that that defect was not relieved by any Statute, for
it is a Mis-trial, and for that cause Judgment was stayed, and a Venire facias
de novo granted.

30 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
CLXXIX. The Provost of Queens College in Oxfords Case.
THe Provost, Fellows, and Scholars of Queens College in Oxford, are Guardians
of the Hospital, and Meason de Dieu in Southampton, and they make a Lease of
Lands parcel of the Possession of the said Hospital to one Hagel for term of
years by the name of Praepositus Socii and Scholares Collegii Reginalis in
Oxonia Gardianus Hospitalis, etc. And in an Ejectione firmae upon that Lease,
it was found for the Plaintiff. It was objected in Arrest of Judgment, That
this word (Gardianus) ought to be in the Plural Number (Gardiani) for the
College does consist of many persons, and every one of them capable; and not
like to Abbot and Covent: The Court was all of Opinion that the Exception is
not to be allowed, but that as well the Lease as the Declaration were both
good, for the College is a Body, and as one Person, and so it is as well
Gardianus.

30 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
CLXXX. Greens Case.
AN Action upon the Statute of Huy and Cry was brought by Green: The Case was,
Upon Statute of Hue and Cry.
That the Plaintiff delivered to his Servant certain moneys to carry the same
from Bristol to London, in which journey the Servant was robbed: upon which
matter the Master brought his Action. It was moved, That the Plaintiff by the
Statute of 27 Eliz. c. 13. is not a person able to bring this Action, because
he was not examined twenty days before the Action was brought, but the
Exception was disallowed, for the Court was clear of Opinion, that the Master
should not be examined, but the Servant.

CLXXXI. 30 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
THis Case was moved upon the Statute of 1 and 2 Phil. and Mary, cap. 12. The
Town of Coventry was within the Hundred of Offley in the County of Stafford;
and Queen Mary by her Letters Patents made the said Town a County. And now a
Distress was taken in the residue of the said Hundred, and brought into the
Town of Coventry, and if that be within the Statute was the question. It was
holden by the Court clearly, That now the Town of Coventry is exempted out of
the Hundred aforesaid, and is a thing by it self, and it is a good challenge
for the Hundred of Offley, that the Iuror challenged dwells in the Town of
Coventry, for now it is not parcel of Offley as to the King: But as to the Lord
of the Hundred, the said Town remains parcel of it, notwithstanding the Queens
Grant. And the Citizens of Coventry shall do suit at the Court of the Hundred;
but in an Action upon the Statue of Hue and Cry of a Robbery committed in the
residue of the Hundred, the Citizens shall not be charged.

25 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
CLXXXII. Dolmans Case.
A. Seized of a Manor to which two parts of the Advowson was appendant,
presented, and afterward aliened the Manor cum pertinentiis, the Alienee
presented and purchased the third part of the Advowson, and presented again one
J. S. Chaplain to the Earl of Rutland, who had a dispensation, and took another
Benefice, and was inducted 1 Eliz. and died 11 Eliz. The Queen presented for
Lapse, and her Clerk was instituted and inducted, the Alienee Lord of the Manor
died seized inter alia; this Manor was allotted to the Wife of Dolman for her
part; and he brought a Quare Impedit. It was moved, If Dolman should not join
in this Quare impedit with her who had the third part; and by Walmsley, he need
not, Vide 22 E. 4. 8. By Brian, If an Advowson descend to four Coparceners, and
they make Partition to present by turns, and the third presents when the second
ought, for that time his presentment is gone, but when it comes to his turn
again, he shall present; which proves that they are several Tenants.

CLXXXIII. Mich. 26 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
ONe recovered certain Copyhold Lands in the Court of the Lord of the Manor by
Plaint, in the nature of a Writ of Right: It was moved in the Common Bench, If
a Precept may be made and awarded out of the said Court for the Execution of
the said Recovery, and to put him who recovered in possession with the Posse
Manerii, Posse Manerii and Comitatus differ.
as in such Case at the Common Law with Posse Comitatus; it was resolved
clearly that force in such Cases is not justifiable, but by Mandate out of the
Kings Courts.

Hill. 29 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
CLXXXIV. Anne Bedingfields Case.
DOwer was brought by Anne Bedingfield against Thomas Bedingfield; the Tenant
brought out of Chancery a Writ de Circumspecte agatis containing this matter,
that it was found by Office in the County of Norfolk, that the Husband of the
Demandant was seized of the Manor of D. in the County of Norfolk, and held the
same of the Queen in Chief by Knight Service, and thereof died seized, the
Tenant being his Son and Heir apparent, and of full age, by reason of which the
Queen seized as well the said Manor as other Manors, and because the Queen was
to restore the Tenements tam integre as they came to her hands, it was
commanded them to surcease Domina Regina inconsulta: It was resolved, that
although the Queen be entitled to have Primer Seisin of all the Lands whereof
the Husband died seized, yet this writ cannot extend to any Manors not found in
the Office, for by the Law the Queen cannot seize more Lands than those which
are found in the Office, and therefore as to the Land found in the Office, the
Court gave day to the Tenant to plead in chief. And it was argued by Gaudy
Sergeant for the Tenant, that the Demandant ought to sue in the Chancery
because the Queen is seized to have her primer Seisin. And cited the Case 11 H.
4. 193. And after many Motions, the Court clearly agreed, that the Tenant ought
to answer over, for the Statute of B^gamis, cap. 3. pretends that in such Case
the Justices shall proceed notwithstanding such Seisin of the King, and where
the King grants the Custody of the Land it self 1 H. 7, 18, 19. 4 H. 7. 1. a
multo fortiori against the Heir himself, where he is of full age,
notwithstanding the Possession of the King for his Primer Seisin, by the
Statute of Bigam^s, where the Heir was of full age, there the wife could not be
endowed in the Chancery: But now per Prerogativa Regis, cap. 4. Such women may
be there endowed, si Viduae illae voluerint. And after many Motions the Court
Awarded that the Tenant should plead in Chief at his peril, for the Demandant
might sue at the Common Law if she pleased, Vide Cook 9. Part Acc.

CLXXXV. Savages Case.
ONe Savage was presented to a Benefice, and afterward took another, and then
purchased a Dispensation (which was too late) and then was qualified, and
afterward accepted of the Archdeaconry of Gloucester; and Underhil, who had
the Archdeaconry libelled against the said Savage in the Spiritual Court. Vide
the Case reported in the first Part of Leonards Reports Sect. 442. Ideo Quaere
there.

CLXXXVI. Pasc. 26 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
Husband and wife Copyholders for Life, the Husband surrendered to the Lord, who
granted the Land over by Copy to a Stranger, the Husband dyed, the Wife
recovered and entered, and surrendered to the Lord, and by Wray, the Stranger to
whom the Lord granted it, after the Surrender by the Husband, should have the
Land, and not the Lord himself against his own Grant.

Pasc. 28 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
CLXXXVII. Chomley and Conges Case.
CHomley brought Trespass of Assault and Battery made to his Wife against Cony,
and upon the general Issue it was found for the Plaintiff: It was moved in
Arrest of Judgment, that the Action was not well brought, for the same being an
Action of Trespass done to the person of the wife, the Writ ought to be brought
and prosecuted in both their Names; for now, if Judgment be given for the
Husband, and he dye before Execution, the Wife to whom the wrong was done
should not have Execution, but the Executors of the Husband; and afterward
upon advice the Plaintiff had Judgment to recover, Vide Cont. 9 E. 4. 51. 38 H.
6. 25.

Pasc. 28 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
CLXXXVIII. Blithe and Colegates Case.
Vide this Case Reported by Cook 2 Part of his Reports.
REplevin by Blithe and Colegate, who made Conusans as Bailiff to Roger
Beckwith Son and Heir of Elizabeth Beckwith for damage feasant, and upon a
Special Verdict the Case was, That the said Eliz. was seized, and took to
Husband Christopher Kenne, and by an Indenture made by the said Eliz. without
the assent of her said Husband, by the name of Elizabeth Beckwith, bearing date
14 March, 14 Eliz. declares the uses of a Fine to be levied etc. 1. To the use
of the said Elizabeth for life, without impeachment of Waste, and after to the
use of the Conusees for their lives, and after to the use of the said Elizabeth
and her Heirs: And that afterward the said Christopher Kenne, before any Fine
levied in Feb. 20 Eliz. by Indenture between himself and the said Elizabeth his
Wife of the one part, and R. W. of the other part, without the consent of the
said Elizabeth declared, that the uses of the said Fine so to be levied, should
be to the use of the said Christopher and Elizabeth for life, etc. And
afterward the said Fine was levied by the Husband and Wife; and the only
Question upon the matter was if the uses declared by the Wife, or the uses
declared by the Husband should stand. It was argued by Shuttleworth Sergeant,
that the uses declared by the Husband should stand, and that the Declaration by
the Wife should be rejected, for a Feme Covert is not sui juris, but is sub
potestate v^ri. And therefore ^7 Ass. 17. a Feme Covert without her Husband
acknowledges a Fine, the Husband shall avoid it; and as to the Declaration of
the uses, it is no other thing but the showing of the meaning of the Parties to
the Fine, how and in what manner the Land of which the Fine is levied, shall be
disposed of by the Fine, but such a power cannot be in a Feme Covert: For if an
Infant levy a Fine, and declare the uses by Indenture, the Declaration is void,
and the Fine shall be to his own use, and that was adjudged in the Court of
Wards: The same Law in case of a man of Non sanae memoriae: and if an Idiot
levy a Fine, and declare uses upon it, the Declaration is void, and the Fine
shall be to his own use, and that Case also has been adjudged in the Court of
Wards: And by intendment of the Law, every Wife is at the disposition of her
Husband, as in a Praecipe quod reddat against the Husband and Wife, the Wife
makes default, it shall be accounted the default of the Husband, for the Law
intends that the Wife is ameanable by the Husband. 21 Ass. The Husband seized
in the right of the Wife, made a Feoffment in Fee, and in making of Livery his
Wife interrupts him, it was not any interruption or impediment quo minus the
Livery operetur, for cui ipsa in vita contradicere non potuit, etc. So in a
Praecipe quod reddat against the Husband and Wife, the Husband pleads one plea
and the Wife another, the Plea of the Husband shall be admitted, 33 H 6. 43. 89
Ass. 1 And the Husband may in some case prejudice his Wife in point of
Inheritance, as by Cession, Vide E. 4 2. Fitz. Cui in vita 22. And he argued
much upon the ground, where it shall be said the folly of the Wife to take such
a Husband: If the Husband be seized in the right of his Wife they sell the said
Land, and for Assurance levy a Fine to the Vendee, now the Husband alone shall
have an Action of Debt for the money upon the Sale which proves that it is the
Sale of the Husband alone, which see 48 E. 3. 18. Fenner Sergeant contrary: And
first he confessed that the Declaration by the Wife is utterly void and also
the Declaration by the Husband; and therefore when the Husband and Wife levy a
Fine the Conusee in judgment of Law is in by the Wife, and not by the Husband,
so as the Husband as to the right is a Stranger to the Land, and to the Estate
which passes by the Fine, although he be Party to the Fine, for that is not
for any Interest which he has in the Land, but for the conformity of Law,
which disables a Wife to levy a Fine without her Husband, and therefore it is
not any reason that the husband alone shall be received to declare the uses,
for he is no Proprietor of the Land in right especially, forasmuch as in
account of the Law, the whole passes from the Wife: And the Law in diverse
Cases frames its Judgment according to the possession of the Wife, and that in
acts done by the Husband 14 H. 8. 6 where A seized of a Rentcharge in Fee
issuing out of the Land of the Wife, A releases the Rent to the Husband and his
Heirs, the same shall enure to the Wife, Vide 38 E. 3. 10. From such Cases the
Law respects the nature of the Seisin and the manner of the possession. And as
to the Case vouched out of Dyer 12 Eliz. where the Husband and Wife were seized
of a Message to them, and to the Heirs of the Husband, they suffer a common
Recovery, and the Husband alone declares the uses, the same is good, for in
that Case the Fee was in the Husband, and always he who has the Fee ought and
may declare the use, if all who have interest will not join, and therefore if
Lands be given to two, and to the Heirs of one of them, if they both join in a
Fine he which has the Fee may by himself declare the uses: But if there be two
Ioyntenants in Fee, they both ought to join in the Declaration of the uses, or
otherwise make several Declarations of their several Moieties. So if Cestuy que
use and his Feoffees join in a Fine, and make several Declarations, the
Declaration of the Feoffees shall stand, for that the Land passes from them.
So if Cestuy que use and his Feoffees make a Feoffment in Fee 21 H. 7. And to
that purpose he put the Case reported by Plowden 15 Eliz. 464. Husband and Wife
seized in right of the Wife, they levy a Fine sur Conusans de droit come ceo,
etc and the Conusee renders the Land to the Husband and Wife, and to the Heirs
of the Husband, the Husband dies, the Wife discontinues the Land, the same is
not within the penalty of the Statute of 11 H. 7. For notwithstanding the Wife
be now in by the purchase of her Husband, yet that purchase is not within the
meaning of that Statute, because the Law respects the original Seisin which was
in the Wife, and so it was adjudged. Vide Term. Mich. 30 Eliz.

Pasc. 25 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
CLXXXVIII. The Earl of Northumberlands Case.
THe Earl of Northumberland brought Debt for Arrearages upon Account. The
Defendant showed, that before the said Account, the Plaintiff of his own wrong
imprisoned the Defendant, and he so imprisoned, assigned Auditors, and so the
Account was made by Duress. It was holden a good Plea by the Justices of both
Benches.

Pasc. 25 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
CLXXXIX. Clark and Kemptons Case.
IN Ejectione firmae the Case was, 1 Leon. 141. Smith and Burds Case. Co. 10
Rep. 129. b. Payment of Rents.
The Defendant leased for years to the Plaintiff, rendering rent, payable at
Michaelmas, and the Annunciation, or fourteen days after. Et si contingat the
said rent to be behind post aliquod terminorum vel festorum praedictorum in quo
solvi debet by the space of 14 days, post aliquod festum praedict. that then,
etc. It was adjudged in this Case, that the Lessee had fourteen days after the
said fourteen days mentioned in the Reservation without danger of the penalty
of the condition, and the last words post aliquod Festorum praedict. for the
contrariety shall be rejected.

Pasc. 31 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
CXC. Harris and Whitings Case.
DEbt upon an Obligation by Harris and his Wife, as Executors of Giles Capel
against Whiting, the Condition was that if the Obligor before the Feast of
Pentecost pay such a sum, so as the Obligee be ready at the payment thereof to
enter into a Bond of 200 l. with Sureties to purchase such Land, etc. that
then, etc. The Defendant pleaded that he was ready to pay, etc. and that the
Obligee was not ready to enter into such Bond ut supra. The Plaintiff
Replicando said, that he was ready absque hoc, that the Defendant was ready to
pay. It was moved that the Traverse was not good, for the first Act here was to
be done by the Obligee, viz. to enter into the Bond, ut supra, for otherwise
the Obligor had not any means to compel the Obligee to enter into it. But by
Wray Chief Justice, the first Act is to be done by the Obligor, and at the
Payment the other party is to do that which to him belongs to do.

Trin. 29 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
CXC. Ralph Morris Case.
RAlph Morris and his wife libelled against one in the Ecclesiastical Court,
for that the Defendant called the Wife of the Plaintiff Veneficam, Sortilegam,
and Incantatricem Daemoniorum. And now came the Defendant into the Kings Bench,
surmising that the matter of the Libel is determinable by the Law of the Land,
and thereupon prayed a Prohibition; and it was holden, that although the
Offense of Witchcraft be in some cases punishable in our Law, yet the same does
not take away the Jurisdiction of the Ecclesiastical Law; and to call one Witch
generally, an Action does not lie in our Law, as it has been adjudged. But to
say He has bewitched such a one, an Action does lie: And by Wray, Witchcraft,
which is made Felony by any Statute, is not punishable by the Ecclesiastical
Law; but in case of Slander upon such a Witchcraft, such slanderous words are
of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction; and for Witchcraft which is not Felony, the
Ecclesiastical Court shall punish the party; and afterward in the principal
Case a Consultation was awarded.

Trin. 29 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
CXCI. Tyrrels Case.
TYrrel Warden of the Fleet of an Estate of Inheritance, let the said Office
for years and afterward is condemned in London in many Actions of Debt, and is
there detained in Execution for the sum of fourteen hundred pounds, and now one
Iden sued the said Tyrrel in the Common Pleas, in an Action of debt for 50 l.
and had Judgment to recover, and thereupon the said Tyrrel is brought to the
Bar, and Iden prays he be committed to the Fleet in Execution for his Debt. It
was first moved by the Court, if there was not a practice between Iden and
Tyrrel for to deliver him out of the Compter in London to a more easy Prison
etc. But it was moved by Fenner, who was of counsel with the Creditors in
London, that it should be very dangerous to commit Tyrrel Prisoner to the
Fleet, because he had the Inheritance of Custody of the said Prison, and if the
Lessee under whose guard he shall be, surrenders his Interest; or if he does
not pay his Rent, so as in default thereof Tyrrel re-enter, or if that the Term
expire before that the Creditors of Tyrrel be satisfied, then here is an Escape
and discharge of Execution, and we are without remedy. But as to that it was
said by Rhodes, Windham, and Anderson, That if the Lessee surrender it shall be
an Escape in him, and he shall answer for the same. Afterward by Order of the
Court Tyrrel was committed to the Fleet in Execution, and the Sheriffs of
London discharged.

Mich. 29 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
CXCII. Owen and Morgans Case.
THe Case between Owen and Morgan which was agreed Trin. 29 Eliz. was this,
Richard Owen was seized of, Ante 26. Post 222.
etc. and levied a Fine to Owen and Morgan, and to the Heirs of Owen, and they
granted and rendered the said Land to the said Richard and Lettice his Wife (not
Party to the said Writ of Covenant, nor to the Conusans) and to the Heirs of
the body of the said Richard, the Remainder over to the said Owen now Demandant
in Fee: The Husband alone without the Wife suffered a Common Recovery, the Wife
died, the Husband died without Issue. If this Recovery by the Husband only
should bind the Remainder, was the Question: And now the Lord Anderson declared
openly in Court for himself, and in the name of his Companions, the other
Justices, that the Demandant ought to have Judgment, and that the said Recovery
should not bind the Remainder: But first he spoke to the Fine it self, for the
Wife is not named in the Writ of Covenant, nor the Conusans but in the Render,
the Land is rendered to the Husband and Wife, and the Heirs of the body of the
Husband, and he said a Scire facias did lie upon the Fine well enough, for the
Fine is not void, but only erroneous, and being in its force, this Writ does
well lie. And he cited to this purpose 7 E. 3. Fitz. Sc. fac. 136. where upon
such a Fine levied, and such Exception ut supra taken to it: To which it was
said by Herle, that forasmuch as the Fine is excepted, and yet in its force, we
ought to grant Execution, and also 30 H. 6. none can take the first Estate in
the Fine but he who is named in the Writ of Covenant, but every Stranger may
take by way of Remainder, and such was the Opinion of the whole Court: As to
the matter in Law all the Court agreed, That notwithstanding the Recovery the
Demandant should have Execution, for here the Land which by pretense of the
said Recovery, shall be Recoverd in value, cannot go to the Estate which is
given, for the Estate given was to the Husband and Wife, and the Heirs of the
body of the Husband, and then the Tenant against whom the Recovery was had was
impleaded as sole Tenant, in which Case the Vouchee, when he comes in, is to
warrant a sole Estate, but not another, but now the Land to be recovered in
value shall go to the Husband alone, and the Wife shall have nothing, so as the
true Estate is not warranted and so not answered: And he cited the Case of 38
E. 3. 5. in a Formedon, the Tenant vouched himself for to save the tail, and
showed that one A. was seized, and gave the Land in Demand, to the now Tenant,
and to E. his Wife in tail, which E. is now alive, and by award the Voucher was
disallowed. Because it was there said by Knevyt, the Recovery in value cannot
be according to the gift, 45 E. 3. 18. Tenant in tail discontinues, and takes
back an Estate in Fee, is impleaded, and voucheth the Donor, he shall be ousted
of the Voucher, for that he is in of another Estate, and afterward the
Plaintiff had Judgment to have Execution.

Mich. 33 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
CXCIII. Foles and Griffins Case.
DEbt upon Obligation by Foles against Griffin; the Condition was That if the
Obligee may enjoy certain Tithes demised to him by the Defendant, during his
Term, against all Persons paying yearly the Rent of three pound, that then,
etc. To which the Defendant said, that the Plaintiff did not pay the said Rent,
etc. Beaumont Sergeant moved that the Plea is not good, but he ought to say,
that the Plaintiff enjoyed the Tithes until such a Feast, at which time such
Rent was due, which Rent he did not pay, for which etc. Quod Curia concessit.

Mich. 33 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
CXCIV. Young and Tailors Case.
IN Debt upon an Obligation upon Condition to perform the Arbitrament: (the
Obligation was laid to be made in the Parish of Bow in London) and the
submission was of all things depending between them; so that they made an Award
of the premises before such a day: and said further, that no Arbitrament was
made. The Plaintiff Replicando said, that the Arbitrators made an Award in the
Parish of Pancras in Warda praedict. and laid a breach, etc. The Defendant
rejoyned, that 300 l. was depending in Controversy between them for a certain
thing of which no Arbitrament was made: upon which they were at Issue, and
tried by a Visne of the Parish of Bow only, which passed for the Plaintiff. It
was moved in stay of Judgment, That the Trial was not good, for no place is
alleged where the Controversy of 300 l. is depending* for which cause it
shall be tried where the Bond and Arbitrament was made; to which it was said,
That the alleging the place where the Arbitrament was made is superfluous; for
which Cause the Trial is good: And also the Submission being conditional, the
Award ought to be of all things submitted, or else it is void; contrary if it
be no Condition, Vide Cook 8 Part, Baspoles Case.

Mich. 32 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
CXCV. The Queen and the Bishop of Lincolns Case.
THe Queen brought a Quare Impedit against the Bishop of Lincoln and others:
And the Case was, That F. Bishop of Lincoln, Predecessor of the Defendant, was
Patron of the Church and presented to the same, being void, one Garth, who
being inducted, took another Benefice, by which, by reason of the Statute of 21
H. 8. the first Benefice became void, and remained void by the space of
seventeen years, whereupon the Queen was entitled to present to the same by
Lapse. The said F. then Bishop presented to the same, and afterward was
translated to Winchester, and the Defendant, now Bishop, was suffectus. And he
certified into the Exchequer, that the Incumbent presented by the said F
refused to pay his Subsidy, upon which he was deprived; and if now the Queen
shall present by reason of her Title by Lapse, notwithstanding the plenarty
after, or if the Title by Lapse of that Presentment of the Bishop was, etc. was
a great Question: And the Case late adjudged between Beverly and Cornwel was
cited; but there the Case was, that the Clark presented (where the Presentment
appertained to the Queen by Lapse) died, but here he is deprived, which may be
the Covin betwixt the Ordinary and him. Fenner argued to the contrary, and put
diverse Cases to prove that the Prerogative of the Queen did not alter the right
of the Parties; As the Queen has a Seignory consisting of Homage, Fealty, and
Rent, and the Queen grants the Seignory to a Stranger, reserving the Rent, and
afterward the Tenancy Escheats, the Rent is gone: The Queen leases for years,
rendering rent to a Stranger upon Condition, who enters upon the Lessee, the
Condition of the Queen is suspended. The Queen purchases Lands in Borough
English has Issue a Son, and dies seized he has the Land now by descent;
afterward a younger Son is born, that Land shall be divested out of the
possession of the King, and the Royalty of his person does not alter the right
of descent: And afterward, forasmuch as the same deprivation is the act of the
Incumbent, the refusal the act of the Ordinary himself, the sentence and not
the act of God in the case before cited. It was the Opinion of the Court, That
Judgment should be given for the Queen.

CXCVI. Windham and Meads Case.
WIndham brought an Action upon the Case upon the Common Law of England
concerning Hostlers: The Case was, That the Servant of Windham brought his
Masters horse to the Inn, and there it was stolen. To which the Defendant
said, That the said Servant brought the said Horse to the said Inn to be put to
Pasture, and thereupon the said Horse was put to grass, and was there stolen;
it was ruled in that Case that the Innkeeper should be excused: but if the
Innkeeper of his own head, without direction of the Owner, or his Servant, had
put the Horse to grass, and afterward the Horse is stolen, there an Action
upon the Case does lie.

Trin. 29 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
CXCVII. Neals Case.
IN a false Imprisonment by Neal against the Mayor, Sheriffs, Citizens and
Commonalty of the City of Norwich; the Original Writ was directed to the
Coroners of the said City. And Exception was taken to the Writ, because it was
not directed to the Sheriffs of the said City, but to the Coroners. Sed non
allocatur, for the Sheriffs are parcel of the Corporation, as it is to see by
the name by which they of Norwich are incorporated. And also it has been
adjudged, That a Sheriff cannot summon himself, and therefore by the Award of
the Court, the Writ was allowed to be good.

Trin. 29 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
CXCVIII. Sir John Bromes Case.
SIr John Brom 33 H. 8. acknowledged a Fine of certain Lands, the Kings Silver
was entered, and the Conusans taken; but the Fine was never engrossed, and now
he who claimed under the Fine came in Court, and prayed that the Fine might be
engrossed, and the Court examined them upon their Oaths, to what use the Fine
was levied, and in the Seisin and Possession of what persons the Lands whereof
the Fine was levied had been after the Fine? Upon which Examination it appeared
fully to the Court, that the Party to whom the Fine was levied, was seized
after the Fine, and suffered a Common Recovery of the Land, and that the said
Land had been enjoyed according to the said Fine at all such times since, etc.
Whereupon the Court commanded that the Fine be engrossed. Vide Acc. 8 Eliz.
Dyer 254.

Trin. 29 Eliz. In the Exchequer.
CXCIX. The Lord Dacres and Philip Fines Case.
THe Case between the Lord Dacres and Fines was Tenant in Tail in remainder
upon an Estate for Life of Lands holden in Capite, levied a Fine thereof
without License; 3 Leon. 261.
and Process issued against the Tenants for Life; It was holden by all the
Barons, that by Plea he should be discharged; it was holden, That if the
Conusor had any other Lands ubicunque in Anglia, the Fine for Alienation should
be levied upon them. But it was moved, If the Tenant should be driven to plead
it, because it appears upon Record that the Conusor was but Tenant in Tail in
Remainder, and that was in an Office containing such matter which was pleaded
by another in another Cause before, by which Office it appeared, that the Lord
Dacres was Tenant in Tail, the Remainder in Tail to Philip Fines; and now Fines
had levied a Fine sur Conusans de droit, etc. and because the same appeared on
Record, Manwood awarded that the Process against the Tenants of the Lord Dacres
should be stayed.

Trin. 29 Eliz.
CC. Paston and Townsends Case.
IN Trespass by Paston against Townsend, The Defendant pleaded that Tindal was
seized in Fee by protestation and dyed seized, and the Land descended: To which
the Plaintiff replied, and said etc, absque hoc that Tindal was seized in Fee,
upon which they were at Issue. On the part of the Defendant to prove the Issue,
it was given in Evidence to prove the Issue in his right, that the said Tindal
long time before his death was seized, and aliened, and never after was seized:
It was said that that Evidence did not prove the Issue for the Defendant, for
the Seisin in Fee intended in the Issue is in the nature of a dying seized; and
so Periam conceived that the Defendants Plea did not intend any other Seisin, a
dying seized, and the dying seized is taken by Protestation, to avoid the
doubleness. So as the Seisin upon which the Issue is taken ought to be intended
a Seisin continuing until the time of the death of Tindal, and Seisin at large,
or a general Seisin at any time during the life of Tindal, quod Anderson
concessit.

Trin. 29 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
CCI. Griffith and Prices Case.
ERror by Griffith against Price, upon a Judgment in Chester in Ejectione
firmae, and the Error assigned was because the Original bore date 16 April, 28
Eliz. and the Plaintiff declared of an Ejectment 17 April, 28 Eliz. So as it
appears, that the Action was brought before there was any cause of Action:
and that was holden to be Error: And also Ejectione firmae is not a personal
Action; and afterward the Judgment was Reversed.

Trin. 30 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
CCII. Harris and Caverleys Case.
A Judgment was given in London between Harris and Caverley upon the Statute of
5 E. 6. for buying of Woolls; and upon that Error was brought in the Kings
Bench, quod nota, For this Writ of Error upon a Judgment given in London ought
to be sued before the Mayor, Vide ^ N. B. 22, 23. And Wray asked, Wherefore the
Writ of Error was brought here. To which it was answered by Dodding Clark, that
the Record was removed by Certiorari out of the Kings Bench at the Suit of the
Defendant, to the purpose to bring a Writ of Error, quod coram vobis residet.
And the Error was assigned in this, that by the Statute of 18 Eliz. cap. 5. it
is enacted, that upon every Information that shall be exhibited, a special Note
shall be made of the Day, Month and Year of the exhibiting of the same into any
Office, or to any Officer, who lawfully may receive the same: And here upon
this Information there is not any such Note, according to the said Statute: And
in truth, no Information may be exhibited, for there is not any Officer there
appointed for that matter, for the entry in such Cases in that Court is, Talis
venit and deliberavit hic in Curia Miloni Sands, etc. But in the Case at Bar,
the Entry is, Talis venit and deliberavit in Curia, but without showing to
whom. (But note that the words of the said Statute of 18 Eliz. are in the
disjunctive, into any Office, or to any Officer) and that such Information
shall not be of Record but from that time forwards, and not before, wherefore
here this Information is not upon Record and then no Judgment can be given upon
it. Cook, This Information may be well sued in London, for the words of the
said Statute of 5 E. 6. give Suit in any Court of Record of the King: And the
Court in London is a Court of Record of the King, and every Court of Record
has an Officer to receive Declarations and Pleas, and if it be delivered into
the Office, it is good enough. 2. The Offense is laid in the Parish of Bow in
Warda de Cheap, and alibi in Civitate London, and so there is not any place
laid where the Offense shall be tried. Cook, This Alibi is a Nugation.

Trin. 31 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
CCIII. Peuson and Higbeds Case.
IN Assumpsit, the Plaintiff declared, that in consideration that he by his
Servant had delivered to the Defendant two Bills of Debt amounting to the sum
of 80 l. Solubiles eidem querenti to be received by the Defendant at Roan in
Normandy, to his own use, the Defendant promised to pay to the Plaintiff 60 l.
and upon this matter Judgment was given; and now a Writ of Error was brought
and assigned for Error, because it is not showed in the Declaration that the
Bills were sealed, or that they were made to the Plaintiff, and here is not any
consideration, for the Defendant has not any remedy to compel the Parties to
pay the said debts if they refuse. Godfrey, If the money be not paid at Roan to
the Defendant, he shall have an Action upon the Case, for this is an Assumpsit
in Law, which Wray concessit, for it is a mutual promise and agreement: And it
was argued to the contrary, that here is not any sufficient consideration, for
it does not appear that the Defendant has any remedy for to recover the money.
And 13 Eliz. it was holden, that where the Plaintiff declared in an Action upon
the Case, that in consideration that he had delivered a Bill of Debt to the
Defendant, and has made a Letter of Attorney upon it, etc. the Defendant
promised to pay to the Plaintiff 20 l. and because that the Plaintiff
(notwithstanding that) might release the debt, or revoke the Letter of
Attorney, and so defeat the Defendant of the whole profit, etc. that the Action
upon the matter did not lie: Also for another cause the consideration is not
sufficient, for it is illegal because maintenance; but if it was upon the
consideration precedent it had been good enough: As if J be indebted to A. and
B. is indebted to me, J. may assign to A. the debt which B. owes me. Golding,
Although the consideration be but of small value, yet it is good enough. And if
A. in consideration B will assure to him the Manor of D. promise to pay to B.
100 l. although the Party has not any interest or title to it, yet it is good,
and also though the consideration be Executory, yet it is valuable, for if the
money be not paid at Roan, the Defendant shall have an Action upon the Case
against the Plaintiff: It was also objected that upon the Declaration it does
not appear that the Defend. if the two Bills be not paid, may have an Action
upon the Case against the Plaintiff, for there is not any express Assumpsit on
the Plaintiffs part, that the moneys due by the Bills to the Plaintiff shall be
paid to the Defendant, for if it had been so, then it had been good, for then
there had been a reciprocal promise which is not here, nor can be collected by
any words in the Declaration. Cook, It does not appear upon the Declaration by
whom, nor to whom the money due by the two Bills, shall be paid, for it may be
that they are due to the Defendant and then the delivery of the two Bills is
not any consideration, Quod Clench and Gaudy concesserunt. The Case was
adjourned.

CCIV. Temps Roign Eliz.
THe Case was, A. enfeoffed B upon Condition that if he pay ten pound to the
Feoffee, his Executors and Assigns, within three years next ensuing, that then,
etc. The Feoffee has Issue three Sons, whom he makes his Executors, and dies
before the day of payment. The Ordinary commits Letters of Administration to J.
S. during the minority of the Executors. It was the Opinion of Dyer, that it
was the surest way for A. to pay the moneys to the Executors no withstanding
the administration committed to another, for the Administrator in such Case is
but a Bailiff or Receiver to the Executors, and shall be accountable to them;
which Harper concessit: And Manwood said, That if in that Case the moneys be
paid to one of the Executors, it is sufficient; and the moneys to be paid upon
that conditional Feoffment, are as a sum in gross, and not in the nature of a
Debt, quod caeteri Justiciarii concesserunt.

CCV. Temps Roign Eliz.
A Lease is made of certain Lands for years, Proviso that the Lessee shall not
put his Cattle upon the Land from Michaelmass to St. Andrews Tide, the Question
was, If this Proviso and Restraint shall reach for the whole Term, or but to
the first year. Dyer, Conditions are stricti juris, and ought not to have
liberal constructions; therefore he conceived, that the condition should be
restrained to the first year, and should not further extend. Manwood, If I be
bound that I will not go to London between Easter and Michaelmas, it shall not
extend only to the first year after the date of the Obligation, but for my
whole life.

Hill. 32 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
CCVI. Doughty and Prideaux Case.
ACtion upon the Case by Doughty against Prideaux upon these words, Thou art a
wicked and perjured Fellow, 3 Leon. 269.
and art forsworn in the Court of Star Chamber, as it appears by an
Exemplification here under the Seal of that Court: The Defendant justified by
reason of a Bill exhibited in the said Court, by one Brooks against the now
Plaintiff, for conspiring with another to endite the said Brook of certain
Felonies, and the Defendant, now Plaintiff in his answer to his said Bill
denied upon Oath the said Conspiracy, and Sentence was given in the said Court
against the now Plaintiff, ubi revera, such Conspiracy was. The Plaintiff by
Replication said, That the said Brook was arraigned and endicted upon the said
Indictment, and prayed his Clergy, whereupon it appeared, that the said Brook
was not legitimo modo acquiet'; and the same can be no Conspiracy in the now
Plaintiff, to prove the said Brook to be indicted: And by Walmesley and Periam,
the Replication is not good, for it may be that Brook was acquitted, and yet
that the Plaintiff conspired, upon which a Writ of Conspiracy perhaps will not
lie, but an Action upon the Case without doubt, for the Replication does not
prove that the Plaintiff did not conspire, but that the Plaintiff was not
punishable for such Conspiracy.

CCVII. Pasc. 33 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
AN Abbot made a Lease to three men for eighty years, and in the end of the
said Lease there was a clause, Proviso, That if they dyed within the said Term,
that then the Lessor might enter. The Possessions of the Abbey came to the King,
who granted the Reversion to J. S. who made a new Lease to J. D. for twenty and
one years, to begin after the Expiration, Determination, or Surrender of the
former Lease: The three Lessees dyed within the term, If J. D. might enter
before J. S. had entered, was the Question. It was the Opinion of the Justices,
that he could not, for it is in the Election of J. S. if he will take advantage
of the Condition, and defeat the Lease, but that ought to be by Entry, and none
can make such Entry but the Lessor himself, or by his express direction.

Trin. 31 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
CCVIII. Barlow and Piersons Case.
BArlow brought a plaint of Debt in London against Edward Pierson, which was
his very name, and he caused himself to be removed into the Kings Bench by the
name of Edmund Pierson, and in Easter last he put in Bail Edmund Pierson, and
we declared against him by the name of Edward, his true name, and Judgment was
given for us; and now when we are to resort to the Bail we cannot find any such
Person, wherefore all our labor is lost, and now we would declare de novo upon
that Bail, and we pray that the Court will give way to answer. Kemp, The
ancient use was, when any removed himself hither by Habeas Corpus, the
Plaintiff might declare against him at any time within a year after; but of
late time the Justices, to avoid overlong delays, have taken this order, that
the Plaintiff in such Case declare within two Terms; and this is the second
Term in your Case, wherefore you may declare: And it was said that because that
the Defendant had removed himself by the name of Edmund, he is estopped to say
the contrary: But if it were upon an Original Writ here, it is otherwise. And
afterward the Plaintiff declared against him by the name of Edmund.

Mich. 27 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
CCIX. Kightley and Kightleys Case.
DEbt by Eustace Kightley against Charles Kightley Executors of the last Will
of Francis Kightley: The Defendant pleaded that they had fully administered. The
Case was this, Francis Kightley made the Defendants his Executors, who being
within age administration was committed to another until they came of full age,
and after they were of full age, the Jury found, that in the hands of the
Administrator, fuerunt bona and debita Testatoris amounting to the value of
4000 l. To which Administrator the Executors did release at their full age all
manner of demands; and if that release were Assets in the hands of the
Executors was the Question. Puckering Sergeant argued, it was not Assets, for a
Release of a thing, which is not Assets in the hands of an Executor, cannot be
Assets, and things in Action, before they come in possession, cannot be Assets:
But a gift of Goods in possession is Assets. And there is a difference betwixt
a certain thing released, and a thing uncertain, of a certain it is Assets, for
by such means he has given a thing which is Assets, but contrary of an
uncertain. And this difference is proved by 13 E. 3. Execut. 91. where it is
holden, that if Executors release to the debtor, he shall account for such sum
before the Ordinary by Parn, but True said he shall not account. The whole
Court was against Puckering: And Anderson said, It is a clear Case, that this
Release is Assets, for he has thereby given away that which might have been
Assets. And the Law does intend, that when he releases he has recompense and
satisfaction from the Party to whom the release is made: And it is not
requisite, that every Assets be a thing in Possession, or in the hands of the
Testator, for a thing may be Assets which never was in the hands of a Testator,
as moneys for Lands or other Goods sold. So if they come by reason of another
thing, which was in the Testators hands; as the increase of Goods by the
Executors in their hands by merchandising with the Goods of the Testator or
Goods purchased by the Villein of the Testator after his death, shall be
Assets. So moneys received by the Executor of the Bailiff of the Testator after
his death shall be said Assets. Windam Justice, So it is if the Testator has
Sheep, Corn, or Swine, and dies, and they have young Lambs, Pigs, or Calves,
they are Assets for the reason aforesaid: And he agreed that the release is
Assets, and he said it had been so adjudged, and he denied the difference taken
by Puckering. Periam agreed with the rest in all; and also denied the
difference. And he said, the incertainty must be such, that the same cannot be
proved to the Court, or unto a Jury; that the thing released might not by
possibility have been Assets. For if Trespass be done to the Testator by taking
his Goods, and he dies, and the Executors release all Actions, the same is
Assets, because it might be proved to the Jury, that had they not released, but
brought their Action of Trespass de bonis asportatis in (...) ^estatoris, that
they might have recovered damages which should have satisfied the Debts or
Legacies of the Testator and therefore it shall be Assets: And yet the thing
recovered cannot be in the Testator, or a thing in possession, or certain in
the hands of the Executors. With whom Rhodes agreed. And Periam conceived that
such Administrators made durante minori aetate of the Executor, could not by
our Law neither sue or be sued: For as he conceived, the Infant was the
Executor and an Infant Executor may either sue or be sued, and may release if
there be a sufficient consideration given him wherefore he said if an
Administrator does release where he has no cause nor good consideration, he
shall be answerable of his own Goods when he comes of full age, for the
wasting of the Estate, and such a release shall be Assets: and it was holden,
that a release before Probate of the Will is good, and it is Assets also. And
the same Term Judgment was given, that the Release of the Executor was Assets.

CCX. Temps Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
NOte by Dyer upon the words of the Statute of 32 H. 8. cap. 28. That a
Feoffment of the Lands of his Wife, it shall not be a discontinuance (mes que)
but that the Wife may enter after the death of her Husband, is an Abridgment of
the words precedent, for in some Cases such a Feoffment is a discontinuance; as
if, after the Feoffment they be divorced, she cannot enter, but is put to her
Writ cui ante divortium.

CCXI. Pasc. 29 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
NOte by the Opinion of the whole Court: A man made his Will in this manner, I
will and bequeath my Land to A. And the name of the Devisor was not in all the
Will: That yet the Devise was good by Averment of the name of the Devisor, and
proof that it was his Will; and if a man lying sick, having an intent to make
his Will by words makes such a Devise, but does not command it to be put in
writing, but another without his knowledge or command puts the same in writing
in the life of the Devisor, it is a good Devise, for it is sufficient if the
Devise be reduced into writing.

Pasc. 29 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
CCXII. Brasiers Case.
NOte, It was agreed by all the Justices, and affirmed by the Prothonotaries,
That if the Devisor levieth a Fine, and the Disseisee in preservation of his
right against the said Fine, enter his Claim in the Record at the Foot of the
said Fine, that the same is not any Claim to avoid the said Fine upon the
Statute of 4 H. 7.

Pasc. 29 Eliz.
CCXIII. The Queen and Sir John Savells Case.
A Bill of Intrusion was exhibited by the Queen in the Exchequer against Sir
Robert Savell Knight. who pleaded in bar her pretense, and upon Issue joined, the
matter was tried by the Records, and thereupon Judgment was given for the
Queen. and an Injunction for the Possession awarded accordingly. Sir Robert
dyed, and now Sir John Savell, Son and Heir of the said Sir Robert brought a
Writ of Error in the Exchequer Chamber upon the Statute of 31 E. 3. The
perclose of which Writ was, ad grave damnum ipsius Johannis Savell filii and
haeredis dicti Roberti. It was objected against the Writ, That no Writ of Error
upon the said Statute of 31 E 3. lay upon such proceedings which at the time of
the making of the said Statute was not in force: For trial of an Issue in the
Exchequer by Record, was enacted by the Statute of 33 H. 8. and the Statute of
31 E. 3. extended to give a Writ of Error upon such Judgments which were given
by Verdict, Confession, or Demurrer, and not upon trial by Records, which was
given but of late times. But to this objection it was answered by the Lord
Chancellor, and the other Judges, That long time before the said Stat. of 33 H.
8. Issues joined in the Exchequer have been tried by the Records; and he, when
he was the Queens Solicitor, had seen diverse Presidents to that intent in the
time of Hen. 6.

Mich. 29 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
CCXIV. Houtiers Case.
DEbt was brought upon a Concessit Solvere according to the Law of Merchants
and Custom of the City of Bristol. Exception was taken, because he did not
mention the Custom in his Declaration: And because in the end of his Plea, he
says, Protestando se sequi querelam secundum Consuetudinem Civitatis Bristol,
the Plea was awarded good, and the Exception disallowed.

CCXV. Mich. 29 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
A Man was indicted upon the Statute of 4 Eliz. of Perjury in a Court Leet: And
the Indictment was, That he at the Leet of the Earl of Bath, super Sacramentum
suum coram Senescallo, etc. Exception was taken to it, because it says at the
Leet of the Earl of Bath, whereas every Leet is the Kings Court, although that
another has the profit or commodity of it: And it was said that the Steward of
a Leet is not an Officer of Record; and also his Oath was, If he had done a
Rescous, or not, with which he was charged. And by Drew, It is not within the
Statute; for it ought to be either before a Jury in giving Evidence, or upon
some Article. But the Justices in that were of opinion against him.

Mich. 25 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
CCXVI. Howen and Gerrards Case.
IT was adjudged in this Case, That Partition of Lands made by the Bailiff of a
Franchize, was not good within the Statute of 31 H. 8. of Partition, but it
ought to be done by the Sheriff himself.

Mich. 28 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
CCXVII. Strangder and Burnells Case.
AN Action upon the Case of Trover of Goods, and converting them to his own use
in Ipswich. The Defendant pleaded, That the Goods came to his hands in Dunwich
in the same County, and that the Plaintiff gave to him all Goods which came to
his hands in Dunwich, absque hoc that he is guilty of any Trover or Conversion
in Ipswich. It was holden to be a good manner of pleading by reason of the
special Justification. Vide 27 H. 6. But where a Justification is general, the
County is not traversable at this day, Vide 19 H. 6, 7.

62 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
CCXVIII. Hodges Case.
IF one enfeoffeth his Son and Heir apparent, and no use is expressed, nor
Consideration, it was said It should be to the use of the Son, and so has the
Law been taken; and so it is in Case of a Covenant to stand seized to the use
of the Son. The Court said that there was a difference betwixt the Cases; or in
the Case of Feoffment they seemed to be of Opinion, that the Deed should have
no operation; but in the other Case it may be otherwise upon construction of
the Result of the Use to the Father.

28 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
CCXIX. Mark Stewards Case.
AN Assumpsit before Action brought may be discharged by word, otherwise after
Action brought.

Mich. 30 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
CCXX. Verney and Verneys Case.
IN Dower by Verney against Verney: The Case was, That Lessee for years by
Fine, to whom the Land was rendered by Fine for years upon the Default of the
Tenant, prayed to be received, and it was Counter-pleaded, because the Statute
of Gloucester gave no Receipt, but where the Termor might have Recovery by Writ
of Covenant, but where the Lease, as in our Case, does commence by render by
Fine, there cannot be any recovery by Covenant. But it was the Opinion of the
Lord Anderson, That such a Termor shall be received.

CCXXI. Mich. 32 Eliz. In the Exchequer Chamber.
IN the Exchequer Chamber before the Chancellor, Treasurer, etc. A Writ of
Error was cast upon the Statute of 31 E. 3. cap. 12. It was moved by Egerton
Solicitor to the Queen, for the Defendant, That the Writ of Error ought to
abate for false Latin, for the Writ is Pertenet, where it ought to be
Pertinet. But by Manwood, Anderson, and Wray, The same is no Exception, but
notwithstanding that, the Court may proceed to the Examination of the Errors;
For the same is not properly a Writ, but rather a Commission to the Chancellor,
Treasurer, etc. and therefore it was ordered that the Party should proceed to
the assignment of the Errors.

Mich. 31 Eliz. In the Exchequer.
CCXXII. The Queens, Fanes, and the Archbishop of Canterburies Case.
THe Queen brought a Quare Impedit against Fane, 1 Leon. 201.
the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Bishop of Chichester, and Hudson Incumbent,
and counted that John Ashburnham was seized of the Advowson of Burwash, and was
Outlawed in an Action of Debt, during which Outlawry in force, the Church
voided, by which it did appertain to the Queen to present. The Archbishop and
Bishop pleaded that they claimed nothing but as Metropolitan and Ordinary. Fane
pleaded, That King E. 4. ex gratia sua speciali, etc. and in consideration
fidelis servic. etc. granted to the Lord Hastings the Castle and Barony of
Hastings, and Hundred, etc. Et quod ipse haberet omnia Bona and Catal.
Tenentium, residentium and non residentium, and aliorum resident. quorumcunque
hominum de and in Castro, Baronia etc. seu infra eadem pro numero debit. etc.
tam ad sectam Regis, etc. quam etc. utlagatorum. Et quod ipsi liceret per se,
vel ministros suos, etc. and from him derived to the now Earl of Huntington as
heir, etc. and the said Earl being so seized, and the said Ashburnham seized of
the said Advowson as appendant to the Manor of Ashburnham, holden of the said
Barony, the said Church during the Outlary in force became void: For which
cause the said Thomas Fane ad Ecclesiam praedict. usurpando praesentavit the
said J. H. who was admitted, and instituted, and demanded Judgment, If, etc.
with this that the said Tho. Fane will aver that the said Church of B. is, and
at the time of the said Grant was infra praecinct. libertatis and franchesiae
praedict. and quod praedict. Manerium de Ashburnham tempore concessionis
praedict. was holden of the said Barony. And the Incumbent pleaded the same
Plea: and if by that Grant of King E. 4. to the Lord Hastings, scil, Bona and
Catalla, the presentment to the Church passed or not, was the Question.
Shuttleworth of Counsel for the Queen, he said and confessed, That the Queen
might grant such a Presentment, but it ought to be by special and sufficient
words, or such words so as it might appear to the Court by them that the intent
of the Queen was to grant such a thing, for the general words Omnia Bona and
Catalla, would not pass such a special Chattel in the Kings Grant. And he said
he conceived, that by the words subsequent, that no Goods and Chattels should
pass by such Grant, but such which might he seized, the which the Advowson of a
Church could not be: Et quod ipsi liceret per se vel Ministros suos ponere se
in seisinam, 8 H. 4. 114, 115. The King granted to the Bishop of London that he
should have Catalla Felonum and Fugitivorum de omnibus hominibus, and tenent.
de and in terris and feodis praedict. and de omnibus residentibus infra terr.
and feoda praedict. ita quod si praedicti homines, tenentes and resident. de
and in terris and feodis praedict. seu aliqui eorundem, seu aliquis alius infra
eadem terras and feoda pro aliqua transgressione sua, seu quocunque alio
delicto vitam, vel membrum debeat, vel fugerit and judicio stare noluerit, seu
aliquam aliam transgressionem fecerit pro qua ipse Catalla sua perdere debeat,
in quocunque loco justitia de ea fieri debeat. Ipsa Catalla sint ipsius Episc.
and per Ministros Episc. fn manus ipsius Episc. sesiri possint. Tirwhit, The
Goods of those that are put to penance do not pass, so the Goods of a Felo de
se, Vide 42 Ass. 5. where one being impanelled upon the Grand Inquest before
the Justices of Oyer and Terminer, pleaded the Kings Charter of Exception from
Inquests; and because in the said Charter there was not this Clause (Licet
tangit nos and haeredes nostros) without challenge it was rejected, and he
charged, and sworn. And if the King grant to me to appropriate an Advowson,
which in truth is holden of the King, such a Grant is void. So if there be not
special words, by which it may appear that the King has notice of it, and that
his intent was, that the Grant should extend to the same, it does not pass, 16
E. 3. Fitz. Grants 58 and 33 E. 3. Grants 103 So here this Presentment is a
special Chattel; and it is not usually intended, or thought upon when a man
speaks generally of Goods and Chattels, but that it passes, yet the
Presentment does not lie for the Defendants, for they do not derive any
interest under that Grant, but are mere strangers to it, and therefore they
shall not take any advantage in laying this Grant in the Queens way; for the
Queen has good title against all persons, but those which claim under the said
Grant, but that is nothing to the Defendants. For one cannot cross the title of
the King, if he does not make a title to himself. As 39 Ass. 18. 17 Ass. 11. if
the title of the King be found by a false Office, the party grieved cannot
traverse the title of the King, without making a title to himself, and then the
King may choose whether he will maintain his own title found by the Office, or
traverse the title of the other. Walmesley to the contrary this title of
Presentment is a Chattel, Rex habebit omnia Catalla felonum, etc. Terminus
Annorum is a Chattel, so Exitus and proficua terrarum utlagatorum pro felonia;
so a right of Action for Goods; so it is of an Obligation made to the party
delinquent, therefore also a title to present; therefore if a title to present
shall accrue to the King by such general words, it shall pass also from the
King by such words; and as to that which has been objected, That the Grant of
King E. 4. extends only to such Goods and Chattels which may be seized. He
cited the Case 39 H. 6. 35. where the Grantee of a Rentcharge, for a term of
years granted Omnia Bona and Catalla sua tam viva, quam mortua, the Rent
passed, and yet the Grantee could not put him in Seisin of it when he would,
but ought to expect the day of payment. And this title to present is not a
thing in action, for if no disturbance be made, the Party may have the benefit
of it without any Action. Anderson held that this title to present could not
pass by these general words, Bona and Catalla, for they do not extend to a
Right, or things in Action, but to such things only which are commonly known
and understood by such words. By grant of Goods, Chattels real do not pass. For
when men speak of Goods, Household Stuff, Money, and the like, personal things
only are understood. So a man cannot be said to have a Chattel but where he is
possessed of it, and here this Interest is but Jus praesentandi. Periam, This
Interest is a Chattel; for if the Church became void and before Presentment the
Patron dies, his Executors shall have the Presentment, for that it was a
Chattel vested in their Testator, etc.

19 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
CCXXIII. Hide and Hills Case.
IN Ejectione firmae by Hide against Hill, The Case was, Nicholas Throgmorton
Tenant in Tail, without license of the King, went beyond Sea into Italy, and
there married an English Woman, and there continued in the Service of Cardinal
Pool, and their practiced traitorously against the State here, and against his
Allegiance, within which time he had Issue a Son named Francis: It was holden
that the said Son was not inheritable to the Tail; for if a Subject goes
beyond Sea with the License of the King, and there continues longer than his
appointed time, by that he loses the benefit of a Subject. It was further
given in Evidence, That the said Nicholas was attainted of Treason in the time
of Henry 8. and afterward went beyond Sea, ut supra, and returned in the time
of Queen Mary; and was restored by Act of Parliament: And upon all that matter
it was holden that the said Francis was inheritable.

19 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
CCXXIV. Gray and Edwards Case.
IN an Attaint by Gray against Edwards it was holden by Wray, Gaudy, and
Jeoffries, That if one makes a Deed, and that by these words (Dedi) conveyeth
Lands to another, without any words of Bargain and Sale, and that for a sum of
money; If the Deed be debito modo enrolled, the use shall pass as well as if the
words of Bargain and Sale had been in the Deed, because that a sum of money was
paid for the Land.

19 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
CCXXV. Webbs Case.
IN Action upon the Case the Plaintiff declared, That whereas Cobham was
indebted to J. S. and J. S. to the Defendant, the said Defendant in
consideration that the Plaintiff would procure the said J. S. to make a Letter
of Attorney to the Defendant to sue the said Cobham, promised to pay and give
to the Plaintiff 10 l. It was objected, Here was not any Consideration for to
induce the Assumpsit; for the Defendant by this Letter of Attorney gets nothing
but his Labor and Travel. But the Exception was not allowed of. For in this
Case not so much the Profit which redounds to the Defendant, as the Labor of
the Plaintiff in procuring of the Letter of Attorney, is to be respected.

Temps Roign Eliz.
CCXXVI Heggor and Felstons Case.
IN Trespass, the Case was, A Copyholder surrendered to the use of his Wife for
Life, and after to the use of his Daughter in Fee, the Wife is admitted: It was
holden that the Daughter, after the death of the Wife, Copyholder Surrender by
Attorney.
might without any admittance surrender the same Land, for the first admittance
was sufficient. And Manwood said that Roper was Steward of a Manor, and one of
the Copyholders of the said Manor being in Ireland, he made a Commission to one
to receive a Surrender from him there, and it was holden a good Surrender.

CCXXVII. Trin. 32 Eliz. In the Exchequer.
NOte by Manwood chief Baron, for a Rule to all Counselors, That they do not
advise any Collectors of Subsidies or Fifteens to exhibit any Bills in the
Exchequer Chamber for the not payment of Subsidies; for such Bills shall not be
allowed hereafter, because they have remedy by Distress. Also it was, That if
any be assessed for the Fifteens which he ought to pay, or if two Towns ought
to pay together, and one Town be taxed more than it ought to be, or has been
accustomed, those who are grieved by such Assessment, may have a Commission out
of the Exchequer, which is called ad aequaliter taxand. and that was put in
practice in a case between Bartace and Hind, where one of these was Lord of
Little Marlow, and the other of Hedsore. It was also holden, That Fifteens are
to be levied of Goods and Chattels properly and a Township is sometimes richer
than at other times, and therefore it is not reasonable they pay their Fifteens
always according to the same proportion. But Clark Baron held where the Custom
has always been that the Fifteens shall be taxed according to the quantity of
Acres, then the rate and proportion shall be always on whosoever holds the
Land. And as to the Commission ad aequaliter taxand. Manwood and Fanshaw said,
That they could show twenty Presidents of it.

Trin. 30 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
CCXXVIII. Harris Case.
THe Case of Harris of the Middle Temple, was, Tenant in tail in remainder upon
an Estate for life is attainted of Felony, 2 Leon. 122. Hughs Qu. 13. 3 Leon.
185. 1 Inst ^
If he has forfeited his Remainder during his Life. Popham Attorney General,
He has forfeited it to the Queen; for after his attainder, the Law will not
suffer it to remain in him, and it cannot vest in the Lord of whom the Land is
holden; for the person attainted being Tenant in tail in remainder, was not
very Tenant to the Lord, therefore, if in none of them, the Queen shall have
it, and the Law shall punish the offense so sharply, that it suffer nothing to
remain in him. So Tenant in Dower and by the Courtesy: And it is a Maxim, What
a man has in his own right he may forfeit, but it is not a certain rule,
Whatsoever a man may grant he may forfeit; as Guardian in Socage and Executors
may grant that which they cannot forfeit. 2 Leon. 126.
A man seized in the right of his wife is attainted of Felony, the Queen shall
have but the profits of the Land during the life of the Husband, Vide Register
292. Where the husband seized in the right of his wife of certain Lands is
outlawed of Felony, the King seizes, and has the Lands during the life of the
husband, after the death of whom, issued a Diem clausit extremum, Vide F.N.B.
254. D. Cook, Tenant in tail in possession is attainted of Felony, the King
shall have but the profits, but as our Case is, being Tenant in tail in
remainder upon an Estate for Life nothing shall be forfeited during his life,
and after the death of the Tenant in tail, so attainted of Felony, the Issue in
tail may enter, for the King has not the Freehold; for if the King had the
Freehold, the Issue in tail could not enter without Office, vide Old Natura
Brevium in the Writ of Escheat, That the King shall have only the profits. At
another day it was argued by Egerton Solicitor, That the Queen has the
Interest of him in the Remainder during his life; for a man so attainted cannot
be received against the Queen; and if a man attainted of Felony purchases Land
and dies his wife shall not be endowed of it: And he said that this Remainder
vested in the Queen without Office, then not pardoned by 23 Eliz. It has been
objected, That if the Remainder be in the Queen without Office, by this
attainder of Felony by the Common Law, then also in case of attainder for
Treason, and then what need was there that the Statute of 33 H. 8. should be
made, which enacteth, That in cases of Treason it shall vest in the King
without Office. As to that, I answer, That that Statute was made in affirmance
of the Common Law, and also for other things given to the King by the Statute,
which were not given by the Common Law, as Conditions, Rights, etc. So as the
King might grant over without Office, and also the Subject have a Petition of
Right before Office, which was not at the common Law, 33 H. 8. 20. in the
saving in the end of it: And as to the Statute of 18 H. 6 cap. 6. such things
were in the King without Offce, for by the common Law before Office, the King
might grant them, but he could not grant them if they were not vested in him;
and the said Statute was made to such intent, that the Queen should be fully
informed of her Title, etc. by the Office. Vide Stanford Prerogat. 54, 55. and
Vide 20 E. 4. 11. A. seized of a Manor with an Advowson appendant, is
attainted of Treason, the Church void, the King without any Office shall have
the presentment. But admitting that it is not in the King without Office, yet
the Pardon of 23 Eliz. does not extend to it: For the words of the Pardon are,
Treasons, Felonies, Offenses, Contempts, Trespasses, Entries, Wrongs, Deceits,
Misdemeanors, Forfeitures, Penalties, and Sums of Moneys, and if by any of
these words the matter be helped, is to be considered; and if any thing shall
help it, it is the word Forfeiture: But I conceive that the same does not
extend to this matter; for although it be an ample word, yet it shall be
construed to extend beyond the words accompanied with it, which concern only
personal things, as Contempts, Wrongs, Trespasses, as the Statute of 13 Eliz.
cap. 10. which is penned by general words, as Colleges, Deans and Chapters,
Parsons, Vicars, and others having Spiritual Promotions, that Statute does not
extend by construction to Bishops, and they have Spiritual Promotion; yet the
Statute shall be construed to extend to the Parties named, and other Inferior
Orders and Degrees, and shall not be extended higher. So in the Commission of
the Peace, ad diversas Felonias, and alia Malafacta, etc. those general words
do not extend to Treason, etc. Vide for the Residue of this Case Venable and
Harris's Case, which was the same Case, and is Reported in Leonard 2 Part, fol.
122. Placito 169.

Pasc. 33 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
CCXXIX. Downhall and Catesoy's Case.
IN a Formedon by Downhall against Catesby, 3 Leon. 267.
the Parties were at Issue, and it was tried by Nisi prius: It was moved in
Bank, because that some of the Jury did eat and drink before they gave their
Verdict that the Court would not receive the Postea: Curia that we cannot do;
for we not know whether your Information be true or not, and this matter ought
to be examined by the Justices of Assize or Nisi prius, before whom the Trial
was, and they are to certify thereof, and then we shall have good cause to
stay the Entry of the Postea. In that Case it was said. If any of the Jurors
eat and drink before their Verdict at their own Costs, it does not make the
Verdict void, but if at the Costs of the Plaintiff or Defendant, it is
otherwise.

CCXXX. Hill. 29 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
THe Sheriff took an Obligation of a Prisoner bailable, upon condition that he
should personally appear in the Kings Bench, etc. It was holden a good
Condition, not against the Statute of 23 H. 6. So if the Condition had been
that he should appear for to answer: contrary, that he shall appear and answer;
for in the principal Case, the word (personally) is not of substance, for
although he appears by Attorney, yet the Condition is well performed; and
Judgment was given for the Plaintiff: Anderson reclamante. Vide 27 Eliz. B. R.
Sedford and Cutts Case.

32 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
CCXXXI. Haselwoods Case.
THe Case of Haselwood; A seized of Land is indebted to the King by Obligation
and enfeoffed B. of his Land: And the Case of Fleetwood 15 Eliz. was vouched,
where it was holden, That in purchase the debtor of the King was liable. But by
Pigot, who was of Counsel with Haselwood, the Obligation in this Case was made
before the Statute of 33 H. 8. or otherwise he should be charged.

32 Eliz.
CCXXXII. Sir William Pelhams Case.
SIr William Pelham was Surveyor of the Ordinances, and delivered of the Kings
money to Painter, Clerk of the Ordnance. It was holden, That for that money the
Queen might have Account against Painter. See this Case before Sect. 81.

Trin. 29 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
CCXIV. Ognell and Vnderhills Case.
IN Replevin, the Case was, as appeared upon the pleading, That Rob. Bouchier
was seized of a certain Farm called Cruchefield Grange, and leased the same to
Sir William Raynsford for thirty years, who dyed thereof possessed, by reason
of which the Interest thereof came to Raynsford, as Executor of the said Sir
William Raynsford, who assigned the said Farm, except a parcel of it called
Hobbes, to Sir Henry Bear for parcel of the term, and afterward assigned the
said parcel called Hobbes for part of the term to Frekington and others, and
afterward granted the residue of the said term, not expired, to the said Bear
and Frekington, and afterward the said Rob. Bouchier granted a Rentcharge of
40 l. per annum percipiendum de omnibus terris and renementis quibuscunque
vocat. the Grange of Cruchefield, in the Parish of Stoneleigh in the County of
Warwick nuper in tenura, and occupatione William Raynsford milit. and nunc in
tenura, and occupatione Hen. Bear. Bouchier granted the reversion of Hobbes to
Lewknor in Fee, to whom Scarre releaseth all his right, estate, and demand in
the said Land called Hobbes; the Lease expired, the rent behind, Lewknor leased
at will to R. the first Question was, If the said Rentcharge shall be said
issuing out of the said Lands called Hobbes; for if etc. then by that Release
the rent is gone: But the whole Court was clear of Opinion, That the rent was
not issuing out of Hobbes, but out of the Lands then in the possession of Bear,
and not out of the Lands in the possession of Frekington: Although it was
objected by Walmesley Sergeant, That the words in the Grant of the rent, (in
tenura and occupatione Bear) shall be construed in the disjuncive, quasi sive;
and then the Close called Hobbes, although it was not in the Occupation, yet it
was in tenura of Bear. The Matter was at another day argued by Fenner Sergeant
for the Plaintiff, and he much relied upon the word quibuscunque in the Grant
of the Rent de omnibus terris quibuscunque, commonly called Cruchefield Grange:
As if I grant to you all my Trees, my Apple Trees shall not pass; but if the
Grant was omnes arbores meas quascunque they pass, and that by the Emphasis of
this word Quibuscunque: So if I grant you Common for your Cattle in such a
place, none shall have Common but those which are Commonable, shall have Common
there; contrary where the Grant is pro averiis quibuscunque: And it was
adjudged in the Chancery in the Case of the Bishop of Ely, That where the said
Bishop leased all the Demeasns of a Manor for years, that by the said Lease the
Park within the said Manor should not pass. But perhaps if such a Lease had
been Omnes and singulas terras dominicales quascunque, the Park would have
passed. And afterward the Counsel of the Plaintiff seeing that the Court was
of Opinion with the Defendant, took Exception to the pleading: The Defendant
made Conusans ut Ballivus Administratoris of the Grantee of the Rent, and does
not show the Letters of Administration. And as to that, It was agreed by the
Court that that had been a good Exception if the matter had not been relieved
by the Statute of 27 Eliz. of Demurrers. Another matter was objected upon the
Statute of 32 H. 8. cap. 37. upon the words of the said Statute, so long as the
Lands remain in the possession of the Tenant in Demeasn, who ought immediately
to have paid the said Rent. And it was said by Anderson and Rhodes, that the
Conusans was good enough, and within the relief of that Statute: For Lewknor
was the immediate Purchaser, and although he had let the Lands to another at
will, that did not make any thing, for yet the Estate of the Land is within the
words of the Statute, for the Land remains in the Seisin of the first
Purchaser. And note that in this case Bouchier dyed before the Lease expired,
so as the Rent was not determined in his life. And afterward Judgment was
given for the Defendant.

Mich. 30 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
CCXXXV. Rawlins and Somerfords Case.
IN Ejectione firmae, the Case was, Cartwright possessed of a house for the
term of 30 years, demised a Stall parcel of it to Wartow for two years, and
afterward assigned the whole house to Rawlins for all the years; Rawlins
redemised the same Stall to Cartwright for twenty years, but Wartow did not
attorn; but before the said Redemise, Cartwright by Deed indented, demised the
said Stall to Wartow for six years after the said two years ended, and
afterward Rawlins redemised all the house to Cartwright for 21 years, rendering
rent, with clause of re-entry, and upon the Indenture of the said Redemise was
endorsed that before the sealing and delivery, etc. it was agreed between the
Parties, that Wartow should have the said Stall according to the Lease for six
years to him made: And afterward Cartwright redemised the said Stall to
Rawlins for ten years, and afterward the Rent. was behind, And if the Rent
reserved by Rawlins upon his demise to Cartwright, was suspended, or not, was
moved a question. Cook argued it was not suspended, for Rawlins had in the
Estate but an Interest in futuro, which cannot suspend the Rent before in
possession. And he put the Case 31 E. 1. Fitz. Descent 17. Lord and Tenant, the
Tenant is attainted of Felony, and dies, now the Seignory is not presently
extinct: For if the Lord takes Fealty of the Son, the Seignory does continue in
Esse, and Vide Acc. Fitz. N. B. 144. 26 E. 3. 72. Houghton, the rent is
suspended, as if I lease Land and an Advowson, rendrint rent, and I take back
an Estate in the Advowson, now the rent is suspended. But as to that it was
answered, That there the party has a present interest in the Advowson, but so
it is not in the Case at Bar. And by Cook, A. seized in Fee of three Acres
makes a Lease of two of them for 21 years rendering rent, and afterward the
Lessee leaseth one of the said Acres for years to the Lessor to begin two years
after, it is not a present suspension of the rent until the Lease come into
possession, etc. And afterward it was adjudged, that by the Lease in futuro
the rent was not suspended, Pasch. 28 Eliz. Rot. 255.

Mich. 26 Eliz. In the Exchequer.
CCXXXVI. The Guardians of the Monastery of Otleries Case.
IN the Exchequer, it was found by Special Verdict, 1 Leon. 4.
That the Guardian and Chanons Regular of Otlery were seized of the Manor of O,
etc. and that 22 H. 7. at a Court holden, granted the Lands in question to W.
and W. his Son, for their lives, by Copy, according to the Custom of the said
Manor, and afterward 30 H. 8. they leased the same Land by Indenture to H.
rendering the ancient and accustomed rent, and afterward surrendered their
College, etc. and afterward W. and W. dyed. And if the said Lease so made,
during the Estate Customary notwithstanding the Statute of 31 H. 8. were good
or not, that was the Question, being within a year before the Surrender, etc.
And it was argued by Egerton Solicitor, That the said Lease was void by the
Statute, the words of which are, Whereof, or in the which any Estate or
Interest for term of Life, year or years, at the time of the making of any such
Lease, had his Being or Continuance, and was not then determined, finished, or
expired. And therefore we are to see, if this right or possession which W. and
W. had at the time of the making of the said Lease was an Interest, or Estate
for Life: And as to the word Estate est nihil aliud, than measure of time; for
an Estate of Fee-simple, is as much as to say, an Interest in the Lands for
ever, and so of the rest, and therefore W. and W. had at the time of the making
of the Lease an Estate for the thing demised. And although such Customary
Tenants are termed in Law, Tenants at will, yet they are not simply so, nor
mere Tenants at will, but Tenants at will secundum Consuetudinem Manerii: which
Custom warrants his possession here for life, and therefore it is a more
certain estate, than an estate at will, for the Copyholder may justify against
his Lord, and so cannot a Tenant at will, whose estate is determinable at the
will and pleasure of his Lessor; and although this estate is but by custom, and
by no conveyance, yet it is such an estate which the said Statute intends, and
non refert by what conveyance the estate is raised, so it be an estate; and
this estate being supported by custom, is acknowledged in Law to be an estate,
and so accounted in our Law; and the Law has notably distinguished Copyhold
tenancies by the custom, and tenancies at will at the Common Law, for a
Copyholder shall do fealty, and have aid of his Lord in an Action of Trespass;
he shall have and maintain an Action of Trespass against his Lord; his wife
shall be endowed; the husband shall be Tenant by the Courtesy without a new
Admittance: So customary Tenancies are within the Rules and Maxims of our Law:
As in the Case of Horewood, There shall be a possessed o fratris of it without
admittance; and it was adjudged 8 Eliz in the Kings Bench, That if a Copyholder
surrender to the use of another for years, and the Lessee dies, his Executors
shall have the residue of the term without any admittance. M. 14, 15 Eliz. A
Copyholder made a Lease for years by Indenture warranted by the custom, the
Lessee brought Ejectione firmae, it was adjudged maintainable in the Common
Pleas; Although it was objected, That if it be so, then if the Plaintiff
recover, he should have an Habere facias possessionem, and there Copyholds
should be ordered by the Common Laws of the Land. 10 Eliz. Lord and Copyholder
for Life, the Lord grants a Rentcharge out of the Manor whereof the Copyhold
is parcel, the Copyholder surrendreth to the use of A. who is admitted, he
shall not hold the Land charged; and so it was adjudged in the Court of Common
Pleas.

CCXXXVII. Mich. 23 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
IT was holden by all the Justices in the Common Pleas, That the Queen might be
put out of possession of an Advowson by two Usurpations, and shall be put to
her Writ of Right of Advowson, as a common person shall be, for it is a thing
transitory; and if the Queen after such Usurpations grant the Advowson, the
Grant is void, and so it was adjudged.

CCXXXVIII. Mich. 23 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
THe Case was, Tenant in tail, the remainder over to another in Fee, makes a
Lease for life according to the Statute, and afterward dies without Issue; and
afterward he in the Remainder grants his Remainder by Fine before any Entry,
and by Fenner, the Conusee cannot now enter upon Tenant for life, nor avoid his
lease, for by the Livery to the Tenant for life, a Freehold passes, which
cannot be avoided without an Entry. As if a Parson makes a lease for life,
rendering rent, and dies, the Successor accepts the rent, now the lease is
affirmed, vide 18 E. 4. 25. and then when before any Entry, he in the remainder
grants his remainder, the Grantee shall have it but as a remainder, and so the
Estate of the Tenant for life, which before was voidable, is now made good; and
so it was holden by Windham and Periam: But by Mead and Dyer, by the death of
Tenant in tail without Issue, the lease for life is become void, for the Estate
out of which the Estate for life is derived, is determined by the dying without
Issue, Ergo etc. Vide 21 H. 7. 12. A lease for life is made upon condition,
That if the Lessor pay to the Lessee at such a day 20 l. that his Estate shall
cease, now by the performance of the Condition the Estate is determined without
any Entry.

CCXXXIX. 32 H. 8. In the Common Pleas.
NOte by all the Justices of the Common Pleas, That if a man holds of the King
in chief by Knights Service, and also holds of another Lord by Knights Service,
and dies, his heir within age, and the King seizes the Wardship of the Body
and Land, and afterward the heir comes of full age; and before Livery sued,
the other Lord grants over his Seignory to another, and the heir Attorns, It is
a good Attornment; and also Seisin of the Services had by such Lord by the
hands of such an heir before Livery sued, is good enough, and shall bind him
afterward in an Avowry, etc.

Temps H. 8. Vide 31 H. 8. Rot. 420.
CCXL. Sir William Hollis Case.
SIr William Hollis brought a Quare Impedit against the Bishop of Coventry,
Godfrey Fuliamb Knight. and William Waltham Clark; The Case was, Sir Ralph Langford
Knight. was seized of the Manor of D. to which the Advowson was appendant, and
presented to the same Church one A. his Clark, who was admitted, etc. And
afterward the said Sir Ralph granted the next Avoidance of the same Church to
Sir Godfrey Fuliamb, James Fuliamb, George Fuliamb, and William Walton, and
eorum uni conjunctim and divisim, afterward the said Sir Ralph granted by fine
the said Manor with the Advowson to Sir William Hollis in Fee; the Church
became void, the said Sir Godfrey Fuliamb presented the said Waltham his Clark,
who was admitted, etc. And upon Argument at the Bar and Bench, It was adjudged
against the Plaintiff, and the Presentment of Sir Godfrey sole without the
others, was good: Notwithstanding also that Waltham the Presentee was one of
the Grantees of the next Avoidance, Tr. 31 H. 8. Rott. 420. Vide 21 E. 4. 66.
35 H. 6. 62. See this Case lately Reported in Sir George Mores Reports, by the
name of Sir Godfrey Fuliambs Case.

CCXLI. Temps Roign Eliz.
NOte by Hind and Hales the Kings Attorney, Justices of Assize in the County of
Essex, in the Case of the Bishop of London and one Heron Keeper of Cronden
Park: if the Keeper of my Park or any of his Servants without his assent, of
their own heads, and without my commandment kill my Deers within the said Park,
being within his keeping, or abateth, or pulls down any house within the
Park, or Barn for to lay Hay for the Deer there, or cutteth any Trees, Wood or
Underwoods there growing, and sells the same, or gives it to another, that in
all these cases the Keeper of the Park shall forfeit his Office; And it was
agreed by them, That such a Keeper has not any estate or possession in the
Park, or in the Lodge, but the possession remains always in the Owner of the
Soil of the Park, and the Keeper has but the occupation, and keeping, and the
surveying of the same; for such a Keeper cannot justify the holding of the
Lodge with force in a Writ brought upon the Statute of 8 H. 6. by the Owner of
the Park, but it was agreed that he who has the inheritance in such an Office,
shall not forfeit his Office for the causes aforesaid.

Hill. 29 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
CCXLII. Fitz and Pierces Case.
IN Ejectione firmae by Fitz against Pierce: Pierce was outlawed and now came,
and showed by way of Plea, that the outlawry was erroneous in this, videlicet
ad Com' meum tent' 30 Jan. 29 Eliz. whereas the said day was Dies Dominicus,
and so there was no County Court: It was the Opinion of Windham, that the same
matter did well lie in Plea, for it is matter apparent within the Record, as in
the case of Brecket and Fish, Plowd. Com. 266. Rhodes and Periam were of a
contrary Opinion, and said the case cited is not like to the case at Bar, for
there it appears to the Court, as Judges, when every Term begins and
ends; but it is otherwise in our case, si 30 die Januarii be dies Dominicus
necne, for it shall be tried by the Country, etc.

Trin. 32 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
CCXLIII. Keenes Case.
RAlph Keen Vicar of B. was Indicted for stopping quandam viam valde
necessariam, Indictment.
Nuisance.
for all the Kings Subjects there passing: Exception was taken to it, because
it wanted the word Regiam; and the word necessariam does not imply any matter,
for a Foot way is necessary: Addition.
Also here the Party has not any addition: It is R. K. but it is not said
Clarke, and for these causes the Party was discharged.

Trin. 32 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
CCXLIV. Peake and Pollorts Case.
ACtion upon the Case by Peake against Pollort, Words.
upon these words, Thou art a malicious and sedicious man, and movest the
Queens Subjects to Sedition: It was the Opinion of the Court, that the words
were not actionable, for they were too general; for it may be that the
Defendant has stirred up the Tenants of a Manor to Tumults and Sedition, which
is not any great Scandal. And the Statute of 23 Eliz. is, If any Person do any
thing to move the People to Sedition, the same is Felony; but then it must be
Sedition against the Queen; and of that Opinion was the whole Court.

Trin. 32 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
CCXLV. Ratcliffe and Shirleys Case.
THe Lady Ratcliffe brought an Action upon the Case against Shirley, for these
words, Words.
My Lady Ratcliffe is a beggarly Lady, and gives threadbare Coats; she bought
Sheep, and cosen'd men of their money, and she is as very a Thief as he that
robs by the Highway. Upon Not Guilty, the Jury found that the Defendant
spoke these words, She is a worse Thief than he that robs by the Highway:
It was holden that the words found by the Verdict were actionable, as well as
if the Defendant had called the Plaintiff Thief generally. But it seemed to the
Court, that upon that Verdict the Plaintiff should not have Judgment; for it
may be that the Defendant dixit utrumque at several times; and so several
Causes of Action. And it is not like to the Case 3 Ma. 118. where part of the
words is found, and quoad alia verba non dixit, and so expressly acquit him of
the remnant, so it is not here, for this Verdict does not acquit him of the
other words; and for that Cause Judgment was stayed.

Hill. 26 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
CCXLVI. Herne and Crows Case.
IN an Action upon the Case by Herne against Crow, and declared, that whereas
certain Irish Merchants had imported Furs here into England, which were offered
to be sold in London; which Furs the Defendant desired to buy, but because he
was a Foreigner he could not buy them without peril of forfeiture, and then the
Plaintiff was in communication with the Merchants to have bought them, that the
Defendant in consideration that the Plaintiff promised to the Defendant, that
when he had bought the said Furs, the Defendant should have such a quantity of
the said Furs as he pleased upon equal price, assumed and promised that he
would speak no more with the said Merchants for the buying of the said Furs;
yet, that notwithstanding he proceeded in the said bargain, and offered to the
said Merchants sixty pound more than any other, by reason of which the
Plaintiff could not have them for such reasonable price, as he might have had
them before. It was holden by Wray Chief Justice, That the Declaration here was
insufficient, upon which the Defendant might have well demurred.

Mich. 26 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
CCXLVII. Bakers Case.
A Writ of Partition by Baker Heir of Gertrudi Marquess of Exeter, who devised
all his Lands to Blunt, by which the third part descend to the Plaintiff,
Estrepement.
and prayed a Writ of Estrepement; and it was the Opinion of the Court, that
the Writ is not to be granted, for the Plaintiff may have a more proper remedy
upon the Statute, Cum duo, vel tres, and in a Writ of Partition no Land is
demanded.

CCXLVIII. Mich. Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
Conditions.
A Man was bound in an Obligation that he should release all his right in Black
Acre to the Obligor, and in the performance of the said Condition, he made such
a Lease, and delivered the same to C. to the use of the Obligor. The Opinion of
the whose Court was, That the Condition was not performed, because the Obligor
had not the Lease in his own hands to plead, but is put to his Writ of Derinue
against C. which was not the intent of the Condition.

Mich. 31 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
CCXLIX. Seaman and Brownings Case.
SEaman brought Debt, in an Obligation against Broshnin and others, Executors
of one Marshall; The Condition was, That whereas the said Marshall had sold
certain Lands to the Plaintiff, If the Plaintiff peaceably and quietly enjoyed
the said Lands against the said Marshall, etc and assigned the breach. That the
said Marshall had entered upon them, and cut down five Elms there, upon which
they were at Issue: And it was found that a Servant of the said Marshall had
entered and cut them, and that in the presence of the said Marshall his Master,
and by his commandment: It was the Opinion of the Court, that the Condition was
broken, and that the Master was the principal Trespasser.

Trin. 30 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
CCL. Babingtons Case.
HUmphrey Babington brought a Writ of Disceit, and counted that T. S. was
seized of Land, and held the same of the Manor of Rodely, which Manor is
ancient Demeasn; And that the said T. S. being so seized a Writ of Enter sur
Disseisin was brought against him, in which T. S. pleaded and lost, and
Judgment was given against him. Et quod ipse Humphridus extitit Dominus Manerii
praedicti, and concluded, ad exhaeredationis ipsius Humphr^di periculum
manifestum. Exception was taken to the Count, because the words are, quod cum
ipse existit Dominus Manerii praedicti: where he ought to say further,
Amendment.
Et tempore Judicii praedicti existebat; for if the Recovery was before he
purchased the said Manor, his Action does not lie, which Rhodes and Anderson
concesserunt, wherefore day was given to the Plaintiff to amend his Count.

32 Eliz. In the Exchequer.
CCLI. Sir William Pelhams Case.
THe Case was, A. Tenant for life, the remainder in tall to B. etc. A by Deed
indented and enrolled, bargained and sold the Message so conveyed to W. P. in
fee, who suffered a common recovery, in which A. is vouched; and so a common
recovery had and executed; and this was before the Statute of 14 Eliz. And if
the recovery should bind B. and his remainder in tail was the question, or if
it be a forfeiture. Altham argued that here is a forfeiture: 1. It is to see if
a common recovery suffered by Tenant for life (which here is the Bargainee) be
a forfeiture or no by the common Law, 1 Leon. 264. its not forfeited. 2 Leon.
60, 65.
if no Execution be sued upon the same Recovery. 2. If it be executed, then, if
he in the remainder may enter for the forfeiture. When the Tenant for life
bargains and sells the Message, although upon it an estate in fee be limited,
yet nothing passes from him, but what he may lawfully pass, and that was the
estate for life of the Bargainor, for such an estate only he might lawfully
pass; and here the Vendee is but Tenant for the life of another, and when of
his own assent he suffers a common recovery, and that without right, it is a
forfeiture: By matter in Fait a particular Tenant may commit a forfeiture, as
well as by matter of Record: By matter in Fait he cannot commit a forfeiture,
if not thereby the reversion be not pulled out of him in the reversion: As if a
Lessee for 10 years make a Lease for 1000 years, it is not a forfeiture, for by
that the reversion is not touched; but if he by matter of Record do any thing
which sounds to the disinheriting of him in the reversion, although in truth
the same does not touch the Inheritance, yet it is a forfeiture, Vid. 39 E. 3.
16. If Tenant for life pleads any thing against the right of him in the
reversion, it is a forfeiture, and by Finchden and Belknap, he cannot plead in
the right, 5 Ass. 3. Tenant for life is impleaded in a Praecipe by a stranger,
and confesses the Action, upon which the Demandant has Judgment, the Lessor
enters, against whom the Demandant sueth Execution: The Lessor brought an
Assise, and had Judgment to recover, for it is a forfeiture, because the Tenant
for life has admitted the reversion in another, because it is an alienation to
the disinheriting of the Plaintiff and of the Lessor: 12 E. 3. Fitz Resceipt
14. where Tenant for life pleaded in chief, or cannot deny or gainsay the
Action of the Demandant, or makes default by Covin, he shall forfeit his
Estate: But if a rent be demanded against Tenant for life, and he renders the
same, it is no forfeiture, 12 Ass. 31. Tenant for life is impleaded by Covin,
between him and the Demandant, and pleads in chief without aid prayer, upon
which Judgment is given, he in the reversion enters in a Juris utrum against
Tenant for life, who pleads feintly, traversing the point of the Action, he in
the reversion shall not be received; for in as much as the Tenant has
traversed the Action, he is not within the Statute of West. 2. 3, 5. Default,
Reddition, but he in the Reversion may enter by the Common Law, 22 E. 3. 2. In
Scire facias to execute a Fine against Tenant for life, who pleaded to the
Inquest whereas in truth the Land in demand was not comprised within the Fine,
Judgment is given for the Demandant in the Scire facias, he in the reversion
may enter: In our principal case, here is apparent and manifest Covin; for the
Tenant for life voucheth without cause, and this Recovery is by assent, and is
to the use of the Vendee, who is Tenant for the life of another, and therefore,
by the Common Law, he in the Remainder may enter before Execution sued: And it
is well known that these common Recoveries are used for to dock Remainders in
Tail, and that was the scope of this Recovery. And as to the Case of 5 E. 4. 2.
Tenant for life is impleaded in a Praecipe quod reddat, who voucheth a
stranger, the Demandant counterpleads the Voucher, and it is found for him, he
in the Reversion has no remedy but by a Writ of Right; and if the Vouchee
enters, and loses by Action tried, or default ut supra; that Book is to be
intended of a Recovery executed; for there in such case he in the Reversion
has not an Entry, but is put to his Writ of Entry by the Common Law, Vide Br.
Title Forfeiture 87. 24 H. 8. Tenant for life is impleaded, and prays in the
Aid of a stranger, he in the Reversion may enter; but if he does not enter
until the other has recovered, then he cannot enter, but is put to his Writ of
Entry, Ad terminum qui praeteriit, vel de ingressu ad Communem Legem, and
therein he shall falsify the Recovery; and there, by Brook, Voucher of a
stranger is not cause of Forfeiture, for it does not disaffirm the Reversion in
the Lessor: And he vouched 24 E. 3. 68. where Tenant for life pleaded in the
right with aid prayer: And so he argued, that before Execution he in the
Remainder might enter but after Execution is put to his Action: But in our
Case, although that Execution be good, yet he in the Remainder may enter, for
it is found by Verdict, that at the time of the Recovery he was within age, and
that when he dyed, that he in the next Remainder was within age, and then no
Entry shall be imputed, and then he shall not be driven to his Action: As if
Tenant by the Courtesy makes a Feoffment with warranty, and dies; and the
same descends to his Heir within age, yet he shall enter, although he has not
avoided the warranty in the life of his Ancestors: Also he said that the
Statute of 32 H. 8. extended to this Case; for Sir William Pelham the Vendee
was but Tenant for life, and although that he be but Tenant for the life of
another, yet he is Tenant for life as fully as if he were Tenant for his own
life, (or otherwise Tenant for life or lives.) Note this, the words of the
Statute. As upon the Statute of 20 E. 1. which gives Resceipt, de defensione
juris, the words are, Cum quis aliquod breve Domini Regis impetret versus
Tenentem per Legem Angliae, vel feod taliat' vel sub Nomine Dotis, vel alio
modo, ad terminum vitae; upon these words it is holden 11 H. 4. That where Land
was given to one and his heirs for the life of another, that upon such an
Estate, he in the reversion should be received, by reason of these words, vel
alio modo ad terminum vitae, etc. And although he who enters at the time of the
recovery, was not next in remainder to the particular Estate, yet he is within
the Statute of 32 H. 8. For he was in remainder at the time of the recovery,
and at the time of the entry he in the immediate remainder was dead, and then
he the next in remainder. Vide 15 E. 4. 9. by Litt. If I grant my Services to
one for life, and he in a Praecipe brought against him, pleads in the right, or
grants to another the said Services in Fee, it is not a Forfeiture, for it is
no Discontinuance. It will be objected, That the words of the Statute of 32 H.
8. are, That such recoveries shall be utterly void, and if so, then he in the
reversion cannot be damnified, and then no cause of Forfeiture. So that it may
be easily answered, That where Tenant for life does any thing which sounds to
the disinheriting of him in the reversion, by matter of record, although the
same does not divest, or otherwise prejudice the Inheritance, yet it is a
Forfeiture. Cook, to the contrary. Here in our Case is not any Covin in Sir
William Pelham the Bargainee, he was deceived by the Bargainor; for he did not
know but that the Bargainor was seized in tail according to the Covenant in the
Indenture, by which the Bargainor covenanted that he was seized in tail at the
time of the Bargain; and also to do any other act for assurance of the Estate
of the Bargainee; and it was lawful for him to Vouch his Bargainor, and
although he voucheth a stranger, it is not a Forfeiture. 39 E. 3. 16. Aid
prayer of a stranger is a Forfeiture, and the reason of that is, because he
acknowledges the reversion to be in a stranger, and that is the cause of
Forfeiture. Vide Book of Entries 254. Where upon Aid prayer, the Party to have
Aid showed such Special matter: But in our Case the Tenant for life has
vouched his Bargainor, and not without cause, for he has a warranty from him,
and the Demandant cannot Counterplead it, for he had a Seisin, whereof he might
make a Feoffment. As to the Case 14 E. 3. Fitz. Resceit 135. Lessee for life in
a Praecipe against him without Aid prayer pleads to the Enquest the first
day, he in reversion may enter: It is true, he may enter, and enter into the
Resceit, but not into the Land for a Forfeiture; For then Fitzherbert would
have abridged that Case in the Title of Enter Congeable, and not in the Title
of Resceit: And the Book in 5 Ass. 3. is good Law, for there the Tenant does
confess the reversion to be in another; but in our Case the Tenant voucheth,
which is a lawful Act, and according to the Covenants of his Purchase. And
although the recovery was by agreement, yet it is not for that a Forfeiture;
for if the Tenant for life voucheth truly, it is not a Forfeiture. Before the
Statute of West. 2. cap. 3. which gave resceit to a woman, and to those in
reversion, where the particular Tenant is impleaded, and made default, and
reddere noluerit, no remedy for these Cases, but a Writ of Right, but no Entry;
and that was for the credit which the Law gave to recoveries, car si puissoit,
then is resceit given, but that only in the two Cases aforesaid: But afterward,
because it was found that many particular Tenants being impleaded, would plead
faintly: The Statute of 13 R. 2. gave resceit in such case. And upon what
reasons were these Acts made, if in such cases the Entry was lawful? But after
these two Statutes, another practice was devised; for such particular Tenants
would suffer recoveries secretly in such sort that those in the reversion could
not have notice of it, so as they could not ante judicium, and prayer to be
received; for the remedy of which mischief the Statute of 32 H. 8. was made; by
which, all recoveries had against the Tenant by the Courtesy, or otherwise for
life or lives, by agreement of the Parties, of any Land whereof such particular
Tenant is seized, should be void as Tenant by the Courtesy, etc. should be void
against him in the reversion: And yet an Evasion was found out of that Statute;
for such particular Tenant would make a Feoffment with warranty, and then the
Feoffor should be impleaded in a Writ of Entry, and he vouch the Tenant for
life, who should vouch over, and such a Recovery was out of the Statute of 32
H. 8. for the recovery was not against such particular Tenant, etc. For the
remedy of which mischief the Statute of 14 Eliz. was made; by which, it was
provided that such recoveries had, where such particular Tenant shall be
vouched, should ve void, if such recovery be had between them by Covin. And he
conceived, That the Forfeiture is not in respect of the recovery it self, but
of the Plea pleaded by the Tenant: And here in our Case there is not any Covin
found, or that Sir William Pelham knew that he was but Tenant for life; but it
was found that the recovery was with their assent, and that was lawful, as this
Case is, for they may agree to have such recovery for further assurance; and so
Sir William Pelham has not vouched any but his Bargainor, and that according
to their Covenants, and this Bargainor was not a bare Tenant for life, but had
also a remainder in tail, although not immediately depending upon the Estate
for life, which he cut off; therefore it was not merely a feigned recovery: And
Vide 5 E. 4.2. and Br. Forfeiture 87. where Tenant for life being impleaded in
a Praecipe voucheth a stranger, it is not a Forfeiture, for it does not
disaffirm the reversion, etc. contra of Aid prayer, for a stranger may release
with warranty to Tenant for life, upon which he may vouch: And he reported in
his Argument, That Bromley Chancellor of England sent him to the two chief
Justices to know their Opinions upon these Points, and they were of opinion,
That the Voucher of a stranger was not any Forfeiture, and also that after the
recovery was executed, he in the remainder could not enter; but they conceived
that the right of him in the remainder was not bound: And he said, That after
the recovery executed, he in the remainder could not enter, which see Br.
Forfeiture 87. 24 H. 8. For if Entry in such Case had been lawful, infiniteness
of Suits would follow, which would be a thing against the credit of recoveries.
As to the Objection of the Infancy the same will not help the matter, 6 H. 8.
Br. Saver default 30. Recovery had against an Infant in which he voucheth, and
loses, is not erroneous; contrary upon default: And if an Infant Tenant in
tail suffers a recovery, it is discontinuance, for in such Recovery Infancy
is not respected. And in a Scire Facias upon a Judgment had against the Father,
the Heir shall not have his age. And he cited a Case out of Bendlowes Reports,
5 Eliz. Tenant for life, the remainder over to a stranger in Fee, Tenant for
life is disseized by Covin, in a Praecipe quod reddat against the Disseisor he
voucheth the Tenant for life, who enters into the Warranty generally, and
voucheth over the common Vouchee, It was adjudged that that recovery was out of
32 H. 8. for the recovery was not had against the particular Tenant, but he was
but Tenant in Law quia Vouchee; and also the recovery is a good bar to him in
the remainder, notwithstanding that he was within age at the time of the
recovery. And at another time it was argued by the Barons, and Clark said, That
he conceived that the Entry of him in the remainder was lawful: It has been
objected that Pelham did not know that the Bargainor had but for life, or that
any other person had any remainder in the Land, that is to no purpose to excuse
him; for 42 E. 3. every Purchasor ought at his own peril to take notice of the
Estates and Charges upon the Lands which he purchases: For the Law presumes
that none will purchase without advice of Counsel, and without knowing the
Titles of the Land. And although Statutes have been made to provide against the
practices of particular Tenants, yet that is no Argument that no other remedy
was before. And by Littleton, If Tenant for life joyneth the Mise upon the mere
right, it is a Forfeiture. And he held strongly, That the Judgment did not take
away the Entry, a cause of Forfeiture being given before the Judgment. 5 Ass 3.
He in the Reversion after Judgment and Execution may enter. See also 22 Ass. 31
to the same purpose. For where Tenant for life is impleaded he ought to wait
upon him in the Reversion, and expect Instructions from him in defense, etc.
and therefore if he makes default, or confesses the Action, it is a
Forfeiture. And as to the supposed recompense, the same does not help the Case,
for this common Recovery is no other but an Assurance, and Recoverors are but
Assignees, and they shall take advantage of Conditions by 32 H. 8. and a
recoveror shall be seized to the use of him who suffers the recovery, if no
other use be expressed. And he also held, that when Tenant for life bargains
and sells his Land by Deed enrolled; although no Fee passes, 1 Leon. 264. 3
Inst. 251. b. Mores r. 212. 2 Leon. 60, 65.
yet it is a Forfeiture; and that by reason of the Inrollment, which is matter
of Record: And he said, that if an Infant Tenant for life be disseised, the
Disseisor dies seized, and afterward the Infant dies, that he in the
remainder may enter: Gent. to the same intent: If Tenant for life, etc. the
same is not simply a Forfeiture; for he may have a Warranty, or a Release, or a
Confirmation made to him: Attornment does not give a right, but is only a
consent, yet if he who has nothing in the reversion will levy a Fine of it to
another, and afterward the Conusee brings a Quid juris clamat against the
tenant of the Land, and he Attorns, it is a Forfeiture. Manwood to the same
intent: This is a new Case, and I have not read the Case in any Book, nor seen
any President of it: And it is a great Case, and a general Case, and worthy to
be argued; and I conceive clearly, that here is a direct and express Forfeiture
at the Common Law, without any aid or restraint of any Statute to make it a
Forfeiture: The dignity of Judgment in the repute of Law has been urged which
ought to stand in force until they be reversed by Error, or Attaint; And also
Littleton has been urged 481. where upon the Statute of West. 2. cap. 3. he
says, that before the Statute aforesaid, If a Lease had been made to one for
life, the remainder to a stranger, and afterward a stranger by feigned Action
had recovered against the tenant for life by default, and also the tenant for
life dyed, that he in the remainder had not any remedy: But there Littleton
does not report the same as his own Opinion, but as an Opinion conceived by a
remainder upon the said Statute; and it is in truth but a mere conceit. And as
to the main point he took this diversity: Such Recoveries, in which the title
of the demandant stands indifferently to the Court, and Non constat, if it be
good or not, being suffered by tenant for life by default or confession without
Aid prayer of him in the reversion, do not make any Forfeiture, although the
tenant for life has not dealt well with him in the reversion, not having
prayed in aid of him: And in such Case, If a Lease be made for life, the
remainder over in Fee upon such a recovery, he in the remainder shall have a
Formedon in the remainder, or a Writ of Right, and shall not oust him who
recovered without Action, and that by the Common Law. Then came the Statute of
West. 2. cap. 3. which gave to the Wife Cui in vita upon a Recovery against the
Husband by default, whereas before she had not any recovery but a Writ of
Right, and notwithstanding her former recovery ulterius necesse habet ostendere
jus suum secundum formam brevis quod prius impetraverat, and if his right be
not better than the right of him in the Reversion, he shall lose the Land,
notwithstanding the Judgment given before for him: And that Statute gave
Resceit or Entry ad terminum qui praeteriit, and that Statute is to be intended
of such Recoveries where a good, or at least an indifferent Title is so as non
constat Curiae, if it be good or not: After that, Tenant for life was driven to
a near shift, and would not make default, or lose by nient dedire, but would
plead, but yet faintly; for the remedy of which Mischief the Statute of 13 R.
2. was made, which gave Resceit in such Case; the particular Tenant being
restrained by that Statute: He jugled yet, and practiced to suffer a Recover
secretly, without notice of him in the Reversion: To remedy which Mischief the
Statute of 32 H. 8. was made, and that made such Recovery had against such
particular Tenant void against him in the Reversion. It has been objected,
That the Statute of 32 H 8. does not give any Forfeiture in that Case, but
makes that the Recovery be void, therefore he in the reversion ought to tarry
till after the death of the particular Tenant: To that I shall speak after. But
how our Case is a common Recovery, and constat Curiae, that the Demandant has
not any right, for the Tenant might have barred him, and in truth he who
recovereth is but a Purchasor: Also this recovery is not to the use of the
recoverer, but to the use of him who was Tenant in it, and not paramount, as in
the Case of a recovery upon a good title, a Lease for years made by him who
after suffers a recovery, is good and shall not be defeated by the recoveree;
otherwise it is where the recovery is upon a good Title. Vide Statute of
Gloucest, cap. 11. Where upon default of the Tenant, resceipt is given for
Lessee for years, yet if the Tenant vouch upon default of the Vouchee, the
Lessee for years shall be received; and now resceipt of Lessee for years is out
of the Book, for by the Statute of 21 H. 8. he may falsify: But no resceipt
lies in the Case of a common recovery, for he who recovereth cannot oust the
Termor. As to that which my Brother Clark has said, That the Bargain and Sale
in this Case is not any Forfeiture, but when the Deed of Bargain and Sale is
enrolled it is a Forfeiture, I am not of that Opinion; for although that the
inrollment be of record, yet the Deed is not of record: for against the Deed
enrolled a man may plead Infancy, although none can plead Non est factum to it.
Also he held, that although by the Bargain and Sale, and the inrollment of it,
the Bargainee had not Fee; for by such act the reversion is not removed; yet by
the recovery, and the Execution of it, the Bargainee had gained the Fee out of
the Lessor; for the recovery is to the use of the Bargainee against whom it was
had etc. It has been objected, That he is only a Voucher, which peradventure
was lawful in this Case, by reason of the Warranty paramount, or of a release
or confirmation with Warranty, and two Cases have been vouched to such purpose,
viz. 5 E. 4. 2. Tenant for life being impleaded in a Praecipe, vouched a
stranger, the Demandant counterpleaded the Voucher, which was found for him, he
in the reversion had no remedy but by a Writ of Right: So if the Vouchee had
entered and lost, etc. As to that Case we ought to consider, That every Book
reported in our Law is not Law: But let us observe of what Authority the Case
is, truly it is the conceit of the Reporter himself, for he puts the Case, and
resolves it: but there is no Judge or Sergeant named in the Case, etc. The
other Case is 5 E. 4. 2. Note by Hendon clearly; If my Tenant for life voucheth
a stranger who enters into the Warranty generally, and does not know how to
bar the Demandant, the Tenant shall recover in value, and the reversion of him
who has in value shall be to me in lieu of my former reversion: as release to
Tenant for life shall enure to him in the reversion: But that is but the
Opinion of one Sergeant, etc. But I answer to these Books, If the Demandant in
such recovery have a good title so as the Tenant, or the Voucher, as Hendon
says, know not how to bar the Demandant there such a Voucher of a Stranger is
not a Forfeiture, nor such recovery suffered thereupon: for against his will
and volens nolens he suffered it: But if the Tenant had good matter to bar the
Demandant, and no good cause of Voucher, that the vouching of a stranger, or
suffering of a recovery is a Forfeiture of his Estate: And here in our Case,
the Defendant had not any title, The Tenant or Vouchee had not any Warranty, or
cause of Voucher; But the Tenant might have barred the Demandant if he pleased.
And he said, That the Voucher only does not make the Forfeiture; but much
rather the Recovery; for when Judgment is given, and Execution had, then is the
Fee plucked out of him in the reversion. 6 R. 2. If Tenant for life claims a
Fee it is a Forfeiture; but here Pelham has done more, for he has gained Fee
by the Judgment, therefore a Fortiori it shall be a Forfeiture. But let us a
little see, what medlings or attempts by the particular Tenant, are causes of a
Forfeiture, and what not, 5 Ass. 3. Where A. brings an Entry against Tenant for
life by collusion to oust B. of his reversion, supposing that the Tenant for
life held of his Lease: The Tenant confesses the Action, upon which Judgment
is given, B enters, and his entry adjudged lawful; for that recovery is
adjudged in Law but an Alienation to the disinherisin of him in the reversion;
and here it appears That such recovery by Covin, is but an Alienation, and
without any strength of a recovery. And he cited many other Cases cited before
by Altham, 14 E 3. Resceit 135. Where Tenant for life pleads in chief, or prays
in aid of a stranger where he might bar the Demandant, and will not, it is a
Forfeiture: And also 22 E. 3. 2. and 27 E. 3. where Tenant for life in a Quid
juris clamat Attorns unto the Conusee upon a Fine levied by him who has not
any thing in the Land, the same is a Forfeiture, and yet that Attornment does
not divert the Reversion out of the Lessor. 50 E. 3.7. and 8. Land was given by
Fine in tail, the remainder over to a stranger in Fee, the Donee took a Wife,
and dyed without Issue, the Wife accepted Dower assigned by a stranger, he in
the Remainder brought a Scire facias against the Wife, that she is Tenant in
Dower of the Assignment of a stranger, and pleaded to the Title, the Demandant
recovered, she has lost her Dower, for she has not pleaded dutifully as she
ought, being a particular Tenant. Temps H. 4. Tenant for life loses his Land
in a Recovery against him against his will, and thereupon brings Quod ei
deforceat, and declares upon an Estate tail, and recovers, the same is a
Forfeiture, because he has challenged a higher Estate, etc. 5 H. 7. Tenant for
life joins the Mise upon the mere Right. 2 H. 6. Lessee for years being ousted,
brings an Assise and recovers. 1 H. 7. Accepts a Fine of a stranger sur
Conusans, etc. come ceo que il ad de son done. All these are Forfeitures. In
our principal Case here, the Tenant who suffered the Recovery did not plead at
all to defend the Right; but where he might have barred the Demandant, he gave
strength to his pretended Title, and made it a perfect Title, and by suffering
the Recovery and Judgment to pass, had taken away the Reversion out of the
Lessor to whom he owed Fealty, and therefore it is a Forfeiture: And without
doubt it is apparent to the Court, that the Demandant in this Recovery has not
any Title; for the Recoverers in such Cases are but Assignees and Purchasors:
which appears by the Statute of 7 H. 8. cap. 4. which gives Distress and
Avowry to Recoverers, etc. As to the inventing of Recoveries, it was a
necessary Device; for it was to take away Estate tails which were the causes of
grand Mischiefs and Inconveniences in this Realm; and it was great reason, for
Tenant in tail might by the Common Law alien his Land post prolem suscitat, and
then he had an Inheritance and might commit Waste: But he was so restrained by
the Statute of Westminster. 2. all the Realm, and the Subjects of it, were inveigled
thereby; Ioyntures of Wives, Leases of Farmers Mortgages to Creditors,
Statutes, and other Assurances defeated by their deaths, which was against the
Common Law and all Conscience: These matters tending to the knowledge of the
Justices, and the Mischiefs thereupon ensuing very frequent, and that Tenant in
tail was become a perilous Fellow, and there was no safe dealing with him;
Then they taking into consideration that several Warranties and Assets, and
collateral Warranty without Assets, for that in it self employed Assets did bar
him, Icil. the Entail, upon that consideration they grounded the practice and
usage of common Recoveries; so that by that means Tenant in tail has potestatem
alienandi, as he had at the Common Law, because his authority was restored to
him, and injury done to no man: But as to Tenant for life, he never had
potestatem alienandi: And as to that which has been said, That the Recovery
shall stand in force till after the death of the Tenant for life; and in our
Case here, Tenant in tail is living; certainly if the Law should be such, great
mischief would follow, for then greater Ioyntresses, the Widows of great
Persons, having allowed unto them great and sumptuous Houses, and Lands
furnished with Timber of great value, might suffer such Recoveries and so
having plucked the Fee out of the Heirs, might commit Waste, and the same
should be dispunishable, etc. which should be an intolerable Mischief. And so
he concluded that this suffering of a Recovery was a Forfeiture, and Judgment
was given accordingly.

CCLII. Grendon and Albanies Case.
JOhn Grendon brought Trespass for breaking of his Close against Tho Albany:
And upon the pleading, the Case was, That Francis Bunny was seized, and 1 May,
20 Eliz. by Deed indented enfeoffed N. H. to the use of the said Fr. Bunny for
term of his life, the Remainder to D. in tail, the Remainder to E. in tail, the
Remainder over to F. in Fee: In which Deed of Feoffment a Proviso was, That if
it should happen one P. P. to dye without Issue Male of his Body, that then it
should be lawful for the said Fr. Bunny at any time during his life, by his
Deed Indented to be Sealed and Delivered in the presence of three credible
Witnesses, to alter, change, diminish or amplify any use or uses limited by
the said Deed, and aliquem usum vel usus inde alicui personae, etc. Limitare
post mortem ipsius Fr. to begin: After which the said Fr. Bunny 1 Aprilis, 23
Eliz by his Deed Indented, did renounce, relinquish, and surrender to the said
N. H. D. E. and F. all such Liberty, Power and Authority which he had after the
death of the said P.P. without Issue, ut supra: And further remised, released,
and quit-claimed to them the said Condition, Promise, Covenant and Agreement,
and all his said Power, Liberty and Authority, and further granted to them and
their Heirs, that at all times then after, as well the said Condition, Promise,
Covenant and Agreement, as the said Power, Liberty and Authority should cease,
and to all purposes should be void; after which P. P. dyed without Issue, 1
Maij 23 Eliz. after which 20 March 24 Eliz. the said Fr. Bunny, by Indenture
between him and the said D. Sealed and Delivered, ut supra, altered the former
uses, and covenanted and agreed with the said D. that from thenceforth the said
N. H. and his Heirs should be seized to the use of the Plaintiff and his Heirs,
etc. And note, that in this Case Fr. Bunny being but Tenant for life, enfeoffed
one Tomson, upon whom the said D. entered for a Forfeiture. And it was argued by
Altham, That by the Feoffment by Fr. Bunny to Tomson, the Liberty and Power
aforesaid was not extinct or lost, for this Liberty and Power was not then a
thing in esse, for then was P. P. alive; and also the Liberty is merely
collateral to the Land whereof the Feoffment was made, 39 E. 3. 43. Fitz The
Son and Heir apparent disseised his Father, and thereof made a Feoffment to a
stranger, the Father dyed, now against his own Livery the Son shall not enter;
but if the Son dies, then his Son shall enter, which proves that the Livery is
not so violent to determine a future right, but that afterward it may be
revived, a fortiori in our Case where the thing pretended to be extinct is
merely collateral. 36 E. 3. Fitz. garr. 69. In an Assise of Common, the Release
of the Father with Warranty is not a bar, because it is of another thing. 15 H.
7. 11. Cestuy que use, wills by his Will, that his Feoffees shall sell his
Lands, and dies, the Feoffees make a Feoffment to the same use, yet they may
well Sell, so as against their Livery, the authority to sell remains to them:
And he put Brents Case, Dyer 340. A future use limited to a Wife which shall
be, shall not be prevented by a Fine or Feoffment; and so by the Statute of
fraudulent Conveyances, 27 Eliz. cap. 4. where a Conveyance is made with clause
of Revocation, if afterward the party who made such a Conveyance, shall
Bargain, Sell or Grant the said Land to another for Money, or other good
Consideration paid or given, (the first Conveyance not being revoked) that then
such former Conveyance against the latter Purchasor shall be void etc. The
other matter was, admitting that the said Power and Liberty be not extinct by
the said Feoffment, if by the Indenture of Renunciation, Relinquishment,
Release, etc. it be destroyed; and he said that a thing which is not in esse,
cannot be released, Litt. 105. and 4 H. 7. 10. A Lease for years to begin at a
day to come, cannot be released before it comes in esse, 11 H. 6. 29. Br.
Damages 138. In Detinue, the Defendant would confess the Action, if the
Plaintiff would release the Damages; and the Plaintiff would have so done, but
could not before Judgment; for before Judgment the Plaintiff had not Interest
in the Damages, but he is entitled to them by the Judgment: So Lands in
ancient Demesne are recovered at the Common Law, and Execution had accordingly
and afterward the Tenant releases to him who recovers; and afterward the Lord
reverseth the Judgment the Tenant notwithstanding his release may enter, for
his Title which accrued to him by the reversal was not in esse, at the time of
the release, Vide 98. contr. And it was adjudged 23 Eliz. in the Case of one
Falsor, That where Lessee for years devised his term to his Wife if she should
so long live, and if she dyed within the term, that then the residue of his
term should go unto his Daughter, which should be then unpreferred, and dyed,
his Daughter unpreferred, released to her mother all her right in the said
Land, the mother dyed within the said term the release shall not bind the
daughter, for that at the time of that release she had no title. Cook to the
contrary: And he said, That by the Feoffment the said Power and Liberty is
extinct: And he agreed the Case cited before 15 H. 7 for in such Case the
Vendee of the Feoffees shall be in by the Devise, and not by the Feoffees. 9 H.
7. 1. The Husband makes Discontinuance of the Lands of his Wife, and takes back
an Estate to him and his Wife by which the Wife is remitted they have Issue,
the Wife dies the Husband shall not be Tenant by the Courtesy; for he has
extinguished his future right by his Livery. 12 Ass. P. ultimo. A Praecipe
against A who loses the Land by an erroneous Judgment, and after Execution
had, enters upon the Demandant, and makes a Feoffment, his Writ of Error is
gone, 38 E. 3. 16. In a Scire Facias to execute a Fine, the Plaintiff recovers,
and makes a Feoffment in Fee, and afterward the Tenant by Scire Facias by Writ
of Disceit reverseth the Judgment, now the Plaintiff in the Scire Facias shall
not have a new Scire Facias, 34 H. 6. 44. A. recovers against B. by false Oath,
and after Execution had, B. enters and makes a Feoffment to a stranger, who
Enfeoffs him who recovers, it is a good Bar in an Attaint. 27 H. 8. 29. The
Feoffees to an use are disseised, the Disseisor Enfeoffs Cestuy que use, who
Enfeoffs a stranger, now by that Feoffment his right to the use is gone. And as
to the release, the same is not properly a release, but rather a defeasance to
determine the Power and Authority aforesaid, as if A enfeoffed B. with
Warranty, and afterward B. covenants with A. that the said Warranty shall be
void, the Covenant shall enure to defeat and determine the Warranty. And
afterward Judgment was given against the Plaintiff.

CCLXXIII. Sir Francis Englefields Case. Vide this Case Reported by Cook in
Rep. 7. and by Popham 18.
THe Case to recite at large was this: Sir Francis Englefield Knight. being seized
in Fee of the Manor of Englefield in the County of Berks, and of diverse other
Lands in the first year of Queen Eliz. departed out of the Realm by License of
the Queen for a time, and remained out of the Realm in the parts beyond the
Seas above the time of his License, whereby the Queen by her Warranty under her
Privy Seal required him to return, upon which he was warned, but did not come;
whereupon the Queen seized his Lands for his contempt. After which the Statute
of Fugitives was made 13 Eliz. upon which by Commissions found upon this
Statute, all his Lands were newly seized; and afterward 17 Eliz. by Indenture
made between him and his Nephew, and Sealed by the said Sir Francis at Rome,
the said Sir Francis covenanted with his said Nephew, upon consideration of
Advancement of his Nephew, and after consideration to raise an use, that he and
his Heirs, and all others seized of the said Manor, etc. shall hereafter stand
and be seized of them, to the use of himself for the term of his life, without
impeachment of Waste, and afterward to the use of his Nephew, and of the Heirs
Males of his Body, and for default of such Issue, to the use of the right Heirs
and Assigns of the Nephew for ever, with a Proviso, that if the said Sir
Francis shall have any Issue Male of his Body, that then all the said Uses and
Limitations shall be void and that the said Manors, etc. shall be as before.
Afterward the said Sir Francis was attainted of Treason, supposed to be
committed by him, 18 Eliz. at L. in partibus transmarinis; and the Attainder
was first by Outlary, and afterward by Act of Parliament 28 Eliz. by which the
Forfeiture of the said Condition was given to the Queen; and at the same
Parliament it was Enacted, That all and every Person and Persons, which had, or
claimed to have any Estate of Inheritance, Lease, or Rent, they not entered of
Record, or certified into the Court of Exchequer, of, into, or out of any
Manors, Lands, etc. by or under any Grant, Assurance, or Conveyance whatsoever
had or made at any time after the beginning of her Majesty by any persons
attainted of any Treasons mentioned in the said Act, after the 8 day of Feb. 18
Eliz. or within two years next ensuing the last day of the Session of the said
Parliament, shall openly show in the Court of the said Exchequer, or cause to
be openly shown the same, his or their Grant, Conveyance or Assurance, and
there in the Term time, in open Court, the same shall offer, and Exhibit, upon
his or their Oath, affirming that they have not the same, nor can come by it,
or that it was never put in writing, then the Effect thereof to be entered and
enrolled of Record, or else every such Assurance should be void, and of none
Effect to all intents and purposes, saving to every person and persons, (other
than the parties and privies to such Conveyance, and such as shall not Exhibit
the said Conveyance according to the true meaning of this Act) all such rights,
etc. Whereupon the said Francis the Nephew, the 20 day of November, 30 Eliz. in
his own person affirmed upon his Oath, that he had not the said Conveyance, nor
knew not how to come by it, but delivered the Effect of the Assurance, omitting
the time when it was made, otherwise than that it was made after the beginning
of the Queens Reign, and before the Treason committed by Sir Francis, and
before the Statute of 13 Eliz. against Fugitives, and omitting also the last
clause of the tender of the King; and this he offered openly in the Court of
the Exchequer the same day: After which the Queen being moved with the said
Condition, made a Warrant by Letters Patents under the Great Seal, dated 17
Martii, 13 Eliz. to Rich. Broughton and Henry Bourcher Esquires for her, and in
her place and stead, to deliver or tender to the said Francis the Nephew a Ring
of Gold, to the intent to make void the uses and limitations limited by the
said Indenture, and to return their proceedings upon it into the Court of
Exchequer; whereupon they made a tender of a Ring of Gold to the said Francis
the Nephew the 18 day of November, 31 Eliz. which he refused to receive. And
the two years after the said Session of Parliament was the 13 day of March 31
Eliz. and the said Broughton and Bourcher returned all this that they had done
as before, with their Commission out of the Exchequer: And this Case being a
great case, and consisting of many doubts and questions, was often argued. And
this Term, scil. 33 Eliz. It was argued by Moor of Counsel on the part of
Francis Englefield; and he said, when Sir Francis Englefield covenanted to
stand seized to the use of himself for life, etc. this was not any new use, but
part of the ancient use which was in Sir Francis before, for there was no
Consideration to raise a new use to himself; for a Consideration is a cause, or
an occasion meritorial requiring a mutual recompense in fait, or in Law, Dyer
16 Eliz. 33. b. mutual. 1. of each part, and here this ancient use remains.
For Sir Francis cannot simul and semel agree and suffer, and here is a bare
Covenant without any Consideration on the part of Sir Francis, which see Dr.
and Student 100. cited by Br. Feoffments to Uses 46. A man cannot limit an use
to himself to be a new use upon an Estate executed, as upon a Feoffment, but it
shall be the ancient use; much less upon a Covenant. And that was Milfords
Case, Pasch. 31 Eliz. Rot. 154 in the Kings Bench, where an use limited to the
right Heirs of the Feoffor was holden the ancient use, quod vide also in the
case of the Earl of Bedford, and there is no difference between our case and
the said cases, unless in the said cases the use is limited in the end, and in
our case in the beginning of the Conveyance. But perhaps it will be Objected,
That the particular Estate shall be good for necessity for to support the
Estate limited in the Remainder, which is limited upon good consideration, for
otherwise the Remainder shall be distrained: That is not any reason, for that
conceit in Bayntons case in Plow. Com. 307. 8 Eliz. has been over-voted to be
no Law in the case of the Lord Paget in this Court very lately. And he said,
That the condition conceived in the Proviso is not given to the King. By the
Common Law in case of Escheat, the party comes in the Post; but a Condition
runs in privity: And although the Statute of 33 H. 8. gives to the King
Conditions, yet it does not give the performance of them, or ability to the
King to perform them. And there are three Reasons wherefore this Condition
cannot pass to the King: 1. There is a Condition in the Proviso which precedes
the Condition of the Tender, viz. If the said Francis my Nephew be given to
intolerable Vices, then if the said Sir Francis deliver or offer, etc. and in
the whole pleading it is not averred, that the Nephew was given to intolerable
Vices; therefore the precedent Condition not being performed, the second
Condition is not ripened, nor in season. 2. The substance of this Condition
consists in the will and pleasure of Sir Fr. Englefield, therefore it cannot be
given to the Queen. 3. The prejudice which should come to Francis the Nephew if
this Condition should come to the Queen, Vide Br. Temps H. 8. A Foundership
cannot Escheat, or be forfeited by Attainder of Felony or Treason, for it is a
thing annexed to the Blood which cannot be separated; and he said also that the
Condition was gone before that tender, for the Conveyance by which the Condition
was granted, was made void by the Act of 29 H. 8. cap. 3. by which it is
Enacted, That every person within two years after the last day of this Session
shall openly show and bring forth into the Exchequer his Conveyance, and there
in the Term time, in open Court shall Exhibit the same to be entered and
enrolled of Record; and here the end of the Session was such, that all the
Terms of the said two years were passed before the tender made by the Queen;
and although the two years were not past, yet all the Terms were past, and the
Conveyance ought to be showed in Term time, therefore the true time is incurred
before the Tender, and then the Conveyance is void, and by that the Condition
gone. When the Queen was Tenant for the life of Sir Francis, and makes a Lease
for years, and afterward by the Condition has the Inheritance, if now she
shall avoid the Lease made by her when she was Tenant for life? A Disseisor
makes a Lease, or grants a Rentcharge, and afterward the Disseisee releases
unto him, he shall not avoid his own Act. A man seized in the right of his Wife
makes a Lease for years, has Issue, and so is entitled to be Tenant by the
courtesy; the Wife dies, he shall not avoid his Lease: Feoffor and Feoffee
upon condition join in a Lease for years, the Condition is performed on the
part of the Feoffor, he shall not avoid his Lease: And the Prerogative of the
Queen shall not alter the matter against aequum and bonum: As to the Statute of
29 Eliz. it was not the intent of that to avoid Estates claimed for, or by the
Queen; for the Estate was made for the benefit of the Queen. As to the words of
the Statute, every person or persons which has, or claims to have, etc. the
Queen is not within the words. If a Statute ordains attendance, or restraint of
any Liberty which was before at the Common Law, there the Queen shall not be
within it: As to attendance, the Queen is not bound to make claim upon a Fine
levied: As to re-grant, the Queen is not bound by the Statute of Westminster. 3. Quia
emptores terrarum: also where matter of penalty is imposed. Also here is an
Oath to be taken, etc. the Queen being Tenant for the life of another, leaseth
the Woods, and grants to the Lessee power to cut the Woods, and convert them to
his own use. Now, if after the Inheritance comes to the Queen, if the Queen
may impeach her Grantee; truly the property of the Woods and Trees was in the
Queen at the time of the Grant, and although the Inheritance came to the Queen
afterward, yet the same shall not overthrow the first Interest of the Grantee.
Lessee for life, or for years, before the Statute of Gloucester, could not be
impeached for Waste; therefore, as I conceive, the property of the Trees was in
him, for there was no remedy for them against him. See the reason of that in
Dr. and Student, Quasi, the property of the Trees pass to the Lessee with the
Demise, which shall be taken strongly against the Lessor. If the Lessee cutteth
the Trees, the Lessor shall not have Trespass against him, nor Detinue for the
Trees. Lessee without impeachment of Waste cutteth the Trees, and leaves them
upon the Land, and dies, his Executors shall have them, and not the Lessor. The
Lessor grants omnes boscos, and arbores suas, nothing passes, for they pass to
the Lessee, if they be not excepted. The Lessor against his own Lease cuts the
Trees without the agreement of the Lessee, Trespass lies, 5 H. 4. 56. The Heir
being in Ward, cut Trees in his Lands in the possession of his Guardian, who
brought an Action against the Heir, it was adjudged maintainable, although the
Freehold was in the Heir. Egerton Solicitor to the contrary. Admit the use in
Sir Francis be the ancient use, yet it is but for life; and then when the
Queen, having the Estate of Sir Francis, makes a Lease for 40 years, with the
grant of the woods, the said Lease was void, for the Queen was deceived in her
Grant: Sir Francis was punishable for Waste; therefore the Queen having his
Interest, ought not in Justice to have cut the great Wood. And it is to be
presumed, That if the Queen had known the smallness of her Estate, she would
not have made so great a Lease, nor such a Grant of the Wood. The King seized
of Land in his own right, reciting by his Letters Patents, that he has it by
Attainder of J. S. gives the same to another, the Gift is void. The King
licenceth one to appropriate an Advowson, without being informed that the same
is holden in chief, it is void. A license to alien, whereas in truth the Land
is holden in tail, the Reversion or Remainder in the King, is also void; and
here in our case, the Queen has but a particular Estate for the life of
another, and here out of that petty Estate is drawn a Lease for 40 years, where
Lessee for life was 60 years of age at the least, and also a Grant of all the
Trees: If the Queen has a particular Estate, and grants totum Statum suum,
without reciting of such particular Estate, the Grant is void; the Queen has
the Profits of the Lands of one who is Outlawed in a personal Action, and
grants to another the Land it self, it is void, for it is a wrong to a third
person, which the King cannot do. But here, the Special Interest of the Queen
ought to be recited; Now when the Queen being Tenant for the life of another,
makes Leases ut supra, and afterward the Fee comes to the Queen, the Estate
out of which the Leases are derived being determined, the Leases also are
determined, scil the Estate for the life of another by the accession of the
Fee-simple, and the Queen is in by a new right: It was adjudged 29 Eliz. here,
That where the Queen had the Land of a Fugitive for the life of another, and
leased the same to another Quam diu in manibus nostris fore contigerit and
after the Fee-simple of the Fugitive came to the Queen by his Attainder, the
same Lease was void. King E. 6. gave to his Sister Mary Manerium de B. for her
life, secundum tenorem and effectum Testamenti sive ultimae voluntatis of King
Hen. 8. whose Will was, that she should have it as long as she remained
unmarried; she granted a Rentcharge, King E. 6. dyed, by which the Fee
descended to the said Mary, being Queen of England: and afterward she married.
He made it a Quaere, if the Rent be not gone. Dyer 3 and 4 Phil. and Mary 240.
But Bendloes Reports the same Case to be adjudged, That the Rent was gone. Sir
Francis Englefield 1 Eliz. with leave of the Queen went beyond Sea, his License
expired, the Queen directed to him a Privy Seal with her Commandment to return,
which he received, but did not return, but adhered to the Queens Enemies there,
upon which the Queen seized his Lands, and 8 Eliz. granted a Manor parcel
thereof, and all profits thereof, quam diu in manibus nostris fore contigerit,
afterward by Act 14 Eliz. (for there was some doubt if the Queen might make
Leases, grant Copyholds or usual Woodfalls of such Lands, or only take the
ordinary profits thereof, as vesturam terrae) it is explained, that during the
Interest of the Queen, she might do, ut supra, as Tenant for the life of
another might do, upon which a new Seizure was made for the Queen, and a
Steward appointed by the Queens Letters Patents, who held a Court, and took
Surrenders in the hand of the Queen, and granted Admittances, etc. And it was
resolved by the two Chief Justices, That the two Seizures gave not the Queen
any other or better Seisin in the said Manor than she had before, by the first
Seizure at the Common Law, notwithstanding both the said Statutes, and so the
Courts holden by the Queen void, and all Surrenders and Admittances also: And
so it is adjudged 23 Eliz. Dyer 375. upon which it may be concluded, That if by
the said Statutes, or any of them had had a new right, the last Copy had been
good, notwithstanding the Grant of the Manor before: Also for 8 Ass. the King
grants Custodiam terrae and haeredis quam diu in manibus nostris fore
contigerit, the Heir being a Daughter, and after a Son is born, now the Grant
of the King is void; Tenant in tail, the Reversion in the King discontinues,
the Discontinuee is attainted, the King seizes, and leaseth for years, Tenant
in tail is attainted of Treason; now the Queen shall avoid her own Lease. So if
the Disseisor be attainted, upon which the Queen seiseth, and leaseth, and
afterward the Disseisee is attainted: And he cited the Case of the Abbot of
Colchester, 13 Eliz. The Abbot committed Treason, and afterward by the
Statute, or by Surrender, the Abbey came to the Crown, who leased the Land for
years, the Abbot is attainted of the said Treason; now the King shall be seized
by force of the Attainder, and shall avoid his Lease. As to the Leases made to
the Defendant by the Queen, one was made after the Statute of 29 Eliz. and the
same is not saved by the saving there; for the words are, of Estates then in
esse. 1. Such Estate as they had before the making of the Act: As to Leases
made before they are drowned in the Fee-simple, which accrued to the King by
the Attainder etc. and here by this Statute, the Estate of the Queen for the
life of another is not saved by the Statute, and then the Leases derived out of
it are not saved. The Queen is not bound by the said Statute to exhibit any
Conveyance, for she shall not take any Oath, according to the Statute; and if
the Queen be not within the Body of the Act, she is not within the saving. Now
as to the Condition, The Statute of 33 H. 8. gives to the Queen Uses, Rights,
Conditions. It has been Objected, That such Conditions are intended to be
given to the King, which are to be performed on the part of the Donee, Lessee,
Grantee, Covenantee, but not on the part of the Grantor, etc. For it was in the
will of the Grantor if he would perform them or not, and a Will cannot be
transferred over. But as to that it may be answered, That a Will by Parliament
may be transferred over, for Parliamentum omnia potest. It has been Objected.
If that shall be said the Will of Sir Francis. which now is the Will of the
Queen, it shall be a great prejudice to Francis Englefield the Nephew; for now
he shall be doubly bridled by his Uncle, and by the Queen. It has been
Objected, That here is a Conditional Condition, 1. If the Nephew shall be given
to intolerable Vices, and it is not added to enable the Queen to take advantage
of the Condition, that he is otherwise than of good behavior and conversation
but the words of the Proviso clear the matter, 1. Lest he should be given to
intolerable Vices, and not if he be given, etc. So as it is not a Condition to
a Condition, but a Motive to a Condition. And the Statute of 29 Eliz. by which
Sir Francis was attainted, gives to the King all conditions. It has been
objected, that in the said Statute of 29 Eliz. is a saving, by which Leases
made by the Queen are preserved: But if that Proviso be well observed, it does
not extend to our case. 1. That Act extends to make void any Grant, Lease, etc.
made by the Queen after the Treason committed, etc. but that shall be of such
force, as if the said Act had not been made. As to that I say, That this
Statute does not add or detract from such Leases, but leaves them as it found
them; for the Statute gives to the Queen the Condition, which Condition avoids
the said Leases; for it avoids the Estate of the Queen out of which the said
Leases are derived: And although that the Conveyance, as to the benefit of Sir
Francis or his Nephew, be void by the Statute for not Inrollment of them, yet
it is not utterly void as to the Queen also. The Statute of 1 Eliz. Enacts,
That Leases made by Bishops against the Form of the Statute, shall be void: Yet
they shall not be void against the Bishop himself or against the Lessor:
Exception has been taken, for that the tender of the King is not found by
Office: But he needs no Office, for the tender is the Act of the Queen her
self, there she ought not to be informed of it; for to what purpose shall the
Queen be certified of that which she her self has done: The Queen makes a
Lease for years, upon Condition that the Lessee surrender to her the Manor of B
here for the not doing of it, no Office is requisite. Tenant of the King in
Capite aliens by Fine, that needs no Office, for that appears upon Record; so
here. And although the Condition be returned in the Exchequer after the Term;
yet it is well enough, for the Exchequer is never shut, as to take and receive
Money, Certificates made to be Enrolled; although it be shut as to all Judicial
Acts. And although no tender at all be certified, it is not to the purpose, for
the tender makes the Estate void without any other thing: And it is not like to
a Capias ad satisfaciendum, for that is Ita quod Habeas Corpus, etc. therefore
the Arrest is not sufficient by it self; but the same ought to be remembered
with an Ita. quod, etc. But as to that which has been said, That the Queen
shall not avoid her own Lease, the same is not so, nor in case of a common
Person: As if Tenant in tail enfeoffeth his Heir within age, who makes a Lease
for years at his full age, Tenant in tail dies, Now the Issue shall avoid his
own Lease, for he is remitted: A Disseisor levies a Fine to a stranger, the
Disseisee enters upon the Conusee, and enfeoffs the Disseisor, now he shall
avoid his own Fine, a multo fortiori in the Case of the King. Now it is to see.
If the Grant of the Wood by the Queen, being Tenant for the term of another
life, be good, or not. He conceived it was not; for she was deceived in her
Grant, not knowing that she was but a particular Tenant: It was Objected, That
the Queen has property and right in the Trees and Woods, forasmuch as no Waste
or Trespass lies against her if she cast them down: Certainly the Lessee, if
the Trees and Woods be not excepted, has the property in them, but not the
absolute property, for the Writ of Waste shall say, ad exhaered' Q^erentis, for
he cannot cut them, Id enim tantum possumus, quod de jure possumus, perhaps the
Lessee shall have the Wind-falls, because they are severed from the Inheritance
by the act of God, not of the Lessee himself; and see 27 H. 6. Waste 8. and
also in Statham titulo Waste. A. leaseth to B. for life, without impeachment of
Waste, a stranger cuts Trees, and the Lessee brings Trespass, he shall not
recover damages for the value of the Trees; for the property of the Body and
the Tree is in him who has the Reversion, he may give it, by which it
appears, that the Lessee is not to recover, but only for the cropping and the
breaking of his Close, a fortiori in case where the Lease is made without the
clause absque impetitione vasti, as the Case at bar is: And therefore when the
Queen having so feeble an Estate, makes such a Grant, scil. Grants all the
Woods etc. the Grant is void, for she was deceived in her Grant; by which (if
it should be good) she should wrong her Subject: A Grant to the Queen shall
have a reasonable construction* as the Grant of a common Person. A. grants to
the Queen Common in all his Lands, the Queen by that Grant shall not have
Common, but in Lands commonable, not in his Land where his Corn is growing, or
in his Orchard, or Gardens: Tenant for life grants all the Wood upon his Land,
nothing passes but that which he may lawfully grant. So in Cases of Grants of
the King, 22 Ass. 49. the King grants to one bona and catalla tenent' suorum,
fugitivorum and qualitercunque dampnorum; the Grantee shall not have the Goods
and Chattels of one who has killed the Kings Messenger. So in Grants of
Amercements, the Grantee shall not have a Special Amercement etc. So here, the
Grant of all Woods ought to be intended of such Woods (as Underwoods) which the
Queen might lawfully grant without wrong to another. And he said, That when the
Queen has granted the Land and the Woods for 40 years, that Grant cannot be
divided; and the words of the Grant are, That it shall be lawful to cut the
Woods during the space of 43 years: Now forasmuch as the Lease is surrendered ut
supra, the liberty of cutting the Woods is gone also. A man bargains and sells
his Manor with all Woods upon it growing, the Deed is not Enrolled, so as the
Manor does not pass, the Woods shall not pass in gross, for the Grant shall not
be divided. See more after Sect. 276.

Trin. 31 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
CCLIV. Brown and Peter's Case.
PHilip Brown Executor of Eliz. Brown, brought an Action upon the Case against
John Peter, as Executor of W. Brown, and declared, That the said William Brown
was indebted to the said Eliz. in 80 l. Cumque ad specialem instantiam of the
said William Brown, It was agreed, that the said William Brown should retain
the said Sum in his hands until the said Eliz. should come of full age: In
consideration thereof he promised to give her 100 l. It was found for the
Plaintiff, who had Judgment to recover, and now the Defendant brought Error,
and assigned for Error, because the place of the Agreement was not showed, Sed
non allocatur; for that is the Consideration which is not traversable; also it
is not showed certain, that Brown retained the 80 l. for so long time, Sed non
allocatur, for he shows in his Declaration, That the said Sum was in the hands
of the said William Brown, and it shall be intended that so it there continued.

Trin. 31 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
CCLV. Higham and Cooks Case.
EJectione firmae by Higham against Cook, The Plaintiff declared upon a Lease
for years, to have and to hold to him from the Sealing and Delivery of it; and
declared that the Sealing and Delivery was 1 Maij, and the Ejectment the same
day: And this matter was moved in Arrest of Judgment, that the Ejectment could
not be supposed the same day, for the Lease did not begin till the next day
ensuing the Sealing, Ejectment.
etc. But the Exception was not allowed by the Court; for where the Lease is to
begin from the time of the Sealing and Delivery, or by these words for 21 years
next following, the Ejectment may be well supposed to be the same day; for the
beginning of the Lease is presently upon the Sealing and Delivery, and such a
Lease shall end the same time and hour as it began.

CCLVI. Trin. 28. Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
IN an Action upon the Case upon Assumpsit, the Case was; Land was devised to a
Feme-sole for term of her life, and she let the same to the Plaintiff for 5
years, to begin after the death of the said Woman, and afterward by Deed
bearing date 18 October, leased the same Land to the same Plaintiff for 21
years to begin at Michaelmas before, and in pleading, it was showed, That
virtute cujus dimissionis (posterioris) the Plaintiff entered, and fuit possess.
crastino Michaelis. which was before the making of the Lease, and the Plaintiff
in his Declaration declared, That the Defendant in consideration that the
Plaintiff had assigned to him the said Leases, had promised to pay to him 630
l. It was found for the Plaintiff. Cook, For where the Plaintiff in an Action
upon the Case declares upon two Considerations, in such Case although the one
be void, yet if the other be good and sufficient, the Action is maintainable,
but the Damages shall be given without respect had to the Consideration
insufficient, and the Plaintiff was to declare upon both Considerations; for
the Assumpsit upon which the Action is conceived, was in consideration that
both the Leases were assigned to the Defendant, and our Declaration ought to be
according to the Assumpsit, and it was not material, although that one of the
Considerations was utterly void. Another Exception was taken, Because the Lease
is set forth to be made 18 October, and that by virtue thereof the Plaintiff
entered, Cro. Mich. Then the Plaintiff entering Cro. Mich. was a Disseisor, and
then being in by disseisin, he could not assign his Interest to another, and
that appears clearly to the Court upon the whole matter. But Cook said, That
shall not hurt us, for it is but matter of surplusage to say, Virtute cujus,
etc. As 20 H. 6. 15. the Plaintiff in Trespass supposed by his Declaration,
that the Trespass for which the Action was brought, commenced 10 H. 6. with a
Continuando until the day of the Action brought, viz. idem 14 Febr. 17 H. 6.
where the Writ bore date 12 die Octobris, Anno 17 H. 6. And Exception was taken
to the Declaration, because the continuance of the time was not put in
certainty. But the Exception was not allowed, for it is certain enough before
the viz. the day of Writ brought, and so the viz, is void, and all that which
follows upon it. And so here, this Clause Virtute cujus est, totum sequitur est
omnino void, 7 H. 4.44. Br. Action upon the Case 37. The Writ was Quare
Toloniam asportavit, and illud solvere recusavit. Exception was taken to the
repugnancy, for it would not be carried away, if it were not paid before; yet
the Writ was awarded good, and the first word Toloniam asportavit holden void:
So here in the principal Case. As to the other Exception, it is clear, That
here is not any Disseisin upon this Entry of the Plaintiff before the making of
the said Lease; for there was a Communication betwixt the Parties of such a
Lease to be made, or of such an Assignment, and peradventure the Entry was by
assent of the other part, and then no Disseisin. And posito, it should be a
Disseisin, yet the Plaintiff has assigned all the Interest quod ipse tunc
habuit, according to the consideration, and delivered to the Defendant both the
Indentures of Demises, and so he has granted all that which he might grant:
And if it be a void Assignment or not, is not material, for quacunque via data,
the Consideration is good, and then the Assumpsit good also. Egerton Solicitor
contrary: In every Action upon the Case upon Assumpsit, three things ought to
concur, Consideration, Promise, and breath of Promise; and in this Case the
Assignment of the Lease to begin after the death of the Lessor, is void, being
but Tenant for life, and no Consideration upon the confession of the Plaintiff
himself. And upon the second Consideration it appears, the Lessor, viz. the
Wife who held for life, had but a right to the Land demised, for she was
disseised; for he to whom the Land was after let, entered before the Lease was
made; for it does not appear that he entered by force of any agreement made
before the Lease; therefore by his Entry he was a Disseisor. It was also moved,
That here was not any sufficient consideration, for by a bare or naked delivery
Nihil operatur; and here is not any word of Give or Grant. To which it was
answered, That the delivery of the Indenture was not a bare Bailment, but a
Delivery to the use in the Indenture, and so it is pleaded, and therefore
thereby an Interest passed, for such a delivery cannot be countermanded. An
Indenture with an Averment shall never make an Estoppel. Clench Justice, If I
deliver any thing to one for his proper use, an Interest passes; but if it be
to the use of another, no Interest passes: The party may have usum, but not
proprietatem.

CCLVII. Mich. 18 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
Contract.
IF a Contract be made betwixt two here in England, scil. that one of them shall
carry certain Goods of the others to Burdeux in France, and sell them there,
and with the money thereof coming, shall buy other Goods for the use of him who
was the owner of the first Goods, and safely them deliver to him in London: If
now the party sell them in Burdeux, and buyeth others with the moneys thereof,
and brings them into England, and there converts them to his own use; upon this
matter an Action lies at the Common Law for the Contract, and the Conversion
being the cause of the Action, was made in England: But if the Contract only
was in England, and the Conversion beyond the Seas, the Party at his Election
may sue at the Common Law, or in the Court of Admiralty: And if a Merchant here
write to his Factor in France to receive certain Merchandises which he has
sent to him, and to Merchandise with them for his use; if the Factor receives
them, and converts them to his own use, the Father shall be sued in the
Admiralty.

25 Eliz.
CCLVIII. The Earl of Huntington and the Lord Mountjoyes Case.
IT was agreed by the two Lord Chief Justices, 1 And. 308.
upon conference had with the other Justices in the Case between the Earl of
Huntington and the Lord Mountjoy, That where the Lord Mountjoy by Deed indented
and enrolled, bargained and sold the Manor of Camford to Brown in Fee, in which
Indenture a Clause was Proviso semper; and the said Brown covenants and grants
cum and with them the Lord Mountjoy, his Heirs and Assigns, That the said Lord,
his Heirs and Assigns, might dig for Ore in the Wastes of Camford. And also to
dig Turf there to make Allom and Copperice, without any contradiction of Brown,
his Heirs and Assigns; that now here is a new Grant of an Interest to dig, to
the said Lord and his Heirs in the Lands aforesaid, and not a bare Covenant;
and it was holden also, that the said Lord could not divide the Interest
granted to him in form aforesaid, viz. To grant to another to dig one part of
the said Waste, etc. But they were of Opinion; That Brown, his Heirs and
Assigns, notwithstanding the said Grant to the said Lord, Owners of the Soil
there might dig there. It was further moved in this Case, That the said Lord
had demised the said Interest to one Laycott, who assigned it over to A. and B.
and if the said Assignment to two were good or not, was a further question; for
if to two, so he might do to twenty, and so a surcharge might be to the Tenant
of the Soil. And as to that, the said Justices were of Opinion, That the said
Assignment to two was good: But the two Assignees ought not to work severally,
but together, with one Stock, and with such Workmen as belonged to them two.
And Note, it was holden in this Case, That this word (Proviso) being coupled
with other words of Covenant and Grant, did not create a Condition, but should
be of the same nature as other words of Grant.

CCLIX. Pasc. 25 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
IT was found upon a Special Verdict in Trespass, that the place where, etc.
was Copyhold Land, and that the Custom there is, That every Feme covert there
might devise her customary Lands to her Husband, and surrender the same in the
presence of the Reeve, and six other persons; and it was further found, That A.
was seized of certain Copy Land, having Issue B. and C. his Daughters, and
dyed, they both took Husbands, and B. devised her part by her Will to her
Husband in the presence of the Reeve and six other persons, and afterward at
another day she surrendered to the use of her Husband, who was admitted
accordingly: the Wife dyed, the Husband continued the possession, and the
Husband of the other Daughter brought Trespass. Rhodes Sergeant, The Custom is
not good, neither for the Surrender, nor for the Will; for it is not certain
what Estate she might devise by the Custom, and also it is against reason that
a Feme covert surrender to the use of her Husband: And he cited the Case in
Fitz. 13 E. 3. Dum fuit intra Aetatem 3. where Custom is pleaded in the City of
Gloucest. That every person might alien his Land when he knew how to tell 12 d.
and to measure an Ell of Cloth, and that Custom was disallowed for the
incertainty, for he ought to have showed the certainty of the time, scil. at
what age, and the certain number of years. Vide also 19 E. 2. Fitz. Guard. 127.
That an Infant should be out of Ward when he could do as aforesaid. And as to
the Surrender, it is against reason that a Feme covert should give to her
Husband, for the Wife has not any will but the will of her Husband; and the
Statute of Wills utterly excepts Feme coverts as an unreasonable thing to
suffer them to make Devises; and although the Statute does not extend to
Customary Lands, yet the like reason, the like Law. But by Anderson, the Equity
of that Act extends to Copyholds, as also does the Statute of Limitations: And
it was said by some of the Sergeants that because the Husband was admitted,
Trespass did not lie against him for his Entry was continued with a lawful
Ceremony. In this case, it was moved by Anderson, If a Copyholder makes a
Lease for years by word, if the Lessee might maintain Ejectione firmae, and he
conceived not, for that ought to be a Title in facto, and not by conclusion;
for neither the Judge nor the Jury are estopped: And he said, that if the
Tenant at will makes a Lease for years, that it is not a good Lease between the
parties to it, but that the Lessee might well say that he had nothing, etc.
Mead contrary: And Anderson said, The Book of 12 E. 4. 12. is not Law, scil. If
Tenant at will makes a Lease for years it is not Disseisin, but the said Book
is contrary: Also Anderson said, That in the principal Case the Presciption is
not well laid, Quod quaelibet foemina cooperta viro poterit, etc. whereas there
should be also words, scil. Et usae fuerunt, etc. And it was said, That if the
Devise be good, then the Plaintiff and Defendant are Tenants in Common, and the
Action not maintainable.

Pasc. 30 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
CCLX. Jeroms Case.
JErome made an Affray, of which complaint being made to the Mayor, the said
Mayor sent the Defendant, being Constable, to bring the said Jerome to him, by
virtue of which they went to the house of the Plaintiff, and signified to him
the command of the Mayor, and would have brought the Plaintiff to him, and the
Plaintiffs Wife assaulted them, and they gently lay their hands upon the Wife,
which is the said Assault, Battery and Wounding, etc. upon which it was
demurred. Cook for the Plaintiff; Customs.
The Custom is not good nor reasonable, vide Magna Charta 29. Nullus liber homo
capiatur, nec imprisonetur, etc. nisi, etc. per legale judicium parium suorum
vel per legem terrae; Ergo, shall not be taken and imprisoned upon a bare
suggestion. Vide 24 E. 3. Br. Commissions 3. That where a Commission issued to
apprehend all who were notoriously suspected for Felons and Trespassors,
although they were not Indicted, it was holden against Law, and therefore was
revoked. Vide the Statute of 1 E. 3. cap. 9. 25 E. 3. 4. 28 E. 3. 3. Justice of
Peace not by Prescription.
37 E. 3. 18. and 42 E. 3. 33. 2. To be a Justice of Peace does not lie in
Prescription; for no Justice of Peace was before the Statute of 1 E. 3. and the
beginning of them being known, Prescription cannot be. 3. Admit that the Mayor
was a Justice of the Peace, yet he cannot determine any thing out of Sessions.
4. The Prescription is, That the Mayor may send for him, and does not say
within the City; and it shall be an unreasonable Prescription to say that the
Mayor may send for him; for in such case in any place within England may he
send. 5. It is not showed that they had a Corporation which might prescribe. 6.
The Wounding is not answered, for Molliter injicere manus cannot be taken for a
Wounding, nor for an answer to the Battery. Fleetwood Sergeant and Recorder of
London, If the Statute of Magna Charta should be observed no Felon is duly
handled at Newgate; and here we have not pleaded by way of Prescription, but of
Usage. Consuetudo and Usage are all one: And afterward Judgment was given for
the Plaintiff; for the Plea in bar was holden to be naught, because the
Wounding was not answered, and the Custom is too general; and also for the
fourth Exception.

Mich. 32 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
CCLXI. Goram and Fowks Case.
Prohibition.
THe Case was, The Defendant libelled in the Spiritual Court, that whereas he
was Administrator to one A. and was bound in the Spiritual Court to bring in a
true Inventory of all the Goods of the Intestate, that the Plaintiff detained
Jura and Credita, by reason of which he could not put in a true Inventory; and
upon that the Plaintiff prayed a Prohibition, surmising that he himself claimed
Property in the said Goods; and the Ecclesiastical Court would not allow of it;
and the Trial of the said Goods did belong to the Common Law: And a Prohibition
was granted.

Trin. 33 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
CCLXII. Mountjoyes and Andrews Case.
IN Scire Facias upon a Judgment in Debt; The Defendant pleaded, that
heretofore a Fieri Facias at the Suit of the now Plaintiff issued directed to
the Sheriff of Leice^^er, by force of which the said Sheriff took diverse Sheep
of the Defendant, Execution.
and adhuc does detain them: Retorn of Writ.
It was holden by the Court a good Plea* although he does not say that the Writ
was returned; for the Execution is lawful notwithstanding that, and the
Plaintiff has remedy against the Sheriff.

CCLXIII. Vide this Case reported by Cook 1 Part, by the name of Capells Case.
THe Case between Hunt and Gately in the Exchequer Chamber, was now argued by
Fenne, That the Rent granted by him in the Remainder upon an Estate tail is
good, and shall bind the Land after the Estate tail determined, notwithstanding
the common Recovery suffered by the Tenant in tail in possession. Before the
Statute of Westminster. 2. of Donis Condic, etc. no Remainder could be limited upon
an Estate tail, for that which remained in the Donor was but a possibility, and
therefore then a Formedon in Remainder did not lie: But the said Statute which
provided a Formedon in the Descender, provided also by Equity a Formedon in the
Remainder; for a Formedon in the Reverter, as appears by the said Statute,
was in use in Cancellaria. And now here in our case is a Remainder lawfully
vested in the Grantor, which he may dispose of as he sees good; and therefore
when he grants a Rentcharge out of it, the same is a thing vested in the
Grantee, and by no subsequent act can be divested, and although the Estate
which was charged be now charged by the Recovery, yet it is the same Land which
was charged, and therefore the charge shall continue; as if a gift in tail be
rendering Rent, and the Donee levieth a Fine, yet the Rent remains, and the
Donor shall distrain. 48 E. 3. 3, 9. So here, If after the grant of this Rent,
Tenant in tail in possession levies a Fine, by which the Remainder which was
charged is discontinued, and afterward the Conusor dies without Issue, the
Grantee shall distrain upon such possession which passed by the Fine. As if A.
lease to B. for life, and afterward grants a Rent out of the same Land to C.
B. aliens in Fee and dies, although that A. cannot re-enter, but suffers the
said torcious Estate, gained de novo by wrong, to continue; yet B upon such
possession shall distrain for the Rent, for it is the same Land which was
charged; and by Law a thing in abeyance may be charged: As if a Parson grant a
Rentcharge to begin after his death, and the Patron and Ordinary confirm it,
it shall bind, although the Grant does not take effect in the life of the
Grantor, but when the Freehold is in abeyance: So if the Patron and Ordinary in
the time of Vacation grant a Rentcharge out of the Parsonage, the same is
good, and shall bind the Successor, and yet at the time of the Grant the
Freehold of the thing granted is in abeyance. Vide 5 E. 6. Dyer 69. That a Rent
which is not in esse shall be bound by a Judgment. 22 E. 3. 19. 5 E. 3. Fitz.
Dower 343. By Bracton, Jus, concerning a real thing, is threefold: 1. Jus
terrae, scil. the Ownership of the Land. 2. Jus in terra, as a Rent, Common,
etc. 3. Jus ad terram, scil. Right permanent. And by this Common Recovery in
our case Jus terrae shall be bound, but not Jus in terra: And he said, That if
Land be given to A. in tail, the Remainder to the Kings Villain in Fee, and
before any claim by the King, A. suffers a common Recovery and dies without
Issue, this Recovery shall not bind the King. And as to the Case of 26 H. 8. 2.
which has been Objected against the falsifying of the Recovery, where a Parson
made a Lease for years, and afterward in a Quare Impedit brought against him
and the Patron, they pleaded faintly, to the intent to make the Lessee lose his
Term, now such a Lessee cannot falsify; in such case the Parson by another way
might have defeated the Lease as by Resignation; but in our case the Grantor of
this Rent by no way might defeat his Grant: And he said, a common recovery did
not bind Dower, therefore nor this rent. And if Tenant in tail in possession
grants such a rent, and after suffers a common recovery, the rent shall stand,
why not also in the case of a remainder; for upon them both, as well the
remainder, as the possession, the recovery operatur: And recoveries shall
always bind the possession, and no farther, and shall not disprove the right,
but the possession. And the recovery by it self does not bind the possession,
but in respect of the Voucher, without which no recovery shall bar, and that in
respect of the recompense which the Law presumes, etc. which recompense cannot
extend to this Rentcharge, and then there is no reason that he to whom it was
granted should be prejudiced by this recovery; and always in case of recompense
the Law is very precise. As if I grant unto you an Annuity of 30 l. per Annum
until you be presented to a competent Benefice, a litigious Benefice is not a
recompense intended, nor shall determine the Annuity, nor a Benefice of 15 l.
If two make an exchange for their Lives, and one of them dies, the exchange is
not determined but the Heir of him who dies shall enter and retain the Land as
long as the other shall live. Ad quod Manwod Chief Baron subsidebat: And there
is a great difference between a Lease for years and a Rentcharge; for at the
Common Law upon such Recovery the Lessee for years was bound, contrary of a
Rentcharge; for it was unreasonable that a thing not demanded by the recovery
should be bound by it, especially because that the Land rendered in value shall
not be charged with the rent. Walmesley Sergeant contrary: A remainder upon an
Estate tail is debile fundamentum, and cannot uphold with assurance a
Rentcharge against a common recovery; and it cannot be found in any Book but
in 5 E. 4. 2. That a remainder upon an Estate-tail expectant may be charged,
for an Estate-tail is in Law presumed to be perpetual, and therefore, what
Lands are entailed by Fee, the words of the Fine are, Sibi and haeredibus de
Corpore suo exeuntibus imperpetuum. And it is the common learning in our Books
that every Estate of Inheritance, be it Fee-simple or Fee-tail, shall be
intended to be continued till the contrary be showed. And the Authority which
the Owner of a Remainder has upon it is but conditional; scil If the Tenant in
tail in possession does not countermand it by a recovery, etc. And also the
possession upon which the Avowry is made, is not the same possession which was
charged, but is a Foreign possession gained by the recovery, and therefore,
before the proper possession be recontinued, there can be no Distress nor
Avowry, for the Land is not reduced in the privity of Estate which was charged;
and if he in Reversion upon such Estate tail would grant his reversion rendering
rent, and afterward the Tenant in tail in possession suffers a common
recovery, and dies without Issue; Now the reversion being destroyed, the rent
is gone. And he put this Case: Tenant in tail grants a Rentcharge to begin
after his death without Issue, and afterward suffers a common recovery, and
dies without Issue, it is a good rent, and shall bind the Recoveror etc. At
another day in the Exchequer Chamber, the Case was argued again by Snagg
Sergeant for the Defendant; and he was very long in proving that a remainder
might be charged, as in this case: But the Court discharged him of that, and
directed him to argue to this Point, If this recovery did discharge the rent,
etc. wherefore he argued, That these common recoveries are false and feigned
things, false in the Title, and covenous in the Proceedings, and all in
prejudice of a third person. And Vide 14 H. 8.3. such common recoveries are
holden fraudulent, and therefore by fraud and covin being so odious in our Law,
we ought not to give and allow unto them so much force as is due to unfeigned
recoveries; for these common recoveries do not go in disaffirmance of the
former possession, nor in any eviction of it, but for the most part in
affirmance; and the Estate gained by this recovery is under the Estate of him
against whom the recovery was had, and he is in by him; for common Recoveries
are no other but common Assurances: And in our Case the imagined Recompense
cannot come to him who has by the recovery lost his rent, and therefore it is
not reason that the recovery should bind as to this rent. Vide 12 E. 4. 19, 20.
Tenant in tail discontinueth, and takes back an Estate to him in Fee, and
afterward a common recovery is had against him, it shall not bind the tail,
for the presumed recompense shall go to the Estate which he has lost, scil.
the Estate in Fee, and not to the Estate tail, whereof at the time of the
recovery he was seized: So in our Case, the Land which by Fiction of Law is to
be yielded in value upon this Voucher, shall not extend to the benefit or
recompense of the Grantee of the Rentcharge, but only to H. who has lost his
remainder, and his new remainder, which comes in lieu of the former, shall not
be charged with this rent: And therefore the remainder, which by this recovery
is drawn out of H. transit cum suo onere, and cum acciderit shall answer, and
shall yield the rent according to the purport of the Grant. As 33 H. 6. 4 and
5. two Ioyntenants are, The one grants a Rentcharge, and afterward releases
to his Companion, he shall hold the Land charged, notwithstanding that he be
now fully in by the Feoffor. And if there be Lord and Tenant, and the Tenant
grants a Rentcharge in Fee, and dies without Heir, so as the Land goes to the
Lord in point of Escheat, yet the Lord shall hold the Land charged. And as to
the Statute of Fraudulent Conveyances, 27 Eliz. cap. 4. the same cannot extend
to this Grant; for here, this Grant is upon consideration of Nature made to his
own Son for his advancement. Popham Attorney General to the contrary: And that
neither the Grantee of this Rent, nor he who makes Conusans in his right shall
falsify this recovery. And he put a difference where the party who leaseth or
charge a remainder, is bound by the recovery voluntarily, and where
involuntarily; for where the recovery is suffered voluntarily, there the
Grantee or Lessee shall not be bound by that recovery, but they shall falsify:
But where as our Case is, there the Party who charge or leaseth is bound
involuntarily by such recovery, there all Interests are bound, and the charge
is subject to the same mischief as the remainder it self, out of which it is
issuing, Vide 7 H. 7. 12. He in the remainder in Fee shall not satisfy a
recovery had against the Tenant for life, but he is put to his Writ of Entry,
ad terminum qui praeteriit, in which he shall falsify, and not by Entry, much
less he in the remainder upon an Estate tail shall not falsify; and falsifier
lies properly where the Party who grants or leaseth against his Grant or Lease,
practices by such recovery to avoid or defeat his own Estate, and by
consequence the Interest of his Grantee or Lessee: But in our Case there is not
any such matter; for the Grantor H. was not party or privy to this recovery,
nor Tenant, nor Vouchee, and therefore no Covin, and then no Voucher; and all
the Cases in our Law of falsifying of recoveries are upon such matter. And he
put the Case of 19 E. 2. Fitz. Title Assise 82. where the Conusee of a Statute
Merchant, having sued Execution, one who had no right impleaded the Conusor,
and by Covin recovered against him, and by Execution upon that recovery ousted
the Conusee, it was holden he should have an Assise and falsify; for here he
who party to the recovery: Donee in tail, the remainder over in Fee upon
condition suffers a common recovery, the Condition is gone. And as to the
Statute of 21 H. 8. cap. 15. Falsifying is not given in our Case by the said
Statute, the words of which are, Where diverse Men have leased their Land to
Farm, and afterward, after such Leases made, the Lessors, their Heirs and
Assigns have suffered Recoveries: Within which words our Case is not; for he
against whom the recovery was had was not our Grantor, his Heir or Assign: So
if there be Tenant in tail, the remainder over to another in Fee, he in the
remainder makes a Lease for years, and afterward Tenant in tail in possession
suffers a common recovery, the Lessee shall not falsify; for that Lease was
not made by him against whom the recovery was had. And it is clear, that by the
Common Law, the Grantee of a Rentcharge cannot falsify against the Grantor,
his Heirs or Assigns: But it was a doubt as it appears. 7 H. 7.11. If upon a
faint pleader, the Lessee for years might be received, for the Statute of
Gloucester extends but to default or re-disseisin; but now by the Statute of 21
H. 8. cap. 11. in three Cases, Default, Reddition, and Faint pleading, such
Resceipt lies, which proves that in case of rent, as the Statute of 11 H. 8.
has ordained in case of a Lease for years, where the Lessor, his Heirs or
Assigns, have suffered the recovery and not otherwise. And afterward he argued
very much upon the reputation and dignity of common Recoveries, that they are
the strongest and most effectual Assurances in the Law, and therefore they
ought to be countenanced rather by the Judges, than in any part diminished or
disabled, and we ought to consider of them Non ex rigore juris, rigida
disquisitione, but according to the common use and practice, what is the ground
and foundation of these Recoveries: And so Judges have used heretofore to
examine Matters, which peradventure, according to the strict Rules of the
Common Law, drew them away. But they perceiving that a dangerous Consequence
thereby would follow to an infinite number of the Kings Subjects the Law having
been otherwise practiced before have framed their Judgments, not according to
the exact Rules of Law, but to avoid the Inconvenience aforesaid according to
the common and received practice, etc. Nam communis Error facit jus; and to
that purpose he cited a Case very lately adjudged in B.R. viz. A Writ of Error
was brought in B. R. upon a Judgment given in Wales, and the Error was in this,
That the Writ was returnable co^am Justiciariis Domini Regis Comitatus, etc.
where it should have been coram Justiciariis Magnae Sessionis Dominae Reginae,
etc and such are the words of the Statute of 34 H. 8. cap 26. the which
Sessions shall be called the Kings great Sessions in Wales; and notwithstanding
that the Justices in strict consideration of the Law thought the same to be
Error (for the said Statute had given to the said Court such name; yet because
it was well known to the Justices, That that was the common course in the said
Court ever after the erection thereof; And also, if the said Judgment should be
reversed, for that cause many Judgments should be also reversed, which should
be a great disquietness and vexation to the whole Country there, they in their
discretion thought it convenient to qualify the Law in that point, and so to
avoid the said Inconvenience, affirmed the said Judgment: So in the case at
Bar, If this Rentcharge should stand against the said recovery, no
inconvenience should be so firm, but it should be impeached, no Title so clear,
but should be encumbered, and therefore for the common repulse of many the
strict rules of the Law ought to yield to common practice for the avoiding of a
common inconvenience; it has been holden for Law when Tenant in tail makes a
feoffment in fee, the Feoffee is impleaded, and voucheth the Tenant in tail,
now forasmuch as he comes in as Vouchee, it is now said that he comes in of
all his estates, I do not see any reason for that, but common allowance,
practice, and experience, etc. It was adjourned, etc.

Mich. 27 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
CCLXIV. Baxter and Bartlets Case.
IN Assise of Freshforce by Baxter against Bartlet upon Null tort, Null
Disseisin pleaded, it was found for the Plaintiff who had Judgment; upon which
the Tenant brought Error, for that the Assize have generally found the
Disseisin, but have not enquired of the force: And after many motions the
Judgment was affirmed.

CCLXV. Sir Henry Gilfords Case.
IT was found upon a Special Verdict, That Henry Gilford Citizen and Freeman of
London, 7 Feb. 6 E. 2. seized of a Capital Message, Devised the same by these
words: Lego, and volo, Quod omnes Domus and reddit' quae habeo in Villa de
London, ordinentur and assignentur per Executores meos ad sustentationem trium
Capellanorum qui pro vita celebrabunt in Ecclesia Sancti Pauli, London: Et ad
hoc faciend' Do eis plenam potestatem; and made his Executors William Staunton
and others, and dyed, the Will was Proved and Enrolled according to the Custom.
Afterward the Executors by their Deed bearing date 7 E. 2 granted and assigned
the said Capital Message, and his other Tenements in London to the Dean and
Chapter of Paul's in London, and their Successors, Habend' and tenend' in forma
sequenti. Haec est finalis Concordia, etc. That the Dean and Chapter shall have
the said Lands for ever, to find yearly a competent Sustenance of 10 Marks to a
Priest to celebrate Mass for the said Henry Gilford, and all Souls, and that
the said Priest at all hours of Divine obsequies should give his attendance in
the said Church and faithfully do his Office to say Mass and Prayers according
to the Degrees and Customs of the said Church, and that the Dean and Chapter
should find Bread and Wine, and Massing-cloaths, and Torch-light, and granted
the residue of the profits of the Lands to celebrate an yearly Obit, and for
the perpetual security of the said Chauntry, the said Executors granted to the
Mayor and Commonalty of London 20 s yearly rent for ever: Ita quod, the Mayor
and Chamberlain for the time being presented a meet and convenient Chaplain to
the said Chauntry, to the said Dean and Chapter, within 15 days after the
Avoidance, the which Chaplain the Dean and Chap^er are bound to admit. And the
form of the said Conveyance was such; We the Executors H. G. do grant and
assign to the Dean and Chapter of Paul's all the Lands, Tenements, and Rents
aforesaid, to have and to hold to them and their Successors for the
sustentation of a Chaplain perpetual, and his Clark for the said H. G. and all
Souls, receiving from the said Dean and Chapter 10 Marks for the celebrating of
the said Obit of the said H. G. And that the Grant and Assignment of the said
20 s. to the Commonalty in the relief of the said Chauntry, is such, scil. To
have and receive of one Shop in Cheap maintenance of the said Chauntry
aforesaid: And that the said Dean and Chapter oblige themselves and their
Successors, and the Church, to pay the same to the said Priest and Clark and
that it shall be lawful for the Mayor and Commonalty aforesaid to distrain for
the said Rents: By virtue of which Will and Indenture the Dean and Chapter
enter, and were thereof seized in their demesne, etc. and that at all times
after they had taken the profits thereof until 2 E. 6. and that the Dean and
Chapter of the profits of the premises had yearly paid 10 Marks for the stipend
of the said Priest. And further, the 27 July 16 H. 8. the Dean and Chapter
demised the same to F. Cole for 40 years; and that afterward 15 Maij 36 H. 8.
the said Dean and Chapter leased the same to Nicholas Wilford for 50 years
rendering 9 l. Rent with Clause of Distress if the Rent was behind by half a
year, being demanded the Lease should be void, which N. W. 1 E. 6. devised the
same to his Wife who devised the same to Tho. Wilford the Defendant: And
further found, That as it appeared by an Exemplification out of the Exchequer,
That it was a Chauntry of H. G. and that Tho. was then a Chauntry Priest there,
and that the said Chauntry, with all the Profits and Obits were 6 l. 13 s. 4 d.
the tenth of which is a Mark, which was payable to the King 26 H. 8 And that by
another Exemplification in 2 E. 6. it appeared that the Dean and Chapter of
Paul's certified to the Commissioners of the said King, Cantaria H. G. A. and B.
Executores Testamenti H. Gilford by force of the said Will 7 E 2. granted and
assigned to the Dean and Chapter aforesaid, and their Successors, the said
Lands and Tenements, to the intent that they should maintain for ever a
Chaplain to pray for the Soul of the said H. G. and all Souls: And the
Incumbent of the said Chauntry is one G. and that the said Executors granted to
the Mayor and Commonalty of London the Rent of 20 s. out of a Shop in Cheap,
with the Patronage of the said Chauntry, to the intent that they should
maintain the Chauntry accordingly; and recited all the said Lands and Rents
assigned, and that the Rent of them was 14 l. 1 s. (the Salary of the Priest, 6
l. 13 s. 4 d. for Bread and Wine 3 s. 4 d. the Chamberlain of London 20 s.
being deducted) and so there remains 4 l. 3 s 4 d. And that the said Chaplain
received above his Wages yearly by reason of the said Obit, other Profits, as
Procession pence, and Feeding days 33 s. 4 d. And found further, the Act of 1
E. 6. and further said, That the Church of St. Paul at the time of the said act
was a Cathedral Church, and the Fee of the Bishop of London, and that the
profits and rents devised and ordained to the said Dean and Chapter were in the
said Certificate of 2 E. 6. and that the said Lands, at the time of the making
of the said Act, and for five years before, were not in the actual possession
of the said King H. 8 nor E. 6. and that by force of the Statute of 1 E. 6. the
said Lands came to the possession of the said King as Chauntry Land, and that
the said King granted it to Tho. Butcher in Fee, who bargained and sold the
same to Dobson, who thereof enfeoffed Thoragill, upon whom the said Nicholas
Wilford entered, claiming his Lease: And further found, That 45 s. parcel of the
said rent of 9 l. due at the Feast of St. John Baptist 11 Eliz. for the said
Capital Message was arrear by half a year after the said Feast, and was
lawfully demanded by the said Rich. Thoragill, and for not payment he
re-entred, and let the same to Tho. Buttell, etc. Bell. The Executors by this
Devise have not a bare authority, but an interest; for if one seized of Lands
in Fee devises. That his Executors grant a Rentcharge to one in Fee out of
his said Lands, by that Devise the Executors have a Fee-simple in the Land,
otherwise they could not make such a Grant: So here in the Case in question:
and also by the same reason the Executors have a Fee-simple in the Land, for
otherwise they could not grant a Rent in Fee, nor the Land to the Dean and
Chapter in Fee, by which the Chaplain in perpetuity ought to be found: And
although but one Chauntry was erected where three were intended, but the Land
devised was not sufficient for all three, so that now by the erecting of one
Chauntry only, the Executors performed the trust as near to the intent of the
Devisor as it could be, and as the Land devised might extend unto; it is not
material, if here be a Condition, or a Confidence in the words of the Grant to
the Dean and Chapter ad inveniendum, etc. for if it be a Condition, and broken,
no advantage shall be taken of it, for it is out of the Statute; and if it be a
Confidence, then it is performed as near the intent of the Devisor as it might
be, and the Condition being performed, although not exactly, yet so near as it
may be, it is well enough performed: As a Feoffment upon Condition, that the
Feoffee shall make a Gift in tail to Husband and Wife, and the Heirs of the
Body of the Husband, the Husband dies, now the Gift cannot be modo and forma,
and therefore if it be, it may be, scil. as near the intent of the parties as
it may be, it is good; and therefore if the Land be given to the wife for life
without impeachment of waste, the remainder over, it is sufficient in case of a
Trust and Confidence. 1. It was moved, If here be any Chauntry in the Case: And
a Chauntry is nothing else but a Sustentation for a Priest that chaunts in a
place certain for the Souls of the dead: And Chauntries are in two sorts; the
one incorporated, as by the King by his Letters Patents; the other not
incorporated, as our case is: And truly the greatest number of Chauntries were
not corporal, but were Chauntries but in reputation, and not Revera; but yet
such Chauntries in reputation are within the Statute, which see by the words of
it, accepted, taken or reputed, as Part or Member of any Chauntry. It has been
Objected, That nothing passes to the King by that Statute, but that which is
parcel or belonging to the Chauntry but this Land is not parcel nor belonging
to any Chauntry, for all the Land is in the Dean and Chapter. As to that, we
ought to have regard unto the intent of the Devisor, which was to make the Land
a Chauntry: And so in the time of Hen. 8. it was returned in the Exchequer for
the First Fruits of the Chauntry of Hen. Gilford, and we ought not to respect
the Conveyance it self, which was made by the Executors to the Dean and
Chapter, but also the disposition of the Devisor, so as both ought to be put
together, if they be not contrary one to the other; and if they be, then the
last shall be taken. And when the intent of the Devisor may stand with the act
of the Executors, to construe, That the Land shall make the Chauntry according
to the intent of the Devisor; for the Executors have given all the Land to the
Dean and Chapter to find a Priest, and things belonging to a Chauntry; and the
Executors have given the said Land to the said intent, and the assignment of
the special portion out of it, is but a showing how the profits of the Lands
shall be bestowed: For I conceive, That the Land at the time of the disposition
aforesaid, was not of any better value, than it was appointed to be employed as
aforesaid; and if the Dean and Chapter by their industry have made and improved
it to a greater value, they shall take advantage thereof till it be given to
the King by the Statute, and it shall not be said properly a Rent, but rather a
portion of the profits, etc. and therefore the Land shall be said the Chauntry,
and not the Sum; and here the intent of the Statute extends to the intent of
the Founder: So that if the intent of the Founder was to give the Land to
Superstitious Uses, the same is within the Statute: If Cestuy que use wills
that his Feoffees have the profits of his Lands ut supra, to the Sustentation
of a Chauntry Priest, and the Feoffees employ but 20 l. per Annum, whereas the
Land is of the value of 100 l. per Annum, by this Statute the King shall have
all; for the intent of the Founder was, That all should be employed: And so
here; for upon the Matter, the Dean and Chapter are but as Feoffees; and see
that this Statute of Chauntries makes a great difference between Obits and
Lights, and Chauntries; for in the Case of Obits and Lights, the King shall not
have but that which was employed. Whetstones Case was, That Whetstone seized of
the Manor of Cock, made a Feoffment thereof to certain Feoffees to find two
Obits in such a Chapel, and with the residue of the profits to maintain the
Chapel; and Judgment was given for the Queen. Here the Condition knit to the
Reversion upon a Lease made by the Dean and Chapter to Nicholas Wilford passes
to the King by the Act of Parliament: for a Condition is an Hereditament, and
when the King grants over the reversion to Butcher, the Condition also passes
by 32 H. 8. Bromley Solicitor, The Statute extends to Chauntries in existence
only, and not to Chauntries in reputation. Chauntry has diverse significations
in Law; 1. For the Service which the Chauntry Priest is to do, as cessavit de
Cantaria. 2 Sometimes for the Advowson of the Chauntry, scil. Quod permittat
praesentare ad Cantariam. 3. Sometimes for the Body of the Chauntry, scil. the
Land of which it is endowed, and in that sense it is taken by the Statute. I
will agree, if the same had been an ancient Chauntry time out of mind etc. and
the Incumbents thereof had taken the profits, and made Leases of it, that then
it should be a Chaunt^y within this Statute, for it might be corporated by
prescription: But the Chauntry here in question is not a Chauntry by
prescription, for the beginning of it is known, so it is a Chauntry in
reputation only and not in facto. And he said, That in that case the rent
limited to the sustentation of the Priest shall go to the King and not to the
Land for the Land was not given for the sustentation of a Priest, but the rent
only; so as the Land was not immediately employed for the finding of the
Priest: And he resembled this case to the case lately in question upon the
Statute of 31 H. 8. An Abbot was seized of a great Wood, which was never
employed in kind to the use of the House, being seven Miles distant from the
House, but was never in Lease, but was yearly sold by parcels, and the Woodward
rendered an Account of the same to the Auditor: And the Opinion was, That a
Lease for years made of it within a year before the Dissolution, was not within
the said Statute, for it was not immediately employed for Hospitality. But see
the same reported by the Lord Dyer to the contrary, 3 and 4 Eliz. 207. that
such a Demise was void although that the Wood was not immediately employed,
etc. And see also the words of the Statute. scil. That the Land shall be in the
actual Possession of the King in as ample manner as the Priest had it, and the
Priest had nothing in the Land but only in the Rent: It was adjorned to be
further argued, etc.

Temps Roign Eliz.
CCLXVI. Harveys Case.
HArvey seized of a Manor, made a Feoffment thereof to diverse persons to the
use of himself for life, and after to the use of his Son and the Heirs Males of
his Body, and if the said Son, or any of the Heirs males of his Body
discontinue or alien (otherwise than for 21 years, or three lives) that then
his Feoffees should be seized to the use of Nic. Harvey his Brother in Fee: the
Feoffor dyed, the Son made a Lease for 21 years and afterward discontinued
against the Proviso, if that lease should bind Nic. Harvey who came in by the
latter use, etc. Dyer, It is hard to avoid the lease, for at the time of the
making of it, the lessor had a good interest and authority to make the lease,
and the act which impeacheth the Estate of the lessor commenceth after the
lease by the discontinuance, and therefore shall not avoid the lease. Manwood,
The second use does determine the first use, and all Estates derived out of it.
Mounson contr', For here this word ( Otherwise than for 21 years, etc) so as
such a lease is excepted: As if a man man makes a Feoffment in Fee to the use
of J. S. and his Heirs, until J. D. shall pay to him 20 l. and then to the use
of J. D. and his Heirs, here if J. S. makes a a lease for years, and afterward
the Moneys are paid to J. D. now J. D. shall hold the Land discharged of the
lease, for there is no word (Otherwise) etc. for these words (Otherwise)
qualify the second use. Dyer, The word (Otherwise) amounts to an Exception.
Manwood doubted of it, and moved and demanded if the wife of the Cestuy que use
should have Dower or not. Barham conceived that she should, etc.

CCLXVII. Mich. 31 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
TEnant in Socage made a lease for four years, and dyed, his Heir within age of
8 years, the Mother being Guardian in Socage, leased by Indenture to the same
lessee for 14 years; It was holden, that in this Case the first lease is
surrendered, but otherwise it is of a lease made by Guardian in Nurture.

CCLXVIII. Mich. 29 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
IN Debt it was found for the Plaintiff 20 Eliz. and 21 Eliz. the Plaintiff
released to the Defendant, and the continuance was made until this Term, scil.
Mich 29 Eliz. per Curiam advisare vult: And now the Plaintiff against his own
Release prayed, and had Judgment, A Release pleaded after Judgment and Verdict.
without any knowledge to the Defendant, and Process of Execution issued; and
now Walter, a Clerk of the Court, on the behalf of the Defendant showed the
Release to the Court and also the whole special matter, and prayed the Release
of the Court against this practice. Anderson presently granted a Supersedeas:
But afterward, before the Process issued forth, he and the other Justices were
of Opinion, That the Defendant could not plead the said Release, nor any
further matter after Verdict, and demanded the question of Nelson chief
Prothonatory who advertised the Court, That he could show a President where an
Arbitrament had been pleaded after a Verdict, and Issue joined upon it, and
that was 100 years since: Quod mirum videbatur Curiae hic: Audita Querela
pleaded.
And afterward the Court said to Walter, Sue your Audita Querela, and upon
that you shall have a Supersedeas.

Mich. 29 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
CCLXIX. Sir Richard Lewknors Case.
Post 225.
SIr Richard Lewknor seized of Willingford Park, leased the same for years, and
dyed the Lessee assigned over his term, excepting the Woods and Underwoods
standing growing, and being in and upon the premises, the Assignee committed
Waste, the term expired, the daughters and heir of Sir Rich. and the husband of
the third daughter Coparceners, being dead, as tenant by the Courtesy, brought
an Action of Waste against the Assignee, and the opinion of the Court was, that
the husband ought not to join in that Action, for he can recover nothing, for
damages he cannot have, for the waste was not done to his disinheresin, and the
Land he cannot have, because the term is expired. Snag Sergeant, I conceive
that the exception in the Assignment is good; for an Exception of Trees by the
Lessor himself in his Lease is good, and by reason thereof the Lessee shall not
have Fire-bote, Hey-bote, etc. which otherwise he should have, and the property
of the Trees is in the Lessor, and also the Soil, 14 H 8. 1 and 2. 28 H. 8.
Dyer 19 and vide 46 E. 3. 22 a Lease for years was made with such Exception,
and the Lessor brought an Action for the Trees cut. Q^are clausum tregit, and
that proves that the Soil also is excepted and then the Action of Waste lies
against the Lessee, who has excepted to himself the Wood and the Soil, and not
against his Assignee. Walmsley Sergeant to the contrary. And he said, where
Land is demised the absolute property of the great Trees is in the Lessor, and
the Lessee has in such case, a qualified property: And he cited 2 H. 7. 14.
the Lessor commands the Lessee to dig gravel in the Land demised, or licenseth
him so to do, such commandment or license is not good for the lessor has
nothing to do with the Gravel, nor has any property in it, but such license to
cut Trees had been good; and Vide 10 H. 7.2 and 3. Waste is assigned in the
breaking de uno muro lapideo; the Defendant pleaded the license of the
Plaintiff to break it, and upon that they were at Issue: And he said, If the
lessor cutteth trees, upon which the lessee brings an Action of Trespass he
shall not recover damages according to the value of the trees cut down; but for
the Trespass to the Soil, and for the loss of the Shadow, and the Acorns, etc.
and if the lessee cutteth down trees, the lessor cannot take them, because he
has other remedy. Where a reversion is granted to A. and B. and to the Heirs
of B. Waste is done. A. and B bring an Action of Waste, B. shall recover all
the damages, and A. nothing; which proves that all the Interest in the Land
demised is in B and not in A. therefore here in the principal Case the
Exception is void, for that which the Law allows to the former, is only
House-bote, Hedge-bote, Plough-bote, Fire-bote: And he said that the lessee
fells the trees and the vendee cuts them down, that waste lies against the
lessee, which proves that in that case the Soil does not pass with the trees,
by the exception of the trees, the Soil is also excepted as a servant to the
trees, viz. to nourish the trees; and if he who excepts the trees cuts them
down, or roots them up, the lessee shall have the Soil. And he said, that for
the property that the lessor has in the trees, if he cuts them down, the rent
shall not be apportioned: And if the lessor grants the trees to one, and his
heirs, there shall be no Attornment, which had been requisite if the Soil had
passed. At another day it was argued by Shuttleworth Sergeant, and exception
taken, because it is too general, scil. Quod fecit vastum in terris quas Sir R.
Lewknor pater duarum querentium cujus Haeredes ipsae sunt praefato, Ford
dimisit, etc. And the Plaintiffs counted the Reversion was entailed by Act of
Parliament to the said Sir R. Lewknor; and so the Writ ought to be special,
scil. Cujus Haeredes de corpore ipsae sunt; for although there be not any such
form in the Register, yet that is to no purpose; for in novo casu novum est
remedium apponendum. And he compared it to the Case in F. N. B. 57. where Land
is given to husband and wife, and the heirs of the body of the wife, the wife
dies, the husband commits waste, the Writ shall be, Idem A. de domibus in B.
quas tenet ad vitam suam ex dimissione quam inde fecit praefato A. and M.
quondam uxori ejus, and haeredibus de corpore ipsius M. matris dicti R. cujus
haeres ipse est exeuntibus. And Vide 26 H. 8. 6. Cestuy que use leaseth for
years, the lessee commits waste, the Feoffees bring an Action of waste, the
Writ contains the special matter, although there was not any such Writ in the
Register. Fenner and Walmsley contrary; for there is not any such form in the
Register, Cujus haeredes de corpore, etc. and we are not to devise a new form
in this case, but it is sufficient to show the special matter in the Count;
also the words in the Writ are true, for the Plaintiffs are Heirs to Sir R.
Lewknor. and the Count is well, pursuant and agreeing to the Writ; for they are
Heirs, although they are but Heirs special of his Body. And the Court awarded
the Writ good, and said that the case is not like the case in Fitz. N. B. 57.
nor to 26 H 8. before cited; for in the first case the Plaintiffs cannot show
of whose Demise the Tenant holds, unless that he also show the special
Conveyance, scil. That the Land was given to the Husband and Wife, and to the
Heirs of the Body of the Wife, for always the Demise to the Tenant ought to be
showed certain which cannot be in both these cases if not by disclosing also
the Title to the Inheritance, and the Estate in it. Another Exception was taken
to the Count, That where the two Defendants were Tenants in Common of the said
Lands demised, the Writ is tenuerunt, which is intended a Ioynt-tenure. But
this Exception was not allowed: And Vide 44 E. 3. in Waste the Plaintiff
counted upon diverse Leases, and Fitz. N. B. 60. F. and the Writ shall suppose
one Tenet, and not diverse Tenets. Another Exception was taken to the Writ
because the two Coparceners, and the Heir of the third joined in the Writ,
whereas the Husband of the third Sister being Tenant by the Courtesy, was
alive. Vide 22 H. 6 21, 22. But that Exception for the Tenant by the Courtesy
joins to no purpose; for he is not to have Damages, because the Waste was not
to his disinheresin, and the Land he shall not recover against the Defendant
for the Term is not determined; and such was the Opinion of the Court. As to
the matter in ^aw, Shuttleworth said, That the Action of Waste ought to be
brought against the Lessee himself, and not against the Assignee for when he
grants over his Term, excepting the Trees, it is a good Exception; for when the
Land upon which the Trees grow is leased to another, the Trees pass by the
Lease as well as the Land, and the property of them is in the Lessee during the
Term; by which when he grants his Land, he may well except them, as the first
Lessor might have done; and if the Lessee for years cutteth down the Trees, the
Lessor cannot take them for that he has other sufficient remedy, scil an
Action of Waste. Fenner and Walmsley contrary: And they conceived that the
Lessee had but a special Property in the Trees, scil. for Fire-bote, Plough
bote, House-bote, etc. But if he demiseth the Land, or grants his Interest in
it, he cannot except the Trees, nor his special Property in them no more than
he who has Common appendant may grant the Land, excepting the Common: And in
such case, the general Property in the Trees remains in the Lessor, as parcel
of his Inheritance. And this appears by many cases: 27 H. 8. 13. Lessee for
life and he in the remainder join in a lease for life, the Lessee commits
Waste, the Tenant for life, and he in the remainder, join in an Action of
Waste, the Tenant for life shall recover the place wasted, and he in the
reversion all the damages. Vide 2 H. 7. and 10 H. 7. cited before, That the
Lessor may license the Lessee to cut the Trees, which proves that the Property
is in him. And Vide 40 Ass. 22. the Lessor shall have the Windfalls. And as to
that which has been said, That by the Exception of the Trees, the Soil it self
is also excepted that is true, as to the Trees for nourishment, and not
otherwise; for if the Lessor cutteth down the Trees, or roots them up he shall
not after meddle with the Land where etc. but the Soil shall be entirely to the
Lessee: The Lessor during the Term may grant the Trees, so cannot the Lessee;
therefore the greater and better Property in the Trees is in the Lessor and not
in the Lessee, and the Trees proprie loquendo, are not parcel of the thing
demised. If this Exception of the Trees or Woods should hold place,
Inconvenience would follow; for as it is holden in 15 H. 7. 11. If the Termor
of Wood commits Waste in one corner of the Wood, he should not lose all the
Wood, but that place only: But if in the said Wood there are diverse Plats of
Land in diverse places of the Wood, if the Termor commits Waste in that Wood he
shall lose all the said Plats, although he has not done waste in them, for
they are parcel of the Wood. Vide Temps E. 1. Fitz. Waste 127. and Vide ibidem
Waste 112. 8 E. 2. Waste done in parcel of an House, the whole House shall be
recovered. Vide also 30 E. 3. Fitz. Amendment 67. and 4 E. 3. Waste 10. Now if
that be Law, and the Exception be good, how shall the place wasted be recovered
here, and against whom? It seemed to the Lord Anderson, That the Exception was
void, and that the Action was brought against the Assignee; and he said it was
a knavish and foolish Demise, and if it should be effectual in Law, some
Mischiefs would follow which he would not remember. Windham was of the same
Opinion, and that the Lessee could not assign his Estate with such Exception;
for he has but a special Interest in the Trees, scil. for Fire-bote,
Plough-bote, etc. which should go with the Land. Periam conceived, That as to
such special Property, that none could have it but he who has the Land, and
therefore the Exception is void; but as to the Fruit Trees, such an Exception
might be good; and although that the Trees are not expressly demised, yet quodam
modo, and after a sort, they may be said demised, as annexed to the Land, and
if waste be brought against him who made the Exception, scil. the Lessee, he
cannot say they were not let to him; and therefore he doubted of the Exception:
And Rhodes doubted also of the Exception; and Anderson said, that he was clear
of opinion that the Lessor should have the Windfalls, and afterward the Case
was adjorned to be further argued, etc.

Temps Roign Eliz.
CCLXX. Audleys Case.
Uses.
THe Lord Audley 12 H. 7. enfeoffed Hoddy and others of certain Lands in the
County of Somerset, and afterward by Indenture reciting the said Feoffment and
the date of it, and also that it was to the intent that his Feoffees should
perform his Will, as follows in effect, viz My Will is that my said Feoffees
shall stand seized to the use that the said Hoddy shall receive of the said
Lands ^00 l which he had lent to the said Lord Audley, and also to stand seized
to pay all his Debts upon Bills signed with his hand; and after ^he Debts paid,
that the Feoffees shall make an Estate of the said Lands to him the said Lord
Audley and Joan his wife, and to the heirs of their Bodies, etc. with diverse
Remainders over. The said Lord Audley had Issue by the said Joan* and also
having Issue by a former wife a daughter the Feoffees never made any Estate to
the said Lord and his wife; and by the opinion of diverse Justices and Sages of
the Law upon this matter no use was changed for it is not a last Will, but an
Intent; and although that the Feoffees shall be seized to the use of the
Feoffor and his Heirs, because no consideration was wherefore they should be
seized to their own uses; yet the same could not make a new use to the said
Lord and his wife in tail, without conveying an Estate, etc. for the wife is a
stranger to the Land, and the same cannot be a Will or Testament: for the
Estate mentioned in the said writing ought to be made to the said Lord and his
wife, who could not take by his own Will; and this matter was depending in the
Chancery. And the advice of the Justices being there required, they delivered
their Opinions, That by that writing no use was changed, nor any use vested in
the said Lord and his wife, and a Decree was made accordingly, until proof was
made that such an Estate was made, etc.

Trin. 29 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
CCLXXI. Walgrave and Somersets Case.
IN Trespass by Walgrave against Somerset, the Case was, That tenant at will
cut down Trees, and the Lessor brought Trespass vi and armis: And the Court was
clear of opinion, that the Action was well maintainable modo and forma, and
Judgment was given accordingly. Vide Litt. 25. that Trespass lies, but he does
not speak of vi and armis. See for that 12 E. 4. 8. by Fairfax and Genny, 22 E.
4. 5.

CCLXXII. Mich. 30 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
IN Debt upon an Obligation, the Defendant said that the Obligation was
endorced with a Condition for the performance of Covenants contained in an
Indenture, etc. The Plaintiff assigned the Breach in this, that the Defendant
himself by the same Indenture, that the said House was discharged of all former
Estates and Encumbrances, etc. And further showed, that the Defendant had made
a former Lease of the said House to one A. B. in the County of Warwick; to
which the Defendant said, that tempore dimissionis he was within age; upon
which they were at Issue, and it was tried in the County of Warwick, where it
ought to be tried where the Writ was brought: But the whole Court held the
contrary, Trial.
that the trial was well enough; as if in an Assise the Tenant pleads a
Release of the Plaintiff in a foreign County; to which the Plaintiff pleads,
that at the time of the Release he was within age, upon which they are at
Issue; the Issue shall be tried in the County where the Release is pleaded to
be made, and not where the Writ is brought.

CCLXXIII. Temps Roign Eliz.
ACtion upon the Case was brought for stopping a way: The Plaintiff declared
that the Duke of Suffolk was seized of a House in D. and let the same to the
Plaintiff for life, and that the said Duke, and all those whose Estate, etc.
had used time out of mind, etc. to have a way over the Land of the Defendant to
the Park of D. to carry and re-carry necessary wood for the said House, from
the said Park to the said House: And further declared, That the Defendant
Obstupavit viam: It was moved, that upon the matter no Action upon the Case did
lie, but an Assise, because that the Freehold of the House is in the Plaintiff,
and also the Freehold of the Land over which, etc. is in the Defendant: But if
the Plaintiff had had but an Estate for years, then an Action upon the Case
would lie and not an Assise: And it is not material if the Plaintiff have but
an Estate for years in the Park, Q^od fuit concestum per totam Curiam. It was
holden also that this word Obstupavit was good enough without any more, scil.
without showing any special matter of disturbance, Nuisance, Obstupavit.
as the erection of some Gate, Hedge, Ditch, etc. for Obstupavit implies a
Nuisance continued, and not a personal disturbance, as Forestaller, or saying
upon the Land, etc. that he shall not go over, or use that way: But as to a
local and real Nuisance, the word Obstupavit amounts to Obstruxit: And although
in the Declaration is set down the day and year of the stopping, yet it shall
not be intended that it continued but the same day; for the words of the
Declaration are further, That he was disturbed in the way, and yet is; and so
the continuance of the disturbance is alleged; and of that Opinion was the
whole Court. Action upon the C^se. Prescription.
Leonard Prothonotary, He has declared of a Prescription habere viam tam
pedestrem, quam equestrem pro omnibus and omni^odis cariagiis; and by that
Prescription he cannot have a Cart-way, for every Prescription is stricti
juris. Dyer, That is well observed; and I conceive that the Law is so; and
therefore it is good to prescribe habere viam pro omnibus cariagus, without
speaking of Horse or Foot-way.

16 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
CCLXXIV. The Archbishop of Yorks Case.
Toll
THe King granted to the Archbishop of York the Toll of Corn sold in the Market
of Rippon: And afterward the King granted to the Mayor and Citizens of York to
be discharged of Toll through all the Realm; and afterward the Archbishop
exchanged his Manor of Rippon with the King for another Manor: It was moved, If
now the Citizens of York should be discharged of Toll within the Manor of
Rippon Dyer said that they are not discharged of Toll, for the Grant to the
Archbishop was eigne to the Grant made to the Citizens, and by the exchange the
King had new Right: And when the King grants over the Manor of Rippon, the
Grantee shall have the Toll, notwithstanding the Grant made to the Citizens,
for the Grant made to them was void as to discharge them of Toll at Rippon, and
the Grant of the King to the Citizens shall not take effect after the exchange;
for the Grant was void ab initio. But if the Grant of the King to the
Archbishop had been made for life, then the Grant of the King made to the
Citizens should take effect after the Estate for life determined: And the
better Opinion was, That Toll should be paid.

Hill. 16 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
CCLXXV. William Wallers Case.
WIlliam Waller seized in Fee 26 H. 8. made a Feoffment to the use of his last
Will, and by that devised his Manor of Russels to Rich. Waller his Son in Tail,
and dyed. Rich. Waller entered, and was seized by force of the Statute 27 H. 8.
and afterward 2 E. 6. by his Deed in consideration of a Marriage to be had
between him and one Eliz. A. enfeoffed Worsley and others to the use of himself
and the said Eliz. for their lives, and after the use of the said Rich. Waller,
and his Heirs, and dyed; Eliz. took to Wife Clavell, they both by Fine granted
the said Manor to Tho. Lamb: Habend' eidem Thomae and haeredibus suis tota
vita ipsius Eliz. Tho. Lamb entered, and dyed seized, Tho. his Son and Heir
entered, against whom Thomas Waller, Son and Heir of Rich. brought a Formedon,
the said Eliz. being alive, the Tenant said, he is within age, and prayed that
the paroll might demur; but Non allocatur, for he was but as an Occupant during
the life of Eliz.

CCLXXVI. Residuum of Sir Francis Englefields Case.
THe Case of Sir Francis Englefield was argued by Popham; and he said, That
this Condition was not such a private Condition, or so running in privity, but
that it might be transferred by 33 H. 8. or 29 Eliz. to the Queen; for although
that the consideration which moved and induced Sir Francis to create the
Condition be private and particular, yet that notwithstanding the Condition it
self is general; for the private cause of the Condition does not make the
Condition private, but as in other Cases, and he put the Cases before of
Ransom: But if the Condition had been conceived in these Terms, scil. If my
Nephew shall be given to intolerable Vices, then if I tender, etc. there it
had been otherwise. Vide the Statute of 33 H. 8. cap. 20. by which it is
enacted, That if any Subject is attainted of High Treason by the course of the
Common Law, the King by such Attainder shall have such benefit and advantage as
well of Uses, Rights, Entries, Conditions, etc. as of Possessions, Reversions,
etc. as if it had been done and declared by Authority of Parliament, that is as
much as to say, as if the Condition in its proper terms had been given to the
King by Act of Parliament, etc. and vouched Dacres case 17 Eliz. cited by him
before, where, upon a Grant of all his Goods and Chattels revokable upon tender
of 5 s. it was resolved, That such a Condition was given to the King, and by
special Grace of the Queen Sir Tho. Gorge had the benefit of it: And here,
although the cause of the Proviso be private and special, yet the Condition is
not tied in the cause, and the Statute gives to the Queen all Conditions which
are usual, and for the benefit of the Queen; and at the time of the making of
this Statute such Conditions were usual, and tunc temporis, the Condition was
penned, not by way of re-entry, but that the use should be void; and that such
Conditions were usual at the time of the making of the Statute of 29 Eliz.
appears by the Statute made two years before, scil. 27 Eliz. for the
repressing of fraudulent Conveyances: By which it is provided by an express
branch of it against such Conditions containing power of Revocation; and Laws
are for the most part made to give order for things which may happen: And I
conceive, That this tender for the Queen is well enough for the time,
notwithstanding all the terms are past, yet the two years are not incurred: I
covenant within a year to suffer a common Recovery, all the terms are past
without any Recovery suffered, yet no Action lies upon that covenant before
the year be fully expired, although that the terms be past, it being impossible
to suffer a Recovery within the time prefixed: A. covenants with B. in
consideration of Marriage to suffer a Recovery before the Feast of St. Michael,
and if A. before the said Feast does not suffer such Recovery, that then he
shall be seized to the use of C. Trinity Term passes without any Recovery had,
yet no use shall rise before the said Feast: And I conceive that there needs
not here any Office; but if the Condition be to be performed on the part of the
Patentee, then the breaking of the Condition ought to be found by Office;
contrary where the condition is to be performed on the part of the King: For
acts which Subjects do, are matters in pa^s, therefore an Office is requisite
to make them of Record; but where the Queen does any thing, there needs not any
Office to make it of Record: The Queen herself might tender the King, but by
commission under the Great Seal she has authorized another to do it, and she
has taken sufficient notice that there was such a condition: And when the
Certificate is made and returned, the same is sufficient to inform her that the
condition is performed, for the Certificate being returned, is of record as
well as the Commission, as the retorn of the Writ: And he cited the Case before
cited, Bartues Case, 2 Eliz. Dyer. The King leased the Manor of D. for years to
A. upon condition, that if the King at any time during the term shall make a
Lease to the said A. of the Manor of S. for life, then the Lease for years
shall cease and be void; the King makes the Lease for life, the lease for years
is void without any Office, for the Lease for life is upon record: The case of
Auditor, 3 Eliz. Dyer 197. where the Forfeiture of the Office appears of
record: And Baron Plags Case 15 H. 8. ibidem, the determination of the Office
of Remembrancer by acceptance of the Baron shall bind in the Exchequer, void
without a Scire Facias or Office. Vide etiam Dyer (5 Ma. 159.) he being Justice
of the Common Pleas, was made Justice of the Kings Bench his first Office was
gone and determined: Also he said, That the Condition (being performed ut
supra) sua vi and virtute, without any Office shall make void the Conveyance to
which it was annexed. And if Sir Francis, being attainted, had tendered the
King, ipso facto as it worked to him, so ipso facto it should work to the
Queen. When the Act of 29 Eliz. had made the Assurance void, the Land is in the
Queen presently, by means of Sir Francis, to whom the Land returned, and from
him in the same instant vested in the Queen. Cook to the contrary: The
Condition is not given to the Queen: Words make the Plea; therefore the words
of the Condition are to be considered, in which it is to be seen if this
Condition be annexed to the privity of Nature, or be general. The Form of the
Condition is, Sir Francis being a man of great Living, and having a great Manor
of his own Name, in consideration of the preservation of his Name and Blood,
etc. covenanted to stand seized, etc. And further, pro eo quod, his said Nephew
was of tender age, and his proof could not now appear, and it might be that in
time to come he might be given to intolerable Vices; therefore the said Sir
Francis did not think it convenient to settle the said Inheritance in his said
Nephew absolutely without a bridle to restrain him, therefore it was provided,
That if the Uncle delivered a King of Gold to his Nephew, to the intent to make
void, etc. And this is a special Condition, private and peculiar to the person
of Sir Francis incident to him, and to no other, and incommunicable; and
therefore it is not given to the Queen: But such Conditions which the Heir*
Lord by Escheat, or Executors may have, the Queen shall have by the Statute 10
H. 7. 18. Lessee for years of a House covenants to repair it within six years,
within which term he dies, no reparation being made, covenant lies against
the Executors; contrary if the covenant had been that he should repair during
his life. It has been said, That the things which are matters of privity are
the considerations which caused Sir Francis to make this Proviso, but they are
not any part of the condition or Proviso: Truly the consideration raises the
use, and precedes the Proviso which is tied to the consideration with an Ideo,
and all is but one Sentence knit together with the Ideo. And although
consideration of Blood be not parcel of the Proviso, yet that which follows is,
scil. for that his Nephew, etc. And in this Conveyance Sir Francis praestitit
utrumque munus Nutricis, ubera, and verbera. And Acts of Parliament do not give
away things knit to Nature, by the general words All things. Vide the Lord
Brays case, 2 Eliz. Dyer 90. The Father having the Wardship of his Son and Heir
apparent, if he Outlawed shall not forfeit the same, for it is inseparable to
him, notwithstanding that the Land be holden of the Queen, and so Nature cannot
be transferred, therefore neither this Proviso. And so is the Tenure of
Frankalmoigne 35 H. 6. 58. and it should be a great rigor to take the bridle
out of the hands of the Natural Uncle, into the hands of Justice, which is
Manus regia: And he cited the Case of the Lord Norris, where it was ruled, That
where the Act of Attainder of Norris gave to the King all Rights, Titles, etc.
yet a Writ of Error was not given thereby. ( Manwood, Actions are not expressly
given by the said Act of Attainder.) As to the second point, I conceive that
the Coveyance is become void when the terms within the two years are passed,
and shall not expect until the two years be expired, for the Inrollment ought
to be within the term; so that if all the terms of the two years be past it is
now impossible for to inroll the Deed within the time limited by the Statute,
and then, by 29 H. 8 the Conveyance is void, and then is the Queen seized in
Fee at the time of the making of the Lease by the Attainder of Sir Francis: As
to the Certificate, without Office it is not sufficient to entitle the Queen to
the Land; and I deny the difference put by Popham between a Condition to be
performed on the part of the Patentee, and on the part of the King: I confess
that a Certificate to inform the Queen, or her Council, of the quantity,
quality, value, etc. of the Land, is good without Office, but not to entitle
the Queen de novo to the Inheritance of another; I grant that the Commission is
of Record, but the tender of the King is matter in pais, and not of Record.
Three things ought to be observed in every Certificate, to make it a good and
lawful Certificate according to the course of the common Law, unless it be in
cases of necessity, as in case of Ouster le mere, etc. 1. It ought not to be in
the absence of the party. 2. It ought to be pendente placito convocatis in ea
part convocandis. 3. It ought to be directed to a known Officer; but a thing
certified by a private person, being no Officer, cannot be good. Also a
Certificate according to the course of the common Law, being good, is not
traversable. At another day, the Case was argued by Egerton Solicitor for the
Queen: The Condition is given to the Queen by 33 H. 8. and also by 29 Eliz. and
this Condition in it self is a general and ordinary Condition, and rests not in
privity, and such an Act as may be made by any stranger as well as by Sir
Francis himself, scil. the tender of the King. The reasons which moved Sir
Francis to knit this Condition to the Conveyance were natural, but the Proviso
and the performance of it not tried to Nature, and therefore all the cases of
privity are here out of Seisin. As to the Lord Brays Case, the same was not any
Wardship, but only an Order for the government or his Son and Heir; for the
Wardship of the Father in the Son is not a Chattel in him. As to the Case of
the Lord Norris, the Writ of Error could not accrue to the Queen, for by the
Act of Attainder no Actions were given to the King: And here is not any such
privity as has been pretended, for by the words of the Proviso the Ring might
be tendered to his Executors or Administrators, therefore the Condition might be
tendered when he is dead, therefore without privity. Title for alienation in
Mortmain of Lands purchased by a Villain of the King, or for a Condition
broken, are not in the King before Office: But here the Condition is to be
performed on the part of the Queen, which her Royal Majesty cannot perform, and
therefore Commissioners are appointed to do it, which they have done, and upon
the Commission returned, have informed the Queen of all the performance of it,
and all is now upon Record. And there is a great difference between
Certificates, as in our case, and Certificates which have been cited on the
other side, which are used to make Trials upon Issues joined betwixt party and
party, and in such Certificates I confess the Law, as Cook has argued: The
Sheriff is not known to be such an Officer, but by his Commission under the
Great Seal, he upon a Writ of the King to him directed, Summons, Disseisins,
Attaches, etc. these are matters in fait; but when the Sheriff has returned
his Service, then it is become matter of Record: So in our case, the retorn of
the tender, etc. where the Queen is to be informed of the Lands of the Subject
which she is to have, there ought to be an Office; but here the Queen is to do
an act, and that she has done under the Great Seal by Commission, by the
Retorn of which she is in the whole matter, therefore there needs not an Office
to inform her of that which she her self has done by another Authorized by her
to do it: And he said that the Leases made by the Queen, being Tenant pur auter
vie, were not void ab initio, but from the time of the two years, but now the
Estate of the Queen for life is determined, therefore also the Leases derived
out of it. Exception has been taken to the Information, scil. Praedictus
Franc' per Indenturam suam factam inter, etc. without saying sigillo suo
sigillat', that is good enough; for facta esse non potuit, nisi etiam sit
sigillat', therefore facta includes sigillat': And afterward Trin. 33. Eliz.
this Case was argued by the Barons. Clark puisne Baron said, That Judgment
ought to be given for the Queen. And first he said, I conceive that here upon
this Indenture is no use created in Sir Francis, for he shall pay for a License
of Alienation if the Lands be holden in chief; and they themselves in pleading
the uses, say Virtute cujus the said Sir Francis was seized in his Demesne as
of Freehold for his life the remainder thereof, etc. Although this Condition be
tied to Nature, and rests in privity, as has been objected and so inseparable,
yet by Act of Parliament it may be transferred. Impropriations, Frankalmoign,
Frankmarriage, Guardianship in Socage cannot be given away regularly, but by
Act of Parliament they may; which vide for Impropriations by the Statute of 31
H. 8. Impropriations of Abbeys and Priories dissolved, nam Parliamentum omnia
potest: It may alter the nature of Lands, make Gavelkind discendable according
to the course of the common Law, and so of Borough-English: Attaint, Error,
Disceit, etc. are Actions which lie in privity, yet by Act of Parliament they
may be transferred: And in the case of the Lord Norris, If the Act of Attainder
had given to the Queen all Actions, she might have had a Writ of Error: And we
see by experience, That the King and his Assigns have advantage of conditions
annexed by Abbots to their Leases, and that by 31 H. 8. and our condition is
not so proper or peculiar to Sir Francis, for by the words of it any other
person might have tendered the King for Sir Francis, so as it is not tied to his
person. If the Provi^o had been. Because it may be my Son will marry without my
consent Or it may be I shall have more Children Provided therefore, that if I
tender, etc. that pretense of Marriage without assent, or plurality of
children, is not any parcel of the condition. And he vouched the case between
Clovell and Moulton; A. sold Lands to B. and it was covenanted betwixt them,
That A. upon request made unto him, or his Heirs, should make further assurance
to B. of the said Land; A. is attainted, now the covenant is suspended, for A.
has not any Heir, afterward the Heir of A. is restored by Parliament, with a
saving to others of all their rights, etc. B is not aided by that saving so as
he can make request to the Heir of A. etc. And he said, That the tender of the
King is well enough for time; for although all the Terms were past, yet the two
years were not expired: A. covenants with B. That if A. does not levy a Fine to
B. of the Manor of C. within two years, that then A. shall be seized of the
Manor of D. to the use of the said B. Now although that all the Terms be past
so that no Fine can be levied according to the Covenant, yet no use shall rise
out of the said Manor of D. before that the two years are fully expired: And
here needs not any Office by which the tender ought to be found, the Commission
authorizing the tender, and the retorn of the Certificate by the Commissioners
is sufficient; for the whole matter in fait is become matter of Record; as the
Execution of a Writ once by the Sheriff being returned, and the party grieved
by the Certificate shall have a traverse to it; but where a Certificate is in
lieu of a Trial, as of Bastardy by the Bishop; in Case of Seddition or
Diminution certified in a Writ of Error, there no traverse lies to it; but
upon Certificate of not payment of Tithes, the party grieved may have a
Traverse: In our Case here If the Subject continues possession after such
Certificate made, he is an Intruder. The Queen when she made the Lease was
Tenant for the life of another, and afterward by the tender of the King
according to the Provilo all the Conveyance, and the Estates limited by it, are
dissolved, and the Fee-simple vested in Sir Francis, Quasi ab initio, and
immediately also in the Queen by the Attainder, whose Estate is paramount the
Conveyance made by Sir Francis, which is now, as if it had never been made, and
so are all the Estates created by it, and then the Lease made ut supra is void.
As to the Exception which has been taken to the Information, (Indentura sua)
without saying, Sigillo suo sigillat, it is well enough, for so much is said in
effect; for Non est Indentura sua, if it be not sealed, and all necessary
circumstances are not to be pleaded, as the delivery of the Deed, or livery
upon a Feoffment, for a Feoffment includes livery, and a Deed delivery. Gent,
Baron to the same intent: Here the words of the Proviso are, Tender to Sir
Francis, his Executors or Assigns, no words of Heirs, and on the part of Sir
Francis, If he, or any for him: But in Dacres case, If the said John Dacres
himself, and yet the Queen took advantage of such a Tender. Manwood chief Baron
to the same intent. As to the Exception to the Information, scil. Per
Indenturam suam, without saying Sigillo suo sigillat'; for if the Indenture was
not Sealed, then it was not any Deed, and then no Covenant, and then no Use,
and then no Condition, etc. But I conceive, That the Information is good
enough, for Covenants by Indenture include Sealing and Delivery, and other
things which are of the Essence of an Indenture, which need not to be pleaded,
because in Law presumed: But for a clear Answer to it, Sealing and Delivery are
matters in pais, therefore confessed by the Demurrer: And here the Defendants
have pleaded Quod been and verum est, That the said Sir Francis by the said
Indenture, etc. covenanted, etc. and if any imperfection be in the pleading, it
is now saved by the Demurrer. An Exception has been taken to the bar, because
the Defendants have pleaded three several Leases of several parcels of the
Lands in question, and concluded, Virtute quarum quidem concessionum, they were
possessed and entered, etc. which cannot be good, because several Interests and
Estates, but ought to have pleaded severally, scil. One Lease of such Land in
which the Intrusion is supposed, and so concluded Virtute cujus. they were
possessed, and sic de caeteris. and so to each Interest one several Conclusion:
A. has an Annual Rent of 10 l. out of Bl. Acre, and another Rent of 20 l. out
of, etc. and another Rent of 30 l out of the same Acre and takes a Distress in
Bl. Acre aforesaid, and avows for all the Rents together, the Avowry is not
good, for how can the Avowant have a Retorn? when Non constat Curiae, how many
of the Cattle he took for one Rent, and how many for another: As to the matter
in Law, first, If this Condition does extend to the Estate of Sir Francis,
Nihil habet quaestionis; for by the performance of the Condition Sir Francis is
in statu quo prius, and so all the Estates limited by the said Indenture quite
plucked up by the root. As to the Condition, I conceive that it is not knit in
privity to Sir Francis, and does not depend upon his liking or disliking: The
Act it self, in which is the performance of the Condition, does consist in the
tender of the Ring, the words preceding purporting the doubt of the proof of
his Son, and the bridle, etc. are his Motives by which he was induced to make
the Condition, not to perform the Condition. nor any part or parcel of the
Condition, or word of Condition. The words of the Condition are, If he himself,
or any other by his appointment shall tender, etc. What privity is here? who
knows who shall be his Deputy to make the tender? It may be any person in the
World, therefore no privity in the person who is to tender; and as to the
person to whom the tender is to be made, there is no privity there, for it may
be made to the Nephew, his Executors or Administrators. Also no precise place
is set down in the Condition where the tender shall be, it may be in Ireland,
Scotland, or in any other Country, therefore the Condition in all points
general, and so free as an ordinary Condition: But if the Condition was to be
performed by Sir Francis in his proper person, or by subscribing his name with
his hand, or such like act, then it had been otherwise. The case of Littleton
76. A Feoffment in Fee is made upon Condition, that if the Feoffee pay to the
Feoffor such a day 10 l. then the Feoffee shall have the Land to him and his
Heirs for ever, and before the day the Feoffee makes a Feoffment over upon a
Condition, the second Feoffee tenders the Money, it is a good tender, and yet
the words of the Condition do not extend so far, but only to the first Feoffee,
who was privy to the Condition; so where the payment is to be made on the part
of the Feoffor, and he dies before the day, tender by the Heir is good; and
here, this is a general Condition, and therefore may be performed generally
without being restrained to any person for the performance of it: And here, we
are in an Act of Parliament, Quod omnia potest, 32 H. 8. gave to Assigns of the
Reversion which always before were fixed in privity. Monks dead persons in Law,
by Act of Parliament made capable of Purchase and Inheritance; Gavelkind and
Borough-English made discendable at the common Law, which the King could not
do: An Alien born is made Denizen by the King, by which he may Purchase, but
yet not inherit: But an Act of Parliament may make him heritable; Corruption of
Blood the King cannot take off, but it ought to be purged by Act of Parliament.
As to the Statute of 29 Eliz. it has made the Conveyance void, as has been
objected; for the Terms within the two years limited by the Statute are past,
and then the Condition is gone, as against Intail upon Condition, if the Intail
be spent the Condition is gone: But I conceive, that until the two years be
fully expired, the Estates limited by the Conveyance continue, and the
Condition also. The words of the said Statute are, (Shall within two years
after the last day of this Session, etc. openly show and bring forth into the
Queens Court of Exchequer, his Conveyance, and there in the Term time in open
Court, shall offer and exhibit the same;) These words show that the parties
ought to show the Conveyance within two years, but does not speak of any term
and in the other Clause it speaks of term, but not of two years; so the time in
which it ought to be showed is two years, but the time of the Inrollment might
be in the term after the two years well enough; for there are two two times in
the Statute, the one to show the Conveyance, the other for the Inrollment of
it, and two things are to be done, Showing and Inrollment, and two times
answerable to them, two years, and Term-time. And he took it for a general
Rule, that time once expressed, shall not be afterward by implication
abridged. And if by your construction you make the time to end with the Term,
you abridge the time by a Month at least, which was expressed before, two
years. And for the reasonable construction of times, Vide 28 H. 8. Dyer 44
Boulds Case. If it fortune Joan Moll' to decease before the Feast of etc.
without Issue Male of her Body then living, etc. this word (then) shall be
referred to the Feast, and not to the time of the death of the party; for (as
the reason of the Case is) where the intent of the parties is to have
continuance in the thing, the thing which they would have continue to the most
extreme time as may be: And if Lands be given to one and the Heirs Males of his
Body begotten, and if he dye without Heirs of his Body, then it shall remain
over; by this Implication (if he dies without Heirs of his Body) the Donee
shall not have general Tail, but it shall be intended such Heirs to whom it was
limited before. And in our Case here, there are some weeks between the ends of
the Terms, and the end of the two years, and those weeks shall not be utterly
void, for in these weeks after the end of the Terms those of the Chancery shall
take Conusance of Deeds: And here in our Case, the party was only to show the
Deed, which might have been done at any time after the Terms, so as it be
within the two years; if one be bound with Condition, That if within two years
he pay the Queens Silver upon a Fine to be levied, and then and there in Term
time ingross the same, if he pay the Queens Silver within the two years, he
has saved his Bond, although that the Fine be not engrossed until a Term after
the two years: So if one be bound to acknowledge a Deed in the Chancery within
two years, and there in the Term-time to Inroll the same, if he do acknowledge
it within two years, it is sufficient, and he may inroll it afterward: So in
our Case, the Estates continuing, and the Condition also till the two years are
fully expired, therefore the Condition is well performed; for the Estate
continues defeazable by the Condition, because within the two years, and to
abridge time is a violent thing. And now Sir Francis is alive, so as the power
of the tender of the power of the King continues: And I conceive, That the
Certificate is sufficent without any Office, and the party grieved may have
traverse to it: And I hold clearly, that as this Case is Office cannot be
found. Office properly is to be found of things in pa^s which happen before the
Office, as the Nonage of an Heir, or of an Alien born or of a Villain; here to
entitle the King an Office is necessary to find things which have happened
before; and without doubt this Certificate is traversable, as the Certificate
of the Bishop of Recusancy; and also the Certificate of the Commissioners of
Sewers, and here those who are to certify, are to certify a thing done by
themselves and therefore there needs not any Office, because they do it virtute
Commissionis. If a Commission be awarded to take a Surrender of the Bishopric
of N. or of a Pentioner etc. there needs not any Office to find it; and in the
time of King Hen. 8 diverse Abbots surrendered their Possessions to him, of which
no Office was found. And now for conclusion; The Queen comes in paramount her
first Estate which she had pur auter voy, scil. by Attainder, and now she has
it by the Condition, and so paramount the Title under which the Defendants
claim: And afterward Judgment was given for the Queen.

Trin. 31 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
CCLXXVII. The Scholars of All Souls and Tamworths Case.
This Case is Reported in the first Part of Leonard.
IN a Writ of Right by the College of All Souls in Oxon against Tamworth, the
Writ was, Quod clamat tenere de nobis in liberam, puram and perpetuam
Elemosinam. And Exception was taken to it, because it ought to be Liberam
Elemosinam, without puram and perpetuam. Also it ought to be with a double ee,
and not Elemosinam, sed non allocatur^ for as to the first Exception it is but
Surplusage, and as to the other it is the common course. Another Exception was
taken to the Writ, because that the words are, Quod clamat este jus and
haereditat' sua, without saying in jure Collegij. An^er^on, The Writ is good
enough. If a Parson pleads that he is seized, he shall say in jure Ecclesiae,
for he has two Capacities, and without those words he shall be intended to be
seized in his own right: But if an Abbot plead that he was seized he needs not
such words, for that he has not any other capacity: And so of Dean and
Chapter, Mayor and Commonalty, and afterward the Writ was awarded good, and
that the Tenant should answer over, Vide Liber Entries, 236, 237. It was also
moved, If the College should count of his Seisin within 30 years, because that
the Corporation never dies, and then if he count upon his own possession: And
it was holden, That if the Warden of the College that now is, was ever Seized,
he ought to count upon a Seisin within 30 years: But upon the Seisin of his
Predecessor he ought to count of a Seisin within 60 years, as another common
person: For the change of the Head, if such Seisin, is as the dying seized, and
descent of a common person.

Mich. 15 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
CCLXXVIII. Wood and Chivers Case.
IN Ejectione firmae between Wood and Chivers, the Case was, That the Bishop of
Salisbury let the same Chivers the Manor of Lanington for 80 years for 40 l.
rent, payable at four usual Feasts, upon Condition that if the rent be behind
by the space of three Months after any of the Feasts in which, etc, then a
re-entry: The Bishop dyed, after confirmation, J. S. was created Bishop, who
granted to R. the Office of Receiver of all his Revenues, etc. exercend' per se
vel Deputat. suum; and afterward the Bishop made a special Letter of Attorney
to the said R. to demand the rent, and if it were behind to re-enter: R. at the
last day of the three Months came to the Capital Message of the said Manor, an
hour before the setting of the Sun; for to demand the rent due at Midsummer
then last past, but none was there on the part of Chivers the Lessee to pay the
rent, for which R. left his Servant in the Hall of the said Message,
commanding him to stay there, and if any came to pay the said rent, that he
give to him Notice thereof, and afterward he went out of the same House, and
walked in a Lane which was within the Gate of the House, and did not return
into the House until the Sun was set, and then he returned, and because the
rent had not been paid, he dug a Clod of the Land in the Name of the Bishop,
and so re-entred: And afterward the Bishop let the said Manor to W. for three
years by Deed, signed and Sealed; and because C^^vers continued his possession
notwithstanding the re-entry, he made also a Letter of Attorney to M. to enter
into the said Manor in the Name of the Bishop, and to deliver the said Deed of
the said Lease to the said W. upon the Land, as his Deed and these two Deeds
the Bishop in his Chamber delivered to the said W. but not as his Deed: But he
said unto him, Here is the Lease, and a Letter of Attorney to M. and he shall
enter in my name, and deliver to you the Deed of his upon the Land, as my Deed
upon the Land: Whereupon he took the two Deeds, and delivered them over to M.
who by force thereof entered upon the Land, etc. An Exception was made, because
it does not appear here that the Bishop delivered the Letter of Attorney to M.
himself, nor to the use of M. and then it may be taken, that the Deed of Letter
of Attorney was delivered to M. to keep only, and not as his Deed. But that
Exception was now allowed: For it was holden that the Livery in the Manor was
good enough, and so the Letter of Attorney sufficient; for in all Deeds of
Feoffments in which Letters of Attorney are contained, the Livery of the Deed
is to the Feoffee only and no mention made of any delivery to the Attorney, for
by such Letter of Attorney no Interest is to pass, but only an Authority. And
note, It was resolved by all the Justices, That in the computation of these
three Months there ought to be allowed to every Month 28 days: And now we are
to see if this Rent be well demanded, because the demand was made an hour
before Sunsetting, and then the party went out, and walked in the Lane till
the setting of the Sun, without any other demand: And it was moved that this
walking in the Lane, which was not a common Highway, but a private way, and
that the House of the said Farm was of the one side of the Lane, and the
Farm-land on the other, and so the Land parcel of the Farm, and then his
walking there is a continuance of the demand; quod Catlin concessir, was the
Lane a Highway, or not, for the Manor is on both side. And it was agreed by
all the Justices, That if the Lessor comes to the Land before the last hour,
viz. in the Morning, or in the Afternoon, and demands the Rent, and afterward
goes off the Land, and is not there at the last instant of the day, the same is
not a sufficient demand, although that return be presently after the Sun is
set: And by Gerrard Attorney General, If the Lessor comes upon the Land at the
last day before the last instant, as in the morning, etc. and demands the Rent,
and continues there upon the Land till the Sun be set, without making any other
demand, yet the demand for the Manor is good enough, for his presence there is
the continuance of the demand, Quod fuit concessum per totam Curiam. And by
Catlin, If the Lessor after his demand in the Morning departs off the Land,
and before the last instant returns, and stays upon the Land till
Sunsetting, there is the continuance of a demand, without any further demand,
which Wray Chief Justice concessit. And it was holden in this case, That where
R. left his Servant in the House to stay there, and to signify to him that if
any person came to pay the Rent, that that was not any continuance of the
demand, for R. himself was but a Servant, and he in that business could not
make a Servant: And Catline said, That the Bishop himself might by word command
his Servant to demand a Rent, and to make a Re-entry, Quod fuit concessum, but
in our Case R. had not commanded his Servant to make any demand: And so here
upon the whole matter is not any sufficient demand; and so Wray Chief Justice
said.

CCLXXVIII. Trin. 29 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
ACtion upon the Case was brought for these words, Thou would have stolen my
Cloak if J.S. had not come in the way; and thou art a Thief, and I will prove
it. After Verdict it was found for the Plaintiff. It was objected in Arrest of
Judgment, That these words were not actionable: For the first words, Thou
would have stolen my Cloak, etc. do not by Law give any cause of Action, and
when the words subsequent, Thou art a Thief, are depending upon the said former
words, and to be construed as spoken in respect of them, and upon that intent.
But the Opinion of the whole Court was to the contrary. And that the said
latter words should be taken and construed in abstracto by themselves, as in
gross, and not as dependant upon the former words, and afterward Judgment was
given that the Plaintiff should recover.

Mich. 26 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
CCLXXIX. Hungerford and Watts Case.
HUngerford brought an Action upon the Case againts Watts, Words.
for that the Defendant had said, That the Plaintiff had caused the Defendant
to be arrested with forged Writs. It was objected, That the words were not
actionable; for it might be that the Writs were forged by strangers without the
privity of the Plaintiff, and that the Plaintiff not knowing them to be forged
procured the Arrest. But the Opinion of the Court was, That the words were
actionable; for the word (Caused) extends as well to the Forgery as to the
Arrest, and so amounts to the slander of Forgery.

CCLXXX. Mich. 19 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
Costs.
IN an Action upon an Escape the Plaintiff is Nonsuited: It was holden that the
Defendant should not have Costs. Note, The words of the Statute upon an Action
upon the Statute of 23 H. 8. for any offense or tort personal to be supposed to
be done immediately to the Plaintiff. Notwithstanding this Action is quodam
modo, an Action upon the Statute 1. by Equity of the Statute of West. 2. cap.
11. which gives it expressly against the Warden of the Fleet: Yet properly it
is not an Action upon the Statute, for in the Declaration in such an Action no
mention is made of the Statute which see in the Book of Entries, 169, 171. and
also here is not supposed any immediate personal offense or wrong to the
Plaintiff: And an Action upon the Case it is not, for then the Writ ought to
make mention of the Escape, and that it does not here, and yet at the Common
Law, before the Statute of Westminster. 2. an Action upon the Case lay for an Escape,
and so by Dyer, Manwood, and Mounson, Costs are not given in this Case. And by
Dyer upon Nonsuit in an Action upon the Statute of 8 H. 6. the Defendant shall
not have Costs, for it is not a personal wrong; for the Writ is, quod
disseisivit, which is a real wrong.

Mich. 29 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
CCLXXXI. Hollingshed and Kings Case.
HOllingshed brought Debt against King, and declared, That King was bound to
him in a Recognisance in 200 l. before the Mayor and Aldermen of London in
interiori Camera of Guildhall in London: Upon which Recognizance the said
Hollingshed before brought a Scire Facias before the said Mayor, etc. in
exteriori Camera, and there had Judgment to recover; upon which Recovery he had
brought this Action; and upon the Declaration the Defendant did demur in Law,
because that the Plaintiff in the setting forth of the Recognizance had not
alleged, That the Mayor of London had authority by Prescription or Grant to
take Recognizances, and if he had not, then is the Recognizance taken coram non
Judice, and so void; and as to the Statute of Westminster. 2. cap. 45. the same
cannot extend to Recognizances taken in London, which see by the words, De his
quae recordata sunt coram Cancellario Domini Regis and ejus Justiciariis, qui
recordum habent and in rotulis eorum irrotulantur, etc. and also at the time of
the making of that Statute, the City of London had not any Sheriffs but only
Bailiffs: And the Statute ordains, That upon Recognizance Process shall go to
the Sheriffs, etc. therefore not to them. But the whole Court was clear to the
contrary; for we well know, that they of London have a Court of Record, and
every Court of Record has authority incident to it to take Recognizances for
all things which do concern the Jurisdiction of that Court, and which arise by
reason of the matters there depending. Another matter was Objected, for that
the Recognizance was taken in interiori Camera, but the Court was holden in
exteriori Camera, therefore it was not well taken. But as to that Anderson
Chief Justice said, Admit that the Recognizance was not well taken, yet because
that in a Scire Facias sued upon it, the Defendant shall not take any
advantage, he shall be now bound by that admittance: As if one sues a Scire
Facias, as upon a Recognizance, whereas in truth there is not any such
Recognizance, and the party pleads admitting such Record, and thereupon
Judgment is given against him, the same is not void, but voidable. And
Fleetwood Recorder of London, alleged many Cases to prove the Courts of the
King ought to take notice, that those of London have a Court of Record; for if
a Quo Warranto issues to the Justices in Air, it does not belong to them of
London to claim their Liberties; for all the Kings Courts have notice of them:
And at the last, after many Motions, the better Opinion of the Court was, That
the Plaintiff should recover: Periam aliquantum haesitavit: And it was said by
Anderson, and in a manner agreed by them all, That if dependant this Demurrer
here, the Judgment in London upon the Scire Facias is reversed, yet the Court
here shall proceed, and take no notice of the reversal.

CCLXXXII. Mich. 20 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
A Man seized of a Barn in which the Tithes of certain Lands have used to be
inned, let the same by these words, Demises..
Demise and to Farm-let the Barn, with all Tithes belonging to the same; It was
holden, That by that Demise the Tithes did not pass but Tithes which had
usually been demised with the Barn, passed by such words, as by the Demise of
an House, Cum omnibus terris eidem pertinent', all the Lands pass which have
used to be demised with the said House; for the demising usually of the Tithes
with the Barn makes the Tithes belonging to the Barn, but not the Inning.

Mich. 30 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
CCLXXXII. Haltons Case.
Recognisance. Inrollment.
A Recognizance was acknowledged before J. S. who was one of the Masters of the
Chancery, and before the same was Enrolled, the Conusee dyed; the point was,
whether at the request of the Executors of the Conusee it might now be
Enrolled: It was the Opinion of all the Justices, That upon the request
aforesaid it might be Enrolled, like as it was of a Conusance of a Fine taken
before a Judge, which may be removed out of his hands by a Certiorari, although
it be not a Record before that it be certified, in the speaking of that Case.
It was made a question, whether the Court of Chancery might help a man who
purchased Lands for valuable Consideration, where there wanted the words
(Heirs) in the Deed of Purchase, or not; but the point was not resolved. But in
that Case it was agreed by all the Justices, That after a Fine is levied of
Land, Chancery. Attornment.
that the Chancery may compel the Tenant of the Land to Attorn: And so where an
Annuity or Rent is granted to one for life, or in Fee, and the Deed is
Executed, Sealed, and Delivered, but no Seisin is given to the party of the
Rent or Annuity; the Court of Chancery may decree a Seisin of the Rent to be
given, and the Rent to be paid to the Grantee, and that was said to have been
often times decreed in the said Court of Chancery.

CCLXXXIV. Mich. 30 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
Intrusion. Trespass.
NOte, by Anderson Chief Justice. If one intrude upon the Possession of the
King, and another man enters upon him, that he shall not have an Action of
Trespass for that Entry, for that he who is to have and maintain Trespass,
ought to have a Possession: But in such Case he has not a Possession, for
every Intruder shall answer to the King for his whole time, and every Intrusion
supposes the Possession to be in the King, which all the other Justices
agreed, except Periam, who doubted of it. And Rhodes Justice said, and vouched
19 E. 4. to be that he cannot in such Case say in an Action of Trespass. Quare
Clausum suum fregit.

CCLXXXV. Mich. 29 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
NOte, It was holden by Popham Chief Justice, Remainder.
and so said by him to have been resolved upon a Special Verdict in the County
of Somerset, 20 Eliz. That where a Lease was made unto Husband and Wife for
their Lives, the remainder to the Heirs of the Survivor of them, that the same
was a good remainder notwithstanding the incertainty, and that in that case,
after the death of the Wife, he should have Judgment to recover the Land. But
if a man be possessed of a term for 20 years in the right of his Wife, and he
makes a Lease thereof for 10, rendering rent to him, his Executors and Assigns,
and dies, that in such case, though the Wife surviveth, yet he shall not have
the rent, because that she comes in paramount the Lease: But if a man be
possessed of a term in the right of his Wife, Mortgage.
and Mortgageth for payment of a certain Sum of Money at a day certain, and
before the day the Wife dies, and the Husband pays the Money at the day, and
then dies; whether his Executors, or the Administrators of the Wife, should
have the term, was not then resolved: Ideo Quaere that Case.

Trin. 32 Eliz. In the Exchequer.
CCLXXXVI. Bartase and Hinds Case.
NOte, Manwood Chief Baron gave it for a general Rule for all Counselors at
Law, That they did not advise any Collectors of Subsidies or Fifteens, to
exhibit Bills in the Exchequer Chamber for the Non-payment of Subsidies, etc.
for such Bills should not be allowed hereafter, because they had remedy by
Distress: Also it was holden, That if any be assessed for the Fifteen which he
ought to pay, or if two Towns are to pay together, and the one Town be taxed
more than it ought to be, or had been accustomed, those which are grieved by
such Sesment may have a Commission out of the Exchequer, which is called Ad
aequaliter taxand'; and that was put in ure in a Case between Bartase and Hind,
where one of them was Lord of the Town of Little Marloe, and the other of
Hedford: And it was also holden, That Fifteens are to be levied of Goods and
Chattels properly, and one Township sometimes is richer than another, and
therefore it is not reason that they pay their Fifteen always according to the
same proportion: But by Clark Baron, where the Custom has been that the
Fifteen should be taxed according to the quantity of Acres, there the Rate and
Purport shall be always one, whosoever holds the Land, and as to the Commission
Ad aequaliter taxand', Manwood and Fanshaw said, That they could show above
twenty Presidents of it.

Mich. 17 and 18 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
CCLXXXVII. Barnard and Tussers Case.
Debt.
BArnard recovered in a Scire Facias upon a Recognizance against Tusser, and
afterward brought an Action of Debt upon the same Recovery, and it was
adjudged maintainable, notwithstanding that it was Objected, That the Judgment
in such Scire Facias is not to recover Debt, but to have Execution of the
Judgment. And by Wray Chief Justice, If in a Scire Facias to have Execution of
an Annuity the Plaintiff has Judgment, upon such Judgment he shall have an
Action of Debt.

Mich. 17 and 18 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
CCLXXXVIII. The Earl of Arundel and Bradstocks Case.
THe Case was, The Earl of Arundel let Lands to Bradstock for years, upon
condition that the Lessee should not do any Act by which his Goods and Chattels
might be forfeited: Bradstock committed Felony, and before any Attainder he
obtained his Charter of Pardon: It was holden in this case, That the Earl might
lawfully enter; but if the words of the Condition had been, Whereby the Goods
ought to be forfeited, chen it had been otherwise; for before Attainder they
ought not to be forfeited.

Mich. 17 and 18 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
CCLXXXIX. Tailors Case.
Outlawry. How avoided by Plea in Person.
Tailor was Outlawed in Debt, and a Supersedeas of Record was delivered to the
Sheriff before the awarding of the Exigent: It was holden that the party should
avoid the same by Plea; then it was moved, if the Plea should be pleaded by
Attorney, or in Person: To which it was said by Manwood, That where matter in
fait is pleaded in avoidance of an Outlawry, it ought to be pleaded in Person,
but matter of Record by Attorney. And Ford Prothonotary said, It was so agreed
in Sir Thomas Chamberlains Case in 7 Eliz. and so it was adjudged in this Case.

CCXC. Mich. 17 and 18 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
THe Case was, The Prior of Norwich made a Lease for life by Indenture, by
which the Lessee covenanted to find Victuals to the Cellerer at all times when
the Cellerer came thither to hold Court; the Priory was dissolved and the
Possessions given to the Dean and Chapter newly erected: It was holden in this
case, That the Lessee should perform that covenant to him who supplied the
Office of Cellerer, scil. the Steward: And it was also holden, That the Lessee
should have an Action of Covenant against the Assignee of his Lessor, or his
Lessee, at his Election.

CCXCI. Mich. 19 and 20 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
A. B. and C. three Ioyntenants give their Lands to D. in tail, Joyntenants.
the remainder to A. in tail: It was the opinion of Mead, That the remainder is
void: Manwood and Harper, A. and B. Ioyntenants, Grants.
A. makes a Lease for life of his Moiety to C. and grants the reversion to B.
the same is good, quod Curia concessit. A. and B. Ioyntenants of a Term, A.
grants his Moiety to his Companion, the same is good without question, if it be
by Deed; but if it be by Word, Quaere.

Hill. 20 Eliz.
CCXCII. Hills Case.
HIll. 20 Eliz. Rot. 371. Giles Hill seized of a Close of Pasture called
Pitmonde, and of Broom Acre, two other Closes in his Demesne as of Fee; and so
seized the said Giles, and Agatha his Wife, and Robert their Son, and B. his
Wife, by Indenture leased the same Broom Acre, and the said other two Closes
to W. Hutchin and B. and his Wife for 90 years, Si quis eorum tam diu vixerit
reddendo inde annuatim praedicto Egidio, and Uxori ejus, and Haeredibus ipsius
Egidij, viz. pro Broom Acre 3 s. 4 d. and pro una Clausura 10 s. and pro
altera 20 s. ad quatuor anni Terminos, with Clause of Re-entry, If any part or
parcel of the said rent be behind, etc. Giles and Agatha dyed: The Son sold the
reversion of Broom Acre 12 Febr. 12 Eliz. by Deed Indented, rendering rent to
Smith and Heal; the rent of Broom Acree is behind, Smith and Heal enter, and
lease the same to Reynolds for three years, who being Ejected, brings Ejectione
firmae and Judgment was given for him, for that they are several Reservations,
and several Conditions: And a difference was taken between this and Winters
Case; for in Winters Case the rent reserved originally is entire; but in this
Case the rent is originally several; and also in Winters Case the condition
was, That if any part of the rent be behind, that the Lessor should re-enter
into the whole. Note that the rent reserved for Broom Acre was 3 s. 4 d. and
the condition was, si contingat praedict' reddit', ou ascun parcel de ceo to be
behind in part, or in all, by one Month after any Feast, etc. in quo solvi
debuit, Quod tunc been licebit praefat' Egidio, etc. in omnia and singula
praemista superius specificat' re-entrare; Et nomine, That pro 10 de nariis pro
Broom Acre pro uno quarterio anni aretro existent, the Vendees of the
Reversion did enter.

CCXCIII. Mich. 19 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
Leases.
NOte by Dyer and Manwood Justices, A. leaseth to B. for years, the remainder
to the right Heirs of the said B. and makes Livery accordingly, that the said
remainder is void, because that there is not any person in esse who can take
presently by the Livery, and every Livery ought to have its operation
presently: But where a Lease is made to B. for life, the remainder to his right
Heirs, that he has a Fee executed, and it shall not be in abeyance; and
Judgment was given accordingly.

CCXCIV. Hill. 23 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
THe Case was, a Man made a Lease of a Garden, containing three Roods of Land,
the Lessee is ousted, and he brought Ejectione firmae, and declared, That he
was Ejected of three Roods of Land: And by Rhodes Sergeant, The Declaration
shall not be intended that the Plaintiff was Ejected out of the Garden of which
the Lease was made; which Dyer granted; for Gardinum is a thing which ought to
be demanded by the same name in all Praecipe's: And this Action of Ejectione
firmae is higher than an Action of Trespass; and the Plaintiff if he recover
shall be put into possession by it. Mead and Windham held the contrary; and
they agreed, That in all real Actions a Garden shall be demanded by the name of
Gardinum. But this Action of Ejectione firmae is in the nature of Trespass, and
it is in the Election of the party to declare, as he does, or for to declare of
the Ejectment of a Garden: For a Garden may at one time be used for a Garden,
and at another time for Plough-Land: But they conceived the better course to
be, and the better order of pleading to have been, if the Plaintiff had
declared, That he was Ejeected of a Garden containing three Roods of Land, as
in the Lease it is specified, Vide 22 E. 4. 13. Assise of a Garden. Vide Cook
11 Part, Savells Case. Ejectione firmae of a Close vocat' Leedes, containing
three Roods, a Rule that such Action lies not of a Close, although it has a
certain name, but it ought to be of so many Acres, and of what nature every
Acre is.

CCXCV. Mich. 19 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
AN Action of Debt was brought by an Administrator, who declared, That the
Administration was committed unto him by the Archbishop of Canterbury: It was
holden, That in such Case he needed not to declare Ratione Praerogativae suae;
or that the Intestate had bona notabilia in diverse Dicocesses; for if the
Intestate had not Goods in diverse Diocesses, the same shall come and be showed
on the other side; and then the Plaintiff shall show the same in certain, and
to that purpose diverse Presidents were showed to the Court by Sandbege and
Best, principal Clerks of the Court; and the same was also affirmed by the
Prothonotaries of the Court of Common Pleas.

CCXCVI. Mich. 19 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
IN an Action upon the Case, the Plaintiff declared upon Trover and Conversion
to his use; It was pleaded by Plowden, That the Defendant before the Action
brought, had lawfully sold the Goods, whereof, etc. and he demanded Judgment of
the Action: As if one has Goods by Trover, and Bails them over before any
Action brought against him, Detinue does not lie against him, which Wray Chief
Justice concessit, as to the Detinue: But where such a person, who has Goods
by Trover, Bails them quibusdam ignotis, such an Action will lie against him.

CCXCVII. Mich. 19 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
IN a Writ of Dower the Demandant recovered by default, Retorn of the Sheriff.
and the Sheriff took an Enquest de Officio, by which it was found that the
Husband did not dye seized prout eis constare poterit; and that Inquisition is
returned by the Sheriff, and filed: It was moved by Mead, That the Office and
Inquisition was not good, for the Office ought to have expressly found, That the
Husband dyed seized, or not, and not ambiguously as it does here, prout eis
constare poterit, and therefore by the Award of the Court, the Retorn was taken
off the File because it was insufficient, and a Writ de novo awarded.

CCXCVIII.
A. Is bound to B. upon Condition to stand to the Arbitrament of certain
persons, who award that B shall make a Release to A. of all Actions, Debts,
Duties, and Demands at the request of A. and afterward A. comes to B. and
requires him to make him a Release; who said to him, That he was unlearned, and
that he would go to one to make it, and the next day after the request he seals
and delivers it to A. who accepts of it: It was holden by Windham and Mead,
That notwithstanding that Acceptance, the Obligation was forfeited; for they
said, That presently after request, he ought to have done it in the speediest
manner that might be. Vide acc' 15 E. 4. 31. Vide also Wottons Case, 16 Eliz.
Dyer 338.

Mich. 26 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
CCXCXI. The Dean and Chapter of Christ Church and Parotts Case.
Grants of the King.
NOte in the Common Pleas in a Case between the Dean and Chapter of Christ
Church in Oxford and Parott; It was holden by the Justices, that if the King
grants Lands unto a Corporation by another name than that which they were named
before, yet the Land shall pass, and the Letters Patents shall be to them as a
new Incorporation, etc.

Mich. 19 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
CCC. Beechers Case.
Jurors.
BEecher being a Gentleman of the Middle Temple, was Returned in an Attaint,
and before the Retorn of the Panel, he became a Minister of the Church; and
now at the day of the Retorn he appeared, and prayed to be discharged according
to the Privilege of those of the Ministry: But the Court would not allow of
his prayer, because that at the time of the Panel made he was a Layman:
Wherefore he was sworn one of the Jury.

Hill. 19 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
CCCI. Vernon and Sir Thomas Staveleys Case.
TEnant in Tail made a Lease for the life of the Lessee according to the
Statute of 32 H. 8. Discontinuance.
and by Wray and Gaudy Justices, the same was not a Discontinuance: But if
Tenant in Tail levyeth a Fine which binds his Issue by the Statute of 4 H. 7.
32 H. 8. that same is a Discontinuance. Look upon the Statute of Leases, and of
Fines; the words in the former are, scil. Such Fines shall be good and
effectual in the Law; but in the other, scil. Such Fines shall be a bar against
the Conusor and his Heirs. And if Tenant in Tail after such a Fine dies
without Issue, the Donor cannot enter, but is put to his Formedon: And as to
the principal Case, Dyer agreed in opinion with Wray and Gaudy.

Trin. 28 Eliz. Rot. 1027.
CCCII. Milborne and the Inhabitants of Dunmowes Case.
MIlborne brought an Action upon the Statute of Winchester against the
Inhabitants within the Hundred of Dunmow in the County of Essex: It was found
by Special Verdict, Upon Statute of Hue and Cry.
That the Plaintiff was robbed the 23 of April, inter horam secundam and
Matutinam tempore Nocturno, and ante Lucem ejusdem diei; and the Opinion of the
Court was clear, That the Plaintiff should be barred, for the said Statute
provides for ordinary Travel, as in the case of Archpole, who came to his Inn
after Sunset, and ante Noctem in tempore diurno, which is an usual time for
Travelers to come to their Inn; but the Law does not receive any in protection
of this Statute, which travel in extraordinary hours; for it is the folly of
the traveller to take his journey so out of season; and the inhabitants are not
bound to leave their houses, and attend the highways tempore Nocturno: And
another reason was alleged by the Justices, because that the said Statute
appoints Watch to be kept in the time of night a festo Assensionis usque festum
Sancti Mich. and this Robbery was done the 23 of April, so out of the said
time: And afterward Judgment was given against the Plaintiff.

CCCIII. Hill. 29 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
Devises.
Sergeant Fenner demanded the Opinion of the Court upon this Case. A. devised
Lands to his Wife for life, and afterward to B. his Son, and his Heirs, when
he should come to the age of 24 years; and if his Wife dyed before that his
said Son should attain to the said age of 24 years, that then J S. should have
the said Lands until the said age of the said Son: A dyed, J. S. dyed the Wife
dyed, the Son being within the age of 24 years; If the Executors of J. S.
should have the Lands after the death of J. S. until the said age of the Son,
was the question. Anderson and Periam conceived that he should not; for this
Interest limited by the Will to J. S. was but a possibility, which was never
vested in him, and therefore could not by any means come to his Executors.
Rhodes and Windham doubted of it. And Fenner put the Case 12 E. 2. Fitz.
Condition 9. where Land is Mortgaged to J. S. upon payment of Money to the said
J. S. or his Heirs, such a day, and before the said day J. S. by his Will
devises, That if the Mortgagor pay the Money, that then A. B. shall have them,
that this Devise of that possibility is good, which Case all the Justices
denied. And Windham put the Case between Welden and Elkington, 20 Eliz. Plowd.
519. where Lessee for years devised his term to his Wife for so many of the
years of the said term as she should live; and if she dyed within the term,
that then his Son Francis should have the residue of the years not incurred,
Francis dyed intestate, the Wife dyed within the term the Administrator of
Francis had the residue of the term, and yet nothing was in Francis the
intestate but a possibility. A Lease was made to one Hayward, his Wife, and one
of his Children, Habendum to Hayward for 99 years if he so long live, and if he
dye within the said term, that then the said Wife should have the said term for
so many of the years as should be to come at the time of the death of her
Husband, and if she dyed also within the said term, that then the Child, party
to the Demise, should have the same for so many of the years of the said term
as should be not expired at the time of the death of the Wife. And the case of
Cicell was cited Dyer 8 Eliz. 253. A Lease was made to William Cecill pro
termino 41 annorum si tam diu vixerit: Et si obierit infra praedictum terminum,
extunc Eliz. uxor praedict. Will Cicell habebit, and tenebit omnia and singula
praemissa pro residuo termini praedict. incompleti, si tam diu vixerit: Et si
praedict. Eliz. obierit infra terminum praedict. Tunc Willielmus Cicell the
Son, etc. shall have and hold it pro residuo termini praedict. completi. And it
was holden by Catlin and Dyer, that these Remainders were void, for the term is
determinable upon the death of William Cecill the Father, and the residue of
the said term cannot remain: And by the Lord Anderson, the Remainders of the
term limited ut supra are utterly void; for every Remainder ought to be
certain, but here is no certainty; for it may be that the first possessioner of
the term may live longer, so as he in the Remainder cannot know what he shall
have. And such was also the Opinion of Rhodes. And he put the Case between
Gravenor and Parker, 3 and 4 Phil. and Ma. Dyer 150. A Lease was made to A. for
life by Indenture, Et provisum fuit by the same Indenture, That if the Lessee
dyed within the term of sixty years then next ensuing, that then his Executors
should have in right of the Lessee so many of the years as should amount to the
number of sixty years, to be accounted from the date of the Indenture; and it
was holden, That that secondary Interest to the Executors was void, and that
the words concerning the same did sound in Covenant.

CCCIV. Trin. 31 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
THe Case was, A made B. and C. his Executors, Executors Action.
they took upon them the charge of the Administration, and afterward B. dyed;
and now an Action of Debt was brought against the surviving Executor, and the
Executor of the other Executor, and the Writ was abated, because against the
surviving Executor it ought only to be brought,

Pasc. 30 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
CCCV. Smith and Babbs Case.
SMith brough an Action upon the Case against Babb for stopping of Water
incessanter decurrent. by his Land, Action upon the Case. Stopping of Water.
by which his Land was drowned, and his Grass rotted: Exception was taken to
it, because it is not alleged, That the Water had so run time out of mind.
Gaudy Justice, If the Water has run there but for one year, if the Defendant
has diverted it, so as he has drowned the Plaintiffs Land, the Action will
lie well enough.

Trin. 26 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
CCCVI. Basil Johnsons Case.
BAsil Johnson one of the Clerks of the Chancery, Privilege of a Clerk in
Court.
was impleaded in the Common Pleas by Bill of Privilege, by an Attorney of the
said Court, and now Basil came into Court, and showed that he is one of the
Clerks ut supra, and prayed his Privilege; but the whole Court was against it,
because the Plaintiff is as well privileged in this Court, as the Defendant is
in the Chancery, and was first interessed in his Privilege by the bringing of
his Writ, but the Defendant was not entitled to his Privilege before the
Arrest; and afterward by the award of the Court; the said Basil was ousted of
his Privilege.

32 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
CCCVII. Collier and Colliers Case.
Prohibition.
BEtween Collier and Collier the Case was, That the Plaintiff was Sued for
Incontinence in the Spiritual Court, and there they would have him Answer upon
his Oath if he ever had Carnal Knowledge of such a Woman; upon which he prayed
a Prohibition: Vide inde F. N. B. 41. a. Register 36. Et nemo tenetur seipsum
prodere: But the Court would advise of it.

32 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
CCCVIII. Mountney and Andrews Case.
Execution.
IN a Scire Facias by Mountney against Andrews of Gray's Inn, upon a Judgment in
Debt, the Defendant pleaded, That heretofore a Fieri Facias, at the Suit of the
now Plaintiff, issued to the Sheriff of Leicester, by force of which the said
Sheriff took diverse Sheep of the Defendants, and that as yet he does detain and
keep them. It was holden by the whole Court to be a good Plea, although he did
not say, That the Writ was returned; for the Execution is lawful
notwithstanding that, and the Plaintiff has his remedy against the Sheriff.

Hill. 29 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
CCCIX. Dawbney and Gores Case.
BEtween Dawbney Plaintiff and Gore and Gone Defendants, in a Writ of Disceit,
In Arrest of Judgment it was moved, That two are accountable to one, and the
one of them accounts without the other, that that is not any account, and then
no account can be assigned in that. As to that it was said by Popham
Attorney General, That notwithstanding that one be not compellable to account
without his Companion, and by way of Action of Account, the one shall not
account without the other, unless the Process be determined against him, and
then he who appears has accounted and the other against whom the Process is
determined, has purchased his Charter of Pardon, the account made by his
Companion shall bind him. Vide inde 41 E. 3. 13. Yet if one of the Accomptants
will account willingly, the same is a good account: And in account, if one
confesses, and the other pleads in bar, the confession of the one shall bind
the other; and such was the Opinion of the Court. Another matter was moved in
this case, because that one Tedcastell and Swinnerton, being accountable to the
said Gores and Dawbney, they have accounted to Dawbney only, and he alone has
accepted of the account, and that is not any account, therefore no desceit, but
the Action of Account does remain. To which it was answered by Popham, That the
same was a good account, being accepted by Dawbney, and should bind the Gores;
for an Account is a personal thing, as an Obligation, which may be released by
one of the Obligees. Vide 14 E. 4. 2. Where one was accountable to two, and the
one of them did assign Auditors, before whom the Accountant is found in
Arrearages, and thereupon both of them brought Debt upon Account, and well: And
so none of the Exceptions were allowed by the Court.

Mich. 33 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
CCCX. Trivilians Case.
THo. Trivilian Tenant in tail of White Acre, Black Acre, and Green Acre,
leased White Acre for years to B. and Black Acre to C. and afterward made a
Feoffment of all three Acres to F. and others by Deed, in which Deed was
comprised a Letter of Attorney, in which he ordained Harris, and three others,
his Attorneys, jointly and severally to enter in the Premises, and every part
thereof in the name of the whole, and possession in his name to receive, and
afterward to make Livery, etc with other ordinary and usual words; and it was
expressed in the said Deed of Feoffment, that the Feoffment should be to the
intent to perform his last Will; and afterward one of the said Attorneys
entered into the Land demised for life, and expelled the Tenant for life, and
made Livery and Seisin to the Feoffees accordingly; and afterward the said
Harris, another of the Attorneys, scil. one of the Joint Lessees, being one of
the three Attorneys, made Livery of the Land demised for years; and after the
Feoffor in the time of Queen Eliz. by his last Will devised, That the Feoffees
should be seized of the Land, Rents and Reversion, until of the Issues and
Profits thereof certain Sums of Money should be paid to his younger Sons, and
dyed. And Exception was taken to the pleading, because it is not specially
shown, that the Land devised was holden in Socage. And that was holden a
sufficient Exception: And the Court was of Opinion, That the Opinion of Dyer,
Devises.
Whiddon, and Bendloes in 16 Eliz. was not Law; for by the common Law no Land
was devisable, but by Custom, which ought to be pleaded where Title is made by
Devise. Tenances.
And now by the Statute all Lands holden in Socage are devisable, and but two
parts of the Land holden by Knight Service; and therefore he who would make
Title to himself by a Devise, ought to show the Tenure of it, and so it was
lately adjudged in the Kings Bench in Thompsons Case. And by Anderson and
Periam, This Feoffment was well executed for the manner of it, Attorneys make
Livery.
for the Letter of Attorney is Conjunctim and divisim ad intrandum in omnia and
singula praemissa; and upon these words one Attorney may make Livery in one
parcel of the Land, and the other Attorney in the other parcel, and in this
case, if one of the said Attorneys make Livery in one part only, without
meddling with the residue by himself, or by any other, the same shall pass; for
it is not necessary that all pass, or nothing at all.

7 Eliz. Dyer 79.
CCCXI. The Duchess of Suffolks Case.
ADrian Stokes and the Lady Francisca Duchess of Suffolk his Wife, brought a
Quare Impedit against the Bishop of Exeter and others: The Bishop pleaded, and
demanded Judgment of the Writ, because he said, It appears by the Writ, Quod
praedicta Francisca uxor praefati Adriani, nominatur in dicto Brevi Domina
Francisca Ducissa Suffolk, ubi per Legem terrae eadem Francisca by her Marriage
betwixt the aforesaid Adrian, and her the said Frances, had lost her name of
Dignity, and ought to be named Francisca uxor praefati Adriani: Wherefore, and
because the said Frances is named Lady Duchess of Suffolk in the said Writ,
therefore he demanded Judgment of the Writ. And afterward the Plaintiffs did
discontinue their Suit, and durst not proceed. Vide the Case 7 E. 6. Dyer 79.

Mich. 4 and 5 Phil. and Mary.
CCCXII. The Queen, Due, and Kirbys Case.
THe King and Queen brought a Writ of Disceit against Due and Kirby, and
declared, That Colley, was seized of certain Lands in Fee, and holden of the
King and Queen as of their Manor of Westbury, which Manor is ancient Demesne,
and so seized, levied a Fine to the said Due for Conusans de droit etc. Due
rendered unto Colley for life, the Remainder over to Kirby in Fee; Colley dyed,
Kirby entered as in his Remainder: Kirby pleaded, That the Land is Frank-fee,
etc. upon which they are at Issue; which Issue depending, not tried, Due dyed:
It was moved that the Writ should abate. But it was allowed; for this Action is
but Trespass in its Nature for to punish the said Disceit: And Due had nothing
in the Land, but is named only because he was party to the Disceit. And no Land
is to be recovered, but only the Fine reversed.

Pasc. 26 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
CCCXIII. Russels Case.
RUssel was condemned in an Action of Debt, Execution.
and after the year and day the Plaintiff sued a Capias ad satisfaciend'
against him, and he was taken by force of it, and committed to the Marshal as
in Execution: It was holden by the Court, That the same was a void Execution,
and not only avoidable by Error, and therefore the Defendant was discharged,
for it is not at any Execution; and the Plaintiff may have a Scire Facias when
he will.

Pasc. 26 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
CCCXIV. Wroth and Capells Case.
BEtween Wroth and Capell the Case was, 3 Leon. 102.
That A. was indicted upon the Statute of 8. H. 6. and Exception was taken to
the Indictment, because there were no words of Freehold in it, or to prove that
the party grieved had any Freehold, whereof he might be disseised: But because
the words of the Indictment were Expulit and disseisivit, which could not be
true, if the party expelled and disseised had not Freehold, therefore the
Exception was not allowed, etc. Another Exception was taken to the Indictment,
for that the words were in unum Tenementum intravit, and this word Tenementum
is too general, and an uncertain word; and therefore for that cause the party
was discharged. But the Indictment was further in unum Tenementum, and 10 Acras
terrae eidem pertinent. and as to those Acres he was put to answer.

CCCXV. Pasc. 26 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
Execution.
NOte, It was agreed by the Court, and affirmed by the Clarks, That if an
Action of Debt be brought upon an Obligation against two upon one Joint
Praecipe, and the Plaintiff has Judgment to recover, that one Joint Execution
ought to be sued against them both; but if the Suit were by Original and
several Praecipe's, Execution might be sued forth against any of them.

Mich. 8 and 9 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
CCCXVI. Belfield and Rous's Case.
IN Dower (by Sibill Belfield, who was the Wife of Anthony Rous) against Thomas
Rous, they were at Issue, upon Detinue of Charters, and it was found for the
Demandant; and it was further found, That the Husband of the Demandant, of
whose Seisin she demanded Dower, dyed having Issue Charles Rous, Quodque idem
Carolus and dict' Sibill perceperunt and receperunt per spacium sex annorum
proxime post mortem dict' Anthonij the Issues and Profits of the said Lands,
whereof the Demandant now demands Dower; and that the said Charles afterward
dyed without Issue, after whose death the said Thomas Rous entered, etc. And
Judgment was given for the Demandant, and to recover damages after the death of
her Husband.

CCCXVII. Pasc. 7 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
Uses.
BEfore the Statute of Uses a Feoffment is made to the use of a Man sole, and a
Woman sole, and their Heirs, and afterward they inter-marry, and afterward
the Statute of Uses came: It was the Opinion of the Justices, That they should
hold the Land in such sort as they held the Use, scil. by several and divided
Moieties; for by the said Statute the possession shall be executed to the Use,
in such Nature, Condition, and Quality as it was before.

Mich. 28 and 29 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
CCCXVIII. Sir Gervaise Clyftons Case.
A Quo Warranto was brought against Sir Gervaise Clyfton, 3 Leon. 184. Quo
Warranto.
and showed, That the said Sir Gervaise was seized of a Manor and a Message,
within which he claimed to have a Court with view of Frank-pledge, and other
Liberties, and that without any Grant or Authority, usurpavit Libertates
praedictas: That the Defendant pleaded Quod non usurpavit Libertates praedictas
infra Messuagium praedict' modo and forma; and thereupon it was demurred in
Law, for it was said, That the Defendant ought to have said Non usurpavit
Libertates praedictas, nec eorum aliquam, for he ought to answer singulum; and
also he ought to have pleaded as well to the Manor as to the Message; for if
the Defendant has holden Court within any place of the Manor it is sufficient.
And the Case 33 H. 8. Br. Travers sans ceo 367. was cited, and Information was
in the Exchequer, That the Defendant had bought Wools of A.B. contrary to the
Statute, the Defendant pleaded, That he had not bought of A. B. and the Plea
was not allowed, for he ought to have said, That he had not bought modo and
forma, for if he had bought of A. B. or J. S. the same is not any matter, nor
traversable, which Cook denied to be Law: And he conceived also that the
Information upon the Quo Warranto is not sufficient; for by the same the
Defendant is charged to hold a Court, and it is not showed what Court, and it
may be it was a Court of Pypowders, Turn, etc. And Vide 10 E. 4. 15, 16. a Quo
Warranto contains two things, 1 Claim, 2. Usurpation. And here the Defendant
has answered but to the Usurpation, and it has said nothing as to the Claim:
And it has been holden here, heretofore, that he ought to make answer to both.
And it has been holden in a Reading upon the Statute de Quo Warranto, which is
supposed to be Frowicks Reading, That a Quo Warranto does not lie of such
Liberties which do not lie in Claim, as Goods of Felons, etc. which lies only
in point of Charter.

CCCXIX. Temps Roign Eliz.
THe Prior of Bath leased his Manor of A. to C. for life, rendering rent, and
afterward the Priory was dissolved, the King leased the whole Manor, cum
pertinenciis, to Sir Walter D. Knight. Dyer, The matter depends upon this point. If
the Demesne be severed from the Services during the life of the Lessee: And he
conceived, That the Lord cannot hold a Court, if such a power be not reserved
to him upon the Lease. Weston, The Manor nor is in suspense during the Lease,
for a Reversion upon an Estate for life, and Services in possession cannot be
united to make a Manor, but contrary if but parcel had been leased, Quod Curia
concessit. Welsh, The Demesnes are severed from the Services for ever, as if
they had been granted in Fee; but here having regard to the Lessor, the
Demesnes and Services are united and made one Manor; but as to the Lessee, and
all others, the Services are in gross; and of that Opinion was also Dyer. And
he said, If a Bishop leaseth his Demesnes of his Manor for life, and dies, the
Reversion shall be in his Successor, and was in himself for his life in the
right of his Church: And if Husband and Wife seized of a Manor in the right of
his Wife, lease the Demesnes of the said Manor for life, yet he has the
Reversion in the right of his Wife, and in such Case it does remain a Manor;
but if the Husband sole had made the Lease, he had gained the Reversion to him,
and so severed it from the Manor.

CCCXX. Temps Roign Eliz.
Devises.
A. Devised that his Wife should take the Profits of his Lands, until his
daughter should come to the full age of 25 years, and if the daughter dyed
within the age of 18 years, then his wife should have the Land for her life,
the remainder over to J. S. The daughter became of the age of 18 years, and
dyed before she came of the age of 20 years; and Dyer held clearly, That the
Remainder was gone; for the daughter accomplished, and survived the age of 18
years: And he said that the case late depending in the Kings Bench was this,
The Husband devised the Profits of his Lands to his Wife for 25 years, and that
then his Son should have it in Tail to him, and to the Heirs of his Body, etc.
now before the 25 years expired he has Fee, and if he has Issue, then his
Estate is changed into Tail: But by Carus he has both Estates, scil. Fee-tail,
and Fee-expectant.

CCCXXI. Temps Roign Eliz.
Surrenders.
A Woman Tenant in Tail made a Lease not warranted by the Statute, took a
Husband, had Issue and dyed; the Husband being Tenant by the Courtesy
surrendered to the Issue: It was holden that he should not avoid the Lease
during the life of the Tenant by the Courtesy: But yet some held, That the
Surrender ought to be by Deed, as a Lease to A. for life, the Remainder to B.
for life, the Remainder to C. in Fee; if B. surrenders to C. it must be by Deed.

CCCXXII. Temps Roign Eliz.
THe Case was this, A. leaseth Lands to B. for years, Extent.
rendering Rent, with Clause of re-entry; and afterward Debt is recovered
against him: It was holden, That now the Moiety of the Rent and the Reversion
was extendable by Elegit, and upon such Extent, Condition suspended.
the Condition is suspended during the Extent, as well in the Lessor, as in the
Party who has the Extent.

Temps Roign Eliz.
CCCXXIII. Mitchell and Nordens Case. Procedendo upon Aid-Prayer in Dower.
ELizabeth', etc. Dilectis Jacobo Dyer, etc. Monstravit nobis Elizabeth'
Mitchell, quae fuit uxor, etc. Quod cum ipsa prosecuta fuit coram vobis and
sociis vestris, etc. Breve nostrum de Dote unde nihil habet versus Thomam
Norden etc. Et praedictus Thomas venit, and dixit, Quod vir praedictae
Elizabethae was seized, and leased to him for life with warranty; and for that
cause he vouched to warranty Tristriam' Mitchell Filium and Haeredem dict'
Richardi infra aetatem existen', and in Custodia eo quod dictus Richardus die
quo obiit, etc. Et hoc paratus est verificare. Unde non intendit quod vos
praefati Justiciarii nostri nobis inde inconsultis ulterius procedere velletis:
Et petiit auxilium de nobis, and habuit: Et super hoc dies datus est tam
praefatae Eliz. quam dict. Tho. Norden a die Pasc. etc. Et dictum fuit
praefatae Eliz. Quod sequatur penes vos, quarum quidem allegatione praetextu
vos in placito praedict. ulterius procedere distulistis, and adhuc differtis in
ipsius Eliz. dispendium and gravamen: Et super hoc, eadem Eliz. venit hic coram
nobis in Cancellaria nostra; Et petit Breve nostrum de Procedendo, inde in hac
part vobis dirigend': Super quo quaesita fuit in eadem Curia Cancellariae
nostrae a Gilberto Gerrard, Attornato nostro generali, qui pro nobis in hac
part sequitur si quid dicere scivit, aut potuit, per quod dict' Tristriamus
infra aetatem, and in custodia nostra existen' ut praefatur, ad Warrantiam
obligetur aut obligari debeat, aut si idem Gilbertus aliquid pro nobis habeat
aut dicere scivit quare Breve nostrum de Procedendo praefatae Eliz. in ea part
minime concederetur. Qui quidem Gilbertus adtunc, and ibidem dixit, quod
praefat' Tho. Norden non informavit praedict. Gilbertum de aliquo, per quod
praedict. Tristriamus in custodia nostra existen' ullo modo obligetur ad
warrantizand', and eidem nihil dixit aut dicere scivit and potuit quia
praedict. Breve de Procedendo eidem Eliz. in ea part concederetur: Nos inde
nolentes eidem Eliz. justiciam ulterius differ in hac part: Vobis Mandamus,
quod si coram vobis in placito praedict. taliter sit processum and allegat',
tunc in placito illo, and in redditione Judicii in eodem placito cum ea
celeritate quam de jure and secundum Legem and Consuetudinem hujus Regni nostri
Anglioe poteritis procedatis, and partibus praedict. plenam and celerem, etc.
dicta allegatione non obstante. Test me ipsa, etc. Et super hoc eadem Eliz.
petit Judicium and Seisinam suam versus praedict. Thomam Norden de tertia part
Tenementorum praedict. cum pertinentiis. Super quo visis, etc. Consideratum
est, etc. Quod praedict. Elizabetha recuperet seisinam suam versus praefatum
Thomam Norden de tertia part Tenementor' praedictor'. Et quod idem Thomas
expectet si praedict' Tristriamus Tenementa praedict. unde etc. ei warrantizari
debeat pro recompensatione valentiae tertiae partis praedict' versus eundem
Tristriamum ratione Warrant' illius habend' durant' minore aetate sua, Et donec
manus dict' Dominae Reginae a possessione terrae ipsius Tristriami amoveantur.

Virtute Brevis istius mihi direct' ultimo die, etc. habere feci infranominat'
Eliz. plenariam seisinam de tertia part Messuagii, viz. de una Aula parcell'
Messuagij praedict. ac de una Camera sive Conclave in Messuagio praedict.
existent', necnon de uno Solario, ac de una parcell' ambulatorij vocat' a
Gallery, alia parcell' dict' Messuagii necnon de tertia part unius Molendini,
viz. de integro Molendino praedict' per quemlibet tertium mensem quolibet anno
durante vita, etc. occupand', and gaudend', etc.

CCCXXIV. Hill. 25 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
Traverse.
IN an Action upon the Case, the Plaintiff declared upon certain Corn which came
to the hands of the Defendant, and that he converted it, and supposed the
coming to be to his hands in London. The Defendant said, That he was seized of
certain Lands in R. in Berks, and that the Plaintiff did thereof him disseise,
and sowed the Lands, and before severance he himself re-entred, and took away
the Corn, as was lawful for him to do absque hoc, that any Corn came to his
hands in London: and by the Opinion of the whole Court, the Traverse was holden
to be good.

Hill. 25 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
CCCXXV. Wingate and Sands Case.
EJectione firmae by Wingate against Sands: It was moved upon Evidence, That a
Fine was levied, and in one Term three Proclamations were made, and before that
the fourth Proclamation was made, the Term was adjourned, so as the fourth
Proclamation could not be made the said Term: It was agreed by the whole Court,
That by that adjournment the fourth Proclamation was not executed, but should
be supplied the next Term, in which the fifth Proclamation was to be made.

Trin. 29 Eliz. In the Star Chamber.
CCCXXVI. The Lord Cromwell and Townsends Case.
HEn. Lord Cromwell Exhibited a Bill in the Star Chamber against Roger Townsend
Esquire for that the said Townsend in an Action between James Tavernor Plaintiff,
and Ja. Cromwell, Firmor of the said Lord Cromwell Defendant in Trespass, in
the favor or unlawful maintenance of the said Tavernor, did procure a partial
Jury to be returned. And upon the hearing of the Cause, the matter given in
Evidence was, That the said Tavernor was a Copyholder of the said Lord
Cromwell, and that the said Lord, pretending that the said Tavernor had
forfeited Copyhold, caused the said Ja. Cromwell to make an Entry in the right
of the said Lord upon the said Tavernor, upon which Entry Tavernor brought an
Action of Trespass against the said Ja. Cromwell, in which Action the parties
were at Issue upon the Forfeiture; and before any Venire Facias issued,
Tavernor hearing that one Steward, who was Bailiff of the Liberty under the
Earl of Arundel, and who ought to have made the Panel, etc. was purposed to
have made the said Panel not duly, viz to have returned in the same great
Gentlemen of the Country, who were Lords of Manors in favor of the said Lord
Cromwell; That he went to the said Roger Townsend, who was then one of the
principal Servants and Agents of the said Earl, and showed unto him, That if
those great Persons and Lords of Manors be returned for the trial of the said
Issue, peradventure they would not so easily appear for the Expedition of the
said Parties as Gentlemen of an Vnder-Condition; and also many of them being
Lords of Manors, and having customary Tenants, and therefore not indifferent to
try that Issue; and prayed his Order to the said Steward for the making of an
indifferent Panel: Upon which said Conference with the said Steward for the
making of an indifferent Panel, and showing unto him that in doing and making
of the same there was not convenient, nor any equal course to retorn Knights,
Esquires, or Lords, but rather such sufficient Persons for the greater
Expedition of Justice, and Indifference of Trial: And afterward the said
Tavernor exhibited a Petition, showing all the special matter, and prayed him
to give order for the making of an indifferent Panel for the trial of that
Cause; which Petition was delivered to the Earl by the said Townsend, in the
name of the said Tavernor; upon which the said Earl referred the said Matter,
and the ordering of the same to three of his chiefest Agents and Counselors,
viz. Dicksey. Townsend, and Chrell, and delivered to them the Book of the
Freeholdry within the said Liberty, who according to their Commission made a
Panel, which was returned, and the Jury passed with the said James Cromwell in
the right of the said Lord: And if that intermedling of Townsend with the
Matter, ut supra, etc. especially his conference with the Bailiff, be
maintenance or not, was the Question: And by Anderson and Wray it was said for
Law, That because the said Townsend was in a manner a Servant to the said Earl,
who had the retorn of the Writs, and one of his principal Counselors and
Agents, and hearing ex insinuatione of the said Tavernor the misdemeanour of
the Bailiff of his Lord, could not do better than admonish the said Bailiff of
his duty, for it concerned the Honor of his Master, and also his Inheritance
in the said Liberty: But if the said Townsend had been a mere stranger to the
said Earl, so as no such privity had been betwixt them, the same had been
clearly Maintenance in Townsend, as it was lately adjudged in that Court in the
case of one Gifford, where the parties being at Issue, and a Venire Facias to
the Sheriff to retorn a Jury, a stranger wrote to one of the Jurors, who was
returned in the Panel, praying him to appear at the day, and to do in that
cause according to his Conscience, and the same was adjudged Maintenance. And
afterward upon full hearing of the cause, the said Townsend by the Sentence of
the Court was acquitted of any Maintenance, with great allowance and
approbation of many Lords of the Counsel there present, Bromley Cancellario
tantum exclamante.

CCCXXVII. Mich. 15 and 16 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
IN a Writ of Partition the Defendant prayed in Aid, the Plaintiff
counterpleaded the Aid, upon which Issue was joined, and found for the
Plaintiff: It was the Opinion of the Court That it was peremptory for the
Defendant. And the Plaintiff shall have the Partition, scil. Quod fiat
Partitio, and the reason thereof is for the delay of the Plaintiff, and for the
vexation of the Country who are to try it; otherwise it had been if it had been
adjudged against the Defendant upon a Demurrer.

CCCXXVIII. Mich. 21 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
IN a Formedon of a Manor, the Tenant pleaded Ioynttenancy by Fine with J. S.
The Demandant averred the Tenant sole Tenant as the Writ supposed, and upon
that Issue was joined, and found for the demandant: Upon which a Writ of Error
was brought; and Error assigned in this, That whereas upon Ioyntenancy pleaded
by Fine, the Writ ought to abate without any Averment by the Demandant against
it; the Averment has been received against the Law: And by Southcote at the
common Law, If the Tenant plead Ioyntenancy by Deed, the Writ should abate
without any Averment, but that was remedied by the Statute of 34 E. 1. but
Ioyntenancy by Fine does remain as it was by the common Law; for he has
punishment enough in that, because by that Plea, if it be false, he has by way
of conclusion given away the Moiety of the Land in demand to him with whom he
has pleaded Ioyntenancy; and the Law does not intend that he will so slightly
depart with his Land for the abatement of a Writ: Else in a Praecipe quod
reddat the Tenant confesses himself to be Villain to a Stranger, the Writ
shall abate, without any Averment of Frank-estate; for the Law intends that the
Tenant will not enthrawl himself without cause. Wray to the same intent: But
the Demandant may confess and avoid the Fine, as to say, That he who levied the
Fine was his Disseisor upon whom he has before entered, etc. And if Tenant in
Fee-simple be impleaded, and he says, he is Tenant for life, the Remainder
over to A. in Fee, and prays in Aid of A. the Demandant shall not take
Averment, That the Tenant the day of the Writ brought was seized in Fee. Note,
That in this Fine Ioyntenancy was pleaded but for parcel; and it was holden by
^ray and Southcote, That the whole Writ should abate, as in a Writ against
many, the misnosmer of the one shall abate the whole Writ against all the
Defendants; and so where the Demandant enters into parcel of the Land in
demand, if the Land in demand be one entire thing, it shall abate the Writ in
all. In this Case the Demandant ought to have in his Writ a Foreprise of the
Land, parcel of the Land in demand, whereof the Ioynttenancy by Fine is
pleaded; for this dismembring of the Manor, and destruction of the Land whereof
the Ioyntenancy is pleaded, is peravail and beneath the Gift whereof the
Formedon is conceived; and therefore in respect of the title of the Demandant,
it remains in right parcel of the Manor, and therefore it ought to be demanded
accordingly with a Foreprise: But if A. gives to B a Manor, except 13 Acres in
Tail, there if after upon any Discontinuance the Issue in Tail is to have a
Formedon, in such Case there needs not any Foreprise, for the said 10 Acres
were never severed from the Manor upon the Gift. But if Land in demand be
several as 20 Acres but two, this Foreprise is not good, Vide Temps E. 1. Fitz.
Br. 866. Praecipe unam bovat' terrae; except a Selion, and the Writ was abated,
for every demand ought to be certain, but a Selion is a parcel of Land
uncertain as to the quantity, in some places it is an Acre, in some more, and
in some less. Another point was, That because that the Tenant has admitted and
accepted this Averment, scil. Sole Tenant as the Writ supposes; if the Court
notwithstanding the admittance of the Tenant ought without exception of the
party ex Officio abate the Writ: And Wray conceived that it might, for it is a
possitive Law: As if a Woman bring an Appeal of Murder upon the death of her
Brother, and the Defendant does admit it without Challenge or Exception, yet
the Court shall abate the Appeal, 10 E. 4. 7. And Vide the principal Case
there, Non ideo puniatur Dominus: And if an Action be brought against an
Hostler upon the common Custom of the Realm, and in the Writ he is not named
(Common Hostler) and the Defendant does accept of such a Writ without any
Exception unto it, yet the Court shall abate the Writ ex Officio, Vide 38 H. 6.
30.

CCCXXIX. Mich. 21 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
NOte this Case: A. makes a Feoffment in Fee to B. and binds himself only to
warranty, without more: B. is impleaded, and voucheth A. who enters into the
Warranty, and loses, so as Judgment is given against B. and also to recover in
value against A. who before Execution dies: It was the opinion of the Court,
that B. should have Execution in value against the Heir of A.

CCCXXX. Mich. 21 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
A. Seized of Lands in the right of his Wife for the term of the life of the
Wife, made a Feoffment in Fee to the use of his said Wife for her life: In that
case the wife is remitted, and it is not like Townsends Case, Plowd Com. 111.
for in that case the Entry of the Wife was not congeable, for she was Tenant in
tail, which Estate was discontinued by the Feoffment of her Husband. Periam
Justice cited Si^enhams case. Baron seized in the right of his Wife for the
term of the life of the Wife. They both surrendered, and took back the Land to
them and a third person: And it was holden that the Wife was not presently
remitted; but after the death of her Husband she might disagree.

CCCXXXI. Mich. 21 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
A. B. and C. three Brothers: A. has issue and dies, the middle Brother
Purchases Land, and devises the same to his Son in Tail, and if he die
without Issue that the Land shall remain to the King, and Lineage of the
Father, sc. of the middle Brother, and if the Son of the eldest Son or the
youngest Brother should have the Land, was the Question; and it was the opinion
of the Lord Dyer, That the Son of the eldest Brother should have it.

CCCXXXII. Mich. 21 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
A Lease for life was made to B the Remainder to C. and D. in Tail: It was
holden that in this case C. and D. cannot disagree to that Remainder without
matter of Record, for they are Tenants in Common; but if the Remainder had been
limited to them in Fee, so as they took jointly, it had been otherwise, for
then by the disagreement of the one, the other shall take the whole Land.

Mich. 32 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
CCCXXXIII. Wait and Coopers Case.
IN Ejectione firmae between Wait and Cooper: It was found by Verdict, That
Cranmer, late Archbishop of Canterbury, was seized of the Manor and Borough of
Southwark in the right of his Bishopric, and that the Prior of Morton was
seized of the House in which the Ejectment is supposed, and held the same of
the said Archbishop as of his said Manor and Borough, after which, 30 H. 8. the
said Archbishop gave to the King the said Manor and Borough, with confirmation
of the Dean and Chapter; and that the same year the said Prior surrendered, by
which the said King was seized, as well of the said Manor and Borough, as of
the said House, and afterward the King by his Letters Patents gave the said
House, and other Lands in Middlesex and Essex to Curson and Pope in Fee, tenend
in Libero Burgagio per fidelitatem tantum, and non in Capite, pro omnibus
serviciis and demandis: And afterward King Edw. 6. gave the said Manor and
Borough to the Mayor and Commonalty of London; Curson and Pope covey the said
House to Welsh in Fee, who dyed without Heir: All the Question was, What Tenure
is here reserved upon the Words and Grant made by King Hen. 8. to Curson and
Pope. It was said, It could not be a Tenure in Burgage, because here is not any
Rent reserved, which see by Littleton 162, 163, 164. And the Lord Anderson at
the first very strongly insisted upon that. Another matter was, because here is
reserved for all the Lands and Tenements but one Tenure; so that if the Court
should adjudge the Tenure reserved to be Burgage, then Lands at the Common Law
out of Boroughs should be holden in Burgage: Also a Tenure in Burgage cannot be
created without these words, ut de Burgagio: And to that purpose Shute Justice
agreed, Vide Br. Tenures 94.

Mich. 29 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
CCCXXXIV. Fullers Case.
NOte, It is holden by the whole Court in Fullers case, That if one give 300 l.
to another to have an Annuity of 50 l. assured to him for 100 years, if he, his
Wife, and four of his Children so long shall live, That this is not within the
Statute of Usury: So if there had not been any Condition; but care is to be
taken that there be no Communication of borrowing of any Money before.

Trin. 30 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
CCCXXXV. Goore and Winkfields Case.
3 Leon. 223.
DEbt upon an Obligation by Goore against Winkfield, the Obligation was written
in this Form; Know all by these Presents, That I H. Winkfield am bound to
William Goore in the Sum of, etc. for the payment of which Sum I give full
power and authority to the said Goore to keep the said Sum upon the Profits of
the Bayliwick of Swinstall from year to year, until the same be paid: To which
the Defendant pleaded, That the Plaintiff had levied parcel of the said Sum,
etc. and did not show how much, and therefore the pleading was holden not good.
And it was clearly agreed by the whole Court, That the Plaintiff was at
Liberty, either to bring his Action upon the said Obligation, or to levy the
Debt according to the Clause aforesaid.

Pasc. 26 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
CCCXXXVI. Powley and Siers Case.
POwley brought Debt against Sier Executor of the Will of one A. The Defendant
demanded Judgment of the Writ: For he said, That one B. was Executor of the
said A. and that the said B. constituted the said Defendant his Executor, so as
the Writ ought to have been brought against the Defendant as Executor of an
Executor, and not as immediate Executor of the said A. The Plaintiff replied,
That the said B. before any probate of the Will, or any Administration, dyed,
and so maintained his Writ, upon which the Defendant demurred. Wray was for the
Writ, for although here be not any Probate of the Will of A. or any other
Administration; yet when B. makes his Will, and the Defendant his Executor, it
is an acceptance in Law of the Administration and Execution of the first Will.
Gaudy and Ayliff Justices, that the Writ was not good. Vide 23 Eliz. Dyer 372.

Mich. 19 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
CCCXXXVII. Tailors Case.
Tailor was Outlawed in Debt, where a Supersedeas upon Record was delivered to
the Sheriff before the award of the Exigent. It was holden that the Party
should avoid the same by Plea: Then it was moved, If the Plea should be pleaded
by Attorney, or in Person. To which it was said by the Justices, That where
matter in fact is pleaded in avoiding of an Outlawry, he ought to plead it in
Person; but matter of Record by Attorney. And so Ford Prothonotary said it was
agreed in the Case of Sir Thomas Chamberlain, 7 Eliz. and so it ought to be in
the principal Case here.

CCCXXXVIII. Mich. 18 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
NOte, It was agreed for Law in the Kings Bench, if Lessee for years grant all
his Estate and Interest to A rendering rent by Indenture, and for default of
payment a re-entry. And the Grantor demands the rent, and A. demands an
Acquittance, but the Lessee for years refuses; in such case A. may refuse to
pay such rent, for the rent is to be paid in this nature without an
Acquittance; but contrary if Lessee for years had leased parcel of his Estate,
rendering Rent with Clause of Re-entry, etc.

CCCXXXIX. Mich. 18 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
THe King seized of a Manor to which an Advowson is appendant, a Stranger
presented, and his Clerk in by 6 Months: It was holden, that in such case the
Grantee may present, for the Advowson was always appendant, and the Inheritance
thereof passed to the Grantee for it was not made disappendant by the
usurpation, as in the case of a common person; for the King cannot be put out
of possession. But the Patentee shall not have Quare Impedit of the first
disturbance, for that presentment did not pass to him, being a thing in Action
without mention thereof in his Grant. And if the Patentee brings a Quare
Impedit of a second avoidance, he shall make his presentment by the presentment
of the King, not making mention of the Usurpation: Yet if a Bishop present for
Lops in the case of a common person, he ought to make mention of it; for that
is a title to the Patron.

CCCXL. Trin. 28 Eliz. In the Kings Bench adjudged.
NOte, In the Case of one Manning it was adjudged. That where an Infant
Executor sold the Goods of his Testator for a lesser price than they were
worth, and afterward brought an Action of Detinue against the Vendee, upon
that Detinue in retardatione executionis Testamenti, that the said Sale was
good, and should bind the Executor notwithstanding his Nonage.

28 Eliz. In the Chancery.
CCCXLI. The Lord Awdleys Case.
THe Lord Awdley, 12 H. 7. enfeoffed Hoddy and others of certain Lands in the
County of Somerset, and afterward by Indenture reciting the said Feoffment,
and the date of it; and also that it was to the intent that his Feoffees should
perform his Will as follows in effect, viz. My Will is, That my said Feoffees
shall stand seized to the use, that the said Hoddy shall receive of the profits
of the Lands 100 l. which he had sent to the said Lord Awdley; and also stand
seized to pay all his debts upon Bills signed with his hand; and after the
debts paid, that the said Feoffees shall make Estate of the said Lands unto him
the said Lord Awdley and Jone his Wife, and to the Heirs of their two Bodies,
with diverse Remainders over. The said Lord had Issue by the said Jone, and also
had Issue by a former Wife a daughter, the Feoffees never made any Estate to
the said Lord and his Wife: And by the Opinion of diverse Justices and Sages of
the Laws, that upon that matter no use was changed; for it is not any last
Will, but an Intent. And although that the Feoffees shall be seized to the use
of the Feoffor and his Heirs, because that no consideration was, by which they
should be seized to their own uses, yet the same cannot make any Use unto the
said Lord and his Wife in tail without containing an Estate, for the Wife is a
Stranger to the Land: And also it cannot be a Will, for the Estate mentioned in
the said writing, ought to have been made to the said Lord and his Wife, who
cannot take the same by his Will. This matter depended in the Chancery: And the
advice of the Justices being there required, they delivered their Opinions,
That by the said Writing no Use was changed nor any Estate vested in the said
Lord and his Wife: And a Decree was there made accordingly, until proof be made
that such an Estate was made.

CCCXLII. Mich. 26 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
THe Case was in the Kings Bench, in Debt: It was found by Special Verdict,
That the Testator, being possessed of diverse Goods in London, where he dyed;
and also at the time of his death, the Queen being indebted unto him in the Sum
of 4 l. 10 s. she then residing at Whitehall; the Archbishop as Metropolitan,
granted license of Administration to the Queen; and the Bishop of London
afterward granted license of Administration to J.S. The Court sent to the
Civilians to appear in Court, and to deliver their Opinions in this case. And
thereupon Lloyd, Doctor of Law, appeared and argued to this effect, viz. That
in ancient times in such cases, the several Ordinaries committed several
Administrations for the Goods in their Diocese respecive: In which case, the
mischief was very great, for the Creditor was driven to bring several Actions
of the Administrators of the several Ordinaries: Vide H. 7. 13 R. 2.
Administrators 21. But afterward upon a Decree, upon a Composition in such
cases, the Metropolitan committed the Administration: He further argued, That
debts cannot be said Bona Notabilia, for they cannot be said within or without
any County or Diocese, and are things transitory, and therefore called aes
alienum: And he said, That the Administration granted by the Archbishop was
void, for as Archbishop he had not to intermeddle within the Diocese of
another, but as Legatus Papae: And in the time of Hen. 2. Becket Archbishop of
Canterbury was styled Legatus Natus, but now that power Legantine is
determined, and therefore the authority to commit Licenses of Administration in
another Diocese, but in case of Bona Notabilia is determined: And he said, That
by the Civil Law, Jones Rep. 225.
if a man devises all his Goods in such a County, by that debts do not pass;
and yet by especial words a man may devise his debts. Awbrey Doctor argued to
the contrary; and he confessed that in ancient times every Ordinary in such
cases committed licenses of Administration: But he denied that the Prerogative
which is now practiced in such cases by the Metropolitan was given upon any
Composition, but that it began by Prescription: If a man in his Journey dyed in
another Diocese, notwithstanding that he had out with him but his necessary and
ordinary Apparel, in such case the Metropolitan committed the Administration;
and he said, That as he conceived, debts are Bona Notabilia, and secundum
fictionem Legis, they are local and he said, to make Bona Notabilia it is
sufficient if the Intestate have 3 l. in one Diocese, and 2 l. in another
Diocese: But he said, That posito, that Bona Notabilia are not in the case; yet
the Administration granted by the Metropolitan is not void until it be revoked:
For although that the Metropolitan on the right of his Bishopric, has not to
intermeddle in another Diocese; yet in this case, because the Archbishop of
Canterbury is a Patriarch: (For in Christendom there are four great Patriarchs,
and eight lesser Patriarchs, whereof the Archbishop of Canterbury is one,) and
by reason thereof, he has general Jurisdiction through all England, Ireland,
etc. But now by the Statute, his Authority is restrained. For he cannot cite
any other out of other Diocese by any Process: But notwithstanding, he may do
many great Acts by himself, or his Chancellor in every Diocese; and he argued
very much upon the Prerogative of the Archbishop of Canterbury. The Justices
did not then deliver any Opinion in this case. Quaere, If Letters of
Administration of the Goods of a common person be committed to the Queen, if
good. The case was adjourned. Vide Cook 5 part, Ucre and Jeffreys Case, and
Cook 8 part, in Sir John Needhams Case for the Resolution of this Case.

CCCXLIII. Pasc. 17 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
A Man made a Lease for life, and afterward made a Lease to another for years.
The Ordinary committed Licenses of Administration to A. the Tenant for life,
and A. joined in the purchase of the Fee-simple of the Land demised. It was
holden by the Justices, that the Fee was executed for a Moiety; for the
Remainder for years was not any impediment unto the Execution thereof. Manwood
conceived that the Term was not extinct; for it is not properly a term, but as
an interest of a term, which cannot be surrendered. Mounson, He has the term in
auter Droit, viz. as Administrator, therefore it cannot be extinct. Dyer, If an
Executor has a term, and purchases the Fee-simple, the term is determined. A
Woman, Tenant for years, takes a Husband, who purchases the Fee, the term
there is extinct. Manwood, True there, for the Husband does an act which
destroys the term, viz the purchase: But if a Woman, being a termor, marries
with him in the reversion, the term continues; for here is no act of the
husband, but the act of the Law. Dyer was of Opinion, That the Tenant for life,
and the Administrator should be Tenants in Common of the Fee. The Case was
adjourned.

CCCXLIV. Mich. 20 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
THe Case was, The Husband is seized in the right of his Wife, of certain
customary Lands in Fee. He and his Wife by License of the Lord makes a Lease
for years by Indenture rendering rent, have Issue two Daughters, the Husband
dies, the Wife takes another Husband, and they have Issue a Son and a
Daughter, the Husband and Wife dye, the Son is admitted to the reversion, and
dies without Issue: And by Manwood, the said reversion shall descend to all the
Daughters, notwithstanding the half blood; for the Estate for years, which is
by Indenture, by license of the Lord, is a Demise or Lease according to the
order of the Common Law and according to the nature of the Demise, the
possession shall be adjudged, which possession cannot be said the possession of
the Copyholder, for his possession is customary, and the other is contrary; and
therefore the possession of the one, shall not be the possession of the other,
and so no Possessio Fratris in this case: But if there had been a Guardian by
the custom, or this Lease had been made by surrender, then the Sister of the
half blood should not inherit: And by Mead, the case of the Guardian has been
so adjudged. Mounson to the same intent. And if a Copyhold descend to the Son,
he is not a Copyholder before admittance, but he may take the profits of the
Lands, and punish a Trespasser.

CCCXLV. Mich. 15 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
THe Case was, A man seized of Lands in Fee, devised that his Wife should take
the profits of his Lands until Mary his Daughter and Heir should come to the
age of 16 years, and if the said Mary shall dye, that J. S. should be his Heir.
Manwood, The Daughter, after she has attained the age of 16 years, shall have
the Land in tail; for Devises ought to be construed according to the intent of
the Devisor, as near as it may be collected, but no intent shall be taken
against all reason and certainty. It is certain that the Daughter shall not
have the Fee-simple, for the same should have descended to her without any
Devise; and these words (if she dyed) cannot be intended a Condition, for it is
certain that she shall dye: But if the words had been, before the age of 16
years, That after her death J. S. should be his Heir, in such case it had been
a Condition. And when it is said, That J. S. should be his Heir, it shall be
intended his Collateral Heir, so as the Estate tail remains in the Daughter.
Mounson and Harper contrary. And that she should have but for life: And by
Mounson, if J. S. had been a Stranger to the Devisee, she should take nothing.
And this case was put by Barham, Sergeant, A man devised 100 l. to his youngest
daughter, 100 l. to his middle daughter, and 100 l. to his eldest daugher, and
that all these Sums should be levied out of the profits of his Lands: And it
was the better Opinion of the Court, that the youngest daughter should be first
paid, and then the middle, and then the eldest daughter, and that was one
Coniers Case.

Mich. 16 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
CCCXLVI. The Archbishop of Yorks Case.
3 Leon. 159.
THe Case was, The King granted to the Archbishop of York the Toll of Corn sold
in the Market of Rippon; and afterward the King granted to the Mayor and
Citizens of York to be discharged of Toll through the whole Realm; and
afterward the Archbishop exchanged his Manor of Rippon with the King for
another Manor: It was moved if now the Citizens of York should be discharged of
Toll, for the Grant to the Archbishop was eigne to the Grant to the Citizens of
York, to be discharged of Toll in Rippon. Dyer conceived that they should not
be discharged, for the King had no right; and when the King grants over the
Manor of Rippon, the Grantee shall have the Toll notwithstanding the Grant made
to the Citizens, for the Grant made to them was void, as to discharge them of
Toll at Rippon; for the Grant to the Citizens shall not take effect after the
Exchange, for the Grant was void ab initio: But if the Grant of the King to the
Archbishop had been but for life, then the Grant afterward made to the
Citizens should have taken effect after the Estate for life determined: And the
better Opinion of the Court was, that Toll should be paid.

Mich. 29 Eliz. In the Exchequer.
CCCXLVII. The Bishop of Londons Case.
THe Case was, The King Lord, Mesne and Tenant, the Mesnalty is holden in
Chief, and the Tenancy by Service, the Mesnalty Escheats by Attainder, now if
the Tenancy shall be holden in Chief. Manwood, It has been holden, that no
Tenure in Capite may be, if not by the making of the King: And he said, That if
before the Statute of West. 3. the Tenant of the King had made a Feoffment to
hold of him, so that now there is Lord, Mesne, and Tenant, and afterward the
Mesnalty comes to the King by Attainder, and if by the said Mesnalty to the
Crown, the Seigniory paramount be extinct, then the Tenancy is not holden in
Chief; but if the Mesnalty be drowned in the Seignory, it is otherwise. Some
held, That there was a difference where the Mesnalty comes to the Seigniory,
and where the Seigniory comes to the Mesnalty. Quaere.

Trin. 26 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
CCCXLVIII. Burgess and Fosters Case.
IN Ejectione firmae the Case was, That the Dean and Chapter of Ely were seized
of the Manor of Sutton, whereof the place etc. is parcel demised and dimisable
by Copy according to the custom: And that the said Dean and Chapter by their
Deed granted the Stewardship of the said Manor to one Adams, to execute the
said Office per se vel legitimum suum deputat' eis acceptabilem: After which
the said Adams made a Letter of Deputation to one Mariot ad Capiend' unam
sursam redditionem of one John Whettesley and Ann his Wife, and examinand' Ann'
praedict. ea intention, That the said John and Ann should take back an Estate
thereof for their lives, the Remainder to one John Buck in Fee. (Note the
Surrender ought to be de duobus Messuagiis) Mariot, Two several Surrenders of
the said Husband and Wife of the said two Messuages, and took an Estate for
their lives, the Remainder over to the said John Buck in Fee, upon condition to
pay certain Moneys, etc. It was moved, That the Surrender is void, and without
warrant; for the Warrant was ad Capiend' unam sursam redditionem, and here are
two several Surrenders, and so the Warrant is not pursued and then the
Surrender is void. Another matter was, because the Remainder to John Buck by
the words of the Letter of Deputation should be absolute, and without
condition, and now in the Execution of it is conditional, so as the conditional
Estate is not warranted by the Deputation. But the Court was clear of Opinion
to the contrary in both the points, That the proceedings here are sufficient,
and well warranted by the Deputation. Another matter was objected, because the
Surrender and Regrant is entered into the Roll of a Court dated to be holden 2
Maij, and the Letter of Deputation bears date the 3 of June after; but as to
that the Court was clear, That the Mis-entry of the Date of the Court should
not prejudice the party, for that Entry is not any matter of Record, but only
an Escroll; and if the parties had been at Issue upon the time of the Surrender
made, or of the Court holden, the same should not be tried by the Rolls of the
Manor, but by the Country: And the party shall give in Evidence to the truth of
the matter, and shall not be bound by the Rolls; and according to this
Resolution Judgment was given.

Trin. 31 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
CCCXLIX. Long and Hemmings Case.
GIles Long brought a Quare Impedit against the Bishop of Gloucester, Hemmings
and Hadnell, Hemmings pleaded, That one Tho. Long seized of the Manor of F. to
which the Advowson was appendant, by his Deed granted the Advowson unto him 17
Eliz. The Incumbent pleaded the same Plea; to which the Plaintiff Replicando
said, That before the said Grant, viz. 6 Eliz. the said Tho. Long granted to
him the said Manor, etc. and upon Issue joined, the Jury found this Special
Matter, That the said Feoffment was by word, and Livery and Seisin was made;
and afterward the said Tho. Long granted the said Advowson to the Defendant;
and afterward Attornment was had; and if without Attornment the Advowson
passed with the Manor, was the Question. Shuttleworth argued, That the Advowson
passed as appendant to the Demesns, for an Advowson shall be more properly
appendant to the Demesns than to the Services, for the Services may be
determined many ways, so cannot the Demesns; for if the Services be determined
by Escheat, etc. yet the Advowson remains appendant to the Demesns, and an
Advowson may be appendant to an acre parcel of the Manor, but not to the
Services; and so an Advowson may well pass without Deed, as upon a Feoffment of
a Manor the Services pass without Deed. And if a man seized of a Manor with an
advowson appendant, makes a Feoffment of one acre parcel thereof, with the
advowson, the advowson is appendant to that acre, 33 H. 6. 5. although it be
not by Deed. Vide contra Temps E. 1. Faits and Feoffments 115. 17 E 3. 4. It
ought to be by Deed, 43 E. 3. 24. Walmsley argued to the contrary. The Verdict
is, That Tho. Long give not the Manor but the Capital Message of F. and all
other Lands and Tenements of the same, which words (of the same) have relation
to the Message, and therefore neither the Manor of F. nor the advowson pass:
and admit that all the Demesns pass, yet the advowson cannot pass as appendant,
for that advowson shall pass as appendant to the whole Manor, and not to such,
or such part of it. And by Littleton, 7 E. 4. 27. if a man holds of me three
acres by 12 d. and I grant the Services of the third acre, the same is void; so
here, there is no advowson appendant to the Demesns: And he said, That in this
case the advowson is appendant to the Services; and although Services are
Inheritances incorporeal, yet an advowson may be appendant to them, as one
Office may be appendant to another Office, and one advowson to another
advowson, 33 H. 8. Dyer 48. A Man seized of a Manor, to which an Advowson is
appendant, enfeoffeth one by Deed of one acre, parcel thereof; and also by the
same Deed grants the Advowson the Advowson shall pass as in gross, for they are
several Grants although but one Deed. Another matter was, That Thomas Long
enfeoffed and here the Jury have found, that Thomas Long gave in tail, etc. And
he conceived that the Plaintiff upon that Verdict should have Judgment: As in
Waste, the Plaintiff assigns the Waste in cutting down of 20 Oaks, and upon Not
Guilty, It was found that he cut down but 10, the Plaintiff shall have Judgment
upon that Verdict. The Case was adjourned.

CCCL. Trin. 19 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
THe case was, Lessee for life of another bargains and sells by Deed indented
and enrolled, and afterward levies a Fine to the Conusee, Sur Conusans de
droit come ceo, etc It was holden by the whole Court, That it was a forfeiture
of his Estate; for when the Bargainee, being now Tenant for the life of
another, accepts a Fine of a Stranger sur Conusans de droit, etc. that he admit
the Fee in him by matter of Record, otherwise it is of a Fine sur Release. And
by Manwood, If Lessee for life be disseised and levies a Fine to the Disseisor,
sur Conusans de droit, etc the Lessor shall re-enter. Quod Dyer negavit,
Because that the Lessor at the time of the Fine levied, had not any thing in
the Reversion, but only a Right. Manwood put this Case, Land is given to A. and
B. and to the Heirs of B. they are disseized by two, A releaseth to one of the
Disseisors, now they are Ioyntenants but for a moiety, and the Estate in the
other moiety is changed into an Estate for life.

Trin. 31 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
CCCLI. The Queen and the Bishop of Norwich's Case.
IN a Quare Impedit, the case was, That the title to present to the Church was
devolved to the Queen by Lapse; The Patron himself presented, and his Clerk was
inducted, and afterward deprived. It was the Opinion of the whole Court, That
if the Deprivation was without any covin, that the title of the Queen by Lapse
was gone.

Trin. 29 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
CCCLII. Ashpool and the Inhabitants of Everinghams Case.
IN an Action upon the Statute of Winchester of Huy and Cry, by Ashpool against
the Inhabitants of the Hundred of Everingham: It was argued by Sergeant
Shuttleworth for the Hundred, and he insisted upon this, That the Robbery for
which the Suit was brought, was committed in the night: and Vide Stamford 33
and 38. If a man be robbed in the day, and the Chief escape, and be not taken,
the Town or Hundred shall answer for it: as if he should have said, If the
Robbery was not done in the day, the Town or Hundred should not answer for it:
and by 11 H. 7 5. the Lord cannot distrain in the Night for Rent arrear, for
the Tenant is not bound to tender his rent in the night time. And although
there are no express words in the Statute of Winchester, that Huy and Cry shall
be made by the party robbed, yet in reason it is to be presumed that the same
was intended by the Statute. Vide that by these words in the Statute it may be
employed, viz. That no pain as yet has been appointed for their Concealments
and Lachess, which (Lachess) imports, That none ought to be charged in such
case, but here there was a defalt, and no defalt can be where there was not
notice, and all the course is, Hutesiam and clamorem fecit, and notitiam
inhabitantibus dedit; and also this word (Concealment) amounts to as much, for
none can be said to conceal that whereof he had no notice. And vide Stamford
35, 36. if the Felon escape the Hundred shall answer to the party robbed, who
has made Huy and Cry: But the whole Court was clear, that Huy and Cry, or
Notice to the Inhabitants, was not requisite by the Statute; for as it was said
by the Lord Anderson, it might be that the party robbed was bound, so as he
could not give notice, or make Huy and Cry, or it may be he was killed by the
Thieves; and b. 28 E. 3. 11. Fresh suit is to be made from Town to Town, and
from Country to Country, and that Fresh suit is to be made by the Inhabitants
of the Hundred, and not by the party robbed, for no mention is made of such
Fresh suit: And that will more clearly appear, if we take to the Common Law
before the Statute of Winchester; for before the said Statute, the Law was,
That every Town and City should be guarded by the Inhabitants, etc. so that if
any suspected persons did resort to such Town or City, he should be stayed
until the next Sessions; in which Case he should have deliverance according as
he could acquit himself: And if any Town or City failed therein, and then a
Robbery had been done, the County should answer for it; for at their own peril
they were bound to guard the Country: But there was some difference betwixt
Robberies committed in the day time, and Robberies done in the night, which see
3 E. 3. so Corone 293. Where a man killed another in the day, and the Felon was
not taken, but escaped in the night, and the Town was amerced for the same,
because there the Adventurers came in the day time, and the Felon was not
taken. And as to that which is found by the Verd^ct, That the Robbery was done
post occasum solis, and per lucem diurnam, the Opinion of all the Justices was,
That with such a Robbery the Hundred should be charged, for that at such time
of the day Travelers are commonly drawing to their Lodgings. And afterward
Judgment was given for the Plaintiff.

Pasc. 29 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
CCCLIII. Neals Case.
IN a false Imprisonment by Neal against the Mayor, Sheriffs, and Commonalty of
the City of Norwich: The Writ was directed to the Coroners of the said City:
and Exception was taken to the Writ, because it was not directed to the Sheriff
of the same City, but to the Coroners: But the Exception was disallowed by the
Court, for the Sheriff was part of the Corporation. And also it has been
adjudged, That a Sheriff cannot summon himself: The Writ was holden good.

CCCLIV.
JOhn Grendon brought Trespass for breaking of his Close against Thomas Albany:
and upon the pleading, the Case was, That Francis Bunney was seized, and 1 Maij
20 Eliz. by Deed indented enfeoffed M. H. to the use of the said Francis Bunney
for the term of his life, the remainder to D. in tail, the remainder to E. in
tail, the remainder over to F. in Fee: In which Deed of Feoffment there was a
Proviso, That if it should happen one P. P. to dye without Issue Male of his
Body, that then it should be lawful for the said Francis Bunney at all times,
during his life, by his Deed indented, to be sealed and delivered in the
presence of three credible Witnesses, to alter, change, diminish or amplify
any Use or Uses limited by the said Deed or any Use or Uses thereof to any
person or persons, and to limit after the death of the said Francis to begin:
After which the said Francis Bunney 1 Aprilis, 23 Eliz. by his Deed indented,
did renounce, relinquish, and surrender to the said M. H. D. E. and F. all such
liberty, power, and authority of revocation, which he had after the death of
the said P. P. without Issue, etc. and further did remise, release, and
quit-claim to them the said Condition, Promise, Covenant, and Agreement
aforesaid and all his said Power, Liberty, and Authority, and further granted
to them and their Heirs, that at all times then after, the said power, liberty,
and authority should cease, and to all intents and purposes should be void.
After which P. P. dyed without Issue, Note that in this Case Francis Bunney
being but Tenant for life, enfeoffed one T. upon whom the said D. entered for a
Forfeiture,
1 Maij 23 Eliz. after which 20 Maij 24 Eliz. the said Francis Bunney by
Indenture between him and the said D. sealed and delivered as abovesaid,
altered the former Uses, and covenanted and agreed with the said D. that from
thenceforth the said M. H. and his Heirs should be seized to the use of the
Plaintiff and his Heirs. It was argued by Altham. That by that Feoffment made
by the said Francis Bunney to the said F. the liberty and power aforesaid was
not extinct or lost, for the liberty and power was not then a thing in esse,
because then P. P. was alive; and also the liberty is collateral to the Land
whereof the Feoffment is made. 39 H. 6. 43. The Son and Heir apparent
disseiseth his Father, and hereof enfeoffeth a Stranger, the Father dies, now
against his own Livery the Son does not enter; but if the Father dies, then
the Son shall enter; which proves that the Livery is not so violent as to
destroy a future Right, but that afterward it may be well revived a fortiori,
in our case where the thing pretended to be extinct is merely collateral. 34 E.
3. Fitz. Garr. 69. In Assize of Common, the Release of the Father with Warranty
of the Land, is no bar because it is of another thing. 15 H. 7. 11. Cestuy que
Use declares by his Will, That his Feoffees shall sell his Lands, and dies,
the Feoffees make a Feoffment to the same use, yet they may sell, so as against
their Livery, the Authority to sell remains to them. And he cited Brents case,
Dyer 340. where a future Use is limited to his Wife that shall be, shall not be
prevented by a Fine or Feoffment. And vide the Statute of Fraudulent
Conveyances 27 Eliz. where a Conveyance is made with Clause of Revocation if
afterward the party makes such a Conveyance, bargain, sell, or grant the said
Lands for money or other good consideration paid or given, (the first
Conveyance not being revoked) that then such former Conveyance against the last
Purchasors, shall be void. Another matter was, admitting that the said Power
and Liberty be not extinct by the said Feoffment, If by the said Indenture or
Renunciation, Relinquishment, Release, etc. it be destroyed: And he said, that
a thing in esse could not be released. Litt. 105. and 4 H. 7. 10. A Lease for
years to begin at a day to come cannot be released before that it come in esse.
11 H. 6. 29. Br. Damages 138. In Detinue, The Defendant would have confessed
the Action, if the Plaintiff would have released the Damages, and the Plaintiff
would have so done, but could not before Judgment; for before Judgment the
Plaintiff had not interest in the damages, but he was entitled to them by the
Judgment; so Lands in ancient Demesne are recovered at the Common Law, and
Execution had accordingly, and afterward the Lord reverseth the Judgment, the
Tenant notwithstanding that Release may enter, for his title which accrued to
him by the reversal, was not in esse at the time of the Release. And it was
adjudged 23 Eliz. that where Lessee for years devised his term to his Wife, if
she should so long live, and if she dyed within the said term, that then the
residue of his term should go unto his daughter, who then should be
unpreferred, and dyed, the daughter released to her mother all her right in the
said Land, the mother dyed within the term, That that Release did not bind the
daughter, for that at the time of the Release she had not any title. Cook
contrary: And he said. That by the Feoffment the said power and title was
extinct; and he well agreed the case cited before of 15 H. 7. for in such case
the Vendee of the Feoffees shall be in by the Devise, and not by the Feoffees.
9 H. 7.1. The husband makes a discontinuance of the Land of his wife, and takes
back an Estate to him and his wife, by which his wife is remitted, they have
Issue, the wife dies, the husband shall not be Tenant by the Courtesy, for he
has extinguished his future right by the Livery. 12 Ass. ultimo. A Praecipe
brought against A. who loses the Land by erroneous Judgment, and after
Execution had, enters upon the demandant, and makes a Feoffment, his Writ of
Error is gone. 38 E. 3.16. In a Scire Facias to execute a Fine, the Plaintiff
recovers, and makes a Feoffment in Fee, and afterward the Tenant in the Scire
Facias by Writ of Error, reverseth the Judgment in the Scire Facias, Now the
Plaintiff in the Scire Facias shall not have a new Scire Facias. 34 H. 6.44. A
Recovery against B. by false Oath and after Execution had, B. enters, and makes
a Feoffment to a Stranger, who enfeoffs him who recovers, it is a good bar in
an Attaint. 27 H. 8.29. The Feoffees to an Use are disseised, the Disseisor
enfeoffeth Cestuy que Use, who enfeoffs a Stranger now by that Feoffment his
right to the Use is extinct: And as to the Release, the same is not properly a
Release, but rather a Defeasance to determine the power and authority
aforesaid, as if A. enfeoffeth B. with warranty, and afterward B. covenants
with A, that the said Warranty shall be void, that Covenant shall enure, to
defeat and determine the Warranty: And afterward in the principal Case,
Judgment was given against the Plaintiff. See more of this Case in Cook 1. part.

Trin. 29 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
CCCLV. Owen and Morgans Case.
Ante 26. and 93.
GEorge Owen brought a Scire Facias against Morgan, to have Execution of a Fine
levied 8 Eliz. by which Fine the Land was given to the Conusee and his Heirs,
and the Conusee rendered the same to Husband and Wife, ( Note that the Husband
was the Conusor,) the remainder in Fee to the now demandant; (and Note that the
Writ of Covenant was between the Conusee Plaintiff, and the Husband Deforceant,
without naming of the Wife) and afterward, the Husband suffered a common
Recovery, without naming of the Wife: The Husband and Wife dies without Issue,
and now Owen, to whom the remainder in Fee was limited by the Fine, brought the
Scire Facias, in bar of which the Recovery was pleaded: It was argued by
Sergeant Shuttleworth, That the Recovery had against the Husband only, was a
good bar, and should bind the remainder; and he said, That the Wife ought not
to be named in, or party to the Recovery for nothing accrued to her by the
Fine, because she was not party to the Writ of Covenant, nor party to the
Conusance and none can take by the render, who was not party to the Writ of
Covenant, and to the Conusance. Vide 30 H. 8. Fines 108. None can take the
first Estate by the Fine, but those who are named in the Writ of Covenant, etc.
but every Stranger may take by Remainder. Vide 3 E. 3. Er. Fines 114. 6 E. 2.
Fines 117. 7 E. 3. Scire Facias 136. It is said by Horton, If such a Fine is
accepted, it is good. The Case was adjourned.

CCCLVI.
A. Seized of a Manor, to which two parts of the Advowson were appendant
presents, and afterward aliens the Manor with the appurtenances the Alienee
presents, and purchases the third part of the Advowson, and presents again one
A. who was Chaplain to the Duke of Rutland, and had a Dispensation from the
Pope 1 Eliz. before the Statute was repealed, and was instituted and inducted,
and afterward accepted of a plurality, viz. another Benefice, and dyed 11
Eliz. The Queen presented for Lapse, and her Clerk was instituted and inducted;
The said Lord of the Manor dyed seized inter alia, and that Manor was allotted
to the Wife of D. for her part; and he brought a Quare Impedit, It was moved if
D. should not join in the Quare Impedit with him who had the third part, and by
Walmsley he is not to join in it. 22 E. 4. by Brian, If an Advowson descends to
four Coparceners, and they make partition to present by turns, and the third
does present when the second ought, for that time the presentment is gone, but
when it comes to his turn again, he shall present; which proves that they are
as several Tenants, and therefore ought not to join, etc. It was Adjourned.

Temps Roign Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
CCCLVII. The President of Corpus Christi College Case.
NOte, It was holden by Cholmley Sergeant, Plowden, and many others, in the
Case of the President of Corpus Christi College in Oxford, That if the said
Master or President of any such College, by his Will devises any Land to his
College, and dies, such Devise is void: For at the time when the Devise
should take effect, the College is without a Head, and so not capable of such
Devise; for it was then an imperfect Body: And so it was holden by the Justices
upon good advice taken thereof.

CCCLVIII. Temps Roign Eliz In the Kings Bench.
IN a Warrantia Chartae, the Defendant said that the Plaintiff had not any
thing in parcel of the Land the day of the Writ brought: If in a Praecipe quod
reddat the Tenant aliens, and afterward vouches, the Vouchee is not bound to
enter into the Warranty: But here in this Case it may be, That at the time that
the Plaintiff requested the Defendant to warrant he was Tenant of the Land, in
which Case the warranty is attached, and then if ever the Land be recovered
against him, he shall have this Writ; and of this Opinion was Brown Justice:
For the Land which the Defendant had at the time of the request, is bound by
the request, but if he alieneth after the request, he shall not have the
Warranty.

CCCLIX. Mich. 9 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
A Man seized of a Manor, in which there are diverse Copyholds, and the Custom
there is, That if any Copyholder leaseth his Land above the term of one year,
that he shall forfeit his Copyhold. A Copyholder committed such a Forfeiture,
and afterward the Lord leased the Manor for years, and the Lessee entered for
the Forfeiture; and Weston said that his Entry was not lawful; for although
that the Heir may enter for a Condition broken in the time of his Ancestor,
because he is privy in blood; yet the Lessee or Feoffee cannot do so, for he is
a Stranger, such a one of whom an Estranger shall not take advantage. Dyer, If
this forfeiture be preserved by Homage, and enrolled in the Court Rolls, the
Lessee may well afterward enter; for by the forfeiture the Copyhold Estate is
void and determined, as if a Leaf for years be made, rendering Rent upon
Condition to cease if the Rent be not paid, here presently, by the not payment,
the Interest of the term is determined, and of that the Grantee of the
Reversion shall have advantage.

CCCLX. Mich. 10 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
AN Action upon the Case was brought for stopping of a way: The Plaintiff
declared that the Duke of Suffolk was seized of a House in D. and let the same
to the Plaintiff for life, and that the said Duke, and all those whose Estate,
etc. have used time out of mind, etc. to have a way over the Land of the
Defendant to the Park of D. to carry and recarry Wood necessary for the said
House, from the said Park to the same House; and further declared, That the
Defendant Obstupavit the way. It was moved by Carus, That upon that matter no
Action upon the Case lay, because the Freehold of the House is in the
Plaintiff, and also the Freehold of the Land, over which, etc. is in the
Defendant: But if the Plaintiff, or the Defendant, had but an Estate for years,
then an Action upon the Case would lie, and not an Assize, and it is not
material, If the Plaintiff had but an Estate for years in the Park quod fuit
concessum per totam Curiam: It was also holden. That this word Obstupavit is
sufficient without any more, without showing any special matter of the
stopping, as the erecting of any Gate, Hedge, Ditch, etc. for Obstupavit
implies a Nuisance continued, and not a personal disturbance, as forestalling,
or saying to the Plaintiff upon the Land where, etc. that he should not go
over, or use the said way, for in such case, upon such a disturbance, an Action
upon the Case lies: But as to a local and real disturbance, the word
Obstupavit amounts to Obstruxit: and although in the Declaration is set down
the day and year of the stopping, yet it shall not be intended that it
continued but the same day; for the words of the Declaration are further, By
which he was disturbed of his way, and yet is, and so the continuance of the
disturbance is alleged, and of that Opinion was the whole Court. Leonard
Prothonotary, He has declared of a Prescription, habere viam tam pedestrem,
quam equestrem, pro omnibus and omnimodis Carriagiis, and upon that
Prescription he cannot have a Cart-way, for every Prescription est stricti
juris. Dyer, That is well observed, and I confess that the Law is so; and
therefore it is good to prescribe habere viam pro omnibus Carriagiis, without
speaking either of a Horse, or a Foot-way.

CCCLXI.
A. Enfeoffed B. to the intent that B. should convey the said Land to such
person as A. should sell it. A. sold it to C. to whom B. refused to convey the
Land; and thereupon he brought an Action upon the Case against B. And by Wray
Chief Justice, and Gaudy Justice, here is a good consideration, for here is a
trust, and that which is a good consideration in the Chancery, is in this case
sufficient. Shute Justice was of a contrary Opinion. And afterward Judgment
was given for the Plaintiff.

Mich. 29 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
CCCLXII. Sir Richard Lewknors Case.
SIr Richard Lewknor seized of Wallingford Park, Ante 162.
made a lease thereof for years, and dyed; the Lessee granted over his term to
another, excepting the Wood; the term expired, and an Action of Waste was
brought against the second Lessee by the Coparceners, and the Husband of the
third Coparcener, being Tenant by the Courtesy. Shuttlewood and Snag
Sergeants, did argue, That the Action would not lie in the form it was brought;
and the first Exception which was taken by them was, because the Action was
general, viz. Quod fecit vastum in terris, quas Sir Roger Lewknor, pater
praedict' of the Plaintiff cujus haeredes ipsae sunt praefat' Defendent.
demisit; And the Count was, that the Reversion was entailed by Parliament unto
the Heirs of the Body of Sir Richard Lewknor, and so they conceived that the
Writ ought to have been special, cujus haeredes de Corpore, ipsae sunt: For
they said, that although there is not any such Writ in the Register, yet in
novo Casu, novum est apponendum remedium: And therefore they compared the Case
to the Case in Fitz. N. B. 57. viz. If Land be given to Husband and Wife, and
to the Heirs of the Body of the Wife, and the Wife has Issue and dies, and
the Husband commits waste, the Writ in that case, and the like, shall be
special, and shall make special recital of the Estate. And so is the Case 26 H.
8. 6. where Cestuy que use makes a lease, and the Lessee commits waste; there
the Action was brought by the Feoffees, containing the special matter, and it
was good, although there was not any such Writ in the Register cujus haeredes
de Corpore, and we are not to devise a new form in such case, but it is
sufficient to show the special matter to the Court. And the words of the Writ
are true, for they are Heirs to Sir Roger Lewknor; and the Count is sufficient,
pursuant and agreeing to their Writ; for they are Heirs, although they are not
special Heirs of the Body, and so the Court was of Opinion, that the Writ was
good notwithstanding that Exception. And Anderson and Periam Justices, said.
That the Case is not to be compared to the Case in Fitz. Not. Brevium 57. for
there he cannot show by whose demise the Tenant holds if he does not show the
special Conveyance, viz that the Land was given to the Husband and Wife and to
the Heirs of the Body of the Wife. Nor is it like to the Case of 26 H. 8. for
the same cause. For always the demise of the Tenant ought to be specially
showed, and certainly which it cannot be in these two Cases, but by the
disclosing of the title also to the reversion. Another Exception was taken,
because that the Writ does suppose Quod tenuerunt, which, as they conceived, is
to be meant, that tenuerunt jointly, whereas in truth they were Tenants in
Common. Walmsley contrary, because there is not any other form of Writ, for
there is not any Writ which does contain two tenuerunts and the words of the
Writ are true, quod tenuerunt, although tenuerunt in Common; but although they
were not true, yet because there is no other form of Writ, it is good enough:
as Littleton, If a Lease be made for half a year, and the Lessee does Waste,
yet the Writ shall suppose Quod tenuit ad terminum annorum, and the Count shall
be special: 40 E. 3. 41 E. 3. 18. If the Lessee does commit Waste and grants
over his term, the Writ shall be brought against the Grantor, and shall
suppose, Quod tenet, and yet in truth, he does not hold the Land, and the Writ
shall not contain two Tenets, and such also was the Opinion of the Court. The
third Exception was, because that the Writ was brought by the two Coparceners,
and the Heir of the third Coparcener, without naming of Tenant by the
Courtesy: And thereupon Snag cited the Case of 4 E. 3. That where a Lease is
made for life, the Remainder for life, and the Tenant for life does waste, he
in the Reversion cannot have an Action of Waste during the life of him in the
Remainder: So in the like case, the Heir of the third Coparcener cannot have
waste, because there is a mean Estate for life in the Tenant by the Courtesy.
And to prove that the Tenant by the Courtesy ought to join in the Writ, he
cited the Case of 3 E. 3. which he had seen in the Book at large, where the
Reversion of a Tenant in Dower was granted to the Husband, and to the Heirs of
the Husband, and the Tenant in Dower did waste, and they did join in the Action
of Waste, and holden good: And so is 17 E. 3. 37. and F. N. B. 59. and 22 H. 6.
25. Walmsley contrary; for here in our Case, there is nothing to be recovered
by the Tenant by the Courtesy, for he cannot recover damages, because the
disinherisin is not to him, and the term is expired and therefore no place
wasted is to be recovered, and therefore it is not like to the Books which have
been vouched, For in all those the Tenant was in possession and the place
wasted was to be recovered, which ought to go to both, according to their
Estates in Reversion, but so it is not here; for in as much as the term is
expired, the Land is in the Tenant by Courtesy, and so he has no cause to
complain. And such also was the Opinion of the whole Court, that the Writ was
good notwithstanding the said Exception. Then concerning the principal matter
in Law, which was, whether the Writ was well brought against the second Lessee,
or whether it ought to have been brought against the first Lessee: It was
argued by Shuttleworth, That it ought to have been brought against the first
Lessee; for when he granted over his term, excepting the Trees, the Exception
was good, ergo, etc. For when the Land upon which the Trees are growing is
leased out to another, the Trees pass with the Lease as well as the Land and
the profit of them is in the Lessee during the term, and therefore when he
grants his term, he may well except the Trees as well as the Lessor might have
done. And that is proved by the Statute of Marlbridge, for before that Statute
the Lessee was not punishable for cutting down the Trees, and that Statute does
not alter the property of the Trees, but only that the Lessee should render
damages if he cut them down etc. Also the words of the Writ of Waste proves
the same, which are, viz. ^n terris, domibus, etc. sibi dimissis. And the
Lessee might have cut them down for Reparation, and for Firewood, if there were
not sufficient Underwood, which he could not have done, if the Trees had not
been excepted: And in 23 H. 8. Br. it is holden, that the excepting of the
Trees, is the excepting of the Soil. And so is 46 E. 3. ^. where one made a
Lease excepting the Woods and afterward the Lessee did cut them down, and the
Lessor brought an Action of Trespass, Quare vi and armis clausum freg^, etc.
and it was good, notwithstanding Exception was taken to it: And it is holden 12
E. 4. 8. by Fairfax and Littleton, That if the Lessee cut the Trees that the
Lessor cannot carry them away, but he is put to his Action of Waste. Fenner and
Walmsley Sergeants contrary: And they conceived that the Lessee has but a
special property in the Trees, viz. for Fire-boot, Plough-boot, House-boot etc.
and if he pass over the Lands unto another, that he cannot reserve to himself
that special property in the Trees, no more than he who has Common appendant,
can grant the principal, excepting and reserving the Common; or grant the Land
excepting and reserving the Common; or grant the Land, excepting the Foldage.
The grand property of the Trees does remain in the Lessor, and it is proved by
10 H. 7. 30. and 27 H. 8. 13. If Tenant for life, and he in the Reversion join
in a Leaf, and the Lessee does Waste they shall join in an Action of Waste,
and the Tenant for life shall recover the Freehold, and the first Lessor the
damages, which proves that the property of the Trees is in him: As to that,
that he was dispunishable at the common Law, that was the folly of the Lessor;
and although it was so at the common Law, yet it is otherwise at this day; for
when the Statute says, That the Lessor shall recover damages for the Waste,
that the property of the Trees is in him. As the Statute of Merton. cap. 4.
enacts, That if the Lessor do approve part of the Waste having sufficient for
the Commoners, and they notwithstanding that bring an Assize, they shall be
barred in that Case, and the Lord may have an Action of Trespass against them
if they break the Hedges, by force of that Statute, as it has been adjudged;
for the intent of the Statute was to settle the Inheritance of the Land
approved without interruption of the Commoners, and so in this case: But note,
That by the Statute of Marlbridge, the Lessor shall recover damages for the
Houses, etc. which are wasted etc. and yet a man cannot infer thereupon, that
therefore the Lessee has no interest nor property in them; and such interest
has he in the Trees notwithstanding the words of the Statute, which is
contrary to the meaning, as it seems; and therefore Quaere, if there be any
difference betwixt them and what shall be meant by this word (Property.) But
the damages are given by the Statute in respect of the property which the
Lessor is to have in reversion after the Lease determined. Anderson Chief
Justice, The Lessor has no greater property in the Trees, than the Commoner
has in the Soil. Walmsley 2 H. 7. 14. and 10 H. 7. 2. The Lessor may give
leave to the Lessee to cut the Trees, and the same shall be a good Plea in an
Action of Waste, and the reason of both the Books is, because the property of
them is in the Lessor. And to this purpose the difference is taken in 2 H. 7.
betwixt Gravel and Trees. 42 E. 3. If a Prior license the Lessee to cut Trees,
the same shall discharge him in a Writ of Waste brought by the Successor; but
if the Lessee cutteth down the Trees, and then the Prior does release unto him,
the same shall not bar the Successor, and so is 21 H. 6. And he cited
Culpeppers Case 2 Eliz. and 44 E. 3. Statham, and 40 Ass. 22. to prove that the
Lessor shall have the Windfalls. If a Stranger cutteth down Trees, and the
Lessee brings an Action of Trespass, he shall recover but only to his loss,
viz. for lopping and topping. As to that which was said, That if the Lessee cut
down Trees, that the Lessor cannot take them away, that is true, for that there
is a contract of the Law, that if the Leslee does cut them down, that he shall
have the Trees, and the Lessor have treble damages for them. Also he said, That
the Trees are no part of the thing demised, but are as Servants, and shall be
for Reparations. As if one has a Piscary in the Land of another man, the Land
adjoining is as it were a Servant, viz. to dry the Nets. So if one has Conduit
Pipes lying in the Land of another, he may dig the Land to mend the Pipes, and
yet he has no Interest nor Freehold. To that which was said, That by the
excepting of the Trees upon the Land the Land upon which they stood is
excepted; It is true, as a Servant to the Trees for their nourishment, but not
otherwise: For if the Lessor sells the Trees, he afterward shall not meddle
with the Land, but it will be wholly in the Lessor, quia ^u^^ata causa tollitur
effectus; and if the Lessee tyeth a Horse upon the Land where the Trees stood,
the Lessor may distrain the same for his Rent, and avow as upon Land within his
distress and fee, and holden of him: And he said that the Lessor might grant
the Trees, but so cannot the Lessee; and therefore he said that the property is
in the Lessor and not in the Lessee, and if the Lessor grants them, they pass
without Attornment, but contrary if the Lessor had but a Reversion in them; and
if the Lessor cutteth them down, the Rent shall not be app^^^ioned and
therefore they are no part of the thing demised. For ^ E. 7. and Temps E. 1.
Fitz. Waste, in two or three places it is holden, That if the Waste be done
Sparsim in a Close or Ground the Lessor shall recover the whole; then admit
that the Trees are cut down, If the Exception shall be good how shall the thing
wasted be recovered, and against whom: quod nota. Anderson Chief Justice, did
conceive that the Exception was void, and that the Action was well brought; and
he said, It was a knavish and a foolish demise, and if it should be good, many
mischiefs would follow, which he would not remember. Windham was of the same
Opinion; and he said, That the Lessor might have accepted them, and so take
from the Lessee his Fire-boot, Plough-boot, etc. which shall go with the Land.
Periam Justice agreed, That as to such a special property, none can have it but
such a one who has the Land, and therefore the Exception of the Wood by the
Lessee was void: But as to the other things, perhaps if they were Apple Trees,
or other Fruit Trees, the Exception had been good: Also although the Trees were
not let directly, yet they are after a sort, by a mean annexed to the Land. And
if the Action were brought against him who made the Exception, he cannot plead
that they were let unto him, and therefore he doubted of the Exception. Rhodes
Justice also said, That he doubted of the Exception; and he said, That the Book
of 44 E. 3. is, that the Lessee should have the Windfalls; and did not much
regard the Opinion of Statham. But Anderson was of Opinion that the Lessor
should have the Windfalls. Note, The Case was not at this time adjudged, but
adjourned,

CCCLXIII. Hill. 29 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
A Copyholder with license of the Lord made a Lease for years, and afterward
he surrendered the Reversion, with the Rent, to the use of a Stranger, who was
admitted accordingly. It was moved, If here there needed any Attornment, either
to settle the Reversion, or to create a Privity. It was the Opinion of Rhodes
and Windham Justices, That the Surrender and Admittance, (ut supra) are in the
nature of an Attornment, or at the least do supply the want of it.

Mich. 29 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
CCCLXIV. Bell and Langleys Case.
IN Trespass, the Case was thus, That A. was Lord of a Manor, of which B. held
Black Acre by Copy of Court-Roll in Fee according to the Custom: A. made a
Feoffment of the said Black Acre to a Stranger; B. dyed. The point was, If now
the customary interest be determined against the Heir of B. For it was moved
because that the Feoffee had not any Court, the Heir of B. could not be
admitted, nor the death of his Ancestor presented because but one Copyholder:
But all the Court held the contrary, and that the Copy should bind the Feoffee,
and the ceremony of admittance was not necessary; For otherwise every
Copyholder in England might be defeated by the sole act of the Lord, viz. his
Feoffment. But the Lord by his own act, which shall be accounted his folly,
has lost his advantages, viz. Fines, Heriots, and such other Casualties.

Mich. 29 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
CCCLXV. Box and Mounslowes Case.
THomas Box brought an Action upon the Case against John Mounslowe, That the
Defendant slandred him, in saying, That the said Thomas Box is a perjured
Knave, and that he would prove the said Thomas Box had forsworn himself in the
Exchequer, etc. and supposed the said words to be spoken in London 4 Feb. 28
Eliz. Et praedict' Johannes Mounslowe per Johannem Lutrich Attornatum suum
venit and defendit vim and injuriam quando, etc. Et dicit quod praedict' Tho.
Box actionem suam versus eum habere non debet; quia dicit quod praedict'
Thomas Box being one of the Collectors of the Subsidies, before the speaking
of the said words, viz. 27 and 28 Eliz. in Curia Scaccarij apud Westm', did
Exhibt a Bill against the said John Mounslowe, containing, That the said John
being assessed in ten pounds in Goods, the said Thomas Box came to him, and
demanded of him sixteen shillings eight pence which the said John Mounslowe did
refuse to pay; and that demand and refusal was supposed to be in London in
Breadstreet; Et pro verificatione praemisiorum ad^unc and ibid' Sacramentum
Corporale per Barons praefat' Thomae Box praestitit: The said Thomax Box
swore the said Bill in substance was true, ubi revera, the said John Mounflowe
did not refuse: per quod the said John Mounslowe, postea, viz. praedict.
tempore quo, etc. dixit de praefat' Thoma Box praedict. verba, etc. p^out ei
been Leuit: The Plaintiff replied, that the Defendant spoke the words de
injuria sua propria absque causa per praefat. Johannem Mounslowe superius
allegata: Et hoc petit quod inquiratur per Curiam, and praedict. defendens
similiter. And a Ven^re Facias was awarded to the Sheriffs of London, and it
was found for the Plaintiff, and damages 400 l. And now it was moved in Arrest
of Judgment, that there was no good Trial, nor the Issue well joined* for the
Issue does consist upon 2 points triable in several Counties, viz the Oath
which was in the Exchequer, and that ough to have been tried in Middlesex; and
the matter which he affirmed by the Oath viz the demand and the refusal to pay
the subsidy, and that was alleged to be in London, and is there to be tried;
and the Issue, viz. de (...) propria goes to both, for the ubi revera will not
amend the Case, as Penam Justice said; and both are material: For the Defendant
ought to prove that the Plaintiff made such Oath and also that the substance
and matter of the Oath was not true, for otherwise the Plaintiff cannot be
proved perjured. And therefore the Counties here, (if they might) should have
joined in the Trial: And the Opinion of the Court was against the Plaintiff;
For Anderson and Wincham said, That if this Issue could have been tried by any
one of the Counties without the other, it should most properly and naturally
have been tried in Middlesex, where the Oath was made, for the Perjury, if any
were was in the Exchequer: But they said. The Issue here was ill joined,
because it did arise upon two points triable in several Counties, which could
not join; whereas the Plaintiff might have taken Issue upon one of them well
enough, for each of them did go to the whole, and if any of them were found for
the Plaintiff, that he had sufficient cause to recover. Gaudy moved that it
should be helped by the Statute of Ieofails, which speaks of mis-joyning of
Issues. Anderson, The Issue here is not mis-joyned: For if the Counties could
join, the Issue were good, but because that the Counties cannot join, it cannot
be well tried: But the Issue it self is well enough. Windham and Rhodes were of
the same Opinion; but Periam doubted it. Anderson said, That if an Issue
tryable in one Court, be tried in another and Judgment given upon it, it is
Error. And afterward Lutrich the Attorney said, That it was awarded that they
should re-plead; Nota, quod mirum: For first, the Statute of 32 H. 8. cap. 30.
speaks of mis-joyning of Process, and not mis-joyning of Issues; and admit that
this Case is not within any of those Clauses, each of them being considered by
it self, yet I conceive it is contained within the substance and effect of
them, being considered together. Also I conceive, it is within the meaning of
both Statutes, viz. 32 H. 8. cap. 30. and 18 Eliz. cap. 14. for I conceive, the
meaning of both Statutes was to waste delays, circuits of Actions and
Molestations, and that the party might have his Judgment notwithstanding any
defect, if it were so, that notwithstanding that defect, sufficient title and
cause did appear to the Court. And here the Plaintiff has sufficient cause to
recover, if any of the points of the Issue be found for him: For if it be found
that the matter and substance of the Oath be found true, which might be tried
well enough by those in London) the Plaintiff had cause to recover: Wherefore,
I conceive that the Verdict in London is good enough and effectual: And note,
that Rhodes said that he was of Counsel in such a case in the Kings Bench,
betwixt Nevil and Dent.

CCCLXVI. Mich. 19 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
3 Leon. 103.
THe Case was, A. granted B. a Rentcharge out of his Lands to commence when J.
S. dies without Issue of his Body; J. S. dies having Issue and the Issue dies
without Issue: Dyer said, That the Grant shall not take effect, for J. S. at
the time of his death had Issue, and therefore the Grant shall not then
commence, and if he dies, then not at all by Manwood. And Dyer and Manwood
said, If the words had been to begin when J. S. is dead without Issue of his
Body, then such a Grant should take effect, when the Issue of J.S. dies without
Issue, etc. And they said, That if the Donee in tail has Issue, which dies
without Issue, the Formedon in Reverter shall suppose that the Donee himself
dyed with Issue, for there is an Interest. And there is a difference betwixt an
Interest and a Limitation: For if I give Lands to A and B. for the term of
their lives, if either of them dies, the Survivor shall hold the whole: But if
I give Lands to A. for the lives of B. and C. now if B. or C. dies, the whole
Estate is determined, because it is but a Limitation, and B. and C. have not
any Interest.

CCCLXVII. Temps Roign Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
THe Prior of Bath let his Manor of A. to C. for life, rendrint Rent; and after
the Priory dissolved, the King let the whole Manor, with the appurtenances to
J. S. Dyer, The matter depends upon this point, If the Demesus be severed from
the Services during the life of the Lessee. And he conceived that the Lord
could not hold a Court, if such power were not reserved upon the Lease;
contrary if but parcel had been leased, quod fuit concessum. Welsh, The Demesns
are severed from the Services for ever, as if they had been granted in Fee; but
here, having regard to the Lessor, the Demesns and Services are united, and
make one Manor: But as unto the Lessee, and all others, the Services are in
gross; and such also was the Opinion of Dyer: And he said, That if a Bishop
Leases the Demesns of his Manor for life, and dies, the Reversion shall be in
his Successor, and was in him in his life time in the right of his Church; and
if Husband and Wife, seized of a Manor in the right of the Wife, let the
Demesns of the said Manor for life, yet he has the Reversion in the right of
his Wife, and in such Case it remains a Manor; but if the Husband alone had let
it, he had gained the Reversion to him, and severed it from the Manor.

CCCLXVIII. Trin. 33 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
THe Case was, 3 Leon 252.
A man 30 Eliz. made a Feoffment in Fee to the use of himself for life, and
after to the use of his first Son, and his Heirs: The Father and the Feoffees
before Issue, For money, by Deed gave, granted, and enfeoffed J. S. and his
Heirs, who had no notice of the use: the Tenant for life had Issue, and dyed
the Issue entered. Glanvill, The use limited to the first Son is destroyed; for
without regress of the Feoffees it cannot rise, and it is gone by the Livery.
Vide Plow. Com. 347. And also he put the Case of the Earl of Kent, who by the
Release of the surviving Feoffees, a dormant use was destroyed, and could not
afterward be revived. Harris, The use might rise without the entry of the
Feoffees; and he put a difference betwixt an use created before the Statute,
and created after; for in the first case they ought to enter, and if they be
disabled by any Act, as in the case of Gascoign and the Earl of Kent, it shall
never rise; but in the latter case all the authority and confidence is by the
Statute taken out of the Feoffees, and the use contingent shall rise without
aid of the Feoffees, by the operation of the Law; for the Land is bound to the
uses, and charged with them; as upon a Recovery in a Warrantia Chartae, the
Land of the Defendant is charged pro loco and tempore; and according to the
common Experience in Conveyances for payment of the Kings Debts, as in the case
of Bowden and Dennis, the Debtor of the King made a Feoffment in Fee unto the
use of himself and his Heirs until he should make a default of payment of such
a Sum to the Queen at such a day, and for default to the use of the Queen and
her Heirs. Cooper, There needs no entry of the Feoffees; and he put the
difference before put by Harris, between an use created before, and an use
created after the Statute; and now the Feoffees have not any power to revive or
destroy such uses, but are only as instruments to convey the uses, for the use
is created upon the Livery, and is transferred by the Statute, if the person to
whom the use is limited be capable thereof at the time of the limitation; and
he put the Case of Feoffments to uses, 30 H 8. and there is a great difference
betwixt uses limited before and after the Statute; for they have not such a
Seisin whereof they may make a Feoffment. And he put the Case of Cheny and
Oxenbridge; Cheny let to Oxenbridge for 60 years, and afterward enfeoffed
Oxenbridge to the use of Cheny himself and his Wife, for their lives, with
diverse Remainders over; and it was adjudged in the Court of Wards, that by that
Feoffment the term was not extinct: And he put the Case of the Lord Paget,
adjudged in the Kings Bench; A Feoffment was made to the use of the Feoffor for
life, the Remainder to him whom the Feoffor should name at his death in Fee;
the Feoffor and the Feoffees for good consideration levy a Fine to a stranger
and afterward the Feoffor names one and dies, the party named by the Feoffor
shall have the Land notwithstanding the Fine. Beaumount, The contingent use
here is utterly destroyed; and it appears by the preamble of the Act of 27 H.
8. that the makers of the said Act did not favor Uses, but their intent was
utterly to root out Uses; and if contingent Uses, which are not, nor can be
executed by the Statute, should stand in force, the mischief would be. That no
Purchasor would be secured of his Purchase, but should always be in danger of a
new born use, not before known. And he grounded his further Argument upon the
reason of Manwood and Dyer, Where a man makes a Feoffment in Fee to the use of
himself and his Wife that shall be and afterward he and his Feoffees, and
those in remainder make a Feoffment to diverse new Feoffees, and unto new Uses,
and afterward takes another wife and dies; it seemed to the said 2 Justices
that by that Feoffment ut supra the contingent Use was destroyed; for when the
Estate which the Feoffees accepted of is taken away, which is the root and
foundation of the Uses, which are the Branches and Body of the said Tree, it
necessarily follows, that they also be taken away. And forasmuch as the
Feoffees by their Livery are barred to enter for to recontinue the Estate which
should yield the said Uses, they also are gone and extinguished. Yelverton
conceived that notwithstanding the Feoffment, that the use did rise in its due
time according to the limitation of it. Quaere, the Case was not Resolved but
Adjourned.

CCCLXIX. Trin. 33 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
IN a Replevin, the Defendant avowed for Damage feasant, the Plaintiff in bar
of the Avowry showed, That he is inhabitant of such a Town, and showed, that
every inhabitant in every Message in the said Town had used to have Common in
the place where, etc. Glanvill, The Prescription is not good for want of
capacity in the party who pretends interest, for it is not certain, but applied
to a multitude; and he put diverse cases to prove the same, as 22 H. 6. 21 H. 7.
1. Mariae, Dyer 100. The King grants a Rent probis hominibus de Islington, the
same is void, for they are not capable. Harris, The Prescription is good; and
he agreed that a confused multitude could not prescribe in matter of Interest,
but in an Easement or Discharge, as in a way to the Church, and that by reason
of the custom of the Land, and not in their Person. Vide 7 E. 4. 26. Where it
is pleaded, That all the Inhabitants within such a Town have used to have
Common there, and for a Township to have a way to the Church, and by Danby it
is good; and Littleton said it ought to be pleaded by way of Usage: and 18 E.
4. 3. All the Inhabitants of such a Town, time out of mind, have used to have
Common, etc. Where a difference was taken, where the Prescription is in the
Person, and where in the Land. 15 E. 4. 29. Cooper, Inhabitants of a Town may
well prescribe, and he vouched Bracton 222, 223. Quando acquiritur ex longo usu
sive constitutione cum pacifica possessione continua, and non interrupta ex
scientia negligentia and patientia Dominorum, Et etiam omitti potest per
negligentiam: and he vouched Britton 144. Common is obtained by long
sufferance, and also may be lost by long negligence, etc. The Case was
adjourned.

CCCLXX. Mich. 5 Jac. In the Common Pleas.
TEnant for life of a Rent acknowledges a Statute, and releaseth to the
Terr-tenant, the Statute is forfeited: It was holden by Cook, and two other of
the Justices in Communi Banco, That the Rent as to the Conusee was in esse.

CCCLXXI.
IT was holden by Yelverton in his Reading, That if a man makes a Lease for two
years, and confirms the Estate of the Lessee for 20 years, it is a good
confirmation for 20 years, because that all is but a Chattel.

CCCLXXII.
IF 2 Ioyntenants are for life, and the one grants his Estate for the life of
his Companion, it was holden to be a Forfeiture; for first it is a Severance of
the Ioynture, and then a Lease for the life of another.

CCCLXXIII. Mich. 5 Jac. In the Common Pleas.
TWo men were jointly bound in an Obligation, the one is Principal the other is
Suerty, the Principal dyed, the Suerty took Administration, and the Principal
having forfeited his Obligation, the Suerty made an Agreement with the
Creditor, and took upon him by Bond to discharge the Debt; In Debt brought by
another Creditor of the Intestate, upon fully Administered pleaded by the
Administrator, it was a Question, if upon showing of the Obligation, and that
he had satisfied it, and contented it in his proper Debt he should be relieved
upon that Plea. It was adjudged he should not, because by the joining with the
Principal, the Debt became his own Debt.

CCCLXXIV.
IF Land be given to A. and B. for the life of C. the remainder to the right
Heirs of A. or B. who shall survive: It was holden. That if A do release to B
that the remainder was destroyed. And if Land be given to one in Tail, and if
J. S. comes to Westminster such a day the remainder to J. S. in Fee, if the
Estate-tail descends to two Coparceners who make Partition; now if J. S. come
to Westminster, the Fee shall not accrue, because the particular Estate is not
in the same plight as it was before.

CCCLXXV. Mich. 5 Jac. In the Common Pleas.
IT was resolved, That a Copyholder was not within the Statute of W^^ls.

CCCLXXVI. Mich. 5 Jac. In the Common Pleas.
A Man makes a Feoffment with warranty; If the Feoffee brings a Warrantia
Chartae against the Heir, who pleads riens per descent at the time of the
Voucher and it is found for the Tenant: It was holden, That the Plaintiff
should never after have Execution of Lands which after descend, for that it is
peremptory for the Demandant.

CCCXXLVII. Mich. 5 Jac. adjudge acc'.
THe Queen has the Isle of Garnsey, and cognizance of Pleas within it, for her
Ioynture: A man within Garnsey being disturbed to present to a Church which is
void, brings a Quare Impedit in Communi Banco; It was holden in this Case, That
Garnsey is an Island where our Law runs not; but it is otherwise of the Isle
(...) Man, etc. And it was said, That if the King grants cognizance of Pleas, a
man shall not have cognizance of Quare Impedit, Assise, Redisseisin, etc.

CCCLXXVIII. Mich. 5 Jac. In the Common Pleas.
NOte, It was resolved by the Justices, That if a Parson takes a Benefice above
the value of 8 l. with a Dispensation, and afterward takes a 3 l. Benefice,
that the first Benefice is void by the Statute of 21 H. 8. cap. 13.

CCCLXXIX. 44 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
NOte, It was said that it was adjudged 44 Eliz. in Banco Regis. That if Lessee
for life grants his interest to his Lessor, that the same shall not enure as
a Surrender, because there wants words of Surrender, but shall enure by way of
Grant only.

CCCLXXX. Hill. 5 Jac. In the Kings Bench by Cook.
IT was holden by Cook Chief Justice, 1 Roll. 844. Syderf. 445.
If a man seized in Fee devises that after the death of his Son without issue,
that J. S. shall have his Lands, that in that case the Son has an Estate in
Fee determinable, and that the Remainder is good.

Mich. 5 Jac. In the Kings Bench.
CCCLXXXI. Balls Case.
A Copyholder pleaded, That the Custom of the Manor was, that every Copyholder
for life might appoint in the presence of two others, that such a man should
have his Copyhold after his death without any Surrender to his use and that the
two Tenants should assess for his Fine what Sum they pleased, so as it was not
lesser than had used to be paid, where the Lord would assess a reasonable Fine;
and it was adjudged that it was a good Custom.

Pasc. 6 Jac. In the Common Pleas.
CCCLXXXII. Glascocks Case.
A Copyholder alleges the custom to be, That all the Tenants within such a
Manor in Essex, had used to cut down Trees to repair their Copyhold and
Freehold Tenements within the Manor and also to sell their Trees at their
pleasure: And adjudged a good custom.

Mich. 1 Jac. In the Common Pleas, Rot. 854.
CCCLXXXIII. Sapland and Ridlers Case.
IT was adjudged after long Argument, That where the custom of a Copyhold Manor
was to admit for life, and in remainder for life at any time when there is but
one Copyholder for life in possession: And during the minority of the Heir
within the age of 14 years, his Guardian in Soccage in his own name admits a
Copyholder in remainder for life; that it was a good Admittance according to
the custom; and he was Dominus pro tempore well enough as to that purpose;
although it was objected by Walmsley, That the Guardian is but a Servant and
not Dominus; but because it was agreed that he had a lawful interest, the
admittance was good: And so it was adjudged.

Pasc. 3 Jac. In the Common Pleas.
CCCLXXXIV. Duke and Smiths Case.
IT was agreed, That if he in the Reversion suffers a Common Recovery to
Uses, his Heir cannot plead that his Father had not any thing at the time of
the Recovery, for he is estopped to say that his Father was not Tenant to the
Praecipe, and therefore it is a good Recovery against him by way of Estoppel.

CCCLXXXV. Mich. 6 Jac. In the Kings Bench.
IN a Writ of Error brought upon a Judgment given in Communi Banco in an
Ejectione firmae upon a Lease of a Running Water, it was agreed by the Court,
That no Livery could be made of Running Water, because it is fugitive; but
otherwise it is of Water in a standing Pool, for that is certain and peramount;
and of that Livery ought to be with a dish of part of the Water.

CCCLXXXVI. Duncombs Case. In the Common Pleas.
THe Grantee of a Rentcharge for life acknowledges a Statute, and afterward
he released to the Terr-tenant; It was the Opinion of Cook Chief Justice in
Communi Banco, that the Rent after the Release should be put in Execution upon
the Statute.

CCCLXXXVII. The Opinion of Popham Chief Justice in the Kings Bench.
IT was the Opinion of Popham Chief Justice, That if a man covenant to stand
seized to the use of himself for life, the remainder to the use of his
Executors, that in that Case the Executors shall take to the use of their
Testator: But if a man covenant upon good consideration to stand seized to the
use of the Executors of a stranger, that the word (Executors) is a word of
Purchase, and they shall take to their own use.

CCCLXXXVIII. Mich. 7 Jac. In the Common Pleas.
COok Chief Justice put this case, If the custom of a Manor is, that every
Tenant at his death shall pay his best Beast for a Heriot, if a Feme sole, who
is Tenant for life of this Manor, takes a Husband, and afterward dies, if
the Lord shall have a Heriot: Dodderidge the Kings Sergeant said that he should
not, because that the Wife had not Goods.

Mich. 7 Jac. In the Common Pleas.
CCCLXXXIX. Wards Case.
AN Information was against Ward and his Wife, for his Wives not coming to the
Church, upon the Statute of 28 and 35 Eliz. It was said by Cook Chief Justice,
That the Husband is chargeable for the Recusancy of his Wife, and he said there
needed no Conviction; but before an Information the Husband shall not be
chargeable for his Wife, but where he is named with the Wife; and he said. That
the King had a Feesimple in their Lands, for he has it to him and his Heirs
and Successors until conformity, with satisfaction of the Arrearages. Vide
Statut. 28 Eliz. Rastal. Tit. Corone.

Mich. 3 Jac. In the Common Pleas.
CCCXC. Wheelers Case.
A Copyhold custom is, That a Woman shall have a Free Bench, quam diu se been
gesserit, and live chaft; and she is incontinent, of which the Lord has not
notice, and the Lord admits her Tenant: It was holden it should bind the Lord,
although he had not notice of the Incontinency.

Mich. 5 Jac. In the Star Chamber.
CCCXCI. Edwards and Wattons Case.
NOte for Law in the Star Chamber, If a man write a scandalous Letter unto
another, and put his name to it, if the party who writ it, publishes the same
either before or after the delivery, an Action upon the Case lies against him
at the Common Law: But if the party who writes it does not publish it, yet he
may be sued for the same in the Star Chamber: And it was said in this Case.
That he who receives Books which are written against the Religion established
in the Kingdom, and shows them to others, with Comments of them, he runs into a
Praemunire by the Statute of 4 Eliz.

CCCXCII.
Rolls tit. Waste.
THe Case was, A. made a Lease of White Acre to B. upon condition he should do
no Waste; in which there was a Fish Pond stored with Carps, Pikes, and their
Fry; C. destroys all the Fish, B. being upon the Land, for which A. enters; 1.
If the destruction of all the Fish, and their Fry, be Waste within the Statute
of Gloucester: It was said that it was, for they are parcel of the Inheritance,
as are Deer within a Park enclosed: But it was adjudged 29 Eliz. in Communi
Banco in Moyle and Ewers Case, That where a Lease of a Manor was, in which was
a Warren of Conies, and the Lessee destroyed the Conies, that it was not waste,
for they were ferae naturae, and the Land bettered by them; and such was the
Opinion of Walmsley Justice, although the Conies were in a Warren paled and
enclosed with a Wall; but the destroying of Doves in a Dove-house is Waste. And
it was adjudged in Sir Francis Palmers Case, 9 Jac. in B.R. That although the
cutting of Underwood was not Waste yet the eradicating of it was Waste: The
other matter was, If the destruction of the Fish by a Stranger, the Lessee
being upon the Land were waste; it was said it was waste, for qui non vetat
peccare cum possit jubet; and it was said, That if a man commit waste, or
suffer another to do it, he did incur the penalty in the Statute. But in this
case it was said, That a Condition to defeat an Estate should be taken
strictly: As if a Custom be, that if a Copyholder for waste done shall forfeit
his Estate, if a stranger does the waste it is no Forfeiture, for three things
in Law shall be taken strictly, Conditions, Customs, Penal Laws. As if the
Custom be, That an Infant at the age of 15 may make a Feoffment, he cannot make
it by Attorney. And it was adjudged 1 Jac. in Communi Banco in Woodleys Case.
So the Statute of 5 E. 6. a Penal Law is, That a man shall not buy any Victual
to sell the same again: Yet it was adjudged, That where a man buys Meal, and
makes the same into Starch, and sells it, he may well justify the sale
thereof, and it is out of the Statute, because it is not the same thing.

Pasc. 8 Jac. In the Kings Bench.
CCCXCIII. Wards Case.
IT was adjudged in this Court, That if a Mill be set upon Posts, that no waste
lies for it; and that a Copyhold might be of a Mill, as it was adjudged in
Green and Harris's Case. Also it was said, That there is a real and personal
Forfeiture of Copyhold Lands; Real is not necessary to be found by the Homages,
as was resolved in Brocks Case; but otherwise it is of a Personal Forfeiture:
And Hill. 8 Jac. a Woman Copyholder built a new House upon the Land, and it was
agreed to be a Forfeiture.

Pasc. 8 Jac. In the Common Pleas.
CCCXCIV. Brown and Tuckers Case.
IF a man have Estovers to such a House, 4 Co. 84.
and he enlarges his House, or builds more Houses or Chimneys, the Estovers
remain to all the Houses and Chimneys which were there before, and not to those
added or new builded, as it was adjudged.

Pasc. 8 Jac. In the Common Pleas.
CCCXCV. Batcliffe and Chaplins Case.
1 Roll. 623.
IN an Ejectione firmae between Ratcliffe and Chaplin upon not guilty pleaded,
it was given in Evidence. That time out of mind a Custom had been used, and
that proved by Witnesses, that the eldest Heir, be it Male or Female, should
inherit the Land; and that it appeared in the Court Rolls of the said Manor, of
which the Land in question was parcel; two Presidents to prove that the eldest
Sister ought to inherit, and that the youngest Sister should have nothing in
the Land; the one President was 8 Eliz. and the other 18 Eliz. In the other
side in disaffirmance of the custom, it was given in Evidence, diverse
Court-Rolls 6 H. 4. and especially one President, That both Sisters should
inherit as Coparceners did by the common Law; notwithstanding which, the Jury
found for the custom in regard they upon their own knowledge knew the usage of
the Country, and that in diverse places it had been so used in the Hundred
within which this Manor was. But in this case it was agreed by the Court, That
if the custom had been that the eldest Sister only should inherit, yet by that
custom the eldest Aunt, or the eldest Niece should not inherit the Land: And so
it is in the case of Borough English, where the custom is, That the youngest
Son shall have the Land, it does not give it to the youngest Uncle, for customs
shall be taken strictly: and Foster Justice said. That so it was adjudged in
one Totnams case: And in the Argument of this case, it was said by Cook Chief
Justice, That there are two Pillars of Custom, one the common usage; the other,
that it be time out of mind; and therefore upon the Evidence given to the Jury,
the Court enforced the parties which maintained the custom to show Presidents
in the Court-Rolls to prove the usage, and he said, that without such proof,
and that it had been put in ure, although it had been deemed and reported to
have been the true custom; yet the Court could not give credit to the promise
by Witnesses.

Pasc. 8 Jac. In the Common Pleas.
CCCXCVI. Arden and Goads Case.
IN an Action of Trespass upon the Case for diverse Goods, the Declaration was
of Trover and Conversion of them to the Defendants use: Upon Not Guilty
pleaded, they were at Issue, and there an Inventory of the Goods was given in
Evidence to the Jury, as the Goods were apprised by Vpholsterers: And in this
Evidence another Point did arise, These Goods were taken in Execution, and
delivered to the Defendant by the Sheriff; and afterward the Owner of the
Goods against whom the Execution was awarded, made a Deed of Gift of them to
the Plaintiff by these words, scil. He granted all those Goods which were late
put in Execution. Cook Chief Justice said. That Quacunque via data that Deed
could not entitle the Plaintiff to the Goods, for it is a Dilemma; for Posito,
that the Goods were put in Execution, then they did not pass; and admit that
they were not put in Execution, he did not grant but only those Goods which
were in Execution, and so there is an opposition; and afterward Judgment was
given for the Defendant.

Pasc. 8 Jac. In the Common Pleas.
CCCXCVII. The Earl of Rutland and Spencers Case.
THe case was, 8 Co. 55.
The late Queen Elizabeth granted to the Earl of Rutland the Office of
Parkership and Constable of etc. Habendum from the time of his full age for
life, and also by the same Patent she granted him the Stewardship of a Manor,
Habend' praedict' Officia pro termino vitae per Deputatum suum vel Deputatos
suos, etc. eidem Officio pertinent' in tam amplis modo and forma, etc. Volentes
quod subditi nostri sint auxiliantes and assistentes to him: And after that one
as Steward to that Court came and made Proclamations, and also did the Deputy
of the Earl of Rutland: And thereupon the Earl of Rutland brought an Action
upon the Case against the other: In this case three Points were moved by
Nicholls Sergeant, 1. If a Stewardship granted by the King might be exercised
by a Deputy without such authority given him in his Patent: And he took a
Difference between an Office of Trust and other Offices, as in 28 H. 8. of a
Carver, etc. and 11 E. 4. 1. the Office of the Chancellor of the Exchequer, and
such Offices cannot without special Authority be assigned over, 39 H. 6. 34. Of
the Office of Marshal per se vel sufficient' Deputatum, etc. Nevills Case in
the Commentaries. Offices of trust which are inheritances may be executed by
Deputy. 8 Eliz. Die. 248. A Steward may be retained by word; and he said, There
is a difference between a Deputy and an Assignee; for an Assignee can forfeit
but his own Estate, but a Deputy shall forfeit the Estate of his Master, and
therefore if a Steward grant his Office for life who has the Office in Fee,
the Grantee shall forfeit no more than his Estate for life, 2 E. 6. Br. If the
under Steward make Admittances, it is good, and yet he is but a Deputy; but if
it be out of Court, then it ought to be by a special Custom, Vide 2 Eliz. Dyer.
The Office of Chyrographer granted for life, and exercisable by a Deputy: And
he said, That in these Letters Patents the intent shall be taken beneficially
for the Subject, and that for the Honor of the King, if the King be not
deceived in his Grant. Vide 6 E. 6. Dyer 77. Dodderidge to the contrary; and he
took a difference between Offices of Trust granted for life, and those which
are granted in Fee, for he who has it but for life cannot assign them over;
for the Grantor did not intend that another person should have the Office,
unless express mention were made in the Grant of Assignees: But when the Office
is granted in Fee, there is no such confidence put in the person of the
Grantee, for his heir shall have it, who is a person not known to the Grantor.
But in all cases the Grantee is elected for his skill: I agree 10 E. 4. 10. he
may make a Deputy by special words, but then that Deputy by those words cannot
make a Deputy: That a Steward is an Officer of trust, is proved; for he enters
Plaints in the Court, and Surrenders, and although he has not a Judicial
Place, yet he has a Ministerial Place, and the Lord and Tenants repose their
trusts in him: And it is also an Office of Skill. Vide 21 E. 4. 20. That the
Office of the Keeper of a Park, Steward, etc. cannot be assigned without
special words of Assignees. And as to the Case which was put by Nicholls, 8
Eliz. That one may make a Steward by word, and therefore an Assignee for life
by word, it is a Non sequitur: And he said That for another cause in the Patent
it self, no Deputy in this case could be made; for although the words are
Habendum and Gaudendum, etc. Offic' praedict' per Deputarum suum, sive
deputatos suos, the same had been good if there had been no Habendum before:
There was an Habendum before in the Patent: But here are three several
Habendums, which are as three several Grants, and the defect of the one shall
not be supplied by the other. 22 H. 6. 11. 2. Assizes are maintainable for two
Offices, although they be by one and the self same Grant: And those words
(Volentes, etc.) in the Patent, are nothing to the purpose, for the Grant it
self is determinable by the Body of the Grant, and the Clause de Assistantes
shall not supply that. Vide 20 H. 6. 1. Land given to two and Haeredibus, with
warranty, Haeredibus suis. Vide 13 E. 3. Grants 63. Throgmorton and Tracies
Case, Plow. Com. 18 H. 8. Br. Lovels Case; and so in our Case, the clause of
Assistantes makes nothing to the matter; for reddendo singula singulis it
extends to no more than passed, and was granted before in the body of the
Grant. The second Point which Dodderidge argued was, If there was a sufficient
Disturbance: and he held that there was not, and therefore the finding of the
Jury not good: And the Jury has not found the vi and armis; and he said, That
when the Writ is vi and armis, there ought to be some violence, and taking of
something, and some actual thing is to be done. Vide F. B. 86. and 92. 43 E. 3.
20. 8 R 2. Title Office. 48 E. 3. 25. 16 E. 4. 11. and 2 E. 3. 40. But in this
Case there is but a threatening at the most but no force is used; and there the
Writ is ill, and there is no sufficient Disturbance to maintain this Action.
The Case was adjourned.

Trin. 11 Jac. In the Common Pleas.
CCCXCVIII. Cooks Case.
IN a Writ of Intrusit Maritagio non satisfacto, It was found for the
Plaintiff, but no damages were assessed by the Jury, and the value of the
Marriage was found to 50 l. and now the Question was, If the same might be
supplied by a Writ of Enquiry of Damages, and prima facie the Court seemed to
be of opinion it could not; for where a man may have an Attaint, there no
damages shall be assessed by the Court, if they be not found by Jury: and the
Court would advise of it; but afterward the same Term it was adjudged, That no
Writ of Enquiry should Issue forth; But a Venire facias de novo was granted.
Vide 44 E. 3. Thorp. acc'.

CCCXCIX.
MOuntague Sergeant demanded of the Justices their opinions in a Case upon the
Statute of 3 Jacobi of Recusants, in the behalf of the University of Oxford:
The Case was, If a Recusant Convict, to avoid the said Statute, grants his
Patronage for years to one of his Friends in trust, if the Grant was void, or
not within the said Statute. The Justices refused to deliver their Opinions in
this Case; for they said, That this Point might judicially come in question
before themselves, and such they said was the Answer of Hussy in 1 H. 7. in
Humphrey Staffords case: When King Hen. 7. came in Banco, and demanded a
question of them; but yet tacit they seemed to agree, that such a lease of the
Patronage was void by the said Statute; and they said, That they would not have
the University to be discouraged in the case, which employed their Opinions to
be accordingly: And 21 H. 7. was vouched, that the Patronage was only matter of
favor, and not valuable. And in this Case Cook said, Quod apertus Haereticus
melior est, quam fictus Catholicus.

Trin. 11 Jac. In the Common Pleas.
CCCC. Grubhams Case.
THe Case was this, Grubham made a Lease to one by Deed-poll, Habendum to him
and his Wife, and to his Daughter successive sicut scribuntur and nominantur in
ordine, and afterward dyed, his Wife dyed, and if it was a good remainder to
the Daughter, was the Question. Harris Sergeant, It was void, and not a good
remainder for the incertainty. Et vide Cook 1 part, Corbets Case. In all
Contracts and Bargains there ought to be certainty: and therefore in 22 H. 6.
If a Feoffment be made to two, and Haeredibus, it is void, although it be with
warranty to them and their Heirs. Vide 9 H. 6. 35. Where renunciavit totam
Communiam, does not amount to a Release, because it is not showed to whom he
released: And so in 29 Eliz. in Banco Regis, in Windsmore and Halbards Case,
where an Indenture was to one Habendum to him and his Wife, and a third person,
and it was holden that it was void by way of Remainder to any of them. But the
Court was of Opinion in the principal Case, That the Daughter had a good Estate
in Remainder, and that the Case did not differ from the Case in the Lord Dyer;
where a Lease was made by Indenture to one, Habendum to him, and to another
sicut nominat. in Charta, and that those words made the Grant certain enough;
and so in this Case, sicut scribuntur and nominantur in ordine, shall be sicut
scribuntur and nominantur in eadem Charta; But they agreed, That a Lease made
to three, Habendum successive, was not good for the incertainty.

Hill. 9 Jac. In the Kings Bench.
CCCCI. Price and Atmores Case.
IN an Ejectione firmae it was agreed by the Justices, Where a man possessed of
a term for 60 years, by his Will made his Wife his Executrix, and devised all
his term and interest to her, and if she dyed before the term ended, that the
same should remain to his Son and the Heirs Males of his Body the Son dyed, the
Executrix entered, and claimed as Legatee, and assigned the term over, the
Executor of the Son entered, that his Entry was not lawful, for the Son had but
a Possibility, and no Interest; for by the devise of the whole term, the whole
Interest was in the Wife, and when it was in her it could not remain over;
otherwise if the Land had been granted to her for life, and if she dyed, that
it should remain as before: And note, that 25 Eliz. it was adjudged in Communi
Banco, that such a Possibility could not be released: And 29 Eliz. in
Hammingtons, case, that it could not be granted.

Trin. 11 Jac. In the Common Pleas.
CCCCII. The Bishop of Exeter and Sir Henry Wallops Case.
NOte in this case it was adjudged, That the King by a special Proviso in the
Statute of 21 H. 8. of Plurality, might give to any of his Chaplains as many
Benefices as he pleased. But otherwise it is of a common person, for they are
stinted by the Statute.

Mich. 12 Jac. In the Kings Bench.
CCCCIII. Glover and Archers Case.
THe case was, Tenant for life made a Lease for 21 years, 10 Co. 127, 128 2
Cro. 127. and 309. ib.
rendering Rent at Mich. and the Annunciation, or within 13 Weeks of any of the
said Feasts: After Mich. and before the 13 Weeks past, the Lessor dyed; and the
Plaintiff his Executor brought Debt for the Rent: It was adjudged by Cook and
the other Justices, That the Action did not lie forth Rent: For the Rent being
to be paid at Mich. or within 13 Weeks after, the Lessee has Election to pay
it at any of the days, and before the last day it is not due, and when the
Lessor dies before that day, his Executors have not any right to the Rent, but
after the death of the Lessor, having but an Estate for life, the Rent is gone:
But if the Lessor had had a Fee-simple in the Land, and had dyed before the
last day, the Heir should have had the Rent, as incident to the Reversion: But
if the Lessor had survived both days, the Rent had been a thing vested in him,
and his Executors should have had it; but if the Rent had been reserved at
Mich. and if it be behind by 13 Weeks, that then it should be lawful for the
Lessor to enter; if the Lessor survive Mich his Executors shall have Debt for
the Rent, for then the Rent is due, and the 13 Weeks are but a Dispensation of
the Entry of the Lessor until that time: And in this case as well as where the
Rent is reserved at two days in the disjunctive, it is sufficient that the Rent
be demanded at the latter day, without demanding of it at the first day.

Mich. 10 Jac. In the Common Pleas.
CCCCIV. Sir Baptist Hix and Fleetwood and Gotts Case.
Roll. tit. Condition.
THe Case was, Fleetwood and Gotts bargained and sold Weston Park, being 300
Acres of Land, to Sir Baptist Hix for 11 l. for every Acre, which did amount to
25 30 l. and in the premises of the Indenture of Bargain and Sale, it was
agreed by the parties, That the said Park being Wood-Land should be measured by
a Pole of 18 Foot and a half: And further it was covenanted, That Fleetwood and
Gotts should appoint one Surveyor, and Hix another, who should measure the said
Park; and if it by the measure should exceed the Number of Acres mentioned in
the Indenture, that then Hix should add to them according to the proportion of
11 l. for every Acre, and if it wanted of the Measure, then the said Fleetwood
and Gotts should repay to Hix the Surplusage of that Money, according to the
proportion of 11 l. the Acre: And upon the Indenture Hix brought Covenant, and
Assigned a Breach, because upon Measure it wanted 70 Acres; and the Defendants
did demur upon the Declaration, because the Plaintiff had not therein showed by
what measure it was measured; for they said by Shirley, That although it was
agreed in the first part of the Indenture, that the measure should be by a Pole
of 18 Foot and a half, yet when they come to the Covenants, there they do not
speak of any Measure; for which cause it shall be taken for such a Measure as
the Statute speaks of scil. a Measure of 16 Foot and a half the Pole; and by
such Measure there wants not any part of the Acres. Dodderidge contr. And he
put this ground, That if certainty once appears in a Deed, and afterward in
the same Deed it is spoken indifferently, Reference shall be unto the certainty
which appears: And therefore if by an Indenture Lands be given to a man, and
Haeredibus masculis, and afterward in the same Deed it appears, it is
Haeredibus de Corpore suo: It shall be an Estate-tail, because the first words
were indefinite, and the last certain, by which it appeared that he passed but
an Estate in Tail: And 4 E. 4. 9. b. the words of a Declaration was, Noverint
universi per praesentes nos J. S. teneri, etc. W. B. in 20 l. solvendum eidem
J.S. It was holden by the Court, the same did not make the Obligation void,
because it appeared by the first part of the Obligation, that he should be
bound to the Plaintiff; and therefore the intent being so, the Plaintiff might
declare of a Solvendum to himself: And the words (J. S.) should be Surplusage:
And 22 E. 3. 4. the Abbot of Selby granted quandam annuam pencionem (...) ad
rogatum J.E. illam scilicet quam idem J. E. habuit ad terminum vitae suae, Et
solvendam quousque (sibi) de beneficio Competo provisum fuerit; It was holden
by the Court in a Writ of Annuity brought, That the word (sibi) should have
reference to B. the Grantee, and not to J. E. And Cook said, That the original
Contract did leave the Measure in this Case; and for that he vouched Redwellys
Case in Plowd. Comment. A Lease rendering Rent at Mich. at D. and if it be
behind for a month after demand, that the Lessor shall re-enter; it shall be
demanded at the first place.

Trin. 12 Jac. In the Star Chamber.
CCCCV. Sir Richard Egertons Case.
IN this Case the Wife of Sir John Townsend being sentenced in 1000 l. and in
Execution in the Fleet for the Costs of the Plaintiff; these Points were
resolved by the Court: 1. If a man be Sentenced in the Star Chamber to pay a
Fine, and to Imprisonment, and the Delinquent renders his Body to Prison, that
notwithstanding the Body continues in Prison, the King shall be satisfied the
Fine out of the Profits of the Delinquents Lands. 2. If a Feme Covert be
sentenced there and she renders her Body to Prison, and there abides, That the
Lands of her Husband shall be sequestered, and the Profits thereof for the Fine
of his Wife. And that now upon the Statute of Recusancy the Lands of the
Husband for the Recusancy of his Wife, if he do not render her to Prison, and
discharge the same. 3. If a man be Sentenced in the Star Chamber to pay a Fine,
and to have Imprisonment, and he yield himself to Prison, That before his Fine
be also paid, he shall not proceed in any Action at the Common Law against the
Party in the same Suit.

Pasc. 12 Jac. In the Common Pleas.
CCCCVI. Crane and Parkins Case.
IN Trespass, The Defendant pleaded that the Land in which was parcel of the
Manor of Broughton Astley demisable by Custom, and showed, That the Custom of
the Manor was, that if any Tenant for life dyed, that the Lord for three years
Fine ought to grant the same to his Heir, and pleaded a Grant of the Manor to
the Lord Gray of Grooby: And also pleaded another Custom of the said Manor,
That if any Tenant for life of the said Manor had a Wife, and dyed, that the
Wife shall have in the Land her Widows Estate: And that after the death of the
Wife, that the Son, for a Fine of three years paid to the Lord, should have it
for his life, and that the Defendant claimed as Son, according to that Custom.
The Plaintiff made Title as Lessee for years to the Lord Gray of the Manor, and
traverseth that there was not any such Custom, that the Son for a Fine of three
years paid should have the Land for his life. Hutton said, That the Traverse
was good; for if there was not any such Custom, that the Son should have it so
for life, then ex consequente sequitur, that there is not any such Custom that
the Son should have it after the death of the Wife, or her Surrender, and
therefore he needed not to Traverse the last Custom alleged. But the whole
Court was against him, and ruled, That the Traverse was not good; for he ought
to have traversed the last Custom, because there are several Customs, and the
one is immediately to him, the other not; and the Defendant claimed by the
Second Custom, and therefore the Court awarded, That he should amend his Plea.

Pasc. 12 Jac. In the Common Pleas.
CCCCVII. Sir Henry Rolls and Osborns Case.
Hob. Rep. 20. More Rep. 859 2 Brownl. 169.
SIr Henry Rolls brought a Writ of Warrantia Chartae against Sir Robert Osborn
and Katharine his Wife, and showed, That the Defendant ought to warrant him a
Message. 40 Acres of Land, 700 Acres of Pasture in Kelmarsh, and showed, That
Sir Robert Osborn and his Wife levied a Fine to him and his Heirs of a Manor,
and of the Lands aforesaid, with warranty to him and his Heirs; and further
showed, That a Writ of Enter sur disseisin was brought against him of the said
Message, 40 Acres of Land, 700 Acres of Pasture, and that he had demanded the
Warranty of the Defendant, or that he would minister to him a Plea, which the
Defendant has refused to do, to his damage of 1000 l. the Defendant confessed
the Fine and Warranty, as aforesaid; but further pleaded, That in the same Term
that the Fine was levied, a Writ of Entry was brought against Sir Henry Rolls,
in which Writ he vouched to Warranty the said Defendant, who alone entered into
the Warranty and vouched over the common Vouchee, and so a Recovery was had
accordingly: And averred That the said Recovery was to the use of Sir Henry
Rolls for his life, and if there was a Marriage between him and A. S. within 4
years, then to the use of the said A. S. for her Ioynture, with diverse
remainders over and averred the life of Sir H. Rolls: Upon which the Plaintiff
did demur in Law. Shirley Sergeant argued for the Plaintiff. That the Warranty
was not destroyed, but that the Plaintiff might well mantain his Warrantia
Chartae: and for the same he vouched 22 H. 6.22. Cliffords Case; That there
ought to be an alteration of the Estate to which the Warranty is annexed, and
here is no alteration of the Estate; for although the Recovery was had the said
Term and a Voucher upon it, yet because the uses did not take effect presently,
but were contingent uses, he remained Tenant in Fee-simple as he was before;
and so the first Warranty remained, and was not destroyed. Mountague Sergeant
contrary; and that the Warrantia Chartae was gone, and that for four Causes: 1.
He who comes to an Estate in the Post shall not have a Warrantia Chartae, but
Sir Hen. Rolls comes to the Estate in the Post, ergo, he shall not have
Warrantia Chartae. And for that vide 29 Ass. 34. Lord by Escheat shall not have
Warrantia Chartae. 22 Ass. 57. The Lord of a Villain shall not have a Warrantia
Chartae. 21 H. 6. Disseisor shall not have Warrantia Chartae: and so 19 H 6.25.
10 H. 7.10. Tenant by the Courtesy shall not have the Writ, because all these
come to the Lands in the Post: But see Cook 3. part, Lincoln College Case,
they may have peradventure benefit of a Rent or of a Condition, but not of a
Warranty, 27 E. 3. garr' Statham acc'. 2. Every Warranty ought to have the same
Estate continuing to which the Warranty is annexed, but Sir Hen. Rolls had not
the same Estate continuing, ergo, he shall not have the Warranty, because the
Fine was to him and his Heirs with Warranty; but this Recovery (which was but a
further assurance) was but to the use of himself for life, with diverse
Remainders over so as the first Estate is altered: And 42 E. 3.2. 40 E. 3. 14.
it is a good Plea in a Warrantia Chartae, that the Demandant is not Tenant. And
41 Eliz. in Bointon and Chesters Case, it was adjudged in this Court, That if a
man makes a Feoffment with Warranty, who enfeoffs the first Feoffor, upon
Condition that that Warranty remains, he shall vouch by reason of the first
Warranty; but if upon that Feoffment he had limited any new use, there because
the Estate was altered, the Voucher was gone. Vide F. N. B. 135. 19 E. 3. T.
Voucher 12.2. 48 E. 3. 18. acc'. And it was Resolved 34 Eliz in Banco Regis in
Kempe and Henninghams Case, That in such Case he should not have several
Warrantia Charta's: And therefore because in the principal Case he has once
vouched upon this Recovery, and upon that the Estate is altered, he cannot now
have Warrantia Chartae. 3. Every Warranty is a Covenant real, which consists in
privity, and therefore destroy the privity, and the warranty is gone. But now
in this Case the first privity is destroyed, therefore the warranty is gone.
And therefore 11 H. 4. 8. if two Ioyntenants be with warranty, and one of them
makes a Feoffment in Fee, the warranty is destroyed, because the first privity
is destroyed, 21 H. 6. 51. acc'. But Vide 19 E. 3. Statham Garr' 31. If two
Ioyntenants are with warranty, and the one Releases to the Feoffor, there the
warranty remains, because the privity remains, Vide 2 H. 6. 7. Cook 1 Part,
Chudleighs Case 125. acc'. And see M. 31 Eliz. in this Court, King and Watts
Case: Land is given to Husband and Wife, and to the Heirs of the Body of the
Husband and Wife, the Husband levies a Fine, and dies without Issue, the Wife
is impleaded, and adjudged that she could not have Aid, nor Warrantia Chartae,
because the Estate was bound by the Fine, the Husband being Tenant in special
Tail. 4. No warranty can have but one recompense, and if there be recompense
given, the warranty is gone and extinct: But here is a recompense made by the
Voucher in this Recovery, therefore the warranty is extinct. 34 Ass. pl. 15. 23
E. 3. garr' 77. acc'. and 15 E. 4. 13. 12 E. 4. 12. If he will not take
advantage of the warranty when he may, he shall never have it after. Vide F. N.
B. 134. acc': And 36 Eliz. it was adjudged in Owens Case, That if Tenant in
Tail bargains and sells his Lands, and suffers a Recovery, and afterward
Inrolls the Deed, that that Recovery is a good bar to the Estate tail, because
there is a supposition of recompense: and so he prayed Judgment for the
Defendants. It was adjourned. Vide this Case now Resolved in the Lord Hoberts
Reports.

A TABLE OF THE Principal Matters Contained in this BOOK.
Abatement of a Writ. IN Account, the Writ abated for part, and for part the
Plaintiff had Judgment. 39 In Action upon the Case, and why. 55
Account. Of the King against a Stranger. 32
Actio personalis moritur cum persona. Trover is an Action personal, for it is
grounded upon a personal wrong, and arises upon a disceit and wrong, and if
there was no Conversion, then an Action of Detinue should lie. 44 Where one
takes my Horse, and dies, I shall not charge his Executor. 46 If a Smith pricks
my Horse, my Executors shall not have an Action for it. ibid.
Action upon the Case. Assumpsit. Where it is requisite for the party in an
Action upon the Case to express the Assumpsit with the Request, and where not.
2 If one promise in consideration, etc. to assign to J. S. the Lease of a
Stranger, for this an Action will lie. Adjudged. 2 If A. Prisoner at the Suit
of B. escapes, and being at liberty, promises to B. that if he will permit him
to be at large, etc. that he will pay to him 10 l. for this no Action will lie.
Adj. 3 A Promise against a Promise will maintain an Action upon the Case. ibid.
-- By an Executor to a Creditor upon forbearance to pay his Debt, makes him
liable to pay it of his own Goods. Adj. 1. ibid. -- Will lie against the
Executors of A. upon his Promise at full Age to save one harmless, who was
bound with him (for his Debt) when he was an Infant. 5 -- Will not lie against
an Executor, if he promises to pay a Debt, and has not Assets. ibid. -- Nor is
an Heir subject to an Action upon such a promise, if he has nothing by Descent
6 An entire Assumpsit cannot be severed by Action. ibid. To avoid Controversies
and Suits is a good and sufficient Consideration to ground an Assumpsit upon.
31 The Defendant exhibited a Bill to the Justices of Peace, complaining that
the Plaintiff is a disquieter of his Neighbors, etc. and served a Process upon
J. S. on a Sunday, and the Justices to whom it was exhibited, awarded Process
against the Plaintiff to find Suerties for his good Behavior, by virtue of
which he was taken and imprisoned; For this an Action of the Case will not lie.
35
Action upon the Case for Words. What words are actionable, and what not. 24,
54, 121, 181
Action upon the Statute. Upon 5 Eliz. of Apprentices, holden clearly, That if
one has been an Apprentice for seven years at any Trade mentioned within that
Statute, he may exercise any Trade named in the said Statute, although he has
not been an Apprentice to it. 9 Action upon the Statute of Hue and Cry. 18 Upon
the Statute of 5 Eliz. of Perjury. 25 Upon the Statute of 5 Eliz. of Usury. 43
Upon the Statute of Hue and Cry 51 Upon the Statute of 23 Eliz. of Recusancy.
54 Upon the Statute 4 Eliz. of Perjury. 105 Upon the Statute of 1 Eliz. of
Leases made by Bishops. 61 Upon the Statute of Hue and Cry 85 Upon the Statute
5 E. 6. for buying of Woolls. 103 Upon the Statute of 31 H. 8. of Partition.
106 Upon the Statute of Hue and Cry 191
Alien. Purchaser 82. suffers a Common Recovery. 84
Amendment. If a Writ of Error be brought and delivered to the Chief Justice of
the Common Pleas, and allowed by him under his hand, the Record cannot
afterward be amended. 50 Day given by the Court to amend the Count in Disceit.
123 Of a Writ of Quare Impedit openly in Court by a Clerk of the Chancery. 12
Amercement. Of the Sheriff for making a Retorn contrary and repugnant in it
self. 57
Appeal. If Robbery may be brought 20 years after the Robbery committed, and
the party robbed shall not be bound to bring it within a year and a day. 16 If
the Defendant be attainted by Verdict in an Appeal of Robbery, the fresh Suit
shall be inquired of, but otherwise if he be attainted by Outlary. 48
Assignment. Of Debts to the King. 80 No Bonds shall be assigned to the Queen,
but such as are made for payment of Money. 9
Attaint. Where the King is sole party against the Subject, and the Jury find
for the King, no Attaint lies 46 But where the Suit is tam pro Domino Rege
quam pro seipso contrary. ibid.
Attornment. What shall be a good Attornment, what not. 23 Surrender of a
Copyhold Reversion, with the Rent to the use of a Stranger, and his admittance
thereupon, are in the nature, and so amount to an Attornment. 25 If A. seized
of a Manor, Lease the same for years, rendering Rent, with Clause of Re-entry,
and afterward levy a Fine, sur Cognizance de droit, etc. to the use of himself
and his Heirs, and the Rent being demanded, is behind, he cannot re-enter, nor
avow for the Rent, but is without remedy for the same without Attornment. 34 If
A. seized of a Rent in fee grants the same by Fine to B. to the use of C. there
needs no Attornment to the Conusee, because all the right of the Rent is out of
the Conusor, and transferred to Cestuy que use instantly. 50 Attornment does
not give a right, but is only a consent. 129
Bargain and Sale. IF the Bargainee levies a Fine, and within six months the
Deed be enrolled, the Land shall pass by the Fine. 4
Bayl. If a Scire Facias issue against them, before a Capias issue against the
Principal, and they be taken, they shall be put to their Writ of Error. 36
Bills. The King may exhibit one Bill in the Exchequer for several causes,
arising within several Counties, and it shall be good. 26
Carrier. SEnt with a Letter by one to a Merchant for Merchandises to send them
to him, receiving a sum of Money, the Merchant sent them by the Carrier without
money, the Buyer shall not be charged for the money, the Bargain being
conditional, and it was the Merchants folly to trust the Carrier with those
Wares. 7
Chancery. May compel a Tenant to Attorn. 8. 184.
Common and Commoner. A Commoner cannot kill Conies which destroy his Common. 7
In what Case Common appurtenant by Prescription sans number is improveable by
the Lord of the Waste. 41
Condition. Broken by Lessee for years. 5 Destroyed in part, good in part. 27
Divided. ibid. Grantee of parcel of the Reversion is an Assignee within 32 H.
8. of Conditions. 28 Apportioned. ibid. Suspended. ibid. Conditions by Act in
Law divided not by Act of the Party. ibid. Statute of 32 H. 8. of Conditions
taken by Equity. 29 Condition suspended in part, is suspended in all. ibid. --
Shall be taken favorable for him who is to perform it. 70
Consultation. Was granted, because the Prohibition was general, where it ought
to have been special. 16
Conversion. In Trover is Traversable, and therefore ought to be certainly
alleged. 45
Conveyance. By the Heir upon Intrusion. 60
Copyholder. Baron Surrenders Femes Copyhold. 88 Not within the Statute of
Wills. 236 If a Copyholder in possession surrender the Reversion of his Land
post mortem suam to the Lord to an use; nothing is thereby passed. 8 Tenant for
Life of a Copyhold remainder in fee, he in the remainder may surrender his
Estate, if there be no Custom to the contrary. 9 In what Case a Copyholder
ousted cannot make a Lease for years, upon which the Lessee may maintain
Ejectione firmae. 30 If a Copyholder dies, his Heir within age, he is not
bound to come to any Court during his Nonage, to pray admittance, or tender
his Fine. 31 -- If the death of his Ancestor be not presented, nor
proclamations made, he is not at any mischief, although he be at full age.
ibid. A Copyholder may surrender by Attorney. 111, 241
Costs. The Plaintiff shall have Costs upon 5 Eliz. for hunting in his Park,
notwithstanding the Statute gives treble damages. 36 If the Plaintiff be Non
suited in an Action upon an Escape, the Defendant shall not have Costs. 182
Debt. SHall not be brought against the Husband, upon a Contract by the Wife.
42 For Rent -- 18. For Rent-Corn reserved upon a Lease for years shall be
brought in the Detinet. 47 Upon a Concessit solvere according to the Law
Merchant, and Custom of the City of Bristol. 105
Devise. To a College in Vacancy of a Head. 223 If one possessed of a Term,
devises that his Son shall have the same when he comes to the age of 18 years,
and that his Wife (whom he makes Executrix) shall enjoy it in the mean time,
and dye, and the Wife take Husband, she shall have the Term as Executrix, till
the Son accomplish the age of 18 years. 1 Of Lands, part to the eldest Son in
Tail, and part to the younger Son in Tail, with this clause, That if any of the
Sons dyed without Issue, the whole Land to remain to a Stranger in Fee, the
Sons entered respectively, and the younger dyed without Issue, the Stranger
entered, but his Entry was not lawful, for the eldest Son shall have the Land by
the implicative Devise 14 By a Father to his Son and Heir. 35, 200, 237 Who
shall first take by a Devise. 37
Emblements. WHere by Law they belong to the Executors. 1
Entry. If a Disseisor of 100 Acres, lets the same to diverse for years, the
Entry in one Acre by the Disseisee is an Entry against them all. 8 And if one
makes a Lease for years, rendering 10 l. for the first two years, and afterward
30 l. every year, with Condition to Re-enter if the Rent of 30 l. or any part
be behind, and the Lessor enters for Non-payment of the 10 l. his Entry is
lawful, for it was but one Rent, of which the 10 l. was parcel. ibid. Entry
Congeable. 39
Error. He who is special Heir by the Custom (as of Borough English) shall
have the Writ of Error, and not the Heir at Common Law. 5
Estate. Executed. 37
Estrepement. In Partition ought not to be granted, and why. 60
Evidence. Maybe good enough to maintain a Declaration, though it vary from it.
14
Execution An Infant once discharged out of Execution, shall never be in
Execution again. 6 Execution of a Statute shall bind the King. 10 Where not
good upon a Capias without a Scire Facias. 24 If the Bail be taken in
Execution, before the Capias ad Satisfaciend. against the Defendant be filed,
they may avoid this Execution by Error, but not by Plea or Surmise. 24 If the
Plaintiff takes out Execution within a year and a day after Judgment obtained,
although he does not prosecute it in two or three years, yet when he pleases
he may proceed upon it, and shall not be put to a Scire Facias. 44
Exposition of Words. The words sub Condition, ea Intention in a Feoffment be
not a Condition, but an Estate executed presently according to the intent. 2
Domus est nomen collectivum, and contains many Buildings, as Barns, Stables,
etc. 16 Omnes Dimissiones being general words, shall not be restrained to
special Leases. 17 The word (growing) though it sound in the Present Tense, yet
it shall be taken also in the Future Tense. 36 -- So the word (being) but
otherwise if the words had been ( tunc being). 37 The word (paying) if it
creates a Condition, or not? Quaere. 50 Proviso semper put on the part of the
Lessee, upon the words of the Habendum, makes a Condition; but contrary of a
Proviso on the part of the Lessor 71 The Provost, Fellows and Scholars of
Queens College in Oxford, as Guardians of the Hospital, etc. in S. make a
Lease of Lands, parcel of the Possession of the said Hospital, by the name of
Praepositus Socij and Scholares Collegij Reginalis in Oxonia, Gardianus
Hospitalis, etc. and good without saying (Gardiani) in the Plural Number. 85
Extinguishment. If Lessee for 10 years grant a Rentcharge to his Lessor for
the same years, and the Lessor grant the Remainder in Fee to the Lessee for
years, by this the Rent is extinguished. 2
Felo de se. IF the Queen grants to A. Catalla Felonum de se, within such a
Precinct, where one indebted to the Queen having Goods is Felo de se, the Queen
shall have the Goods to satisfy her Debt. 6
Feoffment. To Uses. 23 By one Coparcener cestuy que use of the whole, is not
only a Feoffment of that moiety she might lawfully dispose of, but also of the
other moiety by disseisin. 52
Fines of Lands. Where a Fine levied by the Husband of Lands (whereof he and
his Wife are Donees in Special Tail) shall bar the Issue, and where not. 2 Fine
by the Husband, where avoids a Lease, and e contra. 15 Fines levied to Uses. 22
Issue of a Tenant in Tail (the Remainder to the King) shall be barred by a
Fine. 40
Fine for Alienation. Not only the Land aliened, but the other Lands of the
Alienor, shall be chargeable for the Fine for Alienation without License. 47
Forfeiture. If Lessee for years, being sued for Rent, claims Fee in the Land,
and has none, it is a Forfeiture. 3 -- Of an Obligation, with Condition, That
the Grantee of the next Avoidance of an Advowson, should enjoy the same without
any disturbance, or claim of the Grantor. 18 An Obligation to perform a
Covenant, that the Lessee of a Term shall enjoy it without expulsion, or any
Act done, or to be done by the Lessor, shall not be forfeited by Non-fesance
38, 39 -- Of an Obligation conditioned to perform an Award. 190 If Tenant for
life join the Mise upon the mere Right, it is a Forfeiture. 128 Where Tenant
for life is impleaded, if he makes default, or confesses the Action, it is a
Forfeiture. ibid. If Tenant for life bargains and sells his Land by Deed
enrolled, although no Fee passes, yet it is a Forfeiture. 129 contra 124
Grant. BY the King of the Office of the Kings Bench. 19 Recital in Grants of
the King. 20 Of omnia bona by an Executor, what passes? 22 Of a Reversion by a
Bishop. 23 Of the Office of a Sheriff. 33
Habeas Corpus. WHere the cause of Commitment must be returned upon it. Where
not. 21
Heirs. The second Son shall inherit the Land purchased by his eldest Brother,
notwithstanding the Attainder of the Father. 5
Jeofails. WHere upon a Jeofail the Court awarded a Repleader. 19
Indictment. -- Quare Clausum A. B. fregit, held good, notwithstanding A. had
but a Lease at will of the Land. 6 -- De uno Equo for a Gelding, not good; But
where Trespass is brought de Equo ellato, and the Jury find a Gelding, etc. it
is otherwise. ibid. Upon Stat. 13 Eliz. c. 8. for being a Broker in an usurious
Contract, for which he incurred a Praemunire. 32 Upon Stat. 5 E. 6. against P.
for drawing his Dagger in the Church against J. S. holden void, for that it is
not said he drew it with intent to strike the party. 49 Upon Stat. 8 H. 6. two
Exceptions taken to it, but disallowed. ibid. For stopping quandam viam valde
necessariam, quashed for want of the word Regiam, and for that the party
indicted had not any addition therein. 121
Infant. Makes a Lease for years, and at his full age says to the Lessee, God
give you joy of it, the Lease is thereby affirmed. 4 If an Infant, being in
Execution, sues a Writ of Error, and is bailed, the Recognisance shall be by
his Bail only that he shall appear, and if Judgment be affirmed, that they pay
the money, and not render his Body to Prison. 6
Inmates. Who shall be accounted Inmates upon the Stat. of 31 Eliz. 10
Interest. Difference between an Interest and a Limitation. 33
Judgment. Shall not be stayed upon Allegation that one of the Defendants was
dead after Verdict, for the Court cannot take notice of it judicially, nor any
of the parties have day in Court to plead it, besides the party is not without
remedy, for he may have a Writ of Error. 15 If the Court may reverse their own
Judgment. Quaere. 60 Reversed for Error in omitting the Costs the Jury gave. 61
Jurors. Where bound by confession of the parties, where not. 56 A Juror before
the Retorn of the Panel became a Minister of the Church, and therefore prayed
to be discharged according to the privilege of those of the Ministry, but it
was not granted, because he was a Lay man at the time of the Panel made. 190
Justice of Peace. One cannot be Justice of Peace by Prescription. 149
Lease. OF a Manor, etc. with all the profits of a Wood, except 40 Trees to the
Lessor to take at his pleasure, the Wood is not comprised within the Lease, but
the Lessee shall only have the profits, as Pawnage, Herbage, etc. 9 If a man
makes a Lease of a Wood ad faciendum maximum proficuum meliori modo quo
poterit, the Lessee cannot thereby cut the Trees, nor do waste. 9 -- Made by a
Corporation, void for Misnosmer. 11 -- Good to maintain an Ejectione firmae. 14
Leases by a Baron contrary to Act of Parliament, void. 17 -- By Tenant at will,
if a disseisin. 35 Leases made by Prebendaries within the Equity of the Statute
of 32 H. 8. c. 28. 51
Leet. Pound breach is not inquirable there. 12 -- But excessive Toll is. ibid.
Nobleman. SHall be bound with Bayl in a Recognizance to render his Body. 6 --
By 13 E. 1. if he has not Goods or Lands, his Body shall be taken in
Execution. ibid.
Obligation. Forfeited. 18
Outlary. How avoided by Plea in person. 22, 186
Payment. OF Rent before the day by the Obligee, does not discharge him. 4 Of a
Debt generally by a Surety Executor to the Principal, if it shall be as
Executor or as Obligor. Quaere. ibid.
Pleadings. In a special Justification in Trover the place of Conversion may be
traversed; but where a Justification is general, the County is not traversable
at this day. 4 It is no good Plea for the Tenant in a Writ of Entry sur
disseisin, to say, that the House in demand is within the City of London,
whereof he is a Citizen, and that King H. 3. concessit civibus, etc. quod non
implacitentur, etc. extra muros Civitatis, praed. sed illis rectum teneatur
infra Civitatem praed. secundum cons. Civit. praed. For he ought to have
showed, That the Citizens for their Lands there ought to be impleaded in the
Hustings. 13 In Trespass for pulling Hurdles, etc. the Defendant justified by
Prescription, to have a free course for Sheep in the place where, etc. and
because the Plaintiff erected Hurdles without leave of the Lord of the Manor,
the Defendant cast them down prout, etc. the Plaintiff replied of his own
wrong, without cause, and held naught, for he should have traversed the
Prescription. 17 Traverse of the place in Trover, where good. 22 Special Plea
to an Assumpsit, not good, and why. 31
Posse Comitatus. It differs from Posse Manerij. 87
Possessio Fratris. Where it shall not be of Copyhold Lands. 38
Previledge. Denied to the Treasurer of the Records of the Kings Bench, and
why. 81
Prohibition. If the Parson Libels in the Spiritual Court against the owner of
Lands for Tithes which he severed, but a Stranger took and carried away, no
Prohibition shall issue, for that he might plead the same matter in bar in the
Spiritual Court. 7 To the Spiritual Court to stay a Suit commenced there for
Tithes, upon a Prescription showed in the Kings Bench. 25 Granted to stay a
Suit in the Court Christian, commenced against an Executor by one for a Legacy
bequeathed to him by his Father, who willed his Goods should be parted amongst
his Children, according to the Custom of London. 12 Upon claim of Property. 150
Quare Impedit. May be brought by Executors to remove a Clerk collated
wrongfully in the life time of the Testator. 15
Recognizance. IF a Recognizor of a Recognizance acknowledged before a Master
in Chancery, dye before it be enrolled, it may be enrolled at the Petition of
his Executors. 8
Common Recovery. Feme not party to the Writ of Covenant, not bound by
Recovery. 26
Remainder. Where void. 21
Resceit. One prayed to be received in a Formedon, and was ousted of it by the
Court. 51
Reservation. Of Rents upon a joint Lease. 27 Difference between a Reservation
and a Contract. 29
Retorn. Of the Sheriff, where void. 21
Sale. OF a Bayliwick of an Hundred, is not within the Statute of 5 E. 6. c.
16. 33 Of Goods by the Sheriff upon Execution, where good, where not. 20, 21
Surrender. If Lessee for years take a second Lease from Guardian in Soccage
(made in his name) it is a surrender of the first Lease. 7 What shall be said
to be a surrender of a Term, what not. 30
Treason. UPon Attainder of Treason, who shall seize the Goods for the Queen. 34
Tithes. Unity no discharge of Tithes. 47
Venire Facias. GRanted de novo, after Verdict, for that the first Venire
Facias was of K. only, for that it ought to have been de Vicento de K. and W. 85
Vesturam terrae. He who has Vesturam terrae cannot dig the Land. 43 -- Those
who have Lot-Meadow, viz. to change every year according to Lots, have not any
Freehold therein, but only Vesturam terrae. 43
Writ. DE fama and gestu, what it is. 40

FINIS.

