A Caveat to the Cavaliers: OR AN ANTIDOTE AGAINST Mistaken Cordials: Dedicated
to the Author of A CORDIAL FOR THE CAVALIERS.

Sic Vos non Vobis, etc. -- LONDON

Printed for Henry Brom at the Gun in Ivie-lane

1661.

A CAVEAT TO THE CAVALIERS, etc.
Sir,
THat Love which Covers many Faults, may be allowed to Commit some; they say a
man may be killed with Kindness, but we all know, he may with Physic, unless
a strict account be taken both of the Quality of the Disease, and of the Temper
of the Patient. Give me leave then to tell you Sir, that though I do not rank my
self among those Worthy and Deserving Gentlemen, to whom your Cordial is
particularly directed, yet you may find me among the Poor Cavaliers, to whom
your Loyal Charity appears to extend: and (with great Honor to your Care) I
must be free to acquaint you, that if the Party be not either Chameleons, or
Book-worms, (to live upon Air, or Paper) your Cordial will not do their
Business.

It troubles me exceedingly, that You, and I, united by a Common Sense, and Tie
of Duty, should so far differ about the manner of expressing it, as to dissent
in Print: yet since we both proceed upon one honest bottom, a Zeal to serve his
Majesty, and his Friends, we may without Dishonor to that Noble end, or the
least injury to our selves, debate the several ways, and means that lead
to it. I said, we May, I might have said, we Must, we Ought to do it: for (as
the case stands) if either his Majesty mistake his Friends, or They the King;
If Honest men either mistake their Enemies, or one another, the least weight on
the wrong side, Hazzards the main, and Casts the Balance:

I come now (though unwillingly) to examine your Cordial, which I shall take in
Sections, as it lies, with due Respect to your Person, and exact Justice to
your Meaning.

A CORDIAL FOR THE CAVALIERS.
Worthy, and Deserving Gentlemen,
1. IN the Affairs and Traverses of this life, it is a true rule, (and it is a
comfortable one) That He who discharges a good Conscience, has enough of his
Own wherewith to reward Himself, though he receive no compensation from any
where else. The World knows, and Envy it self does acknowledge, That in the
late Confusions, (which were of that length that might have shaken the firmest
Spirits in their Loyalty) you have discharged a Good Conscience three ways,
toward your Creator, toward your Country, and toward your King; your
Religion bound you to the One, Nature to the Other, and your Allegiance to the
Third; And although many of you have not yet received what you expected for the
two last, yet touching the first whereunto the other also conduce) you are sure
to have such a Reward one day, that will not only be above all Merit, but
beyond all Imagination in the Kingdom of Eternity.

1. The Cordial (Sir) of a Good Conscience, we carry in our Bosoms, for we
have not stood out a Twenty years persecution, to Blood, Beggary, and Bondage,
we knew not why. Nor are we Fainting yet, wherefore this Drop of Comfort might
have been saved.

Should the same Fate, call us to do the same Part over again, (as things look
scurvily) we would as cheerfully lay down our Rags and Carcasses to serve his
Majesty in Being, at the same rate, as we have Hazzarded, and wasted them:
First, to Defend the Murdered Father; and then, to Restore his Royal and
Banished Successor. This we would do, upon a single and changeless Principle of
Loyalty, and Honor, without the aid of Borrowed CORDIALLS. And yet we thank
you for supplying us even with what we did not want.

Your next care is to divert us by the Rewards of the next World, from
attending our Disappointments in This.

It is a Christian Care, and we acknowledge it, though possibly our Misfortunes
might have brought us to That thought, without the help of a Monitor.

Thus far as Christians: You are now pleased to cheer us up as Patriots and
Subjects.

2. Add hereunto that I hold your Condition to be far from being desperate,
but that you may receive Rewards, at least some Consideration from the other
Two, viz. from your King and Country; for the present Parliament, which
represents your whole Country, being composed of so many Wise, and well weighed
Gentlemen (whereof diverse have been Cosufferers with you) will, as it is well
hoped, out of a sense thereof, have such reflections upon your Sufferings and
Services, both Active and Passive, that they will enable his Majesty, whom the
Law styles, The Fountain of Honor and Bounty, and whereof indeed no other
Power should partake with Him, I say it may well be hoped, that this
Parliament, before their Recesse, will put his Majesty in a Capacity, and
Humbly Advise Him, if not to Reward you, yet to Relieve your present wants in
such a measure, that the Steed may not starve while the Grass grows.

2. I think it would as well have suited the quality of our Pretenses, if what
you call Reward had been styled Bounty, or Benevelence: for the best Actions of
a Private person, toward a Public good, are no further meritorious than by
Imputation.

As to the major part of the Two houses, we are as sensible of their
Affections, as of our own Distresses: but so Discreet withal, as not to hope
for Matters Impossible, nor to ask things unreasonable: and That Is our Choice;
unless we much mistake the present state of this impoverished and exhausted
Nation. But Much, Little, or Nothing, our Duty is still the same, and our
Resolves to Dye as Loyal as we have Lived; without gaping after Diego's
Legacies, and building Castles in the Air, to entertain our wavering or
shrinking Spirits. From the Two Houses, your next motion is to the King.

3. You know well that the King has been among us but a little more than the
compass of one year, And his Grandfather Henry the Great of France, was above
seven years (which is an Age in our Law) before He could requite those who
stuck to Him not much above twenty months in making Him Master of the
Flowerdeluces; You know the vast debts his Majesty has paid both by Sea and
Land, which yet were not his own, nor his Kingdoms, but of that accursed
usurping Commonwealth, which exhausted more of the Public Treasure, than all
the Kings of this Land, since Gold and Silver were first coined in it; You know
He is so shortened, that He has not yet provided bread for all of his own
House; He is in such a Condition, that He cannot give his Royal Aunt that
treatment which might be expected; He has not wherewith to go his Progress:
Consider what vast expenses his Fleets at Sea, his Lifeguard, with other
Garrisons do stand Him in; As also what debts He drew upon Himself so many
years beyond the Seas, for his necessary subsistence, etc.

3. So far are we from comprehending either the Need or Reason of this
Argument, we dare scarce ask the meaning of it; or make appear how little it
concerns us. Can it be Thought that Worthy and Deserving Gentlemen (such as you
style the Cavaliers) would press upon the Kings Necessities? Truly These Hints
sound little less than Accusations. Allow us we beseech you to know something
of Court-affairs although we have no Places there: and to discern the Bias of
the Season as well as you can tell it us.

We can very well recount how long his Majesty has been in England; and we
have read when Henry the Great of France, appointed Pensions for lame
Soldiers, Paid his old Debts, and passed an Edict for the Squeezing of
Public Spunges. We know our Share likewise of the King's Streights, (and
which is more, the Reasons of them) but what is all this to Us? We do not
Importune his Majesty, nor Charge him.

Is it to say, that our Relief must be the work of Time; and to preach Patience
to us? Truly 'twere hard we should not yet have learned That Lesson of all
others which we have now been Twenty years in practicing. But I shall wait upon
you Forward.

4. Now, whereas some object he has rewarded Roundheads, Truly I believe if a
Catalogue were made of those upon whom he has conferred Honor or Office since
his Return, there will be found above twenty Cavaliers for one of any other
upon whom he has set any marks of Favor. It Is true, albeit he came not in by
the Presbyterian, yet he could not have come in without Him so peaceably,
Though some allege that what the Presbyterian did, was not as much out of a
Love to the King, as out of a Hatred be bore to the Independent, who may be
said to have used the Presbyterian as the Fox uses to deal with the Badger,
who having found out his Chamber in the Earth, he so berayeth it, that the
Badger comes thither no more, and so the Fox makes himself master of the hole.

4. By your kind leave Sir, Count again, and I Am afraid you will find a Dozen of
Larks, and a Capon, instead of a Dozen of Capons, and a Lark.

We are not yet so Insolent as to Confine, and Question the King's Bounties; we
do in truth complain, and grieve, to see a Faction packed by some whom his
Majesty entrusts, out of the rankest of his Enemies; and to see diverse persons
recommended to the Kings Favor, and unknown receive it too, whose Foulness
casts a Blot upon the Honor.

Concerning the supposed Antipathy betwixt the wrangling Presbyter, and
Independent: All comes to this; they are Two Ravenous Beasts, that agree well
enough to devour Beeves and Muttons, and prey upon the Innocent. So soon as the
Object of their Common Appetite is spent, they fall to worry one another, yet
in the heat of all their Fury, cast but a Sheep betwixt them, (a Cavalier) they
shall Part, Reconcile, Fall on, and share the Quarry. Now to your next
Exception.

5. Whereas some except against his Majesty's lenity, and Indulgence, let Them
know that Mercy is the inseparable Inmate of a magnanimous breast, and that the
noblest way of Revenge is to forget, and scorn injuries; I have read in Story,
that one thing which made Lewis the twelf of France most famous, was a Speech
which dropped from Him, when being advised by some of his Counsel to punish
such and such as were professed Enemies unto Him, while He was Duke of Orleans,
He answered, That the King of France does not use to revenge the Injuries of
the Duke of Orleans; No more (with most humble submission be it spoken) does
King Charles resent much the wrongs that were done to CHARLES STUART.

5. This is to enter further then becomes us into the Actions of our Sovereign.
We do not blame the King's Indulgence, but rather adore that Divine Sweetness
of his Nature; yet we detest those wretches that abuse it, and we affirm, that
Mis-placed Mercy was his Fathers Ruin. To say that the Snake killed the man
that gave it Life, and warmed it in his Bosom, reflects upon the Serpent, not
the Charity.

Nor by your Favor Sir, is the Exercise of Mercy, a Virtue, in all Cases:
Suppose Six Persons ready to perish for want of Bread; Three of them,
Murderers, and my Enemies; the other Three my Honest Friends: I can relieve
but Half, which Three shall I save? Or if I be uncertain how my stock will hold
out, with which shall I begin? In this case, were not Mercy to the Guilty,
Cruelty to the Innocent? Love your Enemies, is not Hate your Friends: A will to
save All, is indeed a Princely Virtue, but he that makes the Experiment, shall
most Infallibly destroy the best.

As your Discourse of Mercy (to my thinking) needs a Distinction, so has your
Application of it, one too much. King Charles distinguished from Charles
Stuart? All was King Charles, Father and Son; without the Interruption of a
moment: nor were the wrongs done to Charles Stuart, but to King Charles.

6. Therefore, Noble Cavaliers, possess your Souls with Patience, We have a
most gracious King who is in the Meridian of his years, and will live to reward
all in time. In the confused medley of mundane affairs, the Proverb often is
verified, Some have the hap, but some stick still in the gapp, Some have the
fortune of preferment, some not, and 'twill be so to the worlds end. The Author
hereof though during the many years that he was in prison for his loyalty, had
3. sworn over his head in an Office of Credit that he should have had de jure,
yet it nothing discomposeth him, being more than in hope of a compensation some
other way.

6. Why Noble Sir, (at your Request) we will possess our Souls with Patience.
We know the King, and our own Duty, and we shall rather serve him, without
Flattering, then Flatter, without serving him. We never hackny'd out our selves
for Wages, or Reward; and sure that distance from whence your care descends to
overlook us, makes us appear Less then effectually we Are. You treat us in a
Phrase, better applied to stop a Bawling Mutiny, than to compose a Generous
Passion.

If we are sad, it is not so much because we are Poor; nor has our Grief any
disloyal mixture. But will you know what troubles us?

We find the Court dangerously thronged with Parasites: Knaves represented to
the King, for Honest men, and Honest men for Villeines: a watch upon his
Majesty's Ear, to keep out better Enformation: seditious Ministers protected,
and encouraged: Libels against the Authority, and Person of the King, dispersed
even by his Majesty's sworn Servants; and to Discover Treason, is of a
consequence (in some respects) more hazardous, than to commit it.

These are our Grievances, and to find the Reverence of Government invaded by
the pretending, but mistaken Preservers of it.

Let any man tell Titon (a Stationer in Fleetstreet, and now of the Royal
Trayn) of his True Pourtraicture of the Kings of England, printed in 1650.
where the whole Line of the Stuarts is branded for Spurious: -- his Sacred
Majesty now living, stung with the most exquisite, and piercing point of
Rhetorique and Malice: -- -- The late King handled worse than common modesty
would treat his Murderers: -- Let a Man mention this, I say, and his mouth's
stopped with the Act of Indemnity: although this very Person has of Late
published a Pamphlet, of near equivalence to This, against our Gracious, and
abused Sovereign. Are we obliged by the Act of Oblivion, to quit our Nature,
and our Reason with our Passions: -- to such a Loss of Memory, as utterly
defaces the very Images of things Past, and robbs us of the benefit of our
dear-bought experience?

We have our Private Causes of Disquiet too, but Patience is your advise, and
without more ado, we will take it: especially encouraged by the President you
set before us, your Patient self. And yet if your Composure proceed from your
Compensation, (as the Cohaerence renders it) your Instance does not reach Us.

We do not envy you the Glory of your Sufferings, and yet we do not need your
Pattern to proceed by. We have among our selves Sir, diverse that would more
willingly Repeat the very Losses and Hazards themselves then the Story of them:
and for that modest Reason, the Words of Some, weigh down the Actions of Others.

You proceed, and conclude Thus,

7. And as we have a Gracious, so have we a Glorious King, the most Glorious
that ever wore these three Crowns, For all the eyes of Christendom are fixed
upon Him with a kind of astonishment and admiration; and not only of
Christendom, but of all the World besides, for it is written that the Great Turk
should say, If he were to change his Religion, he would fall to Worship the God
of King Charles of England, who has done such miracles for him, such miracles
that no story can parallel: And certainly, God Almighty must needs love Him for
whom he does miracles: which that his Divine Majesty may continue to do, are
the incessant Prayers of

20 Julii 1661. J. H.

7. We do not understand the Phrase of the Court: A Gracious Prince we have, no
doubt, as ever Lived: but how so Glorious, if so oppressed as you have rendered
him, we do not comprehend. Great, as he is Good we wish him, and let That
suffice. Love is the best Praise, and the best Language of the Soul is Action.
Till we are called to That, our Prayer shall be, that all the ENEMIES of the
last King, may prove the FRIENDS of this.

R. L.

But where is the Cordial all this while? you pretend to comfort people under
Corporal necessities, by telling them, they have a Gracious Prince, and a Good
Cause; you bid them not Despayr, for it is possible they may receive their
Reward -- when the Public shall have nothing else to do with their money.
(that is, at Last.) Words will not feed the Hungry; nor Speculations clothe
the Naked. This is no more than what we might have heard from a Good Old wife
in a Chimny-Corner. Have a good Heart; God's all-sufficient. This may Relieve
the Mind, but not the Body.

Your Fourth and Fifth Sections are spent in the Defense of what we do not
Oppose, and not without Mistake, even in the ground of your Plea. The King may
give his Honors and Rewards;-Pardon, or Punish, where, and as he pleases,
(that is, he may forgive such faults as God allows him to dispense with.) but
still, your Twenty to One, is more odds than the proportion will bear.

The learned Bishop Sanderson, concerning Oaths, tells us, That an Error in
the substance of the thing, which was the proper cause of the Oath, renders the
Promise Invalid, and the Obligation void. (Lect. 4. Sect. 13.) Upon which
Equity, it may be a question, whether his Majesty be bound, or not, to make
good all those Grants, which by Deceit, about the substance of the Thing, have
been obtained from him; the proper cause whereof was his persuasion of their
Loyalty, to whom he passed such Grants. Under this Notion have been Dignified
some Persons, with whose Character I shall not foul my Paper, further than
Thus: Those blessings which his Sacred Majesty meant to shed upon his Friends,
fell upon his Enemies; The VOICE was JACOBS, but the HANDS are ESAU'S.

Upon the Main, your Paper bears the Name of a Cordial, without the Effect of
it; and such is our Condition, that it is equally dangerous either to fasten
upon false Comforts, or neglect True ones. What the King Does, or Is; what
Hopes of Profit or Reward; is not one jote material to our business. The Rule
of Loyalty is the same, whatever may be the humor of the Prince* and he that
makes Profit the Reason of his Virtue, will, when that Reason is gone; think it
likewise an Excuse of his wickedness. Our best part is to behave our selves
with Clearness and Prudence; and honorably to Bear what we cannot honestly
avoid: without mincing or palliating the Worst, or Looking into the Stars for
Better.

We have an Uncertainty of Events, before us; of Decree, above us; of
Counsels, and Design, about us; a Light, and Guide within us: and, if there be
no new thing under the Sun; the Future is Behind us.

Be it our Care then to discover, -- what Dangers threaten us; from whence;
which we may struggle with; which not: how, fairly to shunn all; and by the
square of Honesty and Reason, mend a bad Game: All which may be effected; by
procuring that his Majesty may neither mistake his Friends; nor the People his
Majesty: together with a waryness, not to rely upon our Enemies, nor to Divide
among our selves.

These Four hints duly observed secure us; (without a Miracle) as on the
Contrary, we fall into Disorder and Confusion.

The First, and grand Expedient, is --

I. That his Majesty may rightly understand his People.
A Failing in this point would prove a Mischief without Remedy, or Comfort:
one of the saddest Judgments can befall a Prince or Nation. It gives Authority
to a general Ruin: puts Loyalty out of countenance; and it makes Faith and
Honor cheap and ridiculous.

As the Mistake is Mortal, so it is not easy to distinguish betwixt Truths and
Appearances; especially for a Prince so long unwonted, and so much a Stranger
to his People. Men's Hearts are not read in their Faces; and we live in an age,
where commonly the Blackest Souls wear the cleerest Forheads; and Confidence
supplies the place of Merit: Let us not wonder then at benefits misplaced, but
rather labor to prevent, by better Information, so many dangerous, though
well-meaning disappointments: for his Majesty has no other means of knowing
his People, then either faithful Notice, or long Observation; and Delay kills
us.

This is not yet to impose upon his Majesty's Free grace; or intercept the
Course, and Influence of his Royal Goodness, We are, with Reverence, to believe
that where he knows the Person he Preferrs, or Saves, he knows likewise the
Reason of his Bounty or Mercy: and we are not to pry into forbidden secrets.
But where we find the King a Stranger either to the Action or the Person; we
may with fairness enough humbly acquaint his Majesty, that such and such
Decimatours, or High-Court-of-Iustice-men sit now upon the Bench: what such
Ministers were; such and such Officers of the Army: These Privy-Chambermen:
Those something else. -- In fine, what hinders us to present his Majesty
frankly with a view into what peoples hands, Offices of Trust, Credit, and
Profit, are generally committed throughout the Nation? when the King shall see,
how much beside his Royal expectation things are carried: a Design set on Foot
by the Confederates against his Father; (for these Agreements are not the work
of Chance) the Cropp of one Rebellion to become the Seed of another, and his
gracious Act of Pardon to his Enemies, rendered (so much as in them lies) a
Condemnation of Himself, and Friends: his Princely Wisdom will proceed
according to the motions of his own good Pleasure, and There we are to
acquiesce, without presuming to Advise, or Direct, unless our Lord and Master
will have it so; for having declared the matter of Fact, the Judgment and the
Process rests in his Majesty.

By these means may the King assure himself against an open Combination; the
danger of having his Person seized by his Authority; which though a great, is not
the only hazard our blessed Sovereign lies exposed to. ( Whom in his
boundless mercy God deliver from all Conspiracies.)

There are Four sorts of people, which, beyond doubt, his Majesty will have a
care of: 1. His unconverted Enemies. 2. His temporizing Friends. 3. A corrupt
Clergy. And 4. A riotous Commonalty.

The method of Sedition, is first to expose a Prince to Contempt; and by
Degrees to Hatred; The Former of which proceeds very often from too much
Lenity, Humility, or Patience, toward Persons apt to abuse it. The Latter; from
the change of ancient Laws, and Customs, -- Personal Cruelties, -- Profusion
of the Public Treasure, and the Raising of some few Families upon a General
Ruin. Which Favorites are still the Forwardest in any dangerous Revolt,
against their Maker. For whosoever Asks and Getts more than befits a Prince to
Give him; as in the Obtaining of it he preferred his Own Good to his Masters,
so shall he in the Keeping of it; and join his Interests with the stronger
Party.

Concerning Unconverted Enemies, enough is said already; and for the other
Three sorts of People abovementioned, the very Naming of them should suffice,
but that the Order of this Discourse will have it otherwise.

A word then touching the King's Temporizing Temporizing Friends.
Friends, who though less Numerous, possess yet greater Advantages, in regard
of Confidence, and Security, than such whose Actions Common Reason cannot but
look upon with an Eye of Jealousy. The Other, design an Open Force upon the
Crown; These undermine it; and in their several Stations closely serve the
Thriving Interest. But These, his Majesty may give himself the best account of,
and doubtless does, sees all their doublings; and will, when time serves, make
a seasonable use of his Discoveries. His Wisdom knows how to distingush a
Person that sollicites him against his Conscience, Honor, or Reason; from one
that Loves him.

He that excites a Prince to transgress a Public Law, Evil Counselors.
unless to save the Authority of Law it self, is an Enemy.

He that desires a Prince, by stopping the mouths of some Few Beggars, to make
Many; is an Enemy.

He that persuades a Prince to advance mean persons; is an Enemy.

He that advises a Prince to leave Old Friends for New, to reward Treason, and
let Loyalty go a Begging; is an Enemy.

In Fine: he that presses a Prince to any action of general Incovenience, does
his endeavor to divide him from the hearts of his people.

Those that would make him Cheap, go other ways to work: and when a Prince is
neither Loved, nor Feared, he is in an ill Condition.

He that disputes the Mandates of his Prince: neglects his Proclamations:
behaves himself Rudely, or talks scurrilously in his Presence, -- lessens the
Reverence of Majesty.

In the Third place, comes a Corrupted Clergy, none A Corrupted Clergy.
of the least Plagues to a Civil Government, wherever the Corruption lies,
whether in Doctrine, or in Manners: The One, casting a Scandal upon Religion it
self; the Other, seducing the People from the Right. And this may be observed,
the worse*Cause commonly carries the best outside; and by excessive shows of
Holiness, takes off the Peoples thoughts from observing the little Truth and
substance of it. On the Other side; some Scandals to the Character there are,
that are more careful how they Teach, than how they Live; as if a little
Knowledge, and a Good Cause, would bear out an Enormity of Manners. That side
that Drinks less, takes it out in Treason: which is, beyond controversy, the
excellency of Wickedness; for Lucifer himself was but a Traitor.

In Fine, the Clergy is in his Majesty's eye, whose Care, and Prudence will
easily discern, and purge (tho never so small) the unhappy mixture.

The Fourth, and last Member of This Division, is a Riotous Commonalty: which
with great ease may be obliged, and cannot without great hazard be neglected.

The King may need in this particular, some more The Commonalty to be obliged.
express Information, concerning the several Interests of several places; and
the Different Humors of the People. But let one General serve for all: the
Prince that Pinches their Bellies, loses their Hearts. Sir Francis Bacon* in
his Essay of Seditions, tells us, That the multiplying of Nobility, and other
degrees of Quality, in an over-degree of proportion to the Common people, does
speedily bring a state to Necessity: which becomes yet more dangerous, where it
happens that the Ancient Nobility is shrunk into Nothing, and the New Nobility
are to be raised out of nothing: For There, beside an universal Hatred toward
those that are enriched out of the Common-stock, there is also a strong and
powerful Pity toward those that are cast down, who under the Temptations of
Great Indignities, and Fair Occasions, must be exceeding Honest, not to be
Troublesome.

To conclude; Those discontents must needs be dreadful, where Want, Disgrace,
Revenge, Number, and Conduct, meet to promote a Common mischief, and only
Passive Christianity to keep the Peace.

Although we have been larger then becomes us possibly, in the Discourse of
public Enemies, and Dangers, it remains yet that we say something concerning
his Majesty's Friends: That is, Those of his Friends, of whom we have said
nothing among his Enemies.

We Will take a view, First, of their Bulk: Next, of The Kings Old Friends more
numerous than his New.
their Quality: because it is the common business of the Popular Faction, to
cry themselves up for the Loyal and Numerous Party: and to disparage those that
are so.

The Number of the Non-conformists, is no ill Calculation of the others
strength: for (except Romanists) the King, and the Church have certainly the
same Friends, and for the most part, the same Enemies. Upon that Reckoning will
arise the odds of at least Thirty for One throughout the Nation. Even in Covent
Garden, a Parish of the Geneva stamp, the odds was little less, betwixt the
late Petitioners for the Common Prayer, and the Opposers of it. But in the
General Declarations before the Kings Return, and the Appearance afterward to
receive him, the Dis-proportion was yet greater, and more evident.

What was the Reason, that the Godly Legions after they were baffled by the
Independents, would never yet join frankly with the Royalists, but upon all
occasions left them still in the Lurch? Save only This: They were afraid of
being Over numbered, and so enforced to do his Majesty's business, when they
intended but their Own. In brief, they will make a shift to crowd half a Dozen
Churches here about the Town, and they show All.

Come to the test of Loyalty, it is more unequal. More Loyal.
Their Faith, at best, is but of late date, doubtful continuance, and
suspected credit: (For, one essential of Repentance, is Restitution) But we
live in an age of Miracles. It Is a strange thing, that in the same instant, all
those that had been Twenty years against the King, should become his Friends,
and those that had been as long for him, should become his Enemies.

He that would take a just account of the Other side, let him begin with the
first War, and see how much Noble, and Loyal Blood was spilt before the devout
Traitors reached the Kings; -- How many Honorable, and Wealthy Families were
brought to Beggary; -- How many Poisoned, and dispatched in Gaols, and for no
other Crime, but that they loved his Majesty.

Look forward now, and see if the Survivours of that execrable Tragedy, proved
not as faithful afterward to the Son, as they had been to the Father. Was
ever any Tyranny more severe? any Conquest more Absolute, any Attempt more
Difficult? Yet Poor, and Disarmed as they were; -- Death, and almost
Impossibilities before them, -- no Friends to Second them, -- no Reward to
Encourage them; -- Did they not still pursue the Royal Cause, -- This Prince
his Right and Title; when these gay Gentlemen, were quiet Lookers on, that now
persuade his Majesty They did the Business. Nor was it Rashness, or Despair,
that Pricked them on, but Duty, and Honor; for if they would Then have been
Villeins, it is possible they might Now have passed for Honest men.

When they could Act no longer, they served the King by Suffering, and their
Bloods filled up the measure of their Enemies wickedness, by Dying, Ripening
that Vengeance, which Living they could not execute. These are Truths, and the
whole Nation can bear witness of them.

What can those People mean then, but Mischief to the King, whose business
it is further to ruin those, that are already undone for Serving him? God grant
his Majesty may not mistake his Friends. However,

II. God forbid that we should mistake his Majesty.
IN this particular, our Duty is short, and Open. Were all the Ills we suffer,
(joined with as many more as we have hitherto endured) imposed upon us by the
direct Will, and Order of the King. -- If he should say, Hang half my Friends
for their Fidelity, and Sterve the rest for Gaping when they are Hungry: -- We
ought to take all This, but as a sad Occasion of greater Honor; a sharper
Trial of our Faith: or at the worst, as an unkind requital of our Love, but no
discharge of Duty.

The Authority of Princes is Divine; and their Commission makes their Persons
sacred. If They transgress, it is against God, (whose Officers and Deputies
they are) not against Us. If We transgress, it is both against God, and Them;
-- a double Disobedience.

This is not yet to say, that we are bound to thrust our Necks into the Nooze,
and offer up our selves as willing Sacrifices, to appease the Spirit of Rage
and Cruelty. No, we may fairly shun the Mischief, (unless a greater come in
Competition) but not oppose the Power. That Subject is guilty of his Masters
Blood, that sees the Person of his Prince in danger, and does not interpose to
save him; though he be sure to Dye, himself, even by the hand of him whom he
Preserves.

Nor is it enough for Subjects, to keep a Guard upon their Actions, unless
they set a VVatch likewise before the Doors of their Lips; their Tongues, must
be Tied, as well as their Hands; Nay, and the very Boylings of their Thoughts
must be suppressed.

We that are thus instructed in the Grounds, and Terms of Duty, even toward
the worst of Kings, cannot mistake our selves sure toward the Contrary; and
become doubly Guilty; First, by imputing our Misfortunes to a wrong Cause; and
then, by an undutifull and simple menage of them.

There is a Gulf betwixt his Majesty and Us: and, as yet, Darkness is upon the
face of the Deep; One does not clearly understand the Other.

His Majesty is told indeed of a Loose, Beggarly, Profane, Misunderstandings
fomented betwixt the King and his Party.
Tippling sort of People, that call themselves Cavaliers: against whom, under
that appearance, came forth his Majesty's Proclamation; by Some, intended as a
Stabb and Scandal to the Royal Party, but in the King himself, an Act of Piety,
and Prudence. Some that in probability occasioned That, should have done well
to have got one Clause inserted, against Those that deny the Kings Authority
to be above that of the Two Houses.

On the Other side; We are not less perplexed aabout our Sovereign; all Means
are used to Create, Quicken, and Foment Mis-understandings.

The Last was Our King, the Godly Party tells us, but This is Theirs; and the
Presbyterian must be now the White Boy, which looks as if 'twere so indeed, if
we compare Conditions, and search no further then the Outside of the
Differenee. He that sees Cromwells, Brad* shaws, St. John's his Creatures, nay
and the meanest of them, laden with Offices, and Honors, may give himself a
second Thought to understand the meaning of it: especially considering how many
thousands of Loyal Subjects are ready to Perish, for want of that, which in
great superfluity is scattered among scarce so many single persons of the other
side.

These Incongruities may trouble us, but to impute them to the King, were to
commit a sin against Duty and Reason. So far is his Majesty from Allowing or
Directing them, they are kept as much as possibly, from his bare Knowledge: The
Plot is laid against Him, and as they did before, they do but now remove his
Friends, to make way to his Person. The Reason why we are not Relieved, is
This, we put our Business into wrong hands, and apply to the Causes of our
mischief for the Remedy of it.

If we look close to the matter, we shall perceive that many of the Kings
Favors were Extorted; Some Surreptitiously obtained; Others, Abused and
Misapplyed by second hands, that were entrusted to dispose of them better. But
Finally, Those which the King himself bestowed, were given by the
unquestionable Prerogative of his own Freedom, the Grounds whereof, in Part we
know, and in the Whole we Reverence.

There are another sort also of cold Comforters, that tell us, it is not Time
yet. This, to a company of wretches that can stay no longer then they can Fast,
yields little satisfaction.

Are we such Owls, as not to see the Sun at Noon? It Is time Enough for some
that tell us these fine things, (even before the Kings Revenue is settled) to
beg their Forty, Fifty, nay their Hundred Thousand Pound a man, and when the
Nation shall be drawn so low, that every Tax runs Blood; it is then
Prognosticated, that something shall be done for us: That is, the Honor shall
be ours, to finish the undoing of the Nation, and furnish Argument for another
War.

This consequence looks not much wide, but to prevent the worst, rather let us
Resolve to suffer any thing for his Majesty, then cause him to suffer in the
Least for us.

Having hitherto discoursed the high Necessity of a right understanding betwixt
King and People: Our next concern is,

III. Not to mistake our Enemies.
To prevent mistakes; by Our Enemies, we intend only the Kings.

IT was a Jolly saying betwixt Jest and Earnest, of a Presbyterian to a
Cavalier, You told us We were Rebels once, but we will make You so now, before
we have done with you, and That Is one part of their Design. If they can neither
Sink, nor Scatter us, then to Transport us into undutifull distempers, by (that
which makes the Wise man, Mad) Oppression. Rather then fail, they shall Vote
Loyalty, Rebellion, and charge the Author of this plain* and honest Pamphlet,
with Treason. But other Treason then Adherence to the King, the Law,
Conscience, Honor, and Reason, they shall never bring us to. They do wisely
therefore to give the main Attaque, where we are Weakest, and to attempt first
upon our Necessities, for they know our Honesty will hold out longer then our
Fortunes.

By this Course, they purpose to lessen both our Credit, and Number, for
Poverty is a fair step toward Contempt, and they think want will drive men any
whither to seek their Bread. They are not Ignorant of the Likelihood of (what
they more then Covet) a Foreign War, from whence (how fatal soever it prove to
the Public) they may pretend to reap these two Advantages. First, they may
pack their Gang with more Security at home, when the Peoples eyes are all
abroad: Secondly, they forecast to have the Quarrel fought by the Hands of
Cavaliers, which is no other then to commit that Business to be dispatched by
Foreigners, which they cannot so conveniently do themselves. That it will come
to this, may rationally appear from the Constitution of those Missions already
designed.

When by the Fate of War, or that of Extreme Need, some are Destroyed, the Rest
Dispersed of the Kings Party, and the designing Faction yet entire: who is not
Prophet enough to foresee the event?

This, This is the Reward, his Majesty's new Friends have prepared for his old
Ones. But Fore-warned, Forearm'd.

Let not a drowsy, mopish Charity betray us into another Opinion: Are They
Converted? where is the Peccavi, and the Thirty Pieces of Silver: the
Confession, and the Restitution? where is the Inseparable Companion of
Repentance, a Godly Sorrow; a Detestation, not only of the Sin it self, but
even of all their Complicates, in so egregious a Wickedness? Their Knottes
and their Dependencies are still the same they were. They are too Jovial to be
Penitent. In snmm; if they are Penitent, where are the Signs, or Fruits of
their Conversion? If not, they are Dangerous. What do we see more now than we
did in 1641? Or in effect was not the Gospell-Prologue to the Death of the Late
King, the very Air of what we hear at present?

But that we may not be thought to babble, let the whole Puritan Conclave lay
their Heads together, and bring their Party off; or if they do not, let them
acknowledge that for once a Cavalier was in the right on it.

If the People of whom we treat, be not Penitent, the King cannot be safe in
their hands: If they be Penitent, then are we to seek for a Religion: If they
were never in the wrong, then they will use this King as they did his Father.

TO pass over those properties of Repentance, whereof God, and their own Souls
are the only Judges, namely, Contrition and Conversion to God. We Will look a
little what the Church says concerning the Other two, to wit, Confession and
Satisfaction.

Amesius says, that a Public Confession of Public Lib. 4 de Consc. cap. 15.
Sins is necessary, to avoid the Contagion of a Scandalous example.

Preston in his Sermon upon Judas Repentance reckons Confession a part of
Repentance; and so does Calvin in his Harmony upon the Evangelists. But
Musculus upon Matt. 27. 3. most expressly. Ad veram Resipiscentiam pertinet
peccati Confessio; non ea tantum quae deo fit, sed and quae hominibus, quorum
id interest, etc. --

Confession, (says he) is requisite to true Repentance, not only That to God,
but to Men also; (such as are concerned in it) that is, to Those against whom
the offense was committed, and to such as to whom occasion was thereby given of
offending. Judas his sin was against Christ; but in Betraying the Innocent
Blood, he ministered occasion to the Priests and Elders of Sinning, by giving
them the means of Taking and Condemning him, for a sum of money: -- so he
confessed as well before the Priests and Elders, as to God.

I have sinned (says Judas) in Betraying Innocent blood. He does not say,
(Peccastis) YE have sinned in CONDEMNING Innocent blood, but he complains that
HE HIMSELF had sinned in DELIVERING it up.

Now concerning Satisfaction.

Non Remittetur Peccatum nisi Restituatur ablatum: says St. Augustine. No
Restitution, no Remission.

Non-Restitution is Damnation; and Restitution is the way to Salvation, (says
Stock of Repentance, p. 102.) and again: If it be a sin to Take, it is a sin to
Keep. (Ibid. p. 92.)

Non est vera Poenitentia, ubi non Redditur quod male fuerat ablatum, (says
Marlorat upon Matthew.)

Perkins, Dike, Calvin, all the world agree upon the Necessity of Restitution.
In fine, Non-Restitution is Theft.

If it be objected; well, but such and such are Poorer then they were, others
have gotten Nothing, and the rest are Pardoned.

The Casuists tell us, that whosoever Commands, Directs, Favors, or Abets any
unjust Action, the consequence whereof is Damage to another: -- That Person is
bound to Restitution. But we might answer, that much was spent of what they
took from the Cavaliers, to bear up against the Independents.

As to the Act of Indemnity: That saves them from the Law, but in Foro
Conscientiae it is no acquittal: It discharges the Penalty, but not the Crime,
only an effectual Repentance can do that, which cannot be admitted without
Restitution. It Is not an Act of State, that can dissolve a Ty of Conscience:
that were to argue, as if a Parliament could forgive Sins.

At the last day, when Inquisition shall be made for Blood, Theft, Oppression,
etc. -- We dare appeal to the Sworn Patrons of the Cause, Smectymnuus
themselves: what will an Act of Indemnity avail, in Plea before the Great
Tribunal?

So many Parents made Childlesse by Thy Sword; so many Children Fatherless;
the Blood of so many thousand Loyal Subjects spilt like water, Common, and
Noble, and at last the KINGS: and all this in a Cause where every Thought,
Word, Action of Agreement was a Murder. Why should not thou be Damned?

Lord (says he) MURDERS are Pardoned by the Act of INDEMNITY.

So many Plunders, Robberies, Sequestrations, Decimations, Confiscations: -- to
the undoing of many thousand rich Families, and twenty times as many of the
poorer sort, that depended upon them: -- What Sorrow, Acknowledgement,
Reparation, for all these Injuries? what token of Repentance? why therefore
should not thou be Damned?

He pleads the Indemnity too.

So many Grave Divines poisoned in Winchester house: so many honest men of all
sorts and qualities, destroyed by all varieties of misery: Smothered, Famished,
sold for Slaves because they would not fight against their Prince, nor swear
against their Consciences. Why should not ye that did all this, be Damned?

The Act of Indemnity still.

Go to your Rabbi Busy's now, your three-pil'd goodly Levites, that when ye did
all This, called you a Holy Covenanting People: bid them look over their whole
stock of Shifts and Popular Distinctions, and show ye the least shadow of a
Comfort. Which if they do, they must overthrow this Assertion.

Without REPENTANCE, there can be no SALVATION; and without RESTITUTION, no
REPENTANCE.

If it be so, this were a Theme much fitter for a Pulpit-Zeal, then Lawn
Sleeves, or the Cross in Baptism: but in this point our Gospel Ministers are
as mute as Fishes, which manifestly shows the Core of the Faction. How can
these people sleep with all this weight upon their Consciences, unless by
virtue of One of these Two Causes? The Former, a Reprobated, and unfeeling
hardness: the Other, a good opinion of their first Engagement. he One way,
they are our Enemies upon a Principle of Judgment: and the other way, upon a
score of boundless, faithless wickedness.

The use we are to make of All, is only to look to our selves, and to commit
nothing to Hazard, that may be secured by Prudence. Which cautionary Prudence,
must not yet carry us beyond the line of Duty: For though as Christians, they are
not absolved by the Act of Indemnity; yet as Subjects, We are Obliged by it,
nor shall we start an Inch from the Literal strictness of it.

It is an Act of Free, and General Pardon, Indemnity, and Oblivion, granted
upon such Reasons, and Conditions, with such Provisoes and Limitations as are
therein expressed; extending from January 1. 1637. to June 24. 1660.

As it is a Pardon, we complain not; Nor do we pretend any Legal Right to what
we have Lost, in questioning their Conscientious Right to what they have Taken.
If They will do what they ought not to do; -- Keep it; -- We shall however do
what we ought to do; -- Sit down with Submission and Patience, so that the
Indemnity is safe too.

Nor do we at all entrench upon it as an Act of Oblivion: which forbids the
MALICIOUS Revival of past differences; and directs to the burying of all Seeds
of Future Discords, and Remembrance of the Former, etc. --

If the same things are now done over again by the same Party, where lies the
MALICE of saying, Have a care of the same hand again? This is a hint of
Caution, not of Animosity: a means to Prevent Mischief, not to Cause it.

Nor do We charge Particulars: for beyond doubt, there are True Converts; and
diverse, that even in the Counsels of the Kings Enemies, did his Majesty
service. We profess further, that we have no Unkindnesse for such as have not
showed themselves against us, since they received their Pardon: but touching the
Rest, we are at Liberty to speak our Thoughts.

Let us not be too Credulous then, and gape after empty Hopes that will deceive
us. We never Lost any thing by suspecting them; we never gained by Trusting
them. In short, He that will do his Prince and Country a good Office, let him
but get a List of the Instruments, and Officers they have put upon us, (whereof
the King knows nothing) and present it -- to his Majesty. There will need no
other proof of their Combination.

Only one word now,

IIII. That we divide not among our selves.
UNder this notion, (OUR SELVES) we understand, all persons that are
well-affected to the established Government: which must expect to be dealt with
by the Factious Rest, variously, according to the Reason of the Design, and the
Humor of the Party to be wrought upon. It will require not only Constancy,
but Skill, so to demean our selves, as to escape Oversights, and yet not dash
upon Distemper: for we are to encounter, both artificial Flatteries, and sharp
Provocations; and so in danger to miscarry, either upon Facility or Passion.

Some are (...) sighted; and Those they startle into Fears and Iealousies;
concerning Religion, Privileges, the Fundamental Laws, etc. Matters which
being little understood, and much esteemed, are of great effect with the Common
people. Not to be over-strict; Some they Seduce, Others they Corrupt; and
betwixt such as want either Brains, or Honesty, they make up their Party.

Machiavell, and Experience are two great Masters; and they have learned from
Both, that to Destroy a Prince, the surest way is to begin with the generality
of the People, whom if they can but once possess with an Opinion, that the King
designs upon the Freedom of their Estates, and Consciences, the work's half
done. To which end, they themselves contrive, necessitate, nay and Impose,
(though privily) those very Grievances, whereof they likewise prove the first
Complainers: charging upon his Majesty, what was done only by their own
Procurement, and for Their Benefit. They handle the Rabble as they do
Elephants, they digg the Pit Themselves, and when they have entrapped them,
Another must be employed to strike, and to enrage the Beast; They forsooth out
of Zeal, and Pity to the poor Creature, Interpose; take the Elephants part,
and by appearing to remove the Injuryes they Caused, Winn, and Reclayme the
Beast. But in the end, the Elephant serves Them, not They the Elephant.

Let us a little observe, how they have already strewn the way to their Design.

With Reverence to the Authority of the Act of Indemnity, and with submission
to the Force, and Reason of it: we will begin There; and understand it as a
mixture of Mercy, and Expedience, granted on their behalf whose Lives, and
Fortunes were forfeited to the Law.

This Act makes them Masters, in effect, of the Booty of Three Nations: (bating
Crown, and Church Lands) and all they have gotten by a Griping Rebellion, and
Usurpation of almost twenty years Continuance, they may now call their Own;
those People that Contested to preserve the Law, being, by these Penitents,
abandoned to the Comfort of an irreparable, but an Honorable ruin.

To what they had gotten before, let us add the Debt they left in Arriere both
at Sea, and Land; together with what they have begged since, in Money, Land, and
Office. Truly all this put together, one would think might satisfy a
Reasonable sort of People.

Now to look a little the other way. The King cannot but have contracted great
Debts, his Active Friends are Beggered: and Those whose Inclinations were but
suspected Loyal, have smarted sufficiently for it. Come to the Generality; ye
shall not find quick Money enough to keep Commerce alive, all wanting, and
complaining. Now let us Rationally consider,

Whither does this Condition of the Public tend; and whence does it proceed?

The Kings Debts must be Paid, his Revenue settled, his Guards maintained; and
beyond all This, (in common view, a Foreign war inevitable. (The Relief of his
Majesty's Friends, is a thing but by the By; that goes for nothing.) All this
is necessary to be done; but Where, How, Whence, (without a Mine) who can
imagine? A General Imposition will hardly furnish it, the Treasure of the
Nation being drawn into so few hands, and They too have the wit to keep it
close, for diverse reasons; as well to conceal their prodigious, and most
unconscionable Gettings, as to secure their Aftergame; which they are provident
enough to expect.

To raise these Necessary and Large Sums, if common, and formal ways will
not suffice, Others less acceptable must be thought upon. So that upon the
whole, either his Majesty cannot be supplied, even in those Exigencies which
most concern the Honor, and the Safety of the Nation: or else the Generality
must suffer exceedingly by the Pressure; to which some further trouble may
possibly arise even from the manner of Imposing it.

When Discontents come to this Ripeness, then is the time for the Old Patriots
to put in again, and mourn over the Oppressed. They shall show the People what
is against Magna Charta, and the Petition of Right, the Law of the Land, and
the Liberty of the Subject. Then shall they with all Dutyfull Reverence humbly
declare to his Sacred Majesty that it is their Ancient and Undoubted RIGHT, and
c.

In short, Great Payments will certainly cause Great Disquiets; and there are
those will take advantage of them.

This is the Clear and natural tendencie of Affairs; and it behooves us to
provide and Arm our selves against the Malice of it: which may be done, by a
sober Inquiry into the Grounds, and Causes; -- by whose Contrivance and
Design, the Public lies reduced to this Extreme Necessity.

The War occasioned our Destruction: but who occasioned the War? we will only
answer for our selves: that the Cavaliers Cause was as good as the Kings Title
to the Crown. Briefly, Those that have robbed the Public to Enrich
themselves, are the Cause why the Public is not able to Support it self:
Forfeited Estates would have set All clear, without taking in either the Army
Officers, or the Converted Cavaliers into the Reckoning. Nay more, they might
have been left yet better then they began, for they have been no ill Husbands
of their Pillage. But so was the State of the Nation represented to his
Majesty, and such was his Royal Goodness, that he thought fit to remit all;
and it is our Duty not to murmur at it: only let us not forget, when it comes to
the Question, by what hand we perish.

To conclude, their Designs are frivolous, if we our selves do not assist them,
either by Crediting against our Reason, or by Joining with them against our
Duty.

These are our Open and Known Adversaries, (if we can see or know any thing)
but there is another sort, which only time must unmasque, and against whom, this
Caution (for the present) shall suffice.

Vaenalis hominum vita est; and licitatores capitum nostrorum public regnant.

(Euphormio.)
FINIS.
ERRATUM.
Page the 6th. read Capons, for Larkes, etc.


