THE DISSENTER'S Sayings, In Requital for L'Estrange's Sayings. Published in
Their Own Words, FOR THE INFORMATION OF THE PEOPLE.

By Roger L'Estrange.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Brom, at the Gun, in St. Paul's-Church-Iard, 1681.

TO THE READER.
AMong the Curiosities of This Latter Age, the Invention of Transmitting unto
Aftertimes the Apothegms, and Sayings of Men Famous in their Generations, with
a [He being Dead yet Speaketh] for the Motto; is, in my Opinion, not the least
Considerable. This is the Sweet Ointment that has Perfumed the Memory of the
Late Kings Judges, the Sufferers of the Kirk Militant, and the whole Band of
Covenanted Martyrs, that have Finished their Testimony, on the wrong Side of
the Pale. What a Comfort is it for a Man, in the Contemplation of his Future
State, to say with the Reverend Mr. Baxter, (Saints Everlasting Rest, page
100.) Then shall ye be with Pym, and White, etc. Your Names shall be Chanted
with Their Names, Your Sayings Recorded with Their Sayings, etc. This Din may
do well enough when a Man's Bones are laid, and his Head past Aching: But to see
my Self Embalmed before My Time, and Serenaded, with Mr. Roger L' Estrange's
Sayings, with Brief Notes to prevent Mis-apprehensions, etc. It looks methinks
like the Inviting a Man to his own Funeral: And in few Words, I was not so very
Hasty, but I could have waited, till the Complement might have come on in due
Season.

This is precisely the Seven and Thirty'th Civility of This Kind, that I have
Received, within less than Two Months, from the True Protestant Dissenters:
Which truly I look upon but as so many empty Casks thrown out to divert me from
sinking the Rotten Barque they are Engaged in. These Learned Pieces, I know
very well, are Composed, and Published at the Charge, and for the Service of
our Ignatian Society: So that I cannot pitch upon a more suitable way of
Acknowledgment, than to Oppose SAYINGS to SAYINGS; the Dissenters Sayings to
L'Estrange's Sayings, fairly and impartially Reported; and in such manner
Digested, and Disposed, that the Reader shall find every Article of the Subject
in Question, unanswerably Refuted by their Own Lips and Pens: Conscience
Fighting against Conscience, Text against Text, Practice against Pretense; and
the whole Meddling Party, from One End of the Controversy to the Other, laying
violent Hands upon Themselves. So that there shall need no Other Plea for the
Government, than the very Arguments of those that Contend so eagerly against
it; Every Party still as it was Uppermost, serving it self of the Same
Scriptures, and Weapons, against the Opposition of the Under-Schismaticks,
which the Lawful Magistrate does employ for his own Support against the whole
Body of the Schism.

In This Extract, or Collection, the Reader may phansy himself to be gotten
into the Phanaticks Tyring-Room; where he sees all their Dresses, and
Disguises; their Shifts of Masks, and Habits; their Change of Scenes; their
Artificial Thunders, and False Fires: Nay, the very Buggs, and Devils, that
they fright Fools and Children with, at a Distance, to be no more, Near hand,
than Paint, and Canvass. You have here laid open to you, the Mystery of the
Work; to the very Springs, and Wheels, that make the Motion Play; Their Deeds
of Darkness brought to Light, their very Souls Exposed; their Pleas and
Consciences still varying with their Fortunes. Or, in One Word, You have here
the Dissenters Picture to the Life, of their own Drawing.

Upon That Fruitless Conference at the Savoy, where His Majesty did all that
was possible for Him to do, to Gratify the Importunities of an Ungrateful, and
Insatiable Party, without Laying the Church, and the Crown at their Feet: (And
the Treaty brake off (in effect) because the King would not part with the Rest)
What did they do; but, instead of Submitting to some Accommodable Alterations
in the Service Book, (as was propounded) wholly Abolish the Liturgy of the
Church, and Publish a Directory of their Own; with Miserable Complaints, and
Appeals to the People, that they could not prevail, so much as to be Heard.

How much are they beholden to Me then, for bringing them to the Fairest
Hearing here that ever Men had; for they shall have their Own Choice, (the
Multitude) for their Judges, and They Themselves shall be allowed to be their
Own Advocates. And, in Truth, there will need no more; when every Man of them
is both Plaintiff, and Defendent within Himself, and his own Right Hand a
Witness against his Left.

POSTSCRIPT.
JUst as I was hurrying away this Sheet to the Press, out comes The Protestant
Mercury, (If he had called it The Protestant Cheat, or Cuckold, a Body might
have guessed at the Authors of it, by Their Names.)

On April 3. (say They) Mr. L'Estrange thought fit to Take the Sacrament, at
his Parish Church; (St. Giles in the Fields) and was observed To Whisper the
Minister some time before he did Receive. But he would do well in his next
Pamphlet, to tell those that still suspect him; how often, and where, and when,
he came to That Holy Table, in Sixteen Years Time before the Discovery of the
Popish Plot; and before he was Publicly questioned for being a Papist.

It is true that I Received the Blessed Sacrament, as above; and Whispered also
to the Minister; (the Learned, and Reverend Dr. Sharp) and the very Words I
Whispered were These. [So let God deal with Me, as I am Clear, not only of
Popery, but of All the Things that have been Sworn against me, that look
toward it.] Now, for the further Satisfaction of Knaves, and Fools, (for no
other, that know Me, and my Circumstances, can pretend to suspect me) let them
Ask Mr. Gatford, Minister of St. Dionis Backchurch, and a Worthy Divine, if I
have not several times Received the Holy Sacraments from his Hand, and in my
Parish Church too; long, and late before the Discovery of the Popish Plot. To
say nothing of Hundreds of other Witnesses that I could produce in my
Justification, if the Triple League of Mercenary Libellers were worthy of it.

AUTHORITIES Cited in This WORK.
BAstwick, Burton. Jenkins, Junius Brutus. Baxter, Buchaman. Case, Mean Tekel.
Knox, Buroughs. Marshall, Poor Mans's Cup. Strickland, Jus Populi. Calamy,
Goodwyn. Bond, Brooks. Manton, Saltmarsh. Love, Del. Herle, Nonsuch Charles.
Cartwright, Fenner. Caryl, Faircloth. Owen, Gilby. Goodman, Cockaine. Bridges,
Simpson. Ward, Vdal. Cross, Newcomen. Spurstoe, Salwey. Martin Junior* Snape.
Holms, Edwards. Young, Gillespy. Evans, Robinson. Cosens, Penry. King, Kid.
Mitchel, Guthery. Crab, (a Felt-maker.) Hobson, (a Tailor.) Mellish, (a
Cobbler-) Debman, (a Cooper.) Heath, (a Coller-maker.) Potter, (a Smith.)
Durance, (a Wash-Ball-Man.) Green, (a Felt-maker.) Spencer (a Coachman.) Rice,
(a Tinker.) Field, (a Bodies-maker.) Crew, (a Tailor,) etc.
Dissenters Sayings, etc.
. 1. Of Toleration.
(A) A Toleration is against the Nature of Reformation; a Reformation and a
Toleration are diametrically opposite. The Apologists in Petitioning for a
Toleration, have not only broken the Covenant themselves, but they endeavor by
all their Wit and Art to bring the Parliament and Kingdom into so great a guilt
as the breach of This Solemn Covenant. Edwards Antapalogia, Page 241. A
Toleration of men in their Errors, this pretended Liberty of Conscience, is
against the Judgment of the greatest Lights in the Church, both ancient and
modern, Page 242.

(B) Does it indeed belong to you only to look to the Civil Peace, and to let
Religion, and Truth, and the Worship of God stand or fall, to their own Master?
Fight God, Fight Devil; Fight Christ, Fight Antichrist; Catch that Catch can;
you have nothing to do but to stand by, and look on. Say so then; Speak, out,
publish it in your Declarations to the World, and let the People of England
know, that it is the Right and Liberty to which the Subjects of England are
born; that every man hold what he please, and publish and Preach what he holds:
That it is the Birthright (as some would have it) of the Free-born-People of
England, every man to worship God according to his own Conscience; and to be of
what Religion his own Conscience shall Dictate: Do so, and see (Fathers and
Brethren) how long your Civil Peace will secure you, when Religion is
destroyed; how long it will be ere your Civil Peace be turned into Civil War!
For no doubt, if this be once granted them, but they may in good time come to
know also, (there be them that are instructing them even in these Principles
too) that it is their Birthright to be freed from the Power of Parliaments,
and from the Power of Kings; and to take up Arms against Both, when they shall
not Vote and Act according to their Humors. Liberty of Conscience falsely so
called may in good time improve it self into Liberty of Estates, and Liberty of
Houses, and Liberty of Wives; and in a word, Liberty of Perdition, of Souls,
and Bodies.

I hold it a Truer Point in Divinity, that Errans Conscientia LIGANDA, then
LIGAT; but certainly the Devil in the Conscience may be, nay, must be bound.
Lightfoot Sermon. to Com. Aug. 26. 1645. Page 30.

Ye Servants of Christ, take heed of yielding to the Pretenses of Conscience;
the Devil, not Christ, has his Throne There. Hugh's Sermon. to the Com. May 26.
1647. Page 34.

(C) What? when we have so much appeared against Popery and Superstition, shall
we now begin to think of Indifferency and Toleration? Certainly it is but a
sorry exchange of a Bad Religion for None. Horton Sermon. to the Lords, Dec. 30.
1646. Pa. 38.

(D) Would These men that so highly defend Toleration, grant that Toleration
(if they had power in their hands) to others, which they desire for themselves?
I doubt it. The Arrians did sometimes seem as earnest Enemies to Persecution,
as these men; yet when they had Authority on their side, they raised a
Persecution against the Orthodox, more terrible then the Heathen Emperors
against the Christians. Cranfords Sermon. before the Lord Mayor, Feb. 1. 1645.
Pa. 11.

(E) O let the Ministers therefore Oppose Toleration (as being that by which
the Devil would at once lay a Foundation of his Kingdom to all Generations)
witness against it in all places; possess the Magistrate of the Evil of it;
yea, and the People too; showing them how, if a Toleration were granted, they
should never have Peace in their Families more; or ever after, have Command of
Wives, Children, Servants, etc. Let Us therefore fill all Presses, cause all
Pulpits to ring, and so possess Parliament, City, and the whole Kingdom against
the Sects, and of the Evil of Schism and Toleration; that we may no more hear
of a Toleration, nor of Separated Churches, being Hateful Names in the Church
of God. Amen, Amen, Ibid. Edwards Gangraena, Part. 1. Page 84.

(F) We are bold to hint unto you these ensuing Reasons against the Toleration
of Independency in this Church.

First, No such Toleration has hitherto been established (so far as we know)
in any Christian State, by the Civil Magistrate.

Secondly, Because some of them have solemnly professed, that they cannot
suffer Presbytery: And answerable hereunto is their Practice in those places
where Independency prevails.

(G) Thirdly, To grant to Them, and not to Other Sectaries, who are Freeborn
as well as They, and have done as good Service as they to the Public (as they
use to plead) will be counted Injustice, and great Partiality: But to grant it
unto all, will scarce be cleared from great Impiety.

(H) Fourthly, Independency is a Schism, etc. Now we judge, that no Schism is
to be Tolerated in the Church. 1 Cor. 1.10. 1 Cor. 10.25. Romans 6.17. with 1
Cor. 3.3. Gal. 5.20. Presbyt. Minist. Letter from Sion College, to the Assembly
of Divines, Dec. 18. 1645.

(I) Many Mischiefs will inevitably follow upon this Toleration, and that both
to Church and Commonwealth.

First, To the Church: As 1. Causlesse and Unjust Revolts from our Ministry,
and Congregations. 2. Our Peoples minds will be troubled, and in danger to be
subverted, as Acts 15.24.3. Bitter heart-burning among Brethren will be
fomented and perpetuated to posterity. 4. The Godly, Painful, Orthodox
Ministers will be discouraged, and despised. 5. The life and power of Godliness
will be eaten out by frivolous Disputes, and vain Janglings. 6. The whole
Course of Religion in private Families will be Interrupted and Undermined. 7.
Reciprocal duties between persons of nearest and dearest Relation will be
extremely violated. 8. All other Sects and Heresies in the Kingdom will be
encouraged to endeavor the like Toleration, and shelter themselves under the
wings of Independency. 9. And the whole Church of England, in short time, will
be swallowed up with Destruction and Confusion.

(K) Secondly, To the Commonwealth; for it is much to be doubted lest the
Power of the Magistrate should not only be weakened, but even utterly
overthrown, considering the Principles and Practices of Independents, together
with their Compliance with Other Sectaries sufficiently known to be
Anti-Magistratical, Ibid.

(L) It would lay the Foundation of Strife and Division in the Kingdom, to have
Two ways of Church Government. Epistolary Discourse, p. 21. Printed by Order,
1644.

The Cities Humble Remonstrance and Petition of May 26. 1646. presses to have
some speedy course taken for the suppressing of all private and Separated
Congregations.

Notes upon. 1.
A Toleration (A) is a Breach of Covenant; and against the Judgment of the
Church. (B) Destructive of Government, and (C) Religion. (D) They that ask it
will never grant it. (E) The Devils Engine to Confound States, Families, and
Souls. Separated Churches are not to be endured, (F) without President; and (G)
never to be Pleased: (H) Intolerable; (I) Ruinous both to Church and (K)
Commonwealth; and (L) the very Bone of Contention.

So that to desire a Toleration, is to Ask a thing which it were Impious to
Allow, and which they have sworn to hinder, all they can: A thing that sets up
the Kingdom of Hell; without either President, or Profit: to the certain Ruin
both of Church and State: And This, by their Own Confession, and Avowed by
their own Authority. This, as to the Thing it self: We shall now see it in the
EFFECTS.

. 2. The Fruits of a Toleration.
(A) THis is that Diabolical Liberty (says Beza. Confess. Fid. Eccl. l. 5. de
sect. 44.) which has filled Polonia, and Transylvania with so many Plagues of
Opinions.

Reader, that thou may discern the mischief of Ecclesiastical Anarchy, the
monstrousness of the much-affected Toleration, and be warned to be wise to
Sobriety, and fear, and suspect the pretended New Lights; I approve that this
Treatise, discovering the Gangrene of so many strange Opinions, should be
Imprinted. James Cranfords License to the First Part of Edward's Gangrena.

(B) You have, most Noble Senators, done worthily against Papists, Prelates and
Scandalous Ministers; in casting down Images, Altars, Crucifixes; throwing out
Ceremonies, etc. but what have you done against other kinds of growing Evils;
Heresy, Schism, Disorder; against Seekers, Anabaptists, Antinomians,
Brownists, Libertines, and other Sects? You have destroyed Baal and his
Priests; but have you been zealous against Golden Calves, and the Priests of
the Lowest of the People? -- You have put down the Book of Common Prayer, and
there are many among Us that put down the Scriptures; slighting, yea,
blaspheming them. You have broken down Images of the Trinity; Christ; Virgin
Mary, Apostles; And we have those who overthrow the Doctrine of the Trinity:
oppose the Divinity of Christ, speak evil of the Virgin Mary, slight the
Apostles. You have cast out the Bishops, and their Officers; and we have many
that cast down to the ground all Ministers in all the Reformed Churches. You
have cast out Ceremonies in the Sacraments, as the Cross, Kneeling at the
Lords Supper; and we have many cast out the Sacraments, Baptism and the Lords
Supper. -- The Sects have been growing upon us ever since the first year of
your sitting, and have every year increased more and more; things have been bad
a great while, but this last year they are grown Intolerable. And if Schism,
Heresy etc. be let alone, and rise proportionably for one year longer, we
shall need no Cavaliers, nor Enemies, from without, to destroy us. Ib. Epist.
Ded. to the Lords and Commons.

(C) The Independent Churches, like Africa, do breed and bring forth the
Monsters of Anabaptism, Antinomianism, Familism, Nay that huge Monster, and old
flying Serpent of the Mortality of the Soul, Antapologia. P. 262.

(D) As John Baptist wore a Leathern Girdle, So the Doctrine that he preached
was Leathern Doctrine. Saltmarsh's Sermon. at the Bath.

(E) The Saints are those that are now styled Anabaptists, Familists
Antinonians, Independents, Sectaries, etc. -- The First party that rose against
you, namely the Profane ones of the Land, are fallen under you; and now there
is another Party, Formalists, and Carnal Gospellers rising up against you, etc.
Del's Sermon. to the General and Officers June 7. 1646.

(F) Shall the Presbyterians, Orthodox, Godly Ministers be so cold, as to let
Anabaptism, Brownism, Antinomianism, Libertinism, Independency, come in upon
us, and sleep in a whole skin? Gangren. Par. 1.91.

(G) When Cartwright, Hildersham, Travers, and many other gracious Divines, by
the blessing of God upon their Great diligence, had undermined and well near
overthrown the Episcopal Sees, and all the Cathedral Ceremonies; Incontinent
the Generation of the Separatists did start up etc. [ Bayly's Disswasive Page
12.]

(H) The famous City of London is become an Amsterdam; Separation from our
Churches is Countenanced; Toleration is cried up; Authority lies asleep, etc.
Calamy's Sermon. to the Lord Mayor, Jan. 14. 1645. Page 3. Divisions, whether
they be Ecclesiastical or Political, in Kingdoms, Cities or Familyes are
Infallible Causes of Ruin to Kingdoms, Cities and Families. Sermon. to the
Lords, Dec. 25. 1642.

(I) Diversity of Religion, disjoynts and distracts the Minds of men, and is
the Seminary of Perpetual Hatreds, Jealousies, Seditions, Wars, if any thing in
the world be; and in a little time, either a Schism in the State begets a
Schism in the Church, or a Schism in the Church begets a Schism in the State.
etc. Once for all, it is the Preservation and Reservation of Religion which you
have Covenanted to endeavor; and not a Liberty of Opinion, which will consist
with neither. Newcomen. Sermon. to Parl. Sept. 12. 1644.

(K) Independents the most Pharisaical, proud, envious, and malicious Sect that
ever sprung up: ( Bastwicks Independency not Gods Ordinance) Wild-geese,
Old-geese, sticklers against Parliaments, and Presbytery; Fighters against God;
Violaters of all the Laws of God and Nature; a company of Rats among
Joyn'd-stools; not worthy to give guts to a Bear; Moon-calves, etc. Id.
Postscr. Pa. 12.32, 34, 36. etc.

(L) The Errors and Innovations under which we so much groaned of Latter
years, were but Tolerabiles Ineptiae, tolerable Trifles, Childrens-Play,
compared with these Damnable Doctrines, Doctrines of Devils, as the Apostle
calls them: Polygamy, Arbitrary Divorce, Mortality of the Soul, No Ministry; no
Churches; no Ordinances: no Scripture. Yea the very Divinity of Christ, and the
Holy Ghost questioned by some; denied by Others; and the very Foundation of all
these laid in such a Schism of boundless Liberty of Conscience, etc. Sermon.
before the Commons, Aug. 22. 1645. Page 29.

(M) The Scriptures denied to be the word of God -- Only of Human Authority --
Insufficient, and Uncertain. Edward's Gangrena. Page 15. -- God has a hand in,
and is the Author of the Sinfulness of his People. P. 16. -- The Soul dies
with the Body. -- In the Unity of God there is not a Trinity of Persons. -- Nor
Three distinct Persons in the Divine Essence; but only Three Offices. Page 17.
-- That Christ's human Nature is de^led with Original Sin. -- That no man shall
perish or go to Hell, for any Sin but Unbelief only. Page 18. -- That men may
be saved without Christ. -- That there is no Original Sin in us; only Adams
first sin was Original Sin. Page 20. -- That the Doctrine of Repentance is a
Soul-destroying Doctrine. Page 21. etc.

(N) A Minister in Hertfordshire bringing a place of Scripture against an
Anabaptist which he could not Answer; said, It was the Weakness of the Apostle,
and there he wanted the Spirit, Page 33. Part. 1. -- Some of the Sectaryes
Plead Miracles, Revelations, Visions, as Christ's appearing to an Anabaptist,
and forbidding her to baptize her Child, Page 58. And their dressing up a Cat,
like a Child, Ibid.

(O) One Cozens of Rochester in Kent, said, that Jesus Christ was a Bastard;
and that if he were upon the earth again, he would be ashamed of many things he
then did. Ibid. Page 105.

Oh Lord! Thine Honor is now at stake; for now, O Lord, Antichrist has drawn
his sword against thy Christ; and if our Enemies prevail, thou will lose thine
Honor. Strickland at Southampton, Jun. 9. 1643.

If thou do not finish the good Work which thou have begun, in the
Reformation of the Church, thou will show thy self to be the God of Confusion:
and such a one, as by Cunning Stratagem have contrived the Destruction of thine
own Children. [ Cross at St. Mildreds in the Counter, July 6.]

O God, O God! Many are the hands lift up against us; But there is one God: It
is Thou thy self, O Father, who do us more Mischief then them all. [
Robinson at Southhampt. Aug. 25.]

O Lord! when will thou take a Chair, and sit amongst the House of Peers? When,
O God; When (I say) will thou Vote amongst the Honorable Commons? Thine own
Commons, who are so Zealous for thine Honor? [ Evans of St. Clemens.]

I say, This is Gods Cause; and if our God has any Cause, This is It. And if
This be not Gods Cause, then God is no God for me; but the Devil is Got up into
Heaven. [Bond, at the Savoy.]

As I am a Faithful Sinner, Neighbors, This is my mornings draught. Here Is to
you all. [Isaack Massy at Vppingham in Rutl. giving the Communion on
Easter Day, 1644. drinking off the whole Cup.] See A short View of the Late
Troubles in England, Chap 43.

Painful and Laborious Preachers.
(P) Samuel Fulcher an Egg-man Re-baptiz'd by Crabb a Felt-maker: Gangrene
Part. 2. Page 9.

(Q) Paul Hobson a Preaching-Taylor: Gangrene Part. 2. P. 18. Green the
Felt-maker. Page 248. Part 3. Spencer a Coachman. 249. Potter a Smith, Page 96.
John Durance a Washbal-maker, Ibid. Andrew Debman an Anabaptist-Cooper. Page
88. (all Preachers:) and four famous Preachers more in Hertfordshire, Viz.
Heath the Coller-maker of Watton, Rice the Tinker of Aston, Field the
Bodyesmaker of Hertford. Crew the Tailor of Stevenage. A Shoo-maker-Preacher,
etc. Part. 3. P. 81.

Notes upon. 2.
TOleration was (A) the destruction of Poland, and Transylvania: (B. C. D. E.
F. G. H. I. K. L. M.) and the Mother and Nurse of all Heresies (N) and (O etc.)
Profaneness, Blasphemy, and Imposture. (P.Q.) Introducing Mechaniques into
the work of the Ministry.

Take (in one Word now) the Steps of the whole Proceeding. The First Effort
upon the Government was made in the Name of the Dissenters in General; for
Liberty of Conscience. So soon as the Presbyterians had gotten the Power into
their hands, they presently set up for an Uniformity: opposing a Toleration,
with all their Might (as in the First Section) foreseeing, and predicting the
Monstrous Opinions and Confusions which it would Infallibly produce.

They show us in the Second Section (upon Experiment) that they were true
Prophets; and that all the Evils they foretold us, came accordingly to pass:
So that (in short) under pretense of Tender Consciences they dissolved the
Established Government; and by the help of that Pretext got themselves into the
Saddle. No sooner was the Presbyterian Mounted, but he, without any more to do,
bent all his Force immediately to the Erecting of an Inexorable and Rigorous
Uniformity: Wisely considering, that the same Trick that they had put upon
Episcopacy, would most Infallibly (if not prevented) be the Ruin of the
Presbytery too; or of any Government upon the face of the Earth.

Now take Notice, Good People, that in Asking a Toleration, they Ask what they
judge Unsafe, and Unlawful to Allow. They Ask, what they Know, and Declare,
will be our Undoing: With what Equity, Reason, Conscience or Design, be you
the Judges.

. 3. The Dissenters Harmony among themselves.
Pres. THe Sectaries agree with Julian the Apostate, [ Gangr. P. 54.] The
Sectaries are Libertines and Atheists, [P. 185.] Unclean, Incestuous, [Pa.
187.] Drunkards, [P. 190.] Sabbath Breakers, Deceivers, [Pa. 191.] Guilty of
gross Lying, Slandering, Juggling, falsifying their words and promises; guilty
of excessive Pride and Bousting, [Pa. 192. Of insufferable Insolences, horrible
Affronts to Authority; and of strange Outrages, [Pa. 194.] There never was a
more Hypocritical, false, dissembling Generation in England, then many of the
Grandees of our Sectaries. They encourage, protect, and cry up for Saints, Sons
of Belial, and the vilest of men. [ P. 240. Gang. 2. pa. 1646.]


Ind. Presbytery is Babylon, Egypt, a Limb of Antichrist, a Tyrannical Lordly
Government; a worse Bondage then that under the bishops [Martin Eccho] [and
Burtons Conformity Deformity] worse then either Egypt, or Babylon. The Spirit
(1645.) of that Ten-horned Beast is now making War with the Lamb -- whose Word
is Reformation, and this under a fair Color of a COVENANT, etc. The Mystery of
Iniquity, the Mother of all Mischief, the Cause of all our present Calamities,
etc. Epist. Ded. to the Lord Mayor of London.


Pre. The Northamptonshire Addressers to Richard Cromwell desire he would show
Tenderness toward the name of God, against the Bold Blasphemers of his
Magistracy, Defamers of his Sacred Ordinances, Seducers from Truth, Corrupters
of his Worship; and then, that he would Exercise Just Severity against
Despisers of Dignityes, and Revilers of Authority; whose Vnhallow'd Tongues set
on fire from Hell, spare not to flash out their Insolent Reproaches, and
Impious Execrations against his FATHERS SEPULCHER, and his OWN THRONE.


Ind. The Lord Lives, who has brought us from the Romish Papacy, which is
Spiritually, Egypt, by a mighty Deliverance, and manifold Preservations etc.
Out of the Scotch Tyranny, and Scotch Presbytery, which came like a Tempest
from the NORTH, etc. From this bloody Design of the Egyptian Papacy; from the
black Plots, and bloody Powers of the Northern Presbytery. Sterry Sermon. before
the Parliament. Nov. 5. 1651. Page 7.


Pr. O how like is John Lilburn to John a Leyden; as if he had been spit out of
his mouth! Dell to Tho. Muncer. -- O how like are our Sectaryes to the old
Anabaptists in Germany! Gangraen. Part. 3. Page 262.


Ind. The Covenant's Impossible to be kept, and the makers of it have run into
Wilful Perjury. This makebate, Persecuting, Soul-destroying, England-Dividing,
and Undoing Covenant. [Lillburns England's Birthright] -- To violate an
Abominable and accursed Oath out of Conscience unto God; (Says I. Goodwyn 12
Cautions P. 4. Speaking of the Covenant) is a Holy, and a Blessed Perjury.


Pr. A putredinous Vermin of bold Schismatics and frantic Sectaryes, etc.
forsaking our Assemblyes as Babylonish, Antichristian. Burgess Sermon. to the
Commons. Nov. 5. 1641. Page 60.


Ind. The Three-formed Presbytery consisting of three Kinds, Pastors, Teachers,
and Elders, is not Gods Ordinance; but Antichristian. Smiths Differences, Page
4.


Pr. These detestable Sectaryes! the Plague of Heresies among us; and we have
no power to keep the Sick from the Whole. The Wolves that were wont to ly in
the Woods are come into our sheep-folds, and Roar in the Holy Congregations.
Paget's Heresiography, P. 37. Printed 1648.


Ind. The Assembly is Antichristian, Romish, Bloody, the Plagues and Pests of
the Kingdom, Baals Priests, Diviners, Southsayers, with Two Horns like a Lamb,
but a Mouth like a Dragon. [Gangraena 3. Part Page 230.] -- Insatiable
Hirelings, Gehazi's Cheaters, Pulpited Divines, Distributers of Sundays Doles,
Simonious, Decimating Clergy, Common Incendiaryes. [Lond. Minist. Seas. Exhort.
P. 21.1660.]


Pres. Since the Suspension of our Church Government every one that lists
turns Preacher. As Shoomakers, Cobblers, Button-makers, Hostlers, etc. [ Paget
Here Is. Epist. Ded.]


Ind. The National Covenant is a double faced Covenant, the greatest Makebate,
and snare that ever the Devil, and the Clergy his Agents, cast in amongst
honest men in England, in our Age. [Londons Liberty in Chains. P. 42.


Pr. Was there ever in our times, a Generation of greater Self-seekers,
Boasters, proud Blasphemers, Covenant-breakers, Unthankful, Makebates, Heady,
Despisers of those who are good, Mockers and Scoffers, Walking after their own
ungodly Lusts, Despisers of Dominions, and speakers evil of Dignityes, having a
Form of Godliness, but denying the Power thereof, (and so in the rest) then
our Sectaryes? Gangrena. Part. 3.257.


Ind. The Seed of God in This Nation has had Two Capital Enemies, the Romish
Papacy, and the Scottish Presbytery. [Sterry's England's Deliverance, Page 7.]
The Blackbird Divines, The Assembly Swinherds [ A Ballad called, The Prophecy
of the Swinherds Destruction, To the Tune of The Merry Soldier, Or, The Jovial
Tinker.


Notes upon. 3.
THose Conscientious and well-meaning People that measure Other men's hearts by
their Own, and are consequently the more liable to be imposed upon, under Forms
and Pretensions of Zeal, and Religion: Those People (I say) should do well to
consult the Reasons of things, as well as their Appearances; which in many
doubtful and dangerous Cases, would either guide them to a right Resolution,
or to the Avoidance of an Inconvenience, upon Judgment, and Consideration.

The Uniting of Protestant Dissenters has a face of great Piety, and Goodness;
and it is undoubtedly p^r^i^eted by many Godly people, out of a very
Charitable, and Christian Intention. And whether it be Safe, Expedient,
Practicable, or not; the very Inclination to the doing of the thing, is a
Virtue. But a man would be think himself yet, in common Prudence; First, What
the Parties are that pretend to This Union: Secondly, Their Temper: and
Thirdly, whether it be possible to Unite them, or Not. If These be reasonable
Enquiries, nothing can be fairer then to Resolve them out of their own Mouths.

1. The two predominant Parties (you see) are Presbyterians and Independents;
All the Other Sects, being only Independency in Fractions. 2. Observe their
Temper, and try if you can Reconcile their Revisings, with their Scruples;
Their Implacable Aversion, One to the Other, with their Conjunct Importunities
for Indulgence to Both. 3. How is it possible to unite those people under a
Bond of Conscience, that upon the very score of Conscience declare themselves
to be mortal, and Inconciliable Enemies.

. 4. The Dissenters behavior toward the Government, and First, the Clergy.
ARchbishops and Bishops, are Unlawful, Unnatural, False, and Bastardly
Governors of the Church, and the Ordinances of the Devil, petty Popes, petty
Antichrists; like Incarnate Devils, Cogging Couzening Knaves; they will lie
like Dogs. Proud, Popish, Presumptuous, Profane, Paultry, Pestilent,
Pernicious Prelates and Ursurpers; Impudent shameless, wain scor-fac'd;
Butchers, Horse-leeches, Robbers, Wolves, Simoniacks, Persecutors, Sowers of
Sedition; Their Antichristian Courts are the Synagogue of Satan. The Beelzebub
of Canterbury, the Canterbury Caiaphas, Esau, a monstrous Antichristian Pope,
etc. Most of the Ministers are Popish Priests, Monks, Friars,
Alehouse-haunters, Drunkards and Dolts, Hogs, Dogs, Wolves, Foxes, Simoniachs,
Usurers, Proctors of Antichrists Inventions; Popish Chapmen, halting Neutrals,
desperate and forlorn Athiests; a Cursed, Uncircumcised, and Murdering
Generation; a Troop of bloody Soul-Murtherers, and Sacrilegious Church Robbers.
AntiChrists Rags shall make him a Priest, be he never such a Dolt, or a
Villain. See Bancrofts dangerous Positions, Lib. 2. Cap. 12. and 13. with the
Authorities.

The Kings Clergy were Croaking Frogs that came out of the Mouth of the Dragon,
out of the Mouth of the Beast, and the False Prophet: The Spirits of Devils
which go forth unto the Kings of the Earth, to gather them to battle. Wilsons
Sermon. to Parl. Sept. 28. 1642 Printed by Order.

The Cathedrals are a Nest and Cage of all Unclean Birds, a Harbor of dumb
dogs, a Crew of Ale-swilling Singing-Men, offering daily near the Holy Table
the blind Whelps of an Ignorant Devotion, etc. -- the Prelatical Hog-sty.
Bridges.

Idol, Idle Shepherds, Dumb Dogs, that cannot bark (unless it were at the Flock
of Christ;) and so they learned of their Masters both to bark and bite too.
Greedy Dogs that could never have enough; that did tear out the Loins and
Bowels of their own people for Gain. Swearing, Drunken, Unclean Priests, that
taught nothing but Rebellion in Israel, and caused people to abhor the
Sacrifice of the Lord: Arminian, Popish, Idolatrius, Vile Wretches; Such, as
had Job been alive, he would not have set with the Dogs of his Flock Who I say
brought in These? Did not Prolacy? A Generation of men they were that never had
a Vote for Jesus Christ. Yea, what has poisoned and adulterated Religion in
all these branches; and has let in Popery, and Profaneness upon the Kingdom
like a Flood, for the raising of their own Pomp and Greatness, but Prelacy?
Look into their Families, and they were for the most part the vilese in the
Diocese; a very Nest of Unclean Birds. In their Courts and Consistories, you
would have thought you had been in Caiaphas-Hall, where no other Trade was
driven, but the Crucifying of Christ in his Members. Cases Sermon. at
Milk-street, Sept. 30. 1643. Page 45, 46, 47.

How the Presence of the Preaching of Christ did soorch and blast th^se
Cathedral Priests, that Unhallowed Generation of Scribes and Pharisees; and
perfected their Rebellion into that unpardonable sin against the Holy Ghost. [
Case on Ezra 10.2, 3. P. 33.

The Plastering or palliating of these Rotten Members [Bishops] will be a
greater dishonor to the Nation and Church, then their cutting off; and the
Personal Acts of these Sons of Belial, being connived at, become National sins.
[ Smectymnuus Red. 1660. P. 58.

These Ecclesiastical Officers, Ceremonies, and Discipline, are set up by the
Pope, and are an Appendix or Tail of Antichrist. [Dr. Holms Sermon.. 1641. P. 33.]

This Prelacy in the Article; this many-headed Monster of ArchBishops, Bishops,
Chancellors, Commissaries, Deans, Deans and Chapters, Archdeacons and all
other Ecclesiastical Officers depending on that Hierarchy; This is the Beast
wherewith we fight in this Covenant, -- Thy Mother Papacy shall be made
Childeless among Harlots, your Diocesses Bishopless, and your Sees Lordless,
and your places shall know you no more, Case ubi supra. Pa. 50.51.

Prelacy (that whelp) has learned this Policy of its Mother Papacy (that
Lioness) etc. Ibid. P. 64.

We lack a right Government of the Church; Instead of the Ordinance of God in
the Government of his Church, the merchandise of shameless Babylon is
maintained. The Government now used by Archbishops, Bishops, etc. is both
Antichristian and devilish. Rome is come home to her Gates; Antichrist reigns
amongst us. The Established Government of the Church is Traitorous against the
Majesty of Jesus Christ. It confirms the Popes Supremacy; It is accursed; It
is an Unlawful, a False, a Bastardly Government. They must needs be not only
Traitors to God and his Word, but also Enemies unto her Majesty and the Land,
that defend the Established Government of the Church to be Lawful. [ Dangerous
Pos. Lib. 2. Cap. 4. See the References.

Christ's Religion is fondly patcht with the Popes; The Communion-Book is an
imperfect Book, culled and picked out of that Popish dunghill the Portuyse and
Mass Book. The Sacraments are wickedly mangled and profaned. They eat not the
Lords Supper, but play a Pageant of their own, to blind the people. Their
Pomps, Rites, Laws and Traditions, are Antichristian, Carnal, Beggarly, Popish
Fooleries; Romish Relics, and Rags of Antichrist, Dregs and Remnants of
Transformed Popery. Pharisaical outward Faces and Vizzards, Remnants of Romish
Antichrist, known Liveries of Antichrist; a cursed Leaven of a cursed,
blasphemous Priesthood; Cursed Patches of Popery and Idolatry; they are worse
then Lousy, etc. [Dan. Pos. L. 2. cap. 9.]

The Dagon of the Bishops Service Book brake its Neck before this Ark of the
Covenant, [Ibid. P. 66.]

Notes on 4.
LEt the Reader lay his hand upin his Heart here, and ask himself. Is this
pretended Tenderness of Christianity the style of the Gospel, or no? Is it the
Language of the Disciples of Jesus Christ? Can these People really have an
Evangelical Compassion for their Brethren, and at the same time fly thus in the
face of Dignities, and treat their Superiors at this outrageous rate? Have we
so learned Christ, as to make Scurrility and Railing the Badge of our
Profession? They would be thought to supplicate all this while for Gentleness
and Compassion: And is this the way to obtain it, by a Practice, that is almost
sufficient to turn Mercy it self into Indignation? But alas! their business is
not to procure Favor from the Government, but to expose it to Reproach. And
all this clutter about the Clergy is only to render them Odious and
Contemptible to the People. Pray'e take notice once again. The stress of their
Charge upon the Church is only to move the multitude against it, as a Frame of
Constitution that is Antichristian and Popish: And yet, pray mark it, they do
in the same breath; offer Proposals of being United into that Ecclesiastical
Popish State; Which brings the matter unavoidably to this Issue; either that
they do, against their Consciences, cast that scandal upon the Church for the
Advancement of some Other Design; or else, by desiring this Union, they do
acknowledge themselves willing to be Incorporate into a Popish Constitution.
But this Bustle about the Church, you shall fee, has a furthlr Prospect: For
these People have the Faculty of handling Religious Matters, in order to
Political as well as of hooking in Temporal Matters, in order to Spirituals.

. 5. The Dissenters Behavior toward the Civil Government.
(A) THe King, the Nobles, and the Prelates, are sure the Murderers of Christ
-- O People, I will be silent! Speak People, and tell me what good the King has
done since his Home coming. [M. Welsh at Sanchil in Carrit at a Conventicle.]
And at another Conventicle, thus. I am confident, that God will yet assert the
Cause of Pentland-hills, in spite of the Curates, and their Masters, the
Prelates; and in spite of the Prelates, and their Master the King; and in spite
of the King, and his Master the Devil. [ Ravillac Redivivus, Pa. 45.

(B) Her Majesty and State do maim and deform the Body of Christ, and so bid
God to battle against them, etc. By the same authority that the Queen appoints
the apparel noe appointed to the Ministers, she may command any piece of
Popery, so she name it Policy, etc. -- The Servants of God are persecuted under
her -- That Excommunication should not be exercised against Princes, I utterly
dislike. [ Danger. Pos. L. 2. C. 3. Cartwrights Reply, Par. 2.

(C) The State shows it self not upright, allege the Parliament what it will
-- It shall be easier for Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of Judgment, then for
such a Court. -- There shall not be a man of their seed that shall prosper, be
a Parliament Man, or bear Rule in England any more -- None ever defended this
Hierarchy of Bishops to be lawful, but Papists, and such as were infected with
Popish Errors -- All the Newgates and Oldgates, yea, and all the Tyburns in
England are too little for such rash and presumptuous Heads, that will not give
God leave to Rule, but will take the Scepter out of his hands. -- I do fear
that many of the forwardest Enemies of Reformation are not the backwardest
Friends that the King of Spain has in England at this day. [ Dan. Pos. L. 2. C
6.]

(D) As long as you maintain these cursed Acts of 1584 the Tyranny of Bishops,
etc. you are a Persecutor. [ Dan. Pos. l 1. cap. 6.]

(E) The Magistracy and Ministry walk hand in hand, in the contempt of True
Religion -- The Laws maintaining the Archbishops are no more to be accounted of
then the Laws maintaining the Stews -- Impiety is suffered to bear sway against
the Majesty of God, and that by Law and Authority. -- As great Indignities
offered to Jesus Christ in committing his Church unto the Government of the
Common Law, as can be by mean Hirelings unto a King. [ Ibid. l. 2. cap. 8.]

Come hither, ye Malignant Athiests, come hither; gnash your teeth, and let
their eyes rot in their holes. [ Bond to the Commons, Oct. 8. 1645 Pa. 5.

(F) The Kings of the Earth have given their power to Antichrist: How have they
earned their Titles; Eldest Son of the Church; the Catholic, and most
Christian King; DEFENDER OF THE FAITH -- Do not the Kings of all these Nations
stand up in the room of their Progenitors, with the same implacable Enmity to
the Power of the Gospel? [ Dr. Owen Fast Sermon. Apr. 19. 1649. Pa. 22.

There was Corruption both in Church and Commonwealth. Idols were set up in
Dan and Bethel, i.e. in the places of Judgment, and in the House of God, [
Buroughs on Isa. 66. v. 10. Pa. 37.

The greatest blow that ever was given to Antichristian Government, is that
which Now it has had. Babylon is so fallen, as it shall never rise again. [
Buroughs on Isa. 66.10. Pa. 44.

G. O Worm! Dare thou be so Impudent to put thy self in Gods Stead; to meddle
with Men's Consciences, and Lord it in Religious Concerns? [ Gods Loud Call,
Page 17.1661.]

H. What hope that the Reformed Religion will be protected and maintained by
the Son, which was so irreligiously betrayed by the Father? [ Plain English,
1660. Page 2.]

I. C. S. the Son of that Murderer, is proclaimed King of England; whose
Throne of Iniquity is built on the Blood of precious Saints and Martyrs. [ Door
of Hope, Page 1.1660.]

-- The Murderers of our Savior were less Guilty than That Prince. [ Case of
King Charles, 1648.]

K. Let Justice and Reason blush, and Traitors and Murderers, Parricides and
Patricides, put on White Garments, and rejoice as Innocent Ones, if This Man (
the Late King) should escape the Hands of Justice and Punishment. [ English
Translation of the Scottish Declaration, Page 12.1650.]

L. Charles the Second, The Son of a Bloody Father; Heir to an Entailed Curse,
more certain than to his Kingdom; Trained up in Blood; and One that never
sucked in any other Principles but Prerogative, and Tyranny. [Ibid. Page 23.]

M. Charles the First rather chose to submit to the Justice of an Ax in a
Hangman's Hand, than to sway a Scepter with Equity. [ Nonesuch Charles, Page
167.]

Notes on Sect. 5.
YOu have here (A) the Strain and Spirit of a True Covenanting-Brother. And
they all sing the same Note: For they do not only Abjure the Government, but
they Abjure Repentance too; swearing never to make Defection to the Contrary
Part; But all the Days of their Lives, Zealously and Constantly continue
therein against All Opposition; and promote the same accordingly to their
Power, against all Lets and Impediments whatsoever.

In (B) you find the Petitioner for Indulgence Excommunicating his Sovereign.

The Paraphrase of (C) is according to the Style of This Age, only crying, No
Tory, No Courtier, at an Election; the branding of Honest Men with being
Popishly affected; and he that will not run Riot with the Rabble is made a
Pensioner of France.

[ D. and E.] Complaining of Persecution. In (F.) you see what work the Doctor
makes with the Defender of the Faith. [G H. I.K.L.] are as so many Daggers in
the Heart of Sovereignty it self. But it is according to the Principles of the
True Protestants of Munster, that still begin with Religion, and end with
Treason. Pray say if it be not a thousand pities now, after all these
Complements upon His Sacred Majesty, and His Blessed Father, that these
High-flown Dissenters should not be taken into the Government? When these
People set up for Pillars of the Church, it were a kind of Injustice not to
Allow the Kings Judges to put in too for Ministers of State.

Sect. 6. The Presbyterians Opinion of the Covenant.
1. BE astonished, O Heavens! and tremble, O Earth! Let the Sun it self be
clothed in Blackness at this so horrid an Impiety! What! Abjure such a
Covenant? A Covenant so solemnly taken! A Covenant, for the Matter of it, so
Religious! so Holy! etc. -- And must This Covenant be Abjured now? This
Covenant! Is not God's Own Word, and God Himself too after a sort Abjured in
That Act, whoever are guilty of it? etc. -- The Highest of all Crimes
imaginable, a Crime that murders Conscience, that murders Souls, that
murders Religion it self; a Crime against the First Table! most immediately
against the Sovereign God; and the greatest of that Nature that Men can be
guilty of. [ Speeches of the three Regicides, Page 5. and 6.

The Cause (says Bark stead) lies in the Bosom of Christ, and as sure as Christ
rose, the Cause will rise again. [Ibid. Page 16.]

I die cleaving to all those Oaths, vows, and Protestations that were imposed
by the Two Houses of Parliament; as owning them, and dying with my Judgment for
them. [ Love's Trial, Printed Aug. 1652.]

The convincing Demonstration, that [ there lies no Obligation on me, or any
other Person, from the Oath commonly called The Solemn League and Covenant] is
a Knot cut by the Sword of Authority, while it cannot be loosed by Religious
Reason. [Short Survey of the Grand Case, Page 23.1663.]

O the Burning of the Covenant in England, and the Causes of Wrath in Scotland,
shall certainly be followed with such a Fine, and Fierceness of Indignation, as
shall make Authors, Actors, Abetters, and Rejoycers thereat, know what it is to
give such an open defiance to the Almighty. A Covenant Burnt; and Burnt by
Authority; in the sight of Heaven, with such Hell-black Solemnities, where the
great God is altera pars contrabens, for Reformation of Religion according to
his Word; and Righteousness in walking before him; is such a Sin, as may make
every Soul to tremble at the forethoughts of what God will do; for vindicating
his Glory from that Contempt thereby cast upon him. -- I wish that the Burning
of that City into Ashes where that Covenant was Burnt, together with that
Nonesuch Plague and War, may make them take warning ere it be too late, who
did this Wickedness. -- O England, England; I fear, I fear thy Woe hasteneth;
the Wrath of God is upon the Wing against thee, both for breach of Covenant,
and wiping thy mouth as if thou had done nothing amiss! Thou have stood, and
seen thy Brothers Day; Alas, for thy Day, when Others shall stand aloof from
thee, for fear of sharing in thy Judgments! [ Poor Man's Cup, etc. Page 19.]

We shall not, nor cannot enter upon the particular Declaration of that Grace,
Constancy and Courage, by which the Lords Faithful Witnesses were sustein'd,
and did bear Testimony to the Word of his Truth, the Holy Covenant, and the
Cause and Work of God. [ Napthali, Page 162.]

I bear my Witness unto the National Covenant of Scotland, and Solemn League
and Covenant betwixt the Three Kingdoms of Scotland, England, and Ireland.
These Sacred, Solemn, Public Oaths of God, I believe, can be loosed nor
dispensed with by no Person or Power upon Earth. [ Napthali, Page 207.]

I bear my Witness and Testimony to the Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and
Government of the Church of Scotland, by Kirk-Sessions, Presbyteries, Synods,
and General Assemblies. Popery and Prelacy, and all the Trumpery of Service and
Ceremonies that wait upon them, I do abhor. I do bear my Witness unto the
National Covenant of Scotland, and Solemn League and Covenant, etc. [ The
Testimony of James Guthrie, Minister, at his Death at Edinbourgh, June 1. 1661.
-- And so of every Man of the Party that Died for the Rebellion in Scotland.

Notes on Sect. 6.
BY This Covenant was designed the Subversion of the Government; and by the
force of This Covenant it was accomplished. They do all of them assert the
Obligation of it to the very Death; and by virtue of This Covenant it is, that
they have Confederated afresh, in Scotland, to murder the King and all that
serve under Him. Now if This be their Principle, let any Man consider the
Consequence of admitting any Unrenouncing Covenanter, by an Act of Special
Grace, into the Government; after so full a Proof and Exposition of the Meaning
of That Covenant; and so frank a Declaration of their Resolution to make it
good.

Sect. 7. Dissenters Liberty of Conscience.
THe Scots did not only resolve to take the Covenant themselves, but enjoined
it throughout the whole Kingdom. Sir Henry Vane's Speech at a Common Hall,
October. 27. 1643. Page 4.] -- They enjoined it upon the Penalties, that those
that should not take it, or should defer it, should be esteemed Enemies to
Religion, to his Majesty's Honor, and to the good of the Two Kingdoms; that
they should have all their Rents and Profits Confiscate: That they should brook
nor enjoy any Office, or Benefit in that Kingdom; that they should be cited to
the next Parliament, to Answer the not taking of it; and to be proceeded with
there as Enemies to the State, and to Religion; and to receive such farther
Punishment, as by the King and Parliament should be put upon them [ Ibid. Page
5.] -- And that particular account shall be taken by the several Presbyteryes,
of all who shall refuse, or shift to swear, and subscribe; and that they be
proceeded against with the Censures of the Church, as enemies to the
Preservation and Propagation of Religion. [ S. Marshall, Ib. Page 11.]

We give now Public Warning to all Neuters, to rest no longer upon their
Neutrality, but that they address themselves speedily to take the Covenant, and
join with all their power in the Defense of This Cause against the Common
Enemy, etc. Otherwise we do declare them to be public Enemies, to their
Religion and Country; and that they are to be censured and punished as
professed Adversaries, and Malignants. [ Declaration of England and Scotland,
Jan. 30. 1643.]

If any Person or Persons whatsoever shall at any time or times hereafter, use
or cause the aforesaid Book of Common Prayer, to be used in any Church,
Chapel, or Public Place of Worship, or in any private place or Family within
the Kingdom of England, or the Dominion of Wales, or Port and Town of Berwick;
every such Person so offending therein shall, for the First Offense, pay the
sum of Five Pounds of Lawful English Money. For the Second Offense Ten Pounds;
and for the Third shall suffer one whole years Imprisonment, without Bail or
Mainprize. [ Ordinance of Parliament, Aug. 23. 1645. for putting the Directory
in Execution.]

Resolved upon the Question, by the Commons assembled in Parliament, that all
Persons that have, or shall come and reside in the Parliaments Quarters, shall
take the National League and Covenant, and the Negative Oath, notwithstanding
any Articles that have been or shall be made by the Soldiery. [ June 2. 1646.]

What Person soever, having taken the Solemn League and Covenant, shall go into
the Enemies Quarters without Drum, Trumpet, or Pass, shall Dye without Mercy. [
An Article of War.]

Notes on Sect. 7.
LEt any Man that has but Eyes in his head, compare Cases now. Here Is a
Rebellious Oath of Conspiracy, opposed to an Authoritative Oath of Canonical
Obedience, and Allegiance: Here Is a pretended scruple of Perjury, in breaking a
Treasonous Oath; and no bones made of the Perjurious violation of a Legal One:
Here Is a Nullity against an Act of State; and this is not the worst on it
neither. Those very Men that forced a Rebellious Oath upon all people without
Exception, to the utmost Extremity of Tyranny and Rigor, Contrary to Law; are
now complaining of persecution, under the Common Rule of a Legal Provision:
Declaring at the same time, that they are still determined to pursue the ends
of their aforesaid Covenant, which were manifestly the subversion of the
Government.

You see likewise, how Unmercifully they dealt with People, in the Case of the
Common Prayer: And yet who but these Men to Mutiny for Liberty, in the very
point, wherein most injuriously they made all their Fellow Subjects, Slaves?

Sect. 8. The Power of the Kirk.
(A.) THe Assembly is Independent, either from King or Parliament, in matters
Ecclesiastical.

(B.) It is lawful for Subjects to make a Covenant, and Combination, without
the King, and to enter into a Bond of Mutual Defense against the King, and all
persons whatsoever.

(C.) Subjects may appeal from the King and Council to the next General
Assembly, and Parliament; and in the mean time, before their Appeals are heard
and discussed, they may disobey the King and Council.

(D.) An Assembly may abrogate Acts of Parliament; and discharge Subjects of
their Obedience to them, if they any way reflect on the business of the Church.

(E.) The Protestation of Subjects against Laws established, whether it be made
coram Judice, or non Judice (before the Judges, or the People) does void all
Obedience to those Laws, and discharges the Protesters from any Obligation to
live under them.

(F.) A number of Men, being the Greater part of the Kingdom, may do anything
which they themselves conceive conducing to the Glory of God, and the good of
the Church, notwithstanding any Laws standing in force to the contrary. [ Kings
Large Declaration, Fol. 407. and deincep.]

(G.) The Rights and Privileges of Parliaments, and the Liberties of the
Kingdom, are the Suburbs of the Gospel; and an Inheritance bequeathed by God to
Nations and Kingdoms, and under That Notion, Holy -- These be the Outworks of
Religion, the Lines of Communication (as I may so say) for the defense of This
City. [ Case's Covenant Renewed, 1643. P. 52.]

(H.) Such a height of Opposition to the Lords Anointed, as never since Man was
upon the Earth was there such a Supremacy framed into a Law; whereby Name and
Thing of all Kingly Power is plainly and explicitly taken from, and extorted
out of the hand of our blessed Lord Jesus Christ; and given unto and settled
upon the King: (O dangerous, and Unsetling Settlement!) Now the Incommunicable
Prerogative of Him, who is King in Sion, and whose Right it is to give Laws to
Rule his own Church, and House, is alienate and appendent to the Imperial Crown
of the Nation; -- The most manifest, unmasked, high, and horrid Usurpation of
the Throne of Christ, that ever the World saw -- But its Impossible he can sit
long, who sets himself upon the Mediators Throne. For the Arm of Jehovah shall
snatch and hurry him thence. Be wise now therefore O ye Kings, etc. is a
necessary caution here. [ Poor Man's Cup, Page 21.]

(H.) The Presbytery may forbid Unjust Suits of Law, and so does the Scripture,
as scandalous to Christians -- Our General Assembly is no other then Christ's
Court (Acts 15.) made up of Pastors, Doctors, and Brethren, or Elders -- They
hold (I believe with warrant of Gods Word) if the King refuse to Reform
Religion, the Inferior Judges, and Godly Pastors, and other Church Officers may
Reform; If the King will not Kiss the Sun, and do his Duty, in purging the
House of the Lord, may not Eliah and the People do Their Duty, and cast out
Baals Priests? -- They may Swear, or Covenant, Without the King, if he Refuse,
and build the Lords House Themselves; [2 Chronicles. 15.9.] and Relieve, and Defend
one another when they are oppressed -- They Deposed the Queen for her Tyranny,
but Crowned her Son. All This is vindicated in the following Treatise. -- This
Assembly is to judge what Doctrine is Treasonable. -- It is true, Glasgow
Assembly (1637.) Voted down the High Commission, because it was not consented
to by the Church; and yet was a Church-Judicature, which took upon them to
judge of the Doctrine of Ministers, and deprive them, and did encroach upon the
established lawful Church-Judicatures. [Rutherfords Preface to Lex Rex.]

Notes on Sect. 8.
DO These People talk of the Lordlyness of Prelates; when His Holiness Himself
never claimed so much, Barefaced, as these Papal Protestants do both Challenge
and Practice? And it is not the Slavery, but the Masters, that we ought to be
most ashamed of. Nor will the Impatient, and Imperious Humor wait for the
season of their Power; but while they are yet in shackles Themselves, they are
Imposing upon their Sovereign. And methinks it is very Unequal for Men, that
give no Quarter to Loyal Subjects, to stand expostulating for Privileges to
Revolters.

Here Is King and Parliament gone at First Dash (A) A Confederacy Authorized at
Next; (B) A Papal Dispensation from Obedience (C) The King and Three Estates
swallowed up in the Assembly. (D) Subjects set above the Law. (E) The
Sovereignty vested in the Multitude. (F) Parliaments subordinated to the Kirk.
(G) The King Himself Arraigned, and Judgments denounced against him. (H) The
Judges Degraded; Courts of Justice silenced; the Rabble passing Sentence on the
Supreme Magistrate. Deposing of Princes Justified ( I.) This is all Plain
enough, without Exposition; But we are Now about to be yet a little Plainer.

Sect. 9. Principles and Positions.
(A) THe Two Houses have Legal Power to Levy Monys, Arms, Horse, Ammunition,
upon the Subjects, even without, or against the Kings Consent; and to put into
safe hands such Forts, Ports, Magazines, Ships, and Power of the Militia, as
are intended, or likely to be intended, to introduce a Tyranny; not only when
Arms are actually raised against them, but when they discern, and accordingly
declare a Preparation made toward it. Political Catechism. Page 7.1679.

(B) A King abusing his Power, to the Overthrow of Religion, Laws, and
Liberties, may be controlled and opposed: And if he set himself to overthrow
all these by Arms, then they who have Power, as the Estates of a Land, may and
ought to Resist by Arms; because he does by That Opposition break the very
Bonds, and overthrow all the Essentials of this Contract and Covenant. This may
serve to justify the Proceedings of This Kingdom against the late King, who in
a Hostile way set himself to overthrow Religion, Parliaments, Laws, and
Liberties. Douglase's Coronation Sermon. Page 10.1951.

(C) The Lords and Commons are as the Master of the House. [ Calamy's Sermon,
December. 25. 1644. Page 22.] -- The Parliament whom the People Choose are the
great and only Conservators of the Peoples Liberties. Ibid.

(D) The Parliament of the Commonwealth of England without the King, 1651. were
the Supreme Authority of this Nation, Jenkins's Petition. October. 15. 1651.

(E) The Sovereignty here among Us is in King, Lords and Commons. (Baxter's
Holy Commonwealths, Page 72.1659.)

(F) The Government of England is a Mixed Monarchy, and governed by the Major
part of the Three Estates assembled in Parliament. [ Parliament Physic for a
sin-sick Nation. Page 111.

(G) The Houses are not only requisite to the acting of the Power of making
Laws; but Coordinate with His Majesty in the very power of Acting. Ahabs Fall.
Page 42.)

(H) Resolved, That in case of Extreme Danger, and of His Majesty's Refusal,
the Ordinance agreed on by both Houses for the Militia, does oblige the People,
and ought to be obeyed by the Fundamental Laws of This Kingdom. (Vote of both
Houses, March 15. 164^. Ex. Col. 112.)

(I) Resolved, That when the Lords and Commons in Parliament (which is the
Supreme Court of Judicature in the Kingdom) shall declare what the Law of the
Land is; to have This not only questioned and controverted, but contradicted,
and a Command that it should not be obeyed, is a high breach of the Privilege
of Parliament. ( Ex. Col. 114. March 16. 1641.)

(K) The Lords and Commons in Parliament do declare, That it is against the
Laws and Liberties of the Kingdom, that any of the Subjects thereof should be
commanded by the King to attend Him at His Pleasure; but such as are bound
thereto by special Service. ( Ex. Col. 193. May 17. 1642)

(L) The Towns, Forts, Treasure, Magazine, Offices, and the People of the
Kingdom, and the whole Kingdom it self is entrusted unto the King, for the Good
and Safety, and best advantage thereof; and as This Trust is for the Use of the
Kingdom, so ought it to be menag'd by the Advice of the Houses of Parliament,
whom the Kingdom has Trusted for That purpose. ( Third Remonstrance, May 26.
1642. Ex. Col. 266.)

(M) A Parliament may dispose of any thing wherein His Majesty or His Subjects
has a Right, in such a way as that the Kingdom may not be exposed to hazard or
danger thereby. ( Ibid. 267)

(N) The Votes of the Lords and Commons in Parliament being the great Council
of the Kingdom, are the REASON of the King, and of the Kingdom. (Ibid. 278.)

(O) Supreme Head and Governor over all Persons in all Causes, as it is meant
of singular Persons rather than of Courts, or of the Collective Body of the
whole Kingdom, etc. And to speak properly, it is only in His high Court of
Parliament, wherein and wherewith His Majesty has absolutely the Supreme
Power, and consequently is absolutely Supreme Head and Governor, from whence
there is no Appeal. (Remonstrance, May 26. 1642. Ex. Col. 703.)

(P) The Kings of This Realm ought to be very tender in denying both Houses of
Parliament any thing that concerns the Public Government, and good of the
Kingdom; and they ought to deny themselves and their own Understandings very
far, before they Deny Them; and that upon this ground, because they lie under
the Obligation of an Oath to pass such Laws, if they be Just and Good, for the
Kingdom. And it must Then be a Tender Point for a Prince to judge otherwise of
those Laws that are Represented unto Him as such, by the Representative Body of
the whole Kingdom. ( Ibid. Page 715.)

No Presidents can be Bounds to the Proceedings of the Parliament. ( Ibid. Page
726)

(Q) A Parliament may dispose of any thing wherein the King, or any Subject
has a Right, in such a way that the Kingdom may not be endangered thereby. And
if the King, being humbly sought unto by His Parliament, shall refuse to join
with them; In such Cases, the Representative Body of the Kingdom is not to sit
still, and see the Kingdom perish before their Eyes; and of this danger THEY
are Judges, and Judges Superior to all others that Legally have any Power of
Judicature in This Kingdom. (Ibid.) No Member of either House ought to be
meddled withal for Treason, Felony, or any other Crime; without the Cause first
brought before Them, that they may judge of the Fact, and Their leave obtained
to proceed. (Ibid.)

The Sovereign Power does reside in the King and both Houses of Parliament: And
His Majesty's Negative Voice does not import a Liberty for His Majesty to deny
any thing as He pleases, though never so requisite and necessary for the
Kingdom. ( Ibid. 727.)

(R) When there is certain appearance, or grounded suspicion that the Letter of
the Law shall be improved against the Equity of it; (that is, the Public
Good, whether of the Body Real, or Representative) then the Commander going
against its Equity, gives Liberty to the Commanded, to refuse Obedience to the
Letter. (Ex. Col.. Page 152.)

(S) The Clause wherein we Swear the Preservation and Defense of the Kings
Person, and Authority, does lie under some restreint, by That limitation [In
the Preservation and Defense of the True Religion and Liberties of the
Kingdom.] To which we Reply, It maintains him as far as he is a King: He may be
a Man, but sure no King, without the Lists and Verge of Religion and Laws; it
being Religion and Laws that make Him a King. Case's Covenant Renewed, Page 54.

(T) Princes for just Causes may be Deposed. If they be Tyrants against God and
his Truth, their Subjects are Freed from their Oaths of Obedience -- The People
have the same Power over the King, that the King has over any one Man. -- The
making of Laws does belong to the People; and Kings are but as Masters of the
Rolls. -- [ Dan. Pos. Lib. 1. Cap. 4.

(U) He that resists the King commanding in the Lord, resists the Ordinance
of God; but he who resists the King commanding that which is against God,
resists no Ordinance of God, but an Ordinance of Sin and Satan. ( Lex Rex,
Page 267.1644.)

(W) Convention of the Subjects in a Tumultuary way for a Seditious End, to
make War without Warrant of Law, is forbidden; but not when Religion, Laws,
Liberties, Invasion of Foreign Enemies necessitate the Subjects to Convene;
though the King and Ordinary Judicatures going a corrupt way to pervert Judgment
shall refuse to consent to their Conventions. ( Rutherford's Lex Rex, Page 464.)

(X) Our Fundamentals were not made by our Representatives, but by the People
Themselves; and our Representatives themselves Limited by Them; which it were
good that Parliaments as well as People would observe, and be faithful to: For
no Derivative Power can Null what Their Primitive Power has established. The
Englishman, Page 11.1670.

(Y) The Privileges and Lawful Prerogatives of the Sovereign, must veil, in
cases of necessity, unto this high and supreme Law, The Safety of the People.
Then no less must the Privileges of a Parliament yield unto This. (Lex Rex,
Page 159.)

If we be sworn to maintain the Kings Person and Authority, in the Defense of
the Liberties of the Subject, then whoever prefers the Liberties of the Subject
to his Person or Authority, are not Traitors, or Rebels. (Ibid. Page 251.)

(Z) Noblemen ought to Reform Religion, if the King will not. The Commonalty
concurring with the Nobility, may compel the Bishops to cease from their
Tyranny; and by their Power Bridle the cruel Beasts. -- They may lawfully
require of their King to have True Preachers; and if he be negligent, they
justly may themselves provide them, maintain them, defend them against all that
do persecute them, and may retein the Profits of the Church Livings from the
other sort -- The Nobility and Commonalty ought to Reform Religion; and may
remove from Honors, and punish whom God has condemned. [ Deuteronomy. 12.] of what
Estate or Condition soever. -- The Punishment of such Crimes as touch the
Majesty of God does not appertain to Kings and Chief Rulers only, but also to
the whole Body of the People; and to every Member of the same; as Occasion,
Vocation, or ability shall serve, to revenge the Injury done against God. [
Dan. Pos. Lib. 1. Cap. 4.

If the Magistrates shall refuse to put Mass-mongers and False Preachers to
death; the People (in seeing it performed) do show that zeal of God which was
commended in Phineas, destroying the Adulterers; and in the Israelites against
the Benjamites. -- Dan. Pos. Lib. 2. Cap. 1.

(a) Judges ought by the Law of God to summon Princes before them for their
Crimes: And to proceed against them as against all other Offenders -- Evil
Princes ought by the Law of God to be Deposed; and Inferior Magistrates ought
chiefly to do it. -- When Magistrates do cease to do their Duties, the People
are as it were without Officers. And then God gives the Sword into Their
hands, and he himself is become immediately Their Head: For to the Multitude a
Portion of the Sword of Justice is committed: From the which no Person, King,
Queen, or Emperor, being an Idolater, is excepted; they must Dye the Death,
etc. -- God will send to the People which are willing to do their Duty, but are
not able, some Moses, or Othoniel. If they know any Jonathan, they must go unto
him to be their Captain, and he ought not to refuse them. By the word of God a
Private Man, by some Special Inward Motive, may Kill a Tyrant; as Moses did the
Egyptian: as Phineas did the Lecherous; and Ebud did King Eglon, etc. -- It is
lawful to kill wicked Kings and Tyrants; and both by Gods Law, and Man's Law,
Queen Mary ought to have been put to death as being a Tyrant, a Monster, a
Cruel Death, etc. The Subjects did kill the Queen's Highness Athalia; Jebu
killed the Queen's Majesty Jezebel; Elias, being no Magistrate, killed the
Queen's Majesty's Chaplains, Baal's Priests. These Examples are left for our
Instruction. Where this Justice is not executed, the State is most Corrupt. [
Dan. Pos. Lib. 2. Cap. 1.

(b) Whenever a King, or other Superior Authority creates an Inferior, they
invest it with a Legitimacy of Magistratical Power, to punish Themselves also,
in case they prove Evil Doers. ( Right and Might well met, Page 7.1648.

Princes derive their Power and Prerogative from the People; and have their
Investitures merely for the Peoples Benefit. (Jus Populi, Page 1.1644.)

If the Prince fail in his Promise, the People are exempt from their Obedience;
the Contract is made void, and the Right of Obligation is of no force. It is
therefore permitted to the Officers of a Kingdom, either all, or some good
number of them, to suppress a Tyrant. (Vindiciae contra Tyrannos, Page 120,
121, 1648.)

It is lawful for any who have the Power to call to account a Tyrant or wicked
King, and after due Conviction to depose and put him to death, if the ordinary
Magistrate has neglected, or denied to do it. (The Tenure of Kings and
Magistrates, 1649.)

Notes on Sect. 9.
THe First Clause (A) has been of great Use to the Protestant Mercuries, and
Intelligences, for the shaping of their Addresses. (B) A Dispensation again.
(C. D. E. F. G.) The King is Deposed by the Dissenters. (H) The Two Houses
above the King. (I) Calls the King to an account for not submitting to the Two
Houses. (K) Allows Him to be Master only of His Own Domestiques. (L) The Two
Houses are the Kings Guardians; and (M) may Dispose of Kings and Subjects
Rights at pleasure. (N) The Votes of the Two Houses are the REASON of King and
Kingdom. (O) Singulis Major, Universis Minor. (P) The King bound to pass
whatever Bills the Two Houses offer Him, though against His Judgment. (Q) No
Member of either House to be Touched for Treason without leave. (R) The Equity
of the Law set up against the Letter of it. (S) The King distinguished from the
Person. (T) Princes Deposable by the People. (U) Obedience and Resistance
Conditional. (W) People may Convene against Authority. (X) The Fundamentals of
Government are from the People. (Y) And so is Sovereignty, to which both Kings
and Parliaments must vail. (Z. and a.) Popular Violence and Reformation
Justified. Deposing and Killing of Kings. (b) Gives the Constable a Commission
to lay the King by the Heels.

Let the Reader take Notice, that These are not the Wild Speculations of
sick-brain'd Phanatiques, but Positions Rooted in the very Foundations of the
Separation; Subversive of the very Ordinance of Government; and not only
asserted by Votes, and Arguments, but put in practice upon the Lives and
Liberties both of Prince and People.

Sect. 10. Tumults Encouraged; and chiefly, by the [Able, Holy, Faithful,
Laborious, and Truly Peaceable Preachers of the Gospel.] (Petition for Peace,
Page 4.)
(A) THe Land is sore Troubled; there is no place, nor being for a faithful
Minister of the Word. Our Blood cries for Vengeance against the Bishops. -- If
This Persecution be not provided for, it is the Case of many a Thousand in
England; great Troubles will come of it. [ Dan. Pos. L. 2. Cap. 10.]

It astonishes us to foresee what Doleful Effects our Divisions would produce.
[ Proposals, Page 12.1661.]

(B) The Act for suppressing Conventicles is a Law dishonorable to God,
destructive to the Gospel, and pernicious to most of the sober People of the
Nation. [ Quaeries upon the Proclamation for enforcing the Laws against
Conventicles, etc. Page 12.] Qu. Whether the Saints ought not to continue the
assemblies of their Worship of God, without or against the Consent of their
Magistrates, they being commanded so to do? [ Matthew. 28.18, 19, 20. Heb. 10.25.
etc. Page 14.]

(C) When the Ark of God is taken, the Ministers of Christ are driven into
Corners; the Souls of our Wives and Children are in danger to miscarry. [
Calamy's Sermon. Dec. 28. 1662. Page 8] Where are our Moseses, our Eliah's? Where
are those that lay to heart the danger of the Ark of God? [ Page 10.] -- It is
not your Wicked Ministers that can settle the Ark; It is not your Profane,
Drunken Ministers; No, it must be your Godly, Sober, Pious, and Religious
Ministers. [Pag. 17, 18.]

(D) That Truth for Owning of which you are put to suffer the loss of all
things, is that very Truth for which Christ himself suffered as a Martyr: viz.
That He was a King. -- Yea he is a King, and will be a King when You are gone;
and will prove himself higher than the Kings of the Earth, by rescinding of
Your Supremacy, that Idol of his Indignation, and Object of his Revenge. -- Of
a Truth, Lord, against thy Holy Child JESUS whom thou have anointed, are all
these gathered together; and it is for our owning of Him as. Thy Anointed, and
refusing to be on that Conspiracy, that we are thus used. [ The Poor Man's Cup
of Cold Water Minister'd to the Saints and Sufferers for Christ, in Scotland,
Page 13.1678.]

(E) We saw the Blood of these Blessed Saints and Martyrs ( the Scotch Rebels)
of Jesus shed: We saw the Frame of our Government Dissolved, and Overturned: We
saw an Act. Recissory, the Wickedness whereof reached Heaven: We saw Abominable
and Abjured Episcopacy, reestablished by Law, and the Faithful Ministers of
Christ driven from their Flocks: Thus we saw Jericho Rebuilt; and so the Nation
became a Curse; being so deeply, and so deliberately involved into the Guilt of
Open, Owned, Avouched, and by Law established Perjury: Now what did we in the
mean time? Alas, we had not the Spirit of the Day in its Day, etc. [Poor Man's
Cup, Page 20.]

(F) Beloved Brethren, Albeit God has put and ordained distinction betwixt
King and Subjects; yet in hope of the Life to come he has made all equal: And
therefore I say that it does no less appertain to You to be assured that your
Faith and Religion be grounded, and established upon the True and Undoubted
Word of God, than to your Princes or Rulers. -- And to You it does no less
appertain, than to your King or Princes, to provide that Christ Jesus be truly
Preached amongst you. [ Jus Populi, Page 215.]

(G) They Deifie a Creature, and renounce their Homage to the King of Kings;
and so provoke him to destroy both Them and their King by their Apostasy, and
wicked Defection; and that openly before Men and Angels, as David hanged up the
Sons of Saul before the Sun: And then they need not fear either Dag or Dagger,
Pistol or Poisoned Poniard. [ Ibid. Page 414.]

(H) Come, my Brethren, I say, and fear not to take this Agag (Prelacy I mean,
not the Prelates;) and hew it to pieces before the Lord. [ Case's Covenant
Renewed, Page 51.]

(I) Down with Baal's Altars, down with Baal's Priests, etc. [ Salwey's Sermon
to the Commons, October. 25. 1643. Page 19.]

(K) I may truly say as the Martyr did, That if I had as many Lives as Hairs on
my Head, I would be willing to sacrifice all those Lives in this Cause. [ Mr.
Calamy's Speech at Guildhal, October. 6. 1643.]

(L) Let no Law hinder you; Si jus violandum, etc. And if Law be to be broken,
it is for a Crown, and therefore for Religion. [Simpson on Prove. 8.15.16. Page
23.] -- You are set over Kingdoms, to root out, pull down, destroy, and throw
down; do it quickly, do it thoroughly. [ Ibid. Page 24.]

(M) Who were they but the poorer and meaner sort of People that at the first
joined with the Ministers to raise the Building of Reformation? [ Marshal's
Sermon. June 15. 1643. Page 15.]

(N) Here is an extraordinary appearance of so many Ministers to encourage you
in This Cause, that you may see how real the Godly Ministry in England is unto
This Cause. [ Calamy's Speech at Guild Hall, October. 6. 1643.]

(O) To You of the Honorable House, Up, for the Matter belongs to You; We,
even all the Godly Ministers of the Country, will be with You. [ Faircloth to
the Commons on Josh. 7.25. Page 29.] Let not the Pretense of Peace and Unity
cool your Fervor, or make you spare to oppose your selves unto those idle and
Idolized Ceremonies against which we dispute. (Dispute against English-Popish
Ceremonies, Page 11.)

(P) A Word to the People: Are Magistrates your Servants? Then learn to be
Wise, and know your Privileges for time to come; and be not frighted out of
your Right and Reason at once, by those Traitors and Rebels who would make you
believe that it is Treason and Rebellion to call Them to account for the
Treason and Rebellion they are Guilty of. (Mean Tekel, Page 41.) Parliaments
are the Peoples Servants. -- The King, Judges, Justices, Mayors, Constables,
and all other Magistrates or Officers, are our Servants, to protect us, and
secure us from Violence and Oppression; If they break their Trust, and Oppress
us, the Law of God and Nature allows us to call our Servants to account, punish
them according to their Deserts, and turn them out of our Service. ( Ibid.)
Alas, poor England! thy Shepherds are become Robbers; thy Princes within thee
are Roaring Lions; thy Judges are Ravening Wolves, etc. ( Page 46.) -- What
Authority had a Parliament to give away our Birthrights? to enslave the
Corporations and Counties that sent them up to assert their Freedoms; and to
expose us to the Lusts of Wicked Oppressors; to give away the Militia of the
Land to the King? etc. ( Page 50.) -- The Parliaments giving away our
Birthrights to the King, is just of as much force as if the Convocation of
Prelates, or Council of Bishops should give our Souls to the Devil: They have
as much Power to do the latter, as the Parliament have to do the former. ( Page
51.)

(Q) Some Persons may be stirred up to do some things that are not in
themselves so justifiable, or seemingly warrantable, (at least in all
Circumstances) which yet the Overruling Hand of God may be in; as in Moses
killing the Egyptian; Phineas slaying Zimri and Cosbi, Numb. 25.7, 8. (
Sufferers Catechism, Page 32.1664.)

(R) It is remarkable that this single act of Phineas in killing two Persons is
so much rewarded, and taken notice of by the Lord; yea, more than the many who
were killed by the Judges. ( Jus Populi, P. 416.) -- Now sure I am this Fact of
Phineas was according to the Law, and to the express mind of God; and why then
might it not be imitated in the like case? What Warrant, Command, or Commission
had Phineas, which we cannot now expect? ( Ibid. Page 419.)

Notes on Sect. 10.
Here Is a Complaint of a Persecution (A) by the greatest of Persecutors, and
the most Mercyless of Men; as you have it out of their own Mouths. The Law
vilify'd, ( B) and Authority affronted, in the very Instant while they pretend
to Supplicate for Relief. What can be more Inflaming, Scandalous and
Pharisaical then the Clause, ( C?) or more Seditious then (D. E. F. and G?)
More Incentive to the People then ( H. I. K. and L.) And who were the Eminent
Incendiaries ( M. N. and O.) but the very Principals of the Dissenting
Ministers? What horrible Affronts upon the King, Parliament and Government in (
P?) What Instigations are there to any execrable Practice upon the Sacred
Person of His Majesty in ( Q. and R?) View their Principles; Compare my
Citations with their Writings; turn your Eye from Thence to their Practices;
and if you find I have done them any wrong in the Report, let me bear the
Burden of the Scandal. But if the matter be truly represented, let the Reader
judge of the Rest.

Sect. 11. The War against the King Justified.
(A) OUr War has been proved over and over to unbiased Consciences, to be
Just. (Caryl to the Commons, April 23. 1644. Page 35.

(B) The Scots were necessitated to take up Arms for their Just Defense; and
against Antichrist, and the Popish Priests, Ward, before the Lords, on Deuteronomy.
33.16. Page 16.

(C) If I had taken up Arms against the Parliament in that Wa^, my Conscience
tells me I had been a Traitor, and guilty of Resisting the highest Powers. [
Baxters Holy Commonwealth, Page 433. -- and I cannot see that I was mistaken
in the Mayn Cause; nor dare I repent of it, nor forbear the same, if it were to
do again in the same state of Things. [ Ibid, Page 486.]

(D) Some say the Terms are dubious, if not false; it being indefinitely
asserted, It is not lawful to take Arms against the King, on any pretense
whatsoever. Although our King is, and we hope ever will be so qualified, that
in reference to Him, it may be true; yet it is not impossible for a King, Regis
Personam exuere; in a Natural or Moral Madness, or Phrensy, to turn Tyrant, yea
Beast, etc. -- In This case, Men think Nature does dictate it, and Scripture
does justify a Man se defendendo vim vi repellere, etc. [ A short Survey of
the Grand Case, Page 12.1663.]

(E) Their Rising (The Rebels at Pentland-hills) was supposed against Lawful
Authority; whereas it was rather a Rising for Lawful Authority; while against
Persons abusing their Authority, and not walking in the right Line of
Subordination unto the Supreme Magistrate and Governor of Heaven and Earth; but
Rebelling against Him, in making Laws Contrary to His Laws, and executing them
contrary to His Will and Command. 2. That their Rising was in Rebellion;
whereas it was rather in Loyalty to God, and the Country, against such as had
erected a Standard of Rebellion against the High and Mighty Prince Jesus Christ
our Lord, and Supreme Governor, and in Loyalty to that Supreme Law, The safety
of the People: defending themselves against manifest, and intolerable Tyranny.
[ Jus Populi, 1669. Preface.] -- We may safely say, that these Valiant Worthies
were basely and barbarously Murdered, and that there was no just cause to take
their Lives. [Ib. Preface.

(F) When strong and inevitable Necessity urges, in order to Necessary and
Just Ends; people may have their own Convocations, even against Authority, and
de jure, be guilty of the breach of no standing Law against the same; seeing
all know that Salus Populi est Suprema Lex; and that no Law, or Act, when the
strict observation thereof tends to the Detriment of the Republic (for the
good of which all Laws are made) is of force. [ Jus Populi, Page 18.] --
Resistance may be used against the Person of, or the Man who is, the
Magistrate; without the least contempt, or wrong done unto the Holy Ordinance
of God -- The Peoples Safety is such a Royal thing, that the King Himself, and
all his Prerogatives, yea and Municipal Laws too; must vail the Cap unto it,
themselves being Judges. [ Ibid. Page 25.] -- The Late War carried on by the
Parliament of Scotland against the King, was Lawful, both in point of Law and
Conscience; and if That was Lawful (as it was, and shall be found to be) when
He and all His Accomplices have done their Utmost, with all their Lying Cavils,
false Calumnies, Reproaches, and what not, that Hell can hatch to disprove, and
condemn the same) a War raised by the Subjects in their own sinless
self-defence, without the conduct of their Representative, cannot in every case
be condemned, particularly not in our Case Now. Jus Populi, Page 31.

(G) The Generation of the Prelatical, and Malignant Faction, did not cease to
Chant after the Determinations of the Cruel, and Bloody Council; and cry out
upon Those Noble and Worthy Patriots (whose Memory shall be in Everlasting
Remembrance) as Traitors and Rebels, Justly Condemned and Executed.

Notes on Sect. 11.
WE have the War here against the Late King Justified (A. B. C.) by Three
Divines of Note, in the First place. (D.) Minces it a little, but comes to the
same point at last. (E. F. and G.) Justify not only the Ground of That
Rebellion, and the Fact it self; but Canonize the very Rebels of Pentland-Hills
for Martyrs. Now can it be imagined, that any Man will take upon him to defend
the Late Sedition, that does not stand as well-affected to another? It is a
strange Partiality for Them to think it more Reasonable for Separatists to
Overturn the Government against Law, then for the Magistrate, by keeping Close
to the Rule of the Law, to do his endeavor to Support it. If they call it a
Persecution, the Magistrates not Dissolving of the Law in favor of Dissenters;
Why may not we be allowed to call it a Rebellion, for the Dissenters to
Dissolve the Government in despite of the Magistrate?

Sect. 12. Reformation by Blood.
(A) YOu cannot Preach, nor Pray them down directly and immediately; -- Well!
that which the Word cannot do, the Sword shall. (Reyner to the Commons, Aug.
28. 1644. Page 12.

(B) Episcopacy must not only be pulled up, but the Bishops must be hanged up
before the Lord; and the Bloodiest and Sharpest War to be endured, rather then
the least Error in Doctrine, or in Discipline. ( A Scottish Sermon, Kings large
Scotch Declaration, fol. 404.

(C) Those mine Enemies that would not have me Reign over them, bring them
hither, and slay them before me. Those Men that rise up in cursed Practices to
change Religion, to bring in Idolatry, and False Worship; to Depose Christ from
his Throne, and set up Antichrist in his Place: -- Noble Sirs; in your
Execution of Judgment upon Delinquents, Imitate God, and be Merciful to none
that have sinned of Malicious wickedness: Let not your Eye pity any who in This
bloody Quarrel have laid the Foundation of their Rebellion and Massacres in
Irreconcilable Hatred to Religion and the Government of Jesus Christ. Case's
Sermon to the Court Martial, Aug. 17. 1644.

(D) As Josiah put to death those that followed Baal, so may the Parliament
those that will not return, and leave Antichristianism. Marshalls Sermon. March
26. 1645. -- That Anti-Christianism that was sworn in the Covenant to be rooted
out. Page 45.

(E) I will confidently affirm, that our days now are better then they were
seven years ago, because it is better to see the Lord Executing Judgment, then
to see Men working Wickedness; and to behold a People lie Wallowing in their
Blood, rathen Apostatizing from God, and embracing Idolatry and Superstition,
and banishing the Lord Jesus from amongst them. (S. Marshall to Both Houses,
etc. Jan. 18. 1643. Page 18) -- Carry on the Work still; leave not a Rag that
belongs to Popery; lay not a bit of the Lords Building with any thing that
belongs to Antichrist; but away with it, Root and Branch, Head and Tail; till
you can say, Now is Christ set upon his Throne. (Ibid. Page 21.

(F) The Cause you manage is the Cause of God; the Glory of God is embarkt in
the same Ship in which This Cause is. ( E. Calamy's, Sermon to the Peers; June
15. 1643. Page 53. -- He that dies fighting the Lords Battle, dies a Martyr.
Ibid. Page 57.)

(G) Cursed be he that withholdeth his Sword from Blood; that Spares, when God
says Strike; that suffers those to escape, whom God has appointed to
Destruction. ( Case on Dan. 11.32. Page. 24. To the Commons.

(H) The Execution of Judgment is the Lords Work; and they shall be Cursed,
that do it negligently: And Cursed shall they be, that keep back their Sword
from Blood, in This Cause. (Strickland, Nov. 5. 1644. Page 26.

(I) The Lord is pursuing you if you execute not Vengeance on them betimes.
(Faircloth on Josh. 7.25. Page 48. Why should Life be further granted to Them,
whose very Life brings Death to all about them! Ibid.

(K) Though as Little Ones they call for Pity, yet as Babylonish they call for
Justice, even to Blood. (Bridges on Rev. 4.8. Page. 11.

(L) Let us not out of any worldly respects of Estate, Wives, Children, Honor,
good Nature, Justice, Compassion, Care of Trade, of Laws, grow slack and lazy
in our Undertakings; upon the Success of which the Eyes of Christendom are
fixed: -- But let us proceed to shed the Blood of the Ungodly. (L -- Dec. 19.
1642.

(M) It is Commendable to fight for Peace and Reformation, AGAINST the Kings
Command. ( Calamy's Sermon, December. 25. 1644. Page 29.

(N) Do Justice to the greatest: Readiness Sons are not Spared, no nor may Agag,
nor Benhadad, though themselves KINGS. Zimri and Cosbi, though Princes of the
People, must be persn'd into their Tents. This is the way to Consecrate your
selves to God. ( Herle Sermon to the Commons, Nov. 5. 1644. Page 16 -- In vain
are the high Praises of God in your Mouths, without a Two-edged Sword in your
hands. Ibid. Jan. 15. 1643. Page 31.

(O) If you would have a Peace with Popery, a Peace with Slavery; if you would
have a Judas Peace, or a Joab's Peace; (you know the Story, he kissed Amasa,
and then Killed him) If you would have a Peace that will bring a Massacre with
it; a French Peace: It may be had easily. But if you would have a Peace that
may continue the Gospel among you, and bring in a Reformation, etc. Such a
Peace cannot be had without Contribution toward the bringing in of the Scots.
(Calamy's Speech at Guild Hall, October. 6. 1643.

Notes on Sect 12.
YOu have here Fourteen Paragraphs, so Sanguinary, and Salvage; that if they
had not Christian Names to them, a body would take the Authors of them for
Saracens: And to go a little farther with you yet, Thirteen of the Fourteen are
the Work of Dissenting Divines; Not of Mr. Calamy's Wicked, Profane, Drunken
Ministers; (as he was pleased to Baptize the English Clergy) but of the Godly,
Sober, Pious, and Religious Ministers (as he thought fit to distinguish those
of his own Party.) Let the Reader Judge n^w if These be not fit Workmen to be
employed in the Repairing of our Breaches? One more now, and I have done.

Sect. 13. The Murder of the Late King Encouraged, and Justified.
(A) WE propound that That Capital, and Grand Author of our Troubles, the
Person of the King may be speedily brought to Justice, for the Treason, Blood,
and Mischief he is guilty of. ( Armies Remonstrance, Nov. 16 1648. P. 62.

(B) Have you not sins enough of your own, but will you wrap your selves up in
the Treachery, Murder, Blood, Cruelty and Tyranny of others? ( Tho. Brooks
Sermon before the Commons, December. 26. 1648. Page 17.) ( Prep^ration to the
Kings Murder) -- Set some of those Grand Malefactors a Mourning, (that have
caused the Kingdom to Mourn so many years, in Garments Rolled in Blood) by the
Execution of JUSTICE, etc. ( Ibid. Page 19.)

(C) The King of Syria came against Israel, and by the mighty power of God, he
and his Army were overthrown, and the King was taken Prisoner. Now the Mind of
G^^ was (which he then discovered only by that present Providence) that Justice
should have been executed upon him; but it was not. Whereupon, the Prophet
comes with Ashes upon his Face, and waited for the King of Israel, in the way
where he should return, (1 Kings 20.42.) and as the King passed by, he Cried
unto him, Thus says the Lord, because thou have let go a Man whom I appointed
for Destruction, therefore Thy Life shall go for his Life. Now see how the King
of Syria, after this, answers Ahab's Love: About Three years after, Israel and
Syria engaged in a New War: Benhadad's Life was once in Ahab's hand, and he
ventured Gods displeasure to let him go. But see how Benhadad rewards him for
it: Fight neither against small nor great, but against the King of Israel.
Honorable and Worthy, If God do not lead you to do Justice upon those that
have been the great Actors in shedding Innocent Blood, never think to gain
their favor by sparing of them, etc. (G. Cockaine's Sermon to the Commons,
November. 29. 1648.)

(D) When Kings command unrighteous things, and People suit them with willing
compliance, none doubts but the Destruction of them both is Just and Righteous.
(Dr. Owen, a Fast-Sermon, Jan. 31. 1648. Page 5.) -- A Great, Mighty Potentate,
that had caused Terror in the Land of the Living, and laid his Sword under his
Head, brought to punishment for Blood. (Ibid. a Thanksgiving-Sermon, October. 24.
1651. Page 6.)

(E) Praised be God who has delivered us from the Imposition of Prelatical
Innovations, Altar-Genu-flexions and Cringings; with Crossings, and all that
Popish Trash and Trumpery. And truly I speak no more than what I have often
thought and said, [ The Removal of those Insupportable Burdens countervails
for the Blood and Treasure shed and spent in these late Distractions, etc.] W.
Jenkins before the Parliament, (as they called it) Sept. 24. 1656. Page 23.

(F) Corbet says, That he was now fully satisfied in his own mind of the
Lawfulness of the Fact, as well as of the Power by which it was done; and that
it was his Duty no longer to stand out, but to join with his Brethren, as an
Actor in it; or else he might become guilty of Unfaithfulness to the Cause of
God, and his Country, etc. (Three Regicides Speeches 1662. Page 57.) -- And as
for that Necessary and Public Act of Justice, he did never repent at all,
that he had a hand in it; Nor, after all the Searchings of Heart about it, did
see cause so to do, when at any time he had the most serious, and calm
Reflections upon it. ( Page 58.)

(G) The Parliament having wisely changed the Government to a Commonwealth, and
cut off that Hereditary Usurpation of Monarchy, which was never either justly
begun, or continued. (The False Brother, Page 34.1651.)

Notes on Sect. 13.
IN (A) we have only Men of Blood, pressing for Blood; and nothing less than
the Blood of a Tender, a Religious, a Protestant, and their Native Prince, will
content them. The War is now transferred from Popery to Tyranny: The Masque is
taken off; and it is downright Treason, and Blood that is Charged upon him by
the Army. And what was it, but the Dissenting Pulpits that put these Diabolical
Thoughts into their Hearts; These Bloody Words into their Mouths; and the very
Swords into their Hands? Who but the Godly, Peaceable Ministers, the Zealous
Protestants, (as They make bold to call themselves) and just such Protestants,
as Ministers, to a Scruple. Murder, Blood, Cruelty, Tyranny, says Brooks, (B)
and see then how this Parricidal Evangelist bellows for the Execution of
Justice; which was, in English, the King's Murder. In (C) you have another of
the Stamp, pressing the same Point, and upon the same Foundation too; (for
shedding Innocent Blood) with an Insinuation of no less than the Mind of God
for their warrant. In (D) you have one of our Re-reformers bestriding two Kings
at a Step. And in (E) another of the same Tribe, with the Rights of the Church
in one Scale, the Blood and Treasure of His Sacred Majesty, and so many
Thousands of his Loyal Subjects, in the other, and all too little to weigh
against a Cross, and an Altar. (F) Is only a Defense of the Execution, by a
Regicide: And in (G) the Change of Government approved by a Republican.

To wind up all now in a word. The Presbyterians (you see) hold Toleration to
be the Source of all Heresies; utterly Unlawful, Insufferable, Impious, and
Destructive, both of Church and State. The Independent qualifies it, with some
Restrictions, to their own advantage; but Episcopacy and Presbytery find no
Quarter. They are at War among themselves, upon an Inconsistency of Principles;
and openly profess their reciprocal Animosities to be matter of Conscience. The
Civ^l Government passes with them for Tyrannical, and the Ecclesiastical for
Antichristian. They stick to their Covenant to the Death; and the Roman Papacy
it self, even in their own accounts of it, is not more bloodily Rigorous in
Impositions upon Conscience, than the Papal Presbytery, according to the
Testimony of their Words and Actions. The Imperial Authority of the Crown is
wholly swallowed up in the Transcendent Usurpations of the Kirk. Their
Positions are not only Ruinous to the Peace of This Government, but to the very
Being also of Government it self. Their very Assembly of Divines, did not only
Animate the Sedition, and Encourage the bringing of the Late King to the Block;
but several eminent Members of it passed an approbation of that Unspeakable
Villainy, after the Fact was committed; and frighted the People, in their
Pulpits, out of their Christianity and Allegiance, into an Enthusiastic Rage,
after Confusion and Blood.

Sum up all This now; and try if you can Reconcile These People, in their
Practices and Opinions, even to their very Selves.

THE END.

