The Casuist Uncas'd, IN A DIALOGUE Betwixt RICHARD AND BAXTER, With a
MODERATOR Between Them, For QUIETNESS Sake.

By Roger L' Estrange.

The Second Edition.

LONDON, ^rinted for H. Brom at the Sign of the Gun in S. Paul's Churchyard.
1680.

(...) upon the Manners, as well as the Services of the Royal Party. What can
I do better, then to face him with the Acts of the Assembly, and the
Proceedings of the Two Houses, to the Contrary? And to produce his own Act and
Deed in evidence against his Profession? On the One hand, you have Mr. Baxter
valuing himself upon his Principles of Loyalty, and Obedience; And on the Other
ha^^, you have the very same Mr. Baxter, (according to the Outward Man) not
only pleading the Cause, but Celebrating the Justice, and Canonizing (as in his
Saints Rest, Pa. 101. of the Old Editions) the Prime Directors and Instruments
of The Late Rebellion: Asserting the very Doctrine of Those Positions,
whereupon it was founded. When Mr. Baxter Sets up for a Toleration; wh^^ can be
fairer then to show him his own Arguments against it? Or to ask him, how HE, (a
kind of Heteroclite in his opinions,) that has Chalked out so singular a
Platform of Church-Regiment (...) himself, comes now to be a Common Advocate
for all the Dissenting Parties? Take him in One Mood, (as in his Five
Disputations, and elsewhere) and he tells ye, that a Diocesan Prelacy is
plainly Antichristian, and Intolerable. And yet in his No^-Conformists Plea,
and other parts of his Writings, he tells ye aga^n, that the Nonconformists
would have submitted to it. Now if the Constitution was so Abominable, why
should they submit to it* And if it was not so, why does Mr. Baxter say that it
was? An^ why does he still persist, in Debauching and Alienating the hea^^ of
the People from their Rulers, in matters which he himself acknowledges to be
Warrantable, and Established by Law? And so for (...) Liturgy and Ceremonies,
he is at the same Variance with himself, about the Lawfulness, or Unlawfulness
of Those Points also.

Now since Mr. Baxter has been pleased to take upon himself, the Patronage of
the Non-Conformists Cause, and to put forth his Plea, and his Plea again for
That Interest; what can be more Ob^iging then to take him at his word, and
consider him under the Public Character of Their Representative? At This Rate,
Mr. Baxters Works will be as good as a Non-conformists Dictionary to us: and
assist the World toward the Understanding of the Holy Dialect, i^ a Wonderful
manner. For the Purity of the Gospel; the ways of Christ: the Ordinances of
the Lord; the Power of Godliness; the Foundations of Faith; the Holy
Discipline: A Blessed Reformation, etc. These are Words, and Expressions, that
signify quite another thing to Them, then they do to Us. Faithful Pastors;
Laborious Ministers; Heavenly Guides; Zealous Protestants; The Upright in the
Land: Humble Petitioners; Just Privileges; Higher Powers; Glorious Kings; Holy
Covenanting unto the Lord, etc. This is not to be taken now, as the Language
C^rrant of the Nation, but only as a Privy Cipher of Intelligence betwixt
Themselves, and the Cant, or Jargon of the Party. Nay, they fly from us in
their Speech, their Manners, their Meaning, as well as in their Profession. The
very Christ-Crosse in the Horn-Book is as much a Scandal to them, as the Cross
in Baptism; and they make it a point of Honor to maintain the Freedom of
their Own Tongue, in token, that they are not as yet a Conquered Nation.

But are the Non-conformists agreed upon it, or not; that Mr. Baxter shall be
their Speaker; and that what he delivers in Their Name, shall be taken and
deemed as the sense of the Party? If it be so; we have no more to do then to
Consult Mr. Baxter himself, and from his o^n Writings, (which I have here
Cited, and Applied, with exact Faith, and Justice) to take our Measures of the
Dissenting Brethren.

No man presses Obedience to the HIGHER POWERS, more Imperiously then He does:
But then he makes Those Higher Powers to be still the Usurpers, one after
another, as they get into ACTUAL POSSESSION. [Prove (says he) in the Preface to
his Holy Commonwealth) that the KING was the HIGHEST POWER, in the time of
Division, -- and I will offer my Head to Justice, as a Rebel.] His meaning
must Inevitably be This; Either that the King had no Right to the Crown before
the Divisions, or that he forfeited his Title, by the Rebellion; which is an
Admirable way of Transition, from rank Treason, to Lawful Authority. But in
all Th^se Cases, he has still a Recourse for a Salvo to his Box of
Distinctions: and tells ye, that they Shot at CHARLES STUART in the Field, for
the Honor and Safety of the KING in the Two Houses: And then, Good Lord! How
he runs himself out of Breath with Detesting, and Renouncing, and Renouncing,
and Detesting KING-KILLING! And yet upon Occasion when Oliver the King-killer
falls in his Way; How does he lay himself out in Euloyges, upon the PIOUS
Defunct! Praying, (as the highest Instance of the Veneration he had for That
Usurper) that the Spirit of the Father might descend upon the Son. [We pray
(says he to Richard) that you may INHERIT a tender care of the Cause of Christ]
Key for Catholics, Ep. Ded. But then in another Fit, he shall advance ye into,
his Politics, with a Troop of Aphorisms; Lay Principalities and Powers Level
with the Ground, and tear up the very Ordinance it self of Government by the
Roots. [If Providence (Says he) STATEDLY, disable him that was the Governor
etc.] Ho. Com. These. 136.

[And yet he does not Downright ^vow the Doctrine of King-Killing; He does
indeed approve of giving Battle to the Kings WILL: but whether to aim at it, in
his Maiestys HEAD, or in his HEART, is not, as yet, STATEDLY determined. Now t^
moderate the matter, The Presbyterians only cut off his Majestys Hands, and
Feet, so that he could neither Help nor Shift for himself, and then gave him
(Sold him I should say) to the Independents, Who cut off his Head. If Mr.
Baxter speaks the Sense of the Non-Consormists, as he pretends to do, then must
This serve for an Exposition of their Loyalty; But if not; Why does not the
Party either disown or take away his Commission?

This is it, which the Restless, and Implacable Adversaries of our Common
Repose, make such a noise in the World with, as the work of the spirit of
Persecution; the Enflaming of Differences; the Widening of Breaches; and the
Violation of the Act of Oblivion. Whereas, in Truth, there is nothing in it of a
Spiteful Invective, but on the other side, it is only a plain, and a necessary
defense.

Mr. Baxter, in his Non-Conformists Pleas, delivers (in his way) a kind of
Deduction of the War. Particularly, under the Head of [Matters of Fact to be
fore-known, to the True Understanding of the Cause.] 2d Part. Page 120. In This
Chapter, from the Question of the Constitution of Churches; the Powers of
Princes, and Pastors in Eccclesiastical Matters, and Cases of Lawful
Separation; he makes a Sally, without any manner of Connection, or Provocation,
into the State and Right of the War. Pa. 123. He charges it upon a Faction
among the Bishops, and the falling in of the Majority of the Parliaments, to
the Popular part of them; in That division: which is a Calumny, as remote from
the Subject of his Discourse as it is from Truth. If it had been as he would
have it; how comes the whole Order of Bishops to be Assaulted? Their Persons
Affronted; and their Votes in Parliament taken away; without distinction? Was
the Feud so deadly, as to make them destroy Themselves; and Ruin the whole
Hierarchy in Revenge? How came it to pass, that Bishop Hall, a Person
Celebrated even by Mr Baxter himself for his Piety and Moderation: How came
This Reverend Prelate I say, te be so Coursly handled by the Corporation of the
Smectymnuans, Marshall, Calamy, Young, Newcomen, and Spurstow: and Treated by
Five of the most Eminent men of the Par^y, with Scurrilitys fitter for the
Priests of Priapus, then the Ministers of the Gospel. Pa. 124. He goes on with
his Remarks upon Bishop Laud, over and over. The Book of Sports, on the Lords
day, the business of [Altars, Rayls, and Bowing toward them. Afternoon-Sermons
and Lectures put down; Imprisonments, Stigmatisings, Removals, etc.] And then
Pa. 125. He p^oceeds to [the new Liturgy Imposed on the Scots, etc.] But says
he, (a little below) we are Unwilling to be the Mentioners of any More then
Concerns our Present Cause, and the Things are Commonly known.] Which is such
a way of Mentioning no more, as gives to understand without speaking, all the
Ill Imaginable that was Left unsaid.

Methinks Mr. Baxter might have let This most Reverend, Pious, Loyal and
ANTIPAPAL Archbishop have slept quietly in ^is Grave, and out of pure
Gratitude to our Present Sovereign, to whose Mercy this very Gentleman owes his
Life, setting aside the Veneration that belongs to Majesty, and Truth; M^thinks
Mr. Baxter might have spared this L^bell, ander the Government of the Son,
against the Administrations of the Father. But it is no new thing, ^or
Criminals to Arraign Innocents; or for Those that a^e Pardoned for Subverting
the Government, to shoot their Arrows (^v^n ^itter Words) against Those that
h^ve been Persecuted and Murdered for Endeavoring to defend it.

And now after all These Imputations upon the King, the Church, and the Loyal
Party, ^v^n to the Degree of making them A^swera^le for all the Blood that has
been spilt: We must not so much as presume to say that we are Innocent. But
every Vindication of the King, the Church, and the Law from the Insults of the
Common Enemy, is exclaimed against as an Inrode upon the Act of Indemnity. If
Mr. Baxter will needs be laying the R^b^llion at the wrong d^or, and
Discharging the Presbyterians: Why may not any Honest man Reply upon him; and
say, (in agreement with Mr. Baxter himself, Non-Conformists Plea, I. Part. Pa.
127. that it was the Solemn League and Covenant that did the work: Which Solemn
League was not only an Expr^sse Oath of Allegianc^ to Presbytery, but to the
most Tyrannical of all Presbyteri^s, That of the Scottish Kirk it self. But why
do I call it an Oath of Allegiance to Presbytery? When it was in Truth, a
direct Conjuration against the Government, both Ecclesiastical, and Civil, for
the Introducing of it?

It would be Tedious, and Superfluous, to Crowd all the Particulars of This
Pamphlet into a Preface; so that I shall rather refer the Reader, to the Book,
for the rest; where he may compare Mr. Baxter with himself: for it is,
Effectually, but an Abstract out of Mr. Baxter's Writings. By the Paradoxes,
Disagreements, and Contradictions he will be able to Judge of the Author; and
by the Author, in a great Measure of the Party. He that would see them drawn
more to the Life, may repair to the Original of our Saviors for the Pharisees,
in the Gospel. Examine them Narrowly and you shall not find so much as the
semblance of a Colorable Argument; but they are still changing their Battery,
and Pretense, according to the various Accidents, and dispositions of State:
and it is but tracing the History of the Late times to find every Round of the
Ladder, that advanced them from Petitioners to Rulers. They Plead the Cause of
Thousands in the Land, they tell us, and yet there is not a Single man in all
Those Thousands, that understands one bit of the Controversy. They cry aloud
against Idolatry, Superstition, Abominations, Symbolical Ceremonies,
Will Worship, Humane Inventions, and Order their Disciples just as they do
their Children: They dress up a Terrible thing of Clouts, and call it a
Bull-begger, which is no other then a Mormo of their own Creating. They have a
certain Routin of Words, and Sayings, that have the tone of Magique in the very
Sound of them, and serve only (without any other Meaning) like the Drum, and
the Trumpet, to rouse up the Multitude to Battle. But the Lords Ordinance, and
the Primitive Pattern stand them in Mighty stead. For though they have been
Foyld as often as Encountered upon This Question; yet the very Terms of the
Controversy being is good as Syriack, to the Common people; there is a Mist
cast before their Eyes, and they are never in so good time, to see Visions as
when they are stark blind.

To Conclude, I have exposed these She^^s to the ^^^^ck, rather as Mr. Baxters
work, then my own. If (...), it was none of my Fault that my Author would not
me(...). Nor have I any more to say upon the whole matter, but that I have been
as fair to Mr. Baxter, as He has been to Himself.

A DIALOGUE, etc.
Moderator. Richard and Baxter. Moderator. YEs, yes. I remember the Conference
at the Savoy perfectly well; by This Token, that Dr. Gunning and Dr. Pearson
(the Bishops of Ely and Chester) delivered you this very Proposition.

That Command which Commands an Act in it self Lawful, The Proposition at
the Savoy about the command of lawful Superiors.
and no other Act whereby any unjust Penalty is enjoined, nor any Circumstance
whence directly, or per accidens, any Sin is Consequent which the Commander
ought to provide against, has in it all things requis^^^ to the Lawfulness of
a Command, and particularly cannot be guilty of commanding an Act per accidens
Unlawful; nor of Commanding an Act under an Unjust Penalty. [ B of Worcesters
Letter, in his Vindication against M. Baxter. P. 36.]


Ri. Very Good; Richards Resolution ^^^^er his hand.
and I gave them under my hand my Opinion to the Contrary. [Because ( said I)
the first Act commanded may be per accidens Unlawful, and be Commanded by an
Unjust Penalty; though no other Act or Circumstance Commanded be such.] Ibid. Pa.
36.


Ba. Nay hold you Brother, I Am of another Opinion. Baxter of another opinion.
[If the thing Commanded be such as is simply ill, and forbidden us by God in
all Cases whatsoever, then no ones Commands can make it Lawful: But if it it
be a thing that is only Inconvenient, or Unlawful by some Lesser accident; then
the Command of Authority may pre-ponderate, as a more weighty Accident] R. B's
Church-Divisions, Many Commands anlawful which the subject ought yet to obey.
P. 194. Nay [Many a Ruler sins in his Commands, when it is no Sin, but a
Duty of the Inferior to Obey them. As if a Magistrate Command Religious Duties
in mere Policy: or if he force a Lawful Command with Unlawful Penalties; and
Yet it will be the Subjects Duty to Obey.] Ibid. No Rule^ is bound ^o provide
against Events not to be foreseen.
[Nor is any Ruler bound to suspect, and prevent such Unusual Dangers of men's
Sin, or Ruin, as fall out beyond all Rational Foresight, or Expectation; of
whose Probable Event (or Possible at least), there was no just Evidence.] R.
B's Non-Conformists Judgment. P. 60.


Mo. Magistracy cut off at a blow.
Your Argument (Mr. Richard) has cut off all Magistracy at a Blow: For there is
not any Command Imaginable that falls not within the Reach of your Exception.
And Mr. Baxter is in the Right on it. But what do ye think now (Gentlemen) of
the Operation, or further Extent of such a Power?


Ri. The Civil Power must not make Laws about Gods Worship.
If you mean as to matters concerning Religion [ No man (...) any Authority to
make Laws about Gods Worship, but (...) Christ has given him.] Non-Conformists
Plea 2d Part. P. 28.


Ba. Pray'e hold me a little Excused There too; for [we renounce the Opinion of
them that hold that Circa Sacra the King has no Power to Command the
Circumstances of Worship. But Baxter says, that Circa Sacra he may.
] N^^-Conformists Plea. Part 2 d. P. 73.


Mo. Richard and Baxter still at variance.
There is but a Right and a Wrong in the case (my Masters) and you have hit them
both again, I make no doubt on it, but your Circa Sacra comprehends Liturgies,
Ceremonies, and other Circumstances of Order, relating to the Church, pray'e
tell me how your Consciences stand affected that way: Not as to the Merits of
the Cause (for the world is already clogged with That Controversy) but I would
willingly know what thoughts, You, and the Party you plead for, entertain of
our Ecclesiastical matters.


Ri. [ When the King called us to signify our desires in 1660. the Ministers of
London were commonly invited to come to Sion College, Richards Account of the
Savoy-Conference.

Vshers Primitive Episcopacy offered, but rejected,


that their Common Consent might be known: And There we agreed, to desire or
offer nothing for Church Government but A.B. Ushers Model of the Primitive
Episcopal Government. When his Majesty would not grant us That Model, nor the
Bishops once Treat about it, he was pleased in his Gracious Declaration about
Ecclesiastical Affairs to offer and prescribe the Episcopacy of England as it
stood, with little alteration, etc. (A Government (says his Majesty) Fol. 10.
Which is established by Law, and with which the Monarchy has flourished
through so many Ages, and which is in truth as ancient in this Island as the
Christian Monarchy thereof. The English Episcopacy submitted to by Richard, etc
) [ This Declaration we Joyfully and thankfully accepted, as a ^opefull means
of a Common Conformity and Concord.] Non-Con's Plea, 2d. Part Pref.


Ba. [The English Prelacy ( I tell you) is the product of proud Ambition and
Arrogance; But held Antichristian and Diabolica^ by Baxter.
and contrary to the express Command of Christ.] R. B's. Five Disputations P.
45. Bishops are Thorns and Thistles, and the Military Instruments of the
Devil.] R. B's. Concord. P. 122. How could you ^ustify then a Submission to
such a Prelacy?


Mo. If an Angel from Heaven I perceive were employed to bring (...) two to an
Agreement, Richard and Baxter never (...) ^e reconciled.
he should lose his Labo^r; For That which is highly acceptable to the One, and
the hopeful Foundation of a Common Concord, is Ant^christian, Diaboli^al, and
Uns^fferable to the Other.

You a^e up (I find) at every Turn with the (...) Projectpunc; and in such a
manner too, as if the most ^^^^onable thing in the World ^ad been offered o^
the One (...)* and refused on the Other: The Ground of A.B. Usher Project of
Episcopacy.
Whereat That (...) was (...) accommodated to the ^ard (...) the Kings Affairs,
at the time of Framing (...) any man, in a case of Extremity, (...) of an Arm
^r a Leg, for the (...) yet he a very strange request to ask a man in a state
of Freedom, and Safety, to part with a Leg or an Arm from his Body: And as
wild a thing, on the other side, to Grant it. But the very offer at it under a
pretense of Conscience, was highly disingenuous, especially when upon the Issue
the Scruple was removed by the Ref^sal; and This Satisfaction given to the
world, by your own Acknowledgment, that Conformity and Episcopacy may stand
well enough together, when you please.


Ri. I c^nnot deny but that [ma^y proposed to have yi^lded to Prelacy, Many
would have yielded to Prelacy, etc
Liturgy, and Ceremonies.] Non-Con. Plea, Part I. P. 136.


Ba. Why truly [a Certain Episcopacy may be yielded to, for the Peace (if not
for the Right Order) of the Church; The Diocesan Episcopacy gratifies the
Devil, says Baxter, and not to be readmitted.
] [But the Diocesan Episcopacy which was lately in England, and is now laid by
may not be lawfully reassumed, or readmitted, as a means for the Right Order or
Peace of the Church.] R.B's. Five Disputation, P. 2. 1659. [A Government which
gratif^eth the Devil, and wicked men.] Ibid. P. 36.


Mo. R. and B. still Clashing.
Still upon the Contradiction. But if they were so well disposed to come In,
what was it I beseech you that put them off again?


Ri. The New Uniformity spoil d all.
When they saw the New Act for Uniformity, their Deliberations were at an End.
Ibid. P. 26.


Ba. [After proving Prelacy to be against the ^ill of Christ* and the Welfare
of the Churches, Prelacy Unlawful in it self says Baxter.
Five Disp. Pref. 1^. and contrary to the word of God, and Apostolical
Institution, Ibid P. 51. what need was there then of any further Disswasion?


Mo. Why not Prelacy as ^awful after the Act, as before?
Pray'e tell me Mr. Richard; Was Prelacy Lawful Before the Act for Uniformity,
and not After? You are Angry at the One, and therefore you Renounce the Other;
for it was no longer Prelacy, Liturgy, or Ceremonies, it seems that you boggled
at, but the New Act. Now since you your selves were convinced, that such a
Conformity as aforesaid would have been Warrantable, and only transferred your
Exceptions to the New Act; how comes it that you go on still decrying the
State, Rites, and Offices of the Church to the Multitude; and make That a
matter of Conscience in One breath which you left at Liberty in Another? The
Uniformity does not alter the case one jot to the Common People; It is the same
case still to the People.
but the Layety may as lawfully submit to Prelacy, Liturgy and Ceremonies,
After the Act, as they did before.


Ri. [ The People who now adhere to the Non-Conformists, Hard thoughts of
Epi^copacy and Bishops, and upon what groun^^
who were at age before the Wars, had very hard thoughts of the Bishops
Persons; and some, of Episcopacy it self; because of the Silencing of
Ministers, and ruining of Honest men about Sundays-sports, Reading That Book,
and other such things, beside Nonconformity, etc. Non-Con. Plea. Part I. P. 139.


Mo. the Bishops and Episcopacy it self you say were thought hardly of; partly
for S^lencing your Mi^isters. Which was yet a way of proceeding Conformable to
the directions of the Law; and in part, (among Other Provocations) for the Book
of Sports upon the Lords day. Be it spoken with Reverence to the Honor and
Duty of that Holy Day; I should have thought that the Rebels assaulting of
their Sovereign at Edge hill upon That day, A Gr^^ter Scandal to tr^vell upon
the Lords day then to give theKing ba^^le.
might have given your Scrupulists as hard thoughts of the Faction that did it,
and of those Sanguinary Casuists that sounded the Trumpet to That Battle. But
how came they off I beseech you, from That froward Humor?


Ri. [ When the Ministers that guided them, Richard Confesses that the
Mini^ters gu^ded the people* and says that the Non-conformists undertook for
the next Bishops good behavior.
began to seem more reconciled to the Episcopal Party, and upon the R^ports and
Promises which they had heard, that the next Bishops would prove more moderate,
pious, and peaceable then the Former, and would by experience avoid Divisions
and Persecution; the said People began to be inclined to more Reverent and
Favorable Thoughts of the Bishops, and were upon experience of the late
Confusions in a far fairer way to Union and Submission to them then before.
Non-Con. Plea, Part I. P. 139.


Mo. If it be True that the People were induced to have a more Charitable
Opinion of the Prelates, by the Hopes which their Guides gave them of having
better Bishops next bout* It appears, first that the Quarrel was not to the
Office, The Quarrel not to the Office of Bishops but to the persons.
but to the Persons. And Secondly, it shows that the Ministers menage the
Multitude, For or Against their Superiors, as They please: which lays a
stronger Obligation upon the Government, to secure a Well-affected Ministry,
when the Public Peace lies at the Mercy of the Dissenting Clergy. But what
becomes of us next?


Ri. When they saw their Teachers taken from them, and some (...) set over them
against their Wills who were better known to them th^^^o the Obtruders:
Richard^ Reasons why the People sell from the Church again
And when they heard of about 2000, Silenced at once, This so much Alienated
them from the Bishops, that it was never since in Our Power to bring them to so
much Esteem of them, and Re^^rence for them as might have been. Non-Con. Plea,
Part I. P. 140


Mo. The Uniformi^y made Episcopacy and Common-p^ayer unlawf^ll.

It Is the Law that Silences, an^ not the Bishops.


So that upon the Upshot, there passed an Act for Uniformity, Ergo, Episcopacy
and Common-Pray^r are Unlawful.

See now what it is that you call Silencin^ of so many Ministers. It is no more
then a fair Revival of those necessary Provisions for the Safety of the
Government, which had been viol^ntly overborn and discontinu'd in our late
Troubles: Upon which violation, ensued our Deplor^ble Confusio^s And to take
the business aright, ^he Law does not s^e^ce your Ministers more then it does
Ours: but holds forth one Comm^n Rule indifferently to All men, with a respect
to Political, as well as Eccl^siast^^al-Concord. Every man sees before him the
Conditions of his Freedom; and he that either Cannot, or Will not comply with
the Terms of a General Rule, Non-Conformists silence themselves.
Silenceth himself. And is not the Man neither that is Silenced by This Law,
but this or that Incongruous Practice or Opinion. If Richard thinks fit to come
In, there is no body hinders him; and if John will not come in, who can help it?
In short, This way of Silencing amounts to no more then a very Gentle Expedient
for the stopping of those Mouths that would be blowing the Coal toward a
Rebellion. Wherefore I beseech ye Gentlemen for the Act of Oblivions sake,
which has done a great deal more for you then This comes to, have some pity
for the poor Act of Uniformity.

As to your account of about two thousand Silenced Ministers, a matter of 8^ or
900. difference shall break no squares betwixt you and me. Berter particulars
suffer then (...) Order o^ ^^vernment be dissolved.
But what yet if they Were two thousand? must the divine Ordinance of
Government be profaned, and the harmony of Order Dissolved, in favor of that
Inconsiderable Party of Irregulars; and to the scandal of six times as many
Conscientious and Obedient Subjects of the State both Ecclesiastical, and
Civil?


Ri. For my own part [I do not know that I differ in any point of Worship,
Ceremonies, or Discipline, Richard ag^ees with Dr* Reynolds (...) conformed.
from the Learned Dr. John Reignolds] R. B's Letter to Mr. Hinckley, P. 89. And
my Judgment is, that [ a Peace with the Divines of the Episcopal Judgment is
much to be desired, and earnestly endeavored.] Five Disp. Page 1.


Mo. If you agree in the Conclusion with that Reverend Dr. you are safe; and
take This for a Rule; Out of the ways of Love and Peace there can be no Comfort.


Ri. Alas [It is a Sect, as a Sect, and a F^ction, as a Faction, and not this
or that Sect or Faction which I blame: Richard pleads altogether for Love.
It is Unity, Love, and Peace which I am pleading for; and he that is angry
with me for calling men to Love, is angry for calling them to Holiness, to
God, and Heaven. Holiness which is against Love, is a Contradiction; it is a
deceiptfull name which Satan put^eth upon Unholynesse. Church Divisions. ^ref.


Ba. Your Churches bear with Drunkards, Whoremong^^^, Railers, Ba^ters way of
e^pressing.
Open Scorners at Godliness, Five Disp. P. 37. [T^e most ungodly of the Land
are the forwardest for your ways. You may have almost all the Drunkards,
Blasphemers, and Ignorant Haters of Godliness in the Country to Vote for you.]
Five Disp. Pref. Page 17. To the Adherers to Prelacy.


Ri. ^ichard against rash ^^nsuring (...).
[ He is as Mortal an Enemy to Love, who back-biteth, and s^ith he is Profane; Or
he is an E^^ty Formalist, or he is a lukewarm, Temporizing, Complying
Man-Pleaser; As he that sait^ he is a peevish, Factious Hy^ocrite.] To Preach
without Love, and to hear without Love, and to pray without Love, and to
communicate without Love to any that differ from your Sect, Oh what a loathsome
Sacrifice is it to the God of Love!] Church-Divisions. Preface. Love is the
fulfilling of all the Law; the End of the Gospel; the Nature, and mark of
Christ's Disciples, the Divine Nature; the Su^ of Holiness to the Lord; the
Proper Note by which to know what is the man, and what his State; and how far
any of his Other Acts are acceptable unto God. Ibid.


Ba. Baxter against Rich^rd
How many years have we begged for Peace of those that should have been the
Preachers and wisest Promoters of Peace; and cannot yet obtain it; nor quiet
them that call for fire and sword, not knowing what Spirit they are of?
Non-Con. ^lea, Pref. [The Declaration about Ecclesiastical Affairs tells us,
that the King would have given the People Peace, but with Vnpeacea^^^
Clergymen, No Petition could prevail.] Ibid. [And all This is out of a bitter
^nmity to Gods word and ways; Mr Ba^ters Cha^ity to the Clergy and discip^ine
of ^he Church
for they will be at more pains then This, in any way that is Evil; or in any
Worship of Man's devising. They are as zealous for Crosses and Surpl^ces,
Processions, and P^rambulations, reading a Gospel at a Crosse-way, the
Observa^ion of Holy days, the repeating of the Litany, or the like Forms in the
Common Prayer, the bowing at the name of the word Jesus, (while they reject his
Worship) the receiving of the Secrament when they have no Right to it, and that
upon their Knees, as if they were more Reverent and Devout then the true
Laborious servants of Christ; with a Multitude of things which are only the
Traditions of their Fathers; I say they are as zealous for These, His brotherly
Love.
as if Eternal Life consisted in them. Where God forbids them, there they are
as forward as if they could never do enough, and where God Commands them, There
they are as backward to it; yea as much against it as if they were the Commands
of the Devil himself. And for the Discipline of Christ, Church ann State
arraign d.
tho all parts of the world have much opposed it, yet where has it been so
fiercely and powerfully resisted? The Lord grant that this hardened, willful,
malicious Nation fall not under that Heavy Doom, Luke 19.27. But those mine
Enemies which would not that I should reign over them, bring them hither and
slay them before me. R.B's. Saints Rest, Part. 3. P. 91.


Mo. To see the difference now Gentlemen, betwixt your two Spirits! The One, so
meek, Richard and Baxter of two quite different spirits.
and like a Christian, the Other, so clamorous, and so Uncharitable. What hopes
of Unity and Peace; or what Pretense to it; so long as these dividing and
defaming Liberties are kept a foot? Your Friend Richard tells you very well
(Mr. Baxter) that Such Holiness is a deceiptfull Name that S^tan puts upon
Unholynesse, The persecuted are the perssecutors.
and a loathsome Sacrifice to the God of Love. You revile the Government, and
those that Conform to it, and yet at the same time you tell the People that you
are persecuted.

You would be thought kinder to his Majesty however, in devolving the severity
from the King upon the Clergy; and yet his Majesty is pleased to mind you that
[Since the Printin this Declaration, several Seditious Pamphlets and Quaeres
have been Published, and Scattered abroad, to infuse dislike and Iealousies
into the hearts of the People; and of the Army, and some who ought rather to
have repented the former mischief they have wrought, then to have endeavored
to improve it, have had the hardynesse to publish that the Doctrine of the
(...) (against which no man with whom we have conferred (...) excepted) ought
to be reformed as well as the Discipline.^ So that all this yielding was too
little, it seems to stop the Mouths of an Insatiable Faction. But what is it at
last that you would be at?


Ri. Be sure first of what spirit ^he Non-Confo^mists are.
I beg of the Clergy that before they any more render Odi^^s These whom they
never heard, and Urge Rulers to Execute the Laws against them; that is, to
confine, Imprison, Excommunicate, Sil^nce, and Undo them, they would be sure,
what manner of spirit they are of. Non-con. Plea, Part I. Epistle.


Mo. [ Sure of what spirit you are] do ye say! Why Certainly your own
Conscience tells you that we are sure of that, The spirit of the
Non-Conformists.
as Hearing, Seeing, Feeling, and Understanding can make us. You are by your
own Professions of the Presbyterian Spirit. The Spirit that made Perjury the
Condition of Life, Liberty and Estate, to every man in the Case of your
Covenant. The Spirit that Entered upon Sequestered Livings, and left not the
Loyal Clergy the Freedom, so much as of Teaching a School, to supply
themselves, and their Miserable Families with Bread. The Spirit that denied the
King in his Distresses, the Comfort of so much as a Common Prayer Book, or the
Assistance of his own Chaplains.

His Late Majesty's Judgment and Experience upon it.
[ A greater Rigor and Barbarity then is ever used by Christians, to the
meanest Prisoners, and Greatest Malefactors; whom though the Justice of the
Law, deprive of Worldly Comforts, yet the mercy of Religion allows them the
Benefit of their Clergy, as not aiming at once to destroy their Bodies, and to
damn their souls, EIK.BAS. 207. [ They that envy my being a King, The spirit
that Richard pl^ads, ^or.
are loath I should be a Christian; while they seek to deprive me of all things
else, they are afraid I should save my Soul. Ibid.] Behold here in a few words
the Spirit that you plead for.


(...). (...) poor Creatures, [We would [only] have a Toleration of all ^ha^'s
Tolerable [ he that will Tol^rate All, is Bad; Richards ^oleration.
and he that will Tolerate* none that differ, is Madd.] R. B's. answer to Dr.
Stillingfleet. P. 84.


Mo. If the Church may be Judge, all that are Tolerable are Tolerated already;
Who are the Judges, the Government, or the People.
If the People must be the Judges, the Intolerable must be Tolerated for
Company. For so long as every Party Makes, or Pretends it self, to be in the
Right, all the Dissenters have one Common Plea. But in case of any Indulgence
to be allowed, it is certainly due to these in preference, that are quietest
without it. I cannot but have great Compassion for any Party that labors under
a Religious and Invincible Disagreement, Modest Dissenters deserve pity.
and Modesty applies to Authority for Relief: For so long as they only tell
their own Tale, I cannot but in ^harity believe that they have no other design
then to do their own business. But when a Conscientious Pretense comes to be
carried on by Scandal, Invective, Reproach, and such Methods as are directly
Irreligious; the dispute is no longer matter of Scruple, or Worship, but
Superiority, and Power. The Dispute is not Scruple but Power.
There may be Religion in telling the Government what you desire, but the
exposing of your Superiors to the People* is Down right Sedition. And, as you
have handled the matter, you might even with as good a Grace tell the Rabble in
plain English: Look ye my Mas^ers, Plain* dealing.
here is a company of Antichristian Swearing, Drinking Fellows, that will not
let us have Liberty of Conscience; But I would fain hear you two debate the
business of Tolera^on a little betwixt your selves.


Ri. What [if you shall smite or cast out a supposed Schismatique, and Christ
shall find an able, holy peaceable Minister, Richard puts the Case of a Saint
and a Schismatic.
or other Christian Wounded, or Mourning out of doors. Pet. for Peace. P. 12. [
Or see a Schismatique wounded and a Saint found Bleeding, etc. Saints Rest. P.
1^^.


Ba* And now you talk of Saints, Richard [to think of such a Friend dyed at
such a time, Baxters Saints
and such a one at another time, such a precious Christian slain in such a
Fight, and such a one at ^uch a Fight, (O what a number of them could I name)
and that all these are entered into Rest; and we shall surely go to Them, but
They shall not return to Us. Baxter sully resolved to go to them that died in
Rebellion.
Saints Rest. P. 100. In That State of Rest, Angels as well as Saints will be
Our blessed Associates. Ibid. P. 101. [I think Christians, This will be a more
Honorable Assembly then you ever here beheld, and a more happy Society then
you were ever of before. Surely Py^ and White, He joys to think what Company he
shall have.
etc. are now members of a more Knowing, Vnerri^g, Well-ordered, Right-aiming,
Self-denying, Unanimous, Honorable, Tryumphant Senate, then This from whence
they were taken, is or ever Parliament will be. It is better to be doorkeeper
to That Assembly whither Twisse etc. are Translated; then to have continued
here the Moderator of This. Saints Rest. P. 101. [Nay how many Professors will
rashly rail and lie in their Passions? Baxter says, that Professors will rail,
and lie, etc.
How few will take well a Reproof, but rather defend their sin? how many in
these times that we doubt not to be Godly have been guilty of Disobedience to
their Guides, and of Schism, and doing much more to the hurt of the Church, a
very great Sin. Peter, Lot, and it is like David did often commit greater Sins, R.
B's Five Disdutes* of Right to Sacraments P. 329. But a man must be guilty of
more sins then Peter was in denying and forswearing Christ, But that neither
Perjury, drunkenness, Incest, Concubines, nor Idols, can make them dotoriously
ungodly.
that is notoriously ungodly; yea, then Lot was, who was drunk two nights
together, and committed Incest twice with his own Daughters; and that after the
miraculous destruction of Sodom, of his own wife, and his own miraculous
Deliverance. Nay, a man that is notoriously ungodly (in the sense in hand) or
Unsanctify'd, must be a greater sinner then Solomon was with his Seven hundred
Wives, three hundred Concubines, and gross^ Idolatries, P. 326.327.


Mo. And are These the Saints (Gentlemen) that you are afraid should be cast
out, The Saints that are cast out for heretics.
for Schismatiques? They must be of your own Canonizing then, for I assure you
I find no such Saints in our Calendar. But let me hear I beseech you whom we
are to keep out, and whom to take in.


Ri. We must either Tolerate All men to do what they will, Either Tolerate All
or None, but upon a Penalty*
which they will make a matter of Conscience or Religion; and then some may
offer their Children in sacrifice to the Devil; and some may think they do God
service in killing his Servants, etc. [ Or else you must Tolerate no Error or
fault in Religion; and then you must advise what measure of Penalty you will
Inflict. Church-Divis. P. 363, 364.


Mo The two great Difficulties will be to say what Errors are Tolerable, and
what not; and then to bring the Magistrate and the People to an Agreement upon
the matter.


Ri, [ If no Error were to be a Tolerated, No men must be Tolerated, if no
Error.
no men were to be Tolerated and the Wisest in the World must be numbered with
the Intolerable, as well as the rest. Church Divis. P. 348.


Ba. [But some People make those things to be Duties which are no Duties, and
Sins which are no Sins, calling Evil Good, Baxter shows the Inconveniences of
Toleration.
and Good Evil; and having made a Religion of their own, confidently think that
it is of God, valuing all men that they have to do with according as they are
nearer or further off from This, which they account the way of God; choosing a
Church or Party to join with, by the Test of This Religion, which their Pride
has C^osen. Church Divis. P. 11. [Thus they divide the Kingdom and Family of
Christ; Pride makes one man's Religion.
destroying first the Love of Brethren and Neighbors in themselves, and then
laboring to destroy it in all Others; by speaking against those that are not
in their own way with Contempt, and Obloquy, Faction anothe^s.
to represent them as an Unlovely sort of Men; and if the Interest of their
Cause and Party require it, Which ends in blood.

And yet pass^^ for doing God good service. And the motion of the spirit.


perhaps they will next destroy their Persons: And yet all this is done in zeal
of God, and as an Acceptable service to him. Ibid. P. 12. [And they think it a
resisting of the Spirit to resist their Judgment. P. 13. [I have known too many
very honest-hearted Christians, especially Melancholique Persons and Women who
have been in great doubt about the Opinions of the Millenaries, the
Separatists, the Anabaptists, the Seekers, and such like; and after earnest
Prayer to God, Enthusiastic* zea^*
they have been strongly resolved for the way of Error, and Confident by the
strong Impression that it was the Spirits Answer to their Prayers, and
thereupon they have set themselves into a Course of Sin. Ibid. P. 162. And [In
truth it is very Ordinary with poor phancyfull Women, Dotage^ ^a^en for
Re^elations.
and Melancholy Persons to take all their deep Apprehensions for Revelations.
Ibid. P. 167.


Mo. Well; but these people all this while take themselves to be in the right.


Ba. Scripture the Ru^e.
But as for that which is Contrary to Scripture, I am sure it is contrary to the
Will of God. Church Divis. P. 166.


Mo. But who must expound it?
Out of all doubt; but what if They expound the Scripture One way, and You
Another?


Ba. One man's Faith must not Impose upon anot^ers.
[Why if they believe That themselves which they can give you no reason to
believe, they must be content to keep their belief to themselves; and not for
shame persuade any other to it without proof. If they say that God has
revealed it to them, tell them that he has not revealed it to You, and
therefore That Is nothing to You, till they prove their Divine Revelation. If
God reveal it to them, but for themselves they must keep it to themselves.
Ibid. P. 166. [If they say that the spirit has told Them the meaning of the
Scripture, say as before that it is not told to you which is not proved to you.
Ibid 167. [But if we do through weakness or perverseness take lawful things to
be unlawful, Mistake will not justify the Error, nor ex^use a Disobedience.
Men will be zealous even in Error. More zeal then understanding is not good.
None so fierce and bold as ^he Ignorant.
That will not excuse Us in our disobedience. Our Error is our Sin, and one
Sin will not excuse another R. B's. Five Disput. P. 483. [He that mistakingly
thinks any thing is good or bad, Duty or Sin which is not so, will be zealous
in persute of his Mistake if he be serious for God. Cath. Theol. Pref. [It is
an Ill sign when your zeal is beyond the proportion of your Understanding: And
your Prudence and Experience is much less then other men's, as your zeal is
greater. Church Divis. P. 123. [Beside that the more weak and worthless, and
Erroneous any ones Judgment is, usually the more furious are they in the
prosecution of it, as if all were most certain Truth which they apprehend.
These are the boldest both in Schisms, and persecutions. Ibid. 357.


Mo. But you will say, that in cases where the common people may be imposed
upon by Cred^lity, Fancy, or Weakness, they may repair to their Teachers to
set them right.


Ba. Even the most of Teachers take abundance of things for true and good that
are false and evil, and for false and bad, Even Teachers themselves are false
Guides.
which are true and good: Much more are godly vulgar people Ignorant, and
consequently err in many things, Cath. Theol. Pref. [And I my self was
mistaken in my Aphorisms of Justification and the Cov^nants, M^. Baxter himself
has been mistaken*
as I have acknowledged in the same Preface.


Mo. You have had very ill luck, Sir, Ill luck with his Aphorisms.
with your Aphorisms.


Ri. [ I must confess that when God had first brought me from among the more
Ignorant sort of people, How Richard was wheedled in.
and when I heard Religious Persons pray without Form, and Speak
affectionately, and seriously of Spiritual and Heavenly things, I thought
verily that they were all undoubted Saints, till e're long, of those whom I so
much honored, one fell of to Sensuality, and to Persecuting Formality; and
another fell to the foulest Heresy, i. e. he was reconci 'd to the Church.
and another to disturb the Churches Peace, by Turbulent Animositys and
Divisions. Church Divil. P. 23.24. etc.


Ri. [ I thought once, that all the talk against Schism and Sects, did but
vent their Malice against the best Christians, under those Names; But since
Then, Richards best Christians found to ^e Schismatics.
I have seen what Love-killing-Principles have done. I have long stood by while
Churches have been divided, and Subdivided; one Congregation of the Division
laboring to make the other Contemptible, and odious; and This called, the
Teaching of Truth, and the purer Worshipping of God; Church-Divisions. Pref.


Ba. [When so great a man as Tertullian was deceived by Montanus, and his
Prophetess: Great m^n misled, and why not (...).
When such a one as Hacket could deceive not only Coppinger, and Arthington,
but abundance more; when David George in Holland, John of Leiden in Munster,
etc. could deceive so many persons as they did; when the pretended Revelations
of the Ranters, First, and the Quakers After, could so marvellously transport
many Thousands of professors of Religion in this Land, Believe not every spirit.
I think we have fair warning to take the Counsel of St. John. Believe not
every Spirit, but try the Spirit whether they be of God. Church Divis. P. 164.

The Dissenters Cause is still Gods cause.

Their false Prophets. The Kings death directed by a Revelation.

Sedgwicks day of Judgment.

Vavas^r Powe^s Prophecy of no more Kings or Taxe^.


[Alas? how common was this in the Army, to set up and Pull down, do an undo,
own and disown, as by the Spirit of God! There was Mr. Erbery, Mr. Saltmarsh,
Mr. Dell, Mr. William Sedgwick, who as from God wrote one week to the Army,
against their putting the King to Death, and the next week wrote to them quite
on the other side, and that set London by a Prophecy or Vision on looking for
the day of Judgment, on a set day. Second. Admon. to Bagshaw. P. 68. Vavasor
Powell at Clifton upon Them in Worcestershire, quickly after Worcester Fight,
said in his Sermon that he would tell them these things as from God that they
should have no more Kings, nor any more Taxes, nor pay any more Tithes. Ibid.
P. 69.


Mo. Pray'e do but consider now, if your particular Pastors disagree among
themselves; if you your self, Mr. Baxter, have been mistaken in your Judgment
as well of Truth in Notion, as of Persons; If those that you took for Saints,
proved Schismatics; and Persecutors, those that you took for Conscientious
Professors, are we not much better in the hand of a known and Impartial Law
that cannot deceive us, then at the Mercy of a wild Multitude, Rather the Law
of the Land then the Humor of the people.
Unknown and Prepossessed, who in all probability will impose upon us?


Ri. A Fear of sinning is necessary in all that will be Obedient to God, and
will be saved: A Fear of sinning ought to be cherished, even in a mistake.
It is that Fear of God which is the beginning of Wisdom. It is therefore to be
loved and cherished, even when Scrupulousness mistaketh the matter. Non-Con.
Plea. 2d. Part. P. 163.


Ba. Dangerous trusting to scruples.
There Is no trusting to Scruples. [I have known some that have lived long in
douhts and fears of Damnation who have turned Anabaptists, and suddenly had
Comfort; and yet in a short time they forsook that Sect, and turned to another.
I have known those also that have lived many years in timorous Complaints, and
fears of Hell, and they have turned to the Antinomians, and suddenly been
comforted; and others have turned Arminians (which is clear contrary) and been
comforted; and others have but heard of that Doctrine of Perfection in this
Life, and suddenly been past their fears, as if hearing of Perfection had made
them perfect: And from thence they have turned Familists, and at last showed
their Perfection by Fornication,, and Licentiousness and mere Apostasy; who
yet lived very conscientiously and blamelessely, as long as they lived in their
Fears and Troubles, P. 170. Church Divis.

[Could I have believed him that would have told me five years ago ( This
bearing date Ian. 15. 1649. Who would have thought it?
) that when the * Scorners of Godliness were subdued, and the bitter
persecutors of the Church overthrown; that such should succeed them who
suffered with us, The Episcopal Clergy.
who were our Intimate Friends, with whom we took sweet Counsel, and went up
together to the House of God? Simeon and Levi.
Did I think it had been in the hearts of men professing such zeal to Religion,
and the ways of Christ to draw their Swords against each other: and to seek
each others Blood so fiercely? Alas! if the Judgment be once perverted, and
Error has perverted the Supreme Faculty, whether will men go, and what will
they do? O the force of a misguided Con^cience!
O what a potent Instrumen^ for Satan is a misguid^d Conscience! It will make a
man kill his dearest Friend, yea Father or Mother, yea, the Holiest Saint, and
think he does God good service by it: The very Case of the seduced mu^^i^ude.
And to facilitate the work, it will first blot out the Reputation of their
Holiness, and make them take a Saint for a Devil* Saints Rest. P. 133. [Whence
can it be, but for want of self-denial, that Magistrates pro^^ssing a zeal for
Holiness r^gard no more the Interest of Christ; but that the Name (and but the
Name) of Liberty, (a Liberty that has neither Moral Good, The Name of Libe^ty
does mo^e ^^en ^he conside^atio^ (...) Heaven it self.
or Evil in it) is set in the balance against the things of everlasting
Consequence, and thought sufficient to over weigh them; And that the mere
pretense of this Indifferent Carnal Liberty is thought an Argument of
sufficient weight for the Introduction of a wicked, Damning Liberty, even a
liberty to deceive, and destroy as many as they can, and to hinder those that
desire men's Salvation. R. B's Self-denial Epist. Monitory. [Shall every man
have leave to do evil, Baxt^r against Liberty.
that can be Ignorant enough to think (or say he thinks) that he does well? And
must Magistrates rule as men that are Uncertain whether there be a Christ, or a
Church, or Heaven, or Hell; because some are found in their Dominions so
foolish, or Impious as to be Uncertain of it? And Toleration.
Ibid. [Will merciful Rulers set up a trade for butchering of Souls, and allow
men to set up a shop of poison, for all men to buy and take that will, yea to
proclaim this poison for Souls in Streets, and Church Assemblies? etc. I^i^.
But the same Argument that tempts the sensual to Hell; does tempt such
Magistrates to set up Liberty for drawing men to Hell. Ibid. Is Faith and
Holiness propagated by Persuasion, and not by Force? Surely then Infidelity,
Popery and Ungodlynesse ar^ Propagated by Persuasion too; Again I tell yo^,
self-love does make such Rulers wiser then to grant Commission at liberty to
all that will, to tice the Soldiers to Mutinies and Rebellion, etc. Ibid.
Liberty, in all mat ers of Worship, and of Faith, is the open and apparent way
to set up Popery in the Land. Liberty the way to set up Popery*
N^^-Con. Plea. Pref.


M^. Well Mr. Richard: After this frank and sensible D^claration of your self
upon this Chapter, do but teach me which way in the world to reconcile your
Practice and your Conscience; for you are a Person certainly of all men Living,
the most Improper Advocate for a Toleration; Mr. Richard an Improper Advocate
for Toleration.
and the most unfit Solicitor of a Popular Petition. First, as your Judgment
lie^ directly against the thing you plead for. Secondly, as you are conscious
of the danger, as well as the Injusti^^ of such a License. Thirdly, you have
been a very u^happy Instrument already betwixt his Majesty and his Subjects.
And Lastly, In demanding That over again from This King, by which his Father
was destroyed, you make your self suspected to have some Ill Design: For to
Triumph and Rejoice (as you do) after the Thing is done, is less, a great
deal, then to forethink the doing of it. And it is not only that you are
sufficiently convinced of the mischiefs of a Toleration, but your Conscience
(if I be not much mistaken) will make as good a shift as any man's without it.


Ri. W^ are against no Bishop or Church Government of Gods Appointment. Prof.
of Non-consormists P. 89. Richard is a Conformist.
[ We hold it not unlawful to take Oaths, and make Covenants, Subscriptions,
or Declarations of things Lawful, when Authority commands us. Ibid. P. 98.
We readily Subscribe the doctrine of the 39. Articles. Ib. 98. We are far from
condemning all Forms of Prayer, and Public Liturgy, P. 100. We pick no
Quarrels about Forms and Words. Church-Div. p. 176. [ Tell me if you can,
where God forbids you to use Good and Lawful Words in Prayer, merely because
the Magistrate, or Pastor bids you use them. Is this the meaning of all the
Precepts of Honoring, and Obeying your Superiors? [Do nothing which they bid
you do, though otherwise Lawful] O Strange Exposition of the 4 th Commandment?
p. 178. [ I take the Common Prayer to be Incomparably better then the Prayers
or Sermons, of many that I hear; and to be the best that I expect in many
places when I go to Church. R.Bs. Letter to Mr. Hinckly p. 78. [ It Is like, the
Pharisees Long Liturgy, was in many things worse then Ours, though the Psalms
were a great part of it: and yet Christ, and his Apostles often joined with Them,
and never Condemned them. Chapter Div. P. 176. [ He is void of Common sense that
thinks that his Extemporary Prayer is not as truly a Form to all the People,
as if it had been written in a Book. And every Public Minister Imposes a Form
of Prayer upon all the Congregation. Ibid. 179. [ We hold, not all the use of
Images, even the Images of Holy Persons, to be Unlawful. Profession of
Nonconformists. P. 104. [ We hold not a Gown, or other mere distinctive Garment
for Ministers to be Unlawful. And some of us hold a Surplice rather to be used,
then the Ministry forsak^^. Ibid. [ Many of us hold it Lawful to communicate
Kneeling Ibid. p. 105. [ We all hold that God must be Orderly, and Decently
Worshipped with the Body, as well as Spiritually, with the mind. And that
Reverend Gestures, and Behaviors are fit, not only to express Mental
Reverence to God, but also to Excite it, in our selves and others. Ibid. 105.
We are for the use of the Creed, Commandments, and Lords Prayer. p. 106.


Ba. [It is now about Twenty Years since I Preached at a Fast to the Parliament
for Loyalty; the King the next morning was voted home to his Crown, and
Government, 2 d part^ of Non-Con. Plea. Preface. In This Sermon, I have given
the World a Taste of my Affections to the Church. Mr. Baxters Sermon that
brought the King in.
[Gentlemen, I have nothing to ask of you for my self, nor any of my Brethren,
as for Themselves; but that you will be Friends to Serious Preaching, and Holy
Living, and will not ensnare our Consciences with any Vnscripturall Inventions
of men. Presbytery for the Lords sake
This I would beg of you as on my Knees. 1. As for the sake of Christ. 2. for
the sake of Thousands of poor Souls. 3. For the Sake of Thousands of the dear
Friends of the Lord. 4. For your own sakes. 5. For the sake of your Posterity.
6. For the Honor of the Nation and your Selves. 7. For the Honor of Sound
doctrine, and Church Government. etc. Pa. 45. and 46. For if you Frown on
Godliness, under pretense of Uniformity in Unnecessary things; and make things
worse then when Libertinism, and Schism so prevailed: the people will look
back with Groans, Oh the happy times when Presbyterians ruled.
and say; What happy times did we once See! And so will honor Schism, and
Libertinisme, and Usurpation, through Your Oppression. 8. I beg this of you for
the Honor of Sovereignty, and the Nations Peace. Ibid. And then for your
[new-made Religions, Have a care of scandalous Inventions. The Ignorant
Church-Tyrants.
and needless Scandalous Inventions, and an adoring of your Titles and Robes of
Honor, covering your Ignorance, Pride, and Sensuality, which Church Tyrants
call the Order of the Church. etc. [All the Images of Piety, Government, Unity,
Peace, and Order, which Hypocrites and Pharisees sat up, are despised Engines
to destroy the Life and Serious Practi^e of the things Themselves, and are set
up in Enmity against Spirituality, and Holiness, that there might be no other
Piety, Government, Unity, Peace, or Order in the Church, but These Liveless
Images. Chapter Div. Pa. 105. and 106.


Ri. [ Though we are not satisfied of the lawfullness of using the Transient
Image of the Cross, Richard not absolutely against the Cross.
as a dedicating Sign, and Symbol of Christianity, so much Sacramental (much
less to refuse from Baptism, and Christendom, all Christian Infants, unless
they will have them so Crossed, no more then if a Crucifix were so Imposed, and
used) yet do we not Condemn all use of either Cross, or Crucifix. Nor do we
presume Conscientiously to Reproach, and dishonor the Ancient Christians, who
living among Pagans that derided Christ Crucified, did show them, by often using
this sign, that they were not ashamed of the Cross. And though we find, that
they used more Rites, and significations, devised Signs, and Ceremonies, then
we think they should have done, yet we judge it our Duty to love and honor
their Memorial; Nor do we take all Rites to be Sinful that are significant.
Non-conformists Profession Pa. 103.104.


Ba. You are not satisfied of the Lawfulness, etc. you say. ^axters a
Loyallist.
But are you convinced of the Unlawfulness? For [we must obey Magistrates
though we know not that their Commands are Lawful, so long as they are so
Indeed, and we have no sufficient reason to believe them Unlawful. Holy C^m.
Thesis. 323. For [It is not our Erroneous Conceits, Error is no e^cuse for
disobedience.
that a Lawful Command is Unlawful, that will excuse any man from the Guilt
of Disobedience. Ibid. 357. [But if a thing seem to you very needful to a Good
End, and yet the word be against it, avoid it: etc. The Pre^eoce of Nature, and
true Reason avoids ^ll Law
[And if you ^hink that the Scripture commands you This or That Positive
means, if Nature and True Reason assure you that it is against the End, and is
like to do much more harm, then good, be assured that you mistake That
Scripture* Chapter Divis. pa. 205.


Mo. It is a strange thing Mr Richard, that your Consci^nce should be so easy
to your self, and yet so Troublesome to the Government. A Popu^ar Fallacy.
But your Reserve of leaving every Pivate man to judge, First, of the Condition
of the Law, by the Word; and Then, of his Judgment of That Scripture, whether
it be Right or Wrong, by Nature and Right Reason: This Reserve I say undoes all
again: For every man that does Ill, with a Good Intention, reckons that he has
Nature and Right Reason on his side.

Now for You Mr. Baxter; you tell us over and over so often of your Fast S^rmon
to the H^^se of Commons, and the Kings being called in the n^xt day, as if That
very Sermon had wrought his Majestiss Restoration, But I find upon Perusal of
it that you are just as kind to the Church in this Piece of 1660. as you were a
little before to his Majesty in your Holy Common Wealth of 1659. That is to say;
you are begging, arguing, and Casing of it all that is in you, to keep them
both out; and truly This Particular piece of yours makes almost as bold with
the King himself, The Presby^eri^n way of b^in^ing in ^he King.
as with the Episcopal Clergy: as you shall hear by and by. Was it not enough
for you to Adjure the Commons into an Opposition o^ That Order in the Church,
which (as he t^lls you) is as Ancient as the Monarchy of This Island? An Order,
that you and your Confederates most Undu^ifully destroyed? But could you now
have the Confidence to demand the spoils again, which you first ravished from
the Church, and the Independents afterward took from you, as the Reward of your
Sedition, and Schism? And could you yet have the greater Confidence, in case of
a Disappointment, to break out into this most Unchristian Excl^mation, on the
behalf of the People? Oh: [ What happy times did we on^^ see! That is to say;
when the Kingdom was Laid in Bl^od, and Ashes; all that was Sacred, trampled
under Foot, And all this Confusion, only to heave the Presbyter into the Saddle.


Ri. Richards challenge,
I have described the Judgment of such Non-conformists (...) I have Conversed
with, (not undertaking for every odd person wh^^ I know not) I do desire those
that seek our Blood, and Ruin, by the false Accusation of Rebellious
Principles, In justification o^ the Non-Conformis^s.
to tell me if they can, [wh^t Bodies, or Party of men on Earth have more sound
and Loya^^ Principles of Government, and Obedience. 2d. Part. Non-Co^. Plea.
Pref. [Our Accusations are. 1. That we are Presbyteria^s, and Phanatiques. The
Non-Conformists charge.
2. That we began the War in 1641. and 16^^* 3. That we destroyed the King. 4.
That our Principles are Disl^^al. 5. That we are Plo^ting a Rebellion. Ibid.
But what is a Pr^^byterian?


Mo. A Presbyterian is a Member of a State Faction, under a Religious
denomination. A Presbyterian defined.
For by that (...) we do not understand such as are really of That Cl^ss^cal
and Whymsical Profession; but a sort of People tha^ drive on a Political
design, under the Color of an Ecclesiastical Scruple of persuasion. And in as
extensive a Latitude do you take the Word, your selves. Presbyterians swallow
ap all other Sect^ at first, and t^en sp^w the^ up ag^in.
For all the Sects are Presbyterians (or Dissenting Protestants, as you call
them) when you have need of them in Con^^ederacy against the Government; though
the Presby^terians spews all the rest up again, (as they did in 1647. when they
had done their work;) But pray what say ye to the B^ginning o^ the War?


Ri. [ In 1642. the Lamentable Civil War ^^ok^ out; Richard say^ that the
Episc^pal m^n b^gan ^he war. The two Hous^s, Lord ^ieu^e^^n^s. O^^ic^r, Civil
and Mi^i^^^y, Assemb^y (...) Divine^, a^m^st all Episcop^l m^n.
At which time as far as ^ver we could l^arn by A^qu^intance with s^m^ of them,
and Report of others, excepting an In^onsid^rable number, the Houses of Lords
and Commons consisted of Those that had still lived in Con^ormity to the Church
of England, and the Episcopa^l Government, etc. 1 Part. Non-Conform. Plea. p.
126. [ The Lord Li^utenants whom the Parliament chos^, were almost all
Epis^opal Conformists, Ibid. [ The ^ar Greater Part of the Gene^all Officers,
Colonells, Li^utenant-Colonells, and Majors of the Earl o^ Essex his Army; And
of the Sea-Cap^ai^s, and of the M^jor-G^nerals of Brigades, and Counties about
the Land, bid [ The Assembly of Divines at Westminster also, were m^n that had
liv^^ in Conformity, except about 8. or 9. and the Scots, p. 12^.


Mo. You do well Richard to say that ^hey HAD Lived in Conformity, for the
Complying humor was now going off apace; Insomuch that a profe^t opposition to
the Orders of the Church became q^^ckly a distinguishing mark of the disloyal
Party: The Kings ^^gag'd Enem^^^ ^ere all (...).
And all those Parliament men, O^^icers, and Assembly-Div^nes, Contributed
Unanimously in their several S^at^^n^ toward the Common Ruin. On [ Fryd^y D^c.
1^. 1640. (...)
A Petition was brought into the (...) All^derman Pennington from the Citizens
of Lon^^n* in (...) name of 15000. Complaining of the Church-(...), in having
Archbishops, Bishops, etc. Usin^ the Cr^sse in Baptism; Kneeling at the
Communion Table, (...) unlawful in the Protestant Church. Diurnal Occurrences.
Pa. 12. Ian 13. Petition against the Government of Bishops from Several
Counties. P. 16. Ian. 13. The Remonstrance with 700. hands against the Bishops
and their Prelacy was read, P. 33. March 7. A Bill against Episcopacy read in
the House of Commons, etc. Pa. 47. Mar. 10. 1640. Bishops Votes in Parliament
taken away, Pa. 49. in Novem. 1641. several Tumults against Bishops, and Dec.
11, 12. Bishops accused of High Treason. The Bishops in the mean time
Petitioning his Majesty, and entering a Protest of their Privileges, and
against Tumults. Apr. 2. 1642. A due and necessary Reformation of the
Government and Liturgy of the Church pretended. Ex. Col. P. 135.

It is to be hoped, that all These violences upon the Ecclesiastical State, and
the Persons of the Bishops, were not acted by Conformists. And it will not be
denied, I suppose that after the Posting and Proscribing of the Greater part of
the Clergi^s Friends, (as well as the Kings) The Schismatical Int^rest was
carried on by the Major vote of the Rem^ining Fragment; and all This was before
the Eruption of the War; the Earl of Essex not receiving his Commission, till
July 12. 1642. Unless you will say that Epis^opal men themselves, were for the
Extirpation o^ Bishops.


Ri. The Parliament b^ought in the Scots.
[ When the Parliaments Armies were worsted and weakened by the King, and they
found themselves in dang^r of being Ov^rcome, they intreat^d help from the
^cots ( it is true) who taking advantage of their streights, brought in the
Covenant, as the Condition of their help. Non-Conf. 1 part. p. 27. And ^or the
Assembly 1 [ I think I have not read of many Assemblies o^ Worthier men since
the Apostles days. Few worthier Assemblies since the Apostles days.
Answ. to Dr. Stillingfle^t. p 84. The Covenant ^^d Vow, was taken by the
Parliament, and by their Garrisons, and Soldiers that would voluntarily take it
as a Test whom they mig^^ Trust Non-Conf. Plea. p. 128. Their good na^u^e
toward the Independents.
[ The Assembly never endeavored to turn the Independents out of the
Parish-Churches, and Benefices, nor to Silence them; forbidding them Public
Preaching, as you do us, etc. Answ. to Dr. Stillingf. p. 14. They Imposed no
Liturgy, no one Ceremony; no Practice on them, contrary to their Conscience, p.
85. The Presbytery being only a Tolerated, or Intended thing, without any
Imposition that ^ver we knew of.


Mo. It is very well known what pains your Celebrated Assembly took to make the
City bleed for That Scottish expidition, The Guild Hall ha^^ngue^ (...) brought
in the Scots.
and we have the Guild hall Harangues on That Occasion, still upon Record. But
I shall rather mind you of some Proceedings which you would be thought to have
forgotten; to the Immortal Honor of your Confederates. Only half a dozen Words
in the way to it-

It is no wonder for men that have so low an Esteem for General Counsels, as
both You Sir, and Mr. Baxter profess to have, in several of your Writings, to
entertain yet very Reverend Thoughts of the Pybald Assembly. His Late Majesty
had quite another Opinion of them. See his Proclamation, Inhibiting the
Assembly of Divines, an^ others Summoned to Westminster, by an Ordinance of
Both Houses of Parliament. Bibliotheca Regia. P. 328. Iun. 22. 1643.

Whereas there has been a long time, a desperate and Seditious design amongst
diverse Factious persons, His Majesty's Proclamation against the Assembly of
Divines. Jun* 22. 1643.
to alter the whole Frame, Constitution, and Government of this Church; so long
and so happily Established within this Kingdom; in pursuance whereof they have
discountenanceed, and in a manner suppressed the Book of Common Prayer, settled
by Law; driven away, Imprisoned, Removed, very many Learned, Orthodox, Godly
Divines, and Ministers from their Cures, for discharging their duty and
Conscience in Preaching: and in their places, without the least color or
shadow of Lawful Authority, have Instituted, or Deputed mean Factious Persons
Unqualify'd with Learning or Virtue; Painful, Able, Laborious Ministers.
to corrupt and poison the minds of our Good Subjects, with Principles of
reason and Rebellion, and have seized the Rents and Revenues of our Bishops,
The Loyal Presbyterians.
Deans, and Chapters, for their own private Lucre, or Benefit, and for the
Maintenance of the Army in Rebellion against us. The (...).


Pray Observe my Friends, that this was before the Scots were called in; and
the work of men too in Opposition to the Church: I come now to your Apostolical
Assembly.

Since These bloody distempers, and when so many Armies are on Foot in several
parts of the Kingdom, Kings Proclamation.
a Bill has been presented to us for the Calling of an Assembly, of such
Divines, as are mentioned in the said Bill, the far greater part whereof are
men of no Reputation or Learning; A Dutiful Proposition.
and eminently disaffected to the Government of the Church of England* The
Worthy (...).
and very many of them are persons who have openly pr^ached Rebellion, and
incited the People to take up Arms against us, and so are not like to be
proper Instruments of Peace, in Church, or State; which Bill having many
Claus^s in it very derogatory to our Honor, and Just Rights, The (...)
and very Scandalous to the Reformed Protestant Religion: not so much as any
part being left to Us, either in the Choice of the Persons, or in Adjo^rning or
Dissolving the Assembly. Bib. Regia. Pa. 329.

What do you think now of the Worthy Assembly? your [Men of sound, and Loyal
Principles of Government, and Obedience. These are the Men that you declare
your selves Resolved to stand or fall by; (and out of your own mouths a Man may
warrant This Assertion; that you are no better Friends to This King, then that
Parliament and that Assembly were to the La^^. Methinks This Testimony of his
Late Majesty against your designs, and Proceedings, should move your
Consciences and stare you in the Faces, as if it were his Ghost.

You would have the world believe that the Covenant was never Imposed, but that
people might take it, or let it alone, as they pleased; That the Assembly
silenced no body; forced nothing; and that Presbytery was only as a Tolerated,
or Intended thing, etc. Now how great an Abuse this is upon That part of the
Nation that does not know the story, An Abuse put upon the Nation.
will appear out of the Memorials of These Times, under the Authority of the
Faction it self.

The Lords and Commons took the Vow and Covenant Iun. 6. 1643. Husbands
Collections. Fol. 203. An Extract of Par^iament Proceedings 1643.
and thought fit to have it taken by the Ar^ie^, and Kingdom. Ibid.
Archbishop of Canterbu^^^^ Temporal Livings, Dignities, and Ecclesi^st^^^^
P^^motions Sequestered, June 10. 1143. (...) for calling an Assembly of Learned
(...) ( Thirty of the Layety, in the Commission.) June 24. 208. An Order for
Ministers upon the Fast Day to pray for a blessing on this Assembly. June
27.43. The Assembly Petitions Both Houses for a Fast, and the removing of Blind
Guides, and Scandalous Ministers; destroying Monuments of Idolatry, The
Assembly stir up the people to rise.
etc. July 10. 19^3. Fol. 240. [An Order for Divines that attend the Assembly,
to go into the Country to stir up the people to rise for their Defense. Aug.
10. 1643. Fol. 285. [An Ordinance for taking away of Superstitious Monuments.
Aug. 28. 1643. Fol. 307. An Ordinance to examine Witnesses against Scandalous
Ministers, Sep. 6. 164^. Fol. 311. Soldiers to take the Covenant, October. 10
Fol. 359. An Order for the Assembly of Divines, to treat of a Discipline and
Government, the present to be abo^ished, and to prepare a Directory* Octo. 1^.
16^^. (...) An Order for returning the Names of such as take not the Covenant
to the House of Commons, Nov. 30. 1643. Fol. 390. An Order for diverse persons
to take the Covenant at Margarets Westminster. Dec. 12. 1643. Fol. 399. An
Ordinance disabling any person within the City of London, from any place of
Trust, that shall not take the Covenant. Dec. 20. 1643. Fol. 404. An
exhortation for taking the Covenant, etc. Feb. 9. 1644. Fol. 422. An Order for
taking it throughout the Kingdoms of England, and Scotland, with Instructions*
Feb. 9. 1644. Fol. 420. A Second Order for demolishing Superstitious Monuments.
May 9. 1644. Fol. 487. An Order for none to Preach, but Ordained Ministers,
except allowed by Both Houses of Parliament, May 6. 1645. Fol. 646. An Order
for putting the Directory in Execution. Aug. 11. 1645. Fol. 715. Several Votes
for choice of Elders throughout all England, and Wales. Feb. 20. 1646. Fol.
809. An Order for taking the Negative Oath, and National Covenant. Iun. 2.
1646. Fol. 889. An Order for putting the Orders of Church Government in
execution. Iun. 9. 1646. Fol. 889. An Order for dividing the County of
Lancashire, into 9. Classes, October. 2. 1646, Fol. 919. An Order for Abolishing
Archbishops, and Bishops, and settling their Lands upon Trustees for the use
of the Commonwealth. October. 9. 1646. Fol. 992. An Order for the speedy
dividing and settling of several Counties of This Kingdom, into distinct
Classical Presbyteries, and Congregational Elderships. Ian. 19. 1647. Scobells
Acts, 139. The Form of Church Government to be used in the Church of England,
and Ireland, agreed upon by the Lords and Commons, assembled in Parliament,
after Advice had with the Assembly of Divines. Aug. 29. 1648. Fol. 165.

By this time I hope you are satisfied that it was a Presbyterian War according
to the very Letter, Proved to he a Presbyterian War.
Or if the Nonconformists did not begin the War, pray'e who bid?


Ri. Our Calamities began in Differences about Religion, Richard says, the War
began about Religion.
and still That Is the wound that most needs Closing, etc, R. B's. Fast Sermon.
1660. p. 41.


Ba. Do not you know, that write about the Cause, Baxter says, it began about
matter of Law.
that the War was not founded in Theological differences, but in Law
differences? R. B's. Letter to Mr. Hi^ckly. p. 25.


Ri. The first open beginning was the Militia, Richard says, 'twas about the
Militia.
Non. Conf. Plea. p. 126.


Ba. I know how unsatisfied many are concerning the Lawfullnesse of the War;
Baxter says, the War was made for Reformation.
I cannot yet perceive by any thing which they object, but that we undertook
our Defense upon warrantable Grounds. The extirpation of Piety was the then
great Design, which had so far succeeded, that very many of the most able
Ministers were silenced; Lecturers, and Evening-Sermons on the Lords Day
suppressed; Christians imprisoned, dismembered, and Banished; the Lords Day
reproached, and devoted to Pastimes; that it was as much as a man's Estate (at
least) was worth, to hear a Sermon abroad, when he had none, or worse at home;
To meet for Prayer, or any Godly Exercise; A lewd scandal upon the late Kings
Government.
and that it was a matter of Credit, and a way to Perferment to revile at, and
be enemies against those that were most Conscientious; And every where safer to
be a drunkard, or an Adulterer, then a painful Christian: And that multitudes
of Humane Ceremonies took place, when the worship of Christ's Institution was
cast out, besides the slavery that Invaded us in Civil Respects: So am I MOST
CERTAIN that this was the work which We took up Arms to resist: And these were
the Offenders whom we endeavored to Offend. And many of those that scruple the
Lawfulness of our War, did never Scruple the Lawfullness of destroying us; nor
of that doleful havoc, and Subversion that was made in the Church of Christ
amongst us. The fault was, that we would not more willingly change the Gospel
for Ignorance, and our Religion for a Fardel of Ceremonies. R. B's. Saints
Rest. p. 257.258.


Ri. [ But the Kings Subjects may not enter into Leagues, C^^^nants and Arms
against him, R^c^ard will not allow of war ^ot Religion.
without his consent, and Laws, m^^ly to propagate Religion and Reformation in
the Kingdom. Non-conf. Plea, 2d. part, pa. 77. [ If Governors command us to sin
against G^^, Subjects must not obey, but yet not Resist; Much less take up Arm^
(...) Reform Others, or even to bring in a True Religion by Vnauthoris^^
Violence. Ibid. p. 56.


Ba. It is but a delusory course of some in These Times t^^t write many
Vol^mns, Baxter i^ for a Re^igious Were.
to p^ove, that Subjects may not bent Arms against th^i^ Princes for Religion.
Ho. Commonwealth, p. 4^1. They are fools that think ^ther (...).
[It is either Confusion and Ignorance of the State of the ^uestion, or
pal^a^le error in them that maintain, that it is (...) lawful to fight for
Religion. It is one thing to fight to ma^e o^^ers Religious, and another thin^
to sight to preserve (...) ^wn Religion, and to preserve the means of Religion,
to Us, and the Nation, and our Posterity, Ibid. Persecutors (...) ta^e away our
Lives or Liberties, if we worship God accordi^^ ^o his Will, In ca^^ o^
p^r^secuti^^ we figh^ ^or our own, and our pos^eri^^^^ ^al^ation.
and use the necessary means of Salvation. It ^^ghting a^^inst this
Persecuti^n* we sight principally, and ultimately, for our Own, and Posterities
Salvation, and nex^, for the Necessary means the^eto, and Proximately for (...)
Lives and Liberties. Ibid.


Mo. The Rancour, and Inhumanity of This Scandal makes me take the Less notice
of your shifts and contradictions; so that I shall wave the Course of your
Reasoning, and speak a Word to your Conscience.

Pray'e cast a back Thought upon the Piety, the Modera^ion, The late Kings
s^ffe^ings forgot en among g^eater (...).
the Unexampled sufferings and Constancy of That Incomparable Prince, whose
Government, and Administration is here so Diabolical* Traduced. It is a
wonderful thing to me, that the Legal Justice that was exec^^ed upon two or
thr^^ Contumacious Schismatiques, should be so fresh in your Memory, and yet
the Tragedy of that Royal, and Protestant Martyr that fell a Sacrifice to the
Idol of your Enthusiastical Reformation should be so utterly forgotten. Pryn,
Burton, and Bastwick lamented, but not a word ^f the Royal Mar^yr.
How can you so call to mind the silencing of a Stubborn Cabal of Lawless
Mutineers; And the Blood of Canterbury, your Sacrilegious Robbing, and Taking
Possession, not fly in the ^aces of your Accomplices? Especially considering how
much you your selves have contributed to the common Fate.


Ri. [ How far the ^arliament was from being Presbyterians, may b^ s^^n in the
Propositions sent from them by the Earl of Essex, to the King at ^otin^ham, and
pa^tly their defeating all the desires and endeav^urs of those that would have
Presbytery settl^d through the Land. We know of no places, Presbytery not
settled, say^ Rich^rd.
but London and Lanca^hire, where it was commonly taken up, and some little of
(...) at Coventry, and some few such places, Non-Cons. Plea, ^st. part, 128.


Ba. [It is not known that the Presbyterian Government has been exercised in
London, in Lancashire, Baxter contradicts hi^, And co^fo^^s himself with
comparing (...) day of Richard P^otector wi^h Charle. ^.
and in many Counties these many years? 5. Disp. Pr^f. 28.29. [Look into this
County where I live, and you shall find a faithful, humble, laborious
Ministry, Associated, and walking in as great Unity as ever I read of since the
Apostles Days: No Difference, no Quarrels, but sweet and amicable
Correspondency, and Communion, that I hear of. Was there such a Ministry, or
such Love and Concord, or such a Godly People under them in the Prelates Reign?
There was not: Where we had Ten drunken Readers Then, we have not One now; Ten
(...) Hypocrites Now (...) One (...)
and where we had One Able, Godly Preacher Then, we have many Now: and This is
our Loss and misery in these times, which yo^ so much lament. Ibid.


Mo. This last passage I find in a Preface Entitled [ To those of the
Nobility, Gentry, Baxters Comp^e^en^ to the Sons of the (...). 1659
and Commons of This Land that adhere to Prelacy: Publ^shed in the year 1659.
and ushered in, by an Epistle Dedicatory, [To his ^ighness Richard Lord
Protector of the Common Wealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland: with this
expression in the last Page. [Your zeal for God will kindle in your SUBJECTS a
zeal for You: Richard Cromwells fait^full Subjects.
and for a Farewell, [A Faithful Subject to your Highness, as you are an
Officer of the Universal King.

Richard Baxter.

It is worthy of a Note Mr. Baxter, that your Pen cuts more still in 1659. then
it did in seven years before, and that your Humor runs much, (about That
season) upon Casuistical Points, and the Collation of Affairs, and Times. Now
all the Reason I can discern for your change of Topique still upon That Crisis,
is This. The Wheel was almost come round again, and Rebellion upon the very
point of finishing its Course. ^or they had run the Monorchy down, into an
Aristocracy; That, into a Democracy; Cromwell took up the Government next, in a
Single Person. But all these Successive Usurpations were so Grievous, and
Insupportable to the people, that necessarily the next Remove must be the
Restoring of the King, to perfect the Revolution. Now so soon as ever you
discovered the dawning but of the least hope for his Majesty's Restoration.
Mr. Baxters, Political Aphorisms composed expressly to keep out the King.
what Mists did you presently cast before the Peoples Eyes in your Political
Aphorisms, upon the Question of Authority, and Obedience? What pains did you
take to possess the Nation with an Opinion of the blessed differences betwixt
the State of Matters uoder Richard the Usurper, and Charles the Martyr? and to
hammer into the heads of the Multitude, the danger of Re-admitting their
Lawful Soverei^n? Pray'e tell me Sir, was Mr. Dance's Sequestered Living, and
your Little Worcestershire Association so Inestimable a Prize, that you could
part with the Blood of a most Religious Prince; the Lives of at least Fourscore
Thousand Christians; the Order of the Government, both in Church and State;
your Lives, Liberties, and Estates; the Peace, Honor, and Well being of Three
Kingdoms, and all This, in Exchange for Infamy, Beggary, and Bondage, and yet
reckon your self a Gainer by the Bargain?


Ri. The Common-wealths-men persecuted me and Others, so far as to make Orders
to Sequester us, for not taking the Engageme^^* Poor R^chard like (...) and
pr^ying against the Scots.
and for not keeping their Fasts and Thanksgivings for the (...) ^^gainst
Scotland. R. B's. 2d. Admonition to Bagshaw. p. 9^.


Ba. [It is a dreadful Observation to see so much of the Spirit of Malignity
possessing those that once said they sought against Malignants; The spirit of
Malignity has taken (...) the Army.
and that the ^inisters and Servants of the Lord, are rayled at by (...) as
^orme^ly they were by the worst of Those (...) ^es^royed; and with this
d^^^dfull Aggravation, that Then it ^as but Some that were Reviled, and now,
wi^h many, (...) is All. Th^^, it was but under the Name of Puritan^, and Roun^
^eads; The Presbyterians Per^ecuted.
and Now it is openly, as Ministers, under the Name of Priests, and
Black-C^ats, and Presbyters and Pulpiteers. S^lf-d^^yal, Ep. Monitory.


Mo. This is to Intimate that the P^^sbyterians were under a Persecution, Who
were the Persecutors, The Presbyterians Journeymen (the Army) se^ up for
themselves.
I beseech ye? Even Your own Io^rney men; who when they had wrought Sedit^^n
long enough under you, took the Trad^ into their Own hands, and set up for
Themselves. And that you may not value your selves upon the Merits of your
sufferings; Pray'e what was it that you suffered for? Presbytery is too
Tyrannical for the spirit of an Indepe^dent to bear. The Stomach of That Party
would not brook it, Somewhat of an accomoda-Generosi^y in the Independents.
and so they cast it up again: For there is, though a Licentious, yet somewhat
of a Practical, and Accomodable Generosity in that Party. But are not you
aware, Gentlemen, that the worse you speak of these people, the greater is your
Condemnation; for making the Episcopal Party still, more Insupportable then
These, at the very Worst?


Ri. [ Was it not Persecution, when many Anabaptists and Separatists made such
work in England, The poor Presbyterians persecuted by the Army, for not joining
against the Scots.
Scotland, and Ireland, in Cromwells time, and after, as they did? when so many
were turned out of the Universities for not Engaging, and so many out of the
Magistracy, and Corporation-Priviledges? And when an Ordinance was made to cast
out all Ministers who would not pray for the success of the Wars against
Scotland, or that would not give God thanks for their Victories. When I have
heard them pro^ess, that there were many Thousand Godly men, that were killed
at Dunba^ ((...) instance in no other) and yet WE were all by their Ordinance
to be cast out, that would not give God thanks for This. Chapter Div. Pa. 256.
1668. What more harsh kind of Persecution could there be then to force men to
go Hypocritically to God against their Consciences, Oh the persecution o^
forcing men against their Conscien^es.
and take on them to beg for the Success of a War which they Judged Unlawful.
and to return him a Public Counterfeit Thanks for Bloodshed; yea, for the
blood of Thousands? etc. Ibid.


Ba. Only See to This Brethren, that none of you suffer as an evill-doer; But
so long as ^hey do not suffer as evildoers.
as a busy-Body in other men's Matters; as a Resister of the Commands of Lawful
Authority; as Ungrateful to Those that have been Instruments of our Good; as
evill-Speakers against Dignities; as Opposers of the Discipline, and Ordinances
of Christ; as Scornful Revilers of you^ Christian Brethren; as Reproachers of
a Laborious, Judicious, Conscientious Ministry, etc. Saints Rest. Pa. 131.


Mo. You do not speak I suppose of the Seven or Eight and Twenty Cathedralls
that were Defaced; No persecution to oppress the Church and all that love it.
The 115. Ministers forced out of their Livings within the Bills of Mortality:
nor of the History of Querela Cantabrigiensis. You accounted it no Persecution
the forcing of men to Pray for the Success of a Rebellion against their
Sovereign; and to give God thanks for the Victories over the King, and the
Loyal Assertors of his Majesty's, and the Churches Rights and Government.

As for you, Mr. Baxter, Mr. Baxt^r places the Crown upon the wrong Head.
your Counsel is very good, if it were not that in the Dignities, and Lawful
Powers you have placed the Crown upon the wrong head: and directed an Obedience
to the Faction, in stead of the King: after your usual Method of Crushing the
One, to Advance the Other. The King destroyed by Presbyterians, as
Presbyterians.
But it will be a hard matter I believe to convince you that the Presbyterians
destroyed the King, and that they did it as Presbyterians too, though I reckon
it to be very easily Probable both from their Practices, and Positions. And
T^is I should not at This time have made the Question, but that your self Mr.
Baxter, have been pleased to bring it upon the Carpet.


Ba. [The Generality of the Orthodox, Sober Ministers, The Loyalty of ^axters
Orthodox sober Ministers.
and Godly people of This Nation, did never consent to King-Killing, and
Resisting Sovereign Power, nor to the Change of the Ancient Government of this
Land. But they have been True to their Allegiance, and Detesters of
Unfaithfullness and Ambition in Subjects; and Resisters of Heresy and Schism
in the Church, and of Anarchy, and Democraticall Confusions in the
Commonwealth. R.B. Sermon before the Commons, Anno. ^0. 1660. Pa. 44.


Ri. It is most certain Brother, that we did never directly consent, Richard
subject to the Higher power, but not resolved which it is.
( as you say) But Unhappily there has been a difference among us which is the
higher Power, when Those that have their Share in the Sovereignty, are divided:
But whether we should be Subject to the higher Power, is no question with us.
Ibid. 45.


Mo. If by your Orthodox, Sober Ministers you mean, the Episcopal Divines, your
Assertion holds good, or in a Litterall Construction either; but if you intend
the Non-Conformists, under these Two Epithets of Orthodox, and Sober; What do
ye think of Mr, Manton, An Even score of Orthodox sober Divines.
Calamy, Case, Douglas, Burton, Herle, Goodwyn, Woodcock, Brooks, Bridges,
Marshall, Cockayn, Faircloath, Saltmarsh, Sterry, Strictland, Newcomen? And for
Brevity sake, I. O. W. I. and R. B. shall make them up an even score. I could
show ye how these Reverend Authors have traced the King killing Cause, from the
very Egg to the Apple; (as they say) Preached the Lawfullness of the War; the
People into a Rebellion; the Kings Head to the Block; and then Justified all
when they had done. And yet who but these men of Blood, to Quarrel with the
Government, because they cannot get themselves Priviledg'd above the Peaceable
and Obedient Sons of the Church?

What do ye think of the Author of CELEUSMA; that told the Commons in a Sermon
Sept. 25. 1656. The last Kings blood not valued at a Ceremony.
[That the Remove of Prelatical Innovations Countervail'd for the Blood and
Treasure shed and spent in the Late Distractions:] Is not this person now with
his Clamor ad Coelum, a very hopeful Solicitor for a Second Reformation? He
that has Solemnly declared, that [ If the Re-Imposing of Ceremonies could have
brought the Late King to Life again, he would never have yielded to it.] At the
Rate of Computation, why shall not a Ceremony at this day, outweigh the Life
of the Son, as Formerly it did That of the Father? But what needs more proof
then the very Order of Aug. 10. 1643.
For the Assembly-Divines to (...) the People to rise for their Defense?

There is another person also who is engaged i^ This present Controversy, to
whom I would gladly Recommend a due Consideration of this following Extract.

[When Kings Command Unrighteous things, The Kings Murder justified the day
after it was committed.
and people suit them with willing Commplyance, none doubts but the destruction
of them both, is Just and Righteous] A Fast Sermon to the House of Commons.
Ian. 31. 1648. Pa. 5.

He that is Entrusted with the Sword, and dares not do Justice, on every one
that dares do Jnjustice, is afraid of the Creature, but makes very bold with
the Creator. Pa. 15.

[The Kings of the Earth have given their Power to Anti Christ. How have they
earned their Titles? All Christian Kings Anti-Christianiz'd*
Eldest Son of the Chuach; The Catholic, and most Christian King; Defender of
the Faith; and the Like. Has it not been by the Blood of Saints? is there not
in every corner of These Kingdoms, the Slain and the Banished ones of Christ
to Answer for? A Fast Sermon of Apr. 19. 1649. Pa. 22.
Do not the Kings of all these Nations stand up in the Room of their
Progenitors; with the same Implacable Enmity to the Power of the Gospel? Pa. 22.

There are Great and Mighty Works in hand, A Reflection upon ^is Majes^y a^^er
his De^e^t at Wo^cester.
in this Nation. Tyrants are punished; the Jaws of Oppressors are broken;
bloody Revengefull people in Wars, disappointed, A Thanksgiving Sermon for the
Scots defeat at Worcester, Octo, 24. 1651. P. 2.

[What is This Prelacy? Prelacy Antichristian.
A mere Antichristian Encroachment upon the Inheritance of Christ, Pa. 5.

[A Monarchy of some hundred years continuance, allways affecting, A Pedant
triumphing over Charles the II. and Monarchy it self.
and at length wholly degenerated into Tyranny; destroyed, pulled down.
Swallowed up a great mighty Potentate that had caused terror in the Land of
the Living, and laid his Sword under his head, brought to Punishment for Blood,
P. 6.

And calling the King Tyrant.
[If any persons in the World had cause to sing the Song of Moses, and the Lamb,
We have this day. The Bondage prepared for us was both in Spirituals, and
Temporalls, about a Tyrant full of Revenge; and a Discipline full of
Persecution, has been our Contest: whether the Yoke of the One and the Other,
should by the Sword and Violence, be put upon our Necks, and Consciences, is
our Controversy, Pa. 7.

Are These Fit Agents for Unity and Peace?
Is it not a Prodigious boldness for such Spirits as These, to obtrude
themselves, either upon the Government, or the People, as men of Scruple, and
the most competent Agents for the Promoting of Unity, and Peace? And you your
self Mr. Baxter, have not been out neither at this great work of Reforming
Confusion, as your own Confessions in some measure, but your Conversation and
Writings do Abundantly bear Witness.

Richard True to the King, but he mistook the King.
Mr. Richard here I must confess, furnishes you with a Salvo that Ignatious
Loyola himself would have blushed at. You were ever True to the King, you say,
but you did not know Who was King. Some would have him to be where he was NOT,
and Others would not allow him to be where he WAS. Sir, This doctrine might
have done well enough in a Pulpit at Coventry, Baxters Re^stauration Sermon.
Asserts the Presbyterian Loyalty. Makes the King a Subject, and worse. Pleads
for Presbytery, without a word of restoring the King.
when you were helping the Lord against the Mighty; but from such a
Restoration Sermon, the Lord deliver us! There is first not one word of
Restoring the King in it, though it was a Fast that had a Particular Regard to
That Debate. 2. It Asserts the Loyalty of the Presbyterians, and yet at the
same time, supposes the Supreme Power in the Two Houses, which, in few words
makes the Late King both a Subject, and (with Reverence) a Rebel. 3. The
Settling of the Presbytery, for that is allways the English of their SOUND
DOCTRINE, and CHURCH GOVERNMENT, Pa. 46.) is violently pressed as the first thing
to be done. Give FIRST to God, the Things that are Gods. 43. with a Pharisaical
Ostentation of the Conscionable, Prudent, Godly, People of the Land, Pa. 46. in
opposition to the Profane. You could not do any thing in the world more to
obstruct his Majestys Return, and yet you are pleased to make this Sermon an
Instance of your Zeal to advance it.


Ri^ [ The Parliament did not raise War against the Person or Authority of the
King, The War rais^d for King and Par^ia^ent.
nor did I ever serve them on any such Account: but to defend themselves
against the Kings Mis-guided will. Holy Commonwealth. Pa. 476. Their
Commissions, (all that ever I saw) were for King and Parliament. We had Two
Protestations, and a Solemn League and Covenant Imposed upon the Nation, to be
for King and Parliament. And if D^cla^ations, Their Oaths and Covenants were
fast and loose at pleasure.
Professions, Commissions, and National Oaths and Covenants will not tell us,
what the cause of the War was, th^n there is no Discovery. Ibid. Pa. 477.


Mo. These Commissions, The pretext of the War, Religion; the Cause, Ambition.
Oaths and Covenants tell you the Pretext of the War, but you must go to their
Proceedings, and Practices to find the Cause of it. The Two Houses Seize the
Kings Towns, Magazins, Forts, and Shipping. The Loyal Presbyte^ians usurp
Sovereign Power.
They violently take the Militia into their own hands; Vote an Ordinance of
Both Houses as binding as an Act of Parliament. Declare his Majestys
Commissions Void, Issue out Orders for Securing the Kingdom: Vote the
Maintaining of a War, and the Seizing of his Majestys Magazins; Sequester the
Church and Crown Revenues: and justify all these Injuries, as done in pursuance
of their Protestations, and Covenants, and This is your way now of being FOR
the King. Suppose that any man had beaten you, and Plundered ye, and Imprisoned
ye, and abused your Friends for your sake, and a body should tell you all this
while that this man was FOR Mr. Baxter. The Two Houses were the King in the
Covenant.
If you were really for the King: why would not For the King according to the
Oath of Allegiance do the business as well as For the King according to the
Covenant? Or how came you to Alienate your self from his Majesty's
Iurisdictino, and to turh Subject, to the Two Houses? Who Absolved you from the
One Oath, No Reconciling of the Covenant King and the Legal.
or who Authorized you in the Other? or when you found that the King in the
Covenant clash'd with the King in the Oath of Allegiance, why did you not
rather comply with the Law, then with the Usurpation? For it is Impossible to
be True to both Interests, under so manifest an Opposition. You see the Color
of the War, and I shall not need to tell you that the Cause of it was Ambition,
of Dominion, which was exercised to the highest degree of Tyranny.


Ri. Richard holds Oaths to Princes to be Dispensable
If a People that by Oath and Duty are obliged to a Sovereign, shall sinfully
dispossess him, and contrary to their Covenants, choose and Covenant with
Another; they may be obliged by their Latter Covenants, notwithstanding the
Former. Holy-Common-Wealth. Page 188.


Ba. Baxter holds Oaths of Allegiance to be Indispensable.
That cannot be, my Friend; for we hold it [Impious and Papal to pretend to
absolve Subjects from their Oaths to their Sovereign. Holy Com. Pa. 359. [It is
not in Subjects Power, by Vows to withdraw themselves from Obedience to
Authority. Non-Confor. Plea. P. 213.


Mo. But why can ye not now dispense with your Covenants, as well as you did
formerly with the Oath of Allegiance?


Ri. Richard will hate the Covenant binding as it is a Vow.
Part of This Covenant is [against Popery, Superstition, and Profaneness; and
all that is against Sound Doctrine and Godliness, etc. which the
Non-Conformists take to be Lawful and Necessary things. Non-Conf. Plea. 1st.
Part. P. 142. But the Controversy is not This, and That, but whether as a Vow
made to God, it bind to things Necessary. P. 143.


Ba. Soft a little. The League and Covenant and Vow and Covenant.
This that you speak of is the League and Covenant, not the Vow, and Covenant.
The Latter was only a Bond of Confederacy to assist the Parliaments Forces
against the King; and taken by the Lords ane Commons Iun. 6. 1673. and then
Ordered Iun. 27. to be taken all over the Kingdom. But the Other was Composed
afterward and upon closing with the Scots accomodated to the Scottish Model,
and Ordered, Feb. 2. 1643. to be taken throughout England and Wales, The League
and Covenant Impos d.
and Entitled, For R^formation, and D^fence of Reli^ion; the Honor and
Happiness of the KING, etc. [By this Covenant, you are bound, not only to an
Extirpation of Bishops, Baxter is his own on^essor and bsolves himse^f.
but to endeavou^ the Introducing of a Scottish Presbytery: How can you then
dispense with an Admittance of the Primates Episcopacy, as you propounded, in
Contradiction to the Terms of that Engagement?


Mo. Favor me with a word I pray'e. Did ye not Covenant [ to preserve and
defend the Kings Majestys Person, and Authority?]


Ri. Yes, The Covenan^ for the King, qualified for Re^igion.

If the King be against Religion the Covenant is against him.


[in the Preservation and Defense of the True Religion.


Ba. But in case of the Kings Opposing it, we are still Obliged [ to continue
therein, against all Opposition, and ^o promote the sam^, according to our
Power, against all Lets, and Impediments whatsoever. See the Covenant.


Mo. Let it suffice Gentlemen that your Party destroyed the King; it is no
great matter How.


Ri. [ As to the Death of the King, I have in the times of Usurpation, proved
that the Presbyterians detest^d it. Richard lays the Death of the King to
Oliver.
That it was a Proud Conquering Army, by the Contrivance of Ol. Cromwell, and
the applause of a Few Phanatiques that did it by the consent of a small care of
the Old Parliament, called the Rump, that durst not trust the King in Power.
Non-Conf. Plea. part. 2. Preface.


Ba. The Baxterians attacked the King.
Prithee Dick Speak truth and shame the Devil. What did we raise Armies for? And
Attaque the King himself in the Head of his Troops? We Will maintain That, by our
Principles, and Aphorisms. [War is not an Act of Government, but Hostility. Men
are not in Reason to be supposed to Intend their Enemies Good, if they fight we
are to b^lieve, they would Kill: And they fough^ to kill.
and Nature believes not Killing to be an Act of Friendship. Holy
Commonwealth. Pa. 422.

Baxt^rs Unfeigne^ Repen^ance.
^ do Unfeignedly Repent that I did no more for ^eace in my Place then I did;
and that I did not pray more heartily against Con^^ntion* and W^r, b^for^ it
cam^: and spoke no more against it th^n I (...) that I spa^e so much to blow
the Coals. For ^his (...) for^iven^sse of the Lord, through the Precious b^o^d
of t^^ Gr^^t Reconciler. The hatred of strife, and War, and Love of P^a^e, and
Obs^rvation of the Lamentable Miscariages si^ce, Mr. Baxter consulted the Word
of God about Opposing the King.
have called me often to search my heart, and try my ways by the word of God;
whether I did Lawfully engage in That War, or not: (which I was confident then,
was the Greatest outward service that ever I performed to God. And whether I
Lawfully encouraged so many Thousands to it. Holy Commonwealth. Pa. 485.486.

Mr Baxter would be the same man if another King were to be Deposed and
Murdered.

Mr. Baxter very cautious of Treason against the two Houses.

Baxter fails foul upon Richard.


[But yet I cannot see that I was mistaken in the main Cause; nor dare I repent
of it, nor forbear the same, if it were to do again, in the same State of
Things. I should do all I could to prevent such a War, but if it could not be
prevented, I must take the same side as then I did. And my Judgment tells me,
that if I should do otherwise, I should be Guilty of Treason or disloyalty
against the SOVEREIGN POWER of the Land, and of Per^idiousnesse to the
Commonwealth, and of preferring Offending Subjects, before the Laws, and
Justice; and the Will of the King above the safety of the Commonwealth, and
consequently above his own Welfare. Ibid, And then for you so Impudently and
Impertinently --


Mo. Nay, let us have none of this, Gentlemen I beseech ye, The Moderator
interposes
why You Two are Old Acquaintances; Fellow Laborers, Fellow Sufferers, and One
Woman's Children as we say. --


Ba. I shall not eat my words I assure ye; I may forget my self perhaps, Baxter
vindicates Oliver.
but I am not a man for Recantations. I say again, that it was Impudently and
Impertin^^tly done to reflect upon Oliver Cromwell, as if he had done an Ill
thing. My Holy Commonwealth [was written while the Lord Prot^ctor (^rudently,
Piously, Faithfully, to his Immortal Horror, A prudent, pious, Faithful Prince.
how ill soever you have used him) did Exercise the Government. Holy Common
wealth, Preface to the Army. [And I have forborne to change any One Word of it
all, that you may see the worst of my Intendments. And that True Principles
will stand in all Times, and Changes, though to the shame of those Changes that
make bad Times. Ibid. These are my own words, and do you think that I would
ever have bestowed upon a detestable wretch, the Epithetes of PRUDENT, PIOUS
and FAITHFUL? And again; If Oliver had not been a Religious, and Gracious
Prince, Baxter prays that Richard Cromwell may* Inherit the Piety of his Father.
can you Imagine that I should ever have treated his Son Richard with this
Complement? [We pray that you may INHERIT a Tender care of the Cause of Christ.
Key for Catholics, Ep. Ded. which shows both that Oliver had a Tenderness
for Christ's Cause; and necessarily Implys that the Cause he Managed was the
Cause of Christ.

And then you shuffle it again upon the Phanatiques, and the Rump, that durst
not trust the King with Power. The Presbyterians Disarmed the King, and the
Independents Killed him.
Why prithee what Power did we allow him? We took away his Arms and his Men,
and his Money, and his Credit, and his Towns, and his Ships, and his Laws, and
his Liberty, and all the Ensigns of Royalty: and the Maxims whereupon we
supported our Proceedings, did his besinesse. The Two Houses and the Army were
no more then the Gun and the Ball; The one gave fire and the other killed him.


Mo. Mr. Baxter; I (as you say) you do Unfeignedly Repent, that you spoke so
much Formerly to blow the Coals. Baxter repen^s, and then ^epents of his
Repentance.
Why are ye blowing of them again? You carried Thousands you say, into the War,
and Eng^ged in it your self, and would do the same thing over again upon the
like Occ^sion: And your Judgment tells you that it were Treason against the
Sovereign Power of the Land to do otherwise. According to This Doctrine, a
Remnant of the Lords and Commons may do as much to This K^^g as they did to his
Father, and the Presbyterians Pulpi^s shall justify the Prooc^eding. You do
Generously however to own your Positions. But yet methinks you should have some
regard to the dismal Consequences that have ^nsu'd upon this Controversy.


Ba. [It were too great Folly, by Following Accide^ts, that were then unknown,
Baxter thanks God for his Blessings upon this Nation in consequence of the
Rebellion.
for me to Judge of the Former Cause. That which Is Calamitous in the Event, is
not allways sinful in the Enterprise. Should the Change of Times make me
forget the State that we were formerly in, and Change my Judgment, by losing
the sense of what then conduced to it is Enformation, This Folly and
forgetfullnesse would be the way to a sinful, and not an Obedient Repentance.
Nor can I be so Unthankful as to say, for all the sins and Miscarriages of Men
since, that we have not received much mercy from the Lord: Holy Commonwealth.
Pa. 487.

When Godliness was the Common Scorn, the Prejudice, and shame most lamen^ably
prevailed to k^ep men from it, The Blessed Difference betwixt the Government of
the Late King, and of Cromwell
and so encouraged them in Wickedness: But through the great mercy of God,
many Thousands have been converted to a Holy, upright Life, proportionably more
then were before, since the Reproach did cease, and the Prejudice was removed,
and Faithful Preachers took the Place of Scandalous ones, or Ignorant Readers.
When I look upon the Place where I live, and see that the Families of the
Ungodly are here one, and there one in a street, as the Families of the Godly
were heretofore (though my own Endeavors have been too weak and cold) it
^orceth me to set up the stone of Remembrance, and to say [HITHERTO HAS THE
LORD HELPED US. Ibid. [Oh the sad, and Heart-piercing Spectacles that mine Eyes
have seen in four years space. [ This was Jan. 15. 1649.] [In this Fight, a
dear Friend falls down by me: From another, a Precious Christian b^ought home
wounded, or dead: Scarce a month, scarce a week, without the sight or Noise of
Blood. Saints Rest, P. 139.


Mo. Here Is first a most Evangelicall account of the blessed Effects of a
Civil War: Baxters Comfortable Effects of a Civil War.

The Blessed Times we had till the Army got the better of the Two Houses


[ The Propagation of Holiness. And Then, a most Remarkable Calculation of the
date of your Calamities, which commences precisely from the Armies getting the
Ascendent of the Two Houses, without any respect to the Outrages both upon the
Church and State, while the Presbyterians Governed.


Ri. Pray'e will ye [patiently read over the Representation, ^r Letter of the
London Ministers to the Lord General, Jan. 18. 1648.


Mo. Very well, and since you are pleased to cast the Cause, and the Integrity
of your Party upon That Issue, we will see what they say.

[ It is already sufficiently known (besides all former Miscarriages) what
Attempts of late have been put in Practice against Lawful Authority: Letter P.
3. London-Ministe^s Letter to the Lord-General. Ian 18. 1648.

The Armies Crime wa^ the opposing of the Parliament, and Imprisoning the King
without Leave.

Only a S^izure of the Kings Person. But an Vnparall^l'd Violen^e upon the
Members of the House.

Being men of Eminent Worth and In^eg^ity.


[ This Lawful Authority was a Faction of the Two Houses] Especially by the
Late Remonstrance, and Declaration, published in Opposition to the Proceedings
in Parliament. [ H^re's the Crimen lesae Majestatis.] [As also by seizing, and
Imprisoning the Kings Person without the Knowledge, and Consent of Parliament.
Ibid.

[Here's only a plain Seizure of the Kings Person, without the Parliaments
Privity or Leave; No Cond^mnation of the Thing it self, furth^r then as it was
done without his Masters Consent. Nor was the King more a Prisoner in the hands
of the Army, then he had been at Newcastle, in the hands of the Presbyterians.]

But now they come to [That late Vnparall'd violence offered to the Members of
it; forcibly hind^ing above one hundred of them (if we mistake not the Number)
from sitting in Parliament: Imprisoning many of their Persons; though many of
them are known to us to be men of Eminent worth, and Integrity; and who have
given most Ample Testimony of their Real Affection to the good of the Kingdom.
Ibid.

Pray'e take notice, that it was upon the Members, an Unparalled violence;
upon the King, no more then a Simple Seizure; and methinks they might have
bestowed some kind Epithete upon his Majesty, as well as upon the Eminent and
Worthy Members. But it is only the bare King; and That Is All.

[ And besides All This, [There is an Intent of Framing and contriving a New
Model, as well of the Laws, and Government of the Kingdom, as of the
Constitution of a new kind of Representative. All which Practices we cannot but
Judge, A Factious Re^nant, the Magistra^es which God h^t^ set ove^ us.
to be manifestly opposite to the Lawful Authority of those Majestrates which
God has set over us; and to the Duty and Obedience, which by the Laws of God
and man, and by our manifold Oaths, and Covenants, we stand obliged to render
to them. Ibid.

The London^ Ministers Mediation little less then Treason.
You are not aware, Mr. Richard, that to Justify the Doctrine of these Letters
falls very little short of Justifying downright Treason; unless you can show a
Law that places the Supreme Power in the Two Houses.

Gods Ordinance violated when Magistr^cy is opposed.
[ The Fear of God therefore, (whose Ordinance is violated, when Magistracy is
opposed) makes us afraid of meddling with Those who without any Color of Legal
Authority, merely upon the Presumption of strength, shall attempt such Changes
as these are. And we cannot but be deeply Affected with Grief and Astonishment,
The Divines fear ull of opposing God, in an Ordinance of the Two Houses.
to see that an Army raised by Authority of Parliament, for the Preservation of
the Privileges thereof, and of our Religion, Laws, and Liberties, should
contrary to their Trust, and many engagements, do That which tends to the
Manifest subversion of them All. P. 4.

None of these scruples in the case of the King.
Pray'e where was the Fear of Cod, when the King was opposed? what Legal
Authority had the Two Houses over his Majesty, more th^n the Army had over the
Two Houses! Or by what Law did That Parliament raise That Army?

The Presbyterians ^rue to the Faction from the beginn^ng.
[We have not forgotten those Declared Grounds and Principles, upon which the
Parliament first took up Arms: and upon which we were induced to join with
them: (from which we have not hitherto declared, and we trust through Gods
Grace, we NEVER SHALL.) Pa. 5.

The Standard of the Presbyte^ian Loyalty why not as tender of a breach of
Trust, according to Law, as against it?
We have here in few words, the Judgment, and the Resolution of the Presbyterian
Divines, and the standard of their Loyalty, from the Lips of the very Oracle of
the Party. I would fain know now which wa^ the fouler breach of Trust, That of
the Two Houses toward his Majesty, to whom both by Law and Conscience they were
obliged, (besides so many Gracious Concessio^s) or that of the Army, to the Two
Houses! The one being like the Robbing of an Honest man, and the other, the
Pillaging of That Thief: Over and above that the Army was Trayn'd up in the
Trade of turning out their Masters.

There was no Intent to divest the King of hi^ Legal Right.
[ And moreover; although the PARLIAMENT thus too^ up Arms for the defense of
their Persons and Privileges, and the Preservation of Religion, Laws, and
Liberties; yet was it not their Intention, thereby to do violence to the Person
of the King, or divest him of ^is Regal Authority, and what of Right belongs
to him. Pa. 7.

Do but show me now any one Essential of Sovereignty which those people left
hi^, if they could take it away, But he had a Righ^ to nothing then, for t^e^
^ook all away.
and I will be answerable to forfei^ my head for it. But still it is but what [
of Righ^] b^longeth to him; and That Is a Salvo for all the Violences Imaginable.

[ We disclam, detest, and abhor the Wicked, The Presbyterians ^ell us they are
no Jes^it^.
and bloody Te^ents, and Practices of Jesuits (the whrst of Papists) Concerning
the opposing of Magistrates, by Private persons, and the Murdering of Kings by
any, though under the most specious, and Colorable Pretenses. Pa. 11.

This is All, which upon that desperate Crisis of State was said for that Pious
and unfortunate Prince: Not one word for the King in the whole Letter.
the saving of the King, being (if any) Incomparably the least part of the
Ministers business. Beside that the dethroning of him was more Criminal then
the beheading of him. And in such a case, it would have been no longer a
Murder, when they should once have voted the Fact to be an Execution of
Justice.

[ We desire (Say they) that you would not be too Confident on former
successes. The Army in Gods way w^ile they joined with the Presby^erians.

Sworn to preserve his Majesties^ Person and Privileges of Parliament.

W^o absolved the Presbyteri^ns of their former Oaths.


If God have made you prosper while you were in his way, this can be no Warrant
for you to walk in ways of your Own. P. 12. [ So that the Old Cause is Gods
still, to this very day.]

And besides; [you have e^gaged your selves by an Oath to preserve his Majestys
Person, and the Privileges of Parliament; and This is most clear, that no
Necessity can justify Perjury, or dispense with Lawful Oaths. Pa. 15.

I should be glad to know now, how you came to be absolved of the Oath of
Allegiance, or how you can honestly pretend to Stand up for any Interest, that
renders the King Accountable to his Subjects.


Ba. [Yet if I had taken up Arms against the Parliament If Baxt^r had served
the king he had been a Traitor.
in That War, my Conscience tells me I had been a Traitor, and Guilty of
Resisting the Highest Powers. Holy Com. Pa. 433.


Mo. At This Rate, the King was a Traitor on the other side.


Ba. Baxters Holy Com. wealth, to ^e taken as Non-Scriptus.
Why do you cite the Holy Common Wealth, so often? for I have desired that the
Book be taken as non Scriptus. Non-Con. ^lea 2 d part. Pref.


Mo. A sh^ft, not a Recantation.
And would not any Malefactor that were deprehended in the manner, say as much
as this amounts to; and wish that the thing might be taken as Non Factum? This
is rather a Shift, then a Retractation.

For the Apho^isms ^ere ^e^el'd directly against the King.
And then again; it is a wonderful thing that you should overshoot your self so
much upon a Subject that was expressly [Suited to the demands, and doubts of
Th^se Tim^s,] Holy Com. Pa. 102. That is to say; The Restoring of the King was
the point then in Agitation, and out comes your Book of Aphoris^s expressly to
possess the People against it.


Ba. If you would have a Recantation more in Form, [I do here freely Profess
that I repent of all that ^^er I thoug^t, Ba^te^^ Recantation.
Said, Wrote, or did, since I was Born, against the ^^ace of Church or State,
Against the King, his Person, or ^^thority, as S^preme in himself; or as
D^^^vative in any of his Officers, M^gistrats, or any Commissioned by him. 2 d
Admonition to Bagshaw. Pa. 52.


Mo. A Repentance that will pass neither upon God, nor Man
This Mock Repentance is a Trick that will not pass either upon God or Man. The
Kings Headsman might have Said as much, and yet account that execrable Office a
meritorious work. You are at your Fast Sermon again; Always Obedient to the
Highest Powers, but divided somewhere about the Receptacle of the Sovereignty.
You ask God forgiveness for all that ever you Thought, Said, Wrote, or Did,
against the King, and the Publick-Peace. And what signifies This Repentance, so
long as you persist in maintaining, that all the violences acted upon the
Person, Crown and Dignity of his Sacred Majesty, in the Name of the King and
Parliament, were not AGAINST the King, but FOR him, This is All, but the
Hypothesis of a Transgression. Lord forgive me all that ever I did amiss. That
is to say, if ever I did any thing amiss. But I charge my self with no
Particulars. Why do ye not Touch the Thesis that you condemn; and say This,
That, and the other Aphorism I Renounce? Nay, why do ye not Reform and Correct
your mistakes, and state the matter aright, toward the bringing of These people
into their Wits again, that have been Intoxicated by your false Doctrine, and
Poisoned from your very Pulpit?


Ba. [If you Quarrel with my Repentance as not In Particulars enough; I answer
you, Baxter Re^sons why his Repen^ance is not Particular
that as in the Revocation of the Book, I thought it best to Revoke the whole,
(though not as Retracting all the Doctrine of it) because if I had named the
Particular Passages, some would have said I had mentioned too Few, and some too
many, and few would have been satisfied. Admon. to Bagshaw. Page 53.


Mo. You have Marked [ Revoke, Mr. Baxters Pi^ Fraus.
] and [Retract] with an Emphatical Character, to give to Understand, that you
do not Retract, though you do Revoke, and you have put them in Italique, to
show that there lies a stresse upon Those two Words. You Revoke the whole
[Book] you say, not as Retracting all the Doctrine of it: If by Revoke you mean
Call in, or Suppr^ss; you might as well call back your Breath again, as the
venom that was diffused by those Aphorisms. And then to say that you do not [
Retract All the Doctrine of it] does not necessarily Imply, that you Retract
any part of it. Or if you do, A Jesuitism.
your Repentance is yet Frivolous, for want of distinguishing the Right from
the Wrong; that your Disciples may not take the One from the Other.

Your Apprehension indeed of saying too much, For fear of too Much or too
Little, Mr. Ba^ter confesses just nothing at all.
or too little if you should come to Particulars, is very Reasonable: For to
please the Lovers to their Prince, Church, and Country, you must not leave one
Seditious, or Schismatical Principle behind ye. But then on the other side, if
you come to pronounce the Levying of Arms, the making of a Great Seal, and
Exercising other Acts of Sovereignty, without, and against the Kings
Commission, to be High Treason by the Established Law, you are lost to all
Intents and Purposes, with your own Party. So that for fear of disobliging the
One side or the Other, by Confessing too much, or too little, you have resolved
upon the middle way of confessing just nothing at all.


Ba. Mr. Baxter proceeds in ^is repentance
[I do Repent (again) that I no more discouraged the spirit of p^evish
Quarrelling with Superiors, and Church-Orders; and (though I ever disliked and
opposed it, yet) that I som^times did too much Encourage such, as were of this
Temper, by speaking too sharply against Those things which I thought to be
Church-Corruptions: He ever opposes what he sometimes encouraged. A Baxterism.
and was too loath to displease the Contentious, for fear of being Incapable of
doing them good, (knowing the Profane to be much worse then They) and meeting
with too few Religious persons, that were not too much pleased with such
Invectives. Ibid.


Mo. This Clause of Repentance, is every jot as much a Riddle to me as the
former. You did not sufficiently discourage the spirit of Quarrelling with
Superiors. [Which spirit you your self Raised.] You were a little too sharp
upon what you thought to be Church-Corruptions, ^'s very Repentances are
Calumnies.
[So that here is a Bit, and a Knock, You were a little too sharp; but it was
against Corrup^ions in the Church; Your very Repentances are Calumnies. But you
were willing to oblige a Contentious Religious Party that was pleased with
Invectives, you could have done them no good else. And what good I beseech ye
did you do them by it, but mislead, and confirm them in Principles of
Disobedience? only you considered you say, that the Profane were much worse
then the Other.

He Repents and Relapses in the same breath.
What is the reason that Mr. Baxter will be perpetually thus Inconsistent with
himself; First you Repent for no more Discouraging, and then (by a side wind)
for Encouraging; and before the Repentance is out of your Mouth, you are at it
again, with your CHURCH-CORRUPTIONS, and your opposition of the PROFANE
forsooth to the Godly, to Inflame the D^vision, and to Harden the
Non-Conformists in their Dissent.

Now as to your Stigmatizing Character of Profane, There is a Personal
Profaneness, Prophanness in Habit, and in Conspiracy
and there is a Profaneness of Association, and Confederacy. There are many
men I know, that have gotten so diabolical a Habit of Swearing, Cursing and
Blaspheming the holy name of God, that they can hardly speak Ten words without
an Oath, or a Curse: This is witho^t dispute a most abominable Sin; But it is
withal so Disagreeable, and so offensive, that it gives a man a Horror for
the Imitation, and Practice, of so Unprofitable, and so Monstrous a Crime; and
though it be a grievous Wickedness, it is not of so dangerous an Example. But
what say you to Sacramental Leagues against Order, and Law? To the forcing of a
whole Nation either to Swear or starve? A Covenanting Prophannesse worse then a
Personal.
to the calling God into a Conspiracy against Government and Religion? To the
Robbing of Altars; demolishing of Temples; dethroning of Kings; degrading of
Bishops? etc. And all This, in the Name of the most High God, and with hands
held up unto the Lord. But go on with your Repentance.


Ba. [I do Repent (also) that I had not more Impartially and dilligently
Consulted with the best Lawyers that were against the Parliaments Cause, He
repents that he did not advise with Lawyers.
(for I know of no Controversy in Divinity about it, but in Politiques and
Law;) and that I did not use all possible means of full Acquaintance with the
Case. Ibid.

[And that for a little while the Authority of such Writers as Mr. Richard
Hooker, Lib. I. Eccles. Polit. and Bishop Bilson, An Invidious Refle^ion upon
Hooker.
and other Episcopal Divines did too much sway my Judgment toward the
Principles of Popular Power.

[And seeing the Parliament Episcopal, and Erastian; and not hearing when the
War began, of Two Presbyterians amongst them all, nor among all their Lord
Li^utenants, Generals, Major Generals, or Colonells, till long after; I was
the Easilyer drawn to think, that Hookers Political Principles had been
commonly Received by all; which I discerned soon after upon stricter Enquiry,
to be Unsound, and have my self written a Confutation of them. Pa. 53.


Mo. This way of Dodging, in one of the Profane (as you style us) would have
been Iesuitical. Jesuitical Dodging*
Here Is only a bare wish that you had made a stricter Enquiry into the Cause,
but no Acknowledgment that you were in the Wrong. And again, If you knew of no
Controversy in Divinity about it; why are all your Writings stuffed with such a
Huddl^ of Texts for Obedience to the Two Houses? What did you search the Word
of God for, in the Case? Holy Com. Pa. 486.

(...) were misled by Mr. Hookers First Book of Ecclesiastical (...) Favor of
Popular Power; Why could not Hooker set him Right to the Church, as well as
wrong to the State. Hookers popular po^er nothing to Coordination.
why would ye not let him set the Right in your Ecclesiastical ^olitiques, and
in your Duty to the Authority, and Discipline of the Church, to make ye some
amends? the Biasse which you will have him to take, in favor of Popular Power,
being not one jot to your purpose, but regarding only the Specification of
Government, and not the Fountain; and who^ly Foreign to your Phansy of a
Co-ordination: Whereas That Great man's discourse in vindication of the Rites
and Injunctions of the Church comes directly to your Point: and stands as sirm
as a Rock against all the Insults of Calumny, and Opposition; without any
pretense to a Reply. But you serve Mr. Hooker in This, and the King himself,
and the English Clergy in Other Cases, Baxters Writings a^e a direct Satyr upon
Government.
as you do the Bishops in your Church History: you turn over Indexes and
Common-Places for matter of Reproach against them, and then obtrude upon the
World, the Frailties of some, and your own most Uncharitable mistakes of
Others, for the History of the Order; but not one word of Their Virtues. (It
would make a black book, the Story of the Presbytery drawn up at the same
Rate.) It is your way still, under a Pretext of advancing the Mistical Church,
to depress the Visible, and to put the people out of Love with both Civil and
Ecclesiastical Constitutions.


Ba. [Pray'e do but observe and see of what manner of persons the Visible
Church has be^n Constituted, B's quarrel to the Visible Church.
in all Ages of the World, till now. In the first Church, in Adams Family, a
Cain, In a Church of Eight persons, the Father and Pastor overtaken with Gross
Drunkenness, and one of his Sons was a Cursed Cham. In a Church of six persons,
Two of them perished (in Sodom (in the flames among the Unbelievers, and a
Third turned into a Pillar of Salt: The Two remaining Daughters, committed
Incest. In Abraham's Family, an Ishmael; in Isaac^s, an Esau: even Rebecca, and
Jacob guilty of deceitful Equivocation; an Abraham and Isaac denied their
Wives to save themselves in their Unbelief. In Jacobs Family a Simeon and Levi,
that sold their brother Joseph. Of the Church of the Isralites in the
Wilderness but Two permitted to enter into the Land of Promise, etc. [The Ten
Tribes were drawn by Ieroboa^ to Sin, by setting up Calves at Dan in Bethel,
and making Priests of the Vilest of the People; and forsaking the Temple, and
the True Worship of God and the Lawful Priests. And these Lawful Priests at
Jerusalem were Ravening Wolves and Greed^ Dogs, and careless, and cruel
Shepherds. The false Pro phets who deceived the People were most Accepted.] Ch
Div. Pa. 35.^6.37. And if you run through the Churches of Rome, Corinth,
Galatia, Colosse, Ephesus, Pergamus, Thyatira, Sardis, Laodicea.] Pa. 39.40.41.
you will find it to be the same case.


Mo. But what is your end in all This?


Ba. [Not to make Sin less Odious, nor the Church or Godly less Esteemed: but
to show you the Frame of the Visible Church, The Reasons of B's Unkindness to
the Visible Church*
in all Generations, and how it differs from the Jewish; lest you should take
on you to be wiser then God, and to build his house after a better Rule then
his Gospel and the Primitive Pattern. Ibid. Pa. 36.


Mo. This is by Interpretation, The Non-Conformists are the Invisible Church;
He makes Dissenters the Invisible Church and Conformists the Visib^^.
and the Episcopal Clergy are the Ravening Wolves, and the Greedy Dogs, and
all the Sons of the Church of England, are the Church Visible, According to
your most obliging way of Allusion. But there is one thing I forgot.

You say, the Presbyterians did not begin the War; which with your Favor is a
great mistake, and yet not a pin matter to the case in Question; whether they
did or not. Did not the Kirk lead the Dance, and the Republican Faction in
England pay them their wages, Presbyterians began the War
and call them their Dear Brethren for their pains? And then the Presbyterian
war was denounced in the Pulpi^, and in the Parliament House too, long before
the Republican broke out openly in the Field. What if the first Public
Sticklers, were not at that time Declared Presbyterians? They were yet in the
Conspiracy against Bishops, though under another Notion; and quickly after they
Listed themselves under That very Profession, as the best cover in nature for
their purpose; for That Schism was never without a State-faction in the Belly
on it. But nothing is more Notorious, then the Intelligence that was held, from
the Beginning, betwixt the Republican Caball, and the Presbyterian Divines! The
one drew the Bellows, and the Other Played the Tune. And take notice likewise,
That Presbyterian was a mark of the Faction rather then a note of the Religion,
and used in Contradistinction to Royallist. A State Faction as well as a
Schism.
But Pray'e finish your Repentance.


Ba. B's Implicit Repentance.
For [All the rest of my Sins in this business, which I know not of
Particularly, I do Implicitly and generally Repe^^ of, and ask of God to give
me a particular Conversion, etc.] Ibid 53.


Mo. B's account soon cast up.
If you have told all the Particulars you know of, yo^^ Account, Mr. Baxter, is
soon cast up.

You begin with a Gen^rall Supposition. All that ever I Thou^^^, Said, etc.
without any One Instance; or Acknowledgement. If you had said, I have committed
many Sins of This kind, and (...) That, it had been something.

Your Second Branch of Repentance, is for no more discouragi^^ Peevishness
toward Superiors; and Then sometimes too (...) Encouraging it by being too
Sharp your self against what yo^ took to be Church Corruptions. Why Sorry for
no MORE discouraging, A General Particular Repentance.
when you were so far from discouraging at all, th^^ on the Contrary, you
Repent in the same Period, for too (...) Encouraging? This is, at the best; but
a Lame and a Gene^^^ Particular Repentance. Rebellion and Peevishness.
That which you make no more of th^^ the Spirit of Peevish Quarrelling (as if
the people had only (...) upon a Nettle) you should have spoken out, and called
it the Spirit of Contumacy, and Rebellion. And what is it that yo^ charge upon
your self here, more then that you were a little too Mealy-mouthed? B. Repents
of being too mealy-mouthed.
But where is your Vindication of the Ch^r^^-Orders you mention? where is your
Determination which (...) the Right Superiors. Why do ye not tell the People
that yo^ were mistaken in the Opinion of our Church-Corruptions; and Instruct
them in their Duties of Obedience to God, and the King? Without so doing, That
which you call Repentance, is o^l^ a Snare to the Multitude, and a Scandal to
the Government.

Your next Pang of Repentance, is for not Consulting the best Lawyers that were
against the Parliament, more Impartially and dilligently then you did.

A Repentance without a Confession.
Is This the Repentance, Mr. Baxter, of a Confessor? A R^pentance, without a
Confession: an arrant piece of Artifice, and Design, to put on the Disguise of
a Recantation, and without any charge or discharge of Conscience, to keep in
with Both Parties. The Sin does not Ly in your not Advising with Lawyers
concerning the State of the Controversy, but in Plungi^g your self and Others
into Blood, hand over head, contrary to the Laws of God and man, without so
much as consulting the grounds of the Quarrel. To the Royallists it looks like
an excuse of your Disloyalty to the King; as who should say; It Is true, I was
to blame: It was a Point of Law, And an abuse upon Both Parties.
and I should have taken better Advise upon it. And if the Other Side accuse you
as a desertor of the Cause, you can acquit your self There too, that you have
not Repented of any one Point to their Prejudice. If it be not as I say, and
that you mean Good Faith, do but publish your Loyalty to the World, in the
manner, or to the effect Following, and I Will ask your Pardon.

I Do Declare, that the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament, Mr. Baxter's
Test.
are still the Kings Subjects, and that it is not Lawful for them to exercise
any Act of Sovereign Power, without or Against the Kings Command, or Consent. I
do l^kewise declare that the War, Raised by the pretended Authority of the
Lords and Commons in 1642. with all their Orders, Ordinances, and Impositions
in pursuance thereof, were also unlawful: And that All Acts of Hostility done
by Them or their Order, against the King, or the Party Commssioned by him,
during the Command of the Earl of Essex, were Acts of disloyalty, and
Rebellion.

If you be really the man that you would be thought to be, you will never Boggle
at This Test: But if This will not down with ye, (let me tell you Sir, that to
my knowledge worse then this, has) you will make me think of the Lady in the
Proverbs, that [ Eats, and wipeth her Mouth, and says I have done no
Wic^ednesse.


Ba. Mr Baxter's Challenge.
You Reflect in These Reproaches either upon my Particular Principles, or upon
the Principles of the Party, or upon Both. As to my self; [If any man can
prove, that I was Guilty of, hurt to the Person, or destruction of the Power of
the King, or of Changing the Fundamental Constitution of the Common-Wealth]
etc. Holy Com. Pa. 489.490. [I will never gain-s^y him if he call me a most
persidious Rebel; and tell me that I am Guilty of far greater Sin, then
Murder, Whoredom, Drunkenesse, or such like. Ibid.

Or if they can solidly Confute my Grounds, I will tha^^ them, and Confess my
Sin to all the World. Ibid.


Ri. Richard takes him up and proves him guilty as ^o the Kings Person.
Nay Brother Baxter, you must give Me leave to put in ^ Word now; and first to
your Practice, then to your Grounds. Di^ not you animate the Party that was in
Arms against the King; (...) much as any man, and was That no hurt to his
Person? [ Remem^^ (say you to the Army) how far I have gone with you in the W^^
-- And shall I be afraid of my Old most Intimate Friends? etc. Holy Com. Pref.
Will you have it now that This Army, your O^^, and intimate Friends, did no
Hurt to his Majesty's Person? A^^ now bethink your self, of your Challenge in
the Preface to your Ho^^ Common wealth. An Opposer of the Kings Power.
[ Prove that the King was the Highest Pow^^, in the time of Divisions, and
that he had Power to make (...) War, which he made, and I will offer my Head to
Justice as a ^^bell.] Is not This Destructive of the Kings Power? And is not
(...) a Change of the Fundamental Constitution of the Common-wea^^^, (...) say
that [the Members of Parliament considered disjunctly, (...) Subjects, And the
Fundamental Constitution.
but that Conjunctly, as a House or Body, they (...) the Sovereignty.] Holy
Com. Pa. 433. And again, pa. 462. [ Te^^ the Parliament has a part of the
Legislative Power, (eve^ (...) ENACTING, and not only of Proposing) is
undoubted.


Ba. Nay if you go to That Richard, I shall call You to A^compt for your
Practices and Propositions too. Do not you remember a certain Dedicatory
Epistle, He acknowl^dgeth the Protectors Sovereignty. And blesses the
Providence that brought Richard to the Government.
to Richard Protector, i^ your Key for Catholics, where you have these words?
[Gi^^ not leave to every seducer to do his worst to damn men's So^l^ when you
will not Tolerate every Traitor to draw your Am^ie^ or PEOPLE into Rebellion.]
And again, [This is one that rejoices in the present happiness of England, and
honors all the Providence of God, by which we have been brought (...) what
we are.] Do not you here acknowledge Richard the Pr^tectors Sovereignty? and
bless all the Providence that have brought matters so Comfortably about?


Ri. Ay, Ay, Baxter; Richard had his Principles from Baxter.
That's a Doctrine you taught me in your Commonwealth. [ I am bound to submit to
the Present Government, as set over us by God, and to Obey for Conscience-sak^,
and to behave my self as a Loyal Subject toward Them. Baxter make^ the
Protect^rs Title as good as the Kings.
For a Full and Free Parliament has owned it, and so there is notoriously the
Consent of the People, which is the Evidence that former Princes had to Justify
their Best Titles. Pa. 484. Whereas in Truth neither was This a Free
Parliament, nor any Parliament at all; neither was your submission to the
present Power, an Act of Conscience, for the same Conscience would have obliged
you as well to the King, upon the same Grounds.


Ba. In good time Mr. Richard: And who taught ye, I wonder your Complements to
Prince Richard in the Five disputations? Where you Address your self [ To His
Highness, Richard, Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of England, Baxters
Addresses to Richard Protector.
Scotland, and Ireland.] Ep. Ded. And further [ Your Zeal for God will kindle
in your SUBJECTS, a zeal for you. The more your Life and Government is Divine,
the more Divine will you appear; and therefore, the more Amiable, and
Honorable to the Good, and Reverend to the Evil. Parliaments will Love and
honor you, and abhor the Motions that tend to a Division, or your Just
Displeasure. Ministers will heartily pray for you, and praise the Lord for his
Mercies by you, and Teach all the People to Love, Honor and Obey you. The
People will Rejoice in you; and you will be loved or Feared of All. Such
Happiness attends Serious Piety, when Impiety, selfishnesse, and Neglect of
Christ, is the shame and Ruin of Prince and People. I crave your Highness
Pardon for this Boldness, and your Favorable Acceptance of the Tendered
Service of,

A Faithful Subject to your Highness, as you are an Officer of the Universal
King, Richard Baxter.





Ri. Ba^ters Resolution in ^^ree Cases, expressly to keep out the King.
IN keep still to my Old Master Doctor of the Aphorisms, [ If a Person enter
into a military State against the People, and by Them be Conquered, they are
not obliged to Restore him, unless there be some other Special Obligation upon
them, beside their Allegiance.] These. 145. And moreover [ If the Person
dispossessed, though it were Unjustly* do afterward become Incapable of
Government, It is not the Subjects du^y to seek his Restitution.] These. 146.
And yet again [Whosoever exp^lls the Sovereign, though Injuri^usly, and
resolves to revive the Commonwealth, rather then he shall be restored: and if
the Commonwealth may prosper without his Restoration, It is the Duty of such
an Injured Prince, for the Common Good to resign his Government; and if he w^ll
not, the People ought to Judge him as m^de Incable by Providence, and not to
seek his Restitution to the Apparent Ruin of the Commonwealth.] These. 147.


Mo. Pray let me put in a Word betwixt ye. What do you call Incapacitys?


Ba. [When Providence depriveth a man of his UNDERSTANDING, Baxters
Incapaci^ies for Government.
He is Materia Indisposita, and Incapable of Government, though not of the
Name.] These. 135. [If God permits Princes to turn so WICKED, as to be Incapable
of Governing, Dominion is founded in Grace. Want of Power deposes a Prince.
So as is consis^ent with the Ends of Government, he permits them to depose
Themselves.] These. 136. Again; [If Providence Statedly disable him that was the
Sovereign, from the executing of Laws, Protecting the Just, and other Ends of
Government, it makes him an Incapable Subject of the Power and so deposes
him.] For a Government so Impotent, is None. A capacity for the Work and Ends
is necessary in the Person; and when That cease, the Power cease.] H^l.
Comm. Page 137.138.


Ri. And then you say further, These. 153. That [Any thing that is a sufficient
Sign of the Will of God, that This is the Person, by whom we should be
Governed, is enough (as Joined to Gods Laws) to oblige us to Consent, and Obey
him, as our Governor.) Upon which Ground, you your self do Justify all that I
have either said, or do^e, in submission to Richard. And so you do likewise in
your Thesis 149. [ If the Rightful Governor be so long dispossessed, that the
Commonwealth can be no longer be without Government, A Case against his
Majesty's ^estauration.
but to the appar^nt hazard of it is Ruin, we ought to Judge that Providence
has disp^^sest the Former, and presently consent to another.] We must not say,
that [because we cannot have such a man, we will have none, but be Vngoverned;
This is to break an Express Commandment, and to cast off the Order and
Ordinance of God, for a Persons sake.] P. 162. And then there is another thing;
You put all the Cases that ever you could muster up, against the Kings Return.
[ If a King (you say) dissolves the Government he can be no Governor. Cases of
Forfeiture.
If an Enemy, no King. A destroyer cannot be a Ruler, and Defender; He
proclaims Hostility, and is Therefore not to be Trusted.] Pa. 539.


Ba. Well, well? Richard. If you had pleased, you might have found out some
other Aphorisms, where I have done as much Right I Am sure to Sovereign Power
as any man living. Baxter asserts Obedience at all hazzards.
Do not I say These. 326. That [It is the Subjects Duty to defend their Prince,
with their Strength, and hazard of their Lives, against all Foreign and
Domestique Enemies, that seek his Life, or Ruin?]


Ri. If you speak This to the Cause in Question; Baxter against the King though
the Parliament had been in the wrong.
how will you come off where you say [If I had known that the Parliament had
been the Beginners; and in most fa^^t, yet the Ruin of our Trustees, and
Representives, and so of all the Security of the Nation, is a Punishment
greater then any fault of theirs against a King, can from him deserve: and That
Their saul^s cannot disoblige me from defending the Commonwealth. ^ Owned not
all that ever they did: but I took it to be my Duty to look to the mayn End.
And I kn^w that the King had all his Power for the Common Good, and therefore
had none against it; and Therefore that no Cause can Warrant him, to make the
Commonwealth the Party, which he shall exercise Hostility against.] Ho. Com.
Pa. 480. [ All this s^^med plain to me] And [When I found so many things
Conjunct, as Two of the Three Estates against the Will of the King Alone, the
Kingdoms Representatives and Trustees assaulted in the Guarding of our
Liberties, and the Highest Court defending them against offending Subjects, ^.
does n^^ love to rub old sores.
and se^king to bring them to a Legal Trial; and the Kingdoms Safety, and the
Common Good, involved in their Cause (which may be more fully manifested,
Neutrality a sin, and Treachery ^o serv^ the King.
but that I would not stir too much in the Evils of times past;) All these, and
many m^re concurring, persuaded me, that it was Sinful to be Neutrals, and
Treach^rous to be against the Parliament in that Cause.] -- [ It were a wonder
if so many humble, honest Christians, fearful of sinning, and Praying for
Direction, The praying Rebels against the Loyal Damme's.
should be all mistaken in so weighty a Case, and so many Damme's all in the
Right.] pa. 481.


Ba. Very Learnedly applied. But do not I say Pa. 437* That [if a Parliament
would wrong a King, and depose him Unjustly, A just way of Deposing a King
implied.
and change the Government, for which they have no Power, the Body of the
Nation may refuse to serve them in it, yea, may forcibly restrayn them? If they
Not^riously betray their Trust, not in some Tolerable matters, but in the
Fundamentalls, A Parliament may betray their Trust 100.
or Points that the Common Good depends on, and engage in a Cause that would
destroy the Happiness of the Commonwealth; It is then the Peoples duty to
forsake them, an^ cleave to the King against them, if they be Enemies to the
Commonwealth.] Page 438.


Ri. Tho a Prince be injured, the people may join with his Enemies.
Now I beseech ye Mr. Baxter be pleased to Compare pa. 43^. with pa. 424. where
you lay down This Thes^^ [ Though some inj^ry to the King be the Occasion of
the War, it is the Duty of all the P^^ple to defend the Commonwealth against
him; Yet so, as that t^^y protest against That Injury.]


Ba. But what say ye all this while to the Case of making Co^nt to an Usurper?
No Obedience due to an Usurper.
[When it is Notorious ( say I) that where a man has no Right to Govern, People
are not bound to Obey him, unless by Accident.] Thesis 339.


Ri. [ We detest their O^inion, who think that a strong and pr^sperous Usurper,
Usurpr rsmust be opposed
may be defended, against the King, or that the King is not to be def^nd^d
against him, to the hazard of our Estates, (...) Lives.] Non-Conf. 2d. part.
Pa. 77. [ Mere Conquest with^^^ Consent, They have no true power.
is no Just Title.] Ibid. P. 108. And again, [Vs^rp^^ have no True Power, nor
do their Commands bind anb one in Consc^ence to formal Obedience: Who are
Usurpers.
nor may they be set up and defended agai^^^ the Lawful Governor.] Pa. 55. [
And Those are Usurpers (...) by Force or Fraud depose the Lawful Governor and
take his place. Ibid. [ If Usurpers claim the Crown, the Su^ject must Judge
wh^^ is their King and must defend his Right. The people to be Judges.
] Non-Con. Plea. 70.


Ba. But what if the People shall Miss-Judge? [All things are not destructive
to the Commonwealth, The people may misjudge.
that are Judged so by Dissenting Subjects.] Holy Com. Pref. [Nor are Subje^ts
allowed to Resist, Baxt. laments the loss of the late Rule^s.

Sworn, and sworn, to King Lords and Commons.

The Lords and Commons rule alone, and ^he Government not changed.


whenever they are consident that Rulers would destroy the Commonwealth.]
Ibid. [Oh how happy would the best of Nations under Heaven be, If they had the
Rulers that our Ingratitude has cast off.] [Our old Constitution, was King,
Lords, and Commons, which we were sworn and sworn, and sworn again to be
faithful to, and to Defend. The King withdrawing, the Lords and Commons Ruled
alone, though they Attempted not the Change of the Species of Government. Next
This, we had the Major part of the House of Commons in the Exercise of
Sovereign Power, the Corrupt Majority, (as the Army called them) being cast
out.] Ibid. etc. It Is no matter for the Following Revolutions; [To resist, or
depose the Best Governors in all the world, that have the Supremacy, is
forbidden to Subjects on point of Damnation. Ibid.


Ri. Pray'e hold your hand a little Mr. Baxter. Baxter charged wi^h
con^radiction.
If the Government was i^ King, Lords, and Commons, how came the Two Houses ^o
Rule Alone, with an Usurpation? And without changing the Species of the
Government? or how came we, that you say were sworn over and over to all Three,
to depose the Head, and Submit to the other Two; and to let the Government sink
from a Mona^chy, into a^ Aristocracy? and why might not the Commons, cast out
the Lords, and the Army the Commons, as well as the Two Houses cast off the
King? Especially by your own Comment upon, [Let every Soul be Subject to the
Higher Powers.] Ho. Com. 3E9. The Higher Po^ers (...) the Gove^nor^ in
possession.
Where you expound the Higher Power, to be Intended of the Governors in Actual
Possession. What hindered this A^gument from holding, when the King was in
Actual Possession?


Ba. [A people may give an Honourary Title to the Prince, and not give the same
to Others, It Is not the N^me that makes the King.
that have part in the Sovereignty.] [So that Names are not the only Notes of
Sovereignty. Wherefore one must not Judge of the Power of Princes by their
Titles, or Names.] Ho. Com. Pa. 432. The people Judges of the King and o^ the
Law.
[The Law says the King, shall have the Power of the Militia, supposing it to
be against Enemies, and not against the Commonwealth, nor them that have part
of the Sovereignty with him. To Resist him here is not to Resist Power, but
Usurpation, and Private Will. In such a Case, the Parliament is no more to be
Resisted then he, because they are also the Higher Power.] Ho. Com. Pa. 431.
Seize the Kings Revenue, and ^e is no longer a King.
And there is more in it yet. [If a Prince be statedly made a Beggar, or
forsaken, or Ejected by a Conqueror, and so Incapable of Governing, if it be
but pro Tempore, the Subjects for That time, (that have no opportunity to
Restore him) are disobliged from his Actual Government. [ Pa. 139.


Ri. So that the S^izing of a Prince's Revenue, deposes him from (...)
Sover^ignty, and descharges his Subjects of their Obedience. But I took
[Inferior Magistrates to be Subjects of the King as well as the meanest men;
Inferior Magistr^tes still Subje^^s.

Richard ever True to the Crown.


and to have no more Power to Depose, or take up Arm^ against him, then other
Subjects.] Non-Con. Plea, 2d. part p. 5^. And [In all the times of Usurpation,
and since, I said, and wrote, that the Kings Person is Inviolable, and to be
Judged by none, either Pe^r, or Parliament, and that it is none but Subjects,
that they may call to Account, Judge, and Punish.] Pref.


Ba. The Law of Nature i^ above the Law of the Land.
I shall leave [Others to Judge, in what Cases Subje^^s may Resist Kings by
Arms; We shall only Conclude, that no Humane Power can Abrogate the Law of
Nature, Non-C^^. Plea. 2 d. Part Pa. 57.


Ri. Modest Subjects study their own Duty not the Kings.
And may not the Two Houses be Resisted by the Law of Nature as well as they
oppo^^^ the King? [Mod^^^ Subjects should rather study what Laws God has made
for Themselves, then what (...) he has made for Kings; and what (...) Own duty
th^^ wh^t i^ the Kings: [Th^ugh (...) are not bound to be (...).] Non-Con.
Plea, 2 d. Part. Pa. 48.


Ba. Sovereign Power not to be re^tr^ined by the people.
Nay I am as little for Restraining of Sovereign Power as any ^lesh breathing.
[It is not sa^e or Lawful for the People to Limit, or Restrain the Sovereign
Power, from dispos^^g so far of the Estates of All, as is necessary to the
safety of A^l, which is the End of Government.] Thesis 115. Nay [A Governor
cannot Law^ully be Restrained by the People from preserving them.] These. 120.
[For the Multitude are Covetous, The Multitude no Judges of Government.
Tenacious, Injudicious, and Incompetent Judges of the Necessities, or
Commodity of the Commonwealth.] Pa. 115.


Ri. But what was it you were saying even now of the Best Governors in the
World?


Ba. I was saying, that [the Best Governors in all the World that have the
Supremacy have been Resisted or deposed in England. I mean 1. Them that the
Army called the C^rrupt Majority: or an Hundred Forty and Three Imprisoned, and
Secluded Members of the Long Parliament, who, as the Majority, had, you know
what power. The Seclu^ed Members and the ^wo Cr^mwells the bent Governors.
2. The Powers that were last laid by. I should with great Rejoicing give a
Thousand Thanks to That man, that will acquaint me of One Nation upon all the
Earth, that has better Governors in Sovereign Power (as to Wisdom and
Holiness Conjun^t) then those that have been Resisted, or deposed in Engl^^^.
Ho. Com. Pref.


Ri. You Speak of the Secluded Members, Rebellion to oppose the s^preme Rulers.
and the Two Cromwells. But they all came in by Violence; And [I know none of
the Non-Conformists that take it not for Rebellion, to pull down or s^t up
^orcibly by the Sword, any thing against the Supreme R^ler, or Without him] R.
Bs. Letter to Mr. Hinckly. Pa. 8^.


Ba. [The Parliament did Remonstrate to the Kingdom, the danger of the
Subversion of Religion, and Liberties, The Par^iame^^ to^d us our danger.
and of the Common Good and Interest of the People whose Trustees they were]
Ho. Com. Pa. 471. And [If a Nation Regularly choose a Representative Body, of
the most Noble, Prudent, Interested Members, to discern their dangers and the
Remedies, and preserve their Liberties and Safety, the People t^emselves are to
discern These Dangers, and Remedies by THEIR eyes.] These. 356. And we we^e
b^und to (...) with Their Eyes*
And I think [it was time for us to believe a Parliament concerning our Danger,
and Theirs, when we heard so many Impious persons rage against them] Pa. 472.
[the Irish professing to raise Arms for the King, to defend his Prerogative and
their own Religion against the Parliament. I say, in such a time as This, we
had Reason to believe our entrusted Watchmen, that told us of the danger, and
no Reason to suffer our Lives and Libertyes to be taken out of their Trust, and
wholly put into the hands of the King. We had rather of the two, TheKing
himself opposed and Baxte^ ^e^o^ved to jus^ify it.
be put upon the Inconvenience of Justifying our Defense, then to have been
Butchered by Thousands, and fall into such hands as Ireland did.] Pa. 473. But
[all the Wars that have been since the Opposition to the Parliament, and
Violence done to the Person of the King: were far from being owned by the
Common Sort of the Now Non-Conformists, etc.] Non-Conf. Plea. Pa. 138.


Ri. You were saying a while ago as I remember, that a Parliament that
destroys Fundamentals, is an Enemy to the Commonwealth, and the People ought
to oppose them. Pray'e Say: (...) not the Freedom and Right of the Electors,
as much a Fundamental, A Fundamental de^troy'd.
as the Privilege, and Trust of the Elected? How comes it then that you
propound the Reducing of Elections to the Faithf^^l, honest Upright men,] etc.
Pref. to the Ho. Com.


Ba. Baxter defends it. Parliaments may be corrupt.
Let me speak afterward of the Necessity, and of the Utility of This Cause.

1. [It is known that Parliaments qua Tales, are not Divine, Religious,
Protestant, or Just. The Six Articles by which the Martyrs were burnt, were
made by a Parliament. All the Laws for the Papal Interests in the days of
Popery* have been made by them. They have often Followed the Wills of Princes
to and fro, and therefore they are not Indefectible, nor Immutable, as such.
Ho. Com. Pa. 243.


Mo. Very right; and all the late Orders and Ordinances (...) Sequestring Crown
and Church-Revenues, Instances of Parliamentary Co^ruptions.
Commitments, Plunders, Decimations and the like, were made by that which you
call a Parliament. But see now in what a Condition That people must be, that
sees with the Parliaments Eyes, in ca^^ of such Parliaments, as you suppose:
and the Remedy you prescribe, is worse then the disease; for take away the
Freedom of Choice, and the Persons Chosen are a Faction rather then a
Parliament.


Ba. 2. [It is known that there are Mambers of Vario^^ minds in them all, Votes
may be c^rried by Faction.
and sometime, the miscarrying Party is so strong, that by a few more voices
they might brsng Misery o^ the Commonwealth.] Ibid.


Mo. A^ appe^rs to our cost.
This we have found in several cases upon Experiment; to the Ruin of three
Kingdoms.


Ba. The major part of Electors are ill me^.
3. [It is well known that in most parts, the Majo^-Vote of the Vulgar that are
Chusers are Ignorant, selfish, of Private Spirits, ruled by money, and therefore
by their Landlords, and other Great and Powerful men, and withal, they are
bitterly distasted against the Serious, diligent Practice of Religion,
according to the Rules of Christ.] Ibid.

4. [It is therefore apparent, that if they had their Liberty, And will choose
others like themselves.
They would choose such as are of their minds; and it was by Providence, and
Accident that heretofore they did not so.] Ibid.


Mo. Here Is a Compendious Model Mr. Baxter of your Project [for the due
Regulation of the Electours, Baxter's model for Reg^lation of Elections. The
Peoples Right of Election taken away by partial qualifications. A Faction packt
under he name of a Parliament.
and Elections of Parliament] These. 211. First, you propound to take away from
the People of England, their Ancient, and Undoubted Right of Choosing their own
Representatives. 2. to Unqualify all the Nobility, Gentry, and Commonalty of
the Land that are Well Affected to the Government of Church and State. And 3ly.
To Pack a Faction under the name of a Parliament of your own Leaven. Or if that
will not do, it is but employing the Rabble again to give the House a swinging
Purge, and you are at your Journeys End. Proceed.


Ba. 5. [It is certain, that the Wars, The People are disobliged, and not
trusted with choosing their own Representative.
the Change of Church Government, and Forms of Worship, the Differences of
Religious men, and the many Sects that have lately risen up among us, and the
strict Laws of Parliament about the Lords day, etc. and Specially their Taxes,
have deeply discontented them, and exasperated them against such as they think
have caused these, so that many would now purposely design Their Ruin.] Ibid.
In fine, [Without Regulating Elections, what Probability is there, but the next
that is chosen by a Majority of Votes, with absolute Freedom, will undo all
that has been done; and be revenged to the full on all that were so odious to
them, and Settle our Calamity by a Law?


Mo. This is a more Candid Account Mr. Baxter, The people sick of their
Representative.
then you Intended it. For the People may well be allowed to have Cursed the
Authors of those bloody Broils; The Profaning of our Temples; The
suppressing of our Church Government, and Liturgy, the Propagating of so many
Sects and Schisms; and bringing the Nation to Groan under Their Taxes, like the
Ass under the Burden. But how is That the Peoples Representative, that Shuts
the people out of the Election, and acts both Without, and Against their
Consent? The Tenth part of this encroachment upon the Common Liberty, from the
King, would have been Cried out against, as Arbitrary And Tyrannical. But what
way would you direct for the Limiting of the Qualifications?


ba. The Pastors to approve of the Electors.
[Let all Pastors in England, that are Approved, have an Instrument of
Approbation, and all that are Tolerated, an Instrument of Toleration; and let
no man be a chuser or a Ruler that holds not Communion with an Approved or
Tolerated Church, and is not signified under the Pastors hand, to be a Member
thereof.] These. 219.


Mo. A most excellent Invention to advance the Empire of Presbytery, The Empire
of Presbytery.
and enslave all other degrees and Persuasions of men whatsoever.


Ba. [The Humble Petition and Advice determines, that under the Penalty of a
Thousand pounds, The Petition and Advice concerning Elections.
and Imprisonment till it be paid, no person be Elected and sit in Parliament
but] [ Such as are persons of known Integrity, fear God, and of Good
Conversation. Baxters admirable Expedient.
They are sworn also for Fidelity to the Protector, etc.] A more excellent Act
has not been made, for the happiness of England, concerning Parliaments, at
least, since the Reformation.
] Ho. Com. 257.258.


Mo. But what is it that you mean by this Known Integrity? or who are to be the
Judges of it? His qualifications accepted.
I take That man that Publicly Sacrifices his Life, his Fortune, his Family,
and his Freedom to the service of his Prince and Country, according to the
Law, to be a man of Known Integrity: and him that Acts in opposition to the
Law, and to his duty, to be clearly the contrary. The Pharisee and the Publican.
I take the Publican, that smites his breast, and cries, Lord be merciful unto
me a sinner; to have more of the Fear of God in him, then the Pharisee, that
Prays in the Market Place, and thanks God that he is not as Other men are: And
I take him to be of as Good a Conversation, that submits quietly to the Rules
of the Government; Reverences Authority, and contents himself with his Lawful
Lot, As he is that values himself upon Outbraving Public Order, Reviling his
Betters; Living upon the spoil, and devouring the Bread of the Oppressed.

What would you say now to the turning of the Tables, and setting up of your
Qualifications on the other side? and to the Kings excluding of the
Non-Conformists by an Oath of Fidelity to himself, What if the King should take
upon him so?
as your Richard [excluded delinquents in the late Eections.] Ho. Com. P. 244.
[ So that the People durst not go according otheir Inclinations.] Ibid. But why
do I argue from your Practices, when your Positions do naturally lead to the
same undutyfull Ends?


Ba. [My dull Brain could never find out any one point of difference in
Theology, about the Power of Kings, Baxt^r f^^des Presbyterian and Episcopal
Loyalty the same.
and the Duty of Obedience in the People, between the Divines called
Presbyterians, and Episcopal. If you know any, name them me, and tell me your
Proofs. R.B's. Letter to Mr. Hinckly,] Pa. 26.


Ri. It Is a Confounding of your Metaphysics methinks with your Politiques, to
talk of Points of Theology, Baxter confounds hisM^taphsiycks with his Poli^icks.
in matters of Civil Power and Obedience; without distinguishing between our
Credenda and Agenda, Notion and Practice; Supernatural Truths and Moral
Duties. And why [The Divines CALLED Presbyterians] and not rather the
Presbyterian Divines? For they are not ALL, Presbyterians, that are so CALLED;
and there is a great deal of difference betwixt the Principles of Presbyterian
Divines, as Presbyterian, and the (...) of those very Presbyterians, as they
are range^ under ^he B^nner of a Civil Interest. But over and above all Thi^,
you have carried it a great deal ^oo far, to say that the Episcopal, and the
Presbyterian Divines hold the same Principles in the Point of King and Subject.
You should rather have acknowledged* the disagreements, and maintained the
P^i^ciple.

We hold, 1. [ That the Parliament by the Constitution, Presbyterian Positions.
have part of the Sovere^^^t^.] Ho. Com. Pa. 457. [2. That the Sovereignty is
jointly i^ K^^g, Lords and Commons, as Three Estates.] 465. [3. The Parlia^ent
have a Power of Enacting Laws as well as of ^roposing them.] Pa. 462. Whereas
The Episcopal Party prono^^ce the Sovereignty to be only in the King; Episcopal
Positions.
2. They assert the Kings sole Supremacy in all Causes, and over all Persons,
whatsoever as well Ecclesiastical, as Civil, and 3. That the two Houses have
no share at all in the Sanction. We hold likewise that It was Treason to resist
the Parliament, as the Enemy did, apparently in Order to their Subversion.] Ho.
Com. 478. Presbyt. Posit.
[ That the Parliament was the highest Interpreter of Laws that was then
Existent, in the Division.] Ibid. And so we find that every step of the
Parliamentary War was Iustify'd by the Assembly, and the whole Current of the
Presbyterian-Divines: Episc. Posit.
The Episcopal Clergy Unanimously declaring themselves to the contrary. Who but
the Assembly July 19. 43. in the Names of Themselves and Others, The Assembly
cries out for blood.

And stir up the people.


to call for the Execution of Justice, on All delinquents? Husband 2d. Vol. of
Collections, 241. And who again, Aug. 10. 1643. but The Divines of the Assembly
that are Re^iants of the Associated Counties, and now Attending the Assembly,
are desired to go down into their several Counties, to stir up the people in
Those several Counties, to rise for their Defense.] Ibid. 285. So that in the
Main, we differ upon the very Constitution of the Government; the Power of the
Prince, the Duty of the Subject, and upon every point of the Parliamentary War:
And we are no less divided upon the Scheme of Forms, and Ceremonies.


Ba. Mr. ^axter never wronged any man.
[Prove that I or any of my Acquaintance ever practiced Ejecting, Silencing,
ruining men for things Unnecessary; yea or for Greater things. Whom did we ever
forbid to Preach the Truth? Whom did we cast out of all Church-Maintenance?
Whom did we Imprison!] R. R's. Answ. to Dr. Stillingfleet. Pa. 97.


Ri. You forget your self Brother: and I am for speaking the Truth, though I
shame the Devil. Richard refreshes his memory.
Pray look into Mercurius Rusticus his Account of the London Clergy that were
Ejected, Silenced, and Ruined by Order of Parliament: See his Querela
Cantabrigiensis, for the Heads, Fellows, and Students, of Colleges, that were
There Ejected, Plundered, Imprisoned, or Banished for their Affections to the
King, and the Established Religion. Consider th^^ You your self took the
liberty to Graze upon another man's Past^re: And all these Violence were carried
on by your Encouragement, Influenced by your Approbation; and the Principal
directors of the^, extold to the Skies, Mr. Baxters Governors.
as the [Best Governors for Wisdom and Holiness,] Ho. Com. Pref. under the
Cope of Heaven.


Ba. A Plot upon the Presbyte^ians.
But however, [Either they must prove that we hold Rebellious Principles, or
they show that they do but in Plot accuse us.]

I know very well that [ The Transproser Rehearsed, Pa. 48. says Mr. Baxter in
his Holy Commonwealth mayntainteth that he (the King) may be called to Account
by any Single Peer. A bloody slander.
] [Must we say nothing to such bloudly slanders? Never such a Thought was in my
mind, nor word spoken or Written by me. But* all is a mere False-Fiction: Nay
in all the times of Usurpation, and Since, I said and Wrote, that the Kings
Person is Inviolable, and to be Judged by none, either Peer, or Parliament, and
that it is none but Subjects that they may call to account, and Judge, and
Punish; and that neither the King may destroy or hurt the Kingdom, nor the
Kingdom the King, (much less a Peer) but their Union is the Kingdoms Life.
And the very Book Accused, goes on such Principles, Alas! the Ho. Com. a most
Innocent Book.
and has not a word meet to tempt a man in his Wits to This Accusation. Judge
now by this one Instance, and by the Cry of the Plotters now against Us, [
Catilina Cethegum,] seeking our destruction, and the Parliaments, as supposed
to favor us (which for ought I know never did any thing for our Relief, or
Ease) whether it be meet, that I should dye in silence under such horrid
Accusations: Mr. Baxter lies under horrid Accusations.
Against which I appeal to the Great and Righteous Judge, before whom I am
shortly to appear, begging his Pardon and Reforming Conviction wherever I
Err.] Apr. 16. 1680. Non-Con. Plea, 2 d Part. Preface. last Page.


Mo. Be not so Transported Mr Baxter at the bloody Slander, as you call it: Mr.
Baxter transported.
for the very excusing of your self after This Manner, falls heavier upon you,
then the Accusation it self. There was a Gentleman of a Good Family, that had
Stolen a Silver-Spoon; and it was laid home to him, as a mighty Aggravation of
the Crime, that a man of his Quality could let himself so low, as to pilfer for
such a Trifle. Ay Sir, Says he, you say very Right, if That had been All; But
in good Faith Sir, my Aim was at the Great Tankard, If it had been a Single
Peer, it had been indeed a bloody Slander; But your Aim was the calling of the
King to an Account, by the Authority of the Two Houses. And then you are
pleased to bless God for the next Change that called Them to Account too: Any
Government but the Right.
for you give the Two Usurpers much better Words, then any you could afford to
the Lords Anointed. You call Them the Higher Powers, and enjoin Obedience to
Them upon the pain of Damnation; which is a Favor you would never allow to his
Late Majesty. Any Government but the Right will down with ye, and Still That
which was a Rebellion in the Enterprise, proves to be a Providence in the
Execution.

But do you say Mt Baxter, that you have allways asserted the Kings Person to
be Inviolable, andc. and that the very Bo^^ accused goes on such Pronciples?
Why then it is no hurt to the King, to be Assaulted, despoyl'd of his
Regalitys; Deposed, Imprisoned, Tried, Condemned and Executed. For the King you
say is but a Title of Respect, not a Character of Power: a Nominal, Empty
business. A King is a name of Respect not Power.
A kind of Dignity, Party-perpale, Half-Prince, half-Subject; and it is but
taking him on the Popular side, and you may do what you will with him. This is
the Chimera of a Prince, according to your Aphorisms: A kind of Mock-Majes^^
set up, for every Seditious Libertine to throw a Cudgel at. You make his
Authority to be so Conditional, and Precarious, that he is upon his good
behavior for his Crown. The Kings Authority made precarious.
If his Administration be not answerable to the Ends of Government: If he wants
either Power, or Money, or Grace, or Understanding; or (which is worst of All)
If the Licentious Rabble will but say, that he wants This, And under several
Incapacities.
or That, he is gone, and Deposed, ^pso facto, as an Unqualifi'd Person. For
according to your These, The Multitude are to be the Judges of These
Incapacities* I^ is a hardy Adventure, M. Baxter (unless you can make
Alm^nacks) to set up such Positions as These, at This time of day. It Is True,
They were printed in Fifty-nine, But they are no^ Resumed, and Avowed in
Eighty. But your Patience yet a little further Sir.

Is it such a Horrid Accusation, to say that Mr Baxter M^i^tains the King,
Baxters Horrid Accusation.
may be called to Account by a Single Peer? Cons^der first, that it is a
Churchman charges it upon you, and yo^ are beforehand with him: for you have
over and over, set forth Those of the Church Way (without exception either of
King, His Character of ou^ Churchmen.
Lords, or Commons) to be a Crew of Superstitious, Form^l, Profane Wretches
that out of a mere Enmity to Godliness, set themselves in Opposition to the
ways of Christ. Take notice again, if you have not delivered the Doctrine
aforesaid in express Terms, It is already made appear that you have said as
much as That amounts to. And over and above the Whyms^^ of your Aphorisms;
your Thirteenth Chapter, of the Late Wars is one of the Rudest and the falsest
pieces of Calumny against the Late King, that I know anywhere Extant.

Your Appeal upon This One Instance (as you call it) for Equity of Judgment,
and Liberty of Speech, would move the very Stones in the Walls, to give you a
Hearing. And yet if, I had been of your Counsel Mr. Baxter, you should have
bethought your self, before you Exclaimed, whether the Enquiry into the
Subject Matter of your Complaint, might not possibly lay open something that
was worse, As undoubtedly it has; for This Holy Commonwealth of yours, is a
kind of (send me well delivered of the Word) a kind of Theologico-Political
Wholesale Shop; and furnished with Cases, Baxters damnable Cases of Conscience.
of all Sorts and Sizes. for the Consciences of the Weak, and the Pretentions
of the Malicious. In One Case, the King is Dispossessed by Providence; In
another, he is deposed for Incapacity; In a Third, he must not so much as dare
to Return, even if the Door were set open to him: In Such or such a case, the
People are bound not to Re-admit him; and in such another, they may if they
please, but they are not obliged to it: and every one of These Cases, Calculated
for this very Point, which was at That Time in Agitation. Insomuch, that the
Application of your Arguments was yet more Criminal then the Error of them.

But what do ye mean, I beseech ye, by the Cry of the Plotters against ye?
Baxt. dreams of a Plot upon him.
As if they knew their Friends no better then So. Their business is the
Subversion of the Government, and of the Protestant Religion, that falls with
it. What should they cry out for against the Separatists, that are all this
while, doing the Papists business to their hands? The Kings Witnesses Speak no
such matter; but on the Contrary; that the Priests and Jesuits make use of the
Schismatiques toward our Common Ruin. So that by Plotters in This place Mr.
Baxter, it is Intended (I presume,) according to your Wonted Benignity) not the
Popish Plotters, but the Episcopal Plotters against ye; which (as you would
gladly have the World to believe) Seek your Destruction, and the Parliaments,
as supposed to Favor ye etc. Now to my thinking, the Parliaments Destruction,
and Ours, would have run every jot as well, as Our Destruction and the
Parliaments. Beside that it is not yet come to That Pass I hope, that
Parliaments, and Schismatiques, The Cart before the Horse
must Stand or fall together. Neither can I Imagine why This Parliament should
be supposed more Inclinable to favor ye, then former Parliaments have been.
The Reasons for Uniformity are the same now that ever they were; and the same,
Here, as in other Places. And then the boldness, and Importunity of the
Dividers increase the necessity of the Injunction. If you have forgotten the
Common Votes, and Address of Feb 25. 1662. upon This Subject, Pray let me
remember you of them.

Resolved, etc. Nemine Contradicente.

That the humble Thanks of This House, be returned to his Majesty, Votes for
Uniformity.
for his Resolution to maintain, the Act of Uniformity.

Resolved, etc.

That it be presented to the Kings Majesty, as the humble Advise of the House,
that no Indulgence be granted to the dissent^^ from the Act of Uniformity.

For these Reasons.
Reasons against To^eration.
1. It will establish Schism, by a Law, amd make the (...) Government of the
Church Precaeious, and the Censures of it, of no moment or Consideration at
all. 2. It will no way become the Gravity or Wisdom of a Parli^ment to pass a
Law at One Session for Uniformity, and (...) the next Session, (the Reasons of
Uniformity continuing still the Same,) to pass Another Law to frustrate, or
Weaken the Execution of it. 3. It will expose your Majesty to the Restless
Importunity of every Sect or Opinion, and of every single person also, who shall
presume to Dissent from the Church of England. 4. It will be a cause of
increasing Sects, and Sectaries, (...) Numbers will weaken the true Protestant
Religion so far, that it will at least be difficult for it, to defend it self
against the^. And which is yet further Considerable, those Numbers which by
being Troublesome to the Government, find they can arrive to (...) Indulgence,
will as their Numbers increase, be yet more Troub^^some, that so at length they
may arrive to a General Toleration; which your Majesty has declared against;
and in time, some pre^^lent Sect, will at last contend for an Establishment,
which for (...) can be foreseen, may end in Popery. 5. It is a thing
altogether without Precedent, and will take away all means of Convicting
Recusants, and be inconsistent with the Method, and Proceedings of the Laws of
England. Lastly, It is humbly conceived, that the Indulgence Proposed will be
so far from tending to the Peace of the Kingdom, that it is rather likely to
Occasion great Disturbance. And on the Contrary; that the Asserting of the
Laws, and the Religion Established, according to the Act of Uniformity, is the
most probable means to produce a settled Peace, and Obedience throughout your
Kingdom: Because the Variety of Professions in Religion, when openly divulged,
does directly distinguish men into Parties, and withal gives them opportunity
to count Their Numbers; which considering the Animosities that out of a
Religious Pride will be kept on foot, by the several Factions, does tend
directly, and Inevitably to open disturbance.


Nor can your Majesty have any security, that the Doctrine or Worship of the
several Factions, which are all governed by a several Rule, shall be
Consistent with the Peace of your Kingdom.

And if any Persons shall presume to disturb the Peace of the Kingdom, We do
in all Humility d^clare, that we will for ever and in all Occasions, be ready
with our utmost Endeavors, and Assistance, to adhere to, and serve your
Majesty,
according to our bounden Duty, and Allegiance.

Only one Word more: and That must be to tax you with Infinite Ingratitude; in
saying, that [ Parliaments, Mr Baxters Ingratitude.
for ought you know, never did any thing for your Relief or Ease] what do ye
think of the Act of Indemnity, I beseech ye? Was it Nothing? to give you your
Lives, Liberties, and Estates again, when all was Forfeited? Nay and it is come
to that Point now too; that those very Instruments that were forgiven by the
King, for the Ruin of the Church and Three Kingdoms, will not at this day
forgive his Majesty, for Endeavoring according to the Advice of his
Parliament, to Reestablish and Preserve them.


Ri. If you would understand us aright, How to understand the Presbyterians.
you must repair to our [Declarations, Professions, Commissions, National Oaths
and Covenants,] and the Like. Ho, Com. Page 477. And pray Observe the Tenor of
our Style, Address. Protestations, and other Proceedings.

[ Your Majesty's most Humble, and Loyal Subjects, the Lords and Commons, Words.
Dec. 14. 1641. [ Most Humble and Faithf^^^ Subjects,] Dec. 15. [ Most Humble
and Obedient Subjects,] Exact Collections. ^a. 2.


Mo. And now put That Libellous Remonstrance of Dec. 15. in the Scale against
Three or Four Words of Course, Practices.
of the same date.


Ri. The Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the House of Commons, Words.
your Faithful and Loyal Subjects, etc. Ibid. Pa* 44. Dec. 31. 1641.


Mo. This was a Message to his Majesty for a Guard, which the King most
graciously offered them, Practices.
but One of his Choosing it seems would not do the Business.


Ri. [ Your most faithful and Obedient Subjects, the Lords and Commons in this
Present Parliament. Words.
] etc. Ibid. Pa. 65. Jan. 29.


Mo. They Petitioned to have the Tower of London, and all oeher Forts,
Practices.
and the whole Militia of the Kingdom to be FORTHWITH put into the hands of
such Persons, as both Houses should Recommend, etc, Ex. Coll. Jan. 29. 1641.
And what did his Majesty now get by the Complement?


Ri. Words.
[ Your Humble and Loyal Subjects, the Lords and Commons,] etc. Ibid. Feb. 22.
1641. Pa. 80.


Mo. His Majesty's Humble and Loyal Subjects, are pleased to declare in this
Petition; Practices.
that if the King does not Instantly grant them their Petition about the
Militia, they are bound by the Laws of God and man to take the Militia into
their own hands.


Ri. Your Majesty's most Loyal, and Obedient Subjects, the Lords and Commons;
Words.
] etc. Ib. Mar. 1. 1641. Pa. 92.


Mo. In this Petition they threaten to dispose of the Militia by the Authority
of the Two Houses. Practices.
They Order his Majesty where to dispose of his Person: and absolutely deny the
Kings Pow^^ of the Militia, but by Authority and consent of Parliament.


Ri. Your most Dutyful and Loyal Subjects, the Lords and Commons,] etc. Ib.
138. Apr. 1642. Words.
Your Majesty's most Loyal and Faithful Subjects, the Lords and Commons, etc.]
Ib. Apr. 8. 1642. Pa. 141.


Mo. Very Good! And the Former of These was for Leave to remove the Magazin at
Hull, to the Tower of London: Practices*
And the Other was to divert the King from going into Ireland to supptesse the
Irish Rebellion: (which had certainly been done) and to tell him, that if he
went contrary to the Advice of his Parliament, They were resolved, in his
Absence, not to submit to any Commissioners he should appoint: but to preserve,
and Govern the Kingdom by the Counsel and Advice of Parliament.] etc.


Ri. Your Majesty's Loyal Subjects the Lords and Commons in his Parliament.]
Ibid. 258. May 1642. Words:



Mo. Here His Majesty's Loyal Subjects press the King to disband his Troops at
York, Practis^s.
or otherwise they will take the Quiet of the Kingdom into their own Care. And
pass These following Votes.

Resolved upon the Question.

1. That it appears that the King (seduced by wicked Counsels) intends to make
War against the Parliament. etc. The War charged upon the King.
2. That whenever the King makes War upon the Parliament, it is a Breach of
the Trust reposed in him by his People, Contrary to his Oath, and tending to
the Dissolution of This Government. 3. That whosoever shall serve, or Assist
him in such Wars, Treason to serve the King.
are Traitors by the Fundamental Laws of this Kingdom, and have been so
Adjudg'd by Two Acts of Parliaments, and ought to suffer as Traitors.] etc.



Ri. Your Majesty's most humble and Faithful Subjects, Words.
the Lords and Commons in Parliament.] etc. Ib. Jun. 2. 1642. Pa. 307.


Mo. This was the Petition that Accompanied the Nineteen Propositions: The 19.
Deposing Propositions.
demanding from the King [the discharge of all his Ministers and Ambassadors,
and none to be taken into their Places but what the Parliament shall approve.
That all matters of State may be transacted only in Parliament; the Privy
Counsel to be by Them approved from time to time and supplied. All Great
Officers to b^ Chosen by their Approbation: They to have the Education of the
Kings Children, and the Choice of their Servants. No Ma^ch to be treated of
without them. A Reformation of Church Government and Liturgy to be contrived by
their Advice: The Militia to be settled in them till settled by a Bill; and all
Proclamations against it to be recalled. New Oaths for Privy Counselors, and
Judges. All Judges and Officers to hold their Places, Quamdi^ se been
Gesserint: Parliament-Iustice upon all Delinquents. An Amnestry with such
exceptions as the Parliament shall advise. All Forts and Castles under
Governors approved by Parliament. All Forces to be Disbanded; and a
Prohibition of any Peers hereaft^^ to be made, from Sitting or Voting in
Parliament, without the Consent of Both Houses.] Are not these the Propositions
think ye, of Most Humble and Faithful Subjects?


Ri. Words.
Yo ur Majesty's Loyal Subjects, the Lords and Commons in Parliament, Ibid.
Sept. 24. 1642. Pa. 617.


Mo. Practices.
His Majesty's Loyal Subjects had now sent the Earl of Essex to fall upon the
Kings Army, and desired his Majesty to leave them and come to his Parliament:
And they Petitioned his Majesty to the same Purpose again. Pa. 630. And so as
the Humor took them, to the very Treaty at the Isle of Wight: But whether
These were the Actions of Rebels, or Loyal Subjects, be you your self the
Judge.


Ri. Words.
Well, But what say ye to the Style of [We your Humble and Loyal Subjects of
both Kingdoms.] Appendix to Husbands Ex. Coll. 2 d. Part. Fol. 22. Jan. 13.
1645.


Mo. These were the Humble, and Loyal Subjects, that, in the same Paper,
Pract^ses.
Refused his Majestys Proffer of a Personal Trea^^ with Them at Westminster.
[Your Majesty (say they) desires (...) Engagement, not only of the Parliament,
but of the Lord Mayor, Alderm^n, Common-Councill and Militia of the City of
London; (...) Chief Commanders of Sir. Tho. Fairfaxes Army; and Those of the
Scots Army; which is against the Privileges and Honor of the P^^liamen^, those
being Joined with them, who are Subject and Subordinate to their Authority.

At the same rate they Proceeded in Their Professions; [They desire only to Lay
a Foundation of Honor, Their Professions.
Safety, and Happiness to the Kings Person and Throne.] Ex. Coll. dec. 14.
1641. [ The Greatness and Prosperity of his Majesty, and his Royal Posterity.]
Ib. Dec. 15. Pa. 2. [ His Majestys greatness and Honour] ^b. Mar. 1.41. Pa.
94. [ Honor and greatn^sse] Mar. 2. P. 102. [ Honor, Safety, and Prosperity
of your Majesty] Mar. 16. P. 118. [ We seek nothing but your Majesty's Honour]
Mar. 15. P. 123. [ The Safety of his Majesty's Person, and his Royal Posterity]
May 5. 42. Pa. 173. [ Our most Dutyfull care for the Safety of your Royal
Person] May 9. P. 180. [ For the Preserving and Mayntaining the Royal Honor,
Greatness, and Safety of your Majesty, and Posterity] Jan. 2. 42. P. 310. And
then see their Remarkable Protestation of October. 22. 1642. In the presence of
the Almighty.
[ We the Lords and Commons in this present Parliament Assembled, do in the
Presence of Almighty God, for the Satisfaction of our Cons^i^nces, and the
Discharge of That Great Trust which lies upon us, make this Protestation and
Declaration to The Kingdom and Nation, and to the whole World; That no Private
Passion or Respect, no Evil Intention to his Majestys Person, no design to the
Prejudice of his Just Honor and Authority, Engaged us to raise Forces, and
take up Arms against the Authors of This War, wherewith the Kingdom is now
Enflamed] Ibid. Pa. 663. [ Without any Intention or desire, (as we do here
profess before the Ever-living God) to hurt, A Rebellion in t^eName of the
everlasting God.
or Injure his Majesty, Either in his Person, or Just Power.] b. P. 666.

I could give you Instances of this kind, without End, and as many, of the
gross and Unquestionable violations of These Professions; For every Order they
past, and every ^istol that they Fired, was a poynt-blank Contradiction, to
their Pretensions. Beside that in the same Breath, they Usurped all the
Regalities of the Crown, and yet Wrote Themselves, His Majesty's most Obedient
SUBJECTS. Covenant. Loyalty.
So that This Style of Loyalty was at the same time a Blind to the Well-meaning
Multitude, and a Note of Confederacy among Themselves: a Loyal Subject,
according to the Covenant, Importing, in plain Terms, a Traitor, in the eye of
the Law. And yet the Cause, and the Obligation of this Covenant, and the
Proceedings upon it, are openly Asserted at This very day.


Ba. Yes, yes; There Is The Counterminer, the Popish Dialogue, Slanders upon ^he
ha^m es^ Presbyterians.
and many others, that continue lowdly to Accuse us, and make men believe that
we are Plotting a new War, and that our Principles are Rebellious etc.] Non
Conf. Plea. 2d Part. Pref.


Mo. What do ye think of maintaining, Presbyte^i^ns Positions.
that [ Whatsoever the Tw^ Houses declare for Law, must pass for Law, without
Control, both upon King and People] Ex. Coll. 297. [ That they may do whatever
they please] Ibid. [ That the Major Part of Both Houses are the absolute
Masters of the Lives and Liberties of the Subject?] Ibid. [ That no member of
the House of Comm^ns be meddled with for Treason, Felony etc. Without Leave of
the House.] Ibid. [ That the S^v^reignty resides in the two Houses, and that
the King has no Neg^tiv^ Voice] Ibid. That there lies no Treason against the
Person of the King. Ibid. [ That the Two Houses may Depose the King and not be
blame^ for so doing. Ibid.

Now in calling Those people that did all This, [ The Bell Governors in the
World] as in the Preface to your Holy Commonwealth: Mr. Baxters best Go^ernors
in the world.
And in Vindicating That Book, from any Principles of Disloyalty toward the
Person of the King, as you do, toward the close of your Preface as to the 2 d.
Part of the Non-conformists Ple^ Apri. 16. 1680. What is This, but the
Asserting of Rebellio^^ Principles? And the Preaching of the old Doctrine to
the people over again, What Is it but the Preface to another War?


Ba. [What have we done these Twenty years against the King or State? The
Innocent Non-Conformists.
Unless it be our Crime to live under Reproach, and Scorn, and Poverty. and
sometime Imprisonments; and never once so much as Petition a Parliament, either
to Pity us, or to Hear us once Speak for our Selves etc.] Ibid. If any Odd
persons, or whosoever have said or done any thing against the King or Kingdom,
or their Neighbors Right or Peace, or have been Guilty of any Fraud,
Drunkenness, Perjury or Immorality besides their Unavoidable Nonconformity,
let them be punished as the Law requires, but let not the Innocent, yea
Thousands be Slandered, and Designed to Destruction for Them.] Ibid.


Mo. If you Speak of the Nonconformists, they have justified, from Sixty to
Eighty, The principles of the Late Rebellion revived.
all the Indignities that were put upon the Government, from Forty, to Sixty:
and there is not any one Seditious, or Schismatical Principle of the Old Stamp,
which they have not afresh, Revived, and Recommended to the People. And for the
Moderation you boast of, I dare be answerable to produce almost as many
Hundreds of Clamorous Libels against A^thority from the Dissenting Party, as
you reckon Years of Silence, Mr. ^axters Odd persons.
and Forbearance. But these are ODD Persons you say; and so is every Dissenter
in the Kingdom: for Ten Millions of men, are but as so many Individuals, when
disencorporate, and L^pp'd off from the Body. If I durst be so bold Sir, I
should venture to say that Mr. Baxter himself is one of the ODDEST persons that
I know in the whole Party. You have First, a Persuasion, He Himself One.
to your self; for you are neither a Presbyterian, nor an Independent, nor an
Anabaptist, nor of any Tribe of the Division that ever yet had a Nam^ to be
known by; but a pure Original, and a ^^ristian of your own making: You have
Secondly, as Peculiar a Conscience too; that had rather leap a Precipice, then
keep the Kings highway. It rises and falls like a Weather-Glasse, upon Change
of Air: and makes St. Paul blow Hot or Cold at pleas^re: [Let every soul be
Subject to the Higher Powers] requires Obedience to Dick Cromwell, upon pain of
Damnation, and Disobedience to Charles the First, upon the same penalty, (as we
have had it already.) And then you have this further Advantage, Mr. Baxter his
o^n King and Pop^.
Sir, that you are your own King, and your own Pope; you Prescribe your own
Laws, and Grant your own Pardons.


Ba. You may prate as long as you will. [ I am against the Imposing of Mystical
Ceremonies, as Crossing, or Surplice] etc. Baxters Agument against Ce^^monies.
Five Disp. Pa. 467. [ For to Impose new Symbolicall Rites upon the Church,
which Christ has not Imposed, does seem to me an Usurpation of his Sovereign
Power.] Ibid. [ And to accuse Christ of Ignorance, or Negligence, in that he
himself has not Imposed them.] And so does it Imply an Accusation of his Laws,
and of the Holy Scriptures, as if they were Insufficient,] Ibid. 468. [ And
These Impositions seem to be plain Violations ^f These Prohibitions of God, in
which we are forbidden to Add to his Worship, or diminish FROM IT.] 469. And
moreover; [ God has already given us so perfect a Directory for his Worship,
that there is nothing more that we can reasonably desire.] Ib. 481.


Ri. Now for my part, I am for the Amiable way. [Christians should not be
Over-busy in Prying into the work of their Governors; The C^se w^ll Resolved.
nor too forward to suspect their d^terminations.] [The Duty of Obeying them
being Certain, and the Sinfulness of the thing Commanded, being Uncertain, and
Unknown, and only Suspected; we must go on the surer side.] Ibid. 484. [ In
disobeying the Lawful Commands of our Superiors, we disobey Christ.] Ibid.
485. Beside that [Disobedience in matters of Circumstance, will exclude, and
Overthrow the Substance of the Worship it self. Pa. 486.


POSTSCRIPT, To the Reader
MR. Baxter has certainly given, in this Extract, the (...) blow to the
Non-conformists that ever they (...) For there are no Arguments against That
Party like their (...) against Themselves. To the clearest Evidences of (...),
and Reason, they will oppose Clamor, and Passion; (...) make a shift to wriggle
themselves Off and On, with (...) drawn Texts and Riddling distinctions. But
when the very (...) of That Interest comes to play Fast and Loose, and shift
(...) Conscience with the Season, the Masque is then taken off; (...) there can
be no Denial of the Fact, so there can be no (...) the Hypocrisy. How comes
Toleration to be a Sin, under (...) Presbyterians, and a Duty under the
Bishops? How comes it (...) be Damnation, in the case of the Late King, and
Richard (...) well, to Obey the Former, and destroy the Latter? Even (...) to
Mr. Baxters own Exposition, which is, that by St. (...) Higher Powers, is
Intended Those in Actual Possession? How (...) Bishops to be Antichristian, at
one time, and Warrantable at (...)? Or the Civil Magistrate to have more power
in (...) matters, under an Usurper, then under a Lawful (...) How comes an
Episcopal Uniformity to be more a Persecution (...) a Presbyterian? Or a Common
Prayer Book more Intolerable (...) a Directory? What can more expose the Credit
of the (...) then this double-dealing in the Foreman of the Party? to (...) Mr.
Baxter Lie down in One Opinion, and Rise, in Another* (...) Accomodating his
Scruples to every Crisis of State? And Consummate the Iniquity of the Pretense;
He has no soone^ veigled the People into a Schism, but he presently (...) with
a Platform of Sedition: and having wrought a (...) from the Ecclesiastical, he
falls to work, in his Cases and (...), upon the Foundations of the Civil
Government.

The End.

