THE HISTORY OF THE PLOT: Or a Brief and Historical ACCOUNT OF THE Charge and
Defense OF Edward Coleman, Esquire William Ireland, Thomas Pickering, John Grove.
Robert Green, Henry Berry, Laurence Hill. Jesuits. Tho. Whitebread, William
Harcourt, John Fenwick, John Gavan, Anthony Turner,
Richard Langhorne, Esquire Sir George Wakeman, Baronet. Benedictine Monks. William
Marshall, William Rumley, James Corker,

Not omitting any one Material Passage in the whole PROCEEDING.

By Authority.

LONDON. Printed for Richard Tonson within Grayes-Inn-Gate next
Grayes-Inn-Lane. 1679.

TO THE READER.
THere has not been any point, perhaps, in the whole Tract of English Story,
either so dangerous to be mistaken in, or so difficult, and yet so necessary to
be understood. as the Mystery of this detestable Plot now in Agitation, (A
Judgment for our Sins, augmented by our Follies) But the world is so miserably
divided betwixt some that will believe every thing, and others nothing, that
not only Truth, but Christianity it self is almost lost between them; and no
place left for Sobriety and Moderation. We are come to govern our selves by
Dreams, and Imaginations; We make every Coffee-house Tale an Article of our
Faith; and from Incredible Fables we raise Invincible Arguments. A man must be
Fierce and violent, to get the Reputation of being Well-Affected; as if the
calling of one another Damned Heretic, and Popish Dog, were the whole Sum of
the Controversy. And what is all this but the effect of a Popular License and
Appeal? When every Mercenary Scribler shall take upon him to handle matters of
Faith, and State; give Laws to Princes; and every Mechanique sit Judge upon the
Government! Were not these the very Circumstances of the late Times? When the
Religious Iugglers from all Quarters fell in with the Rabble; and managed them,
as it were, by a certain fleight of hand: The Rods were turned into Serpents on
both sides, and the Multitude not able to say, which was Aaron, and which the
Enchanter. Let us have a Care of the same Incantation over again. Are we not
under the protection of a Lawful Authority? Nor was there ever any thing more
narrowly Sifted, or more vigorously discouraged, than this Conspiracy.
Reformation is the proper business of Government and Council; but when it comes
to work once at the wrong End, there is nothing to be expected from it, but
Tumult and Convulsion. A Legal and Effectual provision against the Danger of
Romish Practices and Errors, will never serve their turn, whose Quarrel is
barely to the Name of Popery, without understanding the Thing it self. And if
there were not a Roman Catholic left in the three Kingdoms, they would be
never the better satisfied; for where they cannot find Popery, they will make
it: nay and be troubled too that they could not find it. It is no new thing for
a Popular Outcry, in the matter of Religion, to have a State-Faction in the
belly of it. The first late Clamor was against Downright Popery; and then came
on Popishly Affected; (That sweeps all) The Order of Bishops, and the
Discipline of the Church took their Turns next; and the next blow was at the
Crown it self: when every Man was made a Papist that would not play the Knave
and the Fool, for Company, with the Common People.

These things duly weighed, and considering the Ground of our present
Distempers; the Compiler of this Abridgment reckoned that he could not do his
Countrymen a better Office, than (by laying before them the naked state of
things) to give them at one view, a Prospect, both of the subject matter of
their Apprehensions, and of the Vigilance, Zeal, and needful severity of the
Government on their behalf. To which end, he has here drawn up an Historical
Abstract of the whole matter of Fact concerning those Persons who have hitherto
been Tried for their Lives, either upon the Plot it self, or in Relation to it:
opposing Authentic Records to wandering Rumors; and delivering the Truth in
all Simplicity. He has not omitted any one material Point: There is not so
much as one Partial Stroke in it; not a flourish, nor any thing but a bare and
plain Collection, without any Tincture either of Credulity, or Passion. And it
is brought into so narrow a Compass too, that it will ease the Readers head, as
well as his purse; by clearing him of the puzzle of Forms, and Interlocutories,
that serve only to amuse and mislead a man, by breaking the Order, and
confounding the Relative part of the Proceeding.

Having this in Contemplation; and being at the same time possessed of a most
exact Summary of all passages here in Question; This Reporter was only to cast
an Extract of these Notes into a Method: especially finding, that upon
comparing the substance of his own papers, with the most warrantable Prints
that have been published; his own Abstract proved to be not only every jot as
Correct, but much more Intelligible, which being short and full; he thought
might be useful, and find Credit in the world upon its own account, without
need of a Voucher.

THE HISTORY OF THE Charge and Defense OF EDWARD COLEMAN, Esquire
THE first of the Conspirators that was brought to public Justice was Mr.
Edward Coleman; who received his Trial at the Kings Bench-Bar, November. 27.
1678. and pleaded Not Guilty, to the Indictment.

The Jury consisted of Persons of Condition, and known Integrity; being Sworn,
without any exception or challenge from the Prisoner.

The General Heads of his Charge were, The Conspiring of the death of the King.
The endeavor of Subverting the Government of England; and the Protestant
Religion. And these Treasons, and Designs, to be made out against him, partly
by Witnesses, viva voce; and partly by Letters and Negotiations under his own
Hand, proving a Correspondence with several sorts of Agents for the
accomplishing of the aforesaid ends.

The Charge being read, and the particulars of the matter in Evidence, modestly
and learnedly opened by His Majesty's Council, The Prisoner past some
reflections upon the hard measure of not allowing Council to a Prisoner in this
Case, recommending himself to the Justice of the Bench to be Council for him,
and representing the disadvantage of a Roman Catholics appearing at the Bar
under so violent a prejudice, he insisted further, upon the Ingenuity of his
Confessions in Prison; and it being objected to him, as a thing incredible,
that he should break off his Correspondences just at (75) with the Date of the
last Letters of his that were found: His answer was, that he never received any
Letters after that time, but cursory Intelligence, which were either Burnt, or
used as common Paper: And that he had offered all Oaths and Tests in the world
for Confirmation of the truth thereof: and that they had seized every one of
these Letters of general Correspondence, for the two or three years last past
that he knew of.

Hereupon the Court proceeded to the Evidence, the Lord Chief Justice
previously inculcating, the sacredness of an Oath, Mr. Oats sworn concerning
the Plot upon the King. He goes to Father Keyns at Colemans.
and Exhorting both the Jury, and Witnesses, to proceed with all due Tenderness
and Caution: for the life of a man was at stake, and it was not intended that
any thing should be put upon the stretch against the Prisoner.

The Witness first called, was Mr. Oats; and the first thing demanded of him,
was what he could say of the Prisoner being any way privy to the design of
Murdering the King, To which, he gave Evidence, as follows; that is to say:

That in November last, making a Visit to Mr. John Keyns (his Father Confessor,
then lodging at Mr. Colemans in Stable-Yard) Mr. Coleman asked him who that
was? one (says he) that is going to St. Omers. Then says Mr. Coleman to the
Witness, I must trouble you with a Letter or two; and I will leave them for you
with Fenwick (the Procurator of the Society in London.)

On the Monday following Fenwick Fenwick gives him Colemans Packet for St.
Omers.
gave Mr. Oats the Packet Mr. Coleman had left in his hand; and away goes he
to Dover, with it. The outside sheet was a paper of News, which past under the
name of Colemans Letter; and at the bottom of it these words, Pray recommend me
to my Kinsman Playford (who lived at that time in St. Omers.) This Letter was
written in English, at Length, and addressed to the Rector of St. Omers; giving
him an account how matters went in England. The Witness deposes that he read
this Letter, and in it many undutiful expressions concerning the King: Foul
expressions in Colemans News Letter.
and this in particular; that the Match of the Lady Mary with the Prince of
Orange would prove that Traitors, and Tyrants ruin.

That there was also a Letter in Latin to La Chaise, A Letter of thanks to La
Chaise for 10000 l.
with a flying Seal, and no subscription; and this Letter, with the Letter of
News, and the Postscript, were all in a hand, This was a Letter of thanks to La
Chaise, for 10000 l. which he confessed to have received for the service of the
Catholic Cause; with a promise that it should be wholly employed as it was
designed; and that no endeavor should be wanting to destroy the Protestant
Religion Root and Branch. Now this Letter was in answer to one from La Chaise
(dated in August) which was directed to Strange, who at that time was
Provincial of the Society for London, but Strange having hurt his hand with a
Reed, and Mico, his Secretary, being sick, Mr. Coleman wrote this Letter by
direction of the Provincial, as the Provincial told the Deponent himself.

That Letter from La Chaise to which this was an answer, The money to be
employed for the killing of the King.
the Witness Deposed that he saw, and read, and observed instructions in it to
this effect. That the 10000 l. should be laid out to no other end than for the
killing of the King. The Witness did not see Coleman write this Letter, but
delivering it to La Chaise himself, La Chaise named a Gentleman with a French
name, and asked how he did; the Witness not well understanding him, (being at a
loss) One (says La Chaise) that was formerly Secretary to her Royal Highness:
Whereupon Mr. Oats, in Latin, asked him if it were not Coleman; But what
answer was made to this, Mr. Oats does not remember. La Chaise answered his
Letter, and the Witness brought that answer to St. Omers; from whence it was
sent by the Society, under Cover to Mr. Coleman, telling him in express terms
that this Letter was received and owned.

The Witness having a Patent to be taken into the Consult, Mr. Oats had a
Patent to be of the Consult.
had the sight of this Letter at St. Omers, and it was sent to Mr. Coleman, who
acknowledged the Receipt of it from La Chaise; and in the same hand that wrote
the News Letter, which was agreed upon to be Colemans hand.

Mr. Oats being demanded what he could say to the Consultation here in May
last, and how far the Prisoner was privy to the purpose of Murdering the King,
he proceeded to this effect.

By virtue of a Brief from the Father General of the Society at Rome, the
Jesuits were appointed to have a meeting, which begun at the White-Horse-Tavern
in the Strand, A Consult at the White-Horse in the Strand.
in April, Old Style, and May, New, and continued there no longer then till
they had concluded upon the Dispatch of one Father Carry, an Agent, and
Procurator for Rome; and then they Adjourned themselves into Clubs and Cabals,
some at Wildhouse, some at Harcourts, Irelands, Fenwicks Lodgings, and came at
length to this Result.

Pickering and Grove were to destroy the King, either by shot, The result of
that meeting.
or otherwise; and for their Reward, Grove was to have fifteen hundred Pounds,
and Pickering (being a Religious person) 30000 Masses, which may be valued an
Equivalent, at Twelve pence a Mass. Mr. Coleman, in this Deponents hearing, was
told of this determination at Wildhouse; and the Witness affirms, to have seen
a Letter under the Prisoners own hand, to one Ireland; expressing his desire
that by some means or other, the Duke of York might be Trapann'd into the Plot.
There was a P. S. to this Letter, Recommend me to Father La Chaise. And besides
all this, the Witness averrs, that he heard Coleman give his opinion at
Wildhouse, that he thought it was well contrived.

The next point was what the Witness knew of any Rebellion to have been raised
in Ireland, Touching a Rebellion to have been raised in Ireland.
or of any practice designed upon the Duke of Ormond: To which Mr. Oats
deposed,

That in August, there was a Consultation at the Savoy, A Consult at the Savoy
about it.
with the Jesuits and with the Benedictines, and a Letter written from Talbot,
(the pretended Archbishop of Dublin) making mention of one of the Popes
Legates, an Italian Bishop ( Cassay, as he believed) that maintains the Popes
Claim to the Kingdom of Ireland. And in this Letter, he speaks of four Jesuits,
that were contriving the death of the Duke of Ormond, and in case that design
should not take place, that then, Fogarthy should do it by Poison, ( Fogarthy
himself being there at that time.) That before the end of the Consult, Mr.
Coleman came in, and earnestly pressed the dispatch of Fogarthy for Ireland, to
do the Work. The same Letter did also say, that they were ready to rise in
Ireland for the Pope.

The Witness being asked if he knew any thing of Arms: Gave Evidence, Arms
toward the Rebellion.
That 40000 Blank Bills were provided to be sent into Ireland. And that another
Letter from Talbot, (of January or February last) said they were furnished by
the Popish Commission-Officers, and that they had them ready in Ireland.

That Coleman, Fenwick, and the Witness, being together in August last, in
Fenwicks Chamber, in Drury Lane, without any other Company, Coleman told
Fenwick that he had a way now to transmit the 200000 200000 l. toward it.
Pounds for carrying on the Rebellion in Ireland, which he said to this
Deponent also a Week before; so that Mr. Coleman was privy to it, and a prime
Actor in it.

The Witness was now examined about Transmitting money to Windsor, Money to be
sent to Windsor.
, or persuading the sending of any thither, and the time; who deposed as
follows:

That Dr. Fogarthy proposed, and provided four Irish Ruffians to be sent to
Windsor, The four Irish Ruffians sent away, and 80 l. sent after them.
in August last, and they were dispatched the same night. That the next day,
one William Harcourt, Rector of London, sent fourscore pounds to them, in the
name of the Provincial, who was then beyond the Seas: And by whose Authority
the other acted. That Mr. Coleman told the Witness, that he had been to look
for Harcourt at his house in Drury Lane, and was there directed to Wildhouse,
where he sound him. And Coleman asking what care was taken for the four
Gentlemen that went last night to Windsor? Harcourt made answer, that Eighty
Pounds was ordered them; and that the Messenger was there that was to carry it.
That the money was there upon the Table, most in Guinnies, and that Mr. Coleman
gave the Messenger a Guinny to make haste. And that Mr. Oats never saw the
Messenger, but that time.

The Witness was asked what he knew concerning Mr. Colemans discourse with one
Ashby; Ashbies Instructions about the Poisoning or Murder of the King.
whose evidence was that one Ashby (in July last, and formerly Rector of St.
Omers) being in London, and ill of the Gout, was appointed to go to the Bath,
That this Ashby had certain instructions under the hand of White the
Provincial, beyond the Seas, to Authorize Ashby, and the Consult of London; to
dispatch the King, by Poison, in case Groves and Pickering failed: and to offer
Sir George Wakeman 10000 l. to effect it; taking the opportunity of giving his
Majesty Physic, That Mr. Coleman attended this Ashby; that he saw Read, and
Copyed out the Instructions, and sent them over England, to those that were
privy to the Plot, That this Deponent himself saw the Reading, and the
Transcribing of them, Mr. Coleman declaring the sum to be too little, and that
Sir George Wakeman would hardly undertake it upon those terms; adding; That it
were well to give 5000 l. more to make the business sure: and that this was
said at Wild-House, at Mr. Sandersons house: and that upon Mr. Colemans
dispatch of these Suffrages (the word he used for Instructions) to the
Principal of the Catholic Gentry of England, some thousands of Pounds were
Collected, and that Coleman told the Witness, that he sent these Copies about
to quicken people in their Contributions.

The Court demanded if Mr. Coleman was not to have been one of the Secretaries
of State; to which Mr. Oats replied thus.

That in May last New Style, April, Old, soon after the Consult at Mr.
Langhorns Chamber, among other Commissions he saw one from the General of the
Society, Johannes Paulus D'Oliva (by virtue of the Popes Authority) directed to
Mr. Coleman Mr. Colemans Commission for Secretary of State.
, and that this Deponent saw it at Mr. Fenwicks Chamber in Drury Lane in the
month of July, Mr. Fenwick being present; and that Mr. Coleman, did then, and
there, acknowledge the Receipt of it, open it, and say that it was a good
exchange, for it made him Secretary of State, that upon the Seal, there was an
(...) with a Cross, and in English Characters I. H. S; and that he knew this to
be the writing of the said General, for he had seen it forty times.

That in the month Ian. the Witness opened at St. Omers, certain Letters from
Rome, directed to Father Harcourt (he having power so to do) wherein it was
certified that the Commissions were already in Mr. Langhorns hands, Mr.
Langhorn shows Mr. Oats the Commissions.
which gave the Witness a curiosity to ask Mr. Langhorn about them. Now the
Witness being summoned to be at the Consult in April, and appointed by the
Provincial to wait upon Mr. Langhorn, he did so, and in discourse about the
Commissions, asked him if he might not have a sight of them: To which Mr.
Langhorn replied, that he had received the Commissions; and that he would not
scruple to let him have a view of them, the Witness giving him that very day an
account of the Consult.

The Witness was asked if he were acquainted with Langhorn, Mr. Oates's
acquaintance with Mr. Langhorn.
and he declared, That meeting two of Mr. Langhorns Sons in Spain, and doing
them some kindnesses, upon the Witnesses return out of Spain, Mr. Langhorn
received him with great Civility at his house, (somewhere about Sheer-Lane) but
the Wife being zealous another way, Mr. Langhorn advised the Witness rather to
come to him for the future at his Chamber in the Temple; and that the Witness
was ordered by the Provincial to give Mr. Langhorn an account from time to time
of all Results at the White Horse, and Wild house.

Being interrogated how many came over in April together with the Witness, How
many Priests and Jesuits in England at one time.
and how many Priests, and Jesuits, to his knowledge had been lately in England
at one time? he answered that there were nine Jesuits, as the Rector of Liege,
Warren, Sir Thomas Preston; the Rector of Watton, Francis Williams, Sir John
Warner, Charges; one Poole a Monk, and the Witness the Ninth, but for the
number of the rest, that he could not remember it, and that to his knowledge
there had been in England, at the same time 160 Secular Priests, 80 Jesuits,
and by names upon a List, above 300.

The Prisoner being now permitted to ask any questions, Mr. Colemans defense.
and speak for himself.

Mr. Coleman suggested, Mr. Oats did not know Coleman at the Council.
that upon his Examination before the Council, the Witness told His Majesty
that he had never seen him before, and yet now pretends to great intimacy and
acquaintance with him.

Mr. Oats alleged that in truth he said (his sight being had by Candlelight)
that he would not swear that he had ever seen him before; Not till he spoke,
for the Candle was in his Eyes.
but so soon as ever heard him speak, he would have sworn him to be Coleman.

It being demanded, How came Mr. Oats to omit his Charge before the Council?
(when the design upon the King at Windsor was before the Council) how the
Witness came to omit Mr. Colemans giving the Guiny to the Messenger; the time
when the Fourscore pounds was sent; the way of remitting the 200000 l. The
Prisoner Consulting and approving of the Murder of the King; and his saying
that 10000 l. was too small a reward for Sir George Wakeman.

Mr. Oats his answer to all this; Mr. Oates's answer to the former objections.
. was that his business before the Council was rather to Exhibit an
Information, than to deliver a Charge; and that it gives light to a Prisoner
how to shift, when he knows the whole matter of his Accusation beforehand; and
that besides, he was so spent with waiting and watching, that he could scarce
stand upon his Legs: And that the King and Council were sensible of it, and
willing to ease him, but yet if he had been pressed, he should have enlarged his
Information.

The Witness being examined how long it was betwixt the time of his being
Interrogated, and speaking only to the Letters, and that time of communicating
to the Houses of Parliament; the matter at present in question, his answer was,
from Monday the 30. of September, until the Parliament met.

The Witness was likewise asked why he did not inform sooner; Why was this
Information delayed so long? with Mr. Oates's reasons for it.
and of all together, Mr. Coleman being so dangerous a person, and engaged in
so desperate a design, why he did not name the Jesuits he accused. And how he
came to charge Sir George Wakeman by name, and not Mr. Coleman, Mr. Oats reply
was that he had been a long time accusing other Jesuits; that he spoke little
but where the persons were Face to Face. That he had a List of the Jesuits
names, but only such as were expressly charged were taken up, and that being
dosed with sitting up two nights, he forgot Mr. Coleman, but upon Consulting
his papers he made upthe account which afterward he delivered.

The Prisoner urged that the Witness was just by him when he says he could not
see him; Whether Mr. Oats knew Coleman before the Council or nor*
and further that Mr. Oats named three or four places where he says he met him
about Business: The Witness answering that the Candle was in his Eyes, and that
the Prisoner stood more in the dark: and to the rest, that he wore several
Peruques at several meetings; which much disguised him: but that immediately
upon speaking he knew him to be Coleman, denying that the question was ever put
to him whether he knew Coleman or no?

The Prisoner still insisting upon it, Sir Thomas Doleman examined to that
point.
that the Witness did declare before the Council that he did not know him; Sir
Thomas Doleman, and Sir Robert Southwel (being Clerks of the Council, and at
that time present) were examined on the behalf of the Prisoner, Sir Tho.
Dolemans Evidence amounted to this, That Mr. Oats speaking of Coleman; did say
before the Council, that he did not well know him; and that he said these words
after Mr. Coleman was examined, adding that the Witness said, he did not know
him as he stood there. And speaking of Coleman, that he had no acquaintance
with that man.

It was asked Mr. Oats, in regard that he knew Coleman upon hearing of his
voice, why he did not declare himself that he knew him so soon as he had heard
him? To which the Witness answered, That he was not asked.

Sir Robert Southwel And Sir Robert Southwel.
was now Interrogated concerning Mr. Oats his examination before the Council,
and gave evidence, That Mr. Oats declared that 10000 pounds promised to Sir
George Wakeman was now made fifteen, and that Mr. Coleman paid Sir George
Wakeman five thousand pounds in hand. To which Mr. Coleman replied; That Mr.
Oats his Charge was so slight, that the Council were not of his opinion, as
appeared by the mitigation of the first Order, which was at first to Commit him
to Newgate, but only now into the Custody of a Messenger. To this Sir Robert
Southwel gave an account, how that Mr. Oats Examination was so general, it
could not well be fixed; That Mr. Colemans Papers were found, and seized on
Sunday night, and that Mr. Coleman rendered himself voluntarily at the house of
Sir Joseph Williamson, on Monday Morning, hearing of a Warrant out against him:
But so many other Prisoners were upon Examination, that he was not called till
Afternoon, when he seemed to hear these lewd things charged upon him with great
scorn and indignation.

The defense he made was such, M. Colemans Defense before the Council.
that though a Blank Warrant was filled up to send him to Newgate, he was only
for the present committed to a Messenger; and a special Warrant granted to the
Messenger to secure him against the first Order. Upon his Majesty's departure,
the next day for Newmarket, a Committee being appointed to examine several
Papers, and Mr. Colemans amongst others; There were found in a Deal Box such
Papers as moved the Lords forthwith to sign a Warrant for his Commitment to
Newgate.

The sum of Mr. Oats Charge, Mr. Oates's Charge against Coleman.
was his Traitorous Correspondence with the French Kings Confessor, the 15000
pounds accepted by him, and five of it actually paid to Sir George Wakeman, and
the Witnesses opinion that Colemans Papers would cost him his Neck, Mr. Oats
declaring, that he had the Stone, and therefore could not be present at the
Consultation in the Savoy, but that he had an account of all things there from
those that were upon the place.

Thus far Mr. Oats his Examination.

Mr. Bedlow sworn and Examined.

First, Mr. Bedlow examined.
what he had seen, or heard, concerning any Commission to Mr. Coleman.
Secondly, what discourse he ever had with Mr. Coleman concerning that matter.

Mr. Bedlow Mr. Bedlows evidence about Commissions.
swears that he knew nothing of any Commission to Mr. Coleman, more than that
Sir Henry Tichbourn told him that he brought him a Commission from the
principal Jesuits at Rome, by Order from his Holiness; and that he was to be
Secretary of State, but that he never saw it, nor knows the Title of it. As to
any discourse with Mr. Coleman about it, the Witness declared, that in April
(75.) Father Harcourt gave him a large Packet of Letters from Mr. Coleman, who
in the Witnesses sight delivered the said Letters to Father Harcourt; that they
were directed to Mr. La Chaise, and other English Monks, to whom he delivered
the Letters, and brought back an Answer from La Chaise, and certain English
Monks at Paris. Mr. Bedlow furthur declares, that there met at a Consultation
two French Abbots, and certain English Monks, and that he heard them talk of a
Plot upon the Government, and Religion of England; And that the King was to be
destroyed in the first place, and the Lords of the Council; That this discourse
passed upon the Consultation; And there was a Packet of Letters from Mr.
Coleman, they not knowing that the Witness understood French. That the Packet
from La Chaise was directed to Harcourt, with one to Coleman enclosed, and
addressed A Monsieur, Monsieur Coleman.

Mr. Bedlow being examined what he knew of money received by Mr. Coleman; how
much, and for what, What money Mr. Coleman received, how much, and for what.
gave this Evidence.

That it was to promote the subversion of the Government of England, to deliver
it from Hellish Ignorance, and to free Catholics from the Tyranny of
Heretics. The Witness further declares, that being with Harcourt at Colemans,
May 24. or 25. 1677. Harcourt delivered this Deponent another Packet, which he
had also from Mr. Coleman, for the English Monks at Paris, and the Witness to
call at Douay, in his passage, in case they were not gone for Paris before him.
That upon the receipt of these Letters they applauded the merit of the service,
and that upon the Consultation 1677, not having any full assurance what
assistance the English Catholics might have from abroad, they resolved to put
their design in execution that very Summer, the English being in a great
forwardness already. That the Witness after the Consultation gave Le Fair the
Letters, and he carried them to Harcourt, and Harcourt (though indisposed) went
and carried them to Coleman, and this Witness along with him, but he stayed
over the way while Harcourt went in, who soon after gave this Witness a Back to
come over to him, and then, and there, did this Witness hear Coleman say, If he
had a hundred lives he would lose them all to settle the Catholic Religion in
England, and depose, or destroy a hundred Heretical Kings if they stood in his
way. And this at his own house, behind Westminster Abbey* at the foot of the
Staircase.

Here the Prisoner demanded of Bedlow, if ever he had seen him in his life?
Whose answer was, That in the Stone-Gallery in Summerset House, coming from a
Consult, there he had seen him.

After this Mr. Bradley, Mr. Bradley (the Messenger) examined.
the Messenger that seized Mr. Colemans Papers, was examined what Papers he
seized, what he saw, and how he disposed of them. To which Mr. Bradly rendered
this account.

That by Warrant of Council, His account about seizing M. Colemans Papers.
dated September 29. at six at night, for the apprehending of Mr. Coleman, and
seizing of his Papers, he went accordingly, and told Mrs. Coleman his business,
who said he was welcome. And her Husband not being at home, he desired her to
send for him. That upon the search, he found a great many Papers about the
house, and put them into several Bags; and looking into a private Corner in his
own Chamber, in a place behind the Chimney, he found a Deal Box tacked together
with a Nail, with Letters in it, which he delivered into the Custody of one of
his Assistants, to take care of it. And going then into his own Study, he
searched his Scritoire, and put up all the Papers he could find, in Bags
without any other Papers among them; sealed them up with his own Seal, keeping
them constantly in his sight, and so carried every Paper of them to the Clerk
of the Council.

Sir Robert Southwel, and Sir Thomas Doleman were then examined, Sir Robert
Southwel and Sir Thomas Doleman examined about M. Colemans long Letter.
whether or no the Papers then produced in Court, were the Papers which were
brought by Mr. Bradley the Messenger: And first, Sir Robert Southwel,
concerning Mr. Colemans Long Letter; whose answer was that he had not seen that
large Letter in several days after the Papers were brought to him from Bradley,
remitting the account thereof to the other Clerks of the Council. Sir Thomas
Doleman, in answer to the same question, declared that he found it among Mr.
Colemans Papers in a Deal Box that Bradley brought.

The next point was to prove both by his own Confession, M. Colemans Letters
and Papers proved to be of his own handwriting.
and by two Witnesses, that all the Papers in question were of his own hand
writing. Whereupon Mr. Boatman (one that had waited upon him five years in his
Chamber) was first examined, who declared, that he believed all the Papers,
then showed unto him, to be of Mr. Colemans writing; acknowledging further,
that a Packet of Letters from beyond the Seas was directed unto him two or
three days after he was made a Prisoner: Confessing also, that he had received
a Letter for his Master from La Chaise; but denying that ever he wrote any for
his Master to La Chaise; owning also, that his Master kept a large Book of
Entries for his Letters and News: But that he knew not what was become of it,
and that he had not seen it since two days before his Masters Commitment. He
declared likewise, that he did usually receive News every Post, but could not
say that any Letters of the two years last past were entered in the aforesaid
Book.

The Prisoner here interposed that all his Letters from the Hague, Bruxels,
France, and Rome were before the Council, and that these were all he had
received.

One Cattaway (a kind of an Amanuensis to him) was then examined upon those
Papers, who positively affirmed them to be of Mr. Colemans writing.

Sir Philip Lloyd was produced next, to prove the Long Letter Sir Philip Lloyd
proves the long Letter.
against him, upon his own Confession: Who gave Evidence, that he received the
Papers, then showed him, from Sir Thomas Doleman, and that the Long Letter was
owned by Mr. Coleman to be his own handwriting.

It bare date, The scope and substance of it.
September 29. 1675. subscribed, Your most humble, and most obedient Servant,
(without a name.) And it was read by the Clerk of the Crown, according to the
Order of the Court, but being too long to be brought into a Breviate, and the
whole Letter it self being little more than the deduction of a three years
History of former Negotiations (for the greater part with Mr. Ferrier, the
Predecessor of La Chaise) it will suffice to give this Brief of the whole:
Money was the Prisoners great design, and the procuring of it, by a pretense of
more power, both in the Church, and in the State, than effectually he had, is
in short the drift of that large discourse. Toward the end of it, he has
indeed this bold and dangerous passage; Our prevailing in these things would
give the greatest blow to the Protestant Religion that ever it received since
its Birth.

To this foregoing Letter was produced an Answer from La Chaise, Sir Robert
Southwel proves La Chaises Letter.
owning the Receipt of it, and giving Mr. Coleman thanks for it: concerning
which Letter, Sir Robert Southwel declared that he found it in Mr. Colemans
Canvas Bag, the Sunday after the papers were seized: and that Sir Philip Lloyd
examined it. This Letter was Read in Court by Sir Robert Southwel, first in
French, and then in English; which being a very brief and pertinent proof of
the Correspondence in question, we shall here insert according to the
Translation of it there Exhibited.

The LETTER.
SIR, Paris, October. 23. 1675.
THE Letter which you gave yourself the trouble to write to me, La Chaises
Letter to Coleman.
came to my hands but the last night: I read it with great satisfaction, and I
assure you that its length did not make it seem tedious. I should be very glad
on my part to assist in seconding your good intentions; I will consider of the
means to effect it; and when I am better informed than I am as yet, I will give
you an account, to the end I may hold Intelligence with you, as you did with my
Predecessor. I desire you to believe that I will never fail as to my good
will, for the service of your Master; whom I honor as much as he deserves, and
that it is with great truth that I am

Your most humble and most obedient servant, D. L. C.


As it was the business of the Prisoners long Letter abovementioned, The
substance of Mr. Colemans project of a Declaration.
first to procure money and then by his Interest, as he phansied to himself, to
work a dissolution of the Parliament: so in case of attaining that end, Mr.
Coleman had by him the Draught of a Declaration, as from His Majesty, showing
the Reasons of that Dissolution; promising before the end of the next February
to call another Parliament, charging all persons to forbear talking
irreverently of the proceedings, and offering 20 l. to the discoverer of any
seditious talker against it, unto a Principal Secretary of State.

This is in short the substance of that Voluminous Declaration; and he did not
make more bold with His Majesty in this contrivance, out of his own head, then
he did in another Letter of Mr. La Chaise, in the name of his Master the Duke
of York, His Letter in the Dukes name, which gave his Highness great offense.
not only without the order and privity of the Duke, but incurring his very
great displeasure upon the very mention of his project: as he himself confessed
before a Committee of the House of Lords that discoursed with him in Newgate,
to which point Sir Philip Lloyd deposed the truth of what is here asserted, he
himself being then appointed to attend the said Committee.

The Letter itself was Read consisting most of Complement to the French
Interest, The sum of the Letter itself.
and of such imaginations as might give Mr. Coleman some Credit and Authority
in his future undertakings.

There was another Letter produced, Another Letter to La Chaise.
which was also to La Chaise, and without date, it is too long to be here
inserted, and the pinch of the Letter lying in a very narrow compass, we shall
only give you so much of it as may be sufficient for our present purpose.

We have a mighty work upon our hands, Two material passages out of it.
( says he) no less than the Conversion of three Kingdoms; and by that perhaps
the utter subduing of a Pestilent Heresy, which has Domineered over a great
part of this Northern world a long time: There never were such hopes of success
since the death of our Queen Mary, as now in our days. And again, It imports us
to get all the aid and assistance we can, for the Harvest is Great, and the
Laborers but few.

This Letter was acknowledged by Coleman to be of his own writing as attested
by Sir Thomas Dolman and Sir Philip Lloyd from Mr. Colemans own Lips. Mr.
Coleman owns the Letter.
There were read also diverse other Letters of the Prisoner, and one especially
of August 21. (74) to the Popes Internuncio at Bruxelles where he owns the
design to be The utter Ruin of the Protestant party, but these were never
thought fit for the Press.

The Prisoner did here crave the leave of the Court to ask Mr. Oats some
questions, The Prisoner asks the Witness some questions.
who (having been withdrawn to rest himself) was called again; it being also
offered by the Court, that Mr. Coleman might speak with Mr. Bedlow also, but he
did not desire it.

Here the Prisoner demanded the particular days of the months, where the
Consult was held; Dr. Oates's answer to them.
who were present at it: To which Mr. Oats made answer, that it was within two
or three days of the Consult, in May New Style, and April, Old, which began at
the White-Horse and was afterward adjourned to several Companies, That there
were present at it the Provincial, Mico, Strange, and Keins; and that the
Prisoner came to the Provincials Chamber two or three days after the Consult.
As to that at the Savoy, in August, Old Style, the Witness would not charge his
memory with the particular day, and touching the Consult in May, that Mr.
Coleman was not present at it; but two or three days after it, approved at
Wild-house of the resolutions before taken.

The Prisoner here suggests that he was fourscore miles off, The Prisoner says
he was in Warwickshire when charged to be in London.
in Warwickshire upon the 21. of August, Old Style and so for two or three and
twenty days before, solemnly imprecating himself that he never saw Mr. Oats
his Face, but in the Council Chamber, and now in the Court, and that he never
saw Mr. Bedlow but now in the Court in his whole life.

Mr. Coleman did also endeavor to evade the danger of two Witnesses, He pleads
that both Witnesses did not swear to the same Fact.
by alleging that they did not both of them swear the self same fact, which
was overruled by showing that the general fact of killing the King, was sworn
to by both, though not the particular manner, either of Pistol or Poison.

The Prisoner labored likewise to extenuate the malice of his expressions, He
blames his expression and distinguishes upon the word Aid.
by calling them only Extravagant, and to expound himself, by saying that by
the words Aid and Assistance was intended only Money and not Violence, and
finding that all this did not avail him, he offered proof that he was in
Warwickshire at the time sworn that he was in London, which being allowed him,

Boatman Boatman Witnesses his being in Warwickshire.
was called again; whose Testimony was only this, that in August last, Mr.
Coleman was in Warwickshire, all August, to the best of his remembrance; but
he could not say what time of the month the Prisoner was in London, and gave no
positive answer. When he was asked if Coleman was in Warwickshire, and no
where else, the Prisoner affirmed that he had been at the Lord Denbys, and Mr.
Francis Fishers, at least twenty days, and so concluded with these very words,
Positively I say, and upon my salvation, I never saw these Witnesses, Oats but
once, and Bedlow, never before.

The Kings Council then sum'd up the Evidence, the Prisoner offered the same
things over again, and his servant was examined His servant examined again but
could not speak to the day.
as to the time of his Masters going out of Town; and of his return; but could
not speak certainly to the day.

So that the Lord Chief Justice proceeded to his Charge to the Jury, whereupon
the Prisoner was found Guilty The Prisoner found Guilty.
of the High Treason whereof he stood Indicted, and remanded to the Prison,
with order to bring him again the next morning to receive his Sentence. The
Prisoner repeating what he had said before, concerning the two Witnesses.

Mr. Coleman, being brought again the next day ( November 28.) to the Bar,
first prayed favor for his papers, and then offered a Book, to prove him out
of Town He is brought to the Bar again and offers a Book to prove he was out of
Town.
from August 15. to the 31. late at night, referring himself also (for the
truth thereof) to some Papers and Books of Accounts which were then under
seizure, alleging also the improbability of speaking in Company of killing the
King, desiring the benefit, upon the whole matter, of the Act of Grace, but his
offense being since the last Act of Pardon, Pleads the Act of Grace and
receives his Sentence.
and his other pretensions being found to be of no weight, The Lord Chief
Justice, after a grave and pertinent Speech, pronounced Sentence upon the
Prisoner to be Drawn, Hanged and Quartered, etc. according to the usual form.

After Sentence past, He swears himself innocent.
the Prisoner denied the making or receiving; the knowing or hearing, either
directly or indirectly, of any propositions for the destroying of the King; the
subverting of the Government; or the bringing in of Popery by violence, or by
the help of any Foreign power. He declared upon his Salvation, that he had
given the House of Commons a true account of all his Books, Papers, and
Correspondences, and so desiring and obtaining leave for his Wife, and some
immediate Friends to come to him, he was carried back to Newgate.

Upon the Tuesday following, the Sentence was Executed upon him, And is
Executed.
at Tyburn; where he thanked God that he dyed a Catholic, renouncing upon the
word of a dying man, any knowledge of the Murder of Sir Edmond-Bury Godfrey,
and so was turned off.

THE HISTORY OF THE Charge and Defense OF William Ireland, Thomas Pickering and
John Grove.
ON the 17. of December (78.) Thomas White alias Whitebread, The Indictment;
for Conspiring the death of the King.
William Ireland, John Fenwick, Thomas Pickering, and John Grove were Indicted
at Iustice-Hall in the Old Bailey, for Conspiring the Murder of the King, etc.
They all of them pleaded Not-Guilty, and the Jury (being Gentlemen of Quality,)
was presented, and sworn, without any Challenge or Exception.

The Kings Learned Council having opened the Indictment, the Witnesses were
called, and Mr. Oats first sworn, Dr. Oats sworn.
and then demanded what he knew of a design for Murdering the King, and by
whom: who gave Evidence to the effect following.

That in December last, Mr. Whitebread Mr. Whitebreads Letter to Conyers.
was made Provincial of the Society; and then ordered a Jesuit at St. Omers
(one George Conyers) to Preach against the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy,
upon St. Thomas of Canterburies day, which he did, declaring them to be Hellish
and Antichristian.

That in January following the Provincial wrote a Letter to St. Omers unto
Richard Ashby, He summons a Consult.
giving notice of his intent to destroy the King, and in February that he
summoned the Jesuits to a Consult at London, upon April 24. Old Style: The
Provincial dating his Letters at that time from London.

That Whitebread issued a second summons, A second summons; and who appeared
upon it.
which was received, April 5. New-Stile, whereupon Nine appeared at London; the
Rector of Liege, Sir Thomas Preston, Marsh the Rector of Ghent, Williams, the
Rector of Watton; Sir John Harper, and from St. Omers two or three more, who
were all under a caution to lie close, for fear of discovering the design.

That the first Consult, April 24. Old Style, was at the White-Horse-Tavern The
Consult of April 24. at the White-Horse-Tavern.
in the Strand, where John Carry was ordered by Whitebread, Ireland, and
Fenwick, to go Procurator for Rome. This Consult adjourning after that to
several places, as Mr. Sanders's, Irelands, Harcourts, Groves and other places
(not known to the Witness) in little meetings.

That having debated upon the Matter of Religion, and the Murder of the King,
Mico, The Result drawn up by Mico.
the Secretary to the Society, did the same day draw up this following result:

It is resolved, That Thomas Pickering, The sum of the Result.
and John Grove shall proceed upon their attempt upon the person of the King;
and that Groves reward shall be 1500 l. and Pickerings 30000 Masses.

That this resolution was first signed by Whitebread, Who signed it.
and then by Ireland and Fenwick, and likewise by all the four Clubs at the
meetings beforementioned: the Witness carrying the Instrument from one to
another, and seeing them sign it; Whitebread, Ireland, and Fenwick signing it
at that part of the Consult which past at their respective Chambers, the
Witness being still present.

That in May, Mr. Whitebread went to St. Omers, upon his Provincial Visitation;
and with him, Carry and Mico: Carry going from thence to Rome.

That Whitebread having rendered an account of the state of the Catholics
proceedings in England, what moneys Collected; what party made and engaged;
what means used to promote the design, he ordered the Witness to come over into
England, and to murder Dr. Tongue for publishing a Book called the Jesuits
Morals: who left St. Omers June 23. New-Stile, Dr. Oats came over June 24. by
Dover.
took Boat at Calais on the 24. and on the 25. met Fenwick at Dover with some
youths that he was sending to St. Omers.

That the Witness coming in a Coach with Fenwick and other Passengers for
London, In a Coach to London.
the Coach being searched some six miles on this side Canterbury, they found a
Box full of Beads, Crucifixes, Images, etc. and directed to Richard Blundel Esquire
That these things being seized as Prohibited Goods: Mr. Fenwick said that if
they had searched him they might have found Letters in his Pocket would have
cost him his life, That Fenwick passed by the name of Thompson, near the
Fountain Tavern at Charing Cross, to which place he ordered the Searchers to
write to him.

That coming to London, June 27. after a few days, Ashbies Instructions from
Whitebread.
one Ashby came thither sick of the Gout, and was advised to go to the Bath for
his Cure. This Ashby had been Rector at St Omers, and Dr. Oats declares that
he brought these following Instructions from Whitebread. First, the offer of
10000 l. to Sir George Wakeman for making away the King. Secondly the Bishop of
Hereford to be murdered. Thirdly Dr. Stillingfleet. Fourthly, That (not
withstanding the offer to Sir George Wakeman) Pickering and Grove might go on
nevertheless. That Copies of these Instructions were dispersed among the
Conspirators: And that Sir George Wakeman not accepting of 10000 l. Whitebread
gave order for the making of it 15000 l. which was proffered, and accepted as
appeared upon their Books of Entries, and by a Letter from Whitebread
expressing much satisfaction upon the agreement, 5000 l. of it being paid down
in hand, by Coleman or his Order.

That in August, one Fogarthy (since dead) was at a Consultation of the
Jesuits, with the Benedictines; where Fenwick, and one Harcourt were both
present. That at this Consult Fogarthy recommended four Ruffians Four Ruffians
hired to kill the King.
for the attempt, which the Consultors accepted, and they were also approved of
by Fenwick. That these Ruffians were dispatched away, and the next day 80 l.
was sent them, (most of it Gold) Coleman giving the Messenger a Guiny to make
have.

That in August, Broils to be raised in Scotland.
Whitebread gave advice of what he had done about the Scotch business, ordering
W. Harcourt (Rector of London) to send Moore, and Sanders, alias Brown, down
into Scotland, whither they were accordingly sent from London, August 6. in the
name of the Provincial.

The Witness swears further, that Moore and Sanders were employed to promote
Moore and Sanders to promote them.
the design of raising a Rebellion there, which Fenwick, and Ireland had
projected: sending down people under the disguise of Presbyterian Ministers, to
put the Scots into a Tumult, by setting forth the sad condition of living under
an Episcopal Tyranny.

The Witness Deposes also that they had determined to dispose not only of the
King, The Duke as well as the King to be disposed of.
but also of the Duke too, unless they found him (to use their own words)
vigorous in promoting the Catholic Religion.

Dr. Oats was here examined if he knew the Prisoners at the Bar, and ordered
to call them by their names, and likewise examined what he knew of Pickering
and Groves acceptance of the Conditions; whereupon he named them all.

And concerning Pickering and Grove, The Sacrament taken and an Oath of Secrecy.
Dr. Oats declared that he himself was present at Mr. Whitebreads Lodgings,
when they accepted of the Conditions, but that the Consult was over, before
Grove came thither, and that then he took the Sacrament, and an Oath of Secrecy
upon it, and so agreed to it, And that a Jesuit (by the name of Barton
delivered the Sacrament.)

Hereupon Mr. Whitebread interposed, The Prisoner says Dr. Oats was at St.
Omers, when he swears himself in London.
That whereas the Witness says that in April, and May, he was present at such
and such Consults, there were hundreds could prove that Dr. Oats was all that
time at St. Omers; the Prisoner desiring to know at what time he himself
received that Sacrament, to which Dr. Oats Testified that he received it, at
the same time, the 24. of April, the Prisoner taking God to Witness he was not
there.

Dr. Oats was then examined about the time that Mr. Carry was sent to Rome, and
upon what business; to which Dr. Oats answered, that April 24. it was resolved
that Carry should be sent, and that in May, or June, Carry sent to Rome, in May
or June.
Carry was brought over by Whitebread to St. Omers, Secretary Mico with him, and
that then Carry took his Journey, receiving 20 l. at Paris for his expenses.

Dr. Oats being asked what he knew of any design upon the Person of the King
in St. James's Park, Dr. Oates's Evidence against Pickering and Grove.
declared as follows, That he saw Grove and Pickering diverse times together
in the Park, with screwed Guns, (betwixt Pistols and Carbines) and that they
had silver Bullets, which the Witness himself saw in the possession of Grove,
and in the months of May and June; and that Grove told the Witness that he
would champ his Bullets, that the wound might not be Cured, upon this Mr.
Whitebread suggested that the Witness was at that time actually at St. Omers.
But Dr. Oats averred that he saw Grove's Bullets twice or thrice in May and
June, and Pickerings in August.

The Witness was now questioned what he knew of Pickerings Penance, and what
was his offense; who gave Evidence,

That in March last, Pickerings Penance; and for what.
Pickering slipped a fair opportunity (as Whitebread told him) for his flint was
loose, and he durst not strike for fear of missing fire, and that for this
neglect, he had twenty or thirty strokes: and Grove was censured too for
looking not better after it. That he had seen and read this in Letters from
Whitebread, whose hand he knew very well.

The Witness was then ordered to speak to the business of the Ruffians, Dr.
Oates's Risque upon his discovery of the Plot.
that were sent to Windsor, and how they succeeded; to which, Dr. Oats could
say little, in regard that at the beginning of September last, one Bedingfield
had written to Whitebread that the Plot was discovered, and that none but such
a one could do it, calling the Witness by his borrowed name. That this Deponent
coming to speak with the Provincial at his Chamber, Sept. 3. the Provincial
there showed and read Bedingfields Letter to the Witness; reproching, striking,
and abusing him; and charging him with a discovery of the Matter to the King:
and asking him with what Face he could come to him thus, after he had betrayed
him. That the Witness was not only reviled, and commanded to depart the
Kingdom, but was assalted in his Lodging by Whitebread, and others, who would
have killed him if they could.

Dr. Oats was called upon next to speak to the Fourscore pounds: who gave this
Evidence; Fourscore pounds sent to Windsor to the Ruffians.
that he himself saw the money at Harcourts Chamber in Dukes-street near the
Arch; and that it was given by William Harcourt; but for the four Irish men
that were sent to Windsor, that he never saw them, or knew their names, or the
name of the Messenger that carried it, but that the money was paid by Coleman,
and Fenwick present at the payment of it: To which Fenwick demanding, when this
was, and where, Dr. Oats replied that it was in August, and in Harcourts
Chamber, Fenwick denying that ever he saw Dr. Oats there in his whole life.

Dr. Oats being examined who signed the Resolution concerning Grove and
Pickering; Who signed the Resolution.
declared that there were at least forty that signed it, and the five Prisoners
amongst the rest; and that the Witness carried it from one to another, and saw
the signing of it, having been an attendant upon them ever since the Year --
and chiefly at Mr. Whitebreads, the Provincials Chamber, where it was first
signed. That Mico drew up the Resolution at Whitebreads Chamber, and all the
Prisoners privy to it, That when the whole Consultation had signed it, and Mass
was ready to be said, Grove and Pickering did sign it before Mass, and approved
of it, at the Provincials; where they all met that day to receive the
Sacrament; which was delivered in a little Chapel at Wild-House.

As to the Oath of Secrecy, The Oath of Secrecy.
Dr. Oats gives Evidence that he saw Whitebread Administer it, to all that
were there: Mico holding the Book, (a Mass Book) but what the form of the Oath
was Dr. Oats could not say.

Mr. Whitebread reasons the Matter, Mr. Whitebread denies all.
that he was in a very doubtful state of Health, and that he would be loath to
leave the world with a lie in his mouth, how much easier it is to assert an
Affirmative, than to prove a Negative, and declaring before Almighty God that
the Witness had not spoken three words of truth.

Dr. Oats then called to mind that Mr. Whitebread was Authorized to grant
Military Commissions, Whitebread charged with issuing out Commissions.
and informed that the Seals of the Office were in the Court, with which the
Provincial had Sealed some hundreds. That some of them past the Seal in the
time of the former Provincial; That the Commissions of the General Officers
were Sealed by Johannes Paulus de Oliva, the General of the Order; but that the
Seals for inferior Commissions were in the hands of the Provincial. That he had
Sealed one to Sir John Gage, which was delivered unto him by this Witness, who
received it from Mr. Ashby, but by Whitebreads appointment: as appeared by a
Memorial which the Witness saw and read.

That Whitebread, when he went over, lost several Commissions with Blanks,
Several Commissions with Blanks.
and one ready Sealed, which was delivered in his absence unto this Witness.
And that the intent of Arming, was to rise upon the Murder of His Majesty,
Ireland and Scotland being already prepared to encourage an Invasion.

Dr. Oats offered something here concerning Grove, Dr. Oats charges Grove and
three Irishmen with firing Southwark.
informing that he went about with one Smith to gather Peterpence; either to
advance their design, or to send them to Rome: Mr. Grove faintly denying any
acquaintance with the Witness, whereupon Mr. Oats informed the Court, that in
December last, going to take his leave of the then Provincial; before the
Witness going to St. Omers, he met there with Mr. Grove, who appointed to come
next morning to his Lodging, and lent the Witness eight shillings for the hire
of the Coach, by which token it appears that they were acquainted, as well as
by other Circumstances, and by one very particular; when as the Witness
informs, Groves told him that He and three Irishmen had fired Southwark, and
that they had 1000 l. for their pains: Grove 400 l. and the other, 200 l. a
piece.

Upon the Courts examining Mr. Fenwick if he knew Dr. Oats, Fenwick offers the
Seal of the College, and of the Town, to prove that Dr. Oats was at St. Omers
April and May.
Mr. Fenwick owned that he did, and remembered it by diverse Circumstances, but
insisted upon it that Dr. Oats was at St. Omers upon April the 24. which was
the time when Dr. Oats affirms that he brought the Resolve of the Consultation
to the Prisoners Chamber, and that for the month of May, Dr. Oats stirred not
from St. Omers all that month, for the proof whereof, Mr. Fenwick offered a
Testimony under the Seal of the College, and signed by the Magistrates of the
Town. To all which the Court gave a very favorable hearing, and offered time
to make out a proof. But the Evidence propounded not being according to Law,
the Prisoner in this point was overruled.

Dr. Oats on the other side, Dr. Oats came over to the April Consult.
affirms that in December or November he went to St. Omers, stayed there all
January, February, March, and part of April, came over to the Consult of the
24. and went back again presently after it was over. That Father Warner, Sir
Tho. Preston, Father Williams, Sir John Warner, one Nevil, etc. came over with
him: And further, that a Lad from St. Omers being discharged the House, and
having lost his money, Williams supplied him toward his going home (as he
remembers) his name was Hilsley, and that they came up to London together.

That the Witness lay at Groves, And lay at Groves's.
and there was a flaxen-hair'd Gentleman, and Strange the late Provincial, that
lay there besides: but that the Witness was charged to keep himself very close,
Groves in the mean time, denying that Oats ever lay in his house, and
confessing that Strange did, but not in either April, or May.

Mr. Whitebreads reply upon Dr. Oats was; Whitebread denies Dr. Oates's coming
up with Hilsley.
that Williams and Hilsley did come up to Town together; and that Dr. Oats
knew of it, but that he was not with them, nor could he be with them, for he
had no orders.

The Court did here very tenderly advise the Prisoners to bethink themselves,
as a very material point, if they could make it out that Dr. Oats was not in
England in April or May.

Mr. Bedlow was now called and sworn and then examined what he knew of any Plot
to kill the King, Mr. Bedlow called and sworn.
and by whom; who rendered this account.

That he had been near Five years a Carrier of Letters betwixt England and
France, He carried Letters for Harcourt.
for the Society, and the English Monks in Paris. That the first Letter he
carried, was from Mr. Harcourt, who sent for him over (being then a Lieutenant
in Flanders) about Michaelmass last was four years.

That the Witness visiting the English Nunnery at Dunkirk, was kindly treated
by the Lady Abbess, Recommended by the Lady Abbess to Sir John Warner.
who entertained him six weeks in the Convent, and afterward, recommended him
to Sir John Warner as a person fit to be entrusted either with Letters or any
thing else against England: That after a fortnights stay, Sir John Warner sent
him to Father Harcourts, the next spring he sent him with several Letters into
England, and Mr. Harcourt gave him several dispatches from thence to Morton and
Doway, and other places.

That in 1676. he carried a Packet to the Monks at Paris, A Correspondence
betwixt Harcourt and La Chaise.
which they communicated to the other English Monks in France, to whom it was
directed, with a Letter in it to La Chaise, from Harcourt, Prichard, and Carry.
That upon the receipt of this Packet, there past a Consultation betwixt La
Chaise, some Monks, and a French Bishop or two, by whom mention was made (as
Stapleton an English Monk told the Witness) of a Letter from the Lord Bellasis,
and other Catholics in the Plot; showing in what condition affairs stood in
England.

That from the English Monks at Paris the Witness was sent with a Packet
addressed to Mr. Vaughan of Courtfield in Monmouthshire. That Mr. Bedlow went
from thence to Pontois, and carried other Letters from thence into England;
which he opened, and found to be only Prayers for the success of the design,
and an earnest entreaty not to fail meeting at the Warwickshire Consult.

That May 25. 1677. The Witness carried over an other Packet, Mr. Bedlow sent
to Paris.
and delivered some Letters to the English Nuns at Bruges and Ghent. That
coming to Doway, the Monks Sheldon, Stapilton and Latham being gone, the
Witness hastened after them, and overtook them at Cambray: That the intent of
these Letters was to give notice of what had passed in a Consult at
Summerset-House, about the destroying the Protestant Religion; that there was
great joy in Cambray at the News; and at Paris the Witness was informed that
the Lord Bellasis blamed them for not keeping touch with England, Stapleton
telling the Witness that neither my Lord, nor the Society in England had any
reason to blame them, for they had their Men, Money, Men, and Arms in readiness.
Money and Armies in readiness upon any occasion: from thence the Witness was
dispatched into Spain to an Irish Father, whom he overtook at La Mora; and from
thence he went to Salamanca, and St. Iago; and so came back into England, and
Landed at Milford* Haven.

That the Witness passed thence to London, Letters for promoting the Plot.
and delivered the Letter to Mr. Harcourt, that he did not look into the
Contents of it, but knew that it tended to the same purpose with the rest, and
to the advancing of the Plot. That he was afterward sent by Harcourt and
Coleman with Letters to some Papists in England.

That in the beginning of August last there was a close Consult at Mr.
Harcourts, A Consult in August at Mr. Harcourts.
as this Witness was informed by Pritchard. That it was a Plot upon the Kings
life, and that Pickering and Grove had been long about it, but that for fear of
failing, there were four Ruffians to be employed that would do it at Windsor,
and that the next day, Mr. Coleman would inform the Witness of the success.
That Pritchard told him further; that some being sent to Windsor, Mr. Coleman
was following them, having given a Guiny to the Menssenger that carried them
their money. And moreover; that the Witness demanded why they kept him so long a
stranger to the design, they answered him that it was the Societies Resolve,
and the Lord Bellasis's Order, that none but those of the Society, and the
Actors in the Conspiracy should be made privy to it.

That about the latter end of August, Conyers joined to Pickering and Grove, in
the design at Newmarket.
as he believes, the Witness coming to Harcourts Chamber, found Ireland there,
Pritchard, Pickering and Grove. That their discourse was that since the
Ruffians could not dispatch the King, Pickering and Grove should take in
Conyers, and try if they could snap him in his morning walk at Newmarket. That
they were all of them eager upon it, and especially Grove, who said that if it
could not be done by surprise, it must be openly, and that at the worst it
would be an honorable miscarriage; and that in spite of all discoveries the
party was yet strong enough to bring it about.

The Witness swears also, Pickering and Grove to be rewarded.
that Fogarthy and Harcourt were there, and that Ireland, Grove, Pickering and
the rest heard all this. That Harcourt promised the Witness a considerable
reward, Grove to have 1500 l. if he came off, and to be the favorite of the
Church; Pickering to have as many Masses at twelve pence a piece as would come
to that money.

Ireland denies that ever he saw Bedlow before that time in the Court, Ireland
denies the knowledge of Mr. Bedlow.
and bade him produce a Witness if he could, that he had ever spoken to him.

Mr. Bedlow was examined what he could say of the rest; and his answer was, Mr.
Bedlow knows nothing of Whitebreads being in the Plot.
that he charged only those three; that as to Whitebread; that he had heard he
was deep in the Plot, but did not know it, and only knew him by sight, but that
Whitebread and Fenwick had been at many Consultations.

Mr. Bedlow came now to speak to Groves agreement; Grove to put his 1500 l.
into a Friends hand.
and the 1500 l. His evidence was, that Grove was to put it into a Friends
hand, but he knew not his name, nor the certain time of their agreement.

Ireland Ireland says he was in Staffordshire not London.
affirms that he was not in London the whole month of August, and offers to
prove by twenty Witnesses that he was in Staffordshire from one end of the
month to the other, and desires that Mr. Bedlow would name the place, and the
Company where ever they were together.

Mr. Bedlow Mr. Bedlow says he saw Ireland at Le Faires.
replied that he did not pretend to a familiarity with him, but that he had
seen him often, and particularly at Le Fairs at Somerset House in company with
several other Priests and Jesuits: upon Irelands bidding him name one, Mr.
Bedlow named Segnior Perrare: I suppose (says Ireland) if Perrare may be
brought hither, at which words dispute concerned in the business.

The Reader may here take notice that the Printed Trial has this passage in it
page 45. Mr. Bedlow asks Mr. Ireland. do you know Le Fair and Parrare? To
which Ireland replies Yes; but I never saw you in their Company, in
Somerset House in my life, but Once or Twice, yes (says Mr. Bedlow) you have
Twice at Le Faires.

Here is a Contradiction in the one part, A Doubtful passage in the Printed
Trial.
and an Incongruity in the other, which neither finding in my own Notes, nor
any notice taken of it in the Court, the Reader is left to judge if it may not
be some slip in the Press.

Mr. Bedlow gave Evidence also of his seeing Mr. Fenwick say Mass at
Somerset House, and of another Plot A Plot upon some Noble Lords.
discoursed of upon the lives of certain Noble Persons: Knight to kill the Earl
of Shaftsbury; Pritchard, the Duke of Buckingham; O Neale the Earl of Ossory,
and Obrian the Duke of Ormond.

Dr. Oats Dr. Oats calls to mind a Plot upon the Duke of Ormond.
informs the Court of a Consult he had forgotten, where there was a Plot laid
to kill the Duke of Ormond, and raise a Rebellion in Ireland, declaring that in
January last, Fenwick, Ireland, and Whitebread had the perusal of some Letters
from Talbot sent to London, which they Communicated to the Society at St.
Omers. The Letters speaking to this effect, that the Catholics stood fair to
do their business in Ireland. And the Witness also swears, that he saw a Letter
under Covert, signed by Whitebread, Ireland, Fenwick, etc. of thanksgiving for
their hopes in Ireland, and declaring withal, that no stone should be left
unturned for the extirpation of that abominable Heresy out of that Kingdom.

That Fenwick, Mr. Fenwick made privy to that Plot.
about the 21. of August, a little before his going to St. Omers, to bring home
the Provincial, was at a Consult, and did there consent to a design upon the
Duke of Ormonds life, and the moving of a Rebellion, after his death; and
likewise approve of the four Jesuits that were to do the work, and of sending
Fogarthy over to Talbot, in case the four Jesuits should not do their
business. And also that Mr. Whitebread agreed to it, at his coming over, as may
appear by his Books of Entry; for a Letter from Mr. Whitebread, dated as from
St. Omers, about the latter end of August, and taxed at but two pence, made
this Witness suspect that it was written nearer hand: In that Letter Whitebread
approved of the design upon the Duke, and the Witness swears that it was signed
with his own hand, informing the Court, that the said Result might be found in
the Book wherein all the Consults are Registered.

Mr. James Bedlow Mr. James Bedlow swears he had heard of a Plot.
being sworn, declares that he did not know Ireland, That he had heard of
Pickering, and Grove, and could say nothing to the Conspiracy against the King,
but he had heard his Brother talk of the Priests and Jesuits, as people that
he knew, and that many of them visited his Brother. That he had fetched many
sums from them for his Brother, (as 50 or 60 l. at a time) as he had proved to
the Duke of Monmouth, the Lord Chancellor, and Lord Treasurer; from the persons
that paid the money.

Mr. James Bedlow being examined what he had heard his Brother say concerning
Mr. Ireland, and how long he had known him, made answer that he had heard his
Brother speak of him, but where, or in what place, he could not tell.

Mr. Ireland urged that Mr. Bedlow made mention of one place, some three years
since, and that it was at Paris, and that if he talked of him so long, he must
have known him so long; whereupon the question being put to Mr. Bedlow how long
he had known Mr. Ireland, Mr. Bedlow made answer that he had only known him
since August last; but that a man might talk of people that he never saw in his
life.

Mr. William Bedlow, with his Brother, did not withdraw, and Dr. Oats speaking
to the summoning of a Consult, did aver that he heard Mr. Whitebread ask Mr.
Peter's, if he had summoned the Consult, as he directed, him and that Mr. Peter's
answered him, Yes, and that he had written into Warwickshire and
Worcestershire about it.

There was now a Letter produced from Mr. Peter's a Prisoner about this Plot,
Sir Tho. Doleman declaring in Court, that he found it amongst Harcourts papers,
the hand being likewise sworn by Dr. Oats to be Mr. Peter's hand; which Letter,
as it follows, was read in the Court.

Feb. 23. 1677.

These for his honored Friend Mr. William Tonstal, at Burton.
Honored Dear Sir,
I Have but time to convey these following particulars to you. First I am to
give you notice, that it has seemed siting to our Master Consult Pro, etc. to
fix the 21. day of April next, Stylo veteri, for the meeting at London of our
Congregation, on which day, all those that have a suffrage are to be present
there, that they may be ready to give a beginning to the same, on the 24, which
is the next day after St. Georges-day, you are warned to have jus suffragii,
and therefore if your occasions should not permit you to be present, you are to
signify as much, to the end others in their ranks be ordered to supply your
absence: every one is minded also, not to hasten to London long before the time
appointed, nor to appear much about the Town till the meeting be over; left
occasion should be given to suspect the design; finally, secrecy, as to the
time and place, is much recommended to all those that receive Summons, as it
will appear of its own nature necessary.

Tertio pro Domino Solovo disco. Benefact. Prove. Luniensis.

I am straightened for time, that I can only assure you, I shall be much glad of
obliging you any ways.

Sir, Your Servant Edward Petre. Pray my service where due, etc.


Mr. Whitebread declared that he knew nothing at all of this Letter, and Mr.
Ireland that it was none of his Letter, and that he had not heard of it before
in particular.

Upon this matter, Sir Thomas Doleman informed the Court, that Dr. Oats gave
an account of this Consult to His Majesty and Council, four or five days before
this Letter was found.

The Seals were now produced in Court, The Seals brought into the Court.
Dr. Oats affirming them to have been seized in the Provincials Chamber, and
Mr. Whitebread confessing as much.

The Jury were now dischaged of Mr. Fenwick and Mr. Whitebread, The Jury
discharged of Mr. Fenwick and Mr. Whitebread.
upon a tenderness of not screwing up any Evidence to an over rigorous
construction; so that they were taken from the Bar, to attend the event of a
farther discovery.

The Prisoners being now called upon to make their defense, with an assurance
that their Witnesses should be fairly heard, and a free Ingress and Regress
allowed them, without trouble, Mr. Ireland came on first, alleging,

That there were not tow Witnesses against him, Mr. Ireland proves his being in
Staffordshire.
for he could not be at Harcourts Chamber in August, being that whole month out
of Town, That he went into Staffordshire, August 3. in company with the Lord
Aston, his Lady, and his Son; Sir John Southcot, and his Lady, and that Mr.
John Aston can Witness for him, he being in Staffordshire all August.

Mr. Aston was then called, but did not appear, Mr. Ireland complaining that he
had not liberty to send a Note to any body, but it appeared that his Sister was
free to solicit his business.

Upon Irelands denial of his being in Town in August, Sarah Pain swears that
she saw Ireland at his own door at a Scriveners in Fetter-Lane, about Aug. 13.
Sarah Pain (whom Grove owned to have been formerly his servant) was sworn, who
gave this Evidence; That she knew Mr. Ireland, and that she saw him at his own
house about a week after the Kings going to Windsor, who went about the 13. of
August so that about the 20. she saw him, and it was at a Scriveners in
Fetter-Lane. That she knew him very well, for he came often to Mr. Groves, and
opened all the Packets of Letters, which her Master delivered afterward, and
Sealed those that went beyond Seas.

There was then called Ann Ireland, Mrs. A. Ireland proves Mr. Ireland in
Staffordshire.
on the behalf of the Prisoner, who informed that August 3. Mr. Ireland set out
for Staffordshire, and continued there till about a fortnight before
Michaelmas. Upon Mr. Irelands denying that he knew Sarah Pain, she minded him
of her bringing him diverse Letters, that came by the Carriers, as well as by
the Post, to which Mr. Ireland replied, that it might very well be so, and yet
he not remember it.

Mr. Irelands Mother ( Eleanor Ireland) was then called, And so does Mrs.
Eleanor Ireland.
who declared that he went, and returned, as was informed by the Daughter, and
that she and her Daughter lay in the same House with him, all the time:
whereupon it was objected, that he might go from the House and come again, as
is suggested, and yet be in London in the mean time.

Dr. Oats declared that he was with Mr. Ireland in London, Dr. Oats swears
Mr. Ireland in London at that time.
to take his leave of him, betwixt the 12. and 24. and that he saw him
afterward within the month of August, at Mr. Fenwicks Chamber: and further,
that upon the first or second of September he himself had 20 s. of him in Town,
which Mr. Ireland said was a most false lie, he being then in Staffordshire;
and he minded them of a contradiction in the Witnesses, the one speaking of him
as going to St. Omers the 12. and the other charging him with being at
Harcourts Chamber at the end of the month; which was solved thus, that he might
be going, or pretending to go and yet not go.

There was next produced one Harrison, Harrison proves Ireland in Staffordshire.
the Coachman that carried him down, who informed; That he met the Prisoner
(Mr. Ireland) Aug. 5. in the evening at the Bull Inn, in St. Albans, and
Traveled with him till the 16. that he knew not whether he came from London
that day, or not; and that he had never seen him before. That he was a servant
to Sir John Southcot, who married the Sister of the Lord Aston, and that he
carried the Prisoner to Tixal the Lord Astons House: That after three or four
days stay at Tixal he went to Nantwich, and so to Westchester, where he left
him, and that he was now called up to Town by a Messenger the night before.

Mr. Ireland gives this account of his passage, Mr. Irelands journal of his
passage into the Country.
That Aug. 3. he went out of London to Standen, where he lodged that night and
the next, and on the 5. went to St. Albans, going out of his way for Sir John
Southcot and his Ladies Company, who he knew were to meet the Lord Aston and
his Lady at St. Albans; and being asked how he could prove himself to be that
whole month in Staffordshire, when yet it appears that he was in Westchester,
Mr. Ireland made answer that he was in Staffordshire and thereabouts: And that
he was at Wolverhampton, Mr. Gifford Witnesses it too.
he desired Mr. Charles Gifford might be called to bear him Witness; who gave
Testimony, that from a day or two after St. Bartholomew he continued there till
the 9. of September, and could say no more.

Mr. Ireland then reflected upon the credit of Dr. Oates's Testimony, Mr.
Ireland reflects upon Dr. Oates's Testimony.
having been told that he broke Prison at Dover, and other ill things of him;
so that he offered it as reasonable, that some Witnesses might be brought to
attesst his Reputation, desiring time to produce more Witnesses, having
Witnesses already to prove that there are more, and naming Hilsley for one that
would prove, that when Dr. Oats said he came over with him, Dr. Oats was all
that time at St. Omers, but (says Ireland) no man can answer to a charge he was
not aware of.

Sir Denny Ashburnham being solicited to appear, Sir Denny Ashburnhams Evidence.
and testify what he could say concerning Dr. Oats, was now called; and he
informed that upon a Letter received that morning, with the copy of an
indictment of Perjury against Dr. Oats, from the Town of Hastings, for which
he served, he sent them to Mr. Attorney, but it being only a Certificate, and
the Indictment not proceeded upon, and no warrantable Evidence, and neither for
nor against the Prisoners, it was not thought worth a reading. Sir Denny
Ashburnham's information was, that he had known Dr. Oats from a child, and
that in his youth he was looked upon to be a person not much to be confided in,
that being the night before importuned by the Sister of Mr. Ireland to give
Evidence for the Prisoner, he refused so to do, declaring that he could not
speak any thing to his advantage: for though perhaps having known Dr. Oats in
youth, he might have suspended in his belief upon Dr. Oats his single
Testimony, yet finding it so seconded, he was clearly convinced, and satisfied
with the truth of the thing, and he declared farther that he could say nothing
to take off Dr. Oats Evidence. That the matter of the Indictment in question
was only Dr. Oats swearing the Peace against a man, and saying that there were
Witnesses could prove such a Fact, which they would not do when they were
called.

Mr. Ireland pleaded the Loyalty of himself, Mr. Ireland pleads his Loyalty.
and Family, his Relations plundered, an Uncle killed in the Kings service, the
Pendrels, and the Giffords, that preserved the King after his Defeat at
Worcester, and so only desiring time for more Witnesses, he remitted himself to
the Court.

Mr. Groves said little more than that Dr. Oats never lay at his House, Mr.
Grove denies that Dr. Oats ever lay at his House.
and that he never saw him take the Sacrament at Wildhouse, as he could prove,
if he were able to send for Witnesses, his Sister declaring that she never saw
Dr. Oats there, at her Brothers House (Dr. Oats deposing that he was there in
a disguise, and by another name.) The Prisoner concluding all with these words.
As I have a soul to save, I know nothing of this matter charged upon me.

Mr. Pickering affirms that he never shot off a Pistol in his life, Mr.
Pickering swears that he was never in Mr. Bedlows Company.
that he never saw Dr. Oats that he knew of; offers to swear that he never was
in Mr. Bedlows Company; urges that his Father was slain on the Kings side, and
pleads that he had no time to summons his Witnesses.

After the Lord Chief Justice had given his directions to the Jury which were
exact and impartial, together with some learned reflections upon the errors of
the Church of Rome; the Jury went out to consider of their Verdict, The three
Prisoners found Guilty and Condemned.
and in a short time came in again, and returned the three Prisoners severally
Guilty of the High Treason whereof they stood Indicted, and so the Court
adjourned till four in the Afternoon: when meeting again, according to their
adjournment; Mr. Recorder, after a grave and weighty discourse upon that
occasion, pronounced Sentence upon the Prisoners according to the usual form in
such cases, which Sentence was accordingly Executed upon Ireland, and Grove;
January 24. at the common place of Execution, Pickering being Reprieved till
May 9. 1679. when he likewise suffered death according to his Sentence.

The History of the Charge and Defense of Tho. Whitebread, Will. Harcourt, John
Fenwick, John Gavan, and Anthony Turner.
THERE were tried by an Oyer and Terminer, at the Sessions House at Old Bailey,
June 13. 1679. Five Jesuits and Priests, that is to say, Tho. White, alias
Whitebread, (Provincial of the Society in England) Will. Harcourt, Rectour of
London, John Fenwick, Procurator for the Society, John Gavan, and Anthony
Turner, upon an Indictment of High Treason, for a Conspiracy against the Life
of the King, the overturning of the Government, and the destruction of the
Protestant Religion. There was also a Sixth brought to the Bar, one James
Corker, but upon his Petition to the Court for longer time, in regard that he
had not sufficient notice for the producing of his Witnesses, and the preparing
of his Defenses, he was, for the present, set aside.

The Indictment being read, Mr. Whitebread pleads that a man ought not to be
tried twice for the same Fact.
Mr. Whitebread represented to the Court, that having been tried on the 17. of
December last, upon the same Indictment, the Jury impannell'd, and the Evidence
found insufficient that was brought in against him, and the Jury discharged
without Verdict, he was informed that no man could be tried, and have his Life
put in jeopardy twice for the same Cause; and therefore made it his Suit, that
he might have Counsel to direct him upon that point in the matter of Law. He
pressed that his Life was in jeopardy, being delivered over in Charge to the
Jury; and cited Sayer's Case Eliz. 31. who having pleaded to a former
Indictment for a Burglary, was Indicted a second time; the Judges declaring
that he could not be Indicted again for the same Fact. He desired a sight of
the Record, and to be informed whether or no, being come upon his Trial, a man
ought not to be either Condemned, or Acquitted. Upon which motion and proposal
it was opened unto him,

That the Jury being discharged of him, His Plea answered, and overrul'd.
his Life was in no danger; and that the Jury being sworn to make true
deliverance of the Prisoners in their Charge, their Charge is not full till the
last Charge of the Court, after Evidence. And farther, that their Plea was not
to be supported without a Record; and moreover that there was no Record of
December 17. concerning them, for there was no Verdict, because there was no
Trial, nor was it the same Indictment, but contained new matter. Upon which,
Mr. Whitebread submitted himself to the Court.

Mr. Fenwick offered the same Plea with Mr. Whitebread, Mr. Fenwick pleads the
same with Mr. Whitebread.
enlarging himself upon it; That they Two were in the fame danger with the
other Three that suffered, for if Mr. Bedlow (who declared he could say nothing
against them) had given the same Evidence as against the rest, they should have
been likewise Condemned: so that the Evidence falling short, he supposed that
they ought to have been discharged.

The Court proceeded now upon the Prisoners, The Prisoners challenge all that
served in the former Jury.
who did all plead Not Guilty; and the Jury being called, they did unanimously
Except (without naming them) to all those persons that had served before as
Jurymen in the same Cause.

When the King's Counsel had opened the Indictment, Mr. Oats sworn.
Mr. Oats was the first Witness called, and sworn: who giving the Court to
understand, that he should have occasion for several Witnesses, which he
desired might be called in, Mr. Gavan objected against it, for fear of giving
them instructions; so that Mr. Oats giving in their Names, a note was taken of
them, and they were sent for to be in readiness upon occasion, and then Mr.
Oats came to his Evidence, declaring,

That Mr. Whitebread was made Provincial December last was twelvemonth, His
Charge upon Mr. Whitebread for his Orders to Conyers.
and ordered Conyers to preach this Doctrine in the English Seminary upon S.
Thomas of Becket's day, That the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy were
Antichristian, Heretical, and Devilish: which was done accordingly.

And that Whitebread wrote Letters in January, Mr. Whitebread charged for a
Correspondence with Father Talbot.
or February, to S. Omers, of what Talbot had written to him about the State of
Ireland; which was, That thousands would be in readiness to rise when the Blow
was given: signifying by the word Blow, as was usual among them, the Murder of
the King. Farther declaring, that this Expression was in Whitebread's Letter,
and that he said (for the Blow) he hoped it would not be long first.

That in January Whitebread sent two Jesuits to see how things were in Ireland,
The Resolve of Apr. Consult signed.
of whose Return in April Whitebread delivered an Account: mentioning a Consult
appointed in April, old style, May, new; where there met Whitebread, Fenwick,
Harcourt, and Turner, who did all of them sign the Resolve; Whitebread at
Wild-House, Fenwick in Drury Lane, Harcourt in Duke-Street. That the Consult
began at the White-horse Tavern in the Strand, where Carry was made Procurator
to be sent to Rome: after this they Adjourned into small Meeting, at
Whitebread's Chamber, Ireland's, Harcourt's, Fenwick's. The Witness durst not
charge Mr. Gavan with this point.

That the Resolve signed as aforesaid, The Substance of the Resolve.
was* that Pickering and Grovo should proceed to dispatch the King; (as a good
Expedient.) And that after this Consult, the Witness and 8 or 9 more returned
to S. Omers; and in June Whitebread went over to Flanders, (being Provincial)
to look to his Charge; where, upon discourse with some of the Fathers, he had
this Expression, That he hoped to see the -- at Whitehall laid fast enough; and
that if the Brother should appear to follow in his Footsteps, his Passport
should be made too.

That June 13. old style the Witness came for England by order, Mr. Oats
landed at Dover June 15. and came to London about Noon, June 17.
took boat at Calais on the 14. and on the 15. betimes in the morning he landed
at Dover, where Mr. Fenwick was with some Students that he was sending over.
That Fenwick, the Witness, and some others took Coach, baited at Canterbury,
and when they came six miles farther, there was a Box taken by the Searchers,
directed to the Honorable Richard Blundell, Esquire at London, and brought up by
Mr. Fenwick. It was full of Beads, Crucifixes, and the like: and Fenwick
desired the Searchers to send it with a Letter for Mr. Thompson, (so he called
himself) to the Fountain Tavern near Charing Cross. He swears farther, that
Fenwick said, if they had searched his Pockets, as they did his Box, it might
have cost him his Life; for he had Letters there about the Concern in hand.
That he came to London about noon, June 17. old style; and that in July, one
Ashby (or rather Thimbleby) and Fenwick brought over Instructions from
Whitebread, Instructions to poison the King, and issue out Commissions.
for the offering Sir George Wakeman 10000 li. to poison His Majesty, and for
the filling up of a Blank Commission for Sir John Gage, to be an Officer in the
Army; and that by Fenwick's own order the Witness gave it one Sunday into Sir
John's own hand; the Commission being filled at Wild-House by Whitebread's
order, but signed and sealed by Whitebread, who ordered Ashby in July, while he
was at S. Omers, to have it filled up: which Order the Witness saw, and knew
the hand. That there were present at the filling of it up, Mr. Harcourt, Mr.
Ashby, and Mr. Ireland: and that Fenwick and Harcourt did counsel Ashby upon
his leaving of the Bath, Mr. Ashby went to the Bath about the latter end of
July.
(whither he went about the latter end of July,) to take his Circuit in
Somersetshire, and possess the people there with the matter; not doubting but
the Gentleman at Whitehall would be dispatched before he came back.

As to Mr. Gavan, Mr. Oats did not know Mr. Gavan in the Lobby.
Mr. Oats declares, that seeing him in the Lobby, disguised in a Periwigg, and
one enquiring if he knew him, the Witness did not then well know him in that
dress, and so gave no Information against him at that time; not conceiving the
mystery of it, knowing him to have a very good head of hair of his own.

That Mr. Gavan, Mr. Oats his Charge against Mr. Gavan.
in July 1678. informed the Fathers at London how things went in Staffordshire
and Shropshire, and how industrious Father Ewers was to order matters in those
Countries. The Letter did not say from what place, neither did the Witness at
first know the hand, but afterward he did, as he shall make appear; and it was
July, or August, that the Witness saw Mr. Gavan at Mr. Ireland's Chamber. Mr.
Gavan here interposed, upon his Salvation, that he was as Innocent as a Child
unborn: which gave the Court occasion to forbid the Interrupting of the
Evidence.

Mr. Oats declared likewise, Mr. Oats knew Mr. Gavan's hand, having seen him
write a Bill for payment of money.
that meeting Gavan at Ireland's Chamber, he gave Ireland the same Account of
Staffordshire, and Shropshire, as he had before in his Letter: and for the
proof of his hand, the Witness saw him draw a Bill for payment of money to some
little Priest; which was the same Writing with that Letter. That Gavan talked
of Two or Three thousand pounds that would be ready thereabouts for the design.

That betwixt August 8. and 12. Ireland took leave of the Witness, Mr. Ireland
takes leave of the Witness.
and others, at his own Chamber, as if he were going to S. Omers; and that he
leaving the Town, Fenwick, in the other's absence, executed the place of
Treasurer and Procurator. That August 21. Fenwick, Harcourt, Keins and Blundell
were together at Wild-House, and 80 li. before them, Money sent to the Ruffians;
and Coleman gives the Messenger a Guinny.
the greater part in Guinneys; which was for those that were to kill the King
at Windsor: and that the matter being agreed, Coleman came, and gave the
Messenger a Guinny to quicken him in his dispatch. That from Wild-House they
removed to Harcourt's Chamber for the Papers that were to go to Windsor: and
that there the Messenger received his money.

That a day or two after this, A Consult at the Benedictines, and News from
Ireland of a Plot upon the Duke of Ormond.
Fenwick and Harcourt being at a Consult at the Benedictines, he had fresh News
out of Ireland, from Talbot, of a Design upon the Life of the Duke of Ormond:
he enquiring how things stood in England, and desiring Commissions, and Money,
for advancing the Design. That Fenwick sent Commissions (as he told this
Witness) to Chester, by an Express; but concerning the Letters by the Post, the
Witness speaks his own knowledge. That Mr. Fenwick delivered this Witness some
money for necessary Expenses, charging him to get some Masses said for the
Success of the Undertaking. That August 25. after noon, he saw Fenwick at his
Chamber, he being next day to depart for S. Omers, with 8 or 10 Students: after
which time the Witness never saw him more till he was in Custody.

That the first or second of September, Sept. 3. Mr. Whitebread being at
supper, M. Oats could not see him till next morning; and was then abused.
a Letter coming from Mr. Whitebread that was charged but two pence, and yet
passed for a foreign Letter, the Witness concluded that Mr. Whitebread lay
close somewhere in England. That September 3. the Witness went at night to
visit Mr. Whitebread, but could not speak with him, because he was at supper:
but that next morning he gave the Witness ill Language, and Blows, asking him
how he could look him in the face, having done so falsely by him. And that the
Witness asking him what injury he had done him; his Answer was, that the
Witness had discovered the business: upon this mistake, that the person to whom
the Witness had communicated his Information by Dr. Tongue, went to His Majesty
in the same-coloured Clothes that the Witness wore, and Mr. Whitebread having
received a description of his Clothes, concluded it to be the Witness.

That the Witness having countenanced the matter as well as he could to Mr.
Whitebread, Mr. Whitebread and M. Oats friends again.
he showed the Witness a Letter from Bedingfield, informing that the Design had
taken Air; and that if the five Letters sent to Windsor, and intercepted, had
not made the rest look like a Counterfeit, all had been spoiled.

That the Witness having pacified Mr. Whitebread, Mr. Whitebread overjoyed at
Sir Geo. Wakeman's accepting the 15000. li.
he offered to be friends with him, upon condition he would tell him the
person, and the Minister that went with him. Mr. Oats declared this to be all
he had to say to the Prisoner at the Bar, saving only that upon Sir George
Wakeman's refusing to poison the King for 10000 li. Mr. Whitebread advised the
adding of five thousand pounds more, and exceedingly rejoiced to find it
accepted.

Concerning Mr. Turner, and his being present at the Consult in April, and
signing the Resolve of Murdering the King, Mr. Oats has something to say.

As to Mr. Gavan, Mr. Gavan summoned to the Consult of April.
Mr. Oats swears that he was summoned to the Consult of April 24. but cannot
swear he was there, but only that he saw his Name to the Resolve, which was
all one with the Letter about Staffordshire, the Witness still declaring, that
he never saw Gavan write any thing but the aforesaid Bill of Exchange.

That Whitebread, Money raised to carry on the Design.
Fenwick, Harcourt and Turner were there, and that the money was raised for
furthering the Design of destroying the King and Government. That Gavan wrote a
Letter to Mr. Ireland, which he received by the hands of Grove, for the taking
up of money: declaring farther, that that Letter was received by Grove, Ashby in
Town the Beginning or Middle of July.
and delivered to Ireland, giving an account of the affairs of Staffordshire as
is before related: and that this Account was given in London the Beginning, or
Middle of July, when Mr. Ashby was in Town.

Here Gavan alleged that Mr. Oats said but even now, Gavan objects that M.
Oats varies in his story.
that it was in the latter end of July: upon which Mr. Oats moved that the
Witness might be examined by the Court, and not by the Prisoners, that would
put things upon the Evidence which they never said.

After this the Prisoners put several Questions to the Witness. The Prisoners
put cross questions to the Witness.
Whitebread asked him how long he had known him before the April Consult. Mr.
Oats answered, that he never saw his face before. Mr. Whitebread demanded how
he was to be employed, and what Recompense. Mr. Oats told him, that when he
left S. Omers, he was to wait upon the Fathers at Mr. Whitebread's Chamber, and
to carry the Result from place to place, where respectively they met.

To Fenwick's Questions, If Mr. Oats was at the White-Horse Tavern, if he
dined there, how long he stayed in Town, who came over with him, and their
Names, Mr. Oats made Answer, That he was at the White Horse, that he did not
dine there, Mr. Oats stay in England was under 20 days.
that his stay in England was under Twenty days, and that he could not
punctually remember who they were that came over with him, it was so long
since. Whereupon Mr. Fenwick told the Witness, that he need not charge his
memory, for he had them in his Narrative. Mr. Oats, upon this, naming diverse
of them, as Father Williams, the Rector of Watton, the Rectour of Liege, Sir
John Warner, Sir Thomas Preston, etc.

Mr. Whitebread asked the Witness, The Prisoners offer Mr. Oates's Narrative
for Evidence.
if Mr. Nevil and Sir Robert Brett were there, he having said so in his
Narrative. Mr. Oats answered, that he believed that they were there.

Mr. Fenwick offered Mr. Oates's Narrative, as an Evidence upon Oath, being
sworn before a Justice of the Peace; insisting upon it, that his Evidence in
Court ought to agree with his Narrative. But he was answered, that they were to
proceed according to Law, which would not admit a Pamphlet in Evidence.

Mr. Gavan demanded of Mr. Oats, Mr. Gavan seeks to entrap M. Oats about
Ashby's being in Town.
whether it were in August, or July, that Mr. Oats saw him, what time of the
month, and whether before Mr. Ashby went to the Bath, or not. To which Mr.
Oats replied, that it was toward the middle or latter end of July, that he
saw the Prisoner in Town, Ashby being then also in Town, and Gavan telling the
Witness that he would go see him; the Witness declaring particularly, that
about Mid-Iuly Ashby came to Town, stayed not above a fortnight, designing for
the Bath, and that at this time it was that Gavan communicated the subject of
that Letter.

Gavan demanded of the Witness, Gavan presses Mr. Oats upon a precise Week;
which he does not remember.
in which of the two weeks it was ( Ashby staying but a fortnight) that Mr.
Oats saw him in Town. The Prisoner expounding to the Court the Intent of that
Question, that he might endeavor to disprove it either in the one week or in
the other. But Mr. Oats could not charge his memory with the precise Week.

Mr. Gavan put it then to Mr. Oats, Gavan opposes M. Oates's Evidence with a
solemn Imprecation.
how often he had seen him in London. Whose Answer was, only one day, but two
several times that day, as he remembered, by the token that an Apothecary
brought Mr. Gavan a Cordial in the afternoon to Mr. Ireland's Chamber, he
being then and there indisposed. That the Apothecary was called Walpoole, but
that the Witness could not say whether it was he himself that brought it, or
his servant. Mr. Gavan brake out here into this Expression, I do as truly
believe that there is a God, a Heaven, and a Hell, as any one here does. As I
hope for salvation, as I hope to see God in Heaven, I never saw Mr. Oats
before that day in January, when he says I had the Periwigg on, and he did not
know me. And as for July, I call God to witness, I never saw him then. Upon my
salvation, I was not in London.

Liberty being allowed to the Prisoners to ask any Questions in their own
defense, The Prisoners charge Mr. Oats with Mistakes.
Mr. Turner asked Mr. Oats, if Whitehall was not the first place that ever he
saw him in, when he told the Prisoner that he went by another name. Mr. Oats
told him, that in that Disguise, and beastly Periwigg, he did not so well call
him to mind; and that he did not consider Names, but he was the Man. He saw him
at the Consult, where there were 40 or 50 in the Meeting. That he could not say
he saw him at the White Horse, but at Mr. Fenwick's Chamber he did. Turner laid
hold of that, and minded him that at Whitehall he said it was at Wild-House:
which Mr. Oats explained, Mr. Oates's Answer to it.
by telling the Court, that in regard the greatest business was done at
Wild-House, they called all Consults the Consults of Wild-House.

Mr. Dugdale being sworn, Mr. Dugdale sworn, and charges Mr. Whitebread.
was Examined what he could say of Whitebread and Harcourt, but to begin with
Whitebread. He declared, that he had seen Whitebread some two or three years
ago with the old Lady Aston, at Tixall, having no great acquaintance with him.
But that in a Letter from Mr. Groves to Mr. Ewers, he saw one of Mr.
Whitebread's enclosed, cautioning Ewers to choose men that were hardy, and
desperate, (or to that purpose) and no matter for their being Gentlemen. That
he came to know Mr. Whitebread's hand, by looking upon him as he was writing a
Letter at Tixal, which he gave him to convey. That his Name was to the Letter,
Mr. Dugdale knows Mr. Whitebread's hand, having onceseen him write a Letter.
and that it was so like the hand which the Witness saw him write, that he
might almost positively swear it was the same. That he came to the sight of
this Letter, by intercepting it, and reading it; and that he saw it at Tixall:
all Letters coming to Mr. Ewers under cover from Mr. Groves, being directed to
the Witness; the said Mr. Ewers being a Jesuit, and the Witnesse's Confessor.

Mr. Dugdale swears farther, Dugdale engaged in the Plot by Gavan.
that he was engaged in the Plot upon the Life of the King by Gavan and diverse
others. That at Mr. Ewers's Chamber, This Witnesse's; at Boscobel; and
elsewhere; there were diverse Consultations about the Death of the King, and
bringing in of Popery; wherein Mr. Gavan was a great man, having a good Tongue,
and the faculty of moving the people: and the Witness believes that Mr.
Ireland was then in the Country.

That at Tixall there was one Meeting about September last, A Meeting at Tixall
Sept. last, to kill the King, and destroy the Protestant Religion.
where my Lord Stafford was present, Mr. Peter's, Mr. Leveson, Mr. Ewers, and
many more; Mr. Gavan among the rest: and the Meeting was to advise upon the
design of Change of Religion, and taking off the King. That this was Sept. 21.
1678. but that the Witness has heard it spoken of two years ago. That upon
this occasion, the Witness was by Mr. Harcourt chosen to be disposed of at
London, under the Government of Mr. Parsons. That Ewers and Gavan were the
first that brake this business to the Witness, Mr. Gavan often persuading and
encouraging him to it. The Court appearing to be much affected with this
Evidence, laid great weight upon it, as a thing wholly New to them. Upon which
Expression, Gavan made an Exclamation in these words, It Is so to me too, upon
my Soul; for upon my Conscience I never heard of it before; bidding the Witness
look upon him with Confidence if he could. Mr. Dugdale presently desiring Mr.
Gavan to inform the Court, whether he ever had the Witness under his Tuition or
no, or knew any ill thing by him; Gavan acknowledged that he had been
acquainted with Mr. Dugdale, living within 11 miles of Tixall, and conversing
with the Family; and that he knew Mr. Ewers very well, but never was in his
Chamber. Dugdale proceeded, That some of the discourse already given in
Evidence was in the Little Parlour, and some in Mr. Ewers's Chamber. And for a
farther Argument of Friendship betwixt them, that this Witness gave them 400
li. to pray for his Soul, 400 li. given by the Witness to pray for his Soul.
and to set forward this Design, and promised them 100 li. more, upon their
Complaint that they should want money; Mr. Gavan assuring the Witness that he
should be Canonized for what he had done.

Mr. Dugdale swears farther, Forces expected from abroad. A Massacre intended.
that in his hearing they talked as if they looked for Forces from abroad; and
that Mr. Gavan said, that though they were in great Troubles themselves, they
would yet have Men and Money enough to spare for such a Design. And then, as to
a Massacre, the Witness swears, that he has heard it talked at several
Consultations. But they were first advised by a Letter from Paris, that passed
through Harcourt's hands, to make the Death of the King to be a Presbyterian
Plot, and in case of his Miscarriage, to engage the Protestants in a Revenge
upon the Presbyterian party, as guilty of the Fact; and after that, to go on to
a Massacre, and those that escaped it to be afterward cut off by an Army.

The Witness says moreover, King-Killing made lawful.
that Mr. Gavan has many times endeavored to persuade him of the Lawfulness,
if not the Merit, of killing any body for the Advancement of their Religion;
giving Reasons for it out of Scripture, and instancing in the Example of
Garnet, and the Miracles wrought by his Relics.

He declares farther, 100 Treasonable Letters seen by Mr. D.
that he has seen several Treasonable Letters from beyond Seas striking at the
Life of the King, and the Protestant Religion, which this Witness has
intercepted, and read, at least 100 of them, which were sent from Harcourt to
Ewers under a Cover from Groves.

The Witness says farther, Harcourt's Letter seen by Mr. Dugdale about the
murder of Sir Edmundbury Godfry.
that the first Intelligence they had in the Country of the Death of Sir
Edmundbury Godfry was from Harcourt; that it came to Ewers on the Monday, and
bore date on the Saturday that he was Murdered. That the Intelligence was in
these words, This very Night Sir Edmundbury Godfry is dispatched. It was not
said by whom he was murdered, but that he was killed, and they knew by whom.
Upon the sight of Harcourt's (or Harrison's) Letters, which were usually signed
with W. H. which stands for both, this Witness went the next day to an Alehouse
hard by, and asked if they heard any thing of a Knight thas was murdered at
London: And that he had an Evidence in Court for the truth of what he delivered.

Mr. Dugdale was demanded a farther account of Whitebread's Letters to Ewers;
M. Dugdale's account of Whitebread's Letters.
who said, that he particularly remembered one, but could not say how many he
had seen. Mr. Harcourt then asking the Witness the date of the last Letter the
Witness had received from him; Mr. Dugdale answered, that as he remembered, it
was that concerning the Death of Sir Edmundbury Godfry in October: and then
Harcourt affirmed, that he had not written to him this year and half. Mr.
Dugdale now applying himself to the Prisoner, minded him, that upon Mr.
Ireland's being last year in the Country, the Prisoner was used to send the S.
Omers Letters to Mr. Ireland, and so they were dispatched down to my Lord
Aston's. That the Witness had the sight of Eight of those Letters, by the
token, that he pretended to Conjure in telling the Death of Mr. Edward Aston,
before it was known to any of his Relations; which the Witness came to
understand upon reading two of these Letters. That Mr. Ireland took it ill that
he heard it no sooner, and the Prisoner wrote him word of the sending these
Letters.

Mr. Harcourt opposed, Harcourt charges Dugdale with contradicting himself.
that Mr. Dugdale, but five weeks since, owned before a Committee of
Parliament, that he did not know him, and came also to the Gatehouse to entrap
him, before the Gent. of the Committee; but he denies that he has written to
him for several years, and the writing of any such Letter as he mentions, or
that he ever approved of putting any man to death: informing, that the Gent.
for Experiment-sake, desired the Prisoner to write his own hand and name, and
three of them also wrote their names, and he could not say which was the
Prisoner's; who does not disown all this while that he has often writ to
Ewers, and addressed to Dugdale.

Mr. Chetwin was now sworn to speak to a discourse that past betwixt him and
Mr. Dugdale the last Summer, M. Chetwin's Evidence concerning Sir Edmundbury
Godfry.
what it was, and at what time; who gave this Evidence. That being in
Staffordshire, in a Family which Mr. Sanbridge (my Lord Aston's Kinsman) much
frequented, the Gent. coming to him in October last, asked him if he heard any
thing of a Westminster Justice that was killed. The Witness told him, that he
heard nothing of it. I was told (says Mr. Sanbridge,) by a Girl of the house
this morning at Elds, that Mr. Dugdale had reported such a thing there. This
was upon Tuesday morning, and the Saturday following the Witness received an
account at Litchfield that Sir Edmundbury was murdered. Upon Mr. Dugdale's
coming to Town, this Witness, with some others, went to him before his
Examination, the Witness asking him what he could say about that Gentleman's
death; who made answer, that he remembered a Letter from Father Harcourt to
Father Ewers with these words in it, This Night Sir Edmundbury Godfry is
dispatched. That this Witness being out of Town when the Murderers were tried,
upon his return to London, enquired if Dugdale was there; and finding that he
was not, the Witness past this reflection upon it, that there was lost a very
material Witness.

Mr. Dugdale informs, Mr. Dugdale dealt with to kill the King.
that Whitebread charged Ewers in his Letter to take none but stout desperate
fellows, and that they were to kill the King; to take away the King's Life, in
those very words, as the Witness remembers. That these Letters were sent by
the ordinary Post, and it being wondered at, that any man would venture such
words in a Letter, the Witness made answer, that he was to have been an Actour,
and that they directed their Letters to him; that if they were discovered, he
should be hanged, and they come off. The Witness declaring, that he had been
dealt with before by the Lord Stafford and Mr. Ewers, to kill the King. Mr.
Whitebread demanding of him, whether he intercepted and read them himself; and
the Witness replying, that he did so: whereof Mr. Whitebread desired the Jury
to take notice.

Mr. Dugdale was then examined concerning Mr. Turner and M. Fenwick; Mr.
Dugdale privy to the whole Design.
who informs, that he had seen Turner, Ewers and Leveson, with others, together
at Mr. Ewers's Chamber at Tixall, and in other places, about two years since;
and that he had heard them discourse, and agree upon the whole design; and that
this Witness had heard from Ewers, that Turner was to manage the Plot in
Worcestershire: but that for Fenwick, the Witness cannot say that ever he saw
him before. Turner, on the other side, did own that he had been 3 or 4 times in
his whole Life at Tixall, but not so much as in Staffordshire for these four
last years.

Mr. Prance sworn and examined: Mr. Prance told of a Plot upon the King's Life;
and 50000 men ready to set up Popery.
who informs that Harcourt told him about a year ago, as he was paying him for
an Image of our Lady, that there was a Plot upon the Life of the King. And that
Mr. Ireland, Mr. Fenwick and Mr. Grove, at Mr. Ireland's Chamber, were saying,
that there would be 50000 men in readiness, to set up the Catholic Religion:
and Mr. Fenwick told him, that my Lords Bellasis, Powis, and Arundel should
command them: and that Grove afterward told the Witness, the aforesaid Lords
had Commissions to give places. The Witness deposes farther, that asking Mr.
Fenwick what would become of Tradesmen, if we should come to have Wars; he bad
the Witness never fear want of Trade, for there would be Church-work enough for
Images, Crucifixes, and the like. That the Witness going to Mr. Fenwick's
Chamber, after Father James (his Ghostly Father) was dead, Mr. Fenwick would
have had the Witness come to Confession to him. (This was about a week before
Michaelmas last.) Mr. Fenwick denying all, the Witness minded him of a Table
for the Altar that was brought him at the same time.

Mr. Harcourt asking the Witness if ever he had discoursed with him about any
such matter; Mr. Prance affirmed that he had, and that he paid the Witness for
some Candlesticks, one Thompson being in his company. Harcourt owning that he
knew Thompson, and bought such Candlesticks of him.

Mr. Bedlow sworn: Mr. Bedlow's Reasons why he spared Whitebread in the First
Trial.
who informs the Court, that he declined the giving of full Evidence against
Whitebread and Fenwick, for fear of disappointing a design he had then afoot,
being at that time treating with Reading about Mr. Whitebread and Mr. Fenwick,
as well as the Lords in the Tower; appealing to some of the Justices upon the
Bench for the truth thereof, and referring to his Apology at that time in the
Court, for keeping himself upon a Reserve. Mr. Whitebread asking him thereupon,
if he said any such thing at the last Trial.

Mr. Bedlow charge it upon Mr. Whitebread, An account of sending the
Irish-men to Windsor.
that he gave Mr. Coleman an account of sending the four Irish-men to Windsor,
and that he saw Harcourt take out some 80 or 100 li. which money he paid upon
Coleman's Order, and gave the Messenger a Guinny from Mr. Coleman, to drink his
Health, as Harcourt told this Witness, Coleman being gone before he came in.

Touching the Reward of Pickering and Grove; Pickering and Grove to be rewarded.
that Grove was to have fifteen hundred pound, with an assurance of the good
will of the Lords; and Pickering as many Masses, as at twelve pence a piece
would amount to that sum: This allotment being made at Harcourt's Chamber,
where the Witness heard it from Whitebread, Pritchard, Le Fair, and Keins.
That the Reward was for killing the King. Pickering disciplined for not having
his Arms Fixed.
Pickering having been disciplined for his Neglects: one while the Flint's
loose; then no Powder in the Pan; and another time laden only with Bullets,
and no Powder. That he had seen Fenwick at Harcourt's and Whitebread's
Chambers, when the thing was discoursed of, and that they all agreed upon it.

That he saw Whitebread at Harcourt's Chamber only twice; A Debate upon the
odd 5000 li. to Sir George Wakeman.
Harcourt himself was there once, and Pritchard and Le Fair, with others, at
another time: where they discoursed of Sir George Wakeman's sticking at the
10000 li. and so made it up 15000 li. That the business of the Consult was,
first to advise upon their manner of doing it; and then what aftercourse to
take if they failed. Mr. Ireland propounding the taking off the King at his
Morning-Walk at Newmarket; Fenwick, (...) and Conyers to be employed, and three
or four more, as the Witness was informed.

That the Witness knew nothing of Turner but by hearsay. Nor of Gavan, more
then that he had heard he was an Actour in the Plot.

As to Mr. Harcourt, that he was very well acquainted with the Witnesse's
practice of bringing Pacquets and Portmantles Mr. Bedlow brought many Pacquets
and Portmantles of Intellingence to Harcourt.
from beyond Sea, having brought over several for himself. Harcourt replied,
that the Witness never brought him but one Packet, and never any Portmantle;
and that he never saw him more then twice, before that time in the Court, and
once before the Council. Mr. Bedlow informed the Court, that he had got 8 to
have proved this, but the putting off the Trials so from time to time, had
disappointed him of his Witnesses. Proceeding, that he had brought the Prisoner
Letters from Watton, S. Omers, Bruges, Paris, Valladolid, and Salamanca,
Intelligence from S. Omers, Bruges, Paris, Valladolid, Salamanca.
all of them concerning the Plot of changing the Religion of England, and
overturning the Government; what Men and Moneys in readiness, both at home and
abroad, and what more expected: The Contributions and Accounts mostly in Mr.
Harcourt's hands, the Witness having carried several papers from Harcourt to
Langhorne concerning this matter.

Mr. Whitebread now (with leave of the Court) asked if Mr. Bedlow was a
Lieutenant in Flanders or not; and whether of Horse, or Foot. The Witness
replied that he was a Lieutenant of Foot in the P. of Frieseland's Regiment.
Upon which Mr. Whitebread replied, that the Flanders Companies had no such
Officers, but only Captains and Alfarez. So Mr. Bedlow sent for his Commission
to clear it.

Mr. Harcourt pleaded, Mr. Harcourt denies all, and tells how Mr. Bedlow and he
came acquainted.
that some five years since Mr. Bedlow brought him a Packet from Dunkirk; and
that upon the opening of it, the Prisoner found the Letters enclosed addressed
to other persons, to whom he sent them, the outside Cover being only directed
to him. This was the first time the Prisoner ever saw him; and the second was,
when he came afterward to his Chamber, lamenting his Condition, that he was
newly turned Catholic, and had lost his Friends, when the Prisoner lent him 20
s. upon his promise of repaying it, but never saw him after, till lately at the
Privy Council. This was about four years since. Mr. Bedlow affirmed, that he
had ten pounds of the Prisoner for the sending for, but he could not properly
produce his Witnesses before the Trial of the Lords; and that he might honestly
speak a hundred times more of Mr. Harcourt.

The Witness says farther, Mr. Harcourt in the bottom of the Plot.
That the Consult which he carried to S. Omers he had from Mr. Coleman, to whom
Mr. Harcourt went with him, and in that Consult was the Main of the Design; and
that he was also presented by Mr. Harcourt to the Lord Arundell, who promised
him great matters when the Times were come about. Harcourt interjecting, that
he spoke not one true word; Mr. Bedlow demanded of the Prisoner, if in August
or September last he was not in company with Le Fair, or Le Fevre. To which
Mr. Harcourt said, he knew no Le Fair, but Le Fevre he did; and believes that
he saw him then, but never since. And the Witness went on, that Pritchard
recommended him to him, as a person tried and trusty, and fit to be taken into
the privacy of the Design; Pritchard declaring to the Witness in their
presence, that the Death of the King was one part of it. And the Witness says
farther, that going another time from Pritchard to Harcourt, he saw Harcourt
give Sir George Wakeman a Bill of Exchange upon some Citizen for 2000 li. Keins
and Sir William Anderson being present: 2000 li. to Sir George Wakeman, in part
of a greater sum.
which Bill Sir George Wakeman read, folded up, and went and received the money.
And that Mr. Harcourt told Sir George Wakeman upon delivering the Bill, that
That 2000 li. was in part of a greater sum. Sir George Wakeman replying upon
it, that 15000 li. was but a small consideration for the (...) of Religion, and
the saving of Three Kingdoms. Harcourt desired he might name the Citizen upon
whom it was drawn; for it would then be found upon the Merchant's book. Fenwick
urged, that it was not enough to averr that he saw a Bill of Exchange, if he
cannot say from whom it came, and to whom it was directed. But the Court found
that to be of little moment, Mr. Bedlow himself not being concerned in the Bill.

Mr. Bedlow's Commission for Lieutenant was read.
Sir Thomas Doleman was now sworn concerning a Letter produced in Court, who
delivered that it was found about a week after that Dr. Oats had informed the
Council of the Plot, in a Bag of Mr. Harcourt's Papers, which Sir Thomas was
appointed to examine. And then the Letter it self was read.
Honored Dear Sir,
I have but time to convey these following particulars to you. Mr. Petre's
Letter.
First, I am to give you notice, that it has seemed fitting to our Mr. Consult
Prove. etc. to fix the 21. of April next stilo veteri for the Meeting at London
of our Congregation: on which day all those that have a Suffrage are to be
present there, that they may be ready to give a beginning to the same on the
24. which is the next day after S. George's day. You are warned to have jus
suffragii; and therefore if your occasions should not permit you to be present,
you are to signify as much, to the end others in their ranks be ordered to
supply your absence. Every one is minded also not to hasten to London long
before the time appointed; nor to appear much about the Town, till the Meeting
be over, lest occasion should be given to suspect the Design. Finally, Secrecy,
as to the time and place, is much recommended to all those that receive
Summons, as it will appear of its own nature necessary.

Tertio pro Domino Solone Disco Benefact. Prove. Luniensis.

I am straightened for time, that I can only assure you I shall be much glad of
obliging you any ways.

Sir, Your Servant, Edward Petre.


Mr. Harcourt being called upon to explain this Letter, Mr. Harcourt and Mr.
Whitebread expound the Letter: But the Court not satisfied.
informed the Court, that this Letter was written to one that had a Vote in the
Meeting, which by the Order of the Society is to assemble once in Three years,
and advise about their particular Affairs: that the chief business was about
the Choice of a Procurator to be dispatched to Rome, wherein Secrecy was
requisite, because it was dangerous to have it known. As to the Caution of not
hastening before the time, or being too public, for fear the Design should be
suspected, wherein Secrecy was naturally necessary; Mr. Whitebread expounded
it, that the Design was the getting of a Congregation, which it was prudential
to keep secret, as a thing not permitted in this Nation; declaring upon his
Salvation, that there was no other Reason for the enjoining of that Secrecy:
offering farther, that it would be very hard to take away men's lives upon a
word, that may as well bear one Construction as another: instancing in the
usual way of speech, I have a design to dine here or there tomorrow, where the
word design is properly enough made use of. It was returned upon them, that the
word Design, with a Caution of Privacy, and the Business being matter of
Secrecy in its own nature, must necessarily imply something of greater
consequence then the Election of an Officer.

Mr. Gavan in Reply offered his Exposition, Mr. Gavan's Exposition of it.
that the Jesuits in all places meeting once in 3 years for the Inspection of
their Officers, and the Regulation of their Members, This was their time for
their meeting here: applying the word Design to the great Concernment of both
Worlds, which was the subject matter of this Meeting: declaring, upon his
Salvation, that though he was not at this Consult himself, yet he believed that
which he had delivered was the true and only Cause of their Meeting: adding
hereunto, that it being in time of the Parliament Sitting, Secrecy was
necessary, that they might not give offense; and that it concerned them not to
be taken notice of, when their Lives depended upon the Discovery. That the
Design was the Design of a Congregation.

Dr. Oats objected, that though they justify the Consult now, yet when there
was but one proof of it, they denied at first that there was any such Consult.
At which Fenwick disowned the Denial of it.

Mr. Bedlow declared, That whereas Mr. Gavan says, that their desire of Secrecy
was out of a Respect to the Parliament, Papists bolder in Parliament-time then
out of it.
he and others had been employed to bring more Jesuits into England in
Parliament-time, then in any other; for that they were then in least danger.
Dr. Oats adding, that they were more bold, and public in the Lobbies and
Court of Requests, in Sessions of Parliament, and not forbearing to threaten
the Protestants.

Another Letter was now produced, and Sir Thomas Doleman called to speak to it;
who declared, that he found it some two days after that which was read before,
among Mr. Harcourt's papers; and that reflecting upon Dr. Oates's Information
to the Council, concerning Commissions given out, and some ambiguous passages
in the Letter, he, the Witness, presented it to the Council with these Quaere
upon it: Enqu. What is meant by the word Patents?

It was signed Christopher Anderton, Hilton, Febr. 1. 1677/8. Oats
representing that by Hilton was meant Rome, which Harcourt acknowledged. The
Letter it self was now read.

Worthy Sir,
I know not from whence it proceeds, Anderton's Letter.
but I perceive that both your Letters and mine have bad fortune by the way;
for my Correspondents with you complain they hear not from me, whereas I write
constantly entire Pacquets, and since the Bills I received from your self for
Sir William Goring, and for Mr. Ireland, from Mr. Shelly, I have not had one
Letter but what I received this week; which in part made recompense for the
former, for it brought me three of yours, and one of Mr. Ireland's, for which I
render you many humble thanks, and acknowledge the fifteen pounds from my Lord
Castlemain, though Mr. Ireland made no mention of it in his. We are all here
very glad of the promotion of Mr. Thomas Harcourt. When I writ that the Patents
were sent, although I guess for whom they were, yet I know not for certain,
because our Patrons do not use to discover things or resolutions till they know
they have effect. And therefore in these kind of matters I dare not be too
hasty, lest some will say, A fool's Bolt is soon shot.


There arose a great difficulty upon the plurality of the word Patents. A
dispute upon the word Patents.
Mr. Whitebread expounded it to be meant of his Patent for Provincial; which
being but one, would not have been called Patents. Which Mr. Whitebread
qualified by making it a Latinism, and called it Literae patentes. It was
objected, that he being made Provincial January 14. and this bearing date Feb.
5. the word Patents could not be intended of his Commission. To which M.
Whitebread answers, that possibly they did not know till then; and that it was
not known what Exceptions might be exhibited against the person named: besides,
that every Patent is called Literae patentes. Dr. Oats affirmed, that if a man
be chosen to a place, he must execute it, upon pain of Damnation if he disobey
his Superior. To which Mr. Whitebread replied, that a hundred Instances might
be given of Refusalls in the case; and that he would have refused it himself,
if he had foreseen the Trouble of it; appealing to Almighty God, as he was to
answer at the last day, that he knew nothing at all of this business. Dr. Oats
declared that the Patents spoken of in this Letter were sent, a great many of
them, in April and May before.

The Prisoners being now called to their Defense, Dr. Oates's Witnesses were
sent for, to be in readiness.

Mr. Whitebread beginning, Mr. Whitebread's defense; with Reflections upon the
Witness.
that though he did not fear Death, he would be loath to die by Injustice: and
that he hoped that he should be allowed the common freedom of endeavoring to
preserve himself; for that a man's Life might be taken away by Perjury, as well
as by a Pistol: so that he trusted that no man should be admitted as an
Evidence against him, that was not probus Testis; offering that D. Oats was
not such a man, and he craved leave to say that he was Perjured. He says that
he did such and such things by Whitebread's appointment, was present with him
April 24. and that the Prisoner acquainted Dr. Oats with the whole design: a
thing so improbable, that whoever believes it must take the Prisoner for a
Madman, to trust any body with such a concern at first sight; (for he
confesses that so it was;) and then to trust a man that had his Livelihood
from the Society, (for they maintained him,) that is to say, first the
Prisoner's Predecessor, and then himself. Upon his Importunity to be
entertained in the Society, the Prisoner persuaded him to withdraw, reflecting
upon him as a person not answerable to the purpose he pretended to; and that
for several Reasons. First, for his Principles; for he held several Opinions
that were not sound. Secondly, his Life was loose, and therefore he was desired
to retire. To which end, he had a suit of Clothes given him, a Periwigg, and 4
li. in his Pocket, which he promised to repay upon the fale of his Library in
London; but he never did. The Prisoner took notice of the just Wonder of the
Court at writing to Dugdale by the Post in so plain and dangerous terms; and
the like in his discourse to Dr. Oats: but concluded in craving the Court's
leave to produce Witnesses, that from the 10. of December. to the 23. of June
following Dr. Oats was at S. Omers, and lodged but one night out of the house.

It was observed upon Mr. Whitebread, as a strange thing, that they should
still maintain a man that they had so ill an opinion of: but Mr. Whitebread
denied the maintaining of him, affirming, that he was not sent over by them, as
he said he was, and undertaking to prove it: allowing all this while that they
had maintained him before; and distinguishing betwixt an office of Charity to a
man of Letters, and in necessity, and a Confidence of Intrigueing with him in
such a Case as this.

Mr. Fenwick then recommended it to the Court to consider, M. Fenwick's Defense.
that Dr. Oates's Evidence from one end to the other was supported by the sight
of such and such Letters from one person or another; and all the Testimony is,
the sight of the Letters: as if Fenwick, that knew Dr. Oats was turned away
from S. Omers for his Misdemeanors, should after that make him privy to all his
Letters. The Prisoner desired the Court to take notice, that he had a thousand
Letters taken from him, and not one Syllable either of Treason, or of
soliciting people to come over, was charged upon him out of those Letters.
Urging, that all the proof made was but saying and swearing; and defying any
man to make out any probability to any unbyassed judgment, how this could
possibly be. Here the Prisoners were minded, that there is no other Evidence to
be given, then by saying and swearing. Fenwick pursued his discourse,
declaring, that he did no more think of his being taken or accused, then of his
death; and that he removed nothing; and that besides Letters, there were seized
in Bonds and Bills to the value of five or six thousand pounds; and it seems
strange, that out of all this there should nothing of a design appear. For
God's sake (said the Prisoner) where are the Commissions signed? and the moneys
paid?

Mr. Hilsley being presented to the Court as a Witness on the behalf of the
Prisoners, The Prisoners beg that their Witnesses may be sworn.
Mr. Whitebread begs that their Witnesses might be sworn: which though it would
not be granted, because it was against the King; yet the Jury were directed to
value the Testimony according to the credit of the Persons, and the Matter in
question. Mr. Gavan offered that there was no positive Law; and the Lord Coke
in his Institutes says, that there is not so much as Scintilla Iuris against
it. But this being against constant Usage and Custom, it could not be granted.

Mr. Whitebread shows, Mr. Whitebread charges Dr. Oats with falsifying.
that in Mr. Ireland's Trial, page 35 and 36, Dr. Oats declares that he came
from S. Omers with Sir John Warner, Father Williams, and Mr. Hilsley: but it
was answered, that printed Trialls are no Evidence; there may be Errata's in
them. Then Mr. Fenwick asked Dr. Oats, if he did not acknowledge that he came
over with Hilsley: Presses the business of Hilsley.
and Dr. Oats told him, that to any question of that day, if the Court thought
it reasonable, he would give an Answer. Fenwick insisted upon it, that Dr.
Oats was forsworn in affirming he did; but not being convict, that could not
be pressed: so that Fenwick offered to prove his affirmation by Witnesses, that
heard it; asking Dr. Oats again, if he came over with Hilsley. Dr. Oats
clears the Objection.
To which Dr. Oats made answer, that to put them out of their pain, as he said
Then, so he said Now, that One Hilsley did come over with him. To which Hilsley
answered, that he did not, for he left him at S. Omers. Dr. Oats acknowledged
that Hilsley left him at S. Omers, but that he came away a day after him, and
overtook him at Calais. Hilsley denied it, saying, there were a great many
there that could prove the contrary. Dr. Oats informed the Court, that Hilsley
lost his money at Calais, and that he prevailed with Father Williams to relieve
him. Hilsley confessed the loss of his money, but utterly denied that ever Dr.
Oats and he were in a Ship together. Dr. Oats urged, that he might be
Examined if he were not in Orders: but it was not thought reasonable to press
him to accuse himself.

Hilsley offers Witnesses to make out that Dr. Oats was in S. Omers the day
after Hilsley came out, Hilsley offers Proofs on the Prisoners behalf.
and several weeks after. Dr. Oats swears that Hilsley left them upon the way,
and did not come throughout with them to London. Hilsley says that he believes
Dr. Oats was told of his losing his money by one that was with him the second
of May, and that there was one in Court who (he supposed) could speak to it.

Mr. William Parry offered then to swear, Mr. Parry crosses Dr. Oates's
Testimony.
that Dr. Oats was at S. Omers upon that day when he affirms he came over,
that is, that he was there upon the 25; that he stirred not from thence that
day; that the Evidence dined with him, and he went into the Infirmary, for he
was sick; that he was at S. Omers till after the 20. of June, by the token that
he was there at a Play upon the 20. day. Dr. Oats denied the business of the
Infirmary, and offered to make appear to the Court, that Hilsley had been
several years of the Sodality of the Jesuits; and that they dare not but say
what their Superiors bid them.

As to the 20. of June, Dr. Oats averrs that he was at S. Omers at that
Action, Dr. Oats sticks to his affirmation.
but affirms that he was then come back again from London. Parry on the other
side denied that Dr. Oats ever went out of the College; for that he
constantly dined and supped with him, saving 3 or 4 days when he was in the
Infirmary, where he entered April the 25. old style. Dr. Oats advertised the
Court of a Contradiction in the Prisoner's Evidence, upon the difference
between old style and new.

Mr. Parry affirms that Dr. Oats came to S. Omers in December, Mr. Parry for
the Prisoners.
and went not out from the College till the end of June, and that only to
Watton, for two days and a night; and that he is confident of what he says; for
a Scholar never removes from thence to England, but it is the talk of the whole
College. And then (says Mr. Gavan) they go away in Secular Garments, that no
notice may be taken of their leaving the place. Dr. Oats admitted this as a
general Rule, but that his case was a particular Exception to that Rule; and
that he resumed the Habit of the House upon his coming back to London, and
appeared as one of it still, not knowing that it was taken notice of that he
had been out, having never showed himself in the College in a Lay-Habit. Mr.
Whitebread followed it, that let his Clothes be what they would, his place and
seniority was the same, so that at Meals he was visible to the whole House.

There stood up for the Prisoners one Mr. Doddington, Mr. Doddington for
Prisoners.
(another Witness) that passed at S. Omers by the name of Hollis, betwixt 18
and 19 years of age, who gave this Account of Dr. Oats: That he entered the
College about a fortnight before Christmas, and betwixt that and June was
never out, but one night at Watton. That he saw him at least every other day,
and in particular the day after Hilsley departed, which was April 24. new
style; and falling sick, he went the next day into the Infirmary: affirming,
that he saw him in the Garden, upon the 2. of May, with one Blood or Burnaby.
This Witness came into England in April last, about two months since, in part
upon the Proclamation for recalling such as were in Seminaries, and partly for
want of Health.

Mr. Gifford was next Examined, Mr. Gifford for the Pris.
who declared that he came from S. Omers about a month before, and that the
occasion of his coming was to justify that Dr. Oats was at S. Omers when he
said he was here. He affirmed, that he saw him May Day was twelvemonth and
April 21. at S. Omers, and kept him company the whole week after. That he
remembers the first of May, by the token that one Mr. Burnaby coming that day
to the College, Dr. Oats made an acquaintance with him, and this Witness saw
them together; and at the Colledge-hour of Recreation, for a week at least, he
came every day after dinner. That he was not in the Infirmary till the day
after Hilsley was gone away, continuing there about three days; and from that
time till June at least, Gifford solemnly averrs that he saw him at least every
other day, for he never was out all that time, but one night at Watton, for his
Relaxation. And he could not but be taken notice of: for though there were a
matter of 150 that eat all in the same Room; yet he sitting at a Table apart,
betwixt the Religious and the Youths, could not choose but be taken notice of.

Mr. Palmer stood up next; Mr. Palmer for the Prisoners.
who informed, that he came from S. Omers 2 or 3 months since, and that he came
because he cared not for staying any longer: that his Father lives by Windsor:
that he saw Mr. Oats on Mayday, new style, by the token that there were
Strangers that day; and that the Witness saw him in the afternoon playing with
the other Boys at Ninepins. (They call all those Boys that are not of the
Religious: And though he sat at a Table distinct, yet going to School, he was
still reckoned among the Boys.) The Witness saw him the next day with Mr.
Burnaby, and it was wondered at, his thrusting himself into his company, having
never seen him before, as Mr. Burnaby said himself. That the Witness saw him
also at the Action; and also with Mr. Killingbeck on the 5. of May, who was
then departing; and likewise with Mr. Poole, at his going away. That the 11.
day, at a Play, Dr. Oats would needs sit in the place of the Music, and one
Mr. Watson quarrelled with him. Seeing him also betwixt these times, and so
from time to time, till June following.

Mr. Cox informed, Mr. Cox.
that he came away from S. Omers in November after Dr. Oats: that he knew Dr.
Oats very well, and saw him at S. Omers at the time when he affirms that he
was in England; for he was often with Mr. Poole when he was sick, which Mr.
Poole was the Witnesse's Musick-Master. That he went away in July, and never
stirred from S. Omers till he went quite away. That the Witness was there also
till Dr. Oats went, which was after the Consult of the Jesuits, which he
affirms to have been in April, and himself to have been at. The Witnesse's
jumbling of the Months caused the people to laugh: and the Witness still
persisted, that Dr. Oats was at S. Omers till the Jesuits Consult was over. He
informed that he came thither, and was only one night out of the House, at
Watton, all the time he was there. That he did not go away with Mr. Hilsley,
for a Gent. that was going that day for England, being loath to rise, Dr. Oats
told a story of him how loath he was to leave his bed, which was the day after
Hisley went away. The other Gent. went upon the 5. of May, and Mr. Poole and
Mr. Nevil, who he says were with him in England, were neither of them absent at
that time. That Dr. Oats was at S. Omers all May and June. The Witness being
pressed to name the month when D. Oats came away, he said he could not remember
it.

Mr. Thomas Billing informed, M. Billing.
that he came about 3 months since from S. Omers: that he knew Dr. Oats very
well, and saw him at S. Omers the very day, or the day after that he came
thither; (the 10. of December;) and that he continued there till toward the end
of June, never out of the House but once at Watton in Christmas; this Witness
being then in the Infirmary, and Dr. Oats came in, saying that he had been at
Watton. That he had been twice in the Infirmary, and the second time was in
April, where (as the Witness remembers) he was 3 or 4 days: that he saw him in
the College from December till about the end of June. That he was there all
May, and could not be 8 days in England, as he says; for being entered into the
Sodality March 25. he was appointed to read at six a clock every Sunday
morning, and after he had begun, he read constantly in course till he went
away: for he was never sick on a Sunday in April, but somewhat indisposed, so
that he went to the Infirmary upon occasion for some 3 or 4 days, and once in 2
or 3 days the Witness constantly saw him. That upon the second of May he saw
him with Mr. Blunt in the Garden, and also with one Mr. Rushton, by certain
tokens.

Mr. Townley Mr. Townley.
informed, that he knew Oats, and saw him in April, May, and June. Dr. Oats
departed from S. Omers about the 10. of June: he believes that he saw him
every other day for all. April and all May: for sitting at a single Table, as
he did, he might be easily mist.

Mr. Fall Mr. Fall.
informed, that he came from S. Omers some 2 months ago: that he saw Dr. Oats
about Christmas was twelvemonth, and so from that time till June, save while he
was at Watton. This Witness has been in the Convent 2 years and a half.

Mr. John Hall Mr. Hall.
informs, that he came from S. Omers in July 1678. having been there above 7
years: that he saw Dr. Oats there in April, May, and till about the 23. of
June; the Witness taking a more particular notice of him, by serving as a
Butler, and laying the Table, and drawing Beer, and the like; serving Dr. Oats
himself most days. That he came away for his health, beginning to be ill, at
Christmas (77.) That he lives with his Father in Radnorshire, and came up to
London upon a Summons as a Witness.

Mr. Cook Mr. Cook.
informs, that he came from S. Omers last January, upon this occasion, and that
he has been ever since in Town. That he saw Dr. Oats there in June, and that
he went away upon the 23; which he knows, being a Taylour, and having made him
some Clothes. That he saw him every day, and sometimes 20 times in a day. That
he was there all April, and all May, and he came twice every week to the
Witnesse's Shop for things. That the Witness lived in the College, and
remembers that Dr. Oats was at Watton only one night in April, but he cannot
say the very day; only it was spoken of over the House.

Mr. Gavan Mr. Gavan presses Dr. Oats upon his Narrative.
offers, that Dr. Oats says in his Narrative, he came over in company with Sir
John Warner and Sir Thomas Preston; and that to prove him perjured, clears the
Prisoners. But being told, that they should have Indicted him, and made that
out before, if any such thing were; Mr. Whitebread replied, that they were kept
close Prisoners; pressing again the business of his coming over with Sir John
Warner.

Dr. Oats, Dr. Oats clears himself.
to clear himself of all Contradictions, says, that he named some persons at
one time, and some at another, as his memory served him; naming the Rectour of
Liege, Sir John Warner, Father Williams, Father Marsh, Father Warner, Sir
Thomas Preston, etc.

One Bartlet a Dutchman, Bartlet for the Prisoners.
but speaking a little English, informed, that he came from S. Omers May 23.
(78.) new style: that Sir John Warner was at Watton all April and May; and that
he was there himself, and saw Sir John there: that he had been some five or six
weeks in England, and came over about the latter end of June. But Bartlet being
minded that he said the 23. of May before, he excused himself, that he thought
the question had been asked concerning Dr. Oates's coming over, which he heard
of beyond seas.

Mr. Tisser was then sworn to be a true Interpreter to one Carlier, Carlier by
an Interpreter.
a Witness for the Prisoners that could not speak English.

Mr. Tisser informs, that Carlier came into England about seven or eight weeks
since, and that he was for the last two years in Watton: that he was the last
Sunday in April, and all May, at his house there, the Witness having been his
Gardener.

Then Mr. Tisser stood Interpreter for another Witness, Charles Verron, Sir
John Warner proved at Watton by Charles Verron.
who speaks no English. Verron says, that Sir John Warner was at Watton all
April and May was twelvemonth, and so till September: and the Witness affirms
it, for he passes with a Vessel between S. Omers and Watton, and for the most
part sees Sir John every day: and that the Witness is of the Roman Religion.

Baillee And by Baillee.
(a servant to Sir John Warner) informs also, that Sir John was all April and
May was twelvemonth at Watton: and that he being a Mason, Sir John gave him
Directions about a Building, and looked after the doing of it himself.

John Joseph informs, that he knows Sir Thomas Preston, Sir Thomas Preston
proved at Liege by John Joseph.
and that he saw him almost every day in April, May, and June, or however, 2 or
3 days in a week. That the Witness was Porter of the Gate to the English House
at Liege, where Sir Thomas Preston was in the months of April, May, and June.
But that Sir Thomas Preston was away in the time of Vacancy, which is in August.

Peter Carpentier And by Peter Carpentier.
informs, that being Caterer at Liege, he knew Sir Thomas Preston very well,
and saw him there every day, all April, and May.

Mr. Gavan told the Court, Mr. Gavan's different Case; and not at London when
charged to be.
that he had no more Witnesses to this point: and then offered the difference
of his Case from the rest; and that Dr. Oats did not charge him as sitting in
the Consult, but as seeing his Hand to it afterward: representing, that only
a professed Jesuit has a Right of sitting there, (which as then he was not.) The
Prisoner insists upon a Witness that he has, to prove, that at that time he was
at Wolverhampton in Staffordshire. Being told that it was his Hand to the
Consult, not his being present at it, that was charged upon him: Gavan replied,
that he could not sign it at London, unless he were at London; and so he
offered to prove himself at Wolverhampton the four and the five and twentieth
of April. But Dr. Oats swearing that it was in June, or July, that he saw Mr.
Gavan's hand to the Consult, it was considered, that it might be signed at any
time during that Intervall; and so the proving Mr. Gavan at Wolverhampton the
four or five and twentieth of April would do him no good: but however his
Witness was called.

Catharine Winford informed, that for the greatest part of the Summer, Mr.
Gavan sojourned in her house at Wolverhampton in Staffordshire, Mr. Gavan
proved in Staffordshire by Mrs. Winford.
in June, and so to the 23. of July, when he went to another Lodging in the
Town, more convenient for his turn. The Witness said, that he was never from
thence in all that time, and that he sojourned longer with her, but she only
speaks to the Months in question. That after he went, she seldom failed a day
of seeing him: and that she was a Roman Catholic.

Mary Poole And by Mary Poole.
informed, that she had known Mr. Gavan 6 or 7 years, and that being a Servant
to Mrs. Winford at Wolverhampton, she saw Mr. Gavan at this time twelvemonth at
her Mistresse's; and that he was there in April; and that she believes he was
there in May, for she does not remember his going away till the end of July;
and he was there also in June. It was asked her why she stuck more at May then
the other Months: and her Answer was, that any body might mistake. She owned
her self likewise to be a Roman Catholic.

Mrs. Winford And by Mrs. Winford again, more particularly.
was further examined, what Circumstances she could call to mind at the time
when he went from her. To which she answered, That not knowing what she should
be examined upon, she could not well recollect her self; but that he went often
abroad to my Lord Aston's: that she knew not how long he stayed there, but that
she was confident that he did not go to London, for he had no Linen with him
then, as he had when he used to go a Journey. Dr. Oats suggested to the
Court, that he took a Chamber to go into the Exercise, and that under that
pretense he might slip to London and no body the nearer, because upon that
occasion they are close shut up. To which Mrs. Winford answered, that she knew
nothing of it, but upon any urgent business people are then admitted to see
them; and that she her self could speak it upon her own knowledge, and that
about the end of July she went often to him after he had left her Lodgings.
That the former part of July he was in the Witnesse's house, from whence he
went upon the 23. That he was not shut up in the Witnesse's house, and that the
last Eight days she was allowed to come to him: not but that he was shut up,
but still upon business, either of bringing any thing, or speaking with him,
there was admittance to him. Touching the point of his having time enough to be
at London, and back again, while she did not see him; the Witness declared that
she thought he had not; but that she was confident that he did not go. But it
was observed upon her, that she had said, peradventure he might be away 5 or 6
days; but she still persisted, that she was confident he had not been at London
in the Interim.

Mr. Gavan then pressed the Court for liberty of speech, and urged it, that Dr.
Oats charged him directly to have been in Town in July, and that he met the
Prisoner with Mr. Ashby, Mr. Gavan contradicts Dr. Oates's Evidence, as to his
speaking with Mr. Ashby.
who was then in Town; so that the Prisoner's being in Town must be betwixt Mr.
Ashby's coming to Town, and his going out again; which he computed to be a
fortnight's time. The Prisoner reasoning the point, in such sort, that if he
could make it out that he was in Staffordshire from the 15. or 16. of July to
the end of the month, he had then acquitted himself. Dr. Oats makes it to be
either the Beginning or Middle of July that Mr. Ashby came to Town, but does
not swear which; only he rather inclines to think it was the Middle: and while
Mr. Ashby was here, Mr. Gavan came up, and told the Witness that he would go
visit Mr. Ashby.

Mr. Gavan having given Evidence where he was at the end of July, was now
called upon to prove where he was at the beginning of the month. Mr. Gavan
proves what he could; and swears himself Innocent as to the rest.
But he told the Court that his Witnesses were not here; and then addressed
himself to the Court to this effect: That being Innocent, it was not possible
for him to imagine upon what point they would accuse him; but yet he cast his
thoughts every way, to see where he was most liable, and what he had ever done
that might yield the most plausible pretense for a Charge: and that finding
nothing so colorable as his being engaged at that April Consult, the Prisoner
had provided himself at his own Expense with Witnesses to clear that matter.
And now having discharged himself, by the use of all prudential means for his
Clearing, and having done it effectually as to the 24. of April, upon which the
main pretension of a Conspiracy was founded; he cast himself with all
submission upon the Honor and Justice of the Court, offering proofs that he
was not in London in August; protesting solemnly, and upon his Salvation, that
he was not in London; and imprecating upon himself most Exemplary Judgments
from Almighty God, if he were not Innocent.

After this, he offered himself to the Court to pass the Ordeal, He offers
himself to the Ordeal.
as a Test of his Innocence, which in Capital Cases was in practice for a
thousand years together, where there was only the Oath of the Accuser against
the denial of the Accused. But this Custom being now out, and the proposal
favoring of a popular Artifice, it was not allowed him.

Here Six Witnesses more are produced for him. Six Witnesses produced for him.


The first Witness saw him every day the last Week of July.

The second witness saw him the last Fortnight in Staffordshire, as he
believes, but cannot positively averr it.

The third Witness, living in the same Town; could not say that he was out of
it all July; but the last Week he was in the Witnesse's house.

The fourth Witness spoke only to the last Week too.

Mr. Whitebread offered in his defense, that Dr. Oats failing in his Testimony
against Ireland, was not probus Testis, Mr. Whitebread will not allow Dr. Oats
to be probus Testis.
but improbus, and so an incompetent Witness, and not to be credited in one
Case, after being convict of Perjury in another; recommending to the Jury, to
take notice of it, that he fled from his former Testimony. Where the Prisoner
was admonished, that he was gone from the present question: and that there was
no Conviction of Perjury without a Record; and to prove it, that Record must be
produced too.

Mr. Harcourt Mr. Harcourt reflects upon the Credit of the Witnesses.
pressed it, that Mr. Bedlow, Mr. Prance, Dr. Oats, and Mr. Dugdale, were men
of desperate Fortunes, and Flagitious persons, and that False swearing was
their Livelihood; and that these were the men by whom he was charged. And then
again, if the Evidence on his side should be rejected because they were Roman
Catholics, it would be a very hard case in his own particular; and destructive
also of common Commerce with other Countries: and it would be vain to call
Witnesses, if a Roman Catholic should not be taken as a good Evidence.

Mr. Harcourt was here informed of his mistake, for Roman Catholics Roman
Catholics good Evidence.
were allowed to be Witnesses, and none refused upon this Trial.

Mr. Harcourt Mr. Harcourt charges Dr. Oats with Contradictions in his
Evidence.
said farther, that Dr. Oats charged him one while with paying the 80 li. for
the Ruffians at his Chamber, and another while at Wild House; and that he had
Witnesses to that point. Dr. Oats lays it, that Mr. Ireland was by too,
whereas the Witnesses were now in Court that would prove him to have been all
August in Staffordshire; producing it in the printed Trialls. But the Print
being no Record, and what Dr. Oats said before not being the point now in
issue, that Suggestion could not avail the Prisoner. Dr. Oats denying also
that ever he said that Ireland and Harcourt were together at the payment of the
80 li. to the Villains, and affirming that they were not together.

Mr. Gavan And so does Mr. Gavan.
acknowledged that the proof of his not being in Town was rather a Negative,
then a Positive Evidence: but however, as to Dr. Oates's Testimony, he charged
the borrowing of 20 s. of Mr. Ireland upon September 2. at which time Mr.
Ireland was at Boscobell. But Dr. Oats denied the speaking precisely to the
day, and would not be positive whether first, second, or any certain day; but
that, as he remembered, it was the second.

The Prisoner then produced Pendrell and Gifford, and their Wives.

Mr. Gifford gave Evidence, Mr. Gifford gives Evidence against Dr. Oats.
that being last Sessions in Court to prove that he saw Mr. Ireland upon the
24. and 25. days of Aug. in Staffordshire, (the day that Dr. Oats affirmed he
saw him in London,) Dr. Oats being at a loss upon the particulars, affirmed at
last, that he had 20 s. of Ireland, in Mr. Harcourt's Chamber, on the first or
second of September, about the Fast day. Dr. Oats said here, that he spoke to
the best of his memory; and Mr. Gifford went on, saying, that he saw him there
some other of those days; but that there were diverse then in Court that were
every day in his company. But they were now upon the wrong Trial again.

Dr. Oats informed, Dr. Oats speaks to some mistakes.
that it was not Ireland, but Harcourt, that he charged with being at Wild
House, where Coleman met him; and that most of the Money was there, and carried
back to Harcourt's Chamber, where it was delivered to the man that carried it
to Windsor; Coleman leaving a Guinny for the Messenger, but he himself going
away before. Dr. Oats farther delivered, that Mr. Fenwick took leave of Mr.
Ireland, as going to S. Omers, betwixt August 8. and 12: but whether they met
about the Plot or no, or what they said, he does not remember the particulars.
To the Question, whether Fenwick had any communication with Ireland in August
for the furtherance of the Plot, Dr. Oats gave Evidence that he had.

The Lady Southcott was now produced, with her Son, and her Daughter. The Lady
Southcott informing, that she saw Mr. Ireland Eleven Witnesses to prove Mr.
Ireland in Staffordshire.
every day from the 5. of August to the 16. wherein she was positively certain*

Sir John Southcott was then called, and informed, that he knew Mr. Ireland's
face, and that he traveled with him from the 5. of August to the 9. and saw
him several days afterward, in the whole, at least 12 days.

Mr. Edward Southcott then informed, that he was in company with Mr. Ireland,
from the 4. to the 16. but that he was not at his Trial.

Mrs. Harwell informed, that she saw Mr. Ireland on August 17, when he came to
her house at Wolverhampton, and lodged there every night till the six and
twentieth.

Young Mrs. Harwell informed the same, from the 17. to the 26. saving that on
S. Bartholmew's Eve he went to Litchfield, and came back again, upon which day
she did not see him.

Mr. Gavan here offered Evidence of a Prisoner in Newgate to the same point,
desiring to be instructed, whether a man charged with, but not convict of the
same Crime, might not be a good Evidence. But he had no encouragement to make
use of him.

Elizabeth Keeling informed, that she saw Mr. Ireland at Wolverhampton, from
the 17. of August to the 19. when she went out of Town; and coming back on
Thursday, found him there, where he continued till the 26.

Mr. Pendrell then informed, that he saw Mr. Ireland, September. 2. and 3. at
Boscobell; which he knew by his Wife's book, where she set down the day for his
diet, he being with him for his Meals. That the Witness kept the Royal Oak
there: that the Gentleman called himself Ireland, and so did others: that he
knew him no otherwise, and that he did not see him in August.

Mrs. Pendrell informed, that she knew Mr. Ireland only by report: that she
saw him at Boscobell in August or September according to the question, and
never before that time: that she knows it was he that suffered, for she was in
Town when he died.

Mrs. Gifford informed, that Mr. Ireland was at Wolverhampton from the 17. of
August to the 26. and that she also saw him Sept. 2. 7. 10. and 11. and that
her Brother told her it was the same man that was executed. Mr. Gifford then in
Court declaring, that he saw him in Staffordshire, and he saw him die.

Another Mrs. Gifford informs, that she saw Mr. Ireland at Pancrass fair in
Staffordshire; that she did not see him suffer; but her Sister showed him to
her at a Window, saying, That Is Mr. Ireland: that she saw him Tried, and found
him to be the same man: and that it was Sept. 7. that her Sister told her of
him.

Mr. Beadle informs, that he saw Mr. Ireland Sept. 2. at Millage in
Staffordshire, and that they said it was Mr. Ireland the Jesuit: that he never
saw him before, and only supposes him to be the man that suffered: owning
himself (upon the question) to be a Roman Catholic.

Mr. Turner Mr. Turner denies his Charge.
represented, that he stood charged with being at Tixall (where he had not been
in four years) at a Consult in September, and demanded who saw him there: and
it was answered, that there was only Mr. Dugdale to witness that.

Mr. Fenwick produced Captain Hill against Mr. Bedlow; Capt. Hill produced: and
Mr. Fenwick objects ill things done by Mr. Bedlow.
and offered to prove by a Clark of Sir James Boteler's, that he cozened a
Cuttler of a Silver-hilted sword. But the Clark being called, and not present,
nothing was done about it; Mr. Fenwick still reproaching him with several
Cheats. His Pardon being objected; the Prisoner replied, that a Pardon did not
make a good Witness, and pretended to prove something since his Pardon.

Mr. Whitebread charges Mr. Bedlow with giving Evidence against him This Trial,
Mr. Whitebread charges Mr. Bedlow with a false Oath.
in contradiction to his Declaration that he had nothing to say against him the
Last; insisting upon it, that the Reason now suggested of his forbearance, was
no way intimated at that Trial; and that not swearing the whole truth, he had
broken his Oath, and is perjured. This Objection was left to the Jury. And then
Captain Hill informed only of Mr. Bedlow's Condition in the Marshalsea; which
was found to be of no moment to the matter in question.

The King's Council having summed up the whole proceedings, thus far, into a
brief Deduction and Narrative, and so laying it before the Jury, the King's
Witnesses were called. The King's Witnesses called.


Sarah Pain was sworn, Sarah Pain swears Mr. Ireland in Town.
and informed, That passing in Russell-street she saw Mr. Ireland at his own
door there, no body with him; that she knew him very well, and then saw his
Face, and made him a Curtesy: which was about a week after the King went to
Windsor, the King going thither about the twelfth or thirteenth of August; the
Witness saw Ireland about the twentieth. She had lived with Mr. Grove, where
Mr. Ireland came often; and she had carried diverse Letters to him.

William Walker was sworn, Will. Walker swears Dr. Oats in Town.
and informed, That he had known Titus Oats a long time, but for above five
years he had not seen him; only some two years since, that he met him in
Newgate-Market; and after that, in March (78) or the beginning of April, he saw
him in a gray Serge Coat, and (as he remembers) a gray Hat, not knowing him,
till it came in his head as he was in bed, that this was Titus Oats: so that
he went next morning to enquire of him at a place where he had seen him a year
before; and the Woman of the house cried out that he was an undone man, for he
was gone over to the Church of Rome, and that she knew not where he was. The
Witness telling the Woman, that he saw him the day before, about nine or ten in
the morning, at the end of S. Martins Lane near Leicester House. He informed,
that this was some time betwixt the latter end of March, and the middle of
April, and that he saw him only there, and that he looked as if he were
afraid. That he had seen him in his Habit a matter of a year before, and not
before that, of five years. Which was observed as a Contradiction to the S.
Omer Evidences, who would have him beyond Seas all March, April, and May.

Sarah Ives was then sworn, And so does Sarah Ives.
and confirmed Mr. Walker's coming to her shop, and saying as aforesaid. This
was April was twelvemonth, and about the Middle of the month, as she thought.

Mrs. Mayo was sworn, And Mrs. Mayo.
who informed, that a week before Whitsuntide, and in the month of May, a
Servant of Sir Richard Barker's told the Witness, There Is Dr. Oats, he has
turned his Black coat into a White one: Dr. Oats being then in the Courtyard,
and the Witness in the Kitchen. The Witness then asked what he was: and he
answered, he had been a Minister, but he was now either a Quaker, or a
Catholic. The Witness replying, that he was no Quaker, for he wore a
Perriwigg: when he jearing at him, the Witness reproved him for it, being a
friend of Sir Richard Barker's. That Dr. Oats came about a week after, and
another came with him, and they walked into the Garden. That the Ladies of the
house being shy of them, hearing he was turned Jesuit, Dr. Oats, seemed
discontented, that he had not so much Respect now in the house as formerly.
That Dr. Oats afterward going into the Garden, Sir Richard's Servant told the
Witness that Oats was there again, and had brought one with him: Prithee look,
(says he) does he not look like a Jesuit? But the Witness hearing that he came
over about the Plot, went to him, and excused the Family's Coldness to him,
when they thought he was a Papist: Swearing also that Dr. Oats, the Witness in
Court, was the person she saw there.

Philip Page And Philip Page.
was sworn, and informed, that he had known Dr. Oats four or five years; that
he saw him at Sir Richard Barker's about the beginning of May last 1678; that
he spoke with him then; he was in a light-colour'd Campaign Coat: that he went
into the house, and then away again, as soon as he had enquired for Sir
Richard. The Witness remembers the time, for Sir Richard at his house at
Islington had a Patient then that was ill of a Fever. (Sir Richard Barker
informed the Court, that it was Mr. Milver's Daughter.) The Witness being
positive that it was about that time, and that he spoke with him; by the token
that he had an old flapping black Hat on, and Spanish-leather Shoes.

Sir Richard Barker Sir Richard Barker heard Dr. Oats was in Town.
was sworn, and informed, that about the time given in Evidence, returning out
of the Country, he was told that Dr. Oats had been at his house in a Disguise,
as if he were either a Quaker, or a Papist: nay, that they told the Witness of
two Disguises, the one in short Hair, the other in a long Perriwigg: and that
his Coachman, then in Court, told him of it first. That the Witness falling
sick in that Interim, Dr. Oats was gone; but came to his house after his
Recovery, to ask for Dr. Tongue, about the latter end of June, or beginning of
July. That the Witness had known him from a Child, and saw him the last Summer,
but not till June; and that in June (as he remembered) he did see him: but that
his Servants had seen him, as they themselves told him, in May, before
Whitsuntide.

One Butler was sworn, and informed, that he had three years knowledge of Dr.
Oats; and that he saw him at his Master's house in Barbican, Butler saw Dr.
Oats in Barbican.
about the beginning of May last was twelvemonth. That the Witness, being Sir
Richard Barker's Coachman, was cleaning his Coach, and Dr. Oats came in, and
enquired for Dr. Tongue. The Witness telling him that he was not within; he
seemed much discontented, but yet went into the house, and presently out again,
and away. He was in gray clothes like a Shepherd, and his Hair cropped to his
ears; but yet the Witness knew him so soon as he saw him. That the Witness saw
him some six weeks after, in a long black Coat and Perriwigg. That he was sure
it was Dr. Oats, and that he told his Master of it soon after.

Mr. Smith was sworn, and informed, that he knew Dr. Oats, (being Usher of
Merchant-Taylors School, and Dr. Oats his Scholar there.) That he saw him at
dinner at his own house in Islington, Mr. Smith, at Islington.
at the beginning of May 1678, the first Monday in May, as he remembered:
swearing this positively, and that he was with him three or four hours after
dinner, in colored Ribbands, and a green Knot upon his shoulder. That their
discourse was about his Travells, and nothing at all about the Times. That he
knew he had changed his Religion; and that he saw him not in two months after.

Mr. Clay was sworn, Mr. Clay saw him at Mr. Charles Howard's.
and informed, that the first knowledge he had of Dr. Oats was about April
last was twelvemonth, at Mr. Charles Howard's, in a corner of Old Arundel
House, where he met him by chance upon a Visit to Mr. Howard, as an
acquaintance and friend: and that he saw him there the second time in May also;
but the day he could not say; nor whether he saw him afterward or not: but
that Dr. Oats in Court was the person he saw there. Dr. Oats offering to the
court, that Mr. Clay was a Priest in Orders: but that question was not put to
him; only he owned himself to be a Papist.

Mr. Whitebread's Mr. Whitebread presses Dr. Oates's several Contradictions.
plea was, that urging Dr. Oats at the last Trial, to name any one that he
had seen in Town, he could not name any body. And so likewise afterward, at
the Committee, he told that the Prisoner lay privately at Grove's; and the
Prisoner can prove that he never lay there at all: and then he was positive,
that he stayed here but six days, and saw little company. Now the Evidence
affirms, that at the end of March, or the middle of April, he saw him here: and
yet Dr. Oats himself declares, that he passed the Sea with Hilsley, the twenty
fourth of April. If he landed in England the seventeenth of April, as is said,
and continued here a good part of May, how can this stand with his being in
England but six days? The Prisoners were answered, that the precise day was not
so punctually sworn to: so that Dr. Oats might be seen here the latter end of
April, and the beginning of May, and yet his Testimony stand good.

Mr. Gavan offered to the Court, Mr. Gavan sums up his whole defense:
insisting upon the Incompetency of the Evidence against him; the Improbability
of things; and their Disagreements among themselves.
that the Evidence against them spoke only to one or two particular days; one
to his Dining with him, and another to his Disguise: and that in the very
Evidence there was a manifest Contradiction; for he could not come over with
Hilsley, as he said he did, and appear here in May, and all this within six
days. That it might be farther considered also, the disproportion in the Number
of the Witnesses; sixteen for the Prisoners, and such as conversed with Dr.
Oats every day. Or allowing that a less Number for the King should weigh down
a greater Number on the part of the Prisoners, the Exception to his Evidence
about the Rectour of Liege, Sir John Warner, and Sir Thomas Preston, remains
yet untouched. Or supposing a Mistake in what concerns Dr. Oate's being at S.
Omers, there are yet six that prove he has sworn false. And the Prisoner humbly
represented, that no body ought to be condemned but upon two sufficient
Witnesses. And after all, that Mr. Ireland was proved to have been out of
London, from August 3. to September 14* by at least 16 Staffordshire Witnesses.
Which two points remain without Answer: for Dr. Oats says that he was with him
here August 12. when they agree that he was in Staffordshire. As to the Maid,
she only says that she saw him, without speaking to him. The Prisoner here
appealing to the Honor and Conscience of the Court, how far to believe a
Witness that has even in one point falsify'd. And then there is Sir John
Southcott, and his Family, that give an account of Mr. Ireland in the Country
from August 5. to the 19. (which was after the precise day that the Maid speaks
of in London. There are seven or eight of them that agree upon the seeing of
him from the first day to the last.

And whereas it is objected in the business of July, that the Prisoner's
Witnesses speak positively only to the last week; the Prisoner offers, that
they rather incline to think him there the other weeks also then not; and that
being shut up in the Last, they took a more particular notice of him.

He minded the Court also of the Evidence of Mr. Ashby's coming to Town about
Mid-Iuly, and of the Prisoner's coming likewise within the fortnight which Mr.
Ashby staid; and of the Prisoner's saying he would wait upon Father Ashby;
where the discourse past that he speaks of: adding, that he is neither proved
to have been at the Great Consult, nor Capable of it; appealing to Mr. Harcourt
and the rest, whether he were there or not, and upon the word of a dying man
denying it.

As to the Prisoner's name being to it, (which is laid in July) he proves
himself in Staffordshire the last Week of that Month, and has Evidences of
being there till the 14. and the last Week; which he hoped would be considered.

He moved farther, whether standing accused by one Witness, about one Fact in
London, and by another, concerning another Fact in Staffordshire, these two
Witnesses are to be reckoned good in Law. But this being already resolved in
Sir Henry Vane's Case, where several Witnesses proved several Facts in
several Countries, and yet all overt Acts of one and the same Treason; Mr.
Gavan suggested, that Sergeant Rolls was of another Opinion.

Mr. Gavan's second Plea was grounded upon the Circumstances of Credible
Witnesses, and of Clear Evidence; but that in his Case there was neither the
one, nor the other; and therefore that he ought not to be convicted by such a
Witness, and upon such an Evidence. Wherein the Court informed him, that they
were Lawful Witnesses, because not convict of any crime to destroy their
Testimony: and for the Credibility of them, that was left to the Jury.
Whereupon the Prisoner addressed himself to the Jury to this following effect.

That his Life was in their hands: His application to the Jury.
That he was not at the Consult, nor of age to be there: That to the making of
a Credible Witness, there must be Integrity of Life, and Truth of Testimony: He
urges the Insufficiency of D. Oates's Testimony.
That Dr. Oats was turned out of S. Omers as a Person of ill Moralls: That in
Sir John Warner's, Sir Thomas Preston's, and the business of Mr. Ireland's
being here August 12. he is unanswerably disporv'd: And that though he be not
convicted of Perjury, he might have been; so that there was enough before them
to shake his Testimony. And then in Mr. Ireland's business, betwixt August 8.
and 12. how many Proofs of his being in Staffordshire, to one Woman that says
she saw him in Town? Sixteen Witnesses that were daily in his company that
affirmed the contrary. He inculcated over again the business of the S. Omers
Witnesses; sixteen, to three or four: the Contradiction of Dr. Oats his coming
over with Hilsley, and staying but six days; with the Evidence that saw him in
Town April and May; his being at Wolverhampton from July 16. upwards.

As to Mr. Dugdale, Denies any Conspiracy with Mr. Dugdale.
he had the knowledge of him five or six years; several disco urses with him,
but none Treasonous, upon his Salvation: And that he came away from his Lord
after he had embezelled 300 li. of his Money.

That he (Mr. Gavan) had been twenty weeks a Prisoner, without the means of
sending for Witnesses. Concluding with an Asseveration of his Innocence, Makes
protestation of his Innocence.
as he hoped to see the face of God, and with a Prayer for the King and the
Court.

Mr. Whitebread minded the Court of an excellent observation made upon that
rank and dangerous Letter, which Mr. Dugdale pretends to have intercepted from
the Prisoner to Mr. Ewers; That none but a Madman would send such a Letter by
the Post. And so he recommended the Improbability of it to the Jury.

Mr. Fenwick desired the Court and Jury to consider the Evidence on both sides.
Mr. Fenwick arraigns Dr. Oates's Evidence.
The one spoke to the whole time, upon a daily Conversation; the other, only
to this or that day, or seeing Dr. Oats in a Disguise: on the one side, so
many Youths trained up in Virtue; and on the other, a beggarly sort of people,
that might be drawn in to mend their fortunes by their Evidence. His Testimony
then is false as to Sir John Warner, Mr. Williams, and Sir Thomas Preston; for
they came not over with him. Or suppose the Witnesses to be Equal, what support
has he for his Evidence? such and such Letters he pretends from Mr. Whitebread;
which if it were true, the Prisoners deserved to be hanged for Fools, as well
as for Knaves, for trusting a Creature that they never had any Esteem for, and
who was Expelled the College.

And then for the Commissions and Letters he speaks of, Thousands of Letters
seized, and no Treason in them: nor One Commission found in all their Searches.
it is almost a year that this Discovery has been afoot, and thousands of
Letters seized: and yet not one Commission appears; not one penny of money, or
any order for it; no Arms found; nor out of all these Letters any thing
discovered toward this Design. And for all the Writings signed, which he says
were hundreds, from one Consult to another, there is not one single paper
produced in confirmation of it. Ending in these words, There is no Reason
brought among them all, but Saying and Swearing; and that I Will stand by.

Mr. Whitebread told the Court and Jury, Mr. Whitebread offers to the Jury how
he should dare to strike Dr. Oats, if he had his Life at his mercy.
that whereas Dr. Oats charged him with beating of him; First, the Prisoner
neither was, nor ever had been a Fighting man: and he appealed to their
Considerations, how he should dare to strike a person, whom he had made privy
to so Dangerous a Secret. Reflecting then upon the strangeness of the thing,
that so many Eminent persons should be concerned in it, the Plot discovered,
and yet no footsteps of it appear. And so he recommended himself to God, and
the Jury.

Mr. Harcourt then declared, that being now arrived at Seventy years of age,
this was the first time in his whole Life that he had been accused before a
Magistrate: But that a Negative cannot be proved; and that there was no
Evidence against them, but downright Swearing.

Mr. Fenwick was about to pass a Reflection upon the Life and Conversation of
the Witnesses; but bringing no proof, he put an end to the discourse.

Mr. Turner being demanded what he had to say, he did ask, if it were
reasonable to admit of those people to an Oath in Evidence, Mr. Turner excepted
to Dr. Oates's Evidence.
who for Scandal were debarred the Sacrament; as he would prove by one
Hastings. But he being called, and not appearing, the Court proceeded to give
directions to the Jury: wherein the Evidences were so fully and distinctly
summed up by my Lord Chief Justice, that there was nothing to be added to them.

The Jury were then sent out to consider of their Verdict; All the Prisoners
found guilty.
and after about a quarter of an hour, they returned, and found all the
Prisoners Guilty of the High Treason whereof they stood Indicted. And after a
short and pithy Speech of the Recorder to the Jury, they were remanded to
Newgate, and the Court adjourned till next Morning.

THE HISTORY OF THE CHARGE and DEFENSE OF Richard. Langhorn Esquire
UPON June 14. 1679. Mr. Richard Langhorn was brought to his Trial Mr. Langhorn
brought to his Trial.
at the Sessions House in the Old Bailey, according to an Adjournment of the day
before; standing Indicted of High Treason, for contriving the Death of the
King, the Subversion of the Protestant Religion, and of the Established
Government. He pleaded Not guilty to the Indictment. The Jury was sworn without
any Challenge. The King's Council opened the Charge, and so the Court entered
upon the Trial; beginning with some Evidences upon the main Design.

Mr. Dugdale and Mr. Prance were both sworn: Mr. Dugdale swears to the General
Plot.
and Mr. Dugdale spoke first to the Plot upon the Life of the King; declaring,
that he himself had been engaged in diverse Consultations for the Destruction of
His Majesty, and of the present Government, and for bringing in of Popery. That
being at most of their Meetings, he heard these very Expressions used; and was
tempted with Reward to be Instrumental in it, and to kill the King. An Army to
be set afoot upon the Killing of the King.
The men that put him upon it were all Jesuits, as Mr. Ewers, Mr. Gavan, Mr.
Leveson, and Vavasour.

That upon the Killing of the King, they were to be ready with an Army, but not
before: though at first it was resolved to raise an Army out of hand.

They had some thoughts of beginning with a Massacre, Some thoughts of a
Massacre.
and then to cut off those that escaped with an Army; but this Witness did not
hear of any certain number resolved upon. These Consultations were at Tixal,
Boscobel, my Lord Aston's, and Mr. Gerrard's; all in Staffordshire: And the
Protestants were to be destroyed in the first place.

Touching Sir Edmundbury Godfry's Death, A Letter concerning Sir Edmundbury
Godfry's murder.
Harcourt wrote a Letter to Ewers, that began thus, This very Night Sir
Edmundbury Godfry is dispatched; and more to that purpose. The Witness saying
thus to Mr. Ewers about it; I Will be hanged if this don't spoil the Design:
whose answer was, that he was a great Enemy of Loose people, and it would be
judged some of them had done it in Revenge. The Letter was received upon Monday
night, and dated on Saturday.

Mr. Prance declared, Mr. Prance swears to the General Plot.
that one Mr. Messenger was engaged by the Lord Arundell of Wardour and the
Lord Powis, to murder the King; and was promised a considerable Reward, as my
Lord's Butler told this Witness: who afterward meeting with Messenger, and
asking him why he would do it; his Answer was, that he was off on it now.

The King being dispatched, 50000 men were forthwith to be raised, An Army of
50000 to be set on foot upon the killing of the King.
as Fenwick, Ireland, and Grove said in the Witnesse's hearing, being all
together. That this Army was to set up the Romish Religion, and all the
Protestants to be destroyed: the Lords Arundell and Powis to command these
Forces. And he says, that one Harcourt (twice, at his Chamber in Dukesstreet)
told him, that there were several to kill His Majesty. This was in the hearing
of one Mr. Thompson: and M. Fenwick told the Witness, that M. Langhorn was
deeply concerned in it; and that was all the Witness knew.

Dr. Oats was then sworn, Dr. Oats sworn.
and this is the sum of his Evidence. That returning out of Spain into
England in November 1677, he brought Mr. Langhorn His acquaintance and
communication with M. Langhorn.
Letters from two Sons that he had in Spain, in English Colleges; the one at
Madrid, the other at Valladolid. He delivered the Letters within a day or two
after his arrival, to Mr. Langhorn, at his Chamber in the Middle Temple; who
treated the Witness very respectfully: and upon telling him that the Witness
thought his Sons would enter themselves into the Society, Mr. Langhorn
(standing that way affected himself) was very glad of it; for matters would not
hold long in England as they were, (he said) and that if they kept themselves
in the world, they might quickly come to great preferment in England.

The Witness was once more with Mr. Langhorn His second Meeting with Mr.
Langhorn.
before his coming to S. Omers, (which was in November old style, December
new,) when he gave him a Packet of Letters to carry with him. In this Packet
was a Letter of Thanks to the Fathers at S. Omers, for their kindness to his
Sons in their journey for Spain; and promising the repayment of twenty pound
which they had furnished his Sons with upon their passage. This Letter was
subscribed Richard Langhorn, and it made mention of one written to Father Le
Chaise, in order to our Concerns. (These were the very words.) Now the Letter
to Le Chaise this Witness did not see, but only the other that took notice of
it: and he said, that Mr. Coleman having written to him at large, he should not
trouble his Reverence with many words at that time.

The Witness remembers also another Letter, Dr. Oats charges Mr. Langhorn with
dangerous Words.
either in March, or April, (he could not say which) wherein Mr. Langhorn
(among diverse ill passages) expressed a wonderful Zeal for the Catholic
Design; and saying that the Parliament began to cool in the business of the
Protestant Religion; and that now was the time to give the Blow: That was the
word ( the Blow;) but the Letter was too large to give a particular account of.

Dr. Oats minded the Court of the Consult here in April. The Witness and
diverse others came from S. Omers, and other parts, to that Consult. Mr.
Langhorn himself was not at it; but the Witness was ordered by the Provincial
to tell Mr. Langhorn from time to time what passed there: and upon the report
the Witness made him to their proceedings, Mr. Langhorn, with his hands and
eyes up to Heaven, prayed God to prosper them. Mr. Langhorn's prayer for the
success of the Design.


The sum of the Witnesse's Report to Mr. Langhorn was this, Dr. Oates'S
report to Mr. Langhorn.
That Carry was to go Procurator to Rome: That they had concluded upon the Death
of the King: that Pickering and Grove were to attempt the King's person; 1500
li. to Grove, and 30000 Masses to Pickering, to be the Reward. He told him
also, that they had all signed the Agreement. And this past a day or two after
the signing of it.

The Witness swears that there were at that time diverse Parchments lying upon
Mr. Langhorn's Study-Table, He swears Commissions lying upon Mr. Langhorn's
Study-Table, six, or eight.
which he found to be Commissions for the 1 s. Arundell of Wardour, Powis,
Bellasis, and Petre; to be Chancellor, Treasurer, General, Lieutenant General.
That there was one for Coleman to be Secretary of State, and another for Mr.
Langhorn to be Advocate of the Army. They were Authorized by a Brief from the
Pope, directed to the General of the Society; with the Jesuits Cross upon them,
and signed, Johannes Paulus de Oliva.

The Witness being demanded, if they lay Open; he told the Court, that they lay
upon a Corner of a Desk folded up, Commissions upon a corner of Mr. Langhorn's
Desk, folded up.
and that he came to take notice of them, by having information from one Father
Anderton, that these Patents (as he called them) were come; whereupon the
Witness spoke of them to Mr. Langhorn, Mr. Langhorn showed the Witness the
Commissions.
and upon his desire, he let the Witness have the sight of them; who remembers
that there was One more, for a Son of the Lord Arundell, and something for the
Lord Stafford too, concerning the Army. The Witness saw several of these
Commissions, and the greater part of them in Mr. Langhorn's Study; but he could
not say all. The Prisoner told the Witness, that for Inferior Officers and
all, there were about 50; but a matter of 6 or 8 were all that the Witness saw.

Dr. Oats Swears, that in April and May he saw the Answer to several of Mr.
Langhorn's Letters to La Chaise; La Chaise's Letters in Answer to Laghorne
showed to this Witness.
and that the Fathers desiring to have the Originals, Mr. Langhorne delivered
them to this Witness, who carried them to the Fathers. They came from the
Fathers, La Chaise, (Confessor to the French King) and Anderton, (Rector of the
College at Rome.) The Witness saw them in Mr. Langhornes custody; but he
cannot say that they were directed to him: The substance of La Chaise's was, to
assure them of his Firmness to the English Society, and that the French King
would assist them for the Advancing of the Cause.

That Mr. Langhorne (being the Jesuits Solicitor) went with Harcourt, Fenwick,
Keines and Langworth to the Benedictine Monks, Langhorne charged by the Witness
with getting 6000 l. of the Benedictines, toward the Plot.
to desire their Aid toward the work: and the Witness has heard, that at the
Prisoners Instance they contributed 6000 pounds; which was by them paid to the
Society; and Mr. Langhorne was said to have received it, toward the Murder of
the KING, and the Change of Religion. This Witness did not see the payment of
the Money; but about July, or August, he heard Mr. Langhorne say, discoursing
of it, that he would do what he could toward the getting of it; and how
troubled he was, That Sir George Wakeman made such a difficulty of accepting of
Ten thousand pounds for poisoning the King: Adding, That it was a public work,
and a Body would have done it for Nothing; but that he was a very Covetous and
Narrow-soul'd-man.

A Writing under the Jesuits Seal being showed in Court to Mr. Oats, he
presently declared, That to be the very hand which was to the other, and just
such a Seal.

Several Questions being put to the Witness, by, or in the name of the
Prisoner, Dr. Oats Answered, That he went toward St. Omers When, and How Dr.
Oats went to St. Omers; and who came over with him back.
at the latter end of November, and that he arrived there about the tenth of
December, New style; That he went in the Dover-Coach, and stayed there till
April following, without stirring from thence: saving only, that he went to
Paris, and was a Night or two at Watton, and then came away in April: whether
about the middle, or latter end, he could not say: but he was in England under
Twenty days.

There came over with him Nine or ten in all; Dr. Oats stayed in England at
his Return, under 20 days.
as Father Williams, Father March, the Rector of Liege, Sir John Warner: and
that he could not name any more. The Prisoner objecting to him, that the Names
of all the rest were in the Record of the Lords-house; Dr. Oats referred him
to the Record. The Prisoner asked him also, If Sr. Tho. Preston and Poole came
over with him? and the Witness said, they did.

To the Objection, that this was but a Repetition of what was proved the day
before, the Prisoner humbly offered, That the Trial of the day before was in
another County, and by another Jury, and therefore he presumed, in his own
defense, The prisoner allowed all freedom of Defense, asks several Questions.
to urge this; in which liberty he was not debarred.

The Witness said also, that he thought Sir Robert Brett was there. The
Prisoner expressed the drift of his Questions to be only this; to see if Dr.
Oats would now affirm what he swore in the Lords House: Dr. Oats telling him,
that he might produce that Record; and the Court allowing, that a sworn copy of
that Record would be good Evidence. A sworn Copy of a Record, in the Lords
House, admitted to be good Evidence.


The Prisoner asked, if the Witness came from Dover by Coach, Dr. Oats came
over with Hilsley; and so from Dover by Coach: but Mr. Hilsley parted from him.
or on Horseback? Dr. Oats replied that it was a sudden question, but that as
he remembers, he came by Coach. The Prisoner then giving the Reason of his
Question; because upon a Trial at the Kings Bench, the Witness said he came in
a Coach with Mr. Hilsley; Mr. Oats declaring, that they came over together in
the Boat, but upon Landing they parted.

Mr. Langhorne asked him, where he lodged at his coming into Town? and his
Answer was, that when he came in April, he lay at Mr. Groves: but being asked
where he lay the first night, Dr. Oats could not speak certainly to that; Dr.
Oats could not say where he lay in London the first night after his Return:
But in general, that he lay at Mr. Groves's.
but in general, that he lay there, and as he remembers some three or four
nights.

Dr. Oats did not say six days, but under twenty.
Dr. Oats swears, that he acquainted Mr. Langhorne with the Consult within a
day or two after it; that he returned to St. Omers, as he believed, the first
week in May. And being then told, that he had said the day before, that his
stay there was but six days; he said that was a mistake, for he said, under
twenty.

Dr. Oats proves Langhorne's hand, having formerly seen an Order from him for
payment, of Money.
The Prisoner demanded, if Dr. Oats saw him write those Letters he spoke of?
He said No; but he knew his hand, for he saw an Order of his for the paying of
Money to his Sons, and the Money was paid upon that Order.

Dr. Oats proves Letters from La Chaise to Langhorne, upon his own Confession.
The Prisoner demanded, if he could say that La Chaise, or Anderton ever wrote
to him? to which Dr. Oats Answered, That he had Letters subscribed with their
Names, and that Langhorne himself told him that they came from them; and that
they were to be imparted to Priests and Jesuits; and that he delivered those
Letters to the Witness to that end.

Mr. Langhorne puts questions about Dr. Oates's Religion. And whether a
Jesuit, or not.
The Prisoner desired to Know, how long he staid at St. Omers? Dr. Oats told
him, till June 23 New style. The Prisoner then demanded, (seeing him to be come
over from the Church of Rome to the Church of England) when it was that he went
over from the Church of England to that of Rome; and if he was then Beneficed?
The Time, Dr. Oats told him, was in February or March 1676/7, and that he was
for some time in a Vicaridge at Bobbing in Kent: and that he came to that
Vicaridge in 1672. Mr. Langhorne taking notice that he turned Papist in 1677,
asked him whether or no he had left his Living first? Dr. Oats answered, That
he had left the place not very long before; for the Air did not agree with him:
besides, that he had other private Reasons for leaving it.

Mr. Langhorne asked, if turning Papist he became a Jesuit also; because he
says in his Narrative, There came nine of us over, All Jesuits? The Court told
him first, that it was not a fair Question; and then, that what he offered was
no Evidence.

Dr. Oats had been with Mr. Langhorne four or five times.
The Prisoner then asked the Witness, if he had ever been in his Company since
that business in his Chamber of the Consult and Commissions? Dr. Oats made
answer, he had been twice with him about the time of the Consult, and twice or
thrice after his coming over again.

Mr. Bedloe is Sworn.

MR. Bedloe Mr. Bedloes opinion about the Hand and Seal of a Commission from
Rome.
declares upon a question concerning a Writing signed by the Superior of the
Jesuits, that he had it at Mr. Daniel Arthurs; and that finding it to agree
with the Hand and Seal that he had observed upon Commissions in Paris, he
presented it to the Council.

[Let the Reader observe here, that this was a business only of a private
Concern.]

The Witness swears to this effect: That he had no familiarity with Mr.
Langhorne; Mr. Bedloe sets forth Mr. Langhorne's Correspondences, abroad.
but some three years since, being entrusted by Mr. Harcourt and Coleman with
certain Letters to La Chaise; Mr. Coleman carried him to Mr. Langhorne's
Chamber, who there Entered them; and they were then sealed up by Mr. Coleman,
who delivered them to the VVitness to carry them: The Letters being written at
Mr. Colemans, and only Registered by Mr. Langhorne. Some of these Letters were
read in Court at Mr. Colemans Trial.

The scope And the scope of his Letters.
of them was only to inform La Chaise, that he wanted nothing but Money now in
England to accomplish the work; and to learn what supplies they might expect
from France. That the Catholics were safe in England; all places of Trust in
their hands, or at least, in such as were well inclined: and that, considering
the conjuncture of the present Power of the French King, and a general
disposition of Circumstances here, there never was so fair an occasion of
accomplishing their ends. This was to Father Stapylton in English: But the
other to the Nuncio, and La Chaise, were in French, and to the same purpose.

Mr. Langhorne Copied these before the Witness: Mr. Langhorn charged with
making Entries of the aforesaid Letters.
He went into his Study, and wrote while Mr. Coleman and the Witness walked in
the Chamber. The Witness declared, that there was not a penny of Money in this
business, but some way or other past his Accounts. The Witness cannot say that
ever Mr. Langhorne spoke to him expressly of the Kings death, but only of the
Main design.

The Witness was with him a second time, Mr. Bedlow opens the method of the
confederacy.
about a year and half since, and it was from Harcourt, for the Registring of
another packet of Letters. He took the Packet, and without much heeding the
Messenger, sent word to Mr. Harcourt, that Mr. Williams (a Name that this
Witness was known by) had brought him some Letters; which he would return again
the next day, as soon as he had Coppy'd them. That Mr. Harcourt showed this
Witness the Answer: In this Packet there were two Letters, one (says the
VVitness) that he brought out of Spain from Sir William Godolphin, directed to
the Lord Bellassis, which was sent to Mr. Langhorne some three weeks after to
be Entered: the Other, from the Irish Jesuits in Salamanca, directing that the
rest of the Lords concerned, and the whole Popish Party in England should be in
readiness; for they had now gotten some Irish casheer'd Soldiers Irish
Casheer'd Soldiers to embarque as Pilgrims.
that should be laid to embarque at the Groyn, under the color of Pilgrims,
and then to Land at Milford Haven; where (as the VVitness said) the Lord Powis
whould have a considerable body of Men to help forward the design. The Prisoner
Entered Colemans Letters into a large Parchment Book, but the VVitness did not
see him Enter the Other: The Book seemed at least three Inches thick, and that
two thirds of it were filled.

Pritchard telling the VVitness, that the Commissions were in Mr. Langhornes
Mr. Bedloe told, that Langhorne had the Commissions.
hand, and every thing now ready; the VVitness asking about His Commission,
Pritchard made answer, that Mr. Langhornes commissions were only for the
General Officers: And that the VVitness must have his from the Lord Bellassis.

As to the Money to be advanced by the Benedictine Monks, Money from the
Benedictines.
the VVitness says, that in the Packet to La Chaise of May 1676 there was a
Letter enclosed to Mr. Stapylton (a Benedictine Monk) to furnish the Money they
had promised: The Sum was not named, but the VVitness says that La Chaise told
him, that the French King was sure enough, and the Money not to be doubted.
Nay, that part of it was already sent over to Coleman, and Ireland; and the
rest should follow so soon as they were ready for it. The VVitness declares,
that he never discoursed with Mr. Langhorne about Commissions, not ever saw any
in his hand, only Pritchard told it to this VVitness But that St. Henry
Tichburne at Paris showed the VVitness three Commissions, signed and sealed in
form, which made him take so much notice of the writing produced this day in
Court of Mr. Arthurs, having the same Hand and Seal to it.

How far Mr. Langhorne was privy to the treachery of Pickering, and Grove, this
VVitness cannot say: But Mr. Harcourt told the VVitness upon a particular
occasion, that he was going to Mr. Langhornes to Enter Mr. Bedloe deposes the
minutes of the Result to be entered by Langhorne.
the Minutes of that Morning resolution; which was a Result for the dispatch of
those people to New Market that were to Murder the King. But hearsay being no
Evidence, Mr. Bedloe was Examined what he remembered out of any Letter that he
saw Mr. Langhorne transcribe: And so he informed the Court, that in a Letter of
1676, an Account was desired of the Religious at Doway and Paris, what progress
they had made with the rest of their Friends, toward the furnishing of Money;
for the Hearts and Arms of the English were ready; the Garrisons placed in good
hands, and nothing but Money wanting. Nothing wanting, but Money.
There were three of these Letters transcribed by Mr. Langhorne: One to La
Chaise, another to the Popes Nuntio, and a third to the English Monks at Paris.
There were in these Letters expressions of Arms and Garrisons; and in that to
La Chaise, an Invitation of the Assistance of the French. The Letter it self
did not mention the destruction of the King, and of the Protestant Religion;
but Mr. Langhornes and Mr. Colemans discourse expounded the meaning of it, and
that it was to overthrow the Government, and set up Popery; and they did also
lay their heads together after the Letters were transcribed. Here Mr. Langhorne
asked, if this were all that Mr. Bedloe had to charge upon him? whose Answer
was, that he thought of no more at present, but something else might come into
his mind hereafter.

Dr. Oats now minded the Court of one thing which he had forgotten: There were
800000 Crowns (he said) as a Contribution from the Congregation at Rome Eight
hundred thousand Crowns to be remitted from Rome.
to be remitted into England: Mr. Langhorne was inquisitive after this Money,
having advice that it was received in France; and Mr. Langhorne himself told
Father Harcourt, Keines and Fenwick, in July or August, that the Money was
lodged in France.

Mr. Bedloe also recollected himself, that Keines told him one day, I must go
immediately to Mr. Langhorne; and when he returned afterward, with a Letter in
his hand, he told the VVitness that Cardinal Barbarini Keines told the Witness
of a Chiding Letter from Barbarini.
had sent Mr. Langhorne a Chiding Letter, for slipping their opportunities, and
making to more half. This VVitness did not see the Letter, but Keines told him
the tenor of it; and that he had it from Mr. Langhorne.

These VVitnesses having delivered their Evidence, the Prisoner desired they
might not depart the Court.

Thomas Busse declares, that in September last, A Discourse about Four
Irish-men.
drinking with an old Acquaintance that was newly come out of Italy, and just
going over again, one Anthony being in the Company; You must have a special
care (says he to Anthony) of those four worthy Gentlemen that I brought over
with me. What (said this VVitness) from Italy? No (says he) but they are four
worthy Irish Gentlemen, that will do our business. This VVitness neither asking
any Question, nor heeding the matter till Colemans Trial, that speaks of the
Irish Men that were to attempt the King at Windsor; and then he reflected upon
it. He that spoke it, had some Relation to the Benedictine Monks in the Savoy;
and Anthony was something about the Queens Chapel; both of them strong
Papists. So that an Order was granted, with all Reverence to her Majesty, for
the enquiring after Antonio, Hankinson being gone again beyond Sea before.

Mr. Langhorn offered to the Court, To the Prisoners Question about the
Witnesses Pardons, Mr. Bedloe had Three, and Mr. Oats Two.
that the two VVitnesses against him were parties in the Crime charged upon
him; and he desired to know, whether they had their Pardon, or not? Mr. Bedloe
made Answer, that he had Three; and Dr. Oats, that he had Two, under the Broad
Seal: Mr. Bedloe saying, that he gave no Evidence till he had it. It was
declared that they were Witnesses, whether they had or not; or otherwise, that
they should not have been admitted. Mr. Langhorne however remitted himself to
the Court, as to his Council, Whether having had their Pardons, they might not
fall under the same prospect in Law with an Approver; not as directly being
Approvers, but under some Equivalence of Reason with them. If the Approver be
pardoned, the Appellee ought also to be discharged: it seems hard that those
that were Participes Criminis, and having now got their Pardons, should be
admitted for allowable VVitnesses against the Prisoner.

Mr. Langhorne desired also to know, To Mr. Langhorne's Objection, that the
Witness had a Reward, Dr. Oats proved the contrary: and that he was 6 or 700
l. out of pocket.
if they had either received, or if they did not expect gratifications or
Rewards for their discoveries? Dr. Oats, to acquit himself, declared that he
had been Rewarded by expending Six or seven hundred pounds out of his own
Pocket, without knowing whether ever he should see it again. Mr. Langhorne
said, that a Prisoner (Mr. Reading) told him Mr. Bedlow had received Five
hundred pounds. To which it was Answered, that first, Mr. Reading was an
Incompetent VVitness; and secondly, his 500 l. was for the discovery of Sir
Edmondb. Godfreys Murder; not for the Plot. Mr. Bedloe to the same Question
answers that he was 700 l. out of purse. The paint of the Approver overruled.
Mr. Bedlow affirmed, that he was so far from gaining by his Discovery, that he
was Seven hundred pounds out of pocket.

As to the Approver the Court told him, he was ever allowed maintenance, and
there must be a proof of corrupt Contract, or Subornation, to invalidate a
Witness. Mr. Langhorne gave the Court the Reason of pressing this, for though
it might be very prudential to invite any man to come in by the promise of a
Reward toward the discovery of a Plot, where such a person absents himself;
yet it seems very hard, that when a man is once in Custody, VVitnesses should
be called in against him by such means: The Prisoner was here advised to speak
first to the Fact, and afterward to the Witnesses. The Prisoner, upon this,
represented to the Court, that he had no possibility of making any other
defense; setting forth, that from the 17 of October, to that day Sevennight, or
Friday last, he had been kept so close that he knew nothing of what was done
abroad; no Friend or Relation admitted to him; he could never hear what was
charged upon him, and could not foresee what would be, and therefore the he had
no other plea left him, but the Incompetency of the Witnesses. It was objected
to him as a Scandal to the Kings Proclamation to suppose an Encouragement to
the swearing of a Plot, where there was none; and that King, Lords, and Commons
were touched in such a Reflection. Mr. Langhorne said no more, but that there
was a Reward proposed; and so called his VVitnesses.

Dr. Oats informed the Court, Dr. Oats informed the Court of Papists coming
in with their Swords. Hilsley denies his coming over with Dr. Oats. Mr.
Gifford says, that Dr. Oats was at St. Omers after Hilsley's going away.
that there were Papists come in with their Swords on: but that apprehension
being composed, Mr. Langhorne desired that Mr. Hilsley might be set up first;
who gave this Account,

That he came over from St. Omers April 24 New style, Dr. Oats still at St.
Omers.
that he left him at St. Omers, and that he did not overtake him at Calais, as
is suggested. That it is true he lost his Money, as Dr. Oats says, and that he
himself had met one by the way that told Dr. Oats the story.

Mr. Gifford declared, Dr. Oats Sworn to be at St. Omers from December till
June.
that he did see Dr. Oats; and that he told them at St. Omers that Hilsley was
gone away; and this was some three or four days after he was gone: He did not
remember what passed in the particular discourse; nor whether any body was by,
when Dr. Oats and he were speaking concerning Hilsleys being gone away.

There stood up a Third Witness then; Mr. Langhorne urged Dr. Oates's Narrative
and Oath, before the Lords, against him. St. Ioh. Warner at Watton, when Dr.
Oats came over. And Dr. Oats at St. Omers.
who said, that Dr. Oats was with him, and Mr. Burnaby came into the Company,
and told him that he met with Mr. Hilsley, and that he was cousen'd of his
Money: he did not say how, but by a shirking Fellow; and the VVitness does not
know whether he named the place, or no.

To prove now that Dr. Oats must know This by another hand, the third Witness
affirmed further, that Dr. Oats had been at St. Omers from December, till
June, except one day that he was at Watton, where he saw him almost every day:
That he saw him in the Refectory, where he had a little Table by himself; That
this Witness was there every day, and there he saw Dr. Oats.

Mr. Langhorne offered then, what appears both in his Narrative, and upon his
Oath in the Lords house; that he affirmed Sir Robert Brett came over with him.
But Mr. Langhorne was to have spoken to something that was Sworn There. Mr.
Langhorne pressed it, that Dr. Oats had owned that what he Swore was truth; and
so proceeded to his VVitnesses, concerning Sir John Warner coming over with him.

The Fourth Witness was Sir John Warners Gardener; who affirmed, that his
Master was at Watton all April and May 1678; That the Witness was only four
days away at St. Omers, and left his Master, and found him at Watton: That for
the last of April, the first, second and third of May he saw Dr. Oats at St.
Omers; and when he went away, he did not know. He affirmed, that St. John
Warner was at Watton all April and May, but he would not speak to all June:
Being asked, why not to the one as well as to the other? His Answer was, that
the Rector (Sir Francis Williams) came then for England, and in the Absence of
the Rector he took upon him the Charge of the House. This was the 24 th of
April; where Sir John Warner was in June and July he could not tell, nor where
in August and September; more than that he went out of Town then, and the
VVitness knew not whither. The Court asked him, how he came to be more doubtful
of these Months than of the rest? And his Answer was, because that the question
fell upon the other Months. It was then reflected upon, that April 24 was the
very day that Dr. Oats came over; and the Rector, one of those that he said
came over with him: but the VVitness replied, that the Rector came single,
having only one Officer of the College.

Mr. Gifford was then Examined, Dr. Oats and Mr. Pool said to be at St. Omers,
when Dr. Oats said, they were in England. Dr. Oats at St. Omers all May.
as to Sir John Warner; who declared, that he saw him about June in St. Omers,
and then in June or July, when he invited the VVitness to Watton.

The Fifth Witness affirms, that the first of May being a great Feast, he saw
Dr. Oats for four days; and afterward all the Month of May: and that he also
saw Mr. Pool, and Sr. Robert Brett, at the same time; but where Sir John Warner
was then, he knew not; Dr. Oats affirmed that Mr. Pool came over with him.

The Fifth Witness further Informed, that Mr. Pool (being his Musick-Master)
could not be away without his missing of him. That Mr. Pool came from St. Omers
in the Month of June; affirming, that Mr. Pool was at St. Omers all May.

There was a Forreigner then produced; Sr. Ioh. Warner at St. Omers from the
beginning of April to May 14.
who, by an Interpreter, said, that he saw Sir John Warner actually at St.
Omers in April and May, and that he Conversed where he was all May, and saw him
every day from the first Sunday in April to May 14 th, upon which day he went
to St. Omers, and back again, Sr. John Warner having then employed him about a
Building.

Carpentiere then Informed, Sr. Tho. Preston at Liege thorough March, April and
May.
that he saw Sr. Tho. Preston at Liege all through March, April, May; and in
June he was there: In the Vacancies of August and September he was gone, and
about the second of October he returned. The VVitness has been four years
there, and can Answer that for these three years last past, Sr. Tho. Preston
never was in England.

Another Forreigner Informed; Sr. Ioh. Warner at Watton from April 24 to May 16.
that he saw Sr. John Warner at Watton, from April 14 th to the 25 th, and that
he was there to the 16 th of May; that at the beginning of April he was
Superior, and Governed in the House; and he was also in the House the latter
end of May; save one day, and then he went to St. Omers.

John Joseph Informed; Sr. Tho. Preston at Liege.
that Sir Tho. Preston, in March, April, May and June, was at Liege, and so
likewise in July; but in the Vacancies he was absent: That he saw him
constantly, and in two or three days, and that he never heard it said, that he
was in England; and that after the Vacancies he returned, in the beginning of
October.

A Tenth Witness Informed, Dr. Oats said to be at St. Omers all April and May,
and part of June.
that April 25th Dr. Oats went into the Infirmary and stirred not out of the
College; that he saw him at St. Omers all April and May, and a great part of
June, positively to the 20 th; and he was there also in February and March; but
in January he lay one night at Watton; and that he did not come over April the
24 th.

The Eleventh Witness Informed; Mr. Pool at St. Omers all April and May.
that Mr. Pool was at St. Omers all April and May, and went by the name of
Killingbeck; and that he believes so was Mr. Brett.

A Twelfth Witness Informed; Dr. Oats at St. Omers.
that he saw Dr. Oats at St. Omers almost every other day, so long as he was
there: that he saw him first at the beginning of December. That he saw him
positively in April, and the first of May* and that he staid till June; by
tokens that he saw him in April at an Action, and the first of May, being a
great Feast, he saw him at Nine-pins in the Garden. Touching Sir Robert Brett,
and Mr. Nevil, he could not speak to the former; but for the latter, once in
three days he believes he saw him.

A Thirteenth Witness Informed; At St. Omers from December to June.
that he saw Dr. Oats at St. Omers, first in December; and so forward
throughout all the Months, till toward the latter end of June.

Another Witness Informed; Dr. Oats at St. Omers.
that he saw Dr. Oats at St. Omers all the Months of April, May, and a good
part of June; and that Mr. Pool was the third of May in the Infirmary, which he
remembered, it being a Festival, and the day before there was an Action. Mr.
Hilsley went away a day or two after, and the Witness had half an hours
discourse with Dr. Oats: He saw him also a day or two after walking in the
Gallery; and the second of May with one Mr. Burnaby; and then he saw him the
third, fourth and fifth of May with Mr. Burnaby again.

And then one Mr. Hall Informed, Dr. Oats proved to be at St. Omers from
December to June.
that between December 1677, and June 78, Dr. Oats lay every night in the
College; except One, in January, at Watton; and that for the time that he was
there, this Witness never mist seeing of him two days together; save when he
was in the Infirmary: and in March Dr. Oats was there also with Mr. Burnaby,
after Mr. Hilsley had been gone a week; and he was Confirmed there May 26th; he
was there all April and all May.

As to Pool and Nevil, Mr. Pool and Nevill at St. Omers.
they were there March, April, May, June and July.

A Forreigner, by an Interpreter, Informed; that he saw Dr. Oats sometimes in
the House, Dr. Oats, Nevil and Pool, at St. Omers.
sometimes in the Garden, till toward the end of June; that he was in the
Infirmary about Christmas: Nevil and Pool were there all June; and Mr. Pool
left them in July. This Witness was a Waterman, and carried Williams and March,
the last Sunday in April, in his Boat.

The next Witness Informed, The same Evidence again.
that in April and May he saw Dr. Oats at St. Omers; and that Mr. Pool, Mr.
Nevil, and Mr. Brett, were there too. This Witness was a Tailor, and having a
Suit of Clothes to make for Mr. Killingbeck, Dr. Oats came into the Shop, and
asked him questions about them.

Mrs. Grove then Informed, Mrs. Grove affirms, that Dr. Oats never lay at her
House.
that she never saw Dr. Oats: that she had Lodgers in her house April was
Twelvemonth; and that she knew them not till they came to lie there; and that
Dr. Oats could not be there, but she must know him; for there was no place to
Lodge him. Dr. Oats affirmed, that he lay alone when he lay there; and that it
was the place where two men were seized, and carried away. The Witness owned
that such men had been seized there; but denied that Dr. Oats ever lay in That
place: Dr. Oats swears that he did lie there three or four Nights, Dr. Oats
Swears, that he lay there 3 or 4 nights in a Disguise.
more or less. It was considered, that Dr. Oats being in a disguise might not
be known; but the VVitness said that she knew them all, and named them: one
Strange and Mrs. Fitz-Herbert lay one pair of Stairs, her Sister above, and
there they lay all April and May, and in March too there lay one Mr. Crupper in
the Room where the men were taken, and a young man with him; which young man
was a Prisoner by Mr. Oats procurement, and Mrs. Fitz-Herbert Lodged there too.

Mrs. Groves Maid Informed, that her Mistresses Brother and Sister lay in the
Room, Mr. Langhorne charges D. Oats with Contradicting his Evidence before the
Lords, and his Narrative.
and no men but Mr. Strange; he and Mrs. Fitz-Herbert lay there in April, May,
June, July and August.

Mr. Langhorne desires liberty to prove a Copy of the Record in the Lords
House; which not being allowed for Evidence, he told the Court that it was an
Extract out of their Iournals; and the particular he Insisted on, was
concerning the Company that Dr. Oats says came over with him from St. Omers:
It is that which Dr. Oats remitted himself to, and has gone over and over with
it, That Sir John Warner, Sir Thomas Preston, and Mr. Pool, came all along with
him. The Prisoner was told, that if he had a Record to overthrow his present
Evidence, he might produce it; Mr Laughorne then desired that those that took
Irelands Trial might be called, and that he might be permitted to make proof by
Witnesses of what was there Sworn, with regard to the Prisoner at the Bar; and
being told that it was not to be done, the Prisoner desired to know why not;
for he had a Witness to prove that such words were spoken; without which he had
no means of Defense? The Answer to him was, That as it would be no proof
against him, so it could be none for him.

There was a Complaint here brought in by the Lord Castlemain, The Witnesses
affronted by the Rabble, and the Court much offended at it.
of Violence offered, by the Rabble, to the Prisoners Witnesses; and that they
were in danger of their lives, for their coming to give Evidence: which was
highly resented by the Court, as an affront to public Justice, and direction
given to enquire out the Offenders, tht they might be punished.

A Witness was now called to speak to one point; about the meeting at the
Whitehorse Tavern: Never a Room in the Whitehorse Tavern that would hold the
Consult.
who Informed, that she had kept the House Seven years, and left it last July.
The Question was about the Number that met at that Consult? Dr. Oats Answered,
that there might be some eighteen or twenty there at a time, and that they were
divided into several Rooms. The Witness said, that she knew the greatest part
of those that used her House, and that she could say nothing to the particular
of who was in her House April the 24 th 1678; but that she did not remember
that ever she saw Dr. Oats there. It was plain however that he might be there,
and she not know on it. Mr. Langhorne gave this Reason for asking how many,
because Dr. Oats, both in his Depositions before the Lords, Being said to be
fifty Persons.
and in Colemans Trial, affirmed, There were fifty Persons at that Meeting; and
that then they adjourned into several small Meetings. But it was returned, that
so there might be, at several times of the same day; and Dr. Oats explained
himself, That though the Meeting was the 24 th day, the Consult continued yet
till the 26 th at Night. The Witness urged, that she never knew so many in the
House together, but once, in all her time, and that was upon a Jury; and they
were forced to put them into three Rooms, for there was not a Chamber to
receive above a dozen: Upon this three Witnesses made Oath; Proved, that two of
the Rooms would hold 25 or 30 apiece.
the first, that he had seen a dozen or sixteen at dinner there in a Room
together; and that it would hold twenty: the second, that there were two Rooms
in the House, where twenty five or thirty might Dine together in either of
them: and a third, that he himself was at a Wedding-dinner there, toward the
Street, where there were above twenty Persons. The Prisoner thought it material
however, if the Room would not hold fifty; and he spoke only upon Information,
for he had never been There.

Mr. Langhorne being asked, Mr. Langh. offered some Questions to the Court,
which were not admitted.
if he had any more Witnesses, moved that he might reserve them till the Kings
Council had spoken; but that was not found allowable: so he prayed an Answer to
a Question or two, if the Court pleased. The one; Was Mr. Ireland here in
London in August, or not? To which it was replied, that it was a point foreign
to the matter in question. The other was, Since Mr. Oats affirmed himself six
or seven hundred pound out of purse since his Discovery, if the Prisoner might
examine two Witnesses upon the probability of that assertion; for if he were
extremely Necessitous before, how should he get Credit for it since, but by his
Evidence? But it was found to be a matter clear from the Point to demand of
him, how he came by his Money.

Mr. Langhorne then offered a Copy of a Record of the House of Lords, Mr.
Langh. urged Mr. Bedloes contradicting his Evidence before the Lords.
to prove that Mr. Bedloe had there declared, that he had no Person more to
charge, either in the House, or out of the House, than what he there charged;
and that he the Prisoner was none of the Persons there Charged. It was
Objected, that he might forget things at that time, and call them to mind
afterward; and besides, that some body should have been produced to prove,
that Mr. Bedloe took That Oath.

Mr. Langhorne offered a Question now concerning the Commissions, Mr. Langh.
asks how the Commissions were disposed of.
asking whether or no (and to whom) the Prisoner distributed those Commissions,
as the VVitness says he did?

Dr. Oats Replied, That he only said the Commissions were delivered, but not
to whom; but that he affirms they were for those five Persons, and that the
Prisoner himself told him in July, or August, that he had disposed of them,
without naming to whom; only speaking of one, which he sent his Son with to my
Lord Arundell's eldest Son: He told this VVitness, it was delivered, not
calling to mind that he knew of any other. This Question is put (says Mr.
Langhorne) because Dr. Oats Charged the Prisoner before the Lords, And charges
Dr. Oats with a mistake.
with sending the Commission to the Lord Arundel himself. Dr. Oats affirming
also, that he saw a Letter in the Prisoners Chamber, acknowledging the Receipt
of it.

Mr. Langhorne desired, The Narrative of Dr. Oates's Evidence at Colemans Trial.
that Mr. Lidcott might be examined to a point of Dr. Oates's Evidence at
Colemans Trial; where he says, that he came, and communicated to the Prisoner
the Matter of the Consult the very next day after it, and never saw the
Prisoner any more; but Mr. Lidcott (though present there) was not able to speak
to the particulars of the Trial; so Mr. Blany was asked what he could Testify
upon that point; who acknowledged, that he took the Notes, and remembered
something about Mr. Langhorne; but could not charge his Memory upon it without
Book: So Mr. Langhorne presented the Narrative; which Mr. Blany said was not
printed from his Copy. No Evidence in the Law.
But an Historical Narrative was agreed to be no Evidence in Law. Mr. Langhorne
offered, that without some light to his Charge he could not prepare himself for
his defense: and that in other Cases people are confronted before a Magistrate,
and so come to understand the Matter of their Charge.

Mrs. Sillyard was called; but affirming that she durst not give Evidence
without being secured from the Rabble: and the Court being only able to promise
Justice upon any Offender in that kind that should be brought before them, she
was discharged, by Mr. Langhornes consent, without Examination.

Mr. Langhorne said, Mr. Langhorne insists upon the Incompetency of the
Witnesses.
that he intended to make use of her Evidence to a Deposition of Mr. Bedloes at
Readings Trial; which was, that he could have said more against Whitebread, and
Fenwick, then he did at their First Trials; which Concealment he took to be
Perjury, for not having told all the Truth; and that however Impertinent it
might seem, it was yet of great effect to the Prisoner, to show that the
VVitness against him was not to be believed. But Mr. Whitebread, having before
received an Answer to that Objection, the Kings Council summed up the whole
Matter in brief to the Jury; and then more of the Kings VVitnesses were Sworn.

William Walker deposes, Mr. Walker deposes, that he saw Dr. Oats in London
in March or April, 1678.
That he had known Dr. Oats seven or eight years. That toward the end of
March 1678, or the middle of April following, he had seen him in England in a
Disguise, and could not call him to mind that Night; but early in the Morning
it came into his head that it was Titus Oats: and so he rose early to enquire
of a Gentlewoman concerning him, that knew him; and asking her how Dr. Oats
did, she struck her hand upon the Counter, and cried, He is an undone man, for
he was turned Papist. The VVitness asking her then, if she knew were he was?
No, said she, he is skulking somewhere up and down here, and dares not show his
head in the day. Whereupon this VVitness told her, that he had seen him the day
before, about ten in the Morning, betwixt St. Martins Lane and Leicester House;
but that he was disguised: and the VVitness described his Habit to her. Mr.
Langhorne prayed he might speak to the Time as near as he could; and the
VVitness said, that he did rather think (but could not be positive) that it was
about the Middle of April, and that it was 1678, not 1677; about the time of
the year, when he usually came to Town to receive Money. And the VVitness
affirms, That it was Dr. Oats whom he saw, and that he was brought up for a
VVitness, having spoken of this passage to several Persons after the Report of
the Plot; which he supposes might come to Dr. Oates's ear by Chance.

Mrs. Ives then deposed, Mrs. Ives swears to the same effect.
that Mr. Walker told her, (being the Mistress of the House) the substance of
what he gave in Evidence concerning her; adding, that it was about the middle
of April was Twelvemonth, and that Dr. Oates's Father coming to her shop, and
eating some Cream-cheese, upon their first coming in, she told him the Story
that Walker had told her.

One Butler was Sworn (Sr. Richard Barkers Servant) and affirmed, Butl. proves
Dr. Oats in England in May last.
that he had known Dr. Oats two or three years, and that he saw him the
beginning of May last was Twelvemonth at his Masters house, enquiring for Dr.
Tongue: that he was so disguised, as that he heardly knew him. That the witness
in Court was the Man, and Titus Oats his Name. This VVitness bad him Welcome
into England, but he went in, and came forth again, without taking any notice
of the Witness. He was in a Grey-coat, a Flopping-hat, Plain-shoes, his Hair
cropped to his Ears; and one would rather have taken him for a Shepherd than a
Minister. Mr. Langhorne asked, if it were in 1678, or in 1677? The VVitness
affirmed it to be in May was Twelvemonth, and that he told his Master about a
week after, at his coming out of the Country, That Dr. Oats had been there, in
a strange Dress, to ask for Doctor Tongue.

Cecily Mayo was then Sworn; Cecily Mayo, and Philip Page swear Dr. Oats in
London.
and said, she never saw Dr. Oates's face till about a fortnight before
Whitsontide was Twelvemonth; and that then a Servant of Sir Richard Barkers
showed him to her at the Window; and that this Gentleman (Dr. Oats) in Court
is That man.

Philip Page deposed, that he had known Dr. Oats five years; and that he saw
him at Sr. Richard Barkers about the beginning of May was Twelvemonth: and that
he was positive that Dr. Oats, then in Court, was the same Man.

Sir Richard Barker deposed; Sir R. Barker told as much by his Servants.
that he had known Dr. Oats from a Child, and that his Servants told him, that
they had seen him about a year ago; and that he himself had not seen him, which
he wondered at, having lately seen his Father, who said nothing of it: and that
he the VVitness had thoughts of bestowing a Living upon him. It was in
Whitson-week, at the VVitnesses coming home, that he was told by his Servant of
Dr. Oates's being there, and of his Dress; but upon enquiry what Message he had
left, it was answered, that he only asked for the VVitness, and for Dr. Tongue;
and this was in the beginning of May was Twelvemonth. Mr. Langhorne seemed to
admire that the VVitness should intend him a Benefice under these
Circumstances. Sir Richard Barker was certain that this was in 1678: and
informed the Court likewise, that a Grandson of Sir William Thorold (now Sr.
William Thorold) and two or three of the University had a Conversation with Dr.
Oats at the same time, which he presented only as a Circumstance.

Mr. Clay deposed, Mr. Clay saw Dr. Oats twice in April and May.
that he had known Dr. Oats since April last was Twelvemonth; and that he had
seen him twice in April and May, at the House of Mr. Charles Howard, which was
a part of Arundel-house, that was since turned into a Street: He remembering it
by this Token, that Mr. Charles Howard told the VVitness he had been at St.
Omers, and was now come over again, and that he had some inclinations of
entering into the Society; but that he thought he should put him off: the
Witness declaring himself to be of the Church, but not of the Court of Rome.
And that he was certain that this was in 1678. Mr. Langhorne desired to know,
whether Mr. Clay rememberd any thing of Dr. Oates's playing at that time with
Mr. Howards Son, or talking to him about his Book, or asking him Questions? But
Mr. Clay remembered nothing of it, nor that Mr. Howards Son was in the Room.

Mr. Smith deposed, Mr. Smith saw him the first Monday in May.
that Dr. Oats had been his Scholar; that he knew him before the Fire of
London, and that Dr. Oats gave him a Visit, and dined with him, at Islington,
at the beginning of May, the first Monday in May, as he remembered; and that he
was with him 3 or 4 hours. That the VVitnesses Wife was there, and that they
discoursed of Dr. Oats Travels into Spain, Valadolid and Salamanca; that he
had a Cinnamon colored Suit on, and green Ribbands.

Mr. Charles Howard declares, Mr. Charles Howard saw him in July, but not in
May.
that he knew Dr. Oats very well, and that he had known him upward of two
years, and that he had been diverse times at Arundel-house; and particularly
about two years ago. That he remembered him there after July was Twelvemonth,
but not in May; and that the VVitnesses Son died in May 1677. Mr. Howard
declaring, that in April 77 his Child was living, and that Dr. Oats and Mr.
Clay dined there with him: Dr. Oats affirming, that he had not been two years
acquainted with Mr. Clay Mr. Clay alleging, that he never knew Dr. Oats
before the end of April last year: And likewise, that Mr. Howard had a Son yet
living at that time. Dr. Oats informing the Court, that one Son of his was
dead a Twelvemonth before Mr. Clay and Dr. Oats met there. Mr. Howard
explaining himself, that he spoke of his eldest Son, who deceased two years
since.

Mr. Langhorne being called upon to speak what he had to say, Mr. Langhornes
Defense and Exception to Dr. Oats his Testimony.
represented his Case; That he was accused by two VVitnesses: the first, Mr.
Oats, against whom, if he could prove any thing false given in Evidence, he
conceived that he ought not to be regarded. As for Sir Tho. Prestons coming
over with him in April, it has been clearly made out that he was then at
Liege: and for Sr. John Warner, Mr. Pool, and others, coming in the same
passage, he said, that the falsity was proved against him beyond dispute. Then
as to himself, it was proved likewise that he was sick in the Infirmary after
Mr. Hilsley was come away; he deposing that they came together. These
Particulars being clearly proved, he thought sufficient to take off Dr. Oats
Credit; averring also, that from November 1677 to that minute, he never set eye
on him. The Prisoner set forth, that he had been a great while kept close, and
but one Week allowed him to prepare his defense; and therefore depending that
he would have delivered the same things here which he has published in his
Narratives, all that the Prisoner could do was to arm himself as well as he
could against these Points. Mr. Langhorne did likewise tell the Court, that he
had seen Dr. Oats in Michaelmas Term 1677 once or twice, and that he brought
him a Letter from his younger Son in Spain. He told the Prisoner, that he would
go over to St. Omers, for he could not get himself admitted into any of the
Colleges in Spain. He affirmed, that since that day, till now in the Court, he
never saw him; nor knew a face of any of the Witnesses from St. Omers: And that
he hoped the Jury could not look upon those Youths as Capable of driving on a
Design, or aiming at a Reward. It was reflected, They were all Papists, and in
a Common Causes. Mr. Langhorne offered to that Objection, That if the One side
ought not to be Credited, as being Papists and Friends: so neither was the
Other, as being Enemies. If it were clear, that he neither Lodged at Groves,
nor came over with Hilsley; or that neither Sir Thomas Preston, Warner, or
Poole came with him, that then his Evidence ought not to be looked upon as
valuable.

And then as to Mr. Bedloes Evidence, And to Mr. Bedloes.
it may be considered; First, there is no proving of a Negative: Secondly, that
the Prisoner had no acquaintance with him, nor can say, that in his whole life,
he ever saw him before This Occasion: (But yet it is possible that he might see
him, and not know it.) Is it probable now (says Mr. Langhorne) that the
Prisoner, if he were guilty, would ever have taken Mr. Bedloe into a
Confidence, in a Privacy of this Nature; or that a Person of the Prisoners
Practice should spend his time in Registring Letters, and keeping Accounts for
any particular Religious Order? If the Prisoner could have known his Charge, he
might have accommodated his Defense to it: and the VVitnesses that he had were
only such as his Friends thought might be beneficial to him. The Other side
having had all Advantages of bringing their VVitnesses together. The Prisoner
suggested further, That if he fell under any prejudice for his Religion, it
would look as if he suffered for That. Concluding with this Declaration, That
he did believe it Damnation to any one that should go about to kill the King,
or deprive him of his Government: and he recommended the rest to the Court, and
to the Jury. And the Lord Chief Justice hereupon gave directions to the Jury,
with his usual Candor and Gravity.

After Directions given, the Court reflected upon a Letter found amongst
Harcourts Papers, which had been made use of in the Trials of the Day before;
and was found six or seven days after Dr. Oates's Information of a PLOT to the
Council. This Letter the Court ordered to be read, as a Paper that might give
some light to the General Design, and it was read accordingly.

Honored, Dear Sir,
I have but time, A Letter descanted upon.
etc.

[See the History of the Defense of Whitebread, etc. fol. 30.]

The Letter being read, Mr. Langhorne offered, that Dr. Oats might easily have
explained it, being no other than such a Summons to this Meeting, as brought
these over from St. Omers that attended it: and for the Design, it was no more
than the holding of a Congregation, like that of a Dean and Chapter in a
College; and for the Caution of Secrecy, it was but reasonable, where the
discovery was dangerous.

The Jury was now sent out to advise upon their Virdict; The Prisoner found
Guilty, and Condemned.
and after a little time they brought in Mr. Langhorne, Guilty: And then the
Prisoners before Convicted were brought to the Bar, by the Direction of Mr.
Recorder to receive Judgment; which was past upon them To be Drawn, Hanged, and
Quartered, according to the Common form.

Which Sentence was Executed upon the five Priests and Jesuits, on the 20th of
June; and upon Mr. Langhorne, on the 14 th of July, 1679.


THE HISTORY OF THE CHARGE AND DEFENSE OF Robert Green, Henry Berry, and
Lawrence Hill, etc.
THE Three Prisoners abovenamed having been Arraigned at the King's Bench Bar,
Green, Berry and Hill brought to their Trials.
on the Fifth of February 1678, for the Murder of Sir Edmond Bury Godfrey (the
Grand Jury for the County of Middlesex having found the Indictment two days
before) they were upon the tenth of the same Month brought again to the Bar,
to receive their Trials: when his Majesty's Council having opened the
Indictment, the Kings VVitnesses were called; and Dr. Oats first Sworn, who
gave Evidence.

That he applied himself to Sir Edmondh. Godfrey, September the sixth last
past, Dr. Oates's Evidence: And Law in securing the Depositions.
with certain Informations, and having made Oath to the Truth thereof, he
carried the Record back again; and, September the 28 th repaired to Sir Edmond
Godfrey with two or three perfect Copies, and Swore them also. This being done,
the VVitness gave Information thereof to the Council: After which Sir Edmond
came unto the VVitness ( September the 30 th, as he remembers) and told him
what Ill Will he had got; some reproaching, and threatening him for doing so
much; and others, for doing so little; and that the Parliament should be
acquainted with it, being to meet on the One and twentieth of October ensuing.

The VVitness also Swears, Sir Edmond-Bury Godfrey foresees his end.
that about a week before Sir Edmond was wanting, he told the VVitness that
some Popish Lords menaced him for meddling in the Business. That he had great
apprehensions of mischief from the Papist's Party; and he told the VVitness how
he had been watched for several days. The VVitness asked him, why he went
without a Servant? He had One, he said, but he was a pitiful weak Creature: the
VVitness then advising him to get him some smart Lad to wait upon him; but he
gave little heed to it: telling him, that he did not fear any Man upon the
square; but still he would be talking to the VVitness of the danger that he was
in; who gave him this Consolation, That if it should be his Lot to suffer, it
would be in a Righteous Cause.

Thomas Robinson Esquire was Sworn; Mr. Robinsons Evidence.
and deposed, that Sir Edmond and himself had been School-fellows at
Westminster; and for above forty years of a continued Acquaintance (saving only
in the late War) and Fellow-Commissioners for the Peace.

That having been together at Westminster Quarter Sessions, October the 7 th;
upon the rising of the Court they went to dinner with the Head Baily.

They had a great deal of talk there concerning the Plot; The Witnesses
discourse with Sr. Edmond-Bury Godfrey about the Plot.
That this VVitness told Sir Edmondb. that it was said he had taken several
Depositions about it. To which he made Answer, that he had done more in it,
than he thought he should have Thanks for; and that he could have been well
content if it had fallen into some other hand. This VVitness telling him, That
he had but done his duty; and desiring a sight of the Examinations, if he had
them about him. But his Answer was, that a Great Person had them, and that when
he got them again, the VVitness should see them. They both agreed that they
were not yet at the bottom of it; But upon my Conscience, (said Sir Edmondb.) I
believe that I shall be the first Mariyr: adding, that no man should have his
Life neither upon easy Terms. The VVitness advising him to go with a Man, and
he not liking it.

Mr. Prance was then Sworn:

Who declared, Mr. Prance's Evidence.
that before Sir Edmond was murdered, for a fortnight or three Weeks, there
were several Meetings at the Plow-Alehouse, where was Green, Girald and Kelly;
and that the two latter (who were Priests) drew the VVitness in, Drawn in by
Green, Girald, and Kelly.
persuading him that it was no Sin, but rather a piece of Charity; for he was a
busy Man and would be very troublesome. These words passed at the Plow, and at
the Waterside, some week or fortnight before the Murder. Upon the meeting of
Green, Hill and Girald, they came to a Resolution, that who ever saw him first
should immediately give notice to the rest, that they might be ready for him.
Girlad, Kelly and Green said in the VVitnesses hearing, that they had dogged
him into the Red-Lion Fields, Sir Edmond. dogged into Red-Lion-fields.
but had no opportunity to kill him There. On a Sunday-morning Mr. Kelly came
to the VVitness, and told him, that they were then Watching of him; and told
the VVitness afterward, that either Hill or Green had been at his House to
enquire for him; but the Servant telling him, Sir Edmond was not up, he left
word that he would come again by and by: after this they waited their time, and
then dogged him, as Girald and Green told this VVitness; but whether it was
Green or Hill that went, he could not say. And that Day Girald, Green and Hill
dogged him from one place to another, and so into St. Clements. They had set
him in St. Clements.
About Seven of the Clock Green told the VVitness where Sir Edmond was; and he
hastened away from his own House to Somerset House immediately, the VVitness
living in Princess-street, not far off. Where he was at St. Clements this
VVitness cannot tell.

Toward Nine a Clock notice was given to Hill (who came before) that the
VVitness was to be in readiness. And prepare for the Murder.
Presently upon This Hill went away to the Gate, and as Sir Edmond was passing
by, he desired him to try, if he could quiet two Fellows yonder that were
quarrelling; A Quarrel pretended.
which he was loath to do: but Hill pressing it, that the Authority of a
Justice might make them Friends, Sir Edmond went along with him; and as he was
at the bottom of the Railes Green got a Handkercher about his Neck, The manner
of the Murder.
which he had twisted, and there pulled him over, and punched him, and choked
him. Girald would have run him through with his Sword; but the rest were
against it, for fear that it should be found out by the blood.

The VVitness went to the Body a matter of a quarter of an hour after, and
handling it perceived that he had life in him yet; for his Legs quivered; Green
twisted his Neck and bragged of it.
but then Green took him by the Neck and turned it quite round. The VVitness
does not say that he saw him do this, but Green made his brags of it, and the
rest told the VVitness of it too. The Witness was ordered by Hill to stand at
the Watergate, and Berry looked to the Stairs; they did all four tell the
VVitness of the twisting of his Neck, and they were about the body when the
VVitness went down. Berry was not there at first, but he came before they had
him into the house, and helped to carry him up; and so did this VVitness, with
the rest. That is to say Girald, Green, Hill, Kelly, Berry and the VVitness did
all put their helping hands. He was carried into Dr. Godwins house, where Hill
(that had been the Doctors man) had a Chamber, and he went before to get the
door open, while the rest brought the body, the body was kept there till Monday
Night; and then it was laid in Somerset House where this VVitness saw it by
Hills Dark-Lanthorn, they were all there, and upon Tuesday Night the body was
removed again into Hills Lodgings, in a Court below there. What was thrown over
him, this VVitness does not know, Hill had a Dark-Lanthorn which was all the
light there was; but the VVitness was certain that it was Sir Edmund Godfreys
body. It should have been laid in Hills Lodgings, but some body being there
they conveyed it into a Room that was overagainst it (Sir John Arundels
Lodgings as he thought.) About Nine, on Wednesday Night as they were carrying
it into the Chamber where it was first, this VVitness had the hap to come just
at that time, which started them so, that they ran away; but upon the
VVitnesses speaking Berry returned, and the body was got up and so carried off
about Midnight in a Sedan. The body carried off in a Sedan.
It was Hill that brought the Sedan, and all the Company helped to get him into
it. Girald and the VVitness took him up first; Berry stood ready upon a Hemm to
open the Gate, and so he was carried out at the Upper Court Gate, Green and
Kelly went before, and they took him up in Covent Garden to ease the other, In
Longacre the VVitness and his Companion took him up again, and carried him on
as far as Soho Church.

Hill was ready there with a Horse, Hill meets them with a Horse and takes up
the body.
and there the body was set up astride and Hill rode behind it holding it up;
Green, Hill, Girald and Kelly, went along with him, the Sedan being put into a
new-built house till they returned.

The next morning Hill, Hill, Kelly, and Girald, run his Sword through him.
Kelly, and Girald told the VVitness that they had thrust his Sword through his
body, cast him into a Ditch, and his Gloves and things were laid upon the Bank.

As to their meeting at Bow, it was at one Cashes the Queens-Head, there was
one Leueson, Vernat, the VVitness, Mr. Girald and one Dethick, that Mr. Vernat
sent for by a Cobbler; and he came immediately. There was a Barrel of Oysters
for Dinner, Their Consultation at Bow.
and a Dish of Fish, that the Witness bought himself: and it was the Friday
after the Proclamation for sending all Papists out of Town.

The pretense of this meeting (as Mr. Vernat told the VVitness) was only to be
merry.

While the Company was making merry, the VVitnesshearing something rustle at the
door, A Drawer overheard the Conspirators at the Tavern.
he went and found a Drawer harkening there; and told him he had a good mind to
kick him down stairs, and so went away. The VVitness says that Hill and Berry
were in the business before him, as Girald said, with whom the VVitness had
been several times at Berries House; they met twice at the Plow, and the second
time Hill was there. They said there was a great reward promised, but this
Witness cannot tell what.

Girald Giralds Resolution to murder Sir Edmund.
had taken up a full resolution to destroy him that Night: and, rather than
fail, he would have killed him in the Street; in the Lane that goes down to his
House. Mr. Prance being questioned about Mr. Bedlow, declared that before the
VVitness was in Prison, he cannot remember that ever he was in Mr. Bedlows
Company.

Mr. Hill Hill objected against Prances Testimony.
desired the Court that Prances Evidence might not be admitted against him,
because he had denied all to the King, that he had before Confessed; and so was
perjured; but he was answered, that his Confession was not upon Oath. Hill
asked Prance what time it was he went to Sir Edmond Godfreys, who answered that
it was Nine or Ten a Clock. Hill affirmed that he had not been abroad that day;
and denied every syllable.

Then Berry asked Prance what people were in the house, when he said he was
there, and bad him name any; and Prance told him that his Wife was there, and
Girald, Kelly and the VVitness. But Berry could not deny the knowing of Prance,
no more could Hill nor Green. Prance could give no account from whence they
Hounded him, when they murdered him; he was carried into the House some
quarter of an hour after he was killed, being taken and by surprise strangled.

Captain Richardson was asked what he knew of Prances The reason of Prances
flying off.
denying what he had consested: who declared, that he was ordered, the night
before the last Parliament was Prorogued, to carry Prance before the Committee
of Lords, to be examined: How that he was in great disorder, and earnest to
speak with His Majesty; and that being brought into Kings Closset, he threw
himself upon his knees and cried, He was Innocent, and they were all Innocent,
and he said as much to the Council, denying upon the question that any body had
tampered with him. That so soon as ever he was in the Prison again he begged of
Captain Richardson that for Gods sake he would go tell the King that all he had
now said was false, and that true which he before made Oath of; and if he might
have his Pardon, he would make a considerable Discovery. That he recanted
purely out of fear, that he had lost all his Custom among the Catholics, and
though the King should Pardon him, they would go near to murder him. And
Captain Richardson declared that after his Pardon he demeaned himself very
quietly; and expressing a great detestation of the practices in the Church of
Rome.

Mr. Bedlow Sworn,

Who declared that Le Fair, Pritchard, Mr. Bedlows Evidence.
and diverse Priests besides had dealt with him for the killing of a person,
without naming the man, and that he should have help and a good reward: and
that this was in October or September last. After which Le Fair, Pritchard,
and Welsh, put him upon working himself into an Acquaintance with Sir Edmond
Godfrey. He made an acquaintance with Sir Edmund Godfrey.
That this VVitness having introduced himself into a familiarity with Sir
Edmund; insomuch that he had been at his house for about a week together day
after day; they would have had the VVitness have brought them into his Company
too. That he made his Acquaintance by going to him for Warrants against people,
and this VVitness had been with him every day but Saturday the week before he
was murdered. That upon Friday, the day before, the VVitness sent his Boy to
know if he were at home, with an intent to have gotten him over to the Gray
Hound Tavern, where the Confederates then were, five Jesuits; but he was not at
home, and so Le Fair, Welsh and the VVitness, went into the City. That Le
Fair having been next morning at the VVitnesses Chamber, and missing him, they
met by chance in the Afternoon in Lincolns-Inn-Fields; and so they went to the
Palsgraves Head Taverns together; where, upon discourse, he told the VVitness,
there was a very considerable man, who was that night to be put out of the way
(that was the expression) for he had gotten all the Informations of Dr. Oats,
and Dr. Tongue; and if these Papers were not taken from him, there would be such
Discoveries made as would endanger the whole design. The VVitness could not get
it from him, who he was; but there had been several Plots upon him, and none of
them had hit: and that Mr. Coleman had orders to pay 4000l. for the service.
The VVitness parted with him then, upon his promise to come to him at
Somerset House Cloister that night: but the VVitness knowing the business,
failed him; and saw him not again till Monday Night in Red Lion Court, where he
met him. He charged the VVitness with not keeping his word, who told him that
he fell into other Company; and besides that he could not engage to kill any
man without knowing, first, Le Fair appointed Mr. Bedlow to meet him.
who it was. Well! (says he to the VVitness) be you at Nine a Clock to Night at
Somerset House, and you shall hear more. The VVitness went punctually at his
time, and they had a great deal of discourse together in the Cloister: from
thence he walked the Witness into the Court, and chid him for not assisting in
that affair; Their Discourse.
but however, if you will lend us your hand now (said he) to get him off, you
shall have two thousand pounds of the four. The VVitness then asking if he were
murdered; he answered Yes. The VVitness then demanded if he might not see him;
he told him that he might; and so he led him by the hand through a dark passage
into the place where the body lay. Mr. Bedlow brought to the body.
There were several people in the Room; but how many, and who they were, he
could not say. There was no light in it but a Lanthorn; and by that the
VVitness could discern the body. There was a Cravat about his Neck, drawn so
straight, that the VVitness could not get his Finger betwixt. They had some
discourse then of getting him away; pretending him to be one that was related
to a Person of Quallity. The VVitness was very much surprised when he found who
it was; and urged the dropping of him into the Thames with weights to sink him:
Mr. Bedlow advised the sinking of the body in the Thames. Le Fair charges him
to help away with the body by the Sacrament he took on Thursday. Mr. Bedlow
troubled in Conscience.
but they rather chose to have it put upon himself, and to carry him out in a
Chair and the Porter Berry should be ready at the Gate to let them out. They
owned that they had strangled him and would have had the VVitness to help them
out with him. But he excused himself as being yet too early, and that it were
better to stay till about Eleven or Twelve a Clock, promising to be with them
again: But (says Le Fair) upon the Sacrament you took on Thursday you will be
at the carrying him off to Night, which the Witness promised; and so they
parted.

This lay heavy upon the VVitnesses Conscience, who could not resolve to
discover that which he had taken two Sacraments in a week to conceal. In this
trouble of Thought, the VVitness went to Bristol, where God put it into his
heart that some murders were past, and greater to come; For the prevention
whereof he was at last convinced of the duty of revealing this wickedness; and
so made his application to the King and Parliament thereupon. Meeting Prance
afterward in the Lobby; and there apprehending him. Mr. Bedlow declared also
that he saw Green was about the Court, the night when the body was to be
carried away; and that he heard Berry was to open the Gate: but they finding
that the VVitness had again disappointed them, put it off that night for fear
of further obstruction.

Mr. Bedlow being called upon to say something to the business of Prance, The
Providence of Mr. Bedlows discovering Prance.
reported the matter, how that finding the crowd to be great in the Lords
Lobby, and being desirous himself to be private, he bad the Guard clear the
Room of all that had no business there; an order was given for all to quit but
Mr. Bedlow and his Friends: when seeing a man lift up his Hat; to find out his
way, and finding it to be Prance, the VVitness charged his Guards with him; but
he being then in custody, and the Constable telling him that he was his
Prisoner, the VVitness bad him have a care of him, and afterward charged him
before the House of Lords.

As to the Prisoners: Hill said that he never saw Mr. Bedlow; and Berry, that
he never saw Mr. Girald.

The Constable was then sworn, The Constables Evidence about the body of Sir
Edmund Godfrey.
about the finding Sir Edmund Godfreys body; whose Evidence was, that the body
was found in a Ditch, his Sword sticking in it, and two handfuls through his
Back: neither the Sword, nor the place where it lay, was bloody. He had a
thrust in another place, but striking upon a Rib, it passed no further: and
there was no blood there neither. His breast was bruised, his Neck broken (as
the VVitness believed) his Gloves and Stick by him, upon the Bank; his servant
said that it was his Masters Sword, and he had both Gold and Silver in his
Pocket.

The Prisoners offered this VVitness no questions. Evidence upon the view of
his body.
The Surgeons were then Sworn, that viewed the body and opened it. Mr. Skillard
informed, that he viewed the body at Twelve a Clock the next day after it was
found. That the Breast was bruised as with blows or stamping on it, his Neck
distorted: two wounds, one fell on a Rib and the other past through his body:
but he never dyed of those wounds, and neither his Cloths nor his Wastcoat were
pierced; his Neck was certainly broken; and probably he might be dead four or
five days before these wounds were given: upon the opening of him it appeared
that he began to putrify.

Mr. Cambridge, another Surgeon, was Sworn, who deposed that he saw the body
on the same day with Mr. Skillard; the Neck displaced, bruised upon the Breast,
one wound on a Rib, and another that past through him under the left Pap, which
wounds were undoubtedly given him after he was dead.

Elizabeth Curtis (Sir Edmund Godfreys Maid) Sworn and Examined; Eliz. Curtis
swears that Green came to her Masters house.
Deposing that a matter of a Fortnight before her Masters death, the Prisoner
there, that they called Green) was at Sir Edmund Godfreys House in the Morning,
to inquire for him, and first gave him the time of the day in English, and
afterward said something to him in French ( Green denying that ever he saw Sir
Edmund Godfrey) The VVitness persisting in it, that he was with her Master
about a quarter of an hour, and in a darker Periwig then that he wore in the
Court; and that upon Sunday Morning Hill was there: And that on a Satcerday
morning Hill was there.
which Hill also denied; the VVitness particularly remembering that she was then
doing something about the Fire in the Parlour; that she gave her Master his
breakfast there, Hill being with him, and then went up stairs, and missing her
Keys, came down again, and found them upon the Parlour Table; and Hill was yet
there, in the very Cloths he had on in the court, about Nine or Ten a Clock:
which agreed with Prances Evidence; Hill acknowledging, that he had not changed
his Clothes, but objecting that she said in Newgate, she never saw him: and
undertaking to prove, that he was elsewhere that morning, and about a month
after she saw him in Newgate.

But there was another man, that brought a Note for Sir Edmond Godfrey, A Note
brought the Night before.
the night before; which her Master had; and she knows not what became of it.
The man came on Friday night, with a Letter in his hand tied up, and asked for
her Master, the VVitness telling him that he was at home, but Busy. So she
took the Letter and gave it him, the man staying a while, and then desiring an
Answer; the Witness telling her Master as much. Prithee tell him (said he) I
don't understand the meaning of it.

Lancelot Stringer, Stringer proved their meeting at the Plow.
being Sworn, declared; that he had seen Mr. Prance in Company with Mr. Green,
Mr. Hill, Mr. Fitz Girald, and Mr. Kelly, at the Plow, several times; and that
he knew Vernat: Hill acknowledging as much; and that he knew Girald: and Hill
being charged with denying that he knew Kelly before; Hill excused it that he
knew him by sight, as one that much used the Chapel. Stringer was a servant to
Vincent the Master of the Plow; where he came to live at last Bartholomew.

Mr. Vincent was Sworn; who said that he knew Green, Hill, and Berry, and that
they had been at his house with Prance; and likewise that he knew Girald.

Richard Carry Sworn,

Who Deposed that he was sent for by three Gentlemen to the Queens Head. Caries
Evidence upon the meeting at the Queens Head.
That he went up to them; and they examined him, if he knew Poplar, and one Mr.
Dethick; and he told them that he thought he knew the Gentleman, but that he
knew the place very well: So they gave him a Letter for George Dethick Esquire at
Poplar; and charged him to be sure to give it to his own hand and not to any
other body. The Witness carried the Letter, and delivered it to the Gentleman;
telling him whence it came. So he looked upon it; and bad the VVitness tell
them, that he would come to them presently: So the VVitness returned and found
the Gentleman there still that sent him. They gave him a Glass of Wine and paid
him, and so he went away. Carry saying that Prance looked like one of the three,
and Prance affirming Carry to be the man that was sent.

Evans, The Drawers Evidence of that Tavern.
a Boy of the Queens Head, was Sworn; who deposed that some two or three months
since, there was some Company at his Masters, that they read a paper there; and
that Mr. Dethick came to them. That they had a Barrel of Oysters, Sir Robert
Southwets report of Prances Examination.
and a Dish of Flounders to Dinner. That he heard them name Sir Edmond Godfrey;
and that one of them found him at the door and threatened to kick him down
Stairs.

Sir Robert Southwel Sworn; A Relation of all the Circumstances delivered by
Prance, and how the body was removed and disposed of.
who deposed that attending the Council December the 24. Mr. Prance was
examined about Sir Edmond Godfreys murder: and that his information having so
many particulars in it, of such a Bench, such a Corner, Room, Passage and
Gallery; The Board not understanding it, the King directed the Duke of
Monmouth, Lord of Ossory, and Mr. Vicechamberlain to the Queen, to repair to
the place and there take Mr. Prances examination, and report it to the Board;
and this VVitness waiting upon the Lords, took the Examination, and drew it up
into a Report; which was signed by the two Honorable Lords, and read that
Afternoon at the Board. Mr. Prance showed the Lords the Bench they sat upon to
wait Sir Edmond Godfreys coming; the Corner they lugged him unto, when they had
killed him, the Stairs where Berry was to stay, a Little Door with a Stair Case
at the Stables end; a long dark Entry with a door, and eight steps, that led to
Dr. Godwins Lodgings; up two steps on the right hand, there was a kind of a
Closet with a Bed in it, and Mr. Prance told the Lords, that, first, they got
him thither, and left him in Hills charge for two nights; the Witness there
present, and every thing agreeing with Mr. Prances relation to the Council; and
to what he now delivered in Court; only that his Relation was now enlarged, and
that the Lodgings which he took to be Sir John Arundels, were not capable of
any person of Quality. Mr. Prance went thus far ready and directly; but coming
to examine the place whither they had carried the body, he said it was somwhere
by the Garden. There is a long dark Entry that opens into the Outer Court; he
past through that, and then over the Quadrangle to the Piazza; and then went
down a pair of Stairs, saying Thus far we are right I am sure, There is a large
square Court below; and there he began to doubt; but yet went on, and so past
into diverse Rooms on the other side of the Court; and then up Stairs again, and
into other Rooms; but still at a loss in what Room it was that he saw the body:
only certain that he had been in that place; the VVitness still referring
himself to his Report. Sir Robert Southwel now produced the Minutes he had
taken upon these men's Examinations wherein it appeared, that Hill was Examined,
that he confessed he knew Girald, but not Kelly; Hill then interposing, that he
knew one Girald who was not a Priest, and that he did not know Girald the
Priest.

It was charged upon Berry, Berries pretended Orders not to admit any body.
the saying that he had Orders not to admit any Strangers or persons of
Condition into Somerset House for two or three days; and that the P. coming
thither, was not suffered to enter; and that he never had any such Orders
before. To which Berry replied that the P. might have entered if he had pleased;
that it had been proved (as was acknowledged by the Court) that five or six had
gone in before. That he had an order only for two days, as he remembered, and
that he had had such Orders formerly. But there being no such Orders produced,
the Court reflected upon the pretense as the best Artifice they could invent to
keep the design private.

The Prisoners were now called upon to speak for themselves, The Witnesses for
the Prisoners.
and produce their VVitnesses: Hill calling upon God to bear him VVitness that
he was perfectly innocent.

Mary Tilden informed that Hill had lived seven or eight years with her Uncle
Dr. Godwin; Mary Tilden gave Evidence for Hills good behavior.
and that he seemed to be always a trusty servant, kept good hours, and looked
to their house in her Uncles Absence; and was always within by Eight at Night,
ever since last April when they came last into England. That the VVitness was
in the house when Sir Edmond Godfrey was killed: That she heard of the murder
in the Town on the Wednesday; that she herself was never out after Eight a
Clock, nor Hill neither: for he waited at the Table; and that constantly the
Maid barred the door upon his coming in, so that he went out no more that
Night: That he was at home the Saturday Night when Sir Edmond was murdered,
and the next Night, and every Night so long as the VVitness was in Town; and
that she herself was at home the Wednesday Night beforementioned. That she was
the more positive because they kept constant Supper time, and the doors never
opened after; besides that the Lodgings lay so, that no body could go in or out
without being taken notice of, that the Maid kept the Key of the House and not
Hill. Mr. Prance then informed the Court that Mrs. Broadstreet would own but
one Key at first, but before the Duke of Monmouth, she ackowledged six or
seven, to which Mrs. Tilden answered that there was only one Key which secured
that door. The VVitness being asked when she was out of Town; answered in
October; but being told that this happened in October, her answer was that she
mistook the month. Mrs. Broadstreet seconds the former Evidence.
Mrs. Broadstreet being asked what time, answered in September, and then Mrs.
Tilden recollecting herself, said in September too, and that while she was in
Town there was not a day but she went into the Little Room, mentioned by
Prance, upon some occasion or other; Mrs. Broadstreet said they came to Town
the Monday before Michaelmas, affirmed the good hours they kept, and that
nothing could be brought in, but they in the House must know of it. Sir Robert
Southwel then described the place, that it was very little, and overagainst the
Dining Room; and that it was a small square Room, where the body was laid, at
the Stairs head. Mrs. Broadstreet adding that the Key was never out of the
Door; and people constantly going into that Room. Mr. Prance informed that Mrs.
Broadstreet told the Duke of Monmouth that Hill had left his Lodgings before
that time. And Sir Robert Southwel said that there had been some dispute about
it; Prance would have it to be a fortnight after, and Hill affirming that he
was dealing with his Landlord the very Saturday that Sir Edmond Godfrey was
wanting. And that from that time, it was a week or a fortnight before he
removed. But it was urged that Hill pretended that he was gone before. Mrs.
Broadstreet averring that Hill left the Lodgings a fortnight after Michaelmas.
Sir Robert Southwel informing that the said Hill went away only three or four
days after. Mrs. Tilden said further, that the place was so straight, that upon
an occasion of Visits the Footmen always waited in that Room.

Katharine Lee did then inform that she looked to see the Doors Locked every
night; Katharine Lees Evidence, the servant of Mrs. Tilden.
and the Parlour safe, and that she never mist him; and that every morning,
before she went to Market, she went into the Chamber, or called every day at
the Door, and that she always went to bed last. Being asked if Hill might not
slip out, and she never know of it; her answer was that she did not always
watch him. But Captain Richardson informed the Court that the servants keeping
below Stairs in the Kitchen, and there being so many Keys, people might go in
and out and they never the wiser.

Daniel Gray was called and informed that he was with his Brother Hill, Daniel
Gray gives Evidence for his Brother Hill.
from October the eighteenth to the two and twentieth or three and twentieth:
that at Nine or Ten at Night they used to go to Bed, but he did not see him,
when he went to Bed. That the Witness lay at his own House, that Hill agreed
for his House October the eighth, but it was about the twenty first, that he
went thither; and that they lived a matter of a Bow-shot a sunder.

Robert How informed, Robert How gives an account how Hill disposed of himself.
that October the fifth Mr. Hill desired him to view a House that he was a
taking, to see how it was in repair, and that they went and treated with the
Landlord; appointing Tuesday morning, being the eighth, to meet again. That
the Witness wrought there every day, from Wednesday, Twelve days and a half:
and that Mr. Hill was there every day. That on Saturday the twelfth Dining
together, they parted about One or Two a Clock; Mr. Hill (as he says) toward
Covent Garden, and this Witness to his Work: This VVitness told him that Mr.
Hill had been there again about Four a Clock, but the VVitness was gone first.
Where he was that Night the VVitness could not say; but that he saw Mr. Hill
about Nine or Ten in the morning, and that he staid till Two.

Mr. Cutler informed that Hill was with him at his House from Four or Five in
the Evening till Seven or Eight: Mr. Cutler and Mr. Lasingby to the same efect.
when his Wife called him to Supper, and the VVitness never saw him from that
time till the day after he was taken.

Richard Lasingby informed, that on Saturday, October the Twelfth about Noon,
he was with Mr. Hill at the door; that he Dined with him, and How, and that
upon Wednesday Night he saw him from Five to Seven and not after.

Archibald was Examined, Archibald seemed glad for Prances Discovery.
and informed, that upon Monday Night having occasion for one Gray, a Tailor,
he found him at Hills House: and Gray asking what News, the VVitness answered
him very good, for Prance was seized for killing Sir Edmond Godfrey. To which
Hill replied that he was very glad of it, and wished them all taken; and the
next morning the VVitness heard that he was taken out of his Bed. Why then,
said Hill, if I had been guilty I could have made my escape.

James Warrier informed that October 12. Greens Wise called her VVitnesses.
Green was at his House from betwixt Seven and Eight till after Ten, it was
upon a Saturday, and he remembered it exactly by his Work. That he bethought
himself of this about a month after the murder; and that Greens being taken up
made him reflect upon it. It was but Fourteen days that he had been in the
VVitnesses House before he was seized, he was not seized there neither. It was
objected that he was not charged with the death of Sir Edmond Godfrey till
December 24. but only for refusing the Oaths: So that that could not put him in
mind of Sir Edmond Godfreys business.

Mrs. Warrier informed that upon the day that Sir Edmond Godfrey was missing,
Mr. Warrier and his Wife gave Evidence where Mr. Green was.
Mr. Green sat in the VVitness Quarter, till Nine a Clock, and then went up to
his Chamber, the VVitness and her Husband with him, and there staid the beating
of the Tattoo and that this was the Saturday fortnight after Michaelmas.

Mr. Ravenscroft informed, Mr. Ravenscroft testifies his knowledge of Hill.
that Hill had served his Elder Brother for Thirteen or Fourteen years very
faithfully: and that at last he married a Maidservant in the Family. That
hearing of one that was seized about the murder of Sir Edmond Godfrey, the
VVitness was well pleased to hear it; that passing from his Fathers House in
Holborn homeward toward the Savoy, he saw Hill's Wife at her own door, and she
told the VVitness that some body had been there that said Prance had discovered
diverse of Sir Edmond Godfreys murderers; who asked her if her Husband knew any
thing of it. They used to be much together (she said) and perhaps that made
them talk; but for her Husband he defied Prance and all his Works, telling the
VVitness likewise that he was then in the House, which made the VVitness hope
he was innocent, because he did not fly. The Witness declaring such a
detestation of the Fact, that rather than he should escape if he were guilty,
he would be the Executioner himself.

Corporal Collett Informed, Corporal Collet and the Sentinels Examined about
the Chair.
That upon Wednesday, October the 16 th, he placed one Nicholas Trollop
Sentinel at the Strand-Ward, within the Wicket; he was upon Duty from Seven to
Ten, and then was relieved by Nich. Wright; who staid till One. The Sentinels
being placed by the Porters order; not Berry* but One that used to carry Orders.

Trollop Informed, That while he was upon his Post, a Sedan was brought in and
set within the Gate; he took it to be empty, but no order to refuse any Body's
entrance; Collett declaring, that there stands a Sedan empty every night; and
Trollop affirming, that there went none out in his time, for he was never half
a Pikes length from his place; that he did not drink one drop; and that he
remembered every thing particularly, for he had been already twice before the
Committee. Wright also said there passed none in his time; and Trollop
Evidencing, that it was brought in when he was upon Duty, but not carried out
again.

Gabriel Husks Informed, That he was on from One to Four, October the 16 th;
that he neither drank at Berries, nor saw him.

Then Eliz. Minshaw Informed, That Mr. Berry (her Master) October the 16 th was
the whole Forenoon about the Gates; and after that, as he said himself, went to
Bowls. It was duskish when he came home; he went to Bed about 12, and was not
one hour absent. That this VVitness went about Twelve to Bed also, and saw him
no more that night: so that she concludes he was in Bed, because the passage to
his Chamber was through hers. It was then demanded of Prance, what made him
deny what he had said? who Answered, that he was afraid of losing his Trade,
and that he had not as then his Pardon. Mr. Prance was then asked at the
Instance of Mrs. Hill, if he had not been tortured to make him say this; for it
was the talk of the Town, and he was heard to cry out? who declared himself,
that Capt. Richardson had used him very kindly, and let him want nothing. Upon
Prances denial of this, Mrs. Hill exclaimed, that the VVitnesses were not duly
Examined; and so called Mr. Chevins, who could say only this, That he had heard
Mr. Prance deny all.

The Kings Council having heard the Prisoners and their VVitnesses, The
Prisoners all found Guilty of Murder.
summed up the Evidence: And the Lord Chief Justice gave directions to the
Jury; who brought them All in Guilty, and they received Sentence, the day
following, to be severally hanged by the Neck till they were dead. And upon the
One and twentieth of the same Month they were accordingly Executed.

THE HISTORY OF THE Charge and Defense OF Sr. George Wakeman, William Rumly,
William Marshal, and James Corker.
ON the Eighteenth of July 1679, Sir George Wakeman, William Rumly, William
Marshall, and James Corker, were brought to their Trials at the Sessions House
in the Old Bailey, The Cause of Indictment.
upon an Indictment for Conspiring the Death of the King, and the Subversion of
the Government, and the Protestant Religion. But James Corker was first brought
to the Bar, having been arraigned the former Sessions. The Jury being Sworn,
and Admitted without Exception, the Kings Council (as is usual) opened the
Indictment, and Mr. Dugdale was first produced and Sworn. And first as to the
Plot in general,

Mr. Dugdale deposed, Mr. Dugdale drawn into the Plot.
That he had some inckling of the Plot Seven years ago, but that Ewers, Gavan,
Peter's, Leueson, etc. had more particularly acquainted him with it, about two
years since, and drew him into the Design upon the Government and Religion, and
upon killing the King, and the Duke of Monmouth. That all Harcourts Letters
were directed to the VVitness, Eight or Nine at a time; and almost all of them
were concerning the Plot.

The scope of the Letters were to Instruct Ewers how to proceed toward the
getting of Money, The scope of Harcourts Letters.
and engaging the Gentlemen of the Country, to serve as Officers in the Army,
which was to be raised upon the death of the King. That he saw Receipts from
St. Omers of Money paid to that end. That he received a Letter directed to
himself, which came from Harcourt; but who wrote it he could not say, or if it
had any date or no; only he supposes that it came from Beyond Sea to London,
and so to him. It gave Caution to say nothing of Arms, till the King was dead.
He deposed a Correspondency thrice a week betwixt the Conspirators in London
and the Staffordshire Agents: and in a Letter from Whitebread, Ewers was
charged to choose stout and hardy men, Bold Letters sent by the Common Post.
with this expression in the Letter, To kill the King; which Letter was sent by
the Common Post, and superscribed to Mr. Dugdale, who was Sworn to Secrecy by
Mr. Ewers at least ten times. And the VVitness took the Sacrament upon it.

He deposes also, Several Designs upon the King.
That Gavan, Leueson, Ewers, and my Lord Stafford, would have had the VVitness
destroy the King by Shooting, Dagger, or the like; not so as to do it directly
himself, but to come to London for directions how to do it; where Mr. Ireland
was to have him in his Care; and that he was to have come in October last, the
Resolution being taken the July before. This VVitness also deposed, That the
Lord Stafford promised him Five hundred pounds in hand upon his coming to
London, in October, for an Encouragement; but that a more considerable Reward
was to follow, and that he should have come to London, if it had not been
discovered.

He deposes further, The Letter about Sir Edm. Godfrey.
That he found Ewers reading a Letter from London, with these words in it, This
very night Sir Edmond-Bury Godfrey is dispatched, and that it was dated the
very Night that he was killed; Ewers showing the Prisoner the Letter, and
telling him also, that Sir Edmond-Bury Godfry was grown too Inquisitive into
the Plot, and it would be well to take him off. Deposing also, that Mr. Ewers
showed the Prisoner the Letter to comfort him, that one Enemy was gone; and the
VVitness reporting it again to the Minister of the place.

He deposed further, Mr. Dugdale gives 400 l. to pray for his Soul.
That the Protestants were to be destroyed; and that they had great confidence
in the VVitness: he having given them Four hundred pounds, and promised another
Hundred to pray for his Soul; and Land made over to Mr. Girald to raise the
Money upon the Sale.

Mr. Corker demanded, Corkers Objection against that Letter.
from whom the dangerous Letter before mentioned came? and the VVitness not
presently recollecting it, the Prisoner appealed to the Court, upon the
Improbability of sending such a Letter by the Common Post, and yet no
appearance either to whom, or from whom it came. Mr. Dugdales Answer.
But Mr. Dugdale rendered an Account of other Letters; one from Paris to St.
Omers, and thence to London, and so to Tixall; where it was read in the
presence of the Prisoner, by the Lord Aston and Mr. Ewers; It was subscribed I.
W. and thought to be from Sir John Warner; that it was dated from Paris, whence
they advised the casting of it on the Presbyterians, after the Death of the
King, which would make the Church of England men fall in with the Papists, to
destroy the Party. This was the Paris Letter; and the London Letter approved
the Advice with several Lords hands to them, in allowance of the design of
killing the KING; and raising an Army.

The Prisoner asked, Corkers Objections to the story.
if it were dated from St. Omers? and Mr. Dugdale replied, that in the Packet
from St. Omers there were three Letters, Paris, St. Omers, and London, one from
each; and all in one Cover, being covered in Groves Packet: The VVitness
averring, that he himself was to be of the party that should kill the King, in
October. The Prisoner here made a reflection, that Dr. Oats mentioned only
Three designs to kill the King, by Grove and Pickering; by the Ruffians, and by
Poison: and that now a fourth was found out in October, when the Design was
charged upon July, or August? But it was replied upon him, That there might be
more Plots than Docter Oats knew of.

Mr. Marshall offered, That the VVitnesses Testimony was suspicious, even from
the multitude of Persons employed and entrusted; and nothing done upon it,
where yet a few might have done the business. The Prisoners were here ordered
to wait their time without interposing, that the Kings Evidence might be first
heard: whereupon the Prisoners desired Pen, Ink, and Paper, which was granted
them; and so the Court proceeded. It was much wondered that any Body should
write by the Common Post about killing the King. To which Mr. Dugdale Answered,
That in case of Discovery it was to be cast upon him, and that he was under an
Oath to deny it: Affirming, that the very words were for the killing of the
King; Why by the Common Post.
without any Superscription to Ewers, or Name to the Letters. The Prisoners
joined in admiration, at the folly and madness of any man in putting such words
in a Letter.

Mr. Dugdale proceeded, The Black Cross upon Whitebreads Letter.
That Whitebread's Letter was directed to himself, and that it came in Company
with others: that there was a Black Cross upon what he was to deliver to Ewers;
and that he was to disperse them where they were to go. But being asked by what
mark he should know whither to send them? The Witness answered, that Mr. Ewers
knew their hands, and what every thing meant, and for whom it was. To the
Question of how many Letters? the Witness answered, that in two years he
believed he had a Hundred, and Mr. Rumley asking him from how many persons? and
wondering that he had none of them to produce; Mr. Dugdale answered, That there
were a great many from Sir John Warner, and that so long as he intended to go
on with the Plot, he burnt them all; but that he had spoken what he could
remember. He denied the seeing of any Commissions, but affirmed that he spoke
with some that were to be Officers.

Mr. Prance deposed, Fifty thousand Men to be armed.
that some three weeks before Michaelmas, he heard Fenwick and Grove at Mr.
Irelands Chamber talking of raising 50000 Men, and settling Popery: Mr. Fenwick
saying, that it would be easily done, and encouraging the Prisoner (being a
Silver smith) with the hope of work enough, about Crucifixes, Candlesticks,
etc. naming the Lords that were to Command the Army: And after that he was told
of Commissions given out. He deposed further, That my Lord Arundels Butler told
him, that one Messenger was to murder the King, and this Witness meeting Mr.
Messenger, and asking him the Question, he was surprised at it, and said to
this Witness, Pray keep Counsel, for we are off of that now.

Mr. Iennison deposed, Mr. Iennison's Evidence against Ireland.
That in June (78) upon a discourse with Mr. Ireland in Russell-street about
Religion (his Sister Mrs. Aune Ireland being by) Mr. Ireland spoke as if the
Romish Religion would be quickly settled in England, for there was but One
stood in the way; and the King might be easily poisoned. Whereupon this Witness
speaking of it as a horrid thing, Mrs. Ireland asked her Brother why he talked
at that rate? and he qualified the matter as a thing which he thought should
not be done: And then the Witness minding him of the Gunpowder Treason, he
said, it was only a trick of Cecils. The Witness being at that time a Roman
Catholic, but since Converted.

The VVitness deposes further, Mr. Ireland positively Here, Aug. 19.
That he saw Mr. Ireland positively on the 19 th day of August, being then
newly returned from Windsor, as he remembers punctually, upon very particular
Circumstances. The Court looking upon this Evidence as a most eminent
Confutation of what Ireland affirmed at his death: which was, that betwixt the
third of August, and toward the middle of September, he was never in Town, but
all that time in Staffordshire. Mr. Iennison then proceeding, That upon the 19
th aforesaid, he saw Mr. Ireland draw off his Boots at his own Chamber, upon
the Frame of a Table, as the Witness remembers, being come post (as he said)
out of Staffordshire betimes that Morning. That the VVitness telling him (upon
his question where he had been, and what news?) that he had been at Windsor,
and that the King was early up in a Morning, went a Fishing and Hawking: the
VVitness telling him, of his own accord, that his Majesty had but very little
Company with him. Mr. Ireland reflected upon the Kings going so thinly guarded,
The King easily taken off.
saying, that he might be easily taken off. The Witness replying, God forbid:
and then Mr. Ireland smoothing it over, this Witness thought no more on it,
till the Plot was discovered; and then he told his Father and his Sisters this
discourse, saying, that it was very suspicoius. This VVitness was very sure it
was the 19 th, and knew Mr. Ireland very well, having been acquainted with him
a year and an half: And he went out of Town September the 4 th into the North.
Mr. Corker asking the VVitness, when he turned Protestant? and objecting, that
he did not for sake his Religion till he found it might be for his advantage.

Mr. Bows was then Sworn; who declared, that he saw Mr. Iennison in Tunbridge
about the beginning or middle of August: That he went then from Tunbridge. That
the VVitness went to Windsor, August the 12 th or 13 th; and that Mr. Iennison
came to Windsor when the Witness was out of Town.

Mr. Burnett deposes, That about the middle of August, (the very day of
Dachett-Horse-Race) he met Mr. Iennison on his way to Windsor. The Court
declaring this to be a point, that did not concern the Prisoners, but to show
the falsity of Irelands affirmation.

Dr. Oats then made Oath, Dr. Oates's Evidence against Sr. G. Wakeman.
That Mr. Ashby coming sick to Town in July, Sir George Wakeman prescribed him
a course, how he should govern himself both before he went to Bath, and There.
That he should take a pint of Milk morning and evening, and drink nothing else
in the Morning; and at the Bath to have a hundred strokes at the Pump: Sir
George telling him in this Letter who would help him to poison the King. Some
two days after, the VVitness saw Sr. George lay by his Pen, and leave the Paper
upon the Table with the Ink wet upon it, which was an Apothecaries Bill, (as he
supposed) and the same Character with the Letter to Mr. Ashby: and the VVitness
swears, that as Sir George wrote, Mr. Ashby discoursed to him of a Commission
received for Physician to the Army; which the Witness saw at Mr. Ashby's in Sr.
George's hand* He deposed further, That he heard One promise to help Sir George
in the promoting the Catholic Cause, and in the poisoning of the King; and
that he heard Ashby, in the Provincials Name, offer 10000 l. to Sir George for
his reward. This was in July: Harcourt, Fenwick, Ireland and the Witness
present.

He deposes, Concerning the 15000 l.
that Sir George said, That it was not enough for poisoning the King, and so
refused it; and that the Fathers met on purpose to deal with Sir George about
it, before Mr. Ashby went to the Bath, and that upon Sr. George's Refusal, they
acquainted Mr. Whitebread with it; who presently gave the London-Fathers
Commission to offer 5000 l. more; which, as this VVitness is informed, was
accepted; and 5000 l. of it paid down: The VVitness having seen Sir Georges
Name subscribed to the Entry-Book; wherein was specified such a proposal to Sr.
George, with his Acceptance of 5000 l. and Receipt in part of 15000 l. the
Receipt from Harcourt by Colemans Order; and the Goldsmith, as this VVitness
remembers was Stayly, Sir Georges hand to the Receipt, with a Memorandum of the
day (in August) when it was propounded, and accepted. The Entry-Book it self
being in the Fathers custody, at Wild-house; but who kept it this VVitness
could not say; only that Mr. Langhorne had it sometimes, and that the
Acceptance and Receipt were entered the same day.

Dr. Oats says not that he ever saw Sr. George write, Sr. G. Wakemans Letter.
but that he saw him lay aside a Pen, and a Paper newly written, and no body by
that could write it but himself. And Sr. George charging him with declaring,
that he did not know the Prisoners hand; the Doctor affirmed, that a Letter
that he saw signed G. Wakeman, was the same handwriting with that of the
Receipt, and the Physick-Bill. Sir George demanded a positive Answer, The
Doctor, charged with a Contradiction.
If the VVitness had not denied the knowledge of his Hand, and the knowledge
also of his very Person, before his Majesty and Council? To which Dr. Oats
made Answer, That he was so doz'd with sitting up, and his Intellectuals so
disordered for want of sleep, that perhaps he might speak short before the
Council; Doz'd with setting up.
but now that he had light to see Sr. George's face, he could say more to him.
The Doctor affirming the Prisoner to be the same Gentleman, and desiring that
what he had to ask might be put to the Court; the Doctor not calling to mind
whether he said he knew Sir George, or not: but affirming this to be the person
that was called Sir George Wakeman, but not able to say that it was the person
that attended the Council, when the Witness was there. The Doctor deposing
likewise, that he saw Sir George two several days at Mr. Ashbyes Chamber; and
that he never saw him before, and but once after, which was at Wild-house when
the 10000 l. was offered; where Mr. Ashby lay in July, before he went to the
Bath, which was about the end of July, or beginning of August; his stay in Town
being about fourteen or sixteen days.

The Prisoner asking the VVitness then, Sir. G. Wakeman not committed by the
Council.
if he knew all this when he was before the Council, why he said there that he
knew nothing of the Prisoner, but about one Letter from Ashby to Fenwick? And
objecting, That if this Evidence had been given there, he must doubtless have
been Committed; but the Prisoner was directed, to reservo what he had to say
till his proper time; and the Doctor referred his Answer also to its proper
place.

Touching Mr. Corker, Dr. Oats against Corker.
Dr. Oats deposed him to be a Benedictine Monk, privy to the 6000 l. raised
for This design: And that in August last he sent his Consent out of Germany,
to the proposal of raising it; being President of the Benedictines. That he
gave the English Monks in Paris, and La Chaise, an Account how Matters went
forward in England, and that he had a Patent to be Bishop of London; which the
VVitness saw in his own hands.

That this Letter out of Germany he had seen, and that it was addressed either
to Hitchcott, or another Father in London.

The Witness deposing moreover, Corker's Letter out of Germany.
That as he remembers, Mr. Corker went over in July to Lamspring in Germany,
but that in June he saw him with Mr. Fenwick, and that upon discourse about
some body that was behind in his Pension, Mr. Corker gave Mr. Fenwick an Order
for some 20 or 25 l. to be received of Mr. Langhorne; the Order subscribed
James Corker: the VVitness first seeing this Order. And another time, his Name
to an Examination, which agreed with his Letter from Germany. Deposing further,
that the Prisoner disposed of several parcels of Money, as he said, for the
advancing of the Design.

That the Prisoner was also privy to the Consultation of April, Privy to the
April Consult.
and excepted against the Choice of Pickering to kill the King, because while
he was attending at High Mass, an opportunity might be lost. That this
Exception was at the Convent in the Savoy, to the VVitness himself, and at the
same time, when he gave Fenwick his Order for Money: The 6000 l. was to be
advanced upon the Benedictines Estates; and the Witness believed it was paid,
for the Fathers acknowledged the Receipt of it, and that though Mr. Corker was
against Mr. Pickerings doing of it, he did yet approve of the thing it self.

Dr. Oats charged Mr. Marshall also with being present when the 6000 l. was
resolved upon, Mr. Marshal charged.
and with Pickerings design upon the King, making the same Exception against
him with Corker; but he could not say positively that Mr. Marshal was at the
Consult.

Dr. Oats deposed, That Mr. Rumley knew of the Consult for the 6000 l. being
either a Benedictine Monk, or a Lay-Brother: believing that he consented to it,
because he prayed for the success; and that this was in August.

The Prisoners being now allowed to make their Objections, The Prisoners
Defense.
Mr. Corker informed the Court, That Lamspring was not in Germany (as the
VVitness said) but in Westphalia; and urged an Inconsistence of that story, and
his seeing La Chaise. To which Dr. Oats replied, that it was usual with them
to say they would go to one place, when they went to another.

Dr. Oats called one thing more to mind; Dr. Oats knowledge of Mr. Marshal.
that Conyers laying a wager with another Gentleman, that the King should eat
no more Christmas-pyes; Mr. Marshall went half with Mr. Conyers that he should
not.

Mr. Marshall asked, how long the VVitness had known him, and where he had ever
been with him? Dr. Oats answering, that he had seen him often at the Altar,
but had no acquaintance with him: That he had known him off and on two years,
but never heard him speak till the time of the wager; but had only a knowledge
of him by sight. Mr. Marshall, seeming to admire that the VVitness taking him
to be in the Plot, should never converse with him. Mr. Marshall demanded the
Time, and the Place of the Consult? which the Doctor told him was in August,
and either the day before or after the Feast of the Assumption; and the Place
the Savoy.

The VVitness charged the Prisoner also with another Consult in Aug. Several
Consults charged upon the Prisoner.
(of the 21; the former being the 15 th:) at which time came Letters from
Talbot of the State of Ireland. It was dated from Dublin; but it was not taxed
at the Post Office as an Irish Letter. He also deposed, That there were some
Benedictines and Jesuits, and Mr. Marshall in the Company; who agreed, at the
same time, about sending Commissions for the Army Officers: The Letter was read
at the Convent, and the Commissions ordered for Ireland; and the poisoning of
the Duke of Ormond was also agreed upon.

Dr. Oats was asked the time of Pickering being taken; Questions to the Doctor
about Pickering. And the Consults.
and if he himself was present? who Answered, that he was taken upon
Michaelmass Eve, or Morning, and that he the Witness was there. It was demanded
of Dr. Oats, what Consults he was at? who Answered, that there were two
Consults of the 15 th and 21 of Aug. but that the Witness was not at the
Consult for the 5000 l. to Sir George Wakeman.

Mr. Bedlve deposed, Sr. G. Wakeman's Bill for 2000 l.
That about the beginning of August last, he the Witness, was at Mr. Harcourts
Chamber, and Sir George Wakeman came thither after, much out of humor; and
asked Mr. Harcourt, if he had not something for him? Whereupon Mr. Harcourt
demanding of him, how he went on? Sir George answered him short, that that he
did not know whether he should go on or no; for he did not love to be trifled
with in such a business? Stay Sir George (says Mr. Harcourt) things are better
than you imagine; and so took some Papers out of his Cabinet, and a small Bill,
asking Sir George what readiness he was in; for (says he) we have been ready a
good while. Sr. George asking Harcourt what that Bill was? he said it was a
Bill of 2000 l. from a Person whom this VVitness has forgot, and drawn upon a
Goldsmith (as he believed) somewhere near Temple-Barr. That Sir George reading
it, and discoursing upon it, enquired of Mr. Harcourt, who this VVitness was?
Mr. Harcourt telling him, that it was a Friend had been long in the Plot, and
was to have a very great part in it himself. Sir George then telling him (as
this VVitness deposes) that if the Bill were accepted, he should hear from him
suddenly; and so he went his way: This VVitness going presently after him; and
meeting Sr. George Wakeman again, betwixt the Queens-head and Chancery Lane;
from whence the VVitness concluded it to be near Temple-barr, (Mr. Harcourts
Lodgings being but in Duke-street,) Sir George told the VVitness, That the Bill
was accepted, and that Afternoon the Money should be paid. This Deponent
affirming, that he had known Sr. Geo. a matter of 5 years, though not much
acquainted with him.

He deposes further, Two thousand pounds for the present, in part of more.
That upon asking whether or no This was in part of the 15000 l. Mr. Harcourt
made Answer, that it was only for the present; the other being not settled as
yet: But the VVitness affirms, that shortly after it was made 5000 l. and that
Mr. Harcourt told the Deponent, that it was all upon the same account: And if
Windsor and This should both fail, the work would be done at New Market.

Mr. Bedloe deposed, Letters and Discourses about the Plot.
That he had been once in Company with Mr. Corker, Keines, and Le Fevre, at
Somerset House; and that he did not hear any thing from Mr. Corker, that
pointed directly at the Murder of the King; but that he heard Corker and Le
Fevre talking in general about the Plot, and Letters of Intelligence; and
talking of raising an Army, and who were sent to agitate in the Country; what
Interests they had made, and the like. And this was about July was Twelvemonth.

Mr. Bedloe moreover deposes, How Mr. Bedloe know Mr. Marshal
That he knew Mr. Marshall, when he saw him in the Gate House; and that he had
been in his Company in Latham's Chamber several times; that he carried several
Letters to the Catholic Party that were in this Design; which Letters this
Witness brought over from beyond-Seas; and more particulary one to Sr. Fra:
Ratcliffe. That all the Letters this Witness brought to the Fathers, spoke to
the point of Subverting the Government, and Religion of England. that Mr.
Marshall was of the Club, that saw the Letters, and examined the Answers: and
that to this VVitnesses knowledge, the Prisoner sent Letters twice concerning
the destruction of the Government, and the bringing in of Popery.

Mr. Bedloe could say nothing positively as to Mr. Rumly; Little against Rumly.
but that he had heard of his sending of Letters, and of his being entrusted
when any Secret ones were sent; but that he could not swear Mr. Rumlyes privity
to any Letters relating to the Plot.

Sir G. Wakeman asked Mr. Bedloe what day it was that he saw him with Harcourt
when he read the Bill; Questions about Sr. G. Wakemans Bill.
and how he knew it was for this Money? and what acquaintance the Prisoner had
with the Witness? To which Mr. Bedloe answered, that it was about the
beginning of Aug. and he knevv it to be a Bill, for the Prisoner read it aloud,
and that though the Witness had no acquaintance with him, yet Mr. Harcourt
informed him who the VVitness was.

Sr. George urging, Sir G. Wakeman's Objection.
how unlikely it was that he should put his life into any man's hand at first
sight: But Mr. Bedloe replied, that he would have done a great deal more upon
Mr. Harcourts Security. Adding, that he had forgotten the Goldsmiths name, and
the Gentleman's who subscribed the Note: also affirming, that though Sr. Geo.
would not own the knowing of him, yet he had been the Witnesses Physician at
the Bath about 2 years ago. Sir G. Wakeman reflecting upon several marks of
Falsehood in the Evidence.

Mr. Marshall urged Mr. Bedlow to say when ever he saw him, The Prisoner denies
the Witnesse's knowledge of him.
before he came to him in the Gate House; denied his owning the knowledge of
him; and affirmed, that Mr. Bedlow acknowledged himself a Stranger to the
Prisoner; appealing to those in the Prison that heard it. And likewise the
Prisoner affirmed, that Mr. Bedlow, coming to him, used these words, Mr.
Marshall, do not fear, for I will not hurt you: and so pressed it upon Mr. Bedlow
to say, where ever he had seen him.

Mr. Bedlow's Answer was, that he had seen him at the Benedictines in the
Savoy; The Witness affirms the contrary.
and that the first word the Witness said upon coming into the Gate House, was
This is Mr. Marshall, that used to carry Letters to such and such: referring
himself to Sir W. Waller to attest it.

Sir W. Waller gave Evidence, that Mr. Bedlow, Sir. W. Waller speaks to the
point above.
in his hearing, in the Gate House, spoke to the Prisoner, asking him, Mr.
Marshall, do not you know me? and Mr. Marshall answered, that he did not know
him; but yet that he had seen him, Mr. Marshall suggesting to Sir William, that
Mr. Bedlow was gone before he came in; and Sir William affirming, that he was
with Mr. Marshall before Mr. Bedlow came in. Mr. Marshall insisting upon it,
that he was in a private Room with Mr. Bedlow; and that Sir William asked the
Prisoner, in the Common Hall, if Mr. Bedlow had not been there; who told him,
Yes: and that those in the Gate House did know that the Prisoner had been
private with Mr. Bedlow before Sir William came in.

Mr. Bedlow deposed, Mr. Bedlow affirms that he knew Marshall.
that going, by Order, to see the Prisoner, he met Sir William Waller, and went
in with him; and that they were only with the Prisoner in the Common Room; Sir
William withdrawing to one end of it, while the Witness asked the Prisoner some
questions; and Mr. Bedlow calling the Prisoner by his name, upon the first
sight of him. Sir William Waller also affirmed, that Mr. Bedlow did ask him if
his Name was not Marshall.

Mr. Marshall telling Mr. Bedlow, Mr. Marshall denies it.
that he was first with him in a Room on the right hand, where his Guards were;
Mr. Bedlow denied that he knew any such Room: and Mr. Marshall pleaded for
himself, that he had no proofs there, because he could not imagine that such a
thing would have been mentioned. The Prisoner said, that Mr. Bedlow came to the
Gate House a mere Stranger to him: and that Mr. Bedlow asking him, Did not you
send to such a one to have Mr. Bedlow questioned about such and such things?
the Prisoner denied it; and the Witness did not so much as pretend to have any
knowledge of him. Besides, that he might learn his Name from those that took
him: For he delivered himself up a Prisoner, by the name of Marshall, (though
he was otherwise called Marsh): remitting himself to the people in the
Gate House for the truth of what passed there. And that the Witness had him
have a good heart; for he should have an Honorable Bench, and a good Jury. Mr.
Bedlow comforts the Prisoner.
But Mr. Bedlow, on the other side, affirmed, that without hearing of his Name
at all, he said, as soon as ever he saw him, This is Marshall, the Benedictine:
and moreover, that he had seen the Prisoner at the Savoy, and at other places.
Marshall bidding him name any other place, and he would suffer Death for it.
But Mr. Bedlow would not be positive in any other place. Their acquaintance at
the Savoy. The Prisoner positively denies it.
But that he remembered the Savoy more remarkably, as the place of their
Consults about the Letters he carried thither; and that it was there he had the
greatest Conversation with the Prisoner. Mr. Marshall telling the Witness, that
if he could but make it out by any Creature, that ever he, the Witness, was in
the Savoy, he would submit to be hanged, without a word speaking. Mr. Bedlow
replying, First, that he had Witnesses, though they were not at hand; and then
that it was a thing sworn before the Secret Committees. But however, the
Witness named his Landlord, as one that had been often with him there in the
Convent; and with his Maid that carried the Portmantle with his Letters beyond
Seas. And moreover, that he lodged some six months in the Savoy at one
Woodroff's. The Prisoner asking him if it were there that he saw him: Mr.
Bedlow said, No; for only Monks and Messengers came thither. The Prisoner
asking him also, if he were present at the search of the Savoy: he said he was
not, but yet that he gave directions to Sir William Waller where to look.

Sir William Waller deposed, that he had his Directions from Dr. Oats and Mr.
Bedlow where Pickering lay, The Savoy searched by Dr. Oates's and Mr. Bedlow's
Directions.
and to search such and such places, and by those Directions he searched the
Savoy: and that this Description was made before Mr. Marshall was seized some
two or three days. Upon which, it was urged that such a Description could not
be made by one that, had not been there. To which Mr. Marshall replied, that
Dr. Oats had searched there before, and informed Mr. Bedlow, as might be well
enough imagined, both of them joining in the same Charge: and suggesting, how
easy it was to describe a house by Hearsay. Mr. Bedlow did here declare, that
it was he that gave Sir William Waller notice to search particularly under such
a Bench in Pickering's quarter, for the Gun that was made choice of to Kill the
King; and the Gun was found accordingly.

Upon some question of Particularities in the Evidence, Mr. Bedlow's Evidence
against Sir G. W. repeated.
Mr. Bedlow was called up again to repeat his Testimony about Sir George
Wakeman; which was to the effect as before, of his being at Harcourt's Chamber,
Sir George's coming in, and Mr. Harcourt's taking a Bill of Exchange out of his
Cabinet, and saying, Sir George, there is a Bill for you, which I have received
at White Hall to day by the Queen's order. Sir George replying upon it, that he
thought his nine years Service of Her Majesty might pretend to deserve it: and
that there had been no hurt in it, if the Queen had given him it.

Mr. Chapman informed, Sir G. Wakeman's Letter to Ashby.
that one Mr. Thimbilby (an Infirm person of 80 years of age) brought him
recommendations to the Bath from Sir George Wakeman. This was the 17. of July
last. His business was, to get a Lodging as near the King and Queen's Bath as
might be; which was done. And then he showed the Witness a Letter from Sir
George, whereof the lower part was a direction what to take, and how to govern
himself at the Bath; which was now produced in Court. That the Latin Bill the
Witness kept to himself; returning the English part of the Letter to Mr.
Thimbilby. Declaring, that both he and his Son read the English part; and that
there was no mention of King or Queen in it, more then of the King and Queen's
Bath.

A Paper was then showed the Witness, Produced, and Justified.
and a question upon it, If it were Sir George's Hand; the Witness saying that
it was not, having several of his Bills to compare it by. That he knew not of
any date or name to it; and that he did not know whose Hand it was. It was then
considered, that the Witnesse's Paper could not be the Letter Dr. Oats
reflected upon, having neither Sir George's Hand, nor his Name to it, as was
presumed of the Other. Sir George Wakeman then denied the writing any other
Letter, then that of his Servant by his Dictate, which Ashby carried to the
Bath: and says that Dr. Oats had charged him before the Lords but with One
Letter. And then reasoning upon it, that if he had been conscious of any Guilt,
he had time enough to make his Escape; challenged any man to prove, that he had
any thing more to do with Ashby, then as a Physician with his Patient; and
alleged, that a Physician here in the Town would testify, that they two had
been joined in Consultations about him. Sir George desiring the Jury to take
notice, that he never wrote any other Letter.

Mr. Chapman was asked, Dr. Oats insists upon another Letter.
if there was any thing of Milk mentioned in that Letter; who said, No; and the
Milk was never prescribed with the Waters. Dr. Oats affirmed, that the Letter
he saw was in another Hand, a kind of a Gentile Hand. Sir George appealing to
all the world, that Milk was direct Poison in the Case. But Dr. Oats informed
the Court, that he was to take the Milk in Town. Sir George Wakeman opposing,
that it could not be; for he staid but two days after the writing of that
Letter. It came then to be considered, that this could not be the same Letter.
Dr. Oats confirming it also; and that the prescription of Milk was after the
first line or two of Complement; and that there was nothing of a Latin Recipe
in it. Sir George Wakeman observed to the Jury, that admitting any other Letter
then this in Court, he must write two Receipts for the same thing; which was
very improbable. And that the Reason of his Hand not being to it, was, his
being ill, and asleep, when his man (who wrote it over again from a foul Copy)
went away with it.

Mr. Chapman repeating the Order of the Prescription, Sir G. owning One, and no
more.
and declaring that he followed it at the Bath, for six days together; Dr.
Oats deposed, that there was no Bolus in the other Letter; nor what Bath he
should go to, as was in This; and that therefore it could not be the same
Letter. Besides, that it was written above ten days before Mr. Asbby went away.
Sir George objecting, that there was no need of telling him of his Course in
the Bath, so long before he went thither.

Sir George's Servant informed the Court, Sir George's Servant proves the
Letter.
that telling his Master that Mr. Ashby desired Directions for the Bath, it
being well late, and his Master indisposed, he bad the Witness take Pen and
Ink, and write; and making some mistakes, his Master bad him mend it; and so he
interlin'd the Corrections. That this Witness wrote it fair that night, and
carried it next morning, before his Master waked, to Mr. Ashby, who was then
going for the Bath. The Witness declaring, that he knew nothing of Mr. Ashby's
drinking of Milk, only that a Friend of his had advised him to it. But Dr.
Oats deposed, that he himself was with him, and that he drank it Night and
Morning.

The Witnesses for the Prisoners were now called.

And, And Elizabeth Heveningham.
first, Elizabeth Heveningham: who informed, that she was by, when Sir George's
Servant wrote the Letter from his Master's mouth; and that she saw the Letter,
and that there was no such thing in it as is said. Wherein the Court was
satisfied as to the Truth of the Evidence, but that this could not be the same
Letter Dr. Oats spoke of; for That was written Ten days before Mr. Ashby went
to the Bath. Whereupon Mrs. Heveningham affirmed, that Mr. Ashby said, in her
hearing, that he wanted Directions.

Sir George Wakeman pleaded, Sir G. Wakeman's Defense.
that he was left at Liberty 24 days after he had been before the Council: and
that upon Dr. Oates's bringing an Information upon the Letter now in question
to the House of Commons Bar, they sent an Address to the Lords, with admiration
that the present Prisoner was not confined: and that thereupon Dr. Oats was
sent for to the Lords Bar, to repeat the Story; and mentioning the Letter Now
in debate, he consest there, that he did not know Sir George Wakeman's Hand;
and only knew it to be His Letter, by being subscribed G. Wakeman. Sir George
reasoning upon it, that the Witness would have told more, if he had known it,
at That Examination.

Dr. Oats deposed, The Dr. excuses his Omission before the Council.
that Sir G. W. was left at liberty, because the Witness was so weak, and
distempered with watching and toiling about, that he could not perfect his
Charge; and that he (the Dr.) did speak the whole Truth of his knowledge, as
far as he was able; denying that he said he only knew Sir George's Hand,
because George Wakeman was subscribed. Which Sir G. W. opposed; and offered to
make good his Contradiction by the Record. Dr. Oats deposed, that he could not
perfectly remember the very words; but that if the Prisoner proved them by an
Oath upon the Record, it must be referred to the Jury. But to the best of his
memory, upon asking him about Sir George Wakeman's Hand, he said, that he saw a
Letter subscribed with his Name, and that upon This Information Sir G. W. was
committed.

Sir Philip Lloyd was called, Dr. Oates's Deposition against Sir G. W. before
the Council.
who informed the Court, that Dr. Oats made Oath before the Council, Sir
George Wakeman's Reply.
Sept. 3. that he had seen mention made of Sir George Wakeman's undertaking to
poison the King, in a Letter (as he remembered) from Mr. Whitebread to Mr.
Fenwick at S. Omers: and that Coleman had paid Sir George 5000 li. in part of
15000 li. which he was to have. That Sir George Wakeman being called, and
advertised of this Charge, he did not only deny the whole matter, and appear
otherwise unconcerned; but moved it, as a reasonable thing, that he might have
Reparation for the Scandal. This behavior of his was ill taken, and it was
found reasonable to enquire farther into the matter; but the Evidence coming
only from a Third-hand Letter, Sir George was not committed. Dr. Oats being
called in again, was demanded what he could say of his own personal knowledge
concerning Sir George Wakeman. Upon which question, Dr. Oats holding up his
hands, No, (said he) God forbid that I should say any thing against Sir George
Wakeman, for I know nothing more against him. Sir Philip remitting himself to
the whole Council for the Truth of what he delivered. Sir George Wakeman
minding the Jury, that This was a Protestant Witness; and Dr. Oats not
remembering a word of the whole matter.

Dr. Oats did very heartily represent to the Court, Dr. Oats explains himself.
that he only informed the Council as by Report of Sir George Wakeman's
Receipt of the 5000 li. in part: the Council not urging the Witness to speak
upon his Knowledge. That the Witness believed it to be so, but would not be
positive; for in case he should have made such answer as is informed against
him, it was known to the whole board that he was, at that time, hardly Compos
mentis, and scarce in condition to return an answer. But that this Witness did
according to the best of his skill, knowledge, and remembrance, acquaint the
Board with Sir George Wakeman's Letter; but he would not be positive.

Sir Philip Lloyd was then examined as to the Letter: No mention of Sir George
Wakeman's Letter, before the Council.
who informed, that he remembered nothing of that Letter; and that afterward,
this Witness observing, in Dr. Oates's Depositions before the Lords and
Commons, an account of such a Letter from Sir George Wakeman to Mr. Ashby,
found upon the Table, he, this Witness, has often reflected, since that time,
upon Dr. Oates's declaring at the Council, that he had nothing more against Sir
George Wakeman; repeating Dr. Oates's Action and Expression, that, with his
hands erected, he said, he knew no more against him.

Sir George Wakeman's, Plea, Sir George Wakeman's Plea.
that the Council would certainly have committed him, if this Evidence had been
given to the Board, appearing to have something of weight in it; Dr. Oats
sought to qualify that, by saying, that they were such a Council as would
commit no body. Which was reflected upon by the Court, as unadvisedly said.

Mr. Lydcot was called, A Copy offered of the Lords Records.
who brought a Copy of the Lords Records; and informed, that it was a True
Copy, and that Titus Oats was set in several places, as to an Information: but
whether it was his Hand or not, Mr. Lydcot could not say; only that it was
copied from Mr. Rolph's Hand. To all which it was objected, that the Witness
not being present when Dr. Oats said this, not the thing attested by the Clerk
that made the Entry, or saw him subscribe the Examination; that Copy amounted
to no more then a Transcript from the Iournall, which could not be allowed in
Evidence.

Mr. Rumly was offered to have his Witnesses heard: Mr. Rumly cleared.
but the Court finding that he had no need of them, the Prisoner waved them.

Sir Thomas Doleman made Oath, Dr. Oats very ill and weary before the Council.
that Dr. Oats appearing before His Majesty and Council on the Saturday, and
attending morning and afternoon, and being employed that night upon Searches,
the Council sitting Sunday afternoon, (as the Deponent remembered) Dr. Oats
was then examined; and the Council sitting very long, he was appointed that
night to search again, when he seized several Priests and Papers; the night
being wet having much disordered him. On Monday morning he was examined before
the Council again, and at night in so feeble a condition as ever the Witness
saw any man. Sir George Wakeman offered, that he appeared upon Sunday, and so
was dismissed again, till the King himself might have the hearing of the business
the next day. Sir Thomas Doleman than proceeded, that Sir George Wakeman was
then called in, and delivered such an Answer, that the Council very much
wondered at the manner of it: several persons being of opinion, that his Denial
was not so point blank as it might have been; insisting much upon his Loyalty
to the Crown, and Reparation upon a point of Honor.

Sir George Wakeman informed the Court, Sir George Wakeman's Plea before the
Council.
that being charged with Treason before the Council, and Dr. Oats his Accuser,
he pressed Dr. Oats to say if he either knew him, or had seen him before. He
said, No; but that upon a Consult at S. Omers, where Ashby was Rectour, Sir
George Wakeman was pitched upon, by name, for the poisoning of the King: though
the Dr. is now pleased to say that the Debate was in England. That the
Prisoner, finding the Charge sos semote, offered, that where there was no
Proof, he hoped there would not be expected any Defense. The Prisoner, upon
this, taking a freedom to instance in diverse actions of Loyalty, both from
Himself, Family, and Relations, as some Testimony of his Duty to the Government.

Mr. Corker offered in Plea, Mr. Corker's Plea and Argument.
that not knowing his Accusations, he could not come provided with Evidences to
support his Defense: that nothing is easier, then to accuse an Innocent person,
so, that he shall never clear himself: and that it is not a Positive, but a
Probable Oath, that proves a man a Criminal; and that otherwise, Dr. Oats, and
his Companions, might hang up whom they pleased, let the men be never so
Innocent, or the matter charged never so ridiculous: and that the Circumstances
ought to be Credible, as well as the Witnesses; neither of which were (as he
suggested) to be found in his Case. Proceeding in a Reflection upon the Extent
of the Charge; it involving the whole Body of the Roman Catholics in the
Treason: Using many Flourishes of Discourse to affect the Bench, and the Jury,
as to the Credit of the very Plot it self: Raising arguments from
Improbabilities of Circumstances, and Incredibility of Witnesses, to uphold his
pretense. But the Court with as much Ease answered his Defense, as they heard
it with Patience.

Sir George Wakeman recommended one Observation to the Court; Sir George
Wakeman's Observation upon the Doctour's Narrative.
That in Dr. Oates's copious Narrative, there is not one Letter from abroad,
but he deposes positively both to the Date, and to the Receipt of it: and yet
in the Case of a man's Life he will not be confined to a Month.

Mr. Corker suggested diverse Mistakes of Dr. Oates's: Mr. Corker reflects upon
Dr. Oates's Mistakes.
as his charging the Prisoner with the denial of a Truth before a Justice;
wherein the Prisoner cleared the Error: and then the business of his going to
Lamspring. But these were looked upon as matters of no weight. The Prisoner
then reflected upon the Doctour's deposing him to be President of the
Congregation; whereas Stapilton is known to have been President of it for
several years past. And says, that if this Prisoner be not President, Dr.
Oates's Accusation of the Benedictines waiting for his Consent, must fall to
the ground.

The Prisoner being put to prove who was the President of the Order, Mr. Corker
denies all.
not being provided with Witnesses at hand, spoke himself; denying any Letter,
either written, or received, as was suggested; any privity to such a Consult
about the Money; or any necessity for his being at it, if the thing had been
true. And arguing, that in reason, if he had been in the Conspiracy with
Pickering, when Pickering was taken, he would certainly have fled.

And as to his Exception against Pickering, He says that Dr. Oats did not know
him.
because no Lay-brother; the Dr. knowing Pickering so well, and himself being
present at the taking of him, it seemed strange that he should neither know,
nor charge, nor apprehend him the Prisoner, until near a Month after:
especially the Officers coming to this Prisoner's Chamber, when they seized
Pickering. But Dr. Oats, hearing afterward that the Prisoner had lodged there,
entered him in his List, and so took him. Whereas, if (as Dr. Oats says) the
Prisoner was a Fellow-Criminal with Pickering, he being then in quest of the
Conspiratours, it was his duty to have taken them both together. Beside that
the Prisoner's Name not being upon the Doctour's Catalogue, he thought might
acquit him.

But the Prisoner being overruled in it, that what he offered, was no
Evidence, he recommended himself to the Jury, to lay it to their Consciences,
whether they did not assent to him in the Truth of this matter.

Mr. Marshall being now asked what he had to say, spoke to this effect: Mr.
Marshal's Defense.
That upon notice, a month ago, of coming speedily to his Trial, he had
bethought himself of his Defense; and with good hope to acquit himself. But
reflecting upon the Issue of the late Trials, he had once resolved to submit
all to the Sentene of the Court and the Jury, without a word speaking. But that
being now encouraged by the Candor and Equity of the Proceeding, he made it
his humble suit to the Honorable Bench, to take into their own Menage the
Cause of the Prisoner. Passing from thence to a slight reflection upon Dr.
Oats and Mr. Bedlow; and then referring to the Unconcernedness upon him at his
Apprehension, there being no Warrant out against him, nor any Charge of Treason
lying upon him: But that coming by chance to enquire for one where they were
upon a Search, though he saw the Officer at the door, and Candles up and down
the house, yet he went forward; as all the people can testify, and Sir Willam
Waller also, that took him.

Sir William Waller being called, Sir William Waller speaks to the manner of
Taking him.
deposed to this point, that going to search there, he gave order to one at the
door to let nay body in, but no body out: and that the Prisoner came and knocked
at the door, (as Sir William supposed,) not knowing of any Search in the house.
But being let in, and finding how it was, he did what he could to get away
again.

But Mr. Marshall begging pardon for the Contradiction, Mr. Marshall defends
himself.
affirmed with a solemn asseveration, that he entered without knocking, (the
door being open) and so went in of his own accord, as the Constable would bear
him Witness. And for his endeavor to get away again, he affirmed, that while
they were searching within, he continued in an Out-room, the Constable and
others with him wondering, when he came back, that the Prisoner was not gone.
The Prisoner affirming likewise, that he was left at the door alone: and
beside, that he could have slipped out at another door, into an Alley, which he
had the trick of opening while a man might speak three words. The Prisoner
insisting upon this Confidence, as an argument of his Innocence: saying
farther, that be was spoken to to take off his Perriwigg, and stand with his
back to Sir William and Dr. Oats; which the Prisoner did not understand. But
Sir William being so kind afterward as to see him at the Gate House, with two
worthy Gentlemen, Sir Philip Matthews and Sir John Cuttler, upon the Prisoner's
affirming that Dr. Oats was wholly a Stranger to him, the Prisoner was told,
that Dr. Oats (as a token that he knew him) described a certain Mark upon the
Hind-part of his Head: the Prisoner offering himself to the Company, to see if
there were any such thing or no. The Prisoner did now desire, that Dr. Oats
might give an account of that Mark; and that the Jury would believe of him
according as they found it true or false. Sir William Waller informed the
Court, that he knew nothing of any Mark; but that Dr. Oats, when he came in,
called the Prisoner by his name. Mr. Marshall excused the Trouble he had given
the Court, his Defense depending upon the Proof of Doctor Oates's being a
Stranger to him; desiring the Jury to observe, that such a Description was
given; Sir William Waller owning a desire to see him without his Perriwigg, to
look if he had a Shaven Crown: which Mr. Marshall said, Sir William must needs
know could not be; it being an experss Caution, that no Religious wear any such
Testimony of his Profession, in England.

Mr. Marshall informed the Court, Mr. Marshall appeals to Sir William Waller.
that upon Dr. Oates's first Evidence against him, he desired Sir William, that
it might be put in writing: which Sir William refused; but promised to commit
it to memory. Hereupon the Prisoner did now adjure Sir William as a worthy
Gentleman, and as he should answer for it at the Last day, to be as good as his
word. The Prisoner said farther, that Dr. Oats looking hard upon him, asked him
what his Name was: which showed him to be a Stranger. And upon the Prisoner's
owning his Name to be Marshall; Dr. Oats told him, that he was called Marsh.
Urging it, that Dr. Oats seeing the Prisoner; saying that he did not know
them; leaving them in bed, and at liberty to be gone; and he himself declaring
that he was looking for Traitors; the Prisoner left the Jury to judge, whether
he had any thing to charge upon them. Sir William Waller protested solemnly,
that there was nothing of all this. Marshall exclaiming, that he was
astonished; and affirming, that upon a Controversy with Dr. Oats about it,
Mr. Gill the Constable averred it, and promised to attend in Court to make it
good. The Prisoner averring, that he asked Dr. Oats why he did not seize him
before, when he was searching for Traitors, if he knew the Prisoner to be a
Traitor: whose answer was, before Sir William, that at That time he had no
Commission to seize him. But Sir William remembered nothing of This neither.
Mr. Marshall then asked Sir William, if he remembered what Dr. Oats said upon
a question of his seeing the Prisoner last Summer; which was, that he saw him
June, July, and August. Sir William Waller calling to mind something of That;
Mr. Marshall averred that he could prove himself in Warwickshire all those
three Months; but that his Witnesses were not here; and that it was impossible
to foresee what points would come in question. Whereupon he did submissiverly
desire respite of the Court, for the producing of his Witnesses.

The Prisoner recommends over again the consideration of the False Mark; The
Prisoner recommends himself to the Court and Jury.
the Dr's. finding him in bed, and yet not knowing him; his pointblank Evidence
upon August 21; and the most certain means he had of Disproving it: still
insisting upon a very short time to bring up his Witnesses.

Mr. Corker minded the Court of the Officers, Witnesses for the Prisoners.
and others, that said, upon the taking of Pickering, that they had nothing to
say against the Prisoners; which a Servant of the house was then ready to
attest.

Elenor Rigby informed, that upon the Search in the Savoy, Marshall and Corker
were both in bed, at the same time when Pickering was taken: and that the
Company asked the Name of the people in the house; and that this Witness named
to them Pickering, Marsh, Corker, and others. They declaring (Dr. Oats among
the rest) that their business was only to Pickering.

Upon the Question, Corker not President, as pretended.
who was President of the Benedictines, the Witness answered, Mr. Stapilton;
and that he had been so several Years: and that she was certain that Corker
never officiated in that place. And being asked, if ever she had seen Dr. Oats
or Mr. Bedlow there in the house; she (the Witness) answered, that Dr. Oats
came to Mr. Pickering for a Charity that Summer was twelvemonth; and that Mr.
Pickering forbad his coming into the house. Mr. Marshall collecting from that
Evidence, that This being charged for the very Nick of time to advance the
Plot, it was not probable that they would treat so necessary an Instrument in
it at that rate. The Prisoner repeating his desire only of 3 or 4 days time,
to provide his Witnesses: reasoning upon the Thing, that if his Life might
justly be saved, he did presume that the Court would not have him lose it. But
it was urged, on the other side, that he had notice long enough to have brought
them up; and that the Jury must be now kept together till they give up their
Verdict.

Mrs. Elizabeth Shelden informed, Mr. Stapilton President of the Benedictines,
that Mr. Stapilton was at present (and had been for four or five years last
past, to her knowledge) President of, the Benedictine Monks. And Alice
Broadhead informed likewise to the same effect. Upon which Evidence Mr. Corker
raised this Inference, That Dr. Oates's Accusation was of no validity,
depending wholly upon the Prisoner's being President, and consenting to the
Plot under that qualification.

Sir George Wakeman, The Prisoners plead Innocence.
with a soleman Imprecation, disclaimed all the Crime in this matter that was
charged upon him. And so likewise did Mr. Corker: renouncing both the Doctrine
of moving a Sedition for Religion; and all power of Dispensation for so doing.
Mr. Marshall was more Copious and Rhetorical; and more upon Persuasion then
Defense. So that the Lord Chief Justice (after some short Remerks upon the
Romish Principles) summed up the Evidence, And brought in Not Guilty.
and gave directions to the Jury: who after an hour's Consideration returned
the Prisoners Not Guilty.

THE CONTENTS.
The History of the Charge and Defense of Edward Coleman, Esquire Page 1 The
History of the Charge and Defense of William Ireland, Thomas Pickering, and
John Grove. Page 12 The History of the Charge and Defense of Thomas Whitebread,
Will. Harcourt, John Fenwick, John Gavan, and Anthony Turner. Page 21 The
History of the Charge and Defense of Richard Langhorn, Esquire Page 47 The History
of the Charge and Defense of Robert Green, Henry Berry. and Laurence Hill. Page
63, The History of the Charge and Defense of Sir George Wakeman, Baronett,
William Marshall, William Rumley, Page 74 James Corker, Benedictine Monks.

THE END.

