CITT AND BUMPKIN. IN A DIALOGUE OVER A Pot of Ale, CONCERNING MATTERS OF
RELIGION AND GOVERNMENT.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Brom at the Gun in S. Paul's Churchyard, 1680.

CITT and BUMKIN, In a DIALOGUE, etc.
Citt. SO that you would know, First, how we managed the Petition; and
Secondly, how it came to miscarry.


Bum. Those are the two Points, Citt, but first take off your Pot, and then
tell your Story; you shall have mine afterward.


Citt. There was no way, you must know, to carry the business Committees to
promote the Petitions.
clear, without getting a Vote of Common Council for the Petition; and so
making it an Act of the City: And in order to this End, we planted our
Committees every where up and down, from Algate to Temple-barr, at convenient
distances; some few of them in Taverns but most at Coffee-houses; as less
liable to suspicion. Now we did not call these Meetings, Committees, but Clubs;
and there we had all Freedom both for Privacy and Debate: while the Borough of
Southwark, Westminster, and the Suburbs, proceeded according to our Method.


Bum. And what were these Committees now to do?


Citt. Their Commission was to procure Subscriptions, to justify Their Powers
and Instructions.
the Right of Petitioning, and to gain Intelligence: And then every Committee
had one man at least in it that wrote shorthand.


Bum. Well, and what was he to do?


Citt. It was his part to go smoking up and down from One Company to another,
to see who was for us, and who against us: and to take Notes of what people
said of the Plot, or of the Kings Witnesses, or against rhis way of Petitioning.


Bum. But how came those Committees (as ye call 'um) by their Commissions?


Citt. For that, let me tell you, we had two Grand Committees, Two Grand
Committees.
that adjourned from place to place, as they saw occasion: But they met most
commonly at Two Coffee-houses; the One near Guild Hall, the Other in the
Strand; for you must take notice that we went on, hand in hand with our
Neighbors in the Main Design.


Bum. But you do not tell me yet who set up the Other Committees.


Citt. These two Grand Committees, I tell you, nominated and appointed the
Sub-Committees, gave them their Orders, and The Office of the Grand Committees.
received their Reports: It was their Office moreover to digest Discoveries,
and Informations; to instruct Articles, improve Accusations, manage
Controversies, defray the charge of Intelligencers, and Gatherers of hands, to
dispose of Collections; to influence the Anglicus's and Domestics, and fortify
those that were weak in the Faith; to furnish matter sometimes for Narratives.
--


Bum. What do thou-mean by Narratives, Citt?


Citt. They are only Strange Storys; as that of the Dragon in Essex;
Earthquakes, Sights in the Air, Prodigies, and the like.


Bum. One would think it should not be worth their while, to busy their heads
about such Fooleries as these.


Citt. Now this is thy simplicity Bumpkin, for there is not Stories of
Prodigies startle the Common People.
any thing that moves the hearts of the People so effectually toward the Work
of the Lord, especially when the Narrative carries some Historical Remarque in
the Tail of it: As for the purpose, this or that happened in such a Kings
Reign, and soon after such and such troubles befell the Church and State: such
a Civil War, such or such a Persecution, or Invasion followed upon it. When the
People perceive once that the Lord has declared himself against the Nation, in
these tokens of his Displeasure, the Multitude seldom fail of helping the
Judgment forward.


Bum. I don't know what ye call your Committees, but Our Gentry had their
Meetings too; and there was a great Lord or two among 'um that shall be
Nameless.


Citt. We could show you othergates Lords among Us, I Will assure you, then any
you have; but let that pass.


Bum. You told me that your Committees were to procure Subscriptions; we were
hard put to it, I Am sure, in the Country to get Hands.


Citt. And so were we in the City Bumpkin; and if it had not been to advance
the Protestant Interest, I Would have been torn to The way of getting hands in and
about London.
pieces by wild Horses, before I de have done what I did. But extraordinary
Cases must have extraordinary allowances. There was hardly a Register about the
Town that escaped us for Names: Bedlam, Bridewell, all the Parish-books, nay the
very Goals, and Hospitalls; we had our Agents at all Public Meetings, Court,
Church, Change, all the Schools up and down; Masters underwrit for their
Children, and Servants, Women for their Husbands in the West Indies, nay we
prevailed upon some Parsons, to engage for their whole Congregations; we took
in Jack Straw. Wat Tyler, and the whole Legend of Poor Robins Saints into our
List of Petitioners; and the same Names served us in four or five several
places. And where is the hurt of all this now? So long as the Cause it self is
Righteous.


Bum. Nay, the thing was well enough Citt, if we could but have Several ways of
getting Hands in the Country.
gone through with it: And you shall see now that we were put to our shifts in
the Country, as well as you in the City. I was employed you must know, to get
Names at four shillings a Hundred, and I had all my Real Subscriptions written
at such a distance, one from another, that I could easily clap in a Name or two
betwixt 'um; and then I got as many Schoolboys as I could, to underwrite after
the same manner, and after this, I filled up all those spaces with Names that I
either Remembered, or Invented my self, or could get out of two or three
Christning-books. There are a World (ye know) of Smiths, Browns, Clarks,
Walkers, Woods, so that I furnished my Catalogue with a matter of Fifty a piece
of these Sir-names, which I Christened my self. And besides, we had all the
Nonconformist Ministers in the Country for us, and they brought in a power of
hands.


Citt. What do you talk of your Non-conformists? They do but The Protestant
Dissenters great Promoters of the Petition.
work Iourney-work to Ours. We have the Heads of all the Protestant Dissenters
in the Nation here in this Town, why, we have more Religion, Bumpkin, in this
City, then you have People in your whole Country.


Bum. Ay, and it is a great blessing too, that when Professors are at so mighty
Variance among themselves, there should be so wonderful an Agreement in the
Common Cause.


Citt. And that is notably observed, Bumkin; for so we found it here. The
Presbyterian got hands of His Party; the Independent of His; the Baptist of
His; the Fifth-Monarchy man of His; and so throughout all our Divisions: and we
had still the most zealous man in His way, to gather the Subscriptions: And
when they had completed their Roll, they discharged themselves as Naturally
into the Grand Committee, as Rivers into the Sea. And then we were sure of all
the Republlcans.


Bum. But after all this Care and Industry, how was it possible for the
business to Miscarry?


Citt. Why I know it is laid in our dish, that when we had set the whole
Kingdom agogg upon Petitioning, our hearts would not serve us to go through
stitch, and so we drew our own necks out of the Collar, and left the Countries
in the Lurch.


Bum. Nay that is the Truth on it, Citt; We stood all gaping for London to lead
the way.


Citt. The great work that we looked upon was the gaining of a well-affected
Common-Councill; which we secured upon the Election, with all the skill, and
watchfullness imaginable.


Bum. And that was a huge point Citt; but how were ye able to compass it?


Citt. Why we had no more to do, then to mark those that we knew were not for
our turns, either as Courtiers, or Looselivers, Tricks to defeat Elections.
or half-Protestants, and their business was done.


Bum. We went the same way to work too in the Country, at all our Elections;
for it is a Lawful Policy, you know, to lessen the Reputation of an Enemy.


Citt. Nay we went further still; and set a Report a foot upon the Exchange,
and all the Coffee-houses and Public Houses thereabouts, which held from
Change-time, till the very Rising of the Common-Councill, when the Petition was
laid aside; that past so current, that no mortal doubted the Truth on it.


Bum. But you have not told me what that Report was yet.


Citt It was this, that the King had sent a Message to the City to let them
understand that he took notice how much they stood affected to the Petition;
that he expected they would proceed upon it; and that his Majesty was ready to
give them a gracious Answer.


Bum. But was this fair dealing, Brother?


Citt. Did not Abraham say of Sarah, She Is my Sister?


Bum. Well you are a heavenly man, Citt! but come to the Miscarriage it self.


Citt. After as Hopeful a Choice as ever was made, we procured The Petition
laid aside in the Common Council.
a Common-Councill: where the Petition was put to the Vote, and it was carried
in the Commons by two Voices, for the presenting it, and by Fourteen, or
Fifteen Votes in the Court of Aldermen, on the Negative.


Bum. So that your Damned Aldermen, and our Damned Justices, have ruined us
both in City and Country.


Citt. Hang'um, they are most of them Church-Papists; but we should have dealt
well enough with them, if it had not been for that confounded Act for
Regulating Corporations.


Bum. Prithee let me understand that, for I know nothing on it.


Citt. Take notice then that this Devilish Statute has provided, The Act for
Corporations brake the neck on it.
that no man shall serve as a Common Council man, but upon condition of taking
three Oaths, and subscribing one Declaration, therein mentioned; and having
taken the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, according to the Rites of the Church
of England, within one year next before his Election. Now it so fell out, that
what with this Act, and a Court-Letter for putting it in Execution, a matter of
thirty of our Friends were put by, as not duly qualified; And upon this Pinch
we lost it. Nay let me tell ye as a friend, there were at least twenty or
thirty of the rest too, that would hardly have past Muster.


Bum. But is this certain?


Citt. Why I am now in my Element, Bumkin; for thou know my Education has
been toward the Law.


Bum. This was a Plaguey jobb, Citt, but we must look better to our Hitts next
bout.


Citt. Nay my life for thine we'll have another touch for it yet But tell me in
short; how came you off with your Petition in the Country?


Bum. It went on for a good while prettily well at the Quarter Sessions; till
at last one Cross-grained Curr there upon the Bench clawed us all away to the
Devil, and get an Order of Court against it, while you would say what is this.


Citt. But what did he say?


Bum. Oh there was a great deal of stuff on it; the King, and the The Petition
baffled in the Country.
Judges (he said) had declared it to be Seditious, and so they were to take it.
That they sat there to keep the Kings Peace, not to countenance the Breaking of
it; and then (says he) these fellows don't know what they would have. One
Petitions for Chalk, and Another for Chief; the Petition was at first for the
meeting of the Parliament; and then they came to Twit the King with his
Coronation Oath, and then, Delinquents must be brought to Punishment; and then
the Parliament was to Sit as long as they pleased; and at last, every man must
be marked for a Common Enemy that would not Subscribe it. So that first they
would have the Parliament Sit; and then they would cut'um out their work; and in
fine, it was little other then a Petition against those that would not
Petition. He said there were Ill practices in the getting of hands; and so they
threw out the Petition, and ordered an Enquiry into the Abuses.


Citt. Well, there is no remedy but Patience.


Bum. I had need of Patience I Am sure, for they are Examining the Hands
already, as hard as they can drive; You Will see me in the Gazette next Thursday,
as sure as a Gun.


Citt. Why then we must play the Domestique against him, next Friday,


Bum. Nay, I Am sure to be trounc'd for it to some tune, if I be taken.


Citt. Prithee what art afraid of? There Is no Treason in getting hands to a
Petition man.


Bum. No, that is true; but I have put in such a Lurry of Dog-Rogues; they cry
they are defamed, with a Fox, they will have their remedy; and they make such a
Bawling.


Citt. Come, come, set thy heart at rest: and know that in this City thou art in
the very Sanctuary of the Well-affected. But it is good however to prepare for
the worst, and the best (as they say) will help its self. But art thou really
afraid of being taken?


Bum. And so would you be too, if you were in my condition, without a penny, or
a friend in the world to help ye.


Citt. Thou art two great Owls, Bumkin, in a very few words. First, thou have
great friends and do not know no't, and Secondly The blessing of having
neither friends nor Money.
thou do not understand the Blessing, of having neither Friends, nor Money.
In one word, I Will see thee provided for; and in the mean time, give me thy
answer to a few questions.

I make no doubt but they that put thee into this Trust, and Employment of
helping on the Petition, are men of Estate, and men well-inclin'd to the
Public Cause.


Bum. O, their Landlords and Masters are men of huge Estates; but it is the
Tenants, and the Stewards that I have to do withal. But Methods of Popularity.
then (do you mark me) those people are all in all with their Masters.


Citt. I suppose you may be known to the Landlords and Masters themselves too.
Do they ever take any notice of you?


Bum. Yes, yes; I go often to their Houses man, and they speak mighty kindly to
me; and there is nothing but Honest Obadiah, and Good Obadiah at every turn; and
then the Men take me into the Kitchen, or into the Cellar, or so. And let me
tell you Citt, if it had not been for them once, I had been plaguyly paid off
in the Spiritual Court upon a certain Occasion.


Citt. That Is a very good sign of Affection to the Cause, as I told thee: and
it would be never the worse if they were under a Cloud at Court; for an Honest
Revenge, ye know goes a great way with a tender Conscience.


Bum. I have heard some Inkling that way, but we will scatter no words.


Citt. They never speak any thing to you in private, do they? As of Grievances,
(I mean) Religion, the Liberty of the Subject, and such like?


Bum. No, no, but they talk as other people do, of the Plot, and the Jesuits,
and Popery, and the French King, and so.


Citt. And what is the reason now, do ye think, that you are not received into
their Bed-Chambers, their Closets, into their Arms, and into their very Hearts,
as well as some other people as we kaow?


Bum. Alas! what should they do with me? I Am not a man fit to keep them Company.


Citt. Why then Honest Bumpkin, here is a Golden Sentence for thee; Be Taken,
Sifted, Imprisoned, Pillory'd, and stand true to A Golden Sentence.
thy Principles, and thou art company for the best Lord in Christendom. They I
never dare to trust thee till the art Iayl and Pilloryproof; and the bringing
of thee into a Jayl would be a greater kindness, then the fetching of Another
man Out.


Bum. Prithee Cit, tell me one thing by the way, have thou ever made Trial of
this Experiment thy self?


Citt. To tell thee as a friend, I have tried it, and I Am the best A Jayl is
the Highway to Preferment.
part of a thousand pound the better for it. It Is certainly the high way to
preferment.


Bum. And yet for all this, Citt, I have no mind in the World to be taken.


Citt. And that is because the art an arrant buzzard; the Lord deliver me from a
fellow that has neither Money, nor Friends, and yet's afraid of being Taken. Why
it is the very making of man a man's Fortune to be Taken. How many men are there
that give money to be Taken, and make a Trade on it; Nay happy is the man that
can but get any body to Take him. Why I tell ye, there are people that will
quarrel for it, and make Friends to be Taken. It Is a common thing in Paris, for
a man in One six Months, to start out of a Friendless, and Monyless condition,
into an Equipage of Lacquays and Coaches; and all this by nicking the blessed
Opportunities of being discreetly Taken.


Bum. I have heard indeed of a man that set fire to one Old House, and got as
much Money by a Brief for it, as built him two New ones.


Citt. Have not I my self heard it cast in a fellows Teeth, I was the making of
you, Sirrah, thoughy' are so high now a body must not speak to you: You had
never been Taken and clapped up, Sirrah, but for me.


Bum. Father! what Simpletons we Country-folks are to you Citizens!


Citt. Now put the case Bumpkin, that you were Taken, Examined and Committed,
provided you stand to your Tackle, you are a Made man already; but if you shrink
in the wetting, you are lost.


Bum. Pray'e what do you mean by standing to my Tackle?


Citt. You must be sure to keep your self upon a Guard, when you are before the
Justice; and not to be either wheedled, or frightened into any Discovery; for
they will be trying a thousand Tricks with you.


Bum. But may I deny any thing that is charged upon me, pointblank, if I be
guilty of it?


Citt. Yes, in the case of self-preservation, you may; but you A Salvo for a
Lie.
must be sure then that no body can disprove you; for if it be known, it is a
Scandal, and no longer Lawful: Your best way will be not to answer any
Questions against your self.


Bum. But now you have brought me into a Goal, you would do well to tell me how
I shall get out again.


Citt. Why before you turn your self thrice in your Kennell, The Benefits of a
Prison.
(if Baylable) You Are out again, upon a Habeas Corpus: But in the mean time, the
Town rings of your Commitment, the Cause of it, and how bravely you carried it
upon your Examination; all which shall be Reported to your Advantage; and by
this time, you are Celebrated for the Peoples Martyr. And now come in the
Bottles, the Cold-Pies, and the Guynnies: But you must lay your finger upon
your Mouth, and keep all as close as if the Fayries had brought it.


Bum. Pre thee, Citt, were thou ever bound Prentice to a Statesman?


Citt. No, not altogether so neither; but I served a Conveninent time in two of
his Majesty's Houses; and there I learnt My Politiques; that is to say, in
Newgate, and the Gate House; Two schools (says one) that send more wise men
into the World, then the four Inns of Court. Now let your suffering be what it
will, the Merit of it will be rated according to the Difficulty and hazard of
the Encounter: For there is a great difference betwixt the Venture of a Pillory,
and of a Gibbet. But in what case soever; if you stand fast, and keep your
Tongue in your head, you shall want neither Money, nor Law; nor Countenance, nor
Friends in the Court, nor Friends in the Jury.


Bum. Hold, hold, Citt; what if all my great Friends should deceive me at last?


Citt. They Will never dare to do that, for fear you should deceive them. I have
found the Experiment of it my self, and every Term yields us fresh Instances of
people that make their Fortunes in a trice, by a generous contempt of
Principalities, and Powers.


Bum. You Are a brave fellow Citt; but prithee what may thy Employment be at
present, if a body may ask thee?


Citt. I am at this present, Bumpkin, under the Rose, a Secretary-Extraordinary
The Secretary to a Grand Committee.
to one of the Grand Committees I told thee of; and my business is to draw up
Impeachments, Informations, Articles; to lick over now and then a Narrative;
and to deal with the Mercuries to publish nothing against the Interest of that
Party: and in fine, there is hardly any thing stirs, but I have a finger in it.
Mine is a business I can tell you, that brings in Money.


Bum. I make no doubt on it Citt: But could ye put me in a way to get a little
money too?


Citt. We Will talk of that presently. You may think perhaps now the
City-Petition's blown off, that our Committee will have nothing to do. But, I
do assure you, business comes in so fast, upon us, that I shall never be able
to go through it without an Assistant; and if I find you fit for it, you shall
be the man. -- Nay hold, let Me speak, First; do you continue the use of your
Shorthand?


Bum. Yes, I do; and I have mended my Bastard-Secretary very much since you saw
it.


Citt. Will you be Just, Diligent, and Secret?


Bum. I Will give you what security you will ask, for my Truth and Diligence; and
for my Secrecy, I could almost forget to speak.


Citt. That Figure pleases me; but I must shrift you further. How stands your
appetite to Wine and Women?


Bum. Why truly at the rate of other flesh and blood.


Citt. It Is not to barrye neither; but what Liberties ye take, let them be
Private, and either to advance the Common-cause, or at spare hours.


Bum. You cannot ask or wish more then I Will do.


Citt. Only a word or two more, and then I Will let you into nay affairs. What
course did you propound to your self, in case your Petition had succeeded? I
ask this, because you seem so much troubled at the Disappointment.


Bum. Why if this Petition had gone on, and the Parliament had met, I was
promised fonr or five Petitions more; One against Other Petitions upon the
Anvi^.
Danby, and the Lords in the Tower, another for the Sitting of this Parliament,
till they had gone through all they had to do; a Third, for taking away the
Bishops Votes, a Fourth for the Remove of Evil Counselors; and a Fifth for
putting the Militia into Safe hands.


Citt. These points you must know, have been a long time upon the Anvill; and
our Friends have Instructions all over the Kingdom, to proceed upon them to
show the Miraculous Union of the Nation. But do you think because the First
Petition has received a checque, and the Parliament is Prorogued, that
therefore the other Petitions must fall to the ground?


Bum. I cannot well see how it should be otherwise.


Citt. Why then let me tell you, Bumpkin, We Will bring the whole business about
again, and carry it on, in spite of Fate: for we have better heads at work
perhaps then you are aware of.


Bum. Ay, but what Hands have we Citt? for it will come to that at last.


Citt. Those Heads will find Hands, never trouble your self, if there should be
occasion; but it is too early-days for that sport yet. 'Twas an unlucky thing
however to be so surpised; For our Friends did no more dream of the Sacrament,
then of their Dying day.


Bum. Well there is no recalling of what is past: But the Question is how we
shall avoid it for the time to come.


Citt. Nay Bumpkin, there is a Trick worth two of avoiding it, we will Take it next
bout, and then we are safe; we will carry it, I Will undertake by fifty Voices.


Bum. But cannot the Aldermen hinder you from putting it to the Vote?


Citt. It Is the custom of the City I confess, for the Lord A Design upon the
Common Council.
Mayor to Summon and dissolve Common-Councils, and to put all points to the
Question; but we will find a cure for that too. It Is a thing we have been a good
while about already; the bringing down the Authority of the City into the Major
part of the Commons.


Bum. Now if the Mayor and Aldermen should be aware of this, they will never
endure it; but we must leave that to time. But hark ye Citt. I thought our
Friends refusing of the Sacrament had been matter of Conscience.


Citt. Why so it is man, but take notice then, that you are Distinctions of
Consciences.
to distinguish of Consciences: There is, First, a plain, simple Conscience,
and that is a Conscience that will serve well enough to keep a man Right, if he
meet with nothing else to put him out of the way. And then there is a Conscience
of State, or Profit; and that Conscience yields, as a Less Weight does to a
Greater; an Ounce turns the Scale, but a Pound carries the Ounce, and no body
blames the Weaker for being overpowered by the stronger. There is a Conscience
of Profession too; which is a Conscience that does not so much regard the
Reason of the thing, as the being True to a Party, when a man has past his
Word: and this is the Conscience of a man of Honor, that fights for his Whore.
There is likewise a Conscience of Religion, and that is a quiet peaceable
Conscience, that rests in the Affections of the Heart, in submission to Lawful
Institutions; and in serving God, and doing Good to our Nighbour, without Noise
or Ostentation.


Bum. Well, but I see a great many very Conscientious men that Consciences of
State or Interest.
love to Pray and Sing Psalms next the Street, that their Neighbors may hear
'um; and go up and down shaking of their Hands, and wringing of their Hands,
crying out of the Calves of Bethel, and the High places, Popery, Prelacy, and
the Common Prayer, in such a manner, that 'twould grieve a bodies heart to see
'um.


Citt. These are Conscientious men Bumpkin, and this is the Conscience of State
or Profit, that I told ye of.


Bum. Ay, but I have seen some men in Fits of the Spirit, Jump, and sting about
a Pulpit so desperately, that they set the children a crying to have 'um let
out. One while they would raise themselves upon their Tip-toes, and Roar out upon a
sudden, you would have thought they had been pinched with Hot Irons; and then all
in an Instant, they would Dop down again, that ye could hardly see 'um; And so fall
into a faint, lamenting Voice, like the Groan of a poor woman three quarters
spent in Labor. Nay there was One of 'um that gaped, and held his mouth open
so long, that People cried out, The man has a Bone in his Throat. These must
needs be very Conscientious Men, Citt.


Citt. They are so Bumpkin, but it is the same Conscience still; for it works
all manner of ways. We took up this Mode I suppose, from the Transports, and
Grimaces of the Pagan Priests, in the Ceremony of their Sacrifices, which had a
very effectual operation upon the People.


Bum. Nay Citt, these Men have a Holy way of Language too, as well as of
Behavior, for all their Talk is of Heaven, and Heavenly things, the Saints and
the New Jerusalem; they deal mightily, in Expositions upon the Viols, and the
Little Horn: and then they are bitterly severe against Wicked Magistrates, and
those that Lord it over Gods Heritage. They are in fine a very Conscientious
sort of People.


Citt. Oh beyond question so they are: But this is still a Branch of the same
Conscience. I have known indeed some people so Transported with this same
Talkative Holiness, that it has been a kind of Spiritual Salivation to 'um;
they continue spitting when they have not one drop of Moisture left 'um in
their Bodies.


Bum. Prithee Citt, tell me in Honest English, where shall a body find the
simple, and the Religious Consciences thou told'st me of?


Citt. Why every man living has the Former of 'um, but takes no notice on it:
But for the Latter sort, it is very scarce; and Not many Religious Consciences.
you shall find more of it perhaps in one Iayle, or in one Hospital, then in
all the Courts of Christendom. It is commonly the Blessing of men in years, in
sickness, or in adversity.


Bum. Ah Citt, that I were but as capable of Learning as thou art of Teaching!
Prithee explain thy self a little upon the Conscience of Profession too.


Citt. Observe me what I say then, Bumpkin; There is a Profession, A Conscience
of Profession.
Particular, and General: Particular, as when One Cavalier serves another in a
Duel, he is obliged to it by the Profession of a Sword-man, without Formalizing
upon the Cause. There Is a Conscience of Profession even among the Banditi
themselves. What is it but the Profession of Presbytery, that makes the whole
Party oppose Episcopacy; as the Independents do Presbytery; the Republicans,
Monarchy, and the like.


Bum. Now I thought that there might have been Conscience of State, as well as
of Profession in These Cases.


Citt. Thou say very well, Bumpkin, and so there is, and of Profit too; and
it was much the same Case too, throughout the Circle of our Late Revolutions,
when we Swore and Vowed from the Oaths of Allegiance, and Canonical Obedience,
to the Protestation, the Solemn League and Covenant, the Engagement, the
Negative Oath, the Oath of Abjuration, and so till we swore round, into the
Oath of Allegiance again.


Bum. What do you mean now by your General Profession?


Citt. I mean the Subordination of a Partial to a General, of a Private
Profession to a Public; as thou see in the Late Times, Bumpkin, how strictly
the Divided Reformers kept themselves to This Rule, so long as the Common Enemy
was upon his Legs.


Bum. But who do you mean by the Common Enemy?


Citt. I mean, the Court, and the Church-Party. So long (I say) all our
Brethren of the Separation joined as one man, against that Inordinate Power;
and herein we were Conscienciously True to our General Profession; but so soon
as ever we had subdued that Popish and Tyrannical Interest, through the
Conscience of our General Profession, we then consulted our Particular; and
every man did Conscienciously labor for the Establishment of his own way. But
now we come to the great Nicety of all; that is to say, the Conscience of
making a Conscience of using any Conscience at all: There Is a Riddle for ye,
Bumpkin.


Bum. I must confess I do not understand one Bitt on it.


Citt. That Is for want of a Discerning Spirit Bumpkin. What does Conscience
signify to the Saints, that are delivered from the A Conscience of using no
Conscience at all.
Fetters of Moral Obligations, by so many Extraordinary and Overruling
Privileges, which are granted in a peculiar manner to the People of the Lord?
What Is he the better, or the worse, for keeping or for breaking the Ten
Commandments, that lies under the Predestinarian Fate of an Unchangeable
Necessity and Decree? What needs he care for any other Guide, that carries
within himself an Infallible Light? Or He for any Rule at all that cannot sin?
For the same thing may be a sin in another man, which in Him is None.


Bum. Really This is admirable: So that we that are the Elect are bound up by
no Laws at all, either of God or of Man.


Citt. Why look you now for that; we Are, and we are Not. If it so happens that
the Inward and Invisible Spirit move us to do the same thing, which the
Outward, and Visible Law requires of us; in That Case we are Bound; but so, as
to the Spirit, not to the Law: and therefore we are bid to stand fast in our
Christian Liberty.


Bum. That Is extremely well said, for if We Christians should be Shackled with
Human Laws, which can only reach the Outward Of Christian Liberty.
Man, then are the Heritage of the Lord, in no better Condition then the
Wicked, and the Heathen.


Citt. Oh! thou art infinitely in the Right: for if it were not for The Extent of
it.
this Christian Liberty, we could never have Iustify'd our Selves in our Late
Transactions: the Design of Overturning the Government had been Treason;
taking up Arms against the King, Rebellion; Dividing from the Communion of the
Church had been Schism; appropriating the Church Plate, and Revenues to Private
Uses, had been Sacrilege; Entering upon Sequestered Livings had been
Oppression: taking away men's Estates had been Robbery; Imprisoning of their
Persons had been Tyranny; using the name of God to all This, would have been
Hypocrisy, forcing of Contradictory Oaths had been Impiety, and Shedding the
Blood both of the King, and his People, had been Murder: And all This would
have appeared so to be, if the Cause had come to be Tried by the Known Laws
either of God, or of Man.


Bum. Make us thankful now! What a blessed State are we in, that Walk up to
our Calling, in Simplicity and Truth, whose Yea is Yea, and whose Nay is Nay.
It Is a strange way thou have, Citt, of making things out to a man. Thou were
saying but now, that the same thing may be a Sin in One Man, and not in
Another. I Am thinking now of the Jesuits.


Citt. Oh That Is a Iugling, Equivocating, Hellish sort of People; it is a
thousand pitties that they are suffered to live upon the Earth; They value an
Oath no more then they do a Rush. Those are the Heads of the Plot now upon the
Life of the King, the Protestant Religion, and the Subversion of the Government.


Bum. Ay, Ay, Citt, they are a damned Generation of Hellhounds. But, as I was
thinking just now; we have so many things among Jesuits and Phanatiques
compared.
Us, like some things among Them, that I have been run down some times almost,
as if We our selves were Jesuits; though I know there is as much difference, as
betwixt Light, and Darkness: and for my part, I defy them as I do the Devil.

But Citt thou have so wonderful a way of making matters plain, I Would give any
thing in the world thou would but teach me what to say in some Cases, when I Am
put to it. One told me 'tother day, You are rather A vast Difference betwixt
them.
worse then the Jesuits; (says he) for when They break an Oath, they have some
mental Reservation or other for a Come-off: But You Swallow your Perjuryes,
just as Cormorants do Eeles; an Oath's no sooner In at One End, then Out at
the other.


Citt. Let your Answer be This, Bumpkin, That the Lawmaker is Master of his own
Laws; and that the Spirits dictating of a New Law, is the Superseding of an Old
one.


Bum. These are hard words, Citt; but he told me further, don't Their Practices
compared.
You Justify King-Killing (says he) as well as the Jesuits? Only They do it
with Pistol, Dagger, and Poison; and You come with Your Horse, Foot, and
Cannon: They proceed by Excomunicating, and Deposing; by dissolving the
Character, first, and then destroying the Person; and just so did You. First,
ye Deposed the King, and Then ye Beheaded Charles Stuart. And then you need
never go to Rome for a Pardon, when every man among you is his own Pope.


Citt. Now your Answer must be This; That we had, First, The Fanatics Cleared.
the Warrant, for what we did, of an Extraordinary Dispensation. (as appeared
in the providence of our Successes) Secondly, we had the Laws of Necessity, and
Self-preservation to Support us. And Thirdly, the Government being Coordinate,
and the King only One of the Three Estates; any Two of the Three might deal
with the Third as They thought Fit: Beside the Ultimate Sovereignty of the
People, over and above. And now take notice, that the same Argument holds in
the Subversion of the Government.


Bum. Now you have Armed me Thus far, pray'e help me on, one Step farther; for
I was hard put to it not long Since, about the business of the Protestant
Religion. What is That, I pray'e, that ye call the Protestant Religion?


Citt. You are to understand, that by the Protestant Religion is Of Dissenting
Protestants.
meant the Religion of the Dissenters in England, from the Church of England;
As the First Protestants in Germany 1529. (from whom we denominate our Selves)
were Dissenters from the Church of Rome: And So Called from the famous
Protestation they entered against the Decree of the Assembly at Spires, against
Anabaptists.


Bum. So that I perceive We Set up the Protestant Religion; we did not Destroy
it: But they pressed it Then, that the Church of England was a Protestant Church,
and that the Jesuits had only Designed the Destruction of it, where as We did
Actually Execute it.


Citt. Your Answer must be, that the Church of England, though it be a little
Protestantish, it is not yet directly Protestant: As on the Other side, it is
not altogether the Whore of Babylon, though a good deal Whorish; and therefore
the Reply to That must be, that we did not Destroy, but only Reform it.


Bum. Why I have answered People out of my Own Mother-Wit, that we did but
Reform it. And they told me again, the Cutting of it off Root and Branch, was a
very Extraordinary way of Reforming.


Citt. The Answer to That is Obvious, that the Cutting Off The meaning of Root
and Branch.
Root and Branch, is only a Through, or a Higher degree of Reforming. But upon
the whole matter, it was with Us and the Jesuits, as it was with Aaron and the
Magicians; we did Both of us, make Froggs, but We alone had the Power to
quicken the Dust of the Land, and turn it into Lice.

Thou art by this time, I presume, sufficiently instructed in the Methods, and
Fundamentalls of the Holy Cause. I shall now give you some necessary Hints, to
fit, and quallify you for the Province that I intend you. But besure you mind
your Lesson.


Bum. As I would do my Prayers, Citt, or I were Ungrateful, for you have made
me for ever.


Citt. Come we will take 'tother Sup, first, and then to work. Who wayts there
without? Two Potts more, and shut the door after Ye.

A great part of Your business, Bumpkin, will ly among Parliament-Rolls, and
Records; for it must be Our Post to furnish Materials to a Caball only of
Three Persons, that may be ready upon Occasion, to be made use of by the Grand
Committes.


Bum. My Old Master would say that I had as good a guess at a Musty Record, as
any man; And 'twas my whole Employment almost, Rolls and Records hunted for
Presidents.
to hunt for Presidents. Nay the People would Trust me with Great Bags home to
my Lodging; and leave me alone sometimes in the Offices for four and twenty
hours together.


Citt. But what kind of Presidents were they that Ye looked for?


Bum. Concerning the Kings Prerogative, Bishops Votes, the Liberty and Property
of the Subject; and the like: And such as They wanted, I writ out.


Citt. But did you Recite them Whole? or what did you Take, and what did you
Leave?


Bum. We took what served our Turn, and left out the Rest; and sometimes we
were taken Tripping, and sometimes we Escaped: But we never falsify'd any thing.
There were some dogged Passages, indeed we durst not meddle with at all; but I
can turn ye to any thing you have occasion for, with a wet-finger.


Citt. So that here^s One great point quickly over; in thy being Lessons of
Behavior for the Well-affected.
Trained to my hand: A man might lay thee down Instructions, now, for thy very
Words, Looks, Motions, Gestures; nay thy very Garments; but we will leave those
matters to Time, and Study. It is a strange thing how Nature puts her self
forth, in these External Circumstances. Ye shall Know a Sanctified Sister, or
a Gifted Brother more by the Meene, Countenance, and Tone, then by the Tenor
of their Lives, and Manners. It is a Comely thing for Persons of the Same
Persuasion, to agree in these Outward Circumstances, even to the drawing of the
same Tone, and making of the same Face: Always provided, that there may be read
in our Appearances, a Singularity of Zeal, a Contempt of the World, a
fore-boding of Evils to come; a dissatisfaction at the Present Times; and a
Despair of Better.


Bum. Why This is the very Part, that I was Made for; these Humors are to be
put On, and Off; as a man would shift his Gloves; and you shall see me do it as
Easily too; but the Language must be got, I Phansy, by Conversing with Modern
Authors, and frequenting Religious Exercises.


Citt. Yes, yes, and for a help to your memory I would advise you to dispose of
your Observations into these Three Heads, Words, Phrases, and Metaphors: Do you
conceive me?


Bum. There Is not a word you say, falls to the Ground. And I am The Force of
Looks and Tones.
the more sensible of the force of Words, Looks, Tones, and Metaphors (as ye
call 'um) from what I find in my self. Ours certainly may be well termed a
Powerful Ministry, that makes a man cry like a Child at the very Noise of a
Torrent of Words that he does not Understand One Syllable of. Nay, when I have
been out of reach of hearing the Words, the very Tone and Look, has Melted me.


Citt. Thou can not but have heard of That Moving Metaphor A Moving Metaphor.
of the late Reverend Mr. Fowler: Lord Sowse us; (says he) Lord Dowse us, in
the Powdering-Tubb of Affliction; that we may come forth Tripes worthy of thy
Holy Table. Who can resist the Inundation of This Rhetorique? But let us now
pass from the General Ornaments of our Profession, to the Particular business
of our present Case.

I need not tell you, Bumpkin, of the Plott, or that we are all running into
Popery; and that the best Service an Englishman can do his Country, would be
the ripping up of This Design to the Bottom.


Bum. I am so much of Your Opinion, that you have Spoken my very Thoughts.


Citt. Bethink your self, Bumpkin; what Papists do you know?


Bum. Oh, hang 'um all, I never come near any of 'Um.


Citt. But yet you may have Heard, perhaps, of some people that are Popishly
affected.


Bum. Yes, yes; There are abundance of Them.


Citt. Can you prove that ever they Said, or Did any thing, in favor of the
Papists?


Bum. Nay there is enough of That I believe; but then there are such Huge Great
men among 'um.


Citt. Pluck up a good heart Bumpkin; the Greater, the Better; We fear 'um not.
Rub up your Memory, and call to mind what you can say upon Your own Knowledge,
and what you have Heard; either about Sir Edmond-Bury Godfrey, The Plott; The
Traitors that Suffered, or the Kings Evidence.


Bum. I have seen people shrug sometimes, and lift up their Hands and Eyes, and
shake their Heads, and then they would clutch their Fists, look sour, make
Mouths, and bite their Nails, and so: And I dare swear I know what they thought.


Citt. Ah Bumpkin, if they had but so much as muttered, they would been our own.


Bum. Well but hark ye Citt, I hear People swear, or in WORDS to this Effect;
why may not a Man as well swear, in SIGNS to Signs in Evidence.
this Effect? and that they lifted up their Eyes, and hands, bent their Fists,
knit their Brows, and made Mouths, to this or that Effect?


Citt. No, that will never do Bumpkin, but if thou could but phansy that
thou heard'st them speak.


Bum. Why truly I never thought on it, but I saw a Parson once, the Tears stood
in his Eyes, as one of 'um went by to Execution. But your Surcingle-men, (as
our Doctor told us last Lords day) are all of 'um Papists in their Hearts.


Citt. Why what is the Common Prayer Book Bumpkin, but a mess of Parboyl'd
Popery?


Bum. I Am a dog, if our Minister does not pray for the Queen still.


Citt. Nay, we are even at a fine pass, when the Pulpit prays Sad Times.
For the Queen, and the Bench Drinks the Duke of Yorks Health. But to the
point, bethink your self well; a man may forget a thing to day, and recollect
it to morrow. Take notice however, that it is another main point of your
Instructions to procure Informations of this quality.


Bum. I Will fit you to a hair for that matter: But then I must be running up and
down ye know, into Taverns, and Coffee-houses, and thrusting my self into
Meetings, and Clubs. That licks money.


Citt. Never trouble your self for that, you shall be well paid and your
expenses born: Beside so much a head from the State, for every Priest that you
discover.


Bum. Well! these Priests and Jesuits are damned fellows.


Citt. And yet let me tell you Bumpkin, a bare faced Papist is not half so bad
as a Papist in Masquerade.


Bum. Why what are those I prithee?


Citt. They are your Will-worship-men, your Prelates Brats: Take the whole
Litter of'um, and you will find never a barrel better Herring. Let me tell thee
in Love Bumpkin, these Curs are forty times worse to Us then the Jesuits
themselves; for the One is Churchmen worse to Dissenters then Jesuits.
an Open Enemy, the Other lies gnawing like a Canker in our Bowels. And then
being trained up to Latin and Greek, there is no opposing of the Power of
Godliness to the Sophistry of Human Reason: Beside that, the Law is For us in
the One Case, and Against us in the Other.


Bum. Which way shall we go to work then, to deal with this Generation of Men?


Citt. We must join the Wisdom of the Serpent, to the Innocence of the Dove;
and endeavor to compass that by stratagem, which we cannot gain by Argument.
But now am I going to open a Mystery to thee, that is worth --


Bum. Prithee the Worth on it Citt: For talk is but talk, the Worth is the Main
point.


Citt. Why then let me tell thee Bumpkin, the Mystery that I am about to
disclose to thee, was worth to our Predecessors not long since, no less then
Three Kingdoms, and a better penny. But I Will seal your Lips up, before I stir
one step further.


Bum. Why look ye Citt, may this Drink never go thorough me, if I ever blab one
Syllable of any thing thou tell me as a Secret.


Citt. Hold, hold, Bumkin, and may it never come up again if thou do; for
we will have no shifting.


Bum. And may it never come up again neither if I do.


Citt. Well, I Am satisfied, and now give attention; thou see how unanimously
fierce all the several Parties of the Protestant The strange agreement of
Dissenters.
Dissenters are against the Papists. Whence comes this Conjunction, I prithee,
of so many separate Congregations, that are many of them worse then Papists,
One to Another? There must be in it, either Conscience, or Interest: If it were
Conscience, we should fall foul One upon Another, and for matter of Interest;
when the Papists are destroyed, we are but still where we were.


Bum. This is a crotchet, Citt, that did not fall under my Nightcap.


Citt. Be enlightened then. It is not the Destruction of those that are Really
Papists, that will do our Work; for there is nothing The scope of that Agreement.
to be got by it. But it must be our business to make those people pass for
Papists, that are not so, but only have Places to Lose: such as we our selves,
by the removal of them, may be the better for; and This, Bumpkin must be our
Masterpiece.


Bum. I had this very phansy my self, Citt; but it stuck betwixt my Teeth, and
would not out.


Citt. You hear now in General, what is to be done; You must be next instructed
in the Acts of Raising, Cherishing, and Fomenting such Opinions; in what Cases
to Improve them, and where to apply them.


Bum. I Am persuaded my Masters Brother had this very thing in his Head, though
he never made any words on it to me, He had got a List Who are Popishly affected
in the first place.
of all the considerable Offices and Employments in the Kingdom: And I remember
he was used to say, that most of the respective Officers were either Corrupt,
or Popishly affected. If they were Public Ministers; either the Kings
Counsels were betrayed, or they put him upon Governing in an Arbitrary way,
and without Parliaments: As for the Judges there was either Bribery, Absolute
Power, or Oppression laid to their Charge; and so all the rest were branded for
Frauds, Imbezilments, and the like, according to the Quality of their
business: All the Governors of Towns, Castles, and Forts, were Popishly
Inclined; and not to be Trusted. And then all Ecclesiastical Officers,
whatsoever, within four or five, were half way at Rome already.


Citt. This is well remembered, Bumpkin; Now it is worth a bodies while to make
these Blades pass for Papists, and Traitors, that leave Good Offices behind
'um. Nay, we must not suffer so much as any man, either of Brains, or Fortune
(that does not join with Us) to pass untainted.


Bum. Thou say Right, Citt; for whosoever is not With us, is Against us.


Citt. Thou have spoken patt to This point, Bumpkin; but yet thou begin'st at
the wrong End; For you must first get the skill of Raising, and Improving a
Report, before ye come to the Fixing of it: For that is a Nicety not to be
meddled with, till we come to the taking out of the very Pins, and the Unhinging
of the Government; So that the First Clamor must be Levelled point blank at
some Known, and Eminent Papists.


Bum. Well, but what shall we Charge 'um with?


Citt. Why, if we were Once at the bottom of This Plot (which, upon my soul,
Bumpkin, is a most hideous one) and wanted matter for Another, I would charge
them with a design of betraying us to a Foreign Enemy.


Bum. As how a Foreign Enemy prithee?


Citt. As Thus: I would charge 'um with holding an Intelligence A Heavy Charge.
with the Emperor of Morocco, for the Landing of five and thirty thousand
Light Horse men upon Salisbury Plain.


Bum. Prithee, Citt, don't Romance.


Citt. Prithee do not Balderno, ye should say; Speak Statutable English, ye
Fool you. Thou think perhaps that the people will not believe it: Observe
but what I say to thee; let it but be put into the Protestant Domestique, that
his Imperial Majesty is to hold up his hand at the Kings Bench-barr for it, and
let me be Dogs-meat if they do not swallow That too. Why prithee, Nothing
Incredible.
Bumkin, we must make 'um believe stranger Things than This, or we shall never
do our business. They must be made to believe that the King intends to play
the Tyrant; that all his Counselors are Pensioners to the French King; that
all his Enemies are turned his Friends, o'th sudden, and all his Friends, his
Enemies; That Prelacy is Antichristian; all our Clergymen, Papists, the
Liturgy the Masse-Book, and that the Ten Commandments are to be read backward.


Bum. Bless me, Citt, what do I hear?


Citt. Come, come, Sirrah; you are under an Oath; and This is the plain Truth on.
What is it to Thee and Me, I prithee, whether the Great Ministers be True, or
False; Or what Religion, Popish Ministers may have Orthodox Offices.
the Clergy are of, so long as their Livings ye Rogue, are Orthodox, and their
Offices well-Affected.


Bum. This does Qualify, I must confess. But you were saying, that the First
Clamor should be levelled at some Known and Eminent Papists: Now what comes
after That, I beseech you?


Citt. You may safely Mark all Their Friends then for Popishly-Affected; and so
consequently on all that Love them, and all that They Love. When this Opinion
is once started, it is an Easy matter, by the help of Invention, and Story, to
improve it; and by this means we shall come, in a short time to secure all the
Councils of the Nation to our Party, that are chosen by Suffrage. If you were
read in History you would sinde, that still as the Papists set the House on
fire, the Non-conformists took the Opportunity of rosting their own Eggs.


Bum. Yes, yes, I understandye. As for Example now, One goes to the Lords in
the Tower, another (as you were saying) drinks Who are Popishly affected.
the Dukes Health, a Third prays for the Queen: a Fourth Phansies Two Plots; a
Fifth refuses the Petition, a Sixth speaks well of my Lord Chief Justice, or
calls the Protestant Domestic a Libel. All these now are Popishly-Affected.


Citt. Save your breath Bumpkin, and take all in one word: whosoever will not
do as we would have him shall be made so.

But now to the matter of Invention, and Story; I hate the over-hearing of
Discourses, in Blind Allies, and such ordinary Shams: I Am rather for coming
downright to the Man, and to the Point; after the way of the Protestant
Domestique.


Bum. Ay, ay: There Is your free Speaker. Well Citt, the King wants such men
about him. But prithee hear me; Is it certain his Matters of Moment.
Majesty has Lent the King of France Three Millions?


Citt. No, no; some Two and a half; or thereabouts.


Bum. Why, if the King would but make a League now with the Swiss to keep the
Turk off, That way; and another with the Protestants in Hungary, to keep off
the French, the whole world could never hurt us.


Citt. Nay that is true enough, but then the Pole lies so damnably betwixt Us
and the Baltique.


Bum. I Would not value that a Halfpenny, so long as we have the Waldenses to
Friend.


Citt. And then New England lies so conveniently for Provisions. But what do
you think of drawing Nova Scotia, and Geneva into the Alliance?


Bum. Ay, but there is no hope of that: so long as the King follows these
Counsels.


Citt. Thou art a great Read man I perceive in the Interests of States.


Bum. I have always had a phansy to Stows Survey of London, and those kind of
Books.


Citt. But Good Bumpkin, what is thy Opinion of the Bishops Votes, in Case of
Life and Death?


Bum. Ay, or in Cases of Heaven and Hell either. Why as true as thou art a man
Citt, we have but three Protestant Bishops in the Nation; and I am told they
are warping too.


Citt. Prithee why should we look for any Protestant Bishops in the Kingdom,
when there is no Protestant Episcopacy in the World? but for all this, we may
yet live to see the Rufling of their Lawn sleeves.


Bum. Oh, now I think on it; did thou ever read the Story of Moses and the
Ten Tables?


Citt. The Two Tables in the Mount thou mean.


Bum. Gad I think it is the Two Tables. I read it in Print to'ther day, in a
very good Book, that as sure as thou art alive now, the Bishops in Henry the
8th. made the Ten Commandments.


Citt. Why that was the reason, Bumpkin, when the Lords and Commons put down
Bishops, they put down the Ten Commandments too; and made New ones of their
Own. And do not thou take notice that they put down the Lords Prayer too,
because 'twas akinn to the Popish Paternoster? and then for the Creed, they
cast it quite out of the Directory.


Bum. Now as thou lay'st it down to me, the Case is as clear as Crystal. And
yet when I Am by my self sometime, I Am so afraid methinks of being Damned.


Citt. What for, ye Fop you?


Bum. Why for Swearing, Lying, Dissembling, Cheating, Betraying, Defaming, and
the like.


Citt. Put it at worst, do not you know that every man must The Brethren are
only for Profitable Sins.
have his Dos of Iniquity? And that what you take out in One way you abate for
in another, as in Profaning, Whoring, Drinking, and so forth. Suppose you
should see POISON set in Capital Letters, upon seven Vials in a Laboratory;
'twere a madness I know, for any man to venture his Life upon 'um, without a
Taster. But having before your Eyes so many Instances, of men that by drinking
of these Poisonous Liquors, out of a Consumptive, half-starv'd, and
Heart-broken Condition, grow Merry, Fat, and Lusty, would not you venture too?
Imagine These Seven Waters to be the Seven Deadly Sins, and then make your
Application.


Bum. Nay, the Case is plain enough, and I cannot see why that should be a
Poison to me, that is a Preservative to Another: Only our Adversaries twit us
with Objections of Law forsooth, and Religion.


Citt. Wherefore the Discipline of the Late Times saved a great deal of puzzle.
Mr. Prynn sent His Clients to Mr. Case for Religion; and Mr. Case, in requital,
sent His to Mr. Pryn for Law; which kept up a concord among the Well-affected.
But your Lesson in both these Cases, falls into a very Narrow compass.


Bum. Pray'e let it be Plain that I may understand it; and short that I may
Remember it.


Citt. Keep close only to these Three Positions: First, that the King is One of
the Three Estatos; Secondly, that the Sovereign Three Positions.
Power is in the People; and Thirdly, that it is better to obey God, then Man.
These Fundamentals will serve to guide ye in almost any dispute upon this
Matter, that can occur to you.


Bum. But what becomes of me, if my Adversaries should turn the question
another way?


Citt. I Will fortify you there too. And let me tell you that he will have much ado
to keep himself Clear of one of these Two Rocks: Either of Dashing upon the
Plott, or upon the Liberty of the Subject. As for Example,

There Is L'Estrange; as wary a Dog perhaps, as ever pist; and yet ye shall see
how we have hampered Him. I writ the L'Estrange Confuted.
thing my self, ye must know, though it comes out in the Name of the Author of
the Weekly Packet of Advice from Rome. It Is Dedicated to Both Houses of
Parliament; and Designed just for the 26th. of January: So that if the
Parliament had Set, there would have been means used to have had him Questioned
for it.


Bum. Gad, I know where you are now. It Is in the Preface to the History of the
Damnable Popish Plott.


Citt. Ay, that is it. I Will give ye First, the Words in it that concern
L'Estrange, and you shall Then see the Writings of His that I have reflected
upon.


Bum. Oh, It Is a devilish witty Thing, Citt; I have seen it. Methinks the
Rogue, should hang himself out of the way: I Will go to Man's Coffee-house and see
how he Looks on it.


Citt. No, no, Pox on him; he is an Impudent Curr; nothing less than a Pillory
will ever put Him out of Countenance. This Toad was in Newgate, I know not how
long; and yet he will take no warning.


Bum. You must consider, Citt, that he writes for Money; O my Soul, they say,
the Bishops have given him five hundred Guynnyes. But prithee Citt; have not
thou seen the Answer to the Appeal, Expounded.


Citt. Yes, but I have not read it.


Bum. Why then take it from me, Citt, it is one of the shrewdest Pieces that
ever came in Print. L'Estrange, you must know, wrote an Answer to the Appeal.


Citt. We Have a sweet Government the while, that any man should dare to fall
foul upon That Appeal.


Bum. Well, but so it is; and Another has written Notes upon Him: You cannot
imagine Citt, how he winds him about's Finger; And calls him Fiddler, Impudent,
Clod-pate; and proves, him to be a Jesuit, and a Papist, as plain as the Nose
of a man's Face: he shows ye how he accuses the Kings Evidence; and that he is
in Both Plots, in I know not how many places.


Citt. I have known the man a great while; and let me tell ye Citt drawing up
Articles.
in Private, I am to draw up Articles against him. But I have been so busy
about my Lord Chief Justices Articles, and Other Articles against a Great
Woman, that lay upon my hand, that I could not get leisure; and yet I should
have met with him long e're This too, for all That, but that the Committee Sits
so cursedly Late: And then they have cut me out such a deal of work about the
Succession. Well I heard a great Lord say, that That History of his deserved to
be burnt by the hand of the Common Hangman.


Bum. Bravely said, Citt, I Faith: who knows but we two may come to be Pillars
of the Nation? Thou shall stand up for the City, and I for the Country.

Enter Trueman out of a Closet.
Citt. Trepan'd, by the Lord, in our own way.


Trueman. Nay hold, my Masters; we will have no flinching. Enter Trueman.
Sit down, ye had best, without putting me to the Trouble of a Constable.


Citt. Why we have said nothing, Sir, that we care who hears; but because you
seem to be a Civil Gentleman, my Service to you, Sir.


Bum. Ay, Sir; and if you will be pleased to sit down and Chirp over a Pot of Ale
as we do, y're welcome.


True. Very-good; And You are the Representative (forsooth) of the City, and
You, of the Country. Two of the Pillars of the Nation, with a Horse-Pox; A man
would not let down his Breeches in a House of Office that had but Two such
Supporters. Do not I know you, Citt, to be a little Grubstreet-Insect, that
Citt's Faculty and Employment.
but 'tother day scribled Handy-dandy for some Eighteen-pence a Job, Pro and
Con, and glad on it too? And now, as it pleases the stars, you are advanced from
the Obort, the Miscarriage, I mean, of a Cause-splitter, to a Drawer-up of
Articles: and for your skill in Counterfeiting hands, preferred to be a
Solicitor for Fobb'd Petitions: You Will do the Bishops business, and You Will do
the Dukes business; And who but You, to tell the King when he shall make War,
or Peace; call Parliaments, and whom to Commit, and whom to let go? And then in
your Fuddle, up comes all; what such a Lord told you, and what you told him;
and all this Pudder against your Conscience too, even by your own Confession.


Citt. You Are very much Mis-inform'd of Me, Sir.


True. Come, I know ye too well to be mistaken in you; and for your part,
Bumpkin, I look upon you only as a simple Fellow drawn in.


Bum. Not so simple neither, it may be, as you take me for. I was a Justices
Clerk in the Country, till the business of the Petitions; Bumpkins account of
himself.
and my Master was an Honest Gentleman too, though he is now put out of
Commission: And to show ye that I am none of your simple Fellows (do ye mark)
if ye have a mind to dispute upon Three Points, I Am for you. First, the King
is One of the Three Estates; Secondly, the Sovereign Power is in the People.
And Thirdly, It Is better to Obey God then Man.


Citt. Always provided, Bumpkin, that the Gentleman take no advantage of what is
spoken in Discourse.


True. No, there is my hand I will not; and now let us fall to work. If the King
of England be One of the Three Estates, then the Lords and Commons are two
Thirds of the King of England.


Bum. Oh pox, you have a mind to put a sham upon the Plot, I Bumpkin's way of
Argument.
perceive.


True. Nay, if you are thereabouts: -- Well; If the Sovereignty be in the People,
why does not the Law run In the Name of our Sovereign Lords the People?


Bum. This is a mere Jesuitical Trick, to disparage the Kings Witnesses; for
They are part of the People. Now do you take up the Cudgels, Citt.


True. Do so, and we will make it a short business, and let us have no shifting.

Now to show ye that I gave good heed to your Discourse, I Will run over the
Heads of it as you delivered them. First, for Committees, and Grand Committees,
what are they compounded of, but Republicans, and Separatists, a Medly of
People disaffected The Composition of the Committees.
both to Church and State? This you cannot deny; and that they would not suffer
any man otherwise affected, to mingle with them. Now beside the scandal, and
Ill Example of such Irregular Conventions, whoever considers their Principles,
may reasonably conclude upon their Designs: For they are wiser, I hope, then to
lay their Heads together to destroy themselves.


Citt. But it is hard, if Protestants may not meet as well as Other People.


True. Yes, Protestants may meet, but not in the quality of Conspirators, no
more then Conspirators, may meet under the Cloak, and color of Protestants.
The intent of the Meeting is matter of State, and you turn it off, to a point
of Religion.


Citt. But is it not matter of Religion to join in a Petition for the meeting
of a Parliament, to bring Malefactors to a Trial, and to extirpate Popery?


True. Such a Petition as you Instance in, is in the appearance What Petitions
warrantable and what not.
of it, not only Lawful, but Commendable; But then it must be promoted by
Lawful means, and under Decent Circumstances. It Is a good thing to Preach, or
Catechize, but it is not for a Layman presently to pluck the Parson out of the
Desk, or Pulpit, that he himself may do the Office. It is a Good thing to
execute Justice, but yet a private man must not invade the Iudgment-Seat,
though it were to pass even the most Righteous Sentence.


Citt. The King may choose whether he will Grant or no; So that without invading
His Right we only claim the Liberty of Presenting the Request.


True. That may be well enough at First; but still, after No Petition to be
pressed after Prohibition.
One Refusal, and That with a Public Interdict on the Neck on it, forbidding
the pursuance of it; such a Petition is not by any means to be Repeated. First,
out of Respect to Regal Authority: Secondly, as the King is the Sole Judge of
the matter: Thirdly, upon the Importunity, it is not so properly Desiring of a
thing, as Tugging for it. Fourthly, It tends many ways to the Diminution of his
Majesty's Honor, in case it be Obtained: For it implys, either Levity, or
Fear; or (to make the best on it) the King confers the Obligation, and the Heads
of the Petition receive the Thanks. Now add to all this, the suborning of
Subscriptions, and the Inflaming of Parties,, what can be more Undutifull or
Dangerous?


Citt. But do not you find many Honest and Considerable men concerned in these
Petitions?


True. Yes, in several of them I do; and the main reason is The Nation poisoned
with False Principles.
This. There Is no man under Five and Fifty, at Least, that is able to give any
Account, of the Design, and Effects of this way of Petitioning in Forty and
Forty One, but by Hearsay: so that This Nation proceeds mostly upon the
Maxims, and Politiques, which That Republican Humor delivered over to us: But
yet let the Thing, or the Manner of it be as it will, Those that The Injustice
of our Common Wealthsmen.
disarmed, and turned back the Kentish Petitioners at London-bridg. Those that
Wounded, and Murdered the Surry-Petitioneres in the Palace Yard, only for
desiring a Peace, and in order to the Preservation of his late Majesty: Those
People methinks, that were fo Outrageous Against Those Petitions (and Several
others of the same kind) should not have the Face now to be fo Violent, for
This. And whoever examines the present Roll, will find the Old Republicans to
be the Ringleaders.


Bum. Really, Citt, the man speaks Reason.


True. Consider then the Mean ways ye have of advancing your Pretensions, by
Falsehoods, and Scandals, to disappoint Honest The mean ways of promoting their
Designs.
men of Elections; The use ye make of the most Servile Instruments, to promote
your Ends; your fawning Methods of Popularity toward the Rabble; your ways of
undermining the Government of the City, as well as of the Nation; your worse
then Iesuitical Evasions in matter of Conscience; your Non-sensical Salvo's,
and Expositions of Christian Liberty; your putting out the Church of Englands
Colors, and calling your selves Protestants, when you are effectually no
better then Algerines, and Pyrating even upon Christianity it self; your
Beating of the wood, in the History of our most Seditious Times, to start
Presidents and Records in favor of your own Disloyal Purposes. The Pharisaical
Distinguishing of your selves from the Profane (as you are pleased to style all
others, even in your Dress, Tone, Language, etc. Your Uucharitable Bitterness
of Spirit; your lying in wait for Blood; and laying of Snares for the Unwary
and the Innocent; and still vouching an Inspiration for all your Wickedness;
your gathering of all Winds toward the raising of a Storm; Your Unity in
Opposition, and in nothing Else: your Clamours, and Invectives against Priests,
and Jesuits, when it is the Church of England yet, that feels the Last effect
of your Sacrilegious Rage. It Is not so much the Officers of the Church, and
State, that are Popishly Affected, but the Offices Themselves; and Those in the
first place (as you choose your Sins too) that are most Beneficial. To say
nothing of your wild Impostures upon the Multitude. --


Citt. Now you talk of Impostures, what do you think of L'Estrange's History of
the PLOT, and his Answer to the APPEAL? Whether are Those Pamphlets, Impostures
upon the Multitude, or Not?


True. You were saying even now, That The History of the Damnable Popish Plot
was of your Writing; Answer me That Question, First; Was it so, or not?


Citt. No, it was not of my Writing; It was done by a Protestant-Club.


True. Why then let me tell ye, if a man may believe the Preface to That
Club-History, or the Notes upon the Answer to the Appeal (for I have read them
all:) L'Estrange's Pamphlets are great abuses upon the People: But if you had
the Books about ye, the matter were easily cleared, by comparing them*


Citt. By good luck we have 'um all about us, that can any way concern this
Question. And look ye here now.

First, He calls his Abridgement of the Trials, The History of Reflections upon
L'Estrange.
the Plot, without mentioning one word of the Original Contrivance, the
Preparatives, manner of Discovery, and other Remarkables essential to a History.

2. He omits Staly's and Reading's Trials, which yet sure had Relation to the
Plot.

3. In his Epistle, he seems to drown the Popish Plot with suggestions of an
Imaginary One of the Protestants.

4. The amusing People with such Stories, is notoriously a Part of the* Grand
Popish Design.

5. Whereas he tells us, that not one Material Point is omitted, most Readers
cannot find the substantial part of Mr. Bedloes Evidence against Wakeman, (P.
46 of the Trial) So much as hinted at: Not to mention the gross shuffles, and
Omissions in Page 77. and elsewhere.

6. He charges the Printed Trials (in his FREEBORN SUBJECT P. 15.) with many
Gross Incoherences, and very Material mistakes; yet Instances but One, and
corrected too, as an Erratum.

7. When Our Posterity shall urge these Trials for proof against Papists, how
easily may the subtle Villains stop their Mouths, by alleging from this
Author that no heed is to be given to the said Trials; (being so publicly
owned by a Person of his Note, and late Qualification) to be guilty of so many,
and such very Material Mistakes.


True. Observe here, First L'Estrange expounds his History in the Title Page,
by restraining it to the Charge and Defense of the The Fore going Reflections
Answered.
Persons there mentioned: Beside that he calls it an Historical Abstract, and a
Summary, in his Epistle.

2. Staleys Trial had no Relation at all to the Plot, and Reading was not Tried
for's Life; and so not within the Compass of his intention expressed in the
Preface.

3. The Epistle acknowledges a Detestable Plot, and a Conspiracy: but advises
Moderation, and that the Rabble may not dictate Laws to Authority; for that
License was the Cause of the Late Rebellion.

4. It was more then a Story, the Murder of the Late King, and the Subversion
of the Government, and the suppressing of these Necessary Hints, and Cautions
is notoriously a part of the Grand Phanatical Design.

5. In L'Estranges History, here Page 79 and 80. there is every particular of
Mr. Bedloes Evidence in Sir George Wakemans Trial, Page 46. with many other
passages over and above: whereas your Damnable History here Page 295. falls
short at least by One Half. And then for the shuffles, and Omissions reflected
upon, Page 77. see L'Estranges Words, Page 88. The Lord Chief Justice (says he)
after some Remarkes upon the Romish Principles, summed up the Evidence, and
gave Directions to the Jury: which is the substance of the Page cited in the
Preface. Touching your Elsewhere, it is in plain English, No where.

6. Look ye, here is more Juggling. He says SEVERAL Gross Incoherences, and you
have made them MANY: and then you have left out the Parenthesis, (especially in
the Latter of them) which varies the Case too. And I remember again, that the
Erratum was supplied after L'Estrange had corrected it: And sure it was a Gross
one too, to expose a Protestant Gentleman for a Papist, Nine times in two
Pages. I could show ye several other Material Mistakes, but One shall serve for
all. Page 45. (as I take it) of Irelands Trial; which you will find charged
upon the Press, in L'Estranges History, Page 18.

7. Pray'e mark me now: L'Estrange finds Errors of the Press in the Other
Trials and Rectifies them, in his Own: Now if Posterity shall find in the
Right, that the Other are wrong, they are in no danger of being Misled by the
One, in what is Corrected by the Other: And if they do not read the Right Copy
at all, there is no harm done to the Other, but they must take it as they find
it. So that this Remark is so far from Disparaging the Proceedings, that a
greater Right can hardly be done to Public Justice by a Pamphlet. But now let
the Epistle speak for it self.


To the READER.
THere has not been any point, perhaps, in the whole The Epistle to
L'Estra^ge's History of the Plot.
Tract of English Story, either so dangerous to be mistaken in, or so
difficult, and yet so necessary to be understood, as the Mystery of this
detestable Plot now in Agitation. (A Judgment for our Sins, augmented by our
Follies,) But the world is so miserably divided betwixt some that will believe
every thing, and others nothing, that not only Truth, but Christianity it self
is almost lost between them; and no place left for Sobriety and Moderation. We
are come to govern our selves by Dreams and Imaginations; We make every
Coffeehouse Tale an Article of our Faith; and from Incredible Fables we raise
Invincible Arguments. A man must be fierce and violent to get the Reputation of
being Well-affected; as if the calling of one another Damned Heretic, and
Popish Dog, were the whole Sum of the Controversy. And what is all this, but
the effect of a Popular License and Appeal? When every Mercenary Scribler shall
take upon him to handle matters of Faith, and State; give Laws to Princes; and
every Mechanique sit Judge upon the Government! Were not these the very
Circumstances of the late Times? When the Religious Jugglers from all Quarters
fell in with the Rabble; and managed them, as it were, by a certain sleight of
hand: The Rods were turned into Serpents on both sides* and the Multitude not
able to say, which was Aaron, and which the Enchanter. Let us have a Care of
the same Incantation over again. Are we not under the protection of a Lawful
Authority? Nor was there ever any thing more narrowly Sifted, or more
vigorously discouraged, then this Conspiracy. Reformation is the proper
business of Government and Council; but when it comes to work once at the wrong
End, there is nothing to be expected from it, but Tumult and Convulsion. A
Legal and Effectual provision against the Danger of Romish Practices and
Errors, will never serve Their Turn, whose Quarrel is barely to the Name of
Popery, without understanding the Thing it self. And if there were not a Roman
Catholic lef^ in the three Kingdoms, they would be never the better satisfied,
for where they cannot find Popery, they will make it: nay and be troubled too
that they could not find it. It is no new thing for a Popular Outcry, in the
matter of Religion, to have a State-Faction in the belly of it. The first late
Clamor was against Downright Popery; and then came on Popishly Affected; (That
sweeps all.) The Order of Bishops, and the Discipline of the Church took their
Turns next; and the next blow was at the Crown it self; when every Man was made
a Papist that would not play the Knave and the Fool, for Company, with the
Common People.

These things duly weighed, and considering the Ground of our present
Distempers; the Compiler of this Abridgment reckoned that he could not do his
Countrymen a better Office, than (by laying before them the naked state of
things) to give them at one view, a Prospect, both of the subject matter of
their Apprehensions, and of the Vigilance, Zeal, and needful severity of the
Government on their behalf. To which end, he has here drawn up an Historical
Abstract of the whole matter of Fact concerning those Persons who have hither
to been Tried for their Lives, either upon the Plot it self, or in Relation to
it: opposing Authentic Records to wandering Rumors; and delivering the Truth
in all Simplicity. He has not omitted any one material Point: There is not so
much as one Partial Stroke in it; not a flourish, nor any thing but a bare and
plain Collection, without any Tincture either of Credulity, or Passion. And it
is brought into so narrow a Compass too, that it will ease the Readers head, as
well as his purse; by clearing him of the puzzle of Forms, and Interlocutories,
that serve only to amuse and mislead a man, by breaking the Order, and
confounding the Relative parts of the Proceeding.

Having this in Contemplation; and being at the same time possessed of a most
exact Summary of all passages here in Question; This Reporter was only to cast
an Extract of these Notes into a Method: especially finding, that upon
comparing the substance of his own papers, with the most warrantable Prints
that have been published; his own Abstract proved to be not only every jot as
Correct, but much more Intelligible, which being short and full; he thought
might be useful, and find Credit in the world upon its own account, without
need of a Voucher.

True. You have now the whole matter before you; the Epistle, L'Estranges
Narrative justified.
ye see, justifies it self: And then for the Narrative, I dare undertake he
shall yield up the Cause, if you can but produce any One Material Point, which
he has either Falsify'd, Palliated, or Omitted, in the whole Proceeding. But
to be plain with you, Citt, One of the Authors of your Preface is a Common
setter, a Forger of His Adversary detected
Hands, a little spy upon the Swan in Fishstreet; a Hackny Solicitor against
both Church and State: You know this to be true Citt; and that I do not speak
upon Guess; so that Calumny, and False Witnessing is the best part of that
Authors Trade. And then the pretended History is a direct Arraignment of the
Government. He takes up the King and Council, Page 381. reflects upon the
Judges A Bold and senseless Libell.
in the very Contents, and elsewhere; he descants upon the Duke of York, in
opposition to the express sense and declaration of the Bench, Page 145. and has
the confidence yet to Dedicate this Gally-mawfry of audacious slanders to the
Two Houses of Parliament. There is little more in the whole, then what has been
eaten and spewed up again Thirty times over: and the entire work is only a
Medly of Rags, and Solaecisms, picked up out of Rubbish, and most suitably put
together.


Citt. You may take his part as ye please, But there is a Famous Lecturer
charged him Publicly for Popery, in his Answer to the Appeal; and for falling
upon Dr. Lloyd.


True. He did so; but at the same time that Lecturer found no fault with the
Appeal it self; and the best on it is, his Tongue's no L'Estrange charged as a
Papist, by a Certain Lecturer.
more a slander then his Pen: And whoever reads what he has written concerning
the Late King, and the Episcopal Church, will think never the worse of
L'Estrange for what he says. Now for the Reverend Dean of Bangor, I dare say he
never spoke, or thought of him, but with Veneration. Let me see the book.

Look ye here, it is page 18. in L'Estrange's Impression, and it is The Ground of
his Accusation.
page 15. in this; and here is the Point [Their Loyalty and Good service paid to
the King (says the Appealer speaking of the Papists) was merely in their own
Defence] Now see L'Estrange's Reply upon it, If it lies (says he) as a Reproach
upon them that they did not serve the King out of Loyalty; that which they did,
was yet better then not serving him at all; and better in a Higher degree
still, then Fighting against him. And a little after. It is worth the
Observation, that not a man drew his Sword in the opposite Cause, who was not a
Known Separatist; and that on the Other side, not one Schismatic ever struck
stroke in the Kings Quarrel.

And now for your Notes upon his Answer, they are so silly, that it were
Ridiculous to Reply upon 'um [who knows (says he) but the Regicides were
Papists in disguise, page 19.] And a deal of such senseless stuff; enough to
turn a bodies Stomach. And if you would inform your self of his Malice; look ye
here page 4. p. 9. and p. 33. how he Palliates, if not Justifies, the Late
Rebellion, the Murder of the Archbishop of St. Andrews, and the drawing of
the Sword against the King.

Briefly, it is an Insipid Bawling piece of Foolery, from One end to the Other.
And it is not but that I highly approve of your Zeal for the Discovery of the
Plot, and Suppressing of Popery; but we are not yet to Trample upon Laws, and
Public Orders, for the attaining even of those Glorious ends.

But now I think on it; deal freely with me; did you really go to the Registers
ye spoke of, to furnish Names for your Subscriptions?


Citt. No; That was but a Flourish: but all the Rest we Literally did.


True. Are not you Conscious to your selves of your Iniquities? A gross Cheat
upon the Nation.
who made You a Commissioner for the Town, or You for the Country? But we are
like to have a fine business of it, when the Dreggs of the People set up for
the Representatives of the Nation; to the Dishonor of the most Considerable,
and Sober part of the Kingdom. Prithee Bumpkin, with thy Poles, and
Baltiques, how should thou come to understand the Balance of Empires? who
are Delinquents, and who not? the Right of Bishops Votes? And You (forsooth)
are to Teach the King when to call a Parliament, and when to let it alone. And
are not you a fine Fool in the mean time, to Drudg fot the Faction that Sets ye
on, to be afterward made a slave for your pains?

And then for You, Citt, with your Moldy Records, your Lewd Practices of the
Faction.
Coordinate Estates, and your Sovereign Power of the People. Do not I know all
your Fallacies, your Shifts, and Hiding-holes? There Is not one step you set,
but I can trace you in it: You have your Spies upon all Libraries, as well as
Conversations; your Agents for the procuring of old Manuscripts, and Records,
and for the Falsifying of New ones, to make them look like Old Ones. Nay, the
Papers of State themselves had much ado to escape ye. Those that assert the Just
Rights of the Crown, you either Bury or Conceal; only Publishing the Presidents
of Seditious Times, in Vindication of such Principles.


Citt. I must confess I take the Government to be Coordinate, and the King One
of the Three Estates, with submission to be better informed.


True. If it be so, how comes it that the House of Commons Against Coordination.
even in their most Popular seasons, have still owned the Crown of England to
be Imperial? How comes it that all our Laws are called the Kings Laws: all our
Courts of Justice his Majesty's Courts, and all Public Causes tried in the
Kings Name, and by the Authority of his Majesty?


Citt. But have not the Two Houses their share in the Legislative Power?


True. You must distinguish betwixt the Consent, and the Sanction; the
Preparatory Part is Their's, the Stamp is the Kings: The It is the sanction
makes the Law, not the Consent.
Two Houses Consent to a Bill; It is only a Bill, when it is presented, and it
remains yet a Bill, even when the King has Consented to it; and in this Common
Consent, in Order to a Law, the Two Houses may be said to share with his
Majesty: But then the Fiat, that superinduces an Authority, and is Only, and
Properly the Act of Legislation, is singly in the King. So that though they
share in the Consent, they have no pretense at all to the Sanction: which is an
Act of Authority; the other but of Agreement.

And yet again, admitting your Coordination; First, every The Inconveniences of
a Co-ordination supposed.
King runs the hazard of his Crown upon every Parliament he calls: For That
Third Estate lies at the Mercy of the Other Two: And further, it is a kind of
Ringing the Changes with the Government, the King and Lords shall be Uppermost
One day, the King and Commons, Another, and the Lords and Commons, the Third:
For in this Scale of Constitution whatsoever the One will not, the Other Two,
may.


Citt. Well; but Ours is a MIXED Government, and we are a Free People.


True. If ours be a Mixed Government, so as to any Popular Participation Of a
mixed Government and a Qualified.
of Power with the King; then it is not a Monarchy: (which is the Government
Only of One) but if you will call it a Qualified Government; so as to distinguish
it from an Absolute and Unlimited Government, I^le agree with you. But let the
Government be what it will, and where it will, let it do Right or Wrong, it is
Equally Unaccountable, for there lies no Appeal, but to a Superior, and the
Supreme has none but God Himself.


Citt. But if we be a Free People, have not We as much Right to Our Liberties,
as the King has to his Crown?


True. Yes, we have, but the King has this Advantage of us, that We may Forfeit
our Liberties but He cannot forfet his Crown.


Citt. What if a King will Transgress all the Laws of God and Man? may not the
People resume their Trust?


True. No, not unless you can produce an express stipulation to That very
purpose. But let me show you, First, the Error of Power is from God, not from
the People.
taking That to be a Trust from the People, which, in truth, is an Ordinance of
Providence, For All Power is from God: And Secondly, the Absurdity of the very
Supposition, even in the Case of a Trust conferred by the People. If the King
breaks his Trust, the People Resume it: but who are These People? If a
Representative, they are but Trustees Themselves, and may incur a Forfeiture
too, by the same Argument. Where are we next then? For if it devolves to the
Loose Multitude of Individuals, (which you will have to be the Fountain of
Power) you are Then in an Anarchy, without any Government at all; and There you
must either Continue in a Dissociated State, or else agree upon Uniting into
some Form of Regiment, or other: and whether it be Monarchy, Aristocracy, or
Democracy; it comes all to a Point. If you make the Government Accountable upon
every Humor of the People, it lapses again into a Confusion. To say nothing of
Sovereignty of the People most ridiculous.
the ridiculous phansy of a Sovereignty in the People upon This Account; that
they can never be so brought together either to Establish or to Dissolve a
Government, as to authorize it to be the Peoples Act. For there must be, First,
an Agreement to Meet and Consult. Secondly, an Agreement upon the Result of
That Debate; and any One Dissenter spoils all, where every Individual has an
Equal Right: So that unless the People be all of the same mind, This
Supposition will be found wholly Impractible and Idle.


Citt. But is there no Fence then against Tyranny?


True. Only Patience, unless you run into Anarchy, and then into that which you
call Tyranny again; and so tread Eternally that Circle of Rigor and Confusion.
In fine, the Question is this, whether people had better run Certainly into
Confusion to avoid a Possible Tyranny, or venture a Possible Tyranny, to avoid
a Certain Confusion.


Citt. But where we find Positive Laws and Provisions to fail us, may we not
in those Cases, betake our selves to the Laws of Nature and Self-Preservation?


True. No, ye may not; for many Reasons. First, it makes Self-preservation is
no Plea for the People.
you Judges, not only whon those Laws take Place, but also what they are.
Secondly, the Government is Dissolved, (...) Subjects may go off or on at
pleasure. Thirdly, Self-Preservation is the Plea only of Individuals; and there
can be no Color for the exposing of the Public in favor of Particulars. What
would ye think of a Common Seaman that in a Storm should throw the Steers-man
Overboard, and set himself at the Helm? Or of a Soldier that should refuse a
Dangerous Post for fear of being knocked on the Head, when the whole Army,
depends upon the Maintaining of That Pass.


Citt. Pray'e tell me what it is that you call Government, and how far it
extends* for you were saying even now, that the Reason of all Governments is
alike.


True. Government is the Will, and Power of a Multitude, United What Government
is.
in some One Person, or More, for the Good, and safety of the whole. You must
not take it that all Governments are alike; but the Ratio of all Governments is
the same in some Cases. As in the Instance of Self-Preservation; which is only
Pleadable by the Supreme Magistrate, in Bar to all General Exceptions; for he
is First, presumed Certain Privileges essential to Government.
in Reason, to be vested with all Powers necessary for the Defense, and
Protection of the Community: without which his Authority is Vain. He is
Secondly, Obliged in Du^y to exert those Powers for the Comm^^ Good: and he is
Thirdly, entrusted with the Judgment of all Exigences of State, be they Greater
or Less; wherein the Public Good may be concerned. Now put the Case that a
Magistrate should make a wrong Judgment of Matters, and misemploy those Powers;
it were an Infelicity in the Administration; but the Sacredness of Authority is
still the same: And he is a Mad man, that plucks down his House, because it
rains in at the Window. And in case of the Magistrate, it is not so much He, as
They; for the King is (as I said before) the United Power and Will of the
People. And so Fare ye well.


The End.
Errata.
Page ^. line 24. for his, read this. p. 3. l. 27. for Religion r. Religions.
p. 1^ l. 25. for Hands, r. Heads. p. 22. l. 9. for on all, r. on to all.


