Considerations and Proposals In Order to the Regulation OF THE PRESS: TOGETHER
WITH Diverse Instances of Treasonous, and Seditious Pamphlets, Proving the
Necessity thereof.

BY ROGER L' ESTRANGE.

LONDON, Printed by A. C. June 3d. M.DC.LXIII.

TO THE KINGS Most EXCELLENT MAJESTY.
SIR,
IT is not without some Force upon my self, that I have Resolved upon This
Dedication; for I have no Ambition to appear Pragmatical, and to become the
Marque of a Peevish Faction: But since my Duty will have it Thus, I shall
account all Other Interests as Nothing in Competition with my Allegiance.

If Your Majesty shall vouchsafe to look so far, and so low, as into the
Ensuing Treatise, You will find it, Sir, to be Partly, a Deliberative Discourse
about the Means of Regulating the Press; (the matter being at This Instant
under Public Debate) and in Part, an Extract of certain Treasonous, and
Seditious Passages, and Positions, which may serve to Evince the Necessity of
That Regulation. The Latter of which, I do most Humbly Offer to Your Royal
Consideration, not presuming in any Sort, to Concern Your Majesty in the Former.

In This Extract, is presented to your Majesty's view; First, That Spirit of
Hypocrisy, Scandal, Malice, Error, and Illusion, that Actuated the Late
Rebellion. Secondly, A Manifestation of the same Spirit Reigning still, and
working, not only by the same Means, but in very many of the same Persons, and
to the same Ends; That is, There is a Combination, and Design against Your
Sacred Life, and Dignity, which is carried on by the same Arguments, Pretenses,
Ways, and Instruments, that Ruined Your Royal, and Blessed Father. All which,
I think my self Bound, not only in Generals, to Declare; but more Particularly,
to Trace, and to Discover to Your Majesty, as a Duty which I owe both to God,
and to my Sovereign.

The first part of the Conspirators Work, is to disaffect the People toward
Your Majesty's Person and Government; and their next Business is to Encourage,
and Carry on those Seditious Inclinations into Action.

Touching the Former; Scarce any one Regicide or Traitor has been brought to
Public Justice, since Your Majesty's Blessed Return, whom either the Pulpit
has not Canonized for a Saint, or the Press Recommended for a Patriot, and
Martyr. (beside the Arraignment of the Bench, for the very Formalityes of their
Trials) What is the Intent, or what may be the Effect of Suggesting to the
People, that there is no Justice to be found, either in Your Cause, or in Your
Courts; Both which are Struck at in the same Blow) is submitted humbly to Your
Royal Wisdom. Nor is the Faction less Industrious to draw an Odium upon Your
Majesty's Person, and to Perplex, Seduce, and Exasperate the Multitude, in
Matters of Religion, and concerning the Government of the Church.

There have been Printed, and Reprinted, since Your Majesty's Happy
Restoration, not so few as a Hundred Schismatical Pamphlets, against Bishops,
Ceremonies, and Common Prayer: in many of which, Your Majesty is Directly, and
in All of them Implicitly, Charged with an Inclination to Popery. The
Instruments that Menage This Part of the Plot, are Ejected Ministers,
Booksellers, and Printers: and it is believed, by men of Judgment, and
Experience, in the Trade of the Press, that since the late Act for Uniformity,
there have been Printed near Thirty Thousand Copies of Farewel-Sermons (as they
call them) in Defiance of the Law. All which, as they are now drawn together
into one Binding, (to the Number of betwixt Thirty and Forty) and represented
with Figures, do certainly make up one of the most Audacious, and Dangerous
Libels, that has been made Public under any Government; and they are now
Printing it in Dutch too, for the greater Honor of the Scandal. By These Arts,
and Practices, the Faction works upon the Passions and Humors of the
Common People; and when they shall have put Mischief into their Hearts, their
next Business is to put Swords in their Hands, and to Engage them in a direct
Rebellion: which Intent of theirs, together with the Means whereby they hope to
Execute it, I shall humbly lay before Your Majesty in a few words.

That they Propose, and Labor another Change, appears, First; From the
Recourse they have in almost all their Schismatical Papers to the Obligation of
the Covenant; which is no other, than to Conjure the People under the Peyn of
Perjury, to Treat Your Majesty, as the Covenanters did Your Father; and (in a
flat Contradiction to the Blessed Apostle) to pronounce, that He that [OBEYES]
shall receive to himself Damnation. A Second Proof of their Design may be
drawn from their still pleading the Continuance of the Long-Parliament; and the
Sovereignty of the People* which is but in Plain Terms, to Disclayme Your
Authority-Royal, and to Declare to the World, that they want nothing but
Another Opportunity for Another Rebellion. What may be the Event of These
Libertyes, belongs not to Me to divine; but that such Libertyes are taken, I
do, with great Reverence, presume to Enform Your Majesty: And further; that the
Visible Boldness, and Malice of the Faction, seems not to be the only Danger;
Diverse of the very Instruments, who are Entrusted with the Care of the Press,
being both Privy, and Tacitly Consenting to the Corruptions of it; by virtue of
which Connivence, many Hundred-Thousands of Seditious Papers, since your
Majestyes Return, have passed Unpunished. And yet in This Prodigious License,
and Security of Libelling Your Sacred Majesty, and the Government, let but any
Paper be Printed that Touches upon the Private Benefit of some Concerned
Officer; The Author of That Paper is sure to be Retriv'd, and Handled with
sufficient Severity.

Finally; To present Your Majesty with some Common Observations: It is noted,
First, as a very Rare Thing, for any Presbyterian Pamphlet to be Seized, and
Suppressed, unless by Order from Above. Secondly, It is observed of Those
Offenders that are Discovered, that Generally the Rich have the Fortune to Come
off, and the Poor to Suffer: and Thirdly; that scarce One of five, though under
Custody, is ever brought to either of Your Majesty's Principal Secretaryes of
State.

I have now Discharged my Soul both to God, and to Your Majesty; in what I take
to be an Honest, and a Necessary Office; and I have done it with This Choice
before me, either to suffer the worst that Malice, or Caluminy can cast upon
me, or to Forfeit my Duty. I should not speak This but upon Experience, nor
dare to mention it upon This Occasion, but that I think it highly Imports Your
Majesty to know how Dangerous a Matter it is to Render you a Public Service.
To present Your Majesty with a Fresh Instance; I was lately Engaged as a
Commissioner, in a Public Debate on the behalf of the Loyal Officers; and for
no other Crime, or Provocation, but for Asserting the Professed Desires of the
Whole Party: A Certain Gentleman took such a Heat, and Confidence, as Openly to
Charge me with Writing against Your Majesty; Affirming withal, that Your
Majesty had Accused me for it to the Parliament and that my Lord Chancellor
would Justify it: Since which time, it appears, not only that He Himself was
the first Person that by a Private Tale had Endeavored to Exasperate my Lord
Chancellor against Me; but that being called to Account by my Lords Order, for
so Great, and so Injurious a Boldness, both toward Your Majesty, and his
Lordship, He desired God to Renounce him, if ever he spoke the Words, (Although
Delivered in the Face of a Full Committee.) If I were Impudent enough to
trouble Your Majesty with a Personal Character, His Familiar Discourses, both
concerning your Sacred Majesty, and the Honorable House of Commons, would
afford matter for it; but let God witness for me, that I have no Passion, but
for your Majesty's Service, and for the General Good of Your Loyal Subjects:
Both which Interests, I do humbly conceive to be very much concerned in some
Provision, that men may not suffer in their Reputations, for doing their
Duties; and that Those Persons who have Cheerfully, and Honorably passed
through the utmost extremities of a Long and Barbarous War, out of a sense of
Loyalty to Your Royal Father, may not now at last, be stung to Death by the
Tongues of Tale-Bearers, and Slanderers for being Faithful to Your Majesty.
Which is the Case of Many, more Considerable then my Self, and among the Rest
in Particular of

Your MAJESTY'S Most Loyal and Obedient Subject Roger L'Estrange.

To the Right Honorable the LORDS And, To the Honorable the COMMONS Assembled
in Parliament.
HAving been lately Employed, to Draw up some Proposals. touching the
Regulation of the Press, and to Search for certain Seditious Books, and Papers:
I think it Agreeable both to my Reason, and Duty, that I Dedicate to your
Honors some Account of my Proceeding; especially in This Juncture, when both
the Danger, and the Remedy, are the Subject of your Present Care. The Drift,
and Argument of This Little Treatise, is Expressed in the Title. One Particular
only was forgotten in the Body of the Discourse, which I must now Crave Leave
to Insert in my Dedication; (i. e.) An Additional Expedient for the Relief of
Necessitous, and Supernumerary Printers; Many of which would be well enough
Content to Quit the Trade, and Betake themselves to Other Employments, upon
Condition to be Re-imburst for their Presses, Letter, and Printing-Materials:
and it is Computed that 4000 l. or thereabouts, would Buy off their Stock; for
the Raising of which Sum, and so to be Employed, there occurrs This Expedient.

It is Credibly Reported, That there have been Printed at least Ten, or Twelve
Impressions of a Collection Entitled, The First, Second, and Third Volume of
Farewel-Sermons: (with the Figures of the Ejected Ministers) which is no Other,
then an Arraignment of the Law, and a Charge of Persecution, against the King,
and his Parliament.

Upon a Supposition of Twelve Impressions, (at a Thousand a piece, which is the
Lowest) the clear Profit, beside the Charge of Paper and Printing, Comes to
3300 l. which Sum, being Imposed as a Fine, upon Their Heads for whom the Books
were Printed, will defray a Considerable Part of the aforesaid Charge, and what
is wanting, may be abundantly made up by the like Course upon the Publishers of
Other Seditious Pamphlets, Keeping the Same Proportion betwixt the Profit, and
the Punishment.

Of the Farewel-Sermons, I Seized the other day in Quires, to the Quantity of
betwixt Twenty and Thirty Ream of Paper; and I Discovered likewise the Supposed
Author of Another Pamphlet, Entitled [ A Short Survey of the Grand Case of the
Ministry, etc.] Wherein is Maintained, in opposition to the Declarations
Required by the Act of Uniformity; P. 21.
That in some Cases It may be lawful to take Arms against the King -- To take
Arms by the Kings Authority, against his Person, P. 22.
or Those Commismissioned by Him -- And that the Obligation of the Covenant is
a Knot cut by the Sword of Authority, P. 23.
whilst it cannot be Loosed by Religious Reason. Concerning which, and many
other Desperate Libels, if your Honors shall think fit to Descend into any
Particular Enquiry, it may be made appear, that whereas not One of Twenty is
Now taken, scarce One of a Hundred could Escape, if there were not Connivence
(at least; if not Corruption) joined to the Craft and Wariness of the Faction.

How the World will understand This Freedom, and Confidence, in a Private
Person, I do not much Concern my Self; (provided that I offend not Authority)
but the Question to Me seems short, and easy, Whether it be Lawful, or not, for
any Man that sees his Country in Danger, to Cry out TREASON? and Nothing Else
has Extorted This Singularity of Practice, and Address, from

Your Honors Most Dutiful Servant Roger L'Estrange.

Considerations and Proposals In Order to the Regulation OF THE PRESS.
I Think no man denies the Necessity of Suppressing Licentious and Unlawful
Pamphlets, and of Regulating the Press; but in what manner, and by what means
This may be Effected, That Is the Question. The Two Main-points are Printing,
and Publishing.

The Instruments of setting the work afoot are These. The Promoters,
The Adviser, Author, Compiler, Writer, Correcter, and the Persons for whom,
and by whom; that is say, the Stationer (commonly), and the Printer. To which
may be Added, the Letter-Founders, and the Smiths, and Ioyners, that work upon
Presses.

The usual Agents for Publishing, are the Printers themselves, Stitchers,
Binders, Stationers, Hawkers, Mercury-women, Pedlers, and Publishers of
Pamphlets.
Ballad-singers, Posts, Carryers, Hackney-Coachmen, Boat-men, and Mariners.
Other Instruments may be likewise employed, against whom a General Provision
will be sufficient. Hiding, and Concealing of unlawful Books, is but in order
to Publishing, and may be brought under the same Rule.

Touching the Adviser, Author, Compiler, Writer, and Correcter, their Practices
are hard to be Retriv'd, unless the One Discover the Other.

This Discovery may be procured partly by a Penalty upon refusing to Discover,
and partly by a Reward, A General Expedient in Order to Discovery.
to the Discoverer; but let both the Penalty, and the Reward be Considerable,
and Certain: and let the Obligation of Discovery run quite Through, from the
first Mover of the Mischief, to the Last Disperser of it. That is to say; If
any unlawful Book shall be found in the Possession of any of the Agents, or
Instruments aforesaid, let the Person in whose possession it is found, be
Reputed, and Punished as the Author of the said Bock, unless he Produce the
Person, or Persons, from whom he Received it; or else acquit himself by Oath,
that he knows neither Directly, nor Indirectly, how it came into his Possession.

Concerning the Confederacy of Stationers, and Printers, we shall speak anon:
but the thing we are now upon, is, singly Printing, and what necessarily
relates to it.

One great Evil is the Multiplicity of Private Presses, Multiplicity of Private
Presses and Printers a great Evil.
and Consequently of Printers, who for want of Public, and warrantable
employment, are forced either to play the Knaves in Corners, or to want Bread.

The Remedy is, The Remedies are,
to reduce all Printers, and Presses, that are now in Employment, to a Limited
Number; and then to provide against Private Printing for the time to come,
which may be done by the Means Following.

First; To Reduce, and Limit the Number,
The number of Printers and Presses being resolved upon, let the Number of
their Iourny-men, and Apprentices be likewise Limited: and in like manner, the
Number of Master-Founders, and of their Iourny-men, and Their Apprentices; all
which to be Allowed of, and Approved by such Person or Persons, as shall be
Authorized for that purpose; neither let any Ioyner, Carpenter, or Smith,
presome to work for, or upon any Printing Press, without such Allowance as
aforesaid, according to the Direction of the late Act for Printing.

Secondly, And to discover the Supernumeraries;
Let all such Printers, Letter-Founders, Joyners, Carpenters, and Smiths, as
shall hereafter be Allowed, as aforesaid, be Respectively and severally
Interrogated before their Admittance, in order to the Discovery of
Supernumerary Printers and Presses. That is;

1. Let the Printers be Questioned what Private Presses they have at any time
wrought upon for so many years last past, With the means of doing it.
and the time When, and For, and with Whom: and what other Printers and Presses
they know of at Present, beside These of the present Establishment.

2. Let the Founders be also Examined, what Letter they have Furnished since
such a Time: When and for Whom, and what other Printers etc. -- Ut Supra.

3. Let the Joyners, Carpenters, and Smiths be Questioned likewise what Presses
they have Erected, or Amended, etc. When, and for Whom? and what other Presses,
Printers, etc. -- as before.

And if after such Examination it shall appear at any time within so many
Months, that any Man has wilfully concealed, or Denied the Truth, let him
forfeit his Employment as a Person not fit to be Trusted, and let the Enformer
be taken into his Place if he be capable of it, and desire it; or Else, let him
be Rewarded some other way. The same course may be taken also concerning
English Printers and Presses beyond the Seas.

This may serve as the Discovery of Private Printers and Presses already in
Employment: Now to prevent underhand-dealing for the Future, and to Provide
against certain other Abuses in such as are Allowed.

First; Let no Tradesmen but Printers use Printing-Presses.
Let a special care be taken of Card-makers, Leather-Guilders, Flock-workers,
and Quoyf-drawers; either by expressly inhibiting their use of such Presses, as
may be applied to Printing of Books, or by tying them up to the same Terms,
and Conditions with Printers; and let no other Tradesman whatsoever presume to
make use of a Printing-press, but upon the same conditions, and under the same
Penalties with Printers.

2ly. Let no Press or Printing House be Erected or Let, Cautions for Securing
and Regulating the Press.
and let no Joyner, Carpenter, Smith, or Letter-Founder work for a
Printing House, without notice (according to the late Act)

3ly. Let no Materials belonging to Printing, no Letters ready founded, or
cast, be Imported or Bought without the like notice, and for whom ( according
to the late Act.)

4ly. Let every Master-Printer be Bound at least, if not sworn, not to Print,
cause or suffer to be Printed in his House, or Press, any Book or Books without
Lawful License ( according to the late Act.)

5ly. Let no Master-Printer be Allowed to keep a Press but in his own
Dwelling House, and let no Printing House be permitted with a Back-dore to it.

6ly. Let every Master-Printer certify what Warehouses he Keeps, and not
Change them without giving Notice.

7ly. Let every Master-Printer set his Name to whatsoever he Prints, or causes
to be Printed ( according to the late Act.)

8ly. Let no Printer presume to put upon any Book* the Title, Marque, or
Vinnet, of any other Person who has the Privilege of Sole Printing the same,
without the Consent of the Person so Priviledg'd (according to the late Act)
and let no man presume to Print another man's Copy.

9ly. Let no Printer presume either to Re-Print, or Change the Title of any
Book formerly Printed, without License; or to Counterfeit a License, or
knowingly to put any man's Name to a Book as the Author of it, that was not so.

10ly. Let it be Penal to Antedate any Book; for by so doing, New Books will
be shuffled among Old Ones to the Increase of the Stock.

11ly. Let the Price of Books be Regulated.

12ly. Let no Journy-man be Employed, without a Certificate from the Master
where he wrought last.

13ly. Let no Master discharge a Journy-man, nor He Leave his Master, under 14
days Notice, unless by Consent.

14ly. Let the Persons employed, be of Known Integrity, so near as may be; Free
of the said Mysteries, and Able in their Trades (according to the late Act.)

But if 60 Presses must be reduced to 20, Obj.
what shall all those People do for a Livelihood that wrought at the other 40?

It is provided by the Late Act, Ans.
that as many of them shall be employed as the Printers can find Honest work
for, and a sufferance of more, is but a Toleration of the Rest to Print
Sedition, so that the Supernumeraryes are in as ill a Condition now, as they
will be Then; and yet something may be thought upon for their Relief.

There have been diverse Treasonous and Seditious Pamphlets printed since the
Act of Indemnity; as, The Speeches of the Lare King's Judges; A Provision for
Poor Printers.
Sir Henry Vane's [Pretended] Trial; The Prodigies 1 Part and 2. and the Like.
Let any of These Necessitous Persons, make known at whose Request, and for
whose Behoof These, or the Like Seditious Libells have been Printed, and they
shall not only be Pardoned for having had a hand in it Themselves, but the
first Enformer shall upon Proof or Confession be Recommended to the first
Vacancy whereof he is Capable in the New-Regulation, and the Next to the
Second, and so successively: And moreover a Fine shall be set upon the Heads of
the Delinquents, to be Employed toward the Maintenance of so many of the
Indigent Printers as shall be Interpreted to Merit that Regard, by such
Discovery.

Next to Printing, follows Publishing or Dispersing, which, Publishers and
Dispersers about the Town*
in and about the Town, is commonly the work of Printers, Stitchers, Binders,
Stationers, Mercury-women, Hawkers, Pedlars, and Ballad Singers.

Concerning Printers, Stitchers, and Binders; The Penalty may be Double, where
the Fault is so: That is; to be Punished*
where the same Person (for Example) is found to be both Printer and Disperser
of the same unlawful Books, he may be Punished in Both Capacities: of the Rest
(the Stationer excepted) little needs be said but that they may be Punishable,
and the Penalty Suited to the Quality of the Offender.

The most Dangerous People of all are the Confederate Stationers, The
Stationers have their Private Warehouses, and Receivers.
and the breaking of That Knot would do the work alone. For the Closer Carriage
of their business they have here in the Town, Their Private Warehouses, and
Receivers.

Let every Stationer certify, what Warehouses he keeps, and not change them
without giving notice.

Let the Receivers and Concealers of Unlawful, Receivers and Concealers to be
Punished as Dispersers.
or Unlicens'd Books he Punished as the Dispersers of them, unless within 12
hours after such Receipt they give notice to -- that they have such Quantityes
of Books in their Custody, and to whom they belong.

They hold Intelligence Abroad by the means of Posts, Carryers, The Stationers
Agents for Dispersing their Books Abroad.
Hackny-Coachmen, Boatmen, and Mariners: and for fear of Interceptions they
Correspond by False Names, and Private Tokens; so that if a Letter, or Packet
miscarry, Their ways of Privy Correspondence and Concealment.
people may not know what to make on it. As for the Purpose; so many Dozen of
Gloves stands for so many Dozen of Books. Such a Marque for such a Price, etc.

They enter in their Day-Books, only in General terms, such and such Parcells
of Books, without naming Particulars.

1. Let every Stationer, living in or about London, be obliged to keep a
Day-Book of the Particulars of all the Unlicens'd Books, The means of
Prevention and Discovery.
and Papers, which he sends, causes or allows to be sent, by any of the
Messengers abovementioned, into any parts of his Majestyes Dominions; and let
him Enter the Names likewise of the Persons to whom he sends them, under a
Penalty; if either he be proved, to have kept a False Book, or to have
Corresponded under a False Name, and let every Stationer elsewhere ( i. e.
within the Kingdom of England, and Dominion of Wales) be obliged to keep a
Day-Book likewise, of what Unlicens'd Books, and Papers, he Receives, and from
whom, upon the like Penalty.

2. Let no Stationer presume to send, cause or allow to be sent, either by
Land, or Water, any Dry-Fatts, Bales, Packs, Maunds, or other Fardells, or
Packquets of Printed Books, or Papers, without superscribing them in such sort,
that they may be known to be Books, together with the Names of the Persons from
whom they are sent, and to whom they are Directed: Under peyn of Forfeiting all
Parcels of Books that are not so superscrib'd, or otherwise that are advertised
under False Names.

3. Let every Hackny-Coach-man, Carrier, Boatman, or Mariner, that knowingly
Transgresses in the Private Conveighance of such Letters or Packquets as
aforesaid, be subjected to a Particular Penalty.

Concerning Books Imported. They must be First Prepared beyond the
(...)Secondly, conveyed hither; and Thirdly, Received and Distributed here.

Let the English Printer, An Expedient against Printing of English Books beyond
the Seas;
Vender, or Utterer of any Books written in the English Tongue, or by an
English man, in any Other Tongue and Printed beyond the Seas, to the dishonor
of his Majesty or of the Established Government, be required to appear from
beyond the Seas, by a Certain Day, and under such a Penalty; which if he
Refuse, or wilfully fayl to do, Let it be made Penal for any Person Living
within his Majestys Dominions, (after sufficient Notice of his such Contempt)
to hold any further Correspondence with him, Either by Message, Letter, or
otherwise, till he has given satisfaction for his Offense.

Let a General Penalty be laid upon the Importers of any English Books, and
Importing and Disposing of them.
whatsoever, Printed beyond the Seas. And so likewise upon the Contracters,
for; the Receivers, Concealers, and Dispersers of, any Books whatsoever,
Imported into This Realm, and Disposed of without due Authority. It rests now
to be Considered. First What Books are to be suppressed, and Secondly, Into what
hands the Care of the Press is to be Committed.

The Books to be suppressed are as follows.
FIrst, What Books, Libels, and Positions are to be suppressed, and
All Printed Papers pressing the Murder of the late King.

Secondly, All Printed Iustifications of that Execrable Act.

Thirdly, All Treatises Denying His Majesty's Title to the Crown of England.

Fourthly, All Libels against the Person of His Sacred Majesty, His Blessed
Father, or the Royal Family.

Fifthly, All Discourses manifestly tending to stir up the People against the
Established Government.

Sixthly, All Positions Terminating in This Treasonous Conclusion, that, His
Majesty may be Arraigned, Judged, and Executed, by his People: such as are
These Following.

Coordination, The Sovereignty of the Two Houses, or of the House of Commons;
or of the Diffusive Body of the People, in Case of Necessity. The Justification
of the War Raised in 1642. in the Name of King and Parliament. The Defense of
the Legality and Obligation of the Covenant. The Separation of the Kings Person
from His Authority. The Denial of His Majesty's Power in Ecclesiastical
Affairs. The Mainteyning that the Long-Parliament is not yet Dissolved.

If it be objected that This Looks too far Back; It may be Answered that
Persons are Pardoned, but not Books. But to more Particular Reasons for the
Suppressing of Old Pamphlets.

First; It is (with Reverence) a Duty both from his Sacred Majesty and his
Parliament, Reasons for the suppressing of old Pamphlets as well as new.
to the Honor, and Memory of the Late King, to deliver the Reputation of That
Blessed Martyr, from the Diabolical Calumnies, and Forgeries, which are yet
Extant against his Person, and Government.

Secondly, It is as much a Duty toward our Present Sovereign, of whose Royal
Family, and Person, as much Ill is said, and Published, as is possible for the
Wit of Man to Utter, or for the Malice of Hell to Invent.

Thirdly, In Relation to Political Ends, and to the security of the Public,
they ought to be suppressed: for they do not only Revile, and Slander his
Majesty's Royal Person, but many of them Disclaim his very Title to the Crown;
and Others Subject his Prerogative, and Consequently his Sacred Life to the
Sovereign Power of the People; and this is done too, with all the Advantages of
a Pestilent and Artificial Imposture. Now why a Pamphlet should be Allowed to
Proclaim This Treason to the World, which but whispered in a Corner would
certainly bring a Man to the Gallows, is not easily Comprehended.

Fourthly, It makes the English Nation cheap in the Eyes of the World, to find
the Blood and Virtues of the Late King, appear so little to be considered,
beside the Hazardous Consequence of Blasting the Royal Cause, and of
Discourageing Loyalty to Future Generations, by transmitting the whole Party of
the Royallists, in so many Millions of virulent Libels, to Posterity, for a
prostitute Rabble of Villeins, and Traitors.

Fifthly, Those Desperate Libells and Discourses do not only Defame the
Government, Encourage and Enrich the Faction, and Poison the People; but, while
They are Permitted, Those Stationers and Printers, that would otherwise be
Honest, are forced either to play the Knaves for Company, or to Break: for
there is scarce any other Trading for them, but in That Trash. Their Customers
will be supplied, and if they ask for any of these Treasonous Books, they must
either Furnish them, or Lose their Custom.

Sixthly, The same Reason that prohibits New Pamphlets, requires also the
Suppressing of Old ones, (of the same Quality) for it is not the Date, that does
the Mischief, but the Matter, and the Number. If they be Plausible, and Cunning
enough to Deceive, and then Numerous enough to Spread, Buchanan, and Knox will
do the business as sure as Baxter, and Calamy. Besides that in some Respects,
the Old Ones have a great Advantage of the New: for being Written in times of
Freedom, and Menag'd by great Masters of the Popular Style, they speak playner,
and strike homer to the Capacity and Humor of the Multitude; whereas they that
write in the fear of a Law, are forced to cover their Meaning under
Ambiguities, and Hints, to the greater Hazard of the Libeller, than of the
Public.

Seventhly, They must be suppressed, in Order to a Future Regulation: for
otherwise it is but Antedating New Books, and making them pass for Old ones
(which may be done with very little Hazard of Detection) or else, as any
Saleable Book grows scarce; it is but Reprinting it with a false Date, and by
these Additions, and Recruits, a Stock of Seditious Pamphlets shall be kept in
Motion, to the end of the world. In Fine, if they are not fit to be Sold, they
are not fit to be kept; for a verbal Prohibition without an Actual Seizure will
be rather an Advantage to the Private Trade, then a Hindrance; and bring Profit
to the Factious Booksellers and Printers, that have Copies ly upon their
hands, by Enhansing the Prices.

Having already set forth the Quality of those Pamphlets that ought to be
suppressed, together with the Necessity of Suppressing Old as well as New; It
will now follow properly, that I give some Instances of both sorts upon the
foregoing Subjects.

Instances of Treasonous and Seditious Pamphlets.
I. Against the Life of the Late King.
The Armies Remonstrance from St. Albans, Nov. 16. 1648.
We Propound that That Capital and Grand Author of our Troubles, the Person of
the King, P. 62.
may be speedily brought to Justice, for the Treason, Blood, and Mischief He is
Guilty of.

God's Delight in the Progress of the Upright. Printed for Thomas Brewster,
1649.

Have ye not sins enough of your own, Delivered in a Sermon by Thomas Brooks
before the Commons, Dec. 26. 1648.
but will ye wrap your selves up, in the Treachery, Murder, Blood, Cruelty and
Tyranny of others? P. 17. Set some of those Grand Malefactors a Mourning, (that
have Caused the Kingdom to Mourn so many years in Garments Rolled in Blood) by
the Execution of Justice, etc. P. 19.

II. In Justification of Putting His Late Majesty to Death.
The Speeches and Prayers of some of the Late King's Judges. Printed 1660
Diverse Impressions.

That men may see what it is to have an Interest in Christ in a Dying hour, The
Publisher to the Reader. In a Personated Letter from Cook to a Friend.
and to be Faithful to his Cause.

I look upon it [the Murder of the King] as the most Noble and high Act of
Justice that our Story can Parallel. P. 41.

Mercurius Politicus.
That Heroic and most Noble Act of Justice, in Judging and Executing the Late
King -- An Act Agreeing with the Law of God, Printed by a Person now in Office
and eminent employment, 1651.
Consonant to the Laws of Men, and the Practices of all well ordered States and
Kingdoms. P. 784.

Charles the First was Executed a Tyrant, Traitor, Murderer, and a Public
Enemy to the Nation. P. 1032.

III. Against the Title of the Royal Family to the Crown of England.
Mercurius Politicus.
Playing the second Part of Perkin Warbeck, P. 982.
who once Invaded the North after the same manner, with a Crew of Sects at his
Heels, and had every Jot as good a Title as Himself, or as his Predecessor
Henry the 7th.

We had a sufficient Reason to lay aside this Bastard Race of Usurpers and
Pretenders, P. 832.
if it were for no other Cause, but the Mere Injustice and vanity of their
Title.

We have cause to Cut off this Accursed Line of Tyranny, P. 833.
Blood, and Usurpation.

The False Brother.
The Parliament having wisely Changed the Government to a Commonwealth,
Printed by Mr. Baxters Printer for Fran. Tyton. 1651. one of his Majesty's
Servants, if he has not lately put off his place.
and Cut off that hereditary Usurpation of Monarchy, which was never either
justly Begun, or Continued. P. 34.

A Foul and Treasonous piece, printed for Giles Calvert, 1652.
The Rise, Reign, and Ruin of the House of Stuarts.
Printed by Mr. Baxt. Printer for Francis Tyton, 1650.
The true Pourtraiture of the Kings of England. Printed by one in Office and
great Employment, for Frand. Tycon, Aug. 16. 1650.

It is high time now to End that Line that was never either well Begun, or
Directly Continued. P. 42.

A Short Reply, etc. together with a Vindication of the Declaration of the Army
of England.
Touching the Right of This King's Inheritance, We affirm it not only to be
none Originally, without the Content of the Nation; but also, to be justly
Forfeited, by his Own, and Father's Destructive Engagements against the
Commonwealth, and therefore we know not of any Duty, P. 24.
we Owe him, more than to any other engaged Enemy of the Land.

IV. Treasonous, Malicious, and Scandalous Libels against the Person of his
most Sacred Majesty and the Royal Family.
Plain English.
What hope that the Reformed Religion will be protected and Maintained, Printed
for Livewell Chapman, 1660.
by the Son, which was so Irrellgiously betrayed by the Father? P. 2.


A Door of Hope.
C. S. the Son of That Murderer, 1660. Since his Majesty's Return.
is Proclaimed King of England, P. 1.
Whose Throne of Iniquity is built on the Blood of Precious Saints and Martyrs.

The Case of King Charles.
The Murderers of our Savior were less Guilty than that Prince. Printed by
Peter Cole, 1648. The Author Cook the Regicide.


An English Translation of the Scottish Declaration.
Let Justice and Reason blush, Printed by a person in Office and credit, for
Fran. Tyton, 1650.
and Traitors and Murderers, Parricides, and Patricides, put on white
Garments, and Rejoice as Innocent ones, if This Man [ the late King] should
escape the hands of Justice and Punishment. P. 22.


An Implacable P. 13.
and Gangrened Person.

A Butcher P. 19.
rather than a Prince of Bowels and Affection.

[ Charles the 2d] the Son of a Blondy Father, P. 23.
Heir to an Entayl'd Curse, more certain than to his Kingdom, Trained up in
Blood, and one that never sucked in any other Principles but Prerogative and
Tyranny.

The Nonesuch Charles.
[Charles the First] rather chose to submit to the Justice of an Axe in a
Hang-mans hand, P. 167.
than to sway a Scepter with Equity.

This Age knows what such a Tyrant was, P. 169.
in not feeling his force any more upon their Throats.

A True State of the Case of the Commonwealth.
That Accursed Interest; -- Printed 1654. by a person in Offices of great Trust
and Benefit.
a Family that God has cast out before us; -- that has worn the marquis and
badges of Gods high displeasure for almost these Hundred years, P. 47. The
Person of the young Pretender, is a son of Blond, etc. P. 48.

Mercurius Britanicus.
If any man can bring any tale or tiding of a wilful King, which has gone
astray these four years from his Parliament, with a Guilty Conscience, Printed
by Mr. Baxters Printer. 1645.
Bloody Hands, a Heart full of broken Vows and Protestations, etc. P. 825.

V. Pamphlets tending manifestly to stir up the People against his Sacred
Majesty, and the Established Government.
God's Loud Call. Printed by Simon Dover, 1661. P. 17.

Oh! Worm! Dare thou be so impudent to put thy self in Gods stead, to meddle
with men's Consciences, and Lord it in Religious Concerns?

Smectymnuus Redivivus.
The Plastring or Palliating of these Rotten Members [ Bishops] will be a
greater Dishonor to the Nation and Church, Printed for I. Rothwell, 1660.
Published by Mr. Thomas Manton, since his Majesty's Return.
than their Cutting off, and the Personal Acts of These Sons of Belial, being
Connived at, become National Sins. P. 58.


The Root of these Disorders, P. 66.
( viz.) Popery, Superstition, Arminianism, and Profaneness) proceeds from
the Bishops, and their Adherents [ whereof the King is One.]

A Sermon Preached at Aldermanbury-Church, Dec. 28. 1662.
The tongue of Man is not able to express the Misery of that Nation, Delivered
by Mr. Edmund Calamy.
where the Ark of God is Taken [ P. 8.]: and the Ark of God is in This Instant
in Danger of being Lost, [ P. 11.] We have lost our first Love to the Gospel,
and to the Ordinances, [ ibid.] Abundance of Priests and Jesuits are in the
midst of us, and Popery preached amongst us. But where are our old Eli's now?
P. 13.
our Moses's? our Elijahs? our Vriahs?

Animadversions upon the Bishop of Worcesters Letter. Printed by Io. Hayes,
1662. The Author Edw. Bagshaw.

We may lawfully refuse to submit unto such Impositions as God has no where
commanded. P. 8.


The Year of Prodigies.
Amongst the Hellish rout of Profane and ungodly men, let especially the
Oppressors and Persecutors of the True Church look to themselves, 1661. Begun
by Tho. Cree^ for Giles Calvert and Tho. Brewster, and finished by the Order of
Calverts wife, whilst her husband was a Prisoner for that very book.
when the hand of the Lord, in strange Signs and Wonders is lifted up among
them; for -- The final overthrow of Pharaoh and the Egyptians (those cruel
Taskmasters and Oppressors of the Israelites) did bear date not long after the
Wonderful and Prodigious Signs which the Lord had shown in the midst of them.
To the Reader.


A Word of Comfort.
The Church of God appears in his Cause, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, 1662.
Preached by Thomas Watson, calculated for Corbet and Barkstead, and Dated upon
the very day whereon they were Executed, Apr. 19. 1662.
and loses Blood in his Quarrel. [ P. 8.]

Is not God upon the Threshold of his Temple, ready to fly? Are not the
shadows of the Evening stretched out? and may we not fear the Sunsetting of
the Gospel? P. 30.

The Lord may let his Church be a while under Hatches, to punish her Security,
and to awaken her out of her slumbering fits; yet surely the storm will not
continue long. P. 39.


A Dispute against the English-Popish Ceremonies.
Be not deceived to think that they who so eagerly press this Course of
Conformity, This Book was formerly condemned to be burnt by the Common Hangman,
and Reprinted since his Majesty's Return.
have any such end as Gods Glory, or the Good of his Church, and Profit of
Religion. P. 9.

Let not the Pretense of Peace, and Unity, cool your fervor, or make you spare
to oppose your selves, unto those Idle and Idolized Ceremonies, against which
we dispute. P. 11.

Instances of Pamphlets containing Treasonous and Seditious POSITIONS.
VI. The Three Estates are Coordinate, and the King one of the Three Estates.
Baxters Holy Commonwealth. Printed for Francis Tyton, 1659.

The Sovereignty here among us is in King, Lords, and Commons. P. 72.

Parliament-Physick for a Sin-sick Nation.
The Government of England is a Mixed Monarchy, P. 111.
and Governed by the Major part of the Three Estates Assembled in Parliament.

Ahabs Fall, with a Postscript to Dr. Fern.
The Houses are not only Requisite to the Acting of the Power of making Laws,
P. 42.
but Coordinate with his Majesty in the very Power of Acting.

VII. The Sovereignty is in the Two Houses, in Case of Necessity.
The Peoples Cause stated, 1662.
in the [Pretended] Trial of Sir Henry Vane.
The Delegates of the People in the House of Commons, P. 112.
and the Commissioners on the Kings Behalf in the House of Peers, concurring;
do very far bind the King, if not wholly, P. 113.
-- And when These cannot Agree, but break one from another, the Commons in
Parliament Assembled, are, ex Officio, the Keepers of the Libertys of the
Nation, and Righteous Possessors, and Defenders of it against all Usurpers and
Usurpations whatsoever.

Observations upon his Majesty's Answers, etc.
Parliaments may Judge of Public Necessity without the King (if Deserted by
the King) P. 45.
and are to be accounted, by Virtue of Representation, as the whole Body of the
State.

Right and Might well met.
Whenever a King or other Superior Authority creates an Inferior, P. 7. An.
1648.
they Invest it with a Legitimacy of Magistratical Power to punish Themselves
also, in Case they prove Evill-Doers.

VIII. The Power of the King is but Fiduciary; and the Duty of the Subjects but
Conditional.
Ius Populi.
Princes Derive their Power and Prerogative from the People, P. 1. An. 1644.
and have their Investitures merely for the Peoples Benefit.

Vindiciae contra Tyrannos.
If the Prince fail in his Promise, P. 120.
the People are Exempt from their Obedience, An. 1648.
the Contract is made Void, and the Right of Obligation is of no Force -- P.
121.
It is therefore permitted to the Officers of a Kingdom, either All or some
good Number of them, to suppress a Tyrant.

The Tenure of Kings and Magistrates 1649.
--
-- Proving that it is Lawful for any who have the Power, The Title.
to call to Account a Tyrant, or wicked King, and after due Conviction to
depose, and put him to Death, if the ordinary Magistrate have Neglected, or
Denied to do it.

IX. The King is Singulis Major, Universis Minor.
A Declaration of the Lords and Commons touching the Four Bills. March 13. 1647.

It is the Kings Duty to pass all such Laws, as Both Houses shall Judge good
for the Kingdom: Upon a supposition, that they are good, which by them are
Judged such.

De Monarchia Absoluta.
Detrahere Indigno Magistratum etsi Privati non debeant; The Author Edward
Bagshaw, 1659.
Populus tamen Universus quin possit, nemo, opinor, dubitabit. P. 9.

Thorps Charge to the Grand-Iury at York, March 20. 1648.
Kings are Accountable to the People, I do not mean to the Diffused humors and
fancyes of particular men in their single and natural Capacities; but to the
People in their Politic Constitution, lawfully Assembled by their
Representative. P. 3. 1649.

X. The Kings Person may be Resisted but not His Authority.
Lex Rex. Printed by a Person in Office and Employment. October. 7. 1644.

He that Resists the King, commanding in the Lord, Resists the Ordinance of
God. But he who Resists the King, Commanding that which is against God,
Resists no Ordinance of God; but an Ordinance of Sin and Satan. P. 267.

XI. The King has no Power to Impose in Ecclesiastical Affairs.
The Great Question. 1660. The Author Edw. Bagshaw.

I hold it utterly Unlawful for any Christian Magistrate to Impose the Use of
Surplices in Preaching, P. 2.
Kneeling at the Sacrament, Set-Forms of Prayer, etc.

When once Humane Inventions become Impositions, and lay a Necessity upon that
which God has left Free; then may we lawfully Reject them, P. 5.
as Plants of Man's setting, and not of Gods owning.

XII. The Parliament of November 3d. 1640. is not yet Dissolved.
The Peoples Cause Stated in the [Pretended] Trial of Sir Henry Vane. 1662.

How and when the Dissolution of the Long-Parliament (according to Law) has
been made, is yet Unascertain'd, and not particularly Declared: by reason
whereof, (and by what has been before showed) the state of the Case on the
Subjects part, P. 112.
is much altered, as to the Matter of Right, and the Usurpation is now on the
other hand.

XIII. The War Raised in 1642. in the Name of King and Parliament was Lawful.
Baxters Holy Commonwealth. Printed for Francis Tyton, 1659.

I cannot see that I was mistaken in the main Cause, nor dare I repent of it,
nor forbear the same, if it were to do again in the same State of things -- And
my Judgment tells me, that if I should do otherwise, I should be Guilty of
Treason or Disloyalty against the Sovereign Power of the Land, P. 486.
and of Perfidiousness to the Commonwealth.

The Form and Order of the Coronation of Charles the Second. 1660. Since his
Majesty's Return.

A King abusing his Power to the overthrow of Religion Laws and Liberties --
may be Controlled and Opposed. Preached by Rubert Dowglass, at Scoon, Ian. 1.
1651.
This may serve to Justify the Proceedings of this Kingdom against the Late
King, who in an Hostile way set himself to overthrow Religion, Parliaments,
Laws, Page 10.
and Liberties.

XIV. The Covenant is Binding.
A Phoenix: or, the Solemn League and Covenant. Printed by Tho. Creek for Giles
Calvert, Tho. Brewster and Livewel Chapman, since his Majesty's Return.

The breaking of our National Covenant is a Sin in Folio, a Sin of a high
Nature -- a greater sin, then a sin against a Commandment, or against an
Ordinance, a sin not only of Disobedience, but of Perjury, a sin of Injustice a
spiritual Adultery, a sin of Sacrilege, A Sermon of Mr. Calamys.
a sin of great unkindness. P. 158.

Two Papers of Proposals. 1661. from the Presbyterian Ministers.

The Covenant does undoubtedly Bind us to forbear our own Consent to those
Luxuriances of Church Government which we there Renounced, P. 13.
and for which no Divine Institution can be pretended.

A Short Survey of the Grand Case, 1663. Printed by Henry Bridges.
etc.
Some say, the Terms are Dubious, if not false, it being indefinitely asserted,
It is not lawful to take Arms against the King on any Pretense whatsoever, P.
21.
-- Although Our King is, and WE HOPE, EVER WILL BE,
so qualified, that in reference to Him, it MAY be true; yet it is not
Impossible for a King Regis Personum exuere; in a Natural, A Treasonous
Position.
or MORAL Madness, or Frenzy, to turn Tyrant, yea Beast, Waiving his Royal
Place, violently, extrajudicially, extramagisterially to assault his Subject,
as Saul did David: In this Case, men think Nature does Dictate it, and
Scripture does justify a Man, se defendendo vim vi repellere, to take Arms,
though by rallying the Men of Belial, not to Restst, yet to Restreyn, the King,
As the Presbyterians restreyn'd the Late King.
and those who are Commissioned by him, until they make good their Retreat, and
more safely run out of his reach.

To some it foundeth harsh to declare it a Traiterous Position to take Arms by
the Kings Authority, P. 22.
against the Kings Person, or those Commissioned by him -- for if some Russians
should (which God defend) seize the Person of a King, he is a Man, from whom
Commissions may be by fear extorted, whereby true Loyalty must be on their
side, and Treason on the part of the Kings Council, Kindred, and Ministers of
State, if Arming against his Person, by his Authority though on such a Pretense.

The Convincing Demonstration that there lies no Obligation on me, P. 23.
nor any other Person, from the Oath commonly called the Solemn League and
Covenant, is a Knot cut by the Sword of Authority, whilst it cannot be loosed
by Religious Reason.

We are Expectants of God's avengement of the Covenant now it has been taken,
-- We do not, P. 47.
cannot, will not Declare, the Covenant does not oblige me or any other person
to endeavor our alteration of the Government in the Church.

I could add More, and Worse to the Instances already given, but these shall
suffice for a Taste. The Question is now, By whom, the Government and Oversight
of the Press is to be undertaken, and the Contest lies at present betwixt the
Booksellers and Printers, which although Concorporate by an Ancient Grant, are
in this point become Competitors; and since they have divided Themselves, they
shall be here likewise distinctly considered.

The Stationers are not to be entrusted with the care of the Press, for These
following Reasons.
First, Reasons why the Stationers are not to be Entrusted with the Care of the
Press.
They are both Parties and Judges; for diverse of them have brought up Servants
to the Mystery of Printing which they still retein in Dependence: Others again
are both Printers and Stationers, Themselves; so that they are Entrusted
(effectually) to search for their own Copies; to Destroy their own Interests;
to Prosecute their own Agents, and to Punish Themselves: for they are the
Principal Authors of those Mischiefs which they pretend now to Redress, and the
very Persons against whom the Penalties of this Intended Regulation are chiefly
Levelled.

2ly. It is not Advisable to Rely upon the Honesty of People (if it may be
Avoided) where That Honesty is to their Loss: Especially if they be such as
have already given Proof that they prefer their Private Gayn before the
Welfare of the Public: Which has been the Stationer's case throughout our
Late Troubles, some few Excepted, whose Integrity deserves Encouragement.

3ly. In this Trust, they have not only the Temptation of Profit, to divert
them from their Duty (a fair part of their stock lying in Seditious Ware) but
the Means of Transgressing with great Privacy, and Safety: for, make Them
Overseers of the Press, and the Printers become totally at their Devotion; so
that the whole Trade passes through the fingers of their own Creatures, which,
upon the matter, concludes rather in a Combination, then a Remedy.

4ly. It seems a little too much to Reward the Abusers of the Press with the
Credit of Superintending it: upon a Confidence that They that Destroyed the
Last King for their Benefit, will now make it their business to Preserve This
to their Loss.

5ly. It will cause a great Disappointment of Searches, when the Persons most
concerned shall have it in their Power to spoil all, by Notices, Partiality, or
Delay.

6ly. As the Effectual Regulation of the Press is not at all the Stationers
Interest, so is it strongly to be suspected that it is as little their Aim: for
not One Person has been Fined, and but one Prosecuted, (as is credibly
Affirmed) since the Late Act, notwithstanding so much Treason and Sedition
Printed and dispersed since That time.

7ly. It is enjoined by the Late Act that no Man shall de Admitted to be a
Master-Printer, until They who were at that time Actually Master-Printers,
shall be by Death or otherwise reduced to the Number of Twenty: which Provision
notwithstanding, Several Persons have since that time been suffered to set up
Masters; which gives to understand that the reducing of the Presses to a
Limited Number is not altogether the Stationers Purpose.

The Printers are not to be Entrusted with the Government of the Press.
First, Not the Printers,
All the Arguments already Objected against the Stationers hold good also
against the Printers, but not fully so strong. That is, they are both Parties,
and Judges. Self-ended, (upon Experiment) under the Temptation of Profit.
Offenders as well as the Stationers; and in all Abuses of the Press,
confederate with them. Beside, They will have the same Influence upon Searches;
and they have probably as little Stomach to a Regulation, as the other. It Is
true; the Printers Interest is not so Great as the Stationers; for where He
gets (it may be) 20 or 25 in the 100 for Printing an Unlawful Book, the Other
Doubles, nay many times, Trebles his Money by selling it: Yet nevertheless the
Printer's Benefit lies at stake too.

2dly. It were a hard matter to Pick out Twenty Master-Printers, who are both
Free of the Trade, of Ability to Menage it, and of Integrity to be Entrusted
with it: Most of the Honester sort being impoverished by the Late Times, and
the great business of the Press being Engrossed by Oliver's Creatures.

But, although Incorporated;
They Propose to Undertake the Work upon Condition to be Incorporate. That is;
to be Disengaged from the Company of Stationers, and to be made a Society by
Themselves. It may be Answered that it would be with Them, as it is with Other
Incorporate Societies: They would be True to the Public, so far as stands
with the Particular Good of the Company. But Evidently Their Gain lies the
other way: and for a State to Erect a Corporation that shall bring so great a
Danger upon the Public, and not one Penny into the Treasury, to Balance the
Hazard, were a Proceeding not ordinary.

But they Offer to give Security, and to be Liable to Fines. Let That be done,
or giving Security.
Whether they be Incorporate, or no. In case of Failer, they will be content to
lose their Privileges. What signifies That, but only a Stronger Obligation to
a Closer Confederacy? It Is True, The Printers in a Distinct and Regulated
Society may do some good as to the General Business of Printing, and within the
Sphere of that Particular Profession: but the Question is Here, how to Prevent
a Public Mischief, not how to Promote a Private Trade. But are not Printers
the fittest Instruments in Searches? They are, without Dispute, Necessary
Assistants, either for Retriving Concealed Pamphlets, or for Examination of
work in the Mettle, but whether it be either for the Honor, or Safety, of the
Public, to Place so great a Trust in the Hands of Persons of that Quality,
and Interest, is submitte'd to better Judgments.

To Conclude; both Printers, and Stationers, under Color of Offering a Service
to the Public, do Effectually but Design One upon another. The Printers would
beat down the Book-selling Trade, by Menaging the Press as Themselves please,
and by working upon their own Copies: The Stationers, on the other side, They
would Subject the Printers to be absolutely Their Slaves; which they have
Effected in a Large Measure already, by so increasing the Number, that the One
Half must either play the Knaves, or Sterve.

The Expedient for This, The Dependence of the Printers upon the Stationers is
Dangerous.
must be some way to Disengage the Printers from that Servile and Mercenary
Dependence upon the Stationers, unto which they are at present subjected. The
True State of the Business being as follows.

First, The Number of Master-Printers is computed to be about 60. whereas 20.
or 24. would Dispatch all the Honest work of the Nation.

2dly. These Sixty Master-Printers have above 100 Apprentices (That is; at
least 20 more then they ought to have by the Law.)

3dly, There are, beside Aliens, and those that are Free of other Trades, at
least 150 Iourny-Men, of which Number, at least 30. are superfluous; to which
30. there will be added about 36. more, beside above 50. Supernumerary
Apprentices, upon the Reduction of the Master-Printers to 24. So that upon the
whole Reckoning, there will be left a Matter of 60. Iourny-men, and 50.
Apprentices, to Provide for, a part of which Charge might very reasonably be
laid upon those that either Bound or Took any of the said Number, as
Apprentices, contrary to the Limitation set by Authority.

These Supernumerary Printers were at first Introduced by the Booksellers, as
a sure way to bring them both to their Prices, and Purposes; for the Number
being greater then could honestly Live upon the Trade, the Printers were
Enforced either to Print Treason, or Sedition, if the Stationer Offered it, or
to want Lawful Work, by which Necessity on the one side, and Power on the
other, the Combination became exceeding Dangerous, and so it still Continues;
but how to Dissolve it, whether by barely Dis-incorporating the Company of
Stationers, and subjecting the Printers to Rules apart, and by Themselves; or
by Making them Two Distinct Companies, I do not Meddle.

This only may be Offered, that in Case Those Privileges and Benefits should be
Granted, to both Stationers, and Printers, which they themselves desire in
point of Trade; yet in regard that several Interests are Concerned, That of the
Kingdom on the one side, and only That of the Companies on the other; It is but
reason that there should be several Super-intending Powers, and that the
smaller Interest should give place, and be Subordinate to the Greater: That is,
The Master, and Wardens, to Menage the Business of their Respective Trade, but
withal, to be Subjected to some Superior Officer, that should overlook them
Both on behalf of the Public.

As the Powers of Licencing Books, Let the care of Printing be Committed to Six
Surveighers of the Press.
are by the Late Act vested in several Persons, with regard to the several
Subjects Those Books treat of; so may there likewise be several Agents
Authorized and Appointed for the Care of the Press, touching These several
Particulars, under the Name, and Title of Surveyors of the Press: and every
distinct Surveyor to keep himself strictly within the Limits of his own
Province. As for Example.

First, One for Law.
The Lord Chancellor, or Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England for the time
being, the Lords Chief Justices, and Lord Chief Baron for the time being, or
One or More of them, are specially Authorized to License, by Themselves, or by
their Substitutes, all Books concerning the Common Laws of This Kingdom.

Let there be one Surveigher of the Press Constituted peculiarly for That
Subject.

2dly. All Books of Divinity, Physique, Philosophy, Three for Divinity,
Physique, etc i. e. One for each University and the Third for London, etc.
or whatsoever other Science, or Art, are to be Licensed by the Lord Archbishop
of Conterbury, and Lord Bishop of London, for the time being, or one of them,
or by their, or one of Their Appointments, or by either one of the
Chancellours, or Vice-Chancellours of either of the Universities, for the time
being.

Let Three Other Surveighers of the Press be likewise Authorized for These
Particulars.

3dly. All Books concerning Heraldry, Titles of Honor, One for Heraldry, etc.
and Arms, or Concerning the Office of Earl-Marshall, are to be Licensed by the
Earl-Marshall for the time being; or in case there shall not then be an Earl.
Marshal, by the Three Kings of Arms or any Two of them, whereof Garter to be
One.

This is to be the Subject of Another Surveigher's Care.

4thly. Books of History, Politiques, State Affairs, and Another for
State-Afffairs, etc.
and all other Miscellanies, or Treatises, nor comprehended under the Powers
beforementioned, fall under the Jurisdiction of the Principal Secretaries of
State, to be Allowed by Themselves, or one of them, or by their, or one of
their Appointments.

The Care of the Press concerning These Particulars may be another Surveighers
Business. So that six Persons may do the whole work, with good Order, and
Security. Three Substitutes for the Bishops; and Chancellours, and One a piece
for the Rest.

A world now touching the Encouragements of these Officers; and Then concerning
Penalties to be Inflicted upon Offenders, and Rewards to be Granted to
Enformers.

The Inward Motive to all Public and Honorable Actions must be taken for
granted, to be a Principle of Loyalty, and Justice: but the Question is here
concerning Outward Encouragements to This Particular Charge. There must be
Benefit, For Encouragement there must be Benefit and Power.
and Power. Benefit; that a man may Live Honestly upon the Employment: and
Power; for the Credit, and Execution of the Trust.

The Benefit must arise partly from some Certain, and standing Fee; and in
Part, from Accessory, and Contingent Advantages, which will be but Few, The
Employment being Troublesome and Chargeable.
and Small, in Proportion to the Trouble and Charge of the Employment: for
there must be, First; A Constant Attendance: and a Daily Labor in hunting out,
and over-looking Books, and Presses: and Secondly, A Contiual Expense, in the
Enterteynment of Instruments for Discovery, and Intelligence; which being
deducted out of the Pittances of Licenses, and Forfeitures, will leave the
Surveigher a very small Proportion for his Peyns.

The next thing is a Power to Execute; without which, the Law is Dead, and the
Officer Ridiculous.

Now concerning Penalties and Rewards.

1. The Gayn of Printing some Books, The Inconvenience of small Penalties,
is Ten times Greater, if they Escape, then the Loss, if they be Taken: so that
the Damage bearing such a disproportion to the Profit, is rather an Allurement
to Offend, then a Discouragement.

2. As the Punishment is too small, and Rewards.
for the Offender; so is the Reward also, for the Enformer: for reckon the
Time, Trouble, and Money, which it shall cost the Prosecutour to Recover his
Allotment, he shall sit down at last a Loser by the Bargain: and more then
That, he loses his Credit, and Employment, over and Above, as a Betrayer of his
Fellows; so great is the Power and Confidence of the Delinquent Party.

The way to help This, Which in Cases of Public Concern ought to be Deep upon
the Delinquent and the Reward Certain and Considerable to the Enformer.
is, to Augment both the Punishment, and the Reward; and to Provide that the
Inflicting of the One, and the Obteyning of the Other, may be both Easy, and
Certain: for to Impose a Penalty, and to leave the way of Raising it, so
Tedious, and Difficult, as in This Case hitherto it is; amounts to no more then
This: If the Enformer will spend Ten Pound it is possible he may Recover Five:
and so the Prosecuter must Impose a greater Penalty upon Himself, then the Law
does upon the Offender; or Else all comes to Nothing.

An Expedient for this Inconvenience is highly Necessary; An Expedient for the
Quick and Easy getting of the Penalty.
and Why May not the Oath of One Credible Witness or More, before a Master of
the Chancery, or a Justice of the Peace, serve for a Conviction. Especially the
Person Accused being Left at Liberty before such Oath taken, either to Appeal
to the Privy Council, or to abide the Decision.

Now to the several Sorts of Penalties. and to the Application of them.

The Ordinary Penalties I find to be These; Penalties
Death, Mutilation, Imprisonment, Banishment, Corporal Peyns, Disgrace,
Pecuniary Mulcts: which Penalties are to be Applied with regard to the Quality
of the Offense, and to the Condition of the Delinquent.

The Offense is either Blasphemy, Heresy, Schism, Offenses.
Treason, Sedition, Scandal, or Contempt of Authority.

The Delinquents are the Advisers, Delinquents.
Authors, Compilers, Writers, Printers, Correcters, Stitchers, and Binders of
unlawful Books and Pamphlets: together with all Publishers, Dispersers and
Concealers of them in General: and all Stationers, Posts, Hackny-Coachmen,
Carryers, Boat-men, Mariners. Hawkers, Mercury-Women, Pedlers, and
Ballad-Singers so offending, in Particular.

Penalties of Disgrace ordinarily in Practice are Many, and more may be Added.

Pillory, Penalties of Disgrace.
Stocks, Whipping, Carting, Stigmatizing, Disablement to bear Office, or
Testimony. Public Recantation, standing under the Gallows with a Rope about
the Neck, at a Public Execution. Disfranchisement (if Freemen) Cashiering
(if Soldiers,) Degrading (if Persons of Condition), Wearing some Badge of
Infamy: Condemnation to Work either in Mines, Plantations, or House of
Correction.

Under the Head of Pecuniary Mulcts, Pecuniary Mulcts.
are Comprehended, Forfeitures, Confiscations, Loss of any Beneficial Office,
or Employment, Incapacity to hold or enjoy any: and Finally, all Damages
accruing, and Imposed, as a Punishment for some Offense.

Touching the Other Penalties beforementioned, it suffices only to have Named
them, and so to Proceed to the Application of them, with respect to the Crime,
and to the Offender.

The Penalty ought to bear Proportion to the Malice, and Influence of the
Offense, but with respect to the Offender too: for the same Punishment (unless
it be Death it self) is not the same Thing to several Persons; and it may be
proper enough to Punish One Man in his Purse, Another in his Credit; a Third in
his Body, and All for the same Offense.

The Grand Delinquents are, the Authors or Compilers, (which I reckon as all
One) the Printers, and Stationers.

For the Authors, The Authors.
nothing can be too Severe, that stands with Humanity, and Conscience. First,
it is the Way to cut off the Fountain of our Troubles. 2dly. There are not many
of them in an Age, and so the less work to do.

The Printer, Printers and Stationers to be severely Punished.
and Stationer, come next, who beside the Common Penalties of Money, Loss of
Copies, or Printing-Materials, may be Subjected to These further Punishments.

Let them Forfeit the Best Copy they have, at the Choice of that Surveigher of
the Press, under whose Cognizance the Offense lies; the Profit whereof the said
Officer shall see Thus Distributed One Third to the King, a Second to the
Enformer, reserving the Remainder to himself.

In some Cases, they may be condemned to wear some visible Badge, or Marque of
Ignominy, as a Halter instead of a Hat-band, one Stocking Blew, and another
Red; a Blew Bonnet with a Red T or S. upon it, to Denote the Crime to be Either
Treason, or Sedition; and if at any time, the Person so Condemned, shall be
found without the said Badge, or Marque, During the time of his Obligation to
wear it, let him Incur some further Penalty, Provided only, that if within
the said time, he shall discover and seize, or cause to be Seized any Author,
Printer, or Stationer, Liable at the time of That Discovery and Seizure to be
Proceeded against, for the Matter of Treasonous, or Seditious Pamphlets, the
Offender aforesaid shall from the time of that Discovery be Discharged from
wearing it any Longer.

This Proposal may seem Phantastique at first sight; but certainly there are
Many Men who had rather suffer any other Punishment then be made Publicly
Ridiculous.

It is not Needful here to run through every Particular, and to Direct, in What
Manner, and to What Degree, These, and Other Offenders in the like kind shall
be Punished, so as to Limit, and Appropriate, the Punishment: but it shall
suffice, having Specified the several Sorts of Offenders, and Offenses; to have
laid down likewise the several Species of Penalties, Sortable to every Man's
Condition, and Crime.

Concerning Rewards, something is said already, and I shall only Add for a
Conclusion, that they are every jot as Necessary as Punishments; and ought to
be various, according to the Several Needs, Tempers, and Qualities of the
Persons upon whom they are to be Conferred. Money is a Reward for One; Honor
for Another: and either of these Misplaced, would appear rather a Mockery, than
a Benefit.

The End.

