Crack upon Crack: OR, CRACK-FART Whipped with his own ROD,
By Citt and Bumpkin,
If Crack-Fart drawn unto the Life you would see,
Lo here he hangs in formal Effigy:
His Writings were so Foul, as all suppose
They Will Poison us! Good Reader stop your Nose.

Citt. WEll overtaken, honest Bumpkin; what, your Whip in your hand man?
Prithee what is that for? and why so much in haste?


Bump. Dear honest Citt, never better met than now; I am now going about a
Business of extraordinary Importance, and your presence (if you please to
accompany me) will be extreme useful and necessary: I am going in search of
that Dissembling Tool who Nicknames himself Trueman, though indeed the meerest
Crack-fart in the World. Don't you remember him Citt?


Citt. Remember him, I that I do, too well; the first time you know, like a
cunning Sophister, he bolted out of a Closer to surprise us, a second time he
intruded into our Company in our walk to Hampsted, and then obtruded those
things upon us we never imagined.


Bump. Right, right Citt; But if I do not give him a Lace to his fine Coat (if
I can but set eyes on him) as long as this Whip lasts, never believe man more
for my sake.


Citt. Well said Bumpkin, and I Will assist thee with this Cat of Nine-tails; for
to say the Truth, I always took him to be a sharp-witted Logician, without the
least Dram of Honesty; and now the Sophister has showed us a fair pair of heels.


Bump. Pox-on't, who'd think a man in his Coat should serve us so?


Citt. Think Bumpkin, why I always thought no other; for to say the truth, How
could you reasonably expect he would stay to hazard his Neck? Come come, think
what you will, I know he is a mere Hocus, and no better.


Bump. But whither Cit do intend to go to find him?


Citt. First Bumpkin, I Will tell the whither I have been to look him, and
afterward where I intend to go, upon his own words in his Appeal, I conceived
he might very fairly have hanged himself in his Closet, since he so fairly took
his last Farewell of the World; but upon search I found it a notable Cheat, the
Bird was flown, but had left such a poisonous stink of Sedition behind him,
that at first I Protest I took his Closet for a Common-Shore; to say the truth,
I was almost stifled.


Bump. Say you so man? why I thought Sedition could not enter there.


Citt. Not enter there! Faith such another word Bumpkin, will make you and I
fall out; what do ye think I tell ye a Lie? Let me assure ye, I verily believe
Machiavel himself never invented the Hundredth part of so many Political
Mysteries of Villainy as are there extant.


Bump. Say thou so Citt? well but go on, where have thou been else in search
for Monsieur Crack?


Citt. Why next I went to enquire for him at Mr. B. H. -- 's, but he poor man
Protests he had not seen him never since he Publicly absented himself, and to
tell thee the truth, for ought I understand, he has showed him but a kind of a
slippery trick.


Bump. As how pray?


Citt. Why I Will tell thee Bumpkin, This B. H. -- is a man who has an itching
desire for the Philosopher's Stone, which our Crack (for Trueman is not his
right Name) promised to help him to in a small time; and to say the truth, he
had so great Confidence in his words, that he hardly conceived himself Inferior
to the King of Morocco; in the mean time, our sly Politician Crack, makes an
exchange with his Chapman (viz.) Wast Paper for good Gold, assuring him withal,
nothing could more speedily effect his desire; but since Crack has absented
himself, his poor Chapman is ready to gnaw his Thumbs off, as a revenge for his
Folly, and looks as Pale in the Face, as the old Woman that broke her Jaws with
eating thick Milk at Islington,


Bump. Troth Citt. you make me Laugh at this humor; but where else have you
been in his search pray?


Citt. Why I Will tell you Bumpkin, my next and last Journey was to M. --
Coffee-House, and I mist of him there but very narrowly; for he had left his
old scent behind him, the very Room was perfumed by the scent he left; I
thereupon paid for my Dish, and thought to track him by the scent, which I
forthwith did, but with no success; and now honest Bumpkin, if thou will
accompany me, I Will tell thee whither I design next to go in search of this
Animal.


Bump. Honest dear Citt, tell me presently, for I protest my Fingers itch to
have a fling at his Arse, he has so notoriously abused us both; I hope you will
Second me.


Citt. If I don't Bumpkin, take me for a half-Spirited Fool; and I am sure you
know better.


Bump. Come then, let us jogg on, and talk on it as we go.


Citt. It Is done Bumpkin, agreed.


Bump. But which way shall we steer our Course Citt, and not lose our labor?
for I am stark wild till I find him.


Citt. Faith my Opinion is, if we could find but a Cabal of Jesuists, we should
find him Spoaksman to the Company; you know he is a Plaguey Fellow, and has his
Pen and Tongue at will.


Bump. Troth well thought on, but now I consider better, these Vermin are so
disguised, that it is as hard to find them, as the Party we look for; they are
a sort of Plaguey cunning Shifters, and play so many Hocus Pocus Tricks, that if
we should by chance hit in among them, we should scarce know them in Masquerade.


Citt. Truly Bumpkin, I fear so too; but however it is but Labor lost, let us
venture however.


Bump. Well then, let us first steer our Course toward the water side, and call
a Boat, and go on Board the Vanherring, my life for yours he has no small
Acquaintance amongst the Mahometans.


Citt. I care not much if we do, and I believe it a very probable Course; but
how shall we do to get him on shore if we chance to find him; for we must not
attempt any thing on Board.


Bump. Faith Citt, I Will tell thee, Let us each take the care to provide us a
Garment that may bespeak us Mahometans, and we may happily effect our Desires.
What think ye?


Citt. But I cannot well speak their Language.


Bump. Why Citt, I did not take thee before to be so much a Child, or a Novice,
they all speak the same Language as we do as to Outward appearance; when we are
thus accoutred, you need say no more, but that a Friend would speak with him at
the Pope's Head, and he immediately comes on shore.


Citt. Come then, let us go, and fit our selves with a convenient Garb, and away
as fast as we can.


Bump. Let Us strike into this Shop then, and furnish our selves.


Citt. Done, Done Bumpkin, I Will go first in, and try what may be done.


They Enter the Shop, and Citt Cheapens. Citt. Pray Sir, Have you any Disguises
for Masquerade?


Shopkeeper. Yes Sir, Yes, Pray walk in, here is Choice sufficient; How would
you have them trimmed pray?


Citt. I would have them trimmed with a competent Shoulder-Knot of seeming
Honesty, my Coat lined with Equivocations; in a word Sir, you know what belongs
to a true Mohammedan Dress; Pray let us have two of the newest Fashion, one for
my Self, another for my Friend.


Bump. Hold Citt, hold, let me speak to the Gentleman; Pray Sir, let us have
each an entire Suit, except a Hempen Cravat, for that begins to grow out of
Fashion.


Shopkeeper. You shall Gentlemen; Look here is two, I can afford you a good
Pennyworth in Choice goods on my word.


Bump. Well Sir, your price?


Shopkeeper. In a word Sir, the two Suits are worth 12 l. as well as a Jesuit
is worth a Halter; but I Will abate you Six Shillings in the two because you take
them together.


Citt. There Is your Money Sir, Farewell.


Bump. Come now to the Pope's-Head, and on with 'um presently; a fine
Pennyworth I protest, if it catch the Bird.


Citt. Never fear Bumpkin, the Business is as good as done.


Bump. Well Citt, never believe me more, if you don't look as like Crack in
Masquerade in this Garb, as any man living.


Citt. And you the like. Come let us aboard.


[They Enter the Ship, being entertained and kindly welcomed by the
Mahometans.] Mahom. Welcome Aboard Gentlemen, Kindly welcome; Pray who would you
speak withal.


Citt. Is one Mr. Trueman Aboard pray?


Mahom. Yes Gentlemen, but betwixt you and I, he is forced to keep his Cabin
Close, since our Council of Officers last sat; for several Laudable
Performances in Vindication of our Interest.


Bump. We have heard as much, and therefore come to pay our respects to him for
his worthy Service.


Mahom. Stay Gentlemen, if you please I will carry you to him, you are Friends
I hope.


Citt. and Bump. both. I hope you take us for no other Sir; if you do, farewell.


Mahom. Nay, Stay Gentlemen, I Will call him to ye.


Mr. Trueman appears on Deck. Citt. Ah! Mr. Trueman, How have you faired this
many a day, since you absconded your self for our Interest?


True. Truly Gentlemen, I do not very well know you.


Bump. O lack Sir, grown out of knowledge already, I Am sorry for it; Don't you
remember your fellow Clubbers at the Pope's-Head?


True. Cry you mercy, Gentlemen, I can expect no deceit to lurk under this Garb,
accompanied with so fair a Token, you are welcome on Board heartily.


Citt. But we must request your Company on shore upon some Emergent Occasions
at the Pope's-Head, no farther, you shall not stay Sir.


True. Hush, step into the Boat, I Will go with you.


[ Trueman brought ashore, Citt and Bumpkin Cast off their Disguise.] True.
Betrayed, betrayed as I live; Hell and Ten thousand Devils confound your Visit.


[ Bumpkin handles his Whip.] Bump. Say you so Sir; There Is that for you, in
recompense for your last Closet Surprizal; I have not forgot it yet.


[ Citt claws him off with his Cat of Nine-Tails.] Citt. And that Sir, for your
Company to Hampsted; Could you not be contented, you Scoundrel, to ruin your
Country as much as lay in your Power, but strive to make us accessory to the
Cutting our own Throats in a formal Disguise; and then make us believe you had
hanged your self.


True. Your Pardon Gentlemen, upon my Knees I beg it.


Citt. And upon your Knees you shall receive your Punishment, and had done
sometime since, had you not absconded your self like a Rascal as you are: Come,
come Bumpkin, have at his hide,


[ Citt and Bumpkin belabouring him.] Lo Citt and Bumpkin Loyalty do show,
I paying those just Debts they Crack-Fart owe.
FINIS.
Printed for R. I. 1680.


