THE COMMITTEE or Popery in Masquerade.


THE EXPLANATION.
BEhold Here, in This Piece, the Plague, the Fate
Of a Seditious Schism in Church, and State:
Its Rise, and Progress; with the dire Event
Of a Blind Zeal, and a Packed Parliament.
It was This Medly that Confounded All;
This damned Concert of Folly and Cabal,
That Ruined us: For ye must know, that Fools
Are but State-Engins; Politicians Tools
Ground to an Edg, to Hack, and Hew it out;
Till by Dull Sots Knaves Ends are brought about.
Think on it, my Masters; and if e're ye see
This Game played over again, then Think of Me.
You Will say This Print's a Satyr. Against Whom?
Those that Crowned Holy Charles with Martyrdom.
By the same rule the Scripture you will Traduce,
For saying Christ was Crucified by the Jews:
Nay, and their Treasons too agreed in This;
By Pharisees Betrayed; and with a Kiss:
Conscience, the Cry; Emanuel was the Word;
The Cause, the Gospel, but the Plea, the Sword.
[ A] Now lay your Ear close to that Nest of Heads.
Look, don't ye see a Streaming Ray, that sheds
A Light from the Cabal down to the Table;
TO inspire, and Push on an Enthusiast Rabble?
In That Box sits a Iunto in Debate,
Upon their Sovereigns and Three Kingdoms Fate:
They Are Hot, and Loud enough. Attend 'um pray'e,
From point to point; and tell us what they say.
Is it Resolved then that the King must Down?
Not for a World; we will only take his Crown:
He shall have Caps, and Knees still; and the Fame
Of a fair Title, and Imperial Name:
But for the Sword; the Power of War, and Peace;
Life and Death; and such Fooleries as These;
We Will beg These Boons our selves: And Then, in Course,
What cannot be Obtained by Prayer, we will Force.
It rests, now, only; by what Arts and Friends,
Methods, and Instruments, to gain These Ends.
First, make the People Sure; and That must be
By Pleas for Conscience, Common Liberty:
By which Means, we secure a Popular Voice
For Knights and Burgesses, in the Next Choice.
If we can get an Act, Then, to Sit on
Till we Dissolve our Selves, the work's Half-done.
In the mean while, the Pulpits, and the Presses
Must ring of Popery, Grievances, Addresses,
Plots of all Sorts, Invasions, Massacres,
Troops under Ground, Plague-Plaisters, Cavaliers:
Till, Mad with Spite and Jealousy, the Nation
Cry out, as One Man, for a Reformation.
Having thus gained the Rabble; it must be our
Next Part, the Common Council to secure:
And then; let King, Law, Church, and Court-Cabal
Unite, and do their Worst; we will Stand 'em All.
Our Design's This; to Change the Government;
Set up our Selves; and do it by a Parliament.
And This to effect needs only Resolution;
We Will leave the Tumults to do Execution.
The Popish Lords must Out, Bishops must Down;
Strafford must Dye; and Then, have at the Crown.
We will not leave the King, One Minister;
The House, One Member; but what We Prefer:
No nor the Church, One Levite; Down they go:
We, and the 'Prentices will have it so.
[ B] This was scarce sooner Said, than the thing Done:
For up starts Little Isaac, in the Room
Of Loyal Gourney, with a Sword in's hand;
The Ensign of his New-usurpt Command:
Out of his Mouth, a Label, to be True
To the Design of the Caballing Crew:
[ C] His Holiness at's Elbow; Heart'ning on,
A Motly Schism; Half-Pope, Half-Puritan;
Who, while they talk of Union, bawl at Rome;
Revolt, and set up Popery at Home.
[ D] Now, bring your Eye down to the Board; and see
The Agreement of that Blessed Fraternity:
Cov'nanters All; and by That Holy Band
Sworn Enemies to the Established Law of the Land.
These are the Men that Plague all Parliaments
For the Impossible Expedients
Of making Protestant Dissenters, One,
By Acts of Grace, or Comprehension:
When by their very Principles, each other
Thinks himself bound to Persecute his Brother.
They never Did, they never Can Unite
In any one Point, but to overthrow the Right:
Nor is it at all the Intent of Their Debate
To fix Religion, but to embroil the State;
Ill Accidents and Humors to improve,
Under the fair Pretexts of Peace, and Love;
To serve the Turn of an Usurping Power.
But read the Minutes, and They Will tell ye More.
[ E] Take a view, next, of the Petitioners.
But why, (you will say) like Beasts to the Ark in Pairs?
Not to expose the Quaker, and the Maid,
(By Lust to those Brutalities betrayed)
As if those two Sects more addicted stood
To Mares, and Whelps, than other Flesh and Blood:
No, But they are coupled Here, only to tell
The Harmony of their Reforming Zeal.
[ F] Now wash your Eyes, and see their Secretarius
Of Uncouth Visage; Manners most Nefarious;
Placed betwixt Pot and Pipe, with Pen and Paper;
To show that he can Scribble, Tope, and Vapor:
Beside him, (craving Blessing) a Sweet Babby;
(Save it!) the very Image of the Daddy!
He deals in Sonnets, Articles, takes Notes,
Frames Histories, Impeachments, enters Votes,
Draws Narratives, (for Four Pound) very well;
But then it is Forty more, to Pass the Seal.
Beside his Faculty, at a Dry Bob,
That brings him many a comfortable Job.
[ G] Mark, Now, Those Club-men; That Tumultuous Rout
Crown, Bible, Magna Charta, under Foot!
Those Banners, Trophies; and the Execrable
Rage, and Transports of an Incensed Rabble!
Here, the Three States in Chains; and There, the Head
Of a Good King, by Rebels Murdered.
And all this while, the Creatures of Those Knaves,
That blew the Coal, themselves, the greatest Slaves.
What Devil could make Men Mad, to This Degree?
Only mistaken Zeal, and Jealousy.
Liberty, Conscience, Popery, the Pretense;
Rapine, Blood, Sacrilege, the Consequence.
[ H] Let Us Cross the way, Now, to the Doctors Side.
It Is a good, pretty Girl, that holds his Head!
What Is his Disease, Sweetheart? Nay, That Is a Question;
His Stomach's Foul, perhaps, it is Ill Digestion;
But it is a mercy, 't comes so finely away:
Here Is Canons, Surplices, Apocrypha!
Look what a Lump there lies of Common Prayer.
Ay, but the Cross in Baptism, that lies There:
O, how he Reached; and still, as I provoked him,
He Would Heave for Life; 'twas Ten to One 't had Choakt him!
Nay verily; This Stuff, in Holder-forth,
May be as much as a man's Life is worth.
How Do ye Sir? Why somewhat more at Ease,
Since I Have Discharged these Legal Crudities.
But if your Stomach be so extremely Nice;
What Course do you take? O, I have Good Advice:
All the Dissenting Protestant-Divines;
There Is not a man in the whole Club, but Joins.
This Pect'ral, ^ou must know, keeps me alive;
Sequestered Livings are Preservative!
But for the Sovereign Remedy of all,
The Only, never-failing Cordial;
There it is upon That Shelf: That Composition
The Assembly Took, it self, in my Condition.
The Tears of Widows, Orphans Hearts, and Blood
They made their daily Drink, their daily Food:
Behold our Christian Cannibal's Oblation,
To auspicate their Moloch Reformation.
[ I] Well! But what means This Excremental Swarm
Of Humane Insects? How they Fret, and Storm;
Grin at the Vomit; and yet for all this Pother;
At the same Time, lie teizing one another.
Alas! It Is too, too true, you have hit my Grief:
And there is no Help, no Help for it; no Relief.
While They joined Hands with Us, against the Crown,
And Church; How sweetly the Lords Work went on!
But when we came to plant our Directory,
'Bless me, what Freaks they played! you know the Story.
Oh! of themselves, they are even a Vip'rous Brood;
Begot in Discord, and brought up with Blood.
'Twas We that gave 'em Life, Credit, and Name,
Till the Ungrateful Brats devoured their Dam.
What could ye look for else? For it is Dominion,
That you do all contend for, not Opinion.
If you will have any Government; then say,
Which Party shall Command, and which Obey.
Power is the thing ye both Affect, and Hate,
Every one would, ye Cannot, All be Great.
This is, in short, the Sum of the Contest;
Still He that is Up, 's an Eyesore to the Rest.
Presbytery breeds Worms: This Maggot-Fry
Is but the Spawn of Lawless Liberty.
License, is like a Sea-Breach to your Grounds;
Suffer but One Flaw, the whole Country Drowns.
LONDON: Printed by Mary Clark, for Henry Brom, at the Gun in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1681.


