A Modest Plea Both for the CAVEAT, AND The AUTHOR of It. WITH SOME NOTES UPON
Mr. JAMES HOWELL, AND His Sober Inspections.

By ROGER L'ESTRANGE.

Laudatur ab his, Culpatur ab illis. Horat. LONDON, Printed Aug. 28. 1661. For
Henry Brom at the Gun in Ivy lane.

A Modest Plea.
REport speaks me a Prisoner for my last Pamphlet; and if I knew who raised it,
or would have it so, I would (in earnest) thank them for it.

First, as the greatest honor they can do me, to bring my Innocence upon the
Stage, and make me suffer in a Cause, which every honest man prefers before his
Being.

Next, I should thank them for assisting toward the Discovery of the Kings
Enemies: which beyond doubt those people are, that will torment themselves for
a Reflection that concerns no other, -- I say again, there is an appearance of
a Confederacy; but I six nothing upon Persons: whoever says, There he means
me, is in the right, if he be one of the Conspirators; otherwise not. They
know their own Affections best, and I my own meaning; which yet I take to be so
plainly expressed, as that no Englishman can make a Question of it.

This General Rumor has made me call my Papers and my Thoughts to shrift, and
neither in the One, nor in the Other, do I find any thing according to my
judgment of my Duty that suits not with the strictest Obligation of it. So let
my Soul find Comfort, as I believe the King is betrayed; and if I had the
honor of His Majesty's Ear, I would present him with my particular reasons for
that opinion. My expectation was that some of the Seditious Stationers, and
Lecturers, of whom I have complayn'd should have been called to account; and
not to have been threatened my self, effectually, for complaining of them. If
there be any matter of exception, I offer up my whole Life to the Scrutiny of
the whole World, and if from the first Moment of the Quarrel to this Instant,
they prove me Guilty either of the least remissness toward the Kings Cause; any
the least compliance with his Enemies; or the least color of Irreverence
toward his Person, I am content to lose my Head for it. I have now served his
Majesty in being, and his blessed Father these One and Twenty years, without
either asking or receiving any thing -- Let him that charges me make the same
challenge.

It Is a wise Precept, That of Machiavell: Encourage ACCUSATIONS and suppress
CALUMNIES. I ask no more, but to be either followed home, or Let alone.

I come now to enquire into the Subject of the Controversy; the Caveat it
self, which with great reason is by some Opposed, and with as much by me,
Defended: for Their DIANA lies at Stake; My Repute; Safety; Freedom; and which
is more then All; the Soul of every Loyal Subject. (the King himself.)

But to be Thristy of my Time and Paper; where lies the Exception? what Law
does it offend, either of Honor, Conscience, or of the Nation? Does it presume
to tax the King, or his Council? to kindle Iealousies betwixt united
Brethren; or to inflame the Rest, into Impatience and Distemper? Does it excite
Revenge or Tumult? If it does any of this, I Will bind my self to be his Slave,
that shows me where: That is; let it be Tried by Indifferent Judges, and taken
in Coherence; for to catch here and there a snap, is to destroy my meaning: and
at that rate, ye may make Quidlibet, ex quolibet, Treason of the Law, and pick
Blasphemy out of the Holy Bible. But Blamed it is, and why?

Not for the Preface I hope; That only advises Warynesse, and gives the Reasons
for it. There Is not a day that passes without seditious Lectures in the City,
some Openly, others more Covertly bidding the People to prepare for a
Persecution; and Then; ah Lord says Hancock; give the King ANOTHER Heart, a
NEW Heart Lord; and make him Thy Servant. Meade seconds his Fellow-Schismatick
with a word of Consolation; but be of a good Heart, (says he) Ye do not know
what a year, nay what a Note.
MONTH may bring forth. This did he repeat so often, and with such an Accent
upon MONTH, that upon my Soul, I thought it related rather to the Timing of a
Plot, then to the pressing of a Duty: for the Emphasis was much stronger upon
the Time, then upon the Exhortation. (This was a little above a Fornight since,
and in my own Hearing) to which Add; that the whole Crew are of the same Leaven.

I hope there is no harm in This; and as little in charging Tyton a Stationer,
with dispersing Treason since his Majesty's return, for there is a Combination
betwixt the Press and Pulpit to do mischief.

Now to the Matter of the Book wherein I shall omit nothing considerable.

First, Note that to the 17. Page, it is a Reply upon I. H. his Cordial. The
first Two Pages are only Prologue; the Third, is Mr. Howells; the Fourth Mine,
and there I begin: Telling I. H. that as the Cavaliers have lived true to their
Prince, upon a Rule of Honor, Loyalty, and Conscience, so are they as well
disposed to Dye for him (if occasion require) without the Aid of borrowed
CORDIALS. -- In the Fifth and Sixth Pages; I fault his using of the word Reward;
as not becoming a Subject to his Prince: for whether we receive any thing or
nothing, our Duty is still the same. -- My Seventh Page only acquits the
Cavaliers of causing the Kings wants, or pressing them, and fairly checks I. H.
for being over-busy with that Argument. -- In the 8 and 9. Pages, I. H. objects
and answers. I deny his Twenty Cavaliers, to One of the other side, and (with
due Reverence to His Majesty's Prerogative, to bestow where and what he
pleases) I affirm that diverse unknown persons are recommended to his Royal
Favor, who are very unworthy of it -- Page Tenth, I blame the Author of the
Cordial for entering further into the Kings Actions then becomes him. -- Page
11. I. H. exhorts us to Patience in expectation of a Reward: and I tell him
that we never served for wages, but it is our Duty to be Patient. -- The
Twelfth ^age carries the best Color for a Cavil, but first I Will recite it, and
then explain it, to a Syllable.

We find the Court dangerously thronged with Parasites -- Knaves represented to
the King for Honest men, Page 12.
and Honest men for Villains: -- a watch upon his Majesty's Ear, to keep out
better Information; -- seditious Ministers protected, and encouraged: Libells
against the Authority, and Person of the King, dispersed even by his Majesty's
sworn Servants; -- and to Discover Treason, is of a consequence (in some
respects) more hazzardous, then to commit it.

To this I explain my self; that diverse persons whom I know, of dangerous
principles, and scandalous Report, are crept into Office and Preferments. These
are the [Parasites] I mean, and when I am commanded, I shall name them. That
many [Knaves have been represented for Honest men] is evident in several whom
His Majesty has repulsed, not to insist upon some others admitted upon
mistake. [And Honest men for Villains,] I speak upon my own experience. --

[A Watch upon his Majesty's Ear, etc.] That is; Such is the pressing boldness
of some people toward the King, that it is no easy matter without apparent
impudence for a poor Cavalier to interpose, and tell those Truths which the
Others would have concealed. -- Concerning [Seditious Ministers, and Libells]
The Lectures are supplied with the Former, and the whole Nation rings of the
Other. Their business is to inflame the People against the Government, under
the Mask of Persecution, and Popery: They Pray for the Kings Conversion rather
then his Establishment; -- Bishops, they mention not at all; unless to call
them Antichristian Drones; -- and Lazy Lubbers. And who are these Gospel
Ministers, (as they style themselves) but for the greater part, such as the Law
has ejected, and the whole Kingdom spewed out from those Livings, which by
violence, and Treason, they had ravished from Honest men? These are the men
that cry the Gospell's Persecuted; The Candle-Stick's removed. They Cheat the
Poor to Gorge themselves, and pay their Tavern-Scores out of the very Alms-Boxe.

Nor is the Press less active, or less dangerous then the Pulpit. They have
their private Instruments and Combinations to disperse their Libels; and I dare
undertake, there may be found among the Confederate Stationers in this Town,
above a Million of Seditious Pamphlets. It Is the best Trade they Drive, and
bating matter of Conscience, who can blame them for it? Their Gains are great,
their Hazard little; beside the Pleasure of accomplishing their malice.

I was my self upon a search for the Phoenix (a virulent Pamplet) which with
the Printer, Publisher, and Stationer I discovered to Master Secretary, Sir
Edward Nicholas; who with great Honor and exactness sifted the matter, and
proceeded in it.

I found at the same time the first two Sheets of The Year of Prodigies, an
imposture of a most damnable Design. This Book is lately Perfected, sought for,
and many Copies taken; yet let me offer, that Giles Calvert, and Thomas
Brewster, have certainly a hand in it; and Livewell Chapman, Probably, though they
absent themselves. (But to the Book it self.)

The Author of it ransacks several stories, for memorable Accidents and
Prodigies; and for Remarques of such and such Judgments that followed them.
These does he match with a most impudent forgery of the like wonders here, to
strike the People, with a superstitious expectation of the same events. Now
mark how probably the false Prophet draws the Prediction, or the Portent to his
design, and both the Factions cooperate in the Delusion.

To overthrow the Government by King and Bishops is that they aim at: and
this, by the influence of pretended signs from Heaven, upon the Peoples minds,
(in approbation of the Project) they labor to accomplish. (their Observation
reaches from Aug. 1. 1660. to the end of May, 1661.)

They tell us of two Suns seen near Hertford,] p^. 1.
but they name none that saw them. -- Then in the Parallel, they point at the
like in the beginning of Queen Mary; and about the time of the Persecution in
Germany.] They mark also, that it portends the * fall of great men from their
Power, etc.] -- with an Asterisme at FALL.

Again, Two Meteors, etc.] -- This was seen when the Persecution waxed hot in
SCOTLAND.] p^. 4.
In the same page, you will, find the apotheosis of their 5 Martyrs, Scroop,
Jones, and his fellows at Charing cross.] Five Naked men (forsooth) were seen
in the Air in Hertfordshire, (by the Lord knows who) exceeding bright and
glorious, upon the day they were executed.

Armies were seen in Sussex, pa. 11.
etc.] This happened a while before the King of Sweden routed the Imperial
Army: pa. 12.
-- and here in England, in 1640.]

This villenous Impostour, to get himself more credit, gathers some
Observations that predict Pestilence, pa. 18.
a thing which in common reason was to be expected from the distemper of the
season, so that if That succeed, he hopes it may dispose the people to believe
the Rest, (But I shall be too long upon him.)

Let what I have Observed, suffice, for Persecutions: and now the People are
startled, see what encouragement the wretch gives them to rebel, and cast off
the Yoke.

Haylstones as big as Wallnuts, pa. 38.
] -- This happened in the LAST year of QUEEN MARY. pa. 39.
] -- A dreadful Whirlwind, etc.] -- This happened in the LAST year (again) of
QUEEN MARY.] This is to possess the People that the King is not long-lived.

Frogs and Toads out of the Air,] This happened, the year before Charles the
fifth was put to flight, and hardly escaped with life.]

A terrible Tempest and raging Tides, Page 42.
] -- This was observed in the LOW COUNTRIES, a little before they threw off the
yoke of the KING of SPAIN.

A fierce and sudden shower of Rain, Page 43.
etc.] This in the LAST year of QUEEN MARY.

An extraordinary Tide, Page 48.
etc.] -- The like happened a while before the late King (then ^rince of WALES)
began his voyage toward SPAIN.

A River dried up, etc.] -- This happened in the 31. of Richard the second, and
also in 1643. and the 22. of Hen 6. which was conceived to portend a Revolt and
Division of the People.

Several of these stories are lies upon my knowledge; (so far as by particular
enquiries from persons upon the place, where they are said to have happened, I
can know any thing) but let this serve without persuing his further falsehoods:
This is enough to manifest a conspiracy, when both from Press and Pulpit, such
desperate impressions are stamped upon the credulous and superstitious Vulgar.
But that which most amazes me, is, that the consequence of discovering Treason,
should be so mischievous; for the very persons I complain of, escape better then
I do.

Now to resume the examination of my Caeveat, wherein if any syllable be found,
that may be said to reflect either upon the King, or his Counsel; the Act of
Indemdity, or the Public Peace, my words lie open to the World; let him that
has a mind to it, pick a quarrel with them.

Having passd over my answer to the Cordial, where I was under a confinement to
follow Mr. Howell's wanderings, I shall dispose the rest into a little better
Order. And first concerning the King.

We are with reverence, The Kings Actions not to be questioned
to believe that where he knows the Person he Preferrs or Saves, he knows
likewise the Reason of his Bounty or Mercy: and we are not to pry into
forbidden secrets. Enformation lawful.
But where we find the King a stranger either to the Action or the Person; we
may with fairness enough, humbly acquaint his Majesty, etc.] p. 18.

And there we are to acquiesce, Private persons not to advise Pr^nces without
Leave.
without presuming to Advise or Direct, unless our Lord and Master will have it
so; for having modestly declared matter of Fact, the judgment and proceeding
rests in his Majesty.] Again

He that sees Cromwells, A common grievance.
Bradshaws, Saint John's his Creatures, nay, and the meanest of them, laden with
Offices and Honors, may give himself a second thought to understand the
meaning of it:] p. 28.

But to impute these incongruities to the King, His Majesty vindicated.
were to commit a sin against Duty and Reason. So far is his Majesty from
Allowing or Directing them, they are kept as much as possibly from his bare
knowledge: The Plot is laid against him, and as they did before, they do but
now remove his Friends, to make way to his Person.] ib.

Further, The Kings Bounty is Free.
Those favors which the King himself bestowed, were given by the
unquestionable Prerogative of his own freedom; the grounds whereof, in part we
know, and in the whole we reverence.] p. 29. Yet once again.

So was the State of the Nation represented to his Majesty, and such was his
Royal Goodness, that he thought fit to remit all; and it is our Duty not to
Murmr at it.

Thus far with Reverence to His Majesty: which is yet more then had been
needful, had not the frivolous apology of him that wrote the Cordial drawn it
from me* Nor do I find a Syllable that can by any Violence of comment or
conjecture, touch the Counsel: nay to prevent all color for such a mistake,
Thus I clear my self. -- [Beyond doubt, Page 38.
there are true Converts; and diverse that even in the Counsels of the Kings
Enemies, did his Majesty Service.]

Now to the Act of Indemnity: let it be taken in the utmost Latitude; we
willingly submit to it.

As'tis an Act of PARDON we complain not; Page 37.
-- and as an Act of INDEMNITY; we are obliged by it; nor shall we start an
Inch from the literal strictness of it. --

As an Act of OBLIVION, which forbids the MALICIOUS revival of past
Differences, we do not oppose it neither: but a Preventional Prudence is
allowed us: and to defend the justice of our Cause, against the public enemies
of it.

In fine; Postscript.
from the strict airection of the Act of Oblivion, we must not swerve a Title.

Let it be now considered, what this same Caveat may rationally effect upon the
People: If any thing that looks like Tumult; or Irreverence, let me dye the
Death of a Traitor for it. See first my Tenderness for fear of
misconstructions.

Were all the Ills we suffer, Tyranny it self is no Discharge of Duty.
(joined with as many more as we have hitherto endured) imposed upon us by the
direct Will, and Order of the King. -- If he should say, Hang half my Friends
for their Fidelity, and Sterve the rest, for Gaping when they are Hungry; -- We
ought to take all this, but as a sad occasion of greater Honor; a sharper
Trial of our Faith: or at the worst, as an unkind requital of our Love, but no
discharge of Duty. Page 26.

The Authority of Princes is Divine; Disloyalty a double Crime.
and their Commission makes their Persons sacred. If They transgress, it is
against God, (whose Officers and Deputies they are) not against Us. If We
transgress; it is both against God and Them; -- a double Disobedience. ibid.

That Subject is guilty of his Masters Blood, Loyalty an indispensable Duty
that sees the Person of his Prince in danger, and does not interpose to save
him; though he be sure to Dye, himself, even by the hand of him who he
preserves. Page 27.

Not is it enough for Subjects, Loyalty extends to thought, word, and deed.
to keep a Guard upon their Actions, unless they set a VVatch before the Doors
of their Lips; their Tongues, must be Tied, as well as their Hands; Nay, and
the very Boylings of their Thoughts must be suppressed.

We that are thus instructed in the Grounds and Terms of Duty, A due respect
to His Majesty.
even toward the worst of Kings, cannot mistake our selves sure toward the
Contrary; and become doubly Guilty; First, by imputing our Misfortunes to a
wrong Cause; and then, by an undutiful and simple men age of them. Page 29.

Further, upon Discourse of the Cavaliers party, which very well deserves a
Thought; and of the Nations too, which is not in Condition, without some
inconvenience to Relieve us: rather then our necessities, shonld any way
oppress the public and consequently reflect upon the King, my Counsell's this
-- [Rather let us Resolve to suffer any thing for his Majesty, then cause him
to suffer in the Least for us.

Is this the Language of a Mutineer? Certainly, I have expressed my meaning
ill, if this tends to Sedition. Once more; finding a general distaste against
some persons whom the Kings knows only upon Recommendation; Page 15.
what could be softer then to say that [those Blessings which his Sacred
Majesty meant to shed upon his Friends, fell upon his Enemies: The VOICE was
JACOBS but the HANDS are ESAU's.] what does this intimate, but an Obligation
still to the King; even in those benefits which fell beside us?

To sum up the main scope of the Discourse: It is by a Prudential Modesty, and
warynesse to state a right uuderstanding betwixt His Majesty, and his People:
for nothing is more evident, then that ill offices are done; both to the King,
to misperswade him of the Royal Party; and to possess his miserable Friends,
that the King cares not for them* Since Discontents there are, and some unhappy
mistakes, what could be more agreeable to Duty and Reason, then to endeavor to
set all clear? Which I have labored; first by assigning our misfortunes to
their true Cause; and Then, by counselling a Fair, and humble Notice concerning
matter of Fact to his Sacred Majesty.

Where lies the Crime of This, I am to seek; especially proceeding with all
that's possible of Honor and Humility, toward the Person, Office, Dignity, and
the unquestioned wisdom of my Sovereign. It is not lawful for a Private
Subject to offer his Prince an Information? Nay, is he not obliged under the
pain of Perjury, and Treason, (if under Oath, as I am) to the Discovery of any
thing he knows or hears of, that may be Dangerous to his Majesty? If it be
Criminal to tell those truths, without the Knowledge of which a Prince cannot
be safe, then I Am in a mistake, otherwise not: For there I rest without
prescribing; my Duty being only to discover, without presumiug to Advise or
Direct.

Within these Limits I contain my self: and by This rule of Resignation, I have
not only governed my Life, my Tongue, my pen; but even my Thoughts.

And yet some take Exception at this following passage. Let us examine it.

There are another sort also of cold Comforters, False Friends.
that tell us, it is not Time yet: This, to a company of VVretches that can*
stay no longer then they can Fast, yields little consolation.

Are we such Owls, as not to see the Sun at Noon? It Is time Enough for some
that tell us these fine things, (even before the Kings Revenue is settled) to
beg their Forty, Fifty, nay their Hundred Thousand Pound a man, and when the
Nation shall be drawn so low, that every Tax runs Blood; it is then
Prognosticated, that something shall be done for Us: That is, the Honor shall
be ours, to finish the undoing of the Nation, and furnish Argument for another
War. p. 29.

It Is a strange thing, there should be so much Venom in this Caveat, or in the
Writer of it, and yet upon the search of every Period in it, and every Corner
of my Soul, I should be still at so great a Loss, where to find it. Nay more
then that; the further and the longer I enquire into my self, the stronger is
the Testimony my Conscience bears of my Integrity.

But to approve my Heart in this particular as well as to Man, as (I bless
Heaven) I can, and do to God, we will look into the Coherence of This Section. The
professed Drift of it is This.

Having in the Foregoing Section, soberly proposed, by Information, to give His
Majesty a clear and naked view of Men, and Actions, for prevention of such
mistakes as probably might arise from false representations, I pass forward to
a Caution, lest we might mistake his MAJESTY: where the First Page, and half,
is a discourse upon the Authority of Kings, and the Duty of Subjects, stating
the Power as large as Majesty it self can wish, and tying up the Subject, by
the most strict, and conscientious bonds of Duty: applying all at last to the
very Person of our King, and to his Party.

Toward the bottom of the Page, mention is made of the Kings Proclamation
against Profane and dissolute persons; which I advise may not be understood as
any sharpness from the King upon his Party, but as a pious and prudential zeal,
against the vice of blasphemy and distemper. Yet we know very well what art is
used to blast the Royal Party with that Character: and that his Majesty can
only by report, take notice of those liberties, which no man is so shameless
as to practice in his Presence.

I come now to that passage, which were I given to Boast, should be my Glory;
but as it is tossed upon the tongue of fame, it is that, which I would rather be a
Beast, then be the Author of. In the Language of mistake it sounds thus much,
That I should undertake to question the Kings Bounties, and tax his Sacred
Majesty with giving away forty, -- threescore thousand pounds in a morning,
while his friends starve.

With respect to the first Promoter of this Calumny, I shall be bold to blow it
off; and lay before you the ground of this reproach, and thus it runs in
Paraphrase

There are (say I) a sort a people, p. 29.
that stop the hungry Royalists mouths with telling us it is not time yet. It Is
time enough for them to beg, though not for us, even before the King himself is
served, which is a little preposterous. Again, I say they beg, I do not say
Obtain -- great sums, -- that is, the Equivalence, which if the King should
grant, it is (as I say a little higher) but the unquestionable Prerogative of
his own freedom, so I presume not to restrain his Royal goodness.

Nay yet again, it may fall out so that the thing they beg, may prove worth
five times more then they pretend it is; then is the Kings gift but a fifth part
of what they get.

But to finish, In this connection of discourse, the question is not what the
King gives, nor what they get, nor is his Majesty accountable, for their
importunities: But do they deal fairly with us or no? That Is the point, Is it
not time for us, as well as them? Not that we murmur, but they trifle us. When
we want bread, we will starve honorable, because the Public weal will have
it so: yet still we shall subject our selves to virtue, not to delusions.

At last it is said, we shall have something too, but have a care of that, for
when the Nation is drawn low, a heavy tax upon the people would do the King
more hurt, then our relief is worth. Wherefore though our necessities are
great, yet still our Loyalty ought to surmount our wants: Let us not rob the
King of his peoples affections, to fill our own bellies: An honest Principle.
Rather, (say I) let us resolve to suffer any thing, for his Majesty, then
cause him, to suffer in the least for us. P. 29.

This foregoing Caution, (not to mistake his MAJESTY, or in effect our selves,
is followed with an enquiry into the designs, and workings of the Kings
enemies, wherein the necessity of restitution, or else of damnation, is offered
to the judgment of the learned; and I do now upon my honor, engage my self to
become Presbyterian, if in that most important point, (no less then Heaven or
Hell,) The Casuists of the Consistory, will but vouchsafe me the honor of a
confutation.

The next and last Chapter treats how necessary it is for a Prince, to oblige
the generality of the people, and of the arts the Faction uses to put his
Majesty, and his Party upon necessities to do the contrary; concluding with a
saying of Barclay in his Euphornio. [Voenalis hominum vita est, et licitatores
eapitum nostrorum public regnant.]

-- I was my self Sold by Thomas Leman of Linn Regis in Norfolk, a Renegado
from our own Party, and now living. One of the Contractors for my Head (for
virtually he was so) Doctor Mills, that sentenced me to Death without a
Hearing, is now Chancellor to the Bishop of Norwich. After my condemnation, I
threw a Paper among them, and told them that was my defense; since they would
not hear it, they might read it. One of the Committee takes the Paper, and
against the sense of the Court, burns it. Sir Edward Baynton knows whether this
be so or no*

Now to my Postscript, what can be more conducing to the King's safety, then
the discovery of those, of whom his Majesty stands most in danger? That is,
first, such as have actually betrayed his Majesty's Counsels and Designs. pa.
46.
-- Secondly, such as have received monyes, possibly for the Kings relief, and
never accounted for them.]

These people are upon a double account exceeding dangerous. First, they are
cast out of Protection, and in hourly fear to be Detected, which makes them
desperate. Next, they have farther opportunities of doing mischief. They appear
among us as friends, and act against us as enemies. It is in short but this,
the enemy is in our Quarters, and has got the Wo^d.

Let me look back now, or let any man now answer me; where is that syllable, to
which an honest man may not set his Name? Many there are, to which a wise man
would not, but want of skill may be born with, where there is good meaning.

If reverence to the King's Authority, hnmble affection to his Person: If
absolute submission to all his Actions, be an offense, then am I guilty. My
fault is only the putting those Points by which otherwise would wound the King,
(because, perhaps they prick some of his Enemies,) where is the man that
presses Loyalty, that streins the knot of Duty harder then I do? And to
conclude, where have I practiced other then I preach?

Yet truly, were the subject in it self not altogether blameless, the occasion,
and my first fault might excuse me. I did not lead the Dance, I. H. would needs
be giving the world a cast of his cunning, and starts objections, which we must
either overthrow or suffer by. I. H.
[Now whereas some object hehath rewarded ROUNDHEADS, says the Author of the
Cordial.

This is a charge upon the Cavaliers, for to be sure, the other Party will not
complain. Since manifest it is, that in effect some persons are entertained
beyond common expectation; what better office could I do, either to his Majesty
or his Party; then to lay a charm upon the people, not to enquire too boldly
into the actions of their Sovereign? Had I done less, the slur had stuck upon
us, had I. H. done nothing, I had been silent. I. H.
Again [whereas some except against his Majesty's Lenity and Indulgence, etc.]

Not We, say I: could I say less? and at this rate, he squanders away his
Breath and Politiques in Vindication of the King, as if we charged his Majesty.
When to deal freely, his very zeal in an Abuse, and if I had a mind to blast a
cause, I would engage that Gentleman to be For it.

Next to this provocation, I might plead my Primum Tempus, had I not still a
stronger Plea; Innocence.

But to evince the Partiality of my Backfriends. Let us suppose a Fault: what
is the Quality of it: and who the Offender? it is an Error, either of
Imprudence or of Sawcynesse: (for that is the worst they say of it) and the
Offender is a Person that has been twenty years a faithful Servant to the
Crown. Greater Crimes then This have been pardoned, within the Memory of Man;
yes, and greater Offenders too, and those that are the most advantaged by That
Pardon, are now the sharpest upon Me.

Now to the point of Prudence. I shall easily grant, that to exasperate so
Keen, so Close, and Deadly a Faction, as that which Threatens me, were a
gross and weak Oversight in any man that rates Himself above the public; but
being Resolved, rather to sink my self for speaking, plain, Loyal, and
useful Truths, then that the King should suffer by not knowing them, I shall
most readily dispose my self to act that Resignation, which I do now but Talk
of.

NOTES UPON Mr. James Howell, etc.
IF he that wrote the CAVEAT to the CAVALIERS, had been of the Gentleman's
Counsel, that penned the CORDIAL; he should never have disowned the Author, and
after that, have defended the matter of it. If it was Well done, why was it
disclaimed; if Ill, why is it justified? But to the old Epigram;

He does, as Puritans at Baptism do;
He is the Father, and the Witness too.
The thing it self might have been spared; but then so solemnly to disclaim it,
is not pro dignitate HISTORIOGRAPHI Regii.

The Title indeed might have becom'd the Mouth of his Toledo-Captain.

Some SOBER INSPECTIONS made into those Ingredients, that went to the
Composition of a late Cordial, called A Cordial for the Cavaliers.

SOBER INSPECTIONS? (with a mischief) why there was one I. H. that dedicated a
discourse under this Title, To his Highness; The L. PROTECTOR; when he would
have made himself King: wherein he compares OLIVER CROMWELL to CHARLES MARTEL,
and complements him in these words.

There is (says he) a memorable, saying of Charles Martel in that mighty
Revolution in France, when he introduced the second race of Kings; that in the
pursuit of all his actions he used to say, that he followed not the ambition of
his heart, so much as the inspirations of his soul, and the designs of
Providence. This may be applied to your Highness in the conduct of your great
affairs, and admirable successes. -- I rest, in the lowest posture of obedience

At your Highness command, I. H.


One passage more I remember, that is, of very pretty insinuation. Under the
name of POLYANDER is couched the Author of the Dialogue: whom you must imagine
to be a man of Parts, and Travailed. This Polyander gives his opinion for a
single Person against all other forms of Government.

But then he says that It is requisite, that this single person, should be
attended with a standing, visible, veteran Army to be paid well, and punished
well, if there be cause to AWE, as well as to Secure the People.

To give I. H. his due, the other Oliver could not have given his Namesake
better counsel. The Book indeed does mightily cry up the Royal Prerogative, and
it is a little sharp upon the Scots, and the thing commonly called the Long
Parliament: which yet at that time done, does but proclaim the Author of it,
either a weak Statesman, or a worse Subject. For during their divisions, it was
our interest, still to uphold the weaker side, and hinder the other from
settling. Neither can any thing be more unseasonable, then to exalt the rights
of Sovereignty, when a Traitor wields the Scepter: It does but serve to fix the
Crown upon the wrong Head, to magnify the Power of Kings, when an Usurper
manages the Office.

It was an unlucky oversight in Mr. Howell, to Christen this vindication of his
Cordial, -- SOBER INSPECTIONS. If he had called it any thing else, (except S.
P. Q. V.) the Pamphlet might have lived and dyed free from that envy which
commonly attends great Wits and Undertakings. Not one of forty, (I dare almost
swear) but would have been content with the bare Title Page, and never have
turned the leaf: but first to fob the poor Cavaliers with a Cordial like a
whipped Posset, that is all Froth; and then to mend the matter by a sad tale in
favor of it, that wears a Title to give a Horse a Vomit: This is not kindly
done.

But that the world may not mistake I.H. for JAMES HOWEL, the said JAMES
HOWELL, Esquire (in his Survey of VENICE, dedicated to the SUPREME AUTHORITY of the
Nation, the PARLIAMENT of England in 1651.) is clearly for a COMMONWEALTH: For
(says he) were it within the reach of humane brain to prescribe rules for
fixing a Society, and succession of people under the same Species of
government, as long as the world lasts; the Republique of Venice were the
fittest pattern on earth, both for Direction and Imitation.]

And in the tender of his Republican Model to the Keepers of the Liberties; he
treats the mighty men in a style of Reverence and Honor. Most NOBLE SENATORS,
he begins, and with a dignity befitting both the Presenter and the Present,
Thus he concludes, -- Therefore most humbly under favor, the Author deemed it
a piece of Industry not altogether unworthy to be presented unto that Noble
Assembly, by

Their daily Orator. HOWELL.

Now on the other side; I.H. in his Epistle to the PROTECTOR calls this same
NOBLE ASSEMBLY a MONSTER; and his HIGHNESS, HERCULES, for Quelling of it. Yea,
such a Monster, that was like to Gourmandize and devour all the Three Nations.

Who This I.H. was, or That JAMES HOWELL belongs not to our Enquiry; The Author
of the Inspections says indeed very acutely; There are more I.H's. then one; --
and so say I, there may be more James Howell's too. But if the person now in
question, should prove to be a kin to the Other, we may be very well excused if
we suspect his Cordial, and if we rather trust our own Eyes, in our own
Concern, then another Spectacles.

In that contest betwixt One Tyrant and many; if the Noble Assembly had baffled
the Army, then Oliver had been the Monster, but Fortune would have it
otherwise, and so the Lot fell upon the NOBLE ASSEMBLY; but not a halfpenny
matter to us, whether the Dragon killed the Saint, or the Saint the Dragon.

Some Subjects are like Common-Wooers; that may safely swear that they love
Twenty several Wenches, Best, in Four and Twenty hours: and to such humors, no
Government comes amiss; that carries either Interest or Novelty along with it.
He that expects the fixing of that sort of people, might better wait, till a
River should either stop its course, or run it self weary. Labitur, and
Labetur, in omne volubilis aevum.

Others there are who I verily believe did take that Legislative Rabble for a
Parliament; and such we must not blame for calling it so. Yet for the
Cavaliers; that never were, nor are, nor ever can be of That Judgment; we
should do very ill to choose an Advocate out of that number; or to expect much
good from a Physician that could not help himself.

But too much time is spent in Preamble; for which, the Gentleman whom it
concerns may thank himself: I knew at first who wrote the Cordial; but truly I
had no Ambition to measure Pens with Mr. Howell; and my Remarks upon the
Mistake, did not so much as glance upon the Author. No sooner were the
Inspections Public, but my Stationer comes to me by Mr. Howell's Order, with a
sleevelesse Story, how ingenious a piece that same Cordial was; how much His
Majesty was pleased with it: with great Additions too, in favor of the person
that composed it. Some part of This, in the second Impression of my Caveat, I
barely mentioned, and so left it.

Upon Thursday or Friday last, out comes another miserable Paper done by the
same hand, and in justification of the Former; which I must needs take notice
of, for diverse Reasons, whereof (I swear) the Author and the thing it self are
none.

The Copy was pressed upon my Stationer, (a very honest and a Loyal person) as
yet unfinished: who gave me notice of the proposition, but without any thought
of undertaking it. With much ado, I prevailed with him to comply with the good
Gentleman, and out comes Gravity it self under the Form of SOBER INSPECTIONS,
etc.

The very Title speaks the Author no Physician; and he that stands condemned to
read the Text, may swear he is no Conjurer. He writes himself Historiographer
Royal, and tells his Tale to show his Office: Yes, and a dainty Tale it is.

A Toledo Captain met Philip the Second a hunting; I.H.
and taking him for a Private person, told him he was going to Court, to demand
a Reward for his Services. The King asked him, if he had not received his Pay?
He said, Yes: but 'twas long a Coming: However, he would to the King for an Ayuda
de costas, something to drink. Well says the King; but in case his Majesty
will give you nothing? why then let him kiss my Mules Tail, cries the Captain.
Hereupon, the King asked him his Name, and bids him bring his Certificat next
day to the Council, and he would procure him admittance. The Captain appears, --
Well Sir, says the King, What was it you said yesterday the King should do to
your Mule, if so and so? (In our Authors own words) The Captain being nothing
at all danted, said; Truly Sir, My Mule is ready at the Court-gate, if there be
occasion. The King for This, Orders the Captain 400. Crowns present, and 2000
Ryals Annuity.

The Condition of the English Cavaliers is much more considerable; says our
Historian) for the Spanish Captain had all his Arriers paid him, which our
Cavaliers have not.] page 4.

Most Logical and profound! for as Tenterden-steeple was the cause of Godwin
Sands, even so Good people Love one another.

But can the great Defender of our Cause, spy out no other Difference betwixt
the Captains case and Ours, then matter of Pay? That want of Modesty and
Reverence, though the King liked it never so well, ought to have been Reproved
and Punished. Suppose the bluntness of the man hit the Kings Humor; Yet was
it not the less below his Dignity, even to suffer so exemplary a Boldness,
but much more, to Reward it: therein preferring his Fancy to his Honor: Not
but that Monarchs are Men, as well as Subjects; and may be allowed their
Appetites, and Likings; yet beyond question, This was an Oversight in Philip to
lay himself so open; for when the Court had once gotten the length of his Foot;
and that they found there were more ways then good, to Profit, and Preferment;
it would have been no wonder to have seen That Prince served, and attended by
Tumblers, and Buffons, in stead of Statesmen.

The Gentleman has many other pretty fragments of Story, which being
exceedingly beside his Purpose, I reckon not much to mine; wherefore let them
rest: But in good manners something we will afford him in Requital; which his
INGREDIENTS, and his COMPOSITION put me in mind of.

The late Lord Coring after a dear ill-dressed Dinner at Bruxells, sends for
mine Host, and treats him with this Complement: Friend (says he) I do take Thee
for one of the best Cooks in Christendom, 'bate but two faults; The One is;
Thou have the worst Ingredients in Nature; The Other is; Thou putt'st them the
worst together. This is the Fortune of some Writers too, as well as Cooks.

Touching our Authors Calculation of Twenty Cavaliers preferred for One
Roundhead; I have already spoken what I thought fit and modest in my Caveat;
but since it is Mr. Howell's pleasure to re-enforce it, rather then press the
point too far, we will grant it: but then, Twenty of Mr. Howell's Cavaliers
(reckoning himself for One) will not make half so many of Mine.

In his Sixth Page, he tells us, that diverse great Kings have been enforced to
raise, and reward those that were once their very Enemies, FOR A TIME.]

And why FOR A TIME? (if a body may ask) But this shall be discoursed at Length
and Leisure. In short, he tells us what he told us before, and winds up, Thus.

To conclude, I. H.
he who with a sober and well-brass'd judgment will examine that Cordial, will
find that there is never a Line, Word, or Syllable therein but breathes out the
spirit of a perfect Cavalier, as above twenty other several pieces of the same
Author published upon Emergent occasions do breathe besides, there is no
fretfull drug, or the least Corrosive dram in it: but all gentle lenitifs,
therefore he wonders how it should stir up such Malignant humors in any,
unless it were in them who having something lying upon the stomach made wrong
use of that Cordial to cast it up.

We will allow the Gentleman to be a perfect Cavalier, a perfect Republican,
(if he pleases) a perfect Protectorian, a perfect Anything; rather then
disagree about his Perfection: but I would he had not appealed to his Pieces.
And truly if he had spared the Malignant humors, and the Queasie Stomach he
talks of, it would have been never the worse for the Author of the Cordial. But
now he finds himself so much deceived in his Operations, I hope he will mend. He
sees his Cordials prove Vomits; and let me forget my own Name, as he has done
his, if what Mr. Howell gives to move Choler, does not provoke excessive
Pleasure.

THE END.

