Numb. 1 A New DIALOGUE BETWEEN Some body and No body. OR THE Observator
Observed.
Friday, November 25. 1681.
Nobody. Cosen, well met: Cosen a word with you.


Some body* Cosen say you? there be many Conz'ners Sir, in the world; and you
may be one of them for ought I know: for I don't think I ever saw you in my
life, and know not how you come to claim kindred of me.


N. You may have heard of me Sir, for I am of the Family of the Bodies.


S. I know not who you are, for I have heard of many a Rascal: but you look so
like a Tory by your Garb and Habit, that I will have nothing to say to you.


N. I look like what I am not.


S. The more dangerous Fellow still. But what is your Name, that presses thus
to be known to me?


N. My name is No body.


S. I have heard of you indeed good Mr. No body* Sir, Fare you well, for you
are one of the most dangerous Fellows I ever met with; and a Man had need stand
upon his Guard that converses with you, as if he were discoursing with F. G. T.
B. or B. H. who are not to be spoken with, without a Jury of Witnesses.


N. Good Cosen Some body, be not so fearful, for I may talk Treason by
Authority.


S. Why are you a Tory?


N. No body may speak Treason.


S. I thank you for that, and Some body may be Hanged for it. I will not come
within the Air of your breath; for you are one of the most pernicious
Scribblers of the Age, the Press is pestered with your Works of all sorts and
sizes. What Cart loads of Treasonable, Scurrilous, Virulent, and Malicious
Papers, are put out every day in no bodies Name, and Printed for no body, nay
impudently owned by no body.


N. You see then I am a Man of Note.


S. So noted a Man, that I don't care to ha^ to do with you* for you are a Man
of no Principles or Religion, you write on both sides.


N. There Is your mistake; for I am of your Religion.


S. What Is that?


N. Of every Religion; or of the Religion that is uppermost: let us not fall out
about that, our Cosen Every body has invented a Religion that all will conform
to.


S. And what is that?


N. The Religion of H. R. and the Observator, INTEREST.


S. I see you are acquainted with the Torys, you are a Trepanner, I Will leave
you.


N. Ben't so hot as Tory T, who sweats his Religion out at his forehead. Cants
one day, and Recants another, says and unsays as fast as a Dog will trot. Leave
me for nothing?


S. I have told you the Reason, it is a dangerous time to hold Discourses with
Any body; you may swear me out of my Life for ought I know.


N. Any body is a Rascal, for he opposes Some body: But mistake not, I never
swore against Any body in my life, and I am of that Reputation, that my Oath
will not be taken. So that you are safe enough.


S. What is your business with me?


N. Only to Dialoguise after the Mode.


S. After whose mode?


N. The new Mode of Railing: Why should not we Rail a little against the Times,
talk Nonsense, Rant, Fence, Examine, Observe, Abuse the People, Pamphlets,
Manners, Religion and Government, as well as other Folk?


S. Nay, now I see you are no well-meaning Man ^ no lover of your King nor
Country, a hater of Government, a Man of no Religion, a Dissenter, a Canting
Nonconformist, a Whig of the last Edition, by this infailable mark of hinting
against the ingenious Belphagor Heraclitus, and the most indefatigable Briarius
the Observator, who has built a Babel with his hundred Hands, higher than that
of Old in the Plains of Shinar, to save all true Protestants from the Land*
Flood of the Whigs, which he expects.


N. I think you are as fearless as Heraclitus himself, and as Malicious as the
Observator, but I am afraid you have not so good Spectacles, else I would
desire a little of your observation in Dialogue.


S. If I may have any Confidence in you, and that you will not speak Treason, I
don't care if we do Dialogue together, to get us a Stomach sometimes to our
Dinner, as well as other People; for since they have not got a License for all
the Talking in the World, why should not we chatt a little?


N. You say true, they have no Padlock for our Tongues, and I know no reason,
but we may talk as well as they.


S. But then we must talk as impertinently, and with as little Sense and
Reason, and with an huge stock of Confidence.


N. Nay, We must learn to lie too, backbite, defame, rail, threaten, domineer,
and triumph over the weaker side.


S. That I have not yet attained to.


N. But we may observe how artificially the Tories do it, and learn to fence
after their manner: And for that end Cosen Some body, if you will be a Whig, I
will show my self a Tory, and discourse as like one as ever you heard.


S. It Is a dangerous thing to take the Whigs Party, they are going to the Wall,
nay into the Kennel, their Meeting Houses are going down too, there is a Statute
for it.


N. And as the wise Observator says, may they not thank themselves for it?


S. For being so quiet in them? for Preaching and Praying?


N. No, for meddling with the Government.


S. A black Charge, all the enormities of the lewdest People are charged upon
them without Proof or Witness.


N. How so? Is not Heraclitus a sufficient Witness? And is not the Observators
word Proof and plain Demonstration? And is not N. T. to be believed? what would
you have?


S. But for all that a Grand Jury of most of the Nation will find their black
Bill of Charge, IGNORAMUS.


N. Then shall all those of the Nation (let them be who, and as many as they
will) be accounted by them as bad Fanatics as any Grand Jury that ever sat at
Hickes-Hall.


S. But is this the way to be of one Religion?


N. You had best call this Persecution do? Sir, the Whigs Schools too must be
Reformed, as well as their Conventicles confounded: No more Seminaries nor
Nurseries, Mark that!


S. That Is the right way indeed to be of one Religion.


N. Now are you hinting -- speak out Whig, you mean Queen Mary's.


S. Know it by my mumping, if you will these are not times to speak out. Truth
is not to be spoken at all times.


N. Is it not time to down with the Conventicles, when as the Observator
Observes, they convert them into Work houses? What a many several Trades has he
found among them, Listers, Canvasers, Make-Parties, Turners, Cutters, Casters
or Founders? and all these at the Meeting Houses. Good People! how they are
employed, if you believe him? It Is fit therefore they should be all put down,
as well as the Covents, Abbots, Monkeries and Nunneries were by Henry VIII.


S. But I doubt the King will not get so much by these, as Harry did by them: They
were put down for being idle, lazy Drones, and these for being too buisy and
laborious Workmen. See how the times are changed.


N. But they are meeting apace in a Reformation.


S. And shall no Dissentors be indulged?


N. There are a sort that are not in the Observator's List, that hope yet for
more than Indulgement.


S. Prithee, Are there not several sorts of Assentors, or Consentors, as well
as Dissentors?


N. I think so, but name them your self if you will.


S. For instance then, There are your blindfold Assentors, and these are your
true Ignoramuses that know neither the Why nor the Wherefore, of their
Religion; they consent for Form sake, and assent at all Adventures, right or
wrong, and see no more into a Case of Conscience, than the Observator into a
Millstone. Then there are your Hypocritical Consentors, who look one way, and
row another, and many a thousand of this sort, open their Mouths loudest
against Dissentors: These the Observator overlooks, or will not observe. Then
you have your wilful Consentors, who will neither use nor understand Reason and
had rather a third part of the Nation should perish, than part with the least
shred or paring of the Form of Religion, and had rather confound a Million of
Dissentors Consciences, than part with an indifferent Bawble: These are they
who will hear no Reason, for they are in the Right they are sure of it, and cry
out much on Religion, according as it is by Law Established: If you dissent
from these, they cry out Fanatic, Whig, Villain, Traitor, and will have every
Conscience Fancy. These are Men also stiff to their Party, are for Persecution,
and believe as the Church believe, tho they know not what it is. And as for
Spiteful Assentors, commend me to those who cry down, down with them, down with
their Conventicles, down with their Consciences, and then pick up their
sayings, rake in the faults of Persons, speak against every one that crosses
them, and would fain have the Statute renewed for the Writ De Comburend^
Hareticis. These are a sort of virulent, malicious Assentors, that would be, if
they might, as Willful and as Cruel as the Papists.


London, Printed for E. Smith, at the Elephant and Castle in Cornhil. 1081.

Numb. 2. A New DIALOGUE BETWEEN Some body and No body. OR THE Observator
Observed.
Tuesday, November 29. 1681.
No body. WELL met, well met Cosen Some body.


Some body, Nay Mr. No body, I cannot tell that.


N. What are you sick then?


S. Not sick neither, but I don't care to be met with: Meetings must be put
down, there must be no Meetings, therefore I will turn and go backward.


N. Must I speak then to your Backside?


S. Ay, Ay, all things are Arsa versa, topsie turvie, histeron, proteron -- The
Chimes go backward, the World runs backward, the Age backslides, and all things
turn backward.


N. I perceive you are an Ignoramus, a very Whiggish; wilful Ignoramus, that
would change the Times as well as alter the Laws -- You are a mear Stat pro
ratione voluntas. All this grumbling over the Gizzard is because the
Westminster Boys burnt -- in Effigy: is it not so? Come, come, they are not
Queen Mary's days yet, they are peaceable days still; it is but Jack Presbyter
instead of Mr. Pope.


S. I say nothing to No body, but let me think, tho it is somewhat strange to
see such a twerl-about on Gunpowder Treason day, a clout Pope to be rescued
from the Fire, and the Image of a noted Protestant Preacher to be burnt.


N. Yes with all the Ignoramus's and Addresses for a Parliament to boot.


S. It Is now as they would have it.


N. No it is not yet as they would have it. for you have the Loyal Protestants
word for it, That as a great expression of Loyalty to His Majesty they (or Mr.
Some body) wished the real Person of whom the Image represented and all his
Followers, (that is, all Protestant Dissenters) had been burnt with him. So
that you see it is not yet as they would have it.


S. It Is pretty well toward -- on my word, when that horrid Contrivance of the
Gunpowder Plot is forgotten, or durst not be owned by the burning of a Pope.


N. One Nail drives out another; the new Presbyterian, Whiggish Plot, has
driven out the Old and New Popish Plots, as if they had never ^een.


S. That is because the one is real, the other imagined.


N. Which mean you?


S. Nay there I am Ignoramus, and satisfied in my own Conscience, and will not
declare you my Reasons.


N. Why then you are a most wilful Ignoramus, when Heraclitus has made it as
plain as the Nose on your Face, that by putting none but known Dissenters upon
the Pannels, is a most sufficient evidence of a Whiggish Plot as a man can wish
or desire. Besides, to strengthen it, the Narrative of the Dr. of the Tower --


S. But what if I cannot believe it?


N. Then I say you have an Ignoramus Conscience, and shall be called to account
for it

You must come to, and you shall come to,
And you must come whether you w^ll or no.

S. In the mean time I Will keep the (...) till we are out of the Wood.


N. Mr. Ignoramus is about to bring you out of it, if you will have patience
Heraclitus says.


S. Patience! it is the chiefest virtue that has been exercised of late. O
blessed Patience!


N. Now are you praying backwards; there is no understanding Some body, he
speaks one thing and means another.


S. Don't take me for a Jesuit or a Tory.


N. But I take you to be a Man in a Cloak.


S. What mean you? the Loyal Protestant's Holder-forth, so like Dr. Glanvil's
Devil? then you take me for a damned Whig?


N: No Cosen, I must observe to you a little better than so, for the great
Oracle of the Nation has pronounced it, that some Whigs may be saved.


S. Why this is the greatest Proof that he ever gave that he is no Papist; for
the Papists hold, That no Heretics can be saved, and that all who are not of
their Church are HERETICS: But if he has said a Whig may be saved, infallibly
he is no Papist.


N. But mark you my Friend, it is only a Christian Whig that can be saved, and
such Whigs may make this Nation the happiest People on the face of the Earth,
they are common blessings, and to their power do good to all men.


S. I Am glad to hear it with all my heart; and why is this Man so bitter
against the Whigs then? since there may be many Hundreds, if not Thousands of
such Christian Whigs, that are Dissenters in the Nation; good, just, holy,
pious, conscientious, charitable Whigs, that meddle not with the Government,
give no embroil, or trouble to it, but walk according to the true tenderness of
their Opinion; and yet if I am not mistaken, he has in other places said, there
could be none of the Dissenters good, no not one.


N. He speaks only against factious, unchristian Whigs.


S. Faction has no part in Religion; but let him not under that Notion, draw in
and comprehend all Men that dissent from the Church of England, as he has too
often done. Let him rail against the Factious, as much as he pleases; they may
be on the one hand, as well as the other; but he has endeavored by that means,
to shoulder out all Protestant Dissenters, under the Titles of Fanatics and
Whigs, however the evil Spirit came to be allayed at this time.


N. He had spent much of his Gall before, and his Cholodock Vessels were empty.


S. But they will soon fill again, for Choler is the predominate humor of his
Constitution, and you shall hear him shortly as hot as ever against Dissenters,
and make them as very Devils and Hobgoblings as his Pen can paint them.


N. I think you are a Witch, for the very next appearance he makes, he is at his
old Vomit, Choler and Gall: -- Whiggish Murders and Massacres; Whiggish
Blasphemy and Treasons; Whiggish Plots and Rebellions; he spends like Thunder
on the old scent.


S. Don't you know the reason of that? He has told you himself, That he must
needs go whom the Devil drives.


N. There he calls the Parliament, or the Commons at least, Devils by craft;
they are all of them very Belphegors to him, and will send him again into the
Netherlands. But it is you Mr. Dissenting Some body that by assuming the
appellation of Protestant, has brought the dignity of that Profession into
Contempt.


S. Or rather, have not the Tories and Tantivies of your Acquaintance, brought
a scandal and suspicion upon many of the Church of England, by their strange
Methods of justifying them, and condemning all Protestants in the World besides?


N. Be advised, and leave Luther, think on the name no more, there is no such
denomination in Scripture; let it be hence forward Christian, for I am almost
ashamed of the other name now, since your taking it upon you, being a
dissenting Whig, has so much abused it.


S. I am content friend, I like the Name well; but tell me, may not I be still a
dissenting Christian, or a Christian Dissenter? and will not that render me
then to a Tory or a Papist, liable to be compared with a Mohammedan, as most
religiously is observed by the Observator?


N. Why, to tell you truly, if you will be a Dissenting Christian, according to
the Tory Creed, you shall be no more than a Turk or a Jew, nor so much neither;
but look you, if you will live in submission to your Superiors, the Pope and
his Priests, and be so charitable as to believe all for Gospel, what some will
tell you, then you may own the Name, but to take up the Name of Proestant (as
the Whigs do) to steal Horses only, or to take up money upon Credit, is a plous
fraud that the Church of Rome itself has not been hold enough to venture upon.


S. How tender of the Church of Romes Reputation are you grown! Good Christians
all, that seem what they are. True haters of Heretics, and all sorts of
Protestants! But since we are not to be called Protestants, and that Dissenting
Christians implys the same thing, what Name shall we have?


N. As for that, your Godfathers the Observator and Heraclitus have given you
Names sufficient, as Fanatics, Whigs, Traitors, Rebels, Villains, and many
other such like most Christian Appellations, to distinguish you from the Romish
Church: But we will allow you to be a Dissenting Protestant, or a Dissenting
Christian; but by no means a Protestant Dissenter, or a Protesting Christian.


S. What Fiddling is this upon words! It jingles like a tinkling Cymbal, with a
noise without Music.


N. Something like Le Strang's Notes upon College.


S. I see you are about to speak against the Government, therefore I Will leave
you; for I fear it is to draw me in with your new Irish ^way of Dialoguising: To
speak against L. S. or any of his pious words, is to speak against both
Religion, Law, King, Court, Council, and all that, etc.


N. Nay Sir, He Is more than all that I Will assure you, but as to his Notes upon
College, I have nothing more to observe to you, but that he begins well to his
Reader. It is not the part of a Christian, nor indeed of a man (except himself)
to insult upon the miserable, either in their Memorys, or in their Persons,
besides that the Criminal here in Question, has already satisfied Public
Justice, etc.


S. Then comes a Yet this does not hinder but that a man may, according to his
Talent, honestly satisfy this Morality, by endeavoring to say as much ill of
an Executed Dissenter, as he can; and that notwithstanding all his knowledge in
Heathenish and Christian Morals, for the Cause, and something Else sake, he may
honestly be permitted to rake in the Ashes of the Dead, disturb their Memory,
fling Dung on their Words, Execute them over again, play a second Ketch's part,
and dissect their bowels, draw out, with twisting inferences their words, show
their thoughts, expound their meanings, and let no part of their Quarters rest
in quiet.


N. But to leave this stuff, what say you to Heraclitus's last Ballad, of The
Whigs Save-all.


S. I don't care if I give you another, it is called:

The Torys burn all, Or,
The Tories Candles End upon the Whigs Save-all.
To London make have.
While the Candle does last,
Now the People are all in a maze;
For our old cause here,
Does in Triumph appear,
Though our Candle is even at last blaze.
We'ave borrowed Whigs Save all,
That our Candle might have all
The Advantage that we can give it
Our Lies tho but shallow,
Do serve us for Tallow,
With which we take care to relieve it.
We'ave more tricks than one.
And turn every Stone
To bring in the Popish Religion:
Let no Man then blame us,
For sham Ignoramus,
To cheat a Whig, or a Protestant Widgeon.
O now for a Jury,
Of Papist and Tory,
To believe all that is a mear a --
As e're was swore by the true,
Papistical Crew;
And against Tapsky to find Billa Vera.
We can hang, we can burn,
If once the Tide turn,
We then shall have our Mandamus:
Then Whigs you must turn all,
Or else you shall burn all,
We'll never find a Bill Ignoramus.
If Candles-End does last,
Till some time be past,
Tho it grow so near to the Snuff;
To affect our desire
In kindling a Fire
It will serve all our turns well enough.
Then will we remember,
Whigs Fifth of November,
And their burning of so many Popes,
The Image shall not serve turn,
Live Whigs we will burn,
And their Save-alls hang up in our Ropes.
Then it shall appear,
We can domineer.
And in our damned Crimes we can glory;
For when we expire,
We fear not Hellfire,
And can be prayed out of Furgatory.

London, Printed for El. Smith, at the Elephant and Castle in Cornhil. 1081.

Numb. 3. A New DIALOGUE BETWEEN Somebody and Nobody. OR THE Observator and
Heraclitus OBSERVED.
Monday, December 5. 1681.
Nobody. WHat in a brown study? what have you there, Heraclitus railing against
the No Protestant Plot? a most wicked Libel, which, like the Shams, begets
another.


Somebody. I am laughing to see the Fellow mumble a company of Pebbles, taking
them to be Nuts; he thinks to crack them, and breaks the stumps in his Mouth:
Is not Swinger a kin to you?


N. He is one of the Some-bodys I assure you, but which of them I cannot tell
you: But I wonder he could not be met with in the Protestant Banio.


S. He is acquainted indeed with the Rubbers, tho they are a numerous
Corporation, ever since they have rubbed the Popish Plot out of sight. They have
rubbed a Jesuit into a Presbyter.


N. Yes, they would feign rub out the Mayors Sign of Sir Ed. Godfrey too, that
offends the Rubbers.


S. But they will never be able to rub the stain out of the Peoples Memory,
let them rub their hearts out.


N. There are some who think to do it with the Brish of Scandalum Magnatum.


S. That Is nothing to the rubbing of one man into two: There Is a Miracle for
you.


N. Not so great neither, as the Tory Rubbers have performed, who have rubbed 6
or 7 Traitors into Saints. Come Sir, they know how to rub and Let too, as well
as the best Fanatical Rubbers of them all.


S. If you begin to make Comparisons I Will leave you; you are as spiteful as
Heraclitus, and as malicious as the Observator.


N. And have they not reason to be so, when the Whigs present their Papers for
a Neusance?


S. And much they care for it; for they are still ready to present the Whigs
with 2 or 3 sheets of Bumfodder to rub their --


N. You remember the Observator says, things must be done decently and in order.


S. And I remember too, that that Text made an honest man lose his Dinner.


N. That Is a mistake, it was not the Text, but the ill handling that Text made
the honest man lose his Dinner.


S. That Observator is an insulting fellow over the dead, Observe his Notes and
his Sayings.


N. It Is but only to inform the living, and to disabuse the People.


S. Good Man! I will put you one Query. Why this Gentleman never wrote Notes on
the Five Jesuits, who said they died innocent? nor by his convincing way of
arguing, informed the Living, or disabused the Common People, too many of whom
were apt to believe the dying words of such holy men?


N. Because he thought them better Christians than those he writes against: But
let me ask you one Question, what were you studying on?


S. To English a little more than a line of Horace, in the Front of Heraclitus,
Numb. 43.


N. What need you trouble your self, he has done it for you?


S. Even as the Papists interpret Scripture: He has made the Whigs of Ancient
standing: But since Horace was a Roman, I think it may be better applied to his
People, who pray to such Saints, and then I thought -- pulchra Laverna Da mihi
fallere, da justum, sanctumque videri. might say

-- Fair Hag or Saint
Let me deceive the World with Romish paint,
For thy sake, holy Cause, permit me feign,
Seem holy, just, and Godliness my Gain.

N. This interpretation will be as well liked as Captain Wilkinson's
Information.


S. Or as the Bonfires the other night thorough out London, I wonder the
Observator and Heraclitus did not piss them out.


N. They ran away at the Shout of the People upon the pronouncing Ignoramus:
that is a terrible word, and sounds like Thunder in their ears. But let 'em go,
betwixt you and me, the Little great Lord I am afraid is no great Statesman,
but a Fool.


S. Why so?


N. Because he did so openly and plainly discover his Mind, consult and
conspire the most horrid Treason he is charged with, and was indicted for, with
such kind of Men, Papists, Turncoats, Profligated Wretches, that could stand
him in no stead, in those great designs of overthrowing a Kingdom, with so
many, so openly, without binding to secrecy, with Oaths and Sacraments; and to
be so familiar and intimate with such persons, below his Quality, as to open
his Bosom and Secrets; and indeed, to be so great a Fool or Madman, to trust
his Life, his Estate, the Honor of his Family in such Hands. He has clearly
lost my Opinion for a Politician.


S. This was not considered before hand. Look you, these Fellows were Doves;
harmless Pigeons, that could do no hurt with downright Swearing, ask honest
Heraclitus else; who in his impudent front of Numb. 44. puts down,

Dat veniam Corvis, vexat censura Columbus.
They pardon the Crows, and condemn the Doves.
Harmless Turtles!

Did not our Laws with us bear sway,
Each Dog would tear a Limb away:
Then Loyalty would become a Crime,
And Villains to Preferment climb.
Cheaters would turn the wrong to right,
Make Whigs seem black, and Papists white.
Tell me, you worse than Bedlamites,
If Wise Men did not bound the rage
Of some mad Varlets of this Age,
What could secure our Lives, our Laws, our Rights?

N. You are very Poetical methinks. But Sir, Treason is Treason, let me tell
you, not only overt Acts according to the Statute of 25th. of Ed. 3d. but
Treasonable Words are Treason, according to that of 13 Car. 2. being proved by
two credible and substantial Witnesses.


S. A Man had need have a care whom he converses with, and keep a Journal of
his words, as well as Actions; but I think it would do well, that this whifling
Sin of Perjury were made death by the Law, especially in such cases, where the
Juror, by a false Oath, shall attempt to take away the life of another.


N. That Is not our business: Let our wise Legislators in Parliament think of
that: But I hope you do not charge any of the King's Witnesses.


S. Not I; but I hope a Grand Jury may think of their Credibility, since he
that swears Treason against another, by the Statute, ought to be a Credible
Witness.


N. There is another Reason given for the Iuries finding the Bill Ignoramus.


S. Because the Indictment was not put in according to the Time limited in the
Statute. Then you see the Gentlemen had more reasons than one.


N. But Somebody thinks they had no more Reason than an Horse.


S. Don't pretend to know my Thoughts: Sir, this is a Tory trick; when Treason
is spoke to Nobody, to put it upon Somebody; but if Anybody thinks ill of the
Grand Juries Ignoramus, they are the Papists and Heraclitus, for he tells you
plainly, arraigning the Justice and Consciences of the Grand Jury, when the
Court did not, Numb. 44. That their Ignoramus Declaratition convinced not, nor
contributed any thing toward the Conviction of any sober Man, from the
suspicions he had before.


N. But he would have a Man Tried right or wrong by his Peers.


S, Yes, and have his Life put in jeopardy before there is a just occasion for
it* but since the Law is so tender of an English-mens life, as to ordain two
Iuries, first to pass upon him before he shall forfeit it; I know not by what
Authority Heraclitus would have this Old Law broke, to bring a Man upon his
Trial for his Life by his Peers, and not to permit the Grand Jury of his
Country, (made up usually of the most knowing, honest and able Men of the
Country) to judge whether there is any such occasion, of putting a Man's Life in
jeopardy; in which case they are certainly Judges.


N. Ay, but if a certain number of Men be disposed or ordained, to understand a
matter one way, be of this Opinion; and a greater number of Men, as honest and
considerable, and c. determine another way, the minds of Men will remain in
oequilibrio, till true Arguments put a force upon them.


S. May Not I here play the Observator, and pick out the sense of these words?


N. You may save your self the labor, for Heraclitus tells you himself the
meaning, by his Story of his Sheep proved Hogs: though I think the Parallel
does not hold* for in this case, the Irish drovers Hogs are proved Sheep.


S. He that villifies Parliaments, may well be permitted to villifie Grand
Iuries; and to make a company of Loyal Gentlemen Ramuses, to give false
Judgment, contrary to their knowledge, to makes Hogs Sheep.


N. It Is but a Jest Sir, and a Story, take no notice of it.


S, Yet, cut my Throat and defame me, with a Jest and a Story, or a Lie, or any
thing such as Thompson in Numb. 82. of his Loyal Intelligence, who says,
Ignoramus was no sooner named, but a general Hiss went throughout the Court.


N. O Sir, he may say any thing, he may -- -- Cum Privilegio.


S. With the same Authority, as the Observator rails.


N. He has been very well employed in making comparisons.


S. Between the Turks and the Whigs Cruelties; that is his way, speak either
against his beloved Pope or Turk, and he presently flaps you in the* mouth with a
Whig; he has him for all Comparisons, and then he still makes him the worst.


N. It Is his charity for Protestants, that they may not be overlay'd by the
Plot* teeming Monstrous Presbyterian Discipline, that has 20000 Plots in its
Belly, and continually spawning them from Generation to Generation, Numb. 72.
Plots against God, the King, the Liberties of the People, and the freedom of
Humane Society and of Mankind.


S. Great Charges: but now, will not he cry out, if his black Bill be found
Ignoramus, and that he has spite, malice, revenge, interest, and no Truth or
Justice in his Indictment against the Whigs or Protestants* (I know not how to
distinguish 'em) or, to comprehend them in his own words, Dissenters; These are
the Persons he spends half a side against, to prove them Plotters, Traitors,
Rebels and Conspirators, with as little Reason as Honesty.


N. You must not question the Oracle, he is a kind of a Dictator, and can
direct the State to destroy Private Meetings, and tells them, it is necessary,
and that the Government cannot be safe without it.


S. I wonder it has then bin thus long safe and quiet. without trouble or
interruption, till the Popish Plotters began to disturb it; and till the
barking Towzers and the chattering Heraclitus's made such a confused din, that
no body could be heard but themselves; big with Exclamations against such as
speak or act against Popery.


N. Well Sir, have a care I advise you, how you speak against the Observator,
lest he bring you to have your nose rubbed at his Cats Inquisition Office: he will
prove as good a Whipper as ever Bonner was: he is to be Beadle-general to claw
off the Heretic Protestants.


S. That Is putting the Laws in execution, he me^ns the bloody ones of Q. Mary,
but we have a better Governor and one who has so much Piety as not to be moved
by such Instigators, and that understands not the necessity of any such rigor,
as he would infer* having by experience found the contrary. Let Offenders
suffer, but let not the Innocent be oppressed for fear they should offend,

If some could have their Wills, all Men should fall,
Down, and turn Worshippers of Lordly- Baal:
But God, who sees into the Secret Parts,
Examines and confounds unrighteous Arts.

London, Printed for El. Smith, 1681.

Numb. 4. A New DIALOGUE BETWEEN Somebody and Nobody. OR THE Observator and
Heraclitus OBSERVED.
Monday, December 12. 1681.
Somebody. WELL How go squares?


Nobody. Things do not go square, the Tories are all in a rage. Towzer barks,
the Monkey chatters, and the Animals are running mad.


S. Let them be worm'd, is it such hot weather at Christmas?


N. The Bonfires the other day so heated their Brains, they never were cold
since; and besides, such News comes out of the Country, that it is as bad to
'em as Addresses or Petitions for a Parliament.


S. O that is for the rejoicing for Tonys release.


N. I wonder so many should be concerned for that little Man.


S. It Is not for the Man, but the Protestant Cause, which was struck at in him,
makes all Loyal Hearts rejoice, that he is found innocent* for Thousands that
wis^ him well, and that Innocence might never suffer under contrivances, nor
the Protestant Cause undermined by the Iesuitical Shams, would be as ready to
accuse him, did they believe him a Traitor or a Rebel, or knew that he intended
any harm to His Majesty or his Government.


N. Heraclitus, the Observator, and a thousand more, are not of your mind Sir.


S. It Is their business to make the World believe otherwise. He must rise early
that has every bodies good word. And I think there is a Woe to him, whom every
body speaks well of. I should not much care for the good word of a Tory, for he
will make a Saint of Coleman* and a Devil of any, that, for the good of his
Country, opposes his wicked Devices. It Is the fate of a Wise Man to be
suspected, and let him be never so honest, he may be traduced.


N. Prithee leave thy sentences, here is stuff indeed, fit for a Pulpit.
Suspected! will not you believe the New Song of Ignoramus, that makes your Wise
Man a greater Traitor than Coleman?


S. I did not hear it.


N. At the Old Bailey,
Where Rogues flock daily,
A greater Traitor far than Coleman, White, or Staley,
Was late Indicted,
Witnesses Cited,
But Tony was set free, and so the King was righted*
But wot you what Sir,
They found it not Sir,
'Twas every Jurors case, and there lay all the Plot Sir,

S. Are not these a company of Villains, that dare thus to asperse so many Men
of known Loyalty? The time may come the E. of S. may have his Action of
Scandalum Magnatum, as well as the E. of D. but what say our Pamphleteers?


N. Heraclitus bites his Nails and his fingers ends for Madness: He is hardly
yet out of his Fit, for he gnaws* the Latin of his own Indictment most
furiously, and cries, if the Iu^y be Loyal and Honest, they must find him not
guilty.


S. He has opened his Case most learnedly, and made very Oafes of the
Indicters: But has he heard yet of the Protestant Observator, how escapes he
with him?


N. O Sir, he took him to be Comus and Momus revived.


S. Hard words: what was that Comus and Momus?


N. It was a Jest and Earnest, that for some time brish'd the Cobwebs from his
back with a Crabstick. But he is cruel mad at little Harry and his Popish
Latin, that troubles him too* that he is not able to make Converts.


S. He lacks some of his Popish Miracles, that can convert all Protestants to
Heretics, Traitors and Rebels.


N. They have ill luck, their new Powder Plot against the Prince of Orange, or
the Earl of St. Paul, or both, is discovered: and now are they angry with God
Almighty for preventing it.


S. God bless His Majesty from this sort of People, who on every hand thus
wickedly endeavor the overthrow of all honest Protestants. What is that Earl
of St. Paul?


N. He is an Hugonite, for which he was forceed some time since, to leave his
Native Country, his Life being obnoxious to the French Tories, where he had no
hope of benefit of a Grand Jury.


S. O happy England! where great Men are not suffered to be Tyrants, nor the
poor oppressed; where the Laws are open, the King just, and Jurors not
overawed by Greatness. But what says the Tories Printer?


N. I hear he is preferred to attend on the Duchess of P. into France. But did
you see Le'Strange's Godly Sayings?


S. No; and yet I see most things that come out, and they are so many I am fain
to keep a Catalogue of them.


N. They are Printed in the 76 Observator, who justifies him, and by these
notable Sayings of his, proves his quarrel, is not to the dissent, but to the
Sedition.


Somebody. O wonderful! I thought he had been endeavoring by some thousands
of railing Paragraphs, to be picked up through his Writings, to prove the
dissent, a Sedition: And I am sure, more than an hundred times, he calls the
Dissenters not only Seditious, but Villains, Traitors and Plotters. What are
Presbyterians but Dissenters, and Presbytery but a Dissent from the Church of
England in some particulars of Church Government? and yet this Presbytery he
tells you, Numb. 72. Is a Monster with 20000 Plots in the Belly of it, spawning
them from Generation to Generation: Plots against the King, People and all
Mankind; and yet he quarrels not with the dissent, Good Man! but when he makes
the Dissent, to be all one with the Sedition, I cannot see into his
distinction: But what are his Sayings in their behalf?


N. He says, Numb. 69. That Dr. Gouge (though a Dissenter) was acommon
Blessing, and did good to all Men, to the atmost of his power: And Number. 74.
That at least 9 parts in 10, throughout the whole Party of Dissenters; are
People of good Intentions, and would never join in a Rebtllion. And now you
have the Iliades in a Nut-shell.


S. Are these all a little, very little Book of Good and Godly Sayings of Mr.
Le'Strange's; and these he thinks shall atone, for his Voluminous, Railing
Rhapsodies against Dissenters. But I cannot but admire at this second part of
his Sayings, That 9 parts of 10 thorough out the whole Party of Dissenters, are
People of good Intentions, and would never join in a Rebellion. Tho this be a
very great truth, yet methinks, it is very strange out of his black Mouth. But
does not this argue the Man of a great deal of Impudence and Wickedness, to
condemn all Dissenters from the Church of England for Rebels, Factious and
Seditious Bou^efues, when (you see) he knows in his Conscience, 9 parts of 10
are otherwise? God would have spared Sodom could he have found but Ten
Righteous Persons in it, but Le'Strange will not spare the Dissenters, but
would destroy them, as he has endeavored to do their Reputation, though he
believes but a Tenth part of them Wicked or Rebellious.


N. The Wind is veering about; it is time to record his good Sayings. Towzer is
converted into a Spaniel.


S. No, you mistake the Man, he is the same still: he can as soon live without
eating, as without railing; for in Numb. 77. the Strange Observator, falls to
his Old Vomit, and under the Notion of enumerating all the flagitious Crimes of
a company of Traitors and Villains, disowned by all but themselves, brands the
9 parts of the 10 honest Dissenters, with their Mark; and what ever any one
says in the justification of the honest Dissonters, he presently cries out, So
said, so did, their Predecessors with His Late Majesty.


N. He has a good Memory: but I thought the Act of Oblivion, had been a
Statute, that was not thus to be broken.


S. What cares a Tory for Laws or Statutes, so he may gain his Point, that is,
making Protestant Dissenters odious: He forgets His Royal Majesty's most
Gracious Declaration from Breda (which His Majesty has made good, and
Confirmed by Act of Parliament) in which he expressly says; Let all Our
Subjects, how faulty soever, rely upon the Word of a King, solemnly given by
this present Declaration, that no Crime whatsoever, Committed against Us, or
Our Royal Father, before the Publication of this, shall ever rise in Judgment,
or be brought in question against any of them, to the least indamagement of
them, either in their Lives, Liberties or Estates, or, as far forth as lies in
our power, so much as to the prejudice of their Reputations, or Mark of
Distinction from the rest of Our best Subjects: We Desiring and Ordaining, That
henceforth all No^es of Discord, Separation and Difference of Parties, be
utterly abolished among all Our Subjects, etc. And a little after he says -- We
do declare a Liberty to tender Consciences, and that no Man shall be Disquieted
or called in question for Difference of Opinion in Matters of Religion, which
do not disturb the Peace of the Kingdom. Upon which I shall only make one or
two Queries.

I. Whether the Observator, in making distinctions, and in his Daily or Weekly
abusing the Dissenting Protestants, and calling them by so many evil names, and
especially by rakeing up all the most horrid Crimes of a Select Party, and
throwing them upon the Presbyterians, and the whole body of Dissenters, who
live peaceably, and under the Protection of the King's Laws, be not an acting
quite contrary to the mind of His Majesty in this Declaration, and to the great
disturbance of His Majesty's Subjects? II. Whether the Observator does not act
against his own Conscience, in endeavoring to make the whole body of
Dissenters to seem Factious and Rebellious, and to render them Odious and
Formidable to His Majesty, and to the rest of His Majesty's Liege Subjects,
when he has declared that Nine Parts of Ten of them, he believes to be honest
and peaceable? III. Whether after this, any ought to believe, that this
Observator writes for the Honor of his King, or in the behalf of the Church,
or that rather, notwithstanding his Protestations to the contrary, we ought not
to think him the hireling of the Popish Faction in Masquerade?



London, Printed for El. Smith, 1681.

Numb. 5. A New DIALOGUE BETWEEN Somebody and Nobody. OR THE Observator and
Heraclitus OBSERVED.
Monday, December 19. 1681.
Nobody. STand off; keep your distance.


Somebody. What Is the matter now? are you afraid of Heraclitus's Pocket
Flailes?


N. Ay marry am I: for according to his character; a True Protestant in the
Modern sense, or weak disputants, furnish themselves with those knock-down
Arguments, that none can withstand them.


S. I see you are still troubled with the Proceedings of the Old Baily: will
you never forget them?


N. Forget them! no not so soon: that will eternally vex the Torys; you know
they are men of Memory, they will remember things long before they had a being.


S. They are full of Revenge and Malice too, if like Heraclitus; who tells you
Numb. 46. That those Hat Wavers in the Old Baily don't deserve to wear their
Heads.


N. It Is well he is not a Lawmakers, for then you and a great many more had
been hanged before now: There be Tory Necklaces, which are more fatal than
Protestant Flailes.


S. Yes they have Irish Oaths too would decently do the Jobb, if Heraclitus or
the worshipful Observator were of the Jury.


N. They are two Weekly Enemies; will you never leave pelting at them?


S. Not till they leave lying and sland'ring.


N. And that I Will assure you they cannot do, till they leave scribbling. But
they are Hellishly angry with Pug, for averring That Iuries are judges of a
Witnesses credibility.


S. Ay, and because he cannot confute him with Arguments, would reach him with
a pocket Flail if he could. He calls laying down the very words of the Statute,
a wresting it.


N. But he wrests it, to say, Iurys are Judges of the Witnesses Credibility,
when the L C I tells you to the contrary.


S. Would Her. have them to be at once Men without Sense and Reason. But since
my L C I says to the Jury, the Witnesses are intended prima facie credible,
unless you of your own knowledge know the contrary; the Jury may judge then by
their own knowledge of the Witnesses Credibility; and then no doubt the Jury
may very well justify their Ignoramus.


N. But Mr. Observator Numb. 77. proves them credible Witnesses, and makes it
an Arraignment of a Parliament to believe the contrary; since Mr. Dugdale was
particularly recommended by the House of Commons, November. 2. 1680. to His
Majesty, to take him into His Royal Care, etc. and so likewise Mr. Turbervile,
and Mr. John Macnamarra.


S. What an Argument is here! Because they once were credible Witnesses,
therefore there is no possibility for them afterward to become otherwise.
Because the Weather Dragon on Bow sometimes turned his Snout toward the Tower,
therefore he can never after that turn it toward Westminster. Because there
was once a time Mr. D. had not a Clap, therefore Mr. D. afterward cannot get a
Clap to spoil his Evidence. Because once upon a time there was a Poet that
wrote an Elegy on the Usurper O. C. therefore the same Poet cannot prove Loyal,
and write Absolon and Achitophel; or because one fidled once to Cromwell, the
said man afterward cannot turn Tory and Observator. Tempora mutantur -- And
because some persons at some time Swear truly and sincerely, therefore the same
persons may not be tampered with and prevailed upon at some other time to be
Perjured. Certainly the Learned Observator would have all men to be as much out
of their Senses, as he is out in his Arguments, to draw Conclusions, that they
who will not believe these men for credible Witnesses, whom the Parliament once
represented for such, arraign the Parliament. Sure he thinks all the world
fools to be thus ridiculously imposed upon.


N. Nay, it is a mere Popish Design this of uncrediting the Witnesses; for under
the color of asserting the innocence of Protestants (which the Observator will
not believe) they do all that is possible to advantage the cause, and to puzzle
the discovery of the Papists. Numb. 77.


S. How zealous is this good man for the discovery of the Popish Plot! and what
care he takes it may not be stifled by the innocence of the Protestants;
according to his Rule, the best way to find out the Popish Plot, is to swear a
Presbyterian Plot upon the Government and Le'Strange.


N Her* tells you, Number. 46. Ingratitude and dullness will be for ever
Characteristicks of Whiggism. Ungrateful the Whigs are; not to believe the
Witnesses that swore against the Papists; and dull that will not understand the
Observators Arguments to prove them credible.


S. If Ingratitude and Dullness be the Whigs character; Lying and Perjury seems
to be as greatmarks of Torism. If the Tories have all the Wit, let the Whigs be
content with their dull honesty, so they have Sense enough to defend themselves
from their adversaries rage and malice.


N. The Observator is a most prying man, diligent in his Vocation; he will meet
with you for it.


S. Not in Moor-fields, nor at Madam Creswels. He is a diligent Observator
indeed: Dick Ianeway cannot tell the world in his Intelligence, of a Bawds
being Convicted, but he makes his Observations upon it, and chews it as if he
loved Bawdry* and still remembers his old haunts, and what he could have done:
Mark some more of Roger's Pious Sayings, or Apothegms: It Is an unknown deal of
money that good Woman has got by the way of True Protestant Concupiscence. Numb.
78. What a sweet breath he has! she was no Bawd then for a Tory. Mark his next
Godly Sentence, Moor- fields stands in so pleasant an Air, and there is the
finest walk for Meditation, from a Wench to a Sacrament: ibid. You may perceive
what Meditations this man used to have, he speaks so feelingly.


N. He cares not what he says against the Whigs; he would have no body talk
baudy, jeer, nor play the fool or Buffoon but himself.


S. I know he complains foully, Number. 78. What a thing it is to see one
Gospelling it in the Pulpit one day and Buffooning it in a Comus and Momus
another. To see the same person acting Christ upon his Throne to his
Congregation in a Conventicle, and Mimic on the Stage to the Multitude, in a
Libellous Courant. To see a Teacher of the Gentiles go recking from the Stews
to the Holy Table, and at the same time declaiming against Sensuality and
Profaneness. Are not these good and Pious Sayings?


N. It would do well to collect them for the assentors sayings: but where is the
hurt of all this?


S. None at all; But he secretly would wound the Dissenting Ministers, as
guilty of this; some of which he supposes write the Protestant Observator, and
the Courant. But we know the man is no Witch, he may be mistaken in his blind
Observations, as well as his friend Gadbury in the Stars, and in his
Prognostics; though he brags they can hardly piss but he knows it, and has the
History of all their Haunts, Practices, Consults, and all the little accidents,
78.


N. Nay he is downright I assure you, and loves to speak plain.


S. He speaks plain enough, but it would be well if he spoke truth too: but he
is for plain downright lying and accusing. They (says he, Numb. 78. meaning the
Dissenters) have already assassinated one Protestant Prince, and involved 3
Kingdoms in Blood, Sacrilege and Confusion; and they are now contriving the
same over again, by a more audacious and Diabolical Association. This is an
high Charge.


N. But he tells you, that they are Hypocrites, neither Protestants nor
Papists, that take upon them the name of Protestants, and brand all the Sons
and Servants of the Government (such as himself) for Papists. These are the
only men he speaks against, that have made an Association and Confederacy.


S. And let him in Gods Name: but he should do more than write or speak against
such, for he should bring them forth, and show their particular persons to the
world, that Justice might be done on them, and not by his Caterwauling,
endeavor to make us believe all the Dissenters are such kind of persons, and
entered into an Hellish Plot, and Association against the Government.


N. If you would have let him alone, he would have shown you the particular
persons one by one: they say Mr. Somebody has a list of them* but the Ignoramus
Iurys spoiled the sport; and the folly of the Tories in overdoing, has quite
undone the Presbyterian Plot. But do you think, that he who will translate out
of French, an Apology for the Protestants, and justify their departure from
the Church of Rome, will be so wicked to undermine them, and make them guilty
of Plots, when innocent?


S. He can do more than that, when in his Conscience he believes no such thing.


N. The Observator says, Numb. 79. There is no Protestant Plot* but indeed that
there is a Phanatic Plot; but they are no Protestants no more than a Turk, who
puts forth English Colors is a Christian.


S. But who are these he calls Phanatics? He tells you in several places, they
are the Dissenters, and the Protestants are only those of the Church of
England* so that it is clear, all Dissenters are Plotters against the
Government, false Christians, or Heretics, and so according to the Tory
Principle, may be lawfully knocked on the Head, or swore out of their Lives, or
any way put out of the way.


N. That is, Because their Religion is a mass of Errors wrapped up under one
denomination, a medly of Opinions united in a Conspiracy, and divided in Truth,
Numb. 79.


S. Yes, We know what he says of them well enough, and that he makes them the
Gunpowder of the State; but they are Trains of his own laying, and which he
would set fire too, if he could, and were these Dissenters such persons he has
represented them to be, he had done it long since.


N. I confess he cares not for the Damned Virtue Patience. Obs. 80.


S. O that Medicine for a Mad Dog: A virtue in Religion, but not in State,
ibid. He hates Patience on either hand, that Virtue in the Whigs troubles him,
because they will not run horn mad at his luteing; and in the State, because it
nips not the Phanaticks in the bud; that is, hang up all that take the liberty
of contradicting the State Scavengers.


N. I find this Patience has done much mischief.


S. It has disappointed the Tantaras, and makes them blow Sedition so long,
till they are almost weary.


London, Printed for El. Smith, 1681.


