A MEMENTO: DIRECTED To all Those that Truly Reverence the Memory of KING
CHARLES the MARTYR; And as Passionately wish the Honor, Safety, and Happiness
of his Royal Successor, Our most Gracious Sovereign Charles the II.

THE FIRST PART.

By ROGER L'ESTRANGE.

Sic Canibus Catulos similes -- Virg. LONDON: Printed for Henry Brom at the
Gun in Ivy-lane, April the 11. 1662.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE The EARL of CLARENDEN Lord High CHANCELLOR OF ENGLAND.
My LORD,
HE that Owes more then he is Worth, and Pays as far as he is Able, is an
Honest Man; and That Is My Case more ways then One. Nor is it possible for Me
to Think of my Debts and not of your Lordships Bounties, at the same time:
Under whose Roof I have formerly received so many, many Benefits. In the
Establishment of That Felicity, I reckoned my self as sure, as in the
Possession of it: I did, (my Lord) and I must do so still, or do a harder, and
a worse Thing, in Thinking Otherwise. For I am the same I was, and to suppose
your Lordships good opinion, either Begun, or Ended without Reason, were to
subject your Wisdom, or Stability to a Question.

Since so it is, (My Lord) that I cannot suspect your Kindness, without an
injury to your Honor, nor let your Obligations sleep without some Testimony of
my Thankfulness: Vouchsafe to know, (my Lord) that after more then Twenty
Years spent in serving the Royal Interest: Near Six of them, in Gaoles; and
almost Four, under a Sentence of Death, in Newgate; Fortune has been so kind,
as to leave me yet a Bottle of Ink, and a Heap of Paper; out of which pitiful
Remain, I make your Lordship a Present of a Book. This Book I humbly offer,
(not to your Reading, or Thought, but) barely to your Countenance: Let it (my
Lord) but wear the Credit of Your Patronage. Which I the rather wish, because
of a Late Pamphlet that I find Dedicated to your Lordship, by a Mournevall of
Presbyterians, wherein my Name is not well used: and truly (if I am not
Mistaken) his Majesty's Justice and Authority much worse; about the
Imprisonment of Mr. Crofton.

I must Proceed now to acquaint your Lordship, that beside the Honor of your
Protection, I have great need of your Interest, and Favor: which yet I dare
not Beg, for fear of Offending your Readiness to do me all reasonable Justice
without it. In Truth; it is not for a man either of my Nature, or Condition, to
Thrive by Begging; for he that is both Poor and Honest, carries a Double Clogg:
Especially in This Age, (my Lord) when (Heaven and Hell apart) it is a greater
Scandal and Misfortune to be Indigent, then Treacherous.

But there are (my Lord) that do not stick to say, I Am Both: and I forgive with
all my Soul, the Worst that ever was said of Me, with good Intention to the
King. It is not long since I troubled your Lordship with a Paper upon This
Subject; to which (with Leave) I shall add a word or two.

Some will needs have it, that I do not sufficiently Deny the Six hundred Pound.

My Lord; I do so far deny it, that I wish That Penny, or Penyes-worth, which
(to the best of my Knowledge) I ever received from any Creature of the Rebels
Party, or by any Order from Them, or any of Them, may rise against Me at the
Day of Judgment.

There is a further Rumor, as if Captain Whitlock should have sent me word
that he would justify it: whereas I never heard a Syllable from him to That
Purpose; nor can the World show the least Color for the Truth of That Report.

Let me be Pardoned (my Lord) if I conoeive This Address not altogether
Impertinent; for if it did belong to you to Condemn me, while you but Thought
me Guilty; your Lordship is certainly Obliged in Honor, to Acquit me when you
Know me Innocent. In This Particular, (my Lord) I think you are Bound to do me
Right; but in what Follows, I totally Depend upon your Favor.

There is a Pitiful creature, One Bagshaw* (a Chaplain to the Earl of
Anglesie, and the Author of the Animadversions upon the Bishop of Worsters
Letter) This Fellow, when his hand was In, against the Bishop, lends Me a Lash
too, for my Practices with Cromwell. Your Lordship would do me a Peculiar
Honor, to Procure that he might be called before the Counsel, to make good
his Charge: where, if I prove not Him That Villein, which he Pretends, I am,
let Me suffer for it.

My LORD, I am, Your Lordships Most Obedient Servant, Roger L'estrange.
April 11. 1662.
The Preface.
THE Subject I have here undertaken leads me into several unlucky Characters,
which if they were like nobody, would be good for Nothing, as holding no
Proportion with Nature, and Truth. If any man Imagine that he sees himself
Here, let him keep his own Counsel, and Consider, that a Coat may be fit for
him that was never made for him. His Answer was not amiss, that being
Compleyn'd of to the Late Eminent Earl of Strafford, for having written a
Libel: My Lord (says he): The Case is but This* I throw down a Fools Cap; This
Gentleman takes it up, and has a Fancy that it fits Him. In short; Let not an
Ill man find fault with a Vicious Character; For it is much worse to Practice
Wickedness than to Peint it.

The scope of This First Part which I here expose, is by Laying open the
Workings and Series of the Last Rebellion, to disappoint the Purposes of
another. The Second Part I reserve for more Particular Duties, both Christian,
and Political; which shall follow sooner, or Later, according to the
Enterteynment which the World affords to This. The Author's Faults, are enough,
without the Printers. Of Each sort there are Many, and I leave it to the
Judicious Reader to Distinguish them.

A MEMENTO.
PART. I. CAP. I.
The Matter and Causes of Seditions.
THE Matter of Seditions (according to Sir Francis Bacon; The Matter of
Sedition.
whose words and Authority I shall often make use of in this little Treatise)
is of two kinds; Much Poverty, and much Coffeehouse.

The Causes and Motives of Seditions he reckons to be These. The Causes of it.
Innovation in Religion; Taxes; Alteration of Laws, and Customs; Breaking of
Privileges; General Oppression; Advancement of unworthy Persons; Strangers;
Dearths; Disbanded Soldiers; Factions grown desperate. And whatsoever in
offending People, joyneth and knitteth them in a common Cause.

These Inconveniences, either seasonably discovered, colourably pretended, or
secretly promoted, are sufficient to the foundation of a Civil War. In which
Negative and dividing Politiques, none better understood themselves than the
Contrivers of our late Troubles: not only improving and fomenting
Discontentments, where they found them, and creating violent Iealousies, where
there was but any place to imagine them; but They Themselves were the greatest
gainers even by those Grievances against which they complained: Reaping a
double Benefit, first from the Occasion of the Difference, and then from the
Issue of it.

When a seditious bumor is once moved, The Remedy.
the best Remedy is to cut off the Spring that feeds it: by pleasing all sorts
of People, so far as Possible, and by Disobliging none, but upon Necessity.
Which Public Tenderness must be so menaged, that the Majesty of the Prince
be not lost in the Goodness of the Person: for nothing can be more Dangerous
to a Monarch, then so to over-court the Love of his People, as to lose their
Respect, or to suffer them to impute that to his Easiness which ought to be
ascribed purely to his Generosity.

Offenses of That Daring, Contempt more fatal to Kings then Hatred.
and Unthankful Quality, can scarce be pardoned, without some hazard to the
Authority that remits them: Secret Contempts being much more fatal to Kings,
then Public and Audacious Malice: the latter commonly spending it self in a
particular and fruitless Malignity toward the Person, (and that with Terror
too, as being secured under a Thousand Guards of Majesty and Power) whereas the
Other privily teints the whole Mass of the People, with a Mutinous Leaven,
giving Boldness to contrive, Courage to execute; and, if the Plot miscarryes,
there is the hope of Mercy to Balance the peril of the Undertaking. For a
Conclusion of this Point,
He that but Thinks Irroverently of his Prince, deposes him.

Concerning the Materials of Sedition, viz. Poverty and Coffeehouse: it
would be endless to dissolve these General Heads into Particular ^^le^: the
best advice in This Case must be General too; that is, to endeavor to remove
whatever Causes them, referring the Particulars to Counsel, and Occasion.

It Is very well observed by the Lord St. Albans touching Poverty: Poverty
breed^ Sedition.
[So many overthrown Estates, so many Votes for Troubles; and if this Poverty,
and Broken Estate in the Better sort, be joined with a Want and Necessity, in
the mean People, the Danger is Great and Imminent:]
which to prevent, [Above all things (says the same Author) good Policy is to
be used, that the Treasure and Moneys, in a State, be not gathered into few
Hands. For otherwise a State may have a great Stock, and yet starve: A numerous
Nobility causes Poverty.
And Money is like Muck, not good except it be spread.] And again [A numerous
Nobility, causes Poverty, and Inconvenience in a State, for it is a Surcharge
of Expense.

As to the Seeds of Discontentments, they are as various as the Humors they
encounter: dependent many times upon Opinion; and inconsiderable in Themselves,
however Notorious in their Effects.

Touching the Discontentments Themselves, Fears and Jealousies.
it is the Advice of the Lord Verulam, [That no Prince, measure the danger of
them by This; Whether they be Just or Unjust? for that were to imagine People
to be too Reasonable; Nor yet by This, whether the griefs whereupon they rise,
be in Fact, great or small: For They are the most Dangerous, where the Fear is
greater then the Feeling.

Such were those furious, and implacable Iealousies, that started the late
War, which doubtless may more properly be accounted among the Dotages of a
Disease, or the Illusions of a dark Melancholy; then the Deliberate Operations
of a Sober Reason.

Proceed we now from the Matter, and more remote Causes of Seditions, to the
Approches and Prognostics of them.

CAP. II.
The Tokens and Prognostiques of Seditions.
IT is in many Cases with Bodies Politic, as it is with Natural Bodies; Both
perish, by Delaying till the Distemper be grown too strong for the Medicine:
Whereas by watching over, and applying to the first Indispositions of the
Patient, how easy is the Remedy of a Disease, which in one day more perhaps
becomes Incurable? Some take it for a point of Bravery, not to own any Danger
at a Distance, lest they should seem to fear it. Others are too short-sighted
to discern it: So that betwixt the Rash and the Stupid, (a large Proportion in
the Division of the World) we are past the help of Physic, before we can
persuade our selves we need it.

Dangers (says the Incomparable Bacon) are (...) more light, if they once seem
light: and more danger have deceived Men, than forced them. Nay it were better,
to meet some Dangers half way, though they come nothing near, than to keep too
long a watch upon their Approches, for if a man watch too long, it is odds he
will fall asleep.

Neither let any man measure the Quality of the Danger, by That of the
Offender: for again, ['tis the Matter, not the Person, that is to be
considered* Treason is contagious, and a Raskal may bring the Plague into the
City, as well as a Great man.] I do the rather press This Caution, because
Security was the fault of those to whom I direct it.

But what avails it to wary of Dangers, without the skill and providence. to
foresee and prevent them? Or what hinders us from the foreknowledge of Those
Effects, to which we are led by a most evident, and certain train of Causes?
States have their Maladies as well as Persons; and Those Ill habits have their
peculiar Aecidents, and Affections; their proper Issues, and Prognostiques:
upon the true Judgment of which Circumstances depends the Life and Safety of
the Public. Not to play the fool with an Allegory; Be it our care to observe
the Gathering of the Clouds, before they are wrought into a Storm.

Among the Presages of foul weather, The danger Libels.
the Lord St. Albans reckons Libels and Licentious Discourses against the
Government, when they are frequent and open: and in like sort, false news
often running up and down, and hastily embraced, to the disadvantage of the
State.

We need not run beyond our Memories to Agree This Point; it being within the
Ken of our own Notice, that Libells were not only the Forerunners, but, in a
high Degree, the Causes of our late Troubles: and what were the frequent, open,
and Licentious Discourses of (...) in Pulpets, but the illboding Play of (...)
before a Tempest*

We may remember also the false News of Plotts against the Religion, and
Liber^ies of the Nation, and how the King was charged, as an Abettor of the
Design.

We may remember likewise, how the Irish Blood was cast upon the account of his
late Sacred Majesty, even by Those men whose guilty Souls are to Reckon with
Divine Justice for every Drop of it.

Neither have we forgotten with what Care and Diligence These Falsehoods were
dispersed; with what Greediness, they were swallowed; nor what ensued upon it.

If we look well about us, we may find This Kingdom, at this Instant laboring
under the same Distempers: the ^^esse as Busy, and as Bold; Sermons as
factious; Pamphlets as seditious; the Government defamed, and the Defamers of
it (if Presbyteriane escape better then their Accusers. The Lectures of the
Faction are thronged with Pretended Converts, and Seandalous Reports against
the King, and State are as current now as they were twenty years ago.

These were ill Tokens Then, and do they signify just nothing Now? What means
all This but the new Christening of the Old Cause? the doing over again of the
Prologue to the last Tragedy?

Sir Francis Bacon proceeds, that [Disputing, Excusing, Cavilling upon Mandates
and Directions, is a kind of shaking of the Yoke, and Assay of disobedience;
Especially, if in those disputings, they which are for the direction, speak
Fearfully, and tenderly; and those that are against it, Audaciously.

Herein is Judiciously expressed the Motion, or Gradation, from Duty to
Disobedience. The first stepp, is to Dispute; as who should say, I will if I
may. The very Doubt of obeying, subjects the Authority to a Question, and gives
a dangerous hint to the People, that Kings are accomptable to their Subjects.

To Excuse, is a degree worse; for That Is no other, then a Refusal of
Obedience, in a tacit Regard either of an Unjust Command, or of an Unlawful
Power.

To Cavil at the Mandates of a Prince, is an express Affront to his Dignity,
and within one Remove of Violence.

Through these Degrees, and slidings from Bad to Worse, from one Wickedness to
Another,
our late Reformers travailed the whole Scale of Treason; as the Scene changed,
shifting their Habits, till at last, quitting the Disguise of the Kings Loyal
Subjects, they became his Murderers.

What Is more familiar at this Day, than Disputing his Majesty's Orders;
disobeying his Proclamations, and viligying Acts of Parliament? Whereof there
are so many, and so Audacious Instances, it shall suffice to have made this
General mention of them.

Another Observation is, Sir F. B.
that, When Discords and Quarrels; and Factions, are carried openly and
audaciously, it is a sign the Reverence of Government is lost.

This was the temper of that Juncture, when the Schismatieal Part of the two
Houses, and the Tumultuary Rabble joined their Interests against Bishops, and
the Earl of Strafford; which Insolence was but a Prelude to the succeeding
Rebellion.

And are not Factions carried Openly and Audaciously now? when the Promoters,
and Iustifiers of the Murder of the late King, are still continued public
Preachers, without the least Pretense to a Retraction* Dictating still, by
Gestures, Shruggs, and Signs, That Treason to their Auditory which they dare
not Utter? What are their Sermons, but Declamations against Bishops: Their
Covenant-keeping Exhortations, but the contempt of an established Law? How it
comes to pass, Heaven knows; but These Honest Fellows can come off for
Printing and Publishing downright Treason, when I have much ado to escape for
Telling of it.

Whither these Liberties tend, let any man look over his shoulder, and satisfy
himself.

When any of the Four Pillars of Government, Sir F. B.
are mainly shaken, or weakened, (which are Religion, Justice, Counsel, and
Treasure,) men had need to pray for fair weather.

To speak only of the last, The want of Treasure was the Ruin of the late
King; Through which defect, his Officers were exposed to be Corrupted, his
Counsels to be Betrayed, his Armies to be ill Paid, and consequently not well
Disciplined. Briefly, where a Prince is Poor,
and a Faction Rich, the Purse is in the wrong Pocket.

Multis utile Bellum, is an assured and infallible Sign, of a State disposed to
Seditions and Troubles, and it must needs be, that where War seems the Interest
of a People, it should be likewise the Inclination of them.

Touching the General Matter, Motives, and Prognostiques, of Sedition, enough
is said; We Will now enquire into the special cause of the late Rebellion.

CAP. III.
The True Cause of the late War, was AMBITION.
THE true Cause of the late War, The Rise of the late War.
was Ambition: which being lodged in a confederate Cabale of Scotch, and
English, drew the corrupted Interests of both Kingdoms into the Conspiracy: to
wit, the factious, covetous Malcontents, Criminals, Debtors; and finally, all
sorts of men, whose crimes, necessities, or Passions, might be secured,
relieved, or gratified by a change of Government. To these, were joined, the
credulous, weak Multitude; the clamor being Religion, Law, and Liberty: And
here is the sum of the Design, Pretense, and Party.

This League we may presume was perfected in 1637. First from the corespondent
Practices in both Nations, appearing Manifestly about that time: Next, it is
remarkable, that the English Pardon has a Retrospect to the beginning of the
Scotch Tumults; (Ian. 1. 1637. Three years before the meeting of the Long
Parliament) which Provision seems to intimate That Conspiracy. And now the
Poison begins to work. The first Tumult against the Service Book.


Upon the 23 of July in the same year, (according to a Public Warning given
the Sunday before) the Dean of Edinburgh began to read the Service Book in the
Church of St. Giles: whereupon ensued so horrid a Tumult, that the Bishop was
like to have been Murdered in the Pulpit; and after Sermon escaped narrowly
with his life to his Lodgings.

The particular recital of their following Insolences upon the Bishop of
Galloway, the Earls of Traquair and Wigton; the besieging of the Councel-House,
and contempts of the Council, their Audacious Petitions against the
Service Book, and Canons, I shall pass over, as not belonging to my purpose.

Upon the 19 of Febr. following, The Covenanters Usurp the Supreme Authority*
a Proclamation was published against their Seditious Meetings, which they
encounter with an Antiprotest, and presently erect their Public Tables of
Advice and Counsel for Ordering the Affairs of the Kingdom. The Method whereof
was This. Four principal Tables they had. One of the Nobility; a Second of the
Gentry; a Third of the Buroughs; a Fourth of Ministers. And These Four were to
prepare Matters for the General Table; which consisted of Commissioners chosen
out of the Rest.

The first Act of this General Table was their Solemn Covenant; The Institution
of the Scottish Covenant.
a Contrivance principally promoted by persons formerly engaged in a Conspiracy
against the King, The Promoters of it.
and, among others, by the Lord Balmerino, a Pardoned Traitor, and the Son of
One. His Father had been a Favorite, and principal Secretary to King James, and
raised by him out of Nothing, to his Estate, and Dignity. Yet was this
thankless Wretch Arraigned for, and Attainted of high Treason, and after
Sentence to be Hanged, Drawn, and Quartered, he was by the Kings Mercy
Pardoned, and Restored. Another eminent Covenanter was the Earl of Arguile, of
whom Walker gives this Account.

He brought his Father to a Pension; Hist. Iudep. Appendix, page 14.
outed his Brother of his Estate Kintyre; ruined his Sisters by cheating them
of their Portions, and so enforcing them into Cloisters.

It must needs be a Conscientious Design with such Saints as These in the Head
of it.

This Covenant was effectually no other then a Rebellious Vow to oppose the
Kings Authority, The Covenant a Rebellious Vow.
and Justify Themselves in the exercise of the Sovereign Power, which they
assumed, to a degree even beyond the claim of Majesty it self, pleading the
Obligation of the Covenant, to all their Usurpations. A Plea for Treason.


They Levied Men and Moneys; The Usurp^tions of the Covenanters.
Seized the Kings Magazines, and Strong Holds; Raised Forts; Begirt his
Castles; Affronted his Majesty's Proclamations; Summoned Assemblies; Proclaimed
Fasts; Deprived, and Excommunicated Bishops; Abolished Episcopacy; Issued out
Warrants to choose Parliament-Commissioners; Renounced the Kings Supreme
Authority; Trampled upon Acts of Parliament; pressing their Covenant upon the
Privy Council. They gave the last Appeal to the generality of the People;
discharging Counselors, and Judges of their Allegiance, and threatening them
with Excommunication, in case they disobeyed the Assembly.

All this they did, according to the Covenant; and whether This was Religion or
Ambition, let the World judge.

These Affronts drew the King down with an Army to the Borders; and with two
miles of Barwick, A Pacification with the Scots.
the two Bodies had an Enterview; March 28. 1639. But the Scots craving a
Treaty, his Majesty most graciously accorded it; Commissioners were appointed;
Articles agreed upon; and a Pacification Concluded, June 17.

Not one Article of this Agreement was observed on the Covenanters part; Their
Infidelity.
but immediately upon the Discharge of his Majesty's Forces, the Scots brake
forth into fresh Insolences, and Encroachments upon the Prerogative:
addressing to the French King for assistance against their Native Sovereign:
And yet the Quarrel was, as they pretended, for the Protestant Religion, and
against Popery.

In August 1640. they entered England, They enter England.
and upon a Treaty at Rippon soon after, a cessation is agreed upon, referring
the decision of all differences to a more General Treaty at London.

In November began the Long Parliament; The influence of the Scottish Army, and
the City Tumults, upon the long Parliament.
and now the Scene is London: Where with great License and Security, Parties
are made, and Insolences against the Government committed and Authorized under
protection of the Scotch Army, and the City-Tumults. By degrees, matters being
prepared and ripened, they found it opportune, soon after, to make something a
more direct attempt upon the Sovereignty, but by request first; and resolving
if that way fail, to try to force it.

In Ian, they Petition for the Militia: In February, they secure the Tower; and
in March, Petition again for it: The two Houses usurp the Militia.
but so that they Protest, if his Majesty persist to deny it, they are Resolved
to take it: And the next day it is Resolved upon the Question, That the Kingdom
be forthwith put into a Posture of defense, by Authority of both Houses of
Parliament.

In April 1642. the Earl of Warwick seizes the Navy, The Rebellion begins at
Hull.
and Sir John Hotham, Hull; Refusing the King entrance, which was Justified by
an Ensuing Vote; and his Majesty's Proclayming him Traitor for it, was Voted, a
Breach of Privilege.

In May; the pretended Governor of Hull sends out Warrants to raise the
Trained Bands, and the King (then at York) forbids them; moving the Country for
a Regiment of the Trained Foot, The Kings Defense of himself, Voted a War
against his Parliament.
and a Troop of Horse, for the Guard of his Royal Person; whereupon it was
Voted, That the King, seduced by wicked Counsel, intended to make a War
against his Parliament, and that whosoever should assist him, were Traitors.

They proceed then to corrupt and displace diverse of his Servants, Treasonous
Positions of the Two Houses.
forbidding others to go to him. They stop and seize his Majesty's Revenue, and
declare, that whatsoever they should Vote, is not by Law to be Questioned,
either by the King, or Subjects; No Precedent can limit or bound their
proceedings. A Parliament may dispose of any thing wherein the King or People
have any right. The Sovereign Power resides in Both Houses of Parliament. The
King has no Negative Voice. The levying of War against the Personal commands
of the King, though accompanied with his presence, is not a levying of War
against the King: but a levying War against his Laws and Authority (which they
have power to declare) is levying War against the King. Treason cannot be
committed against his Person otherwise then as he was Entrusted. They have
Power to judge whether he discharge his Trust or not, that if they should
follow the highest precedents of other Parliaments Patterns, there would be no
cause to complain of want of Modesty or Duty in them; and that it belonged only
to them to Judge of the Law.

Having stated and extended their Powers, by an Absurd, Illegal, and Impious
severing of the Kings Person from his Office, their next work is to put Those
Powers in Execution; And to subject the sacred Authority of a Lawful Monarch,
to the Ridiculous, and Monstrous Pageantry of a Headless Parliament: and
That Is the Business of the 19. Propositions demanding,

That the great affairs of the Kingdom, Deposing Propositions of June 2.
and Militia, may be menaged by consent and Apprebation of Parliament; all the
great affairs of State, Privy Council, Ambassadors, and Ministers of State,
and Judges, be chosen by Them; that the Government, Education and Marriage of
the Kings Children, be by Their consent, and approbation; and all the Forts and
Castles of the Kingdom, put under the Command and Custody of such as They
should approve of, and that no Peers to be made hereafter, should sit and Vote
in Parliament.

They desire further, that his Majesty would discharge his Guards; Eject the
Popish Lords out of the House of Peers, and put the Penal Laws against them,
strictly in Execution; and finally, that the Nation may be governed either by
the Major part of the Two Houses, or in the Intervals of Parliament, by the
Major part of the Council; and that no Act of State may be esteemed of any
validity, as proceeding from the Royal Authority without Them.

Upon These terms they insisted, The Cause of the War, was Ambition.
and Raised a War to Extort them; So that it is clear, they both designed and
fought, to Dethrone his Majesty, and exercise the Sovereign Power, Themselves:
which was to suit their Liberty of Acting to That of Sitting, and to make
themselves an Almighty, as well as an Everlasting Parliament.

CAP. IV.
The Instruments, and Means, which the Conspirators employed to make a Party.
THat Their Design was to Usurp the Government, is Manifest: Now to the
Instruments and Sleights they used to compass it. The Rabble were the Pillars
of the Cause.


The Grand Projectors knew very well that the strength of their Cause depended
upon the favor of the Ignorant and Licencius Multitude; which made them court
all people of That Mixture, to their Party, (for men of Brain and Conscience
would never have agreed to a Conspiracy, against so clear a Light, so just an
Interest); and Those they found their fast Friends, whom neither the Horror of
Sin, nor the brightest evidence of Reason was able to work upon.

To fit and dispose Both Humors to their purpose; Religion the Pretense.
the first scruple they Started was Religion: which taken as they used it, in
the external form, and j^ngle of it, is beyond doubt, the best Cloak for a
Knave, and the best Rattle for a Fool in Nature. Under This Countenance, the
Murder of the King passed for a Sacrifice of Expiation, and those
Brute-Animals, that scarce knew the Bible from the Alcoran, were made the
Arbitratours of the Difference.

The fear of Popery, Their Zeal against Popery.
was the Leading Jealousy, which Fear was much promoted, by Pamphlets,
Lectures, and Conventicles. Still coupling Popery, and Prelacy; Ceremonies, and
the Abominations of the Whore: by these resemblances of the Church of England,
to That of Rome, tacitly instilling, and bespeaking, the same Disaffection to
the one, which the people had to the other. The Method of the Reformation.
Their Zeal was first employed upon the Names of Priests, and Altar, the
Service Book, Church-habits, and Ceremonies: From Thence, they stepped to the
Demolishing of Church-Windows, Images, Crosses: the Persons of the Bishops went
to it next, and Then the Office. Thus far the Rabble Carried it, the Leaders at
last sharing the Revenues; and here is the Reformation of the Hierarchy complete.

When by these Scandalous Impostures, Rebellion divides God and the King.
the Duties of a Christian and a Subject; Conscience and Loyalty, seem once to
enterfere, what can be looked for, but Rebellion, from a Loose Multitude that
think themselves discharged of their Allegiance?

All Governments are liable to Abuses, Scandals Emproved,
and so was Ours, among the Rest; where Personal Faylings, and Excesses, were
improved into the Fame of an Universal Profaneness, or Apostasy. Nor did they
reckon it enough to Expose, and Aggravate Particular miscarriages, and Invented.
and Humane Fraylties; but the most horrid Crimes Imaginable, were without
either Proof, or Ground, or Color, laid to the Charge of the Episcopal and
Royal Party; Both which were ruined by the same Method of Calumny, and
Sedition.

The main Encouragement to their Attempt, The late King was betrayed by
Presbyterians in his Counsel.
was that, The Presbyterians had a strong Party in the Kings Council; (and this
His Majesty himself takes notice of, in his Large Declaration of 1639. Page
124.) by which means, the Kings Counsels were both Distracted and Betrayed: and
the Conspiratours Secure (at Worst) of Mediators for a Commodious Peace, in
case they Fayl'd of a Successful War. Nor did this Confidence deceive them, in
the following Enterview of the Armies near Barwick, where the Covenanters had
been almost as easily Beaten as looked upon, had not the Quarrel been taken up
by an Importune, and dear-bought Peace; for that expedition cost more Money, A
Dear Peace the cause of a long War.
only to face the Scotch Rebels, then would afterward have served His Majesty
to have Reduced the English.

Throughout the Menage of their Affairs, it may be Observed that they had these
Three regards, Tria Priciipia.
still in their eye, and Care. 1. To Reproach his Majesty's Government. 2. To
Animate, and Reward his Enemies: And 3. To Persecute his Friends: And still as
any thing Stuck, a Tumult ready at a dead lift to help it forward: For they
were not Ignorant, The Method of Treason.
that the King was to be Defamed before he could be Disarmed; Disarmed, before
Deposed; Deprived of his Friends, before Despoyl'd of his Rights and
Privileges: and That being their Design, This was Rationally to be their
Method.

Their first Uproar about the Service Book, Rebellion begins in Confusion, and
ends in Order.
was but a wild trial how far the Multitude would Engage, and the Magistrate
Endure; which appeared in This, that the City-Magistrates did at first,
Earnestly, and Publicly Protest, not only against the Outrage; but for the
Liturgy: not daring to do Otherwise; till a while after, Encouraged by the
Boldness and Importunity of the Offenders,
and the Patience of some in Authority; those very Persons did in their
Pulpits, and Discourses, magnify that Beastly Crew for the Worthies of the
Age, whom just before they had decry'd for Rogues and Villeius. The Truth is,
they were Then about to play the Rogues, Themselves; and when Persons of
Quality turn Rascals, Then do Rascals become Persons of Quality.

At the beginning of the Broyle,
half a dozen broken Heads had saved Three Kingdoms. Who would have owned That
Rabble, had they been Worsted? or, What Resistance could they have made to any
Legal Opposition? But they were Flattered to be Quiet, and That advanced this
Tumult to a Party; the Faction growing every day, more and more Formidable.

As their Strength increased, so did their Pretenses, both in Number, and
Weight; and nothing less would content them, then to strip the King as bare, as
they had done the Bishops. The Particulars of their Insolences are too many
for a Treatise, and, in Truth, too foul for a Story; but in gross, nothing was
wanting to the perfection of the Wickedness, which either Hypocrisy, Perjury,
Treason, Sacrilege, Rapine, Oppression, Forgery, Scandal, Breach of Faith,
Malice, Murder, or Ingratitude could Contribute. All which, in every Point
shall be made good by several Instances, if any man require it.

We'll now look homeward, The English follow the Scottish Pattern.
where we shall find the English Rebellion wrought, to a Thridd, according to
the Trace of the Scottish Pattern.

The Press and Pulpit were already at the Devotion of the Reforming Party, the
Covenanters had an Army on Foot, and the Schismatiques were prepared for a
General Rising; at which time, his Majesty summoned a Parliament, to assemble
in November following.

In This Convention, The Prologue to the late War.
those of the Confederacy, made it their first work to engage the People, by
ripping up of Common Grievances, Breach of Laws, and Privileges; and by
contending to assert their Rights, Liberties, and Religion, against the
Encroachments of Prerogative, and Popery. Being Secure of their Party, they
propose next, the Manner of accomplishing their Purpose; which must be Effected
by Craft, and Terror. In Order whereunto, they first attaqu'd two of his
Majesty's prime Counselors and Confidents, Loyalty pers^cuted.
the Earl of Strafford, and the Archbishop of Canterbury* (Two Persons worthy
of the Kings Trust, and Kindness, however Worried by the Multitude). To weaken
the Lords House, they nulled the Bishops Votes, and Committed 12 of them for
Treason: Five of the Judges were Committed likewise: and to dispose the Lower
House, nothing was wanting which either Force, Flattery, Corruption, or
foul-play in Elections could Procure them.

So far as the King Granted, all went well; but if his Majesty denied them any
thing, the Fault was Laid upon his Evil Consellours: under which Notion all
his Friends were comprehended. So that his Choice was This; either to give away
his Crown, or to have it wrested from him.

In May, the Faction of the Two Houses Published a Protestation, (which was but
a Gentle slip into the Prerogative Royal to try their Interest, and by degrees
to inure the People to their intended, and succeeding Usurpations. Some Four or
Five days after, were signed those Two Fatal Bills, for the Death of the Earl
of Strafford, and the Perpetuity of the Parliament: and having now gained leave
to sit as long as they please,
they have little further to ask, but that they may likewise do what they list.

Where Loyalty was made a Crime, Rebellion Rewarded.
'twas fit Rebellion should pass for a Virtue. Upon which suitable equity, The
Scots were Justified, and Voted, our Dear Brethren; 300000 l. in June 1641. and
Sixscore Thousand more in August following; and so we Parted.

In this Perplexity of Affairs, The King goes for Scotland.
the King takes a journey into Scotland, if Possible, to secure an Interest
There; but the Conspiracy was gone too far to be composed by Gentleness. Upon
his Majesty's Departure, the Houses adjourn, and during the Recesse, appoint a
standing Committee, and They forsooth must have a Guard, for fear of their own
Shadows. In which Interval of the Kings Absence, the Usurpers lost no time, as
appeared by their readiness to Entertein him at his Return: When the first
Present they made his Majesty, His Welcome at his Return.
was the Petition, and Remonstrance of December 15. which I cannot think upon,
but That Text comes into my mind of Mark 15. 18. [Haile King of the Jews, and
they smote him on the head with a Reed, and spat upon him, and bowed the Head,
and did him Reverence.]

This Impious Libell was seconded with an Audacious Tumult, The King Affronted
by Tumults first;
even at the Gates of the Kings Palace, and it was now high time for his
Majesty to enquire into the Contrivers and Abettours of these and other the
like Indignities; and Proclamation was accordingly made for the Apprehending of
them; And Then for compleyning of them.
which very Proclamation was Declared to be a Paper False, Scandalous, and
Illegal.

After This Language, what had they more to do, but by Armed Violence to invade
the Sovereignty, and to improve a loose, and Popular Sedition, into a Regular
Rebellion? Which was a little hastened too, (even beside the Terms of Ordinary
Prudence) to emplunge their Accomplices beyond Retreat, before they should
discern that hideous Gulf into which their Sin, and Folly was about to lead
them. To keep their Zeal, and Fury waking; the Faction had a singular Faculty
at Inventing of Plots; Counterfeiting Letters;
Intercepting Messages; overhearing Conspiracies; which Artificial Delusions
(especially asserted by the pretended Authority of a Parliament, and a Pulpit)
could not but work strong Effects of Scruple, and Jealousy, upon a prejudging
and distempered People.

These were the means and steps by which they gained That Power, which
afterward they Employed in Opposition to those very Ends for which they swear
they Raised it; leaving us neither Church, nor King, nor Law, nor Parliaments,
nor Properties, nor Freedoms. Behold; the Blessed Reformation! We Will slipp the
War, and see in the next place what Government they Gave us in Exchange for
That they had Subverted.

CAP. V.
A short View of the Breaches and Confusions betwixt the Two Factions, from
1648. to 1654.
IT cannot be expected that a Power, acquired by Blood and Treason; maintained
by Tyranny; the Object of a General Curse; and Horror both of God, and Nature;
only United against Justice, and at Perpetual Variance with it self; -- I say,
it cannot be expected, that such a Power as This, should be Immortal. Yet is it
not enough barely to argue the Fatality of Wickedness, from the Certainty of
Divine Vengeance; and There to stopp: -- Usurpers are not Raised by Miracle,
nor cast down by Thunder; but by our Crimes, or Follyes they are Exalted, and
Then, by the Fatu^ty of their own Counsels, down they Tumble. Wherefore let us
Enquire into the Springs, and Reasons of their Fortunes, and Falls; as well as
Gaze upon the Issues of them; A timely search into the Grounds of one
Rebellion, may prevent another. How the Religious Opposers of the late King
advanced themselves against his Sacred Authority, we have already showed; be it
our business here, to Observe their workings, one upon the other.

To begin with Them that began with Us: The Presbyterians ruined by their own
Arguments.
The Presbyterians, having first asserted the Peoples Cause against the
Prerogative, and attempting afterward to Establish Themselves, by using
Prerogative-Arguments against the People; found it a harder matter to Erect on
Aristocracy upon a Popular Foundation, then to subvert a Monarchy upon a
Popular Pretense; or to dispose the Multitude (whom they themselves had
Declared to be the Supreme Power) to lay down their Authority at the Feet of
their Servants. In fine, they had great Difficulties to struggle with, and more
then they could overcome: (I mean, great Difficulties in point of Interest, and
Conduct; for those of Honor and Conscience, they had subdued long since) They
strove however, till, oppressed by a General Hatred, and the Rebouud of their own
Reasonings, they Quitted to the Independents.

Thus departed the Formal Bauble, England a Free State.
Presbytery; succeeded, for the next Four years, by the Phanaticisme of a
Free State. The better half of which time, being successfully Employed in the
subjecting of Scotland, and Ireland to their Power, and Model, and to complete
their Tyranny over the Kings Best Subjects, and their Usurpations over his
Royal Dominions; their next work was to make themselves Considerable Abroad,
and 'twas the Fortune of the Dutch to feel the First proof of That Resolution.

Betwivt these Rival States passed Six Encounters in 1652. most of them Fierce
and Bloody, Quarrels with the Dutch.
the Last especially, a Tearing one. Upon the whole, the Dutch Lost more, but
the English got little, beside the Honor of the Victory; in which particular,
the Kingdom paid dear for the Reputation of the Commonwealth.

This Success raised the Pride and Vanity of the English, so that at next Bout,
nothing less would serve them than an Absolute Conquest. But while they are
Providing for it, and in the Huff of all their Glory; behold the Dissolution of
the Long-Parliament; The Long-Parliament dissolved.
which whether it Began or Ended, more to the Satisfaction of the People, is a
Point not yet decided.

Dissolved however it is, and Rebuked for Corruptions, and Delays, by
Cromwell; who with his Officers, a while after, Summon a new Representative;
and Constitute a new Counsel of State, composed of Persons entirely
disaffected to the Commonwealth. This Little, Ridiculous Convention, thought
to have done mighty Matters, but the Plot Vented, and Vanished.

Some of their Memorable Fopperies are These; Barebones Parliament: Their Acts.
The Famous Act concerning Marriages, was Theirs; they passed likewise an Act
for an Assessement of 120000 l. per Mensem; they Voted down the Chancery and
Tithes; they Voted also a total Alteration of the Laws.

All of a mind they were not, and for Distinction sake, the company was divided
into the Honest Party, and the Godly Party. Of the Former, were Cromwell's
Creatures, and of the Other, Barebones; or rather, Harrisons; (the Person they
had designed for General, if they could persuade Cromwell to quit his Security
for some additional Title of Dignity.) These Zealous Patriots Commonly brought
their Bibles into the House with them; Their Zeal.
and as I am Enform'd, diverse of them were seeking the Lord with Vavasor
Powell, when This following trick was put upon them.

An Hour or two sooner in the morning then usual, December. 12. he that they
called their Speaker took the Chair; Their Dissolution.
and it was presently Moved and Carried, (for several Reasons) to re-assign
their Power to him from whom they had it; The corruption of a Conventicle, is
the Generation of a Protector.
which was immediately persu'd, and so they made Cromwell a Prince, for making
Them a Parliament.

This gracious Resignation produced that blessed Instrument of Government, by
which the Hypocrite was made Protector; and now forsooth the style is changed
from The Keepers of the Liberry of England by Authority of Parliament, Cromwell
Installed, and Sworn Protector.
into Oliver Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and
Ireland, etc. who was Installed and Sworn, December. 16. 1653.

To his Assistance was Appointed a Counsel of 21. the Quorum, 13. A Counsel
of one and Twenty.
By whom immediately upon the Death of the Present Protector, should be chosen
one to succeed him, (always excepted the Right Line from the choice) It Is
supposed, that Lambert had an eye upon himself in the reach of That Article,
and a Particular influence upon the drawing of it, being at That time Popular
enough with the Army to hope for any thing. A while after the Establishment of
this Traitor, comes forth an Ordinance, Declaring Treasons; and now his
Highness thinks himself in the saddle; especially having Beaten the Dutch into
One Peace, and Treated the Swede into Another, which were Proclaimed soon after.

Having run through the Narrative of those Considerable Changes, and
Confusions, of Power, which intervened betwixt the Murder of a most Gracious
Prince, and the appearing Settlement of an Usurping Tyrant, we will make a
little stand here, and look behind us.

The two Main Engines that made Cromwell Master of the Army, Cromwels Masteries.
were first, The Self-denying Ordinance by which he worm'd out the
Presbyterians, and skrew'd in his own Party: The Second, was The Vote of March
19. 1646. for the Disbanding of so many Regiments, and sending Others for
Ireland. This Vote was privily procured by himself and Ireton: which he foresaw
must necessarily inflame the Army: and so it did, never to be reconciled.

This Breach was the setting up of Cromwell: The Foundation of Cromwels
Greatness.
and the Foundation of his succeeding Greatness. It was the Impression of That
Vote that Buffled, and Purged the House in 47. Forced it, in 48. and Dissolved
it, in 53. after which he called Another, that Died Felo de se, and Bequeathed
to his Excellency the Government.

Had the Devil himself Destroyed that Faction, the Nation would have Thanked
him for it; so it is no wonder if his Advance was smooth, and Prosperous: but now
He Is Upp, how to maintein his Power, against a General Odium, and Interest;
how to get himself forced to exchange That Temporary Title of Protector, for
the more Stable, Legal, and desirable Name of King, without discovering his
Insatiate Longing for it: This is a Point of Mastery, and Cunning; and Possibly
the Thing that brake his Heart, was his Despair to Accomplish it.

The Faction has already trod the Round of Government; The Lords and Commons,
outed the King; the Commons, the Lords; the Multitude, the Commons; (and with
the Fate of all Rebellious Courses; seeking Rest, but finding None) At last, up
goes the Pageantry of a Monarch, Cromwell; whose Temper, Streights, and
Politiques, shall be the Subject of the ensuing Chapter.

CAP. VI.
The Temper, Streights, and Politiques, of Cromwell, during his Protectorship.
THe Character of Th^^ glorious Rebel, is no further my purpose, then as i^
leads to a right Judgment of his (...) the Confusion of his Adorers.

Of strong Natural Parts, Cromwels Character.
I persw^^e my self he was, though some think otherwise, ^^puting all his
Advantages to Corruption, or Fortune, (which will not be denied however to have
concurred powerfully to his Greatness). Nor do I pretend to collect his
Abilities from his Word, any more then the World could his Meaning, save that
the more entangled his Discourses were, I reckon them the more Judicious,
because the fitter for his Business. His Interest obliging him to a Reserve,
for he durst neither clearly Own his Thoughts, nor Totally Disclaim them; the
One way endangering his Design, and the Other, his Person. So that the skill of
his Part lay in This; neither to be mistaken by his Friends, nor understood by
his Enemies. By this middle Course he gained Time, to remove Obstacles, and
ripen Occasions; which to improve and follew, was the peculiar Talent of that
Monster.

To these enablements to Mischief, he had a Will so prostitute, and prone, that
to express him, I must say, He was made up of Craft and Wickedness; and all
his Faculties, nay all his Passions, were Slaves to his Ambition. In fine, he
knew no Other measure of Good and Bad, but as things stood in This or That
Relation to his Ends; which I the less admire, when I consider that he was
brought up in a Presbyterian School: where Honor, Faith, and Conscience,
weigh nothing, further then as they subserve to Interest. But enough of This.

In the foregoing Chapter we have Placed the Protector in the Chair, but not
the King in the Throne; the Power he has already, but wants the Title; and,
which is worse, he dares not offer at it, being equally affray'd to own his
Longing, or to miss it. In This Distraction of Thought, his Jealousy joins
with his Ambition; Sollicitous on the One hand for his Family, and on the Other
for his Safety. For his Family, in point of Grandeur, and for his Safety Thus.

After his Death, Cromwell Jelous of his Counsel.
according to the Instrument, the Counsel is to choose a Successor, and
whoever gapes to be the One, is supposed to wish for the Other; which probably
they had rather hasten, then wait for: So that This Miserable creature being
peyned, betwixt the Hazard either of enlarging his Power or having it thus
dependent, and the disdein of seeing it limited, enters into a restless
suspicion of his Counsel, and no way to be quieted but by depressing Those
that Raised him. So much for the first Difficulty, a Second follows.

His Design had These Three Grand Enemies. And of his Army.
The Royallists, The Presbyterians, and the Common-wealths-Men: the Last of
which composed the Gross of his Army; whom he had so inured to the Gust of
Popularity, and Freedom, and so enflamed against the Tyranny of King-ship, that
the bare Change of the word Common-weath, to Kingdom, had been enough to have
cast all into a Revolt.

These were the main Impediments of his Majesty that would be; and now we will
touch upon the Shifts and Tricks his Highness used to Remove them.

Cromwell having squandered away his Money, Oliver erects Major Generals, and
then fools them.
and taking occasion from the Salisbury Rising in 1654. to Squeeze the
Cavaliers for more; Kills two Birds with one Stone, by Commissioning some of
those Persons which he most apprehended in his Counsel, to do his work: whom
under the Name of Major-Generals, and with a Power at Liberty, (doubtless
foreseeing how they would abuse it) he places as Governors over the Several
Counties. These he employes to Levy his barbarous Decimation, which when they
had done, and by a Thousand Insolences enraged the People, he lays them
aside;
being now become, of the most Popular of the Party, the most Abominated
Creatures of the Nation.

Touching the Royallists, The Persecution of the Cavaliers.
no good for him was to be hoped for There, but by Gaols, Exile, Selling them
for Slaves, Famishings, or Murder: all which was abundantly provided for, by
Sequestrations, Pretended Plots, High-Courts of Justice, Spies, Decoyes, etc.
Nay (for the very Dispatch sake) when they should resolve upon the Massacre,
(which beyond doubt they meant us) No Cavalier must be allowed so much as the
least piece of Defensive Arms, by an Order of Nov. 24. 1655.

No Person suffered to keep in his house as Chaplain or Schoolmaster, any
Sequestered or Ejected Minister, Fellow of a College, or Schoolmaster, nor
suffer his Children to be taught by such. Nor any Person of that Quality must
be permitted to Teach a School, either Public, or Private; Nor Preach, but
in his Own Family, nor Administer the Sacraments, nor Marry, nor use the
Common Prayer book, etc.

This was the only Party the Rebels feared and R^in'd; but for the
Presbyterians they knew they would never Ioyn to help the King; and single they
were inconsiderable.

The Commonwealths Men finally contented themselves with the Name of a
Commonwealth, under the Exercise of a Single Person; so that by This Method of
Engaging one Party, conniving at another, and crushing the Third: This Tyrant
gave himself the Means and Leisure to fortify his Interests some other way.

He had already tried a Parliament of his own Call; Cromwells T^^^ of the Horse.
that met, September. 3. 1654. Five or Six days are spent in dangerous Debates
about the Government, and the Authority by which they are Convened. This,
Oliver did not like, and sent them an Appointment to meet him (on the 12.) in
the ^ainted Chamber: where discoursing the Reciprocal ties betwixt Him and his
Parliament; The Fundamentals of the Government, as to a Single Person; the
Succession of Parliaments; their mutual Interest in the Militia; and Liberty of
Conscience; and that These Particulars they were Entrusted to maintain;
concluded, that finding a Design among them to overthrow That Settlement, he
was necessitated to appoint a Recognition, for every Man to sign, before he
could be readmitted into the House; which Recognition was as follows.

I A. B. do hereby Promise and Engage my self to be true and faithful to the
Lord Protector, The Recongition.
and the Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland: and that according to
the Tenure of the Indenture, whereby I am returned to serve in This Present
Parliament; I will not propose, or give my consent to alter the Government, as
it is settled in one Single Person and a Parliament.

This was no Conventicle for Cromwells Turn; so that after Five Months sitting,
This Puppet of a Prince did formally dissolve it, in hope the next might use
him better.

His Credit though but small at Home, had better lack abroad; The Dutch, the
Swede, and then the French, entered a League with him, and the effect of this
Conjunction hastened his Ruin. I must not overslip that One Condition with the
French, was the Extrusion of our Gracious Sovereign,
with his Adhaerents, out of the French Kings Dominions.

Flushed with Success, and Vanity, nothing less serves us now, then the
Spaniards part of the West Indies. By whose advice, it matters not; but in
December. 1654. a Considerable Fleet sets Sail from Ports-Mouth, Cromwels design
upon Sr. Domingo, Disa^^rous.
and about mid- April, 1655. arrives at St. Domingo; Briefly, the Voyage was
disastrous, and those that Escaped the Fate of That Attempt, disposed their
After-game for Iamaica. Blake makes amends at Tunis.
To Balance This disgrace, Blake made amends at Tunis, firing Nine Frigates in
the Port Ferino, and came off fair at last.

Olivers next design was to intercept the Plate-Fleet; His Success against the
Plate-Fleet near the Bay of Cadiz.
and within four Leagues of the Bay of Cadiz, the English engaged eight
Galcons, whereof only One Escaped, Two were Taken, and the Rest Sunk, Burnt, or
Stranded: This disappointment to the Spaniard was a bitter one, and the Success
as seasonable to the English; Yielding them both a Prodigious Booty, and a
Dreadful Reputation. But these Successes were to Cromwell, as a good hand or
Two to a Young Gamester; only Temptations to a Course will ruin him.

While These Exploits were driving on, Abroad, Others were in the Forge at
Home. Here, to gain Love; There, Awe, and Credit, with as much Money toward the
Purchase as the Fates pleased. Upon the Royallists, his Flatteries wrought
little, as being a Party moved neither by Security, nor Profit, (where the
Kings Interest was the Question) Both which, they freely Sacrificed in their
first Dutiful engagement with him: and to the last, stood firm, through the
whole course of Olivers most furious Extremities. But other Instruments there
were, of a more tractable, and complying Temper; and These, forsooth, (Ten,
Twenty perhaps, in a County) worshipped the Golden Calfe, and in the Name of
the People of England, Addressed, Congratulated, [engaged themselves to stand
by and assist him to the Uttermost, Addresses.
in the discharge of the Trust which so remarquably was devolved upon him.]
This is the Style of that from Bucks.

To These Appearances of a General good-liking, Olivers Kindred stood his
Friends.
were added the Conjoynt-endeavours of his Dependents, and Allies; which being
Numerous in Truth, and Considerable by Employment, gave no small Succor and
Support, to his Ambitious Project, and Tottering Greatness. As by the Influence
they had upon the Iuncto, in Sep. 1656. more eminently appeared: consisting of
near 100 Military Officers, 40 or 50 of his Allies, Domestiques, and Particular
Creatures; (I speak the Least) beside their Seconds: A mixture there was
likewise of certain Persons truly Honorable, but diverse being excluded, and
the Rest over-voted, Their Interest came to Nothing.

These were no strangers to their Masters Pleasure, and what That was, may be
collected from the Votes they Passed to please him. The Main were These.

1. An Act for Renouncing and Annulling the Title of Charles Stuart to the
Three Kingdoms.


2. For the Securing of the Protectours Person, and Preserving the Peace of the
Nation.

3. The Humble Petition and Advice.] Wherein was plentifully provided whatever
might conduce to his Establishment, the most Material Points being These
following. (Only Protector should have been King, if he had pleased.)

1. That under the Name and Style of Lord Protector, The Petition and Advice
To Declare his Successor.
etc. He should in his Life time Declare his Successor, and Govern according
to the Petition and Advice, in matters therein expressed, and in other things
according to the Law of the Land.

2. That he would call Parliaments for the Future, Consisting of Two Houses,
etc. -- and Triennial at least:

3. That the Quorum of the Other House be One and Twenty, (...) Other House.
and the Number not above Seventy, Nominated by his Highness, and Approved by
That House.

4. That the Quorum of his Privy Counsel, Privy Counsel.
be Seven, and the Number not exceeding One and Twenty: and that sitting the
Parliament, the Standing Forces of This Commonwealth be disposed of by the
chief Magistrate, with the Consent of Both Houses; and in the Intervals, by
advice of his Counsel.

5. That a Constant yearly Revenue of Thirteen-Hundred-Thousand Pounds be
forthwith Settled, Revenue.
and no Part thereof to be Raised by a Land-Taxe: a Million of This Money, for
the Navy and Army; the Rest, for the Support of the Government: Other Temporary
Supplies being left to the Judgment of the House of Commons.

6. That all That ever served the King Loyally, Cavaliers incapable of Office.
and Constantly, be made Incapable for ever of any Office or Place of Trust in
any of the Three Nations. The Rest is Formality.

To these Propositions, his Highness AMEN, is not to be doubted, and in Form,
May 25. 1657. The LORD PROTECTOR does CONSENT.

Here Is in the First, his Family Secured. In the Second, his Interest; (One
House consisting of his own Creatures). In the Fourth, the Standing-Army is his
own; (that is, in the Intervals of Parliaments, which he can Dissolve at
Pleasure). In the Fifth, a Revenue proposed; and Lastly, his Enemies cast at
his Feet.

On the Day following (June 26.) was presented an Additional and Explanatory
Petition and Advice: Desiring,

That Forty and One Commissioners be appointed by Act of Parliament, who, or
any Five of them, shall be Authorized to examine the Capacities of Members to
be chosen into Future Parliaments, and every unqualify'd Member to forfeit a
Thousand Pounds, and suffer Imprisonment till he Pay it.]

The Forms of Several Oaths are likewise offered; to be taken by the
Protector, his Counsel, and Members of Parliament; and, his Highness is
further desired to Issue forth his Summons in due form of Law to such as he
should think fit to Call to his Other House.
To all which -- The LORD PROTECTOR does CONSENT.

Diverse Bills his Highness passed, that his People scarce Thanked him for;
Mony-Bills very many, and so the Thing was adjourned till the Twentieth of Ian.
next.

But we must not forget the Solemn Investitute of the Protector, by Authority
of Parliament, (forsooth) and yet we must not make the Bauble Proud neither, by
saying too Much on it.

The Foolery was performed in Westminster Hall, Cromwell Installed Protector.
where his Highness was Presented with a Coat: to wit, a Robe of Purple Velvet,
Lined with Ermins: A Bible, Guilt, and Bossed: A Sword: and Lastly, a Scepter
of Massive Gold. When he was Girt, and Vested, he lift up his eyes to Heaven,
and took an Oath, (not the first he had broken by many a Thousand) which being
dispatched, Mr. Manton consecrated the Independent Foppery with a Presbyterian
Blessing; after which his Highness being Published, and Proclaimed, the Comedy
concluded.

Put Comedy and Mr. Manton will Scarce agree in the same Period:
and why? Let us Expostulate. Does not a Counterfeit, or a Mimique better
become a Stage, then a Pulpit? or is it not as Lawful to see Honest Lacy play
a siniveling Schismatique, as a Perfidious, bloody Traitor to sustein the
Person of a Gracious Prince? Yet Here his Holiness Acts his Part himself; (or
in the Gibbrish of the Brethren) performs the Duty of the Day: Pronuncing a
Blessing upon the horrid, and Ridiculous Spectacle.

Say Mr. Manton: did not you know that Cromwell was an Imp^stour;
and that the Purple Robe he ware, belonged not to his Shoulders? How as a
Minister of the Gospel then, could you Officiate to such a piece of Pageantry?
It minds me of Mazarins Kinsman, that upon a Good Friday in Derision Crucified
a Frog.

You knew moreover, that he was a Murderer,
and an Usurper, and that the Gaudy Bible then before him, was but to him the
Book he Conjured by. How as a Christian could you own the Augury? You Would scarce
have ventured to Baptize the Infant of an Unbeliever, that were so Prodigal of
your Charity toward This Monster.

Further; You knew Whose Blood he had Spilt,
Whose Rights he Usurped; and that the Murdered Father, and his injured
Successor, were Both YOUR SOVEREIGNS: The Ceremonial Sword and Scepter
likewise You knew the meaning of. How as a Subject then could you submit to
Countenance so Undutiful an Undertaking?

Lastly;
You knew that the Design was (in Truth u^terly Atheistique, but in show)
Independent. How as a Presbyterian could you Agree to it?

For All This now may you Thank your self Sir. It Is True, you did Exceeding
well, on the late Fast, to reckon Drunkenness, and Profaneness among Those
Crying Sins that draw God's Judgments upon a People, and Earnestly to press a
Reformation. Nay more, I do here publicly confess my self not absolutely Free
from those Distempers, which (not to cast either upon Goodnature or
Complexion) I am both Sorry for, and Ashamed of.

But, I beseech you, how come Plays into the Rang of these Provoking Sins? Or,
what does Histriomastix in the Pulpit? [The Theaters (it seems) are so Thronged
with Coaches, your Greatness can scarce pass the Streets: Those Temples of
Satan, etc.] Good Sir! and what would you now have the world believe of Those
that Frequent Them? But your pleasure is known. Is not This, Lashing of a
Party, under the disguise of taxing a Vice? or Certainly, it is a Strange
Conscience, that adores Catiline in a State,
and Scruples him upon a Stage.

Would not a Whip on the Other hand do well sometimes?

I would go Five Miles barefoot to hear you Preach, that the first War in 1642.
Raised by the LORDS, and COMMONS was a REBELLION. Let me Entreat you, if you
Think so, Say so; and so adieu.

It must not be supposed that the first Tender of the Petition and Advice under
the R^gall Style, Oli^er durst not take upon him the Title of King.
was without Cromwels Privity, and Liking; and beyond doubt, the Title was a
Bait he Licked his Lips at: but the Old Fox durst not Bite; and he had Reason
to be shy, finding how great a Flame the first Bruit of the Proposition had
Raised among the Sectaries: For fear of the Sectaries.
That very Ninth of April, when a Committee was appointed, to treat his
Highness Scruples into a Satisfaction, being designed for a Tumultuary Attempt
upon his Government; and diverse of the Plotters apprehended.

'Twas This, His Reserve.
that put the Gentleman to his Hums and Haws; that makes him Sick to day, Late
to morrow, Busy the next; and when he speaks, Chewe false, And the Reasons of
it.
or utter Oracles* all these put-offs, tending only to gain Time, to find how
the Tide serves, and Taste how the Proposal Relishes. At Last, the Crafty Sir,
fearing the distance too wide for a single Step, resolves rather to make Two
on it; and to content himself at present to be Installed Protector, with such
Additional Powers as were then offered leaving the Complement of his Regality
to the next meeting.

During the Prorogation, Olivers Other House.
Cromwell patched up his Other House, who took their seats (the Term of the
Adjournment being expired) in the Lords House. Such Peers they were, as in good
Truth the Commons were not only ashamed of, but galled to see the Affront they
had done Themselves, Enraged the Commons.
by their own Follies in permitting them. Some few there were of Quality, and
Moderation, Whose Names were only mixed to Grace the Rabble.

And now forsooth the Mushrome-Fops begin to talk of Dignities and Privileges.
The new Peers.
Prodigious Impudence and Folly! -- Two of These Fellows, Pride, and Berkstead
quarreled upon the Bench at Hicks his Hall, about the meaning of [the PREAMBLE
that went AFTER.]

The Commons (though a little late) resented the Indigni^y of Truckling under
such Cattle, The Commons p^ck a Quarrel with the Other House.
and not enduring an Upper-House so like a Bear-Garden, they presently took in
their formerly Secluded Fellows, and fell to work upon the Authority of That
New Creation, not sparing His that Placed them there. This course would soon
have bred ill blood; and Cromwell, after 15 Days trial of their Humor, did
Prudently Dissolve them.

From that Degree of Confidence, to Fall beyond Ressource, and from That point
of Power, to become Ridiculous; did but demonstrate to him the Vanity of his
Ambitious Hopes, and that he aimed at Things Impossible.

Of all the Cross-Encounters of his life, Olivers heartbreaking cross.
This sank the Deepest, and the Impression of That Anguish, went with him to
his Grave; as may be fairly Gathered from the wild disproportion of his
following Actions: which, well considered, will appear rather the Products of
Revenge, Rage, and Despair, then the formed, Regular Polittiques of his wonted
Reason.

Yet that he might not seem to abandon the persuit, and utterly despond; some
Five weeks after the breaking up of the late Assembly, The Mayor of London and
his Brethren were summoned to White Hall, He Fools the City of London.
and there (March 2. 1658.) the Citts are told a Formal Tale of the King of
Scots; 8000 Men in Readiness, and 22 Vessels to Transport them. A General Plot,
The City to be fired, and twenty Terrible Things, to start and Settle a New
Militia, which in some Six weeks time was perfected.

And Now from all Parts are to be procured Addresses: which are no other then
Leagues Offensive, and Defensive Betwixt the Faction, and the Usurper.

Sweet London leads the way; Addresses.
Then, Michell's, Ashfields, Cobbetts Regiments: The Officers of the English
Army; and the Commission-Officers in Flanders. All these in March.

In April the Officers of Biscoes Regiment: and the Commission Officers of the
Militia in Suffolk, Leicester, Sussex, and my Countrymen of Norwich. After
These, follow the Soldiery of South Wales, and Daniels Regiment. The
Well-affected of Notingham, etc.

These Numerous and Pretending Applications, were but False Glosses upon his
Power; and Cromwell was too wise to think them Other: Gained by Contrivement,
Force, or at least, Importunity. Half a Score pitiful wretches call themse^ves
the People of such or such a County, and here is the Total of the Reckoning.
It Is Rumored that his Daughter Cleypoole, in the Agonies of her Death-Sickness
rang him a Peal that troubled him. Whether 'twere so, or no, it is past Dispute,
his Grand Distress was for the Loss of That which while he hoped to gain, made
the most horrid of his helpful Sins, seem Solaces and Pleasures.

While by the Artifice of These Addresses, his broken Interest is pieced as
Fair as well it may, his Care is Divided between the engaging of One Party, and
the Destroying of Another. And under the Masque of a pressing and Pious
Necessity, he breaks out into such Enormous Cruelties, Barbarous Cruelties.
such Wanton, and Conceited Butcheries, that, had not his Brain been Cracked, as
well as his Conscience Seared, he would not have gone so Fantastical a way to
the Devil. Some of the Martyrs Hearts were quick and Springing in the Fire,
(as I had it from several Ey-Witnesses). Ashton did but desire to be Beheaded,
and it was seemingly Granted, but the Order kept till 'twas too late, and Then
tendered with a Ieere.

London was made the Altar for These Burnt-Offrings: God grant That City be not
at last purged by Fire, (I mean, before the General Conflagration) for Those
Polluting Flames. The Crime was Loyalty,
and made out against them, more by the doubling Artifice of Mercenary Tongues,
than any Pregnancy of Proofs.

What could This Furious and Inhumane Rigor avail That miserable Politician,
further then as it Gratified his Malice, and Revenge, for his Lost Hopes, and
Fortunes! Without a Parliament, or somewhat like one, he Perishes for want of
Money; and an Assembly to his mind throughout, he utterly despayres of: so that
no Remedy remains, but by extremities of Violence and Blood to do his Business.
And to That end, he faintly labors the new Modelling of his Army, a way, which
he had found by Long Experience, made Enemies, as well as Friends: Those
certain, and Implacable; These, prone to change their Interest, and without
Money, True to None. In fine, his Fate was Irresistible. and his Tormented Soul
Inconsolable. He Sinks, Sickens, and Dies: Upon the Day of his grand
Anniversary, Cromwels Death.
for Dunbar, and Worcester, (Sept. 3.)

The Night before his Death, arose a Tempest, that seemed to signify the
Prince of the Air had some great work in hand: and it is Remarquable, that
during his Usurpation, scarce any Eminent Action passed without a furious
Storm.


I have drawn This Chapter to a length beyond my intention, and should be too
too Tedious to run through all his Wiles, which were No other then an Habitual
Craft, diffused throughout the entire Course of his Tyranny. But certain
General rules he imposed upon himself, which must not be omitted.

One was, Olivers Maxims.
to Buy Intelligence at any Rate, by That means making every Plot bear it is own
Charges.

2. Never to Engage Two Parties at once; but to Flatter, and Formalize with the
One, till he Ruined the Other: Which was the Reason that he durst never make
the Presbyterians Desperate, for fear of Necessitating them to side with the
King.

3. To extirpate the Royallists by all possible means, as Poverty, Bondage,
Executions, Transplantations; and a Device he had to dispose of several Levies,
out of That Party, Some to serve the Spaniard, Others the French, that they
might be sure to meet in Opposition, and cut One the Others Throats.

4. He ever made his Army his own Particular Care.

5. To keep the Nation in a perpetual Hatred, and Jealousy of the Kings Party;
which he promoted either by forging of Plots, or Procuring Them.

So much for Olivers Temper, Streights, and Politiques.

CAP. VII.
A short Account from the Death of the Tyrant Oliver, to the Return of Charles
the Second, (whom God Preserve from his Fathers Enemies.)
THe Heart of the Cause was broken long since, and now the Soul of it is gone;
though the Protectorate be formally devolved to Richard, as the Declared
Successor to his Father. Whether Declared, or not, was (I remember) at That
time a Question. But whether Thus or So, it Matters not. Oliver's Dead, his Son
Proclaym'd, and at night Bon-fires, with all the Clamor, Bustle, and Confusion
that commonly attends those Vulgar Jollities. The Soldiers took the Alarm,
and in my hearing threatened diverse for daring to express their Joy so
unseasonably: but they came off with telling them that they were glad they had
got a New Protector, not that they had lost the Old. In Truth, the New
Protector was looked upon as a Person more Inclinable to do Good, than Capable
to do Mischief, and the Exchange welcome, to all that Loved his Majesty.

By the Court-Interest (as they called it,) Addresses thick and threefold were
brought in, to Condole, and Gratulate; but Those Complements had no Sap in
them: The Dutch, the Swede, and the French, sent their Ambassadors on the same
Errand. And now the Funerals come on; A Solemn, and Expensive Pageantry; yet,
in my Conscience, the Chief-Mourners were his Highness Drapers.

These Ceremonies over, to keep the Wheel in Motion, a Supply was Resolved upon
for the King of Swede, and little further of Moment, before Ian. 27. When (in
the Language of the Time) met Richards Parliament. The First, and Last of his
Reign.

It cost These people some time to agree the Powers of the Chief-Magistrate,
Richard Recognized upon condition.
and the New Peerage, which came to this result, that Richard should be
Recognized; but with l^mitations, consistent with the Rights of Parliament, and
People: and that for quiet sake [they would transact with the Persons then
sitting in the Other House, as an House of Parliament during that Session.]

The House proceeded by Degrees to make dangerous Inspections into the Militia,
the Revenue; to look into the Exorbicances of Major Generals, to threaten the
Excise; and finally, by all Popular pretenses, to engage the Multitude;
Effectually against both Protector and Army, enduring the Government neither of
the One, nor of the Other.

Whereupon, the Officers set up a Counsel at Wallingford-House, the Protector
advises at White Hall, and April 6. 1659. comes a Paper to Richard from the
General Counsel of Officers, Entitled, A Representation and Petition, etc.
importing, [the great danger of Good Old Cause is in, from Enemies of all
sorts, the Poverty of the Soldiery; the Persecution of Tender consciences,
etc. which Particulars they Petition his Highness to represent to the
Parliament, with their Desire of Speedy Supply, and Certainty of Pay for the
future: Declaring likewise their Resolution, with their Lives and Fortunes to
stand by, and assist his Highness and Parliament, in the plucking the Wicked
out of their places wheresoever they may be discovered, etc.]

The Paper boded a Purge, at least, Signed it was by 230 Officers, presented by
Fleetwood; Published throughout the Army, and followed soon after with a Day of
Humiliation: (the never-failing Sign of Mischief at hand.)

In this Juncture, Each of the Three Parties Enemy to the Other Two.
Each of the Three Parties was Enemy to the Other Two, saving where Either Two
were united to Maintein themselves against the Third: and All Three of Them
Enemies to the Good of the Nation.

The House being Biased for a Commonwealth, and not yet enabled to go Through
with it, Dreaded the Army on the one hand, and Hated the Single-Person on the
Other.

Richard, finding his Power limited by the Members, and Envied by the Officers,
willing to please Both, and Resolved to Hazard nothing, becomes a Common
Property to the House and Army; a Friend to Both by Turns; Theirs to day, TO
others to Morrow, and in all Trials Meekly submitting to the Dispensation.

The Army on the other side had their Protector's Measure to a Hair; The Army
Ruffles the House.
and behind him they Stalked to Ruffle That Faction in the House, that was now
grown so Bold with the Military Interest: and it behooved them to be quick, with
(as the Case stood Then) so Popular an Enemy.

The Members kept their Ground, and April 18. passed These following Votes.

First, The House Opposes the Army.
That, during the sitting of the Parliament, there should be no General
Counsel, or meeting of the Officers of the Army without Direction, Leave, and
Authority of his Highness the Lord Protector, and Both Houses of Parliament.

Secondly, That no Person shall Have and Continue any Command, or Trust in any
of the Armies, or Navies of England, Scotland, or Ireland, or any of the
Dominions and Territories thereto belonging, who shall refuse to Subscribe,
That he will not disturb or interrupt the free meeting in Parliament, of any
the Members of either House of Parliament, or their freedom in their Debates
and Counsels.

Upon These Peremptory Votes, Richard Faces about, joining his small Authority,
to forbid their Meetings; and great Assurances are Enterchang'd, to stand the
Shock of any Opposition.

Two or three days they stood upon their Guards, continuing in that sharling
Posture, Richard dissolves his Parliament.
till April 22. when Richard at the suit (or rather menace) of Disborough and
his Fellows, signs a Commission to Dissolve his Parliament; which to prevent,
the Members Adjourn for Three days; and to avoid the shame of falling by an
Enemy, the Catoe's kill themselves. For at the Three days end, they find the
Door shut* and a Guard upon the Passage, to tell them, They must Sit no more;
Their Dissolution being also Published by Proclamation.

His Highness steps aside next; And is laid aside himself.
and now the Army undertakes the Government. They Model, Cast about, Contrive,
and, after some Ten Days fooling with the Politiques, they found it was much a
harder matter to Compose a Government, than to Disorder it, and at This Plunge,
besought the Lord [after their Wanderings and Back slidings, The Army
acknowledge their backslidings.
to show them where they turned out of the Way, and where the Good Spirit left
the Good Old Cause, that through Mercy they might Return and give the Lord the
Glory.

At last, they call to mind, that the Long Parliament sitting from 1648. to
1653. were eminent Assert^urs of that Cause, and had a Special Presence of God
with them: And invite the old Parliament to sit again.
Wherefore they Earnestly desire Those Members to Return to the Exercise, of
their Trust, etc. -- ]

This is the Tenor of that Canting Declaration, which the Army Officers
presented Lenthall (the Good-Old-Speaker) with, at the Rolls, May 6. in the
Evening; where a Resolve was taken by several of the Members, to meet next
morning in the Painted Chamber, and There to advise about their Sitting.

They met accordingly, The Rump.
and made a shift, by Raking of Goals, to get together a Quorum, and so they
sneaked into the House of Commons, and There Declared for a Commonwealth,
passing a Vote expressly against the Admission of the Members, Secluded in 1648.

This Device was far-fetched, and not long-lived, but These were Old Stagers,
and no ill Menagers of their Time.

To make short; they Erect a Counsel of State, Place, and Displace; mould their
Faction; settle the Godly, appoint their Committees, and so soon as ever they
are Warm in their Gears, begin, where they left in 1653; Fleecing the Nation,
and Flaying the Cavaliers, as briskly, as if 'twere but the GoodMorrow to a
Six-Years Nap.

But the sad Wretches were filthily mistaken, to think Themselves brought in
again to do their own Business; for the Army makes bold to Cut them out their
work in a Petition of May 12. containing 15. Proposals, desiring,

First; (...)
a Free State.] 2. R^gulation of Law and Courts.] 3. An Act of Oblivion, since
April 19. 1653.] 4. All Laws, etc. since 1653. to stand good until
particularly Repealed.] 5. Public Debts since 1653. to be Paid.] 6. Liberty
of Worship, etc. not extending to Popery or Prelacy.] 7. A Preaching Ministry.]
8. The Reformation of Schools, and Universities.] 9. the Exclusion of
Cavaliers, and loose Persons from Places of Power, or Trust.] 10. The
Employment of the Godly in such Places.] 11. To provide for a Succession of the
Legislative Authority.] 12. That Charles Fleetwood be Commander in Chief at
Land.] 13. That the Legislative Power be in a Representative of the People; and
of a Select Senate, Coordinate in Power.] 14. That the Executive-Power, be in a
Counsel of State.] 15. That the Debts of his Late Highness, and his Father,
contracted since December. 15. 1653. may be satisfied, and Twenty Thousand Pounds
per Annum settled upon him, half for Life, and half to him and his Heirs for
ever.

The Principal point was Fleetwoods Command, which they agreed to; only
reserving the Supreme Power to Themselves, and constituting the Speaker,
Generalisimo; in the Name of the Parliament: which waryness showed that they
understood one-another.

For a while, the Iuncto treated the Army like Apes, with a Bit and a Knock,
Flattering some and Removing others, as they saw expedient: Particularly the
Two Sons of the Late Usurper, were fairly laid aside, Submitting and
Resigning in Excellent Form, and without making two words on it.

The High and Mighty did not, all this time, forget, that the Key of the Work,
was Money; nor in Truth did they well consider, that they were called back by
the Army only to Raise it. But On they went through Thick and Thin, and such
Ignoble, sordid Courses they took to Levy it, that, in Effect, to Stop the
Soldiers Mouths, they brake their own Necks; the Nation not enduring any
Longer that such a pilfering Covy of Pick-Pockets should call Themselves a
sarliament.

This Universal Hatred, and Disdeign of Their Proceedings, provoked a General
^eizure of Men, Horse, and Arms: and in Effect, the Plot was General; but what
by Treachery; Delays; Babbling; Disappointments; and Scruples of taking in the
Royal Party, (by those that never meant His Majesty, or his Friends should be
the better for it) the whole was Dashed.

I well remember one Particular, in That Transaction, that passed my
Understanding, and Methought smelt of Treason. It was extremely labored, that
the King might be persuaded to come Over; and That too, before any Port was
Secured, or Men Embodied, on the bare hopes of the Design, to engage his Sacred
Person.

After the Cheshire-Rout, Lambert Retires to his House at Craven, and there
('it is thought) centrives the Ruin of the Rump. Which unforeseeing Creature,
(dreaming of nothing Less) flies higher now then ever, The Faction fli^s high.
Imposing upon the House, and the Militia, an Oath of Abjuration, not only
Renouncing the Title of Charles Stuart, but the whole Line of the Late King
James. And then besides Excise, Customs, Forfeitures, and Confiscations, out
comes an Assessement of 100000 l. per Mensem. They dis-incorporate the City of
Chester, etc. --

In the Carier of their headstrong, The Rump and the Army Clash.
and unbridled Fury, the first Check they received, was from a Petition and
Proposals then on foot in Lamberts Army. Whereupon they Order Ashfield, Cobbet,
and Duckenfield, (Three of the Principal Abettours of it) to bring in the
Original Paper, which was accordingly done, and Caused this Vote, That to have
any more General Officers in the Army, than are already settled by Parliament,
is needless, chargeable and dangerous to the Commonwealth.

Upon this Vote, the Officers appeared to acquiesce; but October. the 5. Matters
were re-enforced, Disborough presenting the House with a Representation, and
Petition, from the General Counsel of the Army. For which, from the Teeth
outward, the Officers had Thanks.

The Conventicle and the Army began now to speak English, and the Members
seeing their Dissolution at hand, however cast This Block in the Armies way;
Enacting, That it should be adjudg'd High Treason for any Person or Persons
after the Eleventh of October. 1659. to Raise Moneys without the Peoples Consent
in Parliament.

This being passed; They Uncommission'd Nine of the Army Officers; to wit,
Lambert, Disborough, Berry, Kelley, Ashfield, Cobbett, Creed, Packer, and
Barrow. They voyded Fleetwoods Commission also, Investing the Command of the
Army in Seven Persons, himself being one, and any Three to be a Quorum.

Hereupon the House adjourns, and Hazelrigg, Morly and Walton (Three of the
Seven) repair to the Speakers Chamber, forthwith dispatching Orders to Draw
their Troops together. The Army-Party do the like, and March to the
Palace-Yard at Westminster, (their Appointed Rendezvous) where The Two Parties
for That Night and part of the next day made Faces at One-another; The Rump
thrown out.
and finally, the Soldiery dismissed the Senate.

Now was the Government once again in the Army; who after Thirteen days
deliberation how to bestow it, The Army settles a Committee of Safety.
October. 26. Disposed of it to a Committee of Safety, consisting of 23 Persons:
Empowered at Large; to advise upon Occasion with the Principal Officers of the
Army; and within Six-weeks time, to bring in a Form of Government. Their Reign
was short, and Troublesome; as it is reported, Feak told Sir Harry Vane upon his
Unction, that his was like to be. They make Fleetwood their Commander in
Chief, and constitute a New Militia.

Scarce were these Worthies warm in their Seats, but the News comes that
Scotland's in Disorder, and Barwick in a wrong hand. Whereupon Lambert marches
Northward; soon after which, comes on a Treaty, that gave General Monk (now
Duke of Albemarle) leisure to purge his Army, General M. Secu^es Scotl^nd.
and to put Scotland in a Posture of Security. By These Delays, and want of
Monys, Lambert's Army Moulders away; and briefly London is left so Thinn, that
Sir Harry Vane's Privy List of Congregationals was the danger they most
Apprehended.

The first step toward their Deliverance, was a Petition desiring the
Assistance of the Common-Counsell for the Procurement of a Free-Parliament:
Promoted by the Honest-Part of the City, and Crossed by some Factious
Magistrates of the Wallingford Leaven.

This Battle did but more Incense the Petitioners, Hewsons Insolence toward the
City.
and upon Monday, December. 5. Horse and Foot were Commanded into the City to
hinder the prosecution of it. Where, by surprise, Hewson the Cobbler knocks Two
or Three Citizens on the head, barbarously wounding and Affronting Others, till
at last, Multitudes being drawn together, and ready to fall in among them
(where not a Red-Cote could have escaped without a Miracle) the Quarrel,
forsooth, was taken up by some of the Formalities, and then excused, to the
Committee of Safety, as if the fault had been the Cities. The Army had at This
time their Guards in Paul's, and Gresham-College.

During These Broils, Hazelrigg sei^es Portsmouth.
Hazelrigg, Morly, and Walton, possess themselves of Portsmouth, and the Forces
employed to reduce it, join with them. The Fleet drives the same Interest
likewise: only the Troops in London were at a stand, and fair for any
Purchaser, but the Opportunity was slipped.

Upon the 26. of December. The Rump sits again.
the Rump sits once again, and Empowers Seven Commissioners, or any Three of
them, to Command the Army; Here, the Secluded Members of 1648. put in for their
Right of Sitting; whereupon a Vote is passed for taking the Case of Absent
Members into Consideration, upon the fifth of January next; and upon the Day
appointed, they Resolve, That the Members Discharged from Voting, or Sitting in
1648. and 49. do stand duly Discharged by Judgment of Parliament, and that
Writs do Issue forth for New in their Places.

And now They think their Game Cocksure, having already Voted the Disbanding of
Lambert's Army; Settled their Counsel of One-and Thirty; and Offered Grace to
the Revolted Officers, (Lambert himself, by Name) that would lay down before
the Ninth of January; Lambert and his Party submit.
whereupon, Lamberts Forces disperse, He himself submits, and the General
receives an Invitation to London.

In Conclusion, after Many Indignities cast upon the Honest Part of the Nation,
for desiring a Free-Parliament, by That wretched Conventicle, that intended
only to Perpetuate it self; The General arrives at London, Feb. 3. and upon the
7. comes out the 100000 l. Tax, The City refuse to Levy Moneys.
which produced a Common-Counsell the day following to advise upon it: where it
was Resolved, To adhere to a former Vote of the Court in the Negative. This
Refusal puzzled the Counsel of State, who without being Masters of the City,
and of Money, were able to do little; so that they forthwith Ordered the
Reducing of the City, by Emprisoning half a Score of their Citizens; and, The
Rump offended with the City.
upon another Denial, to take away their Posts, and Chains, and destroy their
Gates and Portcullisses; which was accordingly Executed, but with such Regret,
that thereupon they lodged the Government of the Army in Five Commissioners,
(the General being One) with Evident Design to wipe him of his Employment. But
Their Ingratitude wrought little with him, whose Actions were only steered by
the Compass of Loyalty and Prudence. So that having humored the People at
Westminster, till they had made themselves sufficiently Odious, and abundantly
tried the Affections of the City to his Design in hand: Upon the 11 of Feb. he
gave the House to understand the Necessity of their timely Dissolution, in
order to the right of Successive Parliaments; the very hopes of which Release
gave the People a Joy, to the Degree of Madness.

Upon the 21. The Secluded Members readmitted.
were readmitted the Secluded Members of 1648. by whom were Writs Issued out
for a Representative, to meet upon the 25. of April 1660. and March 16. 1659.
they formally Dissolve themselves, Committing the Government in that Interval,
to a Counsel of State. Upon the day Appointed, the Convention meets, but not
altogether so Leavened as by the Qualifications was intended;
Excluding Father and Son of such as had served the King, from the Election. In
fine, the Major Part of that* Assembly, according to their Duty, gave the King
his own again, without Those shackles, and conditions which the Qualifyers
would have imposed upon his Majesty: Upon whose Legal and Imperial freedom,
depends the safety and well-being of his People.

CAP. VIII.
The Usurper Oliver was principally distressed by the War with Spain, and his
Standing Army.
WE have now brought Rebellion from the Cradle to the Grave; we have seen it
Triumphant, and now we see it in the Dust, subjected at the Feet of our Most
Gracious Sovereign, to account for the Blood of his Royal Father. Be it our
Business next to enquire, What hindered Oliver from Establishing himself? Upon
what Reason of State, Cause, Error, or Necessity, That prosperous Usurper
fayl'd.

But some will not allow he failed; as if the sole Fatality of the Cause was
his Decease; and the Design only miscarryed through the ill menage of a Weak
Successor. For granted; by good order, it might have been Caudled up, and kept
above ground a little longer: but still it seems to Me, that before Oliver
Died, the Cause was Bedridden, and Hectique past Recovery.

Opinion is Free; Any Man's as Mine, and Mine as Any Man's: so that submitting my
Reasons to the Wise, and Recommending my Weakness to the Charitable, I Proceed.

Cromwell did wisely to take his Rise to the Sovereignty upon the Necks of
those Usurpers whom he cast out in 1653. Cromwell's Rise to the Sovereignty.
For in the same Action, he Obliged the People, Mastered his Enemies; and
Filled his Pockets. Yet were not Those Means that advanced the Tyrant,
sufficient to Establish him.

One Obstacle was the Inconsistence of his Doctrine with his Design: What
hindered his Establishment.
for the same Arguments that Raised him, Ruined him. The People were instructed
to Destroy Kings, not to set them up: and beside, he that had so many Sharers
in the Hazzards of the Rebellion, could not fail of some Competitors for the
Benefit of it.

Further, he had no considerable Party sure to his Interest; and all, but his
Mere Creatures and Allies, were utter Enemies to it. He was Generally Hated.
The City Hated him for their Loss of Trade; the Country, for their Taxes;
the Royallists, for his Rebellion, and Cruelty; the Presbyterians, for his
Breach of Covenant, (That is, for not destroying the King after Their Way); The
Levellers, for his Ambition; and, in fine, all the hope he had, was to
New-Modell an Army to his purpose; that fayl'd him too at last, for want of
Money, and Credit to maintein it. Which Want was chiefly hastened, and procured,
by his precipitate Breach with Spain, together with the Necessity of keeping up
a Standing Army.

The Former of These was doubtless his Mistake; The War with Spain was an
Oversight.
(or rather a Temerity scarce advised upon.) For having brought the Hollander
to his Knees, (the only Stranger he had then to fear) and after That, shak'd
hands with him; his next Course should have been by Thrift and Popularity to
Ingratiate himself at Home, and not by a Rambling, Needless, and Expensive
War, to squander away the life-bloud of the Nation, and in That Indigent
Extremity of the State, to make Ducks and Drakes with the Public Treasure.
Nor was the Consequence less Fatal to him, than was the Enterprise (to a
common Eye) Imprudent: the hopes of carrying his Design, in no wise
Countervailing the risque he ran of losing all he had Got* in case he missed it.

I might Instance in a Thousand ways of profusion, and Oppression Common to
all Usurpers,) both practiced by Him, and exposing him to great Necessities,
but I shall rather bestow the rest I have to say, A Standling Army dangerous.
upon the Fatality of that Tyrant's Condition; Which forced him to make use of
for his Safety, the greatest of all Dangers, to wit, A Standing Army.

For Order sake, We Will first Consider, Upon what Pretense, and to what end
'twas Raised.

In the Next Place; We Will see what it produced, and weigh the Benefits with
the Inconveniences.

Lastly; We Will look into the probable Effects, and Influence of it; as related
to the English Temper, Custom, and Government.

To the first; The Rise of Cromwels Standing Army.
what I here call a Standing Army, was but the Emprovements of a Slight
Temporary force, raised, (in pretense at first) as an Expedient against Plots,
(being indeed it self the Greatest) but Increased, Continued, and Carried on,
by Policy, and Power. This Project came from the Cabale in 1641. Couched under
the Notion of A Guard for the House of Commons: Exact Collect. Pap. 44.
[Who conceived that they could not with the Safety of their Persons, (upon
which the Safety and Peace of the whole Kingdom did then depend) sit any longer
Unarmed, and Unguarded*] -- so great were their [Apprehensions, Ibid.
and just Fears of mischievous Designs, to ruin and destroy them]

This was the Popular Color for that Guard; Plots,
and the Safety of the Public. Where the Plot was, in Truth; and where the
Real Danger; may be gathered from the Practices of Those Armies, whereof The
Guard aforesaid was but the Rise and Foundation. (And That Is the point we
handle next.)

The setting of This little Force a-foot, The Consequences of the House of
Commons Guard.
was a fair Step toward the Militia; One Guard begetting Another; and the same
Reason standing good, for the Augmenting, and Upholding of Those Troops, which
was employed for the first Raising of them. The Parliament was first in Danger;
the City, Next; and Then the Nation: and as their Ielousies Increased, so must
Their Forces, till by Degrees they grow to an Army. The King, and his
Adherents, they call the Common-Enemy; whom they Invade and Vanquish.

Here Is their work done in short; what have they now to fear? Only
New-Modelling, or Disbanding. A blessed Translation of the Government, from the
Rule of the Law, to the Power of the Sword! and There to abide, till One Army
be removed by Another: That is; the Tyranny abides; no matter though under
several Forms, and Tyrants.

Our LEGIONS of the Reformation, were Raised by certain Rebellious Lords, and
Commons; and Seconded by the City of London. We Will see now, how they behaved
themselves toward their Masters and Friends,

In 1647. the Army Reformes, The Effects of a Standing Army.
and Purges the House; Presses their Dissolution. Seizes their General Pointz
in the North; Squeezes and Menaces the City of London; Marches up to it, and in
Triumph through it. Takes Possession of the Tower; Charges the Mayor with
diverse Aldermen and Citizens, of High Treason. Alters their Militia's, and
Common-Counsel; and finally, gives the Law to the House, and That to the Nation.

In December. 1648. the Army gives the House another Purge; and the year
following, Cromwell himself had like to have been out-trick'd by the Levellers
about Banbury.

In 1653. The Army Casts off the Ol^ Conventicle, and up goes Oliver, who calls
Another; only to get a Tax, and a Title: and when They had done the One half,
and made way to the Other; off goes That too. The Next was called in 1654.
another after That in 1656. and Both were served with the same Sauce.

If Cromwell could as easily have molded the Army, as That did the House, his
business had been done with half the Ceremony; but Money was Their business,
and Kingship His, so that they helped him in the One, and Crossed him in the
Other.

In September. 1658. Oliver Dies; Note.
and Then; they are Richard's Army; whose puisne Highness must have His
Parliament too. They meet; and notwithstanding a huge Pack of Officers and
Lawyers, the Vote proved utterly Republican, and Friend, neither to
Single-Person, nor Army.

Now,
Richard takes his turn: but first, down goes his Parliament: and for a while,
the Army Officers, undertake the Government.

Some Ten days after, up with the Rump again, and then they are Lenthall's
Army:
which, in October. 1659. throws out the Rump, and now they are Fleetwood's Army.
Enter the Rump once more, in December. and once more the Army comes about again.
Exit The Rump.
The Rump's next Exit, is for ever, March the 16. 1660.

Behold the Thorough-Reformation; and every Change Sealed with a Sacrament, to
have been an Act of Conscience, and guided by a Divine Impulse.

Behold the Staff of the Rebellion; both the Support and Punishment of it; a
Standing Army.

While Plots could either be Procured, or credibly suggested, the Innocent were
their Prey, and when That entertainment fayl'd them, they worryed one-another:
-- never at Peace; betwixt the Stri^e, first to Subject the Nation, and Then to
Govern it.

So long as the Royal Interest was in Vigor; All Factions Unite against the
King.
it was the Faction's Policy to engage all sorts of People, whom they could
possibly Unite against That Interest; however Disagreeing among Themselves,
their first work being only to Destroy the King) and This was the Composition
of the first Army.

From Killing they Proceed to take Possession; and here Ensues a greater
Difficulty.

A Force is Necessary still, They Divide.
but the State of the Dispute being Changed, the Former Mixture is not for
their present purpose: the Conspiratours that agreed to overthrow the
Government, being now Divided who shall Enjoy it. Hereupon, they fall to
Sorting and Purging of Parties; the Independent at last carrying it, and Oliver
in the Head of them.

After this Decision of the Contest betwixt the Two Factions, And Subdivide.
the Army it self divides; and Cromwell is now more puzzled with the Private
Contrivements of his own Officers, then he was before with the open Power of
his professed Enemy, for they are clearly for his Ruling with them, but not
over them; so that unless ^e can both Uphold them for his Security, and Model
them for his Design, he does nothing: In Both He labored, and beyond Question,
Di'd in the Despair of perfecting Either, finding upon Experience, that his
Ambition was as Intolerable to his Party, as the Charge of Continuing his Army
was to the Public; and what the Latter was, we will read in own words,
delivered at a Conference, April 21. 1657.

The present Charge (says he) of the Forces both by Sea and Land, including
the Government, will be 2426989 l. The whole present Revenue in England,
Scotland, and Ireland, is about 1900000 l. I think this was Reckoned at the
Most, as now the Revenue stands: Why now toward This, you settle by your
Instrument 1300000 l. for the Government, and upon That Account to maintain the
Force by Sea and Land, and This without Land^Taxe I think, and this is short of
the Revenue, that now may be Raised by the Government, 600000 l. because you
see the Present Government is 1900000 l. and the whole Sum which may now be
Raised, comes of the Present Charge 542689. And although an End should be put
to the Spanish: War, yet there will be a Necessity of the Preservation of the
Peace of the Three Nations, to keep up the Present Established Army in England,
Scotland, and Ireland; and also a considerable Fleet, for some good Time;
until it shall please God, to Quiet, and Compose Men's Minds, and bring the
Nation to some better Consistency: so that Considering the Pay of the Army,
coming to upwards 1100000 l. per annum, and the Government 300000 l. it will be
necessary, that for some convenient Time, seeing you find things as you do, and
it is not good to think a Wound healed before it be; that there should be
Raised over and above 1300000 l. the Summo of 600000 l. per annum, which makes
up the Sum of 1900000 l. That likewise the Parliament declare how far they
will carry on the Spanish War; and for what Time, and what farther Sum they
will raise for the carrying on the same, and for what Time, and if these Things
be not Assertained, as one says, Money is the Cause certainly, what ever the
Cause is; if Money be Wanting,
the business will fall to the ground, and all our Labor will be Lost, and
therefore I hope you will have a care of our Undertakings.

How many Souls, The Effects of a Military Government.
Lives, Millions; and Noble Families; How well a Tempered Government; How
Gracious a Prince, and happy a People, were by This Cursed Army Destroyed; will
need no more then their own Consciences to determine, when Divine Vengeance
shall call them to a Reckoning. It brought forth (briefly) the worst of Crimes,
and Mischiefs, without the least Tincture of a Comfort, or shadow of a Benefit.
Nor was it likely to do other, if we consider either the People, Place,
Custom, or Government, they were to work upon.

Concerning the People (first) [Populi fere omnes ad Aquilonem positi, The
English Impatient of of Slavery.
Libertatem quandam spirant] It Is Rodin's observation, that your Northern
Nations are Generally keen Assertours of Freedom; (which for their Parts, the
English made too true) How could it be Expected then, that a People, which
Opposed their Lawful Prince for the fear of Slavery, should ever finally
Submit to a Rebellious Usurper under the Actual and Shameful Extremity of it?
This Reluctance of Humor in the Generality, joined with the Particular
Vigilance, Loyalty, and Enterprisings of the Royallists; rendered those Courses
Necessary at present, to the Usurper, which must certainly sink him in the End.

Nor was it more against the Genius of the People, than against the Interest
and Reason of the Place.

The Place, we are to consider as an Island; no Foreign Danger then in view,
to Palliate the Oppression of an Army; nor any Subject whereupon to turn the
Influence of it. No Stranger in the Case concerned; only at Variance with our
selves; we breed and nourish in our proper bowels, the Evil that Devours, or,
at the best, Consumes us. The Army feared the Plots, but 'twas the Nation felt
them, and the Result of all was only a Dispute betwixt the Civil and the
Military Power; Law, and Necessity: so that Effectually (the two Parties of
this Division thus Enterwatching and Counter-Plotting one another) we were
rather in a State of War than a Posture of Security,
the People being at this Election, either to Resist, or Starve* and the Army,
as much obliged, to make good their undertaking, or fall to nothing. What could
be Rationally the Issue of these Provocations, and Animosities, but either the
Destruction of the Army by the People; or of the People by the Army, in Order
to a General Quiet? Neither of them being safe, but by the Ruin, and
Subjection of the Other. If the People refuse to Pay, they are Presently
Disaffected; if the Soldiery be their own Carvers, they are looked upon as
Tyrannical, and Insolent; and here is Matter furnished for a Civil War.

Now That which makes the Case Worse, is (as I said) that being Islanders, and
wanting the Color of Arming against Dangerous Neighbors, we are forced to
spend That humor in Mutiny among our selves, which might Otherwise be Diverted
by, and Employed upon, a Public Quarrel. A Digression to the State of FRANCE.

Upon the Continent it is Otherwise; as in France, (for the Purpose) where
though the King Enterteins a Standing Army of 12000. and about Fourscore
Regiments more, in Flanders, Italy, Catalogne, and Luxemburgh; (besides
Strangers) There Is yet the Countenance of an Interest, and a Prudentiall Ground
for it: to Balance the Power, or at least Check the Progress of his Ambitious
Neighbor Spain. For, (says the Duke of Rohan in his Interest of France) Il
faut opposer La Force a la Force. Car ni les persuasions, ni la Justice des
arms, ne fera la loi a celui qui sera arm, tellement que la France doit se
retrencher de toute autre despense moins utile, and estre tousiours puissamment
arm. [Force must meet Force, It seems to b^ the Interest of France to maintain
a (...) Army.
for it is the Sword that gives the Law to Equity, and Reason; wherefore let
France rather be sparing in any other way, then in the Constant Entertainment
of a Puissant Army.]

It may be Argued too, that the Exercise of Arms, is the Profession of the
French Nobility, and in Effect, it is only War abroad keeps them in Peace at
home. Yet even in France it self, where the Necessity of a Standing-Army is
bolster'd up with so many fair Appearances, the Effects are Dismal, how
plausible soever the first Occasion seemed.

Where it began, or what it was, not a rush matter, but, that by Gradual
encrochments, from small, and Temporary Pretenses, it is now grown to a
Constant, and unlimited Excess, he that knows any thing of France, cannot be
Ignorant.

They that fetch it from Guntran King of Orleans, 587. look too far back
methinks, and entitle the Tyranny to too fair a President. His Case being This.

Guntran was the Surviver of Four Brothers;
Sons of Clotaire the First; the other Three, being Cherebert, Chilperic, and
Sigibert. The Eldest of These, Died Childlesse, and the Other Two were
Murdered by the Practices of Fredegonde, (first the Mistress, and afterward
the Wife of Chilperic.)

Sigibert, supinely indulging himself in the height of his Conquests, and
Pleasures, was Stabbed in his own Palace by a Couple of Soldiers, employed by
Fredegonde, who did as much at last for her Husband Chilperic; having first
Caused him to Murder his Son Clouis; to Divorce one* Wife, and Strangle
another. The Story is Short, and a little Curious.

Fredegonde had a Gallant, called Landry de la Tour, by Her, Preferred to be
Duke of France and Maire of the Palace)

The King comes one Morning in his Hunting-Dress into the Queens Chamber, as
she was busy about her Head, with her Hair over her Eyes; and (without a word
speaking) tickles her on the Neck with the Twigg-end of his Riding-wand. Ah
Landry (says she) That Is not Cavalier like, A sad Mistake.
to come Behind. The King was as much surpised with the Discovery, as
Fredegonde with the Mistake; and went his way with the Thought of it in his
Countenance. Landry is presently sent for by the Queen, They discourse the
Accident, Debate the Consequences, and in the End, Complot to have Chilperic
Murdered as he returns from the Chase; which was Executed, with much Ease and
Security, the King being only attended with a Single Page, who Died with his
Master, and the Murth^rers escaped.

This Chilperic had, by Fredegonde, Clotaire the Second, (but Four Months old
at the Death of his Father) and the Regency of King and Kingdom was Committed
to Guntran. (the young Kings Uncle by the Fathers side) The Regent, warned by
the Miscarriage of his Brothers, and being enform'd that the same Hand by which
They fell, sought His Life also; A Guard both Suitable and n^cessary about the
Person of a King.
Establishes a Considerable Guard, Constantly to attend his Person: which was
both suitable to his Wisdom, and Dignity; as a Security, against not only the
stroke of Violence, but the very Thought of it, and a fit Circumstance of
Majesty.

The Influence of This Fo^ce went not far, nor, in Truth, the Royalty of their
first Race of Kings, much farther: The Mai^es of Fra^^e abused the Confidence
of their Masters.
whose either L^nity or Averser^sse to Business of State, gave their Great
Counselors the means to Usurp, and Transferr Their Authority, which
Confidence they abused to the Supplanting of their Masters.

Compleints, Suits, References, Addresses, must be made, forsooth, to the
Majors, not to the Kings: They undertake the Disposition of Moneys, and
Offices; the Menage of Treaties and Alliances: They Grant, Revoke at Pleasure:
Briefly, from 632. to 750. France was rather under a Majoralty, then a
Monarchy: and Then, (Pope Zachary, having first Absolved the French of their
Oath of Obedience) the Race of Childeric is Laid By; Pepin, the Son of a
Powerful Subject, deposes his Prince, and ^ets up (...).
Himself (the Fourth of that Name) formally Degraded, and Cast into a
Monastery, by Decree of Parliament; and Pepin Installed in his Stead. Thus did
the Son of the Last Great Subject make himself the First of the Second Race of
Kings: of which, in requital for too much said upon the First, I shall say
nothing at all. Nor much more upon This Subject; save only that Charles the
VII. and his Successor Lewis the XI. Laid the first firm Foundation of the
Military Power; to which, Charles the VIII. Francis the I. etc. have since
furnished their Additionals, and Superstructures, to make the Tyranny complete.

It Is Truth; the Splendour, and Profusion of the Court and Camp, is Dazzling, and
Prodigious; they swim in Pleasures and Plenty: but he that turns his Eye toward
those Miserable Animals, the Peasants, that with their Blood, and Sweat, Feed
and Support that Luxe, and Vanity (with hardly bread for their own Mouths),
will find it much a different Prospect; the great Enhansers of the Charge
clayming Exemption from the burden of it.

He that would see the Glory of the One Part, The State of France.
and the ^lavery of the Other, needs only read L'ESTAT dela FRANCE, of 1661.
Treating of the Officers of the Crown, Honors, Governments, Taxes, Gabelles,
etc. He shall there find the Venality of Office^s, and Their Rates; the
Privileges of the Nobility, and Their Enc^rochments; Who are Exempt from
Payments; or rather, that the Countryman Pays for All. To make an end, let
him also observe the Power, and Partiality of their Supereminent Parliament of
Paris.

The Book I mention, is of undeniable Authority,
wherein Account is given of, The effects of a Standing Army in France.
at the least, Eight Millions (English) arising from Three Taxes only; and for
the sole behoof and Enterteinment of the Soldiery (their Tailles, Taillon, and
Subsistence) Beside their Aids; (an Imposition upon all sorts of Merchandise,
Salt excepted) which must needs be a Vast Income: and their Gabell^s upon Salt;
that brings in near Two Millions more. Not to Insist upon Casualties, and
infinite other Inventions for squeezing, which they Practice; The Plough
mainteins the Army.

Give them their Due, their Noblesse are brave and Accomplished men and the
Brunt of all Hazzards lies totally upon Them; but scarce in Nature is there a
more abject Commonalty: and to conclude; such is their Condition, that without
War, they cannot Live: if not Abroad, they are sure to have i^ at Home.

Let it be Noted too;
the Taxes followed their Army, not their Army the Taxes; for it is One thing to
Levy Money to Raise Guards, and Another thing to Levy Guards to Raise Money: the
One appearing to be done by Consent, the Other by Force. (I use Guards and Army
promiscuously, as only taking a Guard for a Small Army, and an A^my for a
Stronger Guard.)

IF a Standing Army subjects France to so many Inconveniences, A Standing Army
more hazzardous in England, than in France.
(whereof History is full) where the Strength lies in the Nobility; How much
more Hazzardous was it to England, where the welfare of the whole, depended
upon the Affections and Interest of the Middle-rated People: Especially under
an Usurper, that was driven to uphold himself upon the daily consumption of the
Nation: (and a Body, that becomes every day Weaker then Other, must not expect
to be long-lived.)

So much for the Inconvenience of Cromwell's Standing Army, as to the Situation
of England, together with a View of the Effects of it in France. We Will now
consider what Welcome it was like to find upon the Point of Experience, or
Custom.

Alteration of Customs, Alterat^ons of C^sto^es dangerous.
is a work of Hazard, even in Bad Customs; but to Change Customs under which
a Nation has been happy, for Innovations, which upon Experience they have found
Fatal to them, is matter of great Peril to the Undertaker. But I look upon
Oliver's Case, as I do upon a Proposition, of such or such a Mate at Chesse:
where there are several ways to come within One on it, and None to Hit it. The
Devil and Fortune had a mind to Puzzle him. He Prefers his Pawnes; Transposes,
Shifts his Officers, but all will not do; he still wants either Men, or Money;
if he Disbands, he has too few of the One; if he holds up, he has too little of
the Other. Such in Truth, was This Tyrants Exigence, that he was forced to
That, which the Lawful ^ossessours of the English Crown would never venture
upon. No nor the Usurpers neither, before Our Blessed Reformers of 1641. But --
Where will Those People Stay, That thorough God, and Majesty, make way?

Our Saxon Kings contented themselves with a Law, Our Saxon Kings kept no
Standing Army.
What Arms every man of Estate should find, and a mul^t upon such as did
Detractare Militiae.

Edmond Ironside after his Duel with Camillus the Dane; N^r Edmond (...).
and a Composition, to divide the English, and Danish Kingdoms betwixt them and
their Heirs, kept no Army on Foot to Guard the Agreement; Neither did The Danes
(who after His Death, Treacherously Seized the Kingdom) to maintein their
Conquest.

William the Conqueror, Nor W^lliam the Conqu^ror.
that subdued both English and Danes, thought himself safe enough in Creating
Tenures by Knights Service, and permitting Proprieties; though at That time
under such Jealousies, that he took diverse of his English Prisoners into
Normandy with him, for fear of a Commotion in his Absence.

William Rufus, No^ William Rufus.
and, after Him, his Brother Henry the First, (though the Usurpers of the Senior
Right of their Elder Brother Robert) set up his Rest upon the same Terms: And
so did Henry the II. after a Long Contest with King Stephen, and
notwithstanding the unruliness of most of his Sons.

Henry III. Nor Hen. 3. Edw. 1. Edw. nor Ric. 2.
and then Edward I. after the Barons Wars, Employed no Standing Army to secure
themselves: neither did Edward or Richard the Second; notwithstanding a Potent
Faction of the Nobility bandying against the Latter of them.

Neither did the Henry's IV. V. and VI. Nor the Henry's 4, 5, 6, and 7.
in the Grand Schism of York and Lancaster, ever approve of it. Nor Henry VII.
(as Wise and Jealous as any of his Predecessors.)

If any thing could have warranted the Adventure, Nor Hen. 8. ^dw 6. Queen
M^ry, nor Queen Eliz.
methinks the T^epsie-turvy and Brouillery which Henry the VIII. introduced,
might have persuaded, or Provoked it. But neither There, nor in the following
Toss and Tumble of Religion, from Edward VI. to Queen Mary, and then back
again to Queen Elizabeth, was it put in Practice.

King James had no temptation to it. Nor K. James, nor Charles the MARTYR.
King Charles the Martyr, was indeed charged with the Intention of it, and so
he was with being Popishly affected; (In Truth, with what not?) and the One as
True as the Other. But who were They that laid This to His Charge?
Even Those very Persons, (some of them that advised Oliver to keep a Standing
Army, of 10000 Horse, and 20000 Foot, to Aw, and Scourge the Nation. A Course
unknown to our Forefathers; and by the Best, and Worst of Former Princes
equally disallowed; the Bad not judging it Safe, nor the Good, Expedient.

But other more Convenient, Expedients to prevent or disappoint Dangers.
and as Effectual, means they had, either to Prevent Dangers, or Suppress them,
as Their Custom of Friborghes or Frank-Pledges, Enques^s, Oaths, and
^^nalties, Tenures by Kn^ghts-Service, Commissions of Array, etc. which being
of approved Benefit, and Equality, were much more suitable to the G^nius and
Interest of the People, than a Standing A^my, which to allow, had been no other
then to deliver up the Strength of the Nation, into the hands of a Faction.

Nor was it less against the Government, A Standing Army destructive to the
Government.
than against the Humor of the Nation. Put a Parliament over the Nation, and
an Army over the Parliament. Who Governs? But all Oliver's Geese were Swans;
and his Soldiers Saints. Did they not Take what they would; Give what they
would; Raise and Pluck-down at Pleasure? Nay; Effectually, did ever any
Standing-Army Other, if they had nothing Else to do? Had they not already got
the Trick of Calling the People together, to Get Money of them* and then sending
them away like Buzzards, when they had gotten it? of Packing, and Qualifying;
Engrossing of Powers and Offices; Cantonizing the Nation? Was it to be expected
they should restore the Right Line again, when they had set up the Wrong? The
King, when they had erected a General; The Law, when they had Mastered it by
the Sword? They did not Tug so hard, for that they meant to part with Easily.
What they got by Rebellion, was to be mainteyn'd by Tyranny; and Necessity was
sure at Last to do the work of Conscience.

I Think, An Army without Pay, is the most Dangerous Enemy.
more need not be said to Oliver's Standing-Army. His Money could not last
always, and when he wanted That once; he was certain to find his Army as
Dangerous an Enemy, as it had been a Faithful Friend to him in his Prosperity.

Nay truly, 'bate his Usurpation; his want of Faith and Honor, -- But rather
then Profane the Sacred Character of God's Vicegerent by joining Majesty and
Cromwell in the same Supposition; let us Imagine rather a Wise and Lawful
Prince in the place of that Usurper: and yet it may be a Question, How far a
Standing Army would have Consisted with the Interest, even of a Rightful
Monarch.

First; As the Nation was Poor, and in no Condition for the Charge of it. Next;
as it was Impoverished by an Army; and therefore ill-persuaded of That
Expedient. Thirdly; the Prince himself must have been Poor; (in Olivers Place)
and what should a Poor Prince have done with a Standing Army, over a Poor and
Discontented People?

The Interest of This world is Money. Money is the Interest of This World.
Subjects Rebel; Armies Divide; and Kingdoms fall to nothing, for want of it:
That which Fools call Fortune, being (to men of clearer sight) only the
Favorable Influence of Treasure. It Is That, which Carries Towns, Causes, and
Armies; puts Knaves in Honest men's places; Corrupts Counsels, and Supplants
Governments: the People wear their hearts at their purse-strings; and a General
Oppression, is ever accompanied with a General desire to Remove it. I speak of
what they do, not what they ought to do; for all men are not of a Constitution
to hang, and Sterve for Conscience.
In fine, where the State is Necessitous, and a Faction Wealthy, That Prince
(as is already hinted) that erects a Standing Force, in that condition, does
but provide an Army for his Enemies. Not to insist upon the hazzards, arising
either from the People, if the Principal Officers have too little Power; or
from the Officers Themselves, if they have too much; by which, not only the
Public Peace, but the Monarchy it self, is Endangered: the King^ Crown
depending upon the Revolt of a Province. What can be more perilous then This
Conjuncture; where there is so great a Temptation, on the one hand, and so
great a Provocation on the Other; where the Multitude wait only for a Head, and
the Ambitious for a Party?

But why do I discourse the Mischiefs of a Standing Army? They are too many,
great and Obvious, to admit a Question. What Is the Benefit of a Standing Army.
What are the Benefits of it Rather? Is it either safe to any Purpose, or
Useful to the common and pretended end of it, even under a Lawful and
Hereditary Monarch?

It Is true; a Prince may deal with his Dominions, as the Gentleman did with his
Estate, that turned an Inheritance into an Annuity, because he would rather
have it L^^ge, then Long, and That Is the Fairest of a Forced Government;
Suppose he save himself for his own time; what will become then of his
Successor? But that we will waive too; and Consider, what is the Fruit of it to
himself?

Is he the Richer for it? The Mischief and Danger of it.
Alas, the Contrary: the Nation bears a Double Burden, and the Army Sucks the
better half of the Advantage. Is he the Safer? Neither: for a Mutiny in his
Army, is both more likely, and more dangerous, then a Tumult among his People.
In fine; A Standing Army may promote a Faction, but it is the Law preserves the
Public,
and consequently the King.

That Monarch that Secures himself from Private Practices by a Choice, A Royal
Guard Necessary and S^fficient.
Full, and Honorable Guard, well Paid, and Disciplined, about his Royal
Person; With the timely execu^ion of Good Laws.
as to the Rest shall find the Strict and timely Execution of Good Laws the
best Public Security against Sedition.

It Is a Cheap Remedy, and therefore Acceptable to the Generality: A Legal one;
so that the Delinquents Themselves cannot Complein of it; and Lastly, it is a
Sure one: which if it be, what can be more advisable for any Prince and People?
In Truth; so Sure it is, that I Am to seek ('bate only Matter of Claim) where
ever any Settled Government was Embroiled, but either by the Interest of a
Standing Force; or the Remisseness of Authority, in the Execution of
Established Laws.

The Necessity of a Royal Guard is Evident* the Number must be suited to the
differing Exigences of Times and Places: but with This General Regard: That it
be not only sufficient to the Safety of a Prince; but Honorary likewise, and
Accommodate to his Dignity; and Demonstrative rather of his Power then of his
Danger.

But be the Body Great or Small; Nay, we will suppose it equal, to a Standing
Army (but not Distributed (as That is) into County-Troops, and Provincial
Governments) Call it a Guard still, for the very Name of the Other sounds like
a Grievance. The One, supposing only the Peoples Care of their Sovereign;
the Other intimating the Sovereigns Jealousy of his People. Let me not be
understood as in allowance of This Over-proportion: for such a Guard is but an
Army in Disguise.

There may be Temporary Occasions indeed, for Temporary, and Extraordinary
Levies, but the word Temporary, is commonly attended with such a Train of
Reasons for Perpetuity; that if the Occasion be not very Manifest, the World is
apt to doubt of the Necessity. Not that the Generality have any Right to judge
of, or Debate the Grounds of a Change; but I suppose that Their Opinions, and
After-feelings will not be denied to have some Influence upon the Event of it.

To Conclude; That Prince is Great, Safe, and Happy, that Commands by his
Arms, Abroad, and Governs by his Laws at Home. The Apprehension of
Conspiracies and Plots, in my opinion, weighs not much; or if there be any
danger; the failing is rather in the Constitution or Administration, then in
the want of Power to keep the People quiet: Good Laws, and Good Officers, will
do the Business, without an Army; and if the Instruments be bad, The Hazzard's
Ten time^ greater with it.

It will be needful here, for the Clearing of the Question, to make a
Particular Enquiry concerning Seditions; and That Is the Point we will handle in
the Next Chapter; which, for Order sake, we shall divide into Seven Sections,
with their Subdivisions as occasion shall require.

CAP. IX.
Of Seditions in Particular; and showing in what manner they arise from These
Seven Interests. The Church; the Bench; the Court; the Camp; the City; the
Country; and the Body Representative.
IN the first Chapter of this Tract, we have touched upon the Matter and Causes
of Seditions in General: We must be now a little more Particular.

The Scene's Utopia; and we will Divide it, into Seven Interests. The Church;
the Bench; the Court; the Camp; the City; the Country; and the Body
Representative: the least considerable of which, being in any great disorder,
hazzards the whole, and That, either by engaging in some Actual Violence,
against the Government; or by some Irregularity of Proceeding that may Provoke
or Cause it. Of These in their Course, and first of the Church.

Sect. 1.
Seditions Arising from the CHURCH.
THose Troubles in the State which derive from Distempers in the Church,
proceed either from Faction, Ignorance, or Scandal.

The Strongest Tie upon Reasonable Nature, Conscience the strongest Tie.
is Conscience; and the Stubbornest Consciences, are Those that do they know
not What, they know not Why. In Truth, what is Conscience without
Understanding, but a well-meaning Madness? And* That Is the Fairest Sense my
Charity can Afford to the Blind Zeal of a Transported Multitude. If Conscience
bids them Kill the King; R^b the Church; and Tear up the Foundations of Both
Governments; They Will do it: Nay More, This has been done, and Providence it
self Proclaimed for the Doer of it. Great Heed should then be taken, what
Persons are Entrusted with the Care of Souls, since the Consequence of a
Factious Preacher, and a Mistaken Conscience, proves many times the Ruin both
of Prince and People.

Under the Note of Faction, I comprize all Opinions delivered Publicly, and
with Design; against the Doctrine, Practice, or Authority of the Church. Reduce
it, in Short, to Haresie, and Schism^. The former whereof, reflecting only upon
Matters of Faith, concerns rather Religion, then Government: and lies beyond
the Line of my Purpose; but in This Place; the Latter is the Question, and,
briefly as we may, we will take a view of the Rise, the Method, the Design, and
the Effects of it.

It is with Churchmen as with other Mortals* There are of all Sorts, Good,
Bad, and Indifferent. Some we have known, whom neither the Loss of Dignity,
Fortune, Freedom, no, nor the Loss of Life it self, could ever move from the
strict Rule of Conscience, Magnanimity, and Duty. Others we have seen to
Exercise these Cruelties, (though Ecclesiastiques themselves) upon the Nobler
Sort of their own Function. And some again, we have Observed to shift with
every Turn, and Steer by Interest* Still putting on the Livery of the
Prevayling Party: Squaring the Rule, and Will of Heaven to tho Appetites and
Passions of Humanity: so that upon the whole, it is evident; some Clergymen are
Quiet, because they have Preferments, and Others Troublesome, because they want
them.

The Principal Ingredients into Schism are These; Ambition, Avarice,
Popularity, and Envy; The Scope of it is to destroy Authority, and advance a
Faction. Now how to accomplish This, is the great work; for a Rent in the
Church signifies nothing without a Sedition in the State: and in This manner
they Proceed.

First, The Rise of Schism.
in a Style of Holy Tenderness they slily disaffect the People against the
Rites of the Church, as in themselves unlawful; and utterly Destructive of
Christian Liberty.

To strengthen, The Method of it.
and advance the Imposture, what do they next, but rip up all the Faylings, and
show the Nakedness of their Superiors? still aggravating what they find, and
Creating Scandalous Matter where they want it.

When the Multitude are once moved in Conscience against the Impositions, and
in Passion against the Imposers, The Motion of Schis^ into Sedit^on.
their next attempt is upon the Authority, and Then they divide into Separate
Assemblies, which under color of so many Conscientious Dissenters from the
Ceremonies of the Church, are infallibly so many contrivers against the Peace
of the Kingdom. For here comes in the Civil Power to prohibit their Seditious
meetings, and Then, the Saints (they cry) are Persecuted: The Cause is God's;
and they are tied in Conscience, The Design.
to bind their Kings in Chains; and through all Extremities to pursue a
Reformation: This is the Fruit of Tolerating a Faction under a Countenance of
Conscience. Nor is it any wonder to see Those wretches draw their Swords
against Their Sovereign in the Field, whose Souls are turned against him in the
Pulpit.


But it is Objected, that some Ministers do really make a Conscience, of
Conformity. Truly, the better for Them, if they forbear upon That Account; but
it is the same Thing to the Public, upon what-accompt-soever; for they
Prescribe, what they Practice, and by the President of Sticking upon a Doubt of
Conscience, they open a Door to Disobedience upon any Pretense of it, breaking
the Bond of Unity in favor of a Particular nicety of Opinion. And Effect of it.


Very Notable is The Determination of the Lord St. Albans, Note.
in This Case [In Points Fundamental, he that is not with us is against us. In
Points not Fundamental, he that is not against us, is with us.]

Let this suffice to show the Political Inconvenience of Enterteining
Schismatical Preachers. It may be now a Question, Qu. May an enemy to Bishops,
exercise the Ministry?
How far a Christian Magistrate may justify the sufferance of any man to
exercise the Ministry, within his Dominions, that is a professed Enemy to
Episcopacy: Which I Offer, with the fit Modesty of a Proposal, and with
Reverence to the better-enform'd. But if* as the Danger of such a Mixture is
Evident, so the Lawfulness of it shall appear doubtful, their own Argument is
then turned against Themselves, and we have both Scripture and Experience on
our side, over and above.

The Three Questions, wherewith King Charles the Martyr Choked the
Presbyterian Ministers in the Isle of Wight, Remain still Unresolved, and they
are These.

First, Three Questions propounded by King Charles the Martyr, concerning
Church Government.
Is there any Certain Form of Church Government at all prescribed in the Word?

Secondly, If there be any Prescript Form, Whether or no may the Civil Power
Change the same, as they see Cause?

Thirdly, If any Prescript Form there be, and That unchangeable; If it were not
Episcopal, what was it?

In Fact, the Constant Exercise of Church-Prelacy is so manifest, that the
whole stream of Story, and Tradition Runs Episcopal: which to Oppose, were to
deny the only Means of knowing whether it were so, or not.

Is it the Right they Question? Take then the learned Bishop Sanderson's
Deduction of it.

Leaving other men to the liberty of their own Judgments, The Derivation of
Episcopal Government.
my opinion is, that EPISCOPAL GOVERNMENT is not to be derived merely from
Apostolical Practice or Institution: but that it is originally founded in the
Person and Office of the Messiah, our Blessed Lord JESUS CHRIST. Who being sent
by his Heavenly Father to be the great Apostle [HEB. III. 1.] Bishop and
Pastor, [1 PET. 11. 25.] of his Church, and anointed to that Office immediately
after his Baptism by JOHN, with power and the Holy Ghost [ACT. X. 37 -- 8.]
descending then upon him in a bodily shape [LUK. III. 22.] did afterward,
before his Ascension into Heaven, send and empower his holy Apostles, (giving
them the Holy Ghost likewise as his Father had given him) in like manner as his
Father had before sent him [JOH. XX. 21.] to execute the same Apostolical,
Episcopal, and Pastoral Office for the ordering and governing of his Church
until his coming again: and so the same Office to continue in them, and their
Successors, unto the end of the world. [MAT. XXVIII. 18 -- 20. Thus far the
Reverend Bishop.

Some will Pretend, that This only proves the Authoritative Power they received
by their Mission, but no Succession to the Office.

For That; Christ's Mandate to the Apostles.
Observe the Mandate, [Go, Teach ALL Nations.] Personally, and Actually they
could not do it; but in Effect, and Virtually, it is out of doubt, they did it:
and How, but by their Delegates? For otherwise; our Savior Commanded them a
Thing Impossible. Briefly; if the Gospel was to be Preached to All Nations,
(which no Christian will deny) and if (according to the Literal direction of
the Order) the Gospel could not be Preached to all Nations, by so few Persons
as were Then Commissioned; what follows, but the Evident Necessity of a
Substitution: which Delegation being granted, clears the Dispute: for it is
Indubitable that What Authority-soever our Savior vested the Apostles with,
the same likewise was from Them transmitted to their Successors; Who (in the
words of his late Sacred Majesty) succeed into the same Apostolical Power, and
Function, which the Apostles, as Ordinary Pastors, had. Qui in Dominium
alterius succedit, Iure eju^ uti debet. He that succeeds to the Government of
another, succeeds also to his Rights of Governing. And Marque This further;
that the Apostles Powers, and Commissions, were granted before the Descent of
the Holy Ghost: and relating only to matters of Ordinary use, and perpetual
Establishment in the Church: the extraordinary Gifts of the Apostles not at
all proving them extraordinary Officers.

Now how far a Prince may safely either Act, ^ipiscopacy unalterable.
or Suffer the violation of a Church Government of This Authority, I am not yet
instructed.

In fine; it is most certain, that a Divided Clergy makes a Divided Nation; and
by how much Religion is the fairest of all Pretenses; Conscience the deepest of
all Impressions; Preaching and Praying the most Popular and Public of all
Operations: by so much are Disaffected Churchmen the most Pernicious and
Intolerable of all Disloyal Instruments. Corruption Optimi, Pessima.
No Calumny being so Plausible, as That which drops from the Lips of Persons
famous for an External form of Piety: No Hypocrites so abominable, as Those
that Tithe Mint, and Cummin, and yet neglect Mercy and Judgment: that under
color of long Prayers devour Widows houses, etc. And no sting so Deadly, as
That from a Snake in a man's own bosom.

We have now done with the Schismatique; the Active and Industrious Promoter of
Seditions. The Matter he works upon, is Scandal; either Supposed, or Real; and
That comes next.

In all Invectives against the Church, The Method of Schism.
the Scandalous, Negligent, and Insufficient, March hand in hand: to which are
opposed a Party that style themselves a Godly, Peinful, and Able Ministry.
Thus with the Boasting, and Censorious Pharisee, does the Proud Schismatique
advance himself above his Brethren, calling Good Evil, and Evil Good;
imposing equally upon the People, by an uncharitable Judgment, and Report, on
the One side, and a fictitious Holiness, on the Other.

Not to excuse all Clergymen, nor to extenuate the Crimes of any of them. Judas
his Treason was the Fouler because of his Profession: and yet the Eleven were
never the worse, because of Judas his Treason.

We Will Grant, A Scandalous Clergy, makes a Seditious Laity.
that for a Minister to spend one Hour of the week, in a Pulpis, and the rest
in a Tavern; to Undo a good Sermon by an Ill Example, and to discredit a Strict
Doctrine by a Loose Life; is to extinguish the Reverence that is due to the
Function; and to make Preaching look only like a Politic Ordinance to keep
the People in Order. Not that the Doctrine is ever the worse for the Person,
nor the Priesthood the less Venerable for the abuse of it; but it ministers
matter of Scandal, and Exception; and with the Simple it passes for an Argument
against the Government.

But as the Habit of Drunkenness, and Profaneness, in a Churchman is most
unsufferable; Slander is the Sin and Practice of the Devil.
so is it on the other hand a Practice Diabolical, to put all their Actions
upon the Tent, and Skrew up every allowable, and social Freedom to the
construction of a Scandal. As if there were no Medium to be admitted, betwixt
the Angel and the Brute. Are they not Men; and equally subjected to
Infirmities, with other Men? It Is true; their Calling is Divine, but their
Persons are Humane; and as much is required, in regard of Their Ministry: so
somewhat also is to be born with in respect of their Humanity. Remember, there
were those that called our Savior himself a Wine-bibber.

Alas; For a Minister to Drink a Glass of Wine in a Tavern, is made a mighty
business: Nay, to be only Pleasant, and well-humour'd, is by some, cast in
their dish as an Air too Light for the Severity of their Profession: as if the
Messengers of Joy, the bearers of good-tidings to the world, were only to be
sad Themselves, and look, as if either They suspected the Truth of their
Brrand, or their Title to the Benefit of it.

However, Shun Appearances of Scandal.
since there are Those that will make use of small Occasions to do great
Mischiefs; It is a Point of Pious Prudence, fairly to shun appearances of
Scandal; but it is indeed of high, and absolute Necessity, to Punish, or Remove
the Scandal it self: as That which both provokes a Judgment from Heaven, and
stirrs up the People to execute it. Yet let us put some difference betwixt Sins
of Appetite, and Sense; and Sins of Malevolence: in the Former, a man plays
the Beast; but in the Latter, he plays the Devil.

I look upon Ignorance also, Ignorance a species of Scandal.
as a Species of Scandal; even although in a Good Man; for every Good Man makes
not a Good Minister; nor do I know which is more tolerable; Habitual
Profaneness, and Sensuality in a Divine, or Ignorance in a Teacher: the
hazard of False Doctrine, or the Influence of an Ill Example.

Touching the Body of the Clergy, enough is said, to show the dangerous Effects
of Schism, and Scandal; the one tending Directly to Sedition, the other,
Consequentially.

There remains another stumbling block, Bishops blamed by the more blameable.
and That concerns the Governors of the Church; who are commonly charged with
Innovations, Rigor, Pride, or Avarice. They are capable of All This, as they
are Men; but never the more blameable for a Clamor Levelled at them as they
are Bishops: There being great Difference, betwixt Personal Reproof, and a
Factious Confederacy: betwixt the seasonable Freedom of Counsel, or
Reprehension, duly Circumstanc'd; and the contumacious Insolence of Subjects
toward their Superiors. In fine, a likely Tale does Their feat as well as a
certain Truth; only they accommodate all their Stories to the Design of
over-turning the Government, and to the Gust of the Multitude.

The Sound of Innovations, Fears and Jealousies.
and of Popery, in some places, goes a great way with the Common People toward
a Sedition. They Fear, they Wish; they Love, they Hate, they know not what: and
yet against This Terrible Nothing, shall they engage their Lives and Fortunes,
as Zealously, as if their Souls lay at Stake; and as Ridiculously, as if they
Phansy'd These same Innovations to be an Army of Flying Dragons, and the Pope
leading them on upon a Hobbyhorse. With This Device, the Multitude is first
startled, and then every Bush is a Thief; Church-Habits are the Trumpery of
Rome; Decency is Superstitious; Kneeling, direct Idolatry, and finally, to
Impose all This, is interpreted a violence upon the Consciences of the Godly:
Thus from the very Method of Agreement, is raised an Argument for Separation;
and Christian Liberty is rendered Destructive of Humane Authority.

Another General Objection, Bishops charged with Pride, by the Prouder Brethren.
among the Prouder Brethren, is the Pride of Bishops, their Lording it over
Gods Heritage: which through the Person. Wounds the Office, Incensing the
Multitude against the Power it self, under pretext of blaming the unlawful
Exercise of it. Suitable to the Dignity of Bishops, and Correspondent to the
Duty of them, ought to be the Revenue: (that is, sufficient both for Honor and
Hospitality) in which Particular, the Ecclesiastical Patrimony, is by some
People thought as much too Large, as the Jurisdiction; and from a false, and
envious Calculation of Bishops Rents, occasion is taken to inveigh against
their Avarice; exposing them at once, both as a Grievance, and a Booty. Thus,
like the Devil, the Schismatique advances his Kingdom by Slander,
and thrives by the sins of the People.

We have dwelt long upon this Subject of the Church; but, with the next, the
Bench we shall be quicker.

Sect. II.
The BENCH.
THE Two main Springs that Move, and Govern the Affections of reclaimed Nature,
are Conscience, Conscience and Law, Govern the world.
and Law. By the Former, we are obliged, in relation to our Immortal Being;
and by the Other, as Men Linked in Society. Our Priests and Judges, are the
Oracles we depend upon, for Counsel, and Instruction, in both these grand
Concerns; and if They deceive us, what greater Misery can befall a Nation, then
to have Iuglers, and Impostours, take up the Bench and Pulpit? Cousening the
Vulgar with False Weights, and Measures, of Truth and Reason; and uttering
their Licentious Prevarications, for Law, and Gospel? In which Case, the
greater the Modesty, and Virtue of the Common People, the greater is the Peril
of the Delusion: it being their Duty to submit, to the Reason of the One, and
to Believe the Doctrine of the Other, without disputing either, unless in
matters most Notoriously Repugnant to the Elements of Polity, and Religion. And
he is not his Crafts-master, that cannot give, even to the fonlest Purpose, a
color fair enough to cheat a Multitude.
What Wickedness is there, for which a corrupt Divine shall not produce a Text;
and a shifting Lawyer, a President? But enough is said of the Former, and too
much in Preface to the Latter.

Those Faults, Occasions of Sedition.
among the Professors of the Law, which frequently cause Seditions (although
not in Themselves Seditious) are, Corruption; Partiality; Oppression;
Chargeable Delays; or, in a word, the Non-administration of speedy Justice.
Whereupon must necessarily ensue Poverty, Factions, Animosities, etc.

The Consequences are Dangerous likewise, of overstreyning the Prerogative; and
so of Depressing it: both which may be done; either out of Zeal, or with
Design. But, be the Intention of the Doer what it will, the Effects of the
Thing done are Mischievous; for it injects Fea^s and Iealousies of Tyranny, on
the one side; and begets False, and bold Opinions, and Attempts of Liberty on
the Other: engaging all Humors against the Government, whom either the Hopes
and Gust of Freedom, or the Dread of Oppression can work upon. But Personal
Vices, and Mistakes, we may put upon the Roll of Slow Poisons, that do the
Deed, though it be long first.

There are another sort of Lawyers, Seditious Lawyers and Schifmarical Divines
are the most abominable Seducers.
whose Malice is of a Quicker, and Stronger Operation; under whose Lips, is the
Poison of Aspes: or rather, whose Tongues are Daggers, turning the Point of
Law, upon the Law it self; wounding the Eagle with a Feather from his own wing,
and Stabbing the Persons of Princes with their own Authority. These are the
Execrable Regicides; and the Tumultuary Rabble are but the Ministers of their
vile Purposes. Alas! in Matter of Law; by whom should the simple Multitude be
directed, if not by Lawyers? (as by Divines, in points of Conscience) Whether
is the greater offender then; that Ignorant Wretch that Draws his Sword against
his Sovereign, on the behalf of Law, and Religion: (as he supposes) Or, Those
Abominable Seducers, that by wrested Scriptures, pretended Inspirations; by
misconstruction of Laws; misapplying of Presidents; Torturing or Embezelling of
Records, inveigles the Poor Creature into a Good Opinion of so foul an
Enterprise? What signifies the event of a Popular Action, compared with the
deliberate Contrivance, Allowance, and Direction of it; more then the effect of
some dull Passive Instrument, employed by such or such an Agent? Or, if a
Prince be Murdered; whether's the more to blame, the Axe, or the Executioner;
the Bullet, or the Marks-man? So much for the Bench, now to the Court.

Sect. III.
The COURT.
BY the Court-Interest, is meant That Party, which more Immediately depends
upon the Grace and Favor of the Prince: and here (as elsewhere) Seditions are
either Plotted or Occasioned.

Touching the Plotters of Seditions; Plotters of Sedition.
Some out of Avarice, with Judas, Betray their Masters. Others, are spurred on
by Ambition, with Absalom to Supplant Them. One man is puffed up by Popularity; a
Second, stung with Envy; a Third, with Jealousy; a Fourth, Transports himself
with Revenge, or some other Personal Animosity. In fine, These various Humors,
make but One Party; and the Covetous, Ambitious, etc. -- agree in the same
Conspiracy.

Of the Contrivers of Sedition, Are of three Sorts.
some strike directly at the Governor; Others, at the Government: and a Third
Sort, by crafty Circumstances, and Windings, choose rather to Mine the Regal
Authority, then Batter it; and to work out a Prince by a skrew, rather then
force him by an Army.

The first sort of Contrivers here Specified, Usurpers.
are such as Clayming to the Crown, Themselves, Challenge the Prince that wears
it, as an Usurper: And These, by making a fair Title to the People, joined with
a little Popular skill of Humouring the Multitude, may with great ease engage a
Party, in favor of a Person whom they Love, against a Right which they cannot
understand.

Concerning such as directly oppose the Form of Monarchy, Monarchoma-ch^^sts.
upon a Principle of Judgment; much needs not be said, because they are neither
many, nor considerable: for, to maintein That Paradox, they must overthrow all
Story, Sacred, and Profane; the Practice of all Ages, and the Reason of all
Governments.

A Third sort of Contrivers, J^suited Puritans.
are Those who under fair appearances of Loyalty, and Publiquenesse of Spirit,
Masque their Seditious Intents, and Drive on a Particular Interest. From which
kind of evil Instruments, even the Cabinets, and Private Counsels of Princes
are not absolutely Free; and (acco^ding to Sir Francis Bacon) the hazard
arises, either from an Over-greatnesse in one Counselor; or, an Over-strict
Combination in Diverse; which are (says he) things soon found and helped. For
Perspicuity sake, we will treat of this Division in Subsections.

Subsection I.
Over-greatnesse in one Counselor.
THis Over-greatnesse in one Counselor, is to be understood Principally, in
Respect of his Credit with his Master; and partly, in Regard of those great
Offices, and Riches which are commonly heapt upon great Favorites, giving them
the means of over-awing the Honesty of their Inferiors, and of ingratiating
themselves with the People; at least with so many of them as will be drawn to
their Party, either by Fear, or Promotion.

Where it happens that a Prince his Heart is touched with the Magique of so
much Kindness for a Subject, Time is the best Trial of Fidelity.
as to make him dangerously Overgreat: it is not either Wisdom, or Virtue,
that can properly deliver him from That Charm, but it must be rather Time, and
Experience, that shall Dis-enchant him. Nor is it a Fault in a Prince, to
comply with a Natural Inclination; but it is a Barbarous Ingratitude in a
Subject to abuse it, by Endeavoring, (Comparatively) to Darken the Sun, with
the sparklings of a Refracted light, shot from his own Glory.

In This Case, the Happiness of a Nation depends not absolutely upon the
Prudence of the Governor; but, in some Degree, upon the Honesty of the
Favorite: not altogether upon Counsel, but much also upon Enformation: nor
upon That neither, so much concerning the State and Quality of Affairs, as
touching the Fitness of Instruments to menage them, The Knowledge of Persons,
is more then the Understanding of Matters.
and the Faith, and Abilities of Persons. [In vain is it, (says the Profound
St. Albans) for Princes to take Counsel concerning Matters, if they take no
Counsel likewise concerning Persons.]

Is a Kingdom in Danger of Invasion, or
Sedition? To Obviate That Danger by a Force, is a Rational Expedient. But he
that Arms his Enemies in stead of his Friends, Increases the Danger. It were
neither safe, nor Royal, for a Prince to Walk, or Sleep without a Watch about
him. But were he not better be Alone, then take Assassins into his Guard, or
Bedchamber? In fine; Great is the Hazard of Mistaking Person; Great is the
Crime of the Industrious Authors of such Mistakes; and Great the Infelicity of
a Monarch so Mistaking.

Nay, The Noblest Natures most easily Deceived.
which is worst of all in This Particular, the Noblest Dispositions are the
most liable to be Deceived, and only Omniscience, or Ill Nature can totally
Secure a Prince from the Delusion. Imagine a Servant received into the Arms of
his Master, Crowned with Honor and Bounty; and in This State of Favor, giving
advice concerning Persons that are mere strangers to the Monarch: Who fit, or
unfit, for such or such Employment; who false, or Loyal, etc. How should a
Prince suspect a Subject under so many obligations to Fidelity?

Although Abuses of This Kind are in Themselves sufficiently Mischievous,
Abuses from Great Persons hardly Rectified.
yet are they the more so, by reason of the Difficulty, and Peril to Rectify
them; for, in many Cases, (as Sir Francis Bacon) the Truth is hard to know, and
not fit to utter.

He that would duly Execute This Office, What he must do that undertakes it.
must first, Resolve to feel the weight of a Potent Adversary; and Sacrifice
his Hopes, his Fortunes, his Freedom, (nay, and perhaps, in Consequence, his
Life) to his Duty.

He must be wary too, that not a Syllable pass from his Lips, Or Pen, which by
the utmost force of Misconstruction, may seem to glance upon the Monarch:
wherein, his Loyalty is not less concerned, then his Discretion; for it is a
fouler Crime Publicly to Defame a Prince, then Privately to mis-persuade him.
Let him but keep himself to the Fact, (as whether This or That be True, or
False, not meddling with the Equity, and Reason of the matter) he may with as
much Honor, and good-manners, advertise his Prince of a Mistake, as believe
that he is no God.

The Application of This Over-greatness is exceeding various, nor is the Grace
it self less Beneficial to the Public, when Nobly Lodged, then it is the
Contrary, when so large a Bounty is poured into a Thirsty and Narrow soul. But
we are Tied in This Place to discourse the Irregularities of Power, not the
blessed Emprovements of it.

We might reckon the Art of Flattery, The Art of Flattery.
among the main Conducements to a Court-Design: but, That Is one of the Knacks
we Learn without a Teacher. So Common it is, that he that cannot shift his
Face, and Humor, it is odds, can hardly shift his Linen: (he is so Poor, I
mean) In This Particular, the Confidents of Princes, being generally of their
Masters Age and Inclination, or thereabout; have great Advantages, both for the
Freedom of Access, and Privacy: the Timing of Affairs; and the more Clear
Discovery of their Natures.

How The aforesaid Inconveniences may be helped, shall be the Subject of the
next Chapter; but to Discern them in the Intention, falls properly under
Consideration in This.

To give the better Guess at the Design of This Over-great-One, Conscientious
Sedition.
see how he stands Affected, first to the Religion of the place he Lives in.
It Is possible, the Conscience of a Catholic Good, may overruled him, to the
Hazard of a Good which he conceives less Universal: and some Light, may be
taken toward This Discovery, from the Observation of his Familiars; but much
more from his Natural Temper, and from the Tenor of his Life. (i.e. if he be
Naturally Melancholique, and Scrupulous) he may be suspected to be
Conscientiously Seditions.

Is it Ambition moves him? An Ambitious Person.
Ye shall then find him scattering his Donatives among the Soldiers. The Town
has not Poor enough for him to Relieve, nor Rich enough for him to Oblige. He
Caries his Hat in One Hand, and his Heart in the Other. Here he Lends a Smile,
There he Drops a Nod: with These Popular Incantations betwitching the Multitude.

Is the Good of the Subject the Question? Who but He to Ease the People in
Public, of the Grievances which himself had Procured in Private; and in fine,
no man so fit to be made a Judge in Israel. To All This; he must be Daring in
his Person, Close in his Purpose, Firm to his Dependencies, and rather stooping
to the Ordinary People, then mixing with them, he will do no good on it else.

To Proceed; The Test of an Honest Favorite.
let him be Watched, how he Employes his Power, and Favor, whether (with
Machiavel) more to the Advantage of his Master; Or, to his own particular
Benefit: and Then, whether (according to the Lord St. Albans) he applies
himself more to his Master's Business, or to his Nature; and rather to Advise
him, then to feed his Humor. If he be found to study his Masters Passions,
more then his Honor, An ill sign.
and to Prefer his Private Interest, to his Duty, it is an Ill sign.

And it is no good one, Another as bad.
if the Favorite grows Rich, and the Prince Poor: (especially if the Former be
the Cause of the Latter) but it is much a worse, if he Presume to graspe
Authority, as well as Treasure. It looks as if the Supposed Equality of
Friendship, had Drowned the Order of Subjection.

Take Notice next, Note.
of the Proportion betwixt the means he uses, and his suspected ends.

Does he Engross the Disposition of all Charges, and Preferments? See in what
hands he Places Them. Does he endeavor to Obstruct all Grants of Grace. and
Benefit, that pass not through his own fingers? That Is Dangerous: for (says
Sir Francis Bacon) [When the Authority of Princes, is made but an Accessory to
a Cause, and that there be other Bands that Tie faster, then the Band of
Sovereignty, Kings begin to be put almost out of Possession.

Marque then again what Kind of Persons he Promotes, Marque again.
and for what likely Reasons, whether for Money, or Merit; Honesty, or Faction?
Observe likewise the Temper, and Quality of his Complicates, and Creatures; and
whether his Favors be Bounties, or Purchases. If the Former, Judge of his
Design, by his Choice. If the Latter, it is but a Mony-Businesse; which Avarice
meeting with an overweening vanity of mind, is many times mistaken for
Ambition. In fine; what Ambition does at hand, Corruption does at Length; nor
is the Power of the One, more Dangerous, then the Consequence of the Other.

Subsection II.
The Combination of Diverse Counselors.
PRoceed we now, from the Greatness of One Counselor, to the Combination of
Diverse: which (to vary the Phrase) is no other then a formed Confederacy in the
Counsel against the Monarch. Wherein we shall Briefly lay down, first, the
Advantages of the Faction; the Method, next; and lastly, the marquis of it.

Their Advantages are great, The Advantages of a Confederacy in Counsel.
and many; in Regard both of their Privileges, exempting them from Question; of
their Power, to Offend their Enemies, and Protect their Friends; and in
Consideration of their Opportunities to look into Both hands, and play their
Cards accordingly.

In their Method of proceeding, Their Method.
This is their Masterpiece; not only to do all the hurt they can, under a
color of Good; but to Engage Persons of more Honesty, then Understanding, in
Offices, seemingly Serviceable, but Effectually Pernicious to the Public: by
which Artifice, those that are Friends to the Government, do unwarily serve the
Crafty Enemies of it; secretly undermining the Honor of the Prince, under
Pretext of advancing his Profit; Lessening his Power at Home, under the
Disguise of making him more formidable Abroad: and where they cannot persuade
an Interest, if it be Considerable, they will not stick to Purchase it.

As to the Rest, the Method, Rather to Countenance a Sedition, then Head it.
is rather tacitly to Invite and Countenance a Sedition, then openly to Head
it; and to Engage rather for it, then with it, till the hazard of the first
onset be over. In Truth, the first Essay of a Tumult is but a Trial how the
Ice will bear; and the Popular Faction in the Counsel, is more concerned, in
case of a Disaster, how to bring their Friends off, then to Venture the leading
them On; -- for Fear of One. Whence it comes to pass, that by the Obligation
of Encouraging, and Preserving their Party, they are Cast upon a Scurvy
Necessity of Discovering Themselves.

Their Marquis are many; How to know the Faction.
for They are known by their Haunts; by their Cabales; by their Debates; by
their Domestiques; by their Favorites; and by their manner of Conversation, and
Behavior.

If there be any Schismatical Teacher that is Craftier, By their Haunts.
and Slyer then the Rest, you may be sure of my Lord's Coach at His Preachment:
It gives a Reputation to the Conventicle, besides the Gracious Looks at
Parting, that pass betwixt his Honor and the Brethren: which Enterchange, is
but a secret way of Sealing and Delivering a Conspiracy.


Look into their Cabales, By their Cabales.
and ye shall, find them all of a Tribe, and Leaven; Close; Sedulous; and
United: Their Daily Meetings relishing of a Design, as being Composed rather
for Counsel, then Enterteinment.

In their Debates, By their Debates.
you will know them by their Pleas; Shiftings; Delays; Extenuations;
Distinctions; their Frequent, and Industrious Obstructions of Dispatch in
favor of the Faction. By their Zealous Intercessions for the Enemies of the
Prince, and their Coldness for his Friends; by their watchfulness to Seize
all Opportunities of helping the Guilty, and of Surprising the Innocent: by
their Injecting of Snares, and Scruples, to Amuse, and Distract those that are
for the Government, in Order to the Benefit of such as are against it; wherein,
it is worth a Note, that they all Vote the same way, and, without Question, to
the same Purpose: for they shall sooner destroy a Loyal Subject upon a Calumny,
then punish a Traitor Convict; and prosecute one man for Writing, or Saying,
that it is possible for a Prince to have a Judas in his Counsel, when another
shall escape unquestioned, or perhaps be justified, that calls his Sovereign a
Tyrant; and defends the Murder of Kings.

They may be guessed at likewise in some measure, By their Domestiques.
by their Domestiques: Especially, by those of near Relation to Trust, Privacy,
and Business; as Chaplains, Secretaries, etc. Nor is it enough to have it,
like Master like man, unless it be, like Lady like woman too; for the pure
strein must run quite Thorough, for fear of Tales out of Schole, and
Discovering the Secrets of the Family. But This Rule is not Universal.

From their Favorites, By their Favorites.
much may be gathered; first, from their Principles, and Abilities. And Then
from the Frequency, Privacy, and Particularity of their Enterteining them.

The True Composition of a Confident fit for such a Statesman as we here speak
of, is This.

He must be One that knows the Right, The Composition (...) sic Instrum^nt or a
Corrupt Statesman.
and Opposes it; for there is then less Danger of his Conversion, and
Consequently, of Discovering his Patron. Let him be likewise a man of Sobriety,
in his outward appearances; of Reputation. with his Party; and well-grounded in
the Niceties of the Controversy: he must be also a Master of his Passions,
Peremptory in his mistakes; and (right or wrong) never without a Text at hand
for his Opinions.

When a Person of This Character, repairs often to a Counselor of State, a
man may without a Scandalum Magnatum, take the Boldness to suspect his
business. But if to Frequency, be added Privacy, it makes the Matter worse;
and These Instruments are commonly taken in by Owl-light, or at the Backdore.

Nor is the Particularity they show to this kind of Cattle less Remarquable.
Ye shall see a Factious Libeller,
or Schismatique, taken into my Lords Closet, when a Person of Honor, and
Integrity cools his heels in the Hall. One Lawyer admitted, that has Got just
as much by Betraying his Country, as Another, (that is Rejected) has Lost by
Serving it. Briefly; look through the Offices they dispose of, both Civil, and
Military, and in the Persons you may see the Cause they Favor.

Another way of Detecting them, By their Conversation and Behavior.
is from their Conversation, and Behavior. They take up other, Looks, Phrase,
Accent, Habit, Motion, Gesture, then their Neighbors. All which Together, are
but a Certain Idiome, or Propriety, of the Faction.

Further; ye shall see a Statesman, on the sudden, grow more Devout in
Public, then many an honest man is in Private; and Start from his Politiques,
into Cases of Conscience. This Affords matter of Wonder, if not of Question:
but observe him; and if he be more Scrupulous of Obeying the Law in some Cases,
then he is of opposing it in Others, Pronunce him a Iugler.

So much for the Contrivers of Seditions.

Another sort there are of Honester Ill Subjects, An honester sort of Ill
Subjects.
a People, I mean, that Hate the Sedition it self, although they Love the
Occasion of it. Then These, none make a Greater Conscience of Speaking
Reverently of their Sovereign; yet none in show more Careless what they make
Others Think of him. Fiercer declaymers against Rebellion, there are not in the
world; but do they Imagine that it is no sin to Cause, what is so horrid an
Impiety to Commit? They Will say per^hance, They do not Cause it; Yes, yes, there
are that do That is; there are Insatiable Beggars, that such like Leeches, till
they Burst; Asking the very Bread out of the Mouths of Famishing Thousands;
only to add unto their Private Superfluities, or furnish. Ornament for Luxe,
and Vanity. Are not these Persons in a high Degree Accomptable for the Effects
of That Oppression?

If Those that follow Courts, A Ca^eat to (...).
would but Consider, how many Snares beset the Thrones of Princes; what Envy
waits upon their Trayn; how many Spies upon the Actions of their Servants; They
would tread warily. This is not yet to Blame all Courts, but where they are
Vicious, or Corrupt, to show the Desperate Events of those Disorders: whereof a
General Poverty is not the least Considerable; and That inevitably begets a
General Coffeehouse.

But what is all This to a Sedition? Shall People Rebel because they are Poor?
No no, they should not; but what if they will do, what they ought not to do?
[Let no Prince (says the Lord St. Albans) measure the Danger of
Discontentments, by This; whether they be Just, or Unjust: for That were to
Imagine People to be too Reasonable]. So that the Question is not, whether the
Cause can warrant a Commotion; but whether probably it may Provoke one? And
whether the Multitude will not rather Tumult, then Sterve. It is not Here,
Delirant Reges, Plectuntur Achivi -- but on the Contrary; Delirant Achivi,
Plectuntur Reges; The Faults of Servants are Revenged upon the Heads of their
Masters. But to Reason the Matter orderly, and by Degrees, take it Thus.

All men do naturally Covet Power; The Politiques of the Vulg^^.
Partly for their Security; and in Part, for Glory: not considering, that what
Each Individual desires, All cannot enjoy; but finding Themselves Placed by
Nature in a State of Equality, they are apt to Believe, that One man has as
good a Title to Dominion as Another, and from this Levelling opinions proceeds
that Envy which we find Generally in the Common People against their Governors.

Upon the same Grounds, they Contend for Liberty, and since they cannot Rule,
they would at least be Free from the Restreint of Laws and Impositions. But
this must not be, neither.

Why Then, let them but know the Bounds of their Subjection, the Law, by which
they are to be Governed* Yes, That they may, and when they are once enured, and
wonted to the soft yoke of Political Order, and Authority; their further Care
is chiefly Profit, or Pleasure; and to provide Themselves of such Conveniences,
as to man's Life are either Necessary or Delightful, and Here they Rest.

This is the sum of the Vulgar Politiques: Allow the People These Private
Conveniences, and keep but the Priests, and Lawyers, from Prating to them of
Christian Liberty, and Fundamentals; the Generality shall never trouble the
State with Seditions: but he that strips them of their little Livelihood,
rifles a Neast of Hornets. From whence ensues This double Mischief: A Great
deal of Money is drawn into a few hands; and a Great number of People are left
without any at all: Two Hazzards that might pose a wise Prince which rather to
submit to.

As a General Poverty yields the most desperate matter for Sedition, so are the
disorders of a Court the most likely means to produce a General Poverty: and it
is done, by Corruption, Begging, or Non-Payment of Debts.

Corruption is a great Dreyner; The Effects of Corruption in a Court.
for he that Gives must Take; he that Buys, will Sell. But the influence which
Corruption has, upon the Constitution and Morals of a Court, is more Notorious;
especially, if it begin Above; and in a place where the Honester Part is the
Poorer. First, it facilitates the Introducing of a Faction; for he that
designs to make a Party, shall be sure to out bid him that only offers at an
Office. Beside that it makes men knaves in their own Defense; after a dear
Bargain, to lick themselves whole again: and quenches the most Generous
Inclinations, by frustrating the bravest Actions; and conferring Those
Dignities, and Preferments upon unsuitable Persons for Money, which are the
Proper Rewards of Virtue, and Honor. In all these Transactions, the Prince is
sold into the hands of his Enemies.

In short; Court-Beggers.
Corruption does more Immediately expose a Monarch, and Embroyle a Court; but
Inordinate Begging does more Empoverish and distress a People: particularly, if
the Request be preter-Legall, and pinching, either upon Trade, or Tillage: in
which cases the Benefit of a single Person enters into Competition with the
Quiet, and Security of a Nation.

There is an Evil yet behind, Non payment of Debts.
which of all Evils, so trivial in appearance, is (possibly) of the most
fatal, and malicious consequence: and That is, the Non-payment of Debts: which
not only draws upon a Court the most Violent of all Passions; (Envy, and
Hatred) but upon Monarchy it self, a Popular Prejudice.

It Is Dangerous, in regard both of the Quality, and Number of their Creditours;
They are (for the most part) Citizens; Poor, and Many. They lie together in a
Body; meet daily; conferring, and dispersing their Compleints, and Clamours:
they Break at last, and Then they Tumult.

How many Thousand Persons are there in England, that Live, from Hand to Mouth,
only upon the Trades of Cloth, and Ribands? and it is the same, in Utopia. To
Conclude; Pay strikes deep, and takes off, in great measure, That Odium, and
Envy which usually attends the Splendour, Pomp, and Luxury of Courts. A word now
to the Camp.

Sect. IV.
The CAMP.
THe Two Grand Interests of the Soldiery, The Interests of the Soldiery.
are Pay, and Honor; that is such Honor as belongs to them as Swordmen. As
for Instance; it is their Profession not to put up Affronts: They do not love to
have their Underofficers raised over their heads, New-Modelling, or Disbanding
is a Thing they do not like; and a Public disgrace is never to be forgiven.

By Ill Order in These Two Particulars, are commonly occasioned Mutinies, and
Revolts: which become then most perilous when a disobliged General has a Purse
to Engage a Discontented Army. We speak here, of an Army Employed by a Prince
as a Security against his own Subjects, which is quite another Case then
against a Foreign Enemy; for the same Popular and Ambitious Humor, An
Ambitious Commander does better Abroad then at Home.
that in a Commander Abroad, is most Proper, and Necessary, is on the Contrary,
as Dangerous at home. The safety of the State depending only upon the
Insuperable Virtue, and Fidelity of such a Person.

Some Armies we have known to Prove Troublesome, A Haly War i^ a Contrafiction
and to Divide, upon Pretenses of Religion; but, a Holy War is a Contradiction;
and a Story only fit to pass upon Women and Children. Upon the whole, it seems
that an Army, within it self, and without any Separate Interest, may be
troublesome upon These Three Accounts: Either Want of Pay; which causes a
General Mutiny: or Disgrace; which (more Peculiarly reflecting upon such or
such Officers, Troops, or Parties) provokes Animosities, Factions, and
Revolts: or Ambition; which more directly attempts upon the Sovereignty. It may
be also Hazzardous, by reason of some Error in the Constitution of it. That
is; if it be composed of Persons Ill-affected to the Government,
it cannot rationally be expected, that it should labor to Preserve, what it
wishes to Destroy.

But we are treating of Distempers acquired; and rather proceeding from the ill
menage of an Army, then from the first Mis-choyce, or founded in the Judgment
of it. Concerning a Standing-Army, enough is said in the foregoing Chapter: a
word we will add; It is in This Regard, an Affair of a Peevish Quality; that
either a General has too little Power to do his Master's business, or enough
to do his own.

As it is not safe for a Monarch, Hazard not a Rebellion in one Place, for
fear of a Sedition in another.
at any time, to entrust the Chief Officer of an Army, with so much Power, for
fear of a Sedition, as may enable him to move a Rebellion: so is it a work of
great Skill, and Difficulty, so dexterously to Resume, or Balance that
overgrown Power, as to bring in under Command, without discovering such a
Jealousy, as may Provoke him to abuse it. Let This suffice, as to the
Disorders of an Army within it self.

Another Hazard is, lest it be Corrupted into a Dependence, upon some other
Interest, into which Defection, it may be partly Driven by the Neglect, or
Unkindnesse of the Prince, and partly Drawn by the Allurements of Profit, and
Reward.

Having spoken of the Mischief a Seditious Army may Do; very Briefly let us
behold what mischiefs a Vicious, and undisciplined Army may Cause.

There never fails to be an Opposition betwixt the Civil, and the Military
Power; and in like manner betwixt the People, and the Soldiery. Whom nothing
else can Reconcile but downright Force, and Necessity. So that the fairest
State of a Nation overaw'd by an Army of their own Countrymen, is an extorted
Patience, accompanied with a Readiness to embrace any opportunity of working
their Deliverance.

If at the best, the bare appearance of a Force be so Generally distastful;
what Havoc will not the Licentious abuse of it Cause in a Kingdom? Especially
in Populous Towns where One Affront Exasperates a Million, and it is not two
hours work to destroy an Army.

A. Royal Guard is of another Quality; The Constitution of a Guard Royal.
and such it ought to before Choice and Number as both suitable to the Charge
they undertake, for the Safety of That Sacred Person, and sufficient to the
Execution of it.

Sect. V.
The CITY.
BY the City, we intend the Metropolis of a Kingdom; which in many Respects,
challenges a Place and Consideration in This Chapter of Seditions;
Particularly, in Regard of Inclination and Power.

There is not (Generally speaking) so fair an Intelligence betwixt the Court,
Court and City seldom agree.
and City, as for the Common Good of Both were to be wished: and This proceeds
Chiefly from a Pride of Blood, The Reason of it.
on the One side, and of Wealth, on the Other; breeding a mutual Envy between
them.

This Envy, by degrees, boyles up to an Animosity, and Then, Tales are Carried
to the Monarch, of the insolence of the Citizens; and Stories, on the other
side, to the People, of the Height, and Excesses of the Court: and Here Is the
Embryo of a Sedition. From Hence, each Party enters into a Cross Contrivement.
These, how to tame the Boldness of the One; and Those, how to supplant the
Greatness of the Other: Both equally unmindful of their Inseparable Concerns:
the Citizen, that he holds his Charter of the Bounty of his Prince; and the
Courtier, that it is a flourishing Trade that makes a Flourishing Empire. By
These Heats, is a City-Humour against the Court, improved into a Popular
Distemper against the King: and here is the Inclination of a Disordered City.

As to their Power; The Power of a City.
they have Men, Money, and Arms, at an houre's warning; the very Readynesse of
which Provision makes it worth double the Proportion. Their Correspondencies
are Commonly strong, and Firm; and their dependencies Numerous: for the
Pretense, being Trade, and Liberty, books in all Places of the same Interest,
to the same Faction: Beside That General device, (seeming Religion) that stamps
the Cause, and Prints a GOD WITH US upon it. In fine; a Potent, and a Peevish
City is a shrewd Enemy.

Now to the Manner of Actuting Those Seditious Inclinations, and Emproving These
Abilities to do Mischief.

Their first work is to Possess the Vulgar with This Notion, The Manner of
Preparing the People for Sedition.
that in some Cases the Monarch is limited, and the Subject free: intending,
that the Prince is bounded by the Law, and that the People are at Liberty,
where the Law is silent; and so likewise in points of Conscience. (by which
Argument, the People Govern, where there is no express Law, and the King only
where there is.)

Taking it once for Granted, that the Prince is Limited by the Law; (which
Conscientiously he is; for in observing the Law, A Seditious Principle.
he does but keep his own word) They presently Conclude, that if the King
transgress the Rule of his Power, he forfeits the Right of it: and that for
such a Violation, he is accomptable to the People, for whose Behoof the Law
was made. This is a Specious, but a Poisonous Inference, and rather adapted to
a Mutinous Interest, then to a Peaceable, and candid Reason.

Let a Transgression be supposed; are there any Laws Paenal upon the Monarch?
But there are none that warrant Tyranny. Right; but there are some yet that
forbid Rebellion; and (without questioning the Cause) that declare all
Violences whatsoever, upon the Person, or Authority of the King, to be Crimina
Laesae Majestatis, or Treason. Are there any Laws now on the Other side, that
depose Kings for Maladministration? If none, the Law being Peremptorily
against the One, and only not for the Other: The King only Accomptable to God,
and the People to the King.
what does it, but constitute the Subject, in all cases, accomptable for his
Resistance, to the Sovereign; and Leave the Supreme Magistrate, in all cases,
to answer for his Mis-government to Almighty God? But let the Controversy
pass, for we are not here so much to enter into the True State Matters, as to
deliver their Appearances.

And now is the time to bring the Faylings, Cu^sed be the Sons of Ch^m.
and Misfortunes of the Prince upon the Stage; and by exposing him Naked
before the Multitude, to make his Person Cheap, and his Government Odious to
his People. Which they Effect, by certain Oblique Discourses from the Press,
and Pulpit; by Lamentable Petitions, craving Deliverance from such and such
Distresses of Estate, or Conscience: and These they Print, and Publish;
converting their (pretended) supplications for Relief, into bitter
Remonstrances of the Cruelty and Injustice of their Rulers.

By These wiles, are the Vulgar drawn to a dislike of Monarchy; and That Is the
Queue to a discourse of the Advantages of a Popular Government. (the next step
to the Design of introducing it) There Is none of This or That they cry) at
Amsterdam: -- and in short; from these Grudgings of Mutiny; These Grumblings
against Authority, they slide Insensibly into direct, and open Practices
against it. Alas! what are These Motions,
but the sparkling of a Popular Disposition, now in the Act of Kindling; which
only wants a little Blowing of the Cole, to Puff up all into a Flame?

From the Leading, and Preparatory Motives to Sedition, now to the more
Immediate and Enflaming Causes of it: which are reducible either to Religion,
Oppression, Privileges, or Poverty.

Subsection I.
Seditions which concern Religion.
THose Seditions which concern Religion, Religious Sedion, either referring to
Haeresie, or Schism.
referr either to Doctrine, or Discipline: Haeresie, or Schism. The Former, is
a Strife (as they say) for a better, or a worse: a Contest betwixt the
Persuasion of the People, and the Religion of the Government, in matter of
Faith; and tending either to Overthrow the One, or to Establish the Other. In
This Case, the People, may be in the Right, as to the Opinion, but never so as
to justify the Practice* for Christianity does not dissolve the Order of
Society. To Obey God, rather then Man, is Well, Let us obey him then; in not
Resisting Those Powers to which his Ordinance has Subjected us.

Touching This, (with the Brethren's Leave) I take it to be the more
Venial-Mortal Sin of the Two. That is; Rebellion upon a point of Heresy, more
Pardonable, then That from Schism.
the Rebellion of Haeresie, is less unpardonable, than That of Schism: in
regard first, that the Subject of the Difference is a matter of greater Import:
Secondly, it is not Impossible, but the Mispersuasion may be founded upon
Invincible Ignorance --. I do not say that I had rather be an Arrian, then a
Calvinist; but I averr, that he is the foulest Rebel, that for the Slightest
Cause, upon the Least Provocation, and against the Clearest-Light, Murders his
Sovereign.

Those Seditions, Seditions arising from Schism.
which are moved upon account of Schism, are commonly a combination of Many
against One; of Error against Truth: and a Design, that strikes as well at the
Civil Power, as the Ecclesiastic.

This being a Subject which both in the first Section of This Chapter, and
Elsewhere, is sufficiently discoursed upon; we shall rather address our
selves to the Means (Peculiar to a City) of Comforting, The Means of provoking
Sedition.
and ayding these unquiet agitations, as more properly the Business of our
present Argument.

Great Towns have first the Advantage of great Numbers of People, The
Advantages of Great Towns for Seditions.
within a Small Compass of Place; where, with much Ease, and Privacy; Those of
the Faction may hold their full, and frequent Meetings; Debate, Contrive, nay,
and Execute, with all Convenience. For when the Plot is Laid; the Manner, and
the Time, Appointed: there is no more trouble for the Rendezvons; the Party's
Lodged already, the Town it self being the most Commodious Quarter. It Is in
respect of These favorable concurrences, that men of Turbulent, and Factious
Spirits, rather make choice of Populous Cities to Practice in.

Another Hazard may arise from the Temper of the Inhabitants, as well, as from
the Condition of the Place; and from the very Humor, and application of the
Women, in a notion distinct from That of the Men.

From the Temper of the Inhabitants; Cities are inclinable to Seditions, from
the Temper of the Inhabitants.
first, as partaking usually of the Leaven of their Correspondents; whom we
find very often, both Famous for Trade, and Notorious for Schism. (But Men are
Generally so Good-natured, as to think well of any Religion they Thrive under.)

Further; their Employment being Traffic, or Negotiating for Benefit; and
their Profession being to Buy as Cheap as they can, and to Sell, as Dear:
without any measure between the Risque, or Disbursment; and the Profit: they
are commonly better Accomptants, then Casuists; and will rather stretch their
Religion to their Interest, then shrink their Interest to their Religion.

They have again, so superstitious a Veneration for the Justice of Paying Money
upon the Precise Hour; that they can very hardly believe any man to be of the
right Religion, that Breaks his Day. And observe it, let a Prince run himself
deep in Debt, to his Imperial City, they shall not so much Glamour at him for
an ill Play Master,
as upon a Fit of Holiness, suspect him for an Haretique, or Idolater:
Proposing a Tumult, as the ready way to Pay themselves; and That I reckon as
the first step into a Rebellion.

Now, how The Women come to be concerned, That first: and Then; why the
City-Dames more then Other?

It is the Policy of all Cunning Innovatours, when they would put a Trick upon
the world in matter of Religion, Religious Innovatours begin with Women.
which they desire may be Received with Passion, recommended with Zeal, and
Dispersed with Diligence, to begin (with the stronger Sex, though the Weaker
Vessel) that excellent Creature* Woman. And This Course they take, out of
These Considerations.

First, Four Reasons why.
as That Sex is Naturally scrupulous, and Devotion; and so, more susceptible of
delusive Impressions, that bear a face of Piety.

Secondly, as it is too Innocent, to suspect a Deceit, and too Oredulous, to
Examine it; so is it probably not crafty enough to Discover it.

are supposed, not only to Entertein what they Like, with more Earnestness of
Affection, but also to impart what they know, with a Greater Freedom of
Communication: which proceeds from a Particulr propensity in That Gracious Sex,
to enter into a strict Intelligence, concerning Matters Curious, and Novell.

Fourthly, They are as well the Best Advocates, as the Freest Publishers. A
Zealous Sister.
Get them but once engaged, and at next word all their Children are to be
taught Shorthand, and new Catechisms; the Table shall be bl^^t in a Tune; not
the Heel of a Lark; no, not so much as a Prune in the White-Broth, shall escape
without a Particular Benediction. And Then, And her Confessor.
the Wrought Cushion; the Damask Napkin; the Best Room, and the First Cut at
the Table, are reserved for the Adored Genius of the Family. The Good Man of
the House, shall not presume to Close his Eyes, without an Opiate, (to make it
English) according to the Directory; and when he opens them again, next day,
it is odds, he finds his wakefull Bedfellow Shifting her Linen, and Preparing
for a Mornings Exercise. This Reverend Wight has commonly some Skill in
Physique too; enough to Comfort a Professing Sister, that Keeps her Bed, (for
grief no doubt) because her Lord (perhaps) is called aside by State, or
Business.

Nor does The Pious Matron Confine her Bounteous Dispensations within the
Circle of her Private Family; but with an Overflowing Charity, reaches a
helping hand to all the Members of the Distressed Brotherhood; and (like a
Christian to the very Letter) Lays every thing in Common. These are the Early
and Late Advocates; the warm Sollicitresses; What Husband would not Glory to
see his Wife, and Fortune so disposed of?

Let not some few Mistakes persuade the world yet,
that Woman is [not,] of all Creatures, the most accomplished, and the best
disposed to the End she was made for.

That Women are (in General) the fittest Agents of all Others, for a Religious
Error, to me seems past a Question:
Now; why a City-Dame, is for That Purpose, the fittest Instrument even of all
Sorts of Women?

First,
her Employment's Little; she keeps much at Home; and her dead Leisures, are,
beyond doubt, not absolutely Thoughtless. Is not her Mixture Sociable, as That
of other Mortals? Phansy her Solitary Enterteynment now. Does not she wish to
see, and to be seen, as well as other Women? Nay, does she not Contrive too,
how to Compass it? Plays there are none perhaps, at hand; Festivals come but
seldom.

While she is Thus casting, How and How; in Steps the Tempter; dreams out an
Hour or Two in Prologue, and at last, happily hits her Humor; asks her, what
Church she goes to? and invites her to a Lecture. Away she goes; enters her
self a Member of his Congregation; A Shee-Proselyte.
never to be Reclaimed, and so Farewell she. Look to your Wives, my Masters;
and Remember BAGSHAW.

After all This, let me profess, I take the better sort of Citizens, for an
Intelligent, Frank, and Sober People; nor do I find more Prudence, Modesty,
Virtue, then under That Denomination. Yet is it not to be Expected, that so
Vast a Multitude should be without some Loose Examples? and I divide the Blame,
even There too, betwixt an Idle Course of Life, and the Alluring Artifice of
their Seducers. But this I stick to: A Schismatical Clergy infects the Women;
They, the City; and a Schismatical City destroys a Kingdom.


Subsection II.
Oppression.
OPpression provokes Sedition, many ways; and many ways it is Procured, even
by the most Seditious Themselves; with Express end, that it may provoke
Sedition.

The Haughty, Oppression causes Sedition.
and Imperious Rudeness of a Churlish Officer, that without either Proof, or
Hearing, Law, or Reason, hand over head Condemns and Punishes: (only perchance
to Vaunt his Power,) This is a Boldness, that Reflects upon the Safety and the
Honor of his Master; rendering both the Minister hated, and the Prince
suspected.

Unlimitted Protections, Irregular and Heavy Taxes, Billetting and
Free-quartering of Soldiers; The Denial of Equal Right, etc. -- Stir up
Seditious Humors in a City. But These are downright Provocations.

There are that go a cleanlyer way to work, A Presbyterian Trick.
that squeeze the People, under Color of serving the King; winding up the Pin
of Authority, till they Crack the very strings, by which That, and Subjection
are tacked together. They undo all, by Overdoing, and under an humble show of
holding the Stirrup, till the Prince seats himself, they draw so hard they turn
the Saddle: or if he needs a Lift to help him Up, they will give him one, but
such a One, shall cast him Over.

In fine; The Politic Hypocrite.
what ever may be Plausible for the present; fatal in the Consequence; wherein
the Promoters may either seem Innocent, or not appear at all; and a Public
Obloquy rest upon the Sovereign; This is a Device to do Their Business.

Is there any Colorable fear of a Sedition? Their Counsel will be then, to
raise such a Force, as in all likelihood will cause a Rebellion. Are the
Prince his Coffers full? Occasions will be sought to Empty Them; by Breaking
with One Interest, wedding Another. A Thousand Remedies there are for That
Sur-charge of Treasure. When they have drawn the Monarch dry, they know he must
be resupply'd; and they known what a Peevish task it is, to six Regality upon a
new Bottom.

As their first Aim was to Provoke Expense, that he might Want; it will be now
Their work, in such manner to solicit his Supply, that he shall suffer more by
the ill Method of it, then Gain by the Recruit. Briefly, if they can Effect,
that what Themselves call a Supply, the Generality may understand to be an
Oppression (and so They wish it Understood) The City Clamours first; and
Popular Tumults, are but the Forlorn to a Rebellion.

Not that either Force, Loyalty is Indispensable.
or Cruelty, can ever discharge a Subject of his Allegiance: Nay, should his
Prince command one of his Arms for Dogs-meat; he were a Traitor, should he
yet refuse to serve his Master with the other.

Subsection III.
Privileges.
A Third Particular of no small Force upon the Genius of a City, Citizens are
Tender of their Privileges.
is what concerns their Privileges; whereof they Principally are Tender. First,
in points of Trade, and Commerce: Secondly, in Affairs of Order, and Custom,
relating to the Counsel, and Government of the City: Thirdly, in Matters of
Personal Freedom, and Advantage.

Any Empeachment in the Point of Trade, Principally in point of Trade.
they take heynously; as Disappointing at once, the very Purpose of their
Incorporations, the Hopes of their Well-being; and the main Business of their
Lives. In This Respect, they are many times so Delicate, as not to distinguish
between Benefits of Grace, and Rights of Privileges clayming a Title to Those
Advantages which they hold only by Favor.

They are likewise Subject to forget, Their immunities are Precarious.
that even their clearest Immunities are but Dependent, and Precarious: and
they had need be minded, that to believe them Other, is to Forfeit them. For it
implies a Disacknowledgment of the Sovereign Power; which Mistake being once
set afoot, obliges the Prince to Resume, for the Safety of the whole, such
Indulgences as were only Granted for the behoof of a Part. To This he is Tied
by evident Reason of State, and by Political Equity; both as a Wise Prince, and
as a Pater Patriae, a Father of his Country. Wherefore away with These Dividing
Niceties, Neither Prince nor People can be secure but by Agreement.
since neither Prince, nor Peapli^ can be Secure, but by Agreement. What can a
Single Monarch do without the Obedience, Love, and Service of his People? Or
what becomes of a Distracted Multitude, without a Head to Govern Their
Confussions? But This (in the words of a most Ingenious Person) is a Text upon
which the Wise part of the world has used in vain to Preach to the Fools.

Since so it is, that the Vulgar will neither be Taught by Experience, nor
persuaded by Renson, we are to take for Granted, that some Grievances lead to
Seditions, almost as Orderly, as Natural Causes to their Effects, the Multitude
ever siding with Interest, against Virtue.


The Liberty of Exporting Native Commodities raw, and unwrought; and of
Importing (possibly) the same Materials in Manufacture, is a Matter of Evil
Relish, and of Dangerous Consequence. So likewise is the Employment of
Strangers, where the Natives want Work; and the advancing of Foreign Trade, to
the Sterving of it at home.

Concerning the Other Two Particulars, before mentioned, the One Relating to
the Frame of a City-Government, the Other, to their Personal Privileges; it
shall suffice to Note, that an Encroachment upon either of them, Endangers a
Sedition.

Subsection IV.
Poverty.
THe Last, Poverty an Irresistible Incentive to Sedition.
and the most Irresistible incentive to Sedition in a City, is Poverty. That
is, a Poverty proceeding from Misgovernment. Not but that Want, upon what
account soever is bad enough: Whether from Dearth, Losses by Fire, or Storm;
Piracies, Banquerupts; the Ravages of War, etc. -- Yet Here, there is something
in the Fate, the Accident, or Manner, of the Calamity, to allay the Anguish of
it. Men Quarrel not with Providence for ill Seasons; nor with the Winds, the
Waves, or Flames, because of Wracks, or Conflagrations. To suffer by Pirates,
or Banquerupts, is but the Chance of Traffic, and the Extremities of War are
Common Injuries. The most Dangerous Poverty.
But where a Pinching Poverty Seizes a Populous City, and from a Cause too
that is within the Reach of Malice, or Revenge; That State's concerned betimes
to look to the Disorder.

The Immediate Cause of This Necessity among the Common sort is want of Work,
which proceeds from the decay of Trade, arising chiefly from a General Scarcity
of Money; which may be Imputed to One or more, of These Ensuing Reasons.

First, Corruption the Cause of Scarcity.
The Insatiate Corruption of Rapacious, and Great Officers; in whose Coffers,
as in the Grave, Monyes are rather Buried, then laid up. Nay, as in Hell it
self (I might have said) for they are as Bottomless; and of the Treasure that
lies There Condemned, the Doom's almost as Irreversible. It Is as the Fox
Observed to the A word used in Westminster School, when a Boy Counterfeits
Sick.
Aegroting Lion -- Me Vestigia terrent,
Omnia te Adversum spectantia, Nulla Retrorsum.
I can Trace Many, Forward, but None Back.

These Private Hoards cannot choose but produce a Public Penury, Private
Hoards breed Public Penury.
when That Wealth, which would suffice to Employ, and Relieve Thousands, that
either Beg for want of Work, or Sterve for want of Bread; is drawn into so
narrow a Compass. And yet in This supposed Extremity of Affairs, I make a
Doubt, whether is more Miserable, the Needy, or the Oppressor?

Can any Composition more certainly destroy a Nation, The Composition of Wicked
Ministers of State.
then a Concurrence of Power, Pride, Avarice, and Injustice, in the same
Persons? But Then again, when the Storm comes; These are the Ionasses, that by
the Rabble will be first cast Over-bord, to save the Vess^ll. And This they
cannot but forethink, and Tremble at; at least, if ever they get Leisure for a
Sober Thought. And let them Look which way they Please; The Misery of them.
Backward, Forward, Round about, Upward, Downward, Inward, they are beset with
Objects of Terror, and self-affrighted, from the Glass of their own
Consciences.

Behind them, If either they look Back;
they see dreadful Presidents of Corrupt Ministers, thrown from their Slippery,
and ill-menaged State of Greatness: Torn by their Enemies; scarce Pitty'd by
their Friends; the Mirth of their own Creatures, and the mere Mockery of Those
that Raised them.

Forward, Forward;
they find Themselves upon a Precipice, and in great hazard to increase the
Number of those sad Presidents.

If they look Round about them, Round about;
they are Encompassed with the Cries of Widows, and of Orphans; whose Husbands,
or whose Fathers, lost their Lives, in the Defense (perhaps) of their Prince,
and Country. With These, are Mingled the Faint Gr^ans of Sterving Wretches in
their Last Ag^nies, whose Modesty chose rather to Die silent, then Compleining;
and to abide the worst Effects o^ Want, rather then tell the more Intolerable
Story of it. But This to Them, is not so much, as to perceive Themselves at Bay
amids a Snarling Multitude.

In short; Above them;
Above them, there is an All-seeing Eye, an Unchangeable Decree, and an
Incorruptible Judge, that Over-looks, B^low; or within them.
and Threatens Them. Below them, Hell: (or rather it is Within Them; an Accusing
Conscience) If This be their Prospect, how Deplorable is their Condition!

Are not Their Pillows stuffed with Thorns? The Sollic^tous estate of the
Guilty.
Or when they Venture at a Nap, do they not Dream of Robberies, and Seditions?
Whom, or What do they not fear? Where is it they think Themselves Secure? Is not
Their Table Spread with Snares? Does not Every Bribe look like a Bait; Every
Servant, like a Spy; Every Strange Face, like somewhat that is worse? And what
are their Near Friends, but either Conscious Partakers, or Dangerous, and
Suspected Witnesses? They find Themselves Arraigned by the Preacher; Condemned
by the Judge; and Strangled by the Executioner: For being Guilty of the Crime,
and Worthy of the Punishment, They cannot but Apply the Process to Themselves,
and in Imagination, bear the Malefactor Company, even from the Pulpit, to the
Gibbet.

Add to all This, the Sting of an Incessant, Restless Jealousy. Not a Look,
Whisper, Hint, or Action, but they suspect Themselves the Subject of it. The
Holy Text it self, where it Reproves Their Sins, Sounds like a Libell to Them.
Nay, were This silly Innocent Description of them, but in a Tongue which any
man Concerned could understand; some of Their Ears would Tingle at it.

A General Scarcity of Money, Taxes may cause, or occasion a Scarcity diverse
ways.
may, in the Second Place, arise from Taxes, and That either Immediately, in
Respect of the Burden; or Consequentially, in respect of the Occasion; the
Inequality; the Manner of Imposing, or Levying Them; or the Subject Matter it
self of the Tax.

Touching the Burden, and Occasion; It Properly belongs to Those in Power to
Judge of it, as well how much, as to what end? So in the Rest, The People are
likewise to Subject Themselves to such Determinations as their Superiors hold
Convenient. Only in case of an Undue Authority Imposing, or some Illegal Course
of Levying Taxes, there may be some Allowances; which to proportion to their
Various Instances, is neither for This Place, nor for my Meaning.

That Subjects are to Obey Lawful Commands, Subjects are to Obey, without
Disputing.
without disputing the Reasons of Them, is beyond Question. Yet is it not in the
Power of Humane Nature, to keep men from Surmising, and from Guessing at them.
We Will Grant ye too, that in some Cases, some People, will in some Sort, do
some Things as they ought to do. Yet we are where we were; that is, they will
be Guessing still.

If Taxes follow quicker, and run higher then Ordinary; and This too, when a
Nation's Poor already; that it is the way to make it Poorer, I think's no
Secret: for sure, the More men part with, the Less they have Remaining. At
first; Good God! they cry: so much? and the next Question's, Why? ('It Is true,
they should not Ask, but who can hinder them?)

Is it for the Honor or Safety of the Prince? It Is Consequently for the
Public Good;
and he deserves to be expelled Humane Society, that narrowly prefers his
Little dirty Interest, before so Sacred, and so great a Benefit.

But are These Levies to be so Employed? Who Gathers? Who Receives? or, Who
Disposes of them? Are they not Shared, or at least so Reduced by Private hands;
that not a Twenty'th Penny goes to the Public? Are they not for some other
Purpose? (no matter what.) All This is Nothing to the Subjects Right, either of
Enquiry, or Refusal. Yet These Miscariages of the Common Treasure make People
wary, and provide betimes for fear of Troubles. Some Call In Their Monyes;
Others will Let none out: a Third sort, (that dare not stand the Change they
fear) dispose of Theirs Abroad: and This may pass for another Cause of a
General Scarcity of Money.

A Third, is the Inequality of Taxes; the Overpressing of any One Party. As if
the Burden lies heavyer upon the City, then Country; upon the Gentry, then
Yeomanry, etc. -- If upon the City, they call it Spite; if upon the Country,
Oppression. And in fine; fall the Disproportion where it fall can, it breeds
ill blood: for That Weight breaks the Back of any One Interest, which evenly
disposed, would seem no heavy Load, upon the Shoulders of All. Far quam
sortem patiuntur Omnes, Nemo recusat. The Consequence of This Inequality, is a
General Ruin, but piecemeal, and One Part after Another.

Touching the Manner of Imposing, or Levying, we waive That; and pass to the
Subject Matter of the Tax. (A point (how little soever regarded) scarce less
Considerable then the Total Amount of it.)

If the Device be Novell; the People shy and ticklish: if there be Factions
Stirring, and the Prince not absolutely Master, better raise Thrice the Value
in the Rode of Levyes, then hazard the Experiment of a By-way. Note.
It Is Machiavell's advice concerning Sanguinary Cruelties; where Cruelty is
Necessary, do it at once; or at least, seldom as possible. But then be sure to
follow it with Frequent Acts of Clemency; by which Means, you shall be feared
for your Resolution, and beloved for your Goodnature: whereas a Little, and
Often, Terrifies Less, and Disquiets people much more, imprinting Jealousies
of further Inconveniences; so that they know not what to Trust to.

Most Certain it is, that as Many petty Injuries deface the Impression of One
Great Benefit; so in like manner do Many slight Benefits deface the Impression
of One Great Injury; the Last Act sinking deepest. For it is from Thence, Men
Measure their expectation of the Future; and as they look for Good, or Bad,
they are Pea^eable or Troublesome.

Wherefore, as it is Duty to do Well always, so it is Wisdom to do Well Last;
Leave no Marque standing to remember a Discourtesie by.
and where a Pressure cannot be avoided, not to leave standing (so near as may
be) any Memorial of it: Least ^When your Children shall ask their Father in
time to come, saying, What mean you by these Stones? Josh. 4. 6.
etc. --

The ways of Supplying Princes are Various, according to their Several
Interests, Practices, Powers, and Constitutions. Not to lose my self in
Particulars, One General shall serve for all.

It behooves a State to be very wary, how they Relieve a Present need upon the
Foundation of a Lasting Inconvenience for though in some Extremities, there is
no Choice; yet it very rarely happens, that a Prince is the Better for the
Money, where he is the worse for the President. Sir Thomas Row in a Speech at
the Counsell-Table, 1640. (directed to the dashing of a Project, tending to the
Enfeebling of the Quoyne (as he Phrases it) Cites the Lord Treasurer Burleigh,
and Sir Thomas Smith, giving Their Opinion to Queen Elizabeth; in These words:
That it was not the short end of Wits, nor starting holes of Devises, that can
susteyn the expense of a Monarchy, but sound and solid courses. H^race his [Rem
facias, Rem, -- Si possis, Recte, si non, quocunque modo Rem] will not serve
the turn.

It Is sharply said of Sir Francis Bacon; Shiftings passes for Wisdom.
[That the Wisdom of all These Latter Times in Princes Affairs, is rather fine
Deliveries, and Shifting of Dangers and Mischiefs, when they are near; than
solid and grounded Courses to keep them aloof] (but says he again) [It is the
Solaecism of Power, to think to Command the End, and yet not to endure the
Mean.] These are the Sleights, the Ill-husbandry of Government: through which
mistakes, insensibly, a Great Revenue moulders away, and yet the State never
out of Debt.

Excessive Building is another Cause of General Scarcity; Excessive Building.
for it leaves the Country too Thin, and over-peoples the City: Enhansing the
Rate, and consuming the Means of Living. It wastes the Nobility and Gentry; It
Empoverishes also, and Disobliges the Populacy: (All that is got in the
Country, being spent in the City) beside the Hazzardous disproportion, betwixt
the Head and the Body.

One Reason of This Scarcity, may be from some Defect in the Law it self: as
where sufficient Provision is not made for strict, and Peremptory payment upon
Bond. Men will not part freely with their Money, where they may be put off by
Shifts and Delays, and driven to a Vexatious S^it to get it In again.

Another great Inconvenience proceeds from a General Grasping a^ more Trade
then they can Master: which causes many Faylings one upon the Neck of another.

To what is already said, Knavery of ^radesmen.
(not to be endless) we will only add Two Causes more. The One, is the deceit,
and Knavery of Artizans, and Tradesmen; who for a Private Gain betray the
Interest of the Public; and invert the Balance of Trade, by such Abusive
Manufactures, as are neither Saleable abroad, nor Serviceable at Home, which
both Necessitates the Importation of Foreign Commodities, and hinders the
Issue of Native: beside the Treble Charge; their Dearnesse, and their
little-Usefulnesse considered.

We shall Conclude with Pride: Pride.
which were it in nothing else but what is expended upon Guildings, Gold and
Silver Lace, and Foreign Curiosities of Needle Work, would not be
inconsiderable. But where it is General, and extends both to all sorts of
Superfluities, and all Degrees of Persons; That City goes by the Post to Ruin:
for Pride, is not only the Forerunner of Destruction, and the Cause of it; but
the Loud, and Crying Provoker of it.

Sect. VI.
The COUNTRY.
THat Interest which contributes the Least to a Sedition, and suffers the most
by it, is That of the Country: which is properly comprised under Tillage, and
Pasture. For I reckon all Populou^ Places, (whether Towns or Villages) that
subsist by steady Traffic, or Handy-crafts, to be no other then Dependencies
upon the Metropolis; which is usually, That in Proportion to the Kingdom, which
the Principal City, of every Province, is to the Other Parts of it.

This Interest seldom or never leads a Sedition upon it is own Account; and
when it does engage, under Protection possibly of the next strong Hold, or in
favor of some neighboring, and Seditious Market Town, we do not find much
hurt the Countryman does, so long as the Sword, and Plough are menaged by the
same Hand. If they forsake their Husbandry, and turn Soldiers; they fall
under another Notion. The Co^ntry is sure to be undone by a Wa^r.
But in short; let the Cause be what it will, and the event of a War what it
can; They are sure to be undone by it: wherefore They may well be Friends to
Peace, to whom War is so great an Enemy.

Is there a War commenced? The Fruits of it.
Their Cariages must wait upon the Army, Their Provisions feed them: Their
Persons attend them, yes, and Their Contribution Pay Them. Their Teams must
serve the State; Their Wives, and Girls, the Soldiery: They must be Mounting
Dragoons, when they should be Plowing. Lugging their Beans and Bacon to the
Head-Quarter, when they should be Sowing: and at last, scarce a Lame Jade to
get in that little Harvest, which the wild Troops have left them: Their Cattle
are Driven away by one Party to day, Their Corn taken by another to Morrow, and
when they are Thoroughly Plundered, because they had something; they must
afterward expect to be Beaten too, because they have Nothing.

Are not These fair Encouragements to make Husbandmen Seditious? And ye^, This
Interest is several ways made use of to Promote Sedition. Particularly, by
Three sorts of People; The Discontented Nobleman; the Rich Churl; the Stiff,
and Contentious Free-born-Subject.

A Great Person may become Weary of the Court, A Discontented Nobleman.
and withdraw into the Country, out of diverse unquiet Considerations: Out of
Ambition, Pride, or Revenge.

If his Trouble be Ambition, Ambition.
his Course is to strengthen himself by Popularity, and make a Party, by
spending his Revenue in a Bountiful, and Open Hospitality upon the People:
which is the most Winning and the most spreading of all Obligations. His Iades,
his Kites, his Currs, are free to all comers: his Family is the whole World;
and his Companions are the Wits, and the best of Good-fellowes.

If his Retirement be out of Pride as choosing rather to be the first Person in
the Country, Pride.
then the Second or Third at Court: His business is Popularity too, though
perhaps not Aiming so high (for there are a sort of People, insufferably
haughty in their Looks, Garb, and Language; that have not Courage enough to be
Ambitious) This Man's attended by the best Parasites that are to be had for
Money.

The Third Distemper is Revenge; R^venge.
and That Is the worst of the Three: In Ambition, there is somewhat that is Noble.
Pride indeed, is a Base, and Abject Vice, (that is; a Cowardly ^ Pride: Nay
it is at best, but a Simple Sin) But Revenge is Black, and Diabolical. Let it
proceed whence it will. Whether from some Affront, Repulse, Neglect; Nay, a Wry
Look, or a Mistaken Hint raises this Devil.

This is a Humor now of another Complexion: Morose, Unpleasant, and rather
watchful to Improve an Opportunity of Mischief, then Laborious to prepare it.
In the House of a Person haunted with ^his Fury, you shall find Throngs of
Silenced Ministers* Discharged Officers; Crop-eard Schismatiques; Broken
Citizens, etc.

These are the Dangerous Malcontents, whose Differing Inclinations of Temper
are no hinderance to their Unity of Design, where the Safety of the Prince and
Government is the Question.

Next to This Discontented Nobleman, The Rich Chu^le.
Follows the Rich Churl: which is a Creature, that opposing Wealth to Dignity,
becomes the Head of the People, for his Sauciness of bearing up against the
^^wer, and Nobility of the Court. It is scarce to be Imagined, The Interest of
This Chuff in a Popular Scuffle; especially, if he has gotten his Estate by a
Rustical, and ^lodding Industry: for Then the Vulgar Reckon him as One of their
own Rank, and support him, as the Grace, and Dignity of their Order.

We come now to the Stiff, The Contentious Free born^Subject.
and Contentious Freeborn Subject: the Queintest, and the Sharpest Youth of
the Three. He Will tell ye to a hair, upon what Point, Prerogative becomes
Tyranny: How far a Subject may promote a Rebellion, and yet be honest himself,
and Cleave the very Atome, that divides the Rights of King and Subject. Does
any Minister of State, or Justice pass his Commission, but the tenth part of a
Scruple? he cries, It Is Arbitrary, Illegal, and an Encroachment upon the
Birthright of a Freeborn People. Let him be Questioned, and the Matter
Scanned, here is his Dilemma. Either by Carrying the Cause, he Iustifies, and
Puffs up the People; or by Suffering for it, he Enrages them: but still
Obliging them both ways; the One way as their Champion, and the Other, as
their Martyr.

Upon the Sum of the Matter, That Government must be Carried very even, which
These Instruments, in Combination, shall not be able to discompose.

Touching the Common Sort; it is so little it their Power to Embroyle a
Kingdom, and so much less their Interest to do it, that This Little is enough
said concerning Them; setting aside the Influence they have upon the Subject we
are now entering upon.

Sect. VII.
The Body Representative.
THe Seventh and Last Interest we are to Treat of, is the Body Representative,
which is but One Grand Interest made up of all the Rest; and as the Whole
stands well, or ill-affected to the Government, so commonly does That. Yet it
falls out sometime, that the Diligence, and Stickling of a Faction gets the
Start of a General Inclination. It would ask an Age, to reckon up all the
Inconveniences which may arrive from the Evil Composition of This Assembly:
but so strict an Account will not be Necessary, in regard that the Prince may,
at his Pleasure, Remedy all, by Dissolving them.

One great Defect, is that in many places they have no Stated Rule how far
their Cognizance extends; No Measure of their Privileges:
through which Default, more Time is spent, and too too often, more Passion
Stirred, about the bounds of Their Authority, then the main Business of their
Meeting. Beside the desperate Influence of This Mysterious Incertainty, upon
the Prince, and Public: under which Color, nothing so Seditious, but it may
both be Introduced and Protected. Suppose a Motion in the Assembly directly
against the Crown: The Prince takes Notice of it; and demands Reason for it.
Is It not a fine Reply, that to deny Liberty of Speech; to take Notice of any
Thing in Debate; to Question any One Member without the Leave of the Rest, is a
Breach of Privilege.

The Representative we here speak of, answers the nearest of any) to the House
of Commons in England; which Resemblance will much facilitate the task we are
now upon, having only to look back into the History of Charles the Martyr, to
find the Greatest Mischiefs, and the Foulest Crimes which such a Convention in
disorder may be capable of: not meddling with the Names of Persons, but
contenting our selves to discover the Arts, Grounds, and Occasions of
Seditions, without reproaching the Authors of them.

The Dangerous Mixture of a Representative, The Dangerous mixture of a
Representative.
we may divide into These Three Parties. The Designers of Mischief; tho
Permitters of it; and the Incompetent Judges of it: whose faylings, are either
of Commission, Omission, or Ignorance.

To begin with the First. The Designing Party.
The Designers are either the Ambitious Heads of the Faction, that aim at
Power, as well as Profit, in the Subversion of the Government; or such
Dependencyes, as they can Engage by Menace, Flattery, fair Pretenses; Money, or
Preferment. These in their Several Places, promote the same Seditious
Interest, and every man knows his Station.

They have their Contrivers, Their Industry and Combination.
their Speakers, their Sticklers, their Divi^ers, their Moderators, and their
Blancks: (their I-and- NO-men) by which Method, and Intelligence, all Debates
are Menaged to the Advantage of the Party, and Occasion. They know when to
Move, when to Press, when to Quit, Divert, Put off, etc. and they are as
Skillful in the Manner of Moulding their Business, as they are Watchful for
the Season of Timing it. Add to this Agreement, and Confederacy of Design,
their Zeal, and Earnestness of Intention; and what will not an Indefatigable
Industry, joined to these Emprovements of Order, and Counsel, be able to
accomplish? [The Lower* and Weaker Faction, is the firmer in Conjunction (says
Sir F. Bacon) and it is often seen, that a few, that are Stiff, do tire out a
Greater Number, that are more Moderate:]

Yet to the Miracles that are wrought by Forecast, The Matter they work upon.
and Assiduity, there is still requisite a Matter predispos'd, and fit to work
upon: and That Is the Dress, or Cleanly Couching of the Project. It Is not at
first dash to attempt the Person of the King, but the Multitude must by
Degrees, he made sensible of the Faults of his Ministers; and Instructed to
clamor against Oppression and Profaneness. Why should a Freeborn Subject be
Pressed with Taxes, and Obedience, or a Christian Libertine be tied to worship
by a Set-forme? Is it not against the Fundamentals of a Mixed Monarchy, (That
ridiculous supposition) for the Supreme Magistrate to impose upon his
Coordinate Subjects? Or, where is it Commanded in the Bible, for people to
Kneel at the Communion, or to stand up at Gloria Patri?

These are sore Grievances indeed, Their Manner of Proceed^ng.
and now the Humour' s ripe for Petitions to the Senate; which being both
Procured and Framed by a Cabale of the Senators Themselves, cannot fail of
being acceptable to the Faction: who, by this Artifice, get the Credit of being
taken for the proper Arbitratours of all Differences betwixt King, and People,
through which mistake, the Popular Representative becomes both Party and Judge,
and it is Then no hard matter to Guess what will become of the Prerogative.

By making the most of all Compleints, and the Worst of all Abuses; they
bespeak a Compassion for the One side, and they provoke an Odium toward the
Other: which Amplification renders exceedingly Necessary the Remedy of a
Thorough-Reformation.

The Subject is to be Free in One Point, and the Monarch Limited in Another.
These Courts are to be Abolished, Those Counselors to be removed, etc. -- And
in fine, when the Prince has yielded, till they want matter for Compleint;
Their Fears are not less Clamorous, and Importune, then were their
Compleinings. Of which undutiful, and unlimited Distemper, This is the certain
Issue; from one desire they proceed to another, till the Prince to secure Their
Jealousy,
has parted with all possibility of Preserving Himself.

This is their Course, where they find the Government already in Disorder; but
how to Introduce That Disorder, is quite another point of Cunning.

They are here only to procure Those Grievances, for which they are afterward
to provide Remedies, and to cast the State into a Disease* that with better
Pretense they may give it Physic; Siding with the Prerogative against the
People, in the first place, and with the People against the Prerogative, in the
next. In a word; Their Services are snares; they give a little, that they may
take all, and by a Plausible Oppression, provoke a Barbarous Rebellion.

Another sort of ill Ministers in a Representative, The Perm^tters of Seditious
Contrivements.
are the Permitters of these Abuses: Such as being Chosen and Entrusted for the
Public Weal, Abandon their Stations, and Deliver up their Country. Betwixt
whom, and the Conspiratours Themselves, there is but This Difference. The One
Quits the Breach, and the Other, Enters: These, Throw down their Arms, and
Those Take the Town; what the One Party carries by Treason, the Other loses by
Cowardice.

Of These Deserters, The Deserters of their Trust are taken off
some are taken Off by Profit, Pleasure, Vanity, Sloth, Neglect, or Partiality:
Others, are led by their Passions; as Fear, Anger, etc. In all which Cases,
whoever preferrs a Private Interest to a Public, Betrays his Trust.

Some Peoples Mouths are Stopped, by Profit,
with Offices, Rewards, Fair Promises, Hopes of Preferment, etc. And These,
upon the very Crisis of a Debate, find Twenty Shifs, to waive the pinch of the
Dispute, and let the Question fall; even though the Crown it self depend upon
the Issue of it. This is done, either by coming too late, or perhaps, not at
all; by Going away too soon, or saying Nothing when they are There: by which
Discouragements, the Cause is lost, only for want of Their Arguments, and
Voices to Turn the Scale.

Others are Drawn from Their Duties by Pleasure: Pleasure,
perhaps a Party at Tennis, Bowls; Chards; a Pack of Dogs, a Cock fight, or a
Horse-match, a Comedy, a Good Fellow, or a Mistress: And while They are Thus
Employed, the Vigilant Faction steals a Vote That Is worth a Kingdom.

Some again are so Transported with the Vanity of Dress, Vanity,
and Language, that rather then serve the Public with one hair amiss, or in
one Broken Periode, they will let the Public Perish. Mallent Rem-Publicam
turbari, quam Capillos. These, while their Country lies at Stake, are ordering
of their Heads, and Polishing the Phrase, Shaping the Parts of a Set-Speech,
till it is too late to use it. Nothing methinks does less beseem a Grave
Assembly, then This same Facultatula loquendi: this same Rhetorical
Twittle-twattle; it spins out so much Time in Tedious Circumstance, that it
makes a man even sick of a Good Cause, and for the very Form, prejudg the
Reason of it.

Sloth, by Sloth and Neglect,
and Neglect, are yet more dangerous in a Senator; nor only in Regard of
Surprises from the Faction, but of Discontentments likewise from the People.
These think a Wet Day, or a Cold Morning, a Sufficient Discharge of their
Attendance: and while they are taking the other Napp, or t'ther Bottle, the
Monarch perhaps has lost his Crown, or the Subject his Liberty.

Come to Particular Cases, how many Families are lost by Disappointments;
by Relying upon promises; Delays from Time to Time! How many Just and Sad
Petitions are thrown aside, unregarded; as serving only for waste Paper! and
so far from Relief, they cannot obteyn so much as a bare Reading.

Distinguishing of Persons in Matters of Equity, by Partiality.
is furthermore a great Abuse; where a Friend, an Acquaintance, or some
By-Respect shall interrupt the Speedy, and Direct Course of Justice. (I do not
say Divert; though to forbear helping the Right, or not to hinder the Wrong,
because of such or such an Interest, is but a Negative Oppression.)

Those that are moved by Passions, Passion.
from their Duties, are not less Culpable than the Rest. For a Good Patriot
Fears Nothing, but to be Dishonest; Hates Nothing, but Iniquity; and knows no
other Friend then Justice.

Is any Thing proposed, which to my Reason appears of Dangerous Consequence;
Unlawful to my Conscience; Dishonorable to my Prince, or Country? Do I
Discharge my Soul to God, and to the World, in not opposing it? because
forsooth it is my Lords Interest, Fear,
or Project. Where it is my Office to withstand a Public Injury, it is my Act,
if I suffer it: Nor will it serve the turn to say, Alas! I Am but one Man, what
should I struggle for? A Noble Truth, and Equity, though Single, ought to be
Maintein'd against the World. But very rarely is That the Case; for Those
Particulars, that under Color of This Singleness, relinquish and withdraw,
would in Conjunction cast the Balance. The Question is but This.

Whether shall I rather venture, the loss of an Office, or the loss of my
Country? Whether shall I rather disoblige a Powerful Subject, or Betray my
Lawful Prince? Whether in fine, shall I rather choose, Modestly to Oppose a
Faction, or Tamely to desert my Conscience.

Some we find Prepossest with Personal Animosities; or Personal Animosity.
and These Particular Piques, are many Times, the Bane of Public Designs.
They do not so much heed the Matter, as the Man that Promotes it; They are
resolved to like Nothing from That Hand; and while they are Cavilling about
Niceties, and Nothings; the adverse Party runs away with the Sum of the Contest.

Another Infelicity is where Elections are Carried by Recommendation, Fortune,
or Affection; without any Regard to the Abilities of Persons.

These are a Dangerous Party, Fools are fit Inst^um^nts for Kn^ves.
and a fit Subject to work upon: for being more addicted to follow the
Appearances, then Capable of Comprehending the Reasons of Things; They are not
only Liable to fall into Mistakes, but Obstinate Maintainers of Them; and in
all Cases Determinable by Plurality of Voices, the Greater Number of Fools
weighes down the more Prudentiall Counsels of Fewer wise Men Nay, which is
most Ridiculous and Miserable; (but that in Popular Suffrages it must be so)
His Vote many Times Casts a Kingdom, that has not Brain enough to Rule his
Private Family; Deciding the Question, without understanding the Debate.

We have Prosecuted This Theme of Miscariages; far enough. From the Discovery,
our next advance is to the Remedies of them: The harder undertaking; for Faults
are more easily found, then mended.

CAP. X.
How to prevent the Beginnings, and hinder the Growth of Seditions in General;
together with Certain Particular Remedies, applied to the Distempers of Those
Seven Interests, mentioned in the foregoing Chapter.
THe Two main Pillars that support Majesty, Love and Reverence are the Pillars
of Majesty.
are Love and Reverence: To which are opposed, (as the Foundation of a Prince
his Ruin) Contempt and Hatred. What are Disloyal Actions, but the Issue of
Disloyal Thoughts? Or what are General Tumults, but the Rational Effects of
General Discontents? (The Violent part being no other, then the Manifestation
of a Treason already Formed and Perfected in the Affections) So that to set
the Heart Right, is the Prime Duty of a Good subject, and Then to observe the
Law, for Love of the Authority. Kings are first Rendered Odious, or Despised;
and in Persuance of Those Passions they come at last, to be Dethroned, or
Murdered. That is; to be dethroned, or Murdered Actually; (for even the first
Malicious Motion was Murder in the Heart, and betwixt God and our own Souls
every Seditious Thought is a Rebellion)

Although no Prince can be Mighty, The Power of a Prince depends upon the Love
of his People.
without the Love of his People, or Secure under their Hatred; (the One being
Necessary to his Greatness, and the Other Sufficient to his Undoing) yet must
we not suppose the Subjects Love more Needful to their Prince, then His to
them: since upon His Protection depends* Their Welfare; no less then, upon
Their Support, His Power.

Because the Hazard of disuniting is mutual, it must not be supposed that it
is therefore Equal; nor that the Crime is so, where Tumult, and Oppression are
the Question. They are Both ill, but with exceeding odds of worse betwixt them:
The One does but affront the Mode of Government; the Other strikes at
Government it self: the very Ends, and Reason of it; -- Peace, Order, and
Society.

A Prince, without the Hearts of his Subjects, is in a bad Condition; The
Gr^unds of Sedition.
but He that falls from Hatred, to Contempt, His Case is Desperate. For when
they neither Love his Person, nor Fear his Power; They are both Provoked to
Contrive mischief, and Emboldened to Execute it.

These are the General, and Enstaming Grounds of Seditions; which may be
easily prevented, and Cut off in their next Immediate Causes. The Difficulty
is, for a Prince to be Popular, without making himself Cheap; to Gratify his
People, without Derogating from his Authority; and so to Comply with the
Interest of his Subjects, as not to be wanting to the Necessities of his Crown.
In the Due Temperation of which Mixture, Consists, in a Great measure, the
skill of Governing; and thereupon depends the Peace, and Safety of the
Government.

In all well-ordered Monarchies, there are certain Metes and Boundaries, that
Part the Rights of King, and People; and These, are either Laws, or Customs;
providing for the Common Good, and Safety, both of the Subject in his
Obedience, and of the Sovereign in his Authority. Let a Prince Stick to his
Laws, and his People will stick to him.
Let a Prince therefore stick to his ancient Laws, and he may be sure his
People will stick to him; and more he needs not ask, being by Those Laws armed
with Power sufficient to the Intent of Government: or, at the worst, if any
Defect there be, the Fault is imputed to the Constitution, and not to the
Person.

There may indeed occurr such Cases, and Emergencies of Imminent, and Public
Danger, as (being un-foreseen by the Wisdom of former Times) are left without a
Rule. Of These, beyond Dispute, The only Supreme Governor is the only Supreme
Judge; and under so strict a Necessity, He not only may, but ought to dispense
with Common Formalities, in Order both to the Discharge of his Duty, and the
Welfare of his People* The Oath of Protecting, implies a Power of Protecting.
His Oath of Protection, Implying him Vested with a Power of Protecting; and
his Conscience, as a Governor, obliging him to be careful of his Charge.

The Objection is Frivolous, that This Supposition opens a Door to Tyranny;
because that at This Rate, a Prince has no more, but to pretend a Danger, and
Then to do what he Pleases. It Is very right a Prince may Tyrannize under This
Color; but it is as certain, that a People cannot Scruple This Inconvenience,
without incurring a Greater: for it is an Opinion Destructive of Government it
self; all Subjects being equally exposed to the same Hazard, Where a King has
it not in his Power to Oppress his People, They have it in Theirs to Destroy
their King.
under all Governments; and it is inevitable, that either the King must have it
in his Power to Oppress his People, or the People have it in Theirs to Destroy
their Sovereign. (and betwixt the Ills of Tyran^y and Rebellion, all the world
knows the Disproportion) Wherefore let Subjects hope and believe the Best of
their Prince his Will,
and Inclination; without meddling with his Power; for it is not less His
Interest to be well Obeyed, and Beloved; then it is Theirs, to be well Governed.

Yet when a Prince, by Exigencies of State, finds himself forced to waive the
Ordinary Path, and Course of Law; the Less He swerves, the Better: and the
more unwilling He appears to Burden his People, the more willing shall he find
Them to serve Him. Especially, he should be Cautelous, where men's Estates, or
Freedoms, are the Question; to make the Necessity as Manifest as is possible,
and the Pressure as Light, A Mixture of Indulgence, and Severity. Obliges the
Loyal, and Aws the Refractary.
and as Equal, as Consists with his Honor, and Convenience: Mixing however
with This General Indulgence, such a Particular Severity, where his Authority
is Disputed, that the Obedient may have Reason to Love his Goodness, and the
Refractary, as much, to Fear his Displeasure.

By These Means, may a Prince preserve himself from the Hatred of his People,
without exposing himself to their Contempt, and in Order to the avoiding of
That too, we will take up This Observation by the way: That Subjects do
Generally Love, or Hate, for Their own Sakes; but when they despise a Prince,
it is for some Personal Weakness, or Indignity in Himself.

Nothing makes a Monarch Cheaper in the Eyes of his People, then That which
begets an ill opinion, either of his Prudence, The Influe^ce of Prudence, and
Courage.
or Courage; and if they find once that he will either be Over-reached, or
Overaw'd, they have his measure. By Courage here, we do not intend a Resolution
only against Visible and Pressing Dangers; but an Assurance likewise, and
Firmness of mind against Audacious, and Threatening Counsels.

The Prudence we intend, is of a more extensive Notion; and from the most
Mysterious Affairs of Royalty, descends to the most Private, and Particular
Actions of a Princes Life. It enters into his Cabinet-Counsels, and Resolves*
his Public Acts of State; his very Forms of Language, and Behavior; his
Exercises, and Familiar Entertainments. In fine; It is scarce less Dangerous
for a Sovereign to separate the Prince, from the Person, even in his daily
^ractices, and Conversations; then to permit Others to Divide Them in their
Arguments: And in a word; A^ Prince that bears Affronts, and Familiarities from
his Subjects, Lessens himself.
to secure himself from Contempt, it behooves a Monarch to Consider as his most
Deadly Enemies, such as Brave his Authority; and by no means to allow, even in
his most Acceptable Servants, and most Familiar Humors, too great a Freedom
toward his Person.

Not but that a Sovereign may in many Cases Familiarize with his Subjects, and,
by so doing, win the Reputation, of a Wise and Gracious Prince: Provided that
the sweetness of his Nature, cause him not to forget the Severity of his
Office; and that his Stooping to his People* prove not an Emboldening of Them
to come up to Him. This is a Course to Prevent Sedition, in the First Cause,
and check it in the Bud.

But if it come once to show it self and spread; How to hind^r the Spr^ading of
a Seditious Humor.
there is first Requisite, (upon a Clear and Open Proof) a Speedy Execution
of Laws to the Utmost Rigor. I say, [upon a Clear and Open Proof] for in
such cases, it is of great Advantage to a State, to make the Crime as evident as
the Punishment, that the People may at once Detest the Fact and Approve the
Justice. I say Likewise [a speedy execution] for Delay brings many
Inconveniences. It gives a Faction Time to Contrive, and Unite; and Boldness
to Attempt: for it looks as if They that sit at the Helm were either more
sensible of The Danger, or less mindful of their Duty then becomes them.
Lastly; whereas it is added, [to the Utmost Rigor:] My meaning is not to
extend the Severity to a Multitude of Offenders, but to Deter the Generality
by making some few, and Dreadful Examples.

Nay my Advice should be, to Pick These Few too. They should not be Fools,
Madmen, or Beggars; but the Boldest, the Wisest, the most Circumspect and
Wealthy of the Party: the Leaders, and first Starters of the Quarrel: to show
that neither their Confidence should Protect them; nor their Shifts, and
Politiques avayle them. But above All; let not their Money save Them, for That Is
no other then Setting of a Price upon the Head of the Sovereign.

Another Expedient to Stop a spreading mischief, Let a Prince keep an Eye over
Great Assemblies.
is for a Prince to keep a watchful eye over Great Assemblyes; which are
either Irregular and Lawless; or Regular and Constant; or Arbitrary and
Occasional.

Concerning the First; it is seldom seen: where the Manner of a Meeting is
^umultuary, that the Business of it is not so too; and where Many Concurr^ in
One Unlawful Act it is no hard matter, to persuade them to agree in Another.
Let him be Qu^ck,
So that to frustrate the Ends, and Prevent the Consequences of such Meetings,
the surest way, is for the Sovereign to employ his Authority, Timely; and
strictly, to Prohibit them. If That does no Good; He has no more to do, but
Instantly to Scatter them by force, and single out the Heads of the Riot, for
Exemplary Punishment.

Touching Conventions which are Regular, and Steady; and Watchful.
It concerns the Chief Magistrate not to be without his Creatures, and
Discoverers, in Those Assemblies; and to see that they be well Influenced as to
the Government. For Instance; when the People Meet to Choose Officers; when
Those Officers meet to advise upon Business, it is worth the while for a Prince
to learn how the Pulse Beats; and Principally, to Over-watch Churches, and
Courts of Judicature: Both in regard of the hazard of Errors in matters of
Law, and Religion; and of the Multitude, being ever in readiness, and Humor to
Entertein them.

As to Meetings Arbitrary, and Occasional, heed must be taken to the Persons
assembling, the Occasion which brings them Together, and the Matter whereupon
they Treat; which we shall handle in their proper places, and so pass from
Generals to Particulars, beginning with the CHURCH.

Sect. I.
By what means, Haeresies, and Schisms, may be kept out of the CHURCH; Their
Increase hindered, and the Seditious Consequences of Them Prevented: with the
Remedies of other Mischiefs arising from Disorders in the CHURCH.
SInce so it is, that Divisions in the Church have no further Interest in This
place, then as they Lead to Seditions in the State: the shortest Cu^t I know;
will be to reduce all of That Tendency to Sr Francis Bacon' s Notable
Comprizall of Them, under Two Properties [If a New ^ct have not Two Propertyes
fear it not, The mostdange^^us of all Sects.
for (says he) it will not spread. The One is, the Supplanting or the Opposing,
of Authority established: For Nothing is more Popular than That. The Other is,
the Giving License to Pleasures, and a Voluptuous Life. For as for speculative
Heresies (such as were in Ancient Times the Arrians, and now the Arminians)
though they work mightily upon Men's Wits, yet they do not produce any great
Alterations in States; except it be by the Help of Civil Occasions.] Now when
a Prince meets with a Faction Thus Marq'd, let him Look to himself: for there
are against him, the best Counterfeit of a Friend, and the most Deadly
Composition of an Enemy; the Strongest of all Allurements; the most Popular of
all Designs; and the most Rational Means to Accomplish it.

But the Question will be, How to Prevent, what is not as yet Discovered. To
which, we answer that the Sect here spoken of, is New, either Absolutely, or
Comparatively. If Absolutely; Observe what Carnal Interest they drive: If
Comparatively, marque what Copy they follow; and Measure the Disciple by his
Master.

One Safe, A sure way to prerent Schism.
and Certain Remedy, (be the Novelty what it will,) is not to suffer any
Innovation whatsoever, without a warrantable Authority: no, not so much as a
Public Dispute against an Established Order, from a Private Person. Nay more;
let the Dissent be Right, or Wrong, it is the same thing as to the Reason of
Government, though not so to the Conscience of the Dissenter. Suppose the
Subject of an Idolatrous Prince, within his Masters Dominions, and Contrary to
his Express Order, Preaches against the Religion there Established: he does
well, to Discharge his Conscience, but let him have a Care of the Consequence;
for if in Order to the making of Good Christians, Have a Care.
he makes Bad Subjects, his Zeal will hardly acquit him of Sedition: God does
not allow of Proposing Good Ends, by Ill Means; and of Reforming Religion, by
Rebellion.

Let him have a Care likewise, if he comes to suffer for well-doing, how he
behaves himself; for if he but open his Mouth against the Civil Magistrate, as
a Persecutour, he betrays himself to be an Hypocrite.

There are Two Sects, whom I dare say, This Doctrine will not please, i.e. the
Pontifical Presbyterians, and the Rigid Jesuits. The Latter of which, have,
for Convenience sake, been True to One King: The Former, (give the Devil his
Due) since Presbyterians had a Being,
were never True to Any: or if they ever were, let him that Loves Them best, or
knows them better, show me but when, where, how; and with a Noverint universi,
I do here declare, I Will make a Public Recantation. Till Then, we will take the
Presbyterian for the Cock-Schismatique, and (if Sir Francis Bacon's Note holds
Good) the Dangerous New Sect: against Whom, no Caution can be too early, no
Importunity too Earnest, no Restriction too Severe.

These are They that (according to the Lord St. Albans) Propagate Religion by
Wars; Force Consciences; Nourish Seditions; Authorize Conspiracies and
Rebellions. That put the Sword into the Peoples hand, and Dash the first Table,
against the Second. In short; all Those Popular, and Supplanting Politiques,
which we find only here and there; Scattered, and Thin, in Other Sects, are by
These People drawn into a Practicable Method; a Setform of Sedition.

They Govern Their Looks, The Presbyterians Set-form.
their Words, their Actions; Nay, their very Dress, Garb, and Accent, by a
Rule: They are Instructed, when to Beseech, and when to Expostulate; when to
Flatter, and when to Threaten; when to Offer, and when to deny; when to Press
Swearing, and when to Declaim against it; when to Save, and when to Kill.

In the first Scene, And Method.
ye have the Schismatique upon his Knees, begging his Prince into a
Dispensation, for Scrupulous Consciences, that perhaps stick at such and such
Ceremonies; the Cross, the Surplice, or the like.

Let but the Sovereign Comply Thus far, Their Modesty.
and what is the Fruit of This Indulgence? Within a Day or Two, they come for
more, and by Degrees, more still, till at the Last, they find the Government of
the Church as Troublesome, as they did the Rites of it; and Bishops as great a
Grievance, as Ceremonies. Where the King Stops, They Cavil, and now, from
Petitioners for Freedom to Themselves, they are Grown to be most Insolent
denyers of it to Others.

Their Art is next, to Tune the People; which is best done by the Pulpit, where
One half of their Business is Invective against Prelacy, and the Other is
spent in Well-Acted Supplications, that God would turn the Kings Heart;
Accompting His yielding to all They Ask, as a Divine Assurance that their
Prayers are heard.
But if the Monarch still holds out; what Pity it is (they Cry) so sweet a
Prince should be Misled? and Then they fall upon his Evil Counselors; still
Taking all he Gives, and Struggling for the Rest, till having first Disrobed him
of his Rights, Deprived him of his Friends; Step after Step, they attempt his
Sacred Person, and at last take away his Life.

Here Is their Glorious King; the End of all their Vwues, and Covenants, Their
Prayers, and Fastings; or, in a word, the sum of their Religion.

It was great Blasphemy, (says Sir F. B.) when the Devil said; I will Ascend
and be like the Highest; But it is greater Blasphemy, to Personate God, and
bring him in saying; I will Descend, and be like the Prince of Darkness, and
what is it better to make the Cause of Religion, to descend, to the Cruel, and
Execrable Actions, of Murdering Princes, Butchery of People, and Subversion of
States, and Governments?

He that stands firm against (not the Wit, or Bravery, but) the Fawning, and
Treacherous Insinuations of This Faction, may make himself sport with all Other
Practices, and Combinations whatever: and That Prescription, which helps This
Evil, serves for all other Public, and Intestine Maladies.

I think we may be Positive, that there neither is, nor ever was in Nature, any
Society of Men, without a Vicious Mixture, under what- Government, or
Governour-soever. I think we may be as Positive likewise, that Those Ambitious,
and Unsatisfied Particulars, with which all Constitutions are infested, are
only Deterred from troubling all Governments, by the want of Opportunities to
Plot and Contrive; and by the Hazzards they meet with, in putting Those Plots
in Execution.

Wherefore it ought to be a Prince his first Care, The means of Preventing
Schism.
to Choke These Seeds of Discord: which may be Effected, by a Provision of
Orthodox Ministers; (to the utter Exclusion of the Contrary) by Prohibiting
Private Meetings, or Conventicles; and by taking heed to the Press. A
Watchfulness in These Three Points Secures the Church from Schisms, and
Consequently the State from Conscientious Seditions. (at least, if I am not
Mistaken in my Presumption, that there is not any fourth way of Dangerous
Communication)

Touching the Licentious abuse of the Press, and the Freedom of Riotous
Assemblies; the Distemper is not as yet grown Bold enough, to avow Those
Liberties: But from the Nonconforming Ministers, we must expect hard Pleading.

What? Object.
[shall the Faithful Guides be ejected, upon the account of Forms, or
Ceremonies? Petition f^^ Peace, page 4, 5.
because they dare not do that which they Judge to be so great a Sin against
the Lord?] May not a Dissenting Brother be an Honest man?

Our Reply shall be short, Answ.
and Charitable. The Hazzards of Toleration.
If the People take them for Guides, they will be the apter to follow them; so
that the fairer their Credit is, the worse is their Argument.

Nor are they laid aside, as if the Difference it self were so Criminal, but
for the evil Consequences of Reteining Them.

First, it advances the Reputation of the Dissenting Party to have the matter
Look as if either the Power, or Reason were on Their side.

Next, it Subjects the Prince to be Thought Diffident, either of his Authority
to Command, or of the Justice of the Things Commanded.

Thirdly; a Dissenting Minister makes a Dissenting Congregation.

Fourthly; it makes Conscience a Cloak for Sedition, and under Color of
Dividing from the Church, it Ministers Occasion for People to unite against the
State.

Fifthly; it not only leads to Novell Opinions, whereof the Vulgar are both
Greedy, and Curious; but it Possesses the Multitude with These Two Desperate,
and Insociable Persuasions. First, That the People are Judges of the Law; and
Next, That because God alone has Power over Their Souls, the Sovereign has none
over their Bodies.

As to the Honesty of a Dissenting Brother; his Honesty is only to himself, but
his Dissent is to the Public: and the Better the Man is, the Worse is the
President.

Upon These hazzards, depends the Royalty of That Sovereign, that dispenses
with the Law, to Indulge This Faction: and, which is the great Pity of all,
the better he deserves, the worse they use him. So that the only way for a
Prince to deal Safely with These People, is first to lay aside That Dangerous,
and Fatal Goodness, and Steer his Resolutions by the Compass of a Severe, and
Inexorable Reason. Not that Kings are Gods, in any Respect, more then in their
Power, and Mercy; but there are certain Cases, and Instances, wherein That
Power, and Mercy may be Restreyn'd; and wherein it is possible that what is
Excellent in Nature, may be a slip in Government. It Is One Thing for a Party to
ask Pardon for a Fault already Committed, and another thing to beg a
Dispensation beforehand, to Commit it. And there is This Difference also in the
Issue of the Grants. The Prince has the Faction at His Mercy, the One way; and
the Faction has got the Prince at Theirs, the Other. But to the Point.

Will the Monarch's Yielding to this, or That, Content them? They Will say it is
all they aim at; and truly I Would believe them: would they but show me out of
their whole Tribe, any one Instance of This Moderation to save the Credit of my
Charity; Any Presbyterian Interest in Nature that is not Raised upon the Ruins
of a Prince, The Founda^ion of Presbytery.
and Cimented with Broken Vows, and Promises.

If it be Thus; Nothing less then a Miracle can secure That Monarch that makes
This Faction Master of the Pulpit: and This King Charles the Martyr proved by
sad Experience: For not a Soul that by the Instigation of Schismatic
Lecturers deserted the Church,
but became an Enemy to the State. So that Effectually a Gracious Toleration in
some Cases, is by Some people understood no otherwise, then as a Tacit
Commission from the Person of the King to Levy a War against his Office. And
it is very rarely that such an Indulgence is better Employed. In which Opinion
we are not a little Confirmed, by the Reflections of That Blessed Prince above
mentioned. (...) Page 3.
[I wish (says he) I had not suffered My own Judgment to have been overborne in
some Things, more by others Importunities, then their Arguments; My Confidence
had less betrayed My self, and My Kingdoms, to Those advantages, which some
men sought for, who wanted nothing but Power, and Occasion, to do Mischief.]
And after the utmost Trial of Bounty and Remis^nesse to That Faction; These
are his words to his Royal Successor [I cannot yet Learn That Lesson, (...)
Page 239.
nor I h^pe never will you, That it is safe for a King to gratify any Faction,
with the perturbation of the Laws, in which is wrapped up the Public Interest,
and the Good of the Community.]

Finally; Those Perfidious Creatures which at first Petitioned their Sovereign,
afterward fought against Him, Let Pagans blush at These Christians.
and Imprisoned Him: Refusing him in his Distress the Comfort of his own
Chaplains, in Requital for having Granted them the Liberty of their
Consciences. Who struck the Fatal Blow, it matters not: If He had not been
Disarmed, he had not been Killed. Subjects do not Hunt Kings for Sport; only to
Catch Them, and let them go again. To Conclude; He was persecuted with
Propositions worse then Death;
as by his Choice appeared: for he Preferred rather to Die, then Sign Them. But
to Signalize the Honor of his Memory, and the Glory of his Martyrdom, take
his Last Resolution, and Profession.

I look upon it with infinite more content and quiet of Soul, (...) Page 263.
to have been worsted in my Enforced contestation for, and vindication of, the
Laws of the Land, the Freedom and Honor of Parliaments, the Rights of my
Crown, the Just Liberty of my Subjects, and the true Christian Religion in its
Doctrine, Government, and due Encouragements, then if I had with the greatest
Advantages of Success, overborn them all, as some men have now Evidently
done, whatever Designs they at first pretended.

From a Supposition of the first Inclination to Schism, Proposing also how to
strangle it in the Birth: we are now to Consider it in some Degree of Growth,
and Progression; and to enquire after the best means to prevent such
Mischieves, as may arise from the further Increase, and spreading of it. That
is; the Mischieves of Conspiracy, which may be Promoted, either by Speech, or
Writing.

The first great Hazard is when Popular Persons, The Growth of Schism.
are put in Popular Employments, and in Populous Places. A Cunning, and a
Factious Minister, is a Dangerous Instrument in a City; and the more Dangerous,
if Tolerated; for Then he Stirs up Tumults by Authority: and who shall blame
the Flock for Following the Shepherd?

The Liberties of Conventicles, and Pamphlets, are likewise of Desperate
Influence upon the People; but These (as is already said) are easily Suppressed
by the Seasonable Execution of Laws. But There Is no Dallying with the
Combination.

If through the fault of Negligent Officers, tho Distemper be gone too far, and
the Confederacy grown Strong and Bold enough to struggle with the Law. Then,
Other Arts must be found out, either to amuse, Ensnare, or Disunite the
Faction. The Last Resort is violence, which must be Timely too before the
Reverence of Authority is quite Lost.
And let the King Himself appear; not only to Ask, but Take the Heads of the
Sedition; before the Quarrel is Transferred from his Ministers, to his Person:
if he but Stoops, he Falls. How horrible a Mutiny was That which Caesar Quieted
at Placentia? Single, Unarmed and with One wretched word. (QUIRITES) -- Nec dum
desaeviat Ira,
Expectat; Medios properat tentare Furores.
Nor Waits he till the Hot Fit should assuage,
But at the Maddest, Scorns, and Braves their Rage.


As the Resolve was Great, A Noble Resolve.
and the Success Good, so doubtless was the Reason of This Action; For by the
Sodainnesse, he Prevented their Agreement; and by the Generous Contempt of
Danger, he was almost Certain to Divide the Revolt: making the Nobler Part of
the Mutiniers to Adore him, and the Baser, to Fear him.

If the bare Presence of a General, could have This Power upon a Disciplined,
In^^ns'd, and Daring Army; what should a Lawful Monarch apprehend, from an
Unpractic'd, and Loose Multitude?

But the Dispute is not yet Brought to This Extremity; our Purpose in This
Place, being rather to Frustrate, and Disappoint the Malice in the Contrivance,
then Crush it in the Execution. To which end are Requisite, great Diligence,
Secrecy, Watchfulness, Moderation; and (at-what-rate-soever) a strict and
General Intelligence: All which together, make up a Necessary, and Befitting
Prudence.

Sir Francis Bacon's Counsel is, Let the Prince Reform betime.
to Begin, with Reforming Abuses: a work seldom out of Season, but never more
needful; then upon the very first Murmurings, and Motions toward Troubles.
Most especially, let Great Towns be Supplied with Good Ministers, and the
Earlier the Better, least the Multitude think it Extorted; and the Guilty
become too Strong for the Innocent.

In ought to be Impartial too; And Impartially.
too; for a Toleration on the One hand, will make Justice it self look like a
Persecution on the other. Beside That it takes away the Subject of the Cla^^ur
and exalts the Reputation of the Monarch, in making him appear the Common
Father of his People.

By these means, may the Church be Purged of Schism^, without much hazard of
Sedition.

If the Plot be already Mode^^'d and the Multitude Leavened, The Sovereign is
to look for Petitions, on the Behalf of Ejected Ministers; in the Names of
Thousands; and Accompanied with the Rudeness rather of a Riot, then a Request.
The Petitioners may be Put off, Threatened, or Punished etc. -- according to the
Merit of their Behavior: out let a watch be set upon the Leaders of Those
Troops: Note.
their Haunts, and Correspondents. Let it be Marqu'd, who Interceedes, who
Mitigates on Their behalf.

Let the Motions of the Disaffected Clergy be likewise Observed; which of the
Nobility They Frequent: and in five, Spies Employed upon all their Considerable
Privacyes: Ambition is the Cause, no matter what is the Cry.
for, Let the Cry be what it will, the Cause of these Disorders is Ambition. Of
which in another Place, and with One Word more we will Conclude This Point.

That may be Conscience in the People, which is Sedition in the Minister;
wherefore, in all Schismatic Ruptures, I could wish all possible Favor to
the Common sort of the Laity, and as much Severity to the Offending Clergy.

Sect. II.
How to prevent Seditions arising from the Disorders of the BENCH.
WE have begun with the Church; and the Bench properly follows: which is but
to give Them the Same Place in the Order of This Discourse, which they have in
the Argument of it. Was there ever any Considerable Rebellion (I do not say
Revolt) That was not ushered in by Corrupt Divines, Corrupt Divines and Lawyers
are in the forlorn of all Rebellions.
or Lawyers, or Both of Them? And it is no wonder; since upon These Two
Interests depends the Grand Concern, both of our Souls, and Bodies. One Reason
of their Forwardness may be This; that they may do more Harm, upon Safe, and
Easy Terms, then other People: Bolt a Rebellion out of a Text; Dethrone a
King with a Moot-Point, and Execute a Bishop at a Reading. All which is done
with a Wet Finger, for when a People are Discontented, it is but Picking a
Scripture, or a Statute, for the Time and Purpose; and commit the Rest to
Application.

These two Interests hold so Good Intelligence, it is almost Pity to part
Them: and Compared with the Rest, (Supposing all in Disorder) They mind me of a
Combination I have observed betwixt a Beagle, and a Greyhound: the One Starts
the Hare, and Yelps,
the Other Catches it, but by Consent, they part the Quarry.

As I Reckon These Men of the Robe to be the very Pests of Humane Nature, But
the Contrary, are the Pillars and Blessings of Society.
when they Degenerate from the Prime End of their Institution; So take them (on
the Other side) in the Due Exercise of their Callings, they are the Blessings
and the Pillars of Society. A word now to the Lawyer apart.

The Common Crime of Vicious Lawyers, The Common Crime of Vicious Lawyers, is
Avarice
is Av^rice; and Those Inducements to Sedition, which (in the Chapter next
foregoing This) we have divided into Corruption, Partiality, Oppression,
Chargeable Delays, etc. are but as Several Branches from That Root of
Covetousness.

Nay, take their more Pernicious, and Vile Practices; Their Misconstruction of
Laws; Misapplying of Presidents; Torturing or Embezelling of Record, etc. What
is All This, but Corruption in another Dress? A Project to Embroyle the
Government, that They may get Money by Settling it again? The Basest of
Corruptions.
Or if they can procure a Change; They make the best Market they can of their
Country; and Betray it to That Faction that will Give Most for it. Nay, when
That Is done, (and that Matters will come right again, in spite of them) They
shall Betray it Back again to the Right owner: at once Lamenting, and adoring
their Past, and Profitable Transgressions. These are the miserable fruits of
Corruption.

Others there are that Err through want of Judgment. An Ignorant Judge is a
Dangerous Minister.
And That Is a sad Case too; for Mistakes coming from the Lips of a Judge, pass
for Oracles.

Others, And so is a Timorous.
there are again, that understand the Right, but in some Cases, dare not own
it. And These deliver up the People to day, for fear of the King; and the
Prerogative to morrow, for fear of the Subject.

From hence, it seems to me that a Prince his Chiefest Care in This Particular
of the Law, lies in a Narrow Compass: That is, in securing, and preserving his
Courts of Judicature from Corruption; and in Supplying them with men of Eminent
Abilities, and Courage, These are the Instruments to make a Prince, and People
Happy; nor does any Thing more Conduce to it, then the Carrying of an Even, and
Impartial Hand upon the Balance of Government, and Obedience. We come now to
the Choice of Persons, and There the Difficulty lies.

Some Deceive the World, A hard matter to make a good choice.
by appearing Hon^^ter then they are. Others Deceive Themselves, and are Honest
only for want of Temptation. Some there are, that are Proof against Money, but
not against Danger. In short; Where it so much Imports a Prince not to Repent
too late, it may be worth his while to Consider of his Choice to Time.

Concerning the Abilities of Persons for the Offices to which he Designs them;
Common F^me, with a Little Particular Enquiry, will be sufficient: but their
Integrity requires a Stricter Scrutiny. What Is such a man's Humor? his
Behavior? his Temper? are not Unnecessary Questions. And upon the Whole; A
Rule to Choose by.
if he has ever Betrayed any Friend, Trust, or Interest, either for Fear, or
Profit; Away with him. But if upon Trials, either Private, or Hublique, it
appears, that rather then do small Injuries, he has Refused Great Benefits;
that he has Preferred his Faith, and Honor, before his Life, and Fortune; This
Evidence may serve for a Moral Assurance of an Honest Man. Whereas without
This Personal and Particular Examination, not only the Futi^^e Safety, but the
Present Quiet of a Kingdom may come to be endangered by a Mischoyce of
Ministers.

To Reason upon This Hazard; does no^ at all empeach the Sovereign's absolute
Freedom to Elect whom He pleases; nor does it one (...) justify the Subject,
that shall presume to Scan and Judge the Actions of his Prince. But in Regard
that Discontentments breed Seditions; and that Mistakings of This Quality may
beget Discontentments, we Offer This Expedient as to That Consequence. And in
Truth it seems to be a Kind of Profanation of the Seat of Justice, when He
sits upon the Bench, that deserves to hold up his hand at the Bar. To
Conclude; when a Monarch comes to Discover the Inconvenience of such Ministers,
he may Kill Two Birds with One Stone; and Consider who Recommended them. (but
they may be better Kept out, then Driven out.)

Next to the Choice of Good Persons, Succeeds the Care of Good Order, when they
are Chosen: Which may be Provided for, first; by Mainteining an Intelligence
concerning the General Bias, and Complexion of their Proceedings, as to the
Public, (i. e. whether or no they do equal Justice betwixt King, and People)
Secondly, by overwatching them in Cases of more Private and Particular Concern.

Let not This Strictness appear either too much for a Prince his Business, or
below his Dignity. Kingdoms are Lost for want of These early Providence; He
nug^ s^ri^ duc (...) in mala.
these Little Circumspections; but it costs more to Recover them. Nor (in
effect) is the Trouble at all considerable; for it is here, as 'twas with the
Tyrant, that durst not Sleep for fear of having his Throat Cut.
A Mathematician comes to him, and tells him; that for so many Talents he de
secure him; and show him such a Secret, that it should be impossible for any
man so much as to design upon him without Discovery. The Tyrant was content;
provided that he might be satisfied of the Secret, before he parted with his
Money, and so takes the Cunning-man into his Cabinet. What was the Secret? but
that he should give the Fellow so much Money, and pretend that he had Taught it
him. This Story comes up to Us. The bare Opinion of a Prince his Vigilance,
saves him the Need, and Trouble of it: And Three or Four Discoveries in his
whole Reign, shall gain him That Opinion.

Touching Those Abuses which Immediately direct to the Public; (as concerning
the misconstruction of Lawyers, etc.) they are usually couched under the Salvo
of an Ambiguity. To prevent which Inconvenience, all Those Distinctions which
in Seditious times have been made use of for the Authorizing, A way to prevent
Treasonous Mistakes.
or Countenancing of Treason: might be summed up and Declared Treasonous
Themselves. Such I mean, as the Coordinate Power of King, Lords, and Commons.
The Literal and Equitable Construction of Laws. The Person, and Authority of
Princes. Singulis Major, Universis Minor, etc. For sure it is not Reasonable,
that the Clear, and Sacred Rights of Kings, should depend upon the dubious, and
Profane Comments of the People.

Concerning Grievances of a more Particular Quality; the Principal of them are
Injustice, and Delay: The Former whereof, is purely the Fault of the Judge; the
Other, may in some measure, and in some Constitutions, be imputed to a Defect
in the Law. In This Case, the best way to prevent further Mischief, and
Satisfy for what is done already, is an Impartial Severity upon all Offenders
as they are Detected: Especially, where Compleints are General, and the
Injustice Notorious; for nothing less then a Public Example, can amount to a
Public Satisfaction.

Sect. III.
How to Prevent, or Remedy Seditions arising from the Disorders of the COURT.
WE have in the Last Chapter, Page 99. (concerning Seditions which may possibly
arise from a Disordered Court) stated what we intend by the Court-Interest. We
have likewise Divided the Evill-Instruments, into such as either Plot Mischief,
or Occasion it. We have again Subdivided the Plotters into Three Parties. The
Contrivers of Seditions are of Three Sorts
The One whereof opposes the Title of the Governor; The Other, (as Directly)
the Form of the Government: And there is a Third Party, that bring their Ends
about, by Supplications, Vows, Fasting and Prayer; by Forms of Piery, and
Reverence: and finally; that with a Hail Master and a Kiss, Betray their
Sovereign.

Concerning the Two Former; More needs not be said, then that Force is to be
Repelled by Force ^ and That, the Monarch is supposed to have always in
Readiness, for the Safety of the Government. The Other, The Puritan.
is a Serpentine, and Winding Party; that Steals, and Glides into the very
Bosom of a Prince, and Then it Clipps, and Strangles him. This is a Faction
that Answers to our Iesuited Puritan.

Yet while I separate These Three, for Perspicuity of Method; let me not be
understood, as if they would not mingle in Complication of Interest: For
nothing is more Notorious, then that in all Commotions upon pretext of
Conscience, the Religious Division is still the Receptacle of all other
Disaffected Humors whatsoever. He that is an Atheist to Day, becomes an
Enthusi^st to Morrow; where a Crown is the Prize. Only I must confess, the
Presbyterian plays the Fast and Loose of the Device, the best in the whole
World. Let as many Help him as will, it is Liberty of Conscience forsooth; but
have a Care of the Purity of the Gospel; when they come to share with him.
They may, if they please, (nay they shall be Invited to it) run the hazzards of
the Course with him;
Venture Neck, and Body; over Hedge and Ditoh; through Thick and Thin -- but yet
at last, the Devil a bit of the Quarry.

In fine; the Plausible Contrivers of Sedition (under what- Masque-soever are
the People we aim at; and These are either In the Counsel, or Out of it. Sir
Francis Bacon Divides the Dangers from Within the Great Counsel, into an
Over-greatnesse in One Counselor, or an over-strict Combination in Diverse.
The Rest, we only look upon as Their Dependencies.

Page 110. We proceed from the Direct Contrivance of Seditions, to the more
Remote Occasions of them. As Corruption, Monopolizing; Non-payment of Debts,
etc. --

This being the Order into which we have disposed the Causes of Seditions; it
will be suitable, that some Degree of Method be observed in the Remedies. But
first, a word of Introduction.

We are to take for granted, that Sedition is a kind of Clockwork, and that the
Main Spring of all Rebellions is Ambition. We may be again as Confident, that
never any One Monarchy was destray'd, but with design to set up Another.
Religion is but Talk.
(The Talk of This or That Form of Government; or of This or That Shape of
Religion, being no more then a Ball tossed among the People, for the Knaves to
keep the Fools in play with) It Is Truth, that a Sinking Monarchy lapses into an
Aristocracy; and That again into a Popular State. But what is the Reason of all
This?

Does any man Imagine that the Conspir^ours work for One-another, Every man for
himself.
or for Themselves? They Ioyn in the Necessity of a Common Assistance, but they
Divide in the Proposition of a several Interest. Who is He in the Senate, that
had not rather Rule Alone, then in Company, if he could help it? To be short;
where more then One Govern, it is because what Every man Wishes; no Particular
can effect. (that is, to Master the Rest. (Understand me only of Medlers to
overthrow a Government.)

The next Slid^e from an Aristocracy, downward; comes a little clearer yet.
Some of the Craftyest of Those that helped the Peers to Cast off the King, are
now as Busy with the People to Throw off the Nobility: and Then, they are
within one Easy step, of Confusion; from whence, the next Change brings him
that can carry it from the Rest, to the Sovereignty. As arrant a Mockery, is
Religion, in the Mouth of a Conspiratour.

Indeed it makes me smile sometime, A Traitor is of no Religion.
to hear how Soberly Men will talk of the Religion of This or That Faction: as
if a Traitor, or an Hypocrite were of Any. And Then they cry, -- This is
against the Principles of the Presbyterians; and That against the Principles of
the Independents: when (Truly, and Shortly) they are but Thus Distinguished;
Those would subvert the Government, One Way; These, another: And He that would
rightly Understand them, must Read, for Presbytery, ARISTOCRACY; and DEMOCRACY,
for Independency. (I speak of the next Consequence, if they Prevail; not of the
Ultimate Design of the Chief Leaders; for That Is Monarchy) We Will drop ye a
Little Story here.

An Officer of the Reformation advises with an Ingenious Surgeon of my
Acquaintance, No ill Story.
about a Grief, (as he protended) caught with a Streyn. After diverse
Questions; how and how? The Surgeon tells his Patient, that (by his leave) the
Trouble he compleyns of, can be no other, then (to Phrase it Modestly) a Ladies
Favor. The good man blesses himself; and still it must be a Streyn. Why then a
Streyn let it be: but This I Will tell you Sir; The thing that Cures That Streyn,
will Cure the Pox. In fine; the Officer submits, and the Surgeon does his work.

This is the Case of the Two Factions, The Presbyterian has gotten a Streyn.
They Cry out, of their Consciences; but their Disease lies somewhere else: and
Schism is Cured, just as they Cure Sedition.

Nay; does it not behove a Prince, with the same strictness to require
Submission to a Ceremony, A Ceremony may be as well imposed as a (...)
as to a Tax? Or why may not a Justice as well refuse to Swear Obedience, to
the Civil Government, as a Minister to the Ecclesiastique? What can be more
reasonable, then for a Master either to Punish, or dismiss an undutiful
Servant? Briefly, That Momarch that would be Safe, must resolve to be Deaf to
These Religious Clamours. Alas! let but the Ministers Begin; the People Bawle
in Course: not that they are Troubled; but they will do it in Rudeness, or
Imitation. They are as arrantly Taught to do it, as a Friend of mine Taught his
Beagles. Let Him Gape first, and the whole Kennell falls to Howling: Let Him
give off,
They Are Quiet too: and just Thus stands the Case betwixt the Schismatical
Clergy, and the Multitude.

But (it will be said) what is all This to the Court? O^ to Seditions, Thence
proceeding?

Oh very much. These Outcries of the Vulgar* are but False Alarmes: The Dint
is nearer hand, They have their Demagogues, and their Patron; (as the late
Glorious King, and Martyr calls them) and if a Prince look well about him, in
such a juncture as is here mentioned; it is odds, he finds some of their
Principalls, even at his Ear, or Elbow. So that his first Concern is to
Inspect,
and Purge (where he sees Cause) his Royal Palace, Beginning with his
Counsel. Where (as Sir Francis Bacon) The Danger is either, the Over-greatness
of One; or the Combination of Diverse: Which Dangers we shall Obviate with
their Remedies, in Order.

Subsection I.
The Remedies of certain hazzards arising from the OVERGREATNESS Of One
COUNSELOR.
ONe overgreat Counselor may be Dangerous, First; in respect of His
Particular Temper, and Inclination: Secondly; in Regard of His Credit with his
Master: and Lastly; in Consideration of the Influence of That Power, and
Inclination upon the People.

The Overgreat Counselor we here treat of, is as the Malus Genius of a
Nation: and in Two Words, behold the Ground, and Sum of the whole Mischief.
It Is either Vice, or Weakness; applied to the Dishonor, or Damage, of a
Prince, and People.

Now to the Application of That Vice, or Weakness. And first, what ill use may
be made of the One, and what ill effects may proceed from the Other, by virtue
of his Credit with his Master.

If he be Ambitious; Ambition dangerous in a Favorite.
He Is placed upon the very Point, for Popularity. Whom can he not Oblige; by
Hopes, Rewards, Preferments? Whose Tongue cannot He Charm, either to Speech,
or Silence? Whose Reputation; Suit; Fortune; nay in some Cases; Whose very Life
it self, and Liberty, are not dependent upon his Favor? If This Aspiring
Humor be accompanied with a Sharpness of Judging; a Felicity of Contriving;
and an Impulse of Enterprizing: The Master of such a Servant should do well to
Look about him.

It may be Replied, that doubtless so he would, if he saw any Reason to
apprehend his Abuse of That Power; But the Knowledge of the Person, does
sufficiently warrant the Reason of the Dispensation. To which, we Answer; that
though Sovereign Princes are not a comptable to Others, yet they are to
Themselves; both for the Expedience, and Equity of their Actions: And enring
into their own Souls, it is very possible, that they may discover some
Incongruities betwixt their Affections, and their Convenience. Some
Incongruities I say; and such, as may induce the wisest Prince, and the most
Indulgent Master; even toward the most Loyal, and Moriting Servant, to limit
the Graces of his Inclination, to the Rules and Respects of his Office; and to
be wary, A Caution.
least while he Divide his Heart with his Friend, he share also his Authority
with his Subject: Therein, both Endangering Himself, and Grieving his People.

To Conclude; it is Great Prudence, in Public Affairs to commit Little to
Hazard: and it is no small Hazard, to expose a Favorite to strong
Temptations.

Where there are Servants that will employ their Masters Bounty against
Himself, (and of such only, we speak) if the Design be to supplant the
Sovereign, many Remedies may be found out, to frustrate That Ambition. Nay, (as
I have already hinted) whether there be such a Design, or not; it is good to
provide against the very Possibility of it. For, it is fitter, that the
Public should be indebted for it is well-being, to the Care of the Prince,
then to the Honesty of the Favorite.

Ambitious Natures do better in the Field, Ambition does better in a Soldier,
then in a Counselor.
then in the Court; and better yet Abroad, then at Home. If they will advance,
they grow Dangerous for their Power; if they receive a Check, they become so
for their Malice: whence it comes to pass, that we see Few Seditions without a
Malcontent of This Quality, in the Head of them. These are a sort of People, of
whom a Prince cannot be too wary. But we are here to provide against the
Ambition of a Person Raised by Favor, not Aspiring: and from such a one, the
Peril is greater, by reason of the means he has, both to Compass his Ends,
and to Disguise them.

Sir Francis Bacon proposes the Mating of One Ambitious Person with Another;
and in extremities, the Puzzling of him, with an Enterchange of Favors, and
Disgraces, that he may not know what to Expect. Courses, no doubt, advisable,
to put an Insolent Favorite to a stand; if it may be as Safe to Disoblige him,
without Disarming him: but That depends much upon the Complexion of the Person,
according as he is Bold, or Fearful.

There is not any thing which more fortifies, It is the Interest of a Prince to
dispose of Offices by Particular Direction.
and establishes a Monarch, then the disposal of all Offices, and Charges of
Trust, by his particular Choice, and Direction, without the Interpose of any
Public Recommendation: Nor can he transfer That Care to his Great Counselor
without a great share of his Power. And here is the Difference; the one way,
they are the honorable dependencies of the Prince; and the Other way, they are
the suspected Creatures of the Favorite: who by This Indulgence, makes One
Party at Present, and Another in Expectation.

A Warynesse in This Particular, breaks the Neck of his Design.

It is good also for a Prince fairly, and Publicly to Refuse him some
Requests, and where the Suit is too bold, to Check him for Others: That the
World may see, that there are Some things which he cannot obtein; and Others,
which he must not Dare to Ask. Whereas, if he carries all without Reserve, the
Majesty of the Sovereign is lost in the Power of the Favorite. The Advice of
King Charles the Martyr, to his Sacred Majesty now in Being, shall put an End
to This Point.

Never repose so much upon any man's single Counsel, (...) Page 240.
Fidelity, and Discretion, in menaging Affairs of the First Magnitude (that is,
Matters of Religion, and Justice) as to Create in your self, or others, a
Diffidence of your own Judgment, which is likely to be always more Constant,
and Impartial to the Interests of the Crown and Kingdom, than any man's.

This may suffice to Prevent a dangerous Over-greatnesse: How to (...) an
Insolent Favorite.
but if it be found Necessary to Crush it; (as in case of a bold, and manifest
Transgression of Duty, and Violation of Law) Something like an English
Parliament does it best; and much better to be promoted by the People, then by
the Sovereign.

A Second Danger, The Danger of a Favorite that upholds a Faction.
is, when a Prime Minister employes his Credit to uphold a Faction: and it is
the more Dangerous, by the hardness to know what it is. As whether it be
Ambition, Corruption, Popularity; or, in fine, some other Secret Interest. It
may be, they have Need of One-another.

Nothing can be more perilous then This Correspondence, And menage of his
Design.
when a proper Instrument has the menage of it. Oh how he Detests the Faction!
But yet Truly in such, and such Cases; and for such and such Persons; and upon
This or That Nick of Time; if Matters were Ordered so and so. -- And Then, the
Insolence of a Schism is Palliated with the Simplicity of a Scruple: and for
such Cases as will bear no Other Plea, is found out the Color of an
indisputable Necessity. Not to prosecute the several Artifices, by which some
Truths are Disguised, others Suppressed: Those Suits Promoted; These Compleints
Smothered: and finally; by which, both Men, and Things are quite misrepresented.

Kings cannot possibly see all things with their own Eyes, St. (...). Bacon.
nor hear all things with their own Ears, so that they must commit many great
Trusts to their Ministers.] The Hazard then is Great, when the Confident of
the Monarch is the Advocate for the Enemies of the State. But above all, if he
be Surly and Imperious to the Tried Servants of the Crown;
That looks like a Design, to Introduce one Party to Betray the Prince, and to
discourage or Disable Another from serving him.

We are here upon a Supposition, that a Master may be mistaken in a Servant:
and that a Servant may abuse his Credit with his Master. In case This be; What
Remedy?

Supposing the Favorite still in Credit, we must Imagine the Sovereign still
in the Mistake: and therefore not expect a Remedy as to the Person, but rather
fetch Relief from some General Rules of Government: which shall neither
disoblige the Favorite, if he be Honest; nor e^^pose the Prince, if he be
(...):-But This is better done at the Beginning of a Kings Reign, then in the
Middle of it; better upon Judgment of State, then Urgency of Occasion.

The Certain help is a fit Choice of Officers, How to disappoint an Ambitious
Design.
and Servants. Especially in such Places as have Numerous Dependencies; for
otherwise, Three or Four Persons Leaven the Court; half a Dozen more, the
Soldiery; and in Conclusion, a Great Favorite, with a few select Instruments
of his own making, may at his Pleasure seize the Government. This was the Rise
of the Second Race of Kings in France.

Yet God forbid, Favourit^s necessary to the Prince,
that Princes should make Themselves, and their Privadoes miserable, by
Eternal, Causeless, and Unquenchable Iealousies: That Kings should be
Debarred That Blessing, and Relief, without which, Life's a Plague, and Royalty
a Burden. That is; the Use and Comfort of a Friend: [to whom (as the Oraculous
St. Albans) he may Impart, his Griefs, Ioys, Fears, Hopes, Suspicions,
Counsels, and whatsoever lies upon his Heart, to oppress it; in a kind of
Civil Shrift, or Confession:] and from whence, (with the same Author) he may
reap, [Peace of affections, and Support of Judgment.]

Nay, and desirable to the People.
take the Subject's Interest in Too; what can be more Desirable, then for a
Prince to have a Watchful, Wise, Faithful Counselor; and the People, a
Firm Prudent Patriote, in the same Noble Person? Accursed be the man that
envies Either. Yet Here Is a Line still drawn betwixt Majesty and Kindness;
which the One cannot pass, without Diminution, nor the Other transgress
without Presumption. In fine; the Right of Placing, or Displacing Officers,
lies on the Kings side of the Chalk, and falls under the Head of Reward or
Punishment.

King James in the Second Book of his (...), delivers Excellent Advises to
Prince Henry, concerning the Choice of Servants.

First; Concerning the Choice of Servants.
See that they be of a Good Fame, and without Blemish.

Next; Let them be Honest and Fit.
See that they be Endued with such honest Qualities, as are meet for such
Offices as ye ordeyn them to serve in; that your Judgment may be known in
Employing every man according to his Gifts.

Thirdly; Of approved Loyalty to the Father.
I Charge you, according to my Fatherly Authority, to prefer Specially to your
Service, so many as have truly served Me, and are able for it. -- For if the
Haters of your Parents cannot Love you, it follows of Necessity, that Their
Lovers must Love you.

Choose your Servants for your own Uses, Not upon Recommendation.
and not for the Use of Others: and hearken not to Recommendations, more for
serving in effect, their Friends that put them in, then their Masters that
admit them.

Especially take good heed to the choice of your Servants, Public Natures for
Public Places.
that you prefer to the Offices of the Crown and Estate: for in Other Offices,
ye have only to take heed to your Own Weal, but These concern likewise the
Weal of your People; for the Which, ye must be Answerable to God. Be careful
to Prefer none, as ye will be answerable to God, but for their Worthynesse.

Employ every man as ye think him Qualified; Not One to all Purposes.
but Use not One in all Things, lest he wax Proud, and be Envied by his
Fellows.

These were the Directions of a Prince, then whom no Man spoke more upon
Experience: and very hardly shall a Sovereign that takes This Course, even upon
any Account, Miscarry.

Another Profitable Course might be for a Prince to set his Favorite his
Bounds, Let a Prince set his Confident his Bounds, aforehand
aforehand. As for the Purpose; that in such and such Particulars, concerning
Law, and Religion, or wherein his Peculiar Interest is concerned; he never
presume to move him above Once; and that in certain Other Cases, he presume not
to move him at all. By these means, the Favorite is minded of his Duty, the
Prince of his Dignity: and Both Secured; the One, from the Hazard of Granting
too much; the Other from the Temptation of Asking it. So far from being
Impracticable, is This Proposition; that, on the contrary, it is Obvious and
Easy. As for Instance.

There are some things which a King cannot Grant as a Christian; Others, which
he cannot Grant as a King; and some again, which he cannot Grant as a Wise man.
So that Reserving to himself, a Freedom (even from Solicitation) in These
Niceties of Conscience, In Points of Conscience, Honor and Convenience, let
not a Favorite press the Sovereign.
Honor, and Convenience; the Favorite may make his Best of the Rest. The
Relation betwixt a Governor, and his People, is like That of Man, and Wife: A
man may take his Friend into his Arms, but not into his Bed. To make an end of
This; That Favorite that presses his Master to any thing which evidently
exposes him, to Contempt or Hatred, does probably Design his Ruin.

To run through the whole Body of Humane Frailties, would be too Tedious; Let
it suffice, that Those Vices (whether Devilish, or Brutish) which in a Private
man, are Mischievous, or Shameful, are much more so in a Person armed with
Power to Execute the Malice, and qualified with an Eminence, to Recommend a
lewd Example.

Where a Great Trust is committed to a Weak Person; It matters not much to the
Public, whether he be True, or False: for Futility, in him, has the Effect of
Treachery in another: The One Blabs his Masters Secrets, and the Other Betrays
them.

The Third Hazard from the Over-greatnesse of One Counselor, The Danger of
Over greatness as to the People.
arises from the Influence of his Power, and Inclination upon the People: And
That, either as to their Love, or Hatred. The Popular Part we have already done
with: (that is, so far as it concerns the making of a Party to Himself; and the
Remedies of That Danger) That which remains, shall be divided into Pride,
Covetousness, and Mis-advise.

It is seldom seen, A Proud man in Power.
that a Proud man in Power, is not withal Insolent, Vain, and Cruel. The
first to his Superiors, where they will suffer it: The Next to his Equals,
till they are Sick of it: and the Third, to his Inferiors, till he is Hated
for it.

A Favorite of This Temper, makes it his Glory to be thought the Dictatour to
his Master: Disputing, Excusing, Cavilling, upon Mandates and Directions, (as
Sir Francis Bacon) His style is, Ego and Rex Meus; and the Consequence of This
Boldness is to lessen the Sovereign in the Eyes of his Subjects.

It is harder for a Prince to Discover This Audacious Humor, Easily crushed.
then to Crush it; let but the King withdraw his Favor for one Moment^ and of
himself, he falls below the Scorn of Those he lately Trampled on.

If he be Covetous; A Covetous Great man.
The Person of the Prince, and the Honor of the Nation are exposed to Sale:
and the People Squeezed to fill his Coffers, till they have not Bread left for
their own Bellies. This brings the Multitude to Sterve, or Tumult; and There Is
a Kingdom Swallowed by a Favorite.

We here suppose the Worst; and yet even These Extremities, are not quite
Deplorate, and Helpless. Spunges will Spue, as well as Suck; and it is but the
Monarch's sending of the Popular Assembly in quest of the Public Treasure, to
fetch it up again.

Now whence proceeds this Mischief, The Mischief of False Intelligence
but from Misadvise? not want of Prudence, but of Enformation: or which is
worse; from Tales framed to the Passion, and Advantage of the Teller. He Is
made an Enemy to the State, that is not a Friend to This or That Design. Dangers
are Pretended, where there are none; and Security, where there are: And (which
is the Curse of These Ill Offices) the Wisest, and the Bravest of Princes, are
subjected to Delusion, and Surprise, in Common with their Contraries. Could
Solomon' s Wisdom tell him which of the Two Harlots was the Mother of the
Child, without a further means of Decision? Or Could Caesar' s Courage oppose
the Fate of the Senate? In Matters of Fact, Princes, as well as Others, are to
be Instructed by Report; and if from a Person whom they have Reason to believe,
they receive Notice of a Matter whereupon they have not Time to Deliberate;
their Proceedings are to be Directed by the Fairest Appearance of that
Relation. In fine, if a Servant will betray his Master, there is no avoiding it,
for he must Trust somebody. [Remember well ( says Sir Francis Bacon in a
Letter of Advice to the late Duke of Buckingham) the great Trust you have
undertaken, Good Advice (...) Counsel (...).
you are as a Continual Centinell, always to stand upon your Watch, to give
him ( the King) True Intelligence. If you Flatter him, you Betray him; If you
Conceal the Truth of Those things from him which concern his Justice, or his
Honor, (although not the Safety of his Person) you are as dangerous is
Traitor to his State, as he that rises in Arms against him.]

If such as only withdraw their Allegiance from their Prince, are so Criminal;
how much are They to blame then, that, where his Conscience, Life, and Dignity,
lie all at Stake; abuse, and mispossesse him! That cry;
Not That way Sir, for the Lords sake, go This way rather! and so Betray him,
from his Guards into an Ambush.

But Centaurs are scarce more Monstrous in Nature, then These men are in
Manners; and I may seem perhaps very hand driven for want of work, to employ my
time in the searching out of Remedies, for Mischiefs so Improbable. Truly His
Conceit, that imputes the Omission of a Law against Patricides, to a
Presumption that the Crime would never be committed, does not at all divert me
from Believing, Prudence provides for the worst.
that Prudence is to Provide for the Worst; and Nothing left to Chance, that
may be Secured by Counsel. Wherefore, I Proceed to my Prevention.

Since the Only Certainty of what is Done, or Said, comes from the Eye, or
Ear; and that the Sovereign cannot be every where; so that he must either give
Credit to Relation; or know nothing of Affairs at a Distance; let us Consider,
by what means a Prince may most probably escape the Snares of a Mis-enformer.

To advise upon the Choice of the Instrument; is but to say, Choose an Honest
man, and he will not betray you: And not to let any man deceive you Twice, is
but the After-game of Wisdom; for the First Error may be Fatal. Reward and
^unishment keep People in Order.
We must look out some other Course then, and a Better I know none, then a
Strict Justice, and Severity, of Reward, and Punishment. A False Intelligencer
is as bad as a Spy. Wherefore, let a Prince suppress Calumnies, and encourage
Accusations, that he may not take his Friends. for his Enemies, and his Enemies
for his Friends. What can be a Greater Injury to the Sovereign's Honor, then
by a false Story, to cause him Love where he should almost Hate, and Hate where
he should Love? Punish where he should Reward, and Reward where he should
Punish? It breaks the Heart of Loyalty, This sad Mistake, and strengthens the
Hands of Treason. Who would dare to put These Affronts upon Majesty, and
Innocence, if upon Detection, the Scandal were made as dangerous to the
Reporter, as the Consequence to the Sufferer? And This we take for a sufficient
Mean, to keep Malicious Buzzes from the Ears of Princes.

But This is but the work halfe-done; for there are certain Truths as Necessary
to be Told, as are These Calumnies to be Concealed; Honest Truths are Dangerous.
and where the Undertaker of the Office, runs a far greater Risque to serve his
Prince, then the Other does to Ruin him. These Offices are discharged, by
Mercenary Persons, for Reward; and by the Worthyer Sort, for Reverence-Sake,
and Duty. So that betwixt the Fear of Punishment, the Hope of Benefit, and the
rare Integrity of Those that stand firm without considering Either; a Prince
may easily secure himself of Good Advise, and Right Intelligence; and That, (at
least within Himself) amply suffices to his Establishment.

That Kings are Men; who Doubts? And it is as much Their Duty to Remember it, as
it is Their Subjects, not to be too Prying into the Slips of Their Humanity.
Their Clergy are to Prescribe to their Souls; Their Physicians, to their
Bodies; and their Counselors are to Advise in Point of Government: But it is
within the Pale of every Private man's Commission, to offer his Intelligence. As
for Example; A Case put.
Suppose a Counselor of State denies the Kings Supremacy. Shall it be counted
Saw^inesse in a Particular Person to acquaint the Monarch with it? We Will make
an end with This. That State is in an ill Condition, where he that would save
his Prince, must ruin himself: and where One Party is bolder to do the King
Mischief, then the Other is to do him Good. It is now high time to take another
Stepp; and we will stay but a Moment upon it.

Subsection II.
How to frustrate a Combination of Diverse Counselors.
THe Dangers of a Combination in Diverse Counselors are, in Respect of their
Power, and Privileges; their Credit, their Dependencies, (either by Office, or
Expectation) Their Opportunities of Concealing, or Protecting their Friends.
And finally, in Respect of their Intelligence betwixt the State, and the
Faction.

This Confederacy is so liable to be Discovered* so dangerous to be Suffered,
and so easy to be disordered, that it is scarce worth the while, to speak to
so Manifest an Inconvenience. In Little; if they are not Removed as they are
found F^ulty; Disgraced, as they appear Bold; or Secluded from such
Consultations as properly concern the Difference in Question: It will be a hard
matter for a Prince to struggle with a Faction that is assisted by so many
Advantages. If it were nothing else but the mere point of Intelligence; it were
enough to Endanger the Crown; to have a Faction privy to all the Counsels,
Resolves, Deliberations, and Necessities of the Monarch.

In the Lower Region of the Court, The Lower Region of the Court.
we have supposed Three sorts of People, that may Occasion Great
Inconveniences: to wit; Insatiate Beggars; Corrupt Officers; and Ill
Paymasters. I might have added Two more; that is, Men of Ill Lives, and of Ill
Principles. The First of these Five; I thought to have placed in the Upper
Division; but it Commonly belongs to Both; only These Beg Oftener; the Other
More: and to speak the truth of the business, where This Trade is in Fashion,
it may be observed, Four or Five Beggars in Chief.
that there are not above Four or Five Beggars in Chief, and the Rest Beg under
Them; as it falls out sometime in Popular Representatives; A few Get up, and
the Rest Truckle.

Where This Humor is much Indulged, the Consequence of it, is not only
Faction, within the Walls, but a General Coffeehouse, and Necessity
throughout the Nation: For when the Ordinary ways of Profit are disposed of,
Recourse is had to Project, and Invention; which, if not very tenderly menaged,
leaves the King a sad Luser at the Foot of the Account. Beside, that it
Anticipates the Prince his Generosity,
and by Exacting, rather then Obteyning, takes away the Freedom of his Choice,
and Bounty.

The way for a Prince to Help This, is either to put a Stint upon the Suitour,
or a Restreint upon his Proper Goodness; and even where he is Resolved to
Give, not to do it suddenly; lest he appear to Give for the Asking, without
considering the Merit. Let him further have a Particular Care of Persons that
grow Proud upon his Favors: The same weakness of Mind that makes them Proud,
will quickly make them S^wcy too: and the reason is, they think they have got
the better of him.

Corrupt Officers are Another Pest of a Court* Corrupt Officers a General Pest.
and Bane of a State: unless timely looked after; and Then, the Public may
be the Better for them. And it is no ill Policy in some Cases, to let Them
Squeeze for a while, that they may be worth the Squeezing Themselves: for no
Supply is more acceptable to the Generality, then That which is L^vy'd upon
their Oppressors.

The miserable Consequences of Ill-Payment, we have briefly touched upon,
Ill-Pay the reason of Ill-Payment.
Page 114. The Reason of Ill-Payment is commonly Ill-Pay; and Many must needs
get Nothing, when a Few get All: from which vast Inequality, arise Factions,
and Want. The best Remedy for This Evil, is, first to Enable Them to Pay, and
then to leave them to the Law if they Refuse. For Protections are only so far
Necessary to the Dignity of a Court, as they consist with the Peace, and
Justice of a Nation: that the Privilege appear not an Affront to the Law.

When a Court Pays Ill, Want of Money makes People Religious.
it had need Live Well; for when People are Poor, they grow Conscientious; and
for want of Money apply themselves to hearken after Religion: The Severest of
all Reformers being a Necessitous Multitude. Especially, let them absteyn from
Costly Sins; for to Expend much, and Pay nothing, is a most distasteful
Incongruity. To conclude; the General Rule of a Court, is the Example of the
Prince; whom they will be sure to follow in his Errors, and at least Imitate,
in his Virtues: Yet where some Particulars Extravagate, there will be also Need
of his Severity.

We come now to that Canker of the Government, The Ill-principled Courtier.
under the Shadow of the Governor; the Ill-Principled Courtier: who not only
causes Sedition, but is Himself the very Tincture of it. You must Expect to see
all look Pale, and Withered, where This Worm lies sucking at the Root. Can a
Prince be safe, that is served by his Enemies? Or a People Happy when the Soul
of the Public is in Danger? Yet, in some Cases, there may be Reason of State;
and That known only to the Sovereign, for which some Persons, in Exception to
This General Rule, may be admitted. Saving Those very Individuals, it may
behove the Prince not to let any one of the Rest escape; without a Strict
Enquiry; both by what Means, and to what likely End they are There Placed, and
Entertained. Which if he does, and Early too; before the whole Lump has taken
the Leaven; it is more then an Even Lay, that he will find Reason to Remove Them.
Proceed we now to the Camp.

Sect. IV.
How to Prevent Disorders arising from the CAMP.
THe Dangers from the Camp, Dangers from the Camp.
are Principally These Three* Mutiny, Revolt, or Popular Risings. (provoked by
the Oppression, or Insolence of the Soldiery) Of These, in their Order.

Mutinies may be Caused by Want of Pay; How Mutinies may be caused.
some defect of Discipline; by New-Modelling; Disbanding; Disgrace, etc. -- And
all These Disorders may be procured by the Artifice of some Particular Persons
that aim at an Advantage by them.

That Prince that Rayses an Army which he can not Pay Himself, raises it (in
effect) for somebody else that can. In short, a very great Hazard it is, to
have the Soldiery Dependent upon any Other Interest then That of the Monarch.
Where it so falls out, that a Prince lies subjected to the Double
Inconvenience, both of Having an Army, and of Wanting Money; Let him be sure of
a most Exquisite Choice of Officers, both for Honesty, and Ability: That the
Body likewise may be well Chosen, and well Governed. For he has enough to do,
that undertakes to keep his Troops in Order, without Pay; but if they want
Affection too,
the Point is Desperate. This is the Nick of Danger, and Temptation; for a
Necessitous Army, of This Mixture, is any man's Money that will offer for it:
Wherefore in such a Juncture, a Monarch cannot be too wary, of all Popular and
suspected Practices. Let him be sparing also, even in his Personal, and
Private Expenses, at such a time as This: For Military Spirits are apter to
take fire then Other People; and to distrust the Kindness of their Master, if
they observe that he has Money for his Pleasures, and none for his Servants. An
Observation, possibly neither Fit, nor True: However, when men are
discontented, they look upon small kindnesses as Nothing, and they see Injuries
Double.

The next hazard is, Good Pay will bear good Discipline.
upon the Point of Discipline; which, in an unpaid Army, can very hardly be
Preserved, but by the Exceeding Worthiness, and Prudence of the Officers. Nor
by That neither, beyond their Interest and Credit of Persuading: for Punishment
were Tyranny without Wages.

The New-Modelling of an Army is also a tickle Undertaking: Modelling and
Dis^banding are dangerous.
and so is the Dis-banding. The Former is the sharper Disobligation; but it is
but Personal: The Latter is the more Dangerous, for it Destroys the Trade:
And the Peril is either from the Influence of some Chief Officers in the One;
or from a Disposition common to all Military, as well as Natural bodies, in
the Other: that is, an Averseness to Dissolution. Both the One and the Other,
are a work to be dispatched with as much Care, and with as little Noise, as
possible: very Tenderly, and by Degrees.

If any Trouble be Apprehended from the Displacing of some Particulars, How to
New-Modell an Army.
(as he may possibly ressent the Loss of Power; or the Disgrace of being
singled out to lose it after such a Manner) it is but Casting out to him the Lure
of a Better Office, or of a Higher Preferment: wherein he may be more
Serviceable to Himself, and less Dangerous to the Public. Or if he be too
Craf^y to stoop to That; the way is to begin with his Dependencies. This leaves
him Naked; and the Other, Satisfied: At least in show, since to the World he
appears rather Exalted, then Ejected.

Dis-banding is a nicer piece of Business: How to Dis-band.
The very Word is scarce to be Mentioned, till the Thing is Done. For 'though
the State may be Judge when it is Convenient to Raise an Army; the Soldiery are
commonly the Judges when it is time to lay it down again. A Good Preparatory to
This, is Modelling, and Dispersing, before they have the wind of the Design; to
prevent their uniting against it. And by Degrees; One Regiment at a time; to
keep the Rest Quiet, in hope of Continuing. Let That be done by Lot too; for
the Losing Party will sooner forgive a Mischance, then an Unkindnesse. Touching
Mutinies that proceed either from opinion of Disgrace; dispute concerning
Precedence, Command, Provision, Quarter, etc. they may be referred to want of
Discipline.

The Causes of Revolts, The Causes of Revolts.
may be as many as of Discontents: But the Principal, are either Fear,
Despair, Revenge, or Inconstancy in the Common-Souldiery. And they may
likewise be Procured, either by the Ambition, or Corruption of the Chief
Officers.

The best Security against These General Defections, A good Choice is the best
Security against a Revolt.
is in the Original Election, and Constitution of the Army. Wherefore let Heed
be taken (as near as may be) even to the fitness of the meanest Private
Soldier: which in a fair degree may be atteyn'd, be good choice of Valiant,
Prudent, Vigilant, and Faithful Officers. Why should a Kingdom be hazzarded
for a Trifle? How small a matter added to either side carries an Equal
Balance! A Word, a Thought, an Imagination, a Mistake turns the Fortune of the
Day, and Decides the Battle. Is any thing more ordinary then a Panique Terror,
in a Crowd of People? which, as Mr. Hobbs hints in his Leviathan; is only an
Apprehension of Danger, in the first man that Runs; the Rest, Fearing, and
Running by example, every man supposing his Fellow to know why. At This Rate,
Ten Cowards may destroy Twenty Thousand Valiant men.

Against Despair; Arguments are best upon the Place; Revenge may be Prevented
by a Generous, and Military Severity. So that they shall neither have any
Provocation to the Attempt, nor Security in the Execution: But against Their
Inconstancy there is no Remedy.

The mischieves which may arrive upon the account of Ambition, or Corruption,
are scarce to be Prevented, but by choosing Persons of an Impregnable Fidelity;
or Otherwise, the Fairest Bidder carries it. And against Popular Risings,
nothing better then a Strict Discipline; and an Impartial Justice betwixt the
Soldiery and the Country. It does well also, to Interesse Both Parties,
(Civil, and Military) as fairly as possible, in the Common Care of the
Public: For a Pure Military Force has the Face rather of an Enemy, then of a
Guard: But where Persons of Eminent Repute, and Integrity in the Country are
joined in Commission with others as eminent for Martial Affairs, Both sides
are satisfied, and the Common Good better Provided for.

Sect. V.
How to Prevent, or Remedy Seditions arising from the CITY.
WHere the Metropolis is not well Seasoned, The Danger of an Ill^order'd City.
and in good Order, Many, and Great are the Advantages it has to Disturb a
Government. It has Men, Money, and Arms always at hand. But yet let a Prince,
in his Greatest Distress, have a Care how he Abandons it; for it is by much a
more dangerous Enemy at a Distance, then at Home.

The Ordinary Pretenses of a Troubled City, are either concerning Religion,
Oppression, Privileges, or Poverty, but still it is Ambition that sets the Wheel
going;
and it is the Monarch's yielding at first, that destroys him in the End. For
while the Party is Tender, and Wavering; the Humor Corrigible, and the
Authority of the Prince, not as yet either exposed by Patience, or Profaned by
Popular Contempt, and the Insolences of the Rabble; Then is the time, to cut
off all Possibility of Sedition. Murmurings are but the Sm^ak of Rebellion; the
Fire's already in the Straw, but easily smothered: That is, if seasonably
looked after: for if it break forth into a Blaze, All the Buckets in the Town
will hardly Quench it. The very first Mutterings against the Government, are
but a pretty way of putting the Question; as who should say, Sir, May we
Rebel? And the Forbearance of the Prince, seems to Answer them: Yes; Ye may.
And Then, to work they go.

First, Pretext of Religion is a danger^us and wicked Quarrel.
upon Religion: the most Dangerous, and the most wicked Quarrel in Nature. Is
there a God? Or, Is there None? Let any Reasonable Rebel, whether Atheistique,
or Religious, answer me. If a God there be; Is there a God?
Upon what Nation will he power out the fierceness of his Wrath; Upon what
Heads will he employ his Thunder? If not upon That Nation, where his Divinity
is made a Stale; His Majesty Affronted in all his Attributes: And upon Those
Heads, that entitle the Basest of Corruptions to his Immaculate Purity; and the
Dictates of the Devil, to the Inspirations of the Blessed Spirit.

Now to Those that say in their Heart, Or ^s there None?
There is No God: They Will yet allow the Political Convenience of persuading the
People otherwise. So that where This Freedom in Matters of Religion is
permit^ed to the Multitude: Either the Abuse draws down a Vengeance from
Heaven, or the Superstitious League among the People unites a Party against the
Sovereign.

To deal frankly; All Seditions proceed from Misgovernment.
All Seditions are to be imputed to Misgovernment: To the want of Early Care in
the Magistrate. One Man begins; He Imparts himself to Others; They Conferr with
Their Interests, and so the Mischief Branches it self, till it comes to
Overspread a Nation. How easy a matter is it, to Smother a Spark in the
Tinder-Box? A little Harder, to blow out a Candle: Harder yet, to put out the
Fire. In short, when the Town is in a Flame, thank Him that neglected the first
Spark.

The Prince that would prevent Schismatic Seditions, Begin with the Clergy
to prevent Schism.
in a City, must begin with the Clergy, and assure himself of the Pulpit. To
say it is Dangerous; may in some Cases be a Truth. But Dangerous as it is; If it
be more so, to let them Alone, What signifies That Objection? Suppose the
Hazard almost desperate, on the One side: But there is a never-failing
Certainty on the Other: Here it is Hard; There it is Impossible. It is Necessary
also to Suppress Conventicles, Pamphlets, and all other Irregularities, which
either Draw People together, or Unite them, in Order to a Separation.

In a Particular manner, Let the Magistracy be well-affected.
let heed be taken, that the Magistracy of the City, consist of Persons
Well-affected to the Government of the Church: And if they Struggle, let them
be timely Taught, That the Liberty of their Charter, does not discharge the
Bond of their Allegiance. This Strictness ought to be indispensable; for it is
not to be Expected, that One Schismatique should Punish Another.

The Second Grievous Compleint is Oppression; and whether it be True or False,
let it be strongly Urged, and Credited, it is the same thing.

Some Oppressions are Procured at the Instance of certain Ill Instruments about
the Sovereign; Oppression procured by Ill Instruments.
on purpose to stir up the People against him. And This is done, by showing how
Other Princes hamper Their Capital Cities: Never considering, that the same
manner of Governing will no more sit all Varieties of Custom, Temper, and
Situation, then the same Doublet and Hose will sit all Bodies. And then they
Cry, This Damned City must be Humbled, and Taken down. It Is very Right; but
This must be spoken sof^ly, and done warily. For to Level the Menace at the
City, in stead of the Delinquent, is a great Mistake. In such a Heat as This, a
Prince needs no more then Three or Four Churlish, and Rash Officers;
Two or Three spiteful, and Illegal Actions, to bring his Royalty in danger.
Briefly; a Mean there is, betwixt Fury, and Slumber; and equally ruinous to
Princes, are Those Counsels that lead to either of These Extremes.

May not That very thing which These people pretend they aim at, be done by
Gentle, Legal, and Familiar means? Let them Choose their own Officers; That
pleases the City: But it is the Public Care to see the Choice be Honest: and
that secures the Prince. On the One side, no Clemency can be too great, that
stands with the Rule of Government: On the Other side, no Severity too strict,
in Case of a Contumacy that Crosses it.

Burdensome Taxes are many times a Great Compleint, and sometimes a Just one.
Lighter, o^ Heavyer they are, according to the various Humors of the Prince;
and the different Exigencies of Times, and Occasions; Nay, and according to the
differing Disposition in the People at several times, to understand them
Public Necessities must be Supplied; and the Supreme Magistrate is the Judge
of Public Necessities. Though the Levy be Extraordinary, let the way be
Ordinary.
Yet still where a more then Ordinary Levy is Necessary, the Ordinary way of
Raising it may be Convenient: for the One way, they only stumble at the Present
Burden; but the Other, they are startled with an Apprehension of the
Perpetuity of it. In which Case, it fares with Rulers, as it does with Racking
Landlords, in Comparison with Those that Let better Penny-worths. The One has
more in his Rentall, but the Other has more in his Pocket: and the reason is;
the Tenants run away with the Rent.

Sir Francis Bacon is of opinion that [Taxes, and Imposts upon Merchants, do
seldom good to the King's Revenew; for that he wins in the Hundred, he loses
in the Shire; the Particular Rates being Increased, but the Total Bulk of
Trading rather Decreased.]

Some Oppressions again there are, that proceed only from the violence of
Extorting and Corrupt Officers. To Compleints against Abuses of This Quality, a
Prince his Ear is to be ever Open; for it is in a Peculiar manner, his Duty, to
Relieve the Oppressed. A Prince that Invades the Privileges of a City, Breaks
his Word: Privileges are Sacred.
If they are Forfeited, he may resume, or Remit at Pleasure: otherwise, let
them stand Sacred. It can never be safe to Govern ad Libitum: for when People
find no Security in Obedience,
it puts them upon the Experiment of Sedition. If a Monarch has an overgrown
Subject, that he would be quit of; that he would Sacrifice to his proper
Advantage; let him but give him a Temptation to Encroche upon the Rights, or
Customs, of his Imperial City: and if he take the Ba^t, let him Discover him,
and bring him upon the Stage for a Public Oppressor. Such an Action lays
That City at his ^eet. To Finish; That Prince that would have his Subjects
firm to Him, in Danger; must be Kind to Them* in Peace.

The Fourth and Last motive to Sedition, Poverty is a terrible Enemy.
is Poverty: A Terrible Enemy to a Great and Populous City; nor is such a City,
in Extreme Want, a less For^^dable Enemy to the Monarch* for Hunger is neither
to be Awed, nor Flattered.

The Causes of it are so many, and so uncertain, it is hard to assign particular
Remedies. In some Cases, Restreint of Bu^lding i^ convenient; In others, (...)
Laws; the Regulation and Emprovement of Trade; The calling of Corr^^t Ministers
to Account, etc. -- For fear of the worst, it is good, if the Necessito^^ Party
grow Numerous, for the Prince rather to make War with Them abroad, then to
stay, till They make it upon Him, at Home; by That means, exchanging a Civil
War, for a Foreign.

If the Mischief be too far gone, The Prince not to forsake his Metropoli^.
and that it breaks forth into a Direct Sedition; yet can it very hardly
happen, that a Prince can warrant the forsaking of his Metropolis.

First, with Five Hundred men he keeps a Million in Awe; That is, if He
Himself, and his whole Party, be not Coup'd up under the same Roof. They can
Destroy Him, by Number; and He, Them, by Fire.

Next; Let the Prince but carry the First Scu^^le, and (the World to nothing)
the Town is his own. Whereas, let Him withdraw; so great is the Advantage he
leaves to the Rebels, both as to the Readiness, and Proportion, of Men, and
Provisions for War; that (at a Distance) he may get the B^tter of Fi^e or Six
Pitched Battles, and yet Lose all at Last. For They shall sooner Re-enforce a
Broken Army, then He Recruit a Shattered Regiment.

A Third Reason may be, that it Lessens the Reputation of his Power, to give
Ground.

We shall conclude with the Fourth; which is, That Citizens will stand better,
far from Home, then under their own Walls: for what with the Impo^tunities of
their Relations: Their Interests in vie^^^ and the Convenience of a Near
Retrea^; They Fight in Distraction. We speak here of a Civil War, for against
a Foreign Force; These Reasons transport them into a more Determinate
Obstin^tion. from the City, now for the Country,

Sect. VI.
How to Prevent Seditions from the COUNTRY.
IT is very rarely seen that the Country begins a Seditious Quarrel, unless
in case of some Barbarous, and Depopulating Tyranny, or for pure want of Bread.
In Truth, their Business is too Innocent, and They Are so full on it too, they
have scarce Leisure from their Sleep, and Labor, to Think of Wrangling; and
when they do, they dread it. The hurt They do, is by Siding, and Seconding, and
That Unwillingly too: So that to keep Them Quiet, no more is Necessary, than to
have an Eye upon their Patrons, and to allow the Common Sort only to live upon
their Labors.

Sect. VII.
Certain Cautions directing how to prevent and avoid dangers arising from the
BODY REPRESENTATIVE.
THere are Three grand Hazzards which occurr in the Consideration of a Body
Representative. The Choice of the Persons; The Menage of Affairs; And the
Subject Matter of their Consultations.

Touching the Choice; Let the Choice be Legal, and Prudent.
Regard must be first had to the Legality; and Then, to the Prudence of it:
That the Candidate may be of such Age, and Quality; and Chosen in such Manner,
as the Law of the Place requires: And moreover, that he be a Person of Moral
Integrity; A Lover of his Prince, and Country; and one that Understands his
Duty, and Employment. There is a Duty also Incumbent upon the Electours; That
they be not Corrupted by Money,
Overborn by Importunity, or Transported by Fear, or Favor, to an Unworthy and
Unsuitable Choice. From the want of This Care and Fidelity, proceed many times
the Ruin of Princes, and the Subversion of Kingdoms.

Before the Sovereign Summons This Grand Convention,; he may consider how the
Last Ended; The Present Temper of his People; and hold a Strict Intelligence
concerning such Persons, and Fellowships, as are likely to Cross him.

If the Last Assembly Acted and Concluded to the Satisfaction of Himself and
the Kingdom, He may Hope well of the Next: but if the Contrary, let him expect
a Faction: Unless in the Intervall, he take off That Animosity: which may be
attein'd by doing That Himself, as of his own mere Grace, and Motion, which may
bear some Proportion with what they would have done by Their Deputies. There Is
a great Difference, Better the Sovereign Reform, then the Counsel.
betwixt a King's Reforming of Abuses by Himself, and by his Counsel: In the
One Case, it looks as if the People helped Themselves: and makes them think
better of their Own Authority, then they ought to do: In the Other, they find
Themselves Dependent upon the Grace of the Sovereign, and ascribe the Relief to
his Bounty. In fine* it is not amiss for a Prince still to usher in, the Call
of his Great Assembly with some Particular Obligation upon his Subjects.

As to the Rest; if the Prince finds The Temper of the People Peevish, and
Factions Boiling; such as no Clemency, and Goodness can Engage; the less
Subject for Clamor he leaves them, it is the Better; and if upon Convening, he
finds the Mixture Petulant, and Sour; he may with the less noise Dismiss
them.

According to the Choice of Persons, The effects of a Good Choice,
will be the Menage of Affairs: The Public Good; Particular Justice, and the
Dignity of the Assembly, will be the Chief Care of a good Choice: but if the
Choice be Bad; and of a Bad.
These Noble Offices, and Regards, will be the Least part of their Business.
They fall then into Partialities, and Sidings; Help me to day, and I Will help
you to morrow. Acts of State will be Biased by Particular Interests: Matters
Concluded by Surprise, rather then by any formal Determination; and the
Reverence of Order, and Reason will be dashed out of Countenance, by the
Voicings of Faction, and Clamor.

As Politic Bodies have no Souls, so Public Persons should have no Bodies:
but leave those Impediments of Justice, and Distractions of Counsel; (Project,
and Passion) at the Door of the Senate* In short; The Mischieves of Partiality.
where such a Partiality happens, as we here Imagine, the Two main Mischieves
are These: The Iniquity of the end, or the Disorder of the Means. The Former
may in some Measure be Prevented, by an Oath to deal ^prightly. (but the Grand
Failing was in the Election) The Latter may be Regulated by such a Clearness
of Rule, and Method; together with such a Strictness in the Observation of
That Rule, that both Every man may know his Duty, and no man dare to
Transgress it.

But Concerning the Subject Matter now of their Consultations, There lies the
Peril, when they come to reach at Affairs Foreign to their Congnisance. The
Hazard is This; stepp by stepp,
They Encroche upon the Sovereign* Clayming a Right to One Encrochement, from
the President of another. So that Meeting with an unwary Prince, they Steal
away his Prerogative by Inches; and when perchance* His Successor comes to
resume his Right; That Pilfery is called the Liberty of the Subject, and
There Is a Quarrel started betwixt the King and his Subjects. Then comes the
Doctrine in Play, that* Kings are Chosen for the Good of the People, and that
the Discharge of that Trust and Care is the Condition of his Royalty. The very
Truth is, All Government may be Tyranny. A King has not the Means of Governing,
if he has not the Power of Tyrannizing, Here Is the short of the Matter. We are
certainly Destroyed without a Government, and we may be Destroyed with one:
(...) a ^yranny, then (...) Anarchy.
So that in Prudence, we are rather to choose the Hazard of a Tyranny, then the
Certainty of being worried by One-another. Without more words, The Vulgar End
of Government is, to keep the Multitude from Cutting one another Throats:
which they have ever found to be the Consequence of Casting off their
Governors.

When Popular Conventions have once found This Trick of gaining Ground upon the
Sovereign; they catch their Princes, commonly as they do their Horses, with a
Sive, and a Bridle: (a Subsidy, and a Perpetual Parliament) If they will take
the Bit, they shall have Oats. But These are the Dictates of Ignorance, and
Malice: for such is the Mutual Tie and Interest of Correspondency betwixt a
Monarch, and his People; that Neither of them can be safe, or Happy, without
the Safety and Felicity of the Other.

The best way to prevent the Ill Consequence of the Peoples Deputies acting
beyond their Crbe, is Clearly, and Particularly, to State Those Reserves of the
Prerogative, with which they are not to Meddle. And so we will put an End to
This Section, and Chapter.

CAP. XI.
Certain Reflections upon the Felicity and Advantages of the Government of
England; with some Observations upon The present Juncture.
IN the Two last Chapters next antecedent to This, we have at Volly discoursed
the Rise, Progress, and (in some sort) the Remedies of Seditions, without
particular Application to Times, Persons, or Places. It is our Present Purpose,
to bring the Question nearer Home; by Looking a little into the Providence, and
Wisdom, of our Forefathers; The Happy Constitution of the English Government:
And Then, we must not pass This Late Degenerate Race of Cannibal-Christians,
without a Word or Two; From Whence, to the Distracted Iuncture we now live in;
and There we will Finish.

Very Prudent, The Ancient Prudence of England, for the Preven^ing of Sedit^ons.
and Effectual, both for the Preventing, and Suppressing of Seditions, was the
Provision of This Nation, till the Authority of the Prince was shouldered out
by the Insolency of the People: who of the Happiest Subjects in Nature, as well
in Respect of the Prince, as of the Government, worthily became the most
Prostitute Slaves, to the Basest of Tyrannies, and of Tyrants.

The Principal Courses employed for the Prevention, and Discovery of Practices
against the State, were These.

First, the Custom of Fridborghes; (so called, before the Conquest; and
Frank-pledges since) which was beyond Doubt, an Incomparable Expedient. (an
Invention I dare not call it, for it is Original may be ascribed rather to a
Necessity, then Contrivance.)

This was a Custom, The Custom of (...) or Frank-Pledges.
that obliged every Freeman, at the Age of Fourteen years, either to find a
Surety for his fidelity to the Public, or to suffer Imprisonment. Whereupon,
so many Neighbors (to the Number of Ten or a Dozein) became Bound one for
another: and each Particular, both for Himself and his Fellows: which
Combination they called a Pledge. The Condition of it.
The Condition was This. If any man Offended, and Run away, The ^est stood
engaged either to bring him forth within 31 days, or else to answer for his
Offense. And that none might escape, it was imposed upon the Sheriff, at every
County Court, to take the Oath of Persons as they grew up to the age of
Fourteen; and to see that they were all entered in some Pledge, or Other. So
that upon any misdemeaner, and escape; the Magistrate had but to enquire into
what Pledge the Offender was entered.

Oaths of Allegiance were also to be given in the Court-Leets to all Males of
above Sixteen: Oaths of Allegiance.
And Enquiries twice a year in the same Courts.

A Charge was given by Judges of the Kings Bench, to the Grand Jury Impannell'd
at Westminster; as also by Them and other Judges of Assize in their Circuits,
The Judges Charge concerning T^easons, etc.
twice a Year in every County, to enquire of Treasons, Seditions, and
Conspiracies.

Add to These, the Care of the Statutes of 2 E. 3. cap. 3. 7 R. 2. cap. 13. 20
R. 2. cap. 1. that no man should come or go Armed, before the Justices. By the
17 of R. 2. cap. 8. and 14 ^. 4. cap. 7. The Justices of Peace shall enquire of
Riots, and Unlawful Assemblies, and arrest the Offenders. Beside the Dreadful
Penalties in case of Treason, and the Severity of the Law in cases of
Misprision of Treason.

Were but This Vigilance duly employed, who would venture his Head upon so
desperate a Hazard?

Nor was This Watchfulness to Prevent Mischief, any hinderance to the
Readiness of the Nation to Suppress it.

The Nobility and Gentry, Knights Service.
that held by Knights-Service, were still to be Ready with Horse and Arms, at
any Summons; and upon pein of Forfeiture, to attend the King, or his Lieutenant
General, either at Home or Abroad, for Forty Days, at their proper Charge.

If That were not sufficient, the King had the whole Body of the Common People
for his Infantry: Commission of Array.
and an unquestionable Right, by his Commissions of Array, to put the Nation in
a Posture, from Eighteen to Threescore. Beside his Navall Guards* to clear the
Seas and watch the Coast; And This without any Dispute (in those blessed days)
who should be judge of the Danger.

As Nothing was here wanting to the Security of the Nation, which good Laws
could Contritribute; so was there as little wanting to the Felicity of the
People, in regard of the Constitution of the Government.

If it be True, Libido Dominandi Causa B^lli. Sal.
(as Salust says) that the Desire of Rule is the Cause of War: Where there is
no place for such Desire, there can be consequently no Cause of Quarrel. (At
least, there can be no Ambitious Cause; (the Canker of Great Minds, and deadly
Enemy of all Politic Settlements) This is the Happy case betwixt the King of
England, and the People.

Ambition presses forward still; The King is above Ambition.
and he that is Uppermost already, is above it. The Object of it is Conquest,
not Tyranny; and in a Monarch, (as I have said elsewhere) rather Enlargement
of Empire, then of Prerogative.

The People on the Other side; And the Commons Below it.
They are as much Below it. For the Nobility stands betwixt Them and Home: and
it is not for a Faction to take Two Stairs at a step. So that Their Business,
is but Freedom from Oppression, without the least Thought of Dominion.

Yet Differences break out, and Bloody ones; which by a Gross Mistake, we are
too subject to assign unto Wrong Causes. If ye would know the Right:
Cui prodest Scelus, ille fecit. The Gayners by a Public Ruin, are commonly
the Contrivers of it: and in all Wrangles betwixt the Royal, and the Popular
Interest, we may observe, that a Third Party reaps the Fruit of Their Division,
and seizes the Booty: The People only giving in Exchange, for the Name of
Liberty, the Substance of it; sinking a Monarchy into an Oligarchy; and
slipping the Nooze of One Government, to be Halter'd in another.

Were not the Multitude directly Mad, The Interests of the King and Commons are
Inseparable.
they would understand, that Their Well-beeing is so Inseparable from the
King's, and His from Theirs, that the One cannot long survive the Ruins of the
Other: And that when ever They Divide, the Factious part of the Nobility
deceives them Both. Therefore why should They either design upon the King, or
suspect His designing upon Them?

Touching the Peerage, The Peerage are either as Petty Kings, (...) Subjects.
I think we may consider them under this Note of Participation; either as Petty
Kings, or Powerful Subjects. In the One Capacity, they may seem Dangerous to
the People, in the Other to the King. If they presume on This hand, The Commons
are to Assist the King: If They bear hard on the Other, the King is to help the
Commons: by virtue of which Mediating mixture, of Power in the Nobility as to
the People; and of Subjection, as to the King: together with the mutual Need,
and Interest of a Fair Understanding betwixt King, and Commons, All Parties are
Secured: to the utmost possibility of Safety, and Satisfaction. Yet after all
This, There may be Danger of an Aristocracy. But concerning Government, and the
several Forms of it, in all their Latitudes, and Limitations; the Rights and
Interests of Kings, and the Bounds of Subjects, more then enough is said
already, and the Ball tossed so long till both the Gamesters, and Bystanders
are sick of the Dispute.

This Constitution which we have here represented so Eminent, The Excellent
Government of England was subver^ed by a mean ^action.
both for Defense, and Comfort, was nevertheless by a Mean, Wretched Faction
undermined; and yet no Age could ever boast greater examples of Love* Faith,
and Duty; of Christian, Civil, or of Military Virtues then were among the
Assertours of That Government. But all This stresse of Arms and Arguments, was
not sufficient to uphold the King, the Church, the Law, the Freedom, and the
Honor of the Nation. Their Actings were enough to Clear the Cause, Security
lost us.
but not to carry it: for they Began too Late; The Storm was Gathered, and the
Shipp of the Public engaged among a Thousand Rocks, before the Mariners would
believe the Danger: Accom^ting it, in Truth, too Little to be Considered, till
it was too Great to be Resisted. But reserving the more Particular Account of
the Late Kings Fate for the next Chapter: Let us at present, look about us
where we are; yes, and Above us too; for we have cause of Fear, both from
Divinity, and Reason.

In This Place now do I expect Observatours in Abundance. Here, a Marginall
Note for Taxing the Government. There a
for a Scandalum Magnatum. And in fine, Twenty Peevish Glosses upon my plain
and harmless Meaning. But let no man clap a false Bias upon my Bowl, and
carry That to the Wall, that was Intended to the Hedge. Yet let every man take
his course: I shall not beg so much as a Favorable Construction; but readily
submit every Syllable, and Action of my Life, (in what concerns my Duty to my
Prince, and Country) to the Extremest Rigor. Only a Page or Two of good
Advice to my Back-friends, and I Proceed.

Good People, A word to my Back f^iends.
(of what Sort, or Quality soever ye are) Pray'e do not spare Me, if you can do
me any mischief; but spare your selves, if you cannot.

You that have formerly abused Me to the King; do so no more: For when he comes
to find himself Betrayed by your Mis-enformations; and Distressed for want of
Those plain, honest Offices, which (so God save me) I have ever Meant and Paid
him, with the strict Faith, and Reverence of a Subject: Will not his Sacred
Majesty abhor you f^r it?

Or if ye are Resolved to Try the utmost force of Power, and Calumny, upon a
Poor and Single Innocent; be sure, ye be no Advocates for the Kings Murderers,
at the same time that ye are of Counsel against his Friends; ^he People will
suspect you to be of the wrong side else.

Again, since Proofs in Matters of Fact, are so Easy, and in Points of Honor,
so Necessary; Prove what ye say; or say Nothing: for wherein I am Faultlesse, I
am a Fool if I cannot clear my self; and a Slave, if I do not.

Consider next; What if ye crush me? May not the Consequence of That Injustice
prove Dangerous to your Selves? Beside; I am not now Now to Learn, what it is to
Suffer for my Duty.

But above all, Remember, There Is a God; that knows your Souls, and Mine; And
at the worst, to his Infallible Decision shall I remit my Innocence.

Now must I arm my self against These Objections.

Whom does This Saucy Fellow mean? Object.
Who meddles with him? He must be Directing the Church, and Modelling the
State: What has he to do with the Government?

This Saucy Fellow means, Answ.
Those Worthy Persons, that have endeavored to make him odious to the King:
and for no other Reason, (as in his Name, I swear) that he imagines, but
because he is too Honest, for Their Interest. If there be any such; Those are
the Men, he Means; If There be None, He has Offended no body; His Bolt is Shot,
and the Exception Vanishes. But Then who meddles with Him?

The Right Honorable the Earl of Anglesyes Chaplain meddles with him. The
Bishop of Worsters Animadverter meddles with him. My Lord BRADSHAW (Lord
Chief^Iustice of Chester) his most obliged, Ask Doctor Owen, and (...) That was?
most Thankful, and most humble Devoted Servant meddles with him. He that would
have Ravished the Ioyners Wife, near the Blew Bore in Oxford meddles with him.
He that (in effect) Read Aretine to his School-boyes meddles with him. He that
Betrayed, and would have Ruined his Master, that both Taught and Fed him,
meddles with him. He that has written against the Government both of Church
and State, and commended the Putting of the Late King to Death, meddles with
him. He that thinks himself Free to use any Posture in the Church, which he may
in his Chamber, meddles with him. He that wrote the Answer to all that L'S.
intends to say, Anglic^e D. ^.
meddles with him. And in fine, EDWARD BAGSHAWE, St. of Chapter Chapter meddles with
him.

But alas! These are a Pittyfull Meddler, and below the Honor of a Title to my
least Concern.

There are that do Ill Offices, betwixt the Best of Princes, and the most
Loyal of Subjects: And These men Meddle with Me among the Rest, though the
unworthiest of Them. Further; concerning my Directing of the Church, and State:
I have been hitherto only upon the Defensive; and, I hope, it is as lawful for
Me to Assert the Cause, as for Others to Oppose it.

Nor have I stickled more about the Government, then belongs to a Private
Person. A Private Person may discover a Public Enemy.
If I have discovered Traitors, 'twas but my Duty, and I had been a Perjured
Villein, if I had done Less. That They are Winck'd at, Protected, or Brought
off; is none of My Fault. If I have dealt in Presbyterian Prognostications; and
represented Dangers, such as I thought them. First, 'twas well Meant; for I
have kept my self within my Bounds; I had no Interest in it; and, I have got
Nothing by it. Next, 'twas not ill Guessed; and they that compare Times, will
easily Acknowledge it.

I am come now, within a Little, of my Purpose; and that This formal Preamble,
may not raise Expectations of a larger Liberty then I think either Safe, or
Warrantable; within These Limits, I resolve Strictly to Confine my self: That
is, within the Limits of what I ow to the Office, The King, the Law, the
Parliment, and the Counsel are Sacred.
Person, and Government of his Sacred Majesty; Within the Compass of my Duty
to the Established Law; and within the Terms of a befitting Reverence to the
Actions, and Authority, both of the Parliament now sitting, and of the Counsel.

He must be Deaf, that does not hear almost a General Compleint: And Blind
too, that does not perceive a great part of the Reason of it. There is a Party
that Designs it should be so: wherefore let them be wary, Beware of Imputing
the faults of a Faction to the Government.
how they impute the Malice, and Contrivance of a Faction, to any Disorder in
the Government. Their way is first, to Disoblige the Nation, in the King's
Name, as far as possible; for in the End, they are sure that all His Enemies,
will be Their Friends. The Subject wants; so does the King; (They should not
want that Served him else) There are that do not. But let That Pass.

Another main Prop of their Interest, The Faction has a great Advantage.
is that they have got the means of Upholding, both in Power, and Credit, That
Party which Opposed the King; which, in the Consequence, Reproaches and Sterves
those that were for him. While the Lay-Faction are in this manner upon Modelling
the State; the Ministers (in good time) are moving their Scruples, in the
Church. Wherein, beside the Amusement, that it gives even to Those in
Authority; the Doubtfulnesse of the Right betwixt Them, which it suggests to
the People; and the Reputation which it gives the Faction, when they appear in
the Balance against the Law, and the Government: there is yet one further
Mischief which transcends all These; That is, it Intimates, and Colors, to the
Multitude, the Right of the Last War; and by Justifying the Pretenses of That
Rebellion, subministers the Reason, Allowance, and Encouragement of Another.
Let it be observed; If These People should Strike again to morrow, upon the old
Score, whether they might not safely say, that they have been True to their
Principles; The Presbyterians are True to their Principles, but not to their
Profession.
for they have never as yet renounced them. When by These Artisices herein
mentioned, they shall have Cast the Body of the People into a deep Disquiet;
Confirmed their own Party; and either by Foreign Employments, or Domestique
Injuries, and Necessities, when they shall have Dissipated, Suppressed; nay,
actually Fa^^ish'd, and totally Extirpat'd the Tried Servants of the King;
where they will be Next, I leave the Reader to Imagine.

Nor will any man think Me Uncharitable, that Considers but their Daily
Actings, for the Project is as clear as the Light. Does not every body see what
Art and Industry is employed to Retard the Settlement of the Kingdom, Their
Industry.
and with what Vigorous Diligence they prosecute the Contrary? Nor will they
want any thing that is to be had, either for Money, or Fair words: The One Costs
them Nothing, and if they can do any thing by the Other, they have good
Security however: the Interest of the Three Kingdoms standing Engaged for the
Repayment of it. Marque Me; I say, IF they can; I do not say, either that they
CAN, or DO. To This Damned Cunning, observe now but the Luck they have.

How many Persons have I my self Delivered up,
and Discovered, for Publishing This King to be a Tyrant; his Father to have
been a Traitor, and lawfully put to Death? for Defending the Covenant, etc. --
(and all This since the Act of Indemnity) These People had the good hap to be
fetched off, and the Discovery rendered more Dangerous then the Treason.

Of Late, Two Libels.
there came forth Two Libels, (bearing the Title of Letters of Animadversion)
from the same hand: The One, against the Bishop of Worcester, the Other against
Me. The Author of These Libels, has the fortune to be Chaplain to a
Privy-Counsellour, and The Printer has Confessed upon E^amination, that he
delivered Five Hundred Copies of each, to ^agshawe's own hand (for that is his
Name) in the Earl of Anglesyes house. His Lord must be supposed a Stranger to
These Papers, for They are Treasono^s; and Seditious; beside the Forgery in
them, which alone renders the Contriver fitter for a Pillory, then a P^lpit.

It is further to be Presumed, The Libellers Character.
that his Lordship is not well acquainted with his Character: for otherwise, he
would not Entertein a Person of so Insolent, and Ungrateful a Nature; so
Seditious, and Turbul^nt in his Practices; Schismatical, if no^ ^eritical in
his Opinions. A professed Enemy, not only to the King, but also to Monarchy;
Doctor Owen's Dear Friend; and Bradshaw's Slave, to the bases^ degree of
Fawning Servility. (I write but what I Will justify).

Let any man Consider now, if This goes on a while, what will become of the
True, Legal, and Honorable Interest of This Nation. And (God in his Mercy
preserve his Majesty) what will become even of His Sacred Person when his
Friends and Loyalty it self shall be Extirpated?

But it is our own Fault, Kings had need to be well enform'd.
that the King is not more fully, and particularly enform'd of the Calamities
of his Languishing and Faithful Servants; and of the true State and Deportment
of the Faction. His Majesty is no God, and knows what is done at a Distance,
only as other Mortals do, by Enformation. Nay, Kings know commonly less,
concerning Affairs of This Nature, then Ordinary Persons. First, as they less
Frequent Places that afford matter for Observation: And Then, People do not
love to be the Reporters of Ill Tidings to their Sovereign. It Is commonly a
Thanklesse and Unwelcome Office.

Did but his Majesty walk the Streets, as we do; to Over-hear the Whisperings,
and the Murmurs: to Observe the various Passions, and Disquiets of the People:
to see the Stands they make; Their Wondrings, Gazings, Poyntings: and at What I
Pray'e?

That Is He ( says one) that brought me to a Counsel
of War, because I would not march against the King at Worcester; and now
he is so or so. There goes Another, that Condemned Me upon the Kings Account,
and he is in such or such an Office. These are brave Jolly Fellows; but before
This Wonder is Over, up comes Two or Three perhaps, of the saddest Spectacles a
man's eye can Look upon: They have scarce strength enough to move: nor Cloth
enough to hide the scars they have received in the Kings service. Do ye see
That Sickly man?
( cries one) He is a Gentleman that has spent his Fortune for his Majesty;
That very Colonel that goes before, was He that Sequestered, and Blundr'd him.

In fine, Their other Mutterings are not fit for the Public; but infinitely
necessary for his Majesty's Knowledge; whose Piety to his Fathers Ashes; Love
to his People; Prudential regards to his own Safety; whose Justice to his
Honor and his Friends, need but the Notice of these Ills, to remedy them. Or
if his Royal Inclination needed any other motive, beyond his native proneness
to an Act of Mercy; The Pious Presidents, and Practices of former Times might
furnish him.

Amongst certain Articles Established by the King, Bishops, and Lords, It was
Ordained,

That such as have belonged to the Kings Ancestors, 8 H. 6. 11.
his Father, Grandfather, or belonging to himself, shall be preferred to all
benefits or Offices belonging to the Kings disposition, so that there be found
among them persons able thereto.

Amongst certain Articles proposed by John Duke of Bedford, the Kings first
Uncle, It was Ordained,

That forasmuch as there be many old Servants, 11 H. 6. 6.
and feeble, that have dispended their youth in the service of my Lords, my
Grandfather, Father, and Brother, whose souls God assoile; and also with my
Lord that now in, whom God given good life and long, some without any
livelihood or Guerdon, so that they be now in great Mischief, and necessity,
and some but eastly Guerdoned, and naught like to their desert and service:
wherefore I desire that there may be a hook made of all the names of such as
have so served, and been unguerdoned, or naught guerdoned like to their desert,
to the intent, when Offices, and Corodies fall, that they might be given to
such persons; they having Consideration to the Ability of them, and to the time
that they have served, in the same wise as of benefices unto Clerks.

Henry the Fourth of France; (his Majesty's Grandfather) did for the Relief of
such as had been Maym'd, Wounded, or Beggered in his Service, grant by an
Irrevocable Edict;

The Royal House of Christian Charity, Edict July 7. 1606.
and the money growing upon the Remainder of Accounts of Hospitals, Almshouses,
Leprous-Houses, and other such Companies, and of the Usurpations, and
Alienations of the Revenues thereof, revillons of the Accounts, and Abuses, and
Disorders committed in the Government, and Administration of the said Places,
together with the Money which should arise of the Places, and Pensions of
Religious Laymen, in every Abbey, and Pryory of his Realm, being in his
Ma^esties Nomination.

The Consideration of the Horse was referred to the Duke of Montmorency; and of
the Foot, to the Duke of Espernon, who were to make a List of the Persons, and
to Note in the Margent, what Annual Pension every man might merit, according
to his Quality, Valor, and Wounds.

I may the better justify a Sense of Danger, since the Right Honorable the
Earl of Clarenden, has Publicly Declared several Formalities of a Regular
Plot: Though I confess, my Apprehensions looked another Way. But These
ill-boding Concurrences, are without Question, more then Casual; and to These,
may be added diverse other Circumstances of as un-promising an Appearance.

As the Reports we have of Foreign Alliances; Ill Appearances.
the Recourse of Disaffected English into Those Quarters abroad which are most
to be suspected: The dead Stillness, and Silence of the Dis-banded Soldiers,
notwithstanding so many Opportunities for Foreign Employment: (which looks as
if they lay upon a Reserve) The Unsettled State of the Kingdom: The Seditious
Freedom of the Press and Pulpit; and which is more then All, A general
Scarcity of Money. Moreover, it is no despicable evil, the Corrupt Mixture that
yet remains in the Universities: And what are Those Hospitals, and Petty
Schools that still continue unpurg'd, but Nourceries of Sedition? In a
Particular manner, the Danger is Great, nay and the Number too, of ill-chosen
Justices.

This is in fine, the Prospect of our Condition; which however handled by a
Fool, may yet afford Matter for Wiser men to work upon; and the providing of
Expedients for These Mischieves, does properly belong to the Wisdom, and
Authority of a King in Parliament. The sum of all may be Comprehended in
Little. There is a present Danger, which is in Probability to increase; and the
Faction has done their work, if they can but disable That Party, from Serving
the Son, which hindered Them so long from Destroying the Father.

For want of a better Security against Seditions of what-kind-soever, The
Custom of Frank-Pledges revived.
the Revivall of the Custom of Frank-pledges might be thought upon: to be
Imposed upon all Persons, evidently disaffected to the Government, either of
Church or State. For beyond question, the Ties of Interest are Safer, if not
stronger too, upon the Generality, then Those of Conscience. They may give an
Oath the slip, with some pretty Salvo, or Reserve; but there is no evading the
Intention of a Bond. When Ten Men stand Engaged;
every Particular, for the whole Ten, and All, for each Particular; Every
single Person, has Nine Spies upon him.

Another means (which as I hear is now in Agitation) may be, Discoveries
Rewarded.
the Assurance both of Reward, and Pardon, to the First Discoverer of a
Conspiracy, though one of the Complotters, and This by Proclamation. Sir
Francis Bacon' s advice is, that the King, either by himself, ( which were the
Best) or by his Chancellor, should make use of the Judges in their Circuits;
Judges in their circuits are good Intelligencerg.
Charging them, at their Going forth, according to Occurrences, and receiving
from them a Particular Account at their Return home; They would Then ( says
he) be the best Intelligencers of the True State of the Kingdom, and the
surest means to prevent, or remove all growing Mischieves within the Body of
the Realm.

To These General excogitations of Prudence, somewhat of more Particular
relation to the matter in Question might be admitted; as ^^rst, an Express
Abrenunciation of Their Cause, and Covenant: They do not Deserve their Lives
sure, that refuse to confess their Fault. As to the Relief of Distressed
Royallists; (I speak of such as want, almost to the Degree of Perishing, and
there are many such) It Is but time Lost, to Hunt for new ways of Device, and
Project, when every Bush is Beat already. If it migh but now seem as
Reasonable,
to allow them the Benefit of Forfeitures made since the Act of Indemnity, as
it did erewhile seem Convenient to debar them of all Remedy for Injuries
suffered before it: That might in some Proportion, stay their Barking stomachs;
or at least yield them This spiteful Comfort, not to fall Alone: But possibly,
if This Course were Experimented, it would afford more then the World Imagines.

I should End this Chapter here; but that before I break off This Discourse, I
think it is ^it to give some Reasons why I undertook it.

First, How This Discourse may become useful.
it may serve (to Those in Power) as a Memorial, or Note of certain
Particulars, which deserve not to be Neglected, or Forgotten.

Next, it may serve to instruct the People, concerning the true Cause of some
Miscariages, which Popular, and Licentious Ignorance is but too apt to place
elsewere. (for in Truth, there are many peevish Circumstances, which the
Discreet, Pause upon; and the Vulgar neither like, nor understand)

In the Last Place, I reckon my self bound by my Duty to the King, and Nation,
not to conceal, what I have here Declared. Treasons Encouraged.
And Particularly; That Treasons are Encouraged by Impunity. The Offenders
Countenanced, and brought off. The Prosecutours Menaced; and the most Pestilent
Enemies of the last King, as good as Protected in their Seditious Practices
against This. If This falls into a Good hand, good use may be made of it; for I
do not speak at Guess.

However, at the worst, Our Cause is the same; Our Duty the same and our
Affections ought to be the same. The Sun is not less kind, because his
Influence may be intercepted by a Fogge, which Time will certainly dissolve:
Nay and perchance Discover, (over and above that some of Those Blazes which the
Common People take for Stars of the first Magnitude, are in Effect but Comets:
Portents of That Mischief, which they seldom live to see Accomplished,

But enough, of These ungrateful, and Seditious Machinatours against Their
Prince, and their Preserver. And so from These Indignities against the Son,
we will pass to Those Fatalities that made way to the Ruin of the most Pious,
Patient, Merciful, and yet Murdered Father.

CAP. XII.
What it was Principally, that Ruined King CHARLES the MARTYR.
TO see an Imperial Prince Unking'd, Arraigned, and Beheaded; with all
Formalities of Law, and Justice; Why was Late King Murdered?
by his own Subjects, and Those too, People of sworn Faith, and Holiness! Can
any man forbear Demanding, For what Prodigious Reasons so horrible an Action
was Committed?

Was it for Religion? Not for Religion.
No: He Died a Martyr for that Cause, which to maintein, They Swear they
Fought.

Was it for Tyranny of Government? Nor Tyranny.
Neither; for ere the War began, he had granted more in Favor of the Subject,
then all his Ancestors, put them together.

Was it for Cruelty of Nature: Nor Cruelty.
No, nor That; I can scarce call to Mind where ever he denied his Grace to any
man that besought him for it; unless where Mercy had been a sin; and where
his Power was stinted by his Conscience.

Was it for want of skill to Rule, Nor for want of Abilities and Valor.
or Courage to Protect his People? For That, his very Murderers acknowledged
him a Prince of singular Abilities, and Valor. Nor for Impiety or Intemperance.
And touching his Morals, or Devotions; Malice it self could never deny That
King, to be a Person of a most Regular Piety, and restrein'd Appetite.

How came it then, that a Prince, Authorized by his Birth; Sacred by his
Office; Guarded by his Laws; Religious in his Practice; Gracious in his Nature;
Temperate in his Likings; and lastly, Accomplished in his Person, should come
to Fall; in the Heart of his Dominions; before the Gates of his own Palace; and
by the Hands of his own People? (But Christ himself was Crucified.)

Ambition drives Furiously, and in the way to a Crown, Those Christian Rubbs of
Conscience, or Humanity, are not so much as Bulrushes. In fine, That Blessed
Martyr's Actions were so Innocent, The Kings Indulgence was his Ruin.
they were fain to Quarrel with his Thoughts, and for want of Faults to ruin
him, by abusing his Virtues. This we shall manifest to have been Their
Practice; But we will first take a short View of their Approches.

Never since Calvin bound the Head of the Holy Discipline, Presbytery is a
Specifique Poison to Monarchy.
was ever any Monarch Quiet that admitted it: It Is a Specifique Poison to
Monarchy. And the Ground it gets, is not so much by working upon the Judgment,
as upon the Good Nature of Princes: It Looks so Sillily, and Beggs so Heartily;
it is a hard matter to resist so great an earnestness, accompanied with so
little show of Danger. If They are Repulsed; Good God! they cry; That any man
should go about to Damn so many Thousand Souls for such a Trifle: when it is
come to That once, it is gone too far; for such an Exclamation is enough to
raise a Tumult. King James his Answer to Knewstubb upon the Conference at
HamptonCourt, was as it should be; (and no Prince ever had a Truer measure of
Sir John's Foot, then himself) Knewstubb desired to know how far an Ordinance of
the Church was binding, without offense to Christian Liberty? The King turns
quick upon him; Le Roy s' avisera, king James his Answer to a Presbyterian.
says he, We Will no more of Those Questions, How far you are bound to Obey,
what the church has once Ordeyn'd? Had he dealt otherwise, his Majesty had
given the Presbyterian the first Hold.

At the Beginning of Queen Elizabeth, brake forth Those Broils in Scotland,
wherein the Lords of the Congregation (so was the Faction distinguished)
Deprived the Queen-Regent, by the Approbation and Advise of Willock and Knox,
to whom the Case was Refer^'d. The French assisted the Queen D^wager, and the
Lords of the Revolt, were (for some Reasons of State) assisted by Queen
Elizabeth. At That Time it was Principally, that the English took the Scotch
D^s^ase, and upon the Peace, brought it with them into England, whereof we have
abundantly tasted the blessed Fruits, ever since. Let such as are curious of
Particulars, look into the 11. 16. 31. and 36. of that Queens Reign; and see
what Prodigious Haeresies, what Seditious Opinions and Practices: what
desperate Libels and Sermons proceeded from That Schismatic Separation.
Queen Elizabeth ^uieted the Schismatiques by Severity.
At length, by an Exemplary Severity, upon Hackett, and Barrow, she gave her
self some Quiet.

Upon King James his coming to the Crown of England, they Tried Him too: but
when they fell to Scruplize about the Surplice, and the Cross in Baptism; The
King (having first Choked them in Points more Material) to make short work of
it, tells them. S^r did King James.
'Twas Obstinacy, not Tenderness; bids them Conform, at Peril. For the
Perill-sake, They did Conform, and so That Prince was Quiet. But though no
Flame Appeared, the Fire was not Extinct, but prudently Concealed, and Covered
in the Embers.

And now Succeeds King Charles the Martyr, Three Disadvantages of King Charles
the martyr.
under the Disadvantages: First, of a Great Debt, and a present Necessity.
Secondly, of a Natural, so void of Guile, as hardly to believe that there was
such a thing in Nature. (which made him somewhat apt to Credit) And the Third
Disadvantage was, his Inexperience of That Faction which he was now to Cope
with.

Upon his coming to the Crown, He Calls a Parliament; Tells them his wants;
which They knew of Themselves, to be exceeding Great and Pressing. Their Answer
was, (in effect) that Petitions were to precede Subsidies: And thereupon, Two
they presented; The One for Religion, the Other concerning Grievances: and to
Both These, his Majesty gave ample and Particular Satisfaction: which, in stead
of Thankfulness, and Supply, produced only Expostulation, and Boldness. So
high already were they Flown, as to resolve upon a Remonstrance; foul upon the
Memory and Government of the Father; and Imposing upon the Authority of the
Son, which moved the King to Prevent That Affront, by Dissolving That
Parliament. (This was in August 1625.) See but how Great a Confidence did This
small yielding give them! And Thence, we will Date the History of his ensuing
Troubles. The Original of his Troubles.
Marque forward, how they grow upon him; and abuse his aptness to comply with
Them.

In Febr. following, meets a Second Parliament, wherein a matter of Three
Months were spent in a Debate, betwixt the King and the Lords, concerning the
Privileges of the House of Peers. The Progress of them.
The Commons having in the Interim, a Committee for Religion at work, to spy
Faults, where at last was Retriv'd, a Letter under the Signet, for the Reprieve
of some Jesuits, etc. -- and This Reported to the House by Mr. Bim. These
Petulancies did not at all discompose the King, but he calmly again Sollicites
them for Money: The Fleet being in great distress, and ready to Mutiny for want
of Pay. In stead of being Supplied, The House of Commons Affronts him.
his Majesty is insufferably Affronted, Particularly by Mr. Clement Coke, and
Doctor Turner; of whom he compleins, but without obteining satisfaction, save
upon such conditions, as were utterly inconsistent with his Royalty. In fine,
This Parliament prepares another Declaration of the same Stamp with the Former;
and so they are Dissolved too. These Disappointments, they knew, must needs put
the King upon Extraordinary ways to furnish himself for the Present; and that
at the last, his recourse must be to a Parliament, into which they were sure to
be Chosen, and easily foresaw, that the Greater his Majesty's Necessities were,
the more Argument would there be for Compleint.

In This Intervall, The King put to a sad Choice.
the King was left to his Choice of These Two Evils, whether he would hazard
the Revolt of his Navy, and the putting of his Kingdoms into a Flame, for want
of Money; or venture at some uncommon way of Raising it. This extremity puts him
upon his Commissions of Loan: Privy Seals; A Project of Levy by Excize: Nay,
such was his Necessity, that he was fain to Part with 21000 li. per Annum, of
his own Lands, to the Common-Counsell of London,
only for 120000 li. together with some other Debts of his Fathers; which they
Hedged and bought in for little, and clapped upon his Majesty's Account to the
Uttermost Farthing. The Loan was much Opposed; and who but the Refusers of This
Loan, were the Popular men for the Next Parliament? which was Summoned to meet
in March, 1627.

Accordingly they Meet; and the King minds them of their Past Faylings, and
their Present Duties in a Speech worthy of the Prudence, and the Majesty of a
Great Prince. The Kings Speech.
[In This time ( says the King) of Common Danger, I have taken the most
Ancient, Speedy, and Best way for Supply, by calling you together. If (which
God forbid) in not contributing what may answer the Quality of my Occasions,
you do not your Duty, it shall suffice, I have done mine; in the Conscience
whereof, I shall rest Content, and take some other Course, for which God has
empowred Me, to Save That which the Folly of Particular men might hazard to
Lose.

Take not This as a Menace; (for I scorn to Threaten my Inferiors) but as an
Admonition from him who is Tied both by Nature, and Duty, to provide for your
Preservation.]

This Taste of the Kings Mettle, gave them to understand that Rufling would not
do their work, and put them rather upon a semblance of Closing with him: But
with Regard still to Their Trust, and that the People might be as well Eased,
as his Majesty Supplied. Which being formally resolved upon, and that the Kings
Wants, and the Subjects Grievances should march hand in hand: By an Unanimous
Vote, they granted his Majesty Five Subsidies: The Bounties of the Faction are
Baits.
who being too sincere, to take That Bounty for a Bait, even Wept with Joy, at
the surprise of a Kindness so unexpected. But This is but the Guilding of the
Pill, now comes the Poison.

Upon the Motion of Sir Edward Coke, The Petition of Right.
was framed* The Petition of Right, which Passes the House of Commons, but
Sticks with the Peers, as utterly Destructive of the Prerogative Royal,
without a Salvo: Whereupon they offer This Addition. [We present This our
humble Petition to your Majesty, not only with Care to Preserve our own
Liberties, but with regard to leave entire That Sovereign Power, wherewith pour
Majesty is trusted, for the Protection, Safety, and Happiness of your People.]
But this Addition was not for Their Turn, whose business was more to Depresse
the King, and Advance Themselves, then to provide for the Freedom of the
People: And in fine, the Commons adhering, after a long struggle, it passed the
Lords House without Amendment. (In regard that we are now upon the very Crisis,
of King or No King, we shall be a little the more Particular) After Five Days
Consideration thereupon, the King returns This Answer.

The King wills that Right be done according to the Laws, His Majesty's first
Answer to the Petition of Right.
and Customs of the Realm, and that the Statutes be put in Execution, that
Subjects may have no Cause to Complein of any Wrong, or Oppressions, Contrary
to their Just Rights, and Liberties, To the Preservation whereof, he holds
himself in Conscience as well obliged, as of his prerogative.]

This Answer (though Clear, The Commons Cavil.
and Full as possible, to any just Intention) did not yet Relish; and the
pretended Exception, was not to the Matter of it, but the Form: So that a New
Petition is agreed upon, for a more formal Answer: Which his Majesty taking
notice of, The King Passes the Bill.
Prevents, with a Le droit soit fait, comme il est Desire. This Grant finished
Foundation of the Kings Ruin. Now see the Return they made him for This
Goodness; how they Requited This Benignity, and Trust.

The Commissions Of Loan, The Commons Requital.
and Excize, are Instantly Cancelled, and a Scandalous Remonstrance is
Presented to his Majesty, with the Bill of Subsidies. Upon which the King
reflects (as he had Cause) with some Displeasure: and draws a Stinging and a
Punctual Answer to it. This puts the Commons upon Another Remonstrance against
Tonnage, and Poundage, which Provoked the King to give a sudden End to That
Session; Declaring before his Assent to the Bills, His Majesty Explains himself.
The true Intent of what he Granted in That Petition: And that as it was the
Profession of Both Houses, in the time of Hammering That Petition, no way to
Trench upon his Prerogative; so he could not be conceived to have Granted any
New, but only to have Confirmed the Ancient Privileges of his Subjects. And
here his Majesty Prorogues This Parliament.

In Ian. following they Meet again, The Commons Inquisition,
and Appoint Two Committees: The One for Religion, the Other for Civil
Affairs: And These are to Inspect Abuses, and lay open the Kings Misgovernments
to the People. In the Heat of their haste, his Majesty sends Secretary Coke
upon an Inter^eding Message to them, with all the Gentleness Imaginable.
Whereat the House takes Snuff, and calls to Adjourn. In short, the King
Adjourns them from January, to the 2. of March: and Then being Met, Sir John
Eliot begins with a Bitter Invective against the Lord Treasurer: After which
the Speaker acquaints the House with his Majesty's Command, of their
Adjournment till the 10th. They give him a Check for his Peins, and follow
their Business. Up rises Sir John again, and Insolence.
and Offers a Remonstrance against Tonnage and Poundage, to their Reading;
which both Speaker and Clerk Refusing, He Reads it Himself. When it should be
put to the Vote, whether or no, to be Presented to the King, the Speaker
excuses himself, as Commanded by the King, to Leave the House;
and endeavoring to Rise, he was forcibly kept in his Chair, till as the
Protestation of the House was Read, as Follows.

First, The Protestation of the Commons.
Whosoever shall bring in Innovation of Religion, or by favor seek to
introduce Popery, or Arminianisme, or other Opinions disagreeing from the true
Orthodox Church, shall be reputed a capital Enemy to this Kingdom and
Commonwealth.

Secondly, Whosoever shall Counsel or Advise the Taking or Levying of the
Subsidies of Tonnage and Poundage, not being Granted by Parliament, or shall be
an Actor, or Instrument therein, shall be likewise reputed a Capital Enemy to
this Commonwealth.

Thirdly, If any man shall voluntarily yield, or Pay the said Subsidies of
Tonnage, or Poundage, not being Granted by Parliament; he shall be reputed a
Betrayer of the Liberties of England, and an Enemy to this Commonwealth.

Upon Notice of These Distempers, Their Contest,
the King sends for the Sergeant of the Mace, and the House refuses him:
Whereupon, the Usher of the Black Rod is Dispatched, to Dissolve them; but
finding no Entrance, at length, the Guard is called for, and Then the Members
Vanish: After These Provocations, and Contempts, The King Himself Dissolves
them. and Dissolution.
This was the Embryo of our late Rebellion: and the Indulgence of That Gracious
Prince, to That Ungrateful Faction, was That which Ruined him. Whether
Designed, or not, may appear from the Sequel: Diverse of the most Popular and
Active persons in This Contest being found afterward, among his Mortal Enemies
in the War.

Having Traced the Mischief to This Head; we may be shorter with the Rest: and
taking for Granted, that neither Scotland would be out at a Godly Project, nor
the English Faction upon any Terms reject their Brotherly Kindness, we may
rationally presume that they were of Intelligence, in our succeeding Troubles;
especially, if we observe what Time they kept in their motions toward one
another.

In that which follows, we shall not so much apply our selves to the Order of
the Story, as to the Noting of those Fatalities which had a most particular
Influence upon the Life and Fortune of That Incomparable Prince.

In 1634. a Seditious Practice was discovered in Scotland; The Kings Mercy
Abus^d.
and the Lord Balmerino detected to be one of the Prime Conspiratours: His
Father, out of Nothing, became Chief Secretary to King James, whom he Betrayed;
the Treachery was Proved, and the Traitor Condemned, but by the Mercy of the
King, Restored, both in Blood, and Estate. So was the Son found Guilty, and
Pardoned likewise, by the Successor of the Father's Master. Never in show a
more remors-ful Penitent: Yet in the next Conspiracy of 1637. who deeper In
again, then this Presbyterian? It would be hard to find Two Persons of That
Leaven,
to whom the Late King ever refused his Grace, or that did not abuse it.

How easily had the Scotch Rebellion been Crushed in the First Tumult; had not
his Majesty's Excessive Goodness, Abused again.
ore-slipped the Time of Doing it by Force, expecting their Return by fairer
means. He that would read the greatest Opposition that ever was in Nature; of
Truth, and Falsehood; Kindness, and Malice; Mercy, and Ingratitude; Piety, and
Wickedness: Let him but Read the Story of the Scotch-Rebellion in 1638. drawn
by his Majesty's express Command. The Perjuries, Insolences, Forgeries,
and Usurpations of the Holy Kirk at Glasgow: and then say, if ever such a
Contest of Light, and Darkness, as betwixt That Saint, and Those Monsters.

Nor was his Majesty's Clemency abused, more then his Confidence betrayed; for
to the Public Mockery they made of his Indulgence, The King Betrayed by his
Counsel.
was added the Private Correspondence, and Treachery of a Presbyterian Faction
in his Counsel. (His Majesty himself avers as much.)

This ( says the King in his large Declaration) Our Commissioner did not
adventure to communicate with the whole Counsel, Scotch Declar. Page 124.
because he did know that some of our Counselors were Covenanters in Their
Hearts, though for Dangerous ends, they had forborne the Subscribing of the
Covenant with their Hands, and that They would acquaint the Covenanters with
it, with whom they kept Private Meetings.]

The next Eminent Transaction was upon the Enterview of the Two Armies near
Berwick, where his Sacred Majesty had the Rebels Effectually at his Mercy, and
exhausted himself, and his Friends, to the Despair almost of ever Raising
another Army. The Kings Mercy again abused.
Yet even There also, was his Majesty persuaded (such was his Royal Charity,
and Tenderness for his People) upon the Supplication of the Rebels to admit a
Treaty, and thereupon soon after to Conclude a Pacification: whereof the
Covenanters kept* not One Article. The Ingratitude of the Scotch Presbyterians.
Nay, after This, they Libelled the Kings Proceedings, Broke forth into Fresh
Insolences, and Solicited the Assistance of the French King against their
Native Sovereign.

We see the Faith, and Loyalty of the Scotch Presbyterians; Now see the English.
Marque now, if the English use him any Better: And That, but in a Word or Two;
for it is a peevish Subject.

His Majesty calls a Parliament, that Meets November. 3. 1640. Which by the
violence of Tumults abroad, and the Artifice of Iuggles, within-doors, is with
much ado Modelled into a Faction. Observe now the Proportion, betwixt the
Favors of the King, and the Returns of the Party: and see the Fruits of
Clemency, here likewise.

His Majesty passes the Trienniall Bill; The Bounty and Grace of the King.
Abolishes the Star Chamber* and High Commission Court: Passes an Act for the
Continuance of the Parliament. Not to insist upon the several other
Concessions, concerning Ship-mony, Forests, and Stannary Courts; Tonnage and
Poundage; Knighthood, etc. --

In Requital of these Benefits, The Requital of the Presbyterians.
The Presbyterians Clap up, and prosecute his Majesty's Friends; Prefer,
Enlarge his Enemies; Reward the Scots for a Rebellion; Entertain their
Commissioners; Vote them Their Dear Brethren, for Invading us: Call in all
Books and Proclamations against them. Take away the Bishops Votes. Impose a
Protestation: Deny the Earl of Straffords Life to the Intercession of his
Majesty. Present him with a Libellous Remonstrance to welcome him out of
Scotland. Charge 12. Bishops of High Treason. Declare the Kings Proclamation to
be False, Scandalous, and Illegal* Petition for the Militia. Keep the King out
of his own Towns, and Seize his Arms and Ammunition. Send him 19. Propositions
for the Delivery up of his Authority. Vote a General, and Raise an Army
against him. They give the King Battle. Levy Moneys. Vote the Queen a Traitor.
Hang up the Kings Friends. Enter into a Rebellious League. Counterfeit a
Great-Seal. Call in the Scots Again. Abolish the Common Prayer. Seize and
Imprison the King; Share the Revenues of the Church, and Crown. Sequester,
Banish, Imprison his Majesty's Adherents; Sell him, Depose him, and at last,
call themselves his Majesty's best Subjects because they did not MURDER him.


Upon the whole Matter, That Blessed Martyr's Transcendent Charity undid him.
How many did he Oblige and Advance, in hopes to Win, and Reclaim them? His
Majesty's Patience and Goodness Ruined him.
How many did he Pardon and Cherish, in Confidence of their Pretended
Repentance? How long did his Patience forbear Others, in expectation of their
Return? And how unwilling was He to call any thing Schism, which the Faction
called Scruple? Till (Alas!) too Late, he found his Bounties Abused; His
Mercies misplaced; His Waitings Frustrated; His Charity Deluded; and in short,
no other use made of all his Pieties, and Virtues, then to his proper Ruin;
For while his Sacred Majesty suspended the exercise of his Political Severity,
under the amusement of a Religious Tenderness; the Sectaries became Bold upon
his Favor, and strong by the advantage they made of his Patience.

There were indeed some other praevious Encouragements to the War; as the
Remissness of Diverse Bishops in Matter of Uniformity; The sufferance of
Factious Meetings, etc. -- But the Two Grand Fatalities were These. The Kings
grand Fatalityes.
The King WANTED MONEY; and TRUSTED PRESBYTERIANS. Dum Clementiam, quam
praestiterat, expect at,
INCAUTUS ab INGRATIS Occupatus est.
Vell. Paterc. Hist. Lib. 2.


The End of the First Part.
THE CONTENTS OF THE First Part.
CAP. I.
THE Matter and Causes of Seditions in General. Page 1.
CAP. II.
The Tokens and Prognostics of Seditions. 4.
CAP. III.
The True Cause of the Late War, was AMBITION. 10.
CAP. IV.
The Instruments, and Means, which the Conspirators employed to make a Party.
16.
CAP. V.
A short View of the Breaches, and Confusions betwixt the Two Factions, from
1648. to 1654. 24.
CAP. VI.
The Temper, Streights, and Politiques, of Cromwell during his Protectorship.
30.
CAP. VII.
A short Account from the Death of the Tyrant Oliver, to the Return of Charles
the Second, (whom God Preserve from his Fathers Enemies.) 48.
CAP. VIII.
The Usurper Oliver was principally distressed by the War with Spain, and his
Standing-Army. 61.
CAP. IX.
Of Seditions in Particular; and showing in what manner they arise from These
Seven Interests. The Church; the Bench; the Court; the Camp; the City; the
Country; and the Body Representative. 85.
SECT. I.
Seditions arising from the CHURCH. Page 85.
SECT. II.
The BENCH. 96.
SECT. III.
The COURT. 99.
Subsection I.
Over-greatnesse in One Counselor. 100.
Subsection II.
The Combination of Diverse* Counselors. 106.
SECT. IV.
The CAMP. 114.
SECT. V.
The CITY. 117.
Subsection I.
Seditions arising from Religion. 121.
Subsection II.
Oppression. 126.
Subsection III.
Privileges. 128.
Subsection IV.
Poverty. 130.
SECT. VI.
The COUNTRY. 139.
SECT. VII.
The BODY REPRESENTATIVE. 143.
CAP. X.
How to prevent the Beginnings, and hinder the Growth of Seditions in General;
together with certain Particular Remedies, applied to the Distempers of Those
Seven Interests, mentioned in the foregoing Chapter. Page 152.
SECT. I.
By what means, Haeresies, and Schisms, may be kept out of the CHURCH; Their
Increase hindered, and the Seditious Consequences of Them Prevented: ^ with the
Remedies of other Mischieves arising from Disorders in the CHVRCH. 159.
SECT. II.
How to prevent Seditions arising from the Disorders of the BENCH. 171.
SECT. III.
How to Prevent, or Remedy Seditions arising from the Disorders of the COURT.
177.
Subsection I.
The Remedies of certain hazzards arising from the Overgreatnesse of One
Counselor. 182.
Subsection II.
How to frustrate a Combination of Diverse Counselors. 197.
SECT. IV.
How to Prevent Disorders arising from the CAMP. 201.
SECT. V.
How to Prevent, or Remedy Seditions arising from the CITY. 205.
SECT. VI.
How to Prevent Seditions from the COUNTRY. 212.
SECT. VII.
Certain Cautions directing how to prevent, and avoid, Dangers arising from the
BODY REPRESENTATIVE. ibid.
CAP. XI.
Certain Reflections upon the Felicity, and Advantages of the Government of
England; with some Observations upon the Present Juncture. 217.
CAP. XII.
What it was Principally, that Ruined King Charles the MARTYR. 236.
The End of the Contents of the First Part.

