L'Estrange's CASE In a CIVIL DIALOGUE Betwixt ZEKIEL AND EPHRAIM.

LONDON, Printed for H. Brom at the Sign of the Gun in S. Paul's Churchyard.
1680.

ZEKIEL and EPHRAIM. etc.
L' Estrange at a Window above. Zekiel. WHy I tell thee, Ephraim, I heard it
with my own Ears, and it was a Man in Black too, that said it.


Ephesians. In Black, do ye say? 'Twas no Divine I hope.


Zek. No, no; He was too Fierce, and Fiery, for a Divine: By his laying about
him so, and his Bug-Words, a Man would rather have taken him for a Conjurer.
But yet he seems to be a very Good man, in His Way.


Ephesians. There Is a Doctor of Physic or two, that I know, that are very Honest,
Zealous Men: Might it not be One of Them?


Zek. No, no; This Man does not look like a Doctor of any thing: I should
rather take him for some body toward the Law.


Ephesians. Prithee describe him a little. Has he not a Big, deep Voice?


Zek. Yes; and a hoarse kind of wheasing with it, like the Ciphring of an
Organ-Pipe that has got a Flaw.


Ephesians. And thou find'st him a Man of parts too; do not?


Zek. Oh: A Devilish Fellow. Well Ephraim: It Is a strange thing, how one may
be deceived in a bodies Out side. I should not have thought by the semblance of
This man, that he could have said Bo to a Goose.


Ephesians. We are Both upon the same Person Zekiel, only he spoke the same things,
in the Morning at the Amsterdam Coffee-House, and in the Afternoon at Richards.


Zek. Hs has an odd kind of Lift methinks with his Upper-Lip, like the
Snuffling of a Stone-horse at a Mare.


Ephesians. I have observed something of a Convulsion in that Part. But what-like
Face had he, I Prithee?


Zek. Did thou ever take notice of a Vizor, with a a kind of Liver-colour
Vernish yonder, at a Glass Shop by Exeter Change? The Mouth, (if you mark it)
is cut a little higher then Ordinary.


Ephesians. Now thou mind'st me of it, It Is the very Picture of this Worthy
Gentleman. The Nose on it I remember, looks as if it had been drawn on with a
Shooing-Horn.


Zek. But then take the Gentleness of his Manners* the Graces of his Mind; the
Sweetness of his Motions, and Address: Really take him altogether, and the
Man is a Man, every Inch of him.


Ephesians. It Is very true Zekiel: for the Man is Tall, and Slender; and every thing
that he says, or does, comes from him with so Pretty an Obliging Air. But let
us come now to the Point: What did he say?


Zek. He said flat and Plain, that Crack-fart was a Conspirator; up to the Ears
in Young Tongs Sham-Plot; and that a Pillory was too good for him.


Ephesians. Why This is no more then the Common Talk of all the Coffee-Houses about
the Town.


Zek. And let me tell thee as a Secret, Ephraim, the same People carried the
same Humor about the Town, as well as the same Words. There Is a short, Trub,
fat, Fellow, in a white Perrywig, (his Father, as I take it, was a Commitee
man.) There happened one of L' Estrange his Pamphlets to ly in his way, and you
might see his Indignation come up his Gullet, as plainly, as if a Snake were
fetching up a Toad again. Thou can not think how I dote upon this Honest man,
for his Affection to our Interest.


Ephesians. There Is another, that they call the Coffee Draper: upon my credit, he
lays it on to some Tune too. I heard him speak bloody words the other day; and he
was as well Seconded by one that is lately come over from the Profession of an
Hypocrite to the Practice of it, who is an excellent Man too in his Generation.


Zek. Prithee Ephraim let us have no more Riddles. Thou mean the Hypocrite, I
suppose, according to the Letter.


Ephesians. But what do ye think then of the Poetical Joyner? He that Rhim'd so
plaguily upon the Judges and the Juries, about Gascoyn, and Wakeman?


Zek. Ay, now you speak of a Man indeed: If you had but heard him, how he
whipped up two or three Blades the other day, of the Arbitrary way, upon the War
of Forty One, you would have said he had been a Teazer, indeed. He told them to
their very Noses, that the Parliament men of those days were the bravest
Patriots that ever England bred; that they fought for the Liberty of the
Subject; and in one word exalted them to the skies.


Ephesians. Come, come; Let it suffice, that Dr. Oats was There himself, and a great
many Worthy Persons besides; And no Room for any other Discourse then L'
Estrange and Tongue, Celiers and L' Estrange.


Zek. Why Really to give him his Due, the Doctor seemed to be much for
Moderation: One was downright for the Gallows: Another would have brought it
down to Pebbles, and Rotten Eggs; But the Doctor himself, being more inclined
to Mercy, was willing to content himself with a Touch at the Carts Arse.


Ephesians. Prithee Zekiel let us keep close to the Subject, now we are upon it: for
some way or other, This Varlet must be Confounded.


Zek. Nay, That Is a thing absolutely Resolved, Ephraim; and there are more ways
to the Wood then One. Let us try First, how far we can carry it upon the
Reputation of Tongs Plot.


Ephesians. Very Good; and if That will not reach him, we must set our Wits to work
some other way.


Zek. Why you see how all the Coffee-houses take fire at it already.


Ephesians. Ay; and all the News-Mongers too; and consequently the whole Kingdom.


Zek. And then it goes down with the People, without so much as Gulping. Nay;
It has Staggered, I know not how many, of his Best Friends. How many Fools, and
Coxcombs have I heard him called, even by his own Party; since we put This Hare
afoot. Not so few as a Hundred people came to Harry Brooms in One day, to see
what was become of him, and in what Goal to find him.


Ephesians. Nay (as we ordered the matter) his Charge, Examination, and Committment,
were all over the Nation, before either the Counsel, or Himself, had heard one
Syllable of the Story.


Zek. It must not be denied, but that the Design was well laid; and carried on
too, with as much Skill, and Industry, as was possible.


Ephesians. If you speak of the Original design; the Snare for L' Estrange was as
well contrived as Heart could wish it. For nothing could be more Plausible,
then the Means that Tongue used by a Second hand, for the drawing of him into the
Toil. You know what I mean.


Zek. Yes yes; Tongue propounded that L' Estrange might be called in, to his
Assistance, as a fit person to direct him in This Affayr. But This point
Ephraim was not followed so close as it might have been. And then there was too
much Noise made on it beforehand. Now there is no thought of compassing such a
business as This, when it has once taken Vent.


Ephesians. To say the Truth, Zekiel, we were a little out in our Measures, at Both
Ends. First, we let it run too long, without any sort of Personal Application
to L' Estrange. Secondly, we struck too soon at Last. For who knows, but that
with Art, and a little longer Patience he might have been prevayl'd upon, in
the End, to have Pouch'd the Bayt?


Zek. It Is but so much Time and Breath cast away, to stand talking of matters
that are gone and Past: But since Tongs Committment, and the bringing of things
to a Forced Put; I have set as hard upon L' Estrange's Skirts, as another.


Ephesians. And if you go to That (Zekiel) there are Others that have done their
Parts (I believe) too, as well as You: And Pray'e (if a body may ask you) what
mighty businesses have You to boast of, in This Affair, more then your Fellows?


Zek. Nay since you provoke me Ephraim. I am not Afraid to dispute Services
with you, provided that it breed no Ill blood betwixt us; For Competitions are
many times the Ruin, even of the most Generous Undertakings.


Ephesians. These are not so properly Competitious, Zekiel, as Virtuous Emulations,
when Brethren strive only to Exceed one another in Goodness. Wherefore I
Prithee let us vye the good Offices we have rendered the Public, in This
Instance, with that Calmnesse, and Moderation that may become persons of Our
Character, and Profession.


Zek. Thou have spoken with the Lips of an Angel, Ephraim. And beside the Duty
of our Agreement, if there were nothing in it but Humane Policy, it would
concern us to bear up in Unity, against the Common Enemy, and leave the Unhappy
Differences that we find among our selves, to be Adjusted at Leisure. But now
to your Friendly Challenge, Ephraim. See Honest John Gays News-Letter of October.
2. 1680. At the Flying Horse in Fleetstreet, and you will find This Passage
following.

A Person (says he) having visited Mr. Tongue in Newgate, Mr. Tongue delivered
him a Paper, Containing a Discovery of the whole Contrivance against Dr. Oats;
in which is mentioned that Mr. L' Estrange is concerned in it; and that upon
Notice of its being likely to be Discovered, Mr. L' Estrange sent a Letter to
Mr. Tongue, to Remove all the Papers out of his Lodgings, to Mr. Ely's. etc.

Now if This was not a Considerable Service, the sending of This Person to
Newgate; and the Publishing of This Report, which was the Foundation of All the
Following Aspersions upon L' Estrange: I am no Master of my Trade.


Ephesians. Your Will was Good no doubt on it, Zekiel; And so was your Design: you
made use of Proper Instruments too, and gave Birth to a very Serviceable
Rumor: But what needed you have given that Blind Intimation of a Quidam: a
certain Nameless Person that first broch'd the Story? It makes it look like a
Practice; whereas one bold Touch to have made it a discovery upon an
Examination from Above, would have hit the Bird in the Eye. And then L'
Estranges Letter to Tongue, and the Removal of his Papers to Mr. Elys, (to be
plain with ye Zekiel) was even a Silly Invention: for any man might foresee,
that once in Eight and Forty Hours, the Abuse would be detected; (as
effectually it was.) And if the people had not been very kind to us, the
Manifest Falsity of Those Particulars, might have hazzarded the Credit of all
the Rest.


Zek. This was Gays fault, and not Mine: for That Piece was intended only for a
Country Intelligence, and he like a Coxcomb, goes and disperses it here in the
Town.

But what do ye think now of My device, that was Clapped in upon the Back of
Prance his Narative, by way of Postscript? You have seen't I Am sure; 'Twas
Printed for Langly Curtis upon Lud-Gate Hill: and came out October. 1st. The
man you must know, is as True as Steel, where he takes; and a pretty Fellow
enough, if he would but leave a foolish Trick he has taken up, of winding up
his Nose, and showing his Teeth at every turn, like a Whelp that has got a Be
in's Ear. Your Intelligence I can assure ye, had been run to dirt; if This
Paper had not Stepped in, to Relieve ye.

Mrs. Cellier, (says he) mentioning the said Mr. Lestrange very familiarly; and
pretending then to send her Imps, Grange, and Sing up and down to him; though for
all her vain boasting, it cannot (I think) be imagined, that so worthy a
Gentleman and so much a Protestant as he has shown himself by his late Learned
Pamphlets; and one that is, (as I am told) a Justice of the Peace, would have
any Correspondence with such a notorious Popish Baggage, etc.

Here Is a Spark now that would pass the Ordeal, and never say, God save the
King for it. For when he has fairly hinted a familiarity betwixt L' Estrange and
Celiers, and a Correspondence entertained betwixt them, even to the naming of
the very Mercuries that conveyed the Intelligence; you will find in the
Context, that it is all delivered only as a Cr^dible Hearsay; and to tell you
as a Friend, the Small Officer you wot of, had a great hand in the Advice; And
then so soon as ever he had Bespattered him with Calumnies, hardly ever to be
repaired, do but see how delicately the Rogue makes it worse and worse by
pretending to Lick him Clean again.


Ephesians. But how comes Curtis to have such an Interest thereabouts?


Zek. There Is a Mystery in That, my Friend Ephraim. First, upon an Order for a
Prosecution at Law, there is a way of either falling short in the Evidence, and
so bringing the matter off That way; or else of suppressing those Articles that
would have done the business, or in some cases not bringing the question on at
all. Secondly, There is one that does not stick publicly to declare, that he
will not meddle with hindering any Libells against L' Estrange: and so we have
as good as a Protection in that Assurance. And then (under the Rose) There may
be now and then certain Feelings in the Cause, and Connivings, in which Case it
will be dangerous to disoblige us, for fear of telling Tales.


Ephesians. Well, but you are gone from your Text. Where Is the Mighty Service, I
beseech ye, that you have done your Party by This Pamphlet?


Zek. Or rather, Where are your Eyes, Ephraim, that cannot discern it, without
poynting to it? did not you find the Operation of This Paper, Immediately upon
the Publishing it? and that whereas L' Estrange was only mentioned before, as a
setter on of Tongue against the Two Doctors without any other Confederate; It
came now to the Cry of the Town, that Celiers and L' Estrange went on hand in
hand with the Conspiracy: and in such a manner too, that L' Estrange had hardly
any way left him to purge himself, but the Testimony of Celliers, who was not
to be believed. There Is nothing sticks closer to L' Estrange, then this
Intimation: and yet it has started another Bugg too, which is that he is a
Papist, as well as a Plotter; and That persuasion I promise you goes a great
way. Nay I Will tell ye a word more too, but in Confidence. I heard a Gentleman
undertake the other night to prove him one; and This is a man that speaks him
as fair to his Face to, as any man Living, which carrys the greater Credit.


Ephesians. But do you believe, Zekiel, that L' Estrange holds any Correspondence
with Celliers, or not?


Zek I do not believe that ever he exchanged any message with her, or ever so
much as saw the Eyes of her in his whole Life. This is a thing I would not say
to every Body, but I know to whom I speak it.


Ephesians. You must know Zekiel that I did not only start the first General Report
of L' Estranges being in Tongs Plot, but I fixed the Particular Article; and
laid it; for Tampering with Tongue, to Renounce the Retractation he made to his
Uncle, of his former Enformation.


Zek. That might pass well enough to serve a present Turn, but at the long
Run, you could never expect that it would hold water, for at the time of Tongs
Renouncing That Retractation, L' Estrange had not as yet ever seen the face of
Tongue. To deal frankly with ye, I do not approve the laying of so much stresse
neither, upon Tongs Testimony. First, he advances an Enformation; and at the
same time, gives us a Counterpart of it, which according to our Principles was
fairly done. Secondly, he Retracts That Information; and Thirdly, denis, upon
his Salvation that ever he retracted it, and Swears it to have been his own
Spontaneous Act, with Three Witnesses to Assert That Disclamer. Now This is so
Notorious a forfeiture of his Credit, that I should be very loath to Venture the
Pinch of the Question upon his Evidence. So that I am still blowing up the
Clamor of L' Estrange and Celiers and the Jelousy of L' Estranges being a
Papist. And I Will tell ye what, beside; I have push^d it forward, that the Duke
of York sent Tongue a Hundred Guinnyes by L' Estrange, for an Encouragement. And
This works in the peoples heads, like Bottle Ale.


Ephesians. That it does upon my word Zekiel: for I was rounded in the ear but
yesterday, that Prance had Ten Witnesses in Readiness, to prove that L'
Estrange had been Forty times at Mass here; and Solemnly Worshipping according
to the Profession of the Romish Communion. And I was told by another at the
same time, that L' Estrange was run quite away, and a Sum of money offered to
any man that should bring him back again.


Zek. This Play of Fast and Loose may do well enough, so long as the Truth is
kept out of sight: But you see, since L' Estrange's appearing at the Council,
that the business of Tongue is in a manner blown over, and that we are put to
our shifts for Other Pretenses, to uphold the Controversy. So that if it were
not for My story of Celliers, and the Common Theme of Popery, and
Popishly-Affected, I do not know but we might even shut up our shops, and let
fall the Question.


Ephesians. I know very well how matters passed upon L' Estrange's Examination; and
all things considered, I am of Opinion that John Gay has done his part again,
to help us out at a dead Lift, in his paper of Intelligence. Octo. 7.

Yesterday (says he) Mrs. Cellier, Mr. L' Estrange, Mr. Choqueux, Captain Ely,
Mr. Tongue, his Father, and Dr. Oats, had a Hearing before the Council; where
several material things were discovered; and many Words past betwixt Dr. Oats,
and Mr. L' Estrange,; The Council upon Dr. Oats desiring L' Estrange might be
committed, Ordered Dr. Oats to bring a Bill against him, and if it was found,
he should be Secured. And L'Estrange owned that Mr. Tongue had been with him,
but did not communicate any of his Plot to him. The further Hearing of Him and
Mrs Cellier is adjourned till Friday.


Zek. What do thou mean Ephraim, to encourage such a Flam as This? There are
twice as many known Falsehoods in it as there are Lines: And they are so
Palpable too, that there is hardly any man of business, but is able to
Contradict them: Nor is there one Syllable in it to the Purpose, but where
L'Estrange and Cellier are coupled together. He says nothing at all here of L'
Estrange's being snapt up at the Council for his Sawcynesse, and the Moan he
made to their Lordships for Dr. Oates's making so bold with one of the Kings
Justices; and the Drs. telling him that he would prove him a Rogue, by the Best
in the Land; and of the Cause being only put off, in order to the Drs. bringing
of further Evidence. Now since Mr. Gay was so bent upon it, to strain a point
of Candor, and Integrity; methinks he should have had the Brains to have made
a better Choice of the Lies he intended to publish; especially when the One was
every jot as True, and as Cheap as the Other.


Ephesians. Pray'e tell me what Exception you have, now, to the Paper of honest Mr.
Hill? (that of a Strong-Water-man is now become an Intelligencer.) It bears
Date, Octo. 7.

Yesterday (says he) Mr. Justice Bridgman and Dr. Oats appeared at the
Councell-board, where he delivered the Confession of young Tongue, which he made
in Newgate, whereby he accused Mr. L'Estrange, and one Choqueux to be
Conspirators with him in the Plot, against his Father, and Dr. Oats. Very high
Words passed between Dr. Oats, and Mr. L'Estrange; the Latter telling the
Council that Dr. Oats took the Liberty to call him a Thousand times Rogue,
and Rascal; which the Dr. owned, saying he would prove him to be Both, and
desired he might be Secured: Whereupon the Council Ordered the Dr. to prefer a
Bill against him; and if it were found, promised that he should either be
Secured, or give sufficient Bail. Upon Examination, L'Estrange owned that
Young Tongue had been with him; and at the same time told him he had something
to discover but he knew not what it was.


Zek. This piece of Intelligence, Ephraim, is like Chip in Porridge, it does
neither good, not hurt; only it keeps the Wheel a going. And yet the leaviug
out of Cellier (let me tell ye) is the want of a Principal Verb. It was not
well, to put in the Doctors calling L'Estrange, Rogue, and Rascal; unless it
had been accompanied with some Intolerable Provocation; for fear it might be
look upon as an Irreverence toward the Board. The Dr. they say, made often
mention of the Parliament; which the News-Letters do well not to take notice
of, upon matter of Discretion as well as Respect. Upon the whole matter, I
observe This Decorum in all these Papers, that in the Main they have the Wit to
hold mostly in a Tale. The most Positive and Concise of the whole Tribe is
little Hancock. October. 7th.

The Papers of young Tong's Sham-Plot being seized, Mr. L'Estrange, and Mrs.
Cellier were Summoned; but they denied they knew any thing of it; but Mrs.
Cellier would not stand to it, by reason of the many Bruises she received on
the Pillory: But next Wednesday, Mr. Tongue will be brought to Confront them,
face to face.


Ephesians. These Papers of Young Tongs, I must confess I never heard of. But I am
fully Convinced of the benefit of Coupling L'Estrange with Celliers.


L'Estrange. Pray'e my Masters will you give me Leave now to put in a word, in
my own Case: And you shall have the Naked Truth of it, as if I were upon my
Last Confession.


Ephesians. It Is an Old saying, that Listeners seldom hear well of themselves; but
it is as True again, in another Case, that he that makes a Conscience of his
ways, needs never fear being surpised.


L'E. With what face can you pretend to appeal to the integrity of your own
Souls; when you are not more convinced of the difference betwixt Truth and
Falsehood, then you are Conscious to your selves, of a Malicious Conspiracy
against an Innocent Person, in This Practice? For your Calumnies are all
Supported by Confederacy, and Inconsistent with Themselves. The Pretended
Foundation of your Outrage against me, is, for Abetting a Subornation against
the Kings Witnesses: And when you find that upon That Ground you cannot
sustain your Charge; I am to be made a Papist. When That Calumny fails you too,
my Writings are to be picked, and sifted; and an Inquisition to pass upon my
Papers. So that your business is not to punish any Open Faults in me but to
hunt for secret ones, and to revenge your selves upon my Person, because I have
laid my Offenses out of your Sight.


Zek. You should do better to value your self upon the simplicity of your
manners, then upon a flourish of Words and Phrases: And since you are so
forward to offer your self to a Defense; Pray'e will you speak to such Points
concerning this business of Tongue as you judge may be sufficient for your
Vindication.


L'Estrange. It is most Unwillingly that I enter upon This Subject; and for
many Reasons. First, as my Case must necessarily take in some matters that fall
under the Cognizance of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council. Secondly,
As I am no Friend to the Circumstances of almost All Vindications; being still
accompanied more or less with Vanity, and Clamor. Thirdly; It is an Argument
of great Weakness and Ill manners, for me to impose upon the World; and to
expect that the Sun should stand still in the Firmament, to attend my Little
Story. And truly, in This Outrageous Liberty of the Press, I should be no more
moved at a Personal Libell, than at a Pug upon the Thames, for calling me the
Son of a Whore; or at a Privileged Fool, upon the Land, for making as many
Sorts of Rascals of me as ever were created out of the Four and Twenty Letters.
For Course Language is the Dialect of Courser Natures. I never met with any man
that was angry with a Frogg for Croaking: and every one knows that it is as
natural for a Puppy to Bark, as to Breath. But yet under favor, when This
Popular Venom comes to Resolve into a Crime of State; and that the Honor of a
Family: the Life, Freedom, and Reputation of a Loyal Subject, and an Honest
man, comes to be the Issue of the Question; I have no other Choice before me,
but either to Sink under the Infamy of a Fool, and a Traitor, (which is the
Character that the Little Scribbling Hirelings of this Town have bestowed upon
me) or else to Redeem my self by a Clear, and Open Defense: Wherein I shall
endeavor to govern my self with a due Reverence both to Authority, and Truth.


Ephesians. Pray'e Speak, in the first place, to the matter of your Examination.


L'E. Upon Wednesday the 6th of this Instant Oct. I attended the Council;
where Mr. Oats, being present, referred himself, (as to any Charge against me)
to Young Tongs Affidavit.

The Affidavit being read; I spoke, with Leave of the Board, to thoe Parts of
it that seemed to affect me; And, as I then promised, so I delivered a Just,
and punctual Account, upon the whole matter in question: which was to This
following effect.

Mr. Thomas Newcomb of the Savoy, did, at my Instance, desire Mr. Choqueux (his
near Neighbor there,) that he would appoint me some time to discourse with him
at his own House concerning several Historical Passages of the Late War,
whereof (as I was enform'd) he had reserved diverse Memorials; He set the Time,
and I went to him accordingly, telling him in General terms my business: But
company being There, and just setting down to a Collation, it was too late to
enter upon the Discourse after Supper, and so we referred it to another time.

Upon my next Visit, a maid directed me into a low Room, where there were two
young men; (both Strangers to me:) Mr. Choqueux coming down Immediately,
saluted me, and made Young Tongue (who, it seems, was One of them) and myself
known to each other. Mr. Tongue (said I) I have been sometimes at your Fathers
Lodgings in White Hall: did I ever see You There? No Sir, says he, I never saw
you before in my Life; but I have often heard my Father speak of You. Yes (says
Mr. Choqueux) for refusing to License his Royal Martyr; which he took very Ill
at your hands. There were several dangerous Passages in it ( said I) that I
durst not meddle with. As Sir, says Young Tongue, so there were: And upon That,
he took an Occasion to tell me some General Stories of his Father, and Mr.
Oats: That they had had many Privacies together; but without naming any
Particulars of business. And Then he told of one Green (a Weaver) that seeing
his Father looking about him in the Court of Requests, (as I remember) asked him
what News? Dr. Tongue replying, that he heard none: Green made answer that he
would tell Him some; and that there would suddenly be a Popish Massacre. After
which (says young Tongue) my Father made an Acquaintance with him; and not long
after, followed the Plot. Some other wild Discourses he made; but all of them
so Extravagant, and Incoherent, that I cut him off as fairly as with Civility I
could, by Pishing at all he had said, and telling him, in plain terms, that it
signified just nothing.

Upon showing this Dislike, Tongue whispered to Mr. Choqueux, who told me
presently, that if I had any Writing-work, Mr. Tongue would Transcribe any thing
for me with all his heart. Mr. Choqueux also recommending Tongue to me, as one
that had a great esteem for me. I told him that I had no business of That
kind, and that I should be ready to Oblige Mr. Tongue: And so we sat together
over a glass of Wine, without one syllable more of business, more then that I
desired Mr. Choqueux to remember me for what Notes he had of the late War;
the which he said he would, but that his Papers were most of them at Paris.

As I was going to take leave, M. Tongue desired that he might wait upon me at
my House; and propounded such or such a time: So that I agreed at last to the
time of his own choosing: But so little satisfied was I with this kind of
Entertainment, that I slipped out of the way, and so he lost his labor. But the
next morning, Mr. Choqueux brought me a Letter from him, desiring me that in
regard he mist of me last night, I would appoint him another time, for he had
something to say to me.

Upon reading of His Letter, (which I showed to the Bearer of it) Mr. Choqueux
(said I) he that has to do with these Fellows, Must be as wary as if he were
upon the High Rope: a slip is as much as a man's Neck's worth: If you do but
misplace One word, he will be your Ruin. But I Will write him an Answer however;
which in effect was This. I Am sorry that I mist you last night, but if you have
anything to say to me, I shall be at home at 7. in the Evening. Truly (Sir)
says Mr. Choqueux I believe young Tongue to have no sort of Guile in him; but
however, he can do me no hurt, for I have nothing to do with him, but in
relation to his Health.

About 7. in the Evening, came Mr. Choqueux, Mr. Tongue, and two more, (who are
mere Strangers to me): Mr. Choqueux telling me, that Mr. Tongue had desired him
to bring him to me, and that he had something to acquaint me with. Sir (said I)
This business has an Ill face: I will not meddle in any thing looks so like a
Consultation. So the two strangers departed, leaving the Other two behind; Sr.
(says Mr. Choqueux) Mr Tongue has delivered some Enformations already: and he has
an Enformation to offer to your self, as a Justice of Peace. Gentlemen (Said I)
if it be an Enformation ready Drawn, and in your own hand, Mr. Tongue; so as to
need no alteration; if you please to Insert a clause in it for my Security,
wherein you shall declare, that it is your own voluntary Act, and without any
Argument, or Inducement, from me to move you to it, let me see the Information,
and if I find it a matter fit for me to meddle in, I Will Swear you to it; but
otherwise I can do nothing in it. Mr. Tongue making Answer, that he had nothing
ready drawn; Mr. Choqueux went his way, and Tongue Stayed I think about a Quarter
of an hour after at most, after him; telling over the same Stuff again, that I
was so Sick of at the Savoy. I was so far from Pumping him for matter to work
upon, or making any Improvement, or Collections from what he said, that I
quitted the Table where he sat, and walked about the Room; which made him change
his Discourse, to talk of some little Foolish Things that I had written; which
in good manners I gave him, and so he departed. After which time I never
received either Note, or Message from him.


Zek. But did not Dr. Oats charge you for concealing a Conspiracy, contrary to
your Duty, as a Magistrate? And did he not Appeal to the Board, whether or no
you had rendered any account to their Lordships of That Conspiracy?


L' Est. He did so: And my Answer Then was, that it would be a strange
boldness, and Impertinence to trouble their Lordships with every ridiculous
Story that I heard, and a more ridiculous then This I never met withal, under
so Grave a Pretense.

I do now answer further, that as I was not at all Inquisitive into the
Particulars, so the matter in General of what I heard, was, in the very
quality of it, so Insignificant and Trivial; that bating the Charge, and
Trouble of Fees and Attendance, I would have stood the shook of the Issue of
such a Charge, for a single Half Crown, even admitting that every Article of it
could have been proved against me. So that, as I said upon my Examination, I do
not account it worth my while to disguise, or evade any one Circumstance in
This matter, being wholly Intent upon the discharge of my Conscience, in this
affair, with a respect to Modesty, Truth, and Duty. Beside, that on the other
hand I have a natural abhorrence for the Office of a Setter, or a Trepanner:
And it is the Last Lavfull Service in this world, that I would render even to
my Prince and Country.


Zek. These are but Words still: But since you have gone thus far of your own
accord, pray'e go a little further for my sake. Did you neither Tamper with
young Tongue, Originally, nor advise him afterward to disclaim his Retractation
to his Uncle, of his former Informations.


L' Estrange. No: I do' aver it, upon my Hopes of Heaven, that I never saw the
Eyes of Young Tongue (to my knowledge) till after that disclaiming of his
Retractation. And so far was I from laying any stresse upon what I believe
Tongue suggested, that I would have stood in Mr. Oats his Place for Three
halfpence, if it could have been proved against Me.


Zek. You never had any thing to do neither with Mrs. Celliers, for the
carrying on of This Contrivance against the Doctors, had ye?


L' Estr. Upon the word of a Christian, I do not so much as know the Woman: and
I do verily believe that I never saw her Face. Nor had I ever any thing to do
with her, either directly or Indirectly in my whole Life: Nor did I hear so
much as her Name mentioned upon my Examination.


Ephesians. Pray let me put you a Question now. Did you never deliver Tongue a hundred
Guyneys by order from the Duke of York? Or do not you, either know, or believe,
that he had That, or some other Sum given him, or some Reward, promised him,
for the Carrying on of This Affayr? and by Whom?


L'Estr. No, by all that is Sacred, I do neither Know nor Believe that any Sum
of Money, or any Reward, was either Given, or Promised to Tongue by his Royal
Highness, or his Order; nor do I know of any Money given him, or any Reward
Promised him, in consideration of his appearing as an Evidence, by any Person
whatsoever. Neither did I ever touch a Penny of the Duke's Money in my Life,
either for my own, or for the Use of any other Person. But as to any
Gratification to him, or the Hopes of it, in case he could draw me into the
Snare, I can say nothing to That. But by his Proposing of me beforehand, for
his Assistant (being, as then, wholly unknown to him) and by the Sequel of his
Addresses and Applications, it does manifestly appear, that the entrapping of
L' Estrange was one part of his Design.

But you say nothing all this while of a Conspiracy on the other side; and an
endeavor to set up the whole Nation in Evidence against me. For what is it
less, the dispersing of so many hundreds of Papers every Week, all over the
Kingdom, stuffed with the basest and falsest Scandals against me imaginable;
belying the very Ord^rs and Proceedings of the Council; and misrepresenting
Matters of State: And this is the Trade of a Pack of Mercenary Scriblers that
are (probably) kept in Pay to a Faction.


Ephesians. You have the Wit, I perceive, to tell us nothing to your Disadvantage:
Pray'e were not you taken up for being a little too Malapert, when Dr. Oats
laid you so open before the Council?


L'Estr. Not one Jot I do assure ye Gentlemen: and I hope, I understand my Duty
better than to deserve it. True it is, that Mr. Oats charged me with abusing
the Kings Witnesses in my Writings. And I did say indeed, It were well if some
of them did not abuse themselves more in their manners; for that Oats himself
had within a few days called me at least forty Rogues and Rascals, in a
Coffee-House, in one quarter of an hour; whereupon, (not to make the matter
worse than it was) Mr. Oats replied, so I have; and I will prove you to be a
Rogue and a Rascal. And then he was at it that he would find Witnesses: to
which I only observed that they were yet to find.

And pray'e Note, That all this Heat was about my Writings; which he had at the
same time declared in precise words that he had never read.

He threatened me indeed with a Parliament, but that is a Course of Speech he
has got. If the Prisoners but ask a New-comer for his Garnish or Foy, the
Master of the Prison shall be told of a Parliament. A Bishop shall not Suspend
a Minister for refusing to officiate according to the Canon, but he is
presently threatened with a Parliament. If the University shall not think fit to
allow Mr. Oats his Degree; The Lawn-Sleeves are to be Ruffled next Parliament.
I was walking a while since only cross the Outer-Court at White Hall innocently
about my business, and because I did not Cap him, over the Square, as the Boys
do Fellows in Cambridge; Squire L' Estrange (says he) We shall have a
Parliament, twirling his Hat about, betwixt his Finger and his Thumb; with a
Look and Action not to be expressed.

What can be a greater Affront now to that Illustrious Body, than to entitle it
to the Protection of insolent Reproaches and Wrongs. As if Parliaments had
nothing else to do, than to countenance the Animosities, gratify the Passions,
and weak the Revenges of Private and of troublesome men.

To say that I have as great a Veneration for the Constitution of an English
Parliament; as any man living, is only to say the same thing over again which I
have very often said heretofore. And I have made my words good by my Practices
in the Deference and Obedience which I have ever paid to the Authority and
Dignity of That August Assembly, whenever Legally Indicted and Convened. Did
I suffer above three years Imprisonment in Newgate under a Sentence of Death,
from the Late Usurpers (that dethroned and deposed his Majesty) for my Loyalty
to my Prince and the Government? And shall I now be afraid of a Parliament that
stands up for the King's Preservation and Support? Have I been True to the
Crown, through all the Extremities of a Barbarous Rebellion, to be a Traitor
now at last to a Gracious and a Lawful Prince? No, no; Gentlemen, to be hanged
on both sides with the Doctors fair Leave, is a little with the most. I have
not behaved my self at a Rate to fear a Parliament, but rather to wish for it.
As to all Public Matters, I have made the Law my Rule, and I have made my Duty
the Measure of my Actions; and he that keeps himself within these Bounds, needs
no other Security against the Justice of a Parliament; especially a Person that
has upon all occasion asserted the Rights of that Noble Assembly; Treating them
with the style of Venerable Patriots [Case put Page 22] even in the very case
concerning his Royal Highness; and never receding from those Terms of Honor
and Respect.


Zek. You have made a long Discourse here; just nothing to the purpose: for you
are not Charged with Abusing the Parliament, but for Disparaging the King's
Witnesses.


L'Estr. As for the Kings Witnesses, I have had no dealings with any of them,
but with Mr. Oats, and none with him neither in any sort to reflect upon his
Evidence. He gives it up and down, with open-mouth, that I am a Conspirator,
and a Papist; and I declare on the other side, that there are not a couple of
Ranker Lies in Hell. Rogue, Rascal, Villain, and other Scurrillities of the
same seasoning, are the Lard he makes use of in his ordinary Discourses of
L'Estrange. And under all these Indignities I must not dare to say that I am
None of these fine things, for fear of discrediting Mr. Oats by the
Contradiction But so long as he serves my betters with the same sauce, there is
the less hurt done. Where Is the Liberty of the Subject, if men shall be
Arraigned for their Thoughts? Where Is common Equity, if the Testimony of a
Profligate, Little Creature, that has sworn forward and backward, and backward
and forward again, in the same Cause already, shall come to weigh against
almost forty years service of the Crown, without so much as one false step,
which I affirm to be Literally True; and I defy the Devil himself, (let him
but subscribe Satan to his Information) to disprove me in so much as a
Syllable. What Security will there be for Honor or Virtue, when it shall
become dangerous to be honest; And that there shall need no more than such a
wretch as young Tong's kissing of a Book, to work the Ruin of any man living?
We have no Curtius's in This Age to spare; no Devotes, (that will run through
fire and water to redeem their Country (more than the Government (I fear) has
need of. This is a Case not to be imagined; and fitter for a Romantic Vision,
than a Christian Contemplation. It might do well enough, for a Satirical Piece
of Painting, to draw the narrow Way beset with Gibbets, Shackles and Halters;
and to have the broad One strewed with Honors, Preferments, and Rewards: for
it is a Fancy only for an Emblem, not a History.

And yet God forbid but Conspiracies and Conspirators should be thoroughly
sifted and punished; The Suborners of false Evidence made exemplary, and
delivered up to the highest degree of Ignominy and Scorn; But then let the
impartial Hand of Justice hold the Scale; and let Authority, in due course of
Law, pronounce the Sentence. But for Private Men to obtrude themselves upon the
Province of the Magistrate: For Men who upon a Fatality of Principle, are (by a
certain kind of Incantation) enslaved to such or such a Party; for these men (I
say) to take advantages of the Passions, Distempers, Wants and Weaknesses of
Persons in Distress: What may they not do with Mean and Mercenary Souls under
such a Pressure? We are really come to that pass, That the Government it self
as well as the Servants of it lies at the mercy of every common Scribler, and
Hedg-Printer: and it is at their pleasure, whether we shall be Honest Men; or
Rascals, Traitors, Plotters, Suborners, Trepanners; All as They please.


Ephesians. Pray do but mind now, how all this hangs together. You are censured for
discrediting the Kings Witnesses; and you discharge your self with saying that
they abuse you: and there is not one word neither to clear your self from being
a Papist.


L'Estr. I have examined both my Books and my Thoughts. For the Latter; I am
satisfied in my own Conscience, and that is enough for me. As to the Former, let
but any man show me where I have so much as employed any thing to be False that
was true; where I have so much as intimated the Doubt, or Discredited the
Evidence of any thing that was sworn: or where I have so much as advised a
Caution in the point of believing but to the advantage of the Kings Evidences
upon the true and real Plot: and I Will be his Bond-Slave. Now the Sum of all my
words and meaning, is wrapped up in This: Distinguish betwixt Street-Reports and
Sworn-Evidences; do not bring a Disparagement upon the Truth, by being
over-easie to believe Fables: for nothing more supports the credit of any
Cause, than the casting of all Trash and Trumpery out of it.

To the Scandal of Popery; I am not ignorant how Liberal diverse People are of
their Censures in this Case; who by the Ties of Nature, Honor and Good
Manners, ought to be more tender and careful of what they say: And some among
the rest, that stab me with this Poisoned Dagger in their very Arms; for I can
scarce pass them without an Embrace. If what I have said and proved already
upon this Subject, will not satisfy the World, nothing will: But however, it
is only so much pains lost, to attempt it once more.

In my Reformed Catholic, page 3. [The Author (say I) is no Disguised or
Concealed Papist, but of the Communion of the Church of England, Trained up in
the strictest way of it, and standing firm to it against all sorts of
Provocation, Discouragement, Temptation and Argument; and without warping to
the Jesuits, either on the Right Hand, or on the Left.

In my Discovery upon Discovery, Page 9. I expound the Passage above recited,
in these Words,

I had the Honor, in the Late Times, (and being then an Exile) to pass a
matter of Eight Months in the House of the Cardinal of Hesse; where I was as
kindly received as if I had been at my own Father's: I wanted neither
Invitations nor Arguments to carry me over to the Church of Rome; beside the
private Temptation of a Hopeless Interest (as to the King) and a Broken
Fortune. Now if I had been so easily disposed to Truck my Religion for Money
(as the whole Litter of the Town-Scriblers will have it) I do assure you Dr. I
could then have made my Market.

And then in my Letter to Dr. Oats, p. 21. thus;

Now to discharge my Soul to you, Dr. as in Confession; I am (by my Hopes of
Heaven) a True Son of the Church of England.

Some there are, that will have me a Papist of Fifteen Years Standing; others,
only of Six Months; But a Papist I am to be, in despite of my Hearts-Blood.
The Coffee House-Doctors have, in fine, pronounced me a Papist; but where, and
how often, and how many Witnesses to prove me at Mass, they are not yet agreed
upon. The Scene is said to be laid in Somerset House, Wyld-House, and three or
four other obscure Places. The High-Fliers will not abate a single Ave-Mary of
Forty Masses; but the more Moderate reckon upon Nine, precise; within a Dominus
Tecum, which looks like Five Pound wanting a Penny, in a Tavern-Bill. With the
same Conscience they might have made it Even Money as well, if they had so
pleased. There Is some body has made mention of Prance, as the Person to produce
the Witnesses; but I Will not believe it. I could silence all these Calumnies, by
telling you, that I have satisfied the Law in Receiving of the Sacrament, and
taking the Tests; but I Will go further with you.

By my Hopes of a Future State, I am in my Heart and Judgment, a True Son of
the Church of England, according to the Nine and Thirty Articles: And if I was
ever present at the Celebration of any Mass since His Majesty's Return; or if
(to the best Recollection I can make of Things past) I have ever so much as set
my Foot into a Romish Chapel, since His Majesty's Return, I wish I may never
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.


Zek. This is a bold Push; but all this Swearing and Staring will not bring you
off yet for your Writing.


L'Estr. As to my Writings, they are at this Instant under the Anatomy; and I
know most of the very Persons that are Commissioned to Read upon the
Dissection. I look upon my self to be under the Protection of the Law; and I do
positively say, that without a most Unnatural Violence, both upon the Scope and
Wording of them, I am secure.


POSTSCRIPT.
MY Attendance upon his Majesty in Council, about this Business of Tongue, since
the Publishing of these Papers, has Created new Matter for a Postscript; which
I am bound, in common prudence to communicate to the world; for the obviating
of those malicious Calumnies which are daily promoted against me by the skill
and industry of a Faction; to which I have rendered my self odious, by
asserting the Rites and Interests, both of Church and State, according to my
Conscience and Duty.

Upon a strict Examination of this ShamPlot of Tongs, and a full hearing of all
Parties; I presented my Defense, as I have already set it forth, and it was
admitted, without any sort of contradiction. But as I had occasion to say upon
the place; If one Nail will not drive, another must. The Charge of the
Sham-Plot falling to the Ground; (without one word of Mrs. Cellier, as to any
concern of mine) Mr. Oats was pleased to represent me as a Person
Popishly-affected; and he produced Mr. Prance, who declared upon Oath, that he
had seen me three or four several times at Mass, at Somerset House, about two
years since; and that I did there as other People did; but that he could not
speak any more as to my being a Papist, or that he ever saw me receive; neither
could he name any body else that saw me there; and he added to this, that he
had known me about the Town for several years.

Now to this Information, I answer, first, That if I had been there, it would
not prove me to be a Papist; for Thousands of People resort thither, many times
upon Curiosity, without any respect to Religion. Secondly, that having taken
the Oaths and Tests required by the Law, I am Rectus in Curia: so that this
Testimony cannot operate upon me for that reason neither; that is to say, any
further than as to a Scandal.

And yet under these safe and legal Circumstances, without any avail to me,
(more than purging my self from the Reproache) I do here deliberately and
solemnly make this further Declaration to the whole world.

As I do believe there is a God; and that there is a Heaven and a Hell, (with
Reverence to the Divine Majesty, and to Truth) may I be saved, or damned, as I
speak true or false, in this matter; and without any reserve or collusion
whatsoever: and I deliver this upon cold and considerate thoughts, having
before me the Prospect of the most dreadful Vengeance to fall upon me, if I
tell a lie, that ever befell any Mortal?

I never was present at Mass in any place whatsoever, since his Majesty's
Return; nor to the best of my memory, have been under the Roof of a Romish
Chapel, since that time.

After this, Mr Oats exhibited an Information against me for conveying away
Bulls and Popish Books that had been seized and locked up: whereupon the
Messenger of the Press discharged himself upon Oath, that the Name of L'
Estrange was not so much as mentioned in the case. Mr. Oats Expounding himself
afterward, that what he spoke, was only upon Information.

The next Blow at me will be (as I am informed) for saying at Will's Coffee
House, that there is no Plot: which is a thing that I do averr, by all that I
have said before, was never spoken by me, either there, or any where else.

In the last place, I am to be questioned for my Books, and that concludes the
Story.

Whosoever duly considers the Quality of my Case, and the necessity of
encountering so many spiteful flams, as are already dispersed, even since
yesterday, with a fair and a modest Narration of the matter of Fact, will
easily excuse this Appendix.

October. 14. 1680.
THE END

