AN ANSWER TO THE APPEAL FROM THE COUNTRY TO THE CITY.

LONDON, Printed by M. C. for Henry Brom, at the Gun in St. Paul's Churchyard,
1679.

AN ANSWER TO THE APPEAL FROM THE COUNTRY, to the CITY, etc.
THIS Appeal has made a mighty noise about the Town; and yet, Heaven knows,
there is neither Good Faith in it, nor Argument: But all things misapplied, or
mis-reported, to bring an Odium upon the Government, and to in^ame the
Multitude. The pretended Reasonings of it are no more than fallacies and
non-sequiturs, from the beginning to the end; and yet it serves in a
Coffer-Hense for a Test of Honest Men and Mutiniers. Taking it barely in in
self, it is scarce worth an Answer: But in the circumstances of the Boldness
and the Malice, it is but reasonable to bestow such a Reply upon it, as may
give it a Recommendation to public Justice; Especially having already taken
notice of it by the By, in another place.

It is a wonderful thing, the Confidence of this Audacious Pamphlet, in
Addressing it self to the City, after so Fresh, so Loyal, and so Generous an
instance of their scorn, and detestation of any thing that looks like a
seditious practice. Why should a Wat Tyler expect better Quarter from a Lord
Mayor under Charles the Second, than he had from a Lord Mayor under Richard the
Second? Nay, that very The City of London has been always Loyal.
Rebellion of Forty-one is most injuriously charged upon the City of London;
for Gournay, Rica^t, Garraway, and the most considerable of the Citizens, were
not only against it in their Opinions, but opposed it to the utmost with their
Estates and Persons. And that Honorable Society has not yet forgotten either
the Calamities of the War, or the Methods and Instruments which brought so
great a Reproach upon the City. Beside, that it is as much their Interest as
their Duty, and as much their Inclination as either, to support the Government.
For by a War they must of necessity suffer doubly: And not only in the loss or
abatement of their Trade, but in the deep proportion of their Taxes toward the
public Charge. So that these are not a sort of people to be Wheedled out of
their Honor and Allegiance. But we shall now take a view of the Pamphlet it
self.

An Appeal from the Country to the City.
IT begins; Most brave and noble Citizens: And a little lower; With you we
stand, and with you we fall; your example directs our Conduct, etc. Now if the
greeting had been to the Club of Subscribers, that which follows would have
been much more Consequent; for it is a great Truth, that the Conspirators of
both sides must expect to stand and fall together; and that the Factions in the
Country can never make any thing on it, without a Tumult in the City, to lead
the Dance; which (God be praised) there is no fear of, and then for the Credit
which this busy Mutineer can pretend to under this present Government, with
the Noble Citizens (as he claws them) I am persuaded, if the Author of the
Appeal were but known to the Court of Aldermen and Common Council, it might
cost him Dear, the very Complement. Not but that in so great a body, there may
be some few little Fellows a float too, that cry out with the Horse-turds among
the Apples, in the Emblem, How We Apples swim.

In the next clause, the Scribler gives to understand Hodge upon the Monument.
that he has read Hodge upon the Monument; and writing after that Copy, he
follows the fancy of the Citizens looking about them from the top of the
Pyramid. Now to match this dismal prospect of Imaginary Calamities to come, we
shall give you a Parallel in a brief Summary of what this Nation has really
suffered in Fact; and in Truth brought upon it self, by believing such stories
as these, without either Foundation or Effect.

First (says he) Imagine you see the whole Town in (...).
a flame, occasioned this second time by the same Popish malice which set it on
fire before.

First ( say I) Imagine you see the whole Nation (...).
in a Flame, and brought to the extremities of Fire and Sword, occasioned this
second time by the same Schismatical and Republican Malice which embroiled it
before.

At the same instant fancy that amongst the distracted Appeal.
Crowd, you behold Troops of Papists ravishing your Wives and Daughters,
dashing your little Childrens brains out against the Walls, Plundering your
Houses, and cutting your own Throats, by the name of Heretic Dogs.

At the same instant, Fancy December. 1659, once (...).
over again; whole droves of Cobblers, Dray-men, Ostlers, upon Free quarter with
you, till some of your Wives and Daughters are forced to Prostitute themselves
for Bread; your Councels affronted by Armed Troops, and your fellow Citizens
knocked on the head, like Dogs, at their own doors, for not so much as barking;
your Apprentices discharged of their Indentures by an Arbitrary Power; your
Houses Rifled; your Account-books examined; your Servants corrupted to Betray
their Masters; your ^ersons clapped under ^atches, transplanted or thrown (...)
^asty Dungeons; or (in mercy perhaps) your Throats cut, by the Name of Popish
Dogs and Cavaliers: And all this only for refusing to Renounce God and your
Sovereign.

(...) represent to your selves the Tower playing off (...)*
(...) (...), and battering down the Houses about your (...).

(...) (...) present to your sleves the Thimble-maker, (...)*
(...) (...) (...) (...) of the Tower; your Citizens clapped up; St. Paul's and
Gresham-Colledge turned into Garrisons; orders for the demolishing of your
Gates and Chains; and nothing less than Military Execution threatened you,
unless you will redeem your selves with ICCCCO l. a month Contribution,
toward the perpetuating of your Slavery.

Also casting your Eye toward Smithsield, Imagine Appeal.
you see your Father, or your Mother, or some of your nearest and dearest
Relations tied to a Stake in the midst of flames; when with hands and eyes
lifted up to Heaven, they scream and cry out to that God, for whose cause they
die; which was a frequent spectacle the last time Popery Reigned amongst us.

Also casting your eye toward Cheap Side, Cornhil, Parallel.
Charing Cross, Palace-yard, Tower Hill, nay, Whitehall it self: Imagine you
see your Father, or some of your nearest Relations, your Citizens, the
Nobility, Gentry; nay, the King himself, and his best Friends, under the hand
of the Common Executioner, appealing to God, in whose Cause they died, which
was a frequent spectacle, when Rebels and Usurpers, under the title of
Reformers, reigned last amongst us.

Fancy ye behold those Beautiful Churches, erected Appeal.
for the true Worship of God, abused and turned into Idolatrous Temples, to the
dishonor of Christ, and scandal of Religion: The Ministers of God's Holy Word,
torn in pieces before your eyes, and their best Friends not daring even to
speak in their behalf.

Fancy you behold those Beautiful Churches erected Parallel.
for the true Worship of God, abused and turned into Stables; the Pulpits into
Iuggling boxes to Hocus your Wives and Daughters out of their Bodkins and
Thimbles; and nothing to be heard there but Heresy and Sedition, to the
dishonor of Christ, and scandal of Religion. The Ministers of Gods Holy Word
cast out of their Livings by hundreds, and their Children exposed to the wide
World to beg their Bread; and not a Friend that dares open his mouth for them.

Women running with their Hair about their ears; Appeal.
Men covered with Blood, and Children sprawling under Horses feet, and only the
Walls of Houses left standing.

Your Women running with their Hair about their Parallel.
ears, one half to the Works like Pioniers, the other dancing Attendance at
some Merciless Committee, to put in Bail perhaps for some Malignant Friend or
Husband; Men covered with Blood, lost Limbs, and mangled Bodies, from Edg-hill,
Branford, etc. and with horror of Conscience over and above; Altars Robbed,
Churches Demolished, and only the Walls left standing.

In Fine, What the Devil himself would do, were he Appeal.
here upon Earth, will in his absence infallibly be acted by his Agents the
Papists: Those who had so much Ingratitude and Baseness to attempt the Life of
a Prince, so Indulgent to them, will hardly be less cruel to any of his
Protestant Subjects.

In Fine, What the Devil himself would do, were Parallel.
he here upon Earth, will in his absence infallibly be acted (if they may have
their will) by his Agents, the Perjurious and Hypocritical Regicides; that
Betrayed their Prince and their Country by the Solemnity of a Covenant, and
Poisoned the unwary People in that very Sacrament. Those who had so much
Ingratitude and Baseness, not only to attempt, but take away the Life of a
Prince so Indulgent to them as the late King was, who denied them nothing but
his Crown, and his Blood, which afterward they took: These, I say again, that
are so ungrateful to our present Sovereign, as after so much Mercy and Bounty
to the Murderers of his Father, and of his Friends, have now entered into
fresh attempts upon his Life, his Crown and Dignity, will hardly be less Cruel
to any of his Majesty's obedient Subjects.

Now to show you that this way of Incentive, to the Multitude is only the Old
story new furbish'd, and not our Appellants Mother-wit and Contrivance, as he
would have the world imagine. See his Majesty's Declaration of Aug. 12. 1642.
Husbands Collections, page 540.

One day the Tower of London is in danger to be The Old Story
taken; and Information given that Great Multitudes, at least a Hundred, had
that day resorted to visit a Priest, then a Prisoner there by Order of the
Lords: and that about the time of the Information, about fifty or sixty were
then there; and a Warder dispatched of purpose to give that notice: Upon
Inquiry, but four persons were then found to be There, and but eight all that
day, who had visited the Priest. Another day a Tailor in a Ditch over-hears two
passengers to Plot the Death of Mr. Pym, and of many other Members of Both
Houses. Then Libellous Letters found in the Streets, without Names, (probably
contrived by themselves; and by Their Power, Published, Printed, and Entered in
their Iournals) and Intimations given of the Papists Training under ground, and
of notable Provision of Ammunition in Houses; where, upon Examination, a Single
Sword, and a Bow and Arrows are found. A Design of the Inhabitants of
Covent Garden to Murder the City of London. News from France, Italy, Spain,
Denmark, of Armies ready to come for England. And again, Page 536. they cause
Discourses to be Published, and Infusions to be made of Incredible Dangers to
the City and Kingdom, by that our coming to the House: (in the case of the five
Members) An Alarm was given to the City in the Dead time of the Night, that we
were coming with H^rse and Fo^t thither, and thereupon the wh^le City put in
Arms: And howsoever the Envy seemed to be cast upon the Designs of the Papists,
mention was only made of Actions of our own.

Upon a fair understanding of the whole, this supposition of his is no more
than the Counterpart of the old Story: and the Declamatory dangers that he
foresees in Vision, were outdone by those sensible Cruelties and Oppressions
that this poor Kingdom suffered in very deed.

If it be true, that these and forty times more Cruelties We should do well to
look (...) us.
were committed: And that the People were frighted into these Precipices only
by shadows: If it be true again, that those Glorious Pretenders, when they had
the King and his Papists (as they called his most Orthodox Friends) under foot;
that these People, I say, never looked further after Religion; but fell
presently to the sharing of the Church and Crown Revenues among themselves, It
will concern every sober man to look well about him, and to make use of his
Reason, as well as of his Faith, for these Fore-boders seldom Croak but before
a Storm. Four Affronts upon the Government in two Periods.


We in the Country (says he) have done our parts, in choosing, for the
generality, Good Members to serve in Parliament. But if (as our two last
Parliaments were) they must be Dissolved or Prorog^ed, when over they come to
redress the Grievances of the Subject, we may be Pitied but not Blamed. If the
Plot takes effect, as in all probability it will, our Parliaments are not then
to be Condemned for that their not being suffered to sit, occasioned it. Fol. 1.

There are just as many Affronts put upon the Government in these two Periods,
as (in the Printed Folio) there are Lines in it. First, Upon the House of
Commons; for a Representative constituted, for the generality, of such men as
our Appealer calls Good Members, would l^y the Kingdom in Blood, (which is
manifestly the deist of the Libel from the one end of it to the other.)
Secondly, The Appellant Usurps upon the Kings Authority; as if his Majesty were
bound to give an Account to every Libeller, why he Prorogues or Dissolves his
Parliaments (which is a Privilege inseparable from the Supreme Power) in all
forms of Government. Thirdly, It is a Tacit Charge of Tyranny upon the King;
for it is done (he says) when ever they come to redress the Grievances of the
Subject. And lastly, He makes the King a Promoter of the Plot; but whether with
more Indignity or Folly, it is hard to determine, either in the Intimation, o^
in the Supposal of his Majesty to be Felo de se, and a Party to the Conspiracy
against his own Li^. The Plot (he says) will in all Probability take (...) and
he is the occasion of it, that would not suffer these Parliaments to sit.

The Plot is now (...) so far out of our Enemies reach, that no (...) (...) or
Tri^k can ever hope to extinguish it. Wherefore they must either suffer all to
come o^t, or begin by force to justify it, which we see they are going to do,
by their endeavoring to get those Worthy and Brave Commanders Banished, who (
as they think) (...).
are the most likely Persons to conduct and lead us up against any Popish Army.
Fol. 1.

The Appellants meaning is, that the Popish Plot is (...).
so notoriously Public, there is no Concealing of it, and so far we are
agreed: For we have had Legal Trials, Proofs, Verdicts, Sentences, and Legal
Executions in the Case. But yet to my thinking, we have had also as Competent
Evidences of another Plot under that, as a body would wish. But whoever crosses
the second Plot, is presently Libelled, as a Friend to the former. What do we
hear, what do we read, what do we see, but Seditious Discourses, Scandalous
Invectives, and Mutinous Practices against the Government? Is not the Kings
Administration, and his Authority publicly Arraigned? And is not his Sacred
Life struck at in this way of Proceeding? First, They expressly tell the World
that his Majesty Misgoverns. Secondly: They lay it down for a Maxim, that the
People may call him to Account, in case he does Misgovern. And this being
admitted, the next point is, directly (by an undeniable Consequence) to Arraign
him as a Traitor to the Sovereign People. But the Faction it self expounds its
own meaning. What have they to say for that Inhuman and Execrable Murder acted
upon the late Archbishop of St. Andrews in Scotland, and to their Declaration
against the King himself; which was followed with an Open, Actual, and Form^d
Rebellion? This is a Plot that, methinks, a Man may see without his
Spectacles; and according to our Appellants conceit, they began by force to
justify it, for fear all should come out.

To follow him in his Politiques, he tells us further in the passage above
recited, that to facilitate the Papists work, his Majesty Banishes the Persons
most capable of Opposing it. So that he makes his Majesty evidently a Party to
the Plot; or at best, no more than a King upon a Chess-board, to be turned and
carried which way the Gamester pleases: Beside, the putting of the Illustrious
Duke of Monmouth in the head of Popish Troops, in contradiction to himself.

But (for all this yet) Gentlemen ( says he) be not He gives the Ala^m.
dismayed; the Lord of Hosts will be of your sides; for so long as you fight his
Cause, he will fight your Battles: And if God be for you, who dares be against
you? Fear nothing, but as your Interests are United, so let your Resolutions be
the same; and the first hour wherein you hear of the Kings Untimely End, let no
other noise be heard among you, but that of Arm, Arm, to Revenge your
Sovereigns Death, both upon his Murderers, and their whole Party, for that
there is no such thing as an English Papist, who is not in the Plot, at least
in his good Wishes. Fol. 2.

And why [ be not dismaid] Where Is the danger, I beseech you? The Popish Plot
is Mastered; and there is hardly a Roman Catholic dares show his head: Nay,
and for want of Popish matter to work upon, the Church of England it self is
made Papal and Antichristian. And whoever looks narrowly into this business,
will find these Bugbears to be of the Appellants own making. What is all this,
but Curse ye Meroz over again: He claps the Rabble on the back, and spits in
their mouths, and without more ado, turns them loose upon the Government? The
first hour (says he) etc. Here Is no Supposition of the Kings Marther to
qualify the matter; but the thing so Positively pronounced, as if he himself
were of the Conspiracy. So that without any I^s or Ands, the Murder is given
for Granted; and upon this Instigation, the least Rumor in the world that way,
puts the People upon a General Massacre, which the bare report lately of the
French appearing before the Isle of Purb^ck, had like to have done in several
places. Now if they should Arm upon such a mistake, or but an hour too soon, it
were enough to put the whole Nation i^ Blood again: And then his Orders to the
City, to be ready with their Arms at an (...).
hours warning, are as Peremp^ory, as if he had the Command of the Militia.
Beside that, if a Fanatique should Murder the King, the Papists are to be
Puni^d for^t. Because (says ^e) every English Papist is in the Plot, at least
in his good wishes. And it is no less probable on the other side, that every
Unrepenting Covenanter is in the Counterplot; for upon that Covenant it was,
that they founded the Destruction, and the Dissolution of the Government: And
it behooves us to beware of King-killers on the one hand, as well as on the
other. Now see how he goes on.

Think not to ^are better than the rest, by med^ling less; for the Conquerors
Promises are never kept, especially coming from that sort of People, whose
M^xim it is, never to keep their word with Heretics, Fol. 2.

What a wonderful strain of Logic is this? Draw your Swords (says he) and go
to the Devil for Company, for the Papists keep no Faith with Heretics. This
was the Song of 41. and he that would see what Faith the Covenanters kept,
either with God, King, Church, or People, has no more to do than to compare
their (...) and (...) with their actions.

Now Gentlemen (says he) le^t any amongst you should (...) (...) of (...) (...)
and Court.
be ignorant, either of your Enemies, or their Designs, both against the King
and Kingdom, -- they are young Beggarly Offi^ers, Courtiers, over-ho^
Churchmen, and Papists. The Young Officer, or Soldiers Interest makes him
wish for a Standing Army; the Courtier endeavors to advance Taxes, Oppressive
and Illegal Impositions. The over-hot Churchmen wish well to Popery, in hope
of a Cardinals Cap, or at least the Command of some Abbey, Priory, or other
Ecclesiastical Pref^rment, whereof the Roman Church has so great plenty. These
are the men who exclaim against our Parliaments Proceedings, in relation to the
Plot, as t^o Violent; calling these times by no other name, but that of Forty
or Forty-one, when to amuse his Sacred Majesty, and his good People, they again
threaten us with another Forty-eight: And all this is done underhand, to
V^ndicate the Catholic Party, by throwing a Suspicion on the Fanatiques.
These are the Episcopal Tantivies, who make even the very Scriptures Pimp for
the Court; who out of Urim and Thummim can extort a Sermon to prove the not
paying of Tyths and Taxes to be the Sin against the Holy Ghost: And had rather
s^e the Kingdom ^un down with Blood, than part with the least Hem of a
Consecrated Frock, which they themselves made Holy.

Here Is a very fair and round distribution of the (...) (...) (...) (...) (...).
Cities Enemies, into Younger Brothers, Dependents upon the King; Friends to
the Church, and into Professed Papists: And the whole Kingdom it self is again
split into Two Parties, the one consisting of M^iniers and S^hismatiques; the
other of the Loyal Servants and Subjects of the Government, which under the
three first Heads, he brands as the Cities Enemies. These Men he Charges with
lessening the Plot, with resembling the present times to Forty-one, and talking
of another Forty-eight. Now how is it possible but the Positions of Fortyone
should put us in mind of the Rebellion of Fortyone, and the Regi^idal
Principles of Seventy-nine, mind us of the Regicide it self of Forty-eight. For
these Principles and Practices are nothing in the World but the Venom of the
Old Cause swallowed and Spewed up again; and all the Treasons of the Consistory
are cast upon the Conclave: As if the Murder of Charles the First, by the
Treachery of Mock-Protestants, were ever the less Detestable, because the Two
Harries of France were (...) (...).
Assassinated by Professed Papistss. These are the Puritan Jesuits, that turn the
Bible into a Nose of Wax; that make God the Author of Sin; that Depose and
Murder Kings by a Text; and Entitle their Sacrilege and Treason to the
Inspirations of the Holy Ghost. These are the Straight-lac'd Christians, that
make less scruple of Robbing the Altar, than of Kneeling at the Communion: They
can swallow the Blood of Widows and Orphans, and yet Puke at a Surplice. Let
me ask the worthy Gentlemen of the City now, which of the two carried them the
easier, the Schismatical and Sacrilegious, or the Episcopal Tantivy? Or which
they take for the more dangerous Enemies, our Appellants young Beggarly
Officers, or their Old Acquaintances, Pen, Fulks, and their Fellows, who
violently thrust out the gravest and most substantial of Husbands C^ll. ^37.
their Citizens (as the late King has it) and took in Persons of desperate
Fortunes and Opinions, in their places. Let them compare the Appellants
Courtiers too, with the Old Sequestring, Plundring, and Decimating Committees;
with their Court Marshalls, and Major-Generals: when London was made little
better then a shambles; and their Merchants only Cash-keepers to the Tyrants at
Westminster; and then against his Over-hot Churchmen, we will set the Mechanique
Pulp^teers and Tub preachers; that not only divided the people from their
Sovereign, but Wives from their Husbands, Children from their Parents; and
Preached away Apprentices, by Droves into Rebellion: Carrying the Schism through
Church and State, into private Families. This is the Blessed change that is now
propounded, and laid before us.

Lastly, (says he) the chief and most dangerous of your Papist^ the grand
Enemies.
Enemies are Papists, who to make sure of their own Game, allure all the three
forementioned Parties to their side, by the arguments aforesaid. Their design
is to bring in Popery, which they can no ways effect, but either by a Popish
Successor, or by the French Arms.

There is no doubt of the danger of the Papists; but still while the Government
has One Enemy in Front, it is good to secure the Flank and Rear, from another;
So* that the Ci^yes only safety lies in the mean, betwixt the two Extremes of
Popery, on the One hand, and Lib^inism on the Other. The Former (he says) can
never be effected, but by a Popish Successor, or the French Arms. See now how
this hangs together: Inconsistences.
the same Faction clamoured against the late King just at this rate: and yet
there was no prospect at that time, of a Popish Successor, but yet Popery was
charged (most injuriously as all the World can Witness) upon the King himself.
And then for the French Arms, so far was his Majesty from calling them in to
his assistance, that upon the Scottish Rebellion they were Solicited and
Implored into a Confederacy against him. And yet we remember to our griefs,
that those very Rumors and Apprehensions of Popery, even when there was not
any Danger of it, east us all into Confusion. And now our Appellant, to show
how good an Englishman he is, as well as a Subject, enters his Protestation a
little lower in the same Paragraph, that he would rather of the Two, Live under
a French Conqueror, then the Duke as Successor.

I must acknowledge (says he in the next clause) that there is some Coherence
between the Beginning of the Late Civil Wars, and this our present Age. For as
well then as now, the Ambitious Papists, and French Faction were the chief, nay
the only Incendiaries, which set us all in flame.

That the French Cardinal did Artificially improve the Turbulent Humor of the
English and Scottish Schismatics, to the advancing of the Interest of France,
and to the Embroyling of these Kingdoms, I make no question: But to call them
the Only Incendiaries is to give the Lie to the constant current of History,
and the known Certainty of Fact, even within our own remembrance. How were the
Papists and French Factions concerned in the Scottish Uproar of 1637, and a
hundred Sacrilegious Tumults, The Late Rebellion (...)
after that, in the course of the Rebellion? and to set him right now in his
Calculation of his Majesty's French-friends, we shall enform him, that the
Kings Principal supplies of Men, Arms, Money, and Ammunition, were furnished
from Holland.

He tells us further, that the Catholic Cause, like the Chestnut in the Fable,
has ever since Q. Marys days been in the Fire: and that both then, and now,
the Papists make use of the Episcopal, and Court-parties ^law, to take it out;
the First of these, they allure to their assistance, by the Fright of
Presbytery; the Latter by the apprehension of a Republique, though nothing is
less Designed, or more Improbable.

It Is a hard case to have to do with an Adversary Neither Good Faith nor
Argument.
that has neither Candor in his Reports, nor any force of Argument in his
Reasonings; and yet it is the more tolerable here, because it is all that
either the Story or the Cause will bear. He makes the Episcopal and Court-Party
to be the Passive Instruments of the The Church and Court vindicated.
Church of Rome, for the advance of Popery, ever since the Reign of Queen Mary:
which is so notorious a mistake, that Queen Elizabeth, and the Hierarchy in Her
Reign opposed the Errors, and the power of that Church, with all possible
constancy, and Resolution. King James made himself famous by his Pen, as well
as by his Practices, upon the same Subject. The Late King lost his Life in the
defense of the Reformed Religion, and his Majesty that now is, has manifested
his affection to the Church of England, (as by Law Established,) in despite of
all Calumnyes, and through extreme difficulties, with the highest Acts of
Solemnity Imaginable. And now on the other side, let but any man trace the
History The Fanatics trouble some, ever since the Reformation.
of the Schismatiques, from Queen Mary to this Instant; and the restlessness of
that Faction will appear, through every step of his way; and that whenever
the Papists pressed upon the Government, on the One hand, the Separatists never
failed of pinching it on the Other. And yet again whereas he talks of the
fright of Presbytery, and the apprehension of a Republique, as neither
designed, nor probable, there is no man of Thirty years of Age, but knows the A
palpable Error.
contrary; and that this Nation was actually enslaved to that Double Tyranny,
under pretense of delivering us from the danger of Arbitrary Power, and Popery.
Nay, and but two lines further, he charges the Late King for countenancing
Papists* no less then (...) asperse* (...) (...) King.
This: which to every honest man is constructively a Vindication of them Both
Nay, he goes so far toward the owning of a dislike for the Form of our
Government it self, that he says, no Government but Monarchy can in England
ever support, or favor Popery, as who should say; A Commonwealth would put us
out of fear on it.

He says again, Page 3. that the Parliament Party never Entertained any
Papists, unless under a Disguise; and yet we never heard of any more of them,
then the Kings Heads-man in a M^sque. We could show him several Instances of
the contrary; but no man is so senseless, as to imagine that the King was
Deposed, pursued, robbed, taken, condemned and put to Death, ^idiculous.
by a hundred thousand Priests in Visors: we have nothing to say to the Loyalty
of the Papists; but yet the Incongruity of our Appellants charge upon them, we
cannot but in Honesty and common reason, take some notice of, Especially when
the Dust of his Objection flies in his own Eyes.

Their Loyalty and Good service paid to the King (says he) was merely in their
own defense; well knowing that the Foundation of these Commotions was only in
Opposition to their Party.

Putting the Case now, that they served the King The Papists Loyalty was
Interest.
only for their Own Ends: We have an acknowledgment yet, that there was
Loyalty, and good service in it, however qualified: and we know that there were
many Brave, and Eminent men among them, that lost their Estates and Lives in
that service. If it lies as a reproach upon them, that they did not serve the
King out of Loyalty, that which they did, was yet better then not serving him
at all; and better, in a higher degree still, then fighting against him. But
supposing now that they had no known Papists in their Army the Case is not one
jot mended; The (...) (...) (...) (...) count.
for they were all Schismatiques then; and it is worth the Observation, that
not a man drew his sword in that Cause, who was not a Known Separatist; and
that, on the other side, not one Schismatique ever struck stroke in the Kings
Quarrel: The One side contending according to their Duty, in favor of the Law,
and the Other against it.

Our Appellant lies open to another Objection in the cl^use above recited. He
says, the Commotion was The Appellant^ voluntary mistake.
only founded upon an Opposition to that Party. How came it then, that they
seized the Crown, and Church Lands; put the King to Death, plundered,
sequesterd, and beheaded his Protestant Friends, if the Opposition was only to
Popery? But we have seen their pretenses, and we have felt the meaning of them.

He insists upon the Papists desiring Oliver to accept Who put Oliver upon
accepting the Crown.
of the Crown. There Is a little Book that will inform us better concerning that
transaction. It Is called Monarchy asserted, consisting of a Collection of
Speeches upon that debate.

We are at this time (he says) acting the same Play still, though an Old-one
newly Revived; and as that which the Papists then Acted, was laid upon the
Fanatiques, so was the like to have been done, in this present Plot.

It will be easily granted, that this is in a high degree the Old-Play Revived,
but we are too well acquainted with the circumstances of the present Plot, to
carry the resemblance thorough. That which the Fanatiques then acted, was laid
on the Papists; and when they had mastered the King, under the Calumny of a
Papist, they Murdered him as a Protestant. The Question at present is not the
Certainty of One Plot, but the Superfoetation of another: For it is compossible
enough, that a Papist may be before his Majesty with a Dagger, and some rank
Enthusiast behind him with a Pistol.

He proceeds with a Story of Mr. Claypool, not at all to our purpose; and then
gives us further, an account of the Papists design in Scotland; who first by
their Counsels procured the poor Inhabitants to be Oppressed, and then sending
their disguised Priests, and Emissaryes amongst them, encouraged the poor silly
Natives to Mutiny against those Oppressions, hoping to cast the Plot upon the
Presbyterians.

If the Power, Number, and Industry of these Emissaries be such as our
Appellant would have us believe, a man would think there should hardly be a Rat
trap in the three Kingdoms, without a Priest in it. Let us but lay together
several Circumstances in this Appeal concerning the Miraculous Influences of
these men upon all sorts of People, and it will be a hard matter to represent
any thing more Comicall. First, he says, that the Papists have already made
sure of all the Young beggarly Officers, or Soldiers, Courtiers, and A
Legendary Fable.
Over-hot Churchmen; Fol. 2. Secondly, he makes them to have an Absolute
Dominion over the King and his Council; for they have made him Banish those
Officers (he says) that should lead the people up against the Popish Army.
Thirdly, they govern all the Conventicles in the Kingdom, as our Appellant will
have it. And Fourthly, they procured the Scots to be Oppressed, and after that
shifted hands, and made them rebel; and all this is every man bound to
believe, as the Thirteenth Article of his Faith. Now can any thing be more
wonderful, then that these people that can turn the King and his Council with
a Twine thread; that have so absolute a Command of the Multitude; and can set
Governors and Subjects handy-dandy, to Box one another like Punchinello's
Puppets, when they please: is it not a wonderful thing, (I say) that these men
with all this Interest, are not yet able to save a Priest from the Gallows; or
any single person of the Party from the Exact Rigor of the Law. Have they only
a Power to do the Government Mischief, and themselves no Good? We insist the
more earnestly upon this Point, because the comfort of Humane Society Humane
Society dissolved.
is totally destroyed, if we come once to be transported, by these stories,
into a Common Diffidence, every man of his Neighbor; and put into such a
condition, by the Entertainment of these Jealousies, that there will be no
longer any Faith, or Confidence in Mankind; for fear of these Invisible and
undistinguishable Enemies in our daily Conversation.

Now to support, and fortify himself in his Opinion; he says farther, that not
only Dr. Oats mentions The Scotch Rebellion charged upon the Papists.
this in his Evidence, but that the Papists themselves were so well assured of
the Scotch Rising, before it happened, that at the Disbanding of this late
Popish Army, many of the Officers and Soldiers had secret Orders not to sell
their Horses, but to be in a readiness, for that they should have occasion to
use them again within a Fortnight, and so it happened; for within a fortnight
after the Disbanding, the Rebellion brake out in Scotland: So well acquainted
were the Authors of this Mischief, with the time when it would happen.

With the Appellants leave, Dr. Oats only Reports Dr. Oat^'s true account of
the Scotch Rising.
what these Agents Designed to do, and the Hopes of their succeeding in it; but
says nothing positively, that I can find, of what they had done: and in his
Thirty fifth Deposition, expressly makes their Project to be the weakening of
both the Presbyterian, and Episcopal Faction: As to the casting of the Plot
upon the Presbyterians, it was not so well contrived (me thinks) as it might
have been: For it is no Clearing of the Papists from One Plot upon the Kings
Life, the charging of the Presbyterians with another.

Then there is another slip; he will have the Papists privy to the Scotch
Rising, because at the Disbanding of the Popish Army, some Officers were
ordered not to sell their Horses, etc. First, it is not proved that they had
any such Orders; Secondly, he calls it a Popish Army; and implys, that these
Orders were given to Popish Officers, which Officers either went upon the
service or not: If they went, they over threw their own design; for he makes it
the Papists Interest to entertain those Tumults, and these Gentlemen made it
their business to suppress them. If they did not go, their Orders were to no
purpose. But why does the Appellant call it a Popish Army? He should do well to
wash his Mouth, after so foul and scandalous an expression.

But now let us change hands; and see if it be not The Scotch Fanatics (...)
with the English.
more probable that the Fanatics knew beforehand of that Rising, then the
Papists. For though we had at that time greater apprehensions of the French
then ever, yet the importunities of some people were so violent for the
immediate disbanding of the Army, that it looked like a design to remove that
Block out of the Scots way The next passage is a little misterious.

He says, that it was likely the Scots would be beaten by the Kings Forces,
that (says he) it might make both Them and Us less apt to Rise upon any account
whatsoever. So that here is a tacit Confession, that the Appellant found some
inconvenience in this discouragement to a joint Rebellion: And ^o he goes on,
saying, that if this had been a Fanatical Plot, the same Party would certainly
have risen in England at the same time. But this, under favor, will not hold;
for the Scots tumulted in 37. and appeared in actual Rebellion in 38. whereas
their Brethren in England did not take up arms till 41, though privy to and
confederate in the Tumults of 37. He lays it down for granted in the next Line,
that the Papists Murdered the Late King, and so proceeds in these words.

After the Catholics had thus brought the Fathers head to the Block, and sent
the young Princes into Exile; let us reflect upon their Usage of them in
France, etc.

Now to give the Devil his due, I cannot find so Who brough^ the La^e King to
the Block.
much as One Papist in the whole List of the Regicides; and yet I have turned
over all the Acts and Ordinances; Walkers Independency; and in one word, the
whole History of those times; and can hear no news of them. Take notice, that
it is not the question here whether or no the Papists would have scrupled it
upon a fair Occasion* but whether or no, in the Truth of the ^act, it was the
Papists that did it: and I do not think it Fair, to hang one Man, or Condemn
one party for another fault. Put the case one man steals a Horse, and another
robs a Church, it is no vindication of the Horse stealer, to discharge him of
the Sacrilege; no vindication of him that robbed the Church, to acquit him of
the Horse stealing; but it were a high injustice to charge one offender with
the crime of another. His following Reflections upon the Ill-usage the Royal
Family received in France when his Majesty was abroad, and the good Offices
which France has received from hence in requital, are only meant for a sly and
invidious Reproach upon the Government, and there is more of flourish in them
then matter of weight; only he has one speculation not to be past over.

I cannot but ascribe great part of our present Calamities (says he) to his
Highnesses Education in that Arbitrary and Popish Government.

Here he pretends to tell us of our miseries, and from whence in a great
measure they proceed; but it would puzzle a man to find out what these present
Calamities are, more then the froward and fantastical apprehensions of remote
and imaginary Evils: Nay, the very fear it self is counterfeited as well as the
danger, and the men that dress up these goblins to fright the silly multitude,
they do but laugh at them themselves. Our State-Empericks do with our
Politic, as our Physicians do with our Natural Bodies (for there are
Intoxicating Opinions as well as Passions) they make their Patients many times
stark raving mad with that which they are not one jot affected withal
themselves. Do we not live (or if we will, at least, we may) in Peace and
Plenty, under the protection of a Gracious and a Protestant Prince, and under
the blessing also of so particular a providence, that when all our Neighbors
have been at fire and sword round about us, this Nation has been yet exempt
from the common calamities of Christendom? And shall we now expose and abandon
our present quiet and security only for future possibilities, and make our
selves certainly miserable beforehand for fear of being miserable hereafter?
Whosoever soberly considers what we enjoy on the one hand, and what we fear on
the other, comparing and examining both parts with their due and reasonable
circumstances, he shall find all attempts and proposals of popular prevention
or reformation, to be as wild a project, as if a man should cut off a leg or
an arm for fear of corns and chil^lains. But what if our fears were yet juster
then they seem to be? how many things may yet intervene, accurding to the
ordinary course of humane affairs, to disappoint the danger? as Mortality,
Survivorship, change of thought, etc. or can the Appellant prescribe us any
Remedy, that is not worse then the disease? shall a man cast himself from the
top of Bow, for fear of tumbling down stairs? shall we destroy Protestantism
for fear of Popery? or a Good Government for fear of a bad One? shall we run
the hazard of Damnation, for fear of Oppression? Nay, what if our present
apprehensions were Gratified? New ones would yet succeed into their places: For
the Rage of Jealousy is boundless, and Incurable. And so we found it in the
Late Rebellion, which was built upon the same Foundation. Never so mean and so
despicable a slavery, as that which we then brought upon our selves for fear of
slavery. Never was any Papacy so Tirannical, and so Ridiculous together, as
that Persecuting, and Non-sensical Presbytery, which we had in Exchange for the
best tempered Ecclesiastical Government upon the Face of the Earth. Were not
Those blessed days when our Divines had Salesmen, and Mechaniques for their
Tryers; and the Laity a supercilious Company of Classical, and Congregational
Noddys for the Inspectours of our Lives and Manners: When Tone, and Lungs,
without either Learning, or Honesty, were the distinguishing Marks of a Gifted
Brother? Methinks the very Memory of these servile and profane Indignities
should put the bare thought of the Second part of it out of Countenance.

And he seems as much out in the pretended Cause of our Calamities, as he was
in the Calamities themselves. There were no Princes Educated abroad in the Late
Kings time, and yet the same clamor to a Tittle. But if the Appella^t had been
so minded, he might have given us a much more Rational account of our
misfortunes, then he has done. He might, have charged them upon those people,
who in truth, first sent the young Princes into Exile, and then k^pt them
there; and have at present a design upon the Exercise of he same Arbitrary
power again, which they would be thought to fear. They began with a cry against
Popery, but they concluded in the Murder of the King; the dissolution of the
Monarchy, and the perpetual Exclusion of the Royal Family, as may be seen in
their Proclamation of Ian. 30. 48. for Inhibiting any person to be King.
Whereas Charles Stuart King of England, (say they) being for the Notorious
Treasons, Tyrannies, and Murders, committed by Him in the Late Unnatural and
cruel Wars, condemned to Death, etc. It is remarkable, that though they possessed
the people against His Majesty, as a Papist, there is not one word of Religion
in the Reasons, of their putting him to death.

The Appellant comes now to show his Reading in two passages out of Philip de
Comines, with an application of his Observations upon them. The former
concerning certain English Pensioners; which Lewis the Eleventh of France kept
in Pay. Now though I cannot agree the hundredth part of those persons to be
Pensioners, which out of an envy to the Government, the Common people are
instructed to call so; yet I shall never differ with him upon this point, that
the Money of Lewis the Fourteenth may perhaps have been current in England, as
well as that of Lewis the Eleventh was. The other story is that of Lewis the
Eleventh to Charles Duke of Burgundy in the Case of Campobache. The Treachery
of Campobache.
The French King advertizes the Duke of Burgandy (they being then in hostility)
that the Count Campobache was a Traitor to him: But the Duke would not believe
it. And there was one Cifron also, who was of the Plot with Campobache: This
same Cifron, being taken prisoner by the Duke before Nancy, and condemned to
dye; gave the Duke to understand, that he had a most Important secret to
communicate to him. But the Duke neither giving admittance to Cifron, nor
credit to the King; lost his Life afterward, and his Dominions, by being too
incredulous. The Appellant applies this to his Majesty's Case, in Language so
course and scandalous, that there is no repeating of it. And what does all this
amount to, but that a Prince may be as well Equally Dangerous to believe too
much and too Little
undone by believing too much, as too little? If he had Trusted either less to
Campobache, or more to the King, it had come all to a purpose. He will have his
Majesty in danger for not believing enough, of the Popish Plot: But his Royal
Father was Ruined on the other side, by not believing enough of the
Presbyterian Plot. And God grant that his present Majesty may only believe so
much of that Plot over again, as may stand with his honor and safety. But it
appears in this place, by the coursness of the Appellants Expressions, and by
the byasse of the whole Libell throughout, that he is not so much concerned for
the Kings believing or not believing, as to fasten a scandal upon his Majesty,
by persuading the People, that the King does not believe it; and consequently
to possess them, that his Majesty is a favourer of Popery, though never any
Prince in Christendom gave more Convincing and Irrefragable Proofs of the
contrary.

This passage of the Duke of Burgundy (he says Fol. 4.) may be very much to our
purpose, to show you, that when God designs the destruction of a King or
People, he makes them deaf to all discoveries be they never so obvious. And
having Levelled the Application in particular, he speculates in general terms
(toward the bottom of the leaf) upon the whole matter.

There are four several Arguments ( he says) which many times prevail with
Princes to be incredulous of all pretended Conspiracies against themselves. The
First is drawn from their being in, or made privy themselves to Part of the
Plot, but not to the whole. The Second, from their own good nature, and
Clemency. The Third, from the nature of the Evidence. And the Fourth from the
nature and Interest of the pretended Conspirators. To begin then with the
First, when the Prince has been made acquainted with a Design of Introducing a
New Government, or a New Religion, but not with the Design of taking away his
own Life, this sometimes has prevailed with him not to believe, that the same
party with whom he himself is in a Conspiracy, should have any such other Plot
against his Life. But this I hope is not Our Case, For etc. -- And then he
Reasons that his Majesty could get nothing by it. Fol. 3.

We shall put him together now, and make English of him. First, he makes the
Duke of Burgundies Case, in his Deafness to Discoveries to be the Kings.
Secondly, He infers from that Deafness that God has designed his Majesty to
Destruction. Thirdly, he takes upon him to Philosophize upon the Reasons of
Princes Incredulity in such Cases; and very fairly represents his Majesty as a
Party in the Conspiracy, and consenting to the Introduction of a New Government
and a New Religion, though not privy to the Plot of taking away his Own Life.
Only he concludes with a [ But this I hope is not Our Case.] in such away of
Doubting as implys Believing. And so much for the first point.

The Second Motive (he says Fol. 5.) which may The Kings Bounty ^bus'd.
incline a Prince to disbelieve the report of a Plot is, from his Own Good
Nature, and Clemency; which makes him not believe any ill of those to whom he
has been so kind. But this is a fallacious way of arguing.

Now by his Favor, This is not so much an Argument from Good Nature, on the
One side, as from the Tie of Gratitude, on the Other: but whether way soever it
be taken, the Late King found it indeed a very fallacious way of arguing: for
almost all his Acts of Grace, and bounty turned to his mischief, as appears in
his Majesty's Declaration of Aug. 12. 1642. when after delivering up his
Ministers to Impeachments, his Concessions in the business of the Star Chamber,
High*Commission Court, Ship-Mony, Forest-Laws, Stannery-Courts, Tonnage and
Poundage, Continuance of the Parliament, etc. they improved all these Trusts,
and Condescensions even to the formal taking away his Authority, Revenue, and
Life. And those particularly whom his Late Majesty Obliged to the highest
degree, laid the foundation of his Ruin. Nor is the ingratitude of the same
party to the Son less notorious, then the other was to the Father: None flying
so fiercely in the face of the Kings Authority and person, as those that stand
indebted to the King for their Lives and Estates; who yet act as confidently,
as if one Rebellion might be placed in Justification of another. For they do
now afresh and in public avow the methods and practices of the late Times;
while the true sons and servants both of the English Church and State, lie in
the dust, waiting for the righteous Judgment of the Lord in want, and patience.
Now if according to the Appellants Rule those are the most dangerous, to whom
the King has been most kind, that Danger must be understood of the Fanatiques;
for otherwise the Appealer runs the Hazard of a Praemunire, upon the Act for
the safety of the Kings Person, in scandalizing his Majesty for a Favourer of
Popery. It is not yet that the general Rule fails, because of this Exception:
For the greater the Obligation, the greater in reason ought to be the
confidence, though the Appella^t seems to be of another opinion.

Who betrays you in your Beds? (says he) your Friend; for your Enemy is not
admitted to your House. Who betrays you in your Estate? your Friend; for your
Enemy is not made your Trustee. So that nothing is more dangerous then a blind
friendship.

This is an admirable fetch of his, to prove his Royal Highness dangerous to
his Majesty, because he is both a Friend and a Brother; and still the Nearer,
the more dangerous: as if the King were safer in the hands of his Enemies, then
of his Friends. But he expounds himself, that they are more dangerous, in
respect of greater Confidence, and fairer Opportunities. There is no sense
against that danger, but utterly to cast An Argument destructive of Society and
good Nature.
off and renounce all the Bonds, and Dictates of Society and Good Nature. We
must contract no Friendships, and trust no Relations, for fear they should cut
our Throats. How much more wretched then the very Beasts, has our Appealler at
this rate made Mankind, by poisoning the very Fountain of Human Comforts? Nor
is it a Friend that betrays us; but an Enemy, under that appearance: By which
Rule an Episcopal, a Fanatical, a Popish Friend, are all equally dangerous: For
a Man has no more security of a Friend under one denomination, then under
another. But the Appellant in this place speaks of the danger of a blind
Friendship; that is to say, a kindness that is taken up without any
consideration, or Choice, and runs on without fear or wit: which in this
application, must either be very little respectfull, or altogether Impertinent.
He produces And of evil* Consequence.
instances of perfidious Favorites and Relations: as if there were no other to
be found in Nature. By his Argument, because One Woman poisoned her Husband,
all men should destroy their Wives: Because One Son supplanted his Father, all
Parents should drown their Children like Kitlins. Because One Younger Brother
offered violence to his Elder, there should be no longer any Confidence, or
Faith maintained among Brethren.

If little petty Interests (says he) make one Brother wish the others Death,
how much more prevalent will the Interest of a Crown be? Nay of two Crowns,
viz. One here, and another hereafter in Heaven, promised him by an Old fellow
with a bald pate, and a spade-beard.

As to the Argument, this is only the Second Part to the A dangerous
Proposition*
same tune; and a Particular Instance improved into an Universal Exception.
There are Wicked Husbands, Wives, Children; Let there be no more Marrying. Men
have been poisoned in the Sacrament, in their Cups, and Dishes; shall we
therefore never receive the Communion, nor Drink, nor Eat? There have been
Tyrants in all forms of Governments, shall we therefore have no Government at
all? And moreover, as this way of Reasoning Lessensall the Bonds of Human
Trust, and Concord, and runs us back again into Mr. Hobb's Original State of
War, so does it as little serve the Appellants purpose, even if it were
admitted. First, the Temptation of a Crown does not The Temptation of a Crown
work upon any Man, either as a Brother, or as a stranger: but equally upon
Both; and more, or less, as the man is more, or less Conscientious or
Ambitious. So that the danger arises from the Humor of the Person, not from
the Relation. Nay Secondly, The Danger is Greater, from a Popular Faction that
has no Right at all to a Crown, then from a Legal Pretendent to it, upon a
Claim of Descent. For the One only waits his Time, according to the course of
Nature, whereas the Other presses his end by the ways of Blood and Violence,
having no other way to compass it: He makes it yet a stronger argument, where
there is but One Life betwixt a Successor and Three Kingdoms: But does not this
Argument hold as strong on the other side? There was only the Kings Life
betwixt the Faction of 1641, and the Three Kingdoms, which Life they took away,
and so possessed themselves of his Dominions. Their pretense was only a
Reformation of Abuses* with Horrid, and Multiplied Reformation the pretense*
Oaths, that they designed Only the Glory of God, the Honor of the King, the
Preservation of the Protestant Religion. His Majesty (they said) was misled by
Popish Counsels; and their Business was no more then to rescue him out of the
hands of Papists, and bring him home to his Parliament. And what was the Event
of all? A Gracious Prince was Murdered, and 500. Tyrants set up in his stead:
Our Religion, and Our Laws were Trampled upon; and the Freeborn Englishmen
subjected to a Bondage, below that of Gally-slaves: The whole Nation becoming a
Scandal, a Hissing, and a Scorn, to all our Neighbors, round about us.

But what were these people, all this while? If we may credit the Appellant,
they were Priests and Jesuits; Or at least, Papists: But the King tells us,
they were Brownists, Anabaptists, Who they were (...) at destroyed the Late
King.
and Other Sectaries; Preaching Coachmen, Felt makers, etc. The Act for
Indemnity gives us a List of the Regicides: The Act of Uniformity styles them
Sch^smatiques, and throughout the whole History of their Acts, and Ordinances,
there appear none but Dissenting Protestants: The Church of England being the
Only Sufferer, betwixt the Two Extremes. And these People had the Interest of
the Two Crowns in prospect too; which the Appellant descants so Jollily upon:
Almost every Pulpit promising Salvation to the Fighters of the Lords Battles
against the Lords Anointed, with a Cursed be He (at the End on it,) that does
the work of the Lord Negligently.

Upon the Third Head he says, that most Princes Believe, or Disbelieve the
Information which is given them of a Plot, according to the Nature of the
Evidence, and Credit of the Informants.

There is no more in This, then that most Princes Believe, upon the Common
Inducements that move all men of Reason whatsoever, to Believe; Viz. the
Probability of the matter in Question, and the Credit of the Witnesses. Now as
to the Popish Plot; we shall give him these Two Points for Granted, Two Plots
but without discharging a Plot likewise, on the Other hand, upon the same
Principles, and no less pregnant Evidence. We do not speak here of the Popish
Plot, which the Papists would most sillily have turned upon the Presbyterians;
(the shallowest Contrivance certainly that ever was hatched, and the most
palpable Imposture:) But we speak of a Plot that was Bred and born in the
Fanatical party; whereof we have as many Witnesses almost as Readers; in Forty
Libells of That Leaven, and Extraction: Beside several Open and Violent
attempts upon the Government, which do unanimously bear He covers the (...)
with the Plot*
Testimony against them. The Following parts of This Paragraph are wrought into
such a Complication of Zeal and Scandal (one Snap at the King, and another at
the Plot) that every period is a Bait: And whoever touches upon it, is sure of
a Hook in his Nostrills. Under Color of Asserting and making out the Truth of
the Plot, (which no sober man doubts of) he throws Dirt upon his Majesty and
his Ministers, for dodging, and Imposing upon the People, in favor of it. One
while too Much comes out, another while too Little. The Frequent Dissolutions
and Prorogations of Parliaments (he says expressly) were to prevent the Trial of
the Lords: And so the Squib runs sputtering on, from the King to his Privy
Council; Thence, to his Courts of Justice; and in One word, the whole Story
comes to no more then a Political abstract out of Harris's Domestic
Intelligence.

But why these Pamphlets to the Multitude? First, There Is no fear Why this
Appeal to the multitude?
of the peoples running into Popery: For it is their Horror and Aversion.
Secondly, There Is no need of Convincing Them of the Truth of the Plot: But
rather to keep them from Extravagances, upon the Jealousies and apprehensions
they conceive of it already. Thirdly, There Is no need neither of calling Them
to our assistance, toward the suppressing of it: For the sifting and Examining
of this Conspiracy, with the bringing of the Confederates to Public Justice,
is a great part of the business of the Government. So that these Libells cannot
be reasonably understood to have any Other then these Two ends. First, to Teaze
and Chafe the Rabble into a Rage, disposing and preparing them to entertain any
occasion for uproar and Tumult. Secondly, when their Blood is up against This
Detestable Plot, with the Contrivers, Promoters, and abetters of it; what does
he, but turn the Rancour of That Outrageous Humor upon the King, rivy
Council, Courts of Justice; and Briefly, all his Friends; by marking Them out
for Parties in the Treason: And so rendering his Majesty, and his Government
Odious, by these Malicious Insinuations, and endangering the Peace of the
Public, to the Highest Degree?

The Fourth and Last Argument (says he) which may sometimes prevail with the
Prince to disbelieve any report of a Conspiracy, is taken from the Nature and
Principles, and from the Interest, of the Pretended Conspiratours. But neither
of these Motives can pretend to Influence Our Prince into a Disbelief of This
Popish Plot, Fol. 7.

The Appellants Observation and Inference is this, that the Popish Popish
Princip^es and ^nterest.
Plot is to be Believed, because it squares with the Principles and Interest of
the Party. We are better informed in the History and Doctrine of Massacres and
Regicides, then to question the Malice of the Jesuitical Positions, or the
credibility of the Plot here in Debate: and so we shall yield him the Hellish
Tenet, which he insists upon, of Murdering KINGS, and a Hellish Tenet it is
indeed; and as Hellish undoubtedly in a Schismatique, as in a Jesuit. For his
Quarrel otherwise is to the Faction, not to the Maxim which is equally
Dangerous and detestable in all Factions. Now wheresoever we find the same
Principles, we have the Appellants leave honestly to suspect the same Designs.

Was not this the Doctrine of the Fanatiques from Forty, to Sixty? Puritan
Jesui^s.
And did they not make good their Doctrine by their Practice? Did they not
declare the King Accountable to the People? And did they not put him to Death,
upon that Foundation? We have the very Iournals themselves of those Times, to
prove what we say; beside the Damned Harmony of their best received Authors to
that purpose. We propound (say the Remonstrants) that the Person of the King
may be speedily brought to Justice, for the Treason, Blood and Mischief he is
Guilty of. An Act (says another) agreeing with the Laws of God, Consonant to
the Laws of Men, and the Practices of all Well-ordered States and Kingdoms. Let
Justice and Reason blush (says another) and Traitors and Murderers, Parricides
and Patricides put on white Garments and Rejoice as Innocent ones, if this man
(speaking of the Late King) should escape the hands of Justice and Punishment.
The Government of England (says a Fourth) is a Mixed Monarchy, and Governed by
the Mayor Part of the three Estates assembled in Parliament. Whenever a King
(says a Fifth) or other Superior Authority Creates an Inferior, they invest it
with a Legitimacy of Magistraticall Power, to punish themselves also, in case
they prove Evil Doers. It is Lawful (says a Sixth) for any, who have the
Power, to call to account a Tyrant or wicked King; and after due Conviction, to
Depose and put him to Death, if the Ordinary Magistrate have denied to do it.
Detrahere Indigno etc. It is not for private persons to Depose a wicked
Governnour; but that the Universality of the People may Lawfully do it, I think
no body questions.

These Seditious Pasitions, with many more, (and some worse, perhaps,) (...)
(...).
were publicly Printed and avowed before his Majesty's Return. And the very
same Principles, with Pestilert Additions to them, have been exposed by the
same Party, in the face of the Sun, since his Majesty's Restoration. And there
is scarce a Pamphlet without something of this Mixrure, that comes from any of
the Private and Pragmaticall Intermeddlers in the present Controversy. So that
the Principles are the very same, as to the Quality and Ingredients, under
several Colors. And so much for their Principles: Now to their Interests.

In his following way of Reasoning; under the Countenance of Of Counsel with
the Papists.
proving it to be the Papists Interest to Murder the King, he does all he can
in the world, by a side-wind, to possess them with the Necessity of doing it;
and consequently, to force* them upon it: Only, as good luck is, the Arguments
will not bear that stress. I should not dare to speak his words after him, if
it were not, First, that the Libell is already, by several Impressions of it,
made as Public as a News-Book, And Secondly, that his Propositions are
erected upon a false Bottom. Upon which two Considerations, we shall presume to
insert only two Periods of his, upon this Subject.

Their Interest (says he) does unavoidably excite them to Murder A Dangerous
Hint.
his Sacred Majesty; For First, they know he cannot long subsist without a
Considerable Sum of Money, which he must Receive either from the Party, or from
the Parliament: Now for them to supply him with so vast a Su^, is a Charge,
that (you may well imagine) they would desire to get rid of it, if they could,
though by the Kings Death. On the other side, for the Parliament to supply him
with money, that, they know, cannot be done but by taking off the Heads of their
Faction; excluding their Succession, and consenting to such Laws as must of
Necessity ruin them: Besides, his Majesty has already permitted the Executing
so many of their Party, as they never can or will forgive it.

It falls out Happily that the force of his Argument does not The Plot
encouraged.
come up to the Drift of it. But the Weakness of the One takes off the Edge of
the Other. He tells the whole world, that the Papists have no way in the Farth
to save themselves, but by the Murder of the King. The One half of this spoken
in a Corner to a Knot of Priests and Jesuits, and fairly proved upon a man,
would be as much as his Head's worth. And is the Crime ever the Less for doing
the same thing in Public, where the Provocation is stronger? These Discourses
are not to pass for Simple Declarations of a man's Opinion; but Artificial
Encouragements rather, and Advises, toward the doing of the thing; especially
coming from the Pen of a Person that calls himself Iunius Brutus, and
recommends himself to the City by the Borrowed name of a King-killer. Though I
cannot inform my self of any of that Family that lives near Richmond.

His First Argument runs thus. The King wants money; and He falters in his
Arguments.
there is none to be got, but either of the Papists, of the Parliament. The
Parliament, he says, will give his Majesty none; and therefore the Papists will
Murder him to save Charges. This is a Policy far fetched: The Fathers Head (we
know) was set at a Price, but we hope better of the Sons. Now in his prejudging
the Parliament, upon an Assumption that the King gets not a penny of Money of
them, but upon such and such Terms; he does not so much speak his thought, as
vent his Proposition; rather Desiring, then Foreseeing that the House of
Commons will hold the King to such unhappy Conditions. And then he finishes his
Contemplation with this Conclusion, that the Papists will never forgive his
Majesty, for what he has done already. Wherein, First, he Contradicts himself,
in supposing the King an Enemy to the Papists, whom he has hitherto insinuated
to be their Friend. And Secondly, instead of proving the Papists Design against
the King in this Particular, he advances One of his Own.

Now if he would have come roundly up to the Point of the Papists The Popish
and Fanatic Interest the same.
Interest; he should have told us of the Ecclesiastical Dignities and
Preferments that the Church of Rome has conferred upon their Emissaries into his
Majesty's Dominions: And he should have expounded it to the people, what pains
they take, and what Hazzards they run, only in the playing of their Own Game,
and making way to their advantages in Reversion. This is so great a truth, that
most of the serious Catholics themselves reflect familiarly upon these Busy
People, as the common troublers of the Peace of Christendom. But then I should
have opposed an interest also on the Fanatiques side, to Balance this. For
they have their Reversionall prospects too: their sequestered Livings and
Estates; their plundered goods, their profitable Offices and Commissions, Crown
and Church Lands. etc. And they wait for their day again as impatiently as the
Jews do for their Messiah. Nay to keep their title still a foot, they stand
fast to their Old Covenant still, as the Fanatiques Magna Charta; by which they
pretend to make out a Religious claim to all the advantages they got by
sacrilege and oppression. So that their principles and interests lying
indifferently against the Established Order both of Church and State; there will
be no need of casting eithers faults upon the other.

After a worse then Astrological Determination upon the Kings A wicked
Calculation.
Fate; he bestows another Cast of his Cunning upon the City and Citizens of
London, which (he says) is in danger to be consumed by Fire. It is a lewd and a
seditious Hint, in both these Cases, the putting of it into the head, as it is
much in the power of any profligate and desperate villain, to verify his
calculation. Besides that in telling the Citizens what they are to expect, he
does at the same time, Counsel the Papists what to do. They will burn London,
(he says) First, as the only United force, able to withstand Arbitrary
Government, and without that, Popery can never prevail.

If ^opery cannot come in without Arbitrary Government (...) the Jesuits
Mistaken in his Computation.
design the burning of London, as the only Un^ (...) that can withstand that
power: either there is no fear of Popery and Arbitrary Government, and
(consequently) of such a design taking place in this Kings ^ign; or the whole
calumny falls directly upon his Majesty himself: or otherwise, if the
Appellants prospect looks forward into the future, what*s the meaning of all
these Alarms, so unseasonably, to trouble our present peace with the sickly
Visions of things to come? And he should have done well also to have expounded
himself a little upon the United Force that should withstand, and the Arbitrary
Government to be withstood? For otherwise, it may be taken for the sounding of
a Trumpet to a Rebellion. For the Arbitrary Government which he phansies to
himself, must be exercised either by a Lawful Prince, or by an Usurper: If by
the Former, his Tyranny is no Warrant for our opposition; if the Latter,
there is no appearance of any other Usurpation, then (as we shall see presently)
of his own setting up.

Secondly, he says that London is the only place where by reason of their
Excellent Preaching and daily instruction in the Protestant Religion, the
people have a lively sense thereof, and douhtless will not part with it, to
pleasure a Prince; but perhaps rather lose their Lives by the Sword in the
Wars, than by Faggots, in Smithfield.

The passage now is plain English; and as many indignities upon Sed^n in plain
English.
the Government, crowded into one sentence, as could well be brought together.
Here is First, an Exhortation to a Rebellion. For the Prince here in question,
against whom the sword is to be drawn, can be no other, upon his supposition,
then actually the King. And let him take his choice now whether it shall be
intended of his present Majesty, or of his Successor. It is a Rebellion
against the King that now is, in the one Case, and against the Next King in the
other. And Secondly, It is not only a simple Rebellion, but (to the scandal of
the Reformation, and particularly of the Church of England) a Rebellion founded
upon the Doctrine of the Protestant Religion: Thirdly, It is no other then (as
he himself has worded it) the Hellish Tenet of Murdering Kings, in a disguise:
only a Iesuitical Principle in Masquerade. It is, Fourthly, a Condemnation of
the practices and submissions of the Primitive Christians, and the whole story
of our Protestant Martyrology.

He says, Thirdly, that the City is too powerful for any Prince tha^ Sedition
still.
Governs not by the love of his people, which no Popish Successor can expect
to do. This is the very Translation of his Namesake, Iunius Brutus, in his
Vindiciae Contra Tyrannos. ^f the Prince fails in his promise (says he) the
people are exempt from their obedience. The contract is made void, and the
right of obligation is of no force. It is therefore permitted to the Officers
of a Kingdom, either all, or some good member of them, to suppress a Tyrant.
Here Is a great deal of virulence in his Discourse, without one word of weight,
to countenance it. For the well-being of this City is so essentially requisite
to the well-being of this Kingdom, that the very charge of the Government is
not to be defrayed without it. So that it is the interest of all Governors to
cherish, and support it. Here he trifles away some half a score lines more
about the Fire; and then, from the danger of the City, advances to the further
danger accruing to the Citizens, (...) well as to the whole Kingdom, upon the
Kings untimely Death.

The greatest danger (says he) will (...) from a confusion, and want of some
Eminent and Interested (...), whom you may trust to ^ead you up against a
French and Popish Army. For which purpose no person is fitter then his Grace
the Duke of Monmouth, as w^ll for Quality, Courage and Conduct; as for that his
lif^ and fortune depends upon the same bottom with Yours. He will stand by you,
therefore ought you to stand by him. And remember A Proposition for a New King.
the old rule is, he who has the worst title ever makes the best King.

Does he suppose this confusion upon the death of the King; or the burning of
the City, or before, or after? Or has he consulted either the Illustrious
Person, or the Honorable City (that he makes so bold with) to know whether or
not the one would accept of such a Commission upon the Appellants terms, or the
other offer it? the Character that he is pleased to bestow upon his Grace, for
his Quality, Courage, and Conduct, is not unknown to any man that ever so much
as heard of his Name. But the Appellant never considers that all these glorious
circumstances are point blank contradictions to his design. How can he imagine
that so brave a Person can ever stoop to so mean a thought; and suffer himself,
by a rostitute Libell, to be enchanted out of his Honor, reason, and
Allegiance? Or that the most Eminent City of Christendom for purity of
Religion, Loyalty to their Prince, Power, Good Government, Wealth and
Resolution, should be cajoled out of all these blessings and advantages, by the
Iesuitical Fanaticism of a Dark-lanthorn-Pamphlet? But to what end is all this
clutter? The Appellant has a mind (it seems) to change his Master. He who has
the worst Title (he says) ever makes the best King; which is a very fair
proposition for setting up of a worse Title, in his Majesty's place. From hence
he goes forward, still computing upon his Majesty's death, as a thing to be
taken for granted; and so recommending himself to the most worthy Citizens, he
finishes his appeal, filling up the Page with a Postscript concerning some
Antimonarchical principles in the Church of Rome. He that has a mind to see
these matched in the Scottish Kirk, may receive further satisfaction in a
little book Entitled,

TYRANNY and POPERY Lording it over the Consciences, Lives, Liberties, and
Estates, both of King and People.

Also, The Comicall Christian, In a Translation of Twenty Select Colloquies,
out of Erasmus Roterodamus; Pleasantly Representing several Superstitious
Levities crept into the Church of Rome in His days. Both Printed for Henry
Brom at the Gun in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1680.

The HISTORY of the PLOT: Or, A Brief and Historical Account of the Charge and
Defense of Edward Coleman, Esquire William Ireland, Thomas Pickering, John Grove:
Robert Green, Henry Berry, Laurence Hill, Thomas Whitebread, William Harcourt,
John Fenwick, John Gavan Anthony Turner, Jesuits: Richard Langhorn, Esquire: Sir
George Wakeman, Baronet, William Marshal, William Rumly, James Corker,
Benedictine Monks. Not omit ting any one Material Passage in the whole
Proceeding. By Authority. Printed for Richard Tonson within Grayes-Inne-Gate
next Grayes-Inne Lane. 1679.

The End.

