A MEMENTO TREATING, OF THE Rise, Progress, and Remedies of SEDITIONS: WITH
SOME Historical Reflections UPON THE SERIES of Our late Troubles.

By Roger L'Estrange.

THE SECOND EDITION.

Printed in the Year 1642, and now Reprinted for Ioanna Brom at the GVN, at
the West End of St. Paul's: MDCLXXXII.

A MEMENTO.
CAP. I. THE Matter and Causes OF SEDITIONS.
THE Matter of Seditions (according to Sir Francis Bacon; The Matter o(...)
Sedition.
whose words and Authority I shall often make use of in this little Treatise)
is of two kinds; much Poverty and much Coffeehouse.

The Causes and Motives of Seditions he reckons to be these: Innovation in
Religion; Taxes; The Causes of it.
Alteration of Laws and Customs; Breaking of Privileges; General Oppression;
Advancement of unworthy Persons; Strangers; Dearths; Disbanded Soldiers;
Factions grown desperate. And whatsoever in offending People, joyneth and
knitteth them in a Common Cause.

These Inconveniences, either seasonably discovered, colourably pretended, or
secretly promoted, are sufficient to the foundation of a Civil War. In which
Negative and dividing Politics, none better understood themselves than the
Contrivers of our late Troubles: not only improving and fomenting
Discontentments where they found them, and creating violent Iealousies, where
there was but any place to imagine them; but they themselves were the greatest
Gainers, even by those Grievances against which they complained: Reaping a
double Benefit, first, from the Occasion of the Difference, and then from the
Issue of it.

When a seditious Humor is once moved, the best Remedy is to cut off the
Spring that feeds it: The Remedy.
by pleasing all sorts of People, so far as possible, and by disobliging none,
but upon Necessity. Which public tenderness must be so managed, that the
Majesty of the Prince be not lost in the Goodness of the Person: for nothing
can be more Dangerous to a Monarch, than so to over-court the Love of his
People, as to lose their Respect, or to suffer them to impute that to his
Easiness which ought to be ascribed purely to his Generosity.

Contempt more fatal to Kings than hatred.
Offenses of that daring and unthankful quality, can scarce be pardoned, without
some hazard to the Authority that remits them: Secret Contempts being much more
fatal to Kings, than public and audacious Malice; the latter commonly spending
it self in a particular and fruitless Malignity toward the Person (and that
with Terror too, as being secured under a thousand Guards of Majesty and
Power) whereas the Other privily taints the whole Mass of the People, with a
Mutinous Leaven, giving Boldness to contrive, Courage to execute; and, if the
Plot miscarries, there is the Hope of Mercy to balance the peril of the
Undertaking. For a Conclusion of this Point, He that but thinks Irreverently of
his Prince, Deposes him.

Concerning the Materials of Sedition; viz. Poverty and Coffeehouse: it
would be endless to dissolve these General H^o^s into Particular Rules: the
best Advise in this Case must be General too; that is, to endeavor to remove
whatever Causes them, referring the Particulars to Counsel and Occasion.

It Is very well observed by the Lord St. Albans, touching Poverty: Poverty
breeds Sedi^on.
[ So many overthrown Estates, so many Votes for Troubles; and if this Poverty
and broken Estate in the better sort, be joined with a Want and Necessity in
the mean people, the Danger is Great and Imminent:] Which to prevent, [ Above
all things (says the same Author) good Policy is to be used, that the Treasure
and Moneys in a State be not gathered into few hands.; for otherwise a State
may have a great Stock, and yet starve: And Money is like Muck, not good except
it be spread.] And again, A numerous Nobility causes poverty.
[ A numerous Nobility causes Poverty and Inconvenience in a State, for it is
a Surcharge of Expense.

As to the Seeds of Discontentments, they are as various as the Humors they
encounter; dependent many times upon Opinion, and inconsiderable in themselves,
however Notorious in their Effects.

Touching the Discontentments themselves, it is the Advice of the Lord Verulam,
Fears and Jealousies.
[ That no Prince measure the Danger of them by this; Whether they be Just or
Unjust? for that were to imagine people to be too reasonable. Nor yet by this,
whether the Griefs whereupon they rise, be in Fact, great or small; for they
are the most dangerous, where the Fear is greater than the Feeling.

Such were those furious and implacable Iealousies, that started the late War,
which doubtless may more properly be accounted among the Dotages of a Disease,
or the Illusions of a dark Melancholy; than the deliberate Operations of a
sober Reason.

Proceed we now from the Matter and more remote Causes of Seditions, to the
Approaches and Prognostics of them.

CAP. II. The Tokens and Prognostics of Sedition.
IT is in many Cases with Bodies Politic, as it is with Natural Bodies; both
perish by delaying till the Distemper be grown too strong for the Medicine:
Whereas by watching over, and applying to the first Indispositions of the
Patient, how easy is the Remedy of a Disease, which in one day more perhaps
becomes Incurable? Some take it for a point of Bravery not to own any Danger at
a distance, lest they should seem to fear it. Others are too short-sighted to
discern it: So that betwixt the Rash and the Stupid, (a large proportion in
(...) of the World) we are past the help of Physic (...) can persuade our
selves we need it.

Dangers (says the Incomparable Bacon) are no more light, if they once seem
light; and more dangers have deceived Men, than (...) them. Nay, it were better
to meet some Dangers halfway, though they come nothing near, than to keep too
long a Watch upon their Approaches; for if a man watch too long, it is odds he
will fall asleep.]

Neither let any man measure the Quality of the Danger, by that of the
Offender: For again, ['tis the Matter, not the Person that is to be considered;
Treason is contagious, and a Rascal may bring the Plague into the City, as well
as a great Man.] I do the rather press this Caution, because Security was the
Fault of those to whom I direct it.

But what avails it to be wary of Dangers, without the skill and providence to
foresee and prevent them? Or what hinders us from the foreknowledge of those
Effects, to which we are led by a most evident, and certain train of Causes?
States have their Maladies as well as Persons; and those ill habits have their
peculiar Accidents and Affections; their proper Issues and Prognostics: upon
the true judgment of which Circumstances depends the Life and Safety of the
Public. Not to play the fool with an Allegory; Be it our care to observe the
Gathering of the Clouds, before they are wrought into a Storm.

Among the Presages of foul Weather, the Lord St. Albans reckons Libels and
licentious Discourses against the Government, The dangers of Libels.
when they are frequent and open: and in like sort, false news often running up
and down, and hastily embraced, to the disadvantage of the State.

We need not run beyond our Memories to agree this Point, it being within the
Ken of our own Notice, that Libels were not only the Forerunners, but in a
high Degree, the Causes of our late Troubles: and what were the frequent, open,
and licentious Discourses of Cloak-men in Pulpits, but the ill-boding Play of
Porpisces before a Tempest?

We may remember also the false News of Plots agninst the Religion and
Liberties of the Nation, and how the King was charged as an Abetter of the
Design.

We may remember likewise, how the Irish Blood was cast upon the Account of his
late Sacred Majesty, even by Those men whose guilty Souls are to Reckon with
Divine Justice for every Drop of it.

Neither have we forgotten with what Care and Diligence these Falsehoods were
dispersed; with what Greediness they were swallowed; nor what ensued upon it.

If we look well about us, we may find this Kingdom, at this Instant laboring
under the same Distempers; the Press as busy and as bold; Sermons as factious;
Pamphlets as seditious; the Government defamed. The Lectures of the Faction are
thronged with pretended Converts; and scandalous Reports against the King and
State, are as current now as they were twenty years ago.

These were ill Tokens then, and do they signify just nothing now? What means
all This but the new Christening of the Old Cause? the doing over again of the
Prologue to the last Tragedy?

Sir Francis Bacon proceeds, [ That Disputing, Excusing, Cavelling upon
Mandates and Directions,, is a kind of shaking off the Yoke, and Assay of
Disobedience; especially if in those Disputings, they which are for the
Direction, speak fearfully and tenderly; and those that are against it,
audaciously.

Herein is judiciously expressed the Motion or Gradation, from Duty to
Disobedience. The first step is to Dispute; as who should say, I will if I may.
The very Doubt of Obeying, subjects the Authority to a Question, and gives a
dangerous Hint to the People, That Kings are accountable to their Subjects.

To Excuse is a Degree worse, for that is no other than a Refusal of Obedience
in a Tacit Regard either of an unjust Command or of an unlawful Power.

To cavil at the Mandates of a Prince, is an express Affront to his Dignity,
and within one Remove of Violence.

Through these Degrees, and slidings from Bad to Worse, from one Wickedness to
Another, our late Reformers Traveled the whole Scale of Treason; as the Scene
changed, shifting their Habits, till at last, quitting the Disguise of the
Kings Loyal Subjects, they became his Murderers.

What Is more familiar at this Day, than disputing His Majesty's Orders;
disobeying his Proclamations, and vilifying Acts of Parliament? Whereof there
are so many, and so Audacious Instances, it shall suffice to have made this
General mention of them.

Another Observation is, that, When Discords and Quarrels, and Factions, are
carried openly and audaciously, it is a Sign the Reverence of Government is
lost.

This was the temper of that Juncture, when the Schismatical Part of the two
Houses, and the Tumultuary Rabble joined their Interests against Bishops, and
the Earl of Strafford; which Insolence was but a Prelude to the succeeding
Rebellion.

And are not Factions carried Openly and Audaciously now? when the Promoters,
and Iustifiers of the Murder of the late King, are still continued public
Preachers, without the least pretense to a Retraction; Dictating still, by
Gestures, Shrugs, and Signs, That Treason to their Auditory which they dare not
Utter? What are their Sermons, but Declamations against Bishops: Their
Covenant-keeping Exhortations, but the contempt of an established Law? How it
comes to pass, Heaven knows; but These Honest Fellows can come off for Printing
and publishing downright Treason, when I have much ado to escape for Telling of
it.

Whither these Liberties tend, let any Man look over his shoulder, and satisfy
himself.

When any of the Four Pillars of Government, are mainly shaken, or weakened,
Sir F. B.
( which are Religion, Justice, Counsel, and Treasure,) Men had need to pray
for fair weather.

To speak only of the last, The want of Treasure was the Ruin of the late
King; Through which defect, his Officers were exposed to be Corrupted, his
Counsels to be Betrayed, his Armies to be ill paid, and consequently not well
Disciplined: Briefly, where a Prince is Poor, and a Faction Rich, the Purse is
in the wrong Pocket.

Multis little Bellum, is an assured and infallible Sign, of a State disposed
to Seditions and Troubles, and it must needs be, that where War seems the
Interest of a People, it should be likewise the Inclination of them.

Touching the General Matter, Motives, and Prognostics of Sedition, enough is
said; We Will now enquire into the special cause of the late Rebellion.

CAP. III. The True Cause of the late War, was AMBITION.
THE True Cause of the late War, was Ambition: which being lodged in a
confederate Cabale of Scotch, and English, The Rise of the late War.
drew the corrupted Interests of both Kingdoms into the Conspiracy: to wit, the
factious, covetous, Malcontents, Criminals, Debtors: and finally, all sorts of
men, whose crimes, necessities, or passions, might be secured, relieved, or
gratified by a change of Government. To these, were joined, the credulous, weak
Multitude; the clamor being Religion, Law, and Liberty. And here is the sum of
the Design, Pretense, and Party.

This League we may presume was perfected in 1637. First from the Kings Charge
of High Treason against Kimbolton, and the Five Members; Secondly from the
correspondent practices in both Nations, appearing manifestly about that time:
Next, it is remarkable, that the English pardon has a Retrospect to the
beginning of the Scotch Tumults; (Ian. 1. 1637. Three Years before the meeting
of the Long Parliament) which Provision seems to intimate That Conspiracy. And
now the Poison begins to work.

Upon the 23 of July in the same Year, (according to a public Warning given
the Sunday before) the Dean of Edinburgh began to read the Service Book in the
Church of Saint Giles: whereupon ensued so horrid a Tumult, The first Tumult
against the Service Book.
that the Bishop was like to have been Murdered in the Pulpit; and after Sermon
escaped narrowly with his Life to his Lodgings.

The particular recital of their following Insolences upon the Bishop of
Galloway, the Earls of Traquair and Wigton; the besieging of the Council-House,
and contempts of the Council, their audacious Petitions against the
Service Book, and Cannons, I shall pass over, as not belonging to my purpose.

The Covenanters Usurp the Supreme Authority.
Upon the 19 of Febru. following, a Proclamation was published against their
Seditious Meetings, which they encounter with an Antiprotest, and presently
erect their public Tables of Advice and Counsel for Ordering the Affairs of
the Kingdom: The Method whereof was This. Four principal Tables they had. One
of the Nobility; a Second of the Gentry; a Third of the Buroughs; a Fourth of
Ministers. And these Four were to prepare Matters for the General Table; which
consisted of Commissioners chosen out of the Rest.

The first Act of this General Table was their Solemn Covenant; The Institution
of the Scottish Covenant.
a Contrivance principally promoted by persons formerly engaged in a Conspiracy
against the King, and, among others, by the Lord Balmerino, a Pardoned Traitor,
and the Son of One. The promoters of it.
His Father had been a Favorite, and principal Secretary to King James, and
raised by him out of Nothing, to his Estate, and Dignity. Yet was this
Thankless Wretch Arraigned for, and Attainted of High Treason, and after
Sentence to be Drawn, Hanged, and Quartered, he was by the Kings Mercy
pardoned, and restored. Another eminent Covenanter was the Earl of Arguile, of
whom Walker gives this Account.

He brought his Father to a pension; outed his Brother of his Estate Kintyre;
Hist. Indep. Appendix, page 14.
ruined his Sisters by cheating them of their portions, and so enforcing them
into Cloisters.

It must needs be a Conscientious Design with such Saints as These in the Head
of it.

The Covenant a Rebellious Vow.
This Covenant was effectually no other then a Rebellious Vow to oppose the
Kings Authority, and Justify Themselves in the exercise of the Sovereign
power, which they assumed, to a degree even beyond the claim of Majesty it
self, pleading the Obligation of the Covenant, A Plea for Treason.
to all their Usurpations.

They Levied Men and Moneys; Seized the Kings Magazines and strong Holds; The
Usurpations of the Covenanters.
Raised Forts; Begirt his Castles; Affronted his Majesty's Proclamations;
Summoned Assemblies; Proclaimed Fasts; Deprived, and Excommunicated Bishops;
Abolished Episcopacy; Issued out Warrants to choose Parliament-Commissioners;
Renounced the Kings Supreme Authority; Trampled upon Acts of Parliament;
pressing their Covenant upon the Privy Council. They gave the last Appeal to
the generality of the People; discharging Counselors, and Judges, of their
Allegiance, and threatening them with Excommunication, in case they disobeyed
the Assembly.

All this they did, according to the Covenant; and whether This was Religion or
Ambition, let the World judge.

These Affronts drew the King down with an Army to the Borders; and within two
Miles of Barwick, the two Bodies had an Enterview, March 28, 1639. But the
Scots craving a Treaty, his Majesty most graciously accorded it; A Pacification
with the Scots.
Commissioners were appointed, Articles agreed upon, and a Pacification
concluded, June 17.

Not one Article of this Agreement was observed on the Covenanters part; but
immediately upon the Discharge of his Majesty's Forces, the Scots brake forth
into fresh Insolences, Their Infidelity.
and the Encroachments upon the Prerogative; addressing to the French King for
Assistance against their Native Sovereign: And yet the Quarrel was, as they
pretended for the Protestant Religion, and against Popery.

In August 1640, they entered England, They enter England.
and upon a Treaty at Rippon soon after, a Cessation is agreed upon, referring
the Decision of all Differences to a more General Treaty at London.

In November began the Long Parliament; and now the Scene is London: Where with
great License and Security, Parties are made, The influence of the Scottish
Army, and the City-tumults, upon the Long Parliament.
and Insolences against the Government committed and authorized under
protection of the Scotch Army, and the City-Tumults. By degrees, Matters being
prepared and ripened, they found it opportune soon after, to make something a
more direct Attempt upon the Sovereignty, but by Request first; and resolving
if that way fail, to try to force it.

In January they Petition for the Militia: In February they secure the Tower;
and in March Petition again for it: But so, that they Protest, If his Majesty
persist to deny it, they are resolved to take it: The two Houses usurp the
Militia.
And the next day it is Resolved upon the Question, That the Kingdom be
forthwith put into a posture of Defense by Authority of both Houses of
Parliament.

In April 1642, the Earl of Warwick seizes the Navy, The Rebellion begins at
Hull.
and Sir John Hotham, Hull; Refusing the King Entrance, which was justified by
an ensuing Vote; and his Majesty proclaiming him Traitor for it, was Voted a
Breach of Privilege.

In May, they pretended Governor of Hull sends out Warrants to raise the
Trained Bands, and the King (then at York) forbids them; moving the County for
a Regiment of the Trained Foot, The Kings defense of himself, Voted a War
against his Parliament.
and a Troop of Horse for the Guard of his Royal Person: Whereupon it was
Voted, That the King, seduced by wicked Counsel, intended to make a War against
his Parliament, and that whosoever shall assist him, were Traitors.

They proceeded then to corrupt and displace diverse of his Servants, Teasonous
Prositions of the two Houses.
forbidding others to go to him. They stop and seize his Majesty's Revenue; and
declare, That whatsoever they should Vote, is not by Law to be questioned
either by the King or Subjects; No Precedent can limit or bound their
Proceedings. A Parliament may dispose of any thing wherein the King or People
have any Right. The Sovereign Power resides in Both Houses of Parliament. The
King has no Negative Voice. The levying of War against the Personal commands
of the King, though accompanied with his Presence, is not a levying of War
against the King: but a levying War against his Laws and Authority, which they
have power to declare) is levying War against the King. Treason cannot be
committed against his Person otherwise then as he was Entrusted. They have
Power to judge whether he discharge his Trust or not; that if they should
follow the highest Precedents of other Parliaments Patterns, there would be no
cause to complain of want of Modesty or Duty in them; and that it belonged only
to them to judge of the Law.

Having stated and extended their Power, by an absurd, illegal, and impious
severing of the King's Person from his Office, their next work is to put Those
Powers in execution; and to subject the Sacred Authority of a lawful Monarch,
to the Ridiculous and Monstrous Pageantry of a Headless Parliament; And That Is
the Business of the 19 Propositions demanding.

That the great Affairs of the Kingdom and Militia may be managed by Consent
and Approbation of Parliament; Deposing Propositions of June 2.
all the great Affairs of State, Privy Council, Ambassadors, and Ministers of
State, and Judges, be chosen by Teem; that the Government, Education, and
Marriage of the King's Children, be by Their Consent and Approbation; and all
the Forts and Castles of the Kingdom, put under the Command and Custody of such
as They should approve of, and that no Peers to be made hereafter, should Sit
and Vote in Parliament.

They desire further, That his Majesty would discharge his Guards; Eject the
Popish Lords out of the House of Peers, and put the Penal Laws against them
strictly in Execution: and finally, That the Nation may be governed either by
the Major part of the Two Houses, or in the Intervals of Parliament, by the
Major part of the Council; and that no Act of State may be esteemed of any
validity, as proceeding from the Royal Authority without Them.

Upon these Terms they insisted, Che Cause of the War, was Ambition.
and Raised a War to Extort them: So that it is clear, they both designed and
fought to Dethrone his Majesty, and exercise the Sovereign Power themselves;
which was to Suit their Liberty of Acting to that of Sitting, and to make
themselves an Almighty, as well as an Everlasting Parliament.

CAP. IV. The Instruments and Means which the Conspirators employed to make a
Party.
THat their Design was to usurp the Government, is manifest: Now to the
Instruments and Sleights they use to compass it.

The Grand Projectors knew very well that the strength of their Cause depended
upon the favor of the Ignorant and Licentious Multitude; The Rabble were the
Pillars of the Cause.
which made them court all people of that Mixture, to their Party; (for Men of
Brain and Conscience would never have agreed to a Conspiracy, against so clear
a Light, so just an Interest); and Those they found their fast Friends, whom
neither the Horror of Sin, nor the brightest Evidence of Reason was able to
work upon.

To fit and dispose Both Humors to their purpose; the first Scruple they
started was Religion: Religion the pretense.
which taken as they used it, in the external form and jingle of it, is beyond
doubt, the best Cloak for a Knave, and the best Rattle for a Fool in Nature.
Under this Countenance, the Murder of the King passed for a Sacrifice of
Expiation: and those Brute Animals, that scarce knew the Bible from the
Alcoran, were made the Arbitrators of the Difference.

The fear of Popery was the Leading Jealousy, which Fear was much promoted by
Pamphlets, Lectures, and Conventicles: Their Zeal agaidst Popery.
Still coupling Popery and Prelacy; Ceremonies and the Abominations of the
Whore: by these Resemblances of the Church of England, to that of Rome, tacitly
instilling and bespeaking the same dissaffection to the One, which the People
had to the Other. Their zeal was first employed upon the names of Priests, and
Altar, the Service Book, The Method of the Reformation.
Church-habits, and Ceremonies: From Thence, they stepped to the Demolishing of
Church-Windows, Images, Crosses: the Persons of the Bishops went to it next, and
then the Office. Thus far the Rabble carried it, the Leaders at last sharing
the Revenues; and here is the Reformation of the Hierarchy complete.

When by these Scandalous Impostures, the Duties of a Christian and a Subject;
Rebellion divides God and the King.
Conscience and Loyalty, seem once to enterfere, what can be looked for, but
Rebellion, from a Loose Multitude that think themselves Discharged of their
Allegiance?

All Governments are liable to Abuses, and so was Ours, among the Rest; Scandal
Emproved,
where Personal Faylings, and Excesses, were improved into the Fame of an
Universal Profaneness, or Apostasy. Nor did they reckon it enough to Expose,
and Aggravate particular miscarriages, and Humane Frailties; but the most
horrid Crimes Imaginable, and Invented.
were without either proof, or ground, or color, laid to the Charge of the
Episcopal and Royal party; Both which were ruined by the same Method of
Calumny, and Sedition.

The late King was betrayed by presbyterians in his Counsel.
The main Encouragement to their Attempt, was that, The Presbyterians had a
strong Party in the Kings Council; (and this His Majesty himself takes notice
of, in his Large Declaration of 1639. Page 124.) by which means, the Kings
Councels were both Distracted and Betrayed: and the Conspirators Secure (at
Worst) of Mediators for a commodious Peace, in case they Failed of a Successful
War. Nor did this Confidence deceive them, in the following Enterview of the
Armies near Barwick, where the Covenanters had been almost as easily Beaten as
looked upon, had not the Quarrel been taken up by an Importune, and dear-bought
Peace, for that expedition cost more Money, only to face the Scotch Rebels, then
would afterward have served His Majesty to have Reduced the English. A Dear
peace, the cause of a long War.


Throughout the Menage of their Affairs, it may be Observed that they had these
Three Regards still in their Eye, and Care. Tria priciipia.
1. To Reproach his Majesty's Government. 2. To Animate, and Reward his
Enemies: And 3. To persecute his Friends: And still as any thing Stuck, a
Tumult ready at a dead lift to help it forward: For they were not Ignorant,
that the King was to be Defamed before he could be Disarmed; The Method of
Treason.
Disarmed, before Deposed; Deprived of his Friends, before Despoyl'd of his
Rights and Privileges: and That being their Design, This was Rationally to be
their Method.

Their first Uproar about the Service Book, was but a wild trial how far the
Multitude would Engage, Rebellion begins in Confusion, and ends in Order.
and the Magistrate Endure; which appeared in This, that the City-Magistrates
did at first, Earnestly, and Publicly protest, not only against the Outrage;
but for the Liturgy: not daring to do Otherwise; till a while after, Encouraged
by the Boldness and Importunity of the Offenders, and the Patience of some in
Authority; those very Persons did in their Pulpits, and Discourses, magnify
that Beastly Crew for the Worthies of the Age, whom just before they had
decry'd for Rogues and Villains: The Truth is, they were Then about to play the
Rogues, Themselves; and when persons of Quality turn Rascals, Then do Rascals
become persons of Quality.

At the beginning of the Broyl, half a douzen broken heads had saved Three
Kingdoms. Who would have owned That Rabble, had they been Worsted? or, What
Resistance could they have made to any Legal Opposition? But they were
Flattered to be Quiet, and That advanced this Tumult to a party; the Faction
growing every day more and more formidable.

As their Strength increased, so did their Pretenses, both in Number, and
Weight; and nothing less would content them, then to strip the King as bare, as
they had done the Bishops. The particulars of their Insolences are too many
for a Treatise, and in Truth, too foul for a Story; but in gross, nothing was
wanting to the perfection of the Wickedness, which either Hypocrisy, Perjury,
Treason, Sacrilege, Rapine, Oppression, Forgery, Scandal, Breach of Faith,
Malice, Murder, or Ingratitude could contribute. All which, in every Point
shall be made good by several Instances, if any Man require it.

We Will now look Homeward, The English follow the Scottish pattern.
where we shall find the English Rebellion wrought, to a Thridd, according to
the Trace of the Scottish Pattern.

The Press and Pulpit were already at the Devotion of the Reforming Party, the
Covenanters had an Army on Foot, and the Schismatiques were prepared for a
General Rising; at which time, his Majesty Summoned a Parliament, to assemble
in November following.

In This Contention, those of the Confederacy, The prologue to the late War.
made it their first work to engage the People, by ripping up of Common
Grievances, Breach of Laws and Privileges; and by contending to assert their
Rights, Liberties, and Religion, against the Encroachments of Prerogative, and
Popery. Being secure of their Party, they propose next the Manner of
accomplishing their Purpose; which must be Effected by Craft and Terror. In
Order whereunto, They first attacqu'd Two of his Majesty's prime Counselors
and Confidents, the Earl of Strafford, and the Archbishop of Canterbury;
Loyalty persecuted.
(Two Persons worthy of the King's Trust and Kindness, however Worried by the
Multitude). To weaken the Lords House, they nulled the Bishops Votes, and
Committed Twelve of them for Treason; Five of the Judges were Committed
likewise: And to dispose the Lower House, nothing was wanting which either
Force, Flattery, Corruption, or foul-play in Elections could Procure them.

So far as the King Granted, all went well; but if his Majesty denied them any
Thing, the Fault was laid upon his Evil Counselors: Under which Notion all his
Friends were comprehended. So that his Choice was This; either to give away his
Crown, or to have it wrested from him.

In May, the Faction of the Two Houses Published a Protestation, (which was but
a Gentle slip into the Prerogative Royal to try their Interest, and by degrees
to inure the People to their intended and succeeding Usurpations. Some four or
five days after, were signed those Two Fatal Bills, for the Death of the Earl
of Strafford, and the Perpetuity of the Parliament: And having now gained leave
to sit as long as they please, they have little futther to ask, but that they
may likewise do what, they list.

Rebellion rewarded.
Where Loyalty was made a Crime, 'twas fit Rebellion should pass for a Virtue.
Upon which suitable equity, the Scots were Justified, and Voted, our Dear
Brethren, 300000 l. in June 1641, and Six-score thousand more in August
following, and so we Parted.

In this Perplexity of Affairs, the King takes a Journey into Scotland, The
King goes for Scotland.
it possible, to secure an Interest there; but the Conspiracy was gone too far
to be composed by Gentleness. Upon his Majesty's Departure, the Houses Adjourn,
and during the Recess, appoint a standing Committee, and They forsooth must
have a Guard, for fear of their own Shadows. In which Interval of the King's
Absence, the Usurpers lost no time, as appeared by their readiness to Entertain
him at his Return: When the first Present they made his Majesty, His Welcome at
his Return.
was the Petition, and Remonstrance of December 15; which I cannot think upon,
but that Text comes into my mind, of Mark 15.18. [Hail King of the Jews, and
they smote him on the head with a Reed, and spate upon him, and bowed the head,
and did him reverence.]

This Impious Libel was seconded with an Audacious Tumult, The King Affronted
by Tumults first; And Then for complaining of them.
even at the Gates of the King's Palace; and it was now high time for his
Majesty to enquire into the Contrivers and Abettors of these and other the like
Indignities; and Proclamation was accordingly made for the Apprehending of
them; which very Proclamation was declared to be a Paper False, scandalous and
Illegal.

After this Language, what had they more to do, but by Armed Violence to invade
the Sovereignty, and to improve a loose and popular Sedition, into a Regular
Rebellion? Which was a little hastened to, even beside the Terms of Ordinary
Prudence) to implunge their Accomplices beyond Retreat, before they should
discern that hideous Gulf into which their Sin and Folly was about to lead
them. To keep their Zeal and Fury waking, the Faction had a singular Faculty at
Inventing of Plots; Counterfeiting Letters; Intercepting Messages; Over-hearing
Conspiracies: Which Artificial Delusions especially asserted by the pretended
Authority of a Parliament and a Pulpit) could not but work strong Effects of
Scruple and Jealousy, upon a pre-judging and distempered People.

These were the means and steps by which they gained that Power, which
afterward they Employed in Opposition to those very ends for which they swear
they Raised it; leaving us neither Church, nor King, nor Law, nor Parliaments,
nor Properties, nor Freedoms. Behold! the Blessed Reformation: We Will slip the
War, and see in the next place what Government they Gave us in Exchange for
That they had Subverted.

CAP. V. A short View of the Breaches and Confusions betwixt the Two Factions,
from 1648, to 1654.
IT cannot be expected that a Power, acquired by Blood and Treason; maintained
by Tyranny; the Object of a General Curse and Horror both of God and Nature;
only United against Justice, and at perpetual Variance with it self: -- I say,
it cannot be expected, that such a Power as this should be Immortal. Yet is it
not enough barely to argue the Fatality of Wickedness, from the Certainty of
Divine Vengeance; and There to stop: -- Usurpers are not raised by Miracle, nor
cast down by Thunder; but by our Crimes or Follies they are Exalted, and Then,
by the Fatuity of their own Counsels, down they Tumble. Wherefore let us
enquire into the Springs and Reasons of their Fortunes and Falls; as well as
Gaze upon the Issues of them: A timely search into the Grounds of one
Rebellion, may prevent another. How the Religious Opposers of the late King
advanced themselves against his Sacred Authority, we have already showed; be it
our business here, to Observe their workings, one upon the other.

To begin with Them that began with Us: The Presbyterians, The Presbyterians
ruined by their own Arguments.
having first asserted the Peoples Cause against the Prerogative, and
attempting afterward to Establish Themselves, by using Pregogative-Arguments
against the People; found it a harder matter to Erect an Aristocracy upon a
Popular Foundation, than to subvert a Monarchy upon a Popular Pretense; or to
dispose the Multitude (whom they themselves had Declared to be the Supreme
Power) to lay down their Authority at the Feet of their Servants. In fine, they
had great Difficulties to struggle with, and more than they could overcome: (I
mean, great Difficulties in point of Interest, and Conduct; for those of Honor
and Conscience, they had subdued long since) They strove however, till oppressed
by a general hatred, and the Rebound of their own Reasonings, they Quitted to
the Independent*

Thus departed the Formal Bauble, Presbytery; succeeded, for the next Four
years, by the Phanaticism of a Free State. England a Free State.
The better half of which time, being successfully Employed in the subjecting
of Scotland, and Ireland to their power, and Model, and to complete their
Tyranny over the Kings Best Subjects, and their Usurpations over his Royal
Dominions; Their next Work was to make themselves Considerable Abroad, and
'twas the Fortune of the Dutch to feel the First proof of That Resolution.

Betwixt these Rival States passed Six Encounters in 1652. most of them Fierce
and Bloody, the Last especially, Quarrels with the Dutch.
a Tearing one. Upon the whole, the Dutch lost more, but the English got
little, beside the Honor of the Victory: in which particular, the Kingdom
paid dear for the Reputation of the Commonwealth.

This success raised the pride and vanity of the English, so that at next Bout,
nothing less would serve them than an absolute Conquest. But while they are
providing for it, and in the huff of all their Glory; behold the Dissolution of
the Long-Parliament; The Long Parliament dissolved.
which whether it began or ended, more to the satisfaction of the People, is a
point not yet decided.

Dissolved however it is, and Rebuked for Corruptions, and Delays, by Cromwell;
who with his Officers, a while after, Summon a new Representative; and
Constitute a new Counsel of State, composed of Persons entirely disaffected to
the Commonwealth. This Little, Ridiculous Convention, thought to have done
mighty Matters, but the Plot Vented, and Vanished.

Some of their Memorable Fopperies are These: Barebones Parliament: Their Acts.
The Famous Act concerning Marriages, was Theirs; they passed likewise an Act
for an Assessment of 120000 l. per Mensem; they Voted down the Chancery and
Tithes; they Voted also a total Alteration of the Laws.

All of a mind they were not, and for Distinction sake, the company was divided
into the Honest party, and the Godly party. Of the former, were Cromwell's
Creatures, and of the Other, Barebones; or rather, Harrisons; (the Person they
had designed for General, if they could persuade Cromwell to quit his Security
for some additional Title of Dignity. Their Zeal.
) These Zealous Patriots Commonly brought their Bibles into the House with
them; and as I am Enform'd, diverse of them were seeking the Lord with Vavasor
Powell, when This following Trick was put upon them.

An Hour or two sooner in the morning then usual, December. 12. he that they
called their Speaker took the Chayr; and it was presently Moved and Carried,
Their Dissolution.
(for several Reasons) to re-assign their power to him from whom they had it;
The corruption of a Conventicle, is the General of a Protector.
which was immediately persu'd, and so they made Cromwell a Prince, for making
Them a Parliament.

This gracious Resignation produced that blessed Instrument of Government, by
which the Hypocrite was made Protector; and now forsooth the style is changed
from The Keepers of the Liberty of England by Authority of Parliament, Cromwell
Installed, and Sworn Protector.
into Oliver Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and
Ireland, etc. who was Installed and Sworn, December. 16. 1653.

To his Assistance was appointed a Counsel of 21. the Quorum, A Council of one
and Twenty.
13. By whom immediately upon the Death of the present Protector, should be
chosen one to succeed him, (always excepted the Right Line from the choice)
It Is supposed, that Lambert had an eye upon himself in the reach of That
Article, and a particular influence upon the drawing of it, being at That time
Popular enough with the Army to hope for any thing. A while after the
Establishment of this Traitor, comes forth an Ordinance, Declaring Treasons;
and now his Highness thinks himself in the saddle; especially having beaten the
Dutch into One Peace, and Treated the Swede into Another, which were proclaimed
soon after.

Having run through the Narrative of those Considerable Changes, and
Confusions, of Power, which intervened betwixt the Murder of a most Gracious
Prince, and the appearing Settlement of an Usurping Tyrant, we will make a little
stand here, and look behind us.

The Two Main Engines that made Cromwell Master of the Army, Cromwells
Masteries.
were first, The Self-denying Ordinance by which he Worm'd out the
Presbyterians, and Skrew'd in his own Party: The Second, was the Vote of March
19. 1646. for the Disbanding of so many Regiments, and sending Others for
Ireland. This Vote was privily procured by himself and Ireton: which he foresaw
must necessarily inflame the Army; and so it did, never to be reconciled.

This Breach was the setting up of Cromwell: and the Foundation of his
succeding greatness. The Foundation of Cromwels Greatness.
It was the Impression of That Vote that baffled, and purged the House in 47.
Forced it, in 48. and Disolv'd it, in 53. after which he called Another, that
died Fe lo de fe, and Bequeathed to his Excellency the Government.

Had the Devil himself destroyed that Faction, the Nation would have Thank't
him for it; so it is no wonder if his Advance was smooth, and Prosperous: but now
He Is Up, how to maintain his Power, against a General Odium, and Interest; how
to get himself forced to exchange That Temporary Title of Protector, for the
more Stable, Legal, and desirable Name of King, without discovering his
Insatiate Longing for it: This is a Point of Mastery, and Cunning; and Possibly
the Thing that break his Heart, was his Despair to Accomplish it.

The Faction has already trod the Round of Government; The Lords and Commons,
outed the King; the Commons, the Lords, the Multitude, the Commons; (and with
the Fate of all Rebellious Causes; seeking Rest, but finding None) At last, up
goes the Pageantry of a Monarch, Cromwell; whose Temper, Straights, and
Politics, shall be the Subject of the next Chapter.

CAP. VI. The Temper, Straights, and Politics, of Cromwell, during his
Protectorship.
THe Character of This Glorious Rebel, is no further my purpose, then as it
leads to a right Judgment of his Actions, and the Confusion of his Adorers.

Of strong Natural Parts, I persuade my self he was, Cromwels Character.
though some think otherwise, imputing all his Advantages to Corruption, or
Fortune, (which will not be denied however to have concurred powerfully to his
Greatness). Nor do I pretend to collect his Abilites from his Words, any more
then the World could his Meaning, save that the more entangled his Discourses
were, I reckon them the more Judicious, because the fitter for his Business.
His Interest obliging him to a Reserve, for he durst neither clearly Own his
Thoughts, nor Totally Disclaim them; the One way endangering his Design, and
the Other, his Person. So that the skill of his Part lay in This; neither to be
mistaken by his Friends, nor understood by his Enemies. By This middle Course
he gained Time, to remove Obstacles, and ripen Occasions; which to improve and
follow, was the peculiar Talent of that Monster.

To these enablements to Mischief, he had a Will so prostitute, and prone, that
to express him, I must say, He was made up of Craft and Wickedness; and all his
Faculties, nay all his Passions, were Slaves to his Ambition. In fine, he knew
no Other measure of Good and Bad, but as things stood in This or That Relation
to his Ends; which I the less admire, when I consider that he was brought up in
a Presbyterian School: where Honor, Faith, and Conscience weigh nothing,
further then as they subserve to Interest. But enough of This.

In the foregoing Chapter we have Placed the Protector in the Chair, but not
the King in the Throne; the Power he has already, but wants the Title; and,
which is worse, he dares not offer at it, being equally affray'd to own his
Longing, or to miss it. In This Distraction of Thought, his Jealousy joins
with his Ambition; Sollicitous on the One hand for his Family, and on the Other
for his Safety. For his Family, in point of Grandeur, and for his Safety Thus.

Cromwell Jelous of his Counsel.
After his Death, according to the Instrument, the Counsel is to choose a
Successor, and whoever gapes to be the One, is supposed to wish for the Other;
which probably they had rather hasten, then wait for: So that This Miserable
creature being peyned, betwixt the Hazard either of enlarging his Power, or
having it thus dependent; and the disdain of seeing it limited, enters into a
restless suspicion of his Counsel, and no way to be quieted but by depressing
Those that Raised him. So much for the first Difficulty, a second follows.

And of his Army.
His Design had These Three Grand Enemies. The Royalists, The Presbyterians, and
the Common-wealths-Men: the Last of which composed the Gross of his Army; whom
he had so inured to the Gust of Popularity, and Freedom, and so enflamed
against the Tyranny of King-ship, that the bare Change of the word
Commonwealth, to Kingdom, had been enough to have cast all into a Revolt.

These were the main Impediments of His Majesty that would be; and now we will
touch upon the Shifts and Tricks his Highness used to Remove them.

Cromwell having squandered away his Money, and taking occasion from the
Salisbury Rising in 1654. to Squeeze the Cavaliers for more; Kills two Birds
with one stone, Oliver erects Major-Generals, and then fools them.
by Commissioning some of those Persons which he most apprehended in his
Counsel, to do his work: whom under the Name of Major-Generals, and with a
Power at Liberty, (doubtless foreseeing how they would abuse it) he places as
Governors over the Several Counties. These he employs to Levy his barbarous
Decimation, which when they had done, and by a Thousand Insolences enraged the
People, he lays them aside; being now become, of the most Popular of the
Party, the most Abominated Creatures of the Nation.

Touching the Royallists, no good for him was to be hoped for There, but by
Goals, Exile, Selling them for Slaves, The Persecution of the Cavaliers.
Famishings, or Murder: all which was abundantly provided for, by
Sequestrations, Pretended Plots, High-Courts of Justice, Spies, Decoyes etc.
Nay (for the very Dispatch sake) when they should resolve upon the Massacre,
(which beyond doubt they meant us) No Cavalier must be allowed so much as the
least piece of Defensive Arms, by an Order of Nov. 24. 1655.

No Person suffered to keep in his house as Chaplain or Schoolmaster, any
Sequestered or Ejected Minister, Fellow of a College: or Schoolmaster, nor
suffer his Children to be taught by such. Nor any Person of that Quality must
be permitted to Teach a School, either Public, or Private; Nor Preach, but in
his Own Family, nor Administer the Sacraments, nor Marry, nor use the
Common Prayer book, etc.

This was the only Party the Rebels feared and ruined; but for the
Presbyterians they knew they would never Ioyn to help the King; and single they
were inconsiderable.

The Common-wealths-Men finally contented themselves with the Name of a
Commonwealth, under the Exercise of a Single Person; so that by This Method of
Engaging one Party, conniving at another, and crushing the Third: This Tyrant
gave himself the Means and Leisure to fortify his Interests some other way.

He had already tried a Parliament of his own Call; that met, September. 3. 1654.
Cromwels Test of the House.
Five or Six days are spent in dangerous Debates about the Government, and the
Authority by which they are Convened. This, Oliver did not like, and sent them
an Appointment to meet him (on the 12.) in the Painted Chamber: where
discoursing the Reciprocal ties betwixt Him and his Parliament; The
Fundamentals of the Government, as to a Single Person; the Succession of
Parliaments; their mutual Interest in the Militia; and Liberty of Conscience;
and that These Particulars they were Entrusted to maintain; concluded, that
finding a Design among them to overthrow That Settlement he was necessitated to
appoint a Recognition, for every Man to sign, before he could be readmitted
into the House; which Recognition was as follows.

The Recognition.
IA. B. do hereby Promise and Engage my self to be true and faithful to the Lord
Protector, and the Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland: and that
according to the Tenure of the Indenture, whereby I am returned to serve in
This Present Parliament; I will not propose, or give my consent to alter the
Government, as it is settled in one Single Person and a Parliament.

This was no Conventicle for Cromwell's Turn; so that after Five Months
sitting, This Puppet of a Prince did formally dissolve it, in hope the next
might use him better.

His Credit though but small at Home, had better luck abroad; The Dutch, the
Sweed, and then the French, entered a League with him, and the effect of this
Conjunction hastened his Ruin. I must not overslip that One Condition with the
French, was the Extrusion of our Gracious Sovereign, with his Adherents, out of
the French Kings Dominions.

Flushed with Success, and Vanity, nothing less serves us now, then the
Spaniards part of the West Indies. By whose advice, it matters not; Cromwels
design upon St. Domingo, Disastrous.
but in December. 1654. a Considerable Fleet sets Sail from Ports-Mouth, and
about mid- April, 1655. arrives at St. Domingo; Briefly, the Voyage was
disastrous, and those that Escaped the Fate of That Attempt, disposed their
After-game for Iamaica. To Balance This disgrace, Blake made amends at Tunis,
Blake makes amends at Tunis.
firing Nine Frigates in the Port Ferino, and came off fair at last.

Olivers nex design was to intercept the Plate-Fleet; and within four Leagues
of the Bay of Cadiz, His Success against the Plate-Fleet near the Bay of Cadiz.
the English engaged eight Galeons, whereof only One Escaped, Two were Taken,
and the Rest Sunk, Burnt, or Stranded: This disappointment to the Spaniard was
a bitter one, and the Success as seasonable to the English; Yielding them both
a Prodigious Booty, and a Dreadful Reputation. But these Successes were to
Cromwell, as a good Hand, or two, to a Young Gamester; only Temptations to a
Course will ruin him.

While these Exploits were driving on, Abroad, Others were in the Forge at
Home. Here, to gain Love; There, Awe and Credit, with as much Money toward the
Purchase as the Fates pleased. Upon the Royallists, his Flatteries wrought
little, as being a Party moved neither by Security, nor Profit, (where the
King's Interest was the Question.) Both which, they freely Sacrificed in their
first dutiful Engagement with him: and to the last stood firm, through the
whole course of Oliver's most furious Extremities. But other Instruments there
were of a more tractable and complying Temper, and These Foresooth, ( Ten,
Twenty perhaps in a Country) worshipped the Golden Calf, and in the Name of the
People of England, Addressed, Congratulated, Addresses.
[ Engaged themselves to stand by and assist him to the Uttermost, in the
discharge of the Trust which so remarkably was devolved upon him.] This is the
Style of that from Bucks.

To these Appearances of a general Good-liking, were added the
Conjoynt-endeavours of his Dependents and Allies; Oliver's Kindred stood his
Friends.
which being Numerous in Truth, and Considerable by Employment, gave no small
Succor and Support to his Ambitious Project, and Tottering Greatness. As by
the Influence they had upon the Iuncto, in Sep. 1656, more eminently appeared;
consisting of near a 100 Military Officers, 40 or 50 of his Allies, Domestics,
and particular Creatures; (I speak the least) beside their Seconds: a mixture
there was likewise of certain Persons truly Honorable, but diverse being
excluded, and the rest overvoted, their Interest came to nothing.

These were no Strangers to their Masters pleasure, and what That was, may be
collected from the Votes they passed to please him. The Main were these:

1. An Act for Renouncing and Annulling the Title of Charles Stuart to the
Three Kingdoms.

2. For the Securing of the Protectors Person, and preserving the Peace of the
Nation.

3. The humble Petition and Advice.] Wherein was plentifully provided whatever
might conduce to his Establishment, the most material Points being these
following. (Only Protector should have been King, if he had pleased.)

The Petition and Advice to Declare his Successor.
1. That under the Name and Style of Lord Protector, etc. He should in his
Lifetime Declare his Successor, and Govern according to the Petition and
Advice, in Matters therein expressed, and in other things according to the Law of
the Land.

2. That he would call Parliaments for the future, Consisting of Two House,
etc. -- and Triennial at least.

3. That the Quorum of the Other House be One and twenty, and the Number not
above Seventy, Oliver's Other House.
Nominated by his Highness, and Approved by that House.

4. That the Quorum of his Privy Council be Seven, Privy Council.
and the Number not exceeding One and twenty: and that Sitting, the Parliament,
the Standing Forces of this Commonwealth be disposed of by the chief
Magistrate, with the Consent of both Houses; and in the Intervals, by advice of
his Council.

Revenue.
5. That a constant yearly Revenue of Thirteen hundred thousand pounds be
forthwith Settled, and no Part thereof to be raised by a Land Tax: A Million of
this Money for the Navy and Army, the rest for the Support of the Government:
Other Temporary Supplies being left to the Judgment of the House of Commons.

Cavaliers incapable of Office.
6. That all that ever served the King Loyally and Constantly, be made Incapable
for ever of any Office or Place of Trust in any of the Three Nations. The Rest
is Formality.

To these Propositions, his Highness AMEN is not to be doubted, and in Form,
May 25. 1657.

The LORD PROTECTOR does Consent.

Here Is in the First, his Family Secured. In the Second, his Interest; (3. One
House consisting of his own Creatures). In the Fourth, the Standing Army is his
own; (that is, in the Intervals of Parliaments, which he can Dissolve at
pleasure). In the Fifth, a Revenue proposed: And lastly, His Enemies cast at
his Feet.

On the Day following ( June 26. was presented an Additional and Explanatory
Petition and Advice: Desiring,

That Forty and One Commissioners be appointed by Act of Parliament, who, or
any Five of them, shall be Authorized to Examine the Capacities of Members to
be chosen into future Parliaments, and every unqualified Member to forfeit a
Thousand pounds, and suffer Imprisonment till he pay it.]

The Forms of several Oaths are likewise offered, to be taken by the Protector,
his Council and Members of Parliament; and, his Highness is further desired to
Issue forth his Summons in due form of Law to such as he should think fit to
Call to his Other House. To all which --

The LORD PROTECTOR does Consent.

Diverse Bills his Highness passed, that his people scarce thanked him for;
Mony-Bills very many, and so the Thing was Adjourned till the Twentieth of Ian.
next.

But we must not forget the Solemn Investiture of the Protector, by Authority
of Parliament; (forsooth) and yet we must not make the Bauble Proud neither, by
saying too much on it.

The Foolery was performed in Westminster Hall, where his Highness was
presented with a Coat: to wit, Cromwell Installed Protector.
A Robe of Purple-Velvet, lined with Ermins; A Bible, Gilt and Bossed; a Sword:
And lastly, a Scepter of Massy Gold. When he was Girt and Vested, he lift up
his Eyes to Heaven, and took an Oath, (not the First he had broken by many a
Thousand) which being dispatched, Mr. Manton Consecrated the Independent
F^ppery, with a Presbyterian Blessing; after which his Highness being Published
and Proclaimed, the Comedy concluded.

But Comedy and Mr. Manton will scarce agree in the same Period: and why? Let
us Expostulate. Does not a Counterfeit or a Mimique better become a Stage than
a Pulpit? Or is it not as lawful to see Honest Lacy play a snivelling
Schismatic, as a perfidious bloody Traitor to sustain the Person of a Gracious
Prince? Yet here his Holiness Acts his Part himself; (or in the Gibberish of
the Brethren) performs the Duty of the Day: Pronouncing a Blessing upon the
horrid and ridiculous Spectacle.

Did not Mr. Manton know that Cromwell was an Impostur; and that the Purple
Robe he ware, belonged not to his Shoulders? How as a Minister of the Gospel
then, could he Officiate to such a piece of Pageantry? It minds me of
Mazarine's Kinsman, that upon a Good Friday, in Derision, Crucified a Frog.

He knew moreover, that he was a Murderer, and an Usurper, and that the Gaudy
Bible then before him, was but to Him the Book he Conjured by. How as a
Christian could he own the Augury?

Further, He knew whose Blood he had Spilt, whose Rights he usurped; and that
the murdered Father, and his injured Successor were Both his SOVEREIGNS: The
Ceremonial Sword and Scepter likewise he knew the meaning of. How as a Subject
then could he submit to Countenance so Undutiful an Undertaking?

Lastly, He knew that the Design was (in Truth utterly Atheistick, but in show)
Independent. How as a Presbyterian could he agree to it?

For all this now, Mr. Manton may thank himself. It Is true, he did Exceeding
well, on the late Fast, to reckon Drunkenness, and Profaneness among Those
Crying Sins that draw God's Judgments upon a People, and Earnestly to press a
Reformation. But, how come Plays into the Rank of these Provoking Sins? Or,
what does Histriomastix in the Pulpit? [The Theaters (it seems) are so Thronged
with Coaches, his Greatness can scarce pass the Streets: Those Temples of
Satan, etc.] And what would he now have the World believe of Those that
Frequent Them? Is not this, Lashing of a Party, under the disguise of taxing a
Vice? or Certainly, it is a Strange Conscience, that adores Catiline in a State,
and Scruples him upon a Stage. Would not a Whip on the Other hand do well
sometimes?

I would go Five Miles barefoot to hear a Presbyterian Preach, that the first
War in 1642. Raised by the LORDS, and COMMONS was a REBELLION.

It must not be supposed that the first Tender of the Petition and Advice under
the Regal Style, was without Cromwells Privity, and Liking; and beyond doubt,
the Title was a Bait he Lick't his lips at: but the Old Fox durst not Bite; and
he had Reason to be shy, finding how great a Flame the first Bruit of the
Proposition had Raised among the Sectaries: That very Ninth of April, when a
Committee was appointed, to treat his Highness Scruples into a Satisfaction,
being designed for a Tumultuary Attempt upon his Government; and diverse of the
Plotters apprehended.

'Twas This, that put the Gentleman to his Hums and Haws; that makes him Sick
to day, Late to marrow, Busy the next; and when he speaks, Chewe false, or
utter Oracles: all these put-offs, tending only to gain Time, to find how the
Tide serves, and Taste how the Proposal Relishes. At Last, the Crafty Sir,
fearing the distance too wide for a single Step, resolves rather to make Two
on it; and to content himself at present to be Installed Protector, with such
Additional Powers as were then offered, leaving the Complement of his Regality
to the next meeting.

During the Prorogation, Cromwell patched up his Other House, who took their
seats (the Term of the Adjournment being expired) in the Lords House. Such
Peers they were, Olivers Other House.
as in good Truth the Commons were not only ashamed of, but galled to see the
Affront they had done Themselves, Enraged the Commons.
by their own Follies in permitting them. Some few there were of Quality, and
Moderation, Whose Names were only mixed to Grace the Rabble.

And now forsooth the Mushrome-Fobs begin to talk of Dignities and Privileges.
Prodigious Impudence and Folly! Thenew Peers.
Two of these Fellows Pride, and Berkstead quarreled upon the Bench at Hicks
his Hall, about the meaning of [ the PREAMBLE that went AFTER.]

The Commons (though a little late) resented the Indignity of Truckling under
such Cattle, The Commons pick a Quarrel with the Other House.
and not enduring an Vpper-House so like a Bear-Garden, they presenly took in
their formerly Secluded Fellows, and fell to work upon the Authority of That
New Creation, not sparing His that Placed them there. This course would soon
have bred ill blood; and Cromwell, after 15 Days trial of their Humor, did
Prudently Dissolve them.

From that Degree of Confidence, to Fall beyond Ressource, and from That point
of Power, to become Ridiculous; did but demonstrate to him the Vanity of his
Ambitious Hopes, and that he aimed at Things Impossible.

Of all the Cross-Encounters of his life, Olivers heartbreaking cross.
This sank the Deepest, and the Impression of That Anguish, went with him to
his Grave; as may be fairly Gathered from the wild disproportion of his
following Actions: which, well considered, will appear rather the Products of
Revenge, Rage, and Despair, then the formed Regular Politics of his wonted
Reason.

Yet that he might not seem to abandon the persuit, and utterly despond; some
Five weeks after the breaking up of the late Assembly, The Major of London and
his Brethren were summoned to White Hall, He Fools the City of London.
and there ( March. 2. 1658.) the Citts are told a Formal Tale of the King of
Scots; 8000 Men in Readiness, and 22 Vessels to Transport them. A General Plot,
The City to be fired, and twenty Terrible Things, to start and Settle a New
Militia, which in some Six weeks time was perfected.

And Now from all Parts are to be procured Addresses: which are no other then
Leagues Offensive, and Defensive Betwixt the Faction, and the Usurper.

Addresses.
Sweet London leads the way; Then Michell's, Ashfields, Cobbetts, Regiments: The
Officers of the English-Army; and the Commission-Officers in Flanders. All
these in March.

In April; the Officers of Biscoes Regiment: and the Commission Officers of the
Militia in Suffolk, Leicester, Sussex, and my Countrymen of Norwich. After
These, follow the Soldiery of South Wales, and Daniels Regiment. The
Well-affected of Nottingham, etc.

These Numerous and Pretending Applications, were but False Glosses upon his
Power; and Cromwell was too wise to think them Other; Gained by Contrivement,
Force, or at least, Importunity. Half a Score pitiful wretches call themselves
the People of such or such a County, and here is the Total of the Reckoning.
It Is Rumored that his Daughter Cleypoole, in the Agonies of her Death-Sickness
rang him a Peal that troubled him. Whether 'twere so, or no, it is past Dispute,
his Grand Distress was for the Loss of That which while he hoped to gain, made
the most horrid of his helpful Sins, seem Solaces and Pleasures.

While by the Artifice of These Addresses, his broken Interest is pieced as
Fair as well it may, his Care is Divided between the engaging of One Party, and
the Destroying of Another. And under the Masque of a pressing and Pious
Necessity, he breaks out into such Enormous Cruelties, Barbarous Cruelties.
such Wanton, and Conceited Butcheries, that, had not his Brain been Cracked, as
well as his Conscience Seared, he would not have gone so Fantastical a way to
the Devil. Some of the Martyrs Hearts were quick and Springing in the Fire,
(as I had it from several Eyewitnesses). Ashton did but desire to be Beheaded,
and it was seemingly Granted, but the Order kept till 'twas too late, and Then
tendered with a Ieere.

London was made the Altar for These Burnt Offerings: God grant That City be
not at last purged by Fire, (I mean, before the General Confiagration) for
Those Polluting Flames. The Crime was Loyalty, and made out against them, more
by the doubling Artifice of Mercenary Tongues, than any Pregnancy of Proofs.

What could This Furious and Inhumane Rigor avail That miserable Politician,
further then as it Gratified his Malice, and Revenge, for his Lost Hopes, and
Fortunes! Without a Para^^ment, or somewhat like one, he Perishes for want of
Money; and an Assembly to his mind throughout, he utterly despairs of: so that
no Remedy remains, but by extremities of Violence and Blood to do his Business.
And to That end, he faintly labors the new Modelling of his Army, a way, which
he had found by Long Experience, made Enemies, as well as Friends: Those
certain, and Implacable; These, prone to change their Interest, and without
Money, True to None. In fine, his Fate was Irresistible, and his Tormented Soul
Inconsolable. He Sinks, Sickens, and Dies: Upon the Day of his grand
Anniversary, for Dunbar, and Worcester. (Sept. 3.)

The Night before his Death, Cromwells Death.
arose a Tempest, that seemed to signify the Prince of the Air had some great
work in hand: and it is Remarkable, that during his Usurpation, scarce any
Eminent Action passed without a furious Storm.

I have drawn This Chapter to a length beyond my intention, and should be too
too Tedious to run through all his Wiles, which were No other than an Habitual
Craft, diffused throughout the entire Course of his Tyranny. But certain
General rules he imposed upon himself, which must not be omitted.

One was, to Buy Intelligence at any Rate, by That means making every Plot bear
it is own Charges. Olivers Maximet.


2. Never to Engage Two Parties at once; but to Flatter, and Formalize with the
One, till he Ruined the Other: Which was the Reason that he durst never make
the Presbyterians Desperate, for fear of Necessitating them to side with the
King.

3. To extirpate the Royallists by all possible means, as Poverty, Bondage,
Executions, Transplantations; and a Devise he had to dispose of several Levies,
out of That Party, Some to serve the Spaniard, Others the French, that they
might be sure to meet in Opposition, and cut One the Others Throats.

4. He ever made his Army his own Particular Care.

5. To keep the Nation in a perpetual Hatred, and Jealousy of the Kings Party;
which he promoted either by forging of Plots; or Procuring Them.

So much for Olivers Temper, Straights, and Politics.

CAP. VII. A short Account from the Death of the Tyrant Oliver, to the Return
of Charles the Second, (whom God Preserve from his Fathers Enemies.
THe Heart of the Cause was broken long since, and now the Soul of it is gone;
though the Protectorate be formally devolved to Richard, as the Declared
Successor to his Father. Whether Declared or not, was (I remember) at That
time a Question. But whether Thus or So, it Matters not. Oliver is Dead, his
Son Proclaimed, and at night Bon-fires, with all the Clamor, Bustle, and
Confusion that commonly attends those Vulgar Jollities. The Soldiers took the
Alarm, and in my hearing threatened diverse for daring to express their Joy so
unseasonably: but they came off with telling them that they were glad they had
got a New Protector, not that they had lost the Old. In Truth, the New
Protector was looked upon as a Person more Inclinable to do Good, than Capable
to do Mischief, and the Exchange Welcome, to all that Loved his Majesty.

By the Court-Interest (as they called it,) Addresses thick and threefold were
brought in, to Condole, and Gratulate; but Those Complements had no Sap in
them: The Dutch, the Swede, and the French, sent their Ambassadors on the same
Errand. And now the Funerals come on; A Solemn, and Expensive Pageantry; yet,
in my Conscience, the Chief-Mourners were his Highness Drapers.

These Ceremonies over, to keep the Wheel in Motion, a Supply was Resolved upon
for the King of Swede, and little further of Moment, before Ian. 27. When (in
the Language of the Time) met Richards Parliament. The First, and Last of his
Reign.

It cost These people some time to agree the Powers of the Chief-Magistrate,
Richard Recognized upon condition.
and the New Peerage, which came to this result, that Richard should be
Recognized; but with limitations, consistent with the Rights of Parliament, and
People: and that for quiet sake [ they would transact with the Persons then
sitting in the Other House, as an House of Parliament during that Session.]

The House proceeded by Degrees to make dangerous Inspections into the Militia,
the Revenue; to look into the Exorbitances of Major Generals, to threaten the
Excise; and finally, by all Popular pretenses, to engage the Multitude;
Effectually against both Protector and Army, enduring the Government neither of
the One, nor of the Other.

Whereupon, the Officers set up a Counsel at Wallingford-House, the Protector
advises at White Hall, and April 6. 1659. comes a Paper to Richard from the
General Counsel of Officers, Entitled, A Representation and Petition, etc.
importing, [ the great danger the Good Old Cause is in, from Enemies of all
sorts, the Poverty of the Soldiery; the Persecution of Tender consciences,
etc. which Particulars they Petition his Highness to represent to the
Parliament, with their Desire of Speedy Supply, and Certainty of Pay for the
future: Declaring likewise their Resolution, with their Lives and Fortunes to
stand-by, and assist his Highness and Parliament, in the plucking the Wicked
out of their places wheresoever they may be discovered, etc.]

The Paper boded a Purge, at least. Signed it was by 230 Officers, presented by
Fleet-wood; Published throughout the Army, and followed soon after with a Day
of Humiliation: (the never-failing Sign of Mischief at hand.)

In this Juncture, Each of the Three Parties Enemy to the Other Two.
Each of the Three Parties was Enemy to the Other Two, saving where Either Two
were united to Maintein themselves against the Third: and All Three of Them
Enemies to the Good of the Nation.

The House being Biased for a Commonwealth, and not yet enabled to go Through
with it, Dreaded the Army on the one hand, and Hated. the Single-Person on the
Other.

Richard, finding his Power limited by the Members, and Envied by the Officers,
willing to please Both, and Resolved to Hazard nothing, becomes a Common
Property to the House and Army; a Friend to Both by Turns; Theirs to day,
To Others to Morrow, and in all Trials Meekly submitting to the Dispensation.

The Army on the other side had their Protector's Measure to a Hair; The Army
Ruffles the House.
and behind him they Stalked to Ruffle That Faction in the House, that was now
grown so Bold with the Military Interest: and it behooved them to be quick, with
(as the Case stood Then) so Popular an Enemy.

The Members kept their Ground, and April 18. passed These following Votes.

The House Opposes the Army.
First, That, during the sitting of the Parliament, there should be no General
Counsel, or meeting of the Officers of the Army without Direction, Leave, and
Authority of his Highness the Lord Protector, and Both Houses of Parliament.

Secondly, That no Person shall Have and Continue any Command, or Trust in any
of the Armies, or Navies of England, Scotland, or Ireland, or any of the
Dominions and Territories thereto belonging, who shall refuse to Subscribe,
That he will not disturb or interrupt the free meeting in Parliament, of any
the Members of either House of Parliament, or their freedom in their Debates
and Counsels.

Upon these Peremtory Votes, Richard Faces about, joining his small Authority,
to forbid their Meetings; and great Assurances are Enterchang'd, to stand the
Shock, of any Opposition.

Two or three days they stood upon their Guards, continuing in that snarling
Posture, Richard dissolves his Parliament.
till April 22. when Richard at the suit (or rather menace) of Disborough and
his Fellows, signs a Commission to Dissolve his Parliament; which to prevent,
the Members Adjourn for Three days; and to avoid the shame of falling by an
Enemy, the Catoe's kill themselves. For at the Three days end, they find the
Door shut, and a Guard upon the Passage, to tell them, They must Sit no more;
Their Dissolution being also Published by Proclamation.

His Highness steps aside next; and now the Army undertakes the Government. And
is laid aside himself.
They Model, Cast about, Contrive, and, after some Ten Days fooling with the
Politiques, they found it was much a harder matter to Compose a Government,
than to Disorder it, and at This Plunge, besought the Lord [ after their
Wanderings and Backslidings, to show them where they turned out of the Way, The
Army acknowledge their backslidings.
and where the Good Spirit left the Good Old Cause, that through Mercy they
might Return and give the Lord the Glory.

At last, they call to mind, that the Long Parliament sitting from 1648. to
1653. were eminent Assertours of that Cause, and had a Special Presence of God
with them: Wherefore they Earnestly desire Those Members to Return to the
Exercise of their Trust, And invite the old Parliament to sit again.
etc. -- ]

This is the Tenor of that Canting Declaration, which the Army Officers
presented Lenthall (the Good-Old-Speaker) with, at the Rolls, May 6. in the
Evening; where a Resolve was taken by several of the Members, to meet next
morning in the Painted Chamber, and There to advise about their Sitting.

They met accordingly, and made a shift, by Raking of Goals, to get together a
Quorum, The Rump.
and so they sneaked into the House of Commons, and There Declared for a
Commonwealth, passing a Vote expressly against the Admission of the Members,
Secluded in 1648.

This Device was fa-fetch'd, and not long-lived, but these were Old Stagers,
and no ill Menagers of their Time.

To make short; they Erect a Counsel of State, Place, and Displace; mould their
Faction; settle the Godly, appoint their Committees, and so soon as ever they
are Warm in their Gears, begin, where they left in 1653; Fleecing the Nation,
and Flaying the Cavaliers, as briskly, as if 'twere but the Good Morrow to a
Six-Years Nap.

But the sad Wretches were filthily mistaken, to think Themselves brought in
again to do their own Business; for the Army makes bold to Cut them out their
work in a Petition of May 12. containing 15. Proposals, desiring,

First; a Free State.] 2. Regulation of Law and Courts. The Armies Petition.
] 3. An Act of Oblivion, since April 19. 1653.] 4. All Laws, etc. since 1653.
to stand good until particularly Repleal'd.] 5. Public Debts since 1653. to
be Paid.] 6. Liberty of Worship, etc. not extending to Popery or Prelacy.] 7. A
Preaching Ministry.] 8. The Reformation of Schools, and Universities.] 9. The
Exclusion of Cavaliers, and loose Persons from Places of Power, or Trust.] 10.
The Employment of the Godly in such Places.] 11. To provide for a Succession of
the Legislative Authority.] 12. That Charles Fleetwood be Commander in Chief at
Land.] 13. That the Legislative Power be in a Representative of the People; and
of a Select Senate, Coordinate in Power.] 14. That the Executive-Power, be in a
Counsel of State.] 15. That the Debts of his Late Highness, and his Father,
contracted since December. 15. 1653. may be satisfied, and Twenty Thousand Pounds
per Annum settled upon him, half for Life, and half to him and his Heirs for
ever.

The Principal point was Fleetwoods Command, which they agreed to; only
reserving the Supreme Power to Themselves, and constituting the Speaker,
Generalissimo; in the Name of the Pariament: which wariness showed that they
understood one-another.

For a while, the Iuncto treated the Army like Apes, with a Bit and a Knock,
Flattering some and Removing others, as they saw expedient: Particularly the
Two Sons of the Late Usurper, were fairly laid aside, Submitting and Resigning
in Excellent Form, and without making two words on it.

The High and Mighty did not, all this time, forget, that the Key of the Work,
was Money; nor in Truth did they well consider, that they were called back by
the Army only to Raise it. But On they went through Thick and Thin, and such
Ignoble, sordid Courses they took to Levy it, that, in Effect, to Stop the
Soldiers Mouths, they brake their own Necks; the Nation not enduring any
Longer that such a pilfering Covy of Pick-Pockets should call Themselves a
Parliament.

This Universal Hatred, and Disdain of their Proceedings, provoked a General
Seizure of Men, Horse, and Arms: and in Effect, the Plot was General; but what
by Treachery, Delays, Babbling, Disappointments, and Scruples of taking in the
Royal Party, (by those that never meant His Majesty, or his Friends should be
the better for it) the whole was Dashed.

I well remember one Particular, in That Transaction, that passed my
Understanding, and Methought smelt of Treason. It was extremely labored, that
the King might be persuaded to come Over; and That too, before any Port was
secured, or Men Embodyed, on the bare hopes of the Design, to engage his Sacred
Person.

After the Cheshire-Rout, Lambert Retires to his House at Craven, and there
('it is thought) contrives the Ruin of the Rump. Which unforeseeing Creature,
(dreaming of nothing Less) flies higher now then ever, The Faction flies high.
Imposing upon the House, and the Militia, an Oath of Abjuration, not only
Renouncing the Title of Charles Stuart, but the whole Line of the Late King
James, And then besides Excise, Customs, Forfeitures, and Confiscations, out
comes an Assessment of 100000 l. per Mensem. They dis-incorporate the City of
Chester, etc.

The Rump and the Army Clash.
In the Carier of their headstrong, and unbridled Fury, the first Check they
received, was from a Petition and Proposals then on foot in Lamberts Army.
Whereupon they Order Ashfield, Cobbet, and Duckenfield, (Three of the Principal
Abettours of it) to bring in the Original Paper, which was accordingly done,
and Caused this Vote,

That to have any more General Officers in the Army, than are already settled
by Parliament, is needless, chargeable and dangerous to the Commonwealth.

Upon this Vote, the Officers appeared to acquiesce; but October. the 5. Matters
were re-enforced, Disborough presenting the House with a Representation, and
Petition, from the General Council of the Army. For which, from the Teeth
outward, the Officers had Thanks.

The Conventicle and the Army began now to speak English, and the Members
seeing their Dissolution at hand, however cast This Block in the Armies way;
Enacting,

That it should be adjudg'd High Treason for any Person or Persons after the
Eleventh of October. 1659. to Raise Moneys without the Peoples Consent in
Parliament.

This being passed; They Vncommission'd Nine of the Army Officers; to wit,
Lambert, Desborough, Berry, Kelsey, Ashfield, Cobbett, Creed, Packer, and
Barrow. They voyded Fleetwoods Commission also, Investing the Command of the
Army in Seven Persons, himself being one, and any Three to be a Quorum.

Hereupon the House adjourns, and Hazelrigg, Morly and Walton (Three of the
Seven) repair to the Speakers Chamber, forthwith dispatching Orders to Draw
their Troops together. The Army-Party do the like, and March to the Palace-Yard
at Westminster, The Rump thrown out.
(their Appointed Rendezvous) where The Two Parties for That Night and part of
the next day made Faces at One another; and finally, the Soldiery dismissed
the Senate.

Now was the Government once again in the Army; who after Thirteen days
deliberation how to bestow it, October. 26. Disposed of it to a Committee of
Safety, The Army settles a Committee of Safety.
consisting of 23 Persons: Empowered at Large; to advise upon Occasion with the
Principal Officers of the Army; and within Six-weeks time, to bring in a Form
of Government. Their Reign was short and troublesome; as it is reported, Feak
told Sir Harry Vane upon his Unction, that his was like to be. They make
Fleetwood their Commander in Chief, and constitute a New Militia.

Scarce were these Worthies warm in their Seats, but the News comes that
Scotland's in Disorder, and Barwick in a wrong hand. Whereupon Lambert marches
Northward; soon after which, comes on a Treaty, that gave General Monk (now
Duke of Albemarle) leisure to purge his Army, and to put Icotland in a Posture
of Security. General M. Secures Scotland.
By These Delays, and want of Monys. Lambert's Army Moulders away; and briefly
London is left to Thin, that Sir Harry Vane's Privy List of Congregationals was
the danger they most Apprehended.

The first step toward their Deliverance, was a Petition desiring the
Assistance of the Common-Counsell for the Procurement of a Free-Parliament:
Promoted by the Honest-Part of the City, and Crossed by some Factious
Magistrates of the Wallingfort Leaven.

This Baffle did but more Incense the Petitioners, and upon Monday, Hewsons
Insolence toward the City.
December. 5. Horse and Foot were Commanded into the City to hinder the
prosecution of it. Where, by surprise, Hewson the Cobbler knocks Two or Three
Citizens on the head, barbarously wounding and affronting others, till at last,
Multitudes being drawn together, and ready to fall in among them (where not a
Red-Coat could have escaped without a Miracle) the Quarrel, forsooth, was taken
up by some of the Formalities, and then excused, to the Committee of Safety, as
if the fault had been the Cities. The Army had at this time their Guards in
Paul's, and Gresham-Colledge.

During these Broils, Hazelrigg, Morly, and Walton, possess themselves of
Portsmouth, Hazelrigg seizes Portsmouth
and the Forces employed to reduce it, join with them. The Fleet drives the
same Interest likewise: only the Troops in London were at a stand, and fair for
any Purchaser, but the Opportunity was slipped.

Upon the 26. of December. the Rump sits once again, The Rump sits again.
and Empowers Seven Commissioners, or any Three of them, to Command the Army;
Here, the Secluded Members of 1648, put in for their Right of Sitting;
whereupon a Vote is passed for taking the Case of Absent Members into
Consideration, upon the fifth of January next; and upon the Day appointed, they
Resolve,

That the Members Discharged from Voting, or Sitting in 1648. and 49. do stand
duly Discharged by Judgment of Parliament, and that Writs do Issue forth for
New in their Places.

And now They think their Game Cocksure, having already Voted the Disbanding of
Lambert's Army; Settled their Counsel of One and Thirty; and Offered Grace to
the Revolted Officers, (Lambert himself, by Name) that would lay down before
the Ninth of January; whereupon, Lamberts Forces disperse, Lambert and his
Party submit.
He himself submits, and the General receives an Invitation to London.

In Conclusion, after Many Indignities cast upon the Honest Part of the Nation,
for desiring a Free-Parliament, by That wretched Conventicle, that intended
only to Perpetuate it self; The General arrives at London, Feb. 3. and upon the
7. comes out the 100000 l. Tax, The City refuse to Levy Moneys.
which produced a Common-Counsell the day following to advise upon it: where it
was Resolved, To adhere to a former Vote of the Court in the Negative. This
Refusal puzzled the Counsel of State, who without being Masters of the City,
and of Money, were able to do little; so that they forthwith Ordered the
Reducing of the City, by Emprisoning half a Score of their Citizens; and, upon
another Denial, to take away their Posts, and Chains, The Rump offended with
the City.
and destroy their Gates and Portcullisses; which was accordingly Executed, but
with such Regret, that thereupon they lodged the Government of the Army in Five
Commissioners, (the General being One) with Evident Design to wipe him of his
Employment. But Their Ingratitude wrought little with him, whose Actions were
only steered by the Compass of Loyalty and Prudence. So that having humored
the People at Westminster, till they had made themselves sufficiently Odious,
and abundantly tried the Affections of the City to his Design in hand: Upon the
11 of Feb. he gave the House to understand the Necessity of their timely
Dissolution, in order to the right of Successive Parliaments; the very hopes of
which Release gave the People a Joy, to the Degree of Madness.

Upon the 21. were readmitted the Secluded Members of 1648. by whom were Writs
Issued out for a Representative, The Secluded Members readmitted.
to meet upon the 25. of April 1660. and March 16. 1659. they formally Dissolve
themselves, Committing the Government in that Interval, to a Counsel of State.
Upon the day Appointed, the Convention meets, but not altogether so Leavened as
by the Qualifications was intended; Excluding Father and Son of such as had
served the King, from the Election. In fine, the Major Part of that Assembly,
according to their Duty, gave the King his own again, without those Shackles
and Conditions which the Qualifiers would have Imposed upon his Majesty: Upon
whose Legal and Imperial Freedom, depends the Safety and Well-being of his
People.

CAP. VIII. The Usurper Oliver was principally distressed by the War with
Spain, and his Standing Army.
WE have now brought Rebellion from the Cradle to the Grave; We have seen it
Triumphant, and now we see it in the Dust, subjected at the Feet of our Most
Gracious Sovereign, to account for the Blood of his Royal Father. Be it our
Business next to enquire, What hindered Oliver from Establishing himself? Upon
what Reason of State, Cause, Error, or Necessity, that prosperous Usurper
failed.

But some will not allow he failed; as if the sole Fatality of the Cause was
his Decease; and the Design only miscarried through the ill Manage of a weak
Successor. For granted; by good Order, it might have been Caudled up, and kept
above ground a little longer: But still it seems to Me, that before Oliver
Died, the Cause was Bedridden, and Hectic, past Recovery.

Cromwell's Rise to the Sovereignty.
Opinion is Free; any Man's as Mine, and Mine as any Man's: so that submitting my
Reasons to the Wise, and Recommending my Weakness to the Charitable, I proceed.

Cromwell did wisely to take his Rise to the Sovereignty upon the Necks of
those Usurpers whom he cast out in 1653. For in the same Action, he Obliged the
People, Mastered his Enemies, and Filled his Pockets. Yet were not those Means
that advanced the Tyrant, sufficient to Establish him.

One Obstacle was the Inconsistence of his Doctrine with his Design: What
hindered his Establishment.
for the same Arguments that Raised him, Ruined him. The People were instructed
to Destroy Kings, not to set them Up: and beside, he that had so many Sharers
in the Hazzards of the Rebellion, could not fail of some Competitors for the
Benefit of it.

Further, he had no considerable Party sure to his Interest; and all, but his
Mere Creatures and Allies, were utter Enemies to it. The City Hated him for
their Loss of Trade; the Country, for their Taxes; the Royalists, for his
Rebellion, He w^^l Generally Hated.
and Cruelty; the Presbyterians, for his Breach of Covenant, (That is, for not
destroying the King after Their Way); The Levellers, for his Ambition; and, in
fine, all the hope he had, was to New-Modell an Army to his purpose; that
failed him too at last, for want of Money, and Credit to maintain it. Which
Want was chiefly hastened, and procured by his precipitate Breach with Spain,
together with the Necessity of keeping up a Standing Army.

The former of These was doubtless his Mistake; The war with Spain was an
Oversight.
(or rather a Temerity scarce advised upon.) For having brought the Hollander
to his Knees, (the only Stranger he had then to fear) and after That, shak'd
hands with him; his next Course should have been by Thrift and Popularity to
Ingratiate himself at Home, and not by a Rambling, Needless, and Expensive War,
to squander away the lifeblood of the Nation, and in That Indigent Extremity
of the State, to make Ducks and Drakes with the Public Treasure. Nor was the
Consequence less Fatal to him, than was the Enterprise (to a common Eye)
Imprudent: the hopes of carrying his Design, in no wise Countervailing the
risque he ran of losing all he had Got, in case he missed it.

I might Instance in a Thousand ways of Profusion, and Oppression Common to all
Usurpers, both Practiced by Him, and exposing him to great Necessities, but I
shall rather bestow the rest I have to say, A Standing Army dangerous.
upon the Fatality of that Tyrant's Condition; Which forced him to make use of
for his Safety, the greatest of all Dangers, to wit, A Standing Army.

For Order sake, We'll first Consider, Upon what Pretense, and to what end
'twas Raised.

In the Next Place; We'll see what it produced, and weigh the Benefits with the
Inconveniences.

Lastly; We Will look into the probable Effects, and Influence of it; as related
to the English Temper, Custom, and Government.

To the first; what I here call a Standing Army; The Rise of Cromwels Standing
Army.
was but the Emprovement of a Slight Temporary force raised, (in pretense at
first) as an Expedient against Plots, (being indeed it self the Greatest) but
Increased, Continued, and Carried on, by Policy, and Power. This Project came
from the Cabale in 1641. Couched under the Notion of A Guard for the House of
Commons: Exact Collect. Page 44.
[ Who conceived that they could not with the Safety of their Persons, (upon
which the Safety and Peace of the whole Kingdom did then depend) sit any longer
Unarmed, and Vnguarded] -- so great were their [ Apprehensions, Ibid.
and just Fears of mischievous Designs, to ruin and destroy them]

This was the Popular Color for that Guard; Plots, and the Safety of the
Public. Where the Plot was, in Truth; and where the Real Danger; may be
gathered from the Practices of Those Armies, whereof The Guard aforesaid was
but the Rise and Foundation. (And That Is the point we handle next.)

The Consequences of the House of Commons Guard.
The setting of This little Force a foot, was a fair Step toward the Militia;
One Guard begetting Another; and the same Reason standing good, for the
Augmenting, and Upholding of Those Troops, which was employed for the first
Raising of them. The Parliament was first in Danger; the City, Next; and Then
the Nation: and as their Iealousies Increased, so must Their Forces, till by
Degrees they grow to an Army. The King, and his Adherents, they call the
Common-Enemy; whom they Invade and Vanquish.

Here Is their work done in short; what have they now to fear? Only
New-Modelling, or Disbanding. A blessed Translation of the Government, from the
Rule of the Law, to the Power of the Sword! and There to abide, till One Army
be removed by Another: That is, the Tyranny abides; though under evera I Forms,
and Tyrants.

Our LEGIONS of the Reformation, were Raised by certain Rebellious Lords, and
Commons; and Seconded by the City of London. We'll see now, how they behaved
themselves toward their Masters and Friends.

In 1647. the Army Reformes, and Purges the House; Presses their Dissolution.
The Effects of a Standing Army.
Seizes their General Pointz in the North; Squeezes and Menaces the City of
London; Marches up to it, and in Triumph through it. Takes Possession of the
Tower; Charges the Mayor with diverse Aldermen and Citizens, of High Treason.
Alters their Militia's, and Common-Counsel; and finally, gives the Law to the
House, and That to the Nation.

In December. 1648. the Army gives the House another Purge; and the year
following, Cromwell himself had like to have been out-trick'd by the Levellers
about Banbury.

In 1653. The Army Casts off the Old Conventicle, and upgoes Oliver, who calls
Another; only to get a Tax and Title: and when They had done the One half, and
made way to the Other; off goes That too. The Next was called in 1654. another
after That in 1656. and Both were served with the same Sauce.

If Cromwell could as easily have molded the Army, as That did the House, his
business had been done with half the Ceremony; but Money was Their business, and
Kingship His, so that they helped him in the One, and Crossed him in the Other.

In September. 1658. Oliver Dies; and Then, Note.
they are Richard's Army; whose puisne Highness must have His Parliament too.
They meet; and notwithstanding a huge Pack of Officers and Lawyers, the Vote
proved utterly Republican, and Friend, neither to Single-Person, nor Army.

Now, Richard takes his turn: but first, down goes his Parliament: and for a
while, the Army Officers, undertake the Government.

Some Ten days after, up with the Rump again, and then they are Lenthall's Army:
which, in October. 1659. throws out the Rump, and now they are Fleetwood's Army.
Enter the Rump once more in December. and once more the Army comes about again.
The Rump's next Exit, is for ever, March the 16. 1660. Exit The Rump.


Behold the Thorough Reformation; and every Change Sealed with a Sacrament, to
have been an Act of Conscience, and guided by a Divine Impulse.

Behold the Staff of the Rebellion; both the Support and Punishment of it; a
Standing Army.

While Plots could either be Procured, or credibly suggested, the Innocent were
their Prey, and when That entertainment failed them, they worried one another:
never at Peace; betwixt the Strife, first to Subject the Nation, and then to
Govern it.

So long as the Royal Interest was in Vigor; it was the Faction's Policy to
engage all sorts of People, All Factious unite against the King.
whom they could possibly Unite against That Interest, however Disagreeing
among Themselves, their first work being only to Destroy the King) and This was
the Composition of the first Army.

From Killing they Proceed to take Possession; and here Ensues a greater
Difficulty. They divide.


A Force is Necessary still, but the State of the Dispute being Changed, the
Former Mixture is not for their present purpose: the Conspiratours that agreed
to overthrow the Government, being now Divided who shall Enjoy it. Hereupon,
they fall to Sorting and Purging of Parties; the Independent at last carrying
it, and Oliver in the Head of them.

And Subdivide
After this Decision of the Contest betwixt the Two Factions, the Army it self
divides; and Cromwell is now more puzzled with the Private Contrivements of his
own Officers, then he was before with the open Power of his professed Enemies,
for they are clearly for his Ruling with them, but not over them: so that
unless he can both Uphold them for his Security, and Model them for his
Design, he does nothing: In Both He labored, and beyond Question, Died in the
Despair of perfecting Either, finding upon Experience, that his Ambition was as
Intolerable to his Party, as the Charge of Continuing his Army was to the
Public; and what the Latter was, we will read in his own words, delivered at a
Conference, April 21. 1657.

The present Charge (says he) of the Forces both by Sea and Land, including the
Government, will be 2426989 l. The whole present Revenue in England, Scotland,
and Ireland, is about 1900000 l. I think this was Reckoned at the Most, as now
the Revenue stands: Why now toward This, you settle by your Instrument 1300000
l. for the Government, and upon That Account to maintain the Force by Sea and
Land, and This without Land Tax I think, and this is short of the Revenue, that
now may be Raised by the Government, 600000 l. because you see the Present
Government is 1900000 l. and the whole Sum which may now be Raised, comes
short of the Present Charge to 542689 l. And although an End should be put to
the Spanish War, yet there will be a Necessity of the Preservation of the Peace
of the Three Nations, to keep up the Present Established Army in England,
Scotland, and Ireland; and also a considerable Fleet, for some good Time; until
it shall please God to Quiet, and Compose Men's Minds, and bring the Nation to
some better Consistency: so that Considering the Pay of the Army, coming to
upwards 1100000 l. per annum, and the Government 300000 l. it will be
necessary, that for some convenient Time, seeing you find things as you do, and
it is not good to think a Wound healed before it be; that there should be
Raised over and above 1300000 l. the Sum of 600000 l. per annum, which makes
up the Sum of 1900000 l. That likewise the Parliament declare how far they
will carry on the Spanish War; and for what Time, and what farther Sum they
will raise for the carrying on the same, and for what Time, and if these Things
be not Assertained, as one says, Money is the Cause certainly, what ever the
Cause is; if Money be Wanting, the business will fall to the ground, and all
our Labor will be Lost, and therefore I hope you will have a care of our
Undertakings.

How many Souls, Lives, Millions; and Noble Families; The Effects of a Military
Government.
How well a Tempered Government; How Gracious a Prince, and happy a People,
were by This Cursed Army Destroyed; will need no more then their own
Consciences to determine, when Divine Vengeance shall call them to a Reckoning.
It brought forth (briefly) the worst of Crimes, and Mischiefs, without the
least Tincture of a Comfort, or shadow of a Benefit. Nor was it likely to do
other, if we consider either the People, Place, Custom, or Government, they
were to work upon.

Concerning the People (first) [Populi fere omnes ad Aquilonem positi, The
English Impatient of Slavery.
Libertatem quandam spirant] It Is Bodin's observation, that your Northern
Nations are Generally keen Assertours of Freedom; (which for their Parts, the
English made too true) How could it be Expected then, that a People, which
Opposed their Lawful Prince for the fear of Slavery, should ever finally Submit
to a Rebellious Usurper under the Actual and Shameful Extermity of it? This
Reluctance of Humor in the Generality, joined with the Particular Vigilance,
Loyalty, and Enterprizings of the Royalists; rendered those Courses Necessary
at present, to the Usurper, which must certainly sink him in the End.

Nor was it more against the Genius of the People, than against the Interest
and Reason of the Place.

The Place, we are to consider as an Island; no Foreign Danger then in view,
to Palliate the Oppression of an Army; nor any Subject whereupon to turn the
Influence of it. No Stranger in the Case concerned; only at Variance with our
selves; we breed and nourish in our proper bowels, the Evil that Devours, or,
at the best, Consumes us. The Army feared the Plots, but 'twas the Nation felt,
them, and the Result of all was only a Dispute betwixt the Civil and the
Military Power; Law, and Necessity: so that Effectually (the two Parties of
this Division thus Enterwatching and Counter-Plotting one another) we were
rather in a State of War than a Posture of Security, the People being at this
Election, either to Resist, or Starve, and the Army, as much obliged, to make
good their undertaking, or fall to nothing. What could be Rationally the Issue
of these Provocations, and Animosities, but either the Destruction of the Army
by the People; or of the People by the Army, in Order to a General Quiet?
Neither of them being safe, but by the Ruin, and Subjection of the Other. If
the People refuse to Pay, they are Presently Disaffected; if the Soldiery be
their own Carvers, they are looked upon as Tyrannical, and Insolent; and here is
Matter furnished for a Civil War.

Now That which makes the Case Worse, is (as I said) that being Islanders, and
wanting the Color of Arming against Dangerous Neighbors, we are forced to
spend that humor in Mutiny among our selves, which might Otherwise be Diverted
by, and Employed upon, a Public Quarrel.

A Disgression to the State of FRANCE.
This was calculated for 1662.
Upon the Continent it is Otherwise; as in France, (for the Purpose) where though
the King Entertains a Standing Army of 12000. and about Fourscore Regiments
more, in Flanders, Italy, Catalogne, and Luxemburgh; (besides Strangers)
There Is yet the Countenance of an Interest, and a Prudential Ground for it: to
Balance the Power, or at least Check the Progress of his Ambitious Neighbor
Spain. For (says the Duke of Rohan in his Interest of France) Il faut opposer
La Force a la Force. It seems to be the Interest of France to maintain a
Standing Army.
Car ni les persuasions, ni la Justice des arms, ne fera la loi a celui qui
sera arm, tellement que la France doit se retrencher de toute autre despence
moins utile, and estre tousiours puissamment arm. [Force must meet Force, for
it is the Sword that gives the Law to Equity, and Reason; wherefore let France
rather be sparing in any other way, then in the Constant Entertainment of a
Puissunt Army]

It may be Argued too, that the Exercise of Arms, is the Profession of the
French Nobility, and in Effect, it is only War abroad keeps them in Peace at
home. Yet even in France it self, where the Necessity of a Standing-Army is
bolster'd up with so many fair Appearances, the Effects are Dismal, how
plausible soever the first Occasion seemed.

Where it began, or what it was, not a rush matter, but, that by Gradual
encroachments, from small and Temporary Pretenses, it is now grown to a
Constant, and unlimited Excess, he that knows any thing of France, cannot be
Ignorant.

They that fetch it from Guntran King of Orleans, 587. look too far back
methinks, and entitle the Tyranny to too fair a President. His Case being This.

Guntran was the Surviver of Four Brothers; Sons of Clotaire the First; the
other Three, being Cherebert, Chilperic, and Sigibert. The Eldest of these,
Dyed Childless, and the Other two were Murdered by the Practices of
Fredegonde, (first the Mistress, and afterward the Wife of Chilperic.)

Sigibert, supinely indulging himself in the height of his Conquests, and
Pleasures, was Stabbed in his own Palace by a Couple of Soldiers, employed by
Fredegonde, who did as much at last for her Husband Chilperic; having first
Caused him to Murder his Son Clovis; to Divorce one Wife, and Strangle
another. The Story is Short, and a little Curious.

Fredegonde had a Gallant, called, Landry de la Tour, by Her, Preferred to be
Duke of France and Mayor of the Palace).

The King comes one Morning in his Hunting-Dress into the Queens Chamber, as
she was busy about her Head, with her Hair over her Eyes; and (without a word
speaking) tickles her on the Neck with the Twigg-end of his Ridingwand, Ah
Landry (says she) That Is not Cavalier like, to come Behind. The King was as
much surpised with the Discovery, as Fredegonde with the Mistake; and went his
way with the Thought of it in his Countenance. Landry is presently sent for by
the Queen, They discourse the Accident, Debate the Consequences, and in the
End, Complot to have Chilperic Murdered as he returns from the Chase; which
was Executed, with much Ease and Security, the King being only attended with a
Single Page, who Died with his Master, and the Murderers escaped.

This Chilperic had, by Fredegonde, Clotaire the Second, (but Four Months old
at the Death of his Father) and the Regency of King and Kingdom was Committed
to Guntran, (the young Kings Uncle by the Fathers side) The Regent, warned by
the Miscarriage of his Brothers, and being informed that the same Hand by which
they fell, sought His Life also: Establishes a Considerble Guard, constantly to
attend his Person: which was both suitable to his Wisdom, A Guard both Suitable
and necessary about the Person of a King.
and Dignity; as a Security, against not only the Stroke of Violence, but the
very Thought of it, and a fit Circumstance of Majesty.

The Influence of This Force went not far, nor, in Truth, the Royalty of their
first Race of Kings, The Mary's of France abused the Confidence of their
Masters.
much farther: whose either Lenity or Aversness to Business of State, gave
their Great Counselors the means to Vsurp, and Transferr Their Authority,
which Confidence they abused to the Supplanting of their Masters.

Complaints, Suits, References, Addresses, must be made, forsooth, to the
Majors, not to the Kings: They undertake the Disposition of Moneys, and
Offices; the Menage of Treaties and Alliances: They Grant, Revoke at Pleasure:
Briefly, from 632. to 750. France was rather under a Majoralty, then a
Monarchy: and Then, (Pope Zachary, having first Absolved the French of their
Oath of Obedience) the Race of Chilperic is Laid By; Pepin, the Son of a
Powerful Subject, deposed his Prince, and sets up Himself.
Himself (the Fourth of that Name) formally Degraded, and Cast into a
Monastery, by Decree of Parliament; and Pepin Installed in his Stead. Thus did
the Son of the Last Great Subject make himself the First of the Second Race of
Kings: of which, in requital for too much said upon the Former, I shall say
nothing at all. Nor much more upon this Subject; save only that Charles the
VII. and his Successor Lewis the XI. Laid the first firm Foundation of the
Military Power; to which, Charles the VIII. Francis the I. etc. have since
furnished their Additionals, and Superstructures, to make the Tyranny complete.

It Is Truth; the Splendour, and Profusion of the Court and Camp, is Dazzling, and
Prodigious; they swim in Pleasures and Plenty: but he that turns his Eye toward
those Miserable Animals, the Peasants, that with their Blood, and Sweat, Feed
and Support that Luxe, and Vanity (with hardly bread for their own Mouths,)
will find it much a different Prospect; the great Enhansers of the Charge
claiming Exemption from the burden of it.

He that would see the Glory of the One Part, and the Slavery of the Other, The
State of France.
needs only read L'EST AT de la FRANCE, of 1661. Treating of the Officers of
the Crown, Honors, Governments, Taxes, Gabelles, etc. He shall there find the
Venality of Officers, and Their Rates; the Privileges of the Nobility, and
Their Encrochments; Who are Exempt from Payments; or rather, that the
Countryman Pays for All. To make an end, let him also observe the Power, and
Partiallity of their Supereminent Parliament of Paris.

The Book I mention, is of undeniable Authority, wherein Account is given of,
at the least, Eight Millions (English) arising from Three Taxes only; The
effects of a Standing Army in France.
and for the sole behoof and Entertainment of the Souldery (their Tailles,
Taillon, and Subsistence) Beside their Aides; (an Imposition upon all sorts of
Merchandise, Salt Excepted) which must needs by a Vast Income: and their
Gabelle upon Salt; that brings in near Two Millions more. Not to insist upon
Casualties, and infinite other Inventions for squeezing, which they practice:
The Plough maintains the Army. [Take notice that this Reflection was Calculated
for the State of France in 1661.]

Give them their Due, their Noblesse are Brave and Accomplished Men, and the
Brunt of all Hazzards lies totally upon Them; but scarce in Nature is there a
more abject Commonalty: and to conclude; Such is their Condition, that without
War, they cannot Live: if not Abroad, they are sure to have it at Home.

Let it be Noted too: the Taxes followed their Army, not their Army the Taxes;
for it is One thing to Levy Money to Raise Guards, and Another thing to Levy
Guards to Raise Money: the One appearing to be done by Consent, the Other by
Force. (I use Guards and Army promiscuously, as only taking a Guard for a small
Army, and an Army for a stronger Guard.)

If a Standing Army subjects France to so many Inconveniences, (whereof History
is full) where the Strength lies in the Nobility; A Standing Army more
hazardous in England, than in France.
How much more Hazzardous was it to England, where the Welfare of the whole,
depended upon the Affections and Interest of the Middle-rated People:
Especially under an Usurper, that was driven to uphold himself upon the daily
Consumption of the Nation: (and a Body that becomes every day Weaker than
Other, must not expect to be longliv'd.

So much for the Inconvenience of Cromwell's Standing Army, as to the Situation
of England, together with a View of the Effects of it in France. We Will now
consider what Welcome it was like to find upon the Point of Experience, or
Custom.

Alteration of Customs, is a work of Hazard, even in Bad Customs; Alterations
of Customs dangerous.
but to change Customs under which a Nation has been happy, for Innovations,
which upon Experience they have found Fatal to them, is matter of great Peril
to the Undertaker. But I look upon Oliver's Case, as I do upon a Proposition,
of such or such a Mate at Chesse: where there are severral ways to come within
One on it, and None to Hit it. The Devil and Fortune had a mind to Puzzle him.
He Prefers his Pawns; Transposes, Shifts his Officers; but all will not do: He
still wants either Men or Money; if he Disbands, he has too few of the One; if
he holds up, he has too little of the Other. Such in Truth, was this Tyrants
Exigence, that he was forced to That, which the Lawful Possessors of the
English Crown would never venture upon: No, nor the Usurpers neither, before
our Blessed Reformers of 1641. But -- Where will those People stay,
That thorough God, and Majesty, make way.


Our Saxon Kings contented themselves with a Law, What Arms every man of Estate
should find, and a Mulct upon such as did Detractare Militiae. Our Saxon Kings
kept no Standing Army.


Nor Edmond Ironside.
Edmond Ironside after his Duel with Camillus the Dane; and a Composition, to
divide the English and Danish Kingdoms betwixt them and their Heirs, kept no
Army on foot to Guard the Agreement; Neither did the Danes (who after his
Death, Treacherously Seized the Kingdom) to maintain their Conquest.

William the Conqueror, that subdued both English and Danes, thought himself
safe enough in creating Tenures by Knights-Service, and permitting Proprieties;
Nor William the Conqueror.
though at that time under such Jealousies, that he took diverse of his English
Prisoners into Normandy with him, for fear of a Commotion in his Absence.

Nor William Rufus.
William Rufus, and after Him, his Brother Henry the First, (though the Usurpers
of the Senior Right of their Elder Brother Robert) set up his Rest upon the
same Terms: And so did Henry the II, after a long Contest with King Stephen,
and notwithstanding the unruliness of most of his Sons.

Henry III and then Edward I, after the Barons Wars Employed no Standing Army
to secure themselves: neither did Edward or Richard the Second; Nor Hen. 3.
Edw. 1. Edw. nor Ric. 2.
notwithstanding a Potent Faction of the Nobility bandying against the Latter
of them.

Neither did the Henry's IV, V, and VI, in the Grand Schism of York and
Lancaster, ever approve of it. Nor the Henry's 4, 5, 6, and 7.
Nor Henry VII, (as Wise and Jealous as any of his Predecessors.)

If any thing could have warranted the Adventure, methinks the Topsie-turvy and
Brouillery which Henry the VIII, Introduced, might have persuaded, or provoked
it. Nor Hen. 8. Edw. 6. Queen Mary, nor Q. Eliz.
But neither There, nor in the following Toss and Tumble of Religion, from
Edward VI, to Queen Mary, and then back again to Queen Elizabeth, was it put in
Practice.

King James had no Temptation to it. King Charles the Martyr, was indeed
charged with the Intention of it, and so he was with being Popishly affected;
Nor K. James, nor Charles the MARTYR.
(In Truth, with what not?) and the One as true as the Other. But who were They
that laid This to His Charge? Even Those very Persons (some of them that
advised Oliver to keep a Standing Army of 10000 Horse, and 20000 Foot, to Awe
and Scourge the Nation. A Course unknown to our Forefathers; and by the Best
and Worst of Former Princes equally disallowed; the Bad not judging it Safe,
nor the Good, Expedient.

But other more Convenient, and as Effectual, means they had, either to Prevent
Dangers, or Suppress Them, as their Custom of Friborges, or Frank-Pledges,
Enquests, Oaths, and Penalties, Tenures by Knights-Service, Commissions of
Array, etc. Expedients to prevent or disappoint Dangers.
Which being of approved Benefit, and Equality, were much more suitable to the
Genius and Interest of the People, than a Standing Army; which to allow, had
been no other than to deliver up the Strength of the Nation, into the hands of
a Faction.

Now was it less against the Government, than against the Humor of the Nation.
A Standing Army destructive to the Government.
Put a Parliament over the Nation, and an Army over the Parliament, Who
Governs? But all Oliver's Geese were Swans; and his Soldiers Saints. Did they
not Take what they would; Give what they would; Raise and Pluck-down at
Pleasure? Nay, Effectually, did ever any Standing-Army Other, if they had
nothing Else to do? Had they not already got the trick of calling the people
together, to get money of them; and then sending them away like Buzzards, when
they had gotten it; of Packing, and Qualifying; Engrossing of Powers and
Offices; Cantonizing the Nation? Was it to be expected they should restore the
Right Line again, when they had set up the Wrong? The King, when they had
erected a General; The Law, when they had Mastered it by the Sword? They did
not Tug so hard, for that they meant to part with Easily. What they got by
Rebellion, was to be maintained by Tyranny; and Necessity was sure at Last to
do the Work of Conscience.

I Think, more need not be said to Oliver's Standing Army. An Army without Pay,
is the most Dangerous Enemy
His Money could not last always, and when he wanted That once; he was certain
to find his Army as Dangerous an Enemy, as it had been a Faithful Friend to
him in his Prosperity.

Nay truly, 'bate his Usurpation; his want of Faith and Honor, -- But Rather
then Profane the Sacred Character of God's Vicegerant by joining Majesty and
Cromwell in the same Supposition; let us Imagine rather a Wise and Lawful
Prince in the place of that Usurper: and yet it may be a Question, How far a
Standing Army would have Consisted with the Interest, even of a Rightful
Monarch.

First; As the Nation was Poor, and in no Condition for the Charge of it. Next;
as it was Impoverished by an Army; and therefore ill-persuaded of That
Expedient. Thirdly; the Prince himself must have been Poor; (in Olivers Place)
and what should a Poor Prince have done with a Standing Army, over a Poor and
Discontented People?

The Interest of This world is Money. Money is the Interest of the World.
Subjects Rebel; Armies Divide; and Kingdoms fall to nothing, for want of it:
That which Fools call Fortune, being (to men of clearer sight) only the
Favorable Influence of Treasure. It Is That, which Carries Towns, Causes, and
Armies; puts Knaves in Honest men's places; Corrupts Cousells, and Supplants
Governments: the People wear their hearts at their purse-strings; and a General
Oppression, is ever accompanied with a General Desire to Remove it. I speak of
what they do, not what they ought to do; for all men are not of a Constitution
to hang, and Starve for Conscience. In fine, where the State is Necessitous,
and a Faction Wealthy, That Prince (as is already hinted) that erects a
Standing Force, in that condition, does but provide an Army for his Enemies.
Not to insist upon the hazzards, arising either from the People, if the
Principal Officers have too little Power; or from the Officers Themselves, if
they have too much; by which, not only the Public Peace, but the Monarchy it
self, is Endangered: the Kings Crown depending upon the Revolt of a Province.
What can be more perilous then This Conjuncture; where there is so great a
Temptation, on the one hand, and so great a Provocation on the other; where the
Multitude wait only for a Head, and the Ambitious for a Party?

But why do I discourse the Mischiefs of a Standing Army? They are too many,
great and Obvious, to admit a Question. What are the Benefits of it Rather?
What Is the Benefit of a Standing Army.
Is it either safe to any Purpose, or useful to the common and pretended end
of it, even under a Lawful and Hereditary Monarch?

It Is true; a Prince may deal with his Dominions, as the Gentleman did with his
Estate, that turned an Inheritance into an Annuity, because he would rather
have it Large, then Long, and That Is the Fairest of a Forced Government;
Suppose he save himself for his own time; what will become then of his
Successor? But that we'll waive too; and Consider, what is the Fruit of it to
himself?

Is he the Richer for it? Alas, the Contrary: the Nation bears a Double Burden,
and the Army Sucks the better half of the Advantage. The mischief and danger of
it.
Is he the Safer? Neither: for a Mutiny in his Army, is both more likely, and
more dangerous, then a Tumult among his People. In fine; A Standing Army may
promote a Faction, but it is the Law preserves the Public, and consequently the
King.

That Monarch that Secures himself from Private Practices by a Choice, Full,
and Honorable Guard, well Paid, and Disciplined, about his Royal Person; A
Royal Guard necessary and sufficient.
as to the Rest shall find the Strict and timely Execution of Good Laws the
best Public Security against Sedition. With the timely execution of good Laws.


It Is a Cheap Remedy, and therefore Acceptable to the Generality: A Legal one;
so that the Delinquents Themselves cannot Complain of it; and Lastly, it is a
Sure one: which if it be, what can be more advisable for any Prince and People?
In Truth; so Sure it is, that I Am to seek ('bate only Matter of Claim) where
ever any Settled Government was Embroiled, but either by the Interest of a
Standing Force; or the Remissness of Authority, in the Execution of Establi'd
Laws.

The Necessity of a Royal Guard is Evident; the Number must be suited to the
differing Exigences of Times and Places: but with This General Regard: That it
be not only sufficient to the Safety of a Prince; but Honorary likewise, and
Accommodate to his Dignity; and Demonstrative rather of his Power then of his
Danger.

But be the Body Great or Small; Nay, we will suppose it equal, to a Standing Army
(but not Distributed (as That is) into County-Troops, and Provincial
Governments) Call it a Guard still, for the very Name of the Other sounds like
a Grievance. The One, supposing only the Peoples Care of their Sovereign; the
Other intimating the Sovereigns Jealousy of his People. Let me not be
understood as in allowance of This Overproportion: for such a Guard is but an
Army in Disguise.

There may be Temporary Occasions indeed, for Temporary, and Extraordinary
Levies, but the word Temporary, is commonly attended with such a Train of
Reasons for Perpetuity; that if the Occasion be not very Manifest, the World is
apt to doubt of the Necessity. Not that the Generality have any Right to judge
of, or Debate the Grounds of a Change; but I suppose that Their Opinions, and
After-feelings will not be denied to have some Influence upon the Event of it.

To Conclude; That Pince is Great, Safe, and Happy, that Commands by his Arms,
Abroad, and Governs by his Laws at Home. The Apprehension of Conspiracies and
Plots, in my opinion, weighs not much; or if there be any danger; the failing
is rather in the Constitution or Administration, then in the want of Power to
keep the People quiet: Good Laws, and Good Officers, will do the Business,
without an Army; and if the Instruments be bad, The Hazzard's Ten times greater
with it.

It will be needful here, for the Clearing of the Question, to make a
Particular Enquiry concerning Seditions; and that is the Point we will handle in
the Next Chapter; which, for Order sake, we shall divide into Seven Sections,
with their Subdivisions as occasion shall require.

CAP. IX. Of Seditions in Particular; and showing in what manner they arise
from These Seven Interests. The Church, the Bench, the Court, the Camp, the
City, the Country, and the Body Representative.
IN the first Chapter of this Tract, we have touched upon the Matter and Causes
of Seditions in General: We must be now a little more Particular.

The Scene's Vtopia; and we will Divide it, into Seven Interests, The, Church,
the Bench, the Court, the Camp, the City, the Country, and the Body
Representative: the least considerable of which, being in any great disorder,
hazzards the whole; and That, either by engaging in some Actual Violence
against the Government; or by some Irregularity of Proceeding that may Provoke
or Cause it. Of These in their Course, and first of the Church.

I. Seditions arising from the CHURCH.
THose Troubles in the State which derive from Distempers in the Church,
proceed either from Faction, Ignorance, or Scandal.

The Strongest Tie upon Reasonable Nature, is Conscience; Conscience the
strongest Tie.
and the Stubbornest Consciences, are Those that do they know not What, they
know not Why. In Truth, what is Conscience without Understanding, but as
well-meaning Madness? And That Is the Fairest Sense my Charity can afford to the
Blind Zeal of a Transported Multitude. If Conscience bids them Kill the King;
Rob the Church; and Tear up the Foundations of Both Governments; They Will do it:
Nay, More, This has been done, and Providence it self Proclaimed for the Doer
of it. Great Heed should then be taken, what Persons are Entrusted with the
Care of Souls, since the Consequence of a Factions Preacher, and a Mistaken
Conscience, proves many times the Ruin both of Prince and People.

Under the Note of Faction, I comprize all Opinions delivered Publicly, and
with Design; against the Doctrine, Practice, or Authority of the Church. Reduce
it, in Short, to Haeresie, and Schism. The former whereof, reflecting only upon
Matters of Faith, concerns rather Religion, then Government: and lies beyond
the Line of my purpose; but in This Place; the Latter is the Question, and,
briefly as we may, we will take a view of the Rise, the Method, the Design, and
the Effects of it.

It is with Churchmen as with other Mortals; There are of all Sorts, Good,
Bad, and Indifferent. Some we have known, whom neither the Loss of Dignity,
Fortune, Freedom, no, nor the Loss of Life it self, could ever move from the
strict Rule of Conscience, Magnanimity, and Duty. Others we have seen to
Exercise these Cruelties, (though Ecclesiastics themselves) upon the Nobler
Sort of their own Function. And some again, we have observed to shift with
every Turn, and Steer by Interest; still putting on the Livery of the
Prevailing Party: Squaring the Rule, and Will of Heaven to the Appetites and
Passions of Humanity. So that upon the whole, it is evident; some Clergymen are
Quiet, because they have Preferments, and Others Troublesome, because they want
them.

The Principal Ingredients into Schism, are These; Ambition, Avarice,
Popularity, and Envy; The Scope of it is to destroy Authority, and advance a
Faction. Now how to accomplish This, is the Great Work; for a Rent in the
Church signifies nothing without a Sedition in the State: and in This manner
they proceed.

First, In a Style of Holy Tenderness they slily disaffect the People against
the Rights of the Church, The Rise of Schism.
as in themselves unlawful; and utterly Destructive of Christian Liberty.

The method of it.
To strengthen, and advance the Imposture, what do they next, but rip up all the
Failings, and show the Nakedness of their Superiors? Still aggravating what
they find, and creating Scandalous Matter where they want it.

When the Multitude are once moved in Conscience against the Impositions, The
motion of Schism into Sedition.
and in Passion against the Imposers; their next attempt is upon the Authority,
and then They divide into Separate Assemblies, which under color of so many
Conscientious Dissenters from the Ceremonies of the Church, are infallibly so
many Contrivers against the Peace of the Kingdom. For here comes in the Civil
Power to prohibit their Seditious Meetings, and Then, the Saints (they cry) are
Persecuted: The Cause is God's; The Design.
and they are tied in Conscience to bind their Kings in Chains; and through all
Extremities to pursue a Reformation: This is the Fruit of Tolerating a Faction
under a Countenance of Conscience. Nor is it any wonder to see those wretches
draw their Swords against Their Sovereign in the Field, whose Souls are turned
against him in the Pulpit.

But it is Objected, that some Ministers do really make a Conscience, of
Conformity. Truly, the better for Them, if they forbear upon That Account; but
it is the same thing to the Public, upon what account soever; for they
Prescribe, what they Practice, and by the President of Sticking upon a Doubt of
Conscience, And Effect of it.
they open a Door to Disobedience upon any Pretense of it, breaking the Bond of
Unity in favor of a Particular nicety of Opinion.

Very notable is The Determination of the Lord St. Albans, in This Case [ In
Points Fundamental, Note.
he that is not with us is against us. In Points not Fundamental, he that is
not against us, is with us.]

Let this suffice to show the Political Inconvenience of Entertaining
Schismatical Preachers. It may be now a Question, How far a Christian
Magistrate may justify the sufferance of any man to exercise the Ministry,
within his Dominions, Qu. May an enemy to Bishops exercise the Ministry?
that is a professed Enemy to Episcopacy: Which I Offer, with the fit Modesty of
a Proposal, and with Reverence, to the better enform'd. But if, as the Danger
of such a Mixture is Evident, so the Lawfulness of it shall appear doubtful,
their own Argument is then turned against Themselves, and we have both
Scripture and Experience on our side, over and above.

The Three Questions, wherewith King Charles the Martyr Choked the
Presbyterian Ministers in the Isle of Wight, Remain still Unresolved, and they
are These.

First, Is there any Certain Form of Church Government at all prescribed in the
World? Three Questions propoundded by King Charles the Martyr, concerning
Church Government.


Secondly, If there be any Prescript Form, Whether or no may the Civil Power
Change the same, as they see Cause?

Thirdly, If any Prescript Form there be, and That unchangeable; If it were not
Episcopal, what was it?

In Fact, the Constant Exercise of Church-Prelacy is so manifest, that the
whole stream of Story, and Tradition Runs Episcopal: which to Oppose, were to
deny the only Means of knowing whether it were so, or not.

Is it the Right they Question? Take then the learned Bishop Sanderson's
Deduction of it.

Leaving other men to the liberty of their own Judgments, my opinion is, The
derivation of Episcopal Government.
that EPISCOPAL GOVERNMENT is not to be derived merely from Apostolical
Practice or Institution: but that it is originally founded in the Person and
Office of the Messiah, our Blessed Lord JESUS CHRIST. Who being sent by his
Heavenly Father to be the great Apostle [HEB. III. 1.] Bishop and Pastor, [1
PET. II. 25.] of his Church, and anointed to that Office immediately after his
Baptism by JOHN, with power and the Holy Ghost [ACT. X. 37 -- 8.] descending
then upon him in a bodily shape [LUK. III. 22.] did afterward, before his
Ascension into Heaven, send and empower his holy Apostles, (giving them the
Holy Ghost likewise as his Father had given him) in like manner as his Father
had before sent him [JOH. XX. 21.] to execute the same Apostolical, Episcopal,
and Pastoral Office for the ordering and governing of his Church until his
coming again: and so the same Office to continue in them, and their
Successors, unto the end of the World. [MAT. XXVIII. 18 -- 20. Thus far the
Reverend Bishop.

Some will Pretend, that This only proves the Authoritative Power they received
by their Mission, but no Succession to the Office.

Christ's Mandate to the Apostles.
For That; Observe the Mandate, [ Go, Teach ALL Nations.] Personally, and
Actually they could not do it; but in Effect, and Virtually, it is out of doubt,
they did it: and How, but by their Delegates? For otherwise; our Savior
Commanded them a Thing Impossible. Briefly; if the Gospel was to be Preached to
All Nations, (which no Christian will deny) and if (according to the Literal
direction of the Order) the Gospel could not be Preached to all Nations, by so
few Persons as were Then Commissioned; what follows, but the Evident Necessity
of a Substitution; which Delegation being granted, clears the Dispute: for it is
Indubitable that What Authority soever our Savior vested the Apostles with,
the same likewise was from Them transmitted to their Successors; Who (in the
words of his late Sacred Majesty) succeed into the same Apostolical Power, and
Function, which the Apostles, as Ordinary Pastors, had. Qui in Dominium
alterius succedit, Iure ejus uti debet. He that succeeds to the Government of
another, succeeds also to his Rights of Governing. And Mark This further; that
the Apostles Powers, and Commissions, were granted before the Descent of the
Holy Ghost: and relating only to matters of Ordinary use, and perpetual
Establishment in the Church; the extraordinary Gifts of the Apostles not at all
proving them extraordinary Officers.

Now how far a Prince may safely either Act, Episcopacy unalterable.
or Suffer the violation of a Church Government of This Authority, I am not yet
instructed.

In fine; it is most certain, that a Divided Clergy makes a Divided Nation; and
by how much Religion is the fairest of all Pretenses; Conscience the deepest of
all Impressions; Preaching and Praying the most Popular and Public of all
Operations:: by so much are Disaffected Churchmen the most Pernicious and
Intolerable of all disloyal Instruments. No Calumny being so Plausible,
Corruption Optimi, Pessima.
as That which drops from the Lips of Persons famous for an External form of
Piety: No Hypocrites so abominable, as Those that Tithe Mint, and Cummin, and
yet neglect Mercy and Judgment: that under color of long Prayers devour Widows
houses, etc. And no sting so Deadly, as That from a Snake in a man's own bosom.

We have now done with the Schismatic; the Active and Industrious promoter of
Seditions. The Matter he works upon, is Scandal; either Supposed or Real; and
That comes next.

In all Invectives against the Church, the Scandalous, Negligent, and
Insufficient, March hand in hand: The method of Schism.
to which are opposed a Party that style themselves a Godly, Painful, and Able
Ministry. Thus with the Boasting, and Censorious Pharisee, does the Proud
Schismatic advance himself above his Brethren, calling Good Evil, and Evil
Good; imposing equally upon the People, by an uncharitable Judgment, and
Report, on the One side, and a fictitious Holiness, on the Other.

Not to excuse all Clergymen, nor to extenuate the Crimes of any of them.
Judas his Treason was the Fouler because of his Profession: and yet the Eleven
were never the worse, because of Judas his Treason.

We Will Grant, A Scandalous Clergy, makes a Seditious Layety.
that for a Minister to spend one Hour of the week in a Pulpit, and the rest in
a Tavern; to Undo a good Sermon by an Ill Example; and to discredit a Strict
Doctrine by a Loose Life; is to extinguish the Reverence that is due to the
Function; and to make Preaching look only like a Politic Ordinance to keep the
People in Order. Not that the Doctrine is ever the worse for the Person, nor
the Priesthood the less Venerable for the abuse of it; but it ministers matter
of Scandal, and Exception: and with the Simple it passes for an Argument
against the Government.

Slander is the Sin and Practice of the Devil.
But as the Habit of Drunkenness, and Profaneness, in a Churchman is most
unsufferable; so is it on the other hand a Practice Diabolical, to put all
their Actions upon the Tent, and Skrew up every allowable, and social Freedom
to the construction of a Scandal. As if there were no Medium to be admitted,
betwixt the Angel and the Brute. Are they not Men; and equally subjected to
Infirmities, with other Men? It Is true; their Calling is Divine, but their
Persons are Humane; and as much is required, in regard of Their Ministry: so
somewhat also is to be born with in respect of their Humanity. Remember, there
were those that called our Savior himself a Wine-bibber.

Alas; For a Minister to Drink a Glass of Wine in a Tavern, is made a mighty
business: Nay, to be only Pleasant, and well-humour'd, is by some, cast in
their dish as an Air too Light for the Severity of their Profession: as if the
Messengers of Joy, the bearers of good-tidings to the world, were only to be
sad Themselves, and look, as if either They suspected the Truth of their
Errand, or their Title to the Benefit of it.

However, since there are Those that will make use of small Occasions to do
great Mischiefs; Shun Appearances of Scandal.
It is a Point of Pious Prudence, fairly to shun appearances of Scandal; but
it is indeed of high, and absolute Necessity, to Punish, or Remove the Scandal
it self: as That which both provokes a Judgment from Heaven, and stirs up the
People to execute it. Yet let us put some difference betwixt Sins of Appetite,
and Sense; and Sins of Malevolence: in the Former, a man plays the Beast; but
in the Latter, he plays the Devil.

I look upon Ignorance also, as a Species of Scandal; even although in a Good
Man; Ignorance a Species of Scandal.
for every Good Man makes not a Good Minister; nor do I know which is more
tolerable; Habitual Profaneness, and Sensuality in a Divine, or Ignorance in a
Teacher: the hazard of False Doctrine, or the Influence of an ill Example.

Touching the Body of the Clergy, enough is said, to show the dangerous Effects
of Schism, and Scandal; the One tending Directly to Sedition, the Other,
Consequentially.

There remains another Stumbling Block, Bishops blamed by the more blameable.
and That concerns the Governors of the Church; who are commonly charged with
Innovations, Rigor, Pride, or Avarice. They are capable of All This, as they
are Men; but never the more blameable for a Clamor Levelled at them as they
are Rishops: There being great Difference, betwixt Personal Reproof, and a
Factious Confederacy: betwixt the seasonable Freedom of Counsel, or
Reprehension, duly Circumstanc'd; and the contumacious Insolence of Subjects
toward their Superiors. In fine, a likely Tale does their Feat as well as a
certain Truth; only they accommodate all their Stories to the Design of
over-turning the Government, and to the Gust of the Multitude.

The Sound of Innovations, and of Popery, in some places, Fears and Jealousies.
goes a great way with the Common People toward a Sedition. They Fear, they
Wish, they Love, they Hate, they know not what: and yet, against this Terrible
Nothing, shall they engage their Lives and Fortunes, as Zealously, as if their
Souls lay at Stake; and as Ridiculously, as if they Phansy'd These same
Innovations to be an Army of Flying Dragons, and the Pope leading them on upon
a Hobbyhorse. With this Device, the Multitude is first startled, and then
every Bush is a Thief; Church-Habits are the Trumpery of Rome; Decency is
Superstitious; Kneeling, direct Idolatry: And finally, to Impose all This, is
interpreted, A violence upon the Consciences of the Godly. Thus from the very
Method of Agreement is raised an Argument for Separation; and Christian Liberty
is rendered Destructive of Humane Authority.

Another General Objection, among the Prouder Brethren, is the Pride of
Bishops; their Lording it over God's Heritage: Bishops charged with Pride, by
the prouder Brethren.
which through the Person, Wounds the Office, Incensing the Multitude against
the Power it self, under pretext of blaming the unlawful Exercise of it.
Suitable to the Dignity of Bishops, and Correspondent to the Duty of them,
ought to be the Revenue: (that is, sufficient both for Honor and Hospitality)
in which Particular, the Ecclesiastical Patrimony, is by some People thought as
much too Large, as the Jurisdiction; and from a false and envious Calculation
of Bishops Rents, occasion is taken to inveigh against their Avarice; exposing
them at once, both as a Grievance, and a Booty. Thus, like the Devil, the
Schismatic advances his Kingdom by Slander, and thrives by the Sins of the
People.

We have dwelt long upon this Subject of the Church; but with the next, The
Bench, we shall be quicker.

. II. THE BENCH.
THe Two main Springs that Move and Govern the Affections of reclaimed Nature,
are Conscience and Law. By the Former we are obliged, Conscience hnd Law govern
the World.
in relation to our Immortal Being; and by the Other as Men Linked in Society.
Our Priests and Judges, are the Oracles we depend upon, for Counsel, and
Instruction; in both these Grand Concerns: and if They deceive us, what greater
Misery can befall a Nation, than to have Iuglers, and Impostors, take up the
Bench and Pulpit? Cousening the Vulgar with False Weights and Measures, of
Truth and Reason; and uttering their Licentious Prevarications, for Law, and
Gospel? In which Case, the greater the Modesty and Virtue of the Common People,
the greater is the Peril of the Delusion: it being their Duty to submit, to the
Reason of the One, and to Believe the Doctrine of the Other, without disputing
either, unless in Matters most Notoriously Repugnant to the Elements of Polity
and Religion. And he is not his Crafts-master, that cannot give, even to the
foulest Purpose; a Color fair enough to cheat a Multitude. What Wickedness is
there, for which a corrupt Divine shall not produce a Text; and a shifting
Lawyer a President? But enough is said of the Former, and too much in Preface
to the Latter.

Occasions of Sedition.
Those Faults, among the Professors of the Law, which frequently cause Seditions
(although not in Themselves Seditious) are, Corruption; Partiality; Oppression;
Chargeable Delays: or, in a word, the Non-administration of speedy Justice.
Whereupon must necessarily ensue Poverty. Factions, Animosities, etc.

The Consequences are Dangerous likewise, of over-straining the Prerogative;
and so of Depressing it: both which may be done, either out of Zeal, or with
Design. But, be the Intention of the Doer what it will, the Effects of the
Thing done are Mischievous, for it injects Fears and Iealousies of Tyranny, on
the one side; and begets False and bold Opinions and Attempts of Liberty on the
other: engaging all Humors against the Government, whom either the Hopes and
Gust of Freedom, or the Dread of Oppression can work upon. But Personal Vices
and Mistakes, we may put upon the Roll of Slow Poisons, that do the Deed,
though it be long first.

There are another sort of Lawyers, Seditious Lawyers and Schismatical Divines
are the most abominable Seducers.
whose Malice is of a Quicker, and Stronger Operation; under whose Lips is the
poison of Asps: or rather, whose Tongues are Daggers, turning the Point of Law,
upon the Law it self; wounding the Eagle with a Feather from his own Wing, and
Stabbing the Persons of Princes with their own Authority. These are the
Execrable Regicides; and the Tumultuary Rabble are but the Ministers of their
vile Purposes. Alas! in Matter of Law; by whom should the simple Multitude be
directed, if not by Lawyers? (as by Divines, in point of Conscience.) Whether
is the greater Offender then; that Ignorant Wretch that draws his Sword against
his Sovereign, on the behalf of Law and Religion: (as he supposes:) Or, Those
Abominable Seducers, that by wrested Scriptures, pretended Inspirations; by
misconstruction of Laws, misapplying of Presidents; Torturing or Embezelling of
Records; inveigle the Poor Creature into a Good Opinion of so foul an
Enterprise? What signifies the Event of a Popular Action, compared with the
deliberate Contrivance, Allowance, and Direction of it; more than the Effect of
some dull Passive Instrument, employed by such or such an Agent? Or, if a
Prince be Murdered; whether's the more to blame, the Axe, or the Executioner;
the Bullet, or the Marks-man? So much for the BENCH, now to the COURT.

. III. The COURT.
BY the Court-Interest, is meant That Party, which more Immediately depends
upon the Grace and Favor of the Prince: and here (as elsewhere) Seditions are
either Plotted or Occasioned.

Touching the Plotters of Seditions; Plotters of Sedition.
Some out of Avarice, with Judas, Betray their Masters. Others, are spurred on
by Ambition, with Absalom to Supplant Them. One man is puffed up by Popularity; a
Second, stung with Envy; a Third, with Jealousy; a Fourth, Transports himself
with Revenge, or some other Personal Animosity. In fine, These various Humors,
make but One Party; and the Covetous, Ambitous, etc. -- agree in the same
Conspiracy.

Of the Contrivers of Sedition, some strike directly at the Governor; Are of
three Sorts.
Others, at the Government: and a Third Sort, by crafty Circumstances, and
Windings, choose rather to Mine the Regal Authority, then Batter it; and to work
out a Prince by a Skrew, rather then force him by an Army.

The first fort of Contrivances here Specified, are such as clayming to the
Crown, Usurpers.
Themselves, Challenge the Prince that wears it, as an Usurper: And These, by
making a fair Title to the People, joined with a little Popular skill of
Humouring the Multitude, may with great ease engage a Party, in favor of a
Person whom they Love, against a Right which they cannot understand.

Concerning such as directly oppose the Form of Monarchy, upon a Principle of
Judgment; Monarchomachists.
much needs not be said, because they are neither many, nor considerable: for,
to maintain That Paradox, they must overthrow all Story, Sacred, and Profane;
the Practice of all Ages, and the Reason of all Governments.

Jesuited Puritans.
A Third sort of Contrivers, are Those who under fair appearances of Loyalty,
and Publickness, of Spirit, Masque their Seditious Intents, and Drive on a
Particular Interest. From which kind of evil Instruments, even the Cabinets,
and Private Counsels of Princes are not absolutely Free; and (according to Sir
Francis Bacon) the hazard arises, either from an Over-greatness in one
Counselor; or, an Over-strict Combination in Diverse; which are (says he)
things soon found and helped. For Perspicuity sake, we will treat of this Division
in Subsections.

Subsection. I. Over-greatness in one Counselor.
THe Over-greatness in one Counselor, is to be understood Principally, in
Respect of his Credit with his Master; and partly, in Regard of those great
Offices, and Riches which are commonly heaped upon great Favourities, giving
them the means of over-awding the Honesty of their Inferiors, and of
ingratiating themselves with the People; at least with so many of them as will
be drawn to their Party, either by Fear, or Promotion.

Where it happens that a Prince his Heart is touched with the Magic of so much
Kindness for a Subject, Time is the best Trial of Fidelity.
as to make him dangerously Overgreat: it is not either Wisdom, or Virtue,
that can properly deliver him from That Charm, but it must be rather Time, and
Experience, that shall Dis-enchant him, Nor is it a Fault in a Prince, to
comply with a Natural Inclination; but it is a Barbarous Ingratitude in a
Subject to abuse it, by Endeavoring, (Comparatively) to Darken the Sun, with
the sparklings of a Refracted light, shot from his own Glory.

In This Case, the Happiness of a Nation depends not absolutely upon the
Prudence of the Governor; but, in some Degree, upon the Honesty of the
Favorite: not altogether upon Counsel, but much also upon Enformation: nor
upon That neither, so much concerning the State and Quality of Affairs, as
touching the Fitness of Instruments to menage them, and the Faith, and
Abilities of Persons. [In vain is it, The Knowledge of Persons, is more then
the Understanding of Matters.
(says the Profound St. Albans) for Princes to take Council concerning
Matters, if they take no Council likewise concerning Persons.]

Is a Kingdom in Danger of Invasion, or Sedition? To Obviate That Danger by a
Force, is a Rational Expedient. But he that Arms his Enemies instead of his
Friends, Increases the Danger. It were neither safe, nor Royal, for a Prince
to Walk, or Sleep without a Watch about him. But were he not better be Alone,
then take Assassins into his Guard, or Red-chamber? In fine; Great is the
Hazard of Mistaking Persons? Great is the Crime of the Industrious Authors of
such Mistakes; and Great the Infelicity of a Monarch so Mistaking.

Nay, which is worst of all, in This Particular, the Noblest Dispositions are
the most liable to be Deceived, The Noblest Natures most easily Deceived.
and only Omniscience, or Ill Nature can totally Secure a Prince from the
Delusion. Imagine a Servant received into the Arms of his Master, Crowned with
Honor and Bounty; and in This State of Favor, giving advice concerning
Persons that are mere strangers to the Monarch: Who fit, or unfit, for such or
such Employment; who false, or Loyal, etc. How should a Prince suspect a
Subject under so many Obligations to Fidelity?

Although Abuses of This Kind are in Themselves sufficiently Mischievous,
Abuses from Great Persons hardly Rectified.
yet are they the more so, by reason of the Difficulty, and Peril to Rectify
them; for, in many Cases, (as Sir Francis Bacon) the Truth is hard to know, and
not fit to utter.

He that would duly Execute This Office, must first, Resolve to feel the
weight of a Potent Adversary; What he must do that undertakes it.
and Sacrifice his Hopes, his Fortunes, his Freedom, (nay, and perhaps, in
Consequence, his Life) to his Duty.

He must be wary too, that not a Syllable pass from his Lips, or Pen, which by
the utmost force of Misconstruction, may seem to glance upon the Monarch:
wherein, his Loyalty is not less concerned, than his Discretion; for it is a
fouler Crime Publicly to Defame a Prince, then Privately to mis-persuade him.
Let him but keep himself to the Fact, (as whether This or That be True or
False, not meddling with the Equity, and Reason of the matter) he may with as
much Honor, and good-manners, advertise his Prince of a Mistake, as believe
that he is no God.

The Application of This Over-greatness is exceeding various, nor is the Grace
it self less Beneficial to the Public, when Nobly Lodged, than it is the
Contrary, when so large a Bounty is poured into a Thirsty and Narrow soul. But
we are Tied in This Place to discourse the Irregularities of Power, not the
blessed Emprovements of it.

We might reckon the Art of Flattery, The Art of Flattery.
among the main Condurements to a Court-Design: But, That Is one of the Knacks
we Learn without a Teacher. So Common it is, that he that cannot shift his Face
and Humor, it is odds, can hardly shift his Linen: (he is so Poor, I mean) In
This Particular: the Confidents of Princes, being generally of their Masters
Age and Inclination, or thereabout, have great Advantages, both for the Freedom
of Access, and Privacy: the Timeing of Affairs; and the more Clear Discovery of
their Natures.

How the aforesaid Inconveniences may be helped, shall be the Subject of the
next Chapter; but to Discern them in the Intention, falls properly under
Consideration in This.

To give the better Guess at the Design of This Overgreat-One, see how he
stands Affected, Conscientious Sedition.
first to the Religion of the Place he Lives in. It Is possible, the Conscience
of a Catholic Good, may overruled him, to the Hazard of a Good which he
conceives less Universal: and some Light, may be taken toward this Discovery,
from the Observation of his Familiars; but much more from his Natural Temper,
and from the Tenor of his Life. (i. e. if he be Naturally Melancholic, and
Scrupulous) he may be suspected to be Conscientiously Seditious.

Is it Ambition moves him? An Ambitious Person.
Ye shall then find him scattering his Donatives among the Soldiers. The Town
has not Poor enough for him to Relieve, nor Rich enough for him to Oblige. He
carries his Hat in One Hand, and his Heart in the Other. Here he Lends a Smile;
There he Drops a Nod: with These Popular Incantations bewitching the Multitude.

Is the Good of the Subject the Question? Who but He to Ease the People in
Public, of the Grievances which himself had Procured in Private; and in fine,
no man so fit to be made a Judge in Israel. To All This; he must be Daring in
his Person, Close in his Purpose, Firm to his Dependencies, and rather stooping
to the Ordinary People, than mixing with them, he will do no good on it else.

To Proceed; let him be Watched, The Test of an Honest Favorite.
how he Employs his Power, and Faveur, whether (with Machiavel) more to the
Advantage of his Master; or, to his own particular Benefit: and Then, whether
(according to the Lord St. Albans) He applies himself more to his Masters
Business, or to his Nature; And rather to Advise him, than to feed his Humor.
If he be found to study his Masters Passions, more than his Honor, and to
Prefer his Private Interest, to his Duty, it is an Ill sign. An ill sign.


Another as bad.
And it is no good one, if the Favorite grows Rich, and the Prince Poor:
(especially if the Former be the Cause of the Latter) but it is much a worse,
if he Presume to grasp Authority, as well as Treasure. It looks as if the
supposed Equality of Friendship, had Drowned the Order of Subjection.

Note.
Take Notice next, of the Proportion betwixt the means he uses, and his
suspected ends.

Does he Engross the Disposition of all Charges and Preferments? See in what
Hands he Places Them. Does he endeavor to obstruct all Grants of Grace, and
Benefit, that pass not through his own Fingers? That Is Dangerous: For (says Sir
Francis Bacon) [When the Authority of Princes, is made but an Accessory to a
Cause, and that there be other Bands that Tie faster, than the Band of
Sovereignty, Kings begin to be put almost out of Possession.

Mark then again what Kind of Persons he Promotes, and for what likely Reasons,
Mark again.
whether for Money or Merit; Honesty, or Faction? Observe likewise the Temper
and Quality of his Complicates and Creatures; and whether his Favors be
Bounties, or Purchases. If the Former, Judge of his Design, by his Choice. If
the Latter, it is but a Money-business; which Avarice meeting with an
overweening vanity of mind, is many times mistaken for Ambition. In fine; what
Ambition does at Hand, Corruption does at Length; nor is the Power of the One,
more dangerous, than the Consequence of the Other.

Sub-section II. The Combination of diverse Counselors.
PRoceed we now, from the Greatness of One Counselor, to the Combination of
Diverse: which (to vary the Phrase) is no other than a formed Confederacy in the
Council against the Monarch. Wherein we shall briefly lay down; first, The
Advantages of the Faction; the Method, next: And lastly, The Marks of it.

Their Advantages are great, and many; in Regard both of their Privileges,
exempting them from Question; The Advantages of a Confederacy in Council.
of their Power to offend their Enemies, and Protect their Friends; and in
Consideration of their Opportunities to look into both hands, and play their
Cards accordingly.

In their Method of proceeding, Their Method.
This is their Masterpiece; not only to do all the hurt they can, under a
color of Good; but to Engage Persons of more Honesty, than Understanding, in
Offices, seemingly Serviceable, but Effectually Pernicious to the Public: By
which Artifice, those that are Friends to the Government, do unwarily serve the
Crafty Enemies of it; secretly undermining the Honor of the Prince, under
Pretext of advancing his Profit; lessening his Power at Home, under the
Disguise of making him more formidable Abroad; and where they cannot persuade
an Interest, if it be considerable, they will not stick to purchase it.

As to the rest, the Method is rather tacitly to Invite and Countenance a
Sedition, than openly to Head it; Rather to Countenance a Sedition, then Head
it.
and to Engage rather for it, then with it, till the hazard of the first onset
be over. In truth, the first Essay of a Tumult is but a Trial how the Ice will
bear; and the Popular Faction in the Council, is more concerned, in case of a
Disaster, how to bring their Friends Off, than to venture the leading them On,
for fear of One. Whence it comes to pass, That by the Obligation of
Encouraging, and Preserving their Party, they are Cast upon a Scurvy Necessity
of Discovering Themselves.

Their Marks are many; for they are known by their Haunts; How to know the
Faction.
by their Cabales; by their Debates; by their Domestics; by their Favorites;
and by their manner of Conversation, and Behavior.

If there be any Schismatical Teacher that is Craftier, and Slyer then the Rest,
By their Haunts.
you may be sure of my Lord's Coach at His Preachment: It gives a Reputation to
the Conventicle, besides the Gracious Looks at Parting, that pass betwixt his
Honor and the Brethren: which Enterchange, is but a secret way of Sealing and
Delivering a Conspiracy.

Look into their Cabales, and ye shall find them all of a Tribe, and Leaven;
Close, Sedulous, and United: By their Cabales.
Their daily Meetings relishing of a Design, as being Composed rather for
Council, than Entertainment.

In their Debates, By their Debates.
you will know them by their Pleas, Shiftings, Delays, Extenuations,
Distinctions, their, Frequent, and Industrious Obstructions of Dispach in
favor of Faction. By their Zealous Intercessions for the Enemies of the
Prince, and their Coldness for his Friends; by their watchfullness to Seize all
Opportunities of helping the Guilty, and of Surprising the Innocent: by their
injecting of Snares, and Scruples, to Amuse, and Distract those that are for
the Government, in Order to the Benefit of such as are against it; wherein it
is worth a Note, that they all Vote the same way, and, without Question, to the
same Purpose: for they shall sooner destroy a Loyal Subject upon a Calumny,
than punish a Traitor Convict; and prosecute one man for Writing, or Saying,
that it is possible for a Prince to have a Judas in his Counsel, when another
shall escape unquestioned, or perhaps be justified, that calls his Sovereign a
Tyrant; and defends the Murder of Kings.

They may be guessed at likewise in some measure, by their Domestics: By their
Domestics.
Especially, by those of near Relation to Trust, Privacy, and Business; as
Chaplains, Secretaries, etc. Nor is it enough to have it, like Master like Man,
unless it be, like Lady like Woman too; for the pure strain must run quite
Thorough, for fear of Tales out of School, and Discovering the Secrets of the
Family. But This Rule is not Universal.

From their Favorites, By their Favorites.
much may be gathered; first, from their Principles, and Abilities. And Then
from the Frequency, Privacy, and Particularity of their Entertaining them.

The True Composition of a Confident fit for such a Statesman as we here speak
of, is This.

He must be One that knows the Right, and Opposes it; for there is then less
Danger of his Conversion, The Composition of a fit Instrument for a Corrupt
Statesman.
and Consequently, of Discovering his Patron. Let him be likewise a man of
Sobriety, in his outward appearances; of Reputation with his Party; and
well-grounded in the Niceties of the Controversy: he must be also a Master of
his Passions, Peremptory in his mistakes; and (right or wrong) never without a
Text at hand for his Opinions.

When a Person of This Character, repairs often to a Counselor of State, a
man may, without a Scandalum Magnatum, take the Boldness to suspect his
business. But if to Frequency, be added Privacy, it makes the Matter worse; and
These Instruments are commonly taken in by Owl-light, or at the Backdoor.

Nor is the Particularity they show to this kind of Cattle less Remarkable. Ye
shall se a Factious Libeller, or Schismatic taken into my Lords Closet, when a
Person of Honor, and Integrity cools his heels in the Hall. One Lawyer
admitted, that has Got just as much by Betraying his Country, as Another, (that
is Rejected) has Lost by Serving it. Briefly; look through the Offices they
dispose of, both Civil, and Military, and in the Persons you may see the Cause
they Favor.

Another way of Detecting them, is from their Conversation, and Behavior. By
their Conversation and Behavior.
They take up other Looks, Phrase, Accent, Habit, Motion, Gesture, than their
Neighbors. All which Together, are but a Certain Idiome, or Propriety, of the
Faction.

Further; ye shall see a Statesman, on the sudden, grow more Devout in
Public, then many an honest man is in Private; and Start from his Politics,
into Cases of Conscience. This Affords matter of Wonder, if not of Question:
but observe him; and if he be more Scrupulous of Obeying the Law in some Cases,
than he is of opposing it in Others, Pronunce him a Iugler.

So much for the Contrivers of Seditions.

Another sort there are of Honester Ill Subjects; An honester sort of Ill
Subjects.
a People, I mean, that Hate the Sedition it self, although they Love the
Occasion of it. Than These, none make a Greater Conscience of Speaking
Reverently of their Sovereign; yet none in show more Careless what they make
Others Think of him. Fiercer declaymers against Rebellion, there are not in the
world; but do they Imagine that, it is no sin to Cause, what is so horrid an
Impiety to Commit? They Will say perchance, They do not Cause it; Yes, yes, there
are that do. That is; there are Insatiable Beggars, that suck like Leeches,
till they Burst; Asking they very Bread out of the Mouths of Famishing
Thousands; only to add unto their Private Superfluities, or furnish Ornament
for Luxe, and Vanity. Are not these Persons in a high Degree Accountable for
the Effects of That Oppression?

If Those that follow Courts, would but Consider, how many Snares beset the
Thrones of Princes; A Caveat to Courtiers.
what Envy waits upon their Trayn; how many Spies upon the Actions of their
Servants; They would tread warily. This is not yet to Blame all Courts, but
where they are Vicious, or Corrupt, to show the Desperate Events of those
Disorders: whereof a General Poverty is not the least Considerable; and That
inevitably begets a General Coffeehouse.

But what is all This to a Sedition? Shall People Rebel because they are Poor?
No no, they should not; but what if they will do, what they ought not to do? [
Let no Prince (says the Lord St. Albans) measure the Danger of Discontentments,
by This; whether they be Just, or Unjust: for That were to Imagine People to be
too Reasonable.] So that the Question is not, whether the Cause can warrant a
Commotion; but whether probably it may Provoke one? And whether the Multitude
will not rather Tumult, then Starve. It is not Here, Delirant Reges, Plectuntur
Achivi -- but on the Contrary; Delirant Achivi, Plectuntur Reges; The Faults of
Servants are Revenged upon the Heads of their Masters. But to Reason the Matter
orderly, and by Degrees, take it Thus.

All men do naturally Covet Power; Partly for their Security; The Politics of
the Vulgar.
and in Part, for Glory: not considering, that what Each Individual desires,
All cannot enjoy; but finding Themselves Placed by Nature in a State of
Equality, they are apt to Believe, that One man has as good a Title to Dominion
as Another: and from this Levelling opinion proceeds that Envy which we find
Generally in the Common People against their Governors.

Upon the same Grounds, they Contend for Liberty; and since they cannot Rule,
they would at least be Free from the Restraint of Laws and Impositions. But
this must not be, neither.

Why Then, let them but know the Bounds of their Subjection, the Law, by which
they are to be Governed. Yes, That they may; and when they are once enured, and
wonted to the soft yoke of Political Order, and Authority; their further Care
is chiefly Profit, or Pleasure; and to provide themselves of such Conveniences,
as to man's Life are either Necessary or Delightful, and Here they Rest.

This is the sum of the Vulgar Politics: Allow the People These Private
Conveniences, and keep but the Priests, and Lawyers, from Prating to them of
Christian Liberty, and Fundamentals; the Generality shall never trouble the
State with Seditions: but he that strips them of their little Lavely-hood,
rifles a Neast of Hornets. From whence ensues This double Mischief: A Great
deal of Money is drawn into a few hands; and a Great number of People are left
without any at all: Two Hazards that might pose a wise Prince which rather to
submit to.

As a General Poverty yields the most desperate matter for Sedition; so are the
disorders of a Court the most likely means to produce a General Poverty: and it
is done, by Corruption. Begging, or Non-Payment of Debts.

Corruption is a great Dreyner; for he that Gives must Take; he that Buys,
will Sell. The Effects of Corruption in a Court.
But the Influence which Corruption has, upon the Constitution and Morals of a
Court, is more Notorious; especially, if it begin Above; and in a place where
the Honester Part is the Poorer. First, it facilitates the Introducing of a
Faction; for he that designs to make a Party, shall be sure to out-bid him that
only offers at an Office. Beside that it makes men Knaves in their own Defense;
after a dear Bargain, to lick themselves whole again: and quenches the most
generous Inclinations, by frustrating the bravest Actions; and conferring those
Dignities, and Preferments upon unsuitable Persons for Money, which are the
Proper Rewards of Virtue, and Honor. In all these Transactions, the Prince is
sold into the hands of his Enemies.

In short; Court-Beggers
Corruption does more Immediately expose a Monarch, and Embroyle a Court; but
Inordinate Begging does more Empoverish and distress a People: particularly, if
the Request be preter-Legall, and pinching, either upon Trade or Tillage: in
which cases the Benefit of a Single Person enters into Competition with the
Quiet, and Security of a Nation.

There is an Evil yet behind, which of all Evils, so trivial in appearance,
is (possibly) of the most fatal, Non-payment of Debts.
and malicious consequence: and That is, the Non-Payment of Debts: which not
only draws upon a Court the most Violent of all Passions; (Envy, and Hatred)
but upon Monarchy it self, a Popular Prejudice.

It Is Dangerous, in regard both of the Quality, and Number of their Creditours;
They are (for the most part) Citizens; Poor, and Many. They lie together in a
Body, meet daily, conferring, and dispersing their Complaints, and Clamours:
they Break at last, and Then they Tumult.

Sect. IV. The CAMP.
The Interests of the Soldiery.
THe Two Grand Interests of the Soldiery, are Pay, and Honor; that is such
Honor as belongs to them as Swordmen. As for Instance; it is their Profession
not to put up Affronts: They do not love to have their Under-officers raised
over their heads: New-Modelling, or Disbanding is a Thing they do not like; and
a Public disgrace is never to be forgiven.

By Ill Order in These Two Particulars, are commonly occasioned Mutinies, and
Revolts: which become then most perilous when a disobliged General has a Purse
to Engage a Discontented Army. We speak here, of an Army Employed by a Prince,
as a Security against his own Subjects, which is quite another Case then
against a Foreign Enemy; for the same Popular and Ambitious Humor, that in a
Commander Abroad, is most Proper, An Ambitious Commander does better Abroad
then at-Home.
and Necessary, is, on the Contrary, as Dangerous at Home. The safety of the
State depending only upon the Insuperable Virtue, and Fidelity of such a Person.

Some Armies we have known to Prove Troublesome, and to Divide, A Holy War is a
Contradiction.
upon Pretenses of Religion; but, a Holy War is a Contradiction; and a Story
only fit to pass upon Women and Children. Upon the whole, it seems that an
Army, within it self, and without any Separate Interest, may be troublesome
upon These Three Accounts: Either Want of Pay; which causes a General Mutiny:
or Disgrace; which (more Peculiarly reflecting upon such or such Officers,
Troops, or Parties) provokes Animosities, Factions, and Revolts: or Ambition;
which more directly attempts upon the Sovereignty. It may be also Hazardous, by
reason of some Error in the Constitution of it. That is; if it be composed of
Persons Ill-affected to the Government, it cannot rationally be expected, that
it should labor to Preserve, what it wishes to Destroy.

But we are treating of Distempers acquired; and rather proceeding from the ill
menage of an Army, than from the first Mis-choice, or founded in the Judgment
of it. Concerning a Standing-Army, enough is said in the foregoing Chapter: a
word we will add; It is in This Regard, an Affair of a Peevish Quality; that
either a General has too little Power to do his Masters Business, or enough to
do his own.

As it is not safe for a Monarch, at any time, to entrust the Chief Officer of
an Army, with so much Power, Hazard not a Rebellion in one Place, for fear of a
Sedition in another.
for fear of a Sedition, as may enable him to move a Rebellion. So is it a work
of great Skill and Difficulty, so dexterously to Resume, or Balance that
overgrown Power, as to bring it under Command, without discovering such a
Jealousy, as may Provoke him to abuse it. Let This suffice, as to the
Disorders of an Army within it self.

Another Hazard is, lest it be Corrupted into a Dependence, upon some other
Interest: into which Defection, it may be partly Driven by the Neglect or
Unkindness of the Prince, and partly Drawn by the Allurements of Profit and
Reward.

Having spoken of the Mischief a Seditious Army may Do; very briefly let us
behold what Mischiefs a Vicious and Vndisciplin'd Army may Cause.

There never fails to be an Opposition betwixt the Civil, and the Military
Power; and in like manner betwixt the People and the Soldiery. Whom nothing
else can Reconcile but downright Force and Necessity. So that the fairest
State of a Nation over-awed by an Army of their own Country men, is an extorted
Patience, accompanied with Readiness to embrace any opportunity of working
their Deliverance.

If at the best, the bare appearance of a Force be so Generally distasteful;
what Havoc will not the Licentious abuse of it Cause in a Kingdom? Especially
in Populous Towns where One Affront Exasperates a Million, and it is not two
hours work to destroy an Army.

A Royal Guard is of another Quality; and such it ought to be for Choice and
Number; The Constitution of a Guard-Royall.
as both suitable to the Charge they undertake, for the Safety of The Sacred
Person of their Prince, and sufficient to the Execution of it.

Sect. V. The CITY.
BY the City, we intend the Metropolis of a Kingdom; which, in many Respects,
challenges a Place and Consideration in This Chapter of Seditions;
Particularly, in Regard of Inclination and Power.

Court and City seldom agree.
There is not (Generally speaking) so fair an Intelligence between the Court,
and City, as for the Common Good of Both were to be wished: and This proceeds
Chiefly from a Pride of Blood, The Reason of it.
on the One side, and of Wealth, on the Other; breeding mutual Envy between
them.

This Envy, by degrees, boyles up to an Animosity, and Then, Tales are Carried
to the Monarch, of the insolence of the Citizens; and Stories, on the other
side, to the People, of the Height, and Excesses of the Court; and Here Is the
Embryo of a Sedition. From Hence, each Party enters into a Cross Contrivement.
These, how to tame the Boldness of the One; and Those, how to supplant the
Greatness of the Other: Both equally unmindfull of their Inseparable Concerns:
the Citizen, that he holds his Charter of the Bounty of his Prince; and the
Courtier, that it is a flourishing Trade that makes a flourishing Empire. By
These Heats, is a City-Humour against the Court, improved into a Popular
Distemper against the King: and here is the Inclination of a Disordered City.

The Power of a City.
As to their Power; they have Men, Money, and Arms, at an hour's warning; the
very Readiness of which Provision makes it worth double the Proportion. Their
Correspondencies are Commonly strong, and Firm; and their dependencies
Numerous: for the Pretense, being Trade, and Liberty, hooks in all Places of
the same Interest, to the same Faction: Beside That General device, (seeming
Religion) that stamps the Cause, and Prints a GOD WITH US upon it. In fine; a
Potent, and a Peevish City is a shrewd Enemy.

The Manner of Preparing the People for Sedition.
Their first work is to Possess the Vulgar with This Notion, that in some Cases
the Monarch is limited, and the Subject free: intending, that the Prince is
bounded by the Law, and that the People are at Liberty, where the Law is
silent; and so likewise in points of Conscience. (By which Argument, the People
Govern, where there is no express Law, and the King only where there is.)

Taking it once for Granted, that the Prince is Limited by the Law; (which
Conscientiously he is; for in observing the Law; he does but keep his own word)
They presently Conclude, A Seditious Principle.
that if the King transgress the Rule of his Power, he forfeits the Right of
it: and that for such a Violation, he is accountable to the People, for whose
Behoof the Law was made. This is a Specious, but a Poisonous Inference, and
rather adapted to a Mutinous Interest, than to a Peaceable, and candid Reason.

Let a Transgression be supposed; are there any Laws Paenal upon the Monarch?
But there are none that warrant Tyranny. Right; but there are some yet that
forbid Rebellion; and (without questioning the cause) that declare all
Violences whatsoever, upon the Person, or Authority of the King, to be Crimina
Laesae Majestatis, or Treason. Are there any Laws now on the Other side, that
depose Kings for Maladministration? If none, the Law being Peremptorily
against the One, and only not for the Other: what does it, but constitute the
Subject, in all cases, accountable for his Resistance, to the Sovereign; The
King only Accountable to God, and the People to the King.
and Leave the Supreme Magistrate, in all cases, to answer for his
Mis-government to Almighty God? But let the Controversy pass, for we are not
here so much to enter into the True State of Matters, as to deliver their
Appearances.

And now is the time to bring the Faylings, Cursed be the Sons of Cham.
and Misfortunes of the Prince upon the Stage; and by exposing him Naked before
the Multitude, to make his Person Cheap, and his Government Odious to his
People. Which they Effect, by certain Oblique Discourses from the Press, and
Pulpit; by Lamentable Petitions, craving Deliverance from such and such
Distresses of Estate; or Conscience: and These they Print, and Publish;
converting their (pretended) supplications for Relief, into bitter
Remonstrances of the Cruelty and Injustice of their Rulers.

By These wiles are the Vulgar drawn to a dislike of Monarchy; and That Is the
Queue to a discourse of the Advantages of a Popular Government. (The next step
to the Design of introducing it) There Is none of This or That they cry at
Amsterdam: and in short; from these Grudgings of Mutiny; These Grumblings
against Authority, they slide Insensibly into direct, and open Practices
against it. Alas! what are These Motions, but the sparkling of a Popular
Disposition, now in the Act of Kindling; which only wants a little Blowing of
the Cole, to Puff up all into a Flame?

From the Leading, and Preparatory Motives to Sedition, now to the more
Immediate and Enflaming Causes of it: which are reducible either to Religion,
Oppression, Privileges, or Poverty.

Subsection I. Seditions which concern Religion.
Religious Sedition, either referring to Heresy, or Schism.
THose Seditions which concern Religion, referr either to Doctrine, or
Discipline: Haeresie, or Schism. The Former, is a Strife (as they say) for a
better, or a worse: a Contest betwixt the Persuasion of the People, and the
Religion of the Government, in matter of Faith; and tending either to Overthrow
the One, or to Establish the Other. In This Case, the People, may be in the
Right, as to the Opinion, but never so as to justify the Practice: for
Christianity does not dissolve the Order of Society. To Obey God, rather than
Man, is Well: Let us Obey him then; in not Resisting those Powers to which his
Ordinance has Subjected us.

Touching This, (with the Brethren's Leave) I take it to be the more
Venial-Mortal Sin of the Two. That is; the Rebellion of Haeresie, Rebellion
upon a point of Heresy, more Pardonable, then That from Schism.
is less unpardonable, than That of Schism: in regard first, that the Subject
of the Difference is a matter of greater Import: Secondly, it is not Impossible,
but the Mis-persuasion may be founded upon Invincible Ignorance. I do not say
that I had rather be an Arrian, than a Calvinist; but I averr, that he is the
foulest Rebel, that for the Slightest Cause, upon the Least Provocation, and
against the Clearest Light, Murders his Sovereign.

Seditions arising from Schism.
Those Seditions, which are moved upon account of Schism, are commonly a
combination of Many against One; of Error against Truth: and a Design, that
strikes as well at the Civil Power, as the Ecclesiastic.

This being a Subject which both in the first Section of This Chapter, and
Elsewhere, is sufficiently discoursed upon; we shall rather address our selves
to the Means (Peculiar to a City) of comforting, and aiding these unquiet
agitations, The Means of provoking Sedition.
as more properly the Business of our present Argument.

Great Towns have first the Advantage of Great Numbers of People, within a
Small Compass of Place; where, The Advantages of Great Towns for Seditions.
with much Ease, and Privacy; Those of the Faction may hold their full, and
frequent Meetings, Debate, Contrive, nay, and Execute with all Convenience. For
when the Plot is Laid; the Manner, and the Time, Appointed: there is no more
trouble for the Rendezvous; the Partie's Lodged already, the Town it self being
the most Commodious Quarter. It Is in respect of these favorable concurrences,
that men of Turbulent, and Factious Spirits, rather make choice of Populous
Cities to Practice in.

Another Hazard may arise from the Temper of the Inhabitants, as well, as from
the Condition of the Place; and from the very Humor, and Application of the
Women, in a notion distinct from That of the Men.

From the Temper of the Inhabitants; first, as partaking usually of the Leaven
of their Correspondents; Cities are inclinable to Seditions, from the Temper of
the Inhabitants.
whom we find very often, both Famous for Trade, and Notorious for Schism. (But
Men are Generally so Good-natured, as to think well of any Religion they Thrive
under.)

Further; their Employment being Traffic, or Negotiating for Benefit; and
their Profession being to Buy as Cheap as they can, and to Sell, as Dear:
without any measure between the Risque, or Disbursment; and the Profit: they
are commonly better Accountants, than Casuists; and will rather stretch their
Religion to their Interest, than shrink their Interest to their Religion.

They have again, so superstitious a Veneration for the Justice of Paying Money
upon the Precise Hour; that they can very hardly believe any man to be of the
right-Religion, that Breaks his Day. And observe it, let a Prince run himself
deep in Debt, to his Imperial City, they shall not so much Clamor at him for
an ill Play Master, as upon a Fit of Holiness, suspect him for an Heretic, or
Idolater: Proposing a Tumult, as the ready way to Pay themselves; and That I
reckon as the first step into a Rebellion.

Now, how the Women come to be concerned? That first: and Then; why the
City-Dames more then Other?

It is the Policy of all Cunning Innovatours, when they would put a Trick upon
the World in matter of Religion, Religions Innovatours begin with Women.
which they desire may be Received with Passion, recommended with Zeal, and
Dispersed with Deligence, to begin (with the stronger Sex, though the Weaker
Vessel) that excellent Creature, Woman. And This Course, they take out of These
Considerations.

First, as That Sex is Naturally scrupulous, and Addicted to Devotion; Four
Reasons why.
and so, more susceptible of delusive Impressions, Piety.

Secondly, as it is too Innocent, to suspect a Deceit, and too Credulous, to
Examine it; so is it probably not crafty enough to Discover it.

Thirdly, Women are supposed, not only to Entertain what they Like, with more
Earnestness of Affection, but also to impart what they know, with a Greater
Freedom of Communication: which proceeds from a Particular propensity in That
Gracious Sex, to enter into a strict Intelligence, concerning Matters Curious,
and Novell.

Fourthly, They are as well the Best Advocates, as the Freest Publishers. A
Zealous Sister.
Get them but once engaged, and at next word all their Children are to be
taught shorthand, and new Catechisms; the Table shall be blessed in a Tune; not
the Heel of a Lark; no, not so much as a Prune in the White-Broth, shall escape
without a Particular Benediction. And Then, the Wrought Cushion; And her
Confessor.
the Damask Napkin; the Best Room, and the First Cut at the Table, are reserved
for the Adored Genius of the Family. The Good Man of the House, shall not
presume to Close his Eyes, without an Opiate, (to make it English) accordding
to the Directory; and when he opens them again, next day, it is odds, he finds
his wakefull Bedfellow Shifting her Linen, and Preparing for a Mornings
Exercise. This Reverend Wight has commonly some Skill in Physic too; enough to
Comfort a Professing Sister that Keeps her Bed, (for grief no doubt) because
her Lord (perhaps) is called aside by State, or Business.

Nor does The Pious Matron Confine her Bounteous Dispensations within the
Circle of her Private Family; but with an Overflowing Charity, reaches a
helping hand to all the Members of the Distressed Brotherhood; and (like a
Christian to the very Letter) Lays every thing in Common. These are the Early
and Late Advocates; the warm Sollicitresses; What Husband would not Glory to
see his Wife, and Fortune so disposed of?

Let not some few Mistakes persuade the world yet, that Woman is [not,] of all
Creatures, the most accomplished, and the best disposed to the End she was made
for.

That Women are (in General) the fittest Agents of all Others, for a Religious
Error, to me seems past a Question: Now; why a City-Dame, is for That Purpose,
the fittest Instrument even of all Sorts of Women.

First, her Employment's Little; she keeps much at Home; and her dead Leisures,
are, beyond doubt, not absolutely Thoughtless. Is not her Mixture Sociable, as
That of other Mortals? Fancy her Solitary Entertainment now. Does not she
wish to see, and to be seen, as well as other Women? Nay, does she not Contrive
too, how to Compass it? Plays there are none perhaps, at hand; Festivals come
but seldom.

While she is Thus casting, How and How; in Steps the Tempter; dreams out an
Hour or Two in Prologue, and at last, happily hits her Humor; asks her what
Church she goes to? and invites her to a Lecture. Away she goes; A
Shee-Proselyte.
enters her self a Member of his Congregation; never to be Reclaimed, and so
Farewell she.

After all This, let me profess, I take the better sort of Citizens, for an
Intelligent, Frank, and Sober People; nor do I find more Prudence, Modesty,
Virtue, then under That Denomination. Yet is it not to be Expected, that so
Vast a Multitude should be without some Loose Examples. And I divide the Blame,
even There too, betwixt an Idle Course of Life, and the Alluring Artifice of
their Seducers. But this I stick to: A Schismatical Clergy infects the Women;
They the City; and a Schismatical City destroys a Kingdom.

Sub-section II. Oppression.
OPpression provokes Sedition, many ways; and many ways it is Procured, even
by the most Seditious Themselves; with Express end, that it may provoke
Sedition.

The Haughty, and Imperious Rudeness of a Churlish Officer, that without either
Proof, Oppression causes Sedition.
or Hearing, Law, or Reason, hand over head Condemns and Punishes: (only
perchance to Vaunt his Power,) This is a Boldness, that Reflects upon the
Safety and the Honor of his Master; rendering both the Minister hated, and the
Prince suspected.

Unlimited Protections, Irregular and Heavy Taxes, Billetting and
Free-quartering of Soldiers; The Denial of Equal Right, etc. Stir up
Seditious Humors in a City. But These are downright Provocations.

A Presbyterian Trick.
There are that go a cleanlyer way to work, that squeeze the People, under
Color of serving the King; winding up the Pin of Authority, till they Crack
the very strings, by which That and Subjection are tacked together. They undo
all, by Overdoing; and under an humble show of holding the Stirrup, till the
Prince seats himself, they draw so hard they turn the Saddle: or if he needs a
Lift to help him Up, they will give him one, but such a One, shall cast him Over.

In fine; what ever may be Plausible for the present; fatal in the
Consequence; The Politic Hypocrite.
wherein the Promoters may either seem Innocent, or not appear at all; and a
Public Obloquy rest upon the Sovereign; This is a Device to do Their Business.

Is there any Colorable fear of a Sedition? Their Counsel will be then, to
raise such a Force, as in all likelihood will cause a Rebellion. Are the
Prince's Coffers full? Occasions will be sought to Empty Them; by Breaking with
One Interest, Wedding Another. A Thousand Remedies there are for that
Sur-charge of Treasure. When they have drawn the Monarch dry, they know he must
be re-supply'd; and they know what a Peevish task it is, to fix Regality upon a
new Bottom.

As their first Aim was to Provoke Expense, that he might Want; it will be now
Their work, in such manner to solicit his, Supply, that he shall suffer more
by the Ill Method of it, then Gain by the Recruit. Briefly, if they can Effect,
that what Themselves call a Supply, the Generality may understand to be an
Oppression (and so They wish it Understood) The City Clamours first; and
Popular Tumults, are but the Forlorn to a Rebellion.

Not that either Force, or Cruelty, Loyalty is Indispensable.
can ever discharge a Subject of his Allegiance; Nay, should his Prince command
one of his Arms for Dogs-meat; he were a Traitor, should he yet refuse to
serve his Master with the other.

Sub-section III. Privileges.
A Third Particular of no small Force upon the Genius of a City, is what
concerns their Privileges; Citizens are tender of their Privileges.
whereof they Principally are Tender. First, in points of Trade, and Commerce:
Secondly, in Affairs of Order, and Custom, relating to the Counsel, and
Government of the City: Thirdly, in Matters of Personal Freedom, and Advantage.

Any Empeachment in the point of Trade, they take hainously; as Disappointing
at once, Principally in point of Trade
the very Purpose of their Incorporations, the Hopes of their Well-being; and
the main Business of their Lives. In this Respect, they are many times so
Delicate, as not to distinguish between Benefits of Grace, and Rights of
Privilege: clayming a Title to Those Advantages which they hold only by Favor.

They are likewise Subject to forget, Their Immunities are Precarious.
that even their clearest Immunities are but Dependent, and Precarious: and
they had need be minded, that to believe them Other, is to Forfeit them. For it
implies a Disacknowledgement of the Sovereign Power; which Mistake being once
set a foot, obliges the Prince to Resume, for the Safety of the whole, such
Indulgences as were only Granted for the behoof of a Part. Neither Prince nor
People can be secure but by Agreement.
To This he is Tied by evident Reason of State, and by Political Equity; both
as a Wise Prince, and as a Pater Patriae, a Father of his Country. Wherefore
away with These Dividing Niceties, since neither Prince, nor People can be
Secure, but by Agreement. What can a Single Monarch do without the Obedience,
Love, and Service of his People? Or what becomes of a Distracted Multitude,
without a Head to Govern Their Confusions? But This (in the words of a most
Ingenious Person) is a Text upon which the Wise part of the world has used in
vain to Preach to the Fools.

Since so it is, that the Vulgar will neither be Taught by Experience, nor
persuaded by Reason, we are to take for Granted, that some Grievances lead to
Seditions, almost as Orderly, as Natural Causes to their Effects, the Multitude
ever siding with Interest, against Virtue.

The Liberty of Exporting Native Commodities raw, and unwrought; and of
Importing (possibly) the same Materials in Manufacture, is a Matter of Evil
Relish, and of Dangerous Consequence. So likewise is the Employment of
Strangers, where the Natives want Work; and the advancing of Foreign Trade, to
the Sterving of it at home.

Concerning the Other two Particulars, before mentioned, the One Relating to
the Frame of a City-Government, the Other, to their Personal Privileges; it
shall suffice to Note, that an Encroachment upon either of them, Endangers a
Sedition.

Sub-section IV. Poverty.
Poverty an Irresistible Incentive to Sedition.
THe Last, and the most Irresistible incentive to Sedition in a City, is
Poverty. That is, a Poverty proceeding from Misgovernment. Not but that Want,
upon what account soever is bad enough: Whether from Dearth, Losses by Fire,
or, Storm; Piracies, Banquerupts; the Ravages of War, etc. Yet Here, there is
something in the Fate, the Accident, or Manner, of the Calamity, to allay the
Anguish of it. Men Quarrel not with Providence for ill Seasons; nor with the
Winds, the Waves, or Flames, because of Wracks, or Conflagrations. To suffer by
Pirates, or Banquerupts, is but the Chance of Traffic, and the Extremities of
War are Common Injuries. But where a Pinching Poverty Seizes a Populous City,
and from a Cause too that is within the Reach of Malice, The most dangerous
Poverty.
or Revenge; That State's concerned betimes to look to the Disorder.

The Immediate Cause of This Necessity among the Common sort is want of Work,
which proceeds from the decay from Trade, arising chiefly from a General
Scarcity of Money; which may be Imputed to One or more, of These Ensuing Reasons.

First, The Insatiate Corruption of Rapacious, and Great Officers; in whose
Coffers, as in the Grave, Corruption the Cause of Scarcity.
Moneys are rather Buried, then laid up. Nay, as in Hell it self (I might have
said) for they are as Bottomless; and of the Treasure that lies There
Condemned, the Doom's almost as Irreversible.

These Private Hoards cannot choose but produce a Public Penury; when That
Wealth, which would suffice to Employ, Private Hoardsbreed Public Penury.
and Relieve Thousands, that either Beg for want of Work, or Sterve for want of
Bread, is drawn into so narrow a Compass. And yet in This supposed Extremity of
Affairs, I make a Doubt, whether is more Miserable, the Needy, or the
Oppressor?

Can any Composition more certainly destroy a Nation, The Composition of wicked
Ministers of State.
then a Concurrence of Power, Pride, Avarice, and Injustice, in the same
Persons? But Then again, when the Storm comes; These are the Ionasses, that by
the Rabble will be first cast Overboard, to save the Vessel. And This they
cannot but forethink, and Tremble at; at least, if ever they get Leisure for a
Sober Thought. And let them Look which way they Please; Backward, Forward,
Round-about, Upward, Downward, The Misery of them.
Inward, they are beset with Objects of Terror, and self-affrighted, from the
Glass of their own Consciences.

Behind them, they see dreadful Presidents of Corrupt Ministers, thrown from
their Slippery, If either they look back;
and ill-menag'd State of greatness: Torn by their Enemies; scarce Pitty'd by
their Friends; the Mirth of their own Creatures, and the mere Mockery of Those
that Raised them.

Forward, they find Themselve; upon a Precipice, and in great hazard to
increase the Number of those sad Presidents. Forward;


If they look Round-about them, they are Encompassed with the Cries of Widows,
and of Orphans; whose Husbands, Round about;
or whose Fathers, lost their Lives, in the Defense, (perhaps) of their Prince,
and Country. With These, are Mingled the Faint Groans of Sterving Wretches in
the Last Agonies, whose Modesty chose rather to Die silent, then Complaining;
and to abide the worst Effects of Want, rather then tell the more Intolerable
Story of it. But This to Them, is not so much, as to perceive Themselves at Bay
amids a Snarling Multitude.

In short; Above them, there is an All-seeing Eye, Above them*
an Unchangeable Decree, Below: or within them.
and an Incorruptible Judge, that Over-looks, and Threatens Them. Below them,
Hell: (or rather it is Within Them; an Accusing Conscience) If This be their
Prospect, how Deplorable is their Condition!

The Sollicitous estate of the Guilty.
Are not Their Pillows stuffed with Thorns? Or when they Venture at a Nap, do
they not Dream of Robberies, and Seditions? Whom, or What do they not fear?
Where is it they think Themselves Secure? Is not Their Table Spread with Snares?
Does not Every Bribe look like a Bait; Every Servant, like a Spy; Every Strange
Face, like somewhat that is worse? And what are their Near Friends, but either
Conscious Partakers, or Dangerous, and Suspected Witnesses? They find
Themselves Arraigned by the Preacher; Condemned by the Judge; and Strangled by
the Executioner: For being Guilty of the Crime, and Worthy of the Punishment
They cannot but Apply the Process to Themselves, and in Imagination, bear the
Malefactor Company, even from the Pulpit, to the Gibbet.

Add to all This, the Sting of an Incessant, Restless Jealousy: Not a Lock,
Whisper, Hint, or Action, but they suspect Themselves the Subject of it. The
Holy Text it self, where it Reproves Their Sins, Sounds like a Libell to Them.
Nay, were This silly, Innocent Description of them, but in a Tongue which any
man Concerned could understand; some of Their Ears would Tingle at it.

A General Scarcity of Money, may, in the Second Place, arise from Taxes, Taxes
may cause or occasion a Scarcity diverse ways.
and That either Immediately, in Respect of the Burden; or Consequentially, in
Respect of the Occasion; the Inequality; the Manner of Imposing, or Levying
Them; or the Subject Matter it self of the Tax.

Touching the Burden, and Occasion: It Properly belongs to Those in Power to
Judge of it, as well how much, as to what end? So in the Rest, The People are
likewise to Subject Themselves to such Determinations as their Superiors hold
Convenient. Only in case of an Undue Authority imposing, or some Illegal Course
of Levying Taxes, there may be some Allowancies; which to proportion to their
Various Instances, is neither for This Place, nor for my Meaning.

That Subjects are to Obey Lawful Commands, without disputing the Reasons of
Them, Subjects are to Obey without Disputing.
is beyond Question. Yet is it not in the Power of Humane Nature, to keep men
from Surmising, and from Guessing at them. We Will Grant ye too, that in some
Cases, some People, will in some Sort, do some Things as they ought to do. Yet
we are where we were; that is, they will be Guessing still.

If Taxes follow quicker, and run higher then Ordinary; they cry: so much? and
the next Question's Why? ('It Is true, they should not Ask, but who can hinder
them?)

Is it for the Honor or Safety of the Prince? It Is Consequently for the Public
Good; and he deserves to be expelled Humane Society, that narrowly prefers his
Little dirty Interest, before so Sacred, and so great a Benefit.

A Third, is the Inequality of Taxes; the Over-pressing of any One Party. As if
the Burden lies heavyer upon the City, then Country; upon the Gentry, then
Yeomanry, etc. If upon the City, they call it Spite; if upon the Country,
Oppression. And in fine; fall the Disproportion where it fall can, it breeds
ill blood: for That Weight breaks the Back of any One Interest, which evenly
disposed, would seem no heavy Load, upon the Shoulders of All. Far quam
sortem patiuntur Omnes, Nemo recusat. The Consequence of This Inequality, is a
General Ruin, but piecemeal, and One Part after Another.

Touching the Manner of Imposing, or Levying, we waive That; and pass to the
Subject Matter of the Tax. (A point (how little soever reguarded) scarce less
Considerable then the Total Amount of it.)

If the Device be Novell; the People shy and ticklish: if there be Factions
Stirring, and the Prince not absolutely Master, better raise Thrice the Value
in the Rode of Levies, then hazard the Experiment of a By-way. It Is
Machiavell's advice concerning Sanguinary Cruelties; where Cruelty is
Necessary, do it at once; or at least, seldom as possible. But then be sure to
follow it with Frequent Acts of Clemency; by which Means, you shall be feared
for your Resolution, and beloved for your Goodnature: whereas a Little, and
Often, Terrifies Less, and Disquiets people much more, imprinting Jealousies of
further Inconveniences; so that they know not what to Trust to.

Most Certain it is, that as Many petty Injuries deface the Impression of One
Great Benefit; so in like manner do Many slight Benefits deface the Impression
of One Great Injury; the Last Act sinking deepest. For it is from Thence, Men
Measure their expectation of the Future; and as they look for Good, or Bad,
they are Peaceable or Troublesome,

Leave no Mark standing to remember a Discourtesie by. Josh. 4.6.
Wherefore, as it is Duty to do Well always, so it is Wisdom to do Well last; and
where a Pressure cannot be avoided, not to leave standing (so near as may be)
any Memorial of it: Least [ When your Children shall ask their Father in time
to come, saying, What mean you by these Stones? etc. --

The ways of Supplying Princes are Various, according to their Several
Interests, Practices, Powers, and Constitutions. Not to lose my self in
Particulars, One General shall serve for all.

It behooves a State to be very wary, how they Relieve a Present need upon the
Foundation of a Lasting Inconvenience: for though in some Extremities, there is
no Choice; yet it very rarely happens, that a Prince is the Better for the
Money, where he is the worse for the President. Sir Thomas Row in a Speech at
the Council Table, 1640. (directed to the dashing of a Project, tending to the
Enfeebling of the Coin, (as he Phrases it) Cites the Lord Treasurer Burleigh,
and Sir Thomas Smith, giving their Opinion to Queen Elizabeth; in these words:
That it was not the short end of Wits, nor starting holes of Devises, that can
sustain the Expense of a Monarchy, but sound and solid Courses. Horace his [Rem
facias, Rem, -- Si possis, Recte, si non, quocunque modo Rem] will not serve
the turn.

It Is sharply said of Sir Francis Bacon; [That the Wisdom of all these Latter
Times in Princes Affairs, Shifting passes for Wisdom.
is rather fine Deliveries, and shiftings of Dangers and Mischiefs, when they
are near; than solid and grounded Courses to keep them aloof.] (But says he
again) [ It is the Solaecism of Power to think to Command the End, and yet not
to endure the Mean.] These are the Sleights, the Ill-husbandry of Government:
through which Mistakes, insensibly, a Great Revenue moulders away, and yet the
State never out of Debt.

Excessive Building.
Excessive Building is another Cause of General Soarcity; for it leaves the
Country too Thin, and Over-peoples the City: Enhansing the Rate, and Consuming
the Means of Living. It wastes the Nobility and Gentry; It Impoverishes also,
and Disobliges the Populacy: (All that is got in the Country, being spent in
the City) beside the hazardous disproportion betwixt the Head and the Body.

One Reason of this Scarcity, may be from some Defect in the Law it self. as
where sufficient Provision is not made for strict and peremptory payment upon
Bond. Men will not part freely with their Money, where they may be put off by
Shifts and Delays, and driven to a Vexatious Suit to get it In again.

Another great Inconvenience proceeds from a General Grasping at more Trade
then they can Master: which causes many Failings one upon the Neck of another.

To what is already said, Knavery of Tradesmen.
(not to be endless) we will only add Two Causes more. The One, is the deceit,
and Knavery of Artizans, and Tradesmen; who for a Private Gain betray the
Interest of the Public; and invert the Balance of Trade, by such Abusive
Manufactures, as are neither Saleable abroad, nor Serviceable at Home, which
both necessitates the Importation of Foreign Commodities, and hinders the
Issue of Native: beside the Treble Charge; their Dearness, and their little
Vsefullness considered.

We shall Conclude with Pride: which were it in nothing else but what is expended
upon Guildings, Gold and Silver Lace, and Foreign Curiosities of Needle Work,
would not be inconsiderable. But where it is General, and extends both to all
Sorts of Superfluities, and all Degrees of Persons; That City goes by the Post
to Ruin: for Pride, is not only the Forerunner of Destruction, and the Cause
of it; but the Loud, and Crying Provoker of it.

Sect. VI. The COUNTRY.
THat Interest which contributes the Least to a Sedition, and suffers the most
by it, is That of the Country: which is properly comprised under Tillage, and
Pasture. For I reckon all Populous Places, (whether Towns or Villages) that
subsist by steady Traffic, or Handy-crafts, to be no other then Dependencies
upon the Metropolis; which is usually, That in Proportion to the Kingdom, which
the Principal City, of every Province, is to the Other Parts of it.

This Interest seldom or never Heads a Sedition upon it is own Account; and when
it does engage, under Protection possibly of the next strong Hold, or in favor
of some neighboring, and Seditious Market Town, we do not find much hurt the
Countryman does, so long as the Sword, and Plough are menaged by the same
Hand. If they forsake their Husbandry, and turn Soldiers; The Country is sure
to be undone by a War.
they fall under another Notion. But in short; let the Cause be what it will,
and the event of a War what it can; They are sure to be undone by it:
wherefore They may well be Friends to Peace, to whom War is so great an Enemy.

The Fruits of it.
Is there a War commenced? Their Cariages must wait upon the Army, Their
Provisions feed them: Their Persons attend them, yes, and Their Contribution
Pay Them. Their Teams must serve the State; Their Wives, and Girls, the
Soldiery: They must be Mounting Dragoons, when they should be Plowing; Lugging
their Beans and Bacon to the Head-Quarter, when they should be Sowing: and at
last, scarce a Lame Jade to get in that little Harvest, which the wild Troops
have left them: Their Cattle are Driven away by one Party to day, Their Corn
taken by another to Morrow* and when they are Thoroughly Plundered, because they
had something; they must afterward expect to be Beaten too, because they have
Nothing.

Are not These fair Encouragements to make Husbandmen Seditious? And yet, This
Interest is several ways made use of to Promote Sedition. Particularly, by
Three sorts of People; The Discontented Nobleman, the Rich Churl; the Stiff,
and Contentious Free-born-Subject.

A Discontented Nobleman.
A Great Person may become Weary of the Court, and withdraw into the Country,
out of diverse unquiet Considerations: Out of Ambition, Pride, or Revenge.

If his Trouble be Ambition, Ambition.
his Course is to strengthen himself by Popularity, and make a Party, by
spending his Revenue in a Bountiful, and Open Hospitality upon the People:
which is the most Winning and the most spreading of all Obligations. His Iades,
his Kites, his Currs, are free to all comers: his Family is the whole World;
and his Companions are the Wits, and the best of Good-fellows.

If his Retirement be out of Pride as choosing rather to be the first Person in
the Country, Pride.
then the Second or Third at Court: His business is Popularity too, though
perhaps not Aiming so high (for there are a sort of People, insufferably
haughty in their Looks, Garb, and Language; that have not Courage enough to be
Ambitious) This Man's attended by the best Parasites that are to be had for
Money.

The Third Distemper is Revenge; Revenge.
and That Is the worst of the Three: In Ambition, there is somewhat that is Noble.
Pride indeed, is a Base, and Abject Vice, (that is; a Cowardly Pride: Nay it is
at best, but a Simple Sin) But Revenge is Black, and Diabolical. Let it proceed
whence it will. Whether from some Affront, Repulse, Neglect; Nay, a Wry Look,
or a Mistaken Hint raises this Devil.

This is a Humor now of another Complexion: Morose, Unpleasant, and rather
watchful to Improve an Opportunity of Mischief, then Laborious to prepare it.
In the House of a Person haunted with This Fury, you shall find Throngs of
Silenced Ministers, Discharged Officers, Crop-ear'd Schismatics, Broken
Citizens, etc.

These are the Dangerous Malcontents, whose Differing Inclinations of Temper
are no hinderance to their Unity of Design, where the Safety of the Prince and
Government is the Question.

Next to This Discontented Nobleman, Follows the Rich Churl: which is a
Creature, The Rich Churl.
that opposing Wealth to Dignity, becomes the Head of the People, for his
Sauciness of bearing up against the Power, and Nobility of the Court. It is
scarce to be Imagined, The Interest of this Chuff in a Popular Scufflle;
especially, if he has gotten his Estate by a Rusticall, and Plodding Industry:
for Then the Vulgar Reckon him as One of their Own Rank, and support him, as
the Grace, and Dignity of their Order.

We come now to the Stiff, and Contentious Free-born-Subject: the Queintest,
and the Sharpest Youth of the Three. The Contentious Freeborn Subject.
He Will tell ye to a hair, upon what Point, Prerogative becomes Tyranny: How far
a Subject may promote a Rebellion, and yet be honest himself, and Cleave the
very Atome, that divides the Rights of King and Subject. Does any Minister of
State, or Justice pass his Commission, but the tenth part of a Scruple? he
cries, It Is Arbitrary, Illegal, and an Encroachment upon the Birthright of a
Free-born-People. Let him be Questioned, and the Matter Scanned, here is his
Dilemma. Either by Carrying the Cause, he Iustifies, and Puffs up the People;
or by Suffering for it, he Enrages them: but still Obliging them both ways;
the One way as their Champion, and the Other, as their Martyr.

Upon the Sum of the Matter, That Government must be Carried very even, which
These Instruments, in Combination, shall not be able to discompose.

Touching the Common Sort; it is so little in their Power to Embroyl a Kingdom,
and so much less their Interest to do it, that This Little is enough said
concerning Them; setting aside the Influence they have upon the Subject we are
now entering upon.

Sect. VII. The Body Representative.
THe Seventh and Last Interest we are to Treat of, is the Body Representative,
which is but One Grand Interest made up of all the Rest; and as the Whole
stands well, or ill-affected to the Government, so commonly does That. Yet it
falls out sometime, that the Diligence, and Stickling of a Faction gets the
Start of a General Inclination. It would ask an Age, to reckon up all the
Inconveniences which may arrive from the Evil Composition of This Assembly:
but so strict an account will not be Necessary, in regard that the Prince may,
at his Pleasure, Remedy all, by Dissolving them.

One great Defect, is that in many places they have no Stated Rule how far
their Cognizance extends; No Measure of their Privileges: through which
Default, more Time is spent, and too too often, more Passion Stirred, about the
bounds of Their Authority, then the main Business of their Meeting. Beside the
desperate Influence of This Mysterious Incertainty, upon the Prince, and
Public: Under which Color, nothing so Seditious, but it may both be
Introduced and Protected. Suppose a Notion in the Assembly directly against the
Crown: The Prince takes Notice of it; and demands Reason for it. Is It not a
fine Reply, that to deny Liberty of Speech; to take Notice of any Thing in
Debate; to Question any One Member without the Leave of the Rest, is a Breach
of Privilege.

The Representative we here speak of, answers (the nearest of any) to the House
of Commons in England; which Resemblance will much facilitate the task we are
now upon, having only to look back into the History of Charles the Martyr, to
find the Greatest Mischiefs, and the Foulest Crimes which such a Convention in
disorder may be capable of: not meddling with the Names of Persons, but
contenting our selves to discover the Arts, Grounds, and Occasions of
Seditions, without reproaching the Authors of them.

The Dangerous Mixture of a Representative, we may divide into these Three
Parties: The Designers of Mischief; The Dangerous mixture of a Representative.
the Permitters of it; and the Incompetent Judges of it: whose Failings are
either of Commission, Omission, or Ignorance.

To begin with the First. The Designing Party.
The Designers are either the Ambitious Heads of the Faction, that aim at
Power, as well as Profit, in the Subversion of the Government; or such
Dependencies, as they can Engage by Menace, Flattery, fair Pretenses, Money, or
Preferment. These in their Several Places, promote the same Seditious Interest,
and every man knows his Station.

They have their Contrivers, their Speakers, their Sticklers, their Dividers,
their Moderators, and their Blanks: Their Industry and Combination.
(their I-and NO-men) by which Method and Intelligence, all Debates are managed
to the Advantage of the Party and Occasion. They know when to Move, when to
Press, when to Quit, Divert, Put off, etc. and they are as Skilful in the
manner of Moulding their Business, as they are Watchful for the Season of
Timing it. Add to this Agreement and Confederacy of Design, their Zeal and
Earnestness of Intention; and what will not an Indefatigable Industry, joined
to these Emprovements of Order and Counsel, be able to accomplish? [ The Lower
and Weaker Faction is the firmer in Conjunction (says Sir F. Bacon) and it is
often seen, that a few, that are Stiff, do tire out a Greater Number, that are
more Moderate.]

Yet to the Miracles that are wrought by Forecast and Assiduity, there is still
requisite a Matter predispos'd, The Matter they work upon.
and fit to work upon: and that is the Dress, or Cleanly Couching of the
Project. It Is not at first dash to attempt the Person of the King, but the
Multitude must by Degrees, be made sensible of the Faults of his Ministers; and
Instructed to clamor against Oppression and Profaneness. Why should a
Freeborn Subject be Pressed with Taxes and Obedience, or a Christian Libertine
be tied to worship by a Set-form? Is it not against the Fundamentals of a Mixed
Monarchy, (That ridiculous supposition) for the Supreme Magistrate to Impose
upon his Coordinate Subjects? Or, where is it commanded in the Bible, for
people to Kneel at the Communion, or to stand up at Gloria Patri?

These are sore Grievances indeed, and now the Humour's ripe for Petitions to
the Senate; Their manner of Proceeding.
which being both Procured and Framed by a Caball of the Senators themselves,
cannot fail of being acceptable to the Faction: who by this Artifice, get the
Credit of being taken for the proper Arbitrators of all Differences betwixt
King and People, through which Mistake, the Popular Representative becomes both
Party and Judge, and it is then no hard matter to Guess what will become of the
Prerogative.

By making the most of all Complaints, and the worst of all Abuses; they
bespeak a Compassion for the One side, and they provoke an Odium toward the
Other: which Amplification renders exceedingly Necessary the Remedy of a
Through-Reformation.

The Subject is to be Free in One Point, and the Monarch limited in Another.
These Courts are to be Abolished, Those Counselors to be removed, etc. -- And
in fine, when the Prince has yielded, till they want Matter for Complaint,
their Fears are not less Clamorous and Important, than were their Complainings.
Of which undutiful and unlimited Distemper, this is the certain Issue; from one
Desire they proceed to another, till the Prince, to secure their Jealousy, has
parted with all possibility of Preserving Himself.

This is their Course, where they find the Government already in Disorder; but
how to Introduce that Disorder, is quite another Point of Cunning.

They are here only to procure those Grievances, for which they are afterward
to provide Remedies, and to cast the State into a Disease, that with better
Pretense they may give it Physic; Siding with the Prerogative against the
People, in the first place, and with the Prerogative in the next. In a word,
their Services are Snares; they give a little, that they may take all, and by a
plausible Oppression, provoke a Barbarous Rebellion.

Another sort of ill Ministers in a Representative, are the Permitters of these
Abuses: The Permitters of Seditious Contrivements.
Such as being Chosen and Entrusted for the Public Weal, Abandon their
Stations, and Deliver up their Country. Betwixt whom, and the Conspirators
themselves, there is but this Difference: The One Quits the Breach, and the
Other Enters: These, throw down their Arms, and Those take the Town; what the
One Party carries by Treason, the Other loses by Cowardice.

Of these Deserters, some are taken Off by Profit, Pleasure, The Deserters of
their Trust are taken off
Vanity, Sloth, Neglect or Partiality; Others are led by their Passions; as
Fear, Anger, etc. In all which Cases, whoever prefers a private Interest to a
Public, Betrays his Trust.

Some Peoples Mouths are Stopped with Offices, Rewards, by Profit,
fair Promises, Hopes of Preferment, etc. And These upon the very Crisis of a
Debate, find Twenty Shifts, to waive the Pinch of the Dispute, and let the
Question fall; even though the Crown it self depend upon the Issue of it. This
is done either by coming too late, or perhaps not at all; by going away too
soon, or saying Nothing when they are there: by which Discouragements, the
Cause is lost, only for want of their Arguments and Voices to Turn the Scale.

Others are Drawn from their Duties by Pleasure; Pleasure,
perhaps a Party at Tennis, Bowls,; Chards; a Pack of Dogs, a Cockfight, or a
Horse-match, a Comedy, a Good Fellow, or a Mistress. And while they are thus
Employed, the Vigilant Faction steals a Vote that is worth a Kingdom.

Some again are so Transported with the Vanity of Dress and Language, Vanity,
that rather than serve the Public with One hair amiss, or in One broken
Period, they will let the Public perish. Mallent Rem-Publicam turbari, quam
Capillos. These, while their Country lies at Stake, are Ordering of their
Heads, and Polishing the Phrase, Shaping the Parts of a Set-Speech, till it is
too late to use it. Nothing methinks does less beseem a Grave Assembly, than
This same Facultatula loquendi: this same Rhetorical Twittle-tattle; it spins
out so much Time in tedious Circumstances, that it makes a man even sick of a
Good Cause, and for the very Form, prejudge the Reason of it.

Sloth and Neglect, are yet more dangerous in a Senator; not only in Regard of
Surprises from the Faction, by Sloth and Neglect,
but of Discontentments likewise from the People. These think a Wet Day, or a
Cold Morning, a sufficient Discharge of their Attendance: and while they are
taking the other Napp, or the other Bottle, the Monarch perhaps has lost his Crown,
or the Subject his Liberty.

Come to particular Cases, how many Families are lost by Disappointments; by
Relying upon Promises; Delays from time to time! How many Just and Sad
Petitions are thrown aside, unregarded; as serving only for waste Paper? and so
far from Relief, they cannot obtain so much as a bare Reading.

by Partiality.
Distinguishing of Persons; in Matters of Equity, is furthermore a great Abuse;
where a Friend, an Acquaintance, or some By-Respect shall interrupt the Speedy
and Direct Course of Justice: (I do not say Divert; though to forbear helping
the Right, or not to hinder the Wrong, because of such or such an Interest, is
but a Negative Oppression.)

Passion.
Those that are moved by Passions from their Duties, are not less Culpable than
the Rest. For a Good Patriot fears Nothing, but to be Dishonest; Hates Nothing,
but Iniquity; and knows no other Friend but Justice.

Is any Thing proposed, which to my Reason appears of Dangerous Consequence;
Unlawful to my Conscience; Dishonorable to my Prince, or Country? Do I
Discharge my Soul to God and to the World, in not opposing it? because forfooth
it is my Lords Interest, or Project. Where it is my Office to withstand a Public
Injury, Fear,
it is my Act if I suffer it: Nor will it serve the turn to say, Alas! I Am but
one Man, what should I struggle for? A Noble Truth and Equity, though single,
ought to be maintained against the World. But very rarely is That the Case; for
those Particulars that, under Color of this Singleness, relinquish and
withdraw, would in Conjunction cast the Balance. The Question is but This:

Whether shall I rather venture the Loss of an Office, or the Loss of my
Country? Whether shall I rather disoblige a Powerful Subject, or betray my
Lawful Prince? Whether in fine, shall I rather choose, Modestly to Oppose a
Faction, or Tamely to desert my Conscience.

Some we find Prepossest with Personal Animosities; and these Particular
Piques, or Personal Animosity.
are many times, the Bane of Public Designs. They do not so much heed the
Matter, as the Man that Promotes it; They are Resolved to like Nothing from
That Hand; and while they are Cavelling about Niceties, and Nothings; the
adverse Party runs away with the Sum of the Contest.

Another Infelicity is where Elections are Carried by Recommendation, Fortune,
or Affection; without any Regard to the Abilities of Persons.

These are a Dangerous Party, and a fit Subject to work upon. Fools are fit
Instruments for Knaves.
for being more addicted to follow the Appearances, then Capable of
Comprehending the Reasons of Things; They are not only Liable to fall into
Mistakes, but Obstinate Maintainers of Them; and in all Cases Determinable by
Plurality of Voices, the Greater Number of Fools weighes down the more
Prudentiall Counsels of Fewer wise Men: Nay, which is most Ridiculous and
Miserable; (but that in Popular Suffrages it must be so) His Vote many Times
Casts a Kingdom, that has not Brain enough to Rule his Private Family; Deciding
the Question, without understanding the Debate.

We have Prosecuted This Theme of Miscariages; far enough. From the Discovery,
our next advance is to the Remedies of them: The harder undertaking; for Faults
are more easily found, then mended.

CAP. X. How to prevent the Beginnings, and hinder the Growth of Seditions in
General; together with Certain Particular Remedies, applied to the Distempers
of Those Seven Interests, mentioned in the foregoing Chapter.
THe Two main Pillars that support Majesty, are Love and Reverence: Love and
Reverence are the Pillars of Majesty.
To which are opposed, (as the Foundation of a Prince his Ruin) Contempt and
Hatred. What are Disloyal Actions, but the Issue of Disloyal Thoughts? Or what
are General Tumults, but the Rational Effects of General Discontents? (The
Violent part being no other, then the Manifestation of a Treason already Formed
and Perfected in the Affections) So that to set the Heart Right, is the Prime
Duty of a Good Subject, and Then to observe the Law, for Love of the Authority.
Kings are first Rendered Odious, or Despised, and in Persuance of Those
Passions they come at last, to be Dethroned, or Murdered. That is, to be
Dethroned, or Murdered Actually; (for even the first Malicious Motion was
Murder in the Heart, and betwixt God and our own Souls every Seditious Thought
is a Rebellion.)

Although no Prince can be Mighty, without the Love of his People, or Secure
under their Hatred; (the One being Necessary to his Greatness, The Power of a
Prince depends upon the Love of his People.
and the Other Sufficient to his Undoing) yet must we not suppose the Subjects
Love more Needful to their Prince, then His to Them: since upon His Protection
depends Their Welfare; no less then, upon Their Support, His Power.

Because the Hazard of disuniting is mutual, it must not be supposed that it
is therefore equal; nor that the Crime is so, where Tumult and Oppression are
the Question. They are Both ill, but with exceeding odds of worse betwixt them:
The One does but affront the Mode of Government; the Other strikes at
Government it self: the very Ends, and Reason of it; -- Peace, Order, and
Society.

A Prince without the Hearts of his Subjects, is in a bad Condition; but he
that falls from Hatred, to Contempt, his Case is Desperate. For when they
neither Love his Person, nor Fear his Power; They are both Provoked to Contrive
mischief, and Emboldened to Execute it.

These are the General, and Enflaming Grounds of Seditions; The Grounds of
Sedition.
which may be easily prevented, and Cut off in their next Immediate Causes. The
Difficulty is, for a Prince to be Popular, without making himself Cheap; to
Gratify his People, without Derogating from his Authority; and so to Comply
with the Interest of his Subjects, as not to be wanting to the Necessities of
his Crown. In the Due Temperation of which Mixture, Consists, in a Great
measure, the skill of Governing; and thereupon depends the Peace, and Safety of
the Government.

In all well-ordered Monarchies, there are certain Metes and Boundaries, that
Part the Rights of King, and People; and These, are either Laws, or Customs;
providing for the Common Good, and Safety, both of the Subject in his
Obedience, and of the Sovereign in his Authority. Let a Prince Stick to his
Laws, and his People will stick to him.
Let a Prince therefore stick to his Antient-Laws, and he may be sure his
People will stick to him; and more he needs not ask, being by Those Laws armed
with Power sufficient to the Intent of Government: or, at the worst, if any
Defect there be, the Fault is imputed to the Constitution, and not to the
Person.

There may indeed occur such Cases, and Emergencies of Imminent, and Public
Danger, as (being un-foreseen by the Wisdom of former Times) are left without a
Rule. Of These, beyond Dispute, The only Supreme Governor is the only Supreme
Judge; and under so strict a Necessity, he not only may, but ought to dispense
with Common Formalities, in Order both to the Discharge of his Duty, and the
Welfare of his People: His Oath of Protection, The Oath of Protecting, implies
a Power of Protecting.
Implying him Vested with a Power of Protecting; and his Conscience, as a
Governor, obliging him to be careful of his Charge.

The Objection is Frivolous, that This Supposition opens a door to Tyranny;
because that at This Rate, a Prince has no more, but to pretend a Danger, and
Then to do what he pleases. It Is very right, a Prince may Tyrannize under This
Color; but it is as certain, that a People cannot Scruple This Inconvenience,
without incurring a Greater: for it is an Opinion Destructive of Government it
self; all Subjects being equally exposed to the same Hazard, under all
Governments; and it is inevitable, that either the King must have it in his
Power to Oppress his People, or the People have it in theirs to Destroy their
Sovereign. Where a King has it not in his Power to Oppress his People* They
have it in Theirs to destroy their King.
(and betwixt the Ills of Tyranny and Rebellion, all the world knows the
Disproportion) Wherefore let Subjects hope and believe the best of their Prince
his Will, and Inclination; without meddling with his Power; for it is not less
his Interest to be well Obeyed, and Beloved; then it is theirs, to be well
Governed.

Yet when a Prince, by Exigencies of State, finds himself forced to waive the
Ordinary Path, and Course of Law; the Less he swerves, the Better: and the more
unwilling he appears to Burden his People, the more willing shall he find them
to serve him. Especially, he should be Cautelous, where men's Estates, or
Freedoms, are the Question; to make the Necessity as Manifest as is possible,
and the Pressure as Light, A Mixture of Indulgence, and Severity, Obliges the
Loyal, and Aws the Refractary.
and as Equal, as Consists with his Honor, and Convenience: Mixing however
with This General Indulgence, such a Particular Severity, where his Authority
is Disputed, that the Obedient may have Reason to Love his Goodness, and the
Refractary, as much, to Fear his Displeasure.

By These Means, may a Prince preserve himself from the Hatred of his People,
without exposing himself to their Contempt; and in Order to the avoiding of
That too, we will take up This Observation by the way: That Subjects do Generally
Love, or Hate, for their own Sakes; but when they despise a Prince, it is for
some Personal Weakness, or Indignity in himself.

Nothing makes a Monarch Cheaper in the Eyes of his People, than That which
begets an ill opinion, either of his Prudence, or Courage; The Influence of
Prudence and Courage.
and if they find once that he will either be Overreach'd, or Over-awed, they
have his measure. By Courage here, we do not intend a Resolution only against
Visible and Pressing Dangers; but an Assurance likewise, and Firmness of mind
against Audacious and Threatening Counsels.

The Prudence we intend, is of a more extensive Notion; and from the most
Mysterious Affairs of Royalty, descends to the most Private, and Particular
Actions of a Princes Life. It enters into his Cabinet-Counsells, and Resolves;
his Public Acts of State; his very Forms of Language, and Behavior; his
Exercises, and Familiar Entertainments. In fine; It is scarce less Dangerous
for a Sovereign to separate the Prince, from the Person, even in his daily
Practices, and Conversations; then to permit Others to Divide Them in their
Arguments: A Prince that bears Affronts, and Familiarities from his Subjects,
Lessens himself.
And in a word; to secure himself from Contempt, it behooves a Monarch to
Consider, as his most Deadly Enemies, such as Brave his Authority; and by no
means to allow, even in his most Acceptable Servants, and most Familiar
Humors, too great a Freedom toward his Person.

Not but that a Sovereign may in many Cases Familiarize with his Subjects, and,
by so doing, win the Reputation, of a Wise and Gracious Prince: Provided that
the sweetness of his Nature, cause him not to forget the Severity of his
Office; and that his Stooping to his People, prove not an Emboldening of them
to come up to him. This is a Course to Prevent Sedition, in the First Cause,
and check it in the Bud.

How to hinder the Spreading of a Seditious Humor.
But if it come once to show it self and spread; there is first Requisite, (upon
a Clear and Open Proof) a Speedy Execution of Laws to the Utmost Rigor. I say,
[ upon a Clear and Open Proof] for in such cases, it is of great Advantage to a
State, to make the Crime as evident as the Punishment, that the People may at
once Detest the Fact and Approve the Justice. I say Likewise [ a Speedy
Execution] for Delay brings many Inconveniences. It gives a Faction Time to
Contrive, and Unite; and Boldness to Attempt: for it looks as if they that sit
at the Helm were either more sensible of the Danger, or less mindful of their
Duty then becomes them. Lastly; whereas it is added, [ to the utmost Rigor:]
My meaning is not to extend the Severity to a Multitude of Offenders, but to
Deter the Generality by making some few, and Dreadful Examples.

Nay my Advice should be, to Pick these Few too. They should not be Fools,
Madmen, or Beggars; but the Boldest, the Wisest, the most Circumspect and
Wealthy of the Party: the Leaders, and first Starters of the Quarrel: to show
that neither Confidence should Protect them, nor their Shifts and Politics
avail them. But above All; let not their Money save Them, for That't no other
then Setting of a Price upon the Head of the Sovereign.

Another Expedient to Stop a spreading Mischief, is for a Prince to keep a
watchful Eye over Great Assemblies; Let a Prince keep an Eye over Great
Assemblies.
which are either Irregular and Lawless; or Regular and Constant; or Arbitrary
and Occasional.

Concerning the First; It is seldom seen, where the Manner of a Meeting is
Tumultuary, that the Business of it is not so too; and, where Many Concur in
One unlawful Act, it is no hard matter to persuade them to agree in Another. Let
him be Quick,
So that to frustrate the Ends, and prevent the Consequences of such Meetings,
the surest way is for the Sovereign to employ his Authority, Tamely; and
strictly to Prohibit them. If That does no Good; He has no more to do, but
Instantly to Scatter Them by force, and single out the Heads of the Riot, for
Exemplary Punishment.

Touching Conventions which are Regular and Steady; and Watchful.
It concerns the Chief Magistrate not to be without his Creatures, and
Discoverers, in Those Assemblies; and to see that they be well Influenced as to
the Government. For Instance; when the People Meet to Choose Officers; when
Those Officers meet to Advise upon Business, it is worth the while for a Prince
to learn how the Pulse Beats; and Principally, to Over-watch Churches, and
Courts of Judicature: Both in regard of the hazard of Errors in Matters of
Law, and Religion; and of the Multitude, being ever in readiness and humor to
Entertain them.

As to Meetings Arbitrary and Occasional, heed must be taken to the Persons
assembling, the Occasion which brings them Together, and the Matter whereupon
they Treat; which we shall handle in their proper Places, and so pass from
Generals to Particulars, beginning with the CHURCH.

Sect. I. By what Means Heresies and Schisms may be kept out of the CHURCH;
Their Increase hindered, and the Seditious Consequences of Them Prevented: With
the Remedies of Other Mischiefs arising from Disorders in the CHURCH.
SInce so it is, that Divisions in the Church have no further Interest in This
place, than as they Lead to Seditions in the State: the shortest Cut I know,
will be to Reduce all of that Tendency to Sir Francis Bacon's Notable Comprizal
of them, The most dangerous of all Seets.
under Two Properties: [ If a New Sect have not Two Properties, fear it not;
for (says He) it will not spread. The one is, the Supplanting, or the Opposing
of Authority established: For Nothing is more Popular than That. The Other is,
the giving License to Pleasures, and a Voluptuous Life. For as for Speculative
Heresies ( such as were in Ancient Times the Arrians, and now the Arminians)
though they work mightily upon Men's Wits, yet they do not produce any great
Alterations in States; except it be by the Help of Civil Occasions.] Now when a
Prince meets with a Faction thus Marked, let him look to Himself: for there are
against him, the best Counterfeit of a Friend, and the most Deadly Composition
of an Enemy; the Strongest of all Allurements; the most Popular of all Designs;
and the most Rational Means to Accomplish it.

But the Question will be, How to Prevent, what is not as yet Discovered? To
which we answer, That the Sect here spoken of, is New, either Absolutely, or
Comparatively. If Absolutely; Observe what Carnal Interest they drive: If
Comparatively, mark what Copy they follow; and Measure the Disciple by his
Master.

A sure way to prevent Schism.
One Safe and Certain Remedy, (be the Novelty what it will,) is, not to suffer
any Innovation whatsoever, without a warrantable Authority: No, not so much as
a Public Dispute against an Established Order, from a Private Person. Nay,
more; let the Dissent be Right or Wrong, it is the same thing as to the Reason
of Government, though not so to the Conscience of the Dissenter. Suppose the
Subject of an Idolatrous Prince, within his Masters Dominions, and Contrary to
his Express Order, Preaches against the Religion there Established: He does
well, to Discharge his Conscience, but let him have a Care of the Consequence;
for if in Order to the making of Good Christians, he makes Bad Subjects, Have a
Care.
his Zeal will hardly acquit him of Sedition: God does not allow of Proposing
Good Ends, by Ill Means; and of Reforming Religion, by Rebellion.

Let him have a Care likewise, if he comes to suffer for well-doing, how he
behaves himself: for if he but open his Mouth against the Civil Magistrate, as
a Persecutor, he betrays himself to be an Hypocrite.

There are Two Sects, whom I dare say, This Doctrine will not please; i.e. The
Pontifical Presbyterians, and the Rigid Jesuits. The Latter of which, have, for
Convenience sake, been True to One King: The Former, (giving the Devil his Due)
since Presbyterians had a Being, were never True to Any: or if they ever were,
let him that Loves Them best, or knows them better, show me but when, where,
how; and with a Neverint universi, I do here Declare, I Will make a Public
Recantation. Till Then, We Will take the Prebyterian for the Cock-Schismatick; and
(if Sir Francis Bacon's Note holds Good.) the Dangerous New Sect: against Whom,
no Caution can be too Early, no Importunity too Earnest, no Restriction too
Severe.

These are They, that (according to the Lord St. Albans) Propagate Religion by
Wars; Force Consciences; Nourish Seditions; Authorize Conspiracies and
Rebellions. That put the Sword into the Peoples hand, and Dash the First Table,
against the Second. In short; all Those Popular, and Supplanting Politics,
which we find only here and there; Scattered, and Thin, in Other Sects; are by
These People drawn into a Practical Method, a Set-form of Sedition.

They Govern Their Looks, their Words, their Actions; The Presbyterians
Set-form.
Nay, their very Dress, Garb, and Accent, by a Rule: They are Instructed, when
to Beseech, and when to Expostulate; when to Flatter, and when to Threaten;
when to Offer, and when to Deny; when to Press Swearing, and when to Declaim
against it; when to Save, and w^^n to Kill*

In the first Scene, ye have the Schismatic upon his Knees, begging his Prince
into a Dispensation, And Method.
for Scrupulous Consciences, that perhaps stick at such and such Ceremonies;
the Cross, the Surplice, or the like.

Their Modesty.
Let but the Sovereign Comply Thus far, and what is the Fruit of this Indulgence?
Within a Day or Two, they come for More, and by Degrees, More still; till at
Last, they find the Government of the Church as Troublesome, as they did the
Rites of it; and Bishops as great a Grievance, as Ceremonies. Where the King
Stops, They Cavil; and now, from Petitioners for Freedom to Themselves, they
are Grown to be most Insolent Denyers of it to Others.

Their Art is next, to Tune the People; which is best done by the Pulpit, where
One half of their Business is Invective against Prelacy, and the Other is spent
in Well-Acted Supplications, That God would turn the King's Heart; Accounting
His yielding to all They Ask, as a Divine Assurance that their Prayers are
heard. But if the Monarch still holds out; what Pity it is (they Cry) so sweet a
Prince should be Miss-led? And then they fall upon his Evil Counselors; still
Taking all he Gives, and Struggling for the Rest; till having first Disrobed Him
of his Rights, Deprived Him of his Friends; Step after Step, they Attempt His
Sacred Person, and at last take away His Life.

Here Is their Glorious King! the End of all their Vows and Covenants, their
Prayers and Fastings; or, in a word, the Sum of their Religion.

It was great Blasphemy (says Sir F. B.) when the Devil said I will Ascend and
be like the Highest; But it is greater Blasphemy, to Personate God, and bring
Him in, saying, I will Descend, and be like the Prince of Darkness; and what is
it better to make the Cause of Religion, to descend, to the Cruel and Execrable
Actions, of Murdering Princes, Butchery of People, and Subversion of States
and Government?

He that stands firm against (not the Wit, or Bravery, but) the Fawning, and
Treacherous Insinuations of This Faction, may make himself Sport with all Other
Practices and Combinations whatever: and That Prescription, which helps This
Evil, serves for all other Public and Intestine Maladies.

I think we may be Positive, that there neither Is, nor ever Was in Nature, any
Society of Men, without a Vicious Mixture, under what Government, or
Governour-soever. I think we may be as Positive likewise, that Those Ambitious,
and Vnsatisfi'd Particulars, with which all Constitutions are infested, are
only Deferred from troubling all Governments, by the want of Opportunities to
Plot, and Contrive; and by the Hazards they meet with, in putting Those Plots
in Execution.

Wherefore it ought to be a Prince his first Care, The means of Preventing
Schism.
to Choke These Seeds of Discord: which may be Effected, by a Provision of
Orthodox Ministers; (to the utter Exclusion of the Contrary) by Prohibiting
Private Meetings, or Conventicles; and by taking heed to the Press. A
Watchfulness in These Three Points Secures the Church from Schisms, and
Consequently the State from Conscientious Seditions. (At least, if I am not
Mistaken in my Presumption, that there is not any fourth way of Dangerous
Communication.)

Touching the Licentious abuse of the Press, and the Freedom of Riotous
Assemblies; the Distemper is not as yet grown Bold enough, to avow Those
Liberties: But from the Nonconforming Ministers, we must expect hard Pleading.

What? [ shall the Faithful Guides be ejected, Object. Petition for Peace*
page 4, 5.
upon the account of Forms, or Ceremonies? because they dare not do that which
they Judge to be so great a Sin against the Lord?] May not a Dissenting Brother
be an Honest man?

Our Reply shall be short, and Charitable. If the People take them for Guides,
they will be the apter to follow them; Answ. The Hazards of Toleration.
so that the fairer their Credit is, the worse is their Argument.

Nor are they laid aside, as if the Difference it self were so Criminal, but
for the evil Consequences of Retaining Them.

First, it advances the Reputation of the Dissenting Party to have the matter
Look as if either the Power, or Reason were on Their side.

Next, it Subjects the Prince to be Thought Diffident, either of his Authority
to Command, or of the Justice of the Thing Commanded.

Thirdly; a Dissenting Minister makes a Dissenting Congregation.

Fourthly; it makes Conscience a Cloak for Sedition, and under Color of
Dividing from the Church, it Ministers Occasion for People to unite against the
State.

Fifthly; it not only leads to Novel Opinions, whereof the Vulgar are both
Greedy, and Curious; but it Possesses the Multitude with These Two Desperate,
and Insociable Persuasions. First, That the People are Judges of the Law; and
Next, That because God alone has Power over their Souls, the Sovereign has none
over their Bodies.

As to the Honesty of a Dissenting Brother; his Honesty is only to himself, but
his Dissent is to the Public: and the Better the Man is, the Worse is the
President.

Upon these hazards, depends the Royalty of That Sovereign, that dispenses with
the Law, to Indulge This Faction: and, which is the great Pity of all, the
better he deserves, the worse they use him. So that the only way for a Prince
to deal Safely with These People, is first to lay aside That Dangerous, and
Fatal Goodness, and Steer his Resolutions by the Compass of a Severe, and
Inexorable Reason. Not that Kings are Gods, in any Respect, more then in their
Power, and Mercy; but there are certain Cases, and Instances, wherein That
Power, and Mercy may be Restrained; and wherein it is possible that what is
Excellent in Nature, may be a slip in Government. It Is One Thing for a Party to
ask Pardon for a Fault already Committed, and another thing to beg a
Dispensation beforehand, to Commit it. And there is this Difference also in the
Issue of the Grants. The Prince has the Faction at his Mercy, the One way; and
the Faction has got the Prince at Theirs, the Other. But to the Point.

Will the Monarch's yielding to this, or that, content them? They Will say it is
all they aim at; and truly I Would believe them: would they but show me out of
their whole Tribe, any one Instance of This Moderation to save the Credit of my
Charity; The Foundation of Presbytery.
Any Presbyterian Interest in Nature that is not Raised upon the Ruins of a
Prince, and Cimented with Broken Vows and Promises.

If it be thus; Nothing less then a Miracle can secure that Monarch that makes
this Faction Master of the Pulpit: and this, King Charles, the Martyr, proved
by sad Experience: For not a Soul that by the Instigation of Schismatical
Lectures deserted the Church, but became an Enemy to the State. So that
Effectually a Gracious Toleration in some Cases, is by some People understood
no otherwise, then as a Tacit Commission from the Person of the King to Levy a
War against his Office. And it is very rarely that such an Indulgence is
better Employed. In which Opinion we are not a little Confirmed by the
Reflections of that Blessed Prince above mentioned.

[ I wish (says he) I had not suffered My own Judgment to have been over-borne
in some Things, (...). page 3.
more by others Importunities, then their Arguments: My Confidence had less
betrayed My self, and My Kingdoms, to Those Advantages, which some men sought
for, who wanted nothing but Power, and Occasion, to do Mischief.] And after the
utmost Trial of Bounty and Remissness to that Faction; These are his words to
his Royal Successor, [ I cannot yet Learn That Lesson, nor I hope never will
you, That it is safe for a King to gratify any Faction, (...). p. 239.
with the perturbation of the Laws, in which is wrapped up the Public Interest,
and the Good of the Community.]

Finally; Those Perfidious Creatures which at first Petitioned their Sovereign,
afterward fought against him, and Imprisoned him: Let Pagans blush at These
Christians.
Refusing him in his Distress the Comfort of his own Chaplains, in Requital
for having Granted them the Liberty of their Consciences. Who struck the Fatal
Blow, it matters not: If he had not been Disarmed, he had not been Killed.
Subjects do not Hunt Kings for Sport; only to Catch Them, and let them go
again. To Conclude; He was Persecuted with Propositions worse then Death; as by
his Choice appeared; for he Preferred rather to Die, then Sign Them. But to
Signalize the Honor of his Memory, and the Glory of his Martyrdom, take his
Last Resolution, and Profession.

I look upon it with infinite more content and quiet of Soul, (...). p. 263.
to have been worsted in my Enforced contestation for, and vindication of, the
Laws of the Land, the Freedom and Honor of Parliaments, the Rights of my
Crown, the Just Liberty of my Subjects, and the true Christian Religion in its
Doctrine, Government, and due Encouragements, then if I had with the greatest
Advantages of Success, overborn them all, as some men have now Evidently done,
whatever Designs they at first pretended.

From a Supposition of the first Inclination to Schism, proposing also how to
strangle it in the Birth: we are now to Consider it in some Degree of Growth,
and Progression; and to enquire after the best means to prevent such
Mischieves, as may arise from the further Increase, and spreading of it. That
is; the Mischieves of Conspiracy, which may be Promoted, either be Speech, or
Writing.

The Growth of Schism.
The first great Hazard is when Popular Persons, are put in Popular Employments,
and in Populous Places. A Cunning, and a Factious Minister, is a Dangerous
Instrument in a City; and the more Dangerous, if Tolerated; for Then he stirs
up Tumults by Authority: and who shall blame the Flock for Following the
Shepherd?

The Liberties of Conventicles, and Pamphlets, are likewise of Desperate
Influence upon the People; but These (as is already said) are easily Suppressed
by the Seasonable Execution of Laws. But There Is no Dallying with the
Combination.

If through the fault of Negligent Officers, the Distemper be gone too far, and
the Confederacy grown Strong and Bold enough to struggle with the Law. Then,
Other Arts must be found out, either to Amuse, Ensnare, or Disunite the
Faction. The Last Resort is violence, which must be Timely too before the
Reverence of Authority is quite Lost. And let the King himself appear; not only
to Ask, but Take the Heads of the Sedition; before the Quarrel is Transferred
from his Ministers, to his Person: if he but Stoops, he Falls. How horrible a
Mutiny was That which Caesar Quieted at Placentia? Single, Unarmed and with One
wretched word. ( QVIRITES.) -- Nec dum desaeviat Ira,
Expectat; Medios properat tent are Furores.
Nor Waits he till the Hot Fit should assuage, But at the Maddest, Scorns, and
Braves their Rage.


A Noble Resolve.
As the Resolve was Great, and the Success Good, so doubtless was the Reason of
This Action; For by the Sodainess, he Prevented their Agreement; and by the
Generous Contempt of Danger, he was almost Certain to Divide the Revolt; making
the Nobler Part of the Mutiniers to Adore him, and the Baser, to Fear him.

If the bare Presence of a General, could have This Power upon a Disciplined,
Incensed, and Daring Army; what should a Lawful Monarch apprehend, from an
Vnpractic'd, and Loose Multitude?

But the Dispute is not yet Brought to This Extremity; Our Purpose in this
Place, being rather to Frustrate and Disappoint the Malice in the Contrivance,
than Crush it in the Execution. To which end are Requisite, great Diligence,
Secrecy, Watchfulness, Moderation; and (at-what-rate soever) a Strict and
General Intelligence: All which together, make up a Necessary nnd Befitting
Prudence.

Sir Francis Bacon's Counsel is, Let the Prince Reform betime.
to Begin with Reforming Abuses; a Work seldom out of Season, but never more
needful: then upon the very first Murmurings and Motions toward Troubles. Most
especially, let Great Towns be Supplied with Good Ministers, and the Earlier,
the Better, least the Multitude think it Extorted; and the Guilty become too
Strong for the Innocent.

It ought to be Impartial too; And Impartially.
for a Toleration on the One hand, will make Justice it self look like a
Persecution on the Other. Beside, That it takes away the Subject of the
Clamor, and exalts the Reputation of the Monarch, in making Him appear the
Common Father of his People.

By these Means, may the Church be Purged of Schism, without much hazard of
Sedition.

If the Plot be already Modeled, and the Multitude Leavened, The Sovereign is
to look for Petitions, on the Behalf of Ejected Ministers; in the Names of
Thousands; and Accompanied with the Rudeness rather of a Riot, than a Request.
The Petitioners may be Put Off, Threatened, or Punished, etc. according to the
Merit of their Behavior: but let a Watch be set upon the Leaders of Those
Troops: their Haunts and Correspondents. Let it be marked who Intercedes, who
Mitigates on Their behalf.

Let the Motions of the Disaffected Clergy be likewise Observed, which of the
Nobility they Frequent: And in fine, Spies Employed upon all their Considerable
Privacies: For, let the Cry be what it will, the Cause of these Disorders is
Ambition. Ambition is the Cause, no matter what is the Cry.
Of which in another Place, and with One Word more we'll Conclude this Point.

That may be Conscience in the People, which is Sedition in the Minister;
wherefore in all Schismatical Ruptures, I could wish all possible Favor to the
Common sort of the Laity, and as much Severity to the Offending Clergy.

Sect. II. How to prevent SEDITIONS arising from the Disorders of the BENCH.
WE have Begun with the Church; and the Bench properly Follows: which is but to
give Them the same Place in the Order of this Discourse, which they have in the
Argument of it. Was there ever any Considerable Rebellion (I do not say Revolt)
That was not Ushered in by Corrupt Divines, Corrupt Divines and Lawyers are in
the forlorn of all Rebellions.
or Lawyers, or Both of Them? And it is no Wonder; since upon These Two
Interests depends the great Concern, both of our Souls and Bodies. One Reason
of their Forwardness may be This; that they may do more Harm, upon Safe and
Easy Terms, than other People: Bolt a Rebellion out of a Text; Dethrone a
King with a Moot-Point, and Execute a Bishop at a Reading. All which is done
with a Wet Finger; for when a People are Discontented, it is but Picking a
Scripture, or a Statute, for the Time and Purpose; aad Commit the Rest to
Application.

These Two Interests hold so Good Intelligence, it is almost Pity to part Them:
and Compared with the Rest, (supposing all in Disorder) They mind me of a
Combination I have observed betwixt a Beagle, and a Greyhound: the One Starts
the Hare, and Yelps, the Other Catches it, but by Consent, they part the Quarry.

As I Reckon These Men of the Robe to be the very Pests of Humane Nature, when
they Degenerate from the Prime End of their Institution: So take them (on the
Other side) in the Due Exercise of their Callings, they are the Blessings and
the Pillars of Society. But the Contrary, are the Pillars and Blessings of
Society.
A Word now to the Lawyer apart.

The Common Crime of Vicious Lawyers, is Avarice; The Common Crime of Vicious
Lawyers is, Avarice.
and Those Inducements to Sedition, which (in the Chapter next foregoing This)
we have divided into Corruption, Partiality, Oppression, Chargeable Delays,
etc. are but as several Branches from that Root of Covetousness.

Nay, take Their more Pernicious and Vile Practices; Their Misconstruction of
Laws, Misapplying of Presidents, Torturing or Embezelling of Records, etc. What
is All This, but Corruption in another Dress? A Project to Embroil the
Government, that They may get Money by Settling it again? Or if they can procure
a Change; The Basest of Corruptions.
They make the best Market they can of their Country; and Betray it to that
Faction that will Give Most for it. Nay, when That Is done, (and that Matters
will come Right again, in spite of them) They shall Betray it back again to
the Right Owner: at once Lamenting, and Adoring their Past, and Profitable
Transgressions. These are the miserable Fruits of Corruption*

Others there are that Err through want of Judgment. And that is a sad Case
too; An Ignorant Judge is a Dangerous Minister.
for Mistakes coming from the Lips of a Judge, pass for Oracles.

Others there are again, that Understand the Right, but in some Cases dare not
Own it. And so is a Timorous.
And These deliver up the People to Day, for Fear of the King; and the
Prerogative to Morrow, for Fear of the Subject.

From hence it seems to me, That a Prince his Chiefest Care in this Particular
of the Law, lies in a Narrow compass: That is, in Securing, and Preserving his
Courts of Judicature from Corruption; and in Supplying them with Men of Eminent
Abilities and Courage: These are the Instruments to make a Prince and People
Happy; Nor does any Thing more Conduce to it, than the Carrying of an Even and
Impartial Hand upon the Balance of Government, and Obedience. We come now to
the Choice of Persons, and There the Difficulty lies.

Some Deceive the World, by Appearing Honester than they are. Others Deceive
Themselves, A hard matter to make a good Choice.
and are Honest only for want of Temptation. Some there are, that are Proof
against Money, but not against Danger. In short; Where it so much Imports a
Prince not to Repent too late, it may be worth his while to Consider of his
Choice in Time.

Concerning the Abilities of Persons for the Offices to which he Designs them;
Common Fame, with a Little Particular Enquiry will be sufficient: but their
Integrity requires a stricter Scrutiny. What Is such a Man's Humor? His
Behavior? His Temper? are not unnecessary Questions. And upon the Whole? If he
has ever Betrayed any Friend, Trust, or Interest, either for Fear or Profit;
Away with him. But if upon Trials either Private or Public; it appears, A Rule
to Choose by.
that rather than do small Injuries, he has Refused great Benefits: that he has
Preferred his Faith and Honor, before his Life and Fortune: This Evidence may
serve for a Moral Assurance of an Honest Man. Whereas without this Personal and
Particular Examination, not only the Future Safety, but the present Quiet of a
Kingdom may come to be endangered by a Mischoice of Ministers.

To Reason upon this Hazard, does not at all Impeach the Sovereign's Absolute
Freedom to Elect whom He pleases; nor does it one jot justify the Subject,
that shall presume to Scan and Judge the Actions of his Prince. But in Regard
that Discontentments breed Seditions; and that Mistakings of This Quality may
beget Discontentments, we Offer This Expedient as to That Consequence. And in
Truth it seems to be a kind of Profanation of the Seat of Justice, when He
Sits upon the Bench, that deserves to hold up his Hand at the Bar. To Conclude
then; When a Monarch comes to Discover the Inconvenience of such Ministers, He
may kill two Birds with one Stone; and Consider who Recommended them: (But they
may be better Kept out, than Driven on.)

Next to the Choice of Good Persons, Succeeds the Care of Good Order, when they
are Chosen: Which may be Provided for; First, By maintaining an Intelligence
concerning the General Bias and Complexion of their Proceedings as to the
Public; (i. e. Whether or no they do equal Justice betwixt King and People.)
Secondly, By Over-watching them in Cases of more Private and Particular Concern.

Let not This Strictness appear either too much for a Prince his Business, or
below his Dignity. Kingdoms are Lost for want of These Early Providence; these
Little Circumspections; but it costs more to Recover them. Hae nuga Seria
ducunt in mala.
Nor (in effect) is the Trouble at all Considerable; for it is here, as 'twas
with the Tyrant, that durst not Sleep for fear of having his Throat cut. A
Mathematician comes to him, and tells him; That for so many Talents he would secure
him, and show him such a Secret, that it should be impossible for any man so
much as to design upon him without Discovery. The Tyrant was content; provided
that he might be satisfied of the Secret, before he parted with his Money, and
so takes the Cunningman into his Cabinet. What was the Secret? But that he
should give the fellow so much Money, and pretend that he had Taught it him.
This Sorry comes up to Us: The bare Opinion of a Prince his Vigilance, saves him
the Need and Trouble of it: And Three or Four Discoveries in his whole Reign,
shall gain him That Opinion.

Touching Those Abuses which Immediately relate to the Public; (as concerning
the misconstruction of Lawyers, etc.) they are usually couched under the Salvo
of an Ambiguity. To prevent which Inconvenience, A way to prevent Treasonous
Mistakes.
all Those Distinctions which in Seditious times have been made use of for the
Authorizing, or Countenancing of Treason, might be summed up and Declared
Treasonous Themselves. Such I mean, as the Coordinate Power of King, Lords,
and Commons, The Litteral and Equitable Construction of Laws. The Person, and
Authority of Princes. Singulis Major, Vniversis Minor, etc. For sure it is not
Reasonable, that the Clear, and Sacred Rights of Kings, should depend upon the
dubious, and Profane Comments of the People.

Concerning Grievances of a more Particular Quality; the Principal of them are
Injustice, and Delay: the Former whereof, is purely the Fault of the Judge; the
Other may, in some measure, and in some Constitutions, be imputed to a Defect
in the Law. In This Case, the best way to prevent further Mischief, and
satisfy for what is done already, is an Impartial Severity upon all Offenders
as they are Detected: Especially, where Complaints are General, and the
Injustice Notorious; for nothing less then a Public Example, can amount to a
Public Satisfaction.

Sect. III. How to Prevent, or Remedy Seditions arising from the Disorders of
the COURT.
WE have in the Last Chapter, Page 99. (concerning Seditions which may possibly
arise from a Disordered Court) stated what we intend by the Court-Interest. We
have like-wise Divided the Evill-Instruments, into such as either Plot
Mischief, or Occasion it. We have again Subdivided the Plotters into Three
Parties. The Contrivers of Seditions are of Three Sorts.
The One whereof opposes the Title of the Governor; The Other, (as Directly)
the Form of the Government: And there is a Third Party, that bring their Ends
about, by Supplications, Vows, Fasting and Prayer; by Forms of Piety, and
Reverence: and finally; that with a Hail Master and a Kiss, Betray their
Sovereign.

Concerning the Two Former; More needs not be said, than that Force is to be
Repelled by Force: and That, the Monarch is supposed to have always in
Readiness, for the Safety of the Government. The Other, is a Serpentine, and
Winding Party; The Puritan.
that Steals, and Glides into the very Bosom of a Prince, and Then it Clipps
and Strangles him. This is a Faction that Answers to our Iesuited Puritan.

Yet while I separate These Three, for Perspicuity of Method; let me not be
understood, as if they would not mingle in Complication of Interest: For
nothing is more Notorious, then that in all Commotions upon pretext of
Conscience, the Religious Division is still the Receptacle of all other
Disaffected Humors whatsoever. He that is an Atheist to Day, becomes an
Enthusiast to Morrow; where a Crown is the Prize. Only I must confess, the
Presbyterian plays the Fast and Loose of the Device, the best in the whole
World. Let as many help him as will, it is Liberty of Conscience forsooth; but
have a Care of the Purity of the Gospel, when they come to share with him.
They may, if they please, (nay they shall be Invited to it) run the hazards of
the Course with him; Venture Neck, and Body; over Hedge and Ditch; through
Thick and Thin, but yet at last, the Devil a bit of the Quarry.

In fine; the Plausible Contrivers of Sedition (under what Mask-soever) are the
People we aim at; and These are either In the Counsel, or Out of it. Sir
Francis Bacon Divides the Dangers from Within the Great Counsel, into an
Overgreatness in One Counselor, or an Over-strict Combination in Diverse, The
Rest, we only look upon as Their Dependencies.

Page 71. We proceed from the Direct Contrivance of Seditions, to the more
Remote Occasions of them. As Corruption, Monopolizing; Non-payment of Debts,
etc. --

This being the Order, into which we have disposed the Causes of Seditions; it
will be suitable, that some Degree of Method be observed in the Remedies. But
first, a word of Introduction.

We are to take for granted, that Sedition is a kind of Clock-work, and that
the Main Spring of all Rebellions is Ambition. We may be again as Confident,
that never any One Monarchy was destroyed, but with design to set up Another.
(The Talk of This or That Form of Government; or of This or That Shape of
Religion, Religion is but Talk.
being no more then a Ball tossed among the People, for the Knaves to keep the
Fools in play with) It Is Truth, that a Sinking Monarchy lapses into an
Aristocracy; and That again into a Popular State. But what is the Reason of all
This?

Does any man Imagine that the Conspiratours work for One another, or for
Themselves? Every man for himself.
They Join in the Necessity of a Common Assistance; but they Divide in the
Proposition of a several Interest. Who is he in the Senate, that had not rather
Rule Alone, then in Company, if he could help it? To be short; where more then
One Govern, it is because what Every man Wishes; no Particular can effect. (That
is to Master the Rest. (Understand me only of Medlers to overthrow a
Government.)

The next Slide from an Aristocracy, downward; comes a little clearer yet. Some
of the Craftiest of Those that helped the Peers to Cast off the King, are now
as Busy with the People to throw off the Nobility: and Then, they are within
one Easy step, of Confusion; from whence, the next Change brings him that can
carry it from the Rest, to the Sovereignty. As arrant a Mockery, is Religion,
in the Mouth of a Conspiratour.

Indeed it makes me smile sometime, A Traitor is of no Religion.
to hear how Soberly Men will talk of the Religion of This or That Faction: as
if a Traitor, or an Hypocrite were of Any. And then they cry, -- This is
against the Principles of the Presbyterians; and That against the Principles of
the Independents: when (Truly, and Shortly) they are but Thus Distinguished;
Those would subvert the Government, One Way; These, Another; And he that would
rightly Understand them, must Read, for Presbytery, ARISTOCRACY; and DEMOCRACY,
for Independency. I speak of the next Consequence, if they Prevail; not of the
Vltimate Design of the Chief Leaders; for That Is Monarchy) We Will drop ye a
Little Story here.

An Officer of the Reformat on advises with an Ingenious Surgeon of my
Acquaintance, about a Grief, No ill Story.
(as he pretended) caught with a Streyn. After diverse Questions; how and how?
The Surgeon tells his Patient, that (by his leave) the Trouble he complains of,
can be no other, then (to Phrase it Modestly) a Ladies Favor. The good man
blesses himself; and still it must be a Strain. Why then a Stain let it be: but
This I Will tell you Sir; The Thing that Cures That Strain, will Cure the Pox. In
fine; the Officer submits, and the Surgeon does his work.

The Presbyterian has gotten a Strain.
This is the Case of the two Factions, They Cry out, of their Consciences; but
their Disease lies somewhere else: and Schism is cured, just as they cure
Sedition.

Nay; does it not behove a Prince, with the same strictness to require
Submission to a Ceremony, A Ceremony may be as well imposed as a Tax.
as to a Tax? Or why may not a Justice as well refuse to Swear Obedience, to
the Civil Government, as a Minister to the Ecclesiastic? What can be more
reasonable, than for a Master either to Punish, or dismiss an undutifull
Servant? Briefly, That Monarch that would be safe, must resolve to be Deaf to
These Religious Clamours. Alas! let but the Ministers Begin; the People Bawle
in Course: not that they are Troubled; but they will do it in Rudeness, or
Imitation. They are as arrantly Taught to do it, as a Friend of mine Taught his
Beagles. Let him Gape first, and the whole Kennell falls to howling: Let him
give off, they are quiet too: and just Thus stands the Case betwixt the
Schismatical Clergy, and the Multitude.

But (it will be said) what is all this to the Court? Or to Seditions, thence
proceeding?

Oh very much. These Outcries of the Vulgar, are but False Alarms: The Dint is
nearer hand. They have their Demagogues, and their Patrons; (as the late
Glorious King, and Martyr calls them) and if a Prince look well about him, in
such a juncture as is here mentioned; it is odds, he finds some of their
Principals, even at his Ear, or Elbow. So that his first Concern is to Inspect,
and Purge (where he sees Cause) his Royal Palace, Beginning with his Counsel.
Where (as Sir Francis Bacon) the Danger is either, the Over-greatness of One;
or the Combination of Diverse: Which Dangers we shall Obviate with their
Remedies, in Order.

Subsection. I. The Remedies of certain Hazards arising from the Overgreatness
of One COUNSELOR.
ONE Overgreat Counselor may be Dangerous; First, In respect of His
Particular Temper and Inclination: Secondly, In regard of His Credit with his
Master: And lastly, In Consideration of the Influence of that Power, and
Inclination upon the People.

The Overgreat Counselor we here Treat of, is as the Malus Genius of a
Nation: And in Two Words, behold the Ground and Sum of the Whole Mischief.
It Is either Vice or Weakness, applied to the Dishonor or Damage of a Prince
and People.

Now to the Application of That Vice, or Weakness. And first, What ill use may
be made of the One, and what ill effects may proceed from the Other, by virtue
of his Credit with his Master. Ambition dangerous in a Favorite.


If He be Ambitious, He Is placed upon the very Point for Popularity. Whom can
he not Oblige, by Hopes, Rewards, Preferments? Whose Tongue cannot he Charm,
either to Speech or Silence? Whose Reputation, Suit, Fortune; nay in some
Cases, whose very Life it self, and Liberty, are not dependent upon his Favor?
If this Aspiring Humor be accompanied with a Sharpness of Judging; a Felicity
of Contriving; and an Impulse of Enterprizing: The Master of such a Servant
should do well to Look about him.

It may be Replied, That doubtless so he would, if he saw any Reason to
apprehend his Abuse of that Power; But the Knowledge of the Person, does
sufficiently warrant the Reason of the Dispensation. To which, we answer; That
though Sovereign Princes are not Accountable to Others, yet They are to
Themselves; both for the Expedience and Equity of their Actions: And entering
into their own Souls, it is very possible, that they may discover some
Incongruities betwixt their Affections, and their Convenience. Some
Incongruities I say; and such, as may Induce the wisest Prince, and the most
Indulgent Master; even toward the most Loyal and Meriting Servant, to limit the
Graces of his Inclination, to the Rules and Respects of his Office; and to be
wary, lest while He Divide his Heart with his Friend, A Caution.
he share also his Authority with his Subject: Therein, both Endangering
Himself, and Grieving his People.

To Conclude; It is great Prudence in Public Affairs, to commit little to
Hazard; and it is no small Hazard, to Expose a Favorite to strong Temptations.

Where there are Servants that will employ their Masters Bounty against
Himself; (and of such only we speak) If the Design be to supplant the
Sovereign, many Remedies may be found out, to frustrate That Ambition. Nay (as
I have already hinted) whether there be such a Design, or not; it is good to
provide against the very Possibility of it. For, it is fitter, that the Public
should be Indebted for its well-being, to the Care of the Prince, than to the
Honesty of the Favorite.

Ambition does better in a Soldier, then in a Counselor.
Ambitious Natures do better in the Field, than in the Court; and better yet
Abroad, than at Home. If they Advance, they grow Dangerous for their Power; if
they receive a Check, they become so for their Malice: Whence it comes to pass,
that we see few. Seditions without a Malecontent of This Quality, in the Head
of them. These are a sort of People, of whom a Prince cannot be too wary. But
we are here to provide against the Ambition of a Person Raised by Favor, not
Aspiring; and from such a One, the Peril is greater, by reason of the means he
has, both to compass his Ends, and to Disguise them.

Sir Francis Bacon proposes the Mating of One Ambitious Person with Another;
and in Extremities, the Puzzling of him, with an Enterchange of Favors, and
Disgraces, that he may not know what to Expect. Courses, no doubt, advisable,
to put an Insolent Favorite to a stand; if it may be as Safe to Disoblige him,
without Disarming him: but that depends much upon the Complexion of the Person,
according as he is Bold or Fearful.

It is the Interest of a Prince to dispose of Offices by Particular Direction.
There is not any thing which more Fortifies and Establishes a Monarch, than the
Disposal of all Offices, and Charges of Trust, by his particular Choice and
Direction, without the Interpose of any Public Recommendation: Nor can he
Transfer That Care to his Great Counselor, without a great share of his Power.
And here is the Difference; the One way they are the Honorable Dependencies of
the Prince; and the Other way, they are the suspected Creatures of the
Favorite; who by This Indulgence, makes One Party at Present, and Another in
Expectation.

A Wariness in This Particular, breaks the Neck of his Design.

It is good also for a Prince Fairly, and Publicly to Refuse him some
Requests, and where the Suit is too bold, to Check Him for Others: That the
World may see, that there are Some things which he cannot obtain; and Others,
which he must not Dare to Ask. Whereas, if He carries all without Reserve, the
Majesty of the Sovereign is lost in the Power of the Favorite. The Advice of
King Charles, the Martyr, to His Sacred Majesty now in Being, shall put an End
to This Point.

Never repose so much upon any man's single Counsel, Fidelity, and Discretion,
(...). Page 240.
in managing Affairs of the First Magnitude (that is, Matters of Religion, and
Justice) as to Create in your self or others, a Diffidence of your own
Judgment, which is likely to be always more Constant, and Impartial to the
Interests of the Crown and Kingdom, than any man's.

This may suffice to Prevent a dangerous Over-greatness: How to crush an
Insolent Favorite.
But if it be found Necessary to Crush it; (as in case of a bold, and manifest
Transgression of Duty, and Violation of Law) Something like an English
Parliament does it best; and much better to be promoted by the People, than by
the Sovereign.

A Second Danger is, when a Prime Minister employs his Credit to uphold a
Faction: and it is the more Dangerous, The Danger of a Favorite that upholds
Faction.
by the hardness to know what it is. As whether it be Ambition, Corruption,
Popularity: Or in fine, some other Secret Interest. It may be, they have need
of One-another.

Nothing can be more perilous then* This Correspondence, when a proper
Instrument has the manage of it. And manage of his Design.
Oh how he Detests the Faction! But yet Truly, in such and such Cases; and for
such and such Persons; and upon This or That Nick of Time, if Matters were
Ordered So and So. And Then, the Insolence of a Schism is Palliated with the
Simplicity of a Scruple: And for such Cases as will bear no other Plea, is
found out the Color of an Indisputable Necessity. Not to prosecute the several
Artifices, by which some Truths are Disguised, others Suppressed: Those Suits
Promoted; These Complaints Smothered: And finally; by which, both Men and
Things are quite misrepresented.

Kings cannot possibly see all Things with their own Eyes, nor hear all Things
with their own Ears; Sir F. Bacon.
so that they must commit many great Trusts to their Ministers.] The Hazard
then is Great, when the Confident of the Monarch is the Advocate for the
Enemies of the State. But above all, if he be Surly and Imperious to the Tried
Servants of the Crown: That looks like a Design, to Introduce one Party to
Betray the Prince, and to Discourage or disable Another from serving him.

We are here upon a Supposition, That a Master may be mistaken in a Servant;
and that a Servant may abuse his Credit with his Master. In case This be; What
Remedy?

Supposing the Favorite still in Credit, we must Imagine the Sovereign still
in the Mistake; and therefore not expect a Remedy as to the Person, but rather
fetch Relief from some General Rules of Government: which shall neither
disoblige the Favorite, if he be Honest; nor expose the Prince, if He be
Other: But this is better done at the Beginning of a Kings Reign, than in the
Middle of it; better upon Judgment of State, than Vrgency of Occasion.

The certain Help is a fit Choice of Officers and Servants. Especially in such
Places as have Numerous Dependencies; How to disappoint an Ambitious Design.
for otherwise, Three or Four Persons Leaven the Court; half a Dozen more the
Soldiery; and in Conclusion, a great Favorite, with a few select Instruments
of his own making, may, at his Pleasure, seize the Government. This was the
Rise of the Second Race of Kings in France.

Yet God forbid, that Princes should make Themselves, and their Privadoes,
Favorites necessary to the Prince.
miserable, by Eternal, Causeless, and Unquenchable Iealousies: That Kings
should be Debarred That Blessing and Relief, without which, Life's a Plague,
and Royalty a Burden. That is, the Use and Comfort of a Friend; [to whom (as
the Oraculous St. Albans) He may Impart his Griefs, Ioys, Fears, Hopes,
Suspicions, Counsels, and whatsoever lies upon his Heart, to oppress it; in a
kind of Civil Shrift, or Confession:] and from whence, (with the same Author)
he may reap, [ Peace of affections, and support of Judgment.]

Nay, take the Subject's Interest in too; And desirable to the People.
what can be more Desirable, then for a Prince to have a Watchful, Wise,
Faithful Counselor; and the People, a Firm Prudent Patriote, in the same
Noble Person? Accursed be the man that envies either. Yet Here Is a Line still
drawn betwixt Majesty and Kindness; which the One cannot pass, without
Diminution, nor the Other transgress without Presumption. In fine; the Right of
Placing, or Displacing Officers, lies on the Kings side of the Chalk, and falls
under the Head of Reward or Punishment.

King James in the second Book of his (...), delivers Excellent Advises to
Prince Henry, concerning the Choice of Servants.

First, See that they be of a Good Fame, Concerning the Choice of Servants.
and without Blemish.

Next, See that they be Endued with such honest Qualities, Let them be Honest
and Fit.
as are meet for such Offices as ye ordain them to serve in; that your Judgment
may be known in Employing every man according to his Gifts.

Thirdly, I charge you, according to my Fatherly Authority, to prefer
Specially to your Service, Of approved Loyalty to the Father.
so many as have truly served Me, and are able for it. -- For if the Haters of
your Parents cannot Love you, it follows of Necessity, that their Lovers must
Love you.

Choose your Servants for your own Uses, and not for the Use of Others: and
hearken not to Recommendations, Nor upon Recommendation.
more for serving in effect, their Friends that put them in, then their Masters
that admit them.

Especially take good heed to the choice of your Servants, Public Natures for
Public Places.
that you prefer to the Offices of the Crown and Estate: for in other Offices,
ye have only to take heed to your own Weal, but these concern likewise the Weal
of your People; for the which, ye must be Answerable to God. Be careful to
Prefer none, as ye will be answerable to God, but for their worthiness.

Not One to all Purposes.
Employ every man as ye think him Qualified; but Use not one in all Things,
lest he wax Proud, and be Envied by his Fellows.

These were the Directions of a Prince, than whom no Man spoke more upon
Experience: and very hardly shall a Sovereign that takes This Course, even upon
any Account, Miscarry.

Another Profitable Course might be for a Prince to set his Favorite his
Bounds, aforehand. Let a Prince set his Confident his Bounds aforehand.
As for the Purpose; that in such and such Particulars, concerning Law, and
Religion, or wherein his Peculiar Interest is concerned; he never presume to
move him above Once; and that in certain Other Cases, he presume not to move
him at all. By these means, the Favorite is minded of his Duty, the Prince of
his Dignity: and both secured; the One from the Hazard of Granting too much;
the Other from the Temptation of Asking it. So far from being Impracticable, is
This Proposition; that on the contrary, it is Obvious and Easy. As for Instance.

There are some things which a King cannot Grant as a Christian; Others, which
he cannot Grant as a King: and some again, which he cannot Grant as a Wise man.
So that Reserving to himself, a Freedom (even from Solicitation) in These
Niceties of Conscience, Honor, and Convenience; the Favorite may make his
Best of the Rest. In Points of Conscience, Honor, and Convenience, let not a
Favorite press the Sovereign.
The Relation betwixt a Governor, and his People, is like That of Man, and
Wife: A man may take his Friend into his Arms, but not into his Bed. To make an
end of This; That Favorite that presses his Master to any thing which
evidently exposes him, to Contempt or Hatred, does probably Design his Ruin.

To run through the whole Body of Humane Frailties, would be too Tedious; Let
it suffice, that Those Vices (whether Devilish, or Brutish) which in a Private
man, are Mischievous, or Shameful, are much more so in a Person armed with
Power to Execute the Malice, and qualified with an Eminence, to Recommend a
lewd Example.

Where a Great Trust is committed to a Weak Person; It matters not much to the
Public, whether he be True, or False: for Futility, in him, has the Effect of
Treachery in another: The One Blabs his Masters Secrets, and the Other Betrays
them.

The Third Hazard from the Over-greatness of One Counselor, The Danger of
Over-greatness as to the People.
arises from the Influence of his Power, and Inclination upon the People: And
That, either as to their Love, or Hatred. The Popular Part we have already done
with: (that is, so far as it concerns the making of a Party to Himself; and the
Remedies of That Danger) That which remains, shall be divided into Pride,
Coveteousness, and Misadvise.

It is seldom seen, that a Proud man in Power, A Proud man in Power.
is not withal Insolent, Vain, and Cruel. The first to his Superiors, where
they will suffer it. The next to his Equals, till they are sick of it. and the
Third, to his Inferiors, till he is Hated for it.

A Favorite of this Temper, makes it his Glory to be thought the Dictatour to
his Master: Disputing, Excusing, Cavilling, upon Mandates and Directions, (as
Sir Francis Bacon) His style, is Ego and Rex Meus; and the Consequence of this
boldness is to lessen the Sovereign in the Eyes of his Subjects.

It is harder for a Prince to Discover this Audacious Humor, then to Crush it;
Easily crushed.
let but the King withdraw his Favor for one Moment, and of himself, he falls
below the Scorn of those he lately Trampled on.

If he be Covetous; The Person of the Prince, and the Honor of the Nation are
exposed to Sale: A Covetous Great man.
and the People squezed to fill his Coffers, till they have not Bread left for
their own Bellies.

We here suppose the Worst; add yet even these Extremities, are not quite
Deplorate, and Helpless. Spunges will Spue, as well as Suck; and it is but the
Monarch's sending of the Popular Assembly in quest of the Public Treasure, to
fetch it up again.

Now whence proceeds this Mischief, but from Misadvise? not want of Prudence,
but of Enformation: or which is worse; The Mischief of False Intelligence.
from Tales framed to the Passion, and Advantage of the Teller. He Is made an
Enemy to the State, that is not a Friend to this or that Design. Dangers are
Pretended, where there are none; and Security, where there are: And (which is
the Curse of these Ill-Offices) the Wisest, and the Bravest of Princes, are
subjected to Delusion, and Surprise, in Common with their Contraries. Could
Solomon's Wisdom tell him which of the Two Harlots was the Mother of the Child,
without a further means of Decision? Or Could Caesar's Courage oppose the Fate
of the Senate? In Matters of Fact, Princes, as well as Others, are to be
Instructed by Report; and if from a Person whom they have Reason to believe,
they receive notice of a Matter whereupon they have not* Time to Deliberate;
their Proceedings are to be directed by the fairest appearance of that
Relation. In fine, if a Servant will betray his Master, there is no avoiding it,
for he must trust somebody. [Remember well says Sir Francis Bacon in a Letter
of Advice to the late Duke of Buckingham) the great trust you have undertaken;
Good Advice to a Counselor.
you are as a Continual Centinell, always to stand upon your Watch, to give
him (the King) True Intelligence. If you Flatter him, you betray him; If you
Conceal the Truth of those things from him which concern his Justice, or his
Honor, (although not the safety of his Person) you are as dangerous a Traitor
to his State, as he that rises in Arms against him.]

If such as only withdraw their Allegiance from their Prince, are so Criminal;
how much are they to blame then, that, where his Conscience, Life, and Dignity,
lie all at stake, abuse, and misposses him! That cry; Not that way Sir, for the
Lord's sake, go this way rather! and so betray him, from his Guards into an
Ambush.

But Centaurs are scarce more Monstrous in Nature, then these men are in
Manners; and I may seem perhaps very hard driven for want of work, to employ my
time in searching out of Remedies, for Mischiefs so Improbable. Truly his
Conceit, that imputes the Omission of a Law against Parricides, to a
Presumption that the Crime would never be committed, does not at all divert me
from believing, that Prudence is to provide for the Worst: Prudence provides
for the worst.
and nothing left to Chance, that may be secured by Counsel. Wherefore, I
proceed to my Prevention.

Since the only Certainty of what is Done, or Said, comes from the Eye, or Ear;
and that the Sovereign cannot be every where; so that he must either give
Credit to Relation; or know nothing of Affairs at a Distance; let us Consider,
by what means a Prince may most probably escape the Snares of a Mis-enformer.

To advise upon the Choice of the Instrument; is but to say, Choose an Honest
man, and he will not betray you: And not to let any man deceive you twice, is but
the After-game of Wisdom; for the First Error may be Fatal. We must look- out
some other Course then, and a better I know none, then a Strict Justice, and
Severity, of Reward, and Punishment. Reward and Punishment keep People in Order.
A False Intelligencer is as bad as a Spy. Wherefore, let a Prince suppress
Calumnies, and encourage Accusations, that he may not take his Friends for his
Enemies, and his Enemies for his Friends. What can be a greater Injury to the
Sovereign's Honor, then by a false Story, to cause him Love where he should
almost Hate, and Hate where he should Love? Punish where he should Reward, and
Reward where he should Punish? It breaks the Heart of Loyalty, this sad
Mistake, and strengthens the Hands of Treason. Who would dare to put these
Affronts upon Majesty, and Innocence, if upon Detection, the Scandal were made
as dangerous to the Reporter, as the Consequence to the Sufferer? And This we
take for a sufficient Mean, to keep Malicious Buzzes from the Ears of Princes.

But This is but the work half-done; for there are certain Truths as Necessary
to be Told, Honest Truths are Dangerous.
as are these Calumnies to be Concealed; and where the Undertaker of the
Office, runs a far greater Risque to serve his Prince, then the Other does to
Ruin him. These Offices are discharged, by Mercenary Persons, for Reward; and
by the Worthier Sort, for Reverence-Sake, and Duty. So that betwixt the Fear of
Punishment, the Hope of Benefit, and the rare Integrity of Those that stand
firm without considering Either; a Prince may easily secure himself of Good
Advise, and Right Intelligence; and That, (at least within himself) amply
suffices to his Establishment.

That Kings are Men; who Doubts? And it is as much Their Duty to Remember it, as
it is Their Subjects, not to be too Prying into the Slips of their Humanity.
Their Clergy are to Prescribe to their Souls; Their Physicians, to their
Bodies; and their Counselors are to Advise in Point of Government: But it is
within the Pale of every Private Man's Commission, to offer his Intelligence.
As for Example; Suppose a Counselor of State denies the Kings Supremacy. A
Case put.
Shall it be counted Sawciness in a Particular Person to acquaint the Monarch
with it? We Will make an end with this. That State is in an ill Condition, where
he that would save his Prince, must ruin himself: and where One Party is bolder
to do the King Mischiefi, then the Other is to do him Good. It is now high time
to take another Step; and we will stay but a Moment upon it.

Subsection II. How to frustrate a Combination of Diverse Counselors.
THe Dangers of a Combination in Diverse Counselors, are, in Respect of their
Power and Privileges; their Credit, their Dependencies, (either by Office or
Expectation) Their Opportunities of Concealing or Protecting their Friends. And
finally, in Respect of their Intelligence betwixt the State, and the Faction.

This Confederacy is so liable to be Discovered, so dangerous to be Suffered,
and so easy to be disordered, that it is scarce worth the while, to speak to
so Manifest an Inconvenience. In little; if they are not Removed as they are
found Faulty; Disgraced, as they appear Bold; or Secluded from such
Consultations as properly concern the Difference in Question: It will be a hard
matter for a Prince to struggle with a Faction that is assisted by so many
Advantages. If it were nothing else but the mere point of Intelligence; it were
enough to Endanger the Crown; to have a Faction privy to all the Counsels,
Resolves, Deliberations, and Necessities of the Monarch.

In the Lower Region of the Court, The Lower Region of the Court.
we have supposed Three sorts of People, that may Occasion Great
Inconveniences: to wit; Insatiate Beggars; Corrupt Officers; and Ill
Paymasters, I might have added two more; that is, Men of Ill Lives, and of Ill
Principles. The First of these Five; I thought to have placed in the Upper
Division; but it Commonly belongs to Both; only These Beg oftener; the Other
more: and to speak the truth of the business, where this trade is in Fashion,
it may be observed, that there are not above Four or Five Beggars in Chief,
Four or Five Beggars in Chief.
and the Rest Beg under them; as it falls out sometime in Popular
Representatives; A few Get up, and the Rest Truckle.

Where This Humor is much Indulged, the Consequence of it, is not only
Faction, within the Walls, but a General Coffeehouse, and Necessity
throughout the Nation: For when the Ordinary ways of Profit are disposed of,
Recourse is had to Project, and Invention; which, if not very tenderly menaged,
leaves the King a sad Loser at the Foot of the Account. Beside, that it
Anticipates the Prince his Generosity, and by Exacting, rather then Obtaining,
takes away the Freedom of his Choice, and Bounty.

The way for a Prince to Help This, is either to put a Stint upon the Suitour,
or a Restraint upon his Proper Goodness; and even where he is Resolved to Give,
not to do it suddenly; lest he appear to Give for the Asking, without
considering the Merit, (Harry the Great, of France, prohibited Begging beyond
such a Limit.

Let him farther have a Particular care of Persons that grow Proud upon his
Favors: The same weakness of mind that makes them Proud, will quickly make
them Saucy too: and the reason is, they think they have got the better of him.

Corrupt Officers are Another Pest of a Court, Corrupt Officers a General Pest.
and Bane of a State: unless timely looked after; and Then, the Public may be
the Better for them. And it is no ill Policy in some Cases, to let Them Squeeze
for a while, that they may be worth the Squeezing Themselves: An Excellent way
of Raising Moneys.
for no Supply is more acceptable to the Generality, then That which is Levied
upon their Oppressors.

The miserable Consequence of Ill-Payment, we have briefly touched upon, Page
73. The Reason of Ill-Payment is commonly Ill-Pay; Ill-pay the reason of
Ill-payment.
and Many must needs get Nothing, when a Few get All: from which vast
Inequality, arise Factions and Want. The best Remedy for This Evil, is, first
to Enable Them to Pay, and then to leave them to the Law if they Refuse. For
Protections are only so far Necessary to the Dignity of a Court, as they
consist with the Peace and Justice of a Nation: that the Privilege appear not
an Affront to the Law.

When a Court Pays Ill, it had need Live Well; for when People are Poor, they
grow Conscientious; and for want of Money apply themselves to hearken after
Religion: Want of Money makes People Religious.
The Severest of all Reformers being a Necessitous Multitude. Especially, let
them abstain from Costly Sins; for to Expend much, and Pay Nothing, is a most
distastful Incongruity.

We come now to that Canker of the Government, under the Shadow of the
Governor: the Ill-Principled Courtier: The Ill-principled Courtier.
who not only causes Sedition, but is Himself the very Tincture of it. You must
Expect to see all look Pale and Withered, where This Worm lies suching at the
Root. Can a Prince be safe, that is served by his Enemies? Or a People Happy
when the Soul of the Public is in Danger? Yet, in some Cases, there may be
Reason of State; and That known only to the Sovereign, for which some Persons,
in Exception to This General Rule, may be admitted. Saving Those very
Individuals, it may behove the Prince not to let any-one of the Rest escape,
without a Strict Enquiry; both by what Means, and to what likely End they are
There Placed and Entertained. Which if he does, and Early too; before the whole
Lump has taken the Leaven; it is more than an Even Lay, that he will find Reason
to Remove Them. Now to the Camp.

Sect. IV. How to Prevent Disorders arising from the CAMP.
THE Dangers from the Camp, Dangers from the Camp.
are Principally these Three; Mutiny, Revolt, or Popular Risings, (provoked by
the Oppression or Insolence of the Soldiery) Of These, in their Order.

Mutinies may be Caused by Want of Pay; How Mutinies may be caused.
some defect of Discipline; by New-Modelling; Disbanding; Disgrace, etc. And
all These Disorders may be procured by the Artifice of some particular Persons
that aim at an Advantage by them.

That Prince that Raises an Army which he cannot Pay Himself, raises it (in
effect) for some body else that can. In short, a very great Hazard it is, to
have the Soldiery Dependent upon any Other Interest then That of the Monarch.
Where it so falls out, that a Prince lies subjected to the Double
Inconvenience, both of having an Army, and of Wanting Money; Let him be sure of
a most Exquisite Choice of Officers, both for Honesty, and Ability: That the
Body likewise may be well Chosen, and well Governed. For he has enough to do,
that undertakes to keep his Troops in Order, without Pay; but if they want
Affection too, the Point is Desperate. This is the Nick of Danger, and
Temptation; for a Necessitous Army, of This Mixture, is any man's Money that
will offer for it: Wherefore in such a Juncture, a Monarch cannot be too wary,
of all Popular and suspected Practices. Let him be sparing also, even in his
Personal, and Private Expenses, at such a time as This: For Military Spirits
are apter to take fire then Other People; and so distrust the Kindness of their
Master, if they observe that he has Money for his Pleasures, and none for his
Servants. An Observation, possibly neither Fit, nor True: However, when men are
discontented, they look upon small kindnesses as Nothing, and they see Injuries
Double.

The next hazard is, upon the Point of Discipline; Good Pay will bear good
Discipline.
which, in an unpaid Army, can very hardly be Preserved, but by the Exceeding
Worthiness, and Prudence of the Officers. Nor by That neither, beyond their
Interest and Credit of Persuading: for Punishment were Tyranny without Wages.

The New-Modelling of an Army is also a tickle Undertaking: and so is the
Disbanding. Modelling and Disbanding are dangerous.
The Former is the sharper Disobligation; but it is but Personal: The Latter is
the more Dangerous, for it Destroys the Trade: And the Peril is either from
the Influence of some Chief Officers in the One; or from a Disposition common
to all Military, as well as Natural bodies, in the Other: that is, an
Averseness to Dissolution. Both the One and the Other, are a work to be
dispatched with as much Care, and with as little Noise, as possible: very
Tenderly, and by Degrees.

If any Trouble be Apprehended from the Displacing of some Particulars, How to
New model an Army.
(as he may possibly ressent the Loss of Power; or the Disgrace of being
singled out to lose it after such a Manner) it is but Casting out to him the
Lure of a Better Office, or of a Higher Preferment: wherein he may be more
Serviceable to himself, and less Danrous to the Public. Or if he be too Crafty
to stoop to That; the way is to begin with his Dependencies. This leaves him
Naked; and the Other Satisfied: At least in show, since to the World he appears
rather Exalted, then Ejected.

Disbanding is a Nicer piece of business: How to Disband.
The very Word is scarce to be Mentioned, till the Thing is Done. For 'though
the State may be Judge when it is Convenient to Raise an Army; the Soldiery are
commonly the Judges when it is time to lay it down again. A Good Preparatory to
This, is Modelling, and Dispersing, before they have the wind of the Design to
prevent their uniting against it. And by Degrees; One Regiment at a time* to
keep the Rest Quiet, in hope of Continuing. Let That be done by Lot too, for
the Losing Party will sooner forgive a Mischance, then an Unkindness. Touching
Mutinies that proceed either from opinion of Disgrace; dispute concerning
Precedence, Command, Provision, Quarter, etc. they may be referred to want of
Discipline.

The Causes of Revolts, The Causes of Revolts.
may be as many as of Discontents: But the Principal, are either Fear, Despair,
Revenge, or Inconstancy in the Common-Souldiery. And they may likewise be
Procured, either by the Ambition, or Corruption of the Chief Officers.

The best Security against These General Defections, A good Choice is the best
Security against a Revolt.
is in the Original Election, and Constitution of the Army. Wherefore let heed
be taken (as near as may be) even to the fitness of the meanest Private
Soldier: which in a fair degree may be attained, by good choice of Valiant,
Prudent, Vigilant, and Faithful Officers. Why should a Kingdom be hazarded for
a Trifle? How small a matter added to either side carries an Equal Balance! A
Word, a Thought, an Imagination, a Mistake turns the Fortune of the Day, and
Decides the Battle. Is any thing more ordinary then a Panique Terror, in a
Crowd of People? which, as Mr. Hobbs hints in his Leviathan; is only an
Apprehension of Danger, in the first man that Runs; the Rest, Fearing, and
Running by example, every man supposing his Fellow to know why. At This Rate,
Ten Cowwards may destroy Twenty Thousand Valiant men.

Against Despair; Arguments are best upon the Place: Revenge may be Prevented
by a Generous, and Military Severity. So that they shall neither have any
Provocation to the Attempt, nor Security in the Execution: But against Their
Inconstancy there is no Remedy.

The mischieves which may arrive upon the account of Ambition, or Corruption,
are searce to be Prevented, but by choosing Persons of an Impregnable Fidelity;
or Otherwise the Fairest Bidder carries it. And against Popular Risings,
nothing better then a Strict Discipline; and an Impartial Justice betwixt the
Soldiery and the Country. It does well also, to Interess Both Parties,
(Civil, and Military) as fairly as possible, in the Common Care of the
Public: For a Pure Military Force has the Face rather of an Enemy, then of a
Guard: But where Persons of Eminent Repute, and Integrity in the Country are
joined in Commission with others as Eminent for Martial Affairs, Both sides
are satisfied, and the Common Good better provided for.

Sect. V. How to Prevent, or Remedy Seditions arising from the CITY.
WHere the Metropolis is not well Seasoned, The Danger of an Ill-order'd City.
and in good Order, Many, and Great are the Advantages it has to Disturb a
Government. It has Men, Money, and Arms always at hand. But yet let a Prince,
in his Greatest Distress, have a Care how he Abandons it; for it is by much a
more dangerous Enemy at a Distance, then at Home.

The Ordinary Pretenses of a Troubled City, are either concerning Religion,
Oppression, Privileges, or Poverty, but still it is Ambition that sets the Wheel
going; and it is the Monarch's yielding at first, that destroys him in the
End. For while the Party is Tender, and Wavering; the Humor Corvigible, and
the Authority of the Prince, not as yet either exposed by Patience, or
Profaned by Popular Contempt, and the Insolences of the Rabble; Then is the
time, to cut off all Possibility of Sedition. Murmurings are but the Smoke of
Rebellion; the Fire's already in the Straw, but easily smothered: That is, if
seasonably looked after: for if it break forth into a Blaze, All the Buckets in
the Town will hardly Quench it. The very first Mutterings against the
Government, are but a pretty way of putting the Question; as who should say,
Sir, May we Rebel? And the Forbearance of the Prince, seems to Answer them:
Yes; Ye may. And Then, to work they go.

First, upon Religion: the most Dangerous, Pretext of Religion is a dangerous
and wicked Quarrel.
and the most wicked Quarrel in Nature. Is there a God? Is there a God?
Or, Is there none? Let any Reasonable Rebel, whether Atheistick, or
Religious, answer me. If a God there be; Upon what Nation will he power out the
fierceness of his Wrath; Upon what Heads will he employ his Thunder? If not
upon That Nation, where his Divinity is made a Stale; His Majesty Affronted in
all his Attributes: And upon Those Heads, that entitle the Basest of
Corruptions to his Immaculate Purity; and the Dictates of the Devil, to the
Inspirations of the Blessed Spirit.

Or is there None?
Now to Those that say in their Heart, There is no God: They Will yet allow the
Political Convenience of persuading the People otherwise. So that were This
Freedom in Matters of Religion is permitted to the Multitude: Either the Abuse
draws down a Vengeance from Heaven, or the Superstitious League among the
People unites a Party against the Sovereign.

To deal frankly; All Seditions are to be imputed to Misgovernment: All
Seditions proceed from Misgovernment.
To the want of Early Care in the Magistrate. One Man begins; He Imparts
himself to Others; They Conferr with Their Interests, and so the Mischief
Branches it self, till it comes to Overspread a Nation. How easy a matter is
it, to Smother a Spark in the Tinder-Box? A little Harder, to blow out a
Candle: Harder yet, to put out the Fire. In short, when the Town is in a Flame,
thank Him that neglected the first Spark.

The Prince that would prevent Schismatic Seditions, in a City, must begin
with the Clergy, Begin with the Clergy to prevent Schism.
and assure himself of the Pulpit. To say it is Dangerous; may in some Cases be
a Truth. But Dangerous as it is; If it be more so, to let them Alone, What
signifies that Objection? Suppose the Hazard almost desperate, on the One side:
But there is a never failing Certainty on the Other: Here it is Hard; There it is
Impossible. It is Necessary also to suppress Conventicles, Pamphlets, and all
other Irregularities, which either Draw People together, or Unite them, in
Order to a Separation.

Let the Magistracy be well-affected.
In a Particular manner, let heed be taken, that the Magistracy of the City,
consist of Persons Well-affected to the Government of the Church: And if they
Struggle, let them be timely Taught, that the Liberty of their Charter, does
not discharge the Bond of their Allegiance. This Strictness ought to be
indispensible; for it is not to be Expected, that One Schismatic should Punish
Another.

The Second Grievous Complaint is Oppression; and whether it be True or False,
let it be strongly Urged and Credited, it is the same thing.

Some Oppressions are Procured at the Instance of certain Ill Instruments about
the Sovereign; Oppression procured by Ill-Instruments.
on purpose to stir up the People against him. And this is done by showing how
Other Princes hamper Their Capital Cities: Never considering, that the same
manner of Governing will no more fit all Varieties of Custom, Temper, and
Situation, than the same Doublet and Hose will fit all Bodies. And then they
Cry, This Damned City must be Humbled and Taken down. It Is very Right; but This
must be spoken softly, and done warily. For to Level the Menace at the City, in
stead of the Delinquent, is a great mistake. In such a Heat as This, a Prince
needs no more than Three or Four Churlish and Rash Officers; Two on Three
spiteful and Illegal Actions, to bring his Royalty in danger. Briefly; a Mean
there is, betwixt Fury and Slumber; and equally ruinous to Princes, are Those
Counsels that lead to either of These Extremes.

May not That very Thing which these People pretend they aim at, be done by
Gentle, Legal, and Familiar Means? Let them Choose their own Officers; That
pleases the City: But it is the Public Care to see the Choice be Honest: and
that secures the Prince. On the One side, no Clemency can be too great, that
stands with the Rule of Government: On the Other side, no Severity too strict,
in Case of a Contumacy that Crosses it.

Burthensom Taxes are many times a Great Complaint, and sometimes a Just One.
Lighter, or Heavier they are according to the various Humors of the Prince;
and the different Exigencies of Times and Occasions; Nay, and according to the
differing Disposition in the People at several times, to understand them.
Public Necessities must be Supplied; and the Supreme Magistrate is the Judge
of Public Necessities. Yet still where a more than Ordinary Levy is Necessary,
Though the Levy be Extraordinary, let the Way be Ordinary.
the Ordinary way of Raising it may be Convenient: for the One way, they only
stumble at the Present Burden; but the Other, they are startled with an
Apprehension of the Perpetuity of it. In which Case, it fares with Rulers, as
it does with Racking Landlords, in Comparison with Those that Let better
Penny-worths. The One has more in his Rental, but the Other has more in his
Pocket: And the Reason is; the Tenants run away with the Rent.

Sir Francis Bacon is of Opinion, That [ Taxes and Imposts upon Merchants, do
seldom good to the King's Revenue; for that he wins in the Hundred, he loses in
the Shire; the Particular Rates being Increased, but the Total Bulk of Trading
rather Decreased.]

Some Oppressions again there are, that proceed only from the violence of
Extorting, and Corrupt Officers. To Complaints against Abuses of this Quality,
a Prince his Ear is to be ever Open; for it is in a Peculiar manner, his Duty,
to Relieve the Oppressed.

A Prince that Invades the Privileges of a City, Privileges are Sacred.
Breaks his Word: If they are Forfeited, he may Resume, or Remit at Pleasure:
Otherwise, let them stand Sacred. It can never be safe to Govern ad Libitum:
for when People find no Security in Obedience, it puts them upon the Experiment
of Sedition. If a Monarch has an Overgrown Subject, that he would be quit of;
that he would Sacrifice to his Proper Advantage; let him but give him a
Temptation to Encroach upon the Rights or Customs of his Imperial City: and if
he take the Bait, let him Discover him, and bring him upon the Stage of a
Public Oppressor. Such an Action lays That City at his Feet. To Finish; That
Prince that would have his Subjects firm to Him, in Danger, must be Kind to
Them, in Peace.

The Fourth and Last Motive to Sedition, is Poverty: A Terrible Enemy to a
Great and Populous City; Poverty is a terrible Enemy.
Nor is such a City, in Extreme Want, a less Formidable Enemy to the Monarch:
for Hunger is neither to be Awed, nor Flattered.

The Causes of it are so many, and so uncertain, it is hard to assign particular
Remedies. The Prince not to forsake his Metropolis.
In some Cases, Restraint of Building is convenient; In others, Sumptuary Laws;
the Regulation and Emprovement of Trade; The calling of Corrupt Ministers to
Account, etc. -- For fear of the worst, it is good, if the Necessitous Party
grow Numerous, for the Prince rather to make War with Them abroad, then to
stay, till They make it upon Him, at Home; by That means, exchanging a Civil
War, for a Foreign.

If the Mischief be too far gone, and that it breaks forth into a Direct
Sedition; yet can it very hardly happen, that a Prince can warrant the
forsaking of his Metropolis.

First, with Five Hundred Men he keeps a Million in Awe; That is, If He
Himself, and his whole Party, be not Coup'd up under the same Roof, They can
Destroy Him, by Number; and He, Them, by Fire; in case of being put to that
last Extremity.

Next; Let the Prince but carry the First Scuffle, and (the World to nothing)
the Town is his own. Whereas, let Him withdraw; so great is the Advantage he
leaves to the Rebels, both as to the Readiness, and Proportion of Men, and
Provisions for War; that (at a Distance) he may get the Better of Five or Six
Pitched Battles, and yet Lose all at Last. For They shall sooner Re-enforce a
Broken Army, than He Recruit a Scattered Regiment.

A Third Reason may be, that it lessens the Reputation of his Power, to give
Ground.

We shall conclude with the Fourth; which is, That Citizens will stand better,
far from Home, than under their own Walls: for what with the Importunities of
their Relations: Their Interests in view; and the Convenience of a Near
Retreat; They Fight in Distraction. We speak here of a Civil War, for against a
Foreign Force; These Reasons transport them into a more Determinate
Obstination. From the City, now to the Country.

Sect. VI. How to Prevent Seditions from the COUNTRY.
IT is very rarely seen that the Country begins a Seditious Quarrel, unless in
case of some Barbarous and Depopulating Tyranny, or for pure want of Bread. In
Truth, their Business is too Innocent, and They Are so Full on it too, they have
scarce Leisure from their Sleep and Labor to Think of Wrangling; and when they
do, they dread it. The hurt They do, is by Siding, and Seconding, and That
Unwillingly too: So that to keep Them Quiet, no more is Necessary, than to have
an Eye upon their Patrons, and to allow the Common Sort only to Live upon their
Labors.

Sect. VII. Certain CAUTIONS Directing how to Prevent and Avoid Dangers arising
from the BODY REPRESENTATIVE.
THere are Three Grand Hazards which Occur in the Consideration of a Body
Representative. The Choice of the Persons; The Manage of Affairs; And the
Subject Matter of their Consultations.

Touching the Choice; Regard must be first had to the Legality; Let the Choice
be Legal and Prudent.
and Then, to the Prudence of it.: That the Candidate may be of such Age and
Quality; and Chosen in such Manner, as the Law of the Place requires: And
moreover, that he be a Person of Moral Integrity; A Lover of his Prince and
Country; and One that Understands his Duty and Employment. There is a Duty also
Incumbent upon the Electors; That they be not Corrupted by Money, Overborn by
Importunity, or Transported by Fear, or Favor, to an Unworthy and Unsuitable
Choice. From the want of This Care and Fidelity, proceed many times the Ruin
of Princes, and the Subversion of Kingdoms.

Before the Sovereign Summons This Grand Convention, he may consider how the
Last Ended; the Present Temper of his People; and hold a Strict Intelligence
concerning such Persons, and Fellowships, as are likely to Cross him.

If the Last Assembly Acted and Concluded to the Satisfaction of Himself and
the Kingdom, he may Hope well of the Next: but if the Contrary, let him expect
a Faction: Unless in the Intervall, he take off That Animosity: which may be
attained by doing That Himself, as of his own mere Grace, and Motion, which may
bear some Proportion with what they would have done by Their Deputies: but
within the Bounds of Honor and Prudence, Better the Sovereign Reform, than the
Council.
there is a great Difference; betwixt a King's Reforming of Abuses by Himself,
and by his Counsel: In the One Case, it looks as if the People helped
Themselves: and makes them think better of their Own Authority, then they ought
to do: In the Other, they find Themselves Dependent upon the Grace of the
Sovereign, and ascribe the Relief to his Bounty; In fine, it is no tamifs for a
Prince still to usher in, the Call of his Great Assembly with some Particular
Obligation upon his Subjects.

As to the Rest, if the Prince finds the Temper of the People Peevish, and
Factions Boiling; such as no Clemency, and Goodness can Engage; the less
Subject for Clamor he leaves them, it is the Better; and if upon Convening, he
finds the Mixture Petulant, and Sour; he may with the less noise Dismiss them.

According to the Choice of Persons, The Effects of a good Choice
will be the Manage of Affairs: The Public Good; Particular Justice, and the
Dignity of the Assembly, will be the Chief Care of a Good Choice: but if the
Choice be Bad; These Noble Offices, and Regards, and of a bad.
will be the Least part of their Business. They fall then into Partialities,
and Sidings; Help me to day, and I Will Help you to morrow. Acts of State will be
Bias'd by Particular Interests: Matters Concluded by Surprise, rather then by
any formal Determination; and the Reverence of Order, and Reason will be dashed
out of Countenance, by the Voicings of Faction, and Clamor.

As Politic Bodies have no Souls, so Public Persons should have no Bodies:
but leave those Impediments of Justice, and Distractions of Counsel; (Project
and Passion) at the Door of the Senate. In short; where such a Partiality
happens, The Mischieves of Partiality.
as we here Imagine, the Two main Mischiefs are These: The Iniquity of the end,
or the Disorder of the Means. The Former may in some Measure be Prevented, by
an Oath to deal Uprightly: (but the Grand Failing was in the Election.) The
Latter may be Regulated by such a Clearness of Rule and Method; together with
such a Strictness in the Observation of That Rule, that both Every man may know
his Duty, and no man dare to Transgress it.

But Concerning the Subject Matter now of their Consultations: There lies the
Peril, when they come to reach at Affairs Foreign to their Cognizance. The
Hazard is This; step by step, They Eneroach upon the Sovereign; Claiming a
Right to One Encroachment, from the President of another. So that Meeting with
an unwary Prince, they Steal away his Prerogative by Inches; and when perchance
His Successor comes to Resume his Right; That Pilfery is called the Liberty of
the Subject, and There Is a Quarrel started betwixt the King and his Subjects.
Then comes the Doctrine in Play, That Kings are Chosen for the Good of the
People, and that the Discharge of that Trust and Care is the Condition of his
Royalty. The very Truth is, All Government may be Tyranny. A King has not the
Means of Governing, if he has not the Power of Tyrannizing. Better a Tyranny,
than an Anarchy.
Here Is the short of the Matter: We are certainly Destroyed without a
Government, and we may be Destroyed with One: So that in Prudence, we are
rather to choose the Hazard of a Tyranny, than the Certainty of being worried
by One-another. Without more words, The Vulgar End of Government is, to keep
the Multitude from Cutting One-anothers Throats: which they have ever found to
be the Consequence of Casting off their Governors.

When Popular Conventions have once found This Trick of gaining Ground upon the
Sovereign; they catch their Princes, commonly as they do their Horses, with a
Sieve, and a Bridle: (a Subsidy, and a Perpetual Parliament) If They Will take
the Bit, they shall have Oats. But These are the Dictates of Ignorance and
Malice: for such is the Mutual Tie and Interest of Correspondency betwixt a
Monarch and his People; that Neither of them can be Safe or Happy, without the
Safety and Felicity of the Other.

The best way to prevent the Ill Consequence of the Peoples Deputies acting
beyond their Orb, is Clearly, and Particularly, to State Those Reserves of the
Prerogative, with which they are not to Meddle. And likewise to set forth the
Metes and Bounds of their own Privileges, which They themselves are not to
Transgress.

FINIS.

