L'ESTRANGE HIS APPEAL Humbly Submitted to the KINGS most Excellent MAJESTY And
the THREE ESTATES Assembled in PARLIAMENT.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Brom at the Gun in S. Paul's Churchyard, 1681.

L'Estrange's APPEAL. etc.
IF the matter here in question had been the single case of L'Estrange, nothing
could have been more Ridiculous, then the Vanity, and Ostentation of this
Appeal: But as His Case stands complicate with Other Circumstances, that import
no less then the Honor, the Justice and the very Security of the Government;
the business of these Papers is no longer a private Apology, but a public
Duty. This will be better understood, upon a clear Distribution of what I have
to say into such and such Heads; and then debating, expounding, and
distinguishing (in an Orderly Method,) upon the several Members of my Discourse.

The First Point shall be the Subject matter of those Swarms of Libells that in
their Outrageous Course, The Subject of This Discourse.
have taken Me in their way toward the King and the Church.

Secondly, To vindicate, and discharge my self from those Calumnies.

Thirdly; To lay open the Quality of the Libellers: And the True Reason of
their Rancour against me, in despite of all Pretensions to the Contrary.

Fourthly; To set forth their Designs, and Practices upon the Dignity, and
Safety of the Government, and upon the Public Peace. And

Lastly* a Modest Deliberation how far in Honor, Justice and Policy, it may
concern any Prince or State whatsoever to Support, Countenance, and Protect the
Asserters of their Laws, Rights and Privileges, against the bold, and
Seditious attempts of the Enemies of the Constitution. Of These in Order, and
as briefly as I may.

Touching the First point: The Libellers have drawn the Main of my Charge into
these Six Articles.

1. That I have turned the Plot into Ridicule; The Articles against me.
and put an Affront upon King, Lords, and Commons in so doing.

2. That I have Countenanced a Sham-Plot;; and endeavored to turn it upon the
Presbyterians.

3. That I have made it my business to lessen the Credit of the Kings
Witnesses.

4. That I have comprehended All the States, Orders, and Divisions of men, both
Lords, Citizens, and Commons of England, under the Opprobrious Names of Citt,
and Bumpkin.

5. That I have Scandalously misrepresented all the Late Petitions, and the
Promoters of them.

6. That my Writings create Misunderstandings, and tend to the Embroyling of
the Kingdom.

Now to discharge my self of these odious and malicious Imputations, in course
as they lie; I shall speak, First, to the Ridiculing of the Plot, in contempt
of the Authority of the Nation; and refer my self to the Undeniable Evidences
of my own Papers: beginning with my Particular Opinion of it, as I have
delivered it to the World.

. 1. My Opinion of the Quality of the Plot.
The bringing of this DEVILISH Plot, The Acknowledgment of a DEVILISH Plot.
upon the Stage, has struck all men of Piety, and Loyalty, and Love to their
Country, with Amazement and Horror. The Murder of a Prince; the Subversion of
the Government, and Religion; The Plot aggravated.
What can be more Execrable? The Thought of so DIABOLICAL a Practice has justly
transported the People to the highest degree of Rage against it imaginable; and
it is a Meritorious and a Laudable zeal too, A Legal zeal against it
Recommended.
so long as it contains it self within the bounds of Law, and Duty; While the
King, With a Deference to Authority.
Council, and Parliament, are in the mean time Sifting and Examining the
Design; and doing Justice upon the Offenders. Case Put, Page 33.

After all this care taken to tear up the ACCURSED PLOT by the Root. An
accursed Plot.
Further Discovery Pa. 23.

As to the HELLISH DESIGN upon the Life of our Gracious Sovereign, A Hellish
design.
by Pistol, Sword, or Poysou. Ibid. Page 25. And again [This DETESTABLE PLOT
now in Agitation] Hist. of the Plot, A Derestable Plot.
Preface.

Let This serve as to my Opinion of the Quality of the Plot. A word now to the
Believing of it.

Touching my Belief of it.
As to the Popish Plot, that is Sworn by the Kings Witnesses, The Sworn Plot
given for Granted.
I lay my Faith at their feet, without any further Enquiry, or Dispute.
Narrative. Page 20.

Under color of asserting and making out the Truth of the Plot, The Plot
unquestionable.
(which no sober man doubts of) etc. Answer to the Appeal. Page 33.

All our Courts of Justice, Proved upon Record.
and Journals of State bear Witness to it. (The Popish Plot.) Narrative, Pa. 4.

Whoever carefully peruses their Writings, and Depositions; compares their
Testimonies, (that is, the Kings Witnesses,) and yet doubts of the Plot; is
little better certainly then Sealed up under the Spirit of Blindness and
Delusion. He Is mad that believes it not
Ibid. Page 3.

The Question is not the CERTAINTY of One Plot, No Question of the Certainty of
the Plot.
but the Superfaetation of Another. Ans. to the Appeal. Page 19. And further,
It is no clearing the Papists of One Plot upon the Kings Life, The Papists not
cleared by Charging the Presbyterians:
the Charging of the Presbyterians with Another. Ibid. Page 22.

There are a Sort of men that, One Plot under Another.
under countenance of THIS Plot, advance another of their Own. And if a man
Writes, or Speaks, or Reasons against them, he is presently a Favourer of the
Papists, a Lessener of the Plot, and run down with Nonsense, and Clamor. Case
Put. Page 34.

My turning it into Ridicule.
[For my own part I am so far from Laughing at it (the Plot) that it wounds my
Soul, The Plot no Laughing matter.
the very thought on it.] Reformed Catholic, Pa. 10. 11.

Nor have I been less Punctual in my acknowledgments of the Justice of all
Proceedings upon it, and in my Submissions to the Sentences that have been
Passed in the Case.

All Proceedings upon the Plot, Justified.
After so many Priests and Jesuits and other Leading men of That Party removed
by the Stroke of Public Justice. etc. Public Justice.
Further Discovery. Page 23.

We have had Legal Trials, Legal Proceedings.
Proofs, Verdicts, Sentences, and Legal Executions in the Case. Ans. to the
Appeal. Page 10.

His Majesty has two main Difficulties to Encounter at once; The King under
two difficulties.
the One to Master the Plot it self; the Other, to Temper and Sweeten the
Passions of men, Zealous in the Contrary Extreme; that no Inconvenience may
arise from Their Misapprehension of things Another way. Freeborn Subject. Page
27. And again. [The Depositions have been Formally taken before his Majesty,
The Evidences strictly weighed and Examined.
and his Privy Council; and the Evidences STRICTLY weighed, and Examined; and
from thence afterward heartily recommended, and faithfully Transmitted to the
Two Houses of Parliament. Ibid. Page 28.

Be it always understood that where AUTHORITY has passed a Sentence, The
Sentence of Authority is Sacred.
there is no longer any Place for Hesitation or Demur. Further Discovery, Page
3.

. 2. The Shamming of the Plot.
Now as to the Shamming of the Plot, and casting it upon the Presbyterians, the
learned Author of the Giants War, and of several other Course Complements upon
his Majesty; (they say he puts in for a Patrimonial Right to a Place upon one
of the City Gates,) This Learned Author (I say) has been pleased to Gloss
upon My Text, L'Estranges charge, as if he made the Plot only a blind.
as if I represented [The Plot only as a Blind to enrage People; and that there
was a real Design to destroy the Hierarchy, and all the Sons of the Church, by
the name of Papists in Masquerade, and get all the places of Profit to
themselves] Now for my Suggesting the Popish Plot to be only a Blind to enrage
People; I defy the world, either to show that I have misrecited my Self in what
I have already delivered; No color for any such charge.
or to produce any one passage out of all my Writings, that, without extreme
Violence, will in any degree countenance Such a Construction. But still, as I
am Innocent of rendering That to be only a Blind, which King, Lords, and
Commons have pronounced to be a damnable and hellish Plot; So am I thoroughly
convinced, on the Other hand, that there are Several Sham-Plots contrived, and
Started, where there was no color or pretense for a man to Imagine that there
was any Plot at all: and that great use is made of these Inventions, for a
Blind to the Advancing of a Fanatical Design. The Blind lies on the Fanatical
side.
And how far That Project may reasonably tend toward the destruction of the
Hierachy, and the Sons of the Church, under the notion of Papists in
Masquerade; and the engrossing of all Power into their own hands, shall be set
forth in its proper place.

But how comes L'Estrange to be charged with turning the Popish Plot over to
the Presbyterians, Why a sham in 1680. and none in almost 20. years before.
now in 1680. that has been perpetually ringing the same Peal in the ears of
the Government, ever since 1661. that he does at This Instant? And I do not
remember any Popish Plot that was taken notice of in those days.

In the Epistle Dedicatory of my Holy Cheat to the House of Commons, I said the
same thing in 1661, and ever since.
1661. I have these Words (speaking of the Presbyterians) [they cast the blood
and guilt of the late War upon his Majesty; make his Adherents Traitors; place
the Supreme Authority in the two Houses; Subject the Law to an Ordinance; the
Government to a Faction; and Animate the Schismatiques to Serve his Majesty in
Being, as they did his Father. This is the Drift of their Seditious Libells
etc.] And a little farther, This Citation of Douglas's Coronation-Sermon, Then
newly Reprinted.

[This may serve to justify the Proceedings of this Kingdom against the late
King, Presbyterian Treason in 1660.
who in a Hostile way set himself to overthrow Religion, Parliaments, Laws, and
Liberties. Page 10.] What could I say less to the Insolence of such Pamphlets;
or what is it more that I do now upon this Subject, that what I did twenty
years since?

. 3. About disparaging the Kings Witnesses.
The next Calumny laid to my Charge, is the discrediting of the Kings
Witnesses; wherein I once again repair to my own Papers; which, without a new
Dictionary, Black is White; and White is Black.
and a new Grammar, will abundantly acquit me. For according to Common English,
and Syntaxe, I have rather strained a point of Modesty upon an Excess of
Respect, then, on the Other side, been wanting to it. As for Example; in my
Further Discovery, to Dr. Oats.

They are wonderful things, A Personal Respect to Dr. Oats.
Dr. which you have done already; and I am Persuaded that you are yet reserved
for more wonderful things to come; which must be the work of Time to disclose;
when Truth shall deliver her self from the Rubbish of Oppression and Slander:
and in despite of Envy, and Imposture, render your Name as famous to Posterity,
as your Virtue has made it to the present Generation. And this I write with
little less then the Genius of a Prophet. Page 21.

These very words from the Pen of a Servile Parasite, L'Estr's Civilities are
turned into Libels.
would have passed for a Panegyric, which in L'Estrange must be Interpreted
for a Libell: Nay all the force of Argument, and Intention must be destroyed,
and the very Standard of the English Tongue altered, to do me a good Turn.
Every Syllable is put to the Torture, to know what Moutbs I made upon the
Writing of it: And if I do but stumble upon a Figure, that would be an
Ornament, perhaps, upon another man's Paper, it is a Blot upon mine; and the
most Innocent of my Metaphors, and Allusions are melted down into Articles, and
Depositions, without the Allowance of so much as one grain for Humane Frailty.
And all this, by the virtue of a kind of Inverted Alchymy, that instead of the
more Generous Operation of exalting Baser mettles into Nobler, and turning
Copper into Gold, sets up a New Profession of turning Gold, into Dirt.

[Who was it but You, The same Respect continued, and the Fact founded upon the
Narrative.
again; that so effectually laid open the Intrigues of the Priests and Jesuits,
with the Schismatiques, in the late Rebellion? That showed his Majesty so
plainly who they were that Dethroned and Murdered his Father: and painted the
whole Conspiracy so to the Life, that a body might Wink and see thorough it?
Who but you, Sir, to trace them down to this very Instant, through all their
Disguises and Caballs, Fomenting a Rebellion in Scotland with the
Presbyterians; Incendiaries in London with the Millenaries; and up and down
Tampering with the whole Crew of of Sectaries? Who was it but You that first
found out the Conspiracy it self, and then the Conspirators? Who but You the
Eminent Instrument in the opening of the Combination?

What is all this, All Honor paid to the Doctor.
but to Trace the Dr. in the very History of himself? And to say more to his
Honor then, perchance, ever any man said before me: bating only the Person
that, First, gave him the Title of THE SAVIOR OF THE NATION.

It cannot be denied but that the Kings Witnesses have ventured as far, The
Industry and Hazard of the Kings Witnesses acknowledged.
and done as much as men could do, under Their Circumstances, to make out the
Truth of a Damnable and Hellish Popish Plot upon the Life of his Sacred
Majesty, our Religion, and Civil Government, Ib. pa. 23.

It would be endless to encounter the Malice of every Scurrilous Buffoon that
neither dares own his Name to the Government, nor to the Subject of his Outrage
and Venom: But yet in regard that the whole pack of them fall in with full Cry
upon two Passages in the Second and Third Pages of my Further Discovery. I
shall bestow a word or two more upon those Reflections. The Words are These.

I have naturally a Veneration for the Government, A mighty Bustle about this
passage.
and all that Love it; for the Kings Loyal Witnesses; and the Preservers of
his Sacred Life, in the First place: with an Equal Horror and Detestation for
all his Enemies, under what Mask or form Soever. I believe the Plot; and as
much as every good Subject ought to believe; or as any man in his Right Wits
can believe: Nay I do so absolutely believe it, that in my Conscience You your
Self, Doctor, do not believe more of it, then I do. Page 2.

Now where is the disparaging of the Kings Witnesses in all This? The foresaid
passage justified.
I believe the Plot; and as much of it as an honest man ought, or a Sober man
can believe; nay as much of it as the Dr. himself believes: And would any body
have me, now, to believe more?

But the whole World (Say I) shall never bring me to believe, Exceptions to
another passage.
or to Say that I believe That which I neither do, nor can believe; As the
business of Bedingfields being alive again; or that I my self am in the
Conspiracy. Suppose my Boy should come in, and tell me that it rains Buttered
Turnips, I should go near to open the Window to see whether it be so or no,
Page 3.

Shall any man call This now, that is with so much Caution, and Distinction
applied to Cases that are manifestly false and groundless; shall any man (I
say) call This an arraigning of the Doctors Evidence? Or rather how shall any
man dare to apply these false and groundless Storys to the Doctors Case? does
it follow, because I do not believe a thing that is False, that therefore I do
not believe a thing that is True?.

. 4. For abusing all Sorts of People in my Citt and Bumpkin.
The Fourth Article runs for Comprehending all the States, Complaint against
Citt and Bumpkin.
Orders, and Divisions of men, both Lords, Citizens, and Commons of England
under the Opprobrious names of Citt and Bumpkin.

And is not the World much beholden to the Author of this Discovery, My
Libellers Libell the Doctor, and the Nation.
now, for the Resemblance he finds betwixt the LORDS, CITIZENS, and COMMONS of
England, and my CIT, and BUMPKIN? For it is he alone, out of his own mother
Wit, that has found it out. And yet he pronounces, in another place, that I
make my Bumpkin to represent a Cunning, Projecting, Canting Knave; which He, by
Interpretation makes to be a Common Representative of the Nation.
But so far am I now, from confounding men of Honor and Integrity with
Rascals; that I have set upon these Varlets an Express mark of Opposition to
the Sober and considerable part of the Land; and I have done This too, with all
the Clearness, and Contempt imaginable.

And YOU, Citt and Bumpkin a couple of Rascals.
(says Truman) are the Representative, forsooth, of the City; and YOU, of the
Country: Two of the Pillars of the Nation, with a Horse-Pox a man would not let
down his Breeches in a House of Office, that had but two such Supporters. Citts
Character.
Do not I know you, Cit, to be a little Grub-street-Insect, that but to'ther
day Scribled handy dandy for some eighteen pence a Jobb pro and con; and glad
on it too? And now, as it pleases the Stars, you are advanced from the Obort,
the miscarriage of a Cause-Splitter, to a drawer up of Articles; and for your
Skill in Counterfeiting hands, preferred to be a Solicitor for Fobb'd
Petitions. You Will do the Bishops business, and you will do the Dukes business; and
who but you to tell the King when he shall make War or Peace; call Parliaments;
and whom to Commit, and whom to let go? And then in your Fuddle up comes all;
what such a Lord told you, and what you told him, and all this pudder against
your Conscience too, even by your own Confession. Page 26. And then Truman
again, Page 35.

Who made You a Commissioner for the Town, or You for the Country? But we are
like to have a Fine business of it, The dregs of the people.
when the Dreggs of the People set up for the Representatives of the Nation, to
the Dishonor of the most considerable and Sober part of the Kingdom. Prithee,
Bumpkin, Bumpkin an Ignorant saucy Fellow.
with thy Poles and Baltiques, how should Thou come to understand the
Balance of Empires; wbo are Delinquents, and who not; the Right of Bishops
Votes? And you (forsooth) are to teach the King when to call a Parliament, and
when to let it alone.

Our Libellers should do well now to name the Lords, My Adversaries proved the
Libellers.
Citizens, and Commoners, that sat for their Pictures to the Designer of These
two Figures. But Calumny is shameless; they would never else have bespattered
me for an Abuse, wherein I have so many Thousands of Witnesses to the
Contrary. But no better can be expected from the Scum of the Rabble, whosc
Bloods run as Course as their Manners. And then they hit me in the Teeth with
it, upon all occasions, what Rogues I make of the Citizens; and it is not a pin
matter to Them whether a Suggestion be True, or False, provided that the matter
of it be but Scandalous, and the Consequence of it dangerous.

Where was This Zeal, The Appeal a damned Libell and no notice taken of it.
I wonder, for the Honor of the Lords, Citizens, and Commons, in the case of
the Appeal from the COUNTRY to the CITY; where they were all of them made
Rascals indeed, and under the very notion too, of the Representatives of the
Kingdom. It strikes In with a ONE and ALL, at the very first dash [Most Brave
and noble Citizens -- With you we stand, and with you we fall. Appeal. Page 1.]
This is one of the most virulent Libells against his Majesty, Full of Treason
and Scandal.
in his Person, Authority, and Administration; against the whole Body of the
Clergy, and against all the Faithful Friends and Subjects of the Church and
Crown, that ever yet was Printed: Nay it proceeds even to the Tacit Proposal of
a New King. This was no bespattering (was it?) of the Nobility, Citizens, and
Commonalty, to represent them all as in so lewd a Conspiracy against the
Established Government. But our pretended Patriots and Zealots, Our Zelots are
blind of a side.
are all of them blind on That Side; and there is not so much as one man of
them that has ever taken any sort of notice of these daring Affronts upon
Authority, unless to countenance the Sedition; But Recrimination is no
discharge: wherefore I shall remit my self, upon the matter of Respect to the
Citizens of London, to the Reply I published upon the coming out of That
villainous Libel.

It is a wonderful thing, A just Respect to the City of London.
the Confidence of this audacious Pamphlet, in addressing it self to the City,
after so Fresh, so Loyal, and so Generous an Instance of their Scorn, and
Detestation of any thing that looks like a Seditious Practice. Why should a Wat
Tyler expect better Quarter from a Lord Mayor under Charles the Second, then he
had from a Lord Mayor under Richard the Second? Nay, that very Rebellion of
Forty One, is most injuriously charged upon the City of London; for Gournay,
Ricaut, Garraway, and the most considerable of the Citizens, were not only
against it in their Opinions, but opposed it to the Utmost with their Estates
and Persons. And That Honorable Saciety has not yet forgotten either the
Calamities of the War, or the Methods and Instruments, which brought so great a
Reproach upon the City. Answ. to the Appeal, Page 2. And again, [How can the
Appellant imagine that the most eminent City of Christendom for Purity of
Religion, The Glorious City of London.
Loyalty to their Prince, Power, good Government, Wealth, and Resolution,
should be cajoll'd out of all these Blessings and Advantages by the Jesuitical
Fanaticism of a Dark-Lanthorn Pamphlet? Ibid. Pa. 38.]

There is a Passage in my Second Citt and Bumpkin, Page 27. which some of my
Over-Critical Adversaries pretend to lay a more then Ordinary stresse upon; and
I shall here submit it to any Impartial Judgment.

Prithee (says Bumpkin) let us leave This Noddy (Truman) a little, and talk of
something else. What do think was the Reason that Parliaments have been put
off so of late?

Citt. The very Question that I put 'tother day my self; Matters of State.
and 'twas Answered Thus, That the Nation could not be Happy, but in the
Preservation of the Government, as it is Established by Law; For the tearing of
the Law to Pieces must needs distract the People, when they have no Rule to
walk by: That a great many Worthy Persons were disappointed in the Elections,
by being Misrepresented to the People: That by these Practices diverse Persons
were obtruded upon the Nation, of remarkable Disaffections both to Church and
State: And that Therefore (I suppose) they might be put off, to the end that
some other Distempers might be Composed, before their Meeting.

Bum. And what Return did thou make him?

Citt. I told him he smelt of the Court; The Old Topique.
and that he had a Pope in's belly; and so I would have no more to do with him.

For the better Clearing of this Passage, I shall set forth, in the First
place, the true Occasion, and Intent of my Two Dialogues.

Upon the Reading of a Venomous, The Occasion and scope of Citt and Bumpkin.
if not a Treasonous Libell, called, An Appeal from the Country to the City; I
found it to be a direct Encouragement to a Rebellion; and yet recommended to
the World, as the Sense and Act of the whole Nation. Now to vindicate the
Sober, and Loyal Part, both of the Country, and City from This Audacious
Scandal, I thought I could not do better, then to expose the Conspirators under
the Character of a Couple of mean, factious, ignorant, and busy Knaves, and
under the Reproachful names of Citt, and Bumpkin; who are here Introduced in a
Discourse upon Matters of State, and Ironically poynted at in the very Margin,
for meddling with Affairs which they did not understand.

Passing from one thing to Another, What do think (says Bumpkin) was the
Reason, etc?

Now This is not a Question put in such a manner, as either to require, A
Question to the Person, not upon the Fact.
or to draw on an Assertory Resolution upon the true Reason; but a Question
accommodated to the Character of the Person that Asks it: It being the Constant
Practice of those People, upon all Prorogations, or Dissolutions, to Write, and
to Print their Thoughts upon the point; and effectually to call his Majesty to
an Account upon the whole matter.

And beside, as it is a Question Congruous to the Humor of the Person; So has
it no regard at all to an Answer upon the matter of Fact. What do Think?
(says Bumpkin) was the Reason etc. The very Question (says Citt) that I put
the other day my self. And Then without delivering his own Thoughts, he tells
what another said to Him upon the same Question. And Citt does not lay any
stresse upon That Answer neither; but brings in the Respondent speaking only
upon a bare supposal.

By This, A Question of Connection and Transition.
and by what follows, it will plainly appear that This Intervening Clause was
only made usc of for Connexion-Sake, and as a Clause of Transition, for the
carrying on of the Character, out of One Impertinence into Another. For without
coming to any Conclusion at all upon the Point, Citt betakes himself
immediately to the Ordinary Refuge of the Party, of making two or three Answers
serve to all manner of purposes, and questions. I told him (says he) that he
smelt of the Court, and had a Pope in his belly. I make no doubt but This
Apology will satisfy any man that has not my Person in his Eye rather then my
Errors. I remember Boccalini's Laconique Senate, that passed so grievous a
Sentence upon a Letterato, for making use of Three Words when Two would have
done his business* But the Question is Here, whether or no I have Said any
thing that was Ill meant, and not whether that which I have Delivered might
have been Spoken better.

After This Demonstration of the Innocent Intention, and Application of the
matter in Exception, it may seem Superfluous to speak any thing to the Sense
and Wording of it; And yet I must needs say further that I cannot find any one
Syllable in This Passage, that will so much as bear an Ill Construction,
without forcing it beyond the Measures of Common Charity, and Acceptance. For
First, the Position is True that the Preservation of the Law is the Security,
of the Government: and Secondly, the Fact is True; that Several Worthy Persons
were disappointed in their Elections by being Misrepresented to the People.
Eminent Persons misrepresented.
As in the Notorious Instance of Essex (and other places) where so many Eminent
Persons as well of the Layity, as of the Clergy, were run down by the
Multitude; by the Names of Courtiers, Pentioners, Papists, Baals-Priests,
Iesuitical Dumb Dogs, the Black Regiment of Hell; and the like; to the Scandal
of Christianity as well as of Common Justice, and Good Manners.

Now if the Exception be taken to the Expression of obtruding upon the Nation
some Persons of Remarkable Disaffections etc. What is meant by Obtruding.
Here is First, no Reflection upon any Particulars; nor is there any more
signified by the word OBTRUDED, then what we find verified in all Elections;
when upon Double Returns, the House of Commons pronounces the Person rejected,
to have been unduly Chosen, and, effectually, obtruded upon the Nation.

It is again, to be considered; that the Tenses WAS, and HAVE BEEN, have a
regard to what is past; and that the Word Parliaments, (in the Plural Number,
cannot be understood of That which is now in Being; Which was not neither, at
the time when This was Written, in the Exercise of its Power.

And moreover, Disaffections explained.
If the stresse be laid upon the Word DISAFFECTIONS, I do not see, in Propriety
of Speaking, how That word should arise to a Scandal; having only a respect to
a Diversity of Opinion, without any Relation at all to an Evil Practice, or
Design: And it amounts to no more then a Disinclination; which Imports only a
different Liking of any thing, upon a different Persuasion, of or about it; and
I never yet heard it imputed to any man for a fault, to think otherwise of any
thing then Another man does, or to frame his Inclinations to his Opinions: For
such a Dissent, fairly Interpreted, is no Other then an Insuperable Diversity
of Judgment; which is both Warrantable, and Honest, so far as it keeps it self
within Compass, and without breaking forth into Contumacy and Action: And
there is not the least Color given for such a Construction, in This place. But
still, as there neither is nor can be said to be any thing Unlawful in such a
Disagreement, it were nevertheless a thing highly to be wished, that the
Several Members of all great Counsels might be previously United in the
Fundamentals of the main Subject of their Debate.

Upon the Upshot; DISAFFECTED, Sounds no more in This place then a
Nonconformist; and whosoever Scruples the Order and the Authority of Bishops,
and doubts of the Kings Power in Ecclesiastical Matters and over Ecclesiastical
Persons, is in such manner Disaffected to the Church, and State, as to answer
the Literal meaning of This Clause, and no otherwise. Nor is any man to blame
for being of such or such a Principle, that lies under the force of an
Invincible Persuasion, and consequently under the necessity of a Suitable
Inclination. So much for This Point: The Next is,

. 5. My falling foul upon all the Petitioners.
The Fifth Exception is, Exception upon Petitions.
that I have Scandalously misrepresented all the Petitioners, and Promoters of
the late Petitions. How far this Imputation is True or False, and upon what
grounds I support my Opinion; shall be seen in what follows.

[But may not men Petition, you will say, and Petition for a good thing?
Petitions approved and how far.
Yes; if the thing be Simply Good; the Petitioners Competent Judges of it; and
every man keep himself to his own Post, I see no hurt in it: But for the
Multitude to interpose in matters of State, as in the Calling or Dissolving of
Parliaments; Regulation of Church Government; or in other like Cases of
Doubtful and Hazzardous Event, wherein they have no Skill at all, nor any
Right of Intermeddling: Why may not Twenty Thousand Plow-jobbers as well
Subscribe a Petition to the Lord Mayor of London, for the calling of a Common
Council? Or as many Porters and Carr-men here in London put in for the better
Government of the Herring-Trade in Yarmouth? Seasonable Memorial. Page 21. And
then again,

Let the matter of the Petition be never so fair; Not so much the Matter, as
the scope of the Petition.
if it be a business out of the Petitioners Sphere, and Capacity either to
meddle in, or to understand; it is a Suspicious way of Proceeding. Such were
the Confederate Petitions of England and Scotland for a Parliament in 1641.
which were but a Prologue to the Opening of the Subsequent Confederacy against
the Government: when the Petitions that followed sufficiently expounded the
Meaning of the Former. They Petitioned against Ecclesiastical Courts,
Ceremonies, Scandalous Ministers, Bishops Votes in Parliament, and Episcopacy
it self; against Evil Counselors, Monopolies, Corruptions of State, Courts of
Oppression, and innumerable Grievances: And so for the Militia: the Kings
Towns, and Forts; till they brought the King to the Block. Page 20. And after
this manner have they proceeded now again.

The Petition was at first, The advance of the Petition from one thing to
another.
for the Meeting of the Parliament; and then they came to twit the King with
his Coronation Oath: and then Delinquents must be brought to punishment; and
then the Parliament was to sit as long as they pleased: And at last, every man
must be marked for a Common Enemy, that would not Subscribe to it. So that
First, they would have the Parliament Sit; and Then, they would cut them out
their work; and, in Fine, it was little other then a Petition against those
that would not Petition.

The Late Kings Observations upon the Growth of Petitions of this kind are
very Pertinent. The Late Kings Observations upon Petitions.


Upon [the tumultuous Confluxes of mean and rude People, who are taught first
to Petition, then to Protect, then to Dictate; at last, to Command and Over awe
the Parliament. EIK.BAS. upon TUMVLTS]* And the Practices of these people are
excellently well set forth by his late Majesty also Ex. Coll. Page 536.

Their Seditious Preachers, And the menage of them.
( says he) and Agents, are by them, and their Special and particular
directions, sent into the Several Countys, to infuse Fears and Iealousies into
the minds of our good Subjects, with Petitions ready drawn by Them, for the
People to Sign, which were yet many times by them changed three or four times
before the Delivery; upon accidents, or occasions of either or both Houses. And
when many of our poor deceived People of our several Countyes have come to the
City of London, with a Petition so framed, altered, and signed, as aforesaid;
That Petition has been Suppressed, and a New one ready drawn has been put
into their hands, after their coming to Town, (inso much as few of the Company
have known what they Petitioned for) and has been by them presented to one or
both our Houses of Parliament; as That of Bedfordshire, and Buckinghamshire:
witness those Petitions, and amongst the rest That of Hertfordshire, which
took notice of matters agreed on, or dissented from, the night before the
Delivery: which was hardly time enough to get so many thousand hands, and to
travel to London on that Errand.

So that I have very good Authority here, Good Authority for suspecting Popular
Petitions.
for apprehending the danger of Popular Petitions; And to show now that I am
not at all possessed against Petitions in General, or against ALL the
Petitioners; Truman says, that [to join in a Petition for the Meeting of a
Parliament, to bring Malefactors to a Trial, or to extirpate Popery, Some
Petitions both Lawful and Commendable.
is, in the appearance of it, not only Lawful, but Commendable: But then it
must be promoted by Lawful Means, and under Decent Circumstances. Citt and
Bum. Page 27. [It is a good thing to execute Justice, but yet a Private man
must not invade the Judgment Seat, though it were to pass even the most
Righteous Sentence, Ibid. Pa. 28. And Moreover; Many worthy persons concerned
in the Petitions.
Truman acknowledges that he finds many honest and considerable men concerned
in these Petitions.] Ibid. Which is more Evidence then needed for the purging
of my self from so gross a Slander. I come now to the Last Article of my
Charge.

. 6. My Writings (they say) create Misunderstandings, and tend to the
Embroyling of the Kingdom.
It it be so, The scope of all my Writings.
I have been extremely out in my Measures all this while, to be still creating
of Misunderstandings in the very Act of Endeavoring, either to rectify, or to
prevent them. And to be Endangering the Peace of the Kingdom in the Design of
preserving it. If to Assert the Law, and the Government against all Opposers;
If to lay open the Malice and Calumny of so many bold Libells against his
Majesty's Person, Authority, and Government; if to maintain the Apostolical
Order, and the Constitutions of the Church against Schism; and the Powers, and
Privileges of the State against all Principles of Sedition; If to inculcate
Reverence, and Obedience toward our Superiors; If to recommend the Blessings,
and Duties of Unity, in a due Submission to the Provisions that are made for
the Upholding of Order, both in Church, and State: If the bending of all my
thoughts, and Applications to these Ends, be to create Misunderstandings, and
breed Ill Blood in the Hearts of his Majesty's Liege People, Thus am I guilty
of the matter charged upon me in This Article, and no Otherwise.

I shall pass now, in Order, from the Particulars of my Charge to the Quality
of the Libellers, and the true Reason of their Rancour against me, in despite
of all their Pretensions to the Contrary.

As to the Quality of the Libellers, The Quality of the Libellers.
a man may judge of the Meannesse of their Souls by the Condition of the
Office: which is the Part of the very Devil himself; being only to Blacken,
and to Defame. They have lickt up the Vomit of the Nation, which they discharge
again in their Writings, partly upon my self, and the rest upon the Government:
for I have still the Honor to suffer, not only by the same Hand and Fate, with
the King and with the Church, but for their very sakes too.

In this Mercenary Crew of Beastly Libellers, A Hackny Libeller.
there is one little Creature among the rest, that serves as a Common Instrument
to the Faction: And that which They put into his mouth the Forepart of the
week, he commonly throws Out again upon the Government, and all that Love it,
toward the End on it. There is not perhaps so Insolent a Libell permitted upon
the face of the Earth, where ever Christianity, or Good manners set footing; so
Profane, Scurrilous and Seditious; nor has the pretended Author of it any
other Protection for his Crimes, then the Obscurity of his Person; for there is
no Touching of him, without fouling a man's Fingers. And yet to let him see now
that I am not absolutely a stranger to his History. For several years he never
knew what it was to sleep, but in a Cellar or in a Garret, saving now and then,
in his Beer, upon a Bulk. In the days of his Prosperity he was received into
the House, of a Boiling Cook, where he spung'd out a poor Livelihood upon the
Fragments of a Three penny-Ordinary; but his Conversation was yet more
Reproachful then his Quality and Fortune. Whosoever doubts the Truth of This,
needs but go into Salisbury-Court to be better enform'd*

Is not the World at a fine Pass now, when such
Fellows as This shall come to hold the Balance of Empires? To trample the
Crown and the Miter under their feet? To Charge his Majesty himself with a
Confederacy for the bringing in of the French King and Popery; as I am ready to
Prove he has done? To expose the Episcopacy, and the Papacy under the same
Notion, promiscuously, to the Hatred and Contempt of the Common People; To make
sport with the very Badge of our Profession? (That TOOL the CROSS, as the
Buffoon calls it) To Canton out the Nobility and Gentry into what Tribes They
please: as Fools and Knaves; Papists and Traitors; Courtiers and Pensioners?
The Egyptian Locusts were nothing to This Plague of our English Scarabs, that
devour, not only the Fruit, but the Honor of the Land, and render the English
Nation as much as in Them Lies, a Laughing Stock to all our Neighbors round
about us. It is not that I am angry with Harry Care for the delicate
Back-strokes he gave me in Prances last Narrative, by his Invention for the
setting up of a Correspondence betwixt Mrs. Cellier and my self; a Person whose
Face I never saw in my whole Life that I know of, till (before the Couneell)
about a week or ten days after the publishing of That Book: It Is true it was as
false and as shameless a Contrivance as Possible: But why should I expect
better from him when God Allmighty has Written the Signature of what he is, in
the very Visage of the Animal?

Now as to the Pretended Reasons of these Wretches Rancor against me. Why this
Rancour against me?
First, they say that I began with them. Secondly, that I have been pertetually
Harping upon one and Forty, and the Rebellion of One and Forty; without any
Ground, or Provocation for either. It must be my part now to show that I have
never put pen to paper yet, but either in my own Defense, or in the Vindication
of the Public.

The First Reflection I past upon any man, The Faction began with me.
was upon Care, for Libelling me in the Epistle Dedicatory to his Histiory of
the Damnable Popish Plot. I have already laid open the Malice, and the
Sillyness of That Imposture against me, and I have said something like-wise to
the Venom of that pitiful Pamphlet against the Government: Especially Page
91; where he borrows no less then a whole Page of Libell, against the King,
from a sheet entitled a Letter to a Friend in the Country, which ('it is said)
was the work of a better hand. From This time forward I was plied with Fresh
Calumnyes; which have given me fresh and fresh Occasion still of Writing to
clear my self.

As to the Other point of pressing the business of One and Forty more than
needed, I must Appeal to the Pieces themselves which I have published.

My Reformed Catholic was written with a Design to Unmask the Fallacy of
Imposing upon the People, My End of Writing.
under the Name of Dissenting Protestants, a kind of Contradiction to the
Protestant Religion, which is by Law Established; and to Expound the meaning of
several Quaeres and Proposals, that were Then Printed, to deter People from
choosing Men that had either any Relation to the King, or Kindness for the
Church, into the Next Election. I shall refer the Reader for further
Satisfaction in This Particular to Page 9. and so from p. 21. to p. 27; where
there are several Instances of Libels Printed at That time, that fell little
short of downright Treason.

In my Freeborn Subject, Free born Subject,
p. 14. and so forward, there are several Instances likewise of the same
Quality; My Answer to the Appeal was more directly upon the Subject; and after
That, I wrote A seasonable Memorial, expressly to lay open the Arts and Methods
by which the Glorious City of London was formerly betrayed to slavery, and
Faction; the very same Practices being at That time promoted by some particular
Persons, and attempted over again.

My Two Dialogues of Cit and Bumpkin were (as I have said already) Composed for
the Undeceiving of those Credulous People, Citt. and Bumkin.
that had been Unhappily misled by the Insinuations of That accursed Libel,
called The Appeal.

My Letter to Mr. Oate's was founded upon Mr. Oates's Discovery, My Letter to
Mr. Oats justified.
and only a more vigorous Emprovement of His Evidence, toward the Rooting out
of all Priests and Jesuits out of the Land; by such ways and means as do
naturally arise from the Reasons of his Depositions. And I have done This too,
with all due Deference and Respect to the Kings Witness^s, as well as to the
Plot, notwithstanding Mr. Oate's scandalous and undeserved Revilings of me;
which might perhaps have staggered some man less considerate than my self, at
least in some part of his Duty; especially falling so bitterly withal upon the
Memory of a Person for whose Holy Ashes I have so great a Veneration, A
Passionate Expression.
LAUD (says he) was a RASCAL, and a TRAITOR; and This he said over and over,
and without any manner of Provocation. Without running into any more
Particulars; This has been the Case of my Affair from on end of it to the
other. But to come now from the pretended Cause of their malice to me, to the
Cause it self.

I have lived long enough in the World to understand, The Effect of popular
Libels.
in some measure, both Men and Books; and that popular Passions are moved by
popular Discourses, as the Waves of the Sea are by the Power of the Winds. It
is the First Office of Political Pamphlets or Treatises, in all Cases of Design
upon any Eminent Alteration of State, to possess the People with falls Notions
about the Original, the Nature and the Ends of Government; and so to train them
on, from Perverse Principles, in the matter of Rule and Subj^ction, to Evil
Thoughts of their Superiors and Governors; and from Thence, to transport them
into Undutiful and Intemperate Practices against the public Peace* We have
already felt the Effects of This way of Proceeding, in the most outrageous
Rebellion, in all Circumstances, perhaps, that ever was heard of: And the Late
King himself imputed it principally to the Force of Seditions Libels.

Now the same Methods being set a foot again, The Reason of my Writing.
and That Invective Course of Liberty against both the Church and the State,
proceeding without any Check or Control; I thought my self bound in Honor and
Duty, both as an English Man, and as a Subject, to use the best means I could,
either to Stop, or to divert that Torrent. Upon This I took upon me, (so much
as in Me lay) the Defense of the Law, and the Government against all those
Erroneous and Disloyal Positions, that were daily Published, and imposed upon
the Unskilful and Unwary Multitude, to the extreme Hazard and Dishonor of the
State.

I brought the Terms of Dominion and Obedience to the Right Standard; I laid
Open and Rectified all their Fallacious Distinctions, and the dismal
Consequences of the Peoples swallowing such Mistakes. The Cheat laid open.
I took off the Baits of Religion, Liberty and Reformation in the very sight of
the Common People; and laid open the Hook that was under them: I showed them
that the whole Pretense was no other than a Counterfeit; and that there was no
more of Religion, Liberty or Reformation in the bottom of it, then of a Living
Fly in an Artificial one; and that one Leap at it was as much as their Lives,
Estates, and their Souls were worth. I gave the Multitude Antidotes against all
their Pestilent and Poisonous Infusions; I resolved all their Riddles, and from
their own Actions, and Acknowledgments in the like Cases, expounded their
meanings. In one word, by the blessing of God upon this Naked and honest
Simplicity of Dealing, I have found some Well-meaning Dissenters reclaimed from
their Errors, and Others that were wavering before, Now to be fully fatisfyed
and Confirmed. Nor can it well be otherwise, in so Righteous and Reasonable a
Cause; where the manifest Justice and Evidence of the matter would do its own
business, with the help even of a very slender Advocate to support it.

I have spoken enough to the Circumstances of my Charge; My Loyalty is my Crime.
but all That Story serves only for a Blind. And in truth my Zeal for the
Upholding of the Government is my Unpardonable Crime; the Libellers would,
Otherwise, take notice of the many, and the open Scandals, that are cast upon
the King, No notice taken of Treason and Sedition.
and the Church, with an Evident Design to expose Majesty and Episcopacy to
Hatred and Scorn; and show their Affections That way for the Life and Honor of
the KING, and for the Protestant Religion; and not stand picking of Holes in
the Coat of a person that has so unquestionably dedicated all the Faculties of
his Soul, Body, Fortune and Interests to the Service of his Prince and Country;
and to set Spies upon every Action and Line in his whole Life, to try if they
can find but any one point, either in his Conversation or Writings, that might
bear a Double meaning; and, at last, to render that very Ambiguity (if it were
possible) no less than Capital too. But I thank God My Faults of That kind are
as hard to be found out, as my Accusers Virtues.

It goes a great way with many Moderate Nonconformists, I never received any
Reply.
and other Reasonable Persons too, that have not as yet taken any strong
Impressions, either on the one side, or on the other; that notwithstanding all
the rudenesses of Clamor and ill Language against me, for the Papers I have
Published, I have not as yet received one single Reply to the Argument of any
thing that ever I wrote, more than the Opposing of Revilings to my Reasons: So
that their Quarrel to me is purely for interposing betwixt Faction and
Authority. It will be said perhaps, that my Papers are not worth the Answering.
How comes it then that they think it worth the while to bestow so much pains
upon my Person? nay and to propound and meditate so many extraordinary Ways of
Animadversion upon L'Estrange, as if the Foundations of the Government were to
be removed for my sake, and that an Englishman were to be no longer safe under
the Protection of the Law? But these are only Coffee-House-Imaginations, and
which I am sure, will never receive any Countenance or Encouragement from the
Authority and Wisdom of a Parliament.

But since my Hand is in upon this Subject, Two points worth the clearing.
there are Two Points more worth the Clearing than all the rest; as being of
greater Importance toward the understanding of the present Controversy: The
One has a Respect to the more effectual Discovery of Priests and Jesuits. The
Other, To the Impartial Stating and Discussing the Business of Toleration. The
former of these I have handled in my Further Discovery, Dedicated to Dr. Oats,
and Grounded upon the Authority of his Evidence: The Other I have Treated upon
more at large, in my Toleration Discussed, and with a regard to all the
Circumstances that I could fairly bring within the Compass of the Question. Let
the whole World fairly, and by dint of Reason, overthrow either the One or the
Other, and I will yield my self to have been all this while under a great
Mistake.

I know very well that I am Charged for writing more than my Share; Why I have
written so much.
when the true Reason of it was, that others wrote less: and in effect, it was
more than one Man's Work to attempt what I have done: But upon a Sense that the
thing was of absolute Necessity for some body to do; and finding other People
more Cautious than I thought was either Needful or Expedient, in so Public a
Case, I engaged my self further than my Neighbors: and not without the
Foresight of these Outrages which I knew I was to draw upon my self: Neither is
this the first time that I have Sacrificed all other Considerations to my Duty.

Some will have it, No Preferment or Reward in the case.
that I have been set on by the Promises and Temptations of Advantages and
Reward; which is an Imagination so far from the truth of this Matter, that all
things considered (saving my Veneration and Humble Acknowledgments to His
Majesty, who has been very Gracious to me) I do positively averr, that the
King has not a Subject in his Three Kingdoms, that has suffered harder Measure,
and more contrary to Law and Justice, than I my self have done; and all this,
without the Balance of any other Recompense than a little Court-Holy-Water and
Fair Words. Besides that in the Worst of Times, I did the same thing through
all Difficulties and Hazards.

Having already in general Terms reflected upon Scandalous and Dangerous
Libels, Designs and Practices upon the Public Peace.
as the Occasion of my Writings; I shall now take a Taste of the Condition and
Tendency of those Libels, and lay open as briefly as I can, their Designs and
Practices upon the Dignity and Safety of the Government, and the Public Peace.

There needs no more to the proving of a Design, A Lewd Practice implies a
Design.
than such an Explication of a Lewd Practice, as carries with it a Necessary
Congruity and Tendency to such or such a Determinate and Evil End: And the
publishing of a Treasonous Position is but so far the putting of a Disloyal
Imagination into Act: Reward and Punishmen.
As for Instance; The Author of the Plea to the Dukes Answers, does very
plainly conclude the King to be Accountable to his People; and after that,
declares in express Terms, that God approves of the Removal of Evil Kings: And
his complaining in the same Sheet, of a Maladministration, does fairly make
known his Dissatisfaction, and consequently explain his Intention in that
Point. Where Is my fault now, for Crying out both to King and People, Have a
Care of That Man?

The Author of another Libel, called The Impartial Proceedings, etc. recommends
the Case of Portugal for a Precedent to England; and sets the People at
Liberty, If they do not like one King, to Choose another.

The Writer of the Appeal does not only Intimate this; but enforces it with an
Encouragement; He who has the worst Title (says he) ever makes the best King.

The Compiler of the Political Catechism places the Sovereignty in the Two
Houses; and says, that they have Legal Power to Command the People to Assist
them, whenever they shall Declare that there is a Preparation toward a War:
and in such a Case to dispose of the Kings Forts, Ports, Magazines, Ships, and
Power of the Militia; and to Levy Money, Arms, Horse, Ammunition upon the
Subjects, in such Cases of Danger, even WITHOUT, or AGAINST the Kings Consent.

Marvel, in his Growth of Popery, justifies Self-Defence in a Subject against
his Prince, when he is run up to the Wall. And nothing more ordinary than
Printed Censures of the King and his Ministers; the Branding of all his
Officers and Domestiques for Pensioners and Papists; the Church it self for
Will Worship and Superstition; and the Hierarchy for Antichristian. These Sons
of Belial (says the Author of The Freeholders Choice) and then a little below,
Brutal Scurrilities.
I believe (says he) good Father Jacob had a Foresight of these Sons of Levi,
when in his last Will and Testament he left them a Curse for a Legacy, instead
of a Blessing; and if the whole World were now to make their Wills, all but
Knaves and Fools would do the like. And he Treats the Parliament defunct with
the same Generous Freedom: That so we may fall again (says he) into the hands
of as Treacherous and Lewd a Parliament as the wisdom of God, and the Folly of
Man, has most miraculously freed us from. Another falls foul by Name, upon a
List of as many Worthy Persons out of such a number, as ever met perhaps in
such a Body; and three or four of them no less then Members of his Majesty's
Privy Council: And This Catalogue he is pleased to call the Infernal Regiment
of Pensioners. To say nothing of those Scurrilous and brutal Affronts upon the
very Person and Honor of his Sacred Majesty, that an Honest man cannot so much
as Think of, much less Repeat without Horror:

Here Is not One word all This while of the Contrivers and Advancers of These
Villainies: Safer to commit Sedition then to Censure it.
but it is become more Criminal, in the judgment of our Pretended Zealots to
Censure these audacious Extravagances then to commit them.

But now to conclude: How far in honor, justice, and policy, How far to
encourage Loyalty.
it may concern any Prince or State whatsoever to support, countenance, and
protect the Asserters of their Laws, Rights, and Privileges, against the bold
and seditious Attempts of the Enemies of the Constitution, will be the next
Question.

The Two Main Pillars of Government are Reward and Punishment. Reward and
Punishment.
The neglecting of these, is like the letting of a House fall over a man's Head
for want of Repair: But the Magistrate that inverts them* and Rewards where he
should Punish, and Punishes where he should Reward (in what Form of Government
soever it be) is like a man that plucks down his own House with his own Hands;
and nothing can be more dangerous, than to show an Honest man that he has
nothing to hope for, or a Knave, that he has nothing to fear. But this were a
Supposition against the Impulse of Nature, as well as against the Rules of
Politics; there being nothing more Inglorious, or more Perilous, then the
Humor of Obliging our Enemies, to the Ruin of our Friends. This is a Point so
clear of it self, that it needs no Illustration; and so Consonant to the
Principles of Right Reason, (even in the weakest of men) that it does as little
need a Caution.

But what is it that we call the supporting and Protecting of those that Assert
the Government? It is Interest of State to protect the Servants of the
Government.
This is not intended as a Benignity, or Respect toward the Person that does
the Office; but it is meant of a Common Justice to a Principle of Government it
self; without which it is impossible for any Government to be of Long
Continuance: For all Public Services are accompanied with hardship, and pain;
as they, are followed with Envy, and Detraction. It Is nothing for a man to go
down Hill, especially when he sees Profit, Pleasures, and Preferment at the
Bottom; and that in such a Course, he does but follow the Bias of his own
Appetites, and Corruptions: But it is another Case for Flesh and Blood to ly
beating of it out a whole Age against Wind and Tide; and when he has Conquered
That Difficulty, to be cast upon the Rocks, and There abandoned at Last. Or, to
follow my first Allegory; Cold Comfort.
It is but a cold Comfort for a man to lie striving Thirty or Forty Years to
gain the Top of a Hill, only upon a barren Instinct of Honor or Virtue; and
when he comes there, to have only the choice either of a Iayl, or of a Gibbet,
for his last Retreat: the Duty of Persevering is never the less binding, for
the Difficulty of the Attempt; but yet, according to the Measures of Humane
Frailty, the French King himself perhaps, would find it an hard Matter to Levy
an Army of Fifty or Threescore Thousand Men (out of all his Dominions) of That
Complexion.

And the Cherishing of this sense of Loyalty, Loyalty is to be valued, even in
an Enemy.
is not only a necessary point of Prudential Justice to be observed in all
Regiments whatsoever; but it is likewise the Interest, and the practice of all
well-governed Constitutions, to pay an Esteem to the Character of an Inviolate
Integrity, even in an Enemy: For it falls out many times, that Differences of
that sort may come to terminate in the most Amicable and profitable Agreements:
Beside that, they are sure of fair play, in the very heat of the Dispute;
whereas what security can any man promise to himself, from a
State-Weather-Cock, that still keeps his Eye upon his Interest, without any
regard to his Conscience; and changes his Opinion, and his Party, as often,
perhaps, as his Shirt?

It is not that I either pretend to pin my self for Protection, My Appeal to
the Honorable House of Commons.
upon the Government, for my own sake; or that, in Truth, I am Conscious of any
thing, to my self, that requires more than the common benefit of the Law, to
keep me in safety: And I have yet a greater security than all this; which is,
that when the Honorable House of Commons shall come to know me better by my
Actions, and open dealings and Professions, than the world does hitherto, by
the Fiddlers and the Rascals that the Paultry News-mongers here of the Town have
represented me to be; I make no doubt, but they will think me worthy of some
Public Reparation from the Authors of those Scandals: And that those worthy
Gentlemen, out of a regard to the Honorable Blood that runs in their own
Veins, will consider the Case of another Gentleman, as their Own, and not
suffer Men of Name and Family to be blasted at this rate, by the Sons of the
People.

Of all the lewd and scandalous Calumnies that have been advanced against me,
Nothing proved against me.
there has not been one syllable proved. First, as to my pretended Compliances
with Oliver: There are Witnesses enough yet living of that Party that know the
contrary* and not one man breathing so much as to color it with any
particular. Beside a Cloud of the Kings Friends that can prove my restless
endeavors the other way.

I have been lately Charged for a Confederacy with Young Tongue; and in the
Coffee-Houses and News Letters, for a Correspondence with Mrs. Cellier; when
yet I made it as clear as the Sun, that I never saw Tongue, but twice, in my
life; and that till after his affirming, and retracting, and renouncing that
Retractation, (which was the thing that pinned the Basket) and all this upon
his Salvation too; I never knew so much as his Person. It appears likewise that
I gave him the slip, upon the very time he had appointed to visit me; and that
upon his Letter to me next morning, I was so Cautious, that I gave Mr. Choqueux
warning of him. When he came to me that Evening, with Company, I told them I
would do nothing that looked like a Consultation. After this, (two Gentlemen
that he brought, going away) he would needs have me take his Information as a
Justice of Peace. I told him, I would receive none, unless under his own hand,
ready written, and not to be altered; and with a Clause inserted, that it was
his own voluntary act, without any Inducement to it from me: And that after all
this, I would yet consider upon the matter of it, wheth^r it were fit for me to
meddle with, or no. Here the business rested; only Tongue would be pressing
senseless Stories upon me, as he had at first, till upon showing my dislike of
what he said, and telling him (as I had done before) that it signified nothing,
he gave it off, and went his way. And I will now superadd this Protestation,
upon the Faith of a Christian, he said nothing to me that could in any degree
in the world operate upon Mr. Oats's Testimony: And then for Mrs. Collier, that
was only Care's Fancy, (who wrote Prances Narrative) and not so much as
mentioned before the King and Council.

When I had spoken to the business of Tongue, Mr. Oates's Charges.
Mr. Oats let that whole matter fall; and Charged me with a Misdemeanor, for
insisting upon a Clause for Clearing of my self in case of Tonge's Affidavit;
but it was looked upon as a piece of Necessary Caution, and so Mr. Oates's
Judgment was overruled. But Mr. Oats followed This Charge with a sorer one
upon the Neck on it; which was, for Concealing a Conspiracy against the Kings
Witnesses, High Treason.
which he said was High Treason, My Answer was to this Effect, Nonsense is High
Treason.
That it was a strange Conspiracy, for the whole Story was Nonsense from one
end to t'other^ To which Mr. Oats Replied, that if it be a Conspiracy, it is no
matter whether it be Sense or Nonsense; for it is High Treason however. But This
notwithstanding, His Majesty was graciously pleased to give me the Character of
an Honest and a Loyal man; and so That Arrow fell short too.

Mr. Oats was then pleased to beat another Bush; Charged with being a Papist.
undertaking to prove me Popishly-Affected: And Mr. Prance swore that he had
seen me three or four times at Mass, at Somerset House, about two years since;
and doing there as other people did; but he could not say that he saw me
Receive. Whereupon I did with the most horrid Solemnity of Imprecation
Imaginable, declare my self to be of the Religion of the Church of England, and
that I had never entered into any Popish Chapel, or been present at any Mass,
since His Majesty's Return; which Protestation I do here again Resume,
intending by these words HIS MAJESTY'S RETURN, the Kings blessed Restoration,
in the Year 1660. I cannot but note a great Abatement, in Prance's Reckoning;
for I am assured, that Prance swore in the Company of Care, Curtis, and some
other people, that he had seen me at Mass, at least, or about a hundred Times.

Upon the blowing over of This Storm too, Charged with Conveying away Bulls and
Popish Books.
I expected to have had my Quietus; but Mr. Oats reinforced himself again, by
a Charge upon me for conveying away certain Bulls and Popish-Books that were
seized, and locked up with a Padlock upon the Door; but when they came afterward
to look for them, the Padlock was taken off, and the Books gone. Whereupon the
Messenger of the Press was sworn, and being examined to the Points, he could
not say, either that I took off the Padlock, or that I gave any Order, or
Direction about it; or that I knew any thing of the conveying away of the
Books, or any thing coucerning the Books themselves, one way, or other.

This manner of Prosecution (methought) was very Extraordinary; Two Charges
more yet.
considering with what Confidence Mr. Oats had called me Rogue, and Rascal,
that day Sennet, before the Privy Council. And he had not done with me, yet
neither; for he said that one heard me say at Wills Coffee-House, that there
was no Plot: Which, by the Oath I have formerly taken, is false; for I ever
thought there was a Plot.

One thing I had like to have forgotten, Mr. Oats Charged me for Conversing
with one Grange, and Sing: The former I know nothing of; and for Mr. Sing, I do
Converse with him as I do with a hundred other people at the Coffee-House, and
I know nothing more of him, then that amounts to.

I cannot let pass This Circumstance, A Violation upon the Rights of Common
Society.
without the Remarque of a strange Usurpation upon the Common Rights of Humane
Society; if a man must be Obliged, contrary to the Rules of Humanity, and good
Manners, to Catechize every new Face that he sees, and run, like an Animal
solivagum, into Caves, Forests, and Deserts, for fear of giving any man the
time of the day, till he has taken him to Task, upon the Articles of his Faith.
It is not that I set up for an Advocate for the Pleasures of frequent
Conversations, and gaudy entertainments; but I do freely confess, that I had
rather Associate my self with four-footed, then with two-footed Beasts, and
that such an Imposition, even from Authority it self, would be Grievous: But
for a Private Person to assume That Empire, is both Arrogant, and Intolerable.

As for my Self; Adieu.
This Disgust could never have laid hold of me in a better time; for I am
really as Sick of the World, as Peevishness it self can be of Me. And having
stood all Proofs, both of my Fidelity to my Master, and of my Integrity in
despite of my Enemies; I Will e'ne betake my self to the Quietest way of making
my Escape out of an Impious, and Trepanning World, into a better.

THE END.

