Imprimatur, Geo. Stradling. S. T. P. Rev. in Christo Pat. D. Gilb. Episc.
Land. a Sac. Domest.

Aed. Sab. (...). 16. 1662.
Toleration DISCUSSED.

By ROGER L'ESTRANGE.

Far quam Sortem patiuntur Omnes, Nemo recuset. Sen. Troas.

LONDON,

Printed for Henry Brom at the Gun in Ivie-Lane, 1663.

The Praeface.
I AM not so vain, as to expect, that any Man will be either the Better, or the
Wiser, for what I write; and yet, when I consider, that God Himself, is pleased
with Free Will Offerings ( though never the Richer for them) I make That
Thought my Measure: and how Incapable-soever of Doing the Public a Service, I
think my self; yet Honestly Obliged to Offer it a Duty; and This poor Little is
My All.

The Subject I Treat of, is, TOLERATION; wherein (with Modesty) I have not
ventured beyond my Reach: For, upon the Ventilation of the Question, It seems
to me, that it is one of the Hardest Things in the World, for the
Non-conformists to say What They would have; and one of the Easiest (on the
other side) to Overthrow All they can say. To give the Reader a Clear,
Distinct, and Impartial Prospect of the Matter, I have laid the Debate before
him in Colloquy; and under the Names of CONFORMITY, ZEAL, and SCRUPLE, are
Represented the Three Grand Parties, ORTHODOX, PRESBYTERIAN, and INDEPENDENT.
That which first put me upon this Theme, was the Great and Irregular
Earnestness, that was not long stnce Employed, toward the Procurement of a
Toleration. Concerning which, I found my self at a Double Loss: First, touching
the Proposition it self; and Secondly, about the Manner of Promoting it.

As to the Former, Me'thought Toleration in Gross, was of something a
Mysterious Latitude; but upon the taking it in pieces, I perceive, that nothing
can be plainer than the Meaning of it; and the Truth is, It means [ not to be
understood] that they may be sure to make something on it, whether it Hitts or
Misses. The One way, they may do what they please; and the Other way, there is a
Ground for a Compleynt.

A Second thing that surpised me not a little, was the Manner of Introducing
it; for, it was Ushered in by All the Querulous ways of Compleynt and
Aggravation, Imaginable: Which I presume, they would have forborne, had they but
been Acquainted with the Justices Opinions (in the 2d of King James) upon that
very Point.

It was demanded by Chancellor Crooks Reports Pars 2. Pa. 37.
Ellesmere, Whether it were an Offense punishable, and what punishment they
deserved, who framed Petitions, and Collected a Multitude of Hands thereto, to
Prefer to the King, in a Public Cause, as the Puritans had done, with an
Intimation to the King, That if He Denied Their Suit, many Thousands of his
Subjects would be Discontented? Whereto all the Justices Answered, That it was
an Offense Finable at Discretion, and very near to Treason and Felony, in the
Punishment, For they Tended to the Raising of Sedition, Rebellion, and
Discontent among the People.

Upon the Rejection of their Suit, the Business was Hushed, till of Late; When
the Revival of their Pretensions, together with the Dispersing of diverse
Virulent Libells, moved me to Gather up my Thoughts, which I here submit to the
Fate of my other Weaknesses. I might say Twenty things, to Excuse the slips of
my Distracted Leisures; but I shall rather Recommend what is worth the Reading,
than Trifle away a Complement for that which is not.

I caused a Little Tract lately to be Reprinted, under the Title of Presbytery
Displayed: Who was the Author of it, I know not; but it is Certainly, a
Judicious, and Well-ordered Draught of Their Government; and may serve to stop
Any Presbyterian's Mouth that Opens for a Toleration, which how Formidable-
soever it may Appear in a Petition, is Certainly a most Pitiful Thing in an
Argument.

The Contents are to be found at the End of the Book.

Toleration Discussed.
INTRODUCTION.
ZEAL and CONFORMITY, And to Them SCRUPLE. Zeal. GOod morrow to ye, Conformity.


Conform. Welcome, Zeal. Is this your Eight a clock? As sure as I live, A
Presbyterian forfeits his Charter that keeps touch with a Son of the Church.


Zeal. It Is Late I Confess, but I could not possibly get away sooner.


Conf. And I beseech ye (if a body may ask) what mighty business hindered ye?


Zeal. Guess.


Conf. Why then, my Head to a Nut-shell, thou have either been Breathing thy
Girls at some Prohibited Lecture; or getting Hands against the Act for
Uniformity. Go to, speak Truth, What made You and your Ladies so early abroad
this Morning? (for I saw ye at the Back-gate as soon as ye could well find the
way to it)


Zeal. Suppose I should tell ye, that we went to a Religious Meeting.


Conf. Then would I tell you again that it is well your Wife is My Kinswoman.


Ze. What Is your Conceit for That?


Conf. I should suspect she might be tempted Else to make your Head ache: For
Those Assemblies which you call Religious Meetings; What are they, but close
Appointments, where the Men meet to Cuckold Authority: and the Women (if they
please) to do as much for their Husbands? Without Fooling, I look upon
Conventicling, but as a Graver kind of Catter-wawling; and in fine, It Is not
good to wont our selves to stolen pleasures.


Ze. You will be Bitter.


Conf. No no, I will not. Raillery apart, Your Wife's a very good Lass. But
where have you been in Earnest?


Ze. To tell you the very Truth, I have been, with my Wife and my Daughter, to
Joy Mr. Calamy of his Enlargement.


Conf. Bless me! Is he at Liberty then?


Ze. Yes, He is at Liberty. Do ye Wonder at it?


Conf. No, not much. But, prithee why was he Clapped up?


Ze. For Preaching. Is not That Crime enough?


Conf. That Is according as the Sermon is; For so as a man may order the Matter
in a Pulpit, I think he may with a better Conscience Deliver Poison in the
Sacrament; for the One does but Destroy the Body, The Other the Soul. This,
poisons only the Congregation; That, the whole Kingdom.


Ze. I sent ye his Sermon last night, have ye overlookt it?


Conf. Yes: And I have weighed every Syllable in it.


Ze. Well, and How do ye find it?


Conf. Only a Plague-plaister, that is made Public for the Good of His
Majesty's Liege-People. Find it say ye? If ever I live to be King of Utopia,
I Will hang him up that Prints the fellow on it within my Dominions.


Zeal. And what shall become of him that Preaches it, I beseech ye?


Conf. Perhaps I Will spare him for his Industry; for a Presbyterian that
Preaches Sedition, does but Labor in's Calling.


Ze. Come leave your Lashing, and tell me Soberly; What hurt do you find in it?


Conf. That Hurt that brought the Late King to the Scaffold. And (in a word)
which will unsettle the Best Established Government in the world, with a very
small Encouragement; That Hurt do I find in it.


Ze. Truly, My Eyes can discover no such Matter.


Conf. It may be you will see better with my Spectacles. But where is your
Brother-Scruple? He was not with you at Mr. Calamy's, I hope.


Ze. No, ye know He Is of another way; I think he will call upon me here by and
by; for we are to go into the City together about Business.


Conf. What ever the Matter is, I have a strange Itch to day to know your
Business. Prithee is it a Secret?


Ze. It Is a Secret, to You, if you don't know it. But what if I should Long as
much now to know what it is that makes you so Inquisitive?


Conf. I Would save your Longing; Nay, and for fear of the worst, I Will prevent it.
They say that you and your Brother are gathering Hands to a Petition against
the Act for Uniformity.


Ze. Put case we were, what Then?


Conf. In the Day that You Offer That Petition, will I and My Friends prefer
Another against the Act of Indemnity.


Ze. Sure ye do not take it for the same case. Have you read the Kings late
Declaration of December 26?


Conf. Yes; and I see nothing There, but that His Majesty finds Himself Obliged
to preserve Both Alike.


Ze. Do ye Remember what he Says concerning his Promises from Breda?


Conf. Oh very well; and I would advise you as a Friend not to mind Him too
much of them: For first, His Majesty has done HIS PART in consenting to the
Mature and deliberate Offers of his Parliament.

2. You have (Many of ye) failed of Yours in not Complying with the Conditions
of his Royal Mercy. But to the point I am to speak with you about.


Ze. Do so, What is it? Look ye; Here Is Scruple come already.


Conf. So much the Better, for I have somewhat to say to ye Both. Come,
Scruple, I think I may thank your Brother here for This Visit.


Scrup. Truly if it were Thankworthy, so you might; for I am only come to call
him away about Business into the City.


Conf. Nay never talk of Business into the City before Dinner; for, to my
Knowledge, the Afternoon is time enough for your Business.


Scrup. In Good Truth, we are Engaged upon an Appointment.


Conf. I know ye are, and that is the Reason I desired to speak with your
Brother this Morning. You Two are to be at Town-ditch this Morning, if it be
possible; or however, sometime to Day. Is It not so?


Ze. Pray'e where have You your Intelligence?


Conf. I have a certain Familiar that tells Tales out of School. Come, Come,
Resolve upon the Afternoon, It Is but Reprieving Bishops a matter of two hours
Longer.


Ze. Well, Since you will have it so, it shall be so: but let me tell ye, your
Devil deceives ye; for we have no Design at all upon Episcopacy.


Conf. Y'Intend to Petition the Parliament; Do ye not?


Ze. It may be we do.


Conf. In good time; and what is the Scope of your Petition?


Ze. That we may be left at Liberty to Worship God according to our Consciences.


Conf. Have you well considered what will be the Fruit of Granting that Liberty?


Ze. It will exalt the Kings Honor, Establish the Peace of the Nation, Promote
all Honest Interests; and Satisfy all Good Men.


Conf. Make That Good, and ye shall have my Hand to your Petition.


Scrup. And if we do not make it Good, We Will Renounce our Claim.


Conf. Come Gentlemen, There Is a Fire in my Study, and we have Two Hours good
to Dinner. Let Us make use of our Time.


SECT. I. Liberty of Conscience Stated.
Conf. IF I do not mistake ye, my Masters, the Thing ye Contend for is a
Toleration.


Scrup. It is so.


Ze. And that we may not be Enjoined (upon a Penalty) to do that which we think
we ought not to do.


Conf. Your Pardon, my Friend; That Is not the Question, I do not Ask ye what ye
would Not have, but what ye Would: Not what you are Against, but what you are For.
I know well enough that the Act for Uniformity displeases ye; but I would fain
know when That Is gone, what will Please ye, that we may not Destroy a Law to no
purpose.


Ze. Allow us but a Freedom to Worship God, according to the Rule of his own
word, and that Freedom shall content us.


Scrup. In short, the Thing we Desire is Liberty of Conscience.


Conf. Liberty of Conscience? What Mortal can pretend to take it from ye?


Ze. Does not the Act for Uniformity Debar us of it?


Conf. Not at all; Your Actions indeed are Limited, but your Thoughts are Free;
What does This or That Garment, or Gesture Concern the Conscience?


Ze. But if I believe it unlawful to Worship Thus, or So: Whatsoever is not of
Faith, is sin:


Conf. At this Rate, for ought that I know, ye may Believe it unlawful to
worship at all: For ye may as well Except to every mode which is Not commanded,
as to That which Is. (But we are upon the Merits of the Cause, before we state
the Question.) Liberty of Conscience (according to my Books) is a Liberty of
Judging, not of Acting; but I perceive the Liberty which You claym, is a
Liberty of Practice.


Ze. No matter for the Word, so long as we Agree upon the Meaning.


Conf. Nay, by your favor, Zeal, we are not as yet Agreed upon Either; for
that which you seem to Ask in One sense, you Resolve to Take in Another: That
is, ye Ask leave to Think what ye will, and ye Take leave to Do what ye will;
so that the Liberty You demand, is rather Matter of State, then of Religion:
And to Ask, that ye may govern your selves by your own Consciences, is the same
Thing with Asking to be no longer governed by the Kings Laws.


Scrup. Cannot Liberty of Conscience then consist with Civil Obedience?


Conf. Yes, Liberty of Conscience may, but not Liberty of Action; If Liberty of
Conscience will content ye, disclaim Liberty of Practice; But if ye must needs
have Liberty of Practice, speak out, and do not call it Liberty of Conscience.


Scrup. Give it what Name you please; The Liberty I Desire, is a Liberty
toward God in Matters of Religion*


Conf. But what do ye mean by those Matters of Religion?


Zeal. Whatsoever has the Honor of God for it is Direct Interest of Engl. Pa
86. P. 84. 86. 87. 94.
and Immediate End, under which Head, may be comprised [Ceremonies properly
sacred and significant by Humane Institution] [Religious Mystical Habits]
[Canonical Subscription,] [Holy-dayes] -- and in fine, such Inventions of
Worship as are not warranted by Gods Word.


Conf. So that upon the whole Matter, The Liberty you The Non-conformists
Demand.
Demand, is a Liberty of Practice, in such Matters of Religion, as have the
Honor of God for their Direct and Immediate End. All which, in one word,
amounts to a Toleration, and so much for the state of the Question.


SECT. II. Universal Toleration unlawful.
Conf. IF a Toleration you would have, it must be either Absolute, and
General, or Limited and Partial.


Scrup. Let it be General then, for doubtless if a Man be Obliged to Worship,
it supposes him Free to do it in such Manner as he finds himself Bound to do it.


Conf. This Argument of yours takes in Pagans, as well as Christians, for They
have Consciences as well as We, and They are convinced that there is a God,
and that That God ought to be Worshipped; so that to grant a General License, is
to Tolerate Paganism.


Zeal. But Paganism is not within the Pale of the Question.


Conf. Why then no more is Conscience; for if you exclude Pagans, upon what
Account is it? They persuade Themselves they are in the Right, You think them in
the Wrong, and because of the Error of Their Way, deny them the Exercise of
their Opinions; so that your Exception lies to the Error, not to the Conscience.


Scrup. But their Consciences are Erroneous.


Conf. They are so, if You may be Judges of Them, and so are Yours too, when
You come to be Judged by Us. Now tell me, What Right have You to be Judges in
your own Case, any more then They in Theirs?


Ze. We have a Law to judge our selves by.


Conf. And, They, even without a Law, do by Nature the Romans 2. 14.
things contained in the Law, and are a Law to Themselves: But to look nearer
Home, It Is it seems among Christians only, that you would have a General
Toleration; and That in my opinion helps ye not much; for to uphold your Claim,
you must either maintain that there are no Erroneous Consciences among
Christians, or that Error of Conscience is no Sin, or else that Sin may be
Tolerated.


Scrup. That there are Erroneous Consciences, and that sin is not to be
Tolerated, I Grant ye; but I do not take every Error of Conscience to be a sin
(understand me, of Consciences laboring under an Invincible Ignorance.)


Conf. It Is very true, the Formality of sin is the Obliquity of the Will; but
sin, Materially considered, is the Transgression of the Divine Law: and
Conscience it self becomes sinful, when it dictates against That Law.


Scrup. Can there be any sin without Consent? or any Consent without Knowledge?
or any Knowledge in a Case of Invincible Ignorance? The Transgression of the
Law implies the Knowledge of it, or at least the Possibility of knowing it;
without which, it has not the Nature of a Law, as to me. [ The Conditions
Requisite to a Rule, are These, it must be Laud against Fisher. pa. 197.
Certain; and it must be Known: If it be not Certain, it is no Rule; if it be
not Known, it is no Rule to Us.] I had not Romans 7. 7.
known sin (says the Apostle) but by the Law; and in another place, [ Where
there is no Law, there is no Transgression:] Romans 4. 15.
From whence the Deduction is clear, that sin is not barely the Transgression
of a Law, but the Transgression of a known Law; the Inconformity of the Will to
the Understanding.


Conf. The Perverseness of the Will being a Sin* does not hinder the Enormity of
the Judgment to be so too, [ Until the Law (says your own St. Paul) sin was in
the World, but Romans 5. 13.
sin is not imputed when there is no Law.] Briefly; The Word of God is the Rule
of Truth, and All Disproportion to That Rule is Error; God's Revealed Will is
the Measure of Righteousness, and all Disproportion to That Measure is sin. Now
the Question is not, Whether Imputed or not, but whether a Sin or no? and you
cannot make Error of Conscience to be no Sin, without making the Word of God
to be no Rule.


Scrup. I do not deny, but it is a fin as to the Law; but it is None as to the
Person: It is none constructively, with Him that accepts the Will for the Deed.


Conf. Can you imagine, that any Condition in the Delinquent can operate upon
the Force, and Equity of the Law? Because God spares the Offender, shall Man
therefore Tolerate the Offense? David was Pronounced a Man after God's own
Heart; shall Authority therefore grant a License to Murder and Adultery?


Scrup. What Is David's Case to Ours? You Instance in Sins of Presumption, and
the Question is touching Sins of Ignorance.


Conf. Your Patience, I beseech you: It may be Ignorance in him that Commits
the sin, and yet Presumption in him that Suffers it: You cannot comprehend it,
perhaps; but the Magistrate does; and wherein You Doubt, Authority is Certain:
I could lead you now by a Thread, from the Toleration of all Opinions, to the
Toleration of all Practices; and show you the execrable Effects of giving way
to the Impulses of Deluded Conscience; But what needs That, when Two words will
dispatch This Controversy? In Pleading for All Opinions, you plead for all
Heresies, and for the establishment of wickedness by a Law. Do ye think such a
Toleration as This, either fit for You to Ask, or for Authority to Grant?


Ze. But is it not Pity, (considering our Duty is Obedience, and not Wisdom)
that a Good man should be punished for not being a Wise Man?


Conf. And do not you think we should have fine work, if a State were bound to
make no Provision against Crafty Knaves, for fear of Dis-obliging Honest Fools:
You Will set no Trapps for Foxes, for fear of catching your Lambs; and Hunt no
Wolves for fear some of your Currs should stumble upon a Sheep. In short, the
Honest will Obey Good Laws, and let not the Unwise pretend to Mend them. As to
the sparing of the Man, (even where 'twere Impious to give Quarter to the
Opinion) I wish it could be done; but how shall we separate the Error from the
Person; so as to make a General Law take notice of it? To Tolerate Both were
Irreligious, and it seems to Me Impossible to sever them. If you your self now
can either prove the Former to be Lawful, (that is, to do evil, that Good may
come of it) or the Latter to be Practicable, I Will agree with you For a General
Toleration: If otherwise, I hope you will join with me, Against it.


Ze. The Truth is, I am not yet Resolved to Burn for This Opinion; but what do
ye think of a Limited, or Partial Toleration?


Conf. I fear, you will find That, as much too Narrow for your Conscience, as the
other is too Wide: but We Will Try't however.


SECT. III. Limited Toleration does not answer Liberty of Conscience.
Conf. WE are already Agreed, That a Toleration of All Opinions, is a
Toleration of all Wickedness, and consequently Unlawful. Come now to your
Limited, or Partial Toleration, which I take to be A Legal Grant of Freedom, or
Immunity, to such or such a Sect, or Way, and to no Other. Will a Toleration of
This Latitude content ye?


Scrup. I See no other Choice.


Conf. Would ye have it Granted in favor of the Conscience that Desires it, or
in Allowance of the Tolerated Opinion?


Scrup. With an Eye to Both; that Nothing, which is Grievous may be Imposed on
the One hand, nor any thing which is Unlawful Tolerated on the Other.


Conf. But what if the Subject shall account that Imposition Grievous which the
Magistrate thinks Necessary? or That Liberty Conscientious which the Magistrate
believes Unlawful? Whether of the Two shall Overruled? If the Subject, Then is
the Magistrate Obliged to Tolerate whatsoever the Subject shall think himself
Obliged to Do; and This carries us back into a General Toleration; If the
Magistrate Overruled, (as certainly It Is his Right, for no man can be properly
said to Suffer, what he has not a Power to Hinder) Your Plea of Conscience, is
out of Doors.


Scrup. By your Leave, Conformity; I would not have Either of them Govern
Absolutely and Severally in the Case* For if the Magistrate be left to Himself,
He may either set up a False Religion, or Suppress the Right, at pleasure; and
the People by Themselves, may as well Mistake as the Magistrate: whereas
Together, the One Looks to the Other. But tell me, I beseech ye, would you have
no Toleration at all?


Conf. Upon my word, Scruple; no man is a greater friend to Toleration then I
am, if I could but hit upon such a Measure as agrees with Piety, and Political
Convenience: with such a Model as would probably answer the End you seem to aim
at: but to Dissolve a Solemn Law for the Satisfaction of some Particulars, and
at last to leave the People more unsatisfi'd then ye found them, were a Course
(I think) not very Suitable to the Ordinary Method either of Government, or of
Discretion; and That I fear would be the Event of Satisfying your Desires in
This Particular. Pray'e try your Skill, if you can contrive it otherwise, and
say what it is would please ye.


Ze. An Exemption from the Lash of the Act of Uniformity.


Conf. Well! What Is your Quarrel to it?


Ze. I think it a Great Cruelty to Confine a Multitude of Differing Judgments
to the same Rule, and to punish a Conscientious People for those Disagreements
which they can neither Reconcile, nor Relinquish.


Conf. Why do ye then Press That Cruelty your Selves, which you Condemn in
Others. For your Limited Toleration is an Act of Uniformity to Those that are
Excluded. They that are taken In will possibly be well enough pleased; but you
never think of Those that are left Out: whereas you are to Consider that They
that are Out, have Consciences as well as those that are In; and Those that are
In, have no more Privilege, then They that are Out. So that, upon a fair view
of the Matter, You can neither Admit All, nor Leave Out Any, without a Check
either to your Conscience or to your Argument. For put Case, The King should
Grant ye a Limited Toleration; would That Quiet ye?


Ze. Yes, beyond doubt it would.


Conf. Imagine it then, and your self One of the Rejected Party. Are not you as
well, Now, without any Toleration at all; as you will be Then without the
Benefit of it?


Scrup. To deal freely, I would not willingly be Excluded.


Conf. And is not That Every Man's Case as well as Yours? A Limited Toleration
must Exclude Some; and why not You, as well as Another? What Prerogative have
You above Your Fellows? Or why should not All be Tolerated as well as Any? They
can no more Abandon Their Opinions, then You Yours, and Your ways are to Them,
just the same Grievances; which (if ye may be credited) Ours are to You.


Scrup. But are not Some Opinions more Tolerable then Others? Do ye put no
Difference betwixt Points Fundamentally Necessary, and but Accidentally so?
Betwixt the very Basis of Christianity, and the Superstructure?


Conf. Ye pursue a Shadow. Who shall define, Which are Fundamentals, and which
not? If Both parties, (according to your former hint) There Is only a Confusion
of Law, and Subjection, without any Clear, or Certain Result. If the Diffusive
Body of the People, your Limited Dispensation, runs into an Indeterminable
Liberty. If the Supreme Magistrate, Your claim of Conscience falls to Nothing,
so that, step where ye will, You Will Find no Footing upon This Bottom.

Now to the Fundamentals you speak of; bate but That Grand Foundation of our
Faith, that Jesus Christ is come in the Flesh; and that Whosoever Confesses
that Jesus Christ 1 John 4. 3, 15.
is the Son of God, God dwells in him, and He in God. -- Abating (I say)
That Radical Principle (which if we Disbelieve, we are no longer Christians)
there is scarce One point that has not been subjected to a Controversy. In a
word, The Reason of your Proposal requires Either an Universal Toleration, or
None at all: unless you can find out an Expedient to Oblige All by Gratifying
Some. I do not press This, as an Utter Enemy to all Indulgence; but I would not
have it Extorted by Importunity and Struggling; nor Granted in such a Manner as
to look liker a Composition then a Favor. If You should ask me indeed whether
a Prince, upon Special Grace, and mere Motion, may not Grant a Toleration of
some certain Opinions; It Is past Dispute, he May; But the Same Freedom granted
upon a Popular Claim, is quite Another thing, and neither Safe, nor Lawful.


Scrup. Pray'e make me understand the Difference.


Conf. It Is only This; If it be the Subject's Due, it is none of the King's: so
that the People are Supreme, the One Way, and the Prince the Other. Now whether
it be either Safe for a Prince to submit his Regality to the Claim of the
People; or LAWFUL for him, to divest himself of That Authority, wherewith God
has Entrusted him; lay This under your Pillow, and Advise upon it.


SECT. IV. The Non-conformists Plea for TOLERATION upon Reason of State.
Conf. SInce you are not able to make out your Claim to a Toleration, from the
Equity of the Thing; Nay, since it appears (on the Contrary) that all
Indulgences of That Quality are totally Dependent upon the Will, and Judgment
of the Magistrate; You should do well do Leave Complaining, as if the
Government did ye an Injury, (where Effectually You have no Right at all) and
rather labor fairly to possess the world, that you are a Sort of People to
whom the King may with Honor and Safety extend a Bounty.

The Ordinary Inducements to Indulgence, are These Three. 1. Reason of State,
wherein is proposed either the gaining of an Advantage, or the Shunning of an
Inconvenience. 2. The Singular Merits of the Party: and Here, Gratitude takes
place. 3. The Innocence, and Modesty, of their Practices and Opinions: which is
a strong Motive; when Particulars may be Obliged without any Hazard to the
Public. To Begin with the First.

What Reason of State can You now produce that may Move his Majesty to Grant
the Non-Conformists a Toleration?


Scrup. If you had put the Contrary Question, You Had Posed me: Are not the
Non-Conformists the Kings Subjects? And what is a King without his People?


Conf. The Non-Conformists are, by Birth, and Obligation, the Kings Subjects,
but they are not so in Practice, and Obedience. They renounce the Law, and in
so doing, they Cast themselves out of the Pale of Subjection.


Ze. I suppose you will not Deny them however to be a Numerous Party, and some
Experience you have had likewise of their Conduct, Unity, and Resolution; which
Moves me to look upon his Majesty, as (in some Measure) under a Prudential
Necessity of Obliging so Considerable an Interest.


Conf. So far am I from admitting any Political Necessity of Yielding, that, to
My Judgment, the Necessity appears strong, and clear against it.


Ze. We Will waive the General Question, if You please, and speak to the
Convenience of This Iuncture.

Are not the Non-Conformists Numerous?


Conf. Upon the Poll, They are so; and More now too, then they were when His
Majesty came In; and so long as they are Suffered, it is to be Expected they
shall Increase daily. But you say, They are Numerous: If they be, Consequently
Dangerous; the Greater the Number is, the Greater is the Hazard; and Therefore,
because they are Many Already, and will be More, if they be Suffered, they are
not to be Tolerated.


Ze. But will not People be much more Peaceable, when they are Obliged, than
when they are Persecuted?


Conf. Believe me, Matters are at an Ill pass, when the Prince lies at the
Mercy of the People; and certainly the Multitude will be much Quieter without a
Power to do Mischief, then with it. But why do ye say, Persecuted? They
Persecute the Law, and then you cry the Law Persecutes Them. I would you would deal
frankly with me: What is (really) your Opinion of the Honesty of your Party?


Ze. I do seriously believe the Non-conformists to be an Honest, Conscientious
Sort of People.


Conf. But they must be Knaves to make your Argument good: for, if they be
Honest, They Will be Quiet without a Toleration. If they be Dishonest, They Will be
Dangerous with it. Consider again; If there be any Hazard, wherein does it
consist? not in the Multitude, but in the Confoederacy. A Million of men
without Agreement, are but as One Single Person. Now they must Consult, before
they can Agree; and they must Meet before they can Consult* so that, barely to
hinder the Assembling of These Multitudes, Defeats the Danger of them. Whereas,
on the Other side, To Permit Separate Meetings, is to Tolerate a Combination.


Ze. Right; but Those Meetings and Consultations are passed already; for sure
the Non-Conformists have been long enough Acquainted to Understand one another.


Conf. So much the more Need to look after them; and the less cause to Tolerate
them: And for their Agreement in a General Disaffection; That signifies little,
without the Means of joining in a Particular Plot. Again; as it is an Advantage
on the One side, that the Faction know One another; so is it an Equal Advantage
on the Other side, that the King knows the Faction: which renders His Majesty
at any time Master of it; when His Royal wisdom shall direct him to suppress
the heads of it.


Ze. Mistake me not. I do not say it is likely they will be Troublesome, in
respect of their Judgments; but that it is Possible for them to be so, in
regard of their Number.


Conf. He that Fears all Possibilities, lives in a cold Sweat. But I beseech
ye, Whether do You take to be the Greater Number? Those that singly wish to be
Discharged from the Act of Uniformity; or Those that would have no Law at all?
Those that are troubled because they may not Worship according to their
Fancy; or Those that are displeased because they cannot Live and Rule,
according to their Appetite? The Traitor would have One Law discharged; The
Schismatique Another; The Idolater a Third; The Sacrilegious person a Fourth;
The Drunkard a Fifth; The Conventicler a Sixth; The Profane Swearer a Seventh;
The False-Swearer an Eighth; The Murderer a Ninth; The Seducer a Tenth: And in
fine; not One of a Thousand, but had rather Command, then Obey. Shall the King
therefore Dissolve the Law, because there are so many Criminals? That were to
raise an Argument against Authority, from the very Reason of its Constitution.
Shall the People be left to do what they List, because a great many of them,
would do what they should not? Shall his Majesty give up his Government, for
fear of some Millions possibly in his Dominions, that had rather be Kings than
Subjects. Less Forcible, beyond Question, is the Necessity of the Kings
Granting a Toleration, than That of Renouncing His Sovereignty; for, doubtless,
where there is One man that is truly Scrupulous, there are a Hundred Avaritious,
Ambitious, and, in fine, Irreligious persons.


Zeal. I think we may better decide This Question from Experiment, and matter
of Fact, than by Speculative Reasonings. Look back to the beginning of the Late
War, and tell me; Do not you believe that there are more Non-Conformists Now,
then there were Then?


Conf. Yes, I do verily believe that there are Three, Now, for One, Then.


Ze. Why then, the Odds are Three to One against you: for the Third part of
This number, was Then the Predominant Interest of the Nation.


Conf. I could allow you even Treble That number too, and the Reason of my
Assertion would yet bear it, upon the greater Odds of strength betwixt the
Faction then, and now. As for Instance:

At the Beginning of the late War, they were Masters of the Tower, the Navy;
of all considerable Towns, Forts, and Magazines: They had a great part of the
Crown, and Church-Revenues under their Command, and London at their Beck;
beside the Plunder of Malignants, and the bountiful Contributions of the
well-affected. Scotland was already Confoederate with them, in One Rebellion;
and they had made sure of Another in Ireland, (by persecuting, and withholding
the only Person capable to keep them Quiet: the Earl of Strafford) which Broyle
they further Assisted, by manifest Opposals of his Majesty's Resolutions to
suppress it. [ See the Kings Speech of December. Ex. Coll. P. 2. and 3.
14. 1641, and the following Petition concerning the same] Finally; for the
better Countenance of their Usurpations, They had drawn down the Representative
of the People into a Close-Committee, and the Arbitrary Votes of this Seditious
Conventicle, passed with the Vulgar, for the Acts of a Regular, and Complete
Authority. This was the Condition of the Non-Conformists Power Formerly, but
(blessed be God) they are not at present so Formidable.

The Three Kingdoms are Now at Peace; and we have a Parliament that is no
Friend to the Faction. The King is possessed of a considerable Guard, which his
Royal Father wanted: and the sword is in the wrong hand for Their business. His
Majesty is Master likewise of his Rights, both of Power, and Revenue; and his
Capital-City stands Right in its Obedience. To all which may be added, that
although several Particulars of the Party are as Rich, as Pillage and Pardon
can make them; yet they want a Common Stock to carry on a Common Cause: the
Thimbles, and the Bodkins fail; and the Comfortable In-comes of [ Ex. Coll. P.
84.
] Irish Adventures; [ P. 339.
] Moneys and Plate upon the Propositions; [ P. 609.
] confiscated Estates; [ P. 764.
] Twentieth Parts; and [ P. 392.
] weekly Assessments; and a hundred other Pecuniary Stratagems (for the Ease of
the Subject) are Departed from them.

If it be so, that These people have none of Those Advantages Now remaining; by
virtue whereof they did so much Mischief before; what Necessity can any Mortal
Imagine of Tolerating These Naked, and Supportless Creatures, for fear of
Dis-obliging them?


Ze. Are they more Naked and Supportless, Now, than they were before the Long
Parliament? Does it follow that they have no Power, because they do not
Exercise it? Certainly, if they be more in Number Now, than they were Then,
Those Abilities that Raised them Formerly, may Secure them at. Present, from
being thought Contemptible.


Conf. It Is true, before our Late Troubles they were as they are now (for
matter of Power) and out of that Nothing they made themselves Considerable: yet
still I cleave to my Opinion, that the same Abilities will not Now produce the
same Effects; for the world will not be Twice Cousen'd with the same Trick; and
as the Case stands, there is as little danger from their Conduct, as from their
Number.


Zeal. This is a little strange, me thinks, to Grant the Means, and Deny the
End. The Two first Principles of Power ( Men and Moneys) you have Allowed them;
and it is not for your Credit to say that These people want Conduct, by whom
you your selves have been worsted. If you have found them Considerable upon
Experience, do not make them so Despicable in your Argument.


Conf. Have a Care, Friend: For the Men that Worsted us, were a sort of People,
that voted down Bishops on the wrong side of the Parliament door; That Cried,
They Ex. Coll. P. 533. P. 494.
would have no more Porters-Lodge at White Hall; and told his Sacred Majesty in
a Public Declaration [ Aug. 8. 42.] that the Pretense that his Person was
There in danger, was a Suggestion as false as the Father of Lies could Invent
-- that Seized the Tower, the Navy, the Kings Towns, Forts, Magazines, Friends
and Revenues; that Levied war against, and Imprisoned his Sacred Person,
Usurped his Sovereign Authority; Embrew'd their Hands in his Royal Blood, and,
in the very Pulpit, Animated and Avowed the unexampled Murder. These were the
Men that worsted us, and These are the People which you plead for, under the
Mask of Non-Conformists.

Your Patience yet a little further. The Non-Conformists are Many, beyond
Question, (for the whole seditious Party lurks under That Denomination) but so
long as they are neither in Order, nor in Office, they are not valuable. They
are Wealthy too; but so long as That Wealth lies in Particular Coffers, there is
not much fear of it, as to the Public. Now let them be as wise as you Imagine
them, That Policy which over-threw the Late King, signifies nothing to the
Hazard of This: Nay more, That which was Then, Policy, would be Now, Direct
Folly.


Ze. This is but Discourse: My opinion is, that if they had the same Will, and
Purpose to do Mischief which you suppose they have, they do not want Conduct to
their Number, to make the Necessity of Complying with This Interest, to appear
evident, past Contradiction.


Conf. Now Touching their Conduct. They must either do the same thing over
again, or steer another course: and their Method is too Notorious to succeed
the one way, as their Persons are too well known to do any good the Other.


Scrup. I do not well understand what you mean by their Method; for Wisdom, I
suppose, does not confine her self to any Certain and prescript manner of
working; but shapes the Method to the Occasion.


Conf. I am neither totally With you, nor Against you, in This Point: For as in
the Menage of Public Affairs, there is much left to Habitual Prudence, and
Discretion, without need of directing every little Circumstance, or Tracing
every Line; so are there certain General Rules; certain Dispositive Means,
which all wise men conclude to be of absolute Necessity to such certain Ends.


Scrup. The Question in hand is This; Whether the Nonconformists be not an
Intelligent, as: well as a Numerous and Wealthy Party? and how far Reason of
State may prevail for the Toleration of a sort of people in so many Respects
considerable? Pray speak to This.


Conf. If they be very Wise, and very Many, they had need be very Honest too,
there may be Danger else; for if they be not Honest, it is Unsafe, and
consequently Imprudent to Indulge them. I think, the best Measure both of their
Honesty, and Wisdom, may be taken from the Rise, and Menage of the late War:
Wherein, I must confess, there wanted neither Craft in the Packing of the
Cards, nor Conduct in the Playing of them. But what if I should Ask you now,
Who were the Prime Conductors in That Enterprise? If you say, The
Non-conformists; then They are not Honest enough to be Trusted; ( would you
have the King Gratify the Murderers of his Father?) If you say Otherwise;
Then 'twas not Their Conduct that did the work, and they are not Wise enough to
be feared. In short, (to give them their Due, and no More.) That which
Destroyed us Then, was the Conjuncture of the most Perfidious of Subjects, with
the most Pious and Charitable of Princes: The King, in fine, was Ruined by his
own Goodness. First, without the Pacification at Berwick, in 1639. the
Rebellion had been blasted in the Bud; And Secondly, his Majestye's Signing of
the Bill for the Perpetual Parliament, put the English in a capacity of
seconding their Scottish Brethren. These were the Two Capital Concessions that
Killed the Royal Interest; The latter whereof, his Majesty (of ever blessed
Memory) reflects upon, as [ No sin of His Will, though an Error of too (...).
P. 28. and 24.
charitable a Judgment,] and confesses that, [ He did not thereby intend to
shut Himself out of doors, as some men had then Requited Him.]

There was likewise a fatal concurrence of Sedition and Popular Ignorance, to
facilitate the Design. Alas! the late King was oppressed even by Those that
thought they fought for him, before ever they knew what they did; and the folly
of the Common Soldier contributed no less to the General Fate, then the skill
and malice of their Leaders. (Beside some unhappy why-not's and mistakes in the
Kings Armies, which are not at all pertinent to our discourse.)


Ze. Admitting what you say, still it was some Degree of Conduct to Procure
those Grants, and to Improve Those Means.


Conf. Alas! If Judas his Betraying his Master with a Kiss; If the Enflaming
of the People by false, and scurrilous Invectives against their Sovereign; --
If the Erecting of a Prerogative Conventicle by the force of Tumults, and then
giving it the Name of a Parliament; -- If the calling of God to Attest the
Sanction of Perjury and Treason; or if to Engage the People by a Sacramental
Vow to Defend the King, and then Hang them up for Adhering to him; -- If This
(I say) be Conduct: let No man presume to Dispute their Title to it. But if by
Conduct, you intend a course of Honorable Wisdom, you will hardly find any
footsteps of That Conduct, throughout the whole Transaction* Yet let this pass
for Conduct, and let the men that Governed the Design, be allowed for
Politicians; still I maintain, that This Party, though endu'd with the Wisdom
of Angels, cannot in This Iuncture; no not in This Age, pretend again to be
considerable.


Ze. That Is sooner said, then proved.


Conf. Truly, I think not much; in regard that both Their Ways, and their
Persons are too well Known, to be either Suffered, or Credited.

In Order to the late War, the Party had Two Games to play; for they were to
make an Interest both with the King, and with the People, wherein their
Masterpiece was showed imprevailing with both King, and People, to Contribute
to their own undoing; To which End, They first, Acquainted Themselves with his
Majesty's Dearest Inclinations; and Next, with the Niceties, and Distresses of
his Government, and Fortune: of which Discovery they made such use, as Enabled
Them to Overturn the Order both of Church and State, and to perfect their
long-Projected Reformation: For the late King's Predominant Affection being
Piety, and Compassion, and his most Dangerous Distress being want of Money, the
Politics of the Faction appeared in nothing more, than in Working upon his
Majestye's Goodness, and Necessities.

Their Practices upon the People were chiefly employed upon the Two Things,
which of all Others they do the least understand, and the most furiously
pursue, to wit, Religion and Liberty; wherein the Ministers were the Prime
Instruments, and Alaham (in the words of the Excellent Lord Brook) was their
Instructor.

Preach you with fiery tongue, distinguish Might; Lord Brook, Alaham, Pa. 12.

Tyrants from Kings, duties in question bring
'Twixt God and Man; where power infinite
Compared, makes finite power a scornful thing.
Safely so craft may with the truth give light,
To Judge of Crowns without enammelling;
And bring contempt upon the Monarchs State;
Where straight unhallowed power has peoples hate.
Glaunce at Prerogatives Indefinite,
Tax Customs, Wars, and Laws all gathering;
Censure Kings faults, their Spies, and Favorites,
Holiness has a Privilege to sting.
Men be not Wise; bitterness from zeal of spirit,
Is hardly Judged; the envy of a King
Makes People Like reproof of Majesty.
Where God seems great in Priests audacity --
And when men's minds thus tuned and tempted are
To change, with Arguments against present times,
Then Hope awakes, and man's Ambition climes.
This was the Artifice, by which the Faction skrew'd Themselves formerly into
an Interest; but alas, what would the same Thing over again avail them now?
when his Majesty has but to look behind him upon the sad Fate of his Royal
Father, to secure Himself against all Possibility of Another Imposture. And for
the Multitude, they must be worse than Brutes, in case of any New Attempt, ever
to Engage against This King, upon any Man's Credit, that had his Hand in the
Death of the Last; so that we are both Wiser and Surer at Present, then we were
Twenty years ago, upon a double Account; First, the Calamityes of the Last
War are still fresh in our Remembrance, and I do not find the People generally
so sanctified by their. Experience, but they had rather lie still for their
Real Profit, then Fight it over again for the Sound of Religion. Secondly, We
are pre-acquainted with the most likely Instruments and Pretenses of Raising
any New Troubles.

As for the Unity ye boast of, it is very true; that the Non-conformists Agreed
against the Public, till they found it Impossible for them any longer to
Agree among Themselves; And there is the Utmost of their Unity. Their Resolution
indeed I cannot Deny but it comes up to That in the Epigram, That, He that
Dares be Damned, Dares more than fight.


Scrup. We shall do our Cause an Injury to press too far upon Reason of State
in Matter of Religion.


Conf. Indeed, I think you will find it a hard Task, to make it out to any Man of
Reason, that the Kingdom will be either the Better for Granting you a
Toleration, or the Worse for Refusing it: but it is to be hoped that your Merits
will plead better for you then your Politics.


SECT. V. The Non-Conformists Plea for TOLERATION, from the Merits of the Party.
Conf. WHat has your Party (Gentlemen) Merited from the Public, that an
Exception to a General Rule, should be Granted in Your Favor? Name your
services.


Ze. We ventured All to save the Life of the Late King.


Conf. And yet Ye ventured more to Take it away: for, Ye did but Talk for the
One, and Ye Fought for the Other.


Ze. We ever Abominated the Thought of Murdering him.


Conf. You should have Abominated the Money too, for which Ye Sold him.


Scrup. Did We sell him?


Conf. No, You were the Purchasers.


Ze. Did not the Presbyterians Vote His Majesty's Concessions a Ground for a
Treaty?


Conf. Yes: but withal they held him up to Conditions worse than Death it
self; and, in short, They Delivered Him up, when they might have Preserved Him;
and they Stickled for Him, when they knew they could do Him no Good.


Ze. What Design could They have in That?


Conf. They might have the same Design in -48. which they had in -41. for ought
that I know. To make a Party by it; and set up a Presbyterian Interest in the
Kings Name.


Ze. All the World knows, that we were so much afflicted for his Sacred
Majesty's Distress, that we had many solemn Days of Humiliation for it.


Conf. So ye had for his Successes, for fear he should get the better of ye;
and you had your Days of Thanksgiving too, for his Dysasters.


Ze. What do ye think of Preston-Fight? was That a Iuggle too?


Conf. I think ye should do well to let that Action sleep, for the Honor of
the Kirk: for though the Cavaliers found it Great Earnest, it is shrewdly
suspected that there was foul play among the Brethren.


Ze. Pray'e let me ask you One Question: Who Brought in This King?


Conf. They that would not suffer. You to keep him out: That Party that by a
Restless, and Incessant Loyalty, hindered your Establishments.


Ze. And what do ye think of the Sccluded Members?


Conf. I think, a New Choice would have done the Kings business every jot as
well; and Matters were then at That pass, that One of the Two was unavoydable.
In fine, it is allowed at all hands, that the Prime Single Instrument of his
Majestyes Restoration was the Duke of Albemarle. But if you come to Parties,
the very Fact appears against ye: For, though all possible Industry was
employed to make the Next Choice totally Presbyterian, by Disabling all such
Persons, and their Sons, as (in effect) had served the King since -41. without
manifesting their Repentance for it since; Yet, so strong was the General Vote
of the People, for the Kings True Interest, and against All Factions, that All
Endeavor was too little to Leaven the next Convention, as was Designed. If ye
have no more to say for the Merits of your Party, we will pass on to the Merits
of your Cause:


Ze. Do so, and we will give you the Hearing.


SECT. VI. The Non-conformists Plea for TOLERATION, from the Innocence of their
Practices and Opinions.
Conf. COncerning the Innocence of your Practices and Opinions, must be our
next Enquiry; and how far your Actions and Principles Comport with the Duties
of Society, and with the Ends of Government. If Authority find them Regular and
Modest, it will be a fair Motive to his Majesty to Grant ye an Indulgence, upon
so fair a Presumption that You will not Abuse it.


Ze. And we shall willingly cast our selves upon That Trial.


Conf. Go to then. But I must Ask ye some untoward Questions by the way. What Is
your Opinion (Gentlemen) of the War Raised in -- 41. was it a Rebellion, or no?


Ze. It Is a Point we dare not Meddle with.


Conf. Nay, then you falter; for if you Thought it One, you would Answer me; and
if ye think it None, you would think the same Thing, over again, to be none too.
Suffice it, that in fact there was a War, and such a War as no Honest English
Man can Reflect upon, but with Grief, Shame, Horror, and Indignation: Can ye
tell me what was the Ground of the Quarrel?


Ze. I think you were in the Right your self, when ye said, it was Religion and
Liberty.


Conf. I suppose, I shall not need to tell ye the Event of it; But of which
side were the Tender Consciences, For the King, or Against Him?


Ze. We were ever for the King: Witness our Petitions, Declarations, and in a
most Signal Manner, our Solemn League and Covenant.


Conf. Now I thought ye had been Against Him, because ye Seized his Revenues,
Levied a War, Hunted and Imprisoned his Person, and at last took away his Life.
But the truth on it is, Ye were Both: Ye were For Him in Your Words, and Against
Him in Your Actions.


Ze. There were many in Our Party That Loved the King as well as Any of You
that were about Him.


Conf. That is, According to your Covenant: and I do not think but that your
Party Loves This King just as they did the Last.


Scrup. I would his Majesty had no worse Enemies.


Conf. And I say, God send Him better Friends. You Love the Bishops too I hope,
Do ye not?


Scrup. Truly when they are out of their Fooleries, I have no Quarrel to the
Men.


Ze. And to deal plainly, I am not yet Convinced of their Lordships
Prerogative; nor that there is Any Inherent Holiness in a Cope or a Surplice.
But why do you Couple the Crown and the Miter so, as if no Man could be a good
Subject, that is Disaffected to Prelacy.


Conf. To be Free with ye, That Is my Opinion, and I Am the stiffer in it, because
I think you can hardly show me, any One Nonconformist, that upon a voluntary
and clear Account ever struck Stroke For the King; nor any true Son of the
Episcopal Order of the Church, that ever bore Arms Against Him.


Ze. What will you forfeit if I show you Hundreds?


Conf. Either my Head, or the Cause, which you please.


Ze. What do ye think of the Papists then* (but it may be you and they are all
One, and so you w'ont reckon them for Non-Conformists)


Conf. To say the truth, we were All One in Loyalty to his Majesty, and to Your
Eternal Reproach be it spoken, [ That the Papists should have a greater Sense
(...). P. 130.
of their Allegiance than many Protestant Professors]


Ze. Nay I believe a Machiavellian Jesuit shall ha'your good word, sooner then
a Conscientious Puritan.


Conf. Truly no; for a Presbyterian Papist, and a Presbyterian Puritan are Both
alike to me; and I confess, I had rather be Preserved by a Man of Another
Religion, than have my Throat out by One of my Own. But, my Good Brother of the
Consistory, no Slipping your Neck out of the Col ar: I was speaking of the
Non-Conformists; by which Term is properly meant, Such Persons as Refuse to
Obey the Orders of the Church, whereof they Acknowledge Themselves to be
Members; so that the Point in Debate, has no Coherence at all with your
Digression. To Mind you of it, the Question's This: Whether or no the Practices
of the Non-Conformists have been such, as may probably Dispose his Majesty
toward the Granting of a Toleration. And now to hold you to the Question [By
Whom was the War in Scotland begun?] By the Non-Conformists.


Ze. By whom I beseech ye was the Rebellion in Ireland begun?


Conf. By the Presbyterian Papists, but it was provoked, and pre-dispos'd by
the Presbyterian Puritans; [ So that, (...) P. 93.
next to the Sin of those, who begun that Rebellion, Theirs must needs be, who
either hindered the speedy suppressing of it, by Domestique Dissentions, or
diverted the Aids, or exasperated the Rebels, to the most Desperate Resolutions
and Actions, by threatening all Extremities, not only to the known Heads and
chief Incendiaries; but even to the whole Community of that Nation, Resolving
to Destroy Root and Branch, Men, Women, and Children; without any regard to
those usual pleas for Mercy, which Conquerours, not wholly Barbarous, are wont
to hear from their own breasts, in behalf of those, whose oppressive Fears,
rather than their Malice, Engaged them; or whose Imbecility for Sex and Age
was such, as they could neither lift up a hand against them, nor distinguish
between their right hand and their left.] These are the Words of that
Evangelical Prince, that Died a Martyr for That Religion, and Liberty, which He
was Calumniated to have Betrayed. By whom I beseech ye, was He Persecuted,
Divested of All his Regalities, Assaulted, Immured, Deposed, and Murdered, but
By Your Party, Gentlemen? By whom, was Episcopacy Destroyed, Root and Branch;
the Law Trampled upon; Our Churches Profaned; Monarchy Subverted; the
Freeborn People of England Pillaged, and Enslaved; the Nation Engaged in Blood
and Beggary; but by the Non-Conformists?


Ze. Why do ye Charge those Exorbitancies upon the whole Party, that were the
Crimes only of some Particular and Ambitious Men? Do you believe, That it
should ever have gone so far, if we Two could have Hindered it?


Conf. No, Indeed do I not; and I do believe that there were Thousands in the
Party that Intended it as little as your selves. Now, Me thinks, This
Experience should Deter ye, from the Project you are at this Instant upon;
Especially considering that you are upon the very Steps that led to the late
Rebellion. The Method, was Petitioning; the Argument, was Liberty of
Conscience; and the Pretext, Religion* Popery, was the Bugbear; and the
Multitude, were the Umpires of the Controversy. * Nay, you have the very same
Persons to Lead ye On; and They, the very same Matter to work upon. Bethink
your selves; Ye meant no hurt (ye say) to the last King, and yet ye Ruined him:
Ye may perchance Intend as little harm to This King, and yet do him as much.
Not that the matter is in Your Power; but I would not have it in your Will, and
Endeavor. But enough is said touching the Innocence of your Practices: That of
your Opinions, follows; and I am Mistaken, if your Principles prove not
Altogether as Intolerable as your Practices (by Intolerable, I mean,
Inconsistent with the Public Peace)


Ze. Sure you will send me to my Catechism again.


Conf. Nay, Marque me; I will make it so clear to ye, that You your Selves
shall Confess, that Sedition flows as Naturally from your Ordinary, and
Received Opinions, as Corrupt Waters from a Poisoned Fountain; and not as an
Accident neither, attendant upon Your Separation, but as a formed and
excogitated Design, wrapped up, and Coucht in the very Mystery of your Profession.


Ze. 'Wou'd you would be pleased to unvail the Mystery you speak of.


Conf. In Obedience, I Will Endeavor it.

The most Sacred of All Bonds, is That of Government, next to That of Religion;
and the Reverence which we Owe to Humane Authority, is only Inferior to That
which we Owe to God Himself. Yet, such is the Depraved State of Nature, that
Every man is touched with an Ambition (more or less) to gain to Himself some
share in the Command of the Whole: and from hence proceed Those Struglings of
Particular Persons, which we so frequently meet with in Opposition to the
General Laws, and Ends of Order and Society. So soon as This Private Humor
has Improved, and Ripened it Self into a Design, the first Maxim which appears
in favor of it, is This; that The Less Obligation must give way to the
Greater; as (for Instance) Reason of State must give place to Matter of
Religion, and Humane Laws to the Law Divine: which being Duly Weighed, what
has any man more to do in Order to the Embroyling of a Nation, but to persuade
the People that This or that Political Law has no Foundation in the Word of
God; to bid them Stand fast in the Liberty wherewith Gal. 5. 1.
Christ has Made them Free: and finally to Engage the Name of God, and the
Voice of Religion in the Quarrel?


Ze. And do not You your self believe it Better to Obey God then Man?


Conf. Yes, but I think it Best of All to Obey Both: to Obey God, for Himself,
in Spirituals; and Man for God's sake in Temporals, as he is God's
Commissioner. But let me Proceed. Are not you Convinced, that the most likely
way in the world to stir up Subjects against their Prince, is to Proclaim the
Iniquity of his Laws? to tell them (in Effect) that They Will be Damned, if they
Obey; and (in a word) to make the Rabble Judges of their Governors?


Ze. Well, but what is This to Us, or Our Opinions?


Conf. I wish it were not; but to Couch the whole in a Little, Show me, if you
can, where ever your Opinions yet gained Footing in the world without Violence,
and Blood: Show me again, Any One Sermon or Discourse (Authorized by a
Nonconformist) from 1640. to This Instant, that presses Obedience to the
Magistrate, unless where the Faction was Uppermost; which shrew'dly intimates,
that Your Principles are Inconsistent with your Duties, and that the very
Grounds of Your Government are Destructive of any Other.


Ze. Make That appear if you can.


Conf. I will so, and I think we shall not need to travail out of his Majesty's
Dominions to Prove it. Come, Zeal; You're of the Classical way; and You,
Scruple, of the Independent; Produce Your Doctors; (but let them be the Pillars
of your Cause) such Persons, as upon whose Judgment, and Integrity, You Will
venture the Sum of the Dispute.


Ze. Soft and fair, I beseech ye; what is it you undertake to do?


Conf. I do undertake to prove that the Opinions of the Non-conformists, (to
say no worse) will very hardly admit a Toleration: and, Now, By whom will ye be
Tried?


Ze. What do ye think of Rutherford?


Conf. I suppose you mean the Divinity-Professour of St. Andrews. ( John
Goodwin, I remember, calls him, The Chariot of Presbytery, and the Horsemen
thereof) In Truth you have pitched upon the Atlas of your Cause. But hear the
Rabbi in his own words, [ Lex Rex P. 136.
] The Power of the- King is but Fiduciary. [ 156.
] The Sovereign Power is Eminently, Fontal^ter, Originally, and Radically in
the People. [ 140.
] The King is in Dignity Inferior to the People. [ 113.
] There is a Court of Necessity, no less than a Court of Justice, and the
Fundamental Laws must Then speak; and it is with the People, in This Extremity,
as if they had no Ruler.


Ze. Well: but Rutherford is but One man, I believe you will find Gillespy of
another Opinion.


Conf. Assure your Self, Friend Mine, they all sing the Same Song [ Gillespy P.
11. Engl. Pop. Cerem.
] [ Let not the Pretense of Peace and Unity cool your Fervor, or make you
Spare to oppose your selves unto these Idle and Idolized Ceremonies, against
which we Dispute] For [ 245.
] Whenever you may omit that which Princes enjoin, without Violating the Law
of Charity, you are not holden to Obey them, for the Majesty of Princely
Authority.

Are not These Sons of Zeal worthy of Encouragement, think ye? You Will say
perhaps, Gillespy is but One Man neither. Come, Come, I could show ye Hundreds
of Them; and if you will but read Spottswood's History of the Church of Scotland,
and his Late Majesty's Large Declaration, Printed in 1639. ye shall need go no
further for satisfaction. To pass over the Desperate Opinions and Contrivances
of Particulars; as Willock, Knox, Melvil, Gibson, etc. Let us look a little
into their more Solemn Actions, and read the Temper of the Kirk in their
General Assemblies.

1. An Assembly is Independent, either from Kings Declar. P. 409.
King or Parliament in Matters Ecclesiastical. 2. An Assembly may Abrogate an
Act of P. 4^1.
Parliament, if it any way reflect upon the business of the Church. 3. It is
Lawful for Subjects to make a P. 409.
Covenant and Combination without the King, and to enter into a Bond of Mutual
Defense against Him. 4. The Major part of the Kingdom (especially P. 413.
being met in a Representative Assembly) may do any thing which they take to be
Conducing to the Glory of God, and to the Good of the Church; not only Without
the Royal Authority, but Expressly Against it.


Were It not a Thousand Pitties now, to refuse This Tender Sort of Christians a
Toleration?


Ze. Nay; In good truth, I never liked the Extreme Rigor of the Scottish
Discipline.


Conf. And yet 'twas That you Leagued and Covenanted to make your Pattern; but
where do you Expect to Mend your Self, under That Form of Government?


Ze. Truly, I take our English Divines of that Judgment to be very Pious,
Moderate Persons.


Conf. Never a Barrel better Herring; That is, If they come once to Dip into
the Controversy.


Ze. Do not you take Mr. -- for a very sober well-weigh'd Person?


Conf. Take you the Measure of him, from his own Hand. [ If a People bound by
Oath shall Dispossess their Prince, and Choose, and Covenant with Another; they
may be Obliged by the Latter, notwithstanding their former Covenant.] The real
Sovereignty among us, was, in King, Lords and Commons; and if the King raise
War against such a Parliament, in That Case, the King may not only be Resisted,
but cease to be a King. Hear now the File-leader of SMECTYMNUUS. A Sacred
Panegyric. P. 23
[ The Quection in England, is whether Christ or Antichrist shall be Lord, or
King: Go on therefore Courageously: Never can ye lay out your Blood in such a
Quarrel; Christ shed all his Blood to save you from Hell, venture all yours to
set Him upon his Throne. (That is to say, Down with Episcopacy, and Up with
Presbytery) This is the Language of One of your Seraphique Doctors; and the
Sermon both Preached by Command, and Printed by Order. Take notice of his
Auditory too: No less then the Two Houses, General, Lord Mayor, Assembly, and
Scotch Commissioners, Ian. 18. 1643.


Scrup. You will not deny Mr. John Goodwyn (I hope) to be a Reverend Divine.


Conf. At the Rate of Your Divinity, indeed I cannot deny it, Touching the
Righteousness of the Sentence passed upon Defense of the Honorable Sentence
passed upon the late King. Pa. 90.
the King; Doubtless (says he) never was there any Person under Heaven
Sentenced with Death upon more Equitable, and just Grounds, in respect of Guilt
and Demerit. Mr. Ienkins is of the same opinion, and so is Parker, Milton; and,
in fine, the whole Tribe of Meddling Non-conformists are of the same Leven. Now,
to show ye that This Agreement comes not by Chance, you are to observe, that
whatsoever is first Exposed and Blown abroad (by the Hirelings of the Faction)
from the Press, and Pulpit, is still Seconded (at least, if the People Relish
it) with the Approbation of the Counsel: so that the main use of Sermons, and
Pamphlets, is only to dispose the Multitude for Votes, and Ordinances. If you
doubt This; do but Compare the Doctrines of the One, with the Practices of the
Other; and you must be Blind, not to discern that they act by Consent, and
Intelligence. In case of False-worship (says the Pulpit) and (says the Press)
In case of Tyranny, Defensive Arms are Lawful. If the People Swallow This; the
next news ye hear, is a Vote for Ex Coll. Pa. 259*
putting that Position in Practice. Resolved upon the Question that the King
(Seduced by wicked Counsel) intends to make War, etc. [ May 20. 1642.] Resolved
upon the Ex. Coll. Pa. 457.
Question, that an Army shall be forthwith Raised, etc. [ July 12. 1642.


Ze. Will ye make the Parliament then, and the Synod, Confederate with the
Rabble?


Conf. Tush, Tush; Turbam, tam Chlamydatos, quam Coronam voco. I speak of a
Faction, not of an Anthority; I do not meddle with Parliaments: Yet since you
have such a Kindness for the very Names These People Acted under, Let me Offer
ye a Word or two to Consider upon, touching That Thing, which you call a Synod.
First,

The men were neither Legally Convened, nor (...) Pa. 183.
did They Act in the Name of all the Clergy of England: So that no Matter what
They Did, as to the Validity of any thing They could pretend to do. Secondly,
What was Their Employment, but to Advise upon the Cleanliest way of Shifting
the Government, and to do as much for the Bishops, as the House did for his
Majesty? Will ye have the Truth on it? They cleared their Conscience abundantly
to Both. First; in Their Letter to Reformed Churches Abroad, They Charge the
King as the Patron of the Irish Rebellion [Pa. 7.] and, in short, throughout
the whole Tenor of it as the most Insupportable Tyrant in Nature. Secondly, Let
That (not only Unchristian but Inhumane) Collection of White's Scandalous
Ministers bear Witness Against Them. Wherein, without any Respect either to
Truth, or Modesty, They have Exposed so Many Reverend Names to Infamy, and
Dishonor, for the better Color of Their own Wickedness in Robbing them of
their Livings.

I have here laid before you, the Merits, Practices, and Opinions of the Party
you plead for. If I have told ye Truth, Think on it; if otherwise, Disprove it.


Ze. I will not Deny, but Ill things have been done: Shall All therefore be
Condemned, for the Faults of Some?


Conf. And I will not deny neither, but there are Good people in the mixture;
shall All therefore be Indulged for the Honesty of some? Try your skill, my
Masters; and if You can contrive such an Expedient, as may Relieve Particulars,
without Hazard, or Damage to the Whole, ye shall have my Vote for such a
Toleration. But before ye propound it, give me leave to offer ye such other
Reasons of my Own, Against it, as have not been yet touched upon, and then you
are at Liberty to speak to All at Once.


SECT. VII. TOLERATION, causes Confusion both in Church and State.
Conf. GEntlemen, To come quick to the Business; My Exceptions to your Proposal
of Toleration, shall be Reduced to Four Heads: My First Exception arises from
the very Nature of the Thing it self; My Second, from this Iuncture of Time
wherein it is Desired; My Third, from the Consideration of the Parties that
Desire it; and My Last Exception, proceeds from the Reverence I bear to the
Authority that is to Grant it. Now, if You please, We Will begin with the First,
and pass to the Rest in Order.

My First Argument against Toleration, is This: It is (in those that press it)
a Tacit Condemnation of an Established Law, and not without some Reflection upon
the Supreme Authority it self. If there was Reason for the Making of it, There
is yet More for the Observing of it; by how much an Universal Obedience is more
Profitable to the Public, than any Particular Constitution.


Scrup. It would be well, If you would bring all People to the same Mind,
before ye force them to the same Rule.


Conf. But it would be Ill if you should admit of no Rule at all, till you had
found out One, that all the world should be pleased with.


Scrup. We do not ask the Vacating of a Law, but the Relaxing of it.


Conf. Why then, You ask a Worse Thing; for it were Much better for the
Public, utterly to vacate a Good Law, then to suffer the Withdrawing of that
Reverence which is due even to a Bad one. If the Reason of such or such a Law
be gone, Repeal the Law; but to let the Obligation fall, and the Law Stand, is,
not only to Introduce, but to Proclaim a Disorder in the Government. The Law,
in fine, is, an Act of Public, and Impartial Justice, not made for This, or
That Particular, but for a Common Good.

My Second Exception to Tolcration, is, Because it Implies a kind of Assent
(let me not say Submission) both to the Equity of the Subjects Complaint, and
to the Reason of the Tolerated Opinion, which, in some Degree, seems to
Authorize a Separation. Now let it be once admitted, that any One Law may be
Questioned by the Multitude; the Consequence reaches to all the Rest: Let it be
admitted, either, that any One sort of People may be allowed to challenge any
One Law, All other Opinions have the same Right of Compleyning.


Scrup. But we do not question either the Prudence of the Lawmakers, or the
General Equity of the Constitution; only where God has not given us Consciences
suitable to the Rule, we do humbly beg of his Majesty to bestow upon us a Rule
that may comply with our Consciences.


Conf. Would you have a Law made that shall comply with All Consciences? Ye
demand an Impossibility. God Himself never made a Law that pleased all people.
Oh! but the Imposition under a Penalty troubles ye. Take aaway the Sanction,
and what signifies the Law? Well, but You would be exempt I perceive from the
general Obligation; so would every man else, and then there is no Law at all: In
short, Ye cannot say what ye would have. Would ye have a particular Indulgence?
Where Is the Equity of it as to Those that are Excluded? Will ye have it
General? Where Is the Conscience of it, when all Heresies are entertained. You
should consider, that Laws are framed with a regard to the Community; and they
ought to stand Firm and Inexorable: If once they come to hearken to Particular
Clamours, and to side with Particular Interests, the Reverence of Government is
shaken.


Ze. You have speculated here some Airy Inconveniences; but where is the Real
hazard of receding from that Inexorable strictness? (as you call it.)


Conf. First, the Magistrate makes himself of a Party with Those that he
Tolerates, against Those that he Rejects, which draws an envy upon the
Government.

Secondly, The Tolerated Party becomes a Sanctuary for all the seditious
Persons in the Kingdom. It was well said of one (whom I esteem more for his Wit
than his Honesty) speaking of a Thin House of Commons; It looks (says he) like
a Parish Church that borders upon a Conventicle. And the very Truth of it is, A
Schismatical Lecturer, is as bad as a Roasted Dog in a Dove-house, he tolls
away all the Pigeons in the Country. Not that the People throng to him for the
Excellency of the Man, or of the Way, but they Meet to Proclaim Themselves
Masters of the Law, and to count how many Thousand souls there are, even in
this sinful Nation, that will not bow the Knee to Baal. Let them go on, and
within a while, the King perhaps shall sue to Them, for the same Toleration
They now beg from Him, and go without it; that is, unless His Majesty has
better luck then his Father (which God send him, for he has several of the very
same Persons to deal withal.)

Another Objection may be This; If there be any Reason for Granting a
Toleration, it is Probable the Reason will be stronger for Continuing it; so
that, in Time, the People shall Challenge That as a Right, which They now only
Demand as a Favor; and the next Motion is into a Popular Reformation. Let me
add to what I have said, that a Toleration does not only Evirtuate the Law, but
it naturally produces a total Dissolution of Ecclesiastical Order, and
consequently begets a Confusion both in Church and State.


Ze. You speak as if there were no such thing as a Toleration in Nature.


Conf. Of that in place convenient.


SECT. VIII. The Danger of TOLERATION in this Iuncture.
Conf. I Need not tell ye (Gentlemen) that I am no great friend to Toleration
at Any time: but I must confess to ye, that at This time I like it worse then I
have done at any Other.


Scrup. When, to My thinking, there never was more need of it, nor more Hope of
the Fruit of it, then is at this Instant. Are not the People ready to Tumult
for want of it?


Conf. Indeed a very proper Reason why they should have it, that they may be
encouraged to Tumult again, for what they have a mind to Next. How long do you
believe that Government would stand, where the Multitude should take notice
that their Rulers are afraid of them? Are they ready to Tumult? then they are
not Conscientious; and if it be not conscience that moves them, it is Sedition.


Scrup. I Am very confident, An Indulgence would Quiet them.


Conf. Can you remember the steps of the last War, and be of that Opinion?
What was it but That which was given to Quiet the Faction that enabled them to
take All the Rest? To give you a fresh Instance; What could be more Pious,
Gracious, or Obliging, then his Majesty's Late Declaration, in Favor of the
Non-conformists? All that was possible for the King to do, in consistence with
Conscience, Honor, and the Peace of his Dominions, his Majesty has there
frankly assured them of: and what is the effect of all? Are they one jot the
Quieter for it? No, but the worse; for no sooner was his Majesty's Tenderness
(in That Particular) made Public, but the generality (even of Those that had
lately entered into a Regular and Dutiful compliance with the Orders of the
Church) started into a new Revolt; which Demonstrates, that the true ground of
their Separation is not Conscience, but Faction, and proves sufficiently the
benefit, and necessity, of a strict Rule, and the hazard of a Relaxation: For
you see, that rather then abide the Penalty of the Act, they could Conform; but
upon the least Glimpse of an Indulgence, they Relapse into a Schism.

Come, Brother Zeal; Your Friend of -- shall pin the Basket. That Sermon of his
that you wot of, (at least if His it be, and several Impressions of it have
passed as His, without any Contradiction) That Sermon do I take to be one of
the Lewdest Requitals of the Kings Mercy and Goodness that ever -- But no more,
He Is a Son of the Kirk.

Take him First, as a Person whom his Majesty has Pardoned, although a Leading,
and Pragmatical Instrument toward the Ruin of his Royal Father. Consider him
Secondly, as one that has been taken nibbling at Sedition, since his Majesty's
Return before now, and yet been winked at. Thirdly, take notice of the very
point of Time he has chosen for his purpose. His Contempt meets the Kings Mercy
just in the Face, and his Majesty's Arms are no sooner open to receive him,
then he takes that very nick of Opportunity to stabb him in.


Ze. And all This Amplifying, and Passion, for Preaching, forsooth, without a
License.


Conf. The least thing in my thought, I assure ye; for I speak to the Dangerous
Scope and Application of his Sermon, without any concern at all whether he did
Well, or Ill, as to the Act of Uniformity.


Ze. I will not justify his Prudence, but in my Conscience the man never meant
any hurt, either to this King, or to his Father, I should abhor him, if I
thought he did.


Conf. We Will handle that Point at leisure: But to bring what we are now upon,
to a Period. I look upon Mr. Calamy as the Mouth of the Party, and ye see with
what a seditious Confidence they own his Actions, and avow his Disobedience: So
that from Mr. Calamy's single Case, we are to take the Measure of the Main
Question: And now I ask ye; Whether, or no, do you hold it convenient to
dispense with a Law, in favor of That Party, which at the same time both
Challenges, and Defies That Law, and Despises that Mercy?


Ze. When you have made out the Fact, as you have laid it, I Will tell ye my
Opinion.


Conf. Again, we are perpetually Alarmed with Plotts, ye see; Now what better
means then a Toleration, to draw the Conspirators into a Body? In Truth; to
gratify a Party that thus outfaces Authority, and to do it too in the very
Crisis of the Contest, is a Policy that I cannot reach the Bottom of. This Thread
might be drawn finer; but I have something to say concerning the Party, as well
as the Time.


SECT. IX. Arguments against TOLERATION, in respect of the Party that desires
it; with, Animadversions upon a certain Pamphlet, Entitled, A SERMON Preached
at ALDERMANBURY-CHURCH, December. 28. 1662. etc.
Conf. WE are now entering into a Large Field, Gentlemen, and that we may not
lose our selves, Let us move orderly toward the Question. Your Party desires a
Toleration, is it not so?


Scrup. It is so.


Conf. And what is Your Party, I beseech ye? Where do they Dwell? What are
their Names? Their Opinions, etc. -- For to Tolerate, No body knows Whom, or
What, would be a little with the Largest, I think; would it not?


Scrup. Truly I think it would. But to Answer your queynt Question; Our Party
is a certain number of Godly and Conscientious men, that desire a Freedom to
Worship God in their own way.


Conf. But now You must tell me Your Way too.


Scrup. Our Way must be such a Way as is agreeable to Gods Word.


Conf. Do ye mean, that it must be expressly marked out, and commanded There;
or will it serve the Turn, if it be only not Prohibited?


Ze. God forbid, that any sober Christian should imagine that our Savior left
his Church without a Rule, and certainly the Lord's Discipline is the best
Pattern, so that we are to stick to the Ordinance of Jesus Christ, without
Adding or Diminishing.


Conf. Scruple, What say You to This? for if it be so, there is but One way of
Worshipping, Lawful; and consequently, but One way Tolerable.


Scrup. In Truth, I am content to venture My Soul among Those that serve the
Lord according to the Light that he has given them.


Conf. So that I perceive it is utterly Impossible to please ye Both; for You
are for several ways, and your Brother Zeal but for One. How comes it now that
You Two, that can never Agree betwixt your selves, should yet Join in a
Petition against Us?


Scrup. We Agree in This, that neither of us would be Limited.


Conf. Do not You find your self Foul now upon the Old Rock of Universal
Toleration again? I would, You Would be but so honest Once, as to Yield, when You Are
Convinced. Can you either name Those Opinions, which you would have Indulged;
or can you Expect a Toleration for all Opinions at a venture?


Scrup. Provided they be not contrary to Gods Word.


Conf. But who shall be Judge of That? If each Individual, You must admit Right
and Wrong, promiscuously, for no man will condemn himself; If Authority, You
are concluded by an Ecclesiastical Law. Have a Care now of your old Distinction
of Fundamentals, and Non-fundamentals, for then your very foundation fails ye,
and ye renounce the most plausible part of your Plea, to wit, your Title of
Conscience. A word now to your Brother.

You are for the Holy Discipline, Zeal; for That way, and for no Other.


Ze. We are for That way which is prescribed in the Word.


Conf. Of which way, either the People or the Governors must be the Judges. If
you say the People, the Independent has the Better of ye; if the Governors,
you must submit to the Resolutions of the Church: In fine, If ye cannot say
what ye would have, never Complain that ye cannot Obtain what ye Ask; and
That Is my first Reason against Tolerating the Non-conformists. They are a sort
of The Non-conformists would have they know not what.
People that would have they know not what. In which, Particular Experience
bears witness against them: For, what have they done since -- 41. but
Overturned the Government, Divided the Spoil, Enriched Themselves, Embroiled
every thing, and settled nothing? And yet my Masters there was no Act of
Uniformity to hinder ye.


Ze. You cannot imagine sure that all these Hurli-burlies and Confusions, were
Designed.


Conf. Not All perhaps, for I believe ye thought to do your Business with less
Trouble: But that the subversion of the Government was Designed is plain, and
certain; and truly that it is now Designed over again, is scarce less Evident:
Upon which special consideration, I ground my Second Exception.


Scrup. But That would be hard, to ruin so many People of God for an
Uncharitable surmise.


Conf. Go to Scruple; If That be not the scope of your Monstrous Earnestness
for a Toleration, pray'e tell me what is? If ye have no end at all in it, it is
Frivolous; if This be your end, it is Impious; if ye have any other End, make it
appear.


Scrup. 'Twill satisfy our Consciences.


Conf. Heaven and Earth shall be sooner brought together then your Two
Consciences; will the Establishment of Presbytery satisfy your Conscience, or
the Allowance of Liberty satisfy your Brothers? If it be the Uniformity ye
Dislike; How come ye to Join with the Directory, against the Common Prayer;
with That of the Assembly, against That of the Church? In short, Your
Disagreements among your selves, are almost as Notorious as your Conjunction
Against Us, and ye have given Proof to the World, that it is not possible for
any thing Else to Unite you, but a Common Booty; Witness the Contentious Papers
and Disputes, betwixt Calamy, and Burton, Edwards, and Goodwin, and Others, not
to be Numbered, concerning the Letter to the Assembl. Ian. 1. 45. Page 3.
very Point of Toleration. [ The desires of the Independents for a Toleration
(say the London-Ministers) are unreasonable, and unequal, and many Mischiefs
will follow upon it both to Church and Commonwealth.] Now on the other side,
hear what Sterry says, [ Lord thou have done Graciously, and Wonderfully,
Engl. Deliv. Pa. 7.
in saving us from the Bloody Design of the Egyptian Papacy: But this last
Mercy by which thou have saved us from the Black Plotts, and Bloody Powers of
the Northern Presbytery, has Excelled them All.] Rutherford tells ye that Fresh
Disput. Pa. 98.
[ Such Opinions and Practices, as make an evident Schism in a Church, and set
up two Distinct Churches, of different Forms, and Government, etc. cannot be
Tolerated.] Milton Tenure of Kings Pa. 36.
again, will have the Presbyterians to be [ Ministers of Sedition, not
Ministers of the Gospel.] With what face now can those People appear to claim a
Toleration from the Public, whose Principles are so cross, that they cannot
afford it One to Another?


Scrup. Well, but supposing these unhappy Clashings among Themselves, how does
that prove them in Confoederacy against the Public?


Conf. Their very Agreement against the Government, and in nothing else, makes
it evident enough: but if You Would have it clearer, Look thorough their
Proceedings.

In a Petition that accompanied their black Remonstrance of Dec. 15. -- 41. You
may find the Points chiefly Ex. Coll. Pa. 2.
insisted upon to be These. The Honor of the King, the Liberty, and Property
of the Subject; The Moderating of the Bishops Power; and the Removal of some
Unnecessary Ceremonies, for the Ease of Tender Consciences: Nay, so far
Remonstr. Ex. Coll. Pa. 19.
were they from any Purpose or Desire, to let loose the Golden Reins of
Discipline and Government in the Church, that they held it Requisite to
Maintain a Conformity throughout the Kingdom, to that Order, which the Laws
Enjoined; and took it very unkindly that the Malignant Party should Infuse into
the People, that they meant to Abolish all Church Government; and leave every
man to his own Fancy, for the Service and Worship of God, Absolving him of that
Obedience which he Owes under God unto his Majesty, Whom THEY
KNEW TO BE ENTRUSTED WITH THE ECCLESIASTICAL LAW, AS WELL AS WITH THE
TEMPORAL, etc. -- They confess indeed their intention of Reducing within Bounds
that Exorbitant Power which the Prelates Ibid.
had Assumed unto Themselves so contrary both to the Word of God, and to the
Laws of the Land. To which end they passed the Bill for Removing them from
their Temporal Power and Employments, that so the better they might with
Meekness apply Themselves to the discharge of their Functions. Will ye now see
the Correspondence betwixt these Gentlemen's Words, and their Actions? and First
concerning the Honor of the King; wherein This word shall suffice, that they
omitted Nothing, in order to the destroying both of his Soul, Body, and
Reputation, which either Craft, Violence, or Calumny could Contribute, and not
to Rob either of the Two Factions of their deserved Fame, and Interest, in the
Ruin of that Glorious Prince. I shall conclude with Parkers decision of the
Case, The Presbyterians passed the Sentence of Condemnation, The False Brother.
and the Independents executed it.


Ze. I shall not pretend to Justify all their Actions; but in truth my Charity
persuades me, that a great part of the Mischief they did, proceeded rather from
Necessity then Inclination.


Conf. Will ye see then what they did afterward when they were at Liberty to
do what they Listed?

They had no sooner Murdered the Father, but immediately [ Part. 2. Page 3.
] They made it Death to Proclaim the Son. [ Page 7.
] They Scobel Acts, etc.
Abolisht Kingly Government. [ Page 51.
] Sold the Crown Lands. [ Page 65.
] Declared it Treason to deny the Supremacy of the Commons. [ Page 178.
] Nulled all Honors and Titles granted by the King since 41. [ Page 293.
] Made Scotland one Commonwealth with England, etc.

Have they now kept any better Touch with the Liberty and Property of the
Subject? Let their Proceedings witness for them, [ Scobels Acts, etc. Page 41.
] As their Tax upon the Fifth and Twentieth Part. [ Page 60.
] Excise upon Flesh, Victuals, and Salt. [ Page 73.
] A new Excise upon Allom, Copper as, Monmouth-Caps, Hoppes, Saffron, Starch,
etc. [ Page 75.
] A Loan of 66666 l. 13 s. 4 d. for supply of the Scots. [ Page 128.
] An Assessement for the Maintenance of the Army. [ Page 8. Part 2.
] The House of Peers Abolisht, and a Monthly Tax of 90000 l. for the Army. [
Page 149.
] A Monthly Tax of 120000 l. [ Page 153.
] An Imposition upon Coal. [ Page 400.
] A Monthly Assessement of 60000 l. Not to Clogge the Discourse with overmany
Particulars: We Will see Next, What they have done toward the Moderating of the
Power of Bishops, and the Removal of Unnecessary Ceremonies?

[ Page 42.
] The Archbishop of Canterbury Suspended, and his Temporalties Sequestered. [
Page 53.
Monuments of Superstition Demolisht (that is in Short an Ordinance for
Sacrilege) [ Page 75.
] The Book of Common Prayer laid aside, and the Directory commanded in stead of
it. [ Page 99.
] Archbishops and Bishops Abolisht, and their Lands settled in Trustees. [ Page
101.
] Their Lands Exposed to Sale. [ Page 128.
] Festivals Abolisht. [ Part. 2. Page 16.
] Deans and Chapters etc. Abolisht, And their Lands to be Sold. This is your
way, my Masters, of Moderating the Power of Bishops, and of removing
unnecessary Ceremonies; and at the same Rate you have provided for Tender
Consciences, witness Your Penalties [ Part. 1. Page 97.
] for Using the Book of Common Prayer, and your Forfeitures for not Using the
Directory. Ibid.



Zea. Conformity; You should Do better, not to Rip up these Old Stories again.


Conf. And if you would not hear of Them again, you should Leave Doing Them
again.


Zea. Then it seems the whole Number must suffer for the Misdemeanors of
Particulars.


Conf. No; nor the whole Party escape because of some Particulars neither. Would
you have me open my Door to a Troop of Thieves, because two or three of my
honest Friends are in the Company? And That Is the Case. Besides: You must
permit me to distinguish betwixt Particulars and the Party; for the Party of
Non-conformists, are in a Direct Confederacy against the Law; whereas there may
be diverse Particulars, that are moved only upon a Principle of Conscience. And
those that are truly Conscientious, will be known by This; Their'll endeavor
their own Satisfaction without any Importunities upon the Public: for when
they come once to join in a Complaint against the Law, it is no longer
Conscience, but Faction. And the Question is not Here, concerning the Integrity
of certain Individuals, but how far a Toleration belongs to the Party, without
any consideration of Persons.


Zea. Let us suppose then that the Party may have done amiss; I hope it is no
Sin against the Holy Ghost.


Conf. Truly, with Reverence to Charity, I take it to be next akin to it, in
very many of them. For, First; They sinned against an Evident Light, as appears
from their several doublings, and contradictory Proceedings. Next, There was a
Malice, Notorious; only I hope it went no further than God's Vicegerent. But
I Will comply with the utmost of your Argument: You would have Those Indulged
that Repent. With all my heart, if That will Content ye. For still upon That
Condition, not a Soul must be admitted that Refuses to Abjure the Covenant: and
There lies the very Pinch of the Question. For what the Covenant meant, every
body knows, from the express Practice, and Explication of Them that made it.
The League and The Kirks Testimony against Toleration. Page 10.
Covenant (says Rutherford) was the first Foundation of the Ruin of the
Malignant Party in England. And They that Imposed it, Voted it Death for any
man, having taken it, to serve his Majesty: So that whosoever Refuses to Disown
the Covenant, must be Rationally supposed still to pursue the Ends of it. Which
Ends are, The Subjection of the Royal Authoricy to the Conclave of the Kirk,
and ( in Terminis) the Abolition of Episcopacy; (which his Majesty has solemnly
vowed, and Resolved to Preserve) From whence it arises undeniably, that, to
Tolerate the Non-conformists that still adhere to the Covenant, is to Tolerate
the Sworn Enemies both of Royal, and Episcopal Authority, and of the Peace of
the Nation: and in fine, to Tolerate Those that have sworn to persist in that
Opposition all the days of their lives.

From what is already said, it appears, First, That the Non-conformists are not
yet Agreed what they would have, and I dare engage my self to be his Slave that
clears the Proposition, farther, then that they would have This Government
unsettled, and they know not what in the Place on it. Secondly, It is manifest,
that Impossible it is to Please them any longer, then while they are united in
a Common Design upon us: for next to Public Order, they are the deadliest
Enemies one to another, as being Governed by Inconsistent Principles. Thirdly,
It is past Dispute, that by virtue of That Favor which they now Ask, and
under color of Those Pretenses which they now hold forth, They have rendered
Themselves the Instruments of all our Late Miseries, and the Masters of the
Three Kingdoms. Fourthly, It is not more Plain what they have done, then what
they are now about to do; And, that they have the same Design upon the
Public, at this Instant, which they had in 41, is past all Controversy.


Zea. Conformity, You outrun the Constable. Will you pretend to enter into
Men's Thoughts?


Conf. No, I will not; but if I should see a man throwing Wildfire into a
Magazine* and He tells me that he does it to warm his Fingers; would not you
take me for an Ass, if I should Believe him? No, no, my fair Friends. When ye
see a Wise man, Frequently, and Deliberately, doing things that manifestly lead
to evil Consequences, I think a very good Christian may suspect That wise man's
Honesty.


Zea. Come; no more of your High-flown Notions, but out with it in good honest
English: Where Is the Wildfire, and the Magazine that you would give us so
learnedly to Understand?


Conf. Where is it Not rather; to any man that will but look about him, without
winking? Is not That Sermon think ye that you sent me last Night a pretty Squib
to cast into a populous* Town, that is Preached half to Gunpowder already?


Zea. And yet ye said Even now, There was no danger.


Conf. I say the same Thing still; that is, without a Toleration.


Zea. But where is the Mischief of That Sermon I beseech ye?


Conf. The Book lies there upon the Table, and it is Marqu'd to your Hand: but
I Am *not ready for it yet; if you please, we will look it over by and by; and
speak a word in the mean time to the Ius Talionis, to the Do as you would be
done by of the Matter.

You would be Tolerated by That Government, which of all Others, you your
Selves refused to Tolerate; Stick now to your own Rule, and tell me, With what
Face can ye Demand a Toleration, or for what Sort of People? Begin with your
Clergy; would you have Them Indulged?


Zea. Yes, as They are Ministers of Gods Word, They ought to be Indulged.


Conf. That can be no Plea for Them that persecuted Gods Ministers Themselves.
Charity indeed is a General Duty, but it is an Argument that belongs only to
Them that Practice it; For, They that never spared Any, cannot reasonably
desire to be spared Themselves.

They are in the second place not to be Tolerated; upon the point of Scandal:
For, [ Such are Declared scandalous, Scobell's Acts Pars. 2. Pa. 340.
as by Writing, Preaching, or otherwise, publish their Disaffection to the
present Government] It Is their own Law, Gentlemen; and upon that score of
Disaffection, was Introduced the most Barbarous Persecution of a
Gospel Ministry, that ever was heard of among Christians. I could Instance the
Particulars of the Havoc They made in London, the Two Universities, and
finally throughout the Kingdom. Particularly, in South Wales; where They did
not only Persecute The Ministry, but the very Gospel, by Shutting up their
Churches, and Condemning the People to the Dictates and Corruptions of
unbridl'd Nature. Nor was it enough to Sequester, unless They Starved Them too;
For They were not permitted, to live either as Schoolmasters or Chaplains, but
upon severe Penalties: a Committee of Middlesex indeed, told Mr. Lance (a
Reverend, and a Sequestered Minister) that He might Hedge and Ditch for his
Living (and that was the utmost of the Liberty They could Afford Them.) I could
tell ye of the Ministers that were Poisoned in Peter-House, etc. but I shall
make ye sick, and weary; Ashamed I hope ye are already, to Plead for a
Toleration of Those People against the Law, that were Thus Mercyless toward
their Brethren that Acted and Suffered for it. But to Seal up all with an
Authority: Gillespy tells ye, that [ The General Useful Case of Conscience, Pa.
19, and 20.
Assembly has ordained, that known Complyers with the Rebels, and such as did
procure Protections from the Enemy, or keep Correspondence and Intelligence
with him, shall be suspended from the Lords Supper, till they manifest their
Repentance before the Congregation] So that ye see we were not only Debarred
the Common Rights of Subjects, and Benefits of Society; but the very Comforts
of our Religion were taken from us, and an Anathema pronounced upon us for our
Loyalty; and yet these People think it high Reason to be Tolerated Themselves,
and have the Confidence to Importune it from his most Sacred Majesty, to whose
Blessed Father (and That in the Depth, and Bitterness of his Agonies) They
cruelly Denied the Use, and Service of his own Chaplains. [ A greater Rigor,
and Barbarity (...). P. 207.
then is ever used by Christians to the meanest Prisoners and Greatest
Malefactors] But (continues that Pious Prince) [ They that Envy Ibid.
My being a King, are loath I should be a Christian; while they seek to Deprive
Me of all things else; They are afraid I should save My Soul.]

A word now to the Obligations we have to your Civil Authorities, as to the
Freedom of our Persons and Estates. Visit but your own Acts, and be your own
Judges, (but take the Crime along with ye; Obedience to God, to the King, and
to the Law) Not to Enumerate your Particular, and Personal Outrages, as the
Clapping of so many Honorable Persons abord, and Designing Then for Slaves,
because They would not Rebel; the Barbarous Treatment of betwixt Three and
Fourscore Worthy and Loyal Gentlemen in the Business of Salisbury, that were
Shipped away and Sold (by AN HONEST MAN) to the Barbados. Nor to Insist upon
it, how many Honorable Persons have been Smothered, and Starved in Gaoles; how
much Noble Blood has been Spilt both in the Field, and upon the Scaffold, etc.
-- I shall rather Confine my self to some few of your General Provisions for
securing the Royal Party, and for the Extirpation both of that Line, and
Government, to which, Providence has now again Subjected ye: which (to run over
them in short) shall be These [ Scob. Acts Pars. 1. Pa. 37.
] An Ordinance for Sequestration of Delinquents Estates. [ Pa. 135.
] Delinquents Disabled to bear any Office, or have any Vote in Election of any
Mayor, etc. Here Is, Estate, and Legal Freedom, gone already: Now follows
Banishment from One Place, and Confinement to Another. [ Pars. 2. Pa. 104.
] Delinquents must be Removed from London and Westminster, and Confined within
five Miles of their own Dwelling. [ Pa. 175.
] Correspondency with Charles Stuart or his Party Prohibited under Pain of High
Treason] and [ Pa. 372.
] Death to any Man that shall Attempt the Revival of his Claim, or that shall
be Aiding, Assisting, Comforting, or Abetting unto any Person Endeavoring to
set up the Title of Any of the Issue of the Late King. These were the
Conditions of Your Favors, Gentlemen, and the Trials of Our Faith.

If ye are not yet Convinced pray'e tell me, What was the Reason, that
throughout the whole Course of your Power, ye Treated the Episcopal Party still
worse then all the Rest?


Zea. Because They were the Most likely of all Others to Disturb our Settlement.


Conf. Very Good, and what do ye think as to Matter of Conscience? Did ye do
Well, or Ill in it? or rather, Was there any thing of Conscience in the Case?


Zea. Truly I wish much of the Severity had been Abated; but Certainly, as
'twas very fit for the Civil Power to secure the Peace of the Nation; so was
the Power Ecclesiastical no less concerned to exact a Conformity to the Laws
and Ordinances of Christ.


Conf. Can you say This, and not blush to Deny the Force of your own Argument?
If ye did well in refusing to Tolerate the Episcopal Way, because ye thought it
not Right; the Reason is as strong on the Other Side, that have the same
opinion Concerning Yours. If ye did well of the Other Side, out of a Political
Regard to the Public Peace, the same Reason lies as strong against ye That
Way too: so that you must either Confess, that you did Ill Then, in Refusing a
Toleration to Us, or allow that Authority does Well Now, in not permitting it
to You. Do not mistake me. I am as much as any man (to borrow his Sacred
Majesty's words) for [ Those that cannot Conform, Kings Declar. December. 26.
1662. Pa. 8.
through Scruple, and Tenderness of misguided Conscience: and for Dissenters
that Demean His Majesty's Speech to Both Houses, Feb. 18. 1662.
Themselves Peaceably and Modestly under the Government. And That shall appear
by and by, when we come to handle That Question.


Zea. Wee're Agreed then, if That be your Opinion: and pray'e let us forward to
my Friends Sermon now. (A Person whom I take to be within the Limit of your
Professed Kindness)


Conf. A Match; and if you please, I Will Gloss upon him to you.

Lo: Eli sat upon a seat by the way side, waiting: for his heart trembled for
the Ark of God, 1 Samuel 4. 13.

There Is his Text; from whence he gathers Two Observations.

First, When the Ark of God is in Danger to be lost, the People Pa. 5.
of God have thoughtful heads, and trembling hearts. (Or, to put this Doctrine
into a Gospel-Dress) When the Gospel is in Danger of losing, when
Gospel Ordinances are in Danger of being lost, and Gospel Ministers in Danger
of losing, then the People of God have trembling heads, and careful and
solicitous hearts about it.

Secondly, A true Child of God is more troubled, and more Ibid.
solicitous what shall become of the Ark, then what shall become of Wife and
Children, or Estate.

He gives you in the next place, Four Reasons, Why the Pa. 7.
People of God are so much Troubled when the Ark of God is in Danger.

First, For the great Love they bear to the Ordinances of Pa. 8.
God, and to the Faithful Ministers of Christ. They cannot be silent; they
cannot but Tremble when they see the Ark of God in Danger.

Secondly, They are Troubled, because of the Interest they Ibid.
have in the Ark. The Ordinances of God are the Jewels of a Pa. 8.
Christian, and the Treasures of a Christian, and the Loss of them cannot but
Trouble them. And Jesus Christ is the Joy of a Christian, and therefore when
Christ is departing, they cannot but be much afflicted at it.

Thirdly, They are Troubled because of their Accessariness Pa. 9.
to the losing of the Ark.

Fourthly, The People of God are Troubled because of the Pa. 8.
Mischiefs that come upon a Nation, when the Ark of God is Lost. The Tongue of
man is not able to Express the Misery of That Nation where the Ark of God is
Taken.

First, When the Ark of God is taken, then the ways Pa. 9.
of Sion mourn, and none come to the Solemn Assemblies; It was the complaint of
the Church, Lam. 1. 4. That is matter of sadness.

Secondly, The Ministers of Christ are then driven into Corners. And that is
matter of heart-trembling.

Thirdly, The Souls of Many are then in Danger, when the Gospel is gone, your
Souls are in hazard: There is cause of sadness.

Fourthly, The Enemies of God Blaspheme, and are ready to say, Where is your
God? Then do the Enemies of God Triumph.

Fifthly, Then is Jesus Christ trampled under foot, Pa. 10.
and the Ordinances of God defiled and trampled on, and then Blasphemy and
Atheism comes in like an Armed man.


Zea. Very good, and what can you make out of All This; but that The Loss of
the Gospel is a Dreadful Judgment: The very Fear of Losing it, a Dismal
Apprehension; and that All Other Interests are as Nothing in Competition with
Jesus Christ?


Conf. Agreed, Thus far all is Right, and as it should be; But come now to his
Application.

The Ark of God is (at this instant) in Danger of being lost, Pa. 11.
Do You see? Here is no less then All at Stake, the very first Dash. Ask him now,
Where the Danger lies? He Answers ye, that we have lost our first Love to the
Gospel, and to Ibid.
the Ordinances. Is not This to Charge the Church of England with Apostasy?
Hear him again; and set his Vanity against his Sedition. More particularly,
Aldermanbury may Pa. 12.
truly fear the Loss of the Ark, and be Unchurched; for want of a Faithful
Minister to go In and Out before them. That is to say, Famous Mr. Calamy (for
that Epithete he bestows upon Himself) is Removed, and consequently the
Candlestick.

Another thing that makes him fear the Loss of the Ark, is, The Abundance of
Priests, and Jesuits, that are in the midst Pa. 13.
of us, and the Preaching of Popery amongst Us, and the Proneness of people to
run headlong to the Garlic and Onions of Egypt again. But where are our old
Eli's now, to sit watching and Trembling for fear of the Ark? Where are our
Moses' s, Our Elijah' s? Our Uriahs, etc.

Observe This Paragraph well. Here Is first, an Open and Express Endeavor to
Startle the People with a fear of Popery, which was the very Artifice by which
This very Person promoted our Late Troubles.

Secondly, Here Is a direct Arraignment of the King, and of his Ministers. Where
are Our Moses's, etc. -- What is This but to say, Beloved, ye see, Jesus Christ
is Departing, Idolatry is breaking In upon us, and Our Moses' s, Our Ely's,
never look after it. Pray'e lay it a little more to Heart, your selves. You can
complain (says he) of Taxes, and Decay Ibid.
of Trading; of This Civil Burden, and That Civil Burden: but where is the Man
or Woman that Complains of This Misery. The Loss of the Ark? Who lays to Heart,
Who Regards what shall become of Religion? There is a strange kind of
Indifferency, and Lukewarmness upon most Peoples Spirits: so they may have
their Trading go on, and Their Civil Burdens removed, they care not what
becomes of the Ark.

What is This, but to bring Authority to the Bar, and set the Subject upon the
Bench? What is it, but in plain Terms, to solicit the Multitude to a Tumult?
For Mr. Calamy knows very well, that they have no other way in the world to do
him a service in This Case, but by Sedition. And for fear of Mistakes, Note, I
beseech ye, with what Care the Good man leads them to his Meaning: They can
complain of Taxes he says, but He would have them Complain for the Loss of
the Ark; That is, in honest English, He would have them Clamor against the
Government of the Church. The very Truth is, This Gentleman speaks both upon
Experience, and Foresight; for no man knows better, both what it has done, and
what it may do. First, as to his Foresight, Rebellion can never be made God's
Cause, but by taking the Ark into the Quarrel. Next, to his Experience. This
Person was one of the Five that Menag'd the Cause of the Rabble against
Bishops, some Twenty Years ago. There was compleyning for fear of the Ark too:
and what Ensued upon it, but the Dissolution of the Government, the Scandal of
Religion, and the Murder of the King? He Blames the People next for their
Lukewarmness; Pray mark me; They have been once in Arms already since the King
came in. They make no scruple at all of Affronting the Law: They have Entered
into several Plotts upon the very Person of his Sacred Majesty, and All This,
for fear of the Ark, as the poor Wretches miserably Imagine. If This Zeal be
not sufficient, I wonder what Temper it is that our Religious Salamander would
persuade them to: Now take the whole Matter in Complication, and you have

First, A Prohibited Minister Preaching Publicly in Despite of a Solemn Law.

Secondly, The Sermon it self is within the Reach of The Act for the King's
Safety, Where It is Enacted, That what Person soever, shall Maliciously and
Advisedly publish or affirm the King to be an Heretic or a Papist, or that he
endeavors to Introduce Popery; or shall Maliciously and Advisedly, by writing,
Printing, Preaching; or other speaking, express, publish, utter or declare, any
Words, Sentences, or other thing or things, to incite or stir up the people to
Hatred or Dislike of the Person of his Majesty, or the Established Government;
then every such person and persons being thereof Legally convicted, shall be
Disabled to have or enjoy, and is hereby Disabled and made Incapable of having,
holding, enjoying, or exercising any Place, Office, or Promotion
Ecclesiastical, Civil, or Military, or any other Employment in Church or State,
other than that of his Peerage, etc.

Thirdly, Here Is not only a Reproach cast upon the Government, but an Appeal
Offered to the People, for the Redress of it.

Now to proceed; You have him Here, Charging upon the Peoples Consciences, the
sin of not being sufficiently Pa. 14.
affected with the Danger that the Ark of God is in.

It is a sign you do not Love the Gospel; if you had any Ibid.
Love to it, you would be troubled more for the danger of the Ark, then for any
Outward Danger whatsoever.

Is not This, the very style and scope of -- 43. (I spare his former Hortatives
to the War, even for the Sermon, Iu^. 15. -- 43. page 53, and 51.
Credit of the Function,) The Glory of God (he says) is Embarked in the same
Ship which This Cause is in. again, [ When you are derided for hazarding Lives
and Estates in This Cause, you must reply, It is for God, and his Religion. And
what was This Cause, I beseech ye, but the Foulest Conspiracy that ever
appeared under that Masque? (and Those are of all others, certainly, the
Foulest.) Religion was Then in Danger, it seems: That is, the Presbyterian was
not as yet sure in the Saddle; nor would That Obstinate and Implacable Faction
ever be Quiet, till they forced their Sovereign to confute the Imposture with
his Blood.

We have it now from the same Hand, that the Ark is in Danger, and what is that
but The Good Old Cause over again, only a little varied in the Dress? By the
Ark, he has already explained Himself to Intend, the Interest of the Ejected
Clergy [Pa. 6.]; and what he means by pressing so deep a Concern for the Danger
of it, let any sober man Imagine. He tells them first, that the Ark is in
danger, and Then conjures them, as they Love the Gospel, not to Regard any
Outward Danger whatsoever to save it. If This be not to Invite, Provoke, and
Warrant any Violence Imaginable, either upon the Person of the King, or upon
the Authority of the Law, or wherever else the Multitude shall think fit to
fasten the Quarrel; let me suffer the shame that belongs to him that is Guilty
of such an Offense. Nor shall the Project want Hammering, for he is over with
it again and again, [ Let me beseech ye All to Declare Pa. 16.
you are the People of God in DEED, and in Truth, by following the Example of
Old Eli, to be very solicitous for the Ark of God -- [ Consider what a sad
Condition we are in, Pa. 17.
if the Ark be Taken; What will your Estates do ye Good, or all your
Concernments do ye Good, if the Gospel be Gone? -- What is the Glory of
England; What is the Glory of Christianity but the Gospel? If the Gospel be
Gone, our Glory is Gone. -- Oh! when the Glory is Gone, who would Desire to
Live? He goes on, [ I am loath to tell you the story of Chrysostom; Pa. 17, and
18.
he was but One Man, yet when he was banished Constantinople, the People all
Petitioned for him, and said,
They could as well lose the Sun out of the Firmament, as lose Chrysostom from
among them. Oh the sad, and lamentable, and woeful Condition we are in, if the
Ark of God be taken!

Without any Force to his Meaning, take his Sense in few words. What will your
Lives, or Estates avail ye, without the Gospel? Petition for your Chrysostom
again. (Good Gentleman! as if the Sole Receptacle of the Holy Ghost were Mr.
Calamy's Nightcap) Now to what End this Tends, let Any man look that is not
blind. No Man runs the Risque either of his Life, or Fortune, for a Petition;
so that his Enforcing so much, the Contempt of Outward Dangers, and of all
other Concernments, in comparison with the Safety of the Ark, (which is now in
Hazard) cannot Rationally be Applied to an Action that carries along with it No
Danger at all. Wherefore you must of Necessity, Grant, that your friend either
Meant Nothing, or Worse; and that his Pressing, and Disposing the Multitude to
so great a contempt of their Lives, and Fortunes, was but a Tacit Encouragement
of them to some Action that might bring Those Interests in Question.


Zea. I perceive, a Presbyterian is well helped up that has you for his
Interpreter.


Conf. Can you your self Acquit him?


Zea. I must confess, I think he might have Worded it with more Caution.


Conf. And then his Horrible, Unchristian, Bitterness against the Government,
-- You have seen Smectymnuus I suppose.


Zea. Yes, yes; He is a little Eager in his Way.


Conf. Come, Zeal; I Will Disabuse ye: What will you say, if I bring you to a
Person, that shall Aver to Mr. Calamy's Face, that since his Majesty's
Return, He has Declared Himself not Unsatisfied with the Government, and
Discipline of the Church of England, and that only the Importunity of his
Parishioners Diverted Him from accepting a Bishopric? You will the less wonder
at This when ye Consider, how Absolutely he was For the Church, till he found
it more Beneficial to be Against it.


Zea. All that I shall say, is This; Let every man speak as he finds: and so,
if you please, we will leave him to take his Fortune.


SECT. X. Arguments against TOLERATION in Respect of the Authority that is to
Grant it.
Conf. COme Gentlemen, I have yet one Exception more to your Toleration, and
That is upon the Account of the Authority that is to Grant it. From whom do ye
Expect it?


Zea. From the Parliament.


Conf. But what is it you call a Parliament? for, one while the King and the Two
Houses in Co-ordination are a Parliament; and when Ye have Screwed out the
Kings Negative Voice, The Lords and Commons are a Parliament; and Then down go
the Lords, and the Commons alone are a Parliament; and at Last, Out with Them
too, For the Fountain of Dominion is in the People. This is the Scale of your
Politics. But to the Point in hand; You Apply to the Parliament, and your
Grievance is Matter of Conscience; Do ye make the Civil Power a Judge of
Conscience?


Zea. No, under Favor, My Desire that the Parliament will Relieve my
Conscience, does not Consequently make it a Judge of it.


Conf. And with Your Pardon too, How shall the Magistrate know whether your
Conscience is oppressed, or no, if he be no Judge of it? One of these Two Rules
He is to proceed by; Either That of his own Particular, or the General Rule of
all Consciences. If He measure your Conscience by the Former, there is no
Oppression in the Case; for His Conscience is very well satisfied in That which
will not down with Yours. If by the Latter, All other Consciences would be
Concerned as well as Yours, in the Violation of a General Rule: So that
Evidently, your Scruples are Singular, and if you cannot bring them within his
Cognizance, you must Subject them to his Authority; and First teach him to Know
when your Conscience is troubled, before ye Complain because it is not Eased.


Scrup. For That, Every man tells his own Tale best, and may best be Credited
in That which No body knows but Himself.


Conf. And under That Color, so Many Men as make no Conscience at all of an
Imposture, shall pretend to make one of a Ceremony. Peruse the Tragedies of our
Holy Leagues, Covenants, and Reformations: What Crime so Execrable that has not
been Committed under the Motto of Gods Cause, and Patronage of Conscience? What
Act so Horrid, that has not past for a Divine Impulse; and (if it Hit) the
Author of it for an Inspired Instrument of Justice? Nay more; not One Notorious
Practice of a Hundred, upon the Person of a Prince, but under a Religious
Vernish; and Commonly, a Priest at the One End of it, and an Impulse at the
Other.

Was it not a Holy Father and the Prior of the Covent (one of the Heads of the
League) that Confirmed Clement in his Purpose of Murdering Harry the Third of
France? For Davila Delle Guer. Civ. di F^an. Lib. 10.
his Encouragement; They Assured him, that if he outlived the Fact, he should
be a Cardinal; if he Died, a Saint: and This was it that fixed him in his
Determination. What was it again, that Originally Disposed this Monster to That
Direful Villainy; but principally Seditious Sermons against the Ibid.
King as a Persecuting Tyrant? [ Stimolato dalle predicationi, the giornalmente
sentiva fare contra Henrico di Valois, nomi nato il persecutore della feed, and
il Tiranno, etc.] See in the same Author, the Confession of John Castle,
concerning his Attempt upon Harry the Great, which was, that he had been
brought up in the Jesuits School, and Instructed, that it was not only Lawful,
but Meritorious to Destroy Harry of Bourbon, that Revolted Heretic and
Persecutor of the Holy Church [ Esaminato con le solite form, confesso
liberamento, Lib. 14.
etc.] What was it that Animated Ravillac to his Damned Practice upon that
Brave Prince, but (by his own Confession) a Discourse of Mariana's, De Rege,
and Regis Institutione? 'Twas a Divine Instinct too, that Moved Balthazar
Gerard to Destroy the Prince of Aurange [Divine Strada de Bello Belgico Lib. 5.
tantum Instinctu id a se patratum constanter Affirmabat, diu Tortus, etc. To
conclude with that Fresh and Horrible Instance here at Home; Acted upon the
Sacred Person of the Late King. What was it, but the Operation of That Poison
in the People, which was Instilled into them by their Ministers? How
Inconsistent then is the Liberty of the Pulpit, with the Safety of the
Government? and how Great a Madness were it to Expect, that the same Persons
should Establish This Prince by virtue of the same Liberty by which They Ruined
the Last?

You cannot certainly but Confess the Hazard to his Sacred Majesty of Granting
a Toleration; take a little Notice now, of the Indignity in proposing it. That
Grace which were an Ample Reward even for the most Meritorious Services, and
Loyalty, do These People Mutinously Demand as a Requital for the Contrary.


Scrup. Will ye oppose the Exercise of a Charity, because it may be Abused.


Conf. No, but I shall Oppose the Encouragement of a Confidence that Presses to
be Requited for an Injury: and in truth, Your Petition properly taken, is
rather a Mockery then a Request. As for the Purpose, What is it ye stick at?


Scrup. The Act for Uniformity.


Conf. Is it the Model, or the Uniformity that troubles you?


Scrup. Why truly I Except to Both; for Neither is the Particular Act framed to
my satisfaction, nor is it possible, that any One Form of Worship should suit
All Judgments.


Conf. Will Toleration suit All Judgments any better then Uniformity? Or do ye
account the Sanction of any One Form Whatsoever, to be Lawful?


Scrup. Indeed I do not think it lawful for a Magistrate to Enjoin any thing
upon a Penalty, which a Private Person may not lawfully obey him in; nor do I
think it Warrantable for a Man to Obey any Humane Command against his
Conscience.


Conf. Now lay together what you have said; First, It is not Possible, that any
One Form of Worship should suit All Judgments; and then it is not lawful to
Enjoin any thing upon a Penalty, which does not suit All Judgments. What is
This but a mere Trifling of Government, to suppose a Law without an Obligation?
Again; If the Magistrate cannot Impose, neither can he Tolerate; unless you will
suppose him a more Competent Judge of Your Conscience, then of his Own: for you
Allow him the Cognizance of what he may Tolerate, and Deny him the Knowledge of
what he may Impose. In fine, Your Arguments, and Opinions, duly weighed, his
Majesty has either no Power, or no Reason to permit you a Toleration; No Power,
as You state his Capacity, and no Reason as you Disclaim his Supremacy.


Scrup. I do not Oppose the Coactive Power of the Civil Magistrate, in Matters
of Civil Concernment; but I take the Case in Question to be of Another Quality,
and out of the Verge of the Secular Jurisdiction.


Conf. I think it will become you then, not to Importune his Majesty for the
Dissolving of an Ecclesiastical Law, before you acknowledge him Vested with the
Right of Making it.


Ze. If you think fit; let that Point be the Next Question.


Conf. Agreed; it shall.


SECT. XI. The Proper Subject and Extent of Humane Power.
Conf. AS Reasonable Nature consists of Soul, and Body; so is the Authority
that Governs it, Divine and Humane; God, Eminently over All, and Princes
Ministerially under Him, and as His Substitutes. The Dominion of our Souls God
reserves peculiarly to Himself, committing That of our Bodies to the Care of
the Magistrate. Now if Power be a. Divine Ordinance, so consequently is
Subjection; for, to Imagine the One without the Other, were to Destroy the
Ratio of Relatives. A sober Disquisition of This Matter, would save much
Trouble that arises about the Bounds and Limits of our Duty; how far Religion
binds us, and how far Allegiance. That they are severable, we must not doubt,
for Truth it self has said it; Give unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's,
and unto God the things that are God's: But that They are only so severable, as
never to become Inconsistent, is founded upon the same Immovable Rock, Let
every soul be subject, etc. -- a Precept of a Perpetual, and Universal
Operation, and Limited neither to Time, Place, nor Persons.


Ze. Your Deduction of Government, and Subjection from Divine Institution, is
well enough Coucht, and that we are to Obey the Magistrate for God's sake, and
in subordination to God, is Easily Proved, and Granted; but I hear Nothing yet
of the Particular Bounds and Terms of Humane Jurisrisdiction, What it is belongs
to God, and What to Caesar.


Conf. That I confess, is the Pinch of the Question; for One Duty comes up so
close to the Other, that it is not for Every Common Eye to pass between them.
Effectually, they Touch; but, in what Point, is of a Nice Decision. The
Readyest way in my opinion, to the strict Knowledge of our Duty, is by the
Laws and Powers of the Authority; for, it is Requisite that a Man know the
Rule, before he can Observe it. We are then to Consider, that the Almighty
Wisdom has Invested Kings with an Unlimited Power of Commanding, or Forbidding,
in all matters which God himself has not either Commanded, or Forbidden; which
Proposition Resolves it self into This Conclusion,

Whatsoever God has left Indifferent, is the subject of Humane The subject of
Humane Power.
Power.


Scrup. Does not That Opinion destroy Christian Liberty?


Conf. No: but the Denial of it Destroys Magistracy. If Kings have not This
Power, they have none at all; and it Implies a Contradiction, to suppose any
Authority in Nature without it.


Scrup. But may not a Prince tie himself up in a Thing Otherwise Indifferent?


Conf. I speak of Power according to the Institution, not of Power limited by
Paction.


Scrup. May not the same thing be Indifferent to One, and not so to Another?


Conf. Granted; and I pray'e follow it a little further. May not every thing
Imaginable appear Non-Indifferent to some or other; if nothing can be
commanded, but what upon such a Phansy may be Disobeyed?


Scrup. Pardon me, I do not speak of Matters of Civil Concern, but of Matters
of Religion.


Conf. That Is all a Case; for you cannot Instance in any One Civil Action, that
may not be made Relative to Religion. But stick to the Mark; We are upon the
Extent of Humane Power: That there is such a Power; and That Authorized too by
God Himself, You have already granted: Now tell me, Upon what shall That Power
be Exercised, if you Exclude things Indifferent? One man may have a Real
Scruple; and All the Rest, Pretend one; Who shall Distinguish? So that the Rule
holding from One, to All, the Sacred Authority of the Prince becomes Dependent
upon the Pleasure of the Subject, and the Validity of a Divine and Unchangeable
Ordinance, is subjected to the Mutable Judgment and Construction of the People.


Scrup. It may be You Expect the Magistrate should as well have a Power of
Judging what is Indifferent, as of Restreyning it.


Conf. You may be sure, I do; for otherwise I Am where I was, if I make You the
Judge: Is It not all one, as to the Magistrate, Whether you Refuse upon Pretense
that the Thing is not Indifferent, or upon Pretense that he cannot Restreyn a
Thing Indifferent? The Crime indeed is differing in the Subject; for the One
way it is an Usurpation of Authority, and the Other way, it is a Denial of it.


Scrup. Why then it seems, I am to Believe any thing Indifferent, which the
Magistrate tells me is so, be it never so Wicked.


Conf. No; There You 're bound up by a Superior Law.


Scrup. Have you forgot your self so soon? 'Twas but just now, you would not
allow me to be a Judge, and here you Make me One.


Conf. Right; to your self you are, but not to the Public: A Judge of your
own Thought, but not of the Law.


Scrup. At your rate of Arguing now from One to All; Authority, methinks,
should be as much Endangered This way, as the Other; for All may Judge Thus, as
well as One.


Conf. It Is possible they May; Nay we will suppose an Imposition foul Enough to
move them all to do so; and yet there is a Large Difference; for, Diversity of
Judgment does not shake the Foundation of Authority; and a man may Disobey a
sinful Command with great Reverence to the Power that Imposes it.


Scrup. You were saying even now, that my Duty to God, and to the King, could
never be Inconsistent: Pray'e, How shall I behave my self, if the Prince
Commands One thing, and God, Another? I cannot Observe the Law, without
Violence to my Conscience, nor Discharge my Conscience, without Offense to the
Law; What Course shall I take to avoid Enterfering?


Conf. Demean your Self as a Christian toward the Law of God, on the One hand;
and as a Subject, toward the Ordinance of God on the Other: as Considering that
you are Discharged of your Obedience, but not of your Subjection.


Scrup. Suppose the Supreme Magistrate should by a Law Establish a False
Worship.


Conf. He Is still your Prince, and even in This Complication, you may acquit
your self both to God, and Caesar. Divide the Worship from the Magistrate, and
in so doing, you both Fear God, and Honor the King; and it is only This Loyal
and Religious Separation of our Duties, that must set us right in the Main
Controversy. Where do ye find that Kings Reign upon Condition of Ruling
Righteously? Or that we owe them less After Misgovernment, than we did Before?


Scrup. But do ye say, we are bound to Honor an Idolatrous Prince?


Conf. Yes, yes: the Prince you are bound to Honor, though not as an Idolater.
Shall the Vice or Error of the Person, blemish the faultless Dignity of the
Order? By That Rule, the world must Continue without a Government, till we can
find Men without Failings.


Scrup. So that you allow I perceive of Distinguishing betwixt the Person and
the Office.


Conf. Betwixt the Frailty of the One, and the Sacredness of the Other, I do:
for Kings Command as Gods, though they Judge as Men: but I do no more allow of
Dividing the Person of a Prince from his Authority, then of Dividing his Soul
from his Body.


Scrup. And, I beseech ye, what is that which you Call Authority?


Conf. To tell ye Only that it is Gods Ordinance, falls short, I believe, of
the Scope of your* Question. Wherefore take This in Surplusage. It is the Will
and Power of a Multitude, Delivered up by Common Consent to One Person or More,
for the Good and Safety of the Whole: and this Single or Plural Representative
Acts for All. Take This along with ye too. The Disposition of such or such a
Number of Persons into an Order of Commanding and Obeying is That which we call
a Society.


Scrup. What is the Duty of the Supreme Magistrate?


Conf. To procure the Welfare of the People, or, according to the Apostle; He
is the Minister of God, for a Comfort to Those that Do Well, and for a Terror
to Evill-Doers.


Scrup. How far are his Laws binding upon his Subjects?


Conf. So far as They that parted with their Power had a Right over Themselves.


Scrup. Whence was the Original of Power, and what Form of Government was
First, Regal, or Popular?


Conf. Power was Ordained of God, but Specified by Man; and beyond doubt, the
First Form of Government was Monarchique.


Scrup. Nay, Certainly the Popular Form was first, for How could there be a
King without a People?


Conf. So was the Son before the Father (you will say) for How could there be a
Father without a Son. But the Question is First, Was the World ever without a
Government, since the Creation of Man? Secondly, Whether was first in the
World, One Man, or More? I see well enough what it is You Would be at; You would
fain advance the Popular Form above the Regal: which if ye could, 'twere
Nothing to our purpose; for we are not upon the Form of Government, but upon
the Latitude of Humaene Jurisdiction, be the Sovereignty where it will; and
that it extends to whatsoever God has left Indifferent, is my Assertion. If you
Deny This, You Overthrow All Government, (as is already proved) and if you
Grant it, we are at Liberty for the next Enquiry which is concerning,


SECT. XII. The Bounds of TOLERATION; with some Reflections upon SCHISM, and
SCANDAL.
Conf. IT is already agreed, that Government is a Divine Eccles. Polit* Lib. 1.
Pa. 7.
Ordinance; and Order (according to the Reverend Hooker) is only, A
Manifestation of the Eternal Law of God. So that I think, a Man may safely
pronounce (upon This Allowance) First, that What Principle soever is Manifestly
Destructive of Government, or but rationally tending to Confusion, cannot le of
God. Secondly, Every Man is to Content himself in his Station as being no
farther accomptable, than for what is committed to his Charge. Under These Two
Heads will be found (if I mistake not) whatsoever belongs to the Political Part
of our Debate.

We are here to enquire, not how far Toleration may be Convenient, or
otherwise; but how far Warrantable and Lawful: and I find it (by a Reverend,
and Learned Prelate) brought to This Standard, [ In the Question of Toleration,
The Foundation of Faith, Good Life, and Government is to be Secured.] Wherein
is comprised a Provision and Care, that we may live as Christians toward God;
as Members of a Community toward one another; and as Loyal Subjects toward our
Sovereign. Now if you will admit Opinions to be only so far Tolerable as they
Consist with These Duties of Religion, Morality, and Society, We have no more
to do, but to apply Matters in Controversy to the Rules of Piety, and Good
Manners, and to the Ends of Government.


Scrup. ' It Is True; were Men Agreed upon Those Rules: But we see Several Men
have Various apprehensions of the same thing; and that which One Man takes for
a Rule, Another Counts an Error.


Conf. By your Argument, we shall have no Religion, because Men Differ about
the Right; No Bible, because Men Disagree about the Meaning of it: No Rule, in
fine, at all to square our Actions by, till Truth, and Reason shall be
Established by a Popular Vote.

The Law says Worship Thus, or So; use This Form, That Ceremony, Posture,
Habit, etc. -- The Libertine cries No, it is a Confinement of the Spirit; an
Invention of Man; a Making of That Necessary which God left Free; a Scandal to
Tender Consciences, etc. -- And Here Is Authority Concluded, as to the Manner of
Worship.

So for the Time. How do They know when Christ was Born, or Crucified? Nay,
They have much ado to call to Mind when the Late King was Murdered: but the
Relief of Taunton, and the Repulse They gave the Cavaliers at Lyme: This They
can very well Remember, and Celebrate Those Days of Mercy with a most
Superstitious Gravity, and Form. The Churches Fasting-Daies, They make their
Jubilees; and still it happens, that Their Consciences and the Law, run Counter.

It Is the same Thing, as to the Place; Command Them to Church; They Will tell ye,
there is no Inherent Holiness in the Walls; the Hearts of the Saints, are the
Temples of the Lord. Is not God to be found in a Parlour, as well as in a
Steeple-House? In fine, What Is their Plea for All This; but that, This is One
Man's Judgment, That, Another: This or That may be Indifferent to You, but not
to Me. What Is Indifference to Christianity? This sickly Humor opens a door to
as many Controversies as there are Men; it leaves Authority, naked; and exposes
the Law to any man's Scorn, that shall think fit to Scruple his Obedience.

To conclude; This Lawless Liberty, Razes the very foundation of Government; it
creates as many Religions, as there are several Phansies; and, briefly, the
Assertors of This Liberty are of the Number of Those that are not upon any
Terms to be admitted within the Pale of a Toleration.


Scrup. Shall the Magistrate make me Act against my Conscience?


Conf. Shall the Subject make Him Tolerate against His? But to proceed; There
are that place [ Parker, Goodwin, Rutherford, Milton, etc.
] the Sovereignty in the Diffusive Body of the People, that hold it Lawful for
the Subjects to enter into Leagues and Covenants, not only Without the
Sovereign's Consent, but Against his Authority; that call upon the People in
the Pulpit, [ E. Call. Noble-mans Pattern, pa. 45.
] to Assist the Forces raised by the PARLIAMENT, according to their Power and
Vocation, and not to Assist the Forces raised by the KING, neither DIRECTLY nor
INDIRECTLY: That Proclaym [ E. C. Phoenix, pa. 158, and 159.
] the breach of the National Covenant, to be a greater sin, then a sin against
a Command'ment, or against an Ordinance -- a sin of so high a Nature, that God
cannot in Honor but be Avenged upon it.

These are a People likewise, whose Principles stand in no Consistence either
with Piety or with Government; and can as little Pretend to the Benefit of a
Toleration as the Former.

There are that Asfirm, [ Rutherfords Due Right of Presbyteryee, Pa. 485.
] Reformation of Religion to be the People's Duty no Less then the King's: [
Ibid. p. 488.
] and that the Pastors of the Land are Obliged to Reform Themselves and
Religion without the King; nay, though the King command the contrary.

There are that Print [ Mr. Manion's Smectymnuus, Published since his Majesty's
Return, pa. 58.
] the English Episcopal Clergy to be sons of Belial; that Press the Cutting of
them off; that scandalously Charge Them with Drunkenness, Profaneness,
Superstition, Popishness: To the Dishonor of that Government which his Majesty
has sworn to Maintain, and to the Hazard of the Public Peace. These also do I
take to be a People, whose Practices and Opinions Threaten a certain and swift
Destruction both to Church and State, Wherever They are Tolerated. What
security can a Prince expect, where his Mistakes are made the common Theme of
the Pulpit, and where His Regalities are subjected, to the Good Pleasure of His
Subjects.


Ze. You do not think it Lawful then I perceive, to Tolerate the
Non-conformists.


Conf. Till they renounce their Seditious, and Anti-Monarchical ways, I must
confess I do not.


Ze. And which are Those I beseech ye?


Conf. Their Inconformity to the Law; Their Doctrine of Conditional Obedience:
Their Erecting an Ecclesiastical Supremacy to overtop the Prerogative Royal;
To say no more, Their Declaring the Magistrate accomptable to the People.


Scrup. Conformity, You have spoken some sharp Truths, and it is to be presumed
that you will Allow the Liberty you Take. Whether do you believe Scandal to be any
more Tolerable, than Schism? Or, are not the Sons of the Church (as ye call
them) as Guilty of the One, as the Non-conformists are of the Other.


Conf. Scandal, My good Friend, is a General Term; especially as you frequently
apply it: and it is but Reason for me to ask your Meaning, before I give you my
Answer. To say, that the Sons of the Church are Guilty of Scandal, when, eo
nomine, they appear to you Scandalous, is no more then to say, that the Sons of
the Church are the Sons of the Church: for, the Church it self, the Government,
and the Rites of it, are All, Scandalous to You. Wherefore I beseech ye, be a
little more Particular, that I may understand what Scandal you intend, and be
as plain, as plain may be.


Scrup. Nay, you shall have it then, and as plainly too as your Heart can wish.
Your Position is, that No Toleration can warrantably be Granted to the Hazard
of Religion, Good Life, and Government.

According to That Standard, You Would find, that the Conformists have as little
Right to a Toleration, as their Neighbors; and that the Notorious Scandal on
the One side, out-weighs the Pretended Schism on the Other. But, to make my
self understood; by Scandal, I mean Public and Habitual Profaneness,
Sensuality, Dissolution of Manners, etc. -- as, by Schism and Sedition, I
suppose You intend our Incomplyances with your Church Discipline: Our Preaching
up the Power of Godliness, against the Form of it, (which You Interpret to be a
Decrying of your Ceremonies) and our Exhortings, rather to obey God than Man, (
which you are apt to take for an Affront to your Master's Prerogagative.)

It Is true; We cannot bring up our Consciences to your Ceremonies, and, for
Refusing to do, what we cannot Justify the Doing of, we are Baptized,
Schismatiques. This Extermination of Us from the Public Assembly, puts us
upon the Necessity of Private Meetings; and There We are Charged with Plotts;
and Practices upon the State. Take it all at the Worst, It is but doing That
which the Whole World agrees must Necessarily be done* after such a Manner as
some People Imagine we ought not to do it. So much for the Schism of the
Non-Conformists. Now put the Scandal of the Adverse Party into the Other Scale,
and You Your self shall hold the Balance.

Set but Your Tavern-Clubs against Our Conventicles, and (since you will have
it so) Oppose our Plotts against the Government in the One, to your
Combinations against God Himself in the Other; (for Atheism is become the
Sport, and Wit; the Salt of your most Celebrated Enterteinments.) In Your own
Words, [ The Eternal Verity is made a Fable; Religion but a Scar-Crow, (the
sour Impression of a Superstitious Melancholy,) nor, is it enough to Abandon
Heaven, unless ye Invade it too; and in the Throne of Providence, set up the
Empire, and Divinity, of Fortune. When you have dashed the Bible out of
Countenance, with the conceit of The Three Grand Impostors, or some such tart
piece of Drollery, ( and all This Enterlarded with Execrable, and studied
Blasphemies) the Man must be cast off, as well as the Christian; and there is
the Upshot of your Familiar Conversations. If such People as These may be
Tolerated, where is your* Foundation of Faith, Good Life, and Government?


Conf. We are fallen, I must confess into a Lewd Age; and yet truly, when I
consider, that This Nation has been Twenty years under your Tuition, it is a
Greater Wonder to me; that it is not quite Overspread with Atheism, than to
find it Only Teinted and Infected with it. The Reproach and Load of This
Impiety, you have cast upon the Episcopal Party: but when we come to Trace the
Monster to his Den, I Am afraid we shall bring the Footsteps of Him up to your
own Door.

That there are Exorbitants in all Persuasions, is a Thing not to be doubted;
and that there are in ours as well as in Others, I will not Deny; but to
Asperse the Cause for Personal Misdemeanors, is, to my thinking, very
Disingenuous. If ye will Charge Personal Crimes upon the Account of a Party,
You should be sure to Make out Those Crimes to be Rationally Consequent to the
Tenants, or Actings, of That Party. Now if you can show me Any Affinity betwixt
our Principles, and Those Villanyes, you say something; but if ye cannot, the
Dust of your Argument puts out your own Eyes.


Scrup. You forget that you Condemn your own Practice; for why may not I Charge
Personal Extravagancies upon your Party, as well as You do it upon Ours?


Conf. Only because there is not That Affinity (as I said but now) betwixt the
Principles of the Party, and the Faults of the Persons; on the One side, which
I find on the Other. To make This as Clear as the Day, we will open it Thus.

The Episcopal Party was for the King, and it is undeniable, that the King, and
the Church, had both the same Cause, and the same Fate. The Nonconformists were
against the King; and it is There as unquestionable, that They were the Men
that Destroyed both Church, and State. So that the Issue lies within This
Compass; Whether the Sovereignty be in the King, or in the People? If in the
King, the Rebellion was on your side; if in the People, the Guilt of the War
lies upon us. Now place the Power where ye please; Do ye own the Kings
Authority, or do ye Disclaim it? If ye Disclaim it, why do ye Petition to your
Inferior? or why should the King favor his Competitours? If ye Acknowledge
it, We Will proceed upon This Grant, that the Non-Conformists were in a
Rebellion; and prove that all the Transcendent Abominations which you Compleyn
of, are but the proper, and Natural Fruits, that have proceeded from That Root.


Ze. You know there have been several Popular Tracts written upon This Subject;
as -- some-bodyes Sovereign Power of Parliaments. Rutherford's Lex Rex, etc.
that never were Answered yet.


Conf. Well said Old True-penny. I think the Assemblyes Letter to the Reformed
Churches, was never Answered neither. But, to be serious. There are indeed many
dangerous, and seditious Treatises that lie unanswered (the more's the shame,
and Pity.) If no body were wiser then my self; The sum of them All should be
Confuted in one
just Volume, and the Origina's committed to the Fire, for the security of the
Future.


Scrup. But you were about to tell us how Rebellion begets Atheism.


Conf. Well Remembered; and I pray'e Observe. There are but Two sorts of People
that are Capable of being drawn into a Rebellion, the Weak and the Wicked;
Those that do not understand what they do, and Those that care not what they
do. The Ordinary Stale, is Religion; the Scene of This spiritual Imposture is
the Pulpit, and the Arbitrators of the Cause are the Preachers; by the benefit
of which Conjuncture, (to wit) of the Weight of the Matter in Question; [
Religion] with the Authority appointed to Determine it; [ God's Ministers] it
is no hard business for a Peinfull and Well-affected Ministry (That is,
Painful, and well-affected in, and to the Design) to Preach the Generality of
the People into This Division: [ i. e.] Those that cannot reach the Cheat to
scruple at every thing; and Those that go along with it, to make a Conscience
of Nothing: and hence it comes, that This Kingdom is so Pestered with
Enthusiasts, and Atheists.


Zea. But I tell ye again; the Atheists are on the wrong side: The Atheists are
Against us.


Conf. Let me Enform ye then, that Your Proceedings have Made Atheists, More
ways then One.

First, The Mere Quality of your Cause, has made Atheism the Interest of Many
of Your Partakers; Who to put off That Horror which attends them if there be a
God, Endeavor to persuade themselves that there is no God at all.

Secondly, The Work has been carried on under the Masque of Holiness; and the
most Desperate Atheist, is nothing else but a Crusted Hypocrite. I speak of
your Religious Atheist, who has This odds of the Profane, and Scoffing Wretch,
that he abuses God to his Face, and in his own House. The Great Atheists,
indeed, are Hypocrites (says Sir Francis Bacon) which are ever handling Holy
Things, but Essay of Atheism.
without Feeling; so as they must needs be Cauteriz'd in the End. It is
Remarquable, (as I have elsewhere observed) that in the Holy Scripture there
are not so many Woes pronounced, nor so many Cautions Inculcated, against any
Sort of People as against Hypocrites. You shall There find that God has given
the Grace of Repentance to Persecutors, Idolaters, Murderers, Adulterers, etc.
but I Am mistaken if the whole Bible Yields any one Instance of a Converted
Hypocrite.

Thirdly, Let me tell ye, for the Honor of your Practices, that as to the
Defense of Atheism, you have done more then All that ever went before ye; upon
that Noble Argument. Your People were not [ a WICKED, PROFANE, E. Calaus.
Sermon. Dec. 28. 1662. Pa. 21.
DRUNKEN Ministry (They would never have Settled the Ark) but SOBER, PIOUS,
GODLY Ministers, that did the Feat: -- a Praying, and Reforming People. Pa. 19.
Indeed a People that would Seize a Brother's Benefice with more Reverence,
then Any of our Prelates gives a Charity.


Zea. Be not severe, Conformity.


Conf. Then bid your Brethren leave their Gibbrish, and their Iugling; and
we will to our Atheism again. Answer me Soberly, What if a State should grant a
Toleration, for all men to talk of God-Almighty as they please?


Scrup. A Horrid, Impious Proposition!


Conf. Thou art the Man, Scruple; That which you Ask is more and worse; for the
Liberty is the same, and the Danger Infinitely Greater. In Earnest, He that
Looks narrowly through our Late Troubles, from 1640 to 60. will find Matter not
Only to Stagger a Weak Christian, but to put a Wiseman to a Second Thought; and
to make him Exclaim with the Prophet, [ Lo, These are the Ungodly, Psalm. 73. v.
12.
these prosper in the World, and these have Riches in possession -- Then have I
cleansed my heart in Vain, and washed my hands in Innocence.

To see Nigh, and Marshall with their hands lifted up unthe Lord in a Holy
Covenant; Swearing to Day to Defend and Preserve the King's Majesty's Person,
etc. and a while after with the same Consecrated Lips, Blessing That Cursed
Vote, that Manifestly Led to His Destruction (The Vote of Non-Addresses) which
was no more then saying Grace to the Kings Blood. To see a Gang of
Pulpit-Weathercocks Shifting from Party to Party, till they have run through
every point of the Compass, Swearing, and Counterswearing; and when the City
was Split into more Factions, then Parishes, Still to Mainteyn, that the whole
Schism was acted by the Holy Ghost. To find the Pulpit in stead of Plain and
Saving Truths Trading Only in Dark and Oraculous Delusions, and the Pretended
Messengers of Peace, turned Agents for Blood -- To hear and see All This, and
More, and the Cause Prosper too. What could the Wit of Man add more to This
Temptation to Apostasy?

Lastly, I must Impute much of That Iniquity which now Reigns, to your
Necessitated Toleration: I call it Necessitated, for you could never have
Crush't the Government without it. That Toleration started so Many Lewd
Opinions, that it was Some Degree of Modesty, for Fear of a Worse Choice, to be
of No Religion at all; and beyond Question, Many People finding it left so
Indifferent of What Religion they were; became Themselves as Indifferent,
whether they were of Any Religion or no.

You have forced me here, in My own Defense, to be a little Sharper then I
intended; and truly since we are In thus far, and that the Schismatiques think
it so Mighty a matter to hit the Prelatical Party in the teeth at every Turn,
with the Imputation of SCANDAL; I beseech ye tell me,

Which of the Two do you count the more Tolerable, SCANDAL, or SCHISM?


Scrup. If by Schism you mean, a Refusal to join with That Church where I
cannot Communicate without Sin: and if you intend by Scandal, such Actions as
are of Ill example, and administer occasion to your neighbor of Falling, I
think it is easily Determined, that the One is not to be Suffered, and the Other
not to be Condemned.


Conf. When I speak of Schism, and Scandal, let not me be understood, to speak
of This or That Sort, or Degree of Either; but in the Just Latitude both of the
One, and the Other: That is; without more Circumstance, Which do you take for
the more Tolerable Mischief of the Two?


Scrup. Truly betwixt a Perverse-Separation, and a Notorious Scandal, I think
the Choice is hard: but I rather Incline against the Scandal.


Conf. Then let me tell ye, Schism is Both; and if ye will believe Sir Francis
Bacon, [Heresies and Schisms, are Essay of Unity of Religion.
of all others the Greatest Scandals; yea more then Corruption of Manners.]
Consider it first, as it stands in Opposition to Unity, (which is the Bond both
of Religion, and Society) what can be more Scandalous then That which renders
Religion it self, Ridiculous? and That Is the Effect of Schism. To see so many
several Factions Grinning one upon another, and yet all pretending to the same
One, and Infallible Spirit! To bring it homer, How Great a Shame and Trouble is
This to Those that are within us! How great a Discouragement to such as are
without us; and How great a Subject of Rejoicing is it to Those that are
Against us! How many (in fine) has it driven From us; and how many more has it
hindered from coming to us! Again; it is seldom, (I think I might say, never)
seen, that Schism goes Alone: and in Effect, it is but Sedition in a Disguise.
For we find that our Scrupulous Dissenters, can with great Ease, and Unity,
agree in a War, though not in a Ceremony.


Scrup. And may there not be Conspiracies in Scandal, as well as in Schism?
There, with an Evident Design to bring Contempt upon Religion: whereas Here, we
find at least a Color, and Pretense to uphold it. Beside; the sins which I
account Scandalous, are, many of them, Levelled at the Prerogative of God
Himself; and, in short, the Question is not properly, and simply, betwixt
Schism, and Scandal, but betwixt Schism, and ail other sins whatsoever that may
be Propagated by Conversation; (for That Is the Latitude of Scandal)


Zea. Again, let me observe from your own mouth, that Heresies are Scandals,
and several Heresies you know, both by the Laws of God and Man, are Punished
with Death. He Numb. 24. 16.
that Blasphemeth the Name of the Lord, shall be put to Death. And from hence
you may gather some Difference sure, betwixt the heynousness of the One, and of
the Other.


Conf. If you will measure the Sin by the Punishment, you will proceed by a very
uncertain Rule: for Political Laws regard rather Public Conveniences, than
Particular Cases of Conscience. A man shall lose his Life for Picking a Pocket,
and but hazard his Ears for a False Oath. But if you will refer the matter to the
Just and Infallible Judge of all the World, ^^ God Himself; look but into that
dreadful Judgment upon the Schism of Korah. Korah, Dathan, etc. rose against
Moses with two Numb. 16. 1.
hundred and fifty Captains of the Assembly, famous in the Congregation, and
said unto them, Ye take too much upon you, V. 3.
since all the Congregation is Holy, every one of them, and the Lord is among
them. Wherefore then Lift ye your selves above the Congregation of the Lord.
[And what followed?] The Earth opened her mouth, and swallowed Them up with V.
32.
their Families, and all the Men that were with Korah, etc. A fire came out
from the Lord, and consumed the two hundred V. 35.
and fifty Men that Offered the Incense. This set the Multitude a muttering
against Moses and Aaron; saying Ye have killed the people of the Lord. See now
what came V. 41.
of This Muttring too: Fourteen thousand seven hundred of V. 49.
them were consumed by a Plague.


Zea. Well! but what if you will understand That to be Schism, which I know to be
Conscience?


Conf. Then have you the same Freedom to be Even with me, upon the Point of
Scandal; and so the Controversy must be Endless for want of a Judge to Decide
it.


SECT. XIII. The Necessity of a Final, and Unaccomptable JUDGE.
Conf. What Is your Opinion of the Necessity of a Judge?


Ze. I Am clearly for a Judge; that is, for a Judge furnished as well with a
Competency of Understanding to Determine Aright, as with a Power and Commission
to Determine.


Conf. A Judge supposes One Competency, as well as the Other; But the
Determination must be Final, and Decisive; No Appeal From it, and no Contending
Beyond it.


Ze. What not in Case of Error? I should be sorry to see a Roman Infallibility
set up in England.


Conf. How you start now from the shadow of an Infallible Judge, into the
Inconvenience of None at all! You would have a Judge you say: but then, That
Judge must be Questionable, in Case of Error; so that another Judge is to Judge
Him, and the very Judge of This Judge is Himself Questionable; and so is His
Judge, and his Judges Judge;- (to the end of the Chapter) In case of Error:
Which Case of Error may be alleged, Wheresoever there is no Infallibility; and
if there be no Infallibility in Nature, then by Your Rule, there can be no Judge
in Nature.


Ze. I do not say but a man may Judge Certainly in some Cases, though not
Infallibly in All; and my demand is only the Free Exercise of my Judgment of
Discretion, without being Tied up to an Implicit Resignation. There is (in
short) but a Right, and a Wrong; and the One I must Embrace, and Reject the
Other. How shall I know This from That, without Enquiry? and what am I the
better for That Enquiry, if when I have Learned my Duty, I am debarred the
Liberty to Practice it?


Conf. You turn the Question here from the Necessity of a Judge, to his
Infallibility. It Is not a halfpenny to Me, whether you make him Infallible, or
Credible, or Probable; or what you make him, or where you place him, provided
that he be acknowledged* Necessary, and Unaccomptable. Necessary, I suppose you
will not stick at: for there can be no Peace without him, every man being at
Liberty to wrangle, where no man is Authorized to Determine.


Zea. What is it that either Invites Tyranny, or Upholds it, but the Opinion of
an Unaccomptable-Sovereignty?


Conf. What is it rather (you should have said) that Excites Sedition, and
Depopulates Kingdoms, but the Contrary? and the Fiercest Tyranny, is much more
supportable then the Mildest Rebellion.


Zea. I shall readily allow you the Convenience of a Definitive Judgment, if
you will but secure me from the Danger of a Definitive Injustice.


Conf. You mistake your self, if you Oppose a Possible Injury on the One side,
to a Certain Strife and Confusion on the Other. If Infallibility you cannot
find, why may not the the Fairest Probability Content you?


Zea. But would you have That Probability, Govern by Unquestionable, and
Authoritative Conclusions?


Conf. By any means; Ye do nothing, else; for where Controversies are
Inevitable, and Concord Necessary; what can be more Reasonable, than to choose
the most Competent Judge of the Matter in Controversy, for the Concluding
Umpire of the Controversy it self?


Scrup. But a man may Judge Probably in One Case, and Improbably in Another.
Suppose the Determination to be manifest Error, or Injustice; would you have
the same Submission paid to it, as if it were Equity, and Truth?


Conf. Yes; to the Determination, though not to the Error: You are to stand to
the Authority of the Sentence, without Contesting the Equity of it: for Right
or Wrong, it is a Decision. The Principal Scope, and sure end of a Reference, is
Peace: the Hopeful Event, and Issue of it, is, Righteous Judgment. Is it not
well then, to be Sure of the One, and in so fair Hopes of the Other? Put it to
the Worst: You are not bound to be of the Judge his Opinion, but to be
overruled by his Authority: neither do you undertake that he shall Judge
wisely as to the Subject of the Question, but that he shall Judge Effectually,
as to the purpose of the Reference.


Scrup. This Resignation may do well, in Cases of Civil Interest: but it will
hardly hold in matters of Conscience. Who shall pretend to Judge of my
Conscience, beside God, and my self?


Conf. The Scripture, which is the Rule of all Consciences, shall be the Judge
of Yours. But the Question is not, What your Conscience IS, but what it OUGHT
to be: not what your Private Judgment Says, but what the Scripture Means: and
the thing I strive for, is a Judge of That; A Judge of the Rule of Faith; which
I take to be all out as Necessary as a Judge of a Political Law.

You cannot but Allow, that there are Diversities of Opinions, as well in
Religion, as concerning Secular Affairs: and such is our Corruption, that we
draw Poison even from the Fountain of Life, and the Word of God it self, is
made the warrant of all Crimes, and the Foundation of all Heresies.

Look behind ye, and you may see a Prince Murdered by his Subjects, Authority
Beheaded by a pretended Law, and All This Defended by a Text. The Church
Dovour'd by a Divided Ministry; the Government Overturned by a Solemn League
and Covenant, to Support it. An Arbitrary Power Introduced by the Patrons of
Liberty, and Charity it self extinguished for the Advancement of the Gospel. We
have lived to see as many Haeresies, as Congregations; and among Those of the
Classical way, a Consistorian Sarutiny Exercised beyond the Rigor of a Spanish
Inquisition. We have seen some that Romans 2. 22.
Abhor Idols, committing Sacrilege; Christ's Kingdom cried up, till his By
the Familists.
Divinity is denied: Strictness of Life Inculcated, till the very Rule of it
(the By the Antinomians.
Decalogue it self) is Rejected. And Blasphemy hunted out of the Tavern, into
the Pulpit. In short; what Sin, and Misery have we not known, and felt, since
under the Form of Liberty of Conscience, This Freedom of a Private Spirit came
in Vogue? Nor are we ever to expect better from it, till all men shall conspire
to do the same thing, where every man is left to his own Gust, to do what he
pleases: and whence flows all This Mischief, and Confusion, but from a License
of wandering from the Rule?

Show the People a Written Law; They Will tell you of a Law of Nature; and
distinguish betwixt [ The Rutherford, Lex. Rex p. ^1.
Politic Power they have given the King, and the Natural Power which they
Reserve to Themselves.]

Bid them Reverence the King as the Supreme Governor: They Will Answer you, No:
He Is but the Servant, and Vassal of the People: his Royalty is only a Virtual
Emanation from Them; and in Them Radically, as in the first Subject. (According
to Rutherford, Parker, Goodwin, Bridges, Milton, and a hundred more)

Come to the Point of Non-Resistence, and you shall hear, that Goodwins Right
and Might, Pa. 10.
Wheresoever a King, or other Supreme Authority creates an Inferior, they
invest it with a Legitimacy of Magistratical Power, to Punish themselves also,
in case they prove Evildoers: Yea, and to Act any other thing, requisite for
the Praise and Encouragement of the Good.

If it be demanded in what capacity the King may be Resisted? hear Rutherford
again Lex Rex Pa. 265.
The Man who is King may be Resisted, but not the Royal Office; The King in
Concreto, may be Resisted; but not the King in Abstracto.].

But in what Manner may he be Resisted; and by what Means. Lex. Rex Pa. 324.
He may be Resisted in a Pitched Battle, and with Swords and Guns. That is; his
Pa. 269.
Private will may be Resisted, not his Legal Will; Neither is he Present in the
Field as a Pa. 334.
King, but as an Injust Invader, and Grassator.

If he chance to be slain: It Is but an Pa. 324.
Accident; and who can help it? Pa. 273.
He Is Guilty of his own Death; or Ibid.
let them Answer for it that brought him Thither. Ibid.
The Contrary Party is Innocent.

But This Resistance, is only Justifiable (I hope) in Magistrates, or
Authoritative Assemblies; as Parliaments, etc. Rutherford says Nay to that.
All Powers must be served with the same sauce, if they Abuse their Trust. Lex.
Rex Pa. 152.
[ The People can give no Other Power, then such as God has given Them; and God
has never given a Moral Power to do Ill.] Ibid.
[ All FIDUCIARY Power, Abused, may be Repealed; and Parliamentary Power is no
Other: which, if it be Abused, the People may Repeal it; and Resist them;
Annulling their Commissions; Rescinding their Acts, and Denuding them of their
Fiduciary Power: even as the King himself may be Denuded of the same Power, by
the Three Estates] and Goodwin tells us, in Little; that Right and Might.
All Humane Laws, and Constitutions, are made with Knees to bend to the Law of
Nature and Necessity.

Well; but suppose the Prince has the good hap to escape Gunshot; and only to
become a Prisoner; You have no Law to Try him by, He has no Peers, what course
will you take with him? Milton's opinion is that Tenu^re of Kings, Pa. 24.
Every Worthy Man in Parliament, might, for the Public Geod, be thought a Fit
Peer, and Judge of the King;] and Goodwin Dogmatizes, that Defense of the Kings
Sentence, P. 34.
[ where there is no Opportunity, for the Interposure of other Judges, the Law
of Nature, and of Nations allows every man to Judge in his own Case.] Parker
comes homer yet English Translation of the Scottish Declaration, Pa. 18.
There never was (says he) a greater Harmony of the Laws of Nature, Reason,
Prudence, and Necessity to warrant any Act, then may be found, and discerned in
That Act of Justice on the Late King;] Now if you will see a piece of Treason
crowned with Blasphemy, carry your Eve Four Pages farther. Pa. 22. Printed for
Francis Tyton, who has Published as much since the King came in.
God himself had Eclipsed, yea Lost the Brightest Beam of his Divine Glory,
that ever shined on this Lower World, if he had not some way or other, brought
That Person to some Eminent, and Praeter-natural Punishment.]

Me thinks These Practices should put you, and your Cause out of Countenance.


Scrup. You must understand, that though my Reason lies against Uniformity, yet
I Am no Advocate for Anarchy: and it is with Non-conformists as with Other
People; there are Good and Bad, of All Sorts. But to go with the Moderate:
Would you have All men's Consciences Governed by the same Rule, when it is
Impossible to bring them All to the same Mind?


Conf. Better, Particulars suffer for Incompliance with the Public, than the
Public suffer for Complying with Particulars. Uniformity is the Ciment of
both Christian, and Civil Societies: Take That away, and the Parts drop from
the Body; one piece falls from Another.

The Magistrate, (for Order's sake) requires Uniformity; You, and your
Associates Oppose it upon a Plea of Conscience; and the Question is, Whether He
shall Overruled Your Opinions; or You Overruled His Authority? This Dispute
begets a War, for want of a Judge, and to Prevent that Mischief, I offer that a
Judge is Necessary. Or put it Thus: You and I Differ, and Possibly we are Both
of us in the Wrong; but most certainly, we are not Both in the Right: and yet
neither of us but thinks well enough of his own Opinion. What Is to be done in
This Case? shall we wrangle Eternally?


Scrup. No; We Will rather put the matter to Arbitration.


Conf. Well! but the Arbiter himself is Fallible, and may Mistake too; or let
him have the Wisdom of an Angel, he cannot please us Both: for That which
seems Right to the One will appear Wrong to the Other. Shall we stand to his
Award what ever it be? If not; take into your Thought These Consequences. You
Refuse to submit because it is Wrong: I may refuse, by the same Reason, though
it be Right: (for every Man's Reason is of Equal Force, where there is no
Common, and Representative Reason to Bind All) So that by your Reckoning; Every
man is in the Right to Himself, and in the Wrong to all the World beside; every
man's hand is against his Brother, and his Brother's against Him. (At least if
I deceive not my self, in my persuasion, that Nature never produced Two
persons, in all points, of the same Judgment.) Now, if you can neither deny
Confusion to be the Natural Effect of This Liberty of Judgment; nor the want of
a Regulating, and Decretory Sentence, to be the manifest Cause of This
Confusion, I hope you will Grant me the Necessity of an Unaccomptable Judge.


Scru. Is not the Word of God a sufficient Judge?


Conf. No; That Is no Judge, but [ a Rule for Christians Chillingsworths Safe
Way, Pa. 57.
to Judge by] and the Great hazard lies upon the Meaning of That Rule. What
swarms of Heresies have Overspread This Land, since the Bible has been
delivered up to the Interpretation of Private Spirits?


Scrup. You say well, if you could direct me to a Judge that we might All Rely
upon.


Conf. And You say something too, if you could make appear, that None at All,
is better then the best we have: or that Popular Errors, Numberless and
Inevitable (with the Dissolution of Communities to boot) are to be preferred to
the few, and only Possible, Failings of Authority, attended with Peace, and
Agreement. But to come to the short of the Question; This is it: Whether will
you rather have, One fallible Judge; or, a Million of Damnable Heresies?


Scrup. Truly, as you have reduced it, to a Certainty of Peace the One way, and
to as great a Certainty of Discord the Other; to a Certainty of Many Errors
without a Judge, and to a bare Possibility of some few, with One; I am content
in this Particular, to think a Final Judge Necessary.


Conf. If you find it so in the Church, sure you will not Dispute it in the
State, especially against an experience too, the most forcible of all Reasons.
We were never troubled with Constructive Necessities; with Cavils about the
Receptacle of Power, and the Limits of Obedience: with Distinctions betwixt the
Political, and the Natural Right of the People; the Legal, and Personal Will of
the Prince; and betwixt the Equity and Letter of the Law; till Judgment was
forced from its Proper Course, and Channel, and the Decision of Right and
Wrong, committed to the Frivolous and Arbitrary Determinations of the Multitude.


Scrup. Pray'e by your Leave. I am as much for a Judge, as You; but not for One
Judge to All Purposes; nor, I confess, for any Judge so Absolute as you would
have him.


Conf. I tell ye again; A Judge, and no Absolute Judge, is No Judge: and you
shall as soon find the End of a Circle, as of a Controversy, by such a Judge.
Nor is it my Meaning, that One Judge should serve for All purposes.


Scrup. Will you Divide your Matter then, and Assign to every Judicable Point,
his Proper Judge?


Conf. You say well; For truly I do not take the Magistrate to be any more a
Judge of My Conscience, than I am of His.


Scrup. It Is very Right; and it were an Encrochement upon the Prerogative of
God Himself, for him to Challenge it.


Conf. How comes it now, that we that Agree so well in the End, should Differ so
much 'ith' Way to it? But I hope, the clearing of the next point will set us
Through-Right: For after the settling of the Judge, we have nothing further to
do but to Submit; and so we will Forward.


SECT. XIV. The Three great Judges of Mankind, are, GOD, MAGISTRATES, and
CONSCIENCE.
Conf. SOme things we do as Men; other things as Men in Society; and some again
as Christians. In the first place, we are acted by the Law of Individuals;
which Law is, in the second place, Subjected to That of Government; and Both
these Laws are, in the third place, Subordinate to That of Religion; i. e. the
Law of God's Revealed Will. So that the Three great Judges of Mankind, are,
God, Magistrates, and Conscience.

Man, as consisting of Soul, and Body, may be again Subdivided within Himself.
Take him in his Lower Capacity, and he is swayed by the General Law of Animal
Nature; but in his Divine part, you will find him Governed by the Nobler Law of
Refined Reason: which Reason, in some Respects, may be called Prudence; and in
others, Conscience; according as it is variously Exercised. The things which we
do purely as Men, (abstracted from any Ingredients of Policy, or Regulated
Religion) are either Natural Actions, Prudential, or Moral. Of the First sort,
are Those Actions to which we are prompted by a Natural Impulse, in order to
the Conservation of Life, and Being. Of the Third sort, are such Actions as we
perform in Obedience to Moral Principles; (which are no other than the Divine
Will veiled under the Dictate of Humane Reason) and betwixt These Two, lies the
Region of Middle Actions; that is, of such Actions, as although not of simple
and strict Necessity, either to Life, or Virtue, are notwithstanding Useful,
and Commodious, for the Guidance, and Comfort of the One, and for the Practice
of the Other. The Accurate disquisition of This Interest, lays the Axe to the
Root of the Question; for nothing has Embroiled us more, then the Mistaken
Rights of Individuals; which Mistakes being once Cleared, by laying open the
Subordination of several Claims, and Powers, every man may take a Distinct view
of his Own Province.


Zea. Proceed Regularly n^^^, and State These Subordinations as you go.


Conf. Content; and we are now upon the Right of Individuals; in which Naked
simplicity of considering MAN* without any regard to the ordinary motions of
Providence, in the Order, and Regiment of the world, we shall yet find a
manifest Subordination within Himself, and the Law of Sense, under the Dominion
of the Law of Reason in the same Subject. These are the Laws which the Apostle
calls, the Law of his Members, and the Law of his Romans 7. 23.
Will. The Former (and the less Excellent) Law, is the Law Sensitive; which is
no other than the Law of Self-preservation, (indeed, the supreme Law of Animal
Beings, as of Rationals, the Lowest;) This Law Sensitive is (effectually) the
Manifestation of God, in the Creature. (for what Sense does, Nature does; and
what Nature does, God does)


Zea. But what is That Power which you call Nature?


Conf. It is the Ordinary working of God in all his Creatures; by virtue of
which Divine Influence, every thing is moved to seek the utmost Perfection
whereof it is Capable. As for the purpose. The perfection of Man, is the
Congruity of his Actions, with his Reason, which is nothing else but That which
we call VIRTUE. The Perfection of Beasts, is a degree Lower; they are moved
only by a Sensual Impulse, toward what is convenient for them, and when they
have it, they Rest.


Scrup. I can but Laugh, when people are Gravelled, to see how they run to
their Impulses, and Occult Qualities; which is but a more Learned way of
saying, [They don't know what] Pray'e spare me a word; what Difference is there
betwixt Their Impulse, and Our Choice?


Conf. Prithee be Quiet, unless thou have a mind to have a Toleration for thy
Dog. Their Impulse carries them on through a Sensitive Search, not any
Deliberative Discourse: and no Election neither at last; but only the simple
Prosecution of a Determinate Appetite, without Imagining any Proportion,
betwixt the Means, and the End.


Scrup. But still we find that there is a Proportion; and the Motion appears to
Us, according to the Method of Reason, and Orderly proceeding from Question to
Resolution.


Conf. Is it Reason think ye, that makes a Dog follow his Nose, and hunt for
Meat when he is Hungry? Or will ye call it Choice, if he leaves a Turfe for a
Bone? In short; He Is moved by Instinct, toward the End; and Sense carries him
through the Means.


Scrup. But why should the same Process of Means, and the same Application of
Causes, be Ascribed only to Instinct in Brutes, and to Reason in Man?


Conf. You must take notice, that all Natural Operations, are Regular and
Ordinate, by what means soever performed; but it does not follow, because the
Method is according to Reason, that therefore the Instrument must be
Reasonable. But to Mind our Business.

The Law of Self-Preservation, is a Law Common to Beasts with Men; but not of
Equal Force: for Their Sovereign Interest is Life, Ours is Virtue; and
therefore your Argument for Defensive Arms, upon Pretext of That Extremity, was
but a Brutish Plea; For, if the Consideration of Virtue be not above That of
Life, Where lies the Advantage of our Reason?


Scrup. But when the Death is Certain, and the Virtue Doubtful, who shall
decide the Question?


Conf. In a Case Abstracted from the Ties, and Duties of Religion, and
Government; Every Man's Reason Sits as Judge upon his own Life. As for Instance;
You're in the Hands of Thieves; and upon This Condition, Either to Take a False
Oath, or to Lose your Life. Your Conscience tells ye, you must rather Perish.
But if without violence to a Superior Duty, you can preserve your Self, you're
your own Murderer, if you do not. Thus far I think wee're safe, and I suppose
Agreed; that Every Individual is to Govern himself by his Natural Conscience;
but when the several Particulars come to be Bundled up in one Community, the
Case is Otherwise.


Scrup. I am sorry to hear ye say That. Why should not every Man be Governed by
his Own Conscience, as well in Consort, as in Solitude? or, Will ye have it,
that our Duty to God ceases, in the Act of becoming Subjects to a Civil
Magistrate?


Conf. Not so quick, and you shall have it. As to your Conscience, you are as
Free now, as you were before; but your Body is no longer your Own, after you're
once admitted a Member of a Society; and There Is the Difference. You were your
Own servant before, and now you are the King's: (for what is Government, but
the Wisdom, Resolve, and Force of Every Particular, gathered into One
Understanding, Will, and Body?) and This comes up to What I have already
delivered; that, Whatsoever God has left Indifferent, is the Subject of Humane
Power.


Scrup. But who shall be Judge of what is Indifferent?


Conf. We Will scan That, the very next thing we do.

You are already satisfied, that an Authorized Judge is Absolutely Necessary, in
Order to the Peace of Church and State; and to the Ending of all Public
Differences: but we are not yet Agreed upon our Judges, or, if we were, yet in
Regard our Judges are but Men, and so may Err, [ Infallibility being departed
with Christ and his Apostles, in Chilling^. Safe way, P. 104.
lieu of which Living and Infallible Guides, God has in Providence given us a
Plain and Infallible Rule] It may withal be taken into thought, How far a
Private Judge may be Allowed to Opine against a Public, in Case of a
Reluctant Conscience, and (in some sort) to judge his Judge.


Scrup. You say very well; for, place the Ultimate Decision where you will,
it is (as you said before) An Infallible Determination as to the Strife, but not
so, as to the Truth; and it comes to This at last, that every man, in some
Degree, Rejudges his Judge. If I am fully convinced, either that the Command is
sinful in it self, or the Opinion Wicked; I am neither to Obey the One, nor to
Embrace the Other; as being tied up by the General Obligation, of rather
Obeying, and Believing God, then Man. Nay more; If in Obedience to the
Magistrate, I commit a sin against God; and that Ignorantly too; That very Act,
in Ignorance, is Criminal, if I had the Means of being better Enform'd: for
certainly, no Humane Respect, can justify an Offense against God; Now if I am
bound to do nothing that is Ill, I am likewise bound, before I do anything, to
satisfy my self whether it be Ill or no: for otherwise, I may swallow a false
Religion for a True, and be Damned at Last, for not Minding what I Did; Which I
take to be Proof sufficient, that no man is so Implicitly Obliged to rely upon
other Men's Eyes, as Totally to Abandon the Direction of his Own; or so
Unconditionally to swear Obedience to Other Men's Laws, and Persuasions, as to
hold no Intelligence at all, with That Sacred Law, and faithful Counselor,
which he carries in his own Bosom.


Conf. Forgive me, If you Imagine that I would have ye Renounce your Reason.
No, but on the Contrary, I would have ye to be Guided, and Concluded by it, and
only to Obey for Quiet's sake, so far as you can possibly Obey in Conscience.


Scrup. What if a Single Person hitts That Truth which a General Council
Misses? Which will you have him follow? Truth, or Authority?


Conf. Why truly Both; Truth with his Soul, and Authority with his Body: but so
Remote a Possibility must not Presume to Bolster up the Thinkings of a Private
Spirit against the Resolutions of Authority; yet for the very Possibility's
sake, we will take That supposition likewise into our Care, and Word the sum of
the Whole Matter Plainly Thus:

The Church says, ye May do; and the Law says, ye Must Do, That which your
Conscience says, You Ought not to Do. How will you Reconcile your Duty, and
your Conscience, in This Case?


Scrup. Very well; for I think it my Duty to obey my Conscience, upon This
Principle, that Conscience is God's Substitute over Individuals.


Conf. Keep to That; and Answer me again. Is not the Civil Magistrate God's
Substitute too? If he be, How comes Your Conscience to take Place of His
Authority? They are Both Commissioned alike, and consequently, They are Both to
be Obeyed alike; which is Impossible, where their Commands are Inconsistent.


Scrup. The Magistrate is a Public Minister, and his Commission does not
Reach to Particular Consciences.


Conf. It Is very Right; and on the other side, My friend Scruple is a Private
Person, and there is as little Reason to pretend that his Opinion should operate
upon a Public Law. So that if I Mistake ye not, We are Agreed thus far, That
Every Particular is to look to One, and the King to the Whole.


Scrup. I do not much Oppose it.


Conf. If your Brother Zeal, would deal as heartily, with me now about the
Ecclesiastical Power, as You have done in the Civil, we might make short work
of This Question; and I hope he will not deny, that the Church is as well [
Rutherfords Due Right of Presbyt. p. 356.
] Authorized to TEACH, and INSTRUCT in all the External Acts of Worship, as [
Ibid. p. 352.
] the Magistrate is to COMPEL to those External Acts.


Ze. There is no Doubt, but [ Ibid p 407.
] the Church, [as the Church] has a Ministerial Power, Ex Officio, to Define
Controversies according to the Word of God; and that [ Ibid. p. 415.
] A Synod* Lawfully Convened, is a Limited, Ministerial, and bounded visible
Judge, and to be Believed in, so far as they follow Christ, the Peremptory and
Supreme Judge, speaking in his own Word.


Conf. This will not do our business yet; for, if a Synod be but to be Believed
in SO FAR as it follows Christ; etc. They that ought to be Concluded by That
Act, are left the Judges of it, and the Credit of the Authority, rests upon the
Conscience, (or, if you please, the Phansy or Humor) of the Believer: and so
there is no Decision.


Ze. [e] The Truth is, we are to believe Truths Determined [d] Ruth. Free Disp.
page 36.
by Synods, to be Infallible, and never again liable to Retraction or
Discussion; nor because [ So says the Synod] but because [ So says the Lord*]


Conf. Still you are short; for it is not in our Power to Disbelieve what we
acknowledge to be a Truth; but That which is Truth at the Fountain, may become
Error in the Passage; or at least appear so to me; and what Then?


Ze. It must be looked upon as an Error of the Conscience, which is no
discharge at all of your Obedience: from which Error, you are to be Reclaym'd,
either by Instruction, or Censure. For, the People are obliged to [Obey those
that are Ruth. Free Disp. pa. 27.
over them in the Lord, who watch for their souls, as those who must give an
Account;] and not Obliged to stand to, and Obey the Ministerial, and Official
Judgment of the PEOPLE, [He that Hears You (MINISTERS of the Gospel, not the
PEOPLE) hears ME, and he that Despises YOU, despises ME.]


Conf. Then I find we shall shake hands. You two, Gentlemen, are jointly
engaged against the Act for Uniformity; and yet ye cannot say, that it wants
any thing to give it the full Complement of a binding Law: Whether ye Regard
either the Civil, or the Ecclesiastical Authority. Here Is first, the Judgment
of the Church Duly Convened, touching the Meetness, and Convenience of the
Rites and Forms therein Conteyn'd. You have next, the Royal Sanction,
Approving, and Authorizing Those Rites, and Forms, and Requiring your Exact
Obedience to Them. Now so it is, that you can neither Decline the Authority of
your Judges, nor the Subjection of your Duties; What is it then that hinders
your Obedience?


Scrup. That which to me is More then all the World; It goes against My
Conscience.


Conf. Only That Point then, and no More upon This Subject.

That God is the Judge of the World; that the Church is the Judge of what
Properly concerns Religion; that the Civil Magistrate is the Judge of what
concerns the Public Peace; and that Every Man's Conscience is the Judge of what
concerns his Own Soul; is already Cleared: The Remaining Difficulty is This,
How I am to behave my self in a Case, where the Law bids me do One Thing, and
my Conscience, Another.

To take a true Estimate of what is before us, we must first balance the Two
Interests that meet in Competition.

There is in favor, and for the Execution of the Law, (meaning that of
Uniformity,) 1. The Personal Conscience, and 2. the Political Conscience of the
King. There is likewise for the Equity of it, the solemn and deliberate
Judgment of the Church: which is, Effectually, the Public Conscience; and
lastly, for the Observance of it* there is the Duty of the Subject, (which, if
it be withdrawn, does not only invalidate This Particular Act, but it loosens
the sinews of Sovereign Authority; and, which is more, it destroys even a
Divine Ordinance; for, take away Obedience, and Government lapses into
Confusion.)

Now for the Counterpoize; AGAINST This Law, and Thus supported, appears your
Naked Conscience. Nay, That Is the Fairest on it, It may be worse, and in Truth,
any thing that is Ill, under that name.


Scrup. But what is the World to Me, in the scale against my Soul?


Conf. You have great Reason sure, and it is no more than every man may
challenge: That is, to Stand, or Fall, to his own Conscience: Is That your
Principle?


Scrup. Yes, out of doubt; it is Mine, and Yours, and His, and any Man's that is
Honest.


Conf. Well, hold ye a little: Your Conscience will not down with This Law, it
seems; and This Law will as little down with Your Conscience. Weigh now the
Good against the Bad; What if it stands? What if it yields? Make the Case worse
then it is; as Bad as Bad may be, in your own Favor, You cannot Comply with the
Law; and the Law will not stoop to You. What follows upon it?


Scrup. The Ruin of many Godly People that desire to Worship God according to
his Word.


Conf. That Plea wrought little upon You from Us; but let that pass. What Sort
of Ruin do ye mean? Ruin of Liberty? or Estate? (for This Law Draws no Blood)
State your Misfortunes I beseech ye.


Scrup. No Man must Hold a Benefice, or Teach a School, but upon Terms of such
Subscription, or Acknowledgement, as many an Honest Man would rather Dye, then
Consent to: So that We are Distressed, not only for our Selves, as being Deprived
of the Comfort of all Spiritual, and Heavenly Freedoms; But our Poor Infants
are Exposed to be Undone, wanting the Means of a Religious Education.


Conf. If This be All, never Trouble your Selves; for Many an Honest Man has
Outlived more than this comes to. In short, there is a Huge Clamor; but (God
knows) with very Little Reason. Some Particulars will possibly Suffer for want
of a Toleration: and who are They; but ( Most of Them) the Actual Enemies of
the King; and All of Them, the Professed Opposers of the Law?

If you would see the Event of Granting what you ask; Turn but your Face toward
-- 41, and then Blush, and Repent. Do so; and thank his Majesty for your Heads,
without troubling him with your Consciences. Beside; you're not aware, that in
Contesting with the Law, you Quarrel with your Self: There Is your own Vote
Against ye; and all this muttering is no other then your Factious Will,
wrangling with your Political Consent. Yet still I say, Stick to your
Conscience.


Scrup. Your Raillery is ill Placed.


Conf. Then it is the better for my Earnest: and it is in very, very Great
Earnest that I speak it. We Will come now to the Push, and, without What Is, or
Why's, lay down for Granted, that there is a Real Distance betwixt This Act,
and your Conscience. How will you divide your Duty?


Scrup. I Will follow your Advice, and Stick to my Conscience.


Conf. You do the Better: now, Change Hands; and Fancy your self the Supreme
Magistrate. He has a Double Conscience. One, that concerns Himself, The Other
his People.

What his Majesty's Personal Judgment is, has been Declared Abundantly; what
his Prudential Judgment may dispose him to, lies in his Royal Breast. But be
That as Heaven shall Order it, Here Is the Partition of your Rights. The King's
Prerogative has nothing to do with your Conscience, and your Conscience, has as
little to do with His Majesty's Prerogative. The King is accomptable to God for
the welfare of his People, and You are only Accomptable to God for the Good of
your little Particular. If you cannot Obey the Law; do not: but abide the
Penalty. If the Sovereign cannot Relax the Law, He Is as Free to Execute it.
Your Conscience requires Liberty; and your Governor's Conscience requires
Order, and the very ground of your Demand, is the Reason of His Refusal. Now
why you should expect that your Sovereign should bring down His Conscience to
Yours, when you find, upon experiment, that you cannot persuade your Own up to
His, is to me a Mystery. To Conclude; Keep your self within your Sphere, and
where you cannot Consent as a Christian, Submit as a Subject.


Scrup. I cannot much deny the Color of your Argument, and yet me thinks
there is so much to be said too, for Toleration, that I Am afraid you will Leave
me as you found me.


Conf. I Will sterve thee first; for thou shall Eat no Meat till you are my
Convert: wherefore Go on, and do thy worst.


SECT. XV. The Toleration, which the Non-Conformists Desire, has neither GROUND
nor PRESIDENT.
Scrup. It Is a most horrible kind of Persecution.


Conf. Why then Government's a most horrible Ord'nance. For the Punishment of
Evildoers, is the one half of the Magistrates Commission: and what is an
Evil-Doer, but the Transgressour of a Law?


Scrup. But, What do ye think, when the Making of One Law is the Transgression
of Another?


Conf. I think, such a Law is better Broken then Kept. But remember the Judge,
my Friend; and know, that Laws are made for the Community, not for Particulars;
and Good, or Bad, they are Laws still. Suppose them Cruel; you had as good say,
The King's a Tyrant, as Call them so; for the Law is no other than the King's
written Will. Now to your Persecution again; say what ye will, you are Safe.


Scrup. Do not you take the Persecuting Party to be generally in the Wrong?


Conf. I was of That Opinion three or four year ago. But if it be so, the
Persecuted have the less reason to Compleyn, having so comfortable a marque of
being in the Right.


Scrup. But what can justify the very Constitution of a Persecuting Law?


Conf. You should rather have Asked, What can justify the Toleration of a
Troublesome People? The Law stands Fixed, and Immovable; and yet upon a Guard
too. You Attaque That, and then ye cry, That (or the Magistrate) hurts you:
which is thereabout, as if you should Throw your self upon the point of a
Sword, and then Curse the Cutler.


Scrup. Christians' will not persecute Pagans for Conscience, and yet they
worry one another.


Conf. And in some Cases they may have reason: for an Infidel is less dangerous
to the Public than an Apostate. And beside: the One is but giving Quarter to
a fair, and Open Enemy; the Other is to take a Snake into your Bosom. The One,
in Fine, denies but your Opinion; the Other, your Authority. Pray'e take notice
by the By, That which you call Persecution, I translate Uniformity.


Scrup. How shall the Magistrate Distinguish, whom he should Punish, and whom
Not?


Conf. Better a great deal, whom he should Punish, than whom he should Spare.
They Act; and then he brings Those Actions to a Rule, and That shows him
whether they are straight, or crooked.


Scrup. How do you know but you may Persecute God Himself, in a Right
Conscience?


Conf. I tell ye, you are not Punished for your Thoughts, but for your Actions:
and you would Infer, that because (for ought I know) Any Man may be in the Right,
No Man must therefore be presumed to be in the Wrong; That were to grant a
Sanctuary to Wickedness, and to Confound Sin with Conscience.


Scrup. Does not God command, that the Tares should be let alone till the
Harvest?


Conf. But if that were meant of Practical Impieties, how should Governors be
a Terror to Evildoers; when all Malefactors must be let alone till the day of
Judgment?


Scrup. Alas! alas! Severity, at best, does but make Hypocrites.


Conf. But, by your Leave, Forbearance does it much more: for Those that come
In for Fear, never went Off for Conscience, and so were Hypocrites before: and
then you never consider Those Infinite Swarms of Seditious Spirits that throw
themselves into the Tolerated Party under the veil of Sanctity. In fine; it is
much more advisable to take away the Liberty of Some, then to Grant a Liberty
to All. For betwixt Those that are not Wise, where is great hazard of Error;
and Those that are not Honest, where is great Danger of Design (with your
leave, Gentlemen) you will find well nigh the Computation of your Party. But why
do I stand Fencing in a Case, where all that is good for ought, even in the
Favored Party, runs nigh an equal Peril? Is any honest man the better for the
Last War? (I mean, save Those that are Forgiven)


Scrup. Then you presume a War.


Conf. Or what is equal to it; a Standing Army, upon necessity to keep them
Quiet. For in This Town, a Toleration of Religion is Cousin-German to a License
for Rebellion: and at the best, it is but One Ill that procreates Another.


Scrup. And can you Imagine that so many restless Humors, and disturbed
Consciences, will ever be Quiet without it?


Conf. You talk of Conscience. Show me a Conscience, make proof of a
Conscience. I Will show ye a Thousand things like Consciences: but alas! narrowly
looked into, what are they but mere Fancy, Artifice, or Delusion? A company
of People Thus divided; The one half of them Deceive Us, and the other half of
them Deceive Themselves; for it is not what every man Thinks, that is presently
Conscience; but what every body Thinks, in Congruity with the Word of God; and
of That Word, the Church is the best Judge. If Conscience Alone be sufficient,
the Bible is Superfluous: Nay if Conscience, joined with the Bible, be
sufficient, what becomes of the Apostles Commission; [ Go, and TEACH all
Nations?] We shall undertake to Teach THEM, whom our Savior has appointed to
Teach US.

But This is a little beside our business; for the stress of the Question, in
order to a Toleration, does not bear so much upon This Point, whether your
Opinions be True or False; as whether Safe or Dangerous. There are a sort of
People that Reason by one Principle, and Act by another; that begin with
Liberty of Conscience, and end with the Liberty of the Subject: If You be of
That number, There Is Death in the Pot, and no Enduring of ye.

Further, Liberty of Conscience turns naturally into Liberty of Government, and
therefore not to be endured; especially in a Monarchy; and to say truth, It Is
commonly the Method of Embroyling Kingdoms; and but the Embryo of Sedition.
Than which, nothing lies opener to him that will only attend These Two
Particulars: First, In those Times, when there is Generally the least care of
Religion, you shall observe commonly, the most Talk of it; and That too, among
such as least understand it. If This Impulse be not Acted by Conscience, it is
from a worse Principle, and by no means to be Encouraged; for the Mass of the
People is already in a Distemper; and Those Outcries and Transports for
Toleration, are but the Convulsions of a Sick Government. Secondly,
Ecclesiastical and Civil Affairs are so Twisted and Interwoven, that what Party
soever clayms a Right of Freedom to the former, may be fairly suspected to have
a design likewise upon the latter: For the Threads are so Enterlayd, that Both
Interests make, Effectually, but One Piece; so that the State that allows the
People a Freedom to choose their Religion, is reasonably to Expect that they
will Take a Freedom likewise to choose their Government.


Scrup. But why should a Toleration do worse Here than in Holland?


Conf. I would you had found a better Instance. But, not to Dispute how They came
Thither; let it suffice, That where They are, a Toleration would bring us.


Scrup. What do ye think of Poland then?


Conf. I think, That story speaks little in your Favor, either in Respect of
Their frequent Seditions, or in Regard of Their Prodigious and Heretical
Opinions; and yet They lie under the strongest Obligation in Nature to keep
Them Quiet; the Turk being their Neighbor; which makes Their Case to be an
Agreement Rather Against a Common Enemy, than Among Themselves. But back to
Holland, Theirs is no Perfect Toleration: For, ye see, in the Case of Arminius;
finding Barnevelt in the Head of the Party, (of whose Intendments, the States
were at that time Jealous) They would not upon any Terms Allow that Freedom to
the Arminians, which they did to Others; but Convened a Synod, and Exterminated
the Sect.

There Is a Great Difference too betwixt the Interest, and Condition, of Their
Ministers, and Ours. Theirs Preach but upon Good-behaviour; They live upon the
States-Pay; and upon the least Color of Offense, They may be Turned off at
Pleasure; Whereas Our Clergy have a Freehold in their Benefices for Term of
Life; and if they be Factiously Disposed, they may Evade the Law to do a
Mischief, without making a Forfeiture. Consider next, that Their Case, was in
some sort Your Own, only a Common Cause kept ye United. In fine, Nothing but
the fear of a Common Enemy can withhold a Libertine-Nation from falling foul
upon it self. If ye would see what work Peter's, Bridges Sympson, and Ward, made
in Holland, Read Bayly's Dissuasive, Pa. 75. and be Ashamed of Owning such a
Party.


Scrup. You see the Fruit then of driving men to the Extremity of flying their
Country for Religion.


Conf. You see rather, in what They did Abroad, what They would have done at
Home, if They had been Tolerated; and Particularly, Observe Their Proceedings
in New England, where They Acted at Liberty, and Governed Themselves, by Their
Own Laws. Bailey Reports (from People upon the Place) that of Forty Thousand
Persons, Three Parts of Four, were not admitted to be in Any Church. If you
have a mind to know any more concerning Their Heresies, Their Cruelty, Their
Sedition, their Hypocrisy, etc. look into his Dissuasive again, Pa. 53.


Scrup. But ye see the French Allow a Toleration.


Conf. They do so; but not a Toleration of several sorts of Roman-Catholiques;
Neither do Those of the Religion admit of any Sub-division among Themselves;
nay, They have been often Pressed to it, and Refused it. Step into Germany next,
and see the Deplorable Effects of This Phanatical Persuasion There: but above
All, where ever the Beauteous Discipline has set her Holy Foot, All other
Judgments suffer a daily Martyrdom. To Conclude, Toleration was That which
Queen Elizabeth, in all her Distresses, Resuscitatio Pa. 189.
could never be persuaded to. Firm to This Resolution (says Sir Francis Bacon)
not to Suffer the State of Her Kingdom to be Ruined, under pretense of
Conscience and Religion. Yet She Connived so Long, and the unthankful Faction
made such use of Her Favors, that She was forced upon the Rigor of a Strict
Uniformity, to Help Her Self, and That Preserved Her. To say no more, The
Sentence of the Late King was Given in the Pulpit, though the Blow was Struck
upon the Scaffold.


Zea. Not by the Presbyterians, I hope.


Scrup. Truly by Them, if by Any.


Conf. Well Gentlemen, while you Debate That Point, I Will call for Dinner.


SECT. XVI. At whose Door Lies the BLOOD of King CHARLES the MARTYR?
Zea. ANd why by Them, if by Any, I beseech ye? Was Peter's a Presbyterian?


Scrup. Yes surely was he, as much as Marshall was an Independent.


Zea. Go to, Let us spare Names, and Fall to the Matter.


Scrup. The Question is, Upon Whom the Guilt of the Kings Blood lies? You
charge it upon Us; and I, upon You. [The Presbyterians Spoiled Him as a King,
before Others Commonwealth Stated, P. 72.
Executed Him as a Private Man] [Have they not Hunted and Persu'd Him with
Sword, and Fire? Have they not Milton's Tenur. P. 32.
formerly Denied to Treat with Him, and their now Recanting Ministers Preached
against Him, as a Reprobate Incurable; an Enemy to God, and his Church? Marqu'd
for Destruction? etc.] [The Covenanting-Ministers, with Goodwin's Defense of
the King's Sentence, P. 53.
their Party clearly Deposed the King, when They Acknowledged and submitted
unto a Power, as Superior unto His; Levied war against Him, as against a
Traitor, Rebel, and Enemy to the Kingdom, etc.] [The Scots had Parker's
Scotlands Holy War, P. 17.
proceeded so far as to Imprison the Kings Person, and to Sequester all his
Royal Power, which is a Temporary Dethroning, and Deposing.] Nay hear what some
of your Rabbis have not stuck to say in my Justification [The Removal Policy
of Princes, P. 33.
of Prelatical Innovations, Altar-genuflexions and cringings, with Crossings,
and all that Popish Trash and Trumpery, Countervails for the Blood and Treasure
shed and spent in these late Distractions] ( and this was in -- 56.) Once more
and you shall take your Turn. [This may serve to Justify Robert Douglass
Sermon in 51 and in the Phoenix, P. 52.
the Proceedings of this Kingdom against the late King, who in a Hostile way
set Himself to overthrow Religion, Parliaments, Laws, and Liberties.]


Zea. I could Afford you Two, for One, and Pay you in your own Coin. [His
Capacity ( says Parker) was at Westminster English Translat. P. 18.
when His Body was upon the Scaffold at Whitehall Paying unto Justice for his
Misgovernment, and Tyranny] [Think not to save your Selves ( says One of your
Ministers Flesh Expiring, etc. P. 26.
to the Commons, about a Month before the King Suffered) Think not to Save your
Selves ( says He) by an Unrighteous Saving Them who are the Lord's and the
Peoples Known Enemies, for Certainly if ye Act not Like GODS in This Particular
against men truly Obnoxious to Justice, They will be like DEVILS against you --
Benhadad's Life was once in Ahab's Hand, and He ventured God's Displeasure to
let him go. But see how Bernhadad Rewards Him for it. Fight neither with Small
nor Great, but with the KING of Israel]


Conf. Come Gentlemen, Your Dinner's Ready; but first I Charge ye, by that Love
ye bear to Truth, and Honesty; deal Freely with me; What Is Your Opinion of your
Cause?


Zea. We Will take time to Consider of it.


Conf. And of your Petition too, I beseech ye. Go to; I dare swear, there is
Neither of ye will Dye at Stake for it.


Scrup. But still I Am where I was, as to the Favoring of Tender Consciences.


Conf. And truly so am I; where it is possible to Separate the Error, from the
Person: but to permit a Pullique Inconvenience for the Satisfaction of a
Private Scruple, were (upon very weak pretense) to Unhinge the Law, and
Consequently to Dissolve the Government.


Det ille veniam facile, cui venia est opus. Sen. Agamem.
The END.
The CONTENTS.
INTRODUCTION, Page 1 SECT. 1. Liberty of Conscience Stated, P. 5 SECT. 2.
Universal Toleration Unlawful, P. 7 SECT. 3. Limited Toleration, does not
answer Liberty of Conscience, P. 18 SECT. 4. The Non-Conformists Plea for
TOLERATION, upon Reason of State, P. 14 SECT. 5. The Non-Conformists Plea for
TOLERATION, from the Merits of the Party, P. 24 SECT. 6. The Non-Conformists
Plea for TOLERATION, from the Innocence of their Practices and Opinions, P. 26
SECT. 7. TOLERATION Causes Confusion both in Church and State, P. 36 SECT. 8.
The Danger of TOLERATION in this Iuncture, Page 3^ SECT. 9. Arguments against
TOLERATION in respect of the Party ihat Desires it; with Animadversions upon a
certain Pamplet, Entitled, A SERMON Preached at ALDERMANBURY-CHURCH, December.
28. 1662. P. 42 SECT. 10. Arguments against TOLERATION, in Respect of the
Authority that is to Grant it, P. 60 SECT. 11. The Proper Subject and Extent of
Humane Power, P. 64 SECT. 12. The Bounds of TOLERATION, with some Reflections
upon SCHISM and SCANDAL, p. 69 SECT. 13. The Necessity of a Final and
Unaccomptable JUDGE, P. 81 SECT. 14. The Three Great Judges of Mankind, are
GOD, MAGISTRATES and CONSCIENCE, P. 89 SECT. 15. The Toleration, which the
Non-Conformists desire, has neither GROUND, nor PRESIDENT, P. 99 SECT. 16. At
Whose Door Lies the BLOOD of King CHARLES the MARTYR? P. 104
The END.

