A WHIPP A WHIPP, For the Schismatic Animadverter Upon the BISHOP of
WORCESTER's LETTER.

By ROGER L'ESTRANCE.

Aetas Parentum, pejor Avis, tulit Nos Nequiores; mox daturos Progeniem
vitiosiorem. Horat. LONDON: Printed for Henry Brom, at the Gun in Ivy-lane.
February the 7th. 1662.

The Preface.
IF the Bishop of Worcester had not Professed in his late Vindication; that as
it was his first, it should be his last; and intimated a Resolution never to
dip in the same Ink again; I should not have presumed to thrust my Pen into the
Controversy: But finding a Virulent Libel, wherein, most Irreverent Mention is
made of the said Bishop, through whose sides the Function it self is invaded,
and therein, the Authority of the King: I account my self under a Threefold
Obligation, to Cast my Mite into the Public: as I am a Subject to his
Majesty; as I am a Son of the Church; and (upon a long Knowledge of the Bishop)
as I have a Personal Honor for him. (however wanting in the Complemental, and
Waiting part of my Duty to him, since his Majesty's Return.)

Of the Pamphlet which Occasions me to give the World this Trouble, I shall say
little in this place, but that it is All here; though broken into several
Insertions, for the Ease, and Satisfaction of the Bea^.

Concerning Libels in General; let it be considered, that the Last War began
with a Paper-Scuffle; and touching This in Particular, that the Murderers of
the Late King, first drew blood of a Bishop. That Thought, methinks, should
call a stricter Eye upon the Press; to which, Join but the Pulpit, in Favor
of any Faction, and they shall overthrow the best Settlement in Nature.

Truly, where Papers of Public Scandal are not Punished, I think, it is fit
they should be Answered; People will think they have Reason on their side else,
as well as (shall I call it?) Fortune. And yet I know the Fate, and the Reward
of this same Wrangling, Scribbling kind of Honesty. But Patience: It Is not every
man's Lot to Live like a Knave, and Dye like an Honest man.

A Whipp, etc.
ANIMADVERSION.
Honorable and Worthy Sir,
D. E.
I Am to thank You for the last piece of Divertisement you gave me, in sending
the Bishop of Worcester' s Letter, and I wish you would have let me enjoyed the
Satisfaction I took in Rea^ing it, without Obliging me to give you my Sense
upon it: For, besides my unwillingness to meddle in a Personal Quarrel, it will
not, I think, be very Safe for any to Engage against so Angry an Adversary,
which I shall be thought to do, though I resolve to speak nothing but Truth in
the Character I intend to give of him: And it is briefly this; That, in fewer
leaves I never yet read more Passion, which is so very Predominant, that his
Disorderly and Abrupt Style does altogether partake of it; so that the Bishop's
best way will be, to get his Heat mistaken for Zeal, for else it may be justly
accounted something that A Shrewd one.
has a worse Name, and which in the Dog-dayes will be very dangerous.

This being, Sir, my Judgment upon the whole Letter, You may well expect that I
should make it good, by an Induction from particular Instances; but before I do
this, I must deal impartially, and assure you, that as to the main
Controversy, I think the Bishop has much the better of Mr. Baxter: For, if
the Question between them, was as Dr. Gunning and Dr. Pearson do attest, such a
command is so evidently lawful, that I shall much wonder if Mr. Baxter did ever
dispute it; and till he does clearly disprove that that An Elegance.
was not the thing in Question, I must needs think that he has much forgot
himself in making an imperfect and parlial Relation.

Setting aside therefore the business of that particular Contest (wherein you
see how much I am inclined to Favor the Bishop) there are other things in his
Letter, of general concernment, which I think liable to just exception; As,]

I Am more puzzled what to Call This whiffling Incognito that Libels the Bishop
of Worcester, then to prove him any thing almost but what he should be.

By his Severity upon the Bishops Passion, I should take him for a Stoique: by
That upon his Style; for a Critique: by the Divertisement (he says) the Bishops
Letter gave him, for a Phanatique; and by his Dog-Periphrasis of Madness, I
find, the man would gladly be suspected of some Skill in Rhetorique.
Grammatious, Rhetor, Geometres, Pictor, Aliptes,
Augur, Schoenobates, Medicus, Magus, omnia novit.


The Thing, in short; is a Well-willer to the Good-Old-Cause; and gets now and
then a Snap at the Bishop of Worcester, under color of an Account (from Your
most Humble Servant D. E. to the Honorable and Worthy, etc.) concerning That
Reverend Prelate's Vindication: when Effectually, the Intercourse betwixt the
Honorable Sir, and the Humble Servant, is no more then a Dialogue betwixt the
Monky and the Glass. Yet, I warrant ye, it is all over England already, how the
Animadverter has paid the Bishop; and This Paper-Kite of his with a Candle at's
Tail, passes among the Blear-eyed Brethren for a Starr of the first Magnitude.

To deal impartially yet; I do absolutely agree with the Animadverter, that the
Bishop has much the better of Mr. Baxter; [Till he does clearly disprove An
Elegance of D. E's.
that That was not the Thing in Question.]

This Purity of Style is not every man's Talent, only I remember an Elegancy
like This, in a certain Irish Author that served Me once in the Quality of a
Footman. Hoping thereby (says he) that I The like of R. W.
should not prosecute him for the Breach of the Nonperformance of his Promises
made unto me.

May it now please the Illustrious Unknown, to accept of This account to his
Prologue: and to permit Me the Liberty of a short Preface, before I close with
his Exceptions.

Next to No Adversary at all, give Me a Calm Opponent; that knows the Terms of
Modesty, and Honor; and yet makes the best of his Cause: Not Passionate, as
our Author says, the Bishop is: No no; nor False, nor Treacherous, nor
Malicious; nor indeed, Simple, if 'twere possible.

How far the Animadverter now complies with the Obligations of a Fair Enemy,
let any thing that can but Read, and Difference Day from Night, Determine.

Marque first how This Correctour of Magnificat, Our Christian Stoique; handles
the Bishop upon the point of Passion.

Heat, which in the Dog-dayes will be very dangerous, The S^hismatique a la
mode.
[Pag. 1.] The Fatal Example of That one Bishops Usurpations, [Pag. 3.]
Impertinent and False, [Pag. 5.] Most False, [ibid.] If any are Choleric and
Teasty enough to be of his mind [ibid.] As to Christian Charity the whole
thing is but a Letter of Defiance against it, [Pag. 6.] There can be nothing
more false, [ibid.] This Malicious and ill-grounded fancy, [ibid.] It is bold
and Impious, [Pag. 7.] He does very virulently Instance, [Pag. 8.] Were he
either Christian, or Man enough, [Pag. 9.] The Reverend Fathers deep Wisdom,
[Pag. 11.] (an Irony.)

Here Is his Vomit; and in the name of Peace, what stirred this Humor? De
Iracundia, Magister Iracundissimus disputat.

The Bishop of Wor'ster, wipes off an Aspersion cast upon him by Mr. Baxter.
The Animadverter masks himself like a Son of the Church; gives it against
Baxter; and without any Interest in the Dispute, or Provocation to it, falls
upon the Bishop (in what Terms we have showed already; and after a word or two
more, we will look into his Reasons.)

Thrice Three are his Exceptions; so that we have something Sacred and
Mysterious in the Number, how loose and weak-soever we find the Matter of them.
Truly, I could wish them either Shorter, Fewer, or Better, for the Readers
sake; but (since that Reverend Prelate is concerned) I would not wish them
Other for the Bishops. In Truth, so foul they are, that to say What they are,
might pass for Railing. We shall however expose the Libel; every Syllable of
it; take it in Order, and in Pieces; confronting every Point Material in it,
with such Answer as the Quality of it requires.

And now to his Exceptions which begin with This Charge upon the Bishop.

EXCEPTION I.
D. E.
[A] FIrst, That he supposes there is so strict an Union, and so inseparable a
Dependence between Kings and Bishops, that they must stand and fall together,
and all who are enemies to the one, must needs be enemies to the other. I know
very well this Axiom is much talked of, and some advantage may be taken to
confirm it, from the event of our Late Wars.]
[A] THe Maxim, which he Hints at, and Abuses; came from King James: delivered
upon Experience, and since Confirmed, by the Murder of a King, and the
Dissolution of Monarchy: Both which were Effect'd upon the same Grounds, and by
Those very Persons that Abolished Episcopacy.

But the saying is; No BISHOP, no KING; and not in the Conversion; as if it
were Impossible in Nature for the One to subsist without the Other. It Is a Rule
however that deserves to be Registered, in regard that never any Faction
destroyed Bishops, and Saved the Monarch. I wish it were in Capital
Letters in every Chamber of his Majesty's Palace, No BISHOP no KING.

But One way or Other; what does This concern the Bishop of Wor'ster? who
neither says, nor supposes any thing to This Purpose; for he does not so much
as meddle with the Question: but, finding himself Traduced by some that had
frequently, and openly defamed the King; [And is it any Wonder (says he) that
those that are such Enemies to Kings, should not be Friends to Bishops? This
Libeller would have the Face to tell the Sun 'twere Midnight. His next Fetch is
a deep one.

D. E.
[B] You know likewise, Sir, how much my Judgment is for the Order of Bishops;
and how Passionate a Lover I am both of the Kings Person and Government; but
yet, being thus called by You to decla^e Presbyterianissime.
the Truth, though contrary to my own Humor and Interest, I must needs say,
etc.]
[B] This Cuts a Hair; the Man we see, is Willing but Weak. Alas! You know SIR
how much my Judgment, etc. -- and how Passionate a Lover, etc. --

What is there in This Fawning Clause; that the Kings Headsman might not set
his Hand to? He does not say, you know that I Am, Thus or So, but
you know how much I am; that is, Whether I am, or not. The most Pestilent
Enemy the King has might have said a^ ^ch.

Marque ^w, what it is his Judgment is so much for. For the Order of Bishops. He
will not say, Degree, or Praelation of them; (That he renounces) but the Order
of them: a Goodly Shift!

Because every Bishop is a Presbyter, therefore every Presbyter is a Bishop.
The King is a Gentleman; is therefore every Gentleman a King? An E^rl is a
Baron; but the Baron is not Therefore an Earl. These Differ in Order upon the
same proportion of Reason, as does a Bishop from a Presbyter. But to clear This
point, we are first to agree what is meant by Order.

There is first; Ordo Dignitatis: An Order or Dignity, or Praelation: and in
This Respect, A Bishop differs from a Presbyter, as does a Presbyter from a
Deacon. It is Otherwise taken for Potestas ad Actum Specialem; a Power, or
Enablement for some Special Act: and in This sense, a Bishop differs, Ordine,
from a Presbyter, in the Power of Ordination, and Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction;
as a Presbyter does from a Deacon, in the Power of Cons^crating the Sacrament
of the Eucharist. Now say on.

D. E.
[C] It is clear from Story, that Kings were in all parts of the world, in
their most flourishing Estate, before ever Bishops were heard of; and no reason
can be given, why what has once been, may not with the same terms of
convenience be again.]
[C] It Is right: Kings flourished before either Bishops, or Christians were
ever heard of; and therefore, by his Argument we may be as well without
Christianity as without Episcopacy: But Here Is the Case, Kings have been well,
without Bishops, and never well with Presbyterians; which shall they Quit
First? To conclude; There is not at this day extant any Christian Monarchy,
without Bishops, or the Equivalence of them.

D. E.
[D] Bishops, as they are by Law established in England, are purely the Kings
subordinate Ministers, in the Management of Ecclesiastical Affairs; which his
Majesty may conferr upon what Order of men he pleases, though they be as much
Lay Persons as You and I are. It is therefore very injurious to the Kings
Authority, to averr that He could not otherwise uphold and maintain it, than by
preserving the Undue, and, as some think, Antichristian Dignity and Prelation
of his in^iour Officers.]
[D.] Infallibly This man is some Lay-Chaplain; and is now beating the Bush to
start a Benefice without Ordination.

What does he mean by [Purely the Kings subordinate Ministers?] Does he
understand by [Purely] as if to all purposes Ecclesiastical, they Acted only by
Regal Deputation? The King himself does not pretend to all the Powers they
Exercise: The Authority of their External Jurisdiction flows from Him; but
their Internal, and Ministerial Power derives from God: As Subjects, they
proceed by the Kings Laws, as Ministers, they Act by a Divine Commission.

His Majesty may conferr] he says, etc. What may his Majesty Conferr? Leave to
Elect, not Power to Ordein: That by a Right of Apostolical Succession,
descends, and Rests upon the Church.

From This wild, and weak Assertion; he proceeds to give you a Taste of his
Morals as well as of his Intellectuals; and to uphold his Argument by Scandal,
and Sedition. By Scandal first, in charging the Fictions and Fantastiques of
his own brain upon the Bishp of Wor'ster: and Then by Sedition, in casting his
Audacious and Reproachful Epithetes of Undue, and Antichristian, upon an Order,
Instituted by Christ himself, and Incorporate with the Government of this
Nation by the Supreme Authority. But still he persues his shadow.

D. E.
[E.] Bishops are so little usesul to support the Regal Dignity (which is
founded upon a distinct Basis of its own) that upon enquiry it will be found,
how none have been greater enemies to the True and Undoubted Soveraingty of
Princes, than some Bishops themselves: for by their Officious, and fcarce
warrantable intermedling in Civil Affairs; by their Absurd and Insignificant
distinguishing between Civil and Ecclesiastical Causes (of which last they have
always made themselves sole Judges) they mangle the Kings Authority, and as to
Church Matters (which may be extended as far as they please) they leave the
King nothing of Supremacy but the Name. The Pope of Rome therefore (who is the
great Father of all such Bishops) has improved this Notion and Distinction so
far, that in ordine ad spiritualia, he has labored to subject all Civil
Empires unto his sole Jurisdiction.
[E] That Regal and Episcopal Power, have different Foundations; who
Questions? or that some Bishops have opposed some Kings? But did they ever
do it, as Bishops? What fellowship has Christ with Belial? It were no less then
Blasphemy, to entitle Rebellion to the Function, whereof God himself was the
Author.

It concludes little for the Consistorians, that some Bishops have been Enemies
to Kings; if they consider, that we are yet to seek for the First Presbyterian
Party that ever were Friends to them. Concerning his Cavil at the Distinction
between Civil and Ecclesiastical Causes: It Is the Law distinguishes, and so the
good man's Absurdity lashes upon the King, not upon the Bishops. He blames
likewise their Officious, and scarce war antable intermedling in Civil
Affairs.]

Do they Challenge, or Act by their own Power, or by the Kings? If only by
Derivation; either the King himself wants Power, or They have it: If they
extravagate, let him show, Where.

But do the Bishops Mangle the Kings Authority? I hope, not so much as the
Schismatiques did both That, and his Revenue; nay, and his Person too. Were
they Bishops, or Presbyterians, that Preached and Libelled against the Late
King; that Seized his Towns, Seduced his People, Levied a War against him,
Plundered, Sequestered, and Murdered his Friends, and never left the Chase,
till his Royal Blood was spilt upon a Scaffold? Were they Bishops or
Presbyterians, that in Ordine adspiritualia, Contrived, Acted, and Warranted
the Usurpations of the late War? In fine; the Memory is Fresh, and bleeding
still of a Presbyterian; let him produce One Instance of an Episcopal Rebellion
since the Reformation.

He tells us that the Pope of Rome is the great Father of such Bishops; (If the
great Father of Slanderers, and False-speakers had not stood at his Elbow, he
would never have said it) But for Brevity sake; let him bring me the most
Pragmatical Jesuit that ever put Pen to Paper, I Will match him with a
Presbyterian. I do not mean for Wit, and Learning; but for the worst of
Practices he will dare to Charge him with. Nay, let him strein the Papal Tyranny,
he so much declaims against, to what pitch of Arrogance, and Imposition he
pleases, I Will bring him Presbyterian Claims, and Presidents, shall equal it:
and when That Is done, let him show any One Episcopal Position destructive to
Regality, and take the Cause for it. Now have a Care of him; for says He:

D. E.
[F] [So that if the Bishop of Worcester's R^le bold good, of Crimine ab uno --
Disce omnes, i. e. That all men who are of a party may be judged of by the
miscarriages of one, then I must leave it to You to judge, what all those
Bishops, ^at are of the Bishop of Worcester's complexion, do rea^y drive at, by
the fatal example of that one Bishops Usurpation: For,]
[F] Soft and Fair, I beseech you Sir. The Rule holds very Good, but not the
Scandal. The whole Party are to be Judged of, by a Particular: and nothing
makes more Against. the Animadverter, or for the Bishop, then the force of that
Conclusion, and his Retort; (unless he can prove the Usurpations of the One,
and clear the Innocence of the Other; by which the Rest are to be measured.)

Hear the Bishop in his own words; (for This Animal makes the Bishop say what
he list, and yet makes nothing on it when h'as done,) speaking of Mr. Baxter.

You have before seen the ingenuity and veracity, Page 21.
you now see the humility, and the modesty of the Man; and indeed in proportion
of the whole Party, for Crimine ab uno, -- Disce omnes: But does Mr. Baxter and
the rest of his persuasion think indeed, etc.

First, take the Words in their proper Import, and Common Acceptance. Does the
Whole Party necessarily Imply every Individual, or rather the Influence of a
Ruling Vote, which denominates the Result to be the Act of such or such a
Party; extending virtually to every Particular, but not Distinctly. If Party
had been Number, he had said something. (...), (says the Text) Then answered
All the People, his Blood be upon us and upon Mat. 27. 25.
our Children:] which General expression, evidently intended only the
Prevailing Part.

Now to his Crimine ab Uno -- disce Omnes.

Accipenunc Danaum Insidias, (says Aeneas) et Crimine ab uro, Disce Omnes -- --
It was not the Poets intention to brand every man that was a Greek for Simon's
sake, but to show the suitable Treachery of the People, that made use of so
treacherous an Instrument. To say that the French are a Vain; the Spaniard, a
Proud Nation; does it give to understand that there is not a Modest, or an
Humble man in the Country? But This is time lost, for the Bishop restreins his
Application in the very next line, to those of Mr. Baxters persuasion; so that
if Mr. Baxter be blameworthy, his Complicates, are scarce Innocent; and he
that pretends to justify either, becomes an Advocate for no less then
Schism, and Treason.

His Seditious Hint, of the Bishops Usurpation, and warping to the Church of
Rome, deserves rather a Lash, then an Answer. Yet if he makes out either, I Will
bear it for him.

EXC^PTION II.
D. E.
[A] THat Assertion, that the Bishop of Worcester (and consequently every other
Bishop) is the sole Pastor of all the Congregations in his Diocese, if it be at
all defensible, I am sure can be defended only by those Arguments, which are
commonly alleged to maintain the Popes Supremacy over all Churches whatever.
For since a Bishop can no otherwise discharge his duty berein, than by
providing Substitutes, what hinders but the Bishop of Rome may as well oversee
a million of Churches, as the Bishop of Worcester five hundred? Since if
Deputation be lawful, more or less compass and circuit of ground does not at
all alter the case.]
[A] NEver in my Life did I meet an Easier Book to confute with Reason, and a
harder to handle with Civility: a man must underderstand every thing he says,
the wrong way, to make Truth on it. Indeed the Reverend Prelate says, that it
is the Bishop of Wor'ster, and Page 2. and 3.
not Mr. Baxter that is the Pastor of Kidderminster, as well as of all Other
Parochial Churches in that Diocese: and that the Cure of Souls, in That, or
any other Parish of That Diocese, was never, either by Himself, or any Other
Bishop of Wor'ster, committed to Mr. Baxter, etc.] So that the word Sole, is
the Animadverter's Whimsie; and foysted in, only to irritate the Rabble against
Prelacy, as tending toward Popery; when not a Syllable ever dropped from the
Bishops Pen in favor of this feigned and frivolous Assertion.

To discover the Forgery, the Reader needs only compare the Quotation with the
Text; where he shall find, first, the Notorious Juggle of his misallegation;
and Then, having lugg'd in by Head and Shoulders, the Popes Supremacy, under
That Blind (weakly heaven knows) he bestows his Shot upon the Superiority of
Bishops; where in fine, all he does is but to Combat an Idol of his own
Making, and which is yet more pleasant, the Puppet gets the Better of the Rabbi.

The Bishop does not deny Parochial Ministers to be Pastors of their Particular
Flocks; (it is not at all the Question) but still they are Subordinate, and
Delegated by the Bishop, from whom they Receive Institution, and Induction,
Reserving still to himself the Superintendency of them All.

But the man's for Parity I perceive, and against Deputation. He Is Consequently
against the King; for a Leveller in the Church, never fails to be one in the
State. Let him examine himself, and keep his own Counsel.

D. E.
[B]. I forbear to ^rge how contrary this Practice is to the Doctrine of the
Apostl^s, both Paul and Peter (I hope the Bishop will not take it ill that I do
not call them Saints, for these Holy men do not need any style of Honor out of
the Popes Calendar.]
[B] The Animadverter does wondrous well to forbear Paul and Peter, for to my
Knowledge, they are Two of the greatest Enemies he has. But what a wipe he
gives the Bishop, for his Popes Calendar! and then he Churrs like a Turky-cock
at the Conceit on it, I hope the Bishop will not take it ill (quoth he) that I
do not call them Saints.] He Is a notable wit I warrant him.

Paul, an Apostle of Jesus Christ, etc. -- with all the SAINTS, which are in
all Achaia, 2 Cor. 1. 1.] Paul, etc. -- to the SAINTS which are at Ephesus,
etc. Ephesians. 1. 1.] Salute all the SAINTS, Phil. 4. 21.] All the SAINTS Salute
you, Phil. 4. 22.] Since we heard of your Faith in Christ Jesus, and of your
Love toward all SAINTS, Col. 1. 4.]

Was Paul a Papist? or what signifies SAINT, but Holy? Now for a fling at the
Bishop, by the way of Sole Pastor,

D. E.
[C] When Paul had sent for the Elders of the Church at Ephesus, he bids them
to feed the Church of God, over which (not be himself, by his sole Authority,
a^ Bishop of the Diocese, but) the Spirit of God had Act. 20. 28. 1 Pet. 5. 2.
made them, (...), i. e. Overseers, or to use the proper style, Bi^hops. And
Peter commands his Fellow Elders, (for so does that Apostle (...) to call
himself) to feed the Flock which was among them, (...), Overseeing, or Acting
the Bishops, not (like the Bishop of Worcester) as Lording it over Gods
Heritage, but as Patte^ns of the Flock. From which places we learn, not only
that those two so much controverted Names of Bishop and Pres^yter, are without
distinction ascribed to the same Persons, but likewise, that whoever f^d the
Flock, are under Christ (whom the Apostle there stil^s the Chief Shepherd) the
next and immediate Pastors of the Flock; and to extend the Pastoral Power
beyond the actual care of Feeding, is a notion altogether u^scriptural, and
likewise leaves us no bounds where to fix, till we come to ce^re upon some one
Universal Pastor, who may claim this Power over the whole world, by the same
parity of reason, that a Bishop does over one D^ocesse.]
[C] Very good; Paul sends for the Elders of the Church at Ephesus: and they
come I hope; so there is Authority, and Obedience. The Apostle gives them their
Charge also; to Feed the Flock, whereof the Holy Ghost had made them
Overseers: (not the Bishop of the Diocese, says our Aerius.)

No question of it. Does the Bishop of Wor'ster assume any Personal Privilege
in Matters Essential to his Function? Does he pretend to Act by any other
Virtue, then That of his Ecclesiastical Mission? If not; his rude Parenthesis
is a double Impertinence. Again;

Peter (says he) Commands his Fellow-Elders, etc.] Par in Parem non habet
Imperium. A Superiority among Equals is a Contradiction. The word in truth is
so^ter; (...), which intimates rather Exhortation, or Entreaty: and for his
Fellow-Elders, it signifies just as much from the Apostle, as
Fellow-Souldiours, from a General. Their Commission is to Feed, (he says) and
Over-see, not (like the Bishop of Worcester) etc.] Lording it over Gods
Heritage, etc.]

His Railing apart, Marque now his Inferences.

First, that the Names of Bishop, and Presbyter are without distinction applied
to the same Persons.

Go to then; but can he show me where the Powers are exercised in Common too?

We do not argue upon Names, but Things. Can Presbyters Ordein? Inflict a
Censure; or as Mere Presbyters can they Govern? Let Us see a Text for it. If they
are Overseers in Respect of their Flocks, They are yet part of the Flock
Themselves, in respect of the Diocesan Bishop: They Oversee, and they are
Overseen, according to the Scale of Order, and Authority.

His next Deduction is (Haeretical) Church-Parity to which he adds, that the
Pastoral Power extends only to the Actual care of Feeding.]

Is It not a Shephard's Duty, as well to Govern his Flock, as to Feed it? To
Keep in Straglers, etc. -- Bishop Andrews will tell you (in his Opuscula
Posthuma) that Pastor, in the Latin Church, is always taken for a Bishop; for
one that Governs, as well as Feeds, and Governs even the Feeders of Particular
Flocks: In Homer the King himself is called (...), The Shepherd of his People.

Touching his Universal Pastor: by the same reason we are to have an Universal
King.

EXCEPTION III.
D. E.
[A] IT seems to be a Light, and (to say no more) unseemly trifling with sacred
Scripture, to affirm that those words of our Savior concerning such as come
not in by the door, and therefore are Thieves and Robbers, ought to be
understood of such Ministers, as preach to Congregations without the Bishops
License. Which thing, the Bishop (in great heat and Earnestness, as if he had
done very well in it) tells us more then once, that it was the Principal reason
why he silenced Mr. Baxter.
[A] SOmebody resolve me whether This Libeller has more Wit, or Honesty, and
take the Naked Truth of the Story.

Baxter (for Brevity sake) throws out one Dancy, the Minister of
Kidderminster, from his Living, and seizes it to himself; He Preaches Sedition
There, and his Doctrine was but suitable to his Title, for he possessed, and
enjoyed it, by an Act of Violence and Rebellion. If this be not Robbery, what
is? or, if This be to come in at the Door, what is to creep in at the Window?
He Preached without a License; and so came not in at the Door: He forcibly took
away the Right of another, which is the part of a Robber. Silenced he was, for
Preaching without a License, and There Is the Clamor.

Does not the Law forbid it? Are there not diverse Canons of the Church against
it? Nay, let him be Ordeyn'd, and Beneficed, he is not to Preach even in his own
Parish without the Introduction of (...) License: It Is criminal, in the Bishop,
to suffer it* in the Minister, to do it. But Mr. Baxter's Case needs not This
Sifting; his fault being not only Contumacy, but Usurpation.

D. E.
[B] Truly if this practice be justificable, and those who design themselves to
preach the Gospel, must, besides their Ordination, procure a License from a
Bishop, to do that, which a Woe is de^ced against, if the^ offer to o^t, then
1. I see not what Ordination signifies, ^ce the power that (...) is given, ^o
Authority from Man (...) away, any more then dissolve the contract of a
Marriage, much less empeach and hinder the free use of it, except for Moral
and? notoriously vicious Misdemeanors. 2. For one Minister of the Gospel (for
certainly a Bishop is no more) to Silence another, and that for no better
Reason, than because his Fellow-Minister is desirous to preach the Gospel
without a new License, this is an abuse of Dominion, which as our Savior does
no where countenance, so the first Ages of the Church were altogether (...)
with.]
[B] Mr. Animadverter, have a care of your Fingers. If this Practice be not
justificable, the Constitution is Impious, that allows it, and the King is a
Tyrant in Commanding it. These are bloody Words, and Bradshaw is out of hearing.

Ordinatio^ you think sufficient then without a License: Well; and speak Truth
for Once, what do yo^hink of a Good Living without Ordination? Weak and Spi^l
Creature! Ordination Entitles you to the Ministry, but not to the Benefice: It
Authori^es you, as to the Function it self, but not to the Local, and
Circumstantial application of it. The Scripture says, Preach; the Law says,
When and Where. And it must be the Gospel too: not ^t-points betwixt King, and
Subject: Holy Positions of Rebellion; Instructing the Well-affected how they
may kill the King in the fear of God.

Such as are Mr. Baxters* T^s, which the Bishop, in his own Defense has
published at the End of his Letter. But of These, the Anima^verter takes not
the least notice, (Doctus spectare Lacunar) or else perchance they lay on the
blind side of him.

His bringing up the virtue of Ordination to the Instance of a Contract, and in
the Case of Mr. Baxter; seems to reason as if an obligation to Marry, were an
Authority for a Rape.

Again; that a Bishop is but one Minister of the Gospel (which he urges in
Contempt of his Jurisdiction) is a Mistake. The Law understands a Bishop to be
a Corporation: and all the Reason in the World it is, that his Fellow-Minister
(as he Phrases Mr. Baxter) should not Preach without a New License, because he
taught Treason by Virtue of his Old one.

D. E.
[C] For the Bishop's Inst^ of our Saviour' s putting to silence the Scrib^s
and Pharisees, is both Imperti^t and False, because our Savior did only
silence them by Argument, which the Bishop may do when ever he is a^le, but
what is that to an Authoritative and im^erious commanding men to be Silent.
Besides, even then when our Savior was most strict in pronouncing Woes against
the Pharisees in that very Chapter* he is so far from forbidding the Pharisees
to preach, that he commands his Disciples both to hear and to obey their
Doctrine. So that since the Bishop wi^ needs have the Presbyterians to be
Pharisees, let him but allow them the same Liberty of Teaching the People, as
our Savior did the other, and I believe they will not (at least were I a
Presbyterian I should not) envy his Lordship either his Title or M^, how (...)
(...) (...) soever they both be. And though the Bishop is pleased to say, That
the Presbyterians preach nothing but Sedition and Treason (which is most ^alse,
as being directly (...) to their declared Principles) yet the Pharise^s taught
something worse, and that was (...): Yet our Savior (who sure had more power,
and withal more care of his* Church ^hen the Bish^p of Worcester) did not go
about by force to prohibit them]
[C] Touching our Saviors Silencing the Scribes and Pharisees; (having no
ordinary Jurisdiction in the Jewish Church) which way should it be done
(without the Interpose of his Divinity) but by Argument? nor does the Bishop
imply other: (under Correction of his Impertinent, and False:) his Mouth's as
foul as if he were in a Course of Salivation.

But since the Presbyterians must be Pharisees, he desires they may have the
same Liberty of Teaching the People: and so let them, when they sit in Moses
Chair.

I must confess, if the Bishop says, (which I do not find) That the
Presbyterians Preach nothing but Sedition and Treason: I think he does them
wrong, for they Preach Nonsense too, and Blasphemy, in abundance. This does the
Animadverter, (with his usual Modesty) affirm to be most False: and How? It Is
Contrary, insooth, to their Declared Principles] so have been all their
Actings, wherefore it is True.

D. E.
[D] I wish therefore, that this Bishop and the rest of his Brethren (if any
are Ch^lerick and Testy enough to be of his mind) would consider, that as by
silencing their Fellow Ministers for such frivolous and slight pretenses, they
usurp a Power, which Christ never gave, so a^ the l^st day he will not thank
them for the Exercise of it.
[D] How now? Choleric; Testy; Frivolo^s; Usurp? Certainly this Fellow has
been taught like a Parrot, to cry nothing but Walk Knave.

If the Bishops in Acting according to the Law of the Land, Usurp a Power
denied them by Christ, the Law is Antichristian: and There the Scandal sticks,
let the Law, and the Libeller dispute it.

EXCEPTION IV,
D. E.
[A] HOw consistent with the Civil Peace (for as to Christian Charity, the
whole thing is but a Letter of d^fiance against it) the Bishops Distinction is
about the Act of I^dempnity, and (^he so much fo^gotten) Act of (...), I hope
His Majesty and the Parliament will in due ^i ne consider. For he is so hardy
as to tell us, That the King by it only pardoned the corporal punishment; but
the Church had not, nor ought not to forgive the scandal, till honorable
amends were made her by confession and Recantation. Where by speaking of the
Church, as distinct from the State (I mean in point of Co^rcive Jurisdiction)
the Bishop would make us believe, that after His Majesty and the Parliament
have forgiven men their Civil Crimes, there is still another Power, which he
calls the Church, unto which they are still accountable, eve^ so far as to make
a Pu^lick (...). Here I w^sh the Bishop would have s^oken out of the Clouds,
and plainly told us what he meant by the Church: For if it be a Congrega^ion of
the Faithful met together for the worship of God, as the D^finition of
Scripture, and of the Church of England in the 39 Articles; this will not at
all advantage him, since such a Church has (...) Co^cive or Imposing Power:
But if he means the Hierarchy or Ecclesiastical State, ^y Archbishops,
Bishops. etc. there can be nothing more false, or more dishonourabl^ unto o^
Civil Government, than to affirm that it lies in their power, not only ^o
pu^sh, but lik^wise to exact a Recantation, f^r those faults which the King and
Parliament have not only pardo^ed, but und^ sever^ penalties command^ should
never more be remembered: And therefore I doubt not, but that they will resent
this Malicious and ^ll-grounded Fancy.]
[A] YOu are Merry Sir; be wise too; and do not mind the King too much of the
Act of Oblivion; for when he comes to look upon his abused Mercy, 'twill turn
his Patience into Fury. To see the same Knots now in Confederacy against
himself, that Ruined his Father. The Common Prostitutes of Bradshaw, and
Cromwell, are (still the Instruments of the Old Cause) Revived. The same
S^blers, Printers, and Stationers for the Press; the same Engines for the
P^lpit; and the same Snares for the People. Yes, and The same Capps, Smiles,
and Gracious Looks, to Encourage, Countenance, and Protect them. In your own
Words Sir, This [I hope his Majesty and the Parliament will in due time
consider.]

Mind here the Hardiness of the Bishop: whose Position is This; that the King
may pardon the Corporal Punishment; but it is God that must pardon the Guilt;
and the Church the Scandal, (That is, upon Repentance, and Confession:) Where Is
now the Wonder? Can the King Act beyond the Sphere of his Regal Jurisdiction?
But of all People living, Methinks the Presbyterians should the least scruple
this Limitation upon Majesty: shall They that bring their Sovereign to the
Stool of Repentance, pretend that he can save others from it, that cannot help
himself?

The Animadverter takes it ill that the Church should require a Public
Recantation.

Let them but stand to their own Rule, I Am satisfied. [Those are to be judged
Impenitents; that have Publ. Worship. Page 67.
Declared their sin, and never declared their Repentance.] And again:
[Scandalous offenders are not to be admitted to the Holy Communion, till they
Except. Page 8.
have openly Declared Themselves to have truly Repented and amended their
former Naughty Lives.] And This they Press the King to see observed according
to his Royal Declaration of October. 25. 1660. (But it is a ^od they never meant
for themselves).

The Question now, is only whether a Person that teaches and practices
Rebellion for a matter of Twenty year together, and lives by Oppression, be a
Scandalous Offender, or no.

His next Quere is concerning the Church, to which the Retractours are to be
Accomptable.

By the Church, I suppose the Bishop means the Representative, and Jurisdictive
Body of it. But That he takes for an affront to the Civil Government; and gives
the Bishop the Ly beforehand, if he think otherwise.

To This point; The Kings of England, never claym'd the Power of the Keys; and
Church Censures fall under that Consideration, without offense to the
Prerogative Royal. So Gentle Sir, -- There Is no harm done; unless the
self-same thing, done by a Presbyterian must pass for Discipline, and
Conscience: which in a Bishop argues Malice.

D. E.
[B] And since the Bishop is so over-zealous for the very Letter of the Law,
when it imposes Ceremonies, give me leave a little to wonder, that one of his
Profession and Place in the Church should so (...) go against it, when it
enjoins Moderation and Forgiveness as to Civil Injuries. Such as he, who make
the Law, instead of being a Buckler to protect. Converts, a Sword only to cut
off all such as were once Offenders, ^abour what they can, to make men
desperate, and thereby render the peace of the Nation and in that the
prosperity and welfare of His Majesty very insecure and hazardous. For what can
mo^ inrage Men to take wild and forbidden courses, than to see even Preachers
of the Gospel strive to widen their wounds, and contrary to their own former
Professions, to pull off that Plaster, which the wisdom of our St^-Physitians
had provided to ^eal our distempers.]
[B] To give the Devil his due, the man is struck upon a sudden, into a
handsomer veyn of Railing, To see a Divine (says he) and a Bishop; so strict
for the Law in one case, and against it in another?

But how so? Does the Act of Oblivion absolve you from the need of Repentance?
or will any true Convert refuse to own his Offense, as publicly as he
Committed it? The Recantation (I perceive) sticks in your Squeamish Conscience;
which shows that the Guilt does not. I beseech ye look a little nearer.

The Act of Pardon implies there was a Fault; but does not say where, save only
in the Actual Murderers of the late King. At the beginning of the war, the
Presbyterian Party pretended to be as much for the King, as who was most; and
the Schismatical Teachers carried on the work. When by Libelling, Pulpiting
(for Preaching, I cannot call it) and Dissembling, they had made an Interest,
they Plundered, Sequestered, and Shot at him: (for his Good) Prosecuting Those
as his Enemies, that fought under his Commission for him; and fell, Defending
him.

The Fate of the late King we know; and the Clemency of This; which was
intended as a mercy for One Rebellion, not a Foundation for another. It Is True;
the Faction are not to be Punished; but where the Public Peace depends upon
it; are they not to be distinguished? To think Them Innocent, is to suppose the
King Guilty; and under the Masque of the Act of Oblivion, to hide the
Difference; is to endeavor it should be thought so.

Are not the Bishops Entrusted with the Care of Souls, and accomptable for all
under their Charge, Charge, that they miscarry not through Their Default?
Returning to the Exercise of their Ecclesiastical Authority, after a long and
forcible deprivation, they find their Flocks misled, and in the hands still of
the Seducers. If the people go on, they are damned; if their misleaders are
turned off, or put to recant; it is against the Act of Oblivion. If Either; the
multitude take Treason for Religion, and finding Matters so well with them Now,
believe they were in the Right before.

Are not the Bishops bound by the Incumbency of their Pastoral Duty, to teach
them to distinguish Loyalty, from Faction; Sound Doctrine, from Heresy;
Christian Charity and Obedience, from Schism? Which way can This be done, but
by Unwinding the Clew, and unperplexing the People?

If Those that taught them wrong, would but now tell them that they did so; and
take the payns to set them right again, all were well* but till that is done,
the Common sort continue under the same misperswasion; and for Their Errors
the Bishops must answer, whose Office it is to see them Instructed better.

Well well, but [such as He, that make the Law, instead of being a Buckler to
Protect Converts, a Sword only to cut off such as were once ^fenders, etc.]

The Hypocrite is pleasant. Such as He?] As if only the Bishop of Wor'ster
stuck in his Stomach, when it is the Hierarchy it self he boggles at. The Bishop
he says makes the Law a Sword, in stead of a Buckler; but I say, the
Schismatique would make both of it: A Buckler, to Traitors; and a Sword to
Loyal Subjects.

This is the way he says to Enrage the People; and render the welfare of his
Majesty very Insecure, and Hazzardous;] Indeed, to suffer these Mutinous
Affronts is the ready way to another Rebellion: but if This Scandalous and
Seditious w^etch were now made Exemplary, for this Audacious Menace upon the
King, who would either help or Pity him?

EXCEPTION V.
D. E.
[A] IT is bold and impious (I know not how to express it more mild'y) what he
affirms, That I^ to command an Act, which by accident may prove an occasion of
sin, be sinful, then God himself cannot command any thing. For, though, as I
said before, I will by no means own that Assertion, yet, a thing which by
accident may become sinful, may be unlawful in another to command, for want of
sufficient Authori^y; whereas God's Sovereign Power does without dispute or
controversy make all his Commands to be just; and therefore his Name ought not
to be mentioned in our trivial Disputes, because every such vain use of it, is
nothing but a diminution and lessening of his Greatness.
[A] DId you Learn This Language of your Patron the President; Or did the Good
Old Gentleman bequeath you his Conscience; that you so little regard either
Authority, or Truth?

Let the Reader judge of the Libeller. [Bold, and Impious]: and This, from a
Pedant to a Prelate; from an Aerian Heretic, to a Grave, Learned, and
Orthodox Divine. Where Is the Reverence of Government; the Honor of England;
the Protection of the Law? nay, Where Is the Power of Religion; the Safety of
the King; and the Welfare of the People; if such Indignities pass unpunished?
The Example is Emboldening, and Contagious; for what can the Rabble think; but
either that the Insolence is Lawful, the Reproach just, or the Party Terrible?
Where are They whose Duty it is to watch the Press? Is the Blood of the Last
King so soon Forgotten; or the Security of our present Sovereign so little
Regarded; that we should now try the Operation of the same Poison upon the
People again, which formerly intoxicated them; and the Effect of the same
Popular Madness, upon This King, which so lately destroyed his Royal Father?

Let not us persuade our selves neither, that these Luxuriances of Bitterness
against the Bishops, are only the over-flowings of some Private Humors, merely
as dissatisfied to Church Government. No no; there is more in the Case then so:
The Libellers find they get by it; Credit, Countenance, and as by the By,
commodious fortunes. Their Mecaenasses are
too wise to tell the Virtuoso's; look ye, there is This, or That, for such a
Gird at the King, or such a Lash at the Bishops. But a word to the Wise: they
understand for what, and to distinguish from such hands, betwixt a Reward, and
a Bounty: What is This, other then tacitly to keep a Faction in Pay, and to
allow a Salary to Sedition? I have digress'd too long, but the Animadverter is
not forgotten all this while. Now to our Teazer again.

He challenges the Bishop with affirming, [That if to command an Act, which by
accident may prove an occasion of sin, be sinful; then God himself cannot
command any thing:] and imputes to him as if either he derogated from Gods
Almightynesse, or Trifled with his Holy Name and Majesty. Observe now his
Prevarication.

The Bishop of Worcester Relates a Dispute that passed betwixt Himself, and Mr.
Baxter, at the Savoy; concerning Obedience to the Command of a thing in it self
Lawful, by Lawful Authority, under no unjust Punishment, and with no evil
Circumstance, which the Commander can foresee, or ought to provide against.]
Mr. Baxter contends; that the first Act Commanded may be per Accidens,
Unlawful, and be Commanded by an unjust Penalty, though no other Act, or
Circumstance be such.] (Thus, under his own Hand, in writing.)

The Bishop, desirous to bring him off, from an Assertion so Weak, and wicked
at once; lays before him the Impious tendency of it: Tells him that it is Page
10.
Destructive of all Authority, Humane, and Divine.] -- taking away all
Legislative Power not only from Page 11.
the King, but from God Himself: -- for no Act can be so Good of it self but
may prove by Accident a Sin; which being admitted, every Command is a Sin. If
every Command, then God that cannot Sin, cannot Command.]

In This manner, does the Bishop Reason with Mr. Baxter, and to divert him from
so foul a Mistake, shows him the Horrid, and Blasphemous Consequences of it:
and This in fine, does our Spidercatcher deliver to the world for Impious, and
Irreverent in the Bishop, which was no other then a Logical Result from Mr.
Baxter's Argument.

Neither is God's Omnipotence the Question, (Cujus Velle, Potentia; Cui Opus,
Voluntas) but the Corruption of Depraved Nature: By this Rule, whatsoever we
may Abuse must not be Commanded. Bid me Pray -- I may Wander. Go to Church -- I
may sleep. Keep the Sabbath -- I may fall into Judaisme. Relieve the Poor
Cavaliers -- I may do it to be seen of Men: and at This Rate, in In^nitum.

Our Writer's Pen is in Course, and rather then say Nothing, he is Resolved to
say less. Supposing a want of sufficient Authority to Command: which is the
Thing Granted in the Proposition.

EXCEPTION VI.
D. E.
[A] THat an offense, to which a disproportionable penalty is annexed, is not
to be measured by the quality of the Act considered in it self, but by the
mischievous consequences it may produce; whether this ought to hold good in
Civil Laws, becomes neither the Bishop nor me to dispute: but in Divinity
nothing can be more false and dangerous. For to impose in the ^orship of God as
necessary circumstances of it, things confessedly trivial and needless; and
upon the forbearance of them, to debar any from the benefits first of
Christian, and then of Civil Communion; is a thing which has not the least,
pretense of Scripture or Primitive practice to justify it. For, our Savior
te^s us. That whosoever were not against him were for him; and the Apostle bids
us to receive our weak Brother, and not to judge, much less to burden his
Conscience.]
[A] QUestionless This Man is In when he is Out, or he has the worst luck that
ever man had, to be still on the wrong side.

Is there no Difference betwixt the same Sinful Act, Solitary, or Exemplary?
Between Cursing the King in my Heart, or in the Mercat-place? Betwixt a Private
Invective against a Bishop, and a Public Libel? As much as betwixt a Murmur,
and a Rebellion: the Peoples Sins are Mine too, that sin by My Encouragement,
or Example.

We are told that it is not Scriptural, to impose things Needless, as
Necessary, and to debar from the Communion, for Recusancy.

A Decency is enjoined: and if the Church (pro hic and nunc) may not determine
of That Decency; who shall? To see Five hundred several Persons, worshipping in
as many several Postures: Is This a Decency? Bring them to One; There Is Order;
I Will Kneel, says One; Sit, says another; Stand, a Third. There Is no Religion
pretended either in choosing This or That, or in forbearing it. Only when the
Church commands (for Uniformity sake) That Posture to be observed by All, which
was before by many Practiced, and without Scandal to the Rest; Then, such a
Coil there is kept; One cannot do This, nor The Other, That, and nothing must be
done with Doubting. The thing Imposed, they say, is Trivial: Truth; but the
Reason of imposing it, is Considerable. It Is Public Order; and the Imposing
Power, within the bounds of Decency and Order, is beyond Question Sacred. But
Rest we upon This Issue.

The Thing required, is (in it self) confessed on all hands to be Trivial: Now
say; whether is more to blame: the Church for Barring you the Communion,
because you will not do, what they are persuaded you ought to do; or you for
Refusing it, rather than do that which you confess you may do.

We shall conclude this Point against him, from his own Text: Whoever is not
Against Me, is for Me.] Let him Prove us Against Christ; if not, we are for
him: which Argument will not serve him, because as he is not For him in his
Scruple, so he is against him in his Disobedience. For it is but dissolving a
General, into Particulars, and whatsoever is virtually conteyn'd in the One, is
Deductively found in the Other; upon which ground, I dare be Positive, that to
kneel at the Communion, if Appointed by the Church Apostolic, is a Duty
within the Intention of That Precept, Let every thing be done Decently, and in
Order.

D. E.
[B] Unto which sacred Canon nothing can be more directly contrary, than what
the Bishop most incompassionately tells us, That the Laws do well to punish,
even with non-admission to the Sacramen^, such as will not, or perhaps dare
not, kneel. And the Reason he gives is equally Apocrypha, Because, says he, it
becomes not the Lawgivers to endanger the Churches peace for their sake: As if
first, It did not much more become all Lawgivers in the things of God, to
observe the Law of Christ, which is a Law of Love and Liberty. Secondly, As if
the Churches peace would not be much more endangered, by the pressing of things
doubtful, than by the forbearance of them. For since by the enforcing of such
things, as God has no where commanded, our Christian liberty is in^inged; from
hence it follows, that, if we ought not, yet we lawfully may refuse, to sub^t
unto such Impositions; as our Savior did, in not washing his hands before
meat; and the Apostle Paul, in the case of Circumcision.]
[B] This is answered already; but let me add. To Tolerate any Inconformity, by
a Law, opens a Gap to all Heresies, and Schisms: as the Liberty of Venting
Private opinions against the Law, tends manifestly to Seditions, and Rebellion.

The Animadverter tells us of a Law of Love and Liberty. Does he mean, a
Liberty to do what we list; or, what we ought? Not the former sure, for such a
Freedom were destructive of Love; Not Three men of Three Thousand Naturally
Agreeing. But Two or Three lines further, he opens his Mouth, and tells us the
meaning of the Liberty he would be at. A Liberty, that leaves us so Free, that
if we ought not, yet we Lawfully may refuse to submit unto such Impositions.]

To make out This Seditious determination, he brings Two Instances, The One of
our Savior's Eating with Unwash'd hands; which appears to us rather as a
Pretermission, than an Opposition: The Other, of St. Paul's Circumcising of
Timothy; (as he would have it) in Compliance with the Ceremony; but the Text
says otherwise, and that it was to render him more Acceptable to the Jews.
Therefore Paul would that he should go forth with him, and took and Circumcised
him, because of the Jews, which were in those quarters, Acts 16. 3. (but
however the Imposition was not the Question in either Case.)

EXCEPTION VII.
D. E.
[A] AS for the Chain of Consequences, which the Bishop li^ks and ti^s
together: As that from Diversity in external ^ites, arises Dislike; from
Dislike, Enmity; from Enmity, Opposition; thence, Sehism in the Church, and
Sedition in the State: For (...) of which he does very virulently instance in
our unhappy times. To prevent which he tells us, That the State cannot be safe
without the Church, nor the Church without Unity, nor Unity without Uniformity,
nor uniformity without a strict and rigorous Imposition. To all this I answer,
that it is a (...) Rope of sand, and the parts of his Chain do (...) little
hang together; as Sampsons Foxes did before they were tied by the Tails, which
course the Bishop has imitated, not forgetting to put in even the Firebrand it
self to make up the Comparison.]
[A] LAying his Gall and Vanity aside; his Virulences, Ropes of Sand, and
Firebrands; we will come to the Intermission of his Fury, (for it takes him by
Fits) his Sober Folly.

D. E.
[B] Nothing is more clear than that there has been, nay, ought to be,
Diversity in external Forms, without any Dislike at all as to the Person of
another: For, the Apostles that preached to the circumcision gave the right
hand of Fellowship unto the Apostles of the Gentiles; although their Outward
Rites in public Worship, were far more different than those, which, by any of
the most distant persuasions, are now practiced i^ England. 2. The State may be
prefer^ed, without the least reference to the Church, unless it turns
Pe^secuter of it; as is evident i^ those 300 years before Constantine's time,
in which there was no Church at all legally countenanced; and for some scores
of years after, both the Christians and Gentiles were equally advanced and
favored. 3. Unity, I mean such as Christ came to establish (which is an Unity
in heart and spirit) does not in the least depend upon Uniformity, but upon
Charity, i. e. a Christian and a Cand^d forbea^ance of one another i^ things
circumstantial, when we agree in the Essentials of Worship; which is a thing
that mere Civility would teach, though Religion were silent in it.]
[B] Because Diversity of External Forms in several Churches does well enough:
Is Uniformity in the same Church therefore the less Laudable; or what
Proportion is there betwixt the Apostles Case and Our's? Their business was to
Preach the Gospel to all Nations, and lay the Foundation of Christianity: but
our Dispute is only, Whether or no we shall Obey their Delegates in Matters
Indifferent.

Again; the Bishop speaks of the English Church, and State, whose Interests are
Commixt, and Interwoven to a degree of Inseverable complication. His slight
esteem of Uniformity, swayes not at all with me* when I consider That Notable,
and Divine saying of Sir Francis Bacon, The outward Peace of the Church,
distilleth into Peace of Conscience; And it turns the Labors of Writing, and
Reading of Controversies, into Treatises of Mortification, and Devotion.

Concerning Circumstantials; I think it much more suitable, for the People to
Obey, than for the Church to Forbear: and let them say what they please of
Agreeing in Essentials, when I see a perverse Posture, I think it no breach of
Charity to suspect a Froward Mind.

D. E.
[C] And whereas the Bishop thinks he has got some advantage, by reviving the
memory of our late Civil ^ars, which (were he either Christian or Man enough,
he would wish were eternally buried in silence) I must (to use his own Phrase)
tell him in his ear, that our Wars did not arise from the separation of
Conscie^tious dissenters, but from the violence and fury of unconscio^able
Imposers, who would not allow their Brethren (who desired nothing more than to
live peacea^ly by them) that sob^ (...) which the Law of God commanded, and no
Law of Man could justly deprive them of.
[C] See; now he Raves again, [were he either Christian, or man enough, etc.]
still at the Memory of our late Wars, he Starts, and Methinks looks as if that
quarter of the House were Haunted. But here he tells the Bishop a tale in his
Ear; and as arrant a Tale as ever he told in his Life;

The Violence, and Fury of Unconscionable Imposers was the Cause of the War.
He says.] In a Strict sense, it is Truth. A Pack of Contriving Knaves, drew in
a Rabble of Believing Fools; and against Conscience, Law, Honor, and
Gratitude, Levied a War against the King, because he would not give away his
Crown, and Betray his People. This is the Short of All. See the Exact
Collections, and you shall find who Raised the War, and upon what Pretense.

Alas! the Brethren only desired to live Peaceably, (he tells us) and to enjoy
that Sober Liberty, which the Law of God Commanded, and no Law of Man could
justly deprive them of.]

The Scotch Rebellion was a Sober Liberty; (was it not?) So was the Plunder of
Sir John (now Lord) Lucas, and the Lady Rivers: The Tumults Flocking to
Whitehal, and Westminster: The Posting up of Those that would not Murder the
Earl of Strafford: The Cries of Crucify him, against That Learned, and
Reverend Prelate, the Archbishop of Canterbury: The Defacing of
Church-Windows, and Monuments: The Defaming, Sequestring, and Murthring of the
King.

All Th^se, were in our Animadverters opinion, Sober Liberties. Where ^oes the
Law of God* Command These Liberties; so that no Law of Man (as he pretends) can
justly hinder them?

His Sacred Majesty, whom these Libertines Murdered; was of another Judgment.
Those with Me E^ B^. (...). 19.
had (I think) clearly and ^ndoubtedly for their Justification -- the Word of
God, and the Laws of the Land, together with their own Oaths.] -- Those on
the other side are forced to fly to the shifts of some Pretended Fears, and
wild Fundamentals of State (as they call them) which Actually overthew the
Present Fabric both of Church and State, etc.] These are the Words of that
Blessed Martyr: and in the same Meditation again, [I am Guilty in This War of
nothing but This; that I gave such Advantages to some Men, by confirming their
Power, which they knew not how to use with That Modesty, and Gratitude, which
became their Loyalty, and my Confidence.]

Here we see the Authority of a Nameless Libeller, against Records, Living
Witnesses, and the averment of a Dying Prince.

Put stay, whether his account be True, or False, is but one part of the
Question. The Danger, Scope, and malice of it, deserves another Look.

H^re's first, the Blood of the Last War cast upon the Late King; and
Consequently the Regal Rights of the King Regnant, exposed to a Dispute: for
it is expressed, that the (...) Di^enters were denied That Liberty, which no Law
of man could deprive them of: which manifestly implies both the Oppression of
the Late King, and the Insufficiency of Monarchy it self, as to the Ends of
Government. If That War was fair on the Peoples side, Then; so would another
upon the same score, be Now: in which regard, the very Hint is Seditious.
Further, it casts a Dangerous reflection upon the present Government. These
execrable Papers, it is odds his Majesty neither sees nor hears of, and what a
Scandal is it then, under the Reign of the Son, to see such Libelling Against
the Ashes of the Father!

He Will say perhaps, he only tells what Caused the War, without pretending to
Defend it. That shift may serve him, to some purpose, provided he was never
formerly engaged with the Faction; if
he was never Ambitious of testifying to the World his Real Esteem of the
singular Worth and Eminence of the greatest Villein in Nature: he is the more
capable of Mercy.

But does not what he is, appear from the whole drift of his Discourse? What
does he, but Defame the King under the Visor of his Animadversions upon the
Bishop? (For what has the Bishop done without the Kings Authority?) Again,
under the Cloak of an Exception to One Bishop, what does he but inveigh against
the Church: the Episcop^ Dignity and Function? and in fine, why against the
Bishops? but only as the likelyest way to inflame the People by Degrees against
the King? Does not his Majesty enjoin the Practice of Those Ceremonies which he
condemns the Bishops for? But what he drives at, will more fully appear from
that which follows.

D. E.
[D] And whether the public maintaining of the very same Positions and
Practices, may not in time beget the same Feuds and Animosities, although this
Bishop cares not, yet I doubt not but His Majesty, as he now does, so will
always graciously consider.
[D] These Four Lines well applied, would settle the Nation in perfect
happiness: but in another sense then he intends them.

It Is very true; the Public Mainteining of the very same Positions, and
Practices that raised the last War, will most infallibly produce Another:
unless the Sticklers be a little better looked to. They Preached and Libelled
up an Army against our Late Sovereign: are they not at it now again for
Another? Ceremonies, and Lord- Bishops were mighty Grievances, They are so
still. And then the Kings Prerogative came in Play. They are fairly offering at
it Now to. And what was the Event of All? The Holy men Divided the Spoil;
Overthrew the Government, Murdered the King; Beggered and Enslaved the Nation,
and Settled Nothing.

Marque now the Menace of his last Period. What does it say, but This? Let the
King take up his Bishops, or look to himself. And to Embitter the People
against Bishops) Feuds, and Animosities, he presages (though this Bishop cares
not.)

EXCEPTION VIII.
D. E.
[A] WHether, as to the matter of Fact, the French Protestants do enjoin
standing at the Sacrament; and the Dutch, kneeling; I will labor to enform my
self of some more Unbyassed witness than this Bish^p; for in the Ecclesiastical
Laws of those Churches, which I have carefully perused, I can find no such
matter. But if they did so, this would not at all justify the Imposition of
Kneeling; because 1. The Question is de Jure, whether it be lawful to prescribe
any one such certain Posture, without submiting to which, it shall not be
lawful to admit any to the Sacrament, and till the Affirmative of this be
proved by Scriptures, Examples, and Instances from the Practice of men, will
not satisfy a doubting conscience. 2. Neither of those forementioned Postures
are so much to exception as Kneeling; because this last is manifestly more
superstitious, for, 1. It varies most of any from the First Pattern. 2. It has
been monstrously abused by the Papists to Idolatry; which alone renders it most
unsafe to be practiced, and most Unwarrantable to be imposed: Especially, till
it be again explained as in the very first Liturgy of all it was; which I
particularly mention, to show how little our Reformation since Edw. 6th. time,
has been improved.]
[A] HE cannot pass the Bishop without a Reverence; [Some more Unbiased
Witness then This Bishop, etc.] This is the handsomest Ly he has given the
Bishop yet. But to our Business; leaving the French, and Dutch to their
Pleasure: we have already argued that whatsoever is Deductively in the
Scripture, is sufficiently There, to warrant the Practice of it; and we have
proved Kneeling to be rationally and evidently comprised in the General Precept
of Decency. Now to his Particular Exceptions.

It varyes (says he) from the First Pattern.] Was it a Pattern for a Posture;
or the Institution of a Sacrament? Mind the Text.

The Lord Jesus in the night when he was betrayed, took Bread; and when he had
given Thanks, he brake 1 Cor. 11. 23
it, and said, Take, Eat, This is my body which is broken for you; THIS DO ye
in Remembrance of 24
Me.] After the same manner also he took the Cup, 25.
when he had supped, saying: This Cup is the New Testament in my Blood, THIS DO
as often as ye drink it in remembrance of me.

We have here the Complement of the Institution. Now see the Extent of the
Command. DO THIS. What Is That? Take Bread; Give Thanks: -- Break it, and say,
Take, Eat, etc. -- So likewise of the Cup, in such manner as is Prescribed.

Here Is the whole Precept, without any Mention, or the least Hint of other
Circumstance, either for Time, Posture, Habit, or the like. All which being
left equally Indifferent; why not at Night; in the same Habit, Language, and
Syllables, as well as the same Posture?

But Kneeling (he says) has been abused to Idolatry; and therefore not
warrantably Imposed:] Have not Churches been Abused? has not the Holy Scripture
it self been misapplied; and made the ground of Heresy? Are they not therefore
Warrantably Used? Finally; the main stumble they make of Kneeling is the
Command; now if a Posture of Body may not be Commanded, what may? So that ex
professo, their Enmity is not so much Levelled at the Evil, as at the
Government.

EXCEPTION IX.
D. E.
[A] AS it was needlessly, so was it likewise Uncharitably done, to revile the
whole body of Presbyterians for the Faults of Mr. Baxter; upon supposition that
either he is a Presbyterian, or so culpable as the Bishop would make him. For
since every man is to bear his own Burden, what Bible did the Bishop find it
in, that he might, without scruple, asperse a whole order of Men, for the
pretended miscarriage of one; who, by the Bishop's own Confession, was not of
so Amicable and complyant a Temper as the rest: And therefore certainly they
ought not to be brought in as Parties in that crime of Unpeaceableness, from
which the Bishop just before had^absolved them: but choler spoils the Memory;
and, sure his Brethren the Bishops would not take it well of a Presbyterian,
should he cry out Crimine ab uno, disce omnes -- See what manner of Spirit
these Bishops are of, and judge them all by the Bishop of Wercester' s example.
Truly, Sir, I am a little angry, when I consider how much this one man's
Indiscretion has exposed all of the same Order to Censure; For were they all
like him (which I do not, nor dare not think) I should not scruple to pray
heartily, what the Bishop does in scorn concerning the Preachers -- Lord
deliver us from such Bishops. And let all the People say, Amen.
[A] OF This Cavil we have both had enough, and said enough, in and to his
first Exception; and the Animadverter discovers that somewhat has spoiled his
Memory too, as well as he says Choler has done the Bishops: which is a Pity,
considering how little Pretense the Libeller has for a Bad one, and how much
use for a Good one.

I would Gladly know, in what Bible the Animadverter learned to despise
Government, and speak evil of Dignities; to bear false Witness against his
Neighbor, etc. He says the Bishop judges Uncharitably in measuring All by
One: and that he now condemns whom just before he absolved. Answer; Neither the
One, nor the Other. First; his words are only [in Proportion of the whole
Party] which does not Imply either All, or in the same Degree. And for the
Bishop's Contradicting himself; with what Ingenuity can any man extend his
Meaning to All, which in Terminis, is limited to Those of Mr. Baxter's
Judgment; and in distinction, from others of a more complying and Peaceable
Temper?

To go on with him; D. E. tells the Honorable Sir, that he is a little Angry,
to consider how This one man's Indiscretion exposes all of the same Order to
Censure. Gross Impostour! Does he not streyn his little Wit, and huge
Confidence to the utmost, only to start a Scandal, and fix a Blot upon the
Bishop? with what Temper of Spirit, with what weight, (or in truth, Color) of
Reason, with what Ingenuity, and Affection, he has menaged This Discourse, let
the Indifferent determine. He concludes his Exceptions with a Prayer; Lord
deliver us (says he) from such Bishops: Good God (say I) Preserve his Majesty
from Treason, and Deliver the Church from Schism.

POSTSCRIPT.
D. E.
[A] THus, Sir, you see how willing I am to serve you in proposing my
Exceptions, the fuller prosecution of which I must leave to some other Pen,
more able both in Divinity and Policy; who may convince both the Bishop and the
World, that it is not yet time to sow such Tares; This Age is a liitle too
knowing to be gulled with an A (...), or to take every thing for Oracle which a
Bishops Passion distates. But before I case you of your Trouble in reading
this, I will crave leave to give you a Taste of the Reverend Father's deep
wisdom in two or three particulars.
[A] IN truth the man has great reason to recommend the Prosecution of the
Cause to a better Advocate, for what he has said, will hardly do the Work,
either upon the Bishop, or the World; his Arguments being too Weak for the one
Purpose, and his Passion, too Rank, and Open for the other; and any man that
compares the Ground of his Displeasure, with the Violence of it, shall easily
discern that his Trouble because he cannot find more faults, is greater then
his Desire of Reforming any; and that he drives on a Factious Design, against
the Office of Bishops, under color of Taxing them of Misdemeanures.

Now to his Observations upon [the Reverend Fathers deep wisdom] as the pert
Pedant plays upon it.

D. E.
[B] 1. In that he declaims, so fiercely, as if he would crack his Girdle,
against all those who force all Communicants to come unto them, and be
particularly examined before they admit them to the Sacrament. Indeed, Sir,
this was an Imposition, as no way Justifiable, so, for ought I can hear, no
where practiced. The Custom being that men were only once for all examined, at
their first coming to the Sacrament; which the Bishop himself allows under
other Names of being Catechized and Instructed. It was therefore wisely done of
the Bishop, this cold weather to set up a Man of straw, and then get himself
heat by threshing it.
[B] The Reason of That Violence which he himself disallows, we have no need to
argue; but for the Practice, although I do not find it Authoritatively
enjoined, yet that it was frequently used, is only News (I believe) to the
Animadverter.

Cartwright, and diverse others, press the Necessity of Examination; from 2 Chronicles. 35. 6. [Now Examination (says he) being a part of Preparation, it
follows that here is Commandment of the Examination. T. C. l. 1. p. 164.] Only
our Author hearing from the Bishop, that it borders upon Auricular Confession,
is content to waive it. But This, I hope, will not be denied, that by the
Directory, the Ignorant and Scandalous were not to be admitted to the
Communion: and how far they had Liberty to Enquire into the One, and Conclude
upon the Other, I suppose no body doubts. One Common Question among them was
concerning [the Instant of your Call.] A grave Inquisitour of the Party Asked a
Fellow how many Folds Christ had in his Flock? And for the Scandal, nothing
more ordinary then to deny the Sacrament for refusing the Covenant.

In the first Century (says Mr. Cann) of Scandalous and lewd Ministers, are
commonly reckoned such as had called the House of Commons an unjust. S^are
broken Page 23.
Court, Hypocrites, Schismatical, and Pragmatical fellows, a company of
Factious fellows; no Parliament; that their proceeding against the Ea^l of
Straf^ord was wrongful and unjust.

Enough upon this point; only to the Bishops Cracking of his Girdle, and
Threshing a Man of Straw; we do yield, that the Force of the Phanatiques
Tropes, and Figures is not to be resisted.

D. E.
[C] 2. It is methinks very politickly d^ne to exclaim against the po^r
Covenant, and in great zeal to wish all the Books which defend it, were burnt
by the Authors, to save the Hangman a labor. For here let his Adversary do
what he can, the Bishop will be too hard for him: For if he takes no notice of
the Covenant, the Bishop clearly gains the Cause; if he ventures to assert it,
he shall presently be consuted with a Confiscation. So that under the shelter
of this unanswerable Dilemma I leave him, le^t I should be gored with the Ho^ns
of it. And this I speak, Sir, as one that though I never took, but always
opposed the Covenant; yet I have a very good opinion of many that did, and
withal a great Tenderness for the lawful part of an Oath, after it is o^
solemnly taken. I will only add this, That since that Oath has been so
generally taken, even by those that were most active in his late Majesty's
service; and several times ventured their lives, to signalize their Loyalty; I
think the Ashes of it (since it was burnt by public Authority) had much better
have been suffered to rest quietly, than thus to be blown up and scattered
abroad by the Bishops furious breath, when no occasion was given him so much as
to mention it.]
[C] See the peevish, and groundless Insinuation of the Animadverter. What
Exclamations against the Poor Covenant? What great Zeal I beseech ye? No, not
so much as a Wis^.

The Bishop takes notice that some have had the Page 33.
Confidence, Publicly to own the Obligation of the Covenant, even since it
has been condemned to be Burnt by the Parliament. And truly (says the Bishop)
I see no Reason why all those Books and Sermans which have been Preached and
Printed in defense of the Covenant, or to maintain the same, or worse
principles of Sedition, then are in the Covenant; should not be burnt also.
Nay, I dare be bold to say, that if the Authors of such Books and Sermons were
not still of the same opinions (and if they be, God deliver us from suck
Preachers) if they were not still* I say, of the same opinions, but did truly
Repent of them, and were heartily sorry for the horrible mischief they have
done by them, they would wit^ those converted Exo^cists, Act. 19. 19. bring all
those Conjuring Books of theirs together, and so save the Hangman a Labor;
would publicly burn them with their own hands, etc. -- ]

These are the Bishops words at Length; where is the Distemper? Nay who will
oppose the Burning of all such Books, but Those that justify the Matter of
them? To what end are they kept in Being, but by asserting one Rebellion to
procure another?

Concerning the Politic Attaque of the Covenant under the Protection of a
safe Dilemna: the Bishop does not play the Casuist, but notes the boldness of
those People, that blame the Resolution of a Parliament.

Touching the Good Opinion our Author has of the Covenanters, we do not
question it; (Simeon and Levi) and we understand what he means by [the Lawful
Part of an Oath, after it is once solemnly taken.]

No Part of an Oath imposed by an unlawful Authority, how Lawful soever in it
self, can be reputed binding, as part of such an Oath, without the subsequent
Allowance of the Supreme Magistrate. If you swear to worship God; Worship: but
for the Duty, not for the Oaths sake, for in swearing to an Usurper, you do
tacitly disown your Sovereign; and your persuance of That Oath, is but a
Continuation of your Disobedience.

That diverse of the Kings Party took the Covenant, is often and Maliciously
objected to us.

Some took it at first, with good Opinion, and Intentions; and served his
Majesty according to those Intentions. To These, the Covenant was One thing,
and to the Contrivers, another.

At last, the Covenanters (having suppressed the King and his Forces) put the
poor Cavaliers to This Choice, either to Swallow That, or nothing else; to
Swear or Starve; (A more Diabolical Cruelty, I defy Story to show me) Those
that did take it, have the Plea of Frailty, and as I hope) the Comfort of
Repentance. Now see the difference of Their Case from Ours; which the
Animadverter would gladly should be understood to have been a joint Conspiracy.

It was in Them, a Trap, set for the People, bayted with Forms of Godliness,
and Loyalty; under which Masque, they engaged a heedless well-meaning Party
against the King.

Here Is, in the Institution, Treason; in the Matter of it, Profaneness; in the
Enforcement of it, Usurpation; and in the Scope of it, Rebellion, and Perjury.
Never was there a Pack of such Demure Dam'mees. In Rank, and plain English what
does it seem to say but This? Confound us, if we do not. Agree, and Resolve to
Serve God and Honor the King. (A thing that might have been done without
either Cursing or Swearing) Thus far We Are Innocent of the Covenant.

Further, They destroyed the King by the Covenant; We, if we took it, never
persued the Malicious Ends of it. That is, we did not add Rebellion to Frailty.
I do not argue for my self, for I never took either That, or any other
Engagement whatsoever from Them.

By this time, Mr. Animadverter, I think you had as good have let the Covenant
alone too.

D. E.
[D] Lastly, I can never enough commend the Bishops wisdom, in resolving so
angrily never to write again; for he is Old, and has Traveled far, and knows
that it is much easier to speak rash and unjustifiable things than to dese^d
them. And therefore he deals with those, that he ha^ provoked; as witty School
boys d^ with their Compa^ions, first he ^its them a box on the Ear, and then
very discreetly retreats, and fairly run^s away. But if Goliath, who ^ook upon
him to defy the Host of Israel, should as soon as ever he had done, have
sneaked out of the Field, and thought he ^ad done manfully enough in ma^ing a
Bold Challenge, and in showing his Teeth at them; I believe the Philistines
would hardly have thanked him for that empty show of Valor, whereby he could
not conquer, but only enrage the Enemy. And whether the Bishops will not have
the same opinion of this over-forward and unwary Champion of theirs, I hope,
Sir, you will neither enquire your self, nor desire that I should: For I have
already done enough to show how much I am,

SIR, Your most humble Servant, D. E.

[D] If the Bishop had the Libellers Experience of speaking more then he could
Justify, the Bishop might be of the Libellers Opinion.

Do you say, that Age and Travail have made the Bishop Wise? The Animadverter
(for ought I see yet) has a great way to go, and a long while to Live, before
'twill do as much for him. The Bishop Resolves to write no more. Is that it?
Once is enough for His own Honor, and Twice would be too much for Yours.

My Head for it; the Witty Schoolboy was of his Ushering (The Wit on it!) It is
so like the Tutour. A box o'th Earth, and away? Just so did D. E. serve the
Bishop of Worcester. Where is this same D. E.? Who is he? What is he? He
forgets that Mr. Baxter struck the first Blow; and that the Bishop was only
upon the Defensive.

But here we'll give him over; The man I perceive has showed all his Tricks; he
winds up his Bottom, fastens his End, does his Reverence, and Vanishes.

REFLECTIONS upon the Whole.
BEhold the Libeller dissected; and now we'll Read upon him.

Marque first, the Vizor he puts on; A Passionate Lover Page 2.
of the Kings Person, and Government; and for the Order of Bishops.

See his Opinions next: The late War (he says) arose Page 9.
from Unconscionable Impositions, which neither the Law of God commanded, nor
could the Law of Man justify. Again,

He Calls the Praelation of Bishops an Undue, and (as Page 2.
some think) Antichristian Dignity, he had as good have said plain
Antichristian without the Parenthesis, for the Hint is but to round the People
in the Ear that so it is.

A Bishop (he says) is but one Minister, and ought not Page 5.
to silence his Fellow-Minister: If by Arguments ^e can, it is well, but not by
Authority.

In his Twelfth Page, speaking of the Covenant; he professes a great Tenderness
for the Lawful Part of an Oath, after it is once solemnly taken] which does but
insinuate the Obligation of That Diabolical Sacrament.

Herein first, he does manifestly condemn the Late King, and more then Covertly
justify the Late Rebellion: Over and above the denial of his Majesty's Power
in matters Indifferent. Secondly, He Disclaims and Reproaches the Authority of
Bishops; and finally, in asserting the Covenant, he gives a Box on the Ear to
this Present Parliament. So that Briefly; the Power of the King; the Power o^
(...) (...) and the Power of the (...) (...) (...) This Libeller's Reasoning,
subject^d to the Conclusions (at Fairest) of a Conventicle of Schismatiques.

From his Disguise and judgment; n^w to the Drift of his Design, which must be
gathered from the Method he takes to promote it,

That he is a lik^ly person to Intend (...) Mischief, appears first from bis
Principles, which we have showed already to be Destructive of all Authority
both Ecclesiastical, and Civil.

It Is some Presumption too, that he is guilty of Ill meaning, because he does
not set his Name to the Pamp^let: but from the Stuff and Matter of it, it is
most Evide^t, that his Design is to Embroyl the Nation.

First; his Compleints are Levelled at the Faults and Power of Prelates; (and
This is a Vein runs through the whole discourse) to draw an Odium, and Envy
upon the Government: which mutinous Impressions would be too ^nk, without a
smack of Conscience; and therefore Popery comes in; (Oh it is a dreadful word
That Popery) to season the Design; and Encourage a Rebellion for fear of
Idolatry.

When he has showed them the Tyranny of Bishops, and the Danger of their Papal
Domination, the People are to be Instructed, first in the Lawfulness of Casting
them often, Then in the Manner of it; and Lastly, They are to be hearten'd on, by
the Easiness of doing it.

The Lawfulness is hinted in his Ninth Page, [They have the Law of God, and Man
on their side] and more expressly, in the Page foregoing [If we ought not, yet
we Lawfully may refuse to submit unto such Impositions as God has no where
commanded.] They never consider that it is as Lawful for the One to Impose, us
for the Other to do, what God no where commanded.

The Manner of ejecting them, is suggested in the minding of them how they did
it before.

Does he not effectually threaten his Majesty with [the same Feuds, and
Animosities, if These Positions and Practices be maintein'd? Page 10] What
Positions? Observe it; These are the very words he strikes at, (and terms so
Virulent.)

From Diversity, grows Dislike; from Dislike, Enmity; Bishop of Worst. Page 18.
from Enmity, Opposition; and from Opposition, first Separation and Schism in
the Church, and then Faction, Sedition, and Rebellion in the State; which is a
progress very natural, and I would we had not found it to be so by our own
Experience, etc.] So that unless the King will renounce the Right of his
Fathers Cause, the People are by This miserable Scribler animated to renounce
his Majesty.

He makes broad Signs too, to the people to stick to their Covenant; Page 12.
and Commits the Rest to Providence.

Let it not be said now, that I force his Meaning; and that his words in some
places may be taken in a more Favorable Sense; it suffices me, that they fa^ly
bear This: and the Worst, which without Violence the Words will bear, may with
great Justice be applied to his Meaning, Non quid dixerint, sed quo spectarint,
videndum; Libels are to be understood by their Hints, rather than by their
Words.

See first the main Scope of the Libell; which is (in This particular most
undeniable) to defame the Bishops, Disaffect the People, and Streighten the
Power of the King. Which Seditious Aim being taken for granted; whatsoever may
be therein understood in Favor of Mischief, may be very Charitably Concluded
for a Contrivance of it. I Argue from These Reasons.

First, his Concealment is a kind of Flight, and tacitly amounts to a Proof
against kim. Next; it is agreed that his Intent is evil; and the worst sense
holds best Proportion with his Purpose. Here are untoward Circumstances; and
yet There Is one more which (in my Opinion) outweighs all we have spoken of.

The Bishop thinks himself ill used by Mr. Baxter, and the Animadverter steps
between (at the request we must Imagine of the Honorable) He undertakes to say
what he dislikes in the One, what in the Other: and in fine, Many a Quarrel he
picks with the Bishop, dividing only in One Point from the Presbyterian. That
is (in his own Terms)

As to the main Controversy, I think the Bishop has much the better of Mr.
Baxter: For if the Question between them, was as Dr. Gunning, Animad. Page 1.
and Dr. P^arson do attest, such a Command is so evidently lawful, that I shall
much wonder if Mr. Baxter did ever dispute it]

We see here what he means by the main Controversy, and wherein the Libeller
dissents from Mr. Baxter. (The Rest being only Tempest and Invective against
the Bishop, without the least hint of a blame upon the Other.)

See now wherein they Agree, which must needs be in every thing save That
wherein they Differ; that is; in These following Positions, the Animadverter
and the Casuist, are Hand and Glove.

TEN POSITIONS Which (some say) Restored the KING.
I. IF a Prince want such Understanding, Goodness, or Power; as Destructive of
all Kings.
the People judge Necessary to the Ends of Government; in the first Case, he is
Capable of the Name, but not of the Government; in the Second, he Deposes
himself: in the Third, the want of Power deposes him. (Theses. 135, 136, 137.)

II. If a Prince in a Military State against his People, be by them Conquered;
The Case of the late King when he was Bou^t and Sold in (...).
they are not Obliged to Restore him, without some other Obligation then their
Allegiance. (These. 145.)

III. If a Prince be injuriously Expelled, by what Power-soever, that Resolves
to Ruin the Commonwealth, rather then he shall be Restored; The Case of the
King and the Commons in 1650.
and if the Commonwealth may prosper without his Restoring, That Prince is
bound to resign his Government; or if he Refuse, the People are to judge him
Incapable by Providence. (These. 147.)

IV. If a Prince be so long Out, that the Nation cannot well stand without
Oliver Chosen by Pro^.
another: Providence has dispossessed the Former, and we are to make a new
Choice. (These. 149.)

V. If a Prince be thrown out by (...) Rebellion; the strongest Rebel may
Olivers taking the Government upon him was a deed of Charity.
(ex Charitate) undertake the Government. (The Case holds in Good Livings.)
(These. 150)

VI. Any thing that is a sufficient sign of the will of God, that This is
Oliver by the Will o^ God, though not by the Grace of God.
the Person, by whom we must be Governed; is enough (as joined to Gods Laws) to
oblige us to consent, and obey him as our Governor. (These. 153.)

VII. And yet All the People have not this right of choosing their Governors,
The Cavaliers compelled to consent, and the Bret^ea to choose.
but commonly a part of every Nation must be compelled to consent, (These. 159.)

VIII. Those that are known Enemies to the Common good in the chiefest parts of
it, are unmeet to Govern, or choose Governors: (else give us For fear of the
King and his Friends.
up to our Enemies or to Satan:) But such are multitudes of ungodly vicious
men.]

IX. If a People bound by Oath shall dispossess their Prince, and Choose,
Presbyterian Absolution.
and Covenant with another; they may be Obliged by their Latter,
notwithstanding their former Covenant.

X. Though a Nation wrong their King, and so quoad Meritum Causae, The King c^
do (...) wrong with a Sal^.
they are on the worser side, yet may he not Lawfully war against the Public
good, on that account; nor any help him in such a war: because propter finem,
he has the worser cause. (These. 352.)

That these Maxims brought in the King, who questions? A word now to the
Rabbi's Doctrine Concerning the English Government.

1. The real Sovereignty here amongst us was in King, Lords, and Commons, (Page
72.) The King of England no Monarch.


2. The Law that says the King shall have the Militia, supposes The King has
the Militia if the People please.
it to be against Enemies, and not against the Commonwealth, nor them that
have part of the Sovereignty with him. To resist him here, is not to resist
Power, but Usurpation, and private will; in such a case, the Parliament is no
more to be resisted then He. (These. 363.)

3. If the King raise War against such a Parliament upon their Declaration The
People Judg^ of the K^g.
of the Dangers of the Commonwealth, the People are to take it as raised
against the Commonwealth, (These. 358.)

4. And in that Case (says he) the King may not only be resisted, but And may
depose (...) resist him as pleasure.
cease to be a King, and enters into a State of War with the People, (These.
368.)

These, with our Animadverter, pass for unquestionable Fundamentals of
Government, but whether a doubting Qu^.
soul may be Compelled to Kneel when it has a mind to sit, That Is a nice point
indeed.

To pass over the Libellers Scandalous, and Barefaced Impostures; His Rude and
Impetuous Violences, we will only ask; Why all this Fury, and Contrivement
against the Bishop? Is It as a Friend to a silenced Brother; And the main cause?
Though by the Spite I should suspect a Personal Pique: But there may be something
else in it too; and if the man comes off at last, say I Am a Wizard. No matter
what it is; He Is very much Offended: And no matter for that neither. Offended
he is at the Style, I would he had quarreld it in a Better; but at the Bishops
Passion beyond measure.

Truly, upon Perusal of it more then Once, and weighing it Word by Word, I can
find nothing in the Language, that does not very well beseem the Pen, and
Dignity of a Prelate. Yet there was Cause enough for a little Sharpness: and
here is the Case in short.

The Bishop of Worcester finding the Parish of Kidderminster infected with Mr.
Baxters Doctrine (who Preached there without either Cure, or License) forbids
him to Preach there any more, and Preaches there himself, to Disabuse them:
hinting the unfaithful dealing they had received, from One in great Authority
among them, concerning the Kings Cause; The Rites of the Church, and the
sinfulness of a Lawful Command, because by Accident it might be the occasion
of Sin, etc.

Hereupon, Mr. Baxter addresses to the Inhabitants of Kidderminster, pretends
that he was silenced for denying such a Position; (Which was not so, but for
Preaching without a License) and charges the Bishop to have delivered in the
Pulpit words tending to his Defamation, and neither of Charity, Truth, nor
Soberness. This Scandal and some other Partial Relations, short of, and beyond
the true State of the Matter, were the occasion of the Bishops Letter, where I
must confess the Bishop of Worcester may be thought thus far Severe to Mr.
Baxter, in that he has foyld him by Proofs not to be denied, and by Reasons
not to be answered.

THE END.
Books sold by H. Brom at the Gun in Ivie-lane.
A Geographicall Dictionary.

Justice Revived; being the whole Office of a Country Justice of the Peace.

Mr. Mortons Rule of Life.

Books written by R. L'Estrange Esquire
The Holy Cheat.

A Caveat to the Cavaliers.

A Modest Plea.

The Relapsed Apostate; or, an Answer to the Presbyterian Liturgy.

State Divinity; or, A Supplement to the Relapsed Apostate.

Imprimatur libellus hic cui titulus [Pulpit-Conceptions, Popular Deceptions:
or, The Grand Debate resumed, in the point of Prayer, etc.] cum laud
Dignissimi Authoris. Approbavit

ROBERTUS PORY S. T. P. Reverendmo in Christo Patri ac Domino, Domino GULIELMO
Archiepiscopo Cantuariensi, totius Angliae Primati and Metropolitano,
Sacellanus Domesticus.

Page 15. lin. 19, and 20. read thus, -- most apt, for the present, to promote
--


