SOME QUERIES Concerning the Election of Members For the Ensuing PARLIAMENT.

LONDON, Printed in the Year MDCXC.

Some Queries concerning the Election of Members of the Ensuing Parliament.
1. WHether the King has not lately by Actions, as well as Promises, declared
himself for the Interest of the Church of England; and whether those
Republicans, who have always made it their business to libel Kings, can more
effectually abuse his Present Majesty, than in traducing him as their Friend,
and in using, as heretofore, a Kings Name against his Design and Interest?

2. Whether those are true to the Interest of that Church, who endeavored in
the last Session to incapacitate some of the best Members of it; and who were
so far from granting that Amnesty which the King desired and proposed, that
they carried their Fury back to more than one preceding Reign, and set aside
all Acts of Indemnity, but that, which most of them need, in the Year 1660?

3. Whether since the Dissenters do not now desire a Toleration for themselves,
which we have already granted, but openly threaten and pursue their Revenge on
us, it is not necessary that these apparent dangers, at least, should awaken us
out of our Lethargy; and whether the Negligence of the Church of England, which
on like occasions heretofore, was thought the result of Pity and Good Nature,
would not now be esteemed the Effect of Cowardice and Stupidity?

4. Whether those Gentlemen of the Sword, who have Offices in Ireland, would
not be better employed in a Council of War than a Senate House? Whether, if
they think it convenient, it would not be proper for them to make one Visit to
the Remains of their Regiments there, and to contribute by some other means to
the Reducing that Kingdom, than by giving Taxes?

5. Whether those restless Phanaticks, who have been bred up in Rebellion, and
have always since been active Promoters of Sedition, ought not in conscience to
desist now, and to be contented with the single glory of having once ruined
this Kingdom?

6. Whether those Worthy Gentlemen have been justly exposed, in a late impudent
Pamphlet, that were more hasty for sending a speedy Relief into Ireland, See a
List of those that were for the Regency 1690. Land.
than for changing the Right of Succession in an Hereditary Kingdom; and
whether they may not possibly deserve a place again in the House, though they
thought it more Expedient for this Nation to beat K. James out of that One
Kingdom, than to Vote his Daughter out of Three?

7. Whether the King be not now sensible, that most of those hasty Abdicators
did not change the Succession out of kindness to him, but out of a farther
Design of bringing in a Commonwealth, or, in other words, of making this an
Elective, and precarious Monarchy?

8. Whether the Temper of those Excellent Members deserves Censure, who have
promoted a General Pardon, and in that an Universal Quiet and Satisfaction; and
who were not very active in suspending the Bishops, unwhipping Oats, and in
Excepting every body out of the no-Act of Indemnity?

9. Whether any Man can justly stand Recommended to your Choice by no other
Advantages than those of an old Treason, and a long Exile for it? and whether
one may reasonably be thought to have improved his Crime into Virtue, and to
become a Patriot of his Country, by being outlawed into Holland?

10. Whether such men as these may not possibly be Factors for Geneva and
Amsterdam, and more mindful of their late Fellow-Burgers than their old
Countrymen; and whether their frequent protestation, That they are true
Englishmen, would not convince the greatest Sceptick, (if he understands their
veracity,) That they are not so.

11. Whether our good Brethren the Dutch, according to their usual kindness,
would not, in all probability, have forborne to arrest us for their Debt, till
the Conquest of Ireland had put us in a capacity of repaying them; and whether
those Men, who in the absence of most of the Members, gave 600000 l. to the
Dutch, did not more consider their own good will to the Creditors, than our
ability.

12. Whether it was not a strange instance of Justice, in a Knight of the
Shire, I do not mean Sir R. Nudigate, nor Sir R. Cotton of Cheshire.
to move for a new assessment of his own County; and whether if the County do
not choose him again. They will not demonstratively show, that they have more
kindness for their Money than their Representative?

13. Whether there ever was a better Parliament in General, than that of K.
James the Second, and whether any body would approve the Re-election of those
worthy Members, who do not wish for a new Monmouth, and another Argyle?

14. Whether many honest Gentlemen, of Nice Principles, did not desist from
standing at the last Election, as having raised more Scruples to themselves
than they could easily answer; and therefore not hoping to untie the Gordian
Knot, put it for once into the hands of those men who could effectually cut it.
And whether now these Gentlemen will not be concerned to redeem their neglect,
and the more diligently to avert the blow, by how much the less careful they
were to prevent the stroke.

15. Whether the Clergy of the C. of E. are not concerned to be as diligent
against Phanaticism now, as of late against Popery; at least, such of them as
have a greater Respect for Pulpits and Chapels, than for Tubs and Barns?

16. Whether if those men who were incapacitated for procuring or consenting to
Surrenders, shall again Vote for their Judges, they will not give a signal
Instance of their forgiving humor, and show to the World, that they have a
great share of good Nature, though perhaps not an equal portion of Sense?

17. Whether it would not be Heroic for all those Publick-Spirited Gentlemen,
Qu. Whether Mr. Sacheverell.
to take up Mr. S -- 's Resolution of never standing again till they can be
chosen by honest Regulators only?

18. Whether the incapacitating Clause was not brought into the House by Mr.
Sach -- and whether the following List be not a true account of those that
seconded him in it?

Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That every Mayor, Recorder,
Alderman, Steward, Sheriff, Common-Council-man, Town Clerk, Magistrate, or
Officer; who did take upon him to consent to, or join in, any such Surrender,
or Instrument purporting such Surrender as aforesaid. Or did solicit, procure,
prosecute, or did pay or contribute to the charge of prosecuting any Scire
facias, Quo Warranto, or Information in the nature of Quo Warrauto, by this Act
declared void, shall be, and is declared, adjudged, and Enacted to be for the
space of seven years incapable, and disabled to all Intents and Purposes, to
bear, or execute any Office, Employment, or Place of Trust, as a Member of such
respective Body Corporate, or in or for such respective City, Town, Burg or
Cinque-port, whereof, or wherein he was a Member, at, or before the time of
making such Surrender, or Instrument purporting such Surrender, or the suing
out, or prosecuting such Scire facias, Quo Warranto, or Information in nature
of Quo Warranto, any thing in this Act contained, or any other Case, Statute,
or any Ordinance, Charter, Custom, or any thing to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding.

The Honorable Edward Russel, Esquire. William Duncombe, Esquire. Sir Henry
Winchcombe, Baronet. Henry Powle, Esquire. Sir Algernoon May, Knight. Sir William
Rich, Baronet. Sir Henry Fane, Knight of the Bath. Thomas Tipping, Esquire. The
Hon. Thomas Wharton, Esquire. Sir Thomas Lee, Baronet. Thomas Jews, Esquire. William
Iephson, Esquire. Sir William Drake, Knight. Richard Hampden, Esquire. John Hampden,
Esquire. Isaac Newton, Magist. Art. Sir Robert Cotton, Knight and Bar. John
Maynwaring, Esquire. Roger Whitley, Esquire. Hugh Boscawen, Esquire. William Harbord, Esquire.
Edward Russel, Esquire. Sir Henry Ashurst, Knight. Anthony Row, Esquire. Hugh
Fortescue, Esquire. Robert Harly, Esquire. Sir Peter Colleton, Bar. Jonathan Prideaux,
Esquire. Sir John Lowther of Whitehaven, Bar. Sir Henry Capell, Knight. Sir Philip
Gell, Bar. The Honorable Anchitell Gray, Esquire. Sir George Treby, Knight. The
Honorable Robert Russel, Esquire. Sir Francis Drake, Bar. Sir Walter Young, Bar.
Thomas Reynell, Esquire. John Elwell, Esquire. Samuel Foot, Esquire. Henry Trenchard, Esquire.
Thomas Trenchard, Esquire. John Burridge, Esquire. Sir John Morton, Bar. John Manly,
Senior, Esquire. Sir Matthew Andrews, Knight. Henry Mildmay, Esquire. Isaac Rebow, Esquire.
Sir Thomas Middleton, Knight. Sir John Guise, Bar. Sir Ralph Dutton, Bar. Sir
Duncombe Colechester, Knight. Thomas Master, Esquire. John How, Esquire. Richard
Dowdeswell, Esquire. Sir Edward Harly, Knight of the B. Paul Foley, Esquire. John
Dutton Colt, Esquire. John Birch, Esquire. Sir Thomas Pope Blount, Bar. Sir Charles
Caesar, Knight. Sir William Cowper, Bar. Sir Thomas Bide, Knight. The
Honorable Sidney Wortley, alias Mountague, Esquire. The Hon. Sir Vere Fane, Knight of
the Bath. Sir John Knatchbull, Bar. Sir William Honywood, Bar. Henry Lee, Esquire.
Sir Tho. Tailor, Bar. Charles Lord Brandon Gerrard. The Hon. Richard Lord
Colchester. Bennet Lord Sharard. Thomas Babington, Esquire. Sir Edward Hussy,
Knight. Sir William York, Knight. Sir John Brownlowe, Bar. Sir William Ellis,
Bar. The Hon. Philip Howard, Esquire. Sir Patience Ward, Knight. Sir Robert
Clayton, Knight. Sir Thomas Pilkington, Knight. Sir William Ashurst, Knight.
Sir Henry Hobart, Knight. George England, Esquire. John Trenchard, Esquire. Sergeant at
Law. The Hon. Sir Robert Howard, Knight. Sir Thomas Samuel, Knight. Sir William
Langham, Knight. Sir Francis Blake, Knight. Sir Scroop How, Knight. Sir John
Cope, Bar. Sir Thomas Lytleton, Bar. Edward Gorges, Esquire. The R. Hon. Charles
Marq. of Winton. The Hon. William Lord Pawlett. Francis Morley, Esquire. Fitton
Gerrard, Esquire. Henry Wallap, Esquire. The Honorable James Russel, Esquire. Sir Michael
Biddulph, Bar. Philip Foley, Esquire. Henry Boil, Esquire. Sir Philip Skippon, Knight.
Sir Robert Rich, Knight and Bar. Sir John Duke, Bar. Sir Richard Ounslow, Bar.
George Evelyn, Esquire. John Arnold, Esquire. Thomas Howard, Esquire. Foot Onslow,
Merchant. Sir John Thompson, Bar. Denzill Onslow, Esquire. Sir John Pelham, Bar.
John Machell, Esquire. John Lewkener, Esquire. Sir John Fagge, Bar. William Garway,
Esquire. Sir Richard New digate, Bar. Sir Thomas Mompession, Knight: Thomas Pitts,
Esquire. Sir Charles Rawleigh, Knight. Morice Bocland, Esquire. Sir William Pinsent,
Bar. Charles Godfry, Esquire. Thomas Freke, Esquire. John Wildman, senior, Esquire. --
Hawles, Esquire. John Wildman, junior, Esquire. Sir James Rushout, Bar. Thomas Foley,
Esquire. William Bremley, Esquire. John Summers, Esquire. Richard Lord Coote. Henry Herbert,
Esquire. Edward Tompson, Alderman. William Stockdale, Esquire. Sir William Strickland,
Bar. William Palms, Esquire. Sir Michael Wharton, Knight.
Barons of the Cinque Ports.
Richard Austen, Esquire. James Chadwick, Esquire. Julius Deeds, Esquire. Tho. Pappillon,
Esquire. Sir James Oxinden, Knight and Bar.
WALES.
Sir William Williams, Knight and Bar. Bussy Mansell, Esquire. Sir Rowland Gwynn,
Knight.


FINIS.

