Toleration DISCUSSED; IN TWO DIALOGUES.

I. Betwixt a Conformist, and a Nonconformist; Laying open the Impiety, and
Danger of a General Liberty.

II. Betwixt a Presbyterian, and an Independent; Concluding, upon an Impartial
Examination of their Respective Practices, and Opinions, in Favor of the
Independent.

Vaevobis, Hypocritae!

LONDON, Printed by E. C. and A. C. for Henry Brom at the Gun in
Ludgate Street, at the West End of St. Paul's. 1670.

TO THE READER.
The CONTENTS.
SECTION I. UNIVERSAL TOLERATION too Wide, and Unlawful. Page 3 SECT. II.
LIMITED TOLERATION too Narrow, and Disobliging to the Excluded Party. 15 SECT.
III. No Toleration to be admitted, but with the Allowance of the Chief
Magistrate. 18 SECT. IV. The BOUNDS of Toleration. And the Error of making
Fundamentals and Non Fundamentals to be the Measure of it. 23 SECT. V. The
Common Arguments for TOLERATION, Examined. 29 SECT. VI. TOLERATION undermines
the Law, and causes Confusion both in Church, and State. Page 36 SECT. VII. The
Non-Conformist's Plea for Toleration, upon REASON OF STATE. 43 SECT. VIII. The
Non-Conformist's Plea for Toleration, from the MERITS of the Party. 52 SECT.
IX. The Non-Conformist's Plea for Toleration, from the Innocence, and Modesty
of their OPINIONS and PRACTICES. 56 SECT. X. The Non-Conformists demand a
Toleration, which is neither INTELLIGIBLE in the Whole, nor PRACTICABLE so far
as it may be Understood. 78 SECT. XI. The Non-Conformists demand a Toleration,
for No Body knows WHOM, or WHAT. 84 SECT. XII. The Conjunct Importunity of the
Non-Conformists for a Toleration, is not grounded upon Matter of CONSCIENCE. 87
SECT. XIII. The Conjunct Importunity of the Non-Conformists for a Toleration,
is a Manifest CONFEDERACY. 96 SECT. XIV. The Non-Conformists Joynt-Pretenses
FOR A Toleration, overthrown, by the Evidence of their Joynt-Arguments,
Professions, and Practices AGAINST it. 114 SECT. XV. The Non-Conformists JOINT
COMPLAINTS of Hard Measure, and Persecution, confronted with their own
JOYNT-PROCEEDINGS. 120 SECT. XVI. The Non-Conformists tell us, That Liberty of
Conscience is the Common Interest of This Kingdom; but REASON and EXPERIENCE
tell us the CONTRARY. 128 SECT. XVII. This Kingdom has been still the Worse for
Indulging the Non-Conformists, and the Party never the Better. Which evinces,
that UNIFORMITY is the True Interest of This Government, and Not Toleration.
148 SECT. XVIII. The Party of Scrupulous, and Conscientious Non-Conformists, is
neither NUMEROUS, nor DANGEROUS. Page 167 SECT. XIX. The Non-Conformists
Appeal, from the Government, and Discipline of the Church of England, to the
Judgment, and Practice of the Reformed Churches BEYOND THE SEAS; Examined, and
Submitted to Censure. 172 SECT. XX. The Non-Confotmists Exceptions to Our
Public Way of Worship, found Guilty of Great IMPIETY, and ERROR. 194 SECT.
XXI. Whatsoever God has left INDIFFERENT, is the Subject of HUMANE POWER. 217
SECT. XXII. No End of Controversy, without a FINAL and UNACCOMPTABLE JUDGE,
from whose Sentence there shall be no Appeal. 226 SECT. XXIII. The Three Great
Judges of Mankind, are GOD, MAGISTRATES, and CONSCIENCE. 238 SECT. XXIV. The
Church of England charges the Non-Conformists with SCHISM, and the
Non-Conformists charge those of the Church with SCANDAL. The Matter is taken
into Debate. Page 256
Toleration Discussed, betwixt a Presbyterian, and an Independent.
SECT. XXV. An Enquiry, upon a Short, and Impartial Survey of the Rise,
Progress, and Issue of the War, raised by the Two Houses in 1641. Whether were
more Criminal, The PRESBYTERIANS, or the INDEPENDENTS. 271 SECT. XXVI. What
Party soever DEMANDS a Toleration, and yet Mainteins, that it is Destructive
both of Church, and State, to GRANT one, Is an ENEMY to BOTH. 292 SECT. XXVII.
In Case of a Toleration, or Indulgence to be Granted, Whether has the fairer
Preten se to it; The CLASSICAL Way of the PRESBYTERIANS, or the CONGREGATIONAL
Way of the INDEPENDENTS; in Respect of their Form of Government? Page 298 SECT.
XXVIII. Whether may be better Tolerated in This Kingdom, The Presbyterians, or
the Independents; in Respect of their PRINCIPLES, and Ordinary PROCEEDINGS?
Debated, First, With Relation to his Majesty's PERSON, and AUTHORITY. 306 SECT.
XXIX. The Question of Toleration, betwixt Presbytery, and Independency;
Debated, with regard to the Foundation, and Execution of the LAW. 318 SECT.
XXX. The Question of Toleration, betwixt Presbytery, and Independency, Debated,
with a Regard to the Rights, Liberties, and Advantages of the PEOPLE. 327
Toleration Discussed, By way of Dialogue betwixt a CONFORMIST, AND A
NONCONFORMIST.
Conformist. LIberty of Conscience, or, No Liberty of Conscience, is the
Question. What is Conscience?


Nonconformist. Conscience is Amesius de Consci.
Iudicium Hominis de Semetipso, prout subjicitur Iudicio Dei. Indulg. and
Toler. p. 13.
The Judgment that a Man makes of Himself and his Actions, with reference to
the future Judgment of God. Or otherwise, Liberty of Conscience upon its true
and proper Grounds, p 3.
It is An Ability in the Understanding of Man, by a Reflex Act to Judge of
Himself in all he does, as to his Acceptance, or Rejection with God. Rutherford
makes it to be Free Disputation, p. 3.
A Power of the Practical Understanding, according to which the Man is obliged
and directed to give Judgment of Himself; that is, Of His State and Condition,
and of all his Actions, Inclinations, Thoughts, and Words.


C. If this be Conscience, Then Liberty of Conscience is A Liberty of a Man's
Judging of Himself, and his Actions, with reference to the future Judgment of
God.


N. C. Right: But then he is bound likewise to Practice according to that
Judgment, and To Worship God according Indulg. and Toler. p. 13.
to the Light and Understanding which he has, of What is that Worship which is
Acceptable with him, in Matter and Manner, and not otherwise.


C. So that your Liberty of Conscience is now come to Liberty of Practice.
Indeed I could wish that the Advocates for Liberty would be a little more
Candid in this business. They take wonderful Pains (many of Them) to prove,
That Conscience cannot be forced; It is out of the Reach of Humane Power; God
never appointed any Judge of it; Shall any Man pretend to make me believe, That
which I cannot believe? (And the like) Pressing the Argument, as if That were
the very Pinch of the Case, which is just Nothing at all to the Point in
Controversy. It is obvious to Common Reason, that This Suggestion cannot but
create very dangerous and unquiet Thoughts in the People: For if they be denied
Liberty of Conscience (in the plain and honest English of it) They suffer under
the most Barbarous, and Ridiculous Persecution, that ever yet appeared upon the
face of the Earth. But on the other side, If their claim be stretched to
Liberty of Practice, It seems not only unreasonable, but utterly Inconsistent,
both with Christianity it self, and the Public Peace.


SECTION I.
UNIVERSAL TOLERATION too Wide, and Unlawful.
C. LIberty of Conscience (as you have stated it) is An Universal Toleration
for People to say and do what they please, under the Warrant and Pretext of
Conscience.


N. C. That is to say, In Matters properly the Subject of Conscience, with
Reference to the future Judgment of God.


C. By This Rule, Pagans are to be tolerated as well as Christians: For They
have Consciences as well as We: They are convinced, that there is a God; and
that That God ought to be Worshiped; and may plead for the same Freedom, in the
way and manner of their Proceeding.


N. C. But Paganism is not within the Pale of the Question.


C. Why then, no more is Conscience. If you say, They are in the Wrong, and so
debar them the Exercise of their Opinion, because of the Error of it, your
Exception lies to the Error, not to the Conscience; and may be turned upon your
selves: For They say as much of You; and have as much right to condemn You, as
You Them: Neither have you any more Right to be Judges in your own Case, then
they in theirs.


N. C. Well, but we have a Law to Judge our selves by.


C. And so have They too: For, They without a Law, do by Nature the things Romans
2. 14.
contained in the Law, and are a Law unto Themselves.


N. C. But how can that Law-have any Regard to the future Judgment of God, when
they deny the Immortality of the Soul:


C. There is a future Judgment of God in This Life, as well as in the next: And
the Conscience that has no Light at all of another World, is not yet without
Apprehensions of Divine Vengeance in This. Raro Antecedentem Scelestum deseruit
pede poena claudo. You Will be as much to seek now, if you restrain your Argument
to Christianity; for you must either prove, That there are no Erroneous
Consciences among Christinas; or, That Error of Conscience is no Sin; or else,
That Sin may be Tolerated.


N. C. There is no doubt but there are Erroneous Consciences; and it is as
clear that Sin is not to be Tolerated: But I do not take every Error of
Conscience to be a Sin (understand me of Consciences laboring under an
Invincible Ignorance.)


C. It is very true, That as to the Formality of Sin, which is the Obliquity of
the Will, An Error of Conscience under an Invincible Ignorance is no Sin: But
Sin Materially considered, is the Transgression of the Divine Law; and
Conscience it self becomes Sinful, when it dictates against That Law.


N. C. Can there be any Sin without Assent; or any Assent without Knowledge; or
any Knowledge in a Case of Invincible Ignorance? The Transgression of the Law
implies the Knowledge of it, or at least the Possibility of Knowing it; without
which, it has not the Nature of a Law, as to me. [The Conditions Laud against
Fisher, p. 197.
requisite to a Rule are These: It must be Certain; and it must be Known. If it
be not Certain, it is no Rule; If it be not Known, it is no Rule to Us.] I had
not known Sin, but by the Law Romans 7. 7.
(says the Text) And in another Place, Where there is no Law, There is no
Transgression. From whence the Deduction Romans 4. 15.
is clear, That Sin is not barely the Transgression of a Law, but the
Transgression of a Known Law; the Inconformity of the Will to the Understanding.


C. The Perverseness of the Will being a Sin, does not hinder the Enormity of
the Judgment to be so too. [Until the Law, Sin was in the World; but Sin is not
imputed, Romans 5. 13.
when there is no Law.] In few words, The Word of God is the Rule of Truth, and
all Disproportion to that Rule is Error: God's Revealed Will is the Measure of
Righteousness; and all Disproportion to that Measure is Sin. Now the Question
is not, Whether imputed, or no; but, Whether a Sin, or No: And you cannot make
Error of Conscience to be No Sin, without making the Word of God to be No Rule.


N. C. I do not deny, but it is a Sin as to the Law; but it is none as to the
Person; It is none Constructively, with him that accepts the Will for the Deed.


C. Can you imagine that any Condition in the Delinquent can operate upon the
Force and Equity of the Law? Because God spares the Offender, shall Man
therefore tolerate the Offense? David was pronounced a Man after God's own
Heart; shall Authority therefore grant a License to Murder and Adultery?


N. C. What is David's Case to ours? You instance in Sins of Presumpt^on, and
the Question is touching Sins of Ignorance.


C. I was a Blasphemer, a Persecutor, and Injurious (says St. Paul) but I
obtained 1 Timothy 1. 13.
Mercy (he does not say APPROBATION) because I did it in Ignorance and
Unbeleif. Again, The Magistrate has a Conscience, as well as the Subject. It
may be Ignorance in him that Commits the Sin, and yet Presumption in him that
Suffers it. Briefly, in pleading for all Opinions, you plead for all Heresies,
and for the Establishment of Wickedness by a Law. What Swarms of Anabaptists,
Brownists, Familists, Antinomians, Anti-Scripturists, Anti-Trinitarians,
Enthusiasts (and what Not?) have started up even in our days, under the
Protection of Liberty of Conscience? What Blasphemous and Desperate Opinions,
to the Subversion both of Faith and Government! Where Is the Authority of the
Scriptures, and the Reverence of Religion, when every Man shall make a Bible of
his Conscience, divide the Holy Ghost against it self, and dash one Text upon
another? He that has a mind to rake further in this Puddle, let him read
Edwards his Gangraena, Bayly's Disswasive, Paget's Haeresiography, etc.

To pass now from Opinions, to Practices. The Liberty you challenge, opens a
door to all sorts of Villainy and Outrage imaginable; to Rapine, Murder,
Rebellion, King-killing.


N. C. As if any Man that has a Conscience Indulg. and Toler. p. 13, 14.
of his own, or knows what Conscience is, could give Entertainment to so fond
an Imagination, as to suppose, that God at the last day will approve of
Murders, Seditions, and the like Evils: Since what is Evil in it self, and
against the Light of Nature, there is no direction unto it, no approbation of
it from Conscience in the least.


C. But what will this amount to? when, first, Every Man's Word shall be taken
for his own Conscience: And secondly, That Conscience pleaded in defense of his
Actions. That which you style Murder, and Sedition, He Will tell you is only a
Gospel-Reformation, The Destroying of the Hittites and the Amorites, etc. So
that you are never the better for tying a Man up to the Light of Nature in his
Actions, if you leave him at Liberty in his Creed: For there is not that
Impiety in the World, but he will give you a Text for it. The Adversaries of God,
that refuse to enter into a holy Covenant with the Lord, and submit themselves
to Christ's Scepter, may be Sequestered and Plundered, without the Imputation of
Rapine; for it is written, The Meek shall Mat. 5. 5.
inherit the Earth: And it is no more then God's People the Israelites did to
the Egyptians. Nay, if they be Refractary, they may be put to Death too,
without Murder, [Those mine Enemies, which would not that I should Reign over
them, Luke 19. 27.
bring hither, and slay them before me.] If any Man has a spite at the Church,
it is but calling it Antichristian, and Mr. Case * In his Book of the Covenant.
shall give him a Commission to take this Agag, and Hew it in pieces before the
Lord. Taking up Arms against the Government, is helping the Lord against the
Mighty. And King-killing it self, is justified by the Example of Ehud to Eglon.


N. C. But do you believe any Man so mad, as to take these Extravagances for
Impulses of Conscience?


C. Or rather, Is not he madder that doubts it? Considering the Evidences we
have both from Story and Experience, and the very Authority of Scripture it
self, in favor of believing it. Does not our Savior foretell us of False
Christ's, and False Mat. 24.
Prophets, that shall arise and deceive many; yea, if it were possible, the
very Elect? Parties are engaged in all sorts of Abomination, under the Masque
of Conscience. Those of the League in Flanders, 1503. under Maximilian, bound
themselves by Oath, to cast off the Yoke of Government, and to kill and slay
all Opposers; but with such regard to Religion (I warrant ye) that every Member
of that Confederacy was to say five Ave Maryes and Pater Nosters daily, For a
Blessing upon the Undertaking. The Holy League at Peronne, under Henry the
Third of France, was for the Glory of God too, and the Preservation of the
King: What Horrible Effects it produced, I need not tell you. Sleydan reckons
upon Fifty Thousand slain in one Summer, in the Boores Sleydan's Comment. l. 4.
Rebellion in Germany, 1525. And charges the Tumult upon Seditious Preachers,
whereof Muncer was chief. I shall not need to mind you of the Damned Villainies
that were acted by Muncer, Phifer, (Beold, or) John of Leyden, Rottman,
Knipperdolling, Kippenbroke, John Matthias, and the rest of that Gang, under
the Imposture of Inspiration, and Conscience: Their Sacking and Burning of
Towns, Rapes, and Massacres: And all this under the pretense of God's Command,
and the Direction of his Holy Spirit. Nay, so strongly was the deluded
Multitude possessed with the Doctrine and Ways of their False Prophets, that the
Muncerians, upon the Charge of the Landtzgrave of Hesse, stood stone still,
without striking a Blow; calling upon the Holy Ghost to their Succor (as
Muncer had promised them) till they were all Routed and Cut off.

Was it not a Holy Father, and the Prior of the Convent (one of the Heads of
the League) that confirmed Clement in his purpose of Murdering Harry the Third
of France? For his Encouragement, Davila delle Guer. Civ. di Fran. l. 10.
they assured him, That if he outlived the Fact, he should be a Cardinal; If he
died, a Saint. What was it again that originally disposed this Monster to that
cursed Act? Stimolato dalle Predicationi, Ibid.
che giournallmente sentiva fare contra Henrico di Valois, nominato il
persecutore della Feed, and il Tyranno. Seditious Sermons against the King, as
a Persecutor of the Faith, and a Tyrant. See in the same Author, the Confession
of John Castle, concerning his Attempt upon Harry the Great. He had been
brought Lib. 14.
up in the Jesuits School, and Instructed, That it was not only Lawful, but
Meritorious, to destroy Harry of Bourbon, That Revolted Heretic, and
Persecutor of the Holy Church. [Esaminato con le solite Form, confesso
liberamente, etc.] What was it that Animated Ravillac to his Hellish Practice
upon that Brave Prince? but (by his own Confession) A Discourse of Mariana's,
De Rege, and Regis Institutione. It was a Divine Instinct too, that moved
Balthazar Gerard to Murder the Prince of Aurange. [Divino tantum Instinctu, id
Strada de Bello Belgieo, l. 5.
a se patratum constanter affirmabat, diu Tortus.] To conclude now with That
fresh and execrable Instance here at Home, upon the Person of the Late King: It
was the Pulpit that started the Quarrel; The Pulpit that Enflamed it; The
Pulpit that Christened it God's Cause; The Pulpit that conjured the People into
a Covenant to defend it; The Pulpit that blasted the King, that pursued him,
that pressed the putting of Him to Death; and the Pulpit that applauded it when
it was done. And how was all this effected? (I beseech ye) but by Imposing upon
the weak and inconsiderate Multitude, Errors for Truths; by perverting of
Scriptures; and by These Arts, moulding the Passions and the Consciences of the
People to the Interest of a Tumultuary Design. These are the Fruits of the
Toleration you demand. Reflect soberly upon what has been said; and Tell me, Do
you think such a Toleration either fit for You to Ask, or for Authority to
Grant?


N. C. The Truth is, In this Latitude there may be great Inconveniences: And
yet methinks, it is Pity (in Cases of some Honest Mistakes) that a Good Man
should be punished for not being a Wise Man.


C. And were it not a greater Pity, do ye think, for a State to keep no Check
upon Crafty Knaves, for fear of disobliging some Well-meaning Fools? As to the
Sparing of the Man, I wish it could be done, even where it were Impious to give
Quarter to the Opinion: But how shall we separate the Error from the Person,
so as to make a General Law take notice of it? It were Irreligious to Tolerate
Both, and it seems to me Impossible to sever them. If you your self now can
either prove the former to be Lawful (that is, to do Evil, that Good may come
of it) or the latter to be Practicable, I Will agree with you for a General
Toleration: If not, I hope you will join with me against it.


N. C. I am not for a Toleration (as I told you) against the Light of Nature;
Liberty of Consc. upon its true and proper Grounds, p. 12.
nor would I have any Pretense of Conscience admitted, that leads to the
Destruction of the Magistrate, and the Disturbance of the Government.


C. That is to say, You will content Your self with a Limited Toleration:
which, I fear, upon the Debate, will prove as much too narrow for you, as the
Other was too wide.


SECT. II.
LIMITED TOLERATION too Narrow, and Disobliging to the Excluded Party.
C. BY a Limited Toleration we may understand A Legal Grant of Freedom and
Immunity, in Matters of Religion, to Persons of such and such Persuasions, and
to no Others.


N. C. Or, if you please, An Exemption from the Lash of the Act of Uniformity.


C. You say something, if This would do the Work. But to dissolve a Solemn Law,
for the Satisfaction of Some Particulars, and at last leave the People worse
then we found them, were certainly a gross Oversight. However, what is your
Quarrel to it?


N. C. I think it a great Cruelty to confine a multitude of differing Judgments
to the same Rule, and to punish a Conscientious People for those Disagreements,
which they can neither avoid, nor relinquish.


C. Why will you Practice that Cruelty your selves then, which you condemn in
others? For Limited Toleration, is an Act of Uniformity to those that are
excluded. They that are within the Comprehension, will be well enough: But what
will become of them that are left out? who have Consciences as well as their
Fellows, and as good a Title to an Indulgence, as those that are taken in. Upon
a fair View of the Matter, you can neither admit All, without Offense to your
Conscience; nor leave out Any, without a Cheque to your Argument.


N. C. And yet I am persuaded a Limited Toleration would give Abundant
Satisfaction.


C. Suppose you had it, and your self One of the Rejected Party: Are not you as
well now, without any Toleration at all, as you would be then, without
receiving any Benefit by it?


N. C. To deal freely, I would not willingly be excluded.


C. And is not That every Man's Case, as well as yours? A Limited Toleration
must Exclude Some, and why not You, as well as Another? Or indeed, Why should
not All be Tolerated, as well as Any? They can no more abandon their Opinions,
then you Yours: And Your Ways are just the same Grievances to Them, which (if
You may be credited) Ours are to You. So that most undeniably, the Plea of the
Nonconformists upon the Point of Conscience, is all alike: And since None of
them have more Right to an Indulgence, One then Another, Why should any Party
of them expect more Favor; to the Exclusion and Disobligation of the Rest?


N. C. But are not Some Opinions more tolerable then Others? Do you put no
Difference betwixt Truth and Error? Betwixt Points Fundamental and
Non-Fundamental? Betwixt the very Basis of Christianity, and the
Superstructure? In fine, Betwixt such Principles as affect Order and Public
Agreement, and others that flow Naturally into Looseness and Confusion?


C. Without Dispute, Some Opinions and Principles are more allowable then
Others: But where lies the Right of Allowing, or Rejrcting? Let This be first
examined, and then we will advise upon the Opinions, and Principles themselves,
what may be allowed, and what Not.


SECT. III.
No Toleration to be admitted but with the Allowance of the Chief Magistrate.
C. WE are agreed, first, That an Universal Toleration (implying a License to
all sorts of Wickedness) is not upon any terms to be admitted. Secondly, That a
Limited Toleration (being a Grant of Favor to Some, and Exclusive of Others)
must needs lay a Disobligation upon the Excluded Party. The next Point will be,
Where to place the Power of Permitting, or Refusing; and from thence we shall
pass to an Inquiry into the Bounds and Limits of such a Toleration as may be
warrantable: Which being once settled, we are to see how far the Pretenses and
Qualifications of the Parties concerned will suit with those Measures.


N. C. Grant us but an Indulgence to Dissenters of Sound Faith, and Good Disc.
of Relig. Preface.
Life; We ask no more. Let Nothing be imposed upon us that is grievous to our
Consciences on the One Hand, and We shall never desire a Toleration of any
thing that is justly Offensive to Church or State on the Other.


C. But What if the Dissenters shall call that Sound Doctrine, which the Church
defines Heresy? What if the Subject shall account That Imposition grievous,
which the Magistrate thinks N^cessary? Or, That Liberty Conscientious, which
the Governor esteems Unlawful? Who shall overruled? If the Subject, it follows
then, That the Magistrate is obliged to Toler^te whatsoever the Subject shall
judge Himself obliged to do: And this carries us back into a General
Toleration. If the Magistrate overrule, your Plea of Conscience is out of
Doors: And it is at his Choice, What sorts of Dissenters to Indulge; and,
Whether Any, or None, at his Pleasure.


N. C. The World, you know, is as much divided about the Power of the Civil
Magistrate in matters of Religion, as about any other part (perchance) of our
Debate.


C. We shall discourse That more at large elsewhere. But however, as to this
Particular, let us come to a present Settlement, that we may clear our way as
we go. If you make the People Judges of what is fit to be Tolerated, First, (as
I said before) You are upon the Old Rock of Universal Toleration; for (right or
wrong) every Man will stick to the freedom of his own way. Secondly, You lay
the Foundation of a Quarrel never to be reconciled. You shall have as many
Factions, as Men; As many Religions, as Fancies; and every Dissenter shall be
both a Party, and a Judge. To imagine an Agreement betwixt the Magistrate and
the Multitude, by the Common Consent of Both; were to suppose an Accommodation
betwixt Heaven and Hell, betwixt Light and Darkness; which are every jot as
Capable of it, as several of the Differences now before us. And for an Umpire
in the Case, you can pretend to None.


N. C. Pardon me: We have the Word of God to repair to, in what concerns Sound
Faith; and the Light of Nature for our Guide, in the Duties of Good Life.


C. This is to ^e that which was the Ground of the first Controversy, the
Umpire of the Second. For what is the Original of all our Grand Disagreements,
but (as St. Augustine has it) ^onae Scripturae male-intellectae; Good
Scriptures ill understood? And we are never the nearer an Accord for the
Reading of Them, without another Moderator to set us right in the meaning of
Them. Neither is the Light of Nature any more Exempt from false Glosses and
Misconstructions, then the Bible. Upon the whole matter, you see the
Absurdities and Inconveniences that follow upon placing the Judgment and
Direction of Ordering these Matters of Difference, any where else then in the
Magistrate: Whose Duty and Interest it is, both as a Christian and as a Ruler,
to put an end to these Impious Contentions, by such Rules and Establishments as
may secure the Foundations both of Religion and Government.


N C. This would do well, if Men were agreed upon those Rules: But Several Men,
we see, have Uarious Apprehensions of the self same thing; And That which One
Man takes for a Rule, another counts an Error.


C. You are at your ^niversal Toleration again: But pray mark the Consequences
of this way of Reasoning: Because the Multitude cannot agree upon a Rule, there
shall be None at all. Pursue this Argument, and there shall be no Lair, No
Religion, No Scripture, No Truth, left in the World. Because Men differ, Which
is the true Religion. They disagree about the Doctrine of the Bible. That which
is Truth to One Man, is Heresy to another. And never was there any Law that
pleased all People.

Authority says, Worship Thus, or So: The Libertine cries, No, It Is a
Confinement of the Spirit; An Invention of Man; A making of That Necessary
which God left Free; A Scandal to Tender Consciences, etc. And here is
Authority concluded as to the Manner of Worship.

So for the Time. How do they know when Christ was Born, Crucified, or Raised
from the Dead. The Churches Fasting-days They make their Iubile's. Videas hodie
Quosdam (says Calvin) quibus sua Libertas Institur. de Liberate Christiana.
non videtur Consistere, nisi per Esum Carnium die Veneris in ejus Possessionem
venerint. We have many Now adays, that would look upon their Liberty as good as
forfeited, if they should not maintain their Title to it, by Eating Flesh on
Fasting-days.

It Is the same thing as to the Place. Command them to Church, They will tell
you, There is no Inherent Holiness in the Walls: The Hearts of the Saints are
the Temples of the Lord: Is not God to be found in a Parlour, as well as in a
Steeplehouse? Finally, What have they to say for all This, But that This is One
Man's Judgment, That Another's? This or That may be indifferent to you, but not
to me. To conclude, What One Man urges, All may; and in All Cases, as well as
in Any: Which has brought us once again to an indeterminable Liberty; The last
Resort of all the Champions of your Cause, if they be followed home. Now if you
can assign any other Arbitrator of this Matter then the Civil Power, do it: If
you cannot, let us proceed.


N. C. Go forward then.


SECT. IV.
The BOUNDS of Toleration. And the Error of making Fundamentals and
Non-Fundamentals to be the Measure of it.
C. IN the Question of Toleration (says a Learned Prelate) the Foundation of
Faith, Good Life, and Government is to be secured: Wherein is comprised a
Provision and Care, that we may live as Christians toward God, As Members of a
Community toward one another, and as Loyal Subjects toward our Sovereign. If
you will take This for the Standard of your Toleration, we have no more to do, but
to apply Matters in Controversy to the Rules of Christianity, Good Manners,
and Government; and to entertein or reject all Pretensions, thereafter as we
find them Agreeable, or Repugnant, to Religion, Morality, and Society.


N. C. Uery well stated truly, I think.


C. All the Danger is, the falling to pieces again, when we come to bring This
and That to the Test. For if we differ at last upon the Application of
Particular Points, and Actions, to the General Heads of Faith, and Government
already laid down and agreed upon, We shall yet lose our selves in Uncertainty,
and Confusion.


N. C. There will be no fear of That, if we tie up our selves to Fundamentals.


C. What do you mean by Fundamentals?


N. C. There are Fundamentals of Faith, that bind Us as we are Christians; And
there are Fundamentals of Practice, that oblige us as we are Members of a
Community. From These Fundamentals there lies no Appeal to Conscience. In other
Matters (which we look upon as Non-Fundamental) we think it reasonable to
Desire a Toleration.


C. This Distinction has a fair Appearance; but there is no trusting to it.
First, it proposes a thing neither Practicable, nor Reasonable; which is, The
Uniting of all People under one Common Bond of Fundamentals. What possibility
is there of attaining such an Agreement, among so many Insuperable Diversities
of Judgment, as reign in Mankind? Insomuch, that what is a Fundamental Truth to
One, is a Fundamental Error to Another; and Every Man is ready to abide the
Faggot for his own Opinion. It is also very unreasonable to exact it. God
Almighty does not require the same Fundamentals from all Men alike; But Much
from Him to whom Much is given, and Little from Him, to whom Little: And from
All, according to their differing Degrees, and Measures, of Grace, and
Knowledge. You will likewise find your self under great Uncertainty about the
Stating of your Fundamentals: For diverse Circumstances, of Little, or No value
in Themselves, become Fundamental in respect of their Consequences. As for
Instance; That Christ died for Sinners, I presume shall be one Article of your
Faith: But whether upon Mount Calvary, or some other part of the Neighborhood,
seems of no great Moment, as to the Main of Our Salvation. And yet he that
denies, that Our Savior suffered upon Mount Calvary, puts as great an Affront
upon the Veracity of the Holy Ghost in the Gospel, as He which denies that he
suffered upon the Cross.


N. C. I give it for Granted, that from some, more is required; from others,
less: In proportion to their Differing Gifts and Graces. But then there are
some Principles, so Essential to Christianity, and so clear in Themselves, as
to admit of no Dispute.


C. Saving That Grand Foundation of Our Faith, that Jesus Christ is come in the
Flesh; and that Whosoever confesses, 1 John 4. 3. ^5.
that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, God dwells in Him, and He in God.
(Saving (I say) That Radical Principle, which if we disbelieve, we are no
longer Christians) There is scarce One Point that has not been subjected to a
Controversy. If you reduce your Fundamentals to This Scantling, Your Creed
will lie in a very Narrow Compass: But your Toleration will be Large Enough, if
you are at Liberty for the rest. Touching the Clearness of them, I do not
comprehend it: For Supernatural Truths hold no Proportion at all with the
Ordinary Motions of Humane Reason. If They be so clear, Tell us, What they are;
Where we shall look for them; and How we shall know them when we have found
them.


N C. Where should we look for the Foundation of our Faith, but in the
New Testament of Jesus Christ?


C. But still we do not all read the Bible with the same Spectacles. To draw to
an Issue; Generals conclude nothing, so long as we are left at Freedom to
wrangle about Particulars; and you will find much surer footing upon the
Foundations of Established Law, then upon the Whimseys of Popular Speculation.
To my thinking, the Doctrine and Discipline of the Church of England, as it is
settled by Acts of Parliament, with other Legal Constitutions, for the Peace,
and Order of the Government, are every whit as competent a Provision for the
Good of the Public, as your new Fundamentals.


N. C. The Point is not (as you seem to understand it) a Competition between
Our Fundamentals of Notion, and Yours of Law: But an Inquiry concerning the
Limits of a Iustistable Toleration.


C. Very Good: And you refer us to your Distinction of Fundamentals and
Non-Fundamentals, as to a Rule, how far we are at Liberty, and wherein we are
Bounded. But This will not do the work; and I have spent the more words about
it, because I find This Distinction the Ordinary Retreat of Your Party. The
Truth of it is, there is not One of a Hundred of you, but takes This Question by
the wrong Handle. You make it a Question of Conscience, and Religion, What may
be Tolerated, and what not: Whereas the thing falls properly under a
Consideration of State. In Matters not to be Tolerated (as in Articles of
Religion) The Magistrate is positively bound up; In other Cases, He may choose,
whether he will Tolerate, or Restrain; That is to say, with a perpetual Regard
to the Q^iet, and Security of the Public. Where Particulars may be relieved,
without Inconvenience to Communities, it is well: But otherwise, Private
Consciences weigh little in the Scale against Political Societies: And
Toleration is only so far allowable, as it complies with the Necessities, and
Ends of Government.


N. C. That is to say (according to your first Resolution) The Foundation of
Faith, Good Life, and Government is to be secured: Whe^ein I am content to
close with you; though there are some, that believe the Right of Toleration may
be defended without any Restrictions.


C. For Discourse sake, pray try, what you can make on it, either with, or
without.


SECT. V.
The Common Arguments for TOLERATION, Examined.
N. C. NO Man under the Gospel ought to be compelled to believe Lib. of Consc.
p. 37.
anything; and if not to believe, then not to practice.


C. Rutherford says well to this Point: That the Magistrate is not to force Men
Positively to External Worship; but Negatively, to punish Acts of False
Worship, and Omissions of External Performances of Worship, as of Ill Example
to Others: Not Commanding Outward Performances, as Service to God; but
forbidding Omissions of them, as Destructive to M^n.


N. C. It is a strange Absurdity to force Men, against their own Light, to be
guided Lib. of Consc. p. 38.
by Others, unless we are sure, we cannot mistake.


C. But were it not a stranger Absurdity, to leave every Man at Liberty to set
up a New Light of his own; and then to subject the United Light of the Nation
(which is the Law) to the Scattered Lights of Private Persons?


N. C. But does not One Man see that sometimes, which a Thousand may miss?


C. And because This is possible, is the Odds therefore upon One against a
Thousand? Or if so, Why may not the Church be in the Right against the People,
as well as any Particular of the People, against the Church, and the Rest? This
is most Certain, that of a Thousand Differing Opinions, there can be but One
Right: And a Toleration upon your supposal, is sure to set up Nine hundred
ninety nine Errors: Which is the ready way to bring People to cutting of
Throats for Opinions.


N. C. If a Magistrate may punish all that his Conscience says are in the
wrong, then All Persecutors are in the right.


C. Men are not punished for their Consciences, but for their Actions: And if a
Magistrate may not restrain Liberty of Action, then All Rebellions are in the
Right.


N. C. The Magistrate is appointed to see That Executed which Christ has
appointed Li^. of Consc. p. 24.
in Religion; and Punctually tied up, neither to Add, nor to Diminish, either
in the Matter, or in the Manner. The Manner Christ has appointed, being as
positively obliging as the Matter.


C. If it be the Magistrate's Duty to see Christ's Appointments in Religion
Executed, in Matter, and Manner, without Adding, or Diminishing: First, You
must allow him to be a Competent Judge of What Christ has appointed; (for
otherwise his Commission directs him to do He knows no: What.) Secondly,
According to your Argument, there is but One Way of Worship, Warrantable; which
puts a Bar unto any sort of Toleration whatsoever.


N. C. If the Magistrate has any Power over the Consciences of his People, How
came he by it? For he that Lib. of Consc. p. 13, 14.
has no other, then the Light of Nature, has as much Power, as if he were
Christian; and by becoming Christian has no Addition of Power to what he had
before.


C. It is true, that Christianity (as you put the Case) does not confer upon
the Magistrate any New Power; but it lays upon him an Additional Obligation of
Duty. While his Conscience was Pagan, He took his Measures only from Humane
Prudence, and the Light of Nature. But upon his Conversion, He falls under the
Dictate of a Conscience that is Further, and Otherwise Enlightened: And b^comes
Answerable, as well for the Establishing, Securing, and Promoting of
Christianity, as for the Political Conservation of his People, and Government.


N. C. Persecution may make Hypocrites, but not Converts.


C. You may say the Same thing of the Law, in other Cases. That makes many Men
Honest in appearance, for fear of Punishment; that are yet rotten at Heart.
Nay, I am further persuaded, that where Severity makes one Hypocrite, It cures
a hundred. For so long as there is either Profit, or Credit to be got, by the
Disguise of Religion, All Men of Corrupt Principles, and Designs will flow into
the Party. But when That Temptation to Hypocrisy shall be removed; and that
they find nothing to be gotten by the Imposture, but Punishment, and Disgrace,
They will soon betake themselves to a more regular Station in the Government.
Many a Counterfeit Cripple has been cured with a Dog-whip.


N. C. Are Heresies to be Extirpated, and Truth to be Propagated by the Sword,
or by the Word?


C. If it be the Penalty you oppose; Where the Word will not do, You your
selves fly to Censures, and Excommunications, which are Punishments, as well as
Corporal, and Pecuniary Inflictions; and as little Instructive. But you are
upon a Mistake: The Civil Power does not so much Pretend to the Recovery of
those that are out of the Way, as to the Saving of the Rest: Nor does It
properly Punish any Man, as an Heretic, but as a Seducer. Do you but let the
King's Subjects alone, and He Will never trouble Himself to Impose upon your
Consciences. If it reaches not Wickedness in the Heart, It provides yet against
the Infection of it, and the Scandal; by keeping the Hands, and Tongues of
Licentious People in Order.


N. C. I do not deny, but that a Rigorous Law may have some Profitable
Influence upon the Looser Sort: Yet still it falls heavy upon the Innocent, as
well as upon the Guilty. To Know, Believe, or Profess are not in our Power: And
shall a Man be punished for want of Grace, or Understanding?


C. Though it is not in our Power to Know, and Believe, as we please; yet to
forbear publishing of our Thoughts, and Acting in Relation to Them, is
unquestionably in our Power. Neither is any Man to be punished for want of
Grace, or Understanding: But yet it will be ill, if those Defects may pass for
an Excuse. All manner of Impiety should then go Scotfree: for without Doubt,
Let Fools be Privileged, and all Knaves shall pretend Ignorance.


N. C. No Man can call Jesus the Christ, but by the Holy Ghost: Will you Lib.
of Consc. p. 27.
punish any Man for not having the Holy Ghost?


C. No Man that has the Holy Ghost, will deny Jesus to be the Christ: Will you
punish any Man for denying Jesus to be Christ; that is to say, for not having
the Holy Ghost?


N. C. He that acts against his Conscience, Sins.


C. And so does he that Acts by it, If in Error.


N. C. Every Man is true to God, that Lib. of Consc. p. 56.
is true to his Conscience, though it be Erroneous.


C. Will it not then follow, that a Man may worship the Sun, or the Moon, and
yet be true to God, if That Worship be according to his Conscience? To clear
This Point; Some Consciences are Erroneous upon the score of Invincible
Ignorance; and That Insuperable Frailty is a fair Excuse: But Some Consciences
again are Erroneous for want of due Care, Search, and Enquiry; Others, out of
Pertinacy: And there is no Plea to be admitted for These Consciences.


N. C. How do you know, but you may persecute God, in the Conscience of a True
Believer, as St. Paul did, before his Conversion?


C. If I may turn your own Reason against your self, I may do it, and yet be
true to God; if in so doing, I am true to my Conscience. But still you confound
Conscience, and Practice; whereas the Civil Magistrate pretends to no sort of
Authority, or Dominion over the Conscience. And your Objection is of as little
force any other way: For the Magistrate is no more Infallible in One Case, then
in Another; and may as well Dread the Persecuting of God, in the Conscience of
a Murderer, or any other Criminal, as in That of an Heretic.


N. C. I think we have enough: But it may be, This Toleration will please us
better in the Exercise, then it does in the Speculation.


C. What Hinders then, but we may try it that way too?


SECT. VI.
TOLERATION undermines the Law, and causes Confusion both in Church and State.
N. C. WHy may not a Toleration do as well here, as in France?


C. How do you mean? Would you have his Majesty of Great Britain, Tolerate
Roman Catholics here, as his Most Christian Majesty does Protestants in France?


N. C. You speak as if None were to be Tolerated but Papists.


C. Not I truly: But so it must be, if you will have your Toleration after the
French Fashion. Can you show me that any Nonconforming Roman Catholics are
Tolerated There? Nay; Or that those of the Religion do Subdivide, or break
Communion among Themselves? Such an Instance might stand you in some stead.


N. C. But is it not More, To Tolerate a Foreign Religion, then to Indulge
your own? To permit Freedom of Worship to those you repute Heretics, then to
Relate a little toward your Orthodox Friends?


C. The Question is not, in Matter of Religion, whether to Favor Sound Faith,
or Heresy; but in Reason of State, whether is more Advisable, to Tolerate the
Exercise of quite a Different Religion; Or a Separation from the Church Order
Established. Alas! In several Religions (and especially where the Professors
are divided by mutual Prejudice, and Principles of strong Opposition, (as in
this Case too much they are) There Is no great fear of gathering, and engaging
Parties, to the Disturbance of the Public Peace. There is a great Gulf (as he
says) betwixt them. And Men do not usually start from one Extreme to another,
at a Leap; But to Tolerate One Church within Another, is to Authorize a
Dissolution of the Government both Ecclesiastical, and Civil. And the Defection
is the more Dangerous, because it is almost Insensible. As many as will leave
you, may; and every Dissenter is double: One lost, to the Government; Another
gained, to the Schism: Which will quickly bring down Authority to the Mercy of
the People. In fine, By Toleration, a Kingdom is divided against ie self, and
c^nnot stand.


N. C. When you have taken Breath, Do me the Favor to make out what you say.


C. The Demand of a Toleration, is in it self, the Condemnation of an
Established Law; and not without hard Reflections neither, both upon the Equity,
and Prudence of the Law makers. So that, at first Dash, here is the Law
unhinged: For If any One Law may le questioned by the Multitude, The
Consequence reaches to All the Rest.


N. C. We do not question, either the Prudence of the Lawmakers; Or the
General Equity of the Constitution. Only where God has not given Us
Consciences suitable to the Rule, We humbly desire such a Rule, as may Comply
with Our Consciences.


C. Would you have a Law that shall Comply with all Consciences? God Almighty
Himself never made a Law that pleased all People.


N. C. It would be well then, that you should bring all Men to the same Mind,
before you force them to the same Rule.


C. But it would be ill, if there should be no Rule at all, till we had found
out One that all People should say Amen to.


N. C. We do not ask the Vacating of a Law, but the Widening of it.


C. Why then you ask a worse thing; for it were much better for the Public,
totally to Vacate a Good Law, then to suffer a Contempt, even upon a Bad One.
If the Reason of such or such a Law be gone, Repeal the Law. But to let the
Obligation fall, and the Law stand, seems to be a Soloecism in Government. You
should consider, that Laws are not made for Particulars; but framed with a
Regard to the Community: And They ought to stand Firm, and Inexorable. If once
they come to Hearken to Popular Expostulations, and to side with By-Interests,
the Reverence of Government is shaken.


N. C. But where is the Danger of Receding from that Inexorable Strictness?


C. Here it lies. It implies an Assent, both to the Equity of the Complaint,
and to the Reason of the Opinion in Question: (If not also a Submission to
Importunity, and Clamor.) And among many Ill Consequences, It draws This after
It, for One. If any One sort of People may be allowed to challenge any One Law;
All other Sorts have an Equal Right of Complaining against All, or any of the
Rest. So that a Toleration, thus Extorted, does not only unsettle the Law; but
ministers Argument to the Pretense of Popular Reformation. To say Nothing of
the Credit it gives to the Disobedient, and Discouragement to those that keep
their Stations: Beside what may be reflected upon the Magistrate, for
Instability of Counsels.

Another Exception may be This: How shall we distinguish betwixt Faction, and
Conscience? If it prove to be the former, A Toleration does the Business to
their Hand. Nay, Suppose it the latter; and that, hitherto, there is Nothing
but pure Conscience in the Case; What Security have We, that it shall not yet
embroil us in Mutiny, and Sedition? Will not the Tolerated Party become a
Sanctuary for all the Turbulent Spirits in the Nation? Shall they not have
their Meetings, and Consultations, without Control? And when they shall see
the Law Prostituted to the Lusts of the Multitude; The Order of the Government
dissolved; and the Government it self left naked, and supportless; What can We
Expect shall be the End of these things, but Misery, and Confusion?

Nor is it all, that a Toleration is of manifest Hazard to us: But it is That
too, without any sort of Benefit in Return. Shall we be the Quieter for it? No.
One Grant shall become a President for Another; And so shall One Importunity
for Another, Till we are brought in the End, either to a General License; Or to
a General Tumult. (No matter Which) The Rejected Party will be sure to mind
you, that They are as good Subjects, and have as good Claims as Others, that
are Tolerated; upon which disobliging score, there falls an Odium, and Envy
upon the Government.

I think a Man shall not need the Spirit of Prophecy, to foretell these Events.
For a Toleration does naturally Evirtuate the Law, and lead to a Total
Dissolution of Ecclesiastical Order; and Consequently, to a Confusion, both in
Church, and State.


N. C. I do not find my self much pressed by any thing now offered: If a
Toleration unhinges the Law, It Is but making the Law a little Wider, and then
that Block is removed. And so is the Fear likewise of bringing present
Importunities into President: For All Tolerable Liberties may be comprehended
within that Latitude. And as to the matter of Imposing Faction for Conscience,
such a Probiston secures You, as well, as the Act for Uniformity.


C. I have spoken as much as Needs to this Point: If you think you have any
Right to a Toleration, make it out; and Approve your selves for a Generation of
People, to Whom, the King may with Honor, and Safety, Extend a Bounty.


SECT. VII.
The Non-Conformist's Plea for Toleration, upon REASON OF STATE.
C. THe Ordinary Motives to Indulgence, are These Three. 1. Reason of State. 2.
The Merits of the Party. 3. The Innocence, and Modesty of their Practices, and
Opinions. What have you to say now for a Toleration upon Reason of State?


N. C. The Non-Conformists are the King's Subjects; and What Is a King without
his People?


C. By Birth, and Obligation, they are the King's Subjects; but if they be not
so in Practice, and Obedience, They have no longer any Title to the Benefit of
his Protection; And such Subjects are the worst of Enemies.


N. C. You will not deny them however to be a Numerous Party; And a People of
Conduct, and Unity: Which puts the Government under some kind of Prudential
Necessity, to oblige so Considerable an Interest.


C. If they be consequently Dangerous, because they are Numerous; The Greater
the Number is, the greater is the Hazard: And therefore because they are many
already, and will increase if they be suffered, They are not to be Tolerated.


N. C. But Men will be much more Peaceable when they are Indulged, then when
they are Persecuted.


C. Now I am persuaded, that the Multitude will be much quieter without a Power
to do Mischief, then with it. But what is your Opinion of the Honesty of the
Party?


N. C. I do seriously believe the Non-Conformists to be an Honest,
Conscientious sort of People.


C. But they must be Knaves, to make Good Your Argument: for if they be Honest,
They Will be quiet without a Toleration: If they be Dishonest, They Will be Dangerous
with it. Consider again; If there be any Hazard, it lies not in the Number, but
in the Confederacy. A Million of Men without Agreement, are but as One Single
Person. Now They must Consult, before they can Agree; and They must Meet,
before they can Consult. So that barely to hinder the Assembling of these
Multitudes, frustrates the Danger of Them. Whereas, on the other side, To
Tolerate Separate Meetings, is to Countenance a Combination.


N. C. Mistake me not; I do not say, it is likely they will be troublesome, in
Respect of their Temper, and Judgments; but that they are Considerable enough
to be so, in Regard of their Quality and Number.


C. Whether do you take to be the Greater Number; Those that singly wish to be
discharged from the Act of Uniformety; Or Those that would have no Law at all?
Those that are troubled because they may not Worship according to their Fancy:
Or Those that are displeased because they cannot Live, and Rule according to
their Appetite? The Truytor would have One Law discharged: The Schismatic,
Another: The Idolater, a Third: The Sacrilegious Person, a Fourth: The Profane
Swearer, a Fifth: The False Swearer, a Sixth: The Murderer, a Seventh: The
Seducer, an Eighth: And in sine; Not One of a Thousand, but had rather Command,
then Obey. Shall the King therefore dissolve the Law, because there are so many
Criminals? That were to raise an Argument against Authority, from the very
Reason of its Constitution. Shall the People be left to do what they list,
because a World of them have a Mind to do what they should not? Shall his
Majesty give up his Government, for fear of some Millions (perchance) in his
Dominions, that had rather be Kings, then Subjects? Less forcible, beyond
Question, is the Necessity of the King's Granting a Toleration, (if you reckon
upon Numbers) then That of Renouncing his Sovereignty. For doubtless, where
there is One Man that is truly Scrupulous, there are hundreds of Avaricious,
Ambitious, and otherwise Irreligious Persons.


N. C. Tell me, I beseech you; Do not you believe that there are more
N^n-Conformists now, then there were at the beginning of the Late War?


C. Yes, I do verily believe, Three to One.


N. C. Why then it is at least Three to One against You: For at That time, the
Third Part of This Number was the Predominant Interest of the Nation.


C. That does not follow; for you may remember, that at the beginning of the
late War, The Party were Masters of the Tower, The Navy, of all Considerable
Forts, Towns, and Magazins: They had a great part of the Crown and Church
Revenues under their Command, and London at their Beck: Beside the Plunder of
Malignants, and the Bountiful Contributions of the Well-affected. Scotland was
already Confederate with them in One Rebellion; and they had made sure of
Another in Ireland (by Persecuting the Earl of Strafford, who was the only
Person Capable of Keeping them Quiet.) Which they further assisted, by a Gross
Opposition of his Majesty's Proposals, and Resolutions to suppress it. [See the
King's Speech of December. 14. 1641. and Ex. Coll. p. 2. 3.
the following Petition concerning the same.] Finally, for the better
Countenance of their Usurpations, the House of Commons was drawn down into a
Close Committee, and the Votes of that Iunto were Imposed upon the Nation as
the Acts of a Regular, and Complete Authority. This was their Condition
formerly; but blessed be God, it is not so at present.

The Three Kingdoms are now at Peace; and we have a Parliament that is no
Friend to the Faction. The King is Possessed of a Considerable Guard, which his
Royal Father wanted. The Militia is in safe Hands. His Majesty is likewise
possessed of his Regal Power, and Revenue: And his Capital City firm in its
Obedience: To all which may be added, that although diverse Particulars are as
Wealthy as Pillage, and Pardon, can make them; Yet They want a Common Stock to
carry on a Common Cause. The Thimbles, and the Bedkins fail; and the
Comfortable In-comes of Ex. Coll. p 84.
Irish Adventures; p. 339.
Moneys and Plate upon the Propositions; p. 609.
Confiscated Estates; p. 764.
Twentieth Parts; and p 392.
Weekly Assessments; and a hundred other Pecuniary Stratagems are departed from
them.

If it be so, that these People have None of these Advantages now remaining, by
virtue whereof, they did so much Mischief before; What Necessity of Tolerating
for fear of Disobliging Them?


N. C. However; It is not for your credit, to say, these People want Conduct,
by whom your selves have been worsted.


C. The Men that worsted us, were a sort of People, that Voted down Bishops on
the wrong side of the Parliamenthouse Door; That cried, They would have no more
Porter's Lodge at Whitehall; Ex. Coll. p. 533.
and told his Sacred Majesty in a Public Declaration [August 8. 42.] that The
Pretense that his Person was there in p. 494.
Danger, was a Suggestion as false as the Father of Lies could invent. -- That
Seized the Tower, The Navy, The King's Towns, Forts, Magazins, Friends, and
Revenues: That Levied War against, and Imprisoned his Sacred Person; Usurped
his Sovereign Authority; Imbrued their Hands in his Royal Blood; and in the
very Pulpit, animated, and avowed the Unexampled Murder.

If These be the People which you plead for, under the Notion of
Non-Conformists, never trouble your selves to go Nine Mile about, for a
Toleration: But come roundly up to the Point, and desire his Majesty to deliver
up his Crown. If it be Otherwise, You have overshot your self in your
Challenge; and it does not appear, that You are the Numerous, Politic, and
United Party we took you for. If the Non-Conformists were the Principal
Conducters in that Design, they are not honest enough to be trusted; and I see
no Reason of State, to Dispose the King to Gratify the Murderers of his
Father. If They were not so, it was none of Their Conduct that did the Work.


N. C. If Societies, and Professions, shall be made answerable for the Failings
of Particulars, All Communities, and Fellowships will be found blameable alike;
for there is no Order, or Way, without Corrupt Pretenders to it: And it is not
enough to say, there were Non-Conformists in the Party; unless you probe, that
what those Non-Conformists did, was acted upon a Principle, Common to
Dissenters; and that they did it, as Non-Conformists.


C. This is a Defense, instead of an Answer; as if I had now charged the
Combination upon the Non-Conformists, when I only ask, if they were the
Managers of it, or No? This, you neither Confess, nor Deny; And there let it
rest: Since the Dilemma lies indifferently against you, whether they were, or
not. (as does already appear) Touching the Unity you boast of, (I must confess)
it is as eminent against your Superiors, as your Disagreements are among your
selves. And take all together, I see Nothing made out as yet, to prove, that
the Kingdom is likely to be either the Better for Granting a Toleration, or the
Worse for Refusing it. Moreover, We are not unacquainted with your false
Musters. Nine Presbyteries, of Fifty, Spotswood. Hist. Scotl. p. 487.
made up One of your General Assemblies. And upon the Conference at
Hampton Court, in 1604. of above Nine Ibid. p 479
Thousand Ministers, there were but Forty Nine upon the R^ll, that stood out,
and were deposed: Such a Noise (says Spotswood) will a few Disturbers cause, in
any Society where they are Tolerated. But what if a Man should allow the
Non-Conformists to be as valuable as you represent them? It is but a kind of
Pagan Argument, to urge the Worshipping of Them (as the Indians do the Devil)
for fear they should hurt us.


N. C. They that have a Power to do Hurt, have commonly a Power to do Good; And
no doubt of it, the Non-Conformists, under the Obligation of an Indulgence,
would show themselves as serviceable to the Common Good, as any sort of People
whatsoever.


C. What they will do, is uncertain; What They have done, is upon Record, in
Characters of Blood. Give me but One Instance, even since the Reformation,
where England, or Scotland was ever the better for Them (any otherwise, then by
God's Extraordinary Working of Good out of Evil, and Take the Cause.


N. C. I would it were put upon that Issue.


SECT. VIII.
The Non-Conformists Plea for Toleration, from the MERITS of the Party.
C. WHat has your Party Merited from the Public, that an Exception to a
General Rule should be Granted in your Favor?


N. C. Many of Us ventured All, to save the Life of the late King.


C. And yet ye ventured more to take it away: For ye did but Talk for the One;
and ye Fought for the Other.


N. C. We ever abominated the Thought of Murdering him.


C. You should have abominated the Money too, for Which ye sold Him.


N. C. Who sold Him?


C. The Presbyterians sold Him; and the Independents were the Purchasers.


N. C. Did not the Presbyterians Uote His Majesty's Concessions a Ground for a
^reaty?


C. Yes; but it was upon Conditions, worse then Death it self. They delivered
Him up too, when they might have preserved him: And they stickled for Him, when
they knew they could do Him no Good.


N. C. What End could they have in That?


C. The very same End in -- 48, which they had in -- 41: To make a Party by it,
and set up a Presbyterian Interest in the King's Name.


N. C. All the World knows, that We were so much afflicted for his Sacred
Majesty's Distress, that We had many Solemn days of Humiliation for it.


C. So ye had for his Successes (when Time was) for fear he should get the
Better of Ye: And you had your days of Thanksgiving too, for his Disasters.


N. C. Pray'e let me ask You One Question now: Who brought in this King?


C. They that would not suffer You to keep him out: That Party, which, by a
Restless, and Incessant Loyalty, hindered your Establishment.


N. C. And what do you think of the Secluded Members?


C. We Will speak to that Point in another Place. But can you tell me What was the
Ground of the Quarrel? I suppose I need not tell you What was the Event of it.


N. C. Religion, and Liberty.


C. Of Which Side were the Tender Consciences? For the King; Or Against Him?


N. C. We were ever for the King; Witness our Petitions, Declarations, and, in
a most Signal manner, Our Solemn League and Covenant.


C. Now I thought you had been against Him: because You took away his Revenue,
Authority, and Life: Unless you mean that you were For Him in your Words, as
you were Against Him in your Actions.


N. C. There were many of Us, that loved the King as well as any of those about
Him.


C. According to the Covenant (That is.) And does not your Party love This
King, as well as they did the Last? I do not think but you love the Bishops too.


N. C. Truly when they are out of their Fooleries, I have no Quarrel to the
Men. But what makes you couple the Crown, and the Mitre still? As if no Man
could be a Good Subject, that is disaffected to Prelacy.


C. Why truly, I think you can h^rdly show me any One Nonconformist that ever
struck Stroke for the King; Or any true Son of the Episcopal Order of the
Church, that ever bore Arms against Him.


N. C. Are not you your self satisfied, that even Cromwell Himself, and diverse
of his Principal Officers, when the late King was at Hampton Court, had
Deliberations, and Intentions to Save Him? and that there were Thousands in the
Army, that had no Unkindness for his Majesty?


C. I do absolutely believe, both the One, and the Other; and that the Folly,
and Heedlesness of the Common-Souldier contributed, in a High Measure, to the
General Fate: Nay, that his Late Majesty was oppressed, even by those, that
thought they fought for him, before they understood what they did. But yet let
me Commend to your Observation, that these relenting Intervals in the Heads of
the Army, did manifestly Vary, according to the Pulse of their Affairs. Which
evinces, that it was a Deliberation, upon the matter of Convenience, rather
then upon a Point of Conscience. But thus far however we are agreed; That many
of the Non-Conformists were engaged; Whether upon Ignorance, Interest, or
Faction, take your Choice. That is to say, upon Which of These Three you will
found the Merits of your Party.

We are next to Enquire, How far your Principles, and Actions, will comport
with the Duties of Society, and the Ends of Government.


SECT. IX.
The Non-Conformists Plea for Toleration, from the Innocence, and Modesty of
their OPINIONS and PRACTICES.
C. IN the Question of Government, and Obedience, there are many Points,
wherein the Non-Conformists agree: Many more, wherein they differ: and not a
few, wherein they are altogether Fluctuant, and Uncertain. We have Nothing to
do (in this Place) with their Disagreements, or Uncertainties; save only in
those Matters wherein they are United by Common Consent: And to Determine what
Those are, will be a New Difficulty; Unless you tell Us beforehand, What
Authorities we may depend upon. Your Principles must be Known, or they cannot
be Examined. Wherefore, Pray'e Direct us Where we may find them.


N. C. Why truly in the History of the Reformation; for This Controversy has
been on foot from the very beginning of it, to this Day.


C. If you speak of the Reformation beyond the Seas, I do not find any thing
there, that comes near our Purpose. Here is, first, Pretended, a Reformation of
a Reformation; Secondly, A Conjunction of Several Parties, and Persuasions, at
utter Enmity One with Another, in a Confederacy against the Order of the
Government: Whereas in the Great Turn of Affairs Abroad, I see little more then
a Defection from the Church of Rome; and People settling themselves in some
other way, as well as they could. Muncer's Party in Germany, had (I confess)
some Resemblance of the Tumults here in England, that ushered in the late War;
both for the Medly, and for the Rabble. In Scotland indeed, there was a
Contest, for the Reforming of a Reformation; and it went high. But it was only
a Struggle, for the Geneva-Discipline: Which Humor was brought over to us too,
and driven on, for a while, under Q Elizabeth, with much Contumacy, and
Bitterness. But our Case (in short) was never known in the Christian World,
till the late Troubles; and thither it is, that we must resort for satisfaction
to our present Enquiry. Now whether you will be tried by the Declarations, Votes,
Orders, and Ordinances of that Pretended Parliament that carried on the
Quarrel; Or by the Undeniable Doctrines, and Positions of your own Divines;
(and those the very Idols of your Party) is left at your Election.


N. C. As for the Parliament, let them answer for themselves: We had no hand in
their Proceedings. And for our Ministers, They were but Men, and may have their
Failings as well as other People. If you would know our Principles; We are for
Worshipping according to the Light of Our Consciences, for Obeying God rather
then Man; and for yielding all due Obedience to the Civil Magistrate.


C. All This comes to Nothing. For you may make that Light what you please; and
Qualify that due Obedience as you list. What does all this Evasion, and
Obscurity signify; but that there is somewhat in the bottom, more then you are
willing to own?

There are a sort of People, that tell us, The War raised in -- 41, in the Name
of King and Parliament, was Lawful. And That the Sovereignty was lodged in the
Two Houses, (Nay in the People) in Case of Necessity. That Kings are but the
Peoples Trustees; Their Power, Fiduciary; and the Duty of Subjects only
Conditional. That Princes may be Deposed; Nay, and put to Death, in Case of
Tyranny: And That their Persons may be Resisted, but not their Authority. That
the King is Singulis Major, Universis Minor: And that the People may Enter into
Covenant, for the Reformation of Religion, without the Consent of the Chief
Magistrate; nay, against his Authority; and Propagate Religion by the Sword.
They make their Appeals, from the Literal Construction of Law, to the
Equitable; from the Law Written, to the Law of Nature, and Necessity.

A Man might ply You with fresh Instances upon this Subject, till to morrow
morning; But here we will stop: And pray'e speak your Opinion now, of Granting a
Toleration, to a Party that Professes, and Teaches, These Principles; and Acts
accordingly.


N. C. What is all This to the Non-Conformists? Who are already come to an
Agreement; that, In the Question of Toleration, The Foundation of Faith, Good
Life, and Government, is to be Secured.


C. Very Good. So that what Party soever shall be found Guilty of the Positions
aforesaid, and of Actions answerable thereunto, cannot reasonably pretend to a
Toleration, from the Innocence of their Opinions and Practices. Now to
Particulars.

The POSITIONS of Diverse Eminent Non-Conformists.

I. The War raised by the TWO HOUSES in the Name of King and Parliament, 1641.
was Lawful.

[I cannot see, that I was mistaken in Mr. Baxter's Holy Commonwealth. Printed
1659.
the main Cause, Nor dare I repent of it, Nor forbear the same, if it were to
do again, in the same State of Things. -- And my Judgment tells me, That if I
should do otherwise, I should be guilty of Treason, Or Disloyalty, against the
Sovereign Power of the Land. Page 486.

A King, abusing his Power, to the Robert Douglass his Sermon. Preached at
Scoone, Ian. 1. 1651. Printed 1660.
Overthrow of Religion, Laws, and Liberties, may be Controuled, and Opposed.
This may serve to justify the Proceedings of this Kingdom against the Late
King, who in a Hostile way set himself to overthrow Religion, Parliaments,
Laws, and Liberties. P. 10.

The Righteousness of the Parliament's I. Goodwin's Anti-Cavalerism.
Cause, is as clear, as the Sun at Noonday. And, like the Law of God it self,
in These Excellent Qualifications of it; That It is Holy, Just, and Good. P. 6.

II. The Lords, and Commons are the Supreme Power; Nay the People, in Case of
Necessity.

Parliaments may judge of Public The Observator.
Necessity, without the King; (If deserted by the King) and are to be
accounted, by Virtue of Representation, as the Whole Body of the State. P. 45.

Whenever a King, or other Superior Right and Might well met, Anno 1648.
Authority, creates an Inferior; They Invest it with a Legitimacy of
Magistratical Power to Punish Themselves also, in Case they prove Evildoers.
P. 7.

England is a mixed Monarchy, and Governed Parliament, Physic.
by the Major Part of the Three Estates Assembled in Parliament. P. 111.

The Houses are not only requisite to the Ahab's Fall.
Acting of the Power of making Laws; but Coordinate with his Majesty, in the
very Power of Acting. P. 42.

When as a Part of the Legislative Power Interest of England in the matter of
Religion. 1660.
resides in the Two Houses; as also a Power to redress Grievances, and to call
into Question all Ministers of State, and Justice, and all Subjects, of
whatsoever Degree, in Case of Delinquency; It may be thought, that a Part of
the Supreme Power does reside in Them, though they have not the Honorary Title:
And This Part of the Supreme Power, is indeed Capable of doing Wrong: Yet how
it might be guilty of Rebellion, is more Difficult to conceive. P. 49.

The Delegates of the People, in the House of Commons, and the Commissioners
The Peoples Cause stated. An. 1662.
on the King's behalf, in the House of Peers, concurring; do very far bind the
King, if not wholly. P. 112. And when These cannot agree, but break, One from
Another, the Commons in Parliament assembled, are Ex Officio, The Keepers of
the Liberties of the Nation, and Righteous Possessors, and Defenders of it,
against all Usurpers, and Usurpations Whatsoever. P. 130.

III. KINGS are but the Peoples TRUSTEES; Their Power, Fiduciary; and the Duty
of Subjects, Conditional.

[The King, is but the Servant of the People; and his Royalty is only a Virtual
Emanation from them; and in Them, radically, as in the first Subject.] So
Rutherford, Parker, Goodwin, Bridges, Milton, etc.

The People can give no other Power, Lex Rex. An. 1644.
then such as God has given Them: And God has never given a moral Power to do
Evil. All Fiduciary Power, abused, may be repealed; And Parliamentary Power is
no Other: Which, if it be abused, The People may repeal it; and resist them;
Annulling their Commissions; Rescinding their Acts; and Denuding Them of their
Fiduciary Power: Even as the King Himself may be denuded of the same Power by
the Three Estates. P. 152.

Princes derive their Power, and Prerogative Ius Populi 1644.
from the People; and have their Investitures, merely for the Peoples Benefit.
P. 1. Declarat. touching the 4 Bills March 13. 1647.


It is the King's Duty to pass all such Laws, as Both Houses shall judge Good
for the Kingdom: Upon a Supposition, That They are Good, Which by them are
judged Such.

If the Prince fail in his Promise, the Vi^dicia contra Tyrannos. Printed 1648.
People are Exempt frm their Obedience; The Contract is made Void, and the
Right of Obligation is of no Force. -- It is therefore permitted to the
Officers of a Kingdom, either All, or some good Number of them, to Suppress a
Tyrant. P. 120, 121.

IV. Princes may be DEPOSED, and put to DEATH, in Case of Tyranny.

Every Worthy Man, in Parliament, may, for the Public Good, be thought Tenure
of Kings. 1649.
a fit Peer, and Judge of the King. P. 24. Where there is no Opportunity for
the Interposure of Other Judges, the Law of Goodwin's Defense of the King's
Sentence.
Nature, and the Law of Nations allow Every Man to Judge in his own Gase. P. 34.

If a Prince wants such Understanding, Mr. Baxter's Holy Commonwealth.
Goodness, or Power, as the People judge Necessary to the Ends of Government;
In the first place; He is Capable of the Name, but not of the Government. In
the Second; He Deposes Himself. In the Third; The want of Power, Deposes him.
Theses 135, 136, 137.

It is lawful for any, who have the Power, Tenure of Kings. 1649.
to call to Account, a Tyrant, or Wicked King; And after due Conviction, to
Depose, and put him to Death, if the Ordinary Magistrate have Neglected, or
Denied to do it.

It is not impossible, for a King, Regis A Survey of the Grand Case. Printed
1663.
Personam Exuere; In a Natural, Or MORAL Madness or Frenzy to turn Tyrant, Yea
Beast, Waiving his Royal Place, Violently, Extrajudicially, Extramagisterially
to assault his Subjects, as Saul did David. In this Case, Men think Nature does
Dictate it; and Scripture does Justify a Man, Se Defendendo Vim Vi repellere.
P. 23.

The Real Sovereignty among Us, was Mr. Baxter's Holy Commonwealth.
in King, Lords, and Commons; and if the King raise War against such a
Parliament: The King may not only be resisted, but Cease to be a King. Thesis
358.

The Lord rent the Kingdom from Saul, for sparing One Agag; and for want of Mr.
Faircloth before the Commons.
thorough Extirpation of all the accurs^d Things, He lost both Thanks for What
He had done, and Kingdom also. P. 27.

Let no Law hinder Ye: If Law be to Mr. Sympson.
be broken, it is for a Crown; and therefore, for Religion. -- Ye are set over
Kingdoms, to Root out, Pull down, Destroy, and Throw down: Do it quickly, Do it
thorougly.

By what Rule of Conscience, or God, Scripture and Reason for Defensive Arms.
1643.
is a State Bound to Sacrifice Religion, Laws, and Liberties, rather then
endure, that the Princes Life should come into any Possibilities of Hazard, by
Defending them, against those that in his Name are bent to su^due them? If he
will needs thrust Himself upon the Hazard, when he needs not, Whose Fault is
That?

There never was a Greater Harmony of English (...) ^he (...).
the Laws of Nature, Reason, Prudence, and Necessity, to Warrant any Act, then
may be found, and discerned in that Act of Justice on the Late King. P. 18.

Touching the Righteousness of the Sentence ^nce of ^'s ^ce. (...) Good^.
past upon the King; Doubtless never was any Person under Heaven, Sentenced
with Death, upon more Equitable, and Just Grounds. P. 90.

Praised be God, Who has delivered us from the Impositions of Prelatical
Innovacions, (...) Poli^ of P. in^.
Altar-Genu-flections, and Cringings, with Crossings, and All That Popish Trash
and Trumpery. And truly (I speak no more then what I have often thought, and
said) The Removal of those Insupportable Burdens, countervails for the Blood
and Creasure shed and spent in these late Distractions* Nor did I ever as yet
hear of any Godly Men that desired, Were it Possible, to Purchase their
Friends, or Money again, at so dear a Ra^e, as with the Return of These: To
have Those Soul-Burdening, Antichristian Yokes re-imposed upon Us. And if any
such there be, I am sure, that Desire is no part of their Godliness; and I
profess my self, in That, to be None of the Number. P. 23.

V. The PERSONS of Princes may be resisted, though not their AUTHORITY.

The Man who is King, may be resisted, Lex Rex.
but not the Royal Office: The King in Concreto, but not the King in Abstracto.
P. 265. [He may be resisted in a Pitched Battle, and with Swords, and Guns.
324. That is; His Private Will may be resisted, not his Legal Will. 269.
Neither is He in the Field, as a King, but as ^n unjust Invader, and Grassator.
334. If He chance to be Slain, It Is but an Accident; and who can help it? 324.
He is guilty of his own Death; Or let Them answer for it that brought Him
thither, The Contrary Party is Innocent. 273.]

The King's Authority is with the Two Mr. War'^ Analysis of the Covenant.
English Translation.
Houses, though the Person of Charles Stuart be not there.

His Capacity was at Westminster, when his Body was upon the Scaffold at
Whitehall, etc. P. 18.

VI. The King is SINGULIS MAJOR, UNIVERSIS MINOR.

The King is in Dignity Inferior to the Lex Rex.
People. P. 140. The Sovereign Power is Eminently; Fontaliter; Originally, and
Radically in the People. 156.

Detrahere Indigno Magistratum etsi De Monarchin Absoluta.
Privati non Debeant, Populus tamen Universus quin possit, Nemo, Opinor,
dubitabit. It is not for Private Persons to Depose a Wicked Governor: But that
the Universality of the People may Lawfully do it, I think no Body questions.
Fixum Ratumque habeatur, Populi semper esse debere Supremam Majestatem. P. 9.

VII. The People may enter into a Covenant for Reformation, without the Consent
of the Chief Magistrate.

There is much Sin in making a Covenant Mr. Cary^ at Taking the Covenant. 1643.
on Sinful Grounds, and there is more Sin in Keeping it; But when the
Preservation of true Religion, and the Vindication of Just Liberties meet in
the Ground, Ye may Swear, and not Repent; Yea, if Ye Swear, Ye must not Repent.
P. 18. Not only is That Covenant which God has made with Us, founded in the
Blood of Christ; but That also, which We make with God. P. 33.

The Breach of the National Covenant The Phaenix. E. C.
is a Greater Sin, then a Sin against a Commandment, or against an Ordinance.
158. -- A Sin of so high a Nature, that God cannot in Honor but be avenged
upon it. 159.

VIII. RELIGION may be Propagated by the SWORD.

The Question in England is, Whether Marshall's Sacred Panegy^ique.
Christ, or Antichrist, shall be Lord, or King? Go on therefore Courageously:
Never can ye lay out your Blood in such a Quarrel. Christ shed all his Blood to
save You from Hell. Venture All Yours, to set Him upon his Throne P. 23.

Cursed be he that withholdeth his Sword Mr. Case before the Commons. 1644.
from Blood; that spares, when God says Strike; that suffers those to escape,
whom God has appointed to Destruction. P. 24.

In the 10 of Numbers, you shall read Mr. Cala^'s sp^ech at Guildhall. 1643.
that there were Two Silver Trumpets; and as there were Priests appointed for
the Convocation of their Assemblies, so there were Priests to sound the Silver
Trumpets to Proclaim the War. And likewise in the 20 of Deuteronomy, you shall
find there, that when the Children of Israel would go out to War, the Sons of
Levi (one of the Priests) was to make a Speech to Encourage them. And
certainly, if this were the Way of God in the Old Testament; certainly, much
more in such a Cause as This, in which Cause, Religion is so entwined, and
indeed so enterlac'd, that Religion, and This Cause, are like Hippocrates his
Twins, they must live, and dye together.

You have vowed in This Covenant to Mr. Cala^y's N^bleman's P^ 1643.
Assist the Forces raised by the Parliament, according to your Power, and
Vocation; and not to Assist the Forces raised by the King, neither Directly,
nor Indirectly. P. 45. Now let me exhort you, not only to choose to serve God,
and to serve his Church, and his Cause, in this most Just Defensive War, etc.
46.

In vain shall you in your Fasts, with Mr. Herle before the House of Lords.
1643.
Josua, ly on your Faces, unless you lay your Achans on their Backs; In vain
are the High Praises of God in your Mouths, without a Two-edged Sword in your
Hands. P. 31.

The Execution of Judgment is the Lords Mr. Strickland on a Thanksgiving. 1644.
Work, and they shall be Cursed that do it Negligently; and Cursed shall they
be that keep back their Sword from Blood in this Cause. You know the Story of
Gods Message unto Ahab, for letting Benhadad go upon Composition. P. 26.

Whenever you shall behold the hand M. Bridges* on Revel. 4. 8.
of God, in the Fall of Babylon, say; ^rue; Here is a Babylonish Priest crying
out, Alas! Alas! My Living; I have Wife and Children to Maintein. I: but all
this is to perform the Judgment of the Lord. P. 30. Though as Little Ones, they
call for Pity, yet as Babylonish, they call for Justice, even to Blood.

IX. There lies an Appeal from the Letter of the Law, to the EQUITY of it: And
from the Law Written, to the Law of NATURE.

The Commander going against the Ex. Coll. p. 150. An. 1642.
EQUITY of the Law, gives Liberty to the Commanded, to refuse Obedience to the
Letter of it.

There is a Court of Necessity, no less then Lex R^x.
a Court of Justice; and the Fundamental Laws must then speak: and it is with a
People, in this Extremity, as if they had no Ruler. P. 113. The People have
given Ibid.
the Politic Power to the King; and the NATURAL Power they Reserve to
Themselves. 151.

All Humane Laws and Constitutions Right and Might.
are made with Knees, to bend to the Law of NATURE and NECESSITY. P. 85.

Here is more then enough said already; and to go on as far as the Matter would
carry us, there would be no End on it.

You are now at ^berty, either to deny These to be the Positions of the
Non-Con^; or to justify the Positions themselves; or to lay down your Plea for
Toleration, upon the Innocence of their Principles.


N. C. I am no Friend to These Positions: Neither can I yet quit my Clai^,
unless you make it out, that These are the Principles of the Party, which I
take to be only the Errors of Individuals.


C. Show me the Party, and let me alone to prove These to be Their Principles.
But if you will not acknowledge a Party, they are (as you say) but the Errors
of Individuals; though all the Non-Conformists in the Three Kingdoms should own
them under their Hands.

You call your selves Non-Confermists, and so were they, that both began, and
carried on the Late War. Great Apprehensions they had of the Designs of the
Popish Ex. Coll. Pa 2.
Party. [So have you.] Mightily offended they were at the Immoderate Power of
the Bishops. [You again.] Petitioners for the taking away such Oppressions in
Ibid.
Religion, Church Government, and Discipline, as had been brought in, and
Fomented by them. [Your very Picture still.] And for Uniting all such together,
I^d.
as join in the same Fundamental Truths against the Papists: ^hy removing some
Oppressions, and Unnecessary Ceremonies, by which, Diverse weak Consciences have
been scrupled, and seem to be divided from the rest. [The very Platform of your
Comprehension.] Thus far You march Hand in Hand: I need not tell you what
followed upon it; but Your Parts are so much alike, that it looks as if We were
now again upon the first Seen of the same Tragedy. For a Conclusion,
Conformity, or In-Conformity, seemed at first to be the Sum of the Question;
and the Discipline of the Church was made the Ground of the Quarrel. The Ru^ing
Party in the Pretended Parliament, were Non-Conformists; The Army,
Non-Conformists; The Pre^ended Assembly of Divines were Non Conformists; The
City-Ministers, and Lecturers, Non-Conformists; And by the Sol^mn League and
Covenant, every Man that took it, was to be a Nonconformist, upon pain of
Damnation. Now take Your Choice, (since Non-Conformists you are) Whether you will
Range your selves under the Parliament; Your Army; Your Assembly; Your
City-Ministers; Or Your Solemn League and Covenant: And let me bear the Blame,
if I make it not as clear as the Day, That the Principles charged upon You, are
the Principles of Your Party.

As to your PRACTICES, They have been suitable to your POSITIONS; and All those
Violences have been Exercised upon the Government, that were first Dictated in
the Pulpit. The Lawfulness of Popular Insurrections; Of Deposing, and Putting
Kings to Death, under the Cloak of Reformation, has been vented as the Doctrine
of Jesus Christ, even by the Oracles of your Cause: Nay; and several of Them
(at present) Eager Asserters of the Equity of a Toleration. And what has been
the Fruit of These Unchristian-Lectures; but the Subversion both of Church, and
State: And the Murder of a Pio^, and Gracious Prince, under Pretense of Doing
God and the Kingdom Good Service?


N. C. These are Actions (I confess) not to be warranted. But yet my Charity
persuades me, that a great part of the Mischief they did, proceeded rather from
Necessity, then Inclination.


C. Will ye see then what they did afterward, when they were at Liberty to do
what they listed?

They had no sooner Murdered Scobell Act^. etc.
the Father, but immediately Part 2. p. 3.
They made it Death to Proclaim the Son. P. 7.
They abolish't Kingly Government. P. 51.
Sold the Crown Lands. P. 65.
Declared it Treason to deny the Supremacy of the Commons. P. 178.
Nulled all Honors and Titles granted by the King since -- 41. P. 293.
Made Scotland One Commonwealth with England, etc.

Have They now kept any better Touch with the Liberty and Property of the
Subjects? Let their Proceedings Witness for Them; Scobell Acts, etc. p. 41.
As their Tax upon the Fifth and Twentieth Part. P. 60.
Excise upon Flesh, Victuals, and Salt. P. 73.
A new Excise upon Allom, Copperas, Monmouth-Caps, Hops, Saffron, Starch, etc.
P. 75.
A Loan of 66666 l. 13 s. 4 d. for Supply of the Scots. P. 128.
An Assessment for the Maint^nance of the Army. P. 8. Pat 2.
The House of Peers Abolish't; and a Monthly Tax of 90000 l. for the Army. P.
149.
A Monthly Tax of 120000 l. P. 153.
An Imposition upon Coal. P. 400.
A Monthly Assessment of 60000 l. Not to Clog the Discourse with over many
Particulars: We Will see next, What They have Done, toward the Moderating of the
Power of Bishops, and the Removal of Unnecessary Ceremoni^s. P. 42.
The Archbishop of Canterbury Suspend^d, and his T^mporalties Sequestered. P.
53.
Monuments of Superstition Demolish't; (That is, in short, an Ordinance for
Sacrilege) P. 75.
The Book of Common Prayer laid aside, and the Directory Commanded instead of
it. P. 99.
Archbishops and Bishops Abolish't, and their Lands settled in Trustees. P.
101.
Their Lands Exposed to Sale. P. 128.
Festivals Abolish't. Part 2. P. 16.
Deans and Chapters, etc. Abolish't: And their Lands to be Sold.

This is Your Way, Of MODERATING the Power of Bishops, and of REMOVING
UNNECESSARY CEREMONIES. And This is the History (in Little) of the Opinions,
and Practices of your Party: Drawn from matter of Fact; Provable to a Syllable;
and Delivered without any Amplification of the Matter.


N C. Ill things have been done, there is no Question on it; But they have been
done by Ill Men: And it is not a Toleration of Faction that We pretend to, but a
Toleration of Conscience.


C, Which Toleration (upon farther search) will be found to be a mere Utopian
Project, or W^rse.


SECT. X.
The Non-Conformists demand a Toleration, which is neither INTELLIGIBLE in the
Whole, nor PRACTICABLE, so far as it may be Understood.
C. IT makes a great Noise in the World, The Outcry of the Non-Conformists,
for Toleration, Indalgence, Liberty of Conscience, Comprehension, etc. Let them
but set it down in a Clear, Practicable, and Intelligible Proposition, and I
dare say, They shall have it for the Asking.


N. C. We do Propound, That Reformed Disc. of Relig. Title page
Christianity may be settled in its DUE LATITUDE.


C. By Reformed Christianity, I suppose you intend the Protestant Religion: But
your DUE LATITUDE is of a Suspicious Intimation. Do not you remember a
Declaration of the Two Houses (April 9. 1642.) for a DUE, and Necessary Ex.
Coll. p. 135.
Reformation of the Government, and Liturgy of the Church: And Nothing to be
taken away, either in the One, or in the Other, but What should be found Evil,
and justly Offensive; Or, at the least, Unnecessary, and Burdensome? This Due
Reformation ended (as you may remember) in a Total Extirpation of Both Liturgy
and Government: And We see Nothing to the Contrary, but Your DUE LATITUDE may
signify the very same thing with Their DUE REFORMATION. Pray be a little
Clearer.


N. C. Then to put all out of doubt; I would, in the first place, have An
Established Disc. of Relig. Par. 1. p. 28.
Order: Secondly; A Limited Toleration: Thirdly, A Discreet Connivence.

The Parties Comprehended in the Establishment, to be of Importance in the
Public Interest; and of Principles Congruous to such Stated Order in the
Church, as the Stability of the Commonwealth requires.

I Would have the Toleration, to Extend to Those that are of Sound Belief, and
Go^d Life; Yet have taken in some Disc. of Relig. Par. 1. p. 38.
Principles of Church Government less Congruous to National Settlem^nt.

And for Connivence; It is to be remitted to Discretion.


C. What is all This now, but an Universal Toleration, in a Disguise? Some to
be Comprehended within the Establishment; Others to be Tolerated; And the Rest
to be Connived at.

Again; Your Establishment is to be of a Latitude, to take in several sorts of
Dissenters, under such and such Qualifications. They must be of Importance in
the Public Interest; and of Principles Congruous to such Stated Order in the
Church, as the Stability of the Commonwealth requires. Ask the Dissenters
Themselves concerning their own Qualifications, and They Will tell you. that they
are all of them, of Important Interests, and of Congruou^ Principles: So that
this way, you are still upon an Universal Toleration. But on the Other Side, if
You Consult Authority about Your Comprehension, The Preface to the Act for
Uniformity will tell You, that the Establishment is as wide already as the
Peace of the Nation will well bear. If you will Acquiesce in This Judgment, the
Case is determined to Our Hand: If you Appeal from it, You cast your selves out
of the Pale of your own Project, because of your Principles Incongruous to the
Reason of Government.


N. C. But it appears to us, that the Stated Order of the Church may be
widen'd, without any Check to the Stability of Government.


C. And what will This avail You, if it appears otherwise to the Governors
Themselves? If They may be Judges, the Strife is at an End; but if you think to
help your selves by Translating the Judgment to the People; After that Day, let
us never expect any other Law, then the Dictate of the Rabble. It removes the
very Foundations of the Government, and Carries Us headlong into Anarchy, and
Confusion, without Redemption.

If a Man should ask You now, about Your Importance in Public Interest;
First; as to the Interest it self, Whether you mean an Interest of Raising Men,
and Moneys; Or What Other? Next; as to the Degree, and Measure of your
Importance; How Many Regiments of the One, and How many Millions of the Other,
makes up that Importance? Would you not take Time for an Answer?

And then, We are as much at a Loss about Your [Such Stated Order in the Church
as the Stability of the Commonwealth requires] You give Us No Satisfaction at
all, Wherein the Stability of the Commonwealth consists; Or What Stated Order
in the Church that Stability requires: But here is a kind of a Moot-Point cast
in, betwixt Authority, and the People, Which of the Two shall Determine, upon
That Congruity, and Convenience.

Your Limited Toleration too stands or falls upon the Same Bottem, with Your
Comprehension: That is to say, Who shall Judge of the Sound Belief, and Good
Life, of the Pretendents to That Indulgence.

As to your Connivence, You say Nothing of it your self; and I shall Reflect as
little upon it.

Let me only Observe Upon the Whole; that if you had really a Mind to set Us
right, Methinks, You should not Trifle Us with these Ambiguities, and
Amusements: But rather endeavor by some Pertinent, Intelligible, and
Practicable Proposition, to bring Us to a better Understanding. Say, What
Injunctions You would have abated; Name the Parties You would Recommend for
their Importance of Interests, Congruity of Principles, Sound Faith, and Good
Life. Teach us how to know these Qualities, Where to look for Them, and Who
shall Judge of Them. Let it be made out, That the Present Sollicitors for
Tender Consciences, are duly Authorized, and Commissioned to Act as the
Trustees of the Respective Parties. Do This; and Matters may be brought yet to
a Comfortable Issue: But so long as You place the Conditions of your Indulgence
out of the Reach of Ordinary Proof, and indeed, of Humane Knowledge, Every Man
that is Excluded, shall dispute his Title to the Comprehension, without any
Possibility of being Confuted; To the Scandal of Religion, and to the Perpetual
Trouble, Both of King, and People.


N. C. To set forth the Propounded Latitude, Disc. of Relig. Par. 2. p. 22.
in the Particular Limits thereof, were Presumptuous, both in Reference to
Superiors, and to the Party Concerned in it.


C. As if it were not a greater Presumption, to Alienate the Affections of the
People from their Superiors, by Reflectings upon the Iniquity of the
Government, then by the Tender of some Rational Medium of Accord, to Dispose
the Hearts of Superiors to a Compliance with the Prayers, and Necessities of
the People. But there is more in these Generalities, and R^serves then the
Multitude are well aware of; and I am afraid, it will be as hard a matter, to
bring you to an Agreement about the P^rticular Parties to be Tol^rated, as
about the Model it self.


SECT. XI.
The Non-Conformists demand a Toleration, for No Body knows WHOM, or WHAT.
C. THe Non-Conformists are the Party that desire a Toleration; Pray let me ask
ye, What are their Opinions? What are their Names? For, I presume, you will not
expect a Toleration, for No Body knows What, or Whom. Are they all of a Mind?
If They were Tolerated Themselves, Would They Tolerate One Another? Are They
come to any Resolution upon Articles? Are They agreed upon any Model of
Accommodation? Do They know What They would be At? Or is it in the Wit of Man,
to Contrive a Common Expedient to Oblige them?


N. C. There Is no Body says, that they are All of a Mind; Or that it is
p^ssible to please them all; Or Reasonable to End^avour it. There are Diverse
among them, whose Principles will never endure any Order either in Church, or
State. But what is the Sober Part the Worse for these Extravagants? Those, I
mean, who are ready to Justify themselves; even according to the Strictness of
your own Measures.


C. If You are for such a Toleration, as shall Exclude the Wild, and
Ungovernable Sects of Dissenters; How comes it, that, in Your Writings, and
Argumentations, You still plead the General Cause of Non-Conformists, without
any Exception, or Distinction?


N. C. You are not to fasten a Charge of this Quality upon us; that have
already submitted Our selves, Not only to the Moderation of a Limited
Indulgence, but to your own Conditions also, under that very Limitation.


C. This You have done, I must confess, in General Terms; But still I say, as
to Particulars, Your Discourses are of such a Frame and Biass, as to give
Credit, and Encouragement, to Every Sect of the Whole Party.


N. C. I am of a Persuasion, but D^sc. of Relig. Par. 2. p. 45.
not of a Party: and whatsoever my Persuasion be, it is Moderate, Catholic,
and Pacifick.


C. And so is every Man's, if his own Word may be taken for his own Persuasion.
But why a^e ye so Nic^, and Cautious, in the owning of a Particular Way, and
Profession; and yet so Frank, and Open, in a Clamor for the Whole Party? You
Complain that you are persecuted, and yet Obstruct the Means of your own
Relief. Some, Ye say, are to be Indulged; Others, Not. How shall Authority
Distinguish of Which Number You your selves are; so long as You remain under
this Concealment? Are You for the Presbyterians?


N. C. I am not ashamed of their Company, Disc. of Relig Par. 2. p. 45.
that are Commonly called by That Name: Yet I have no Ple^sure in such N^mes of
Distinction. Neither my Design, nor my Principles, engage me to maintein the
Presbyterial Government.


C. Are You In^endent then?


N. C. Neither. But yet I am (as Disc. of Relig. Par. 2. p. 38.
I told you) for Tolerating Th^se of Sound Faith, and Good Life, That have
taken up some Principles of Church Government l^ss Congruous to National
Settlement.


C. What Do you think of the Anabaptists, Brownists, Quakers, etc?


N C. Why truly, So it is, That Ibid.
Prudent, and Pious Men may be of Exceeding Narrow Principles, about
Church Order, and Fellowship: Toward Whom, Christian Charity pleads for
Indulgence; and, We hope, Political Prudence does not gainsay it.


C. So that you are FOR All Parties, but not OF Any. Which Gen^rality gives to
Understand, that your Business, is rather a Confederacy, then a Scruple.


N. C. Make That Good if you can.


SECT. XII.
The Conjunct Importunity of the Non-Conformists for a Toleration, is not
grounded Upon Matter of CONSCIENCE.
N. C. YOu are the first Person certainly that ever undertook to make Proof of
a Conscience.


C. And yet Our Savior tells Us, (in This very Case of Hypocrisy) that the
Tree may be known by its Fruits: But however; the best way of Proving a Thing
Feasible, is the Doing of it.

The Non-Conformists refuse Communion with the Church: What is it They boggle
at?


N. C. Disc. of Relig. Pars 2.
They do esteem the Ceremonies an Excess in the Worship of God. Page 31. Peace
Offering.
[And Dissent from the Present Establishment of Religion, only in things
relating to Outward Order, and Worship. Pa. 12 Indulg. and Toler.
About the Choice of some Peculiar Ways of Worship. Pa. 12. Disc. of Relig.
Pars 1.
But as to the English Reformation, Established by Law, They heartily Embrace
it, and Assent to the Doctrine of Faith contained in the Articles of the Church
of England. Pa. 22. Peace Offering.
They have no New Faith to Declare: No New Doctrine to Teach; No Private
Opinions to Divulge; No Point, or Truth to Profess, which has not been
Declared, Taught, Divulged, and Esteem^d, as the Common Doctrine of the Church
of England, ever since the Reformation. Pa. 11. Indul. and Toler.
They come up to a Full Agreement, in all Material Things, with Them, from Whom
they Dissent. Pa. 30.


C. If They Agree in all Material Things, it follows, that they Divide about
Matters Inconsiderable; and Break the Order, Peace, and Unity of the Church for
Trifles. (Things Indifferent, and relating to Outward Order, and Worship.)


N. C. In Prescribed Forms, and Rites of Religion, The Conscience will Disc of
R^lig. Pars 2.
interpose, and concern it self; and Cannot resign it self to the Dictates of
Men, in the Points of Divine Worship. And Those Injunctions, which to the
Imposers, are Indifferent; in the Consciences of the Dissenters, are Unlawful.
And What Humane Authority can warrant any One to put in Practice, an Unlawful,
Or Suspected Action? Pa. 26.


C. If This be, really, Conscience; You will be found as Cautious in venturing,
deliberately, upon a Suspected Action, in all other Cases, as you are in This.
But what if it shall appear, that This Fit of Tenderness only takes you, when
you are to pay an Obedience to the Law; and that you are as Bold as Lions, when
you come to oppose it? Will you not allow us to think it possible, that there
may be somewhat more, in the Importunities, and Pretenses of the
Non-Conformists, then Matter of CONSCIENCE?

It Is a Suspected Action to Kneel at the Sacrament; but None, to hold up your
Hands at the Covenant. You make a Conscience of disclaiming the Obligation of
That Covenant, in Order to the Security of the Government: But None at all, of
Leaguing your selves in a Conspiracy, for the Subversion of it. Where was your
Tenderness, in Suspected Cases, when, to Encourage Rapine, Sacrilege, and
Rebellion, was the Common Business of your Counsels, and Pulpits? When it was
safer to Deny the Trinity, then to Refuse the Covenant. When the same Persons,
that started at a Ceremony, made no Scruple at all, of Engaging the Kingdom in
Blood; and laying Violent Hands upon their Sovereign. Is not This, Streining at
a Gnat, and swallowing a Camel?


N. C. The Non-Conformists, I know, Disc. of Relig. Pars 1.
are charged with Principles, that detract from Kingly Power; and Tend to
advance Popular Faction. It is true, They have been Eager Asserters of Legal
Liberties. Page 40. But These are Things gone and Past, and Nothing to our
Present Purpose. The Wise Man says, He that Ibid.
repeateth a Matter, separateth very Friends. A looking back to former
Discords, mars the most hopeful Redi^egration. Acts of Indemnity, are Acts of
Oblivion also, and must be so observed. Pa. 41.


C. The Non-Conformists (The Sole Actors in the late War) were only Eager
Asserters (it seems) of Legal Liberties: You do not deal so Gingerly with the
Bishops, in the Point of Ceremonies, as to let them come off, with the
Character of Eager Assertors of Legal Authorities. So that herein also, Your
Consciences stumble at Straws, and leap over Blocks.

Now, Whereas You will have it, that a Reflection upon former Discords, is a
Violation of the Act of Indemnity; And Impertinent to Our Purpose: My Answer
is; First, That I do not revive the Memory of former Discords as a Reproach;
But I make use of some Instances out of former Passages, to make Good my
Assertion: That Your Conjunct Imp^rtunity for a Toleration, is not grounded
upon Conscience. And to show you, that your Practices, and Professions grin One
upon Another. For Conscience is all of a Pi^ce; Not Tender, and Delicate on the
One side, and Callous, and Unfeeling, on the Other.

Secondly, Suppose We should make a little Bold with the Act of Oblivion: I
think We have as much right to do it, as You have to fall foul upon the Act of
Uniformity. Unless you conceive, that the Mercy you have received by One Law,
gives You a Privilege of Invading all the rest. As to Authority; it is One and
the Same in Both; and if there were any place for Complaint against the Equity
of a Legal Establishment, it would lie much Fairer against the Act of
Indemnity. on the behalf of the Royallists, (that have ruined their Estates and
Families in the Defense of the Law; and yet after all, are thereby condemned to
sit down in Silence, and Despair) Then against the Act of Uniformity, on the
Behalf of the Non-Conformists; Who by the One Law, are secured in the Profits
of their late Disobedience; And by the Other, are taken into the Arms of the
Church, according to the Ancient, and Common Rule, with the Rest of His
Majesty's Protestant Subjects: The Same Rule, I say; saying where it is
Moderated with Abatements, and Allowances, in Favor of Pretended Scruples.


N. C. Whereas you make the Non-Conformists the Sole Actors in Our late
Confusions, You run your self upon a great Mistake: For -- It has been Disc.
of Relig. Pa^s 1.
manifested to the World, by such as Undertook to Justify it, when Authority
should require, [That the Year before the King's Death, A Select Number of
Iesui^s being sent from their whole Party in England, Consulted both the
Faculty of Sorbonne, and the Pope's Council at Rome, touching the Lawfulness
and Expediency, of Promoting the Change of Government, by making away the King,
Whom They Despaired to turn from his Hereste: It was Debated, and Concluded, in
Both Places, That for the Advancement of the Catholic Cause, It was Lawful,
and Expedient to Carry on that Alteration of State. This Determination was
effectually pursued by many Jesuits, that came over, and Acted their Parts in
several Disguises. Page 15.


C. If This be True, and Proveable; (as You affirm it is) You cannot do the
Protestant Cause a more Important Service, then to make it out to the
Parliament: Who (You know) have judged the Mat^er Worthy of their Search, and
have appointed Disc. of Relig. Pars 1.
a Committee to receive Informations. Pa. 2. Nay, which is more, You are a
Betrayer of the Cause if you do it not. The WHOLE PARTY in England, do you say?
Prove out This, and you kill the whole Popish Party at a Blow.

This was the Year before the King's Death, it seems: Whas not That within the
Retrospect of the Act of Indemnity? If so, tell me I beseech you, Why may not
We take the same Freedom with the Non-Conformists, that You do with the Papists?


N. C. We shall never have done, if you lash out thus upon Digressions. Pray
keep to the Question.


C. As close as you please. What if a Man should show You a Considerable
Number, of the Eminent, and Active Instruments in the late War, to be now in
the Head of the present Outcry for Toleration? (Take This into your Supposition
too, that These very Persons promoted Our Troubles, This very Way; and
Proceeded from the Reformation of Discipline, to the Dissolution of Government)
Are We bound in Charity to take all their Pretensions of Scruple for real
Tenderness of Conscience?


N. C. Beyond all Question; unless you can either Evidence their Error to be
Unpardonable, or the Men Themselves, Impenitent.


C. Why then let Amesius determine De Conscientia, lib. (...) 4. cap. 15.
betwixt Us. [Peccata illa, quae public fuerunt nota, debent etiam Confessione
Publica damnari; quia ad quos malum ipsum Exempli Contagione pervenerat, ad eos
etiam Poenitentiae, ac Emendationis Documentum, si fieri possit, delet
transmitti.] PUBLIC SINS require PUBLIC CONFESSION; To the End, that as
many as were mis^ed by the Example, may be set right again by the Retraction,
and Repentance. This Conclusion pronounces All Those of the old stamp, that
abused the People formerly, under Color of Conscience; and are now at Work
again, upon the same Pretext, without a Public Recantation, to be in a State
of Impenitency: and gives Us reasonably to presume, that if their Consciences
can Swallow, and Digest a Rebellion, There is no great Danger of their being
Choked with a Ceremony.

Another Thing is This; You do not plead for Particular Judgments; (In which
Case, a Plea of Conscience may be allowed) But every Man urges the Equity (in
Effect) of a Toleration for all the Rest. In which Number, You your selves do,
severally, and jointly, acknowledge, that there are a great many People of
Insociable and Intolerable Principles; such as in Conscience are not to be
admitted. And yet herein also, You profess to be guided by Impulses of
Tenderness, and Piety; although in Opposition to the whole Course of your
former Declarations, and Proceedings, that rise up in Judgment against You.


N. C. If you grant, that there may be a Plea for Particulars, I shall not much
trouble my self about Generals.


C. That Point shall come on in due time. But let us look a little further yet,
into the General Cause; for if it be not Conscience, it is Confederacy.


SECT. XIII.
The Conjunct Importunity of the Non-Conformists for a Toleration, is a
Manifest CONFEDERACY.
C. THis appears, First, from the Method of their Proceedings; Secondly, from
the Natural Prospect, and Tendency of that Method; Thirdly, from the Nature,
and Quality of their Demands, and Arguments; Fourthly; from the Way, and Manner
of their Addresses, and Applications; Lastly; from their Agreement in Matters
of Dangero^s Consequence upon the Peace of the Government.

As to their Method; The Non-Conformists of This Age ^read in the very steps of
their Predecessors: and This you may observe throughout the whole History of
Them; even from the first time that ever the Pretense of Popular Reformation
set foot in his Majesty's Dominions unto This Instant. This is not a Place for
a Deduction of Particulars at length; But a Touch from Point to Point, will not
be much amiss. Wherefore, if you please, Give me a Brief Account of the
Non-Conformists. First, What kind of People they are; Secondly, What It is They
would have; Thirdly, What will the Kingdom be the better for Granting their
Desires? Fourthly, What are their Grievances, as the Case stands with them at
present? Fifthly, What are they for Number, and Resolution?


N. C. They are a People Zealous of Disc. of Relig. Pars 1.
Religion, Pa. 43. An Intelligent, Sober sort of M^n, and Numerous among all
Ranks, P. 25. Indulg. and Toler. p. 7.
Peaceable, and Useful in the Commonwealth; Sound in the Faith; Men of
Conscience; Evident Opposers of all Errors Pernicious to the Souls of Men, and
of an Evil Aspect upon the Public Peace.


C. Very Good: And were not the Conspirators that Seized King James, at
Sp^swoods Hist. Scotl. p 320, 322.
Ruthnen, (1582.) as much as all This amounts to? If You will believe either
Themselves, or the Assembly at Edinburgh in their behalf.

The Reforming Non-Conformists under Petition to the Queen, p. 15.
Queen Elizabeth were Unreprovable before all Men; Her Majesty's most Loyal
Subjects, and God's Faithful Servants: [Most Worthy, Faithful, and Peinful
Ministers; Gilby.
Modest, Watchful, Knowing in the Scriptures, and of Honest Conversation;
(Learned, and Godly; says the Admonitioner, Pa. 25. And Martin Senior calls
them, The Strength of Our Land, and the Sinew of her Majesty's Government.

The Scotch Covenanters, in 1638. outdid King's large Declar. p. 66.
All This, for Zeal to his Majesty's Person, and Authority: The True Religion,
Liberties, and Laws of the Kingdom.

And the Two Houses at Westminster, In 1642. come not behind. Them, in their
Ex. Coll. (...) p. 498.
Professions, for the Defense, and Maintenance of the True Religion; The King's
Person, Honor, and Estate, and the Just Rights, and Li^erties of the Subject.

Here Is Your Character: Now to Your D^mands, What is it You would have?


N. C. Two Papers of Proposals, pa. 5.
A Reformation of Church Government, Liturgy, and Ceremonies. Petition for
Peace, p. 20.
A Bearing with weak Consciences: D^sc. of Relig. Preface. Ex. Col. 19.
and A Relaxation of the Prescribed Uniformity.


C. And This you will find to have been the Constant Pretense of the
Non-Conformists, if you Consult their Story, from One End to the Other. [Not to
let loose the Golden Reins of Discipline, and Government in the Church; But to
Unburthen the Consciences of Men, of Needless, and Superstitious Ceremonies,
Suppress Innovations, and Settle a Preaching Ministry, etc.

Put the Case now, that you had your Asking; What would the Kingdom be the
better for it?


N. C. It will be the better for the King, Church, Nobility, and Gentry. [And
Disc. of Relig. Indulg. and Toler. p. 31.
there is No Nation under Heaven, wherein such an Indulgence, or Toleration as
is desired, would be more Welcome, Us^ful, Acceptable; Or more Subservient to
Tranquillity, Trade, Wealth, and Peace.


C. Reformation no Enemy to Her Majesty and the State, is the very Title of a
Desperate Libel, Printed 1590. against Both. And the Humble Motioner tells You,
that it is for the Advantage of the Queen, Clergy, Nobility, and Commonalty;
That the Wealth and Honor of the Realm will be Increased by it, etc.

This was the Style too of Our Reformers, Ex. Coll. Pa 3.
in 1642. The Securing of the Public Peace, Safety and Happiness of the
Realm; And the Laying the Foundation, Ibid. 21.
of more Honor, and Happiness, to his Majesty, then ever was Enjoyed by any of
his Royal Predecessors. -- Now speak your Grievances.


N. C. We are Excommunicated, Outlawed, In^ulg. and Tolr.
Imprisoned. Our Families Starved, and Begg^r'd. P. 8. Proceeded against with
Outward Punishments, Pecuniary, and Corporal, Nay Death it self. P. 9. [And
Disc. of Relig.
all this while Trade languishes, Rents fall, Money scarce. P. 26. Never a
greater Separation; Never a more General Dissatisfaction. P. 27.


C. Pray'e say: Was it ever better, since Non-Conformists came into the World?
Was not King James, a Favourer of the S^otswoods H^st. Scotl. P. 327.
Enemies of God's Truth, and of Dissolute Persons? A Discountenancer of Godly
Ministers? A Promise-Breaker to the Church; and a Perverter of the Laws;
Insomuch that No man could be assured of his Lands, and Life?

Was it any better even under the Celebrated Government of Queen Elizabeth?
Petition to her Majesty, p. 25.
There were Citations, Degradings, and Deprivations. Second Admon^. p. 37.
Ibid. p. 25.
Some in the Marshalsey; Some in the White-Lion; Some in the Gate^house at
Westminster; Others in the Counter, Or in the Clinke, Or in Bride-well, Or in
Newgate. [How many Good Men's Deaths have the Bishops been the Cause of? How
many have they driven to leave the Ministry, and live by Physique? Or to leave
their Country? [Poor Men have been miserably handled, First Admonit. p. 2.
with Revilings, Deprivations, Imprisonments, Banishments: and Out of This
Realm, they have all the best Reformed Churches through Christendom against
them. [If This Persecution be not provided Second Admonit. P 59.
for, great Trouble will come of it.

How your Party demeaned Themselves toward the Late King, of Blessed Memory, in
the matter of Calumny, and Reproach, You may read at large in that Grand, and
Infamous Libel; The Remonstrance Ex. C^ll. P. 3.
of the State of the Kingdom, December. 15. 1642.

But after all This; What are these People, for Number, and Resolution, that
make such a Clutter?


N. C. Thousands of the Upright of Indulg. and Tolerat.
the Land. Petition for Peace, Page 21.] Multitudes* Dissent, and Resolve to
Continue so doing; Whatever they suffer for it. Pa. 20. And to forego the
U^most of their Earthly Concernments, rather then to Live and Die in an Open
Rebellion to the Commanding Light of God in their Consciences. -- To Ruin Men
in their Substantials of BODY, and LIFE, for Ceremonies; is a Severity, which
ENGLISHMEN will not, long time, by any means, give Countenance unto. Pa. 23.
[To Execute Extremity upon Disc. of Relig. Pars 1.
an Intelligent, Sober, and Peaceable Sort of Men, so Numerous among all Ranks,
may prove Exceeding Difficult, unless it be Executed by such Instruments as may
strik ^errour into the whole Nation. P. 25.


C. Was not Queen Elizabeth told of Thousands, and Hundreds of Thousands, that
sighed for the Holy Discipline? And that since neither Parliament, nor
Convocation-house would take it into Consideration, They might blame
Themselves, if it came in by such Means, as would make all their Hearts Ache?
The Truth will prevail (says the Demonstrator) in spite of your Teeth, and all
the Adversaries of it.

The most Unnatural, Ca^eless, and Large Declaration, P. 53.
Horrible Rebellion, that This, or (perhaps) any other Age in the World has
been Acqu^nted with (To borrow the Words of his Late Majesty) was Profaced with
a Petition in the Name of all the Men, Women, Children, and Servants, of
Edinburgh, against the Service Book: And Another, in the Name of the Noblemen,
Ibid. p, 41, 42.
Gentry, Ministers, and Burgesses, against the Service Book, and Book of
Canons; ^rotesting afterward, that if any Inconvenience Ibid. p. 52.
should fall out, by reason of Pressing those-Innovations, it was not to be
imputed to Them, that sought all Things to be Reformed by Order.

This Commotion in Scotland, led the Way to Our succeeding Broils in England;
Which were promoted by the like Artifices. Great Numbers of his Majesty's
Subjects, Oppressed by Fines, Imprisonments, Ex Coll. p. 8.
Stig^atizings; and Many Thousands of Tradesmen, and Artificers, Empoverish't
by a Generality, and Multiplicity of Vexations. [Great Numbers of Learned, and
Pious Ministers Suspended, Deprived, and Ibid. p 9.
Degraded. In fine, from Pamphlets, they advanced to Petitions; from Petitions,
to Tumults; and from thence, into a Formal State of War.


N. C. So that from This Agreement in Method, You will pretend to Infer a
Conformity of Design.


C. From This Agreement in Method; and from the Natural Tendency of This
Method, I think a Man may honestly Conclude, it can be Nothing else: and I
doubt not, but upon a Sober Examination of the Matter, I shall find You of the
same Opinion.

The most Sacred of all Bonds is That of Government, next to That of Religion;
and the Reverence which we owe to Humane Authority, is Only Inferior to That
which we owe to God Himself. This being duly Weighed, and that the Lesser
Obligation must give place to the Greater. (As for Instance) Reason of State,
to Matter of Religion, and Humane Laws to the Law Divine: What has any Man more
to do, for the Embroyling of a Nation, but first to Puzzle the Peoples Heads
with Doubts, and Scruples, about their Respective Duties to God, and Man; and
then, to Possess them, that This, or That Political Constitution, has no
Foundation in the Holy Scriptures? To bid Them stand fast in the Liberty
wherewith Christ has made them Free, Galat. 5. 1. And Finally, to Engage the
Name of God, and the Credit of Religion in the Quarrel?


N. C. And do not you your self believe it better to Obey God, then Man?


C. Yes; but I think it best of all to Obey Both: To Obey God, for Himself, in
Spirituals; and Man, for God's sake, in Temporals, as He is God's Commissioner.
But tell me; Are you not Convinced, that the most likely way in the World to
stir up Subjects against their Prince, is To Proclaim the Iniquity of his Laws,
and then to Preach Damnation upon Obedience?


N. C. What if it be? Does it follow, because Religion may be made a Cloak for
a Rebellion, That, therefore, It is never to be Pleaded for a Reformation?


C. Truly I have seldom known a Conscientio^ Reformation, accompanied with the
Circumstances of Our Case. Here is, first, a Character of the Non-Conformists,
drawn by their own Hand; and set off with such Flourishes of Purity, and
Perfection, as if the Scribes and Pharisees Matthew. 23. v. 23, 24.
Themselves had sit for their Picture. In the Second Place, You demand, partly,
a Reformation; partly, a Toleration: And in the Third, You assure Us, that all
England shall be the better for it. (Of These Two Points hereafter.) In the
Fourth, You enlarge upon your Grievances; and instead of applying to the
Government, on the behalf of the People, You are clearly upon the Strein of
Appeal to the People from the Rigor of the Government. Your Text is Liberty of
Conscience; But the Stress of your Discourse lies upon the Liberty of the
Subject: The Decay of Trade, Scarcity of Money, Fall of Rents, The Substantials
of BODY, and LIFE, Imprisonment, etc. Upon the Whole; Your Writings want
nothing but Form, of a Direct Indictment of King and Parliament for
Persecution, and Tyranny; And would very well bear the Translation of their
being led on by the Instigation of the Devil, Not having the Fear of the Lord
before their Eyes. If You can defend this manner of Proceeding, pray do it.


N. C. What can be of greater Concernment Disc. of Relig.
to Governors; then to Discern, and Consider the State of their People, as it
is indeed? And Why may it not be Minded of Subjects, and spoken of, without any
Hint, or Thought of ^ebellion? Page 27.


C. But What can be of greater Mischief to Governors, then under Color of
Remonstrating to Them, the State of their People, at the Same time, to
disaffect the People, by an Odious Account of the Errors, Misfortunes, and
Calamities of the Government? Governors are not to be told their Faults in the
Marketplace; Neither are Ministers of the Gospel, by your own Rules, to be
admitted for Privy-Counsellors. This is spoken as to the Good Office of your
Information.

As to the Intention of it, I am not so bold, as to Judge your Thoughts: But if
You had any Drift at all in it, and Considered what You did, I do not see, how
You can acquit your self of Evil Meaning. Suppose the Whole Invective True; And
that you suffer for Righteousness. (to make the Fairest of it) What Effect do
you expect these Discourses may have upon the People? and Waat upon the
Magistrate? Will not every Man conclude, that the English are the Wretched'st
Slaves upon the Face of the Earth? Neither Liberty of Religion, nor of Person,
for any Man that makes a Conscience of his Ways: The Whole Nation, Groaning
under Beggary, and Bondage. Now see What Effects these Impressions may
reasonably produce; and Those Effects are a^ reasonably to be taken for the
Scope of your Intention.

Turn now to the Magistrate, and say; What Proportion do you find betwixt these
Rude Disobligations upon the Government, and the Returns of Grace, and Favor
You desire so Earnestly from it? On the Other Side; if your Report be False,
Your Design appears still to be the same; Only with the Aggravations, of more
Animosity, and Malice in Pursuance of it. But True, or False, it is Nothing at
all to the Business of Toleration, but a Palpable Transition from matter of
Conscience, to matter of State.

This is the Course, in General, of Our Advocates for Toleration; and by the
Desperate Sallies, they make, from Religion, to Government, in their Pamphlets,
A Man may guess what it is they would be at in their Pulpits.


N. C. Oppression makes a Wiseman mad; and it is not Generous to Descant upon
every thing, that is bolted in Heat, and Passion, as if it were a formed
Discourse, upon Deliberation, and Counsel.


C. But is it not a strange thing (my Good Friend) for so many Men to be Mad at
a Time; and to be Mad the Same Way too? If you will have it, that they mean
just Nothing at all, I am content; But if they mean any thing, and all agree in
the same Meaning; It can be nothing else but a Confederacy.

The next Point makes it yet more Evident; that is to say, The Marshalling of
their Numbers, and their Thousands; The Boast of their Interest, in all
Parties, and of the Difficulty to Suppress them: The Proclamation of their
Resolution to Live and Die in defense of their Opinions, with an Innu^ndo of
the Magistrates Meddling with them at their Peril. What can be the End of this
Rhodomontade; but to startle the Government, on the One Side, and to animate
the Multitude, on the Other? It is no Argument at all for an Indulgence, that
they are Many, Powerful, and Resolute; But point blank against it: Unless they
can approve themselves to be Regular, Governable, and Honest. To Sum up all;
Here are Faults found in the Government; and the People Tampered into a Dislike
of it; So that here is a Disposition to a Change, wrought already.

No sooner is the Multitude persuaded of the Necessity of a Reformation; but
behold the Manner of it; It must be either by a Thorough-Alteration, a
Comprehension, a Toleration, or a Connivence. And for the Principal
Undertakers, You may put your Lives in their Hands; for (if they do not slander
Themselves) They are as Godly, an Intelligent Sort of People, as a Man shall
see in a Summers Day. Now, for the Introducing of This Reformation, there is no
way, but to set up the Word of God, against the Law of the Land: By the
Un-Bishopping of Timothy, and Titus; and giving the People a Sight of the
Jewish Sanhed^m, and Gamaliel's Dilemma, through a Pair of Reforming Acts 5. 38.
Spectacles; By which, they discover the Divine Right of Presbytery, with One
Eye; and That of Universal Toleration with the Other; and so become One in the
Common Cause of Maintaining Gospel Worship, against Humane Inventions.

The next Care is, to Gratify the Common People; for there is nothing to be
done, till they come; and there is no Reason in the World, that the poor
Wretches should Venture Soul, Life, and Estate, Gratis! This is Effected, by
the Doctrine of Liberty of Conscience. For Grant but every Man a Right, of
Acting, according to the Dictate of his Conscience, and he has Consequently, a
Liberty of Doing Whatsoever he shall pretend to be according to That Dictate;
And of Refusing to do, whatsoever he shall say is against it: By which
Invention, the Laws of the Kingdom are subjected to the Pretended Consciences
of the People; and the Multitude are made the Judges of the Controversy.

Now comes in the Ioynt-Struggle of the Non-Conformists for a Toleration. This,
if it may be obtained, puts them in a Capacity of doing the Rest, Themselves.
But in Case of Opposition, Their last Resort is to a Muster of their Forces; A
Computation of their Strength, and Interests; Which is the Very same Thing, as
if they should say, in so many Syllables; Gentlemen; You see the Parliament
does not Regard Us: We have a Good Cause, and Hands enough to do the Work, in
spite of their Hearts: ^P AND BE DOING. After This; There wants Nothing, but
the Word, The Sword of the Lord, and of Gideon, To Crown the Enterprise. If
This be not a Conspiracy, tell me What Is.


N. C. You say, It is; and We deny it.


C. There are strong Presumptions also of a Confederacy, to be gathered from
the Nature, and Quality of your Demands. You desire a Comprehension, a
Toleration; But then you place the Conditions of it, out of the Reach of
Ordinary Proof, and indeed, of Humane Cognizance. (as is showed already) So
that No Body knows, who are to be Comprehended, and who left out. This looks,
as if your Business were rather to inflame the Difference, then to compose it.
And then, when you are pressed to Name, and Specify the Parties you plead for;
(since by your own Confession, several are to be Excluded) You fly still to the
Generalities, of Important Interests, and Congruous Principles, and so leave
the Matter utterly incapable of any Clear, and Logical Result; Unless you will
allow Governors the Inspection of their Subjects Hearts: Or Teach us how to
Reduce Wild, and Uncertain Notions, under the Prospect of a Steady Law. But the
Reason of your Dealing thus in the dark, I suppose may be This: Your Design is
to be carried on under the Countenance of the Common Cause, wherein, all those
Persons are United against the Government, that would otherwise spend their
Animosities, One upon Another, and break into a thousand Pieces among
Themselves. Now for you to declare for any One Party, were Virtually, to
declare against all the Rest, and Dissolve the Combination.

Touching the Manner of their Addresses, I shall only add, (to what is past)
that they are Invectives, against those that cannot relieve them, without any
Formal Application to those that can: And tend Naturally to the Tumultuating of
the People, without any Color of Contributing to their Ben^fit.

Of their Agreement in Matters of Dangerous Consequence, enough is spoken
already, to put it past all Contradiction, That Their Conjunct Importunity for
a Toleration, is a Manifest CONFEDERACY. Wherefore let us now proceed from the
Drift, and Design of their Pretensions, to the Morality, and Reason of Them.


SECT. XIV.
The Non-Conformists Joint Pretenses FOR A Toleration, overthrown, by the
Evidence of their Joynt-Arguments, Professions, and Practices AGAINST it.
C. DO as you would be done by, is the Precept, both of Gospel, and Nature.
With what face then, can you ask a Toleration from That Government, which of
all Others, your selves refused to Tolerate? From That Prince, to whose Blessed
Father (in the Depth of his Agonies) you cruelly denied the Use, and Service of
his own Chaplains? [A greater (...), p. 207.
^igour, and Barbarity, then is ever used by Christians to the Me^nest
Prisoners, and Greatest Malefactors. But They that Envy my being a King, are
loath I should be a h^istian; While they seek to deprive me of all things else,
they are afraid I should save my Soul. These are the Words or that Pious Prince
in his last Extremity.


N. C. That Rigor was the Barbarism of a Faction, Not the Principles of the
Party.


C. Hear your Party speak then. [It London Ministers Letter to the Assembly,
Ian. 1* 1645.
is much, that our Brethren should separate from the Church; but that they
should endeavor to get a Warrant, to Authorize their Separation from it, and
to have Liberty (by drawing Members out of it) to Weaken, and Diminish it,
till, (so far as lies in them) they have brought it to Nothing; This we think
to be plainly Unlawfuf.

Toleration would be the Putting the Harmony of the Lancashire Ministers. p.
12. Mr. Faircloth, on Josh. 7. 2^.
Sword in a Madman's hand; A Proclaiming Liberty to the Wolves, to come into
Christ's Flock to Prey upon his Lambs.

Extirpate all Achans, with Babylonish Garments, Orders, Ceremonies, Gestures;
Let them be rooted out from among Us. You of the Honorable House, Up; for the
Matter belongs to You. We, even All the Godly Ministers of the Country, will
be with You.

Toleration makes the Scripture a Nose of Wax: A Rule of Faith to all
Religions. Rutherford's Free Disp. p. 360. Bayly's Dissw^sive Epist Ded. 1645.


Liberty of Conscience, and Toleration of all, or any Religion, is so
Prodigious an Impiety, that this Religious Parli^ment cannot but abhor the very
Naming of it.

Such a Toleration is utterly repugnant Sion-house to the Assembly, 1645.
Anti-Toleration, p. 16.
to, and Inconsistent with the Solemn League and Covenant for Reformation.

It is unreasonable (says the Defender of the London Ministers Letter to the
Assembly) that Independents should desire That Toleration of Presbyters, which
they would not give to Presbyters. For With what face can I destre a Courtesse
from Him, to whom I do onenly prosess,
(...) would deny the same Courtesse? Does not this hold as well for Us, as it
did for You?


N. C. You must not Impose the Judgments of Particular Persons upon Us, as
Instances of Public Authority.


C. What do ye think then of your National Covenant? Was That an Act of
Authority? Wherein you bind Your selves by an Oath, to settle an Uniform
Presbytery, to the Exclusion of all other Forms of Church Order, or Government
what soever; (under the Notion of Schism) and of Prel^cy by Name? Are your
Consciences FOR Toleration Now, that were so much AGAINST it Then? Nay; there
are many among you, that ^eckon your selves under an Obligation, to pursue the
Ends of that Covenant, even to this very Day: And do you think it Reasonable,
for a Government to grant Privileges, and Advantages of Power, and Credit, to a
Party, that owns it self under an Oath of Confederacy to endeavor the
Extirpation of it?


N. C. You mean I suppose of Church Government.


C. I mean of Both Church, and State. Was it not the Test of the King's
Enemies, as well as of the Bishops? Was it not made Death without Mercy, for
any Man, having taken the Solemn League and Covenant, to adhere to his Majesty?
The League and Covenant (says Rutherford) The Ki^ks Testimony against
Toleration p. 10.
was the first Foundation of the Ruin of the Malignant Party in England. And
whoever refuses to Disclaim it, must be rationally understood, still to Drive
on the Intent of it. So that to Tolerate the Non-Conformists, is to Tolerate
the Sworn Adversaries, both of Royal, and Episcopal Authority: Nay, to Tolerate
Those that have Sworn to persist in that Opposition, all the Days of their
Lives; Over and above the Tolerating of those upon Pretense of Conscience FOR a
Toleration, that deny to Tolerate all other People, upon as strong a Pretense
of Conscience AGAINST it.

Where was This Spirit of Moderation toward the weak Brethren, in the Total
Acts and Ordinances, Part 1. p 97.
Suppression of the Book of Common Prayer; and the Imposing of the Directory,
to be O^served in all the Churches within This Kingdom? [No Ruling Elders, but
Ibid. 165.
such as have taken the National Covenant. No Electors of Elders neither, (by
the Ordinance of March 14. 1645.) but such as have taken the National Covenant.
[No Ordination, without a Testimonial Ibid. 171.
of having taken the Covenant of the Three Kingdoms. None to be Admitted, or
Entertained in the Universities, without taking the Solemn League and Covenant,
and the Negative Oath; and Upon Conditions of Submission, and Conformity to the
Discipline, and Directory.

Nay further: You will find in the Four Bills, and Propositions sent to his
Majesty in the Isle of Wight, (March 1647.) when the Two Parties, Presbyterian,
and Independent were upon so hard a Tugg; That the Presbyterian Government, and
Directory seemed to be resolved upon in one Pa. 30, 31.
Line, and unsettled again, in the very next. By a Provision: That no Persons
whatsoever should be liable to any Question, or Penalty, for Non Conformity to
the Form of Government, and Divine Service appointed in the Ordinances; (then
in Force) but be at Liberty to Meet for the Worship of God; so as nothing might
be done to the disturbance of the Peace of the Kingdom. Yet in This Crisis of
Affairs; they could clap in another stabbing Proviso against Us, upon the neck
of That: i. e. That This Indulgence shall not extend
to Tolerate the Use of the Book of Common Prayer, in any Place whatsoever. And
at this rate, you treated the Episcopal Party, throughout the whole Course of
your Power.


N. C. And good Cause for it. Were not they the most likely of all others to
disappoint our Settlement?


C. Agreed. But as to the matter of Conscience; Did you Well, or Ill in it? Or
rather, Was there any thing of Conscience in the Case?


N. C. Certainly it was very fit for the Civil Power to look to it self: And
the Power Ecclesiastical was no less concerned to exact a Consormity to the
Laws, and Ordinances of Christ.


C. How can you say This, and consider what you say, without blushing? If you
did well, in Refusing to Tolerate the Episcopal Way, because you thought it not
Right; the Reason is as strong for Our Way, that have the same Opinion of
Yours. If you did Well on the Other side, out of a Political Regard to the
Public Peace, so do We now, upon That very sc^re. So that you must either
confess, that You did Ill, Then, in Refusing a Toleration to Us; or otherwise
allow, that Authority does Well, Now, in not permitting it to You.


N. C. There might be some Plea for a little Strictness more then ordinary, in
the Heat of an Eager, and Public Contention: But methinks a Persecution in
Cold Blood, does not savor of the Spirit of our Profession.


SECT. XV.
The Non-Conformists JOYNTCOMPLAINTS of Hard Measure, and Persecution,
confronted with their own JOYNT-PROCEEDINGS.
C. WHat is it that you call Hard Measure, and Persecution?


N. C. Your Unmerciful Impositions, upon Tender Consciences, by Subscriptions,
Declarations, etc. There are few Petition for Peace, p. 4. 1661,
Nations under the Heavens of God (as far as I can learn) that have more Able,
Holy, Faithful, Laborious, and Truly Peaceable Preachers of the Gospel,
(Proportionably) then Those that are now cast out in England, and are like in
England, Scotland, and Ireland to be cast out, if the Old Conformity be still
urged. Ours Mr. Calamy, Of the Ark, p. 21.
is not a Wicked, Profane, Drunken Ministry.


C. That is, by Interpretation: God We thank Thee, that We are not as other Men
are. -- Nor even as these Publicans. But to the Matter.

These People that you speak of, are set aside for not Obeying the Law: But
What do you think of those, that were turned out of their Livings, because they
would not Oppose it? And they were dispossessed too, by some of the present
Complainants themselves: Who first came in at the Window, and now are turned
out at the Door. No less then a Hundred and fifteen were Ejected here in
London, within the Bills of Mortality (besides Paul's and Westminster) And the
rest of the Kingdom throughout, was purged after that Proportion. Nor was it
thought enough to Sequester, unless they starved them too; for they were not
allowed to take the Employment, either of Schoolmasters, or Chaplains, but
under Heavy Penalties. In South Wales, the Gospel was as well Persecuted, as
the Ministry: The Churches shut up, and the People let loose to the Lusts and
Corruptions of Unbridled Nature. The Only Pretense of Justification that the
Reformers had, was That Unchristian, and Unmanly Libel, WHITE'S CENTURIES of
Scandalous Ministers; wherein, without any Respect, either to Truth, or
Modesty, They have Exposed so many Reverend Names, to Infamy, and Dishonor,
for the better Color of their own Sacrilegious Usurpations. But take This
along with you, that Loyalty in those Days past for a Punishable, and Notorious
Scandal.


N. C. These were Acts of Policy, and let Statesmen answer for them. But to
have Men cast out of the Church, because they will not Subscribe, and Declare,
contrary to their Consciences, is doubtless a most Unconscionable Severity.


C. And What is it in the Subsciption (I beseech you) that you stumble at? As
to the Acknowledgment of his Majesty's Supremacy, I suppose, you would not be
thought to stick at That. And in Matters of Doctrine, you make Profession to
join with us: So that about the Lawfulness of using the Book of Common Prayer,
and your own Submission to the Use of it, is the Only Question. Your Exceptions
likewise to the Declarations seem to be very weakly grounded, unless you make a
Scruple of Declaring your selves for the Uniformity of the Church, Or for the
Peace of the Civil Government: In which Cases you cannot fairly pretend to be
trusted in Either. But not to Extravagate. You are against the Imposing of
Subscriptions, and Declarations, you say.


N. C. I am against the very Imposition it self, upon any Terms; But when They
are pressed upon Grievous Penalties; They are utterly Intolerable.


C. And yet when the Common Prayer was abolish't, There was a PENALTY, of Five
Pound, for the first Offense; Ten for the Second; And a Years Imprisonment,
without Bail or Mainprize, for the Third Offense, upon any Man that should use
it. So that Here was an Interdiction of Our Way of Worship upon a PENALTY; and
No notice taken of Invading the Liberty of Our Consciences. By the same
Ordinance, of August 23. 1645. was also commanded the Exercise and Order of the
Directory; and That upon a FORFEITURE too: With a PENALTY, from Five Pound to
Fifty, upon any Man, that should Preach, Write, or Print any thing to the
Derogation of it. Now Here was Rigor, you see, on Both Sides: But no Clamor,
upon the Matter of Conscience in This Case neither.

How many of Our Ministers were Poisoned in Peter-House, And Other Prisons,
either for Worshipping according to their Consciences, or refusing to Act
against Them! No Man was admitted to his Composition without SWEARING; No Man
to live in the Parliaments Quarters without SWEARING.

Neither were We only debarred the Common Rights of Subjects, and the Benefits
of Society: But the Comforts of Religion were denied Us; And an Anathema
pronounced upon Us for Our Fidelity. The General Assembly in Scotland Ordained,
That known Compliers with the Rebels, and such as Procured Protections from
the Enemy; or kept Correspondence, or Intelligence with Him, should be
Suspended from the Lo^d's Supper, till they manifested their Repentance before
the Congregation. [^illespy's Useful Cases of Conscience, Page 19, 20.] His
late Majesty, in his Large Declaration of the Affairs of Scotland, Page 199.
tells you, That Men were beaten, turned out of their Livings, Reviled,
Excommunicated, Process'd, for NOT SUBSCRIBING the Covenant. And again, Pa.
202. That there was an OATH given at a Communion at F^fe, Not to take the
King's Covenant, Nor any other, but their own. Now, hear the Commissioners of
the General Assembly, July 25. 1648. His Majesty's Concessions, and Offers,
from the Isle of Wight, are to be by the Parliament Declared Unsatisfactory;
Unless his Majesty give Assurance by SOLEMN OATH, under his Hand, and Seal, for
Settling Religion according to the Covenant; before his R^stitution to his
Royal Power,

But that I am loath to overcharge you, I could give you the History of the
Spiritting several Persons of Honor for Slaves; The Sale of Three or Four
Score Gentlemen to the Barbados; beside Plunders, Decimations, and infinite
other Outrages, both Public, and Private. Give me leave to mind you now a
little^ of some few of Your General Provisions for the Destruction of the
King's Party, and the Extirpation of that Family, and Government to which
Providence has once again Subjected you.

Scob. Acts, Pars 1. p 37.
An Ordinance for Sequestration of Delinquents Estates. P. 135.
Delinquents Disabled to bear any Office, or have any Vote in Election of any
Major, etc. Here Is Estate, and Legal Freedom gone already: Now follows
Banishment from One Place, and Confinement to Another. Pars 2. p. 10.
Delinquents must be removed from London and Westminster, and Confined within
five M^es of their own Dwelling. P. 175.
Correspondency with Charles Stuart, or his Par^y, prohibited, under Pain of
High Treason; and P. 372.
Death to any Man, that shall attempt the Revival of his Glaim, or that shall
be Aiding, Assisting, Comforting, or Abetting, unto any Person endeavoring to
set up the Title of Any of the Issue^ of the Late King.

Where were the ABLE, HOLY, FAITHFUL, LABORIOUS, and TRULY PEACEABLE Preachers
of the Gospel, with the Tender Consciences you talk of, when These Things were
a Doing? Truly, Neither Better nor Worse, then up to the very Ears, a great
many of them, in the Main Action. Some, Preaching up the Conscience of the War;
Others, Wheedling the City out of their Money to Maintain it; and Calling for
more Blood in Prosecution of it. Till in the Conclusion, The King, and the
Government, fell in the Quarrel: And the Pulpits all this while at hand, to
Patronize the Reformation.


N. C. This Ripping up of Old Stories, does but widen the Breach, without doing
any Good at all.


C. If you would not hear of these things again, you should not do them again.


N. C. Then it seems the Whole must suffer for some Particulars.


C. No, not so. But neither must the Whole go Scot-free for some Particulars.
Would you have me open my Door to a Troop of Thieves, because there are four or
five Honest Men in the Company? That there are diverse Conscientious, and
well-minded Men among the Non-Conformists, I make no Question. But I am yet
Positive in This, that the Non-Conformists; in Conjunction, are in a Direct
Conspiracy; and that when they come once to agree in a Public Complaint, It
is no longer Conscience, but Faction. This by the By. -- Now to the Matter
before Us; I have given you a Breviate of your own Proceedings, in the very
Case of your Present Complaints. Lay your Hand upon your Heart, and bethink
your self, who are the Persecutors.


N. C. Let the Persecution rest where it will; I am fully persuaded, that there
is no Settling of this Kingdom in a State of Security, Peace, and Plenty,
without an Indulgence, or Toleration.


SECT. XVI.
The Non-Conformists tell us, That Liberty of Conscience is the Common Interest
of This Kingdom: but REASON, and EXPERIENCE tell us the CONTRARY.
C. THat We may not spend our selves in Repetition, Cavil, or Confusion; Take
Notice, that it is the General Cause of the Non Conformists, which is coming
under D^bate. For That Toleration which the Whole Party desires, must needs be
a Toleration of the Whole Party: And That I Oppose; in Confidence, that I have
Reason, and Experience on my side. We have spoken already, as to the
Unlawfulness; and somewhat likewise; to the Dangerous Consequences of it:
Together with the Unruly Opinions, and Practices of several of the Pretenders
to it. We are now to look a little further into it, with a more Immediate
regard to the Common Interest of the Kingdom, which we may place in the
Concernments of Religion, Government, Peace, and Plenty.

To begin with Religion: I do not Understand, how That which delights in Unity,
shall be advantaged by Division, and Fraction.


N. C. As if there could be no Unity of Doctrine, without Uniformity of
Discipline. The Precept is; One Lord, One Faith, One Baptism: And not One Way,
One Form of Worship.


C. I might tell you, that it is of Ancient, and Unreprovable Practice; for
every National Church to appoint its own Platform of Service, and Ceremonies;
And to require Obedience, and Conformity to That Model, and to Those Rites
respectively, from all its Members. But This I shall not insist upon. There is
no Precept (you say) for any One Way, or Form. But can you show me, that an
Uniformity of Service, and Rituals is any where forbidden?


N. C. Not in Particular: But in the General Prohibition of all Uncommanded
Disc. of Relig. Pars 1.
Worship, Page 26.


C. The Matter in short is This. Either We have a Rule in the Gospel for the
Manner of Our Worship; Or we have None. If there be No way of Commanded
Worship, left us, by Christ, and his Apostles; And all Uncommanded Worship be
(as you say) forbidden, There must be No appointed Worship at all; and Then,
every Man is at Liberty, Not only to Worship after what Manner he pleases, but
(effectually) to Choose, Whether he will Worship, or No: Which brings in all sorts
of Heresies, and Blasphemies; and Countenances even Atheism it self. Now, on
the other Hand; If there be any Particular Manner of Worship Prescribed in the
Word of God; from That Particular Manner, we must not presume to Vary, by a
Toleration of any other Way then That; or of More, then One. Besides, that it
undermines the Foundation of all Communities, to deny the Civil Authority a
Right of Interposing in such Cases, as are Neither Commanded, nor Forbidden, by
God.

Let us next Consider the Probable Effects of a Toleration, in respect of the
Parties pretending to it. Which are, either Presbyterian; Or (in a Sense of
Contradistinction) Independent. The Former are for a Subordination in Churches.
The Other for an Independency: (according to their Denomination) These are for
Gathered Congregations; The Other, for Parochial.

I will not trouble you with the Argumentative Part of the Differences betwixt
them; About the Subordination, or Coordination of Churches; The Redundance, or
Defect of Church Officers; The Receptacle of the Power of the Keys, and the
like: But Nakedly, and Briefly, show you the Kindness they have for One
Another; The Regards they have for Christian Charity, in the Menage of the
Quarrel; and Then leave you your self to Judge, what may be the Event of such a
Toleration, as to RELIGION.

The Sectaries (says Edwards in his Gangraena) agree with Julian the Apostate,
P. 54.] They are Libertines, and Atheists, P. 185.] Unclean, Incestuous, P.
187.] Drunkards, P. 190.] Sabbath Breakers, Deceivers, P. 191.] Guilty of Gross
Lying, Slandering, Iuggling, Falsifying their Words and Promises: Excessive
Pride, and Boasting, P. 192.] Insufferable Insolences, Horrible Affronts to
Authority, P. 194.] There never was a more Hypocritical, False, Dissembling,
Cunning Generation in England, then many of the Grandees of those Sectaries. --
They Encourage, Protect, and Cry up for Saints, Sons of Belial, and the Vilest
of Men, P. 240. Gangraena's Second Part, 1646. -- See Now the Other Party do
as much for the Presbyterians.

The Presbyterian Government is Antichristian, Tyrannical, Lordly, Cruel, a
worse Bondage then under the Prel^tes; A Bondage under Taskmasters, as the
Israelites in Egypt: A Presumptu^us, Irregular Consistory, which has no
Ground in the Word of God. Barrow, P. 79.] A Vexatious, Briery, Thorny,
Persecuting Pre^ytery. [Pulpit Incendiary, P. 26.] F^rmidable to States, and
Free Kingdoms. [Mr. Nigh.] The Assembly is Antichristian, Romis^, (...), the
Plague*s, and P^sts of the Kingdom; Baal's Priests. [Gangraena's Second Part,
230.] The Seed of God in This Nation has had Two Capital Enemies, The Romish
Papacy, and the Scotch Presbytery. [Sterry's England's Deliverance, P. 7.] An
Anabaptist said, that He hoped to see Heaven and Earth on fire, before
Presbytery should be settled; [Edwards his Gangraena.] Barrow calls the
Consistorians, Dangerous, and Pestilent Seducers; Ravening Wolves, which come
to Us in Sheeps Clothing.]

This is enough to show you the Mutual, and Implacable Enmity, and Opposition
of the Two Grand Parties, which, you are now persuading your self, might be
gratified, by a Common Indulgence. Let me further Mind you, that the Strife
ended not there Neither, but proceeded to Blood: And that, so soon, as they had
Mastered the Government, in a Combination, under the Masque of Reformation, and
Conscience; They parted Interests, and Upon the Very same Pretext, Engaged in a
Second War; and fell foul, One upon the Other. Wherein they sufficiently
Manifested to the World, that they fought, not for Forms, and Ceremonies; but
for Booty, and Dominion. No less to the Scandal of the Religion of England,
then to the Ruin of the Monarchy.


N. C. You are not to stop my Mouth with Instances of Tumults, and Factions, in
a Peaceable Plea for Religion, and Conscience.


C. Do not you know, that Toleration is as good, as an Issue in a Government?
All the Vicious Humors in the whole Body flow that way. But Suppose it
Conscience; Are the Dissenters ever to be Reconciled? Shall we not have Nem,
and Monstrous Opinions Propagated daily? And will it not be every Man's
business, to Advance the Credit, and Authority of his own Party? Where is the
Bond of Peace, in this Exercise, and Latitude of Dissension? The Unity of the
Church, in this Multiplicity of Professions? Which is the True Religion, among
so many divided, and contradictory Pretenses to it? Or rather; Is there any
Religion at all, where there is neither Christian Charity, Stability of
Principles, Reverence, or Agreement, in God's Worship?


N. C. I hope you will not deny the Protestant Interest to be the Interest of
the True Religion: And undoubtedly, the bringing of the Protestants into an
Union Liberty of Consc. p. 58.
among Themselves, is the Advantage of every Protestant State,] and of
Protestancy it self.


C. Past all Dispute; and an Uniformity of Worship brings them into that Union;
Which is never to be attained, while the World endures, by a Liberty of
Conscience. How was the Protestant Interest (I beseech you) United in the late
Dissolution of Government; When Every Man did that which was Right in his own
Eyes? Examine the Story well, and you will find Reason to believe, that the
Church of Rome has gained more upon Us, since That Unsettlement of
Ecclesiastical Order, then perchance from the first hour of the Reformation,
even unto That very Day. For Liberty of Conscience, did no less bring a Civil
War upon the Protestant Religion, then the Pretended Liberty of the Subject did
upon the State. It turned every Man's Hand against his Brother. Every Man had a
Religi^n to Himself, and every Man's Conscience (as I told you) was his Bible;
and We are still to presume, that like Causes will produce like Effects.

It is also remarquable, that the lowdest, and boldest Declamers against the
Orders of the Church, proved likewise, the most Pragmatical, and Audacious
Invaders of the Civil Peace; The Antecedent Schism serving only for a Prologue
to the Ensuing Sedition.


N. C. This Arraignment of their supposed Disc. of Relig Par. 1. p. 40.
Principles, about Government, may happily proceed upon Mistake. There is Reason
to think, that the many late Disputes, about Prerogative, and Liberty, are
Controversiae ortae, non primae; that they had their Rise from something else,
which lies at the Bottom.


C. This is but Peradventure I, Peradventure No. For if a Man may happily be in a
Mistake, he may happily too be in the Right. I will grant ye likewise, that the
Disputes about Prerogative, and Liberty, had their Rise from somewhat else,
which lay at the Bottom. That is to say; It was not Purity of Religion,
Reformation of the Liturgy, Retrenching the Exorbitant Power of Bishops, or
Scruple of Conscience, (as pretended) that wrought the Subversion of Church,
and State; but it was the Design, which lay at the Bottom, of Carrying on the
Great Work of Overturning the Government, under Countenance of that Plausible
Imposture, and Disguise.


N. C. Inclinations, and Interests, Dise. of Relig. Par. 1. p. 41.
more then Speculative Opinions, will be found to have born the Sway, and
Caused those Active Motions, on the One Hand, and the Other. These Dogmata, or
Problems about Obedience, and Government, do but little, where Men's Affections,
and Concernments do not give them Spirit, and Uigor.


C. It is most Certain, that Problems draw no Blood; and We do not read, that
ever any Man's Throat was cut, with a Speculation, or a Syllogism; But yet,
Inclinations, and Interests (you allow) may do much, toward Mischief: So that,
I have what I desire, if I am but able to make it out, that Liberty of
Conscience will, most indubitably, beget strong Inclinations in the People, to
shake off the Yoke of Government; and that they will not want specious
Appearances of Interest so to Do.

First; The Servants of Jesus Christ (as the Non-Conformists peculiarly style
themselves) have This Advantage of the Subjects of Temporal Princes; that They
serve the Better Master: and the Dignity of their Spiritual Profession
supersedes the Duty of their Political Allegiance. (So often, as they shall
think Good, to stand upon That Privilege) By Virtue of which Prerogative, they
do not only Claim an Exemption from the Obligation, and Reach of Humane Laws;
But a Commission also, and Authority, to Reform those Laws, (in Case of Error,
and Corruption) according to the Standard of the Gospel. Now to this Principle,
and Doctrine, do but add Liberty of Conscience; and the People have Law, and
Magistracy at their Mercy already. For First; they reckon themselves no further
answerable either to the One, or to the Other, then as they find them Warranted
in, and Grounded upon the Word of God. And Secondly; they may choose whether or
no, they will find any Law, or Magistrate, whatsoever, to be so Warranted, or
Grounded; And consequently, Whether there shall be any Government, or No. One
Man's Conscience cannot allow This, or That Injunction to be according to God's
Word: It may be Lawful to Another, but it is not so to Him; and He calls for
Indulgence, and Moderation. Another Man's Conscience swears by the most High
God, that it is point blank Against it; and nothing will serve Him, but utter
Extirpation. And whatsoever they call Conscience, must pass for Current. Every
Man is to govern himself by his own Opinion; not by Another bodies. It is no
longer Liberty of Conscience, if a Man shall be run down, and concluded, by
Prescription, Authority, Consent of Fathers, Scripture, Reason, and the like,
without being CONVINCED.


N. C. I thought you would have showed me in what manner, or by what means
Liberty of Conscience comes to turn the Hearts, and Interests of Subjects
against their Superiors, as you said you would.


C. A little Patience, and I Will be as good as my Word. It has brought us to
this pass, already, you see, that it has cast the Government upon the good
Nature of the Multitude, and made it purely dependent upon the Breath of the
People, whether it shall Stand, or Fall. So that (in short) the Matter in
Question, falls under these Two Considerations. First; Whether a People, left
to Themselves, either to be under the Restrient of Laws, or not, will not
rather agree to cast off a Government, then to defend it. Secondly; Whether
they will not, likewise, find a very fair appearance of Interest, and
Advantage, in so doing. The Former, I think, will easily be Granted, by any Man
that does but advise either with the Common Practices of the World, or with
Humane Frailty: Taking the World, either in Individuals, or in Parties.

What says the Artificer, the Tradesman, the Farmer? Why should We be put upon
Extremities of Hard Labor, Course Fare, Rising early, and Going to Bed late?
(and all little enough to keep our Families from starving) any more then such,
and such; that lie wallowing in Ease, Abundance, Luxury, and Riot? But This we
may thank the Law for; that has Appropriated those Possessions to Particulars,
which God Almighty gave us in Common. Why should We be the Drudges of the
Kingdom? (says the Day-Labourer) The Law is Their Enemy too, because it keeps
them in Awe, that they dare not Steal. It is the same Case, with Traitors,
Felons, Vagabonds, and all Criminals. And so it is with Factions, and
Associated Parties; We might set up This Government, or This Church; and We,
The Other, (say they) if it were not for Those Accursed Laws, that make it Death
to Endeavor such an Alteration. This is a True, and Naked Account of the
Peoples Thoughts, and Reasonings, in the Point of Liberty, and Obedience: and a
sufficient Proof of their INCLINATION (not against This, or That; but) against
any Establishment: It being the main End of Government, to secure the Community
against the Encroachments, and Attempts of Particulars: Though to the very
great Damage, and Ruin, (many times) of Private Persons, and Parties.

If you be satisfied now, that the People do not Naturally love Government, you
need not doubt but they will judge it their INTEREST to Remove it: Every
Malcontent, enterteining himself with hopes of mending his Condition upon the
Change. But Alas! This is not an Undertaking for Single Persons, Small Parties,
or Petty Factions, by Themselves apart; but some Common Medium must be found
out, for the Uniting of them All; which, indeed, is amply provided for, in the
Project of Liberty of Conscience: and does not only facilitate the Work, by
drawing the Disaffected into a Body; but it does also Countenance, and
Encourage it, by Authorizing the Separation.


N. C. But to Me, it seems, on the Contrary, that an Indulgence would set
Indulg. and Toler. p. 24
the Peoples Minds at Liberty from Fears and Contrivances, for the avoidance of
Impendent Dangers; and encourage them to engage the Utmost of their Endeavors
and Abilities, in the Businesses of Peace, and Security.]


C. As to the Security, and Peace of the Public, if enough be not already
said, you may repair to the History of our late Broils, for the rest: Where you
will also find the Condition of Particulars, to have been every jote as
Distracted, and Unquiet (in proportion) as That of the Government.

You are to expect Schisms in Corporations, Companies, Families; as well as in
Religious Congregations: Divisions, as well betwixt Parents, and Children;
Masters, and Servants; as betwixt Rulers, and Subjects: Feuds betwixt Man, and
Wife; betwixt Brethren, Kindred, Friends; and all these Differences, variously
Influenced, according to the Benignity, or Malignity of their Divided Opinions.
Nor will it be any wonder, (upon admittance of This Liberty) to have as many
Religions in a House, as Persons: where the Husband draws one way, the Wife,
another; and the Rest of the Family have Their ways by Themselves, too. And
This goes on, (to the utter Extermination of Order, Duty, and Quiet) till they
have thoroughly wearied themselves, with Tossing, and Tumbling from one Sect, or
Profession, to another. And then, when they are at their Wits End, they
commonly take up in the Church of Rome, with an Implicit Faith, in the
Conclusion.

Now if what I have said, may be of force sufficient to prove, that Liberty of
Conscience, is destructive, both of Religion, and Government; and of the Peace
of the Kingdom, as well Private, as Public. I cannot see how it should
advance us, (as is earnestly suggested) in the Business of Trade, and Plenty.


N. C. We shall never have a Flourishing Trade without it: Because the Pressure
Liberty of Consc. p. ^8. (...).
in these things falls generally more upon the Trading sort of Men, then any in
the Nation. We may see it in the Great City, and in all Corporations: It makes
many give over Trading, and Retire; It makes others remove into Holland, and
other Foreign Parts; as it did heretofore from Norwich, to the Irrecoverable
Prejudice of our Clothing Trade, upon the like Occasion; And it certainly
prevents all Protestant Strangers to come to Live, and Trade among us.


C. The Pressure (you say) falls most upon TRADERS: I answer, that you begin
with a Non Constat; for the Thing it self does not appear. And then, you make
Traders more Scrupulous then the rest of the Nation, who are not Generally
understood to be more Conscientious; as having diverse Temptations in the way of
their Employments, to strein a Point of Conscience now and then; and they are
but Men, as well as their Neighbors. If your Observation be Right; We may
thank the Nonconforming Ministers, who have had the handling of them.

Your urging, that want of Liberty makes many give over Trading, and Retire,
does not agree with their Observation, that place their Wonder on the other
side, that so many Hold; considering the Circumstances of a long, and Expensive
War with the French, and Dutch. (The most Expensive that ever this Kingdom
undertook) And Two of the most dreadful, and destroying Judgments that ever
Almighty God laid upon this Nation, i. e. Pestilence, and Fire, one upon the
neck of another.

You object, the Removal of others into Holland, as formerly. Indeed it is not
for the Credit of your Cause to mind us of those that formerly left us. Take
the Peins to read Bayly's Disswasive, Pa. 75. and there you shall see what Work
they made in Holland: Even such, that Peter's himself was scandalized at it;
quitted his Congregation, and went to New England. Bridge, Sympson, and Ward,
renounced their English Ordination, and took Ordination again from the People.
The People, after this, deposed Mr. Ward; and the Schism betwixt Sympson's
Church, and Bridge his, was so fierce, that their Ministers were fain to quit
their Stations; and the Dutch Magistrate forced to interpose the Civil
Authority to quiet them. In New England, their Humor, and Behavior not much
Better (according to the Report of the same Author, Page 60, 61.) Of Forty
Thousand Souls, not a Third Part would be of any Church; and such Heresies
started, as a Man would tremble to Recite. If only such as These forsake us,
the Land has a good Riddance.

Further; If it was to the Prejudice of our Clothing Trade, (This Separation)
Who can help it? It was Their Fault to betray the Interest of their Country, by
teaching the Mystery to Foreigners; but no blame at all can be reflected upon
the Government, for Refusing Toleration to such Lawless, and Unruly Libertines.

Now, as to the hindering of Protestant Strangers from coming over to us, and
Trading with us, It is a clear Mistake, to imagine the Church of England to be
such a Bugbear to those of the Reformation abroad, as is pretended. (Which
shall hereafter be made appear) It is not the Act of Uniformity that hinders
Strangers, but the want of an Act of Endenisation; which, perchance, the Wisdom
of future Times will find convenient, for the Supply, and Repair of that
Depopulation which is brought upon us by our Colonies.

But to come to an Issue. How was it with Trade, when Conscience took the full
Swinge? It brought on a War; and so it must again, or a Standing Army to
prevent it. How many Families were ruined, on the one side, with pure
Benevolence to the Cause, in Contributions, and Enterteinments to the Devourers
of Widows Houses, and the Captivaters of silly Women? And on the other side, as
many were undone with Taxes, and Plunder. How went Trading on, when all
Business was neglected, but Gallopping up and down to Lectures, to hear News,
and Sedition? When Prentices robbed their Masters, and took Sanctuary in the
Service? When Public Faith was a Tradesmans best Security; and the whole
Nation held Life, and Estate, at the good Pleasure of a Close Committee?


N. C. Let Liberty of Conscience be Liberty of Conscience, p. 58.
once FITLY given, and the Root of all Men's Hopes, and Pretensions, that desire
Public Mischief, is pulled up.


C. FITLY, will be well indeed; But (with your Favor) what is the meaning of
FITLY? How shall we agree upon the Dos? Unless you intend, that the Magistrate
is to continue Giving, till the Subject shall leave Asking. And That must be:
For, If ever he thinks of holding his hand sooner, he had better have done
nothing.


N. C. But what Color will there be for any further Exception?


C. The very same they have now. New Scruples will bolt New Demands: And
Beside; I should be glad if you would furnish me with any one Instance, where
the Non-Conformists were ever the better for Indulgence.


SECT. XVII.
This Kingdom has been still the Worse for Indulging the Non-Conformists, and
the Party never the Better. Which evinces, that UNIFORMITY is the True Interest
of This Government, and Not Toleration.
C. UPon Queen Elizabeth's coming to the Crown, Those Non-Conformists, that
fled, in Queen Mary's Days, and Separating from the English Congregation at
Francfort, went off to Geneva, came back again for England: and with their
Libels, Clamours, Private Consultations, and Meetings, gave Trouble enough to
the Government for the Ten first Years of her Majesty's Reign; who was, at that
time, so beset, with the Roman Catholics, on the One Hand; and the Puritans,
on the Other, that she thought it well, upon that Pinch, to save her self,
without Exercising Rigor, and Severity upon either Party. This Impunity gave
them the Confidence, a while after, to declare themselves for the Geneva
Discipline, and (in the Fourteenth of Her Reign) by an Audacious Pamphlet
(under the Title of An Admonition) to press the Parliament to a Reformation.
The Principal Abetters of This Libel were Discovered, and Clapped up; And soon
after, out comes a Second Admonition; telling the Parliament, in Plain English,
that, if Authority would not, they must set it up Themselves. And it was not
long, ere they were as good as their Words, by Erecting several Formal
Presbyteries up and down the Kingdom. (As appeared, upon Undeniable Proof, and
Confession of Parties to the Combination) They had their Synods; their
Classical, and Provincial Conferences; Pronounced their Decrees: Concurring in
the main against Bishops, Ceremonies, and Common Prayer. They had their Agents
throughout the Kingdom, upon a strict Survey of the Value of every Benefice;
the Number of Parishioners; Their Quality, manner of Life, and Conversation.
Their Book of Discipline was long upon the Anvile; but at length, (about 1586.)
it was Finished, Communicated, and Subscribed: with a Promise, to observe it
Themselves, and to use all Lawful, and CONVENIENT Means to further, and advance
it. In Conclusion; the whole Matter came to be Detected; Cartwright, Snape, and
several of the Ringleaders, were Examined, and Committed: Whereupon, Coppinger,
Arthington, Hacket, Wigginton, etc. Entered into a Conspiracy for their
Deliverance; and to have the Blood of every Man Cambden' s Eliz. 1591.
that should dare to give his Vote against them, in the Star Chamber; nay, to
Depose the Queen her self, in Case of her Refusal to promote the Reformation.
And all this, not without the Privity, and Tacit Approbation of the most
considerable Ministers of the Party.

This was the blessed Fruit of Lenity, and Forbearance under Queen Elizabeth;
The Law Iustled out by a Faction; A Plot upon the Life of the Queen, and
Counsel, carried on, under Color of Religion, and Reformation.


N. C. Still I perceive, you pick out the foulest Cases, and Instances you can
lay hold on, to Match with Ours.


C. Is it not rather your Misfortune, to write after the foulest Copies? But to
the Business: What would you say, if his Majesty now in being, had Queen
Elizabeth's Game to Play? Apprehensions of his Life, from Jesuits, Both
Protestant, and Papist? The whole Generation of the Non-Conformists United
against his Person, and Government, as well in Judgment, as in Faction? (which
are here divided into a Thousand Disagreements) You would (beyond all
peradventure) give the Government for lost, without an immediate Recourse to an
Act of Indulgence, and Accommodation, to preserve it. But the Policy of Those
Times made Choice rather of another Course; Some were Imprisoned; Others, put
to Death; according to the Demerit of the Offense.


N. C. Are you for Punishing Inconformity with Death then?


C. No, by no means; Hacket, you know, was not put to Death for Inconformity,
but for Treason. And pray let me give You a Brief of his Story, as Cambden
delivers it.

He was born at Oundle in Northamptonshire; Cambden' s Eliz. 1591.
a Poor, Insolent, Ill-natured, and Illiterate Fellow. He married a Widow,
spent her Fortune in Riot; and when he had Nothing else to Trust to, betook
himself to the Imposture of Religion, and an Affectation of the Geneva
Discipline: So far Ingratiating himself with several of the Prime Zealots of
That Profession, that they did him the Honor to make Him of their Council, in
their Grand Design, (to the Execution whereof, He also pretended an
Extraordinary Call, and Commission from Above) He was (in Conclusion)
Apprehended, Charged with Treason, found Guilty, Condemned, and Executed.

Now to show you the Devil himself, in the shape of an Angel of Light, This
Hacket, as He was upon the Hurdle, in the way to his Execution, never left
Calling upon Almighty God, with Hideous Outcries: And Now behold (says he) the
Heavens are Ibid.
Open, and the Son of the most High coming down to Deliver me. When he was come
to the Place of Execution, He prosecuted his Blaspemies, with more Horrid, and
Furious Exclamations: [Heavenly, and Almighty God; Thou that art the Alpha, and
Omega; Lord of Lords, and King of Kings; Thou Eternal God; That know ME to
be the True JEHOVAH, that thou have sent; Show some Miracle from Heaven, for
the Conversion of These Infidels; and save me from my Enemies; Or if thou do
not, I Will set the Heavens on Fire, and with these very Hands cast Thee out of
Thy Throne.

I should have scrupled the bare Recital of these Blasphemies, were it not for
the Desire I have, to Possess you with a Due Consideration of those Execrable
Abuses, that are frequently Imposed upon the World, under the Visor of
Religion. The Condition of the Kingdom was doubtless very sad, that had such
Turbulent Spirits to deal withal; and yet we find, that by One Severe Law (of
the 35th of the Queen's Reign) Her Majesty gave her Self, and her People,
Quiet, as to That Particular, for the whole Remainder of her Life.

The Penalties (as I remember) were These* Imprisonment without Bail or
Main-prize, for being Present at Unla^ul Conve^ricles; The Offender to be
discharged, if within Three Months He made his Open Submission, and
Acknowledgment, in the Form by the said Statute appointed. But in Case of
Recusancy to Conform within That time, He was required to Abjure the Realm. And
in Case of Refusing to Abjure; Or of not Departing within a limited Lime; Or of
Returning without License, to be proceeded against as a Felon, without Benefit
of Clergy.


N. C. And yet you see, for all your D^sc. of Relig. Par. 1. p. 24.
New-modelling of Corporations; Prohibiting of Conventicles, Removing
Non-Conformists five Miles from the Place of their Usual Supports, and
Influences: Nevertheless, the State Ecclesiastical has advanced little in the
Esteem, Acceptance, or Acquiescence of the People.


C. This is very True; and if Other Laws for the Prevention of Capital Crimes,
were no better Executed, then That for Uniformity, Your Argument would lie as
fair every jot, for the Toleration of Murder, as it does now for Schism. But
however, it succeeded well with Queen Elizabeth; and not worse with King James,
as appears by the Story.

His Majesty (under Twelve Years Old) took the Government of Scotland into his
Hand. The Year following, the Ministers Ann^ 1577
presented a Form of Church-Policy, to the Parliament then Sitting; and upon
the Debate, matters were agreed, as far as Possible, without Prejudice to the
King's Authority, and the Liberty of the Subject: And These Points were either
referred to further Consideration, or passed over in Silence. The Assembly took
snuff at this D^latory way of Proceeding, and, without more ado, passed a
Vote, for doing their own Business, without asking the Parliament leave. They
began with the Archbishop of Glasgow: and presently fell upon the whole Order,
requiring Them to renounce their Temporal Titles, Their Civil Jurisdiction; To
decline their Votes in Parliament, and to submit themselves to a Retrenchment
of their Episcopal Revenues. Their next step, was the Demolishing of the
Cathedral at Glasgow: But when the Quarriers were just entering upon the Work,
the Tradesmen of the Town, in an Uproar, threatened the Undertake^s, and so
they quitted it: But not without a Complaint to the Council, of the Insolence
of the Mutineers; Which came to This Issue, his Majesty justified the
Tradesmen, and forbad the Ministers any further meddling in the Destroying of
Churches. And This was all the Cheque they had for so lewd an Outrage.

In 1579, The King wrote to the Ministers, not to prejudge the Decisions of the
Parliament, then approaching, by the Conclusions of their Assembly; and to
Forbear the Practice of any Innovations, till their Meeting. Whereupon, instead
of Complying, they proceeded to a Positive Resolution of Adhering to their
Former Conclusions; Questioned the Archbishop of St. Andrews, for giving his
Voice in Parliament; and soon after, by an Act of Assembly, They commanded the
Bishops, under Pain of Excommunication, not to Exercise the Office of Pastors,
in any sort whatsoever, without License from the General Assembly; and further
directing, the Patrimony of the Church to be so disposed of, as they should
judge Reasonable at their next Convention: Thus, by Degrees, growing Bolder and
Bolder, upon Forbearance.

The Particulars of their Usurpations would be too tedious; I could otherwise
tell you of their Justification of the Treasonous Seizure of the King at
Ruthuen; Their Propositions, and Compleints in 1583, with the King's Gentle
Return; Their Covenants, and Seditious Practices, even to the Encouraging; and
Avowing of Open Rebellion. And still the more Plyant, and Easy his Majesty
was, The more Contumacious, and Untractable were these People. In the End; What
with the Tumult at Edinburgh, in 1596; and the Ministers Band of Confederacy,
immediately upon it; The King was forced upon a Resolution of Rigor, and
Severity; and (as Spotswood observes) he received little or no Opposition
thereafter.

At his Majesty's Entry upon the Government of England, the Ceremonies of his
first Reception, and Inauguration were scarce over, but He was assaulted with
Petitions, and Importunities about the Reformation of the Government, and
Liturgy of the Church: in the Name of Thousands of Godly, Learned, and
Conscientious Men, that could not Conform: Whereupon, a Proclamation was Issued
for a Conference to be held at Hampton Court, in January, 1604. So many
Bishops, and Deans appointed for the Church; and for the Petitioners, there
appeared, Dr. Reynolds, Dr. Sparks, Mr. Knewstubb, and Mr. Chadderton.

The Points in Controversy, were Particularly, and Solemnly Debated; and in
the End, such Satisfaction given even to the Plaintiffs Themselves, that they
all promised Obedience; and Dr. Sparks became, afterward, an Advocate for the
Orders of the Church, and wrote a Treatise for Conformity. Knewstubb indeed
boggled a little, and desired to know, How far an Ordinance of the Church was
Binding, without Offense to CHRISTIAN LIBERTY? Upon which General Question, The
King turned short, and Answered him; Le Roy^s' avisera: Let us have no more of
Those Questions, How far you are bound to Obey, what the Church has once
Ordained: But Conform at your Peril.

While the Business was fresh, they made a faint Pretense of Appealing to
another Conference: but upon second Thoughts, they let it totally fall, and
never gave the King any further Trouble upon That Subject.

Thus far, you see, the Government has been preserved by strictness of Order,
and Uniformity. We come now to those Fatalities of Tenderness, and Relaxation
that destroyed us.


N. C. You never consider, that the Non-Conformists are more Numerous, and
Powerful now then formerly they were, by many Degrees: and that the Dissenters
Cause has got Ground upon the Church-Interest, ever since. But follow your
Discourse.


C. In the First of the late King; was exhibited, in Parliament, A Petition,
(among other Matters) for the Propagation of the Gospel, and the Restoring of
Silenced Ministers; to which, his Majesty, returned a Gracious, and Yielding
Answer, which produced a Remonstrance of Miscarriages in Government; Insomuch,
that his Majesty was forced to Dissolve That Parliament.

In the Second Year of his Reign; He called another Parliament, which pursued
the same Method, and went a little Higher then the Former: So that the King was
fain to Dissolve That too.

In the Year following; the King called Another; and upon their Meeting, went
somewhat a quicker way to work with them: Minding them, in a short, and
pertinent Speech, of their Past Failings; advising them to steer a more
Peaceable Course for the Future, and not to put him upon Extremities, to
provide for the Safety of his People. This change of Style, and Resolution, in
his Majesty, drew Immediately from the Commons, a Grant of Five Subsidies. The
King was too Generous, and Candid to take That Present for a Bait; and
Relapsing into his former Temper of Charity, and Softness, was presently
accosted with The Petition of Right; which, after some Difficulty, and Demur,
His Majesty passes: And after This, followed a Petition, Remonstrance, and
Protestation, which put an End also to That Convention.

Look now a little into the Scotch Affairs, and observe the Growth of the
Non-Conformists Demands, from one thing to another; till in the End, by virtue
of what the King Granted them, they possessed themselves of all the Rest. In
their Tumults (says his Majesty) they complein'd only of the Service Book. In
King's large Dec. p. 73.
their Petition exhibited to the Counsel; they complein'd of the Service Book,
and Canons. In their Covenant they complein of, and Abjure the Five Articles of
Perth. (although Established, first by a General Assembly, and Then by
Parliament) After This, they complein of the High Commission; And Then, of
Prelates Sitting in Civil Judicatories.

Hereupon, His Majesty Commissions Marquis Hamilton, with full Power, and Large
Declar. p. 77.
Authority, to Conclude, and Determine all such Things as should be found for
the Good, Quietness, and Peace of that Kingdom: Directing him also to take the
mildest Course that might be, for the Calming of those Commotions. And what
Effect had this Peaceable Inclination of His Majesty, upon the Covenanters, but
to blow them up into more Seditious, and bolder Practices, against the King's
Authority, and the Public Peace? They pursue their Demands, and Clamor for a
Free General Assembly, and a Parliament. His Majesty gives them all their
Askings: Indicts a Free General Assembly, Ib. p. 137.
and a Parliament; Disch^rges the Service Book, the Canons; High Commission;
The ur^ing of the Five Articles of Perth: Commands the Subscribing of the
Confession of Faith, and the Band thereto annexed; in the very Form which they
pretended to Impose; And offers them an Act of Indemnity for what was past. In
all which Condescentions, the King's Patience, and Mercy only served to
heighten, and confirm those Men in their Undertaking, and to expose his Royal
Dignity, to Contempt. In the conclusion, the King had so far gratified their
Importunities, that they had nothing left to Quarrel upon, but His Majesty's
refusal to Abolish Episcopacy, and to admit the Authority of their Lay Elders.

From hence, they brake out into open Rebellion; and (when the King had them
directly at his Mercy) upon the Interview of the two Armies near Berwick, such
was his Tenderness, that upon their Supplication for a Treaty, he Trusted them
again, and Concluded a Pacification; whereof the Covenanters observed not so
much as One Article.

Upon his Return to London, His Majesty (as is elsewhere observed) passes the
Triennial Bill; Abolishes the Star Chamber, and High Commission Court: Passes
an Act for the Continuance of the Parliament. Not to insist upon the several
other Concessions, concerning Ship Money, Forests, and Stannary Courts; Tunnage
and Poundage, Knighthood, etc.

Now in Requital of these Benefits, the Faction Claps up, and Prosecutes his
Majesty's Friends; Prefers, and Enlarges his Enemies; Rewards the Scots;
Entertains their Commissioners; Votes Them their Dear Brethren, for Invading
Us; Calls in all Books, and Proclamations against them. They take away the
Bishops Votes; Impose a Protestation upon the People; Take away the Earl of
Strafford's Life; Charge Twelve of the Bishops with Treason; Declare the King's
Proclamations to be False, Scandalous, and Illegal; Keep his Majesty out of his
own Towns; and Seize his Arms, and Ammunition. They present Him with Nineteen
Propositions for the Resignation of his Royal Authority. They Vote a General,
and Raise an Army against him. They Usurp the Power of the Militia, and give
the King Battle; Levy Moneys; and Declare the Queen Guilty of Treason.

After all These Usurpations upon the Civil Power, They are put to it to bring
the Cause of Religion once again upon the Stage: They enter into a Covenant;
and call in the Scots again; They Abolish the Common Prayer; secure the Person
of the King; Share the Revenues of the Church, and Crown. They Sequester,
Banish, and Imprison his Majesty's Adherents; and in the Conclusion, Sell,
Depose, and Murder their Sovereign.

This was the Fruit of that Pious, and Unfortunate Prince his Clemency, and
Indulgence.

Now to bring the Instance home to the present Times: What could be more Pious,
Gracious, or Obliging, then His Majesty's Declaration concerning Ecclesiastical
Affairs, in Favor of the Non-Conformists? All that was possible for the King
to do, in Consistence with Conscience, Honor, and the Peace of his Dominions,
His Majesty has therein given them a frank Assurance of. (with their Lives, and
Estates, over and above, in the Act of Oblivion) And are they one jote the
Quieter for all This? No, but the Worse: for no sooner was the King's
Tenderness, in That Particular, made Public, but the Generality (even of
those that had lately Entered into a Regular, and Dutiful Compliance with the
Orders of the Church) started into a new Revolt: which proves sufficiently, the
Benefit, and Necessity of a strict Rule, and the hazard of a Toleration: For
rather then abide the Penalty of the Act, they could Conform; but upon the
least Glimpse of a Dispensation, they Rel^pse into a Schism.

Neither do I find, that they were less Troublesome, before the Act of
Uniformity, when they Preached at Random, then they have been since; Nor, to
say the Truth, that they have much more Cause of Compleint, Now, then they had
Then. For what are they the worse, for a Penalty, that is never Executed?

But if you will have a True Measure of their Moderation, and Good Nature: I
pray'e take notice of their Proceedings upon His Majesty's Commission, for the
Review of the Book of Common Prayer. We will appoint (says His Majesty, in his
Declaration concerning Ecclesiastical Affairs) an Equal Number of Learned
Divines of Both Persuasions, to Review the The Liturgy.
same, and to make such ALTERATIONS as shall be thought most NECESSARY. So that
the Alterations were to be agreed upon by BOTH PARTIES, and found likewise to
be NECESSARY. Now instead of Alterations, jointly agreed upon, They Publish a
Complete Liturgy of their own; indeed a New Directory; but under the Title of
The REFORMATION of the Liturgy. (which in all their Books, signifies
ABOLITION) Give me the favor, next, to observe upon some of their NECESSARY
Alterations. They have turned WEDDED Wife, into MARRIED. DO THOU Believe?
into DO YOU Believe? All this I STEADFASTLY Believe, into All this I UNFEIGNEDLY
Believe. These are some of the Important Scruples, that are cast into the
Balance, against the Unity of the Church, and the Peace of the Kingdom. What is
This, but to make Sport with Authority, and Conscience? Laws must be Suspended;
Princes, Vilified and Importuned; because, forsooth, the Godly Party may not be
Governed by Laws of their own making: Nay, by Words of their own choosing too;
So that we are like to have a Schism, for Syllables, as well as for Ceremonies.
For what is the Difference betwixt WEDDED, and MARRIED, but that the One wears
the Stamp of the Lawmakers, and the Other, of the Law-Menders?

Is it not now evident, that they are the worse for good usage? And that they
have ever been so? You see the Effects of keeping to a Rule, in Queen
Elizabeth, and King James: And we have since felt, to our Cost, the Effects of
a Relaxation: which abundantly satisfies me, That UNIFORMITY is the true
Interest of This Government, and not TOLERATION.


N. C. Uniformity is the Interest of This Kingdom, as it is of any other, where
there is any fair Possibility of Procuring it. But the Principles of Dissent
have taken such Root in this Land, that you may as well think of Depopulating
the Nation, as of Uniting it, upon the Points in Question.


C. But I am otherwise persuaded; and that the Party of Non-Conformists is not
so considerable, as you make it.


SECT. XVIII.
The Party of Scrupulous, and Conscientious Non-Conformists, is neither
NUMEROUS, nor DANGEROUS.
C. I Am apt to believe that Party is not so Numerous as you represent it, for
many Reasons, First; I take English Men's Consciences, and their Neighbors, to
be much of a Make: And I do not find the Subject of Our Controversy, to be
made Matter of Conscience, by any other sort of Christians whatsoever, out of
his Majesty's Dominions.


N. C. It Is well we have Good Authority to the Contrary. The Preface to the
Directory assures us, that The Liturgy used in the Church of England, has
proved an Offense, not only to the Godly at Home; but also to the Reformed
Churches Abroad. And Smectymnuus tells the Parliament, (Page 10.) that there is
such a vast difference between It, and the Liturgies of all other Reformed
Churches as that it keeps them at a Distance from us.


C. We Will talk of That anon; and in the mean time (with your good leave) pursue
what we have now before us. Another thing that peswades me the Conscientious
number of Dissenters cannot be very great, is This. The Law has made an Ample
Provision for their Relief: Leaving every Household, with Four more, at Liberty
to Worship according to their own way. So that the Laity has no Pretense of
Compleint; Especially, those that plead for the Ordination of their own
Ministers, and maintein, that Seven Persons make a Full, Ministerial, and
Completely Organized Church.

A Man might make an Exception to your Account too, upon the score of Old
Reckonings; for you have ever had the faculty of Multiplication. Your Thousands
at Hampton Court, came to a matter of Nine and Forty: And we remember very
well, your old way of Personating Petitions, from Multitudes of the Godly, and
Well-affected, in both City, and Country; when, effectually, the poor Innocent
Papers never Traveled farther, then from the Close Committee, to the Lobby.


N. C. If you will not Credit Report, believe your Eyes. Do you not find our
Meetings Thronged, and many of your Churches Empty?


C. Somewhat, of Both, I must Confess: but yet I am likewise informed, that you
show diverse of these Meetings, as Peter's did his Rings, and Bodkins, at several
Places, several times over and over, to make a Noise, and increase the
Reputation of your Party.

To contract the Discourse. There is a loud Clamor, and the Ministers make it.
And These too, that stickle in the Cause, none of the most Conscientious
neither, unless they have a Gospel we never heard of; to Justify Disobedience
in Themselves; the Provoking of it in Others; The Disturbing of the Public
Peace, and the Sowing of Dissension betwixt Prince, and People: Which is
manifestly the Scope of their Writings, and Designs.


N. C. That Undertaking goes somewhat too far, to pronounce upon their Designs.
Do you pretend to know their Hearts then?


C. Yes; and with very good Authority, If a Man may be allowed to judge what
Reasonable Men aim at, from deliberate Words, and Actions, that lead naturally,
to such and such Certain Ends. And this Humor (I tell ye) of Aspersing the
Government, and Teizing the Multitude, runs through all their Papers. I durst
appeal to your own Soul, Whether you your self can Imagine, that a Twentieth
Part of the present Plaintiffs in Matter of Conscience, are truly acted, and
possessed with that Scrupulosity they pretend to. Alas! Alas! You talk of
Conscience: It Is not what every Man Thinks, or Says, that is presently
Conscience. We are imposed upon, by Fancy, Artifice, or Delusion. Some
Deceive Themselves, and Others Cosen Us. In one Word; Whatsoever is not of
Conscience, in this Medly, is Faction: And undoubtedly, the Conscientious Party
has but a slender share in the Mixture.

As That Party is not Numerous, so neither is it Dangerous: upon a Principle of
Honesty, and Religion. No Man of Conscience, can either desire to Embroyl the
Kingdom, or expect to be the Better for it. But still have a care how ye take
every thing for Gold, that Glisters. Conscience was the Subject of the last
Quarrel; Religion, the Pretext; Popery the Bugbear; And the Issue of it was
Dreadful. Consider with your selves; You have many of the same Persons to lead
you on; And They have the very same Matter too, to work upon. You meant no hurt
to the last King, you say; And yet you ruined him: You may perchance Intend as
little Harm to This, and yet do him as much. And what amends is it, when the
Government is laid again in Dust, and Desolation, to cry, You were Overseen? If
you had thought it should ever have come to This, you would have cut off your
Hands, or Tongues; and I know not what. Look Back; and Tremble at the Course
you are now upon; for you are, Questionless, in the very Track of the late
Rebellion. And one may, without Breach of Charity, conclude, that No Man that
was an Active Instrument in the last War, can acquit himself of a most
Prodigious Impiety, and Ingratitude, in reviving, and prosecuting the same
Interest, and Method now against the SON, by which, he notoriously contributed
toward the Death of the FATHER.


SECT. XIX.
The Non-Conformists Appeal, from the Government, and Discipline of the Church
of England, to the Judgment, and Practice of the Reformed Churches BEYOND THE
SEAS; Examined, and Submitted to Censure.
C. IT is observable, that throughout the whole Quarrel against the Orders, and
Government of the Church of England, the Non-Conformists still fly for
Countenance to the Judgment of the Reformed Churches, Abroad: And so likewise
in the Question of Toleration, they Insist much upon the Practice, and
Tenderness of Other Churches: As if the Ecclesiastical State of This Kingdom,
were as Singular, for Tyranny, and Corruption, as, in Truth, the Litigants
Themselves are for Contumacy, and Disobedience.

In the Answer of the Two Houses to Ex. Coll. p. 604.
the Scots Declaration, 164^. This Government, by Archbishops, Bishops, etc.
is Declared to be Evil, justly Offensive, and Burdensome to the Kingdom; a great
Impediment to the Reformation, and Growth of Religion: and Resolved it is, that
it shall be taken away: With a Regard to the Introducing of another Government,
more apt to procure an Union, with the Church of Scotland, and OTHER REFORMED
CHURCHES ABROAD. And the Ministers, in the Petition for P. 13.
Peace, sing the same Note too: If Men (say they) must be cast out of the
Church, and Ministry, because they are not wiser then the Pastors of most of
the REFORMED CHURCHES, etc. As who should say; The Church of England is the
only Protestant Church in the Christian World, that pretends to This Way of
Proceeding; and the Protestants Abroad, are all of the Non-Conformists side.
Let this Matter be fairly Examined, I beseech you, and we shall quickly see
where the Fault lies.

In the first Place; What is the Judgment of the Reformed Churches abroad,
touching the English Episcopacy?


N. C. You may read their, Judgments in their Practices; Or it is but looking
into the Reformation, in France, Holland, and the Neighborhood, and you may
resolve your self, in that Point.


C. Truly I find nothing at all to your Advantage, which way soever I look;

Luther himself distinguishes betwixt Apol. Conf. p. 137.
Popish Tyrants, and True Bishops, and professes to Condemn them as Popish, not
as Bishops.

The Authors of the Augustane Confession De Reform. advers. Eccles. p. 95.
profess; that they would willingly preserve the Ecclesiastical, and Canonical
Polity, if the Bishops would cease to Tyrannize over their Churches.

Bucer declares himself wholly, for Bishops, and Metropolitans: And Melancthon
to Luther; You would not Imagine (says he) how some People are Nettled, to see
Church-Polity restored: as if it were the Romish Sovereignty again. Ita de
Regno suo, non de Evangelio, dimicant Socii nostri. As if the Quarrel were
Dominion, not Religion.

Calvin acknowledges, that the Ancient Government, by Archbishops, and
Bishops; and the Nicene Constitution of Patriarchs, was for Orders sake, and
Good Government. And delivers himself to Cardinal Sadolet, with an Anathema
upon the Opposers of that Hierarchy, which submits it self to Jesus Christ.

Zanchie (the Compiler of the Gallican Confession) observes a Change of Name,
rather then of Office, throughout most of the German Churches: As
Super-Intendents, and General-Super Intendents, in the place of Bishops, and
Archbishops: Acknowledging that by the Consent of Histories, Counsels, and the
Ancient Fathers, Those Orders have been Generally allowed by all Christian
Societies. Where they are in Exercise, let them continue; and where, by the
Iniquity of the Times, they have been abolished, they ought to be restored.

Beza (the rigid Successor of Calvin) in excuse to the Archbishop of
Canterbury, for meddling beyond his Sphere: -- We do not charge (says he) all
Archbishops, and Bishops, with Tyranny. -- The Church of England has offorded
many Learned Men, and many Glorious Martyrs of That Function. If That Authority
be there still, may a perpetual Blessing go along with it. This, in the Name of
the whole Church of Geneva, and Addressed, To the Primate of all England.
Totius Angliae Primati. Saravia, arguing for the Hierarchy out of the Apostles
Canons, Beza returns him This Answer. This is no more, then what Beza cont.
Sarav. p. 116.
we wish might be restored to all Churches. [Quid aliud hic statuitur, quam
quod in omnibus locis, Ecclesiis restitutum cupimus?

The Three Kingdoms of Swede, Denmark, View of the Government, p. 5. Ibid. p. 6.
and Norway (as Mr. Durell observes) retein the Order still, of Bishops, and
Archbishops. In the Protestant Cantons of Switzerland, there is also a
Subordination of Ministers. And so in the Palatinate; in Hessen; the Duke of
Brandenburgh's Territories; Anhalt, Bremen, Poland, Lithuania, etc.

Come we now into France, Holland, Ibid. p. 122.
and Geneva. And first hear Mr. du Bosc of the Reformed Church of Caen.
Wellordered Episcopacy has most Important, and Considerable Utilities, which
cannot be found in the Presbyterian Discipline.

Mr. Gaches, one of the Ministers of Ibid. p. 125
Charenton. The best Men in our Churches (says he) have honored the Prelates
of England. -- The Name of Schism may do more harm to the Church in one Year;
then the Exc^ss of Episcopal Authority can do in an Age. And again: Sin has
brought in the Necessity of Government; and the Failings of Ministers make the
Order of Bishops Necessary.

Mr. le Moyn, of Rouen, pronounces it Ibid. 138.
to be want of Prudence, and Charity, if any seek the Ruin of Bishops. [I
trust Ibid. 140.
that his Majesty will be sure to re-establish the Authority of the English
Church, and use his Power for a perfect Reunion of all the Reformed Churches;
which that be may Effect, His Majesty must preserve his Bishops.

I hold it impossible (says Mr. Gayon of Ibid. 146.
Bourdeaux) that England can ever be quiet, and flourish, but under the
Episcopal Government.

In Holland, Bogermannus, (the President Ibid. 118.
of the Synod at Dort) upon a Suggestion from the Bishop of Landaff, how fit a
Remedy Episcopacy would be for the Suppression of Heresies, and Schism, made
this Reply; Domine, non sumus adeo foelices] We are not so happy, My Lord. And
for Geneva, we have the Voices of the Principals of that Church also, for the
Authority, and Advantage of Episcopal Government. So that if you be no better
Seconded against our Ceremonies, then you are against our Bishops, you have the
whole Stream of Protestant Divines against you. This is according to what I
have formerly had occasion to deliver, upon This Subject.


N. C. We do dissent, upon just Reasons, Petition for Peace, p. 5.
from the Ecclessastical Hierarchy, (...) Prelacy, (DISCLAIMED IN COVENANT) as
it was Stated, and Exercised in These Kingdoms; yet do (...), nor ever did
renounce the True, Ancient, Primitive Episcopacy, as it was Balanced, or
Menaged by a Due Commixtion of Presbyters therewith.


C. We are not here to Debate the Qualifications, and Limits of the Episcopacy
you pretend to: but to proceed, having made it appear, that the Hierarchy,
which, (under Color of Reduction, or Commixtion) you formerly rooted out, and
are now again undermining; is That very Hierarchy, which you have now heard
Reverenced, and Recommended by so many Venerable Testimonies. Or, if after all
This, you can but produce one Public Act of any Protestant Church, beyond the
Seas, in favor of your Claim, do it; and save your Party the Credit, of not
being Single, and Particular in your Schism. What have you next to say against
our Ceremonies?


N. C. All the best Reformed Churches of Christ, (who only are Competent Judges
The Old Non-Con formist, p. 21.
in this Case, and to whose Judgment, and Example, we ought rather to Conform
our selves, in Ceremonies, then to the Synagague of Antichrist) do esteem
those Ceremonies, Needless, Inexpedient, and Fit to be Abolished: How the
Churches of other Countries approve of them, may appear sufficiently by this,
that they have banished the use of them out of their Assemblies.


C. Are they only NEEDLESS, INEXPEDIENT, and FIT to be Abolished then? I
thought you would have found them absolutely UNLAWFUL, IDOLATROUS, and upon
pein of DAMNATION, not to be RETAINED. According to This Measure, What will
become of the whole Frame of our Government, if it shall take you in the head,
to say the same thing of every Law, and Constitution of the Land? Ceremonies
will not down with you, because they are Needless, Inexpedient, etc. I beseech
you, show me the Needfulness of Killing, and Plundring, or the Expedience of
Dissolving Public Laws, and Depopulating Kingdoms: And yet These are Matters
you can Swallow, even without Chewing. Needless? And Inexpedient? So^ly, I
beseech you; you are for teaching your Governors more WIT, as well as more
Religion, and Conscience.


N. C. ^eep to your Text I pray'e; for we are not now upon the Lawfulness of
the English Ceremonies; but upon an Enquiry, What Enterteinment they receive in
the judgment, and Practice of other Reformed Churches: without engaging our
selves in any other Consideration of their Reason, and Convenience. I say, they
are banished out of their Assemblies, and you are at Liberty (if you can) to
prove the Contrary.


C. Let us first see how far we agree upon the Allowance of any Ceremonies at
all, and where to place the Right, and Authority of Imposing them.

The Church of England thinks it convenient, that every Country should use such
Ceremonies as they shall think best, to the setting forth of God's Honor, and
Glory, etc. Which is according to the sense of Other Reformed Churches, as
appears by their several Confessions.

With Us agrees, first, the Church of Helvetia. [Churches have always used
their Cap 27.
Liberty in Rites, as being things Indifferent. which we also do at this Day.
That of Bohemia likewise: [Humane Traditions. Cap. 15.
and Ceremonies, brought in by a Good Custom, are with an Uniform Consent to be
retained in the Ecclesiastical Assemblies of Christian People, at the Common
Service of God. The Gallican; [Every Place may have their Peculiar
Constitutions, as it Art. 32.
shall seem meet for them. The Belgique; Art. 32.
[We receive those Laws that are fit, either to cherish or maintein Concord, or
to keep us in the Obedience of God. That of Auspurgh; Art. 15.
[Ecclesiastical Rites, which are Ordein'd by Man's Authority, and tend to
Quietness, and Good Order in the Church, are to be Observed. That of Saxony;
[For Art. 20.
Order sake, there must be some Decent, and Seemly Ceremonies. That of
Swethland; Sueh Traditions of Men, as agree Cap. 14.
with the Scriptures, and were Ordained for Good Manners. and the Profit of
Men, are worthily to be accounted rather of God then of Man.


N. C. The Question is not, about an Agreement in Ceremonies that may be
Exercised without Offense, either to God, or Man; (according to your Instances)
but about their Liking, or Dislike, of Those in Practice among Us: As the
Surplice; Kneeling at the Communion; The Cross in Baptism, and the like.


C. As to the SURPLICE; Mr. Durell tells you, that the Churches that View of
the Government, p. 5.
Conform to the Confession of Augsburgh, have the very same Ceremonies with the
Church of England: And Surplices in many Places. And further; that a National
Assembly at Charenton, Anno 1631. has declared, that there is neither
Idolatry, nor Superstition in That Worship. The Protestant Ministers also in
Bohemia, Ibid. p. 24. 25.
Lithuania, Prussia, make no Scruple at all of Preaching in Surplices,
whenever they are called upon to Preach where Surplices are used. Nay, Calvin
himself, Ep. Bullingero, fol. 98
does not approve of Hooper' s violent Inconformity in that Point. [De Pileo,
and Vest Linea, maluissem (ut illa etiam non probem) non usque adeo ipsum
pugnare: Idque nuper suadebam. And let Mr. Baxter pin the Basket. Some Decent
Garment Baxter's Five Disputations, disp. 5. cap. 2. sect. 40.
is necessary; either the Magistrate, or Minister himself, or the Associated
Pastors must determine what. If the Magistrate or Synod tie all to one Habit,
(Suppose it Indeoent) yet this is but an Imprudent use of Power, and the thing
it self being Lawful, I would Obey, and use that Garment.


N. C. You only make mention, where it has been used, and permitted; but you
take no Notice where it has been Rejected. And then the Personal Authorities
you cite, in favor of it, declare their Judgments to be still against it.


C. But only so against it, as not to Allow of a Separation, upon That Scruple.
Now whereas you object the Refusal, or Rejection of it, elsewhere: It does not
follow, that every Church disallows, what it does not Practice: And it shall
content me, to find the Practice of so many Churches for us, and None, against
us.

As to KNEELING at the Communion; the Bohemian Churches use that Posture, and
so do the Churches of Poland. With whom, the French, and Dutch do so far agree,
as In hoc Ritu, suam cuique Ecclesiae Libertatatem salvam relinquere. To leave
every Church at its own Freedom, in that Particular.] Mr. Baxter in his Five
Disputations, does also profess, that rather then disturb the Peace of the
Church, he would Kneel too; How hardly soever he may think of the Imposition.
So that in the Case of Kneeling, likewise, we have several of the Reformed
Churches that join with us in the Practice of it, and not so much as any one of
them, that appears in our Condemnation.

Touching the Use of the CROSS in Baptism; (beside the undeniable Antiquity of
the Custom) you may hear from Mr. Durell, that The Reformed Churches View of
the Government, p. 41.
of the Confession of Augsburgh, do for the most part, use it; and that at
Paris, many Children of the Church of Charenton, have been Baptized in the
Chapels of the English Ambassadors there, according to the Rites of the
Church of England. And moreover, that only the Nonconforming English, and
Scotch oppose it. I could enlarge my self, upon very good Authority, to the
justification of our way of Worship, throughout, in every Particular of your
Exceptions; but I will rather choose to encounter all your Objections at once;
by proving, that the Protestant Churches, Abroad, have as great a Reverence for
the Authority, Rites, and Ceremonies of the Church of England, in the whole
Frame of the Constitution, as they have a Kindness for the several Parts of it,
which they do severally Exercise among Themselves.

I must still be beholden to the Industry of the Reverend Durell, who has much
obliged us with a clear, and Methodical Manifestation of the Agreement of the
Church of England, (as it is now Established by the Act of Uniformity) with
other Reformed Churches beyond the Seas.

Sir John Colladon (one of his Majesty's Physicians in Ordinary) had the Honor
View of the Gover. p. 63.
to Congratulate his Majesty's Restoration, from the City and Church of
Geneva, and from the Protestant Cantons in Switzerland. Upon his Departure, he
put this Quaere to the Rulers of the said Church; Whether he might Lawfully
Join with the Church of England, in Public Worship, and receive the Holy
Sacrament according to the usual Rites thereof? It was Answered, That he might;
and that it was not to be Questioned.

Here is also, A whole French Reformed Ibid. p. 73.
Congregation, that has Conformed to the Rites, and Ceremonies of the Church
of England, to the great Satisfaction of the Divines of Rouen, Paris, Geneva,
Bourdeaux, Ibid. p. 90.
etc. And since the Establishment of This Church, diverse Ministers have Ibid.
p. 92.
come over, from Geneva, France, Germany, Poland, Lithuania, Piemont; Students,
Elders, Private Persons: And none of them ever yet refused, either to Assist,
or to Conform.

Mr. de Laune, Minister of the Wallons Ibid. 64.
Church at Norwich; and Mr. Calendrin, one of the Ministers of the Dutch Church
in London, have diverse times Officiated in English Congregations, according to
the Book of Common Prayer of the Church of England] Without any Scandal, either
Given or Taken.

Nay, so far are they from disowning us, that the French Divines hold them for
Schismatiques, and Punishable, that Ib. 69, 72.
refuse Communion with us. Scripta Anglican. p. 455.
Bucer thanks God with all his Soul, to see the English Ceremonies so pure.


N. C. And have they, I beseech you, their Set Forms? Their Peremptory
Impositions? Their Declarations, and Subscriptions?


C. Yes, yes: All This, and more. For Set Forms, methinks you should rather
tell me any one Reformed Church that wants a Set Form, then put me to the
Trouble of Naming all that have. Calvin, and Beza are Positive for them.
Geneva, much more severe for the Observance of them, then we are here;
Inconformity There, is cause of Banishment for a Year: And the Gallican Church
makes it a matter of Excommunication. In Geneva; Hooker's Eccles. Pol. Preface.
Calvin Established his Discipline by an OATH, both upon People, and Pastors,
to observe That Form for ever after. The Ministers take an Oath of Canonical
Obedience, in Hungary; And the French Divines are not admitted, without
Subscription. There Is no Imposing upon Public Laws, with Private Scruples: No
Bandying allowed, betwixt Conscience, and Authority: He that will not submit to
the Orders of a Community, Away with him. (says Calvin) It is not enough to
take cheque at the Constitutions of the Church, under color of a weak
Conscience (or so pretended) but you must be fully satisfied, that the
Constitution is Wicked IN IT SELF. Nay, Calvin carries it further. Suppose it
really ministers Matter of Offense; (says he) That will not serve to vacate the
Obligation, unless it be also found to be Simply, and IN IT SELF Repugnant to
the Word of God. [Quia tamen Verbo Dei PERSE non Repugnat, Concedi potest. To
provide against Evil Consequences, is the Magistrates Duty, not the Subjects.


N. C. The Worship of God, is in it Two Papers of Proposals, p. 7, 8.
self Pure, and Perfect, and Decent, without having any such Ceremonies affixed
thereunto; [And many Faithful Servants of the Lord, knowing his Word to be a
Perfect Rule of Faith, and Worship, have ever been exceeding fearful of Uarying
from his Will, and of the Danger of Displeasing him, by Additions, or
Detractions, in such Duties.


C. You will hardly find any honest President for this Nicety. (Calvin would
have given it a worse Name) Testatum Velim (says he) me non de Ceremoniis
Litigare, quae Decoro tantum, and Ordini Serviant: vel etiam Symbola sunt, and
Incitamenta ejus quam Deo deferimus Reverentiae. He Declares himself, you see,
not only for Ceremonies, of Order, and Decency; but for Ceremonies of
Significancy, and Incitement to Reverence and Devotion. And in another place,
Ergone (Inquies) nihil Ceremoniarum rudioribus Institut. lib. 4. ca. 9. sect.
14.
dabitur, ad juvandam Eorum Imperitiam? Id ego non dico; omnino enim utile
illis esse sentio, hoc Genus Adminiculi.] Will you allow of no Ceremonies then
at all, (you will say) for the Instruction of the Vulgar? You do not hear me say
so; for I am clearly of opinion; that they are of very great use, and service
to the People.

Upon the Main; The English Non-Conformists, (as Mr. Durell well observes) are
a sort of People by themselves: and Non-Conformists, at Geneva, and Francfort,
as well as at Canterbury, or London.


N. C. But still, methinks, whatever our Consciences are as to the way of
Public Worship, we might yet be Indulged with an Allowance of ^erving God
among our selves. Why should a Toleration do worse Here, then in Holland?


C. I might Answer you with another Question. Why should a Commonwealth do
worse Here, then in Holland? Or Why should a Standing Army do worse Here, then
in Holland? Beside; If you look narrowly into it, you will find the Dissenters
from the Settlement There, to be rather Strangers, then Natives. English,
French, High Dutch, that flowed in to them upon the General Revolt from the
Church of Rome: Lutherans, and Anabaptists, out of Germany; Calvinists out of
France; Separatists, and Semiseparatists out of England, in the Days of Queen
Mary, and Independents, since; all which were entertein'd, more out of Regard
to Policy, then Conscience; their Business being at that time to shake off the
Yoke of Spain, and Change the Government: To which End, these several Parties
contributed effectually, by preparing the People for the Alteration Intended;
and inuring them to New Principles, both of Religion, and State.

And yet you are not to understand Theirs to be a Perfect Toleration neither.
For you see, they would not, upon any terms, allow That Freedom to the
Arminians, which they did to Others; but Convened a Synod, and Exterminated the
Sect. The reason was, they had a Jealousy of the Arminians, for Barnevelt's
sake, the Head of that Party.

You are to take notice also of the great difference betwixt the Interest, and
Condition, of Our Ministers, and Theirs. Our Clergy have a Freehold in their
Benefices for Term of Life; and if they be Factiously disposed, they may Evade
the Law, and do a Mischief, without making a Forfeiture. Whereas Theirs Preach
upon Good Behavior; Live upon the States Pay; and upon the least Color of
Offense, may be turned off at pleasure. I need not tell you what Havoc,
Peter's, Bridges, Sympson, Ward, made in Holland: But what they did Abroad, the
same thing they would have done at Home, if they had been Tolerated.


N. C. What do ye think of Poland then?


C. I think, That Story speaks little to your Advantage: take it either in
Respect of their frequent Seditions, or in Regard of their Prodigious, and
Heretical Opinions: And yet they live under the strongest Obligation in Nature
to keep them quiet; The Tartar, and other Powerful Neighbors, lying hard upon
them; which makes their Case to be rather an Agreement against a Common Enemy,
then among Themselves.


N. C. Now take all at the worst; It is but Athanasius against the World, and
The World against Athanasius. Number and Truth, are not always of a Side.


C. And yet Your Multitudes make up a great part of your Argument. This however
let me speak for you; There has no Industry been wanting to Propagate your
Profession.

In the Year 1619. The Scotch Discipline was presented to the Synod at Dort,
Spotswoods Hist. Scotl. p. 540.
for their Approbation: But they would not meddle with it.

Anno 1654. Upon the Reprinting (at Geneva) of A Collection of the several
Confessions of Faith, received in all the Reformed Churches of Europe; under
the Mr. Durells View of the Government, p. 173.
Title of, Corpus, and Syntag^a Confessionum Fidei, etc. It was moved that the
Thirty Nine Articles of the Church of England, might be left out, and the
Assembly Men's Confession, put in the place: But the Motion was totally
rejected; The Thirty nine Articles Inserted, and not a Word of the Directory.

They had no better luck with their Covenant neither, then with their
Discipline. [The Ministers, and others of the Consistory The late Kingslarge
Declarat. p. 75.
at Charenton, and of other Reformed Churches in France; as also the
Professors, Ministers, and Consistory of Geneva, and of other Neighboring
Reformed Churches in those Parts, were so scandalized with this Prodigious
Covenant, as that they were afraid of nothing more, then this, that it would
bring an indeleble Scandal upon the Reformed Churches, and alienate the Minds
of all the Princes of Christendom, from ever enterteining a good Thought of
their Religion.

The Venerable Assembly of English Divines, and Scotch Commissioners (as they
styled Themselves) sent the Copy of their Covenant, and a Solemn Invitation to
Seventeen Reformed Churches beyond the Seas to Ioyn with them. Their Letter
should have been Latin; But so it was, that they left it a Measuring Cast,
whether they were the better Christians, Casuists, Subjects, or Grammarians.
Their skill was most employed, in Exhorting the French Protestants to follow
Their Example, and cast off the Yoke of Antichrist; (that is to say, of
Obedience) And in Calumniating their Sovereign, as a Confederate with the
Popish Interest, to destroy the Protestancy. Which Design, was only to be
obviated, by a Holy League. This was the Drift of the Address; But we never
heard Syllable of the Answer.

There needs no more be said to prove the Judgment of the Reformed Churches
strong, and unanimous against you; and you had best make a Trial, if you can
supply by Reason, and Argument, what you want in Countenance, and Authority.


SECT. XX.
The Non-Conformists Exceptions to O^ Public Way of Worship, found Guilty of
Great IMPIETY, and ERROR.
C. WHat are your Exceptions to Our Way of Worship? Are they General; or
Particular? Is it the Imposition it self, or the Thing Imposed, that displeases
you?


N. C. Why truly Both. The One takes away my Christian Liberty; and the Other,
the Liberty of my Conscience. The greatest part of my Trouble, i^ the Act of
Uniformity.


C. Is it the Model, or the Uniformity you stick at?


N. C. Both alike; for neither is the Particular Act framed to my Satisfaction;
nor is it possible that any One Form of Worship should suit All Judgments.


C. Will Toleration suite All Judgments, any better then Uniformity? But, I
perceive, you do not account the Sanction of any One Form whatsoever to be
Lawful.


N. C. Indeed I do not think it Lawful for a Magistrate to enjoin any thing
upon a Penalty, which a Private Person may not Conscienciously Obey him in; Nor
do I think it Warrantable, for a Man to Obey any Humane Command, against the
Dictate of his Conscience.


C. Put This together now. First, It is not Possible that any One Form of
Worship should suit All Judgments: And then, It is not Lawful to enjoin any
thing upon a Penalty, which does Not suit All Judgments. What is This, but a
mere Trifling of Government; to suppose a Law, without an Obligation?

Again; If the Magistrate cannot Impose, neither can he Tolerate; unless you will
suppose him a more Competent Judge of Four Conscience, then of his Own: for you
allow him to Understand what he may Tolerate, and deny him the Knowledge of
what he may Impose. So that either he has no Power, or no Reason to favor you:
No Power, as you state his Capacity; And no Reason, as you disclaim his
Authority. But you were saying, that the Imposition, takes away your Christian
Liberty. As how, I beseech ye?


N. C. In making Those things Necessary, which Christ left Free. For wherein
does Christian Liberty more concern it self, then in the Free use (...)
Indifferent, or the Forbear^nce of Doubtful things, which we are bound entirely
(...) preserve; And whereof, by your Ecclesiastical Injunctions, we stand
Deprived?


C. If the King be Tied up, in Matte^ that are either Commanded, or Forbidden;
and the People left at Liberty, in things Indifferent: I would fain know what
Authority has to work upon. But thi^ Point will fall in of it self by and by:
Though enough be said already, to prove your Position utterly destructive of
Order, and Society. For there is but Good, Bad, and Indifferent, in Nature:
What we are BOUND to do; What we are Bound NOT to do; and What we may either
DO, or LET ALONE. (That is to say, without the Interposal of some Incidental
Obligation to determi^ that Indifference)

The Asserters of this Doctrine, fetch their Warrant for it, out of St. Paul
(...) the Galatians 5. 1. Stand fast in the Liberty wherewith Christ has made
us Free. Upon This Text they ground their Exemption. But here they prudently
st^ too; for the Context would have spoiled all: And they might as well have
Argued against the Efficacy of Christ's Death, from the latter part of the
second Verse, as for Christian Immunity, (in the Latitude they understand it)
from the former part of the first. The Apostle goes on in These Words; And be
not entangled AGAIN with the Yoke of Bondage. (...) Behold; I Paul say unto
you, that if ye be CIRCUMCISED, Christ shall profit you nothing. 3 For I
testify again to every Man that is CIRCUMCISED, that he is a Debtor to do the
whole Law.

The Case, briefly, was This. By the Coming of our Blessed Savior, the Jewish
Ceremonies were abolished: Some that had a mind to Continue them, and keep the
People still under the Yoke of the Law, stood for the Doctrine of the
Circumcision. (which was here the very Matter in Q^estion) The Apostle cautions
the Galatians against it; and not to be entangled AGAIN with the Bondage of the
Law. Which amounts only to a Discharge from the Bondage of That Law to which
they were before Subjected; without extending That Liberty, to the Prejudging
of Authoritative Laws, and Impositions for the time to come. As if the Apostle
had Preached one thing to the Galatians, and the contrary to the Romans,
Obedience, at pleasure, in one place; and Obedience under pein of Damnation, in
another.

In the Second, and Third Verses, St. Paul (you see) clears, and presses it
further. As if he had said; Be Circumcised at your Peril. For That single Point
of the Law, makes you answerable for the Performance of every Title of it. We
are not (says Calvin) (Perperam ad Peliticum Calv. Inst. li. 3. ca. 19. sect.
15.
Ordinem) perversely to apply the Doctrine of Spiritual Liberty, to Political
Order, as if Christians were to be ever the less Subject to External Government
by Humane Laws, because their Consciences are set at Liberty before God. Nay,
says he, in another place; Si Ecclesiae Incolumitati Ibid. lib 4. ca. 10. sect.
27.
been prospectum volumus] The Church can never be safe, without St. Paul's
Decency and Order. But in regard of the diversity of Customs; and the variety
of Men's Minds, and Opinions; It is not possible to secure any Polity, without
the Authority of certain Laws; or to preserve any Order, without some stated
Form. Now so far am I from condemning any Laws conducing to this End, [Ut his
ablatis, dissolvi suis Nervis Ecclesias, Totasque Deformari, and Dissipari
contendamus] that I look upon the Removal of them, as the Dissolution of the
very Sinews of the Church, and expect nothing after it, but DEFORMITY, and
DISSIPATION. Nor is it to be Imagined, that All things should be done Decently,
and in Order, (after the Apostles Precept) but by the mediation of certain
Rules, and Observations, which may serve as so many Bonds for the Regulation of
that Decency, and Order. Always provided, That Those Ceremonies be not Imposed
as Necessary to Salvation, or Essential to God's Worship.

From your Plea for Christian Liberty, (which is a Proposition, in it self,
destructive of all Communities) let us now move to your next Exception, in the
Matter of Scruple: which I am afraid will be found no less Intolerable in
Religion, then the other was in Government; and Dangerous enough in Both.

It would take a Man an Age to run through all the Quirks, and Niceties of the
Question; and to trace every Particular, in dispute, from the Original of its
Practice, or Institution. And beside; It were but Actum Agere; for the
Lawfulness, and the Antiquity of Bishops, Liturgies, and Ceremonies, with all
the Minutes,

(...) sion: I am persuaded, it would pose the ^est Conveyancers in this
Kingdom, to draw up a Deed of Trust, to That Purpose, without a Flaw in it. That
is to say: A Commission from the Diffusive Body of the People, must be Directed
to such and such Ministers, as Commissioners for Tender Consciences.

From HEAVEN it never came neither, I do verily believe. For most certainly
Christ, and his Apostles, never Issued out any Commission, for the Distracting
of Consciences, and Societies. We read indeed of CONFIRMING the Weak, but not a
Syllable, of STAGGERING them. And for the Extraordinary Ways, of Vision, and
Revelation, they are not so much as mentioned.


N. C. If you would have given me leave, I should have told you, even now, that
they are Warranted by a Sense, and Impression of Conscience, in the Discharge
of their Pastoral Duty: Which obliges them, [To watch over Petit. for Peace, p.
79.
their Flock; To preserve them from Errors, Heresies, Divisions; To Defend the
Truth, Confute Gainsayers, and Seducers, Instruct the Ignorant, Excite the
Negligent, Encourage the Despondent, Comfort the Afflicted, Confirm the Weak,
Rebuke, and Admonish the Disorderly, and Scandalous.


C. Here Is much against you, and no^ ^ne Word in your Favor. Instead of
PRESERVING their Flocks FROM Heresies, and Divisions, your Pastors demand a
downright TOLERATION of them. And instead of Encouraging the Despondent,
Comforting the Afflicted, and Confirming the Weak; They tell the Distressed,
(for their Comfort) that if they do any thing with Doubting, they shall be
Damned; and never go further, to deliver them from those Doubts; but there they
very fairly leave them, Surrounded with in^xtricable Scruples; and their very
Souls, Broken, and Confounded with Agony, and Horror. Whether they do Well, or
Ill, now be You your self the Judge.

My Opinion is, that they have as little to say for the Conscience of their
Proceedings, as any way else. First, Their very Preaching, and Writing, (by
reason of their Legal Incapacity) is a Transgression of the Law. Secondly, In
the Matter it self, they are to blame; for it is of very evil Consequence, both
upon the Public, and upon Particulars. To sa^ nothing of their Undertaking
for other Men's Consciences, which is a Privilege belonging only to God himself.

That they do Ill, in disobeying the Law, and in troubling the Government, I
suppose you will not deny; And yet am I persuaded, that the very Foundation of
their Plea for Separation, and Dissent, is the greatest part of the Mischief.
We have Laws Ecclesi^l, for the Ordering of the Church; and you refuse to Obey
them* For what Reason, I beseech you?


N. C. The best Guide in the Case of Impositions, and Obedience, I take to be
the Word of God; and our Doubtings sure are very Reasonable, concerning God's
Worship* where the Scripture gives no Direction. Show us where they are
Commanded in the Gospel, and we are ready to Obey them.


C. The Scripture is the Rule of our Faith, not of our Outward Actions, and
Practice. (...) Whatsoever, to make up the Hooker's Eccl. Pol. li. 2. sect. 8.
Doctrine of Man's SALVATION, is added, as in supply of the Scriptures
Insufficiency, we reject it. But does it therefore follow, that ALL things
Lawful to be done, are comprehended in the Ibid.
Scripture? Admit. This, and God in delivering Scripture to his Church, should
clear have abrogated amongst them, the Law of Nature, which is, An Infallible
Ibid.
Knowledge Imprinted in the Minds of all the Children of Men, directing us in
the Choice of Good and Evil, in the Daily Affairs of this Life. Admit This; and
what shall the Scripture be, but a Snare, and a Torment to Weak Consciences,
filling them with Infinite Perplexities, Scrupulosities, Doubts Insoluble, and
Extreme Despairs. Not^ that the Scripture it self does cause any such thing,
but the Necessities of this Life, urging Men to do that which the Light of
Nature, Common Discretion, and Judgment of it self directs Men unto: On the
other side, This Doctrine teaching them that so to do, wire to sin against
their Souls; and that they put forth their Hands to Iniquity, whatsoever they
go about, and have not first the Sacred Scripture of God for their Direction.
How can it choose but bring the Simple a Thousand Times to their Wit^ End? How
can it choose but v^x and amaze them; to be obliged in every Action of Common
Life, to find out some Sentence of Scripture, Clearly, and Infallibly setting
forth, what we ought to do? Admit This, and it shall not be with Masters, as it
was with him in the Gospel; but Servants being commanded to go, shall stand
still, till they have their Errand Warranted unto them by Scriptures. Thus far
the Learned Hooker: in Agreement with Mr. Calvin, (the Oracle of the other
Party) in his Chapter of Christian Liberty, who writes to this Effect.

Let every Man have a care not to make Calv. Inst. ca. 9. sect. 7
things Indifferent, Matters of Religion; for nothing can be more necessary
then the right understanding of That Liberty; without which, we shall never
have any Peace of Conscience, and there will be no End of Superstition. [Quae
si aberit, nulla Conscientiis nostris futura est Quies; Nullus Superstitionum
finis] He that Scruples the Lawfulness of Eating, or Drinking Delicacies, will
by degrees, let his Scruple fall to Meats and Drinks l^ss Delicats, and so from
one thing, to another, Lower, and Lower; (and all this while, in a perpetual
Anxiety of Conscience) till he comes at last to satisfy himself, that what he
takes, both for Quantity, and Quality, is but just sufficient to entertein the
absolute Necessities of Nature. He must have a Text for every thing he does;
and not step over a Straw, without consulting Scripture first: and every Common
Action is made a Case of Conscience. From this miserable Perplexity of Mind,
what can be expected, but Despair, and Confusion? Hanging, Drowning, Cutting of
Throats, and all the wretched Extremities of Violence, which those poor
Creatures exercise upon themselves, as their last Retreat, to avoid the Fury of
a Tormenting Conscience.

This is the Fruit of the Doctrine of CHRISTIAN LIBERTY; a Dangerous, and an
Impious Position; and can have no other Aim, (In Truth, scarce any other Issue)
than the Vacating of Humane Laws; and the Extermination of all Principles of
Duty, and Subjection out of the Hearts of the People. But to be as short as may
be, you see the Effects of your Scruples; pray'e speak a little to the Grounds
of them. What Exceptions have you to our COMMON PRAYER? And see if you do not
from one end to the other, fall foul upon your Arguments.


N. C. It is devised by Men. Trial of the Engl. Liturgy. p. 4.



C. So are your Ministers Prayers; and ^l Prayers whatsoever, Scripture-Forms
Excepted.


N. C. It is Imposed upon the Minister, Ibid. p. 5.
and People, of Necessity.


C. The Imposition of the Directory was yet more General, Strict, and
Peremptory. There was no Dispensation for a Family, and Four more, which, as it
might be improved, takes in well nigh the whole Kingdom.


N. C. But your Common Prayer is stinted, both in Matter, and Words, to be used
without Variation: and so was not the Directory.


C. Why may not the Church impose a Stinted Form upon the Minister, as well as
the Minister, (if he so pleases) upon the People? For if the Minister be left
at Liberty either to keep to one Form, or to vary, at his own Election, The
Congregation is at his Mercy, whether they shall have a Stinted Form, or No.
Smectymnuus is so gracious as to allow of a Stinted Form, Himself; in Case the
Minister shall be found insufficient to discharge the Page 11.
Duty of Prayer in a Conceived way: But then it is to be Imposed on him as a
Punishment: To use Set Forms, and no other. So that it is not the Unlawfulness
it seems, of a Set Form, nor the Imposition, but the Inexpedience you stumble
at: And the World is at a fine pass sure, when the Parliament of England shall
not presume to make Laws, without asking the Si^c'd Ministers Opinions first,
about the Expedience of them. The Directory, as to the Matter of it, is as well
a Stinting of the Spirit, as the Common Prayer. For in the Sulstance, and Scope
of the Prayer, the Minister is limited; only for the WORDING of it, he is at
his own Freedom: And if he may but Turn ALMIGHTY and most MERCIFUL Father, into
OMNIPOTENT and most GRACIOUS Lord God, the Peace is concluded. Otherwise we are
to look for nothing but Fire and Sword: Lives, Laws, and Liberties, must be
hazzarded i^ the Quarrel.


N. C. Do you make no difference between Imposing Set Forms, upon a few
Insufficient Ministers, and upon a Multitude of Others, in Common, that have
the Gift of Prayer?


C. No, none at all, as to the Exemption of Any Man from the General Rule.
Beside; What Security can any Man give, that he shall continue in the Right
Exercise of his Reason? Put case your Gifted Minister should be taken with some
Distemper that seizes the Brain, and Disorders, (or but Clouds) his
Understanding: Nay, let it be only some faint, drowsy Indisposition of Body,
or heaviness of Mind; What becomes of the Assembly, under so Languid,
Spiritless, (and perchance Extravagant) a Dispensation?

Further: The Right, and the Reason too, of Imposing upon One Minister, extends
to All.

Again: If a Set Form may be admitted, where the Minister is not good at
Extempore; What becomes of your Argument, I beseech ye, for the Consciences of
the CONGREGATION? Unless you understand the Weakness of the Minister to be a
Dispensation for the Scruples of the People; In which case, it may be lawful
for the King and Parliament to Impose a Service Book.

And yet again: Over and above the Vanity, and the Arrogance of the
Undertaking; do me but the favor to consider, what an Irreverence, what a
Profanation of Gods Holy Worship, and Ordinances, must needs ensue upon it.
The Desk is turned into an Oratory, as well for the TRIAL of Gifts, and
Faculties, as for the EXERCISE of them: and half the Business the Congregation
has at Church, is to hear Men Talk to God Almighty, upon their Probation: which
is done too, (God knows it, even at the best) not without great Imperfections,
and Failings; witness their [Affectations, Emptiness, Impertinency, Rudeness,
Con fusion, (...), p. 127.
Flatness, Levity, O^scurity, vain, and Ridiculous Repetitions, their Sensl^ss,
and oft-times Blasphemous Expressions:] which are but Helps at a Plunge, either
to gain time for the recovery of their lost Matter, or to stop Gaps, and fill
up Broken Sentences. Now where is the Life, and Power (as you call it) of
Devotion, all this while; when the Whole Man is taken up, (and all little
enough too) about Words, and Periods; And the Ministers chief Care diverted
from the Saving of Souls, to the Saving of his own Credit? Hence proceeds That
Agreement of Tone, and Emphasis, in all their Exclamations, Acted Passions, and
Vain Repetitions, with now and then a Groan drawn out to a most Doleful Length
for a Parenthesis. For they are all sick of the same Disease, and these
Interjections give them a little Breath, and Respit, for Recollection. Now in
This loss of Sense, and Order, How is it possible for the Affections of the
Congregation, to keep company with the Minister in all his Wanderings,
Doubtings, and Circumlocutions? The one half of their Intention is spent in
Divining (beforehand) what he drives at; and the other, in unriddling his
Meaning, when he has Delivered it. Whereas in Set-Forms, both Minister and
People are freed from These Distractions, and totally intent upon the Duty of
the Worship: and there is a greater Harmony, and Union of Affections, when they
Pray All at the same Time, in the same Words, and for the same Thing. I might
insist upon the Inconvenience of leaving Ministers at Liberty, for fear of
disturbing the Public: and tell you over and over, that in our Stinted Forms
we do but join in the Common Privilege of Other Churches: But more then enough
is spoken Already. Let me hear now what you have to say against our Ceremonies.


N. C. Whereas Kneeling is Imposed, Proposals to His Majesty, p. 22.
in the Act of Receiving the Lord's Supper, We desire that none may be Troubled
for Receiving it Standing, or Sitting.


C. You have quitted your Hold, I perceive, of Scriptural Direction, and
President. For neither Standing, nor Sitting was the Tricliniary Posture. But
why not Kneeling, as well as either Sitting, or Standing?


N. C. Because it is a Novelty; contrary Ibid. p. 23.
to the Decrees, and Practice of the Church, for many Hundred Years after the
Apostles. And it has been forbidden by General Councils. And it is not Good
also to show a needless Countenance of Adoring the Bread of God.


C. Can you show me that Kneeling at the Lord's Supper has been forbidden,
where Kneeling at other parts of Public Worship has been Allowed? Now you
your selves allow of, and Practice Kneeling in other Cases, which is every jote
as contrary to the Ancient Custom, as Our Kneeling at the Sacrament. But We
must not Kneel, you say, for fear of Countenanceing the Adoration of the
Breaden God.

To which I Answer, that First, The Doctrine of our Church speaks directly to
the Contrary. Secondly, The Rubric directs Kneeling at the Confession; and the
People continue Kneeling, at the Receiving.


N. C. But with your Favor, the Rubric does afresh enjoin Kneeling: and order
the Communion to be delivered into the Peoples Hands KNEELING.


C. Right. And now take your Choice, whether we shall rather run the hazard of
being suspected to adore the Breed, because we receive it after the English
Gesture of Worshipping, which is Kneeling; or incur the same Censure, by
Changing Posture, and taking it after the Ancient way of Worshipping, which is
Standing?

If you can make appear, that where the Custom was to Worship Standing, they
Received, Kneeling; you say something toward the persuading of us that Worship
Kneeling, to Receive Standing.

Your Exceptions throughout, are much of a Quality; Negatively Imposing upon
Authority, because you will not be Positively bound up your selves. For, You
shall NOT do This, or That, is an Imposition, as well as You SHALL. Another
Humor you have gotten, of Scrupling at Ceremonies, because they are made as
Necessary to Salvation, as the Word it self, and the Sacraments. (This is the
Suggestion of the Petition for Peace, Pa. 8.) Whereas it has been, and still it
is the Constant Care of the Imposers themselves, by an express Solemnity of
Explanation, to satisfy the whole World to the Contrary.

Give us leave only for one Word more, and that out of Calvin's Institutions,
concerning Scandal; (Lib. 3. Cap. 19.) which you make one part of your
Compleint. There is (says he) a Scandal GIVEN, and TAKEN. The One is the
Scandal of the Weak; the Other, of the Pharisees; who out of a p^rverse
Malignity of Spirit, turn every thing to the worse. There is no Yielding to
this sort of Men; No Enduring, no Hearing of them: [Qui quum in mill
Impietatis Formas Duces se praebent, sic sibi agendum fingunt, ne proximo sint
Offendiculo. Who, under color of Tenderness in the Matter of Scandal, make no
Conscience at all of a thousand Gross Impieties. This is His Judgment, and Our
Case: And there is no Remedy, but by concluding upon a Final, and Unaccomptable
Judge.


SECT. XXI.
Whatsoever God has left INDIFFERENT, is the Subject of HUMANE POWER.
C. AS Reasonable Nature consists of Soul, and Body; so is the Authority that
Governs it, Divine, and Humane: God, Eminently over All, and Princes
Ministerially, under Him, and as his Substitutes. The Dominion of our Souls,
God reserves Peculiarly to Himself, committing That of our Bodies to the Care
of the Magistrate.

Now if Power be a Divine Ordinance, so consequently is Subjection; for to
Imagine the One, without the Other, were to destroy the Reason of Relatives. A
Strict, and Accurate Disquisition of This Matter, would save us much Trouble
that arises about the Bounds, and Limits of our Duty; How far Religion binds
us, and how far Allegiance. That they are severable, we are not to doubt, since
Truth it self has said it. Give unto Caesar the things that are Caesar' s; and
unto God, the things that are God's. But that they are only so severable, as
never to become Inconsistent, is founded upon the same Immovable Rock; Let
every Soul be subject, etc. A Precept, of a Perpetual, and Universal Operation,
and Limited neither to Time, Place, not Persons.


N. C. Your Deduction of Government, and Subjection, from Divine Institution,
is well enough; and that we are to Obey the Magistrate for God's sake, and in
Subordination to God, is easily Proved, and Granted: But I hear nothing yet of
the Particular Bounds, and Terms of Humane Jurisdiction; What it is belongs to
God, and what to Caesar.


C. And That, I confess, is the Pinch of the Question: For One Duty comes up so
close to the Other, that it is not for every Common Eye to pass between them.
Effectually, they Touch; but in what Point, is of a Nice Decision. The nearest
way to the Knowledge of our Duty, is to apply it to the Laws, and Powers of the
Authority: for a Man must first Know the Rule, before he can Observe it. We are
then to consider, that the Almighty Wisdom has invested Kings with an
Unlimimited Power of Commanding, or Forbidding, in all Matters, which God
Himself has not either Commanded, or Forbidden: Which Proposition resolves it
self into This Conclusion. Whatsoever God has left Indifferent, is the Subject
of Humane Power.


N. C. Does not that Opinion destroy Christian Liberty?


C. No: But the Denial of it destroys Magistracy. If Kings have not This Power,
they have None at all: And it Implies a Contradiction, to suppose any Authority
in Nature without it.


N. C. But may not a Prince tie himself up, in a thing otherwise Indifferent?


C. I speak of Power according to the Institution, not of Power limited by
P^ction.


N. C. May not the same thing be Indifferent to One, and not to Another?


C. Very Good: And will not every thing Imaginable. appear Non-Indifferent to
some or other; if nothing may be Commanded, but what upon such a Fancy may be
Disobeyed?


N. C. Pardon me: I do not speak of Matters of Civil Concern, but of Matters of
Religion.


C. That Is all a Case; for you cannot Instance in any One Civil Action, that
may not be made Relative to Religion. But we are now upon the Extent of Humane
Power. That there is such a Power, and That, Authorized too by God Himself, you
have already Granted. Let me but understand now, Upon what Subject shall that
Power be Exercised; If you exclude Things Indifferent? One Man may have a Real
Scruple, and All the Rest, pretend one. Who shall distinguish? So that the Rule
holding from One to All, the Sacred Authority of the Prince becomes dependent
upon the Pleasure of the Subject; and the Validity of a Divine, and
Unchangeable Ordinance, is subjected to the mutable Judgment, and Construction
of the People.


N. C. And you expect, the Magistrate should as well have the Authority of
Judging what is Indifferent, as of Restreining it.


C. You may be sure I do; for I am but where I was, If I make You the Judge. Is
it not all one, as to the Magistrate, whether you Refuse, upon Pretense that
the Thing is not Indifferent, or upon Pretense, that He cannot Restrein a thing
Indifferent? The Crime indeed is differing in the Subject: for the One way,
it is an USURPATION of Authority; and the Other way, it is a DENIAL of it.


N. C. Why then it seems, I am to believe every thing Indifferent, which the
Magistrate tells me is so, be it never so Wicked.


C. No; There you are bound up, by a Superior Law.


N. C. Have you so soon forgot your self? You would not allow me to be a Judge,
just now; and here, you make me one.


C. Right. To your self, you are one, but not to the Public; you are a Judge
of your own Thought, but not of the Law.


N. C. And does not This way of Arguing as much endanger Authority, as the
Other? For All may Judge Thus, as well as One.


C. It Is possible they may. Nay we will suppose an Imposition foul enough to move
them all to do so; and yet there is a large difference: For Diversity of
Judgment does not shake the Foundation of Authority; and a Man may disobey a
Sinful Command, with great Reverence to the Power that Imposes it.


N C. You were saying even now, that my Duty to God, and to the King, could
never be Inconsistent. How shall I behave my self, I pray'e, if the King
command one thing, and God another? I cannot observe the Law, without violence
to my Conscience, nor discharge my Conscience, without Offense to the Law. What
Course shall I take, to avoid Enterfering?


C. Demea^ your self as a Christian, toward the LAW of God, one the One hand,
and as a Subject, toward the ORDINANCE of God, on the Other: As considering,
that you are discharged of your Obedience in That Particular, but not of your
Subjection in the General.


N. C. Put Case the Supreme Magistrate, should by a Law, Establish a False
Worship.


C. He Is nevertheless your Prince, and even in This Complication, you may
acquit your self both to God, and to Caesar. Though the Worship be amiss, The
Magistrate is yet to be Reverenced; and you are to divide the One from the
Other; in such manner, as still both to Fear God, and Honor the King. This
Loyal, and Religious Separation of our Duties, will set us right in the Main
Controversy. Where do ye find that Kings Reign, upon Condition of Ruling
Righteously? Or that we owe them Less, AFTER Misgovernment, then we did Before?


N. C. But do you say, we are bound to Honor an Idolatrous Prince? This is not
according to the Doctrine of many of our Grave Divines.


C. They are never the Better Divines for That Doctrine. The Prince, I tell ye,
you are bound to Honor, though not as an Idolater. Shall the Vice, or Error
of the Person, degrade the Order? By That Rule, The World must continue without
a Government, till we can find Men without Failings.


N. C. So that, when it makes for your Turn, you can Allow (I see) of
Distinguishing betwixt the PERSON, and the OFFICE.


C. Betwixt the Frailty of the One, and the Sacredness of the Other, I do: for
Kings Command, as Gods, though they Judge, as Men. But I do no more approve of
Dividing the Person of a Prince, from his Authority, then of Dividing his Soul
from his Body.


N. C. And I beseech you, What is That, which you call AUTHORITY?


C. It is the Will, and Power of a Multitude, delivered up by Common Consent,
to some One Person, or More, for the Good, and Safety of the Whole: And This
Representative Acts for All. Now on the other side, The Disposition of such, or
such a Number of Persons, into an Order of Commanding, and Obeying, is That
which we call a Society.


N. C. What is the Duty of the Supreme Magistrate?


C. To procure the Welfare of the People; Or, according to the Apostle, He is
the Minister of God, for a Comfort to those that do Well, and for a Terror to
Evil doers.


N. C. How far are his Laws Binding upon his Subjects?


C. So far, as They that Parted with their Power, had a Right over Themselves.


N. C. Whence was the Original of Power? And what Form of Government was First;
Regal, or Popular?


C. Power was Ordein'd of God, but Specified by Man: And beyond doubt, the
First Form of Government was Monarchique.


N. C. But I should rather think the Popular Form was First: For how could
there be a King, without a People?


C: So was the Son before the Father, you may say, for How could there be a
Father without a Son? But the Q^estion is; First: Was the World ever without a
Government, since the Creation of M^n? Secondly; Whether was there first in the
World, One Man, or More? But we are not here upon the Form of Government, but
upon the Latitude of Humane Jurisdiction; be the Sovereignty where it will. And
my Assertion is, that It extends to whatsoever God has left Indifferent. If you
deny This, you overthrow all Government.


N. C, And what are you the better, If I should grant it; unless we could All
come to an Agreement, about what is Indifferent, and what not?


C. Which must be procured by the Allowance of some Judicial Authority to
dec^de it.


SECT. XXII.
No End of Controversy, without a FINAL and UNACCOMPTABLE JUDGE, from whose
Sentence there shall be no Appeal.
C. WHen Subjects come once to Dispute Laws, The War is already Declared
against the Government. For it is not the Equity or Iniquity of the MATTER of
the Law, that is the Question; but the AUTHORITY of the LAWMAKERS; under the
countenance indeed of somewhat that might be mended in the Law it self. And the
Business comes Immediately to This Issue; Whether the King, or the People,
shall Determine, in what concerns the Good of the Community? That is to say;
Whether the Government shall Stand, or Fall? Whether or no we shall submit our
selves quietly to be overruled in all Controversies, by a Definitive Sentence
of Law; (according to the End, and Intention of Government, in its first
Institution) Or otherwise, by receding from that Common, Peaceable, and
Impartial Arbitrator of all our Differences; from our Faith given; our Oaths,
and Contracts: throw our selves back again into a State of Nature, and
Dissolution; and for want of a Moderator, leave all our Disagreements to be
decided by the Sword? (The certain Event of all Popular Appeals, from Laws, to
Multitudes)

This was tbe Ruin of us, in our Late Confusions. The Faction, you saw, could
do nothing, upon the Suggestions of Right, or Wrong; Convenience, or
Inconvenience; till they came to make Themselves the Judges of it: And no
sooner were they Possessed of That Pretension, but all went presently headlong
to Destruction. From Questioning the Legal Power of the King, they proceeded to
the Exercise of an Arbitrary Power, Themselves: From Asserting the Subjects
Liberties, to the Invading of them: And from the Reformation of Abuses, to the
Extirpation of the Government. The Two Houses led the Dance, and outed the
King; The Commons did as much for the Lords; and the People, as much for the
Commons: Which comes to no more, then what was reasonably to be expected, upon
turning the Course of Public Affairs into a wrong Channel; and subjecting the
Indisputable Rights of Sovereign Authority, to the Censures, and Expostulations
of the Rabble.


N. C. What are those Indisputable Rights, I beseech ye?


C. I reckon (among others) The Power of Making Laws; and likewise of Enforcing
the Execution of them; without admitting any sort of Demur, or Contradiction:
for let the People break in once upon any One Law, and they will hardly quit
their hold, till they have worm'd out, or unsettled all the Rest. In short; I
do esteem it a matter of Absolute Necessity, to the Peace, and the very Being
of all Government, to have some Unaccomptable Judge; some Unquestionable
Expedient of Law, or Authority, for the Ending of Controversies: The
Determination to be Final, and Decisive: No Appealing from it, and no
contending beyond it.


N. C. What not in Case of Error? I could be well enough content with a Judge;
and with Indispu^able Laws, if you could but assure me of Infallible
Lawmakers. But I should be sorry to see a Roman-Infallibility set up in
England.


C. So that rather then a Fallible Judge, you will have None at all. You could
be content with a Judge, you say; but then That Judge must be Questionable, in
Case of Error; so that Another Judge is to Judge Him; and the very Judge of
This Judge, is Himself Questionable; and so is his Judge, and his Judges Judge;
(in Infinitum) in Case of Error: Which Case of Error may be Alleged,
wheresoever there is no Infallibility; and if there be no Infallibility in
Nature, then by your Rule, there can be no Judge in Nature.


N. C. I do not say but a Man may Judge Certainly in some Cases, though not
Infallibly in All: and all I ask, is only a Free Exercise of my Judgment at
Discretion, without being tied up to an Implicit Resignation. There is but a
Right, and a Wrong; and the One I must Embrace, and Reject the Other. How shall
I know This from That, without Enquiry? And what am I the better for That
Enquiry, if when I have Learned my Duty, I am debarred the Liberty to Practice
it?


C. You turn the Question, from the Necessity of a Judge, to his Infallibility.
It Is all one to me, whether you make him Infallible, or Credible, or what you
make him, or where you place him; provided that he be Acknowledged Necessary,
and Unac^omptable. That He is Necessary, I presume you will easily afford me:
for there can be no Peace without him, every Man being at Liberty to Wrangle,
where no Man is Authorized to take up the Strife. But would you have him
Unaccomptable, or no?


N. C. What greater Encouragement is there in the World, to Tyranny, then the
Opinion of an Unaccomptable Sovereignty?


C. What is it rather (you should have said) that Excites Sedition, and
Depopulates Kingdoms, so much as the Contrary? And doubtless, the Fiercest
Tyranny is much more supportable, then the Mildest Rebellion.


N. C. Truly, as to the Convenience of a Definitive Sentence. I should be glad
to see it; without the Hazard of a D^finitive Injustice.


C. You mistake your self, if you oppose a Possible Injury on the One side, to
a Certain Wrangle; and Confusion on the Other. If Infallibility you cannot
find, why may not the fairest Probability content you?


N. C. But would you have that Probability govern by Unquestionable, and
Authoritative Conclusions?


C. By any means; you do nothing else: For where Controversies are Inevitable,
and Concord (if it may be had) Necessary; What can be more Reasonable, then to
choose the most Competent Judge of the Matter in Controversy, for the
Concluding Umpire of the Controversy it self?


N. C. But a Man may Judge Probably in One Case, and Improbably in Another:
Suppose the Determination to be manifest Error, or Injustice; would you have
the same Submission paid to it, as if it were Equity, and Truth?


C. Yes: To the Determination, though not to the Error: You are to stand to
the Authority of the Sentence, without Contesting the Equity of it: for Right,
or Wrong, it is a Decision. The Principal Scope, and sure End of a Reference, is
Peace: The Hopeful Event, and Issue of it, is Righteous Judgment. Is it not
well then, to be sure of the One, and in so fair a Likelihood of the Other? Put
it to the worst; You are not bound to be of the Judge his Opinion, but to be
overrul'd by his Authority: Neither do you undertake that he shall Judge
Critically, as to the Subject of the Question; but that he shall Judge
Effectually, as to the purpose of the Reference.


N. C. This Resignation may do well, in Cases of ^ivil Interest: but it will
hardly hold in Matters of Conscience. Who shall pretend to Judge of my
Conscience, beside God, and my Self?


C. The Scripture, which is the Rule of all Consciences, shall be the Judge of
Yours. But the Question is not, What the Conscience Is, but what it Ought to
be: Not what your Private Judgment says, but what the Scripture means; and the
Thing I strive for, is a Judge of That: A Judge of the Rule of Faith; which I
take to be all out as necessary, as a Judge of a Political Law.

You cannot but allow, that there are Diversities of Opinions, as well in
Religion, as concerning Secular Affairs: And such is our Corruption, that we
draw Poison, even from the Fountain of Life; and the Word of God it self, is
made the Warrant of all Crimes, and the Foundation of all Heresies.

Look behind ye, and you may see a Prince Murdered by his Subjects: Authority
Beheaded by a Pretended Law, and all this Defended by a Text. The Church
Devoured by a Divided Ministry; The Government overturned by a Solemn League
and Covenant to support it: An Arbitrary Power Introduced by the Patrons of
Liberty: The Lord's Prayer Cashiered, to make way for the Motions of the Holy
Ghost; and Charity it self Extinguished for the Advancement of the Gospel. We
have lived to see as many Heresies, as Congregations; and a Consistorian
Scrutiny, pressed beyond the Rigor of a Spanish Inquisition. We have seen some
that Romans 2. 22.
abhor Idols, committing Sacrilege: Christ's Kingdom cried up, till his By the
Familists.
Divinity is Denied. Strictness of Life Inculcated, till the very Rule of it By
the Antinomians.
(The Decalogue it self) is Rejected: And Blasphemy hunted out of the Tavern,
into the Pulpit.

In fine; What Sin, and Misery have we not known, and felt, since under the
Form of Liberty of Conscience, This Freedom of a Private Spirit came in vogue?
Nor are we ever to expect better from it, till all Men shall conspire to do the
same thing, where every Man is left to his Own Gust, to do what he pleases. And
whence flows all this Mischief, and Confusion, but from a License of Wandering
from the Rule? Methinks These Practices should put you, and your Cause out of
Countenance.


N. C. I am no Advocate for Anarchy, though no Friend to Uniformity: And I know
it is with Non Conformists, as with other People; there are Good and Bad of All
sorts. But to go with the Moderate: Would you have all Men's Consciences
Gobern'd by the same Rule?


C. Better Particulars suffer for Incompliance with the Public, then the
Public suffer for Complying with Particulars. Uniformity is the Ciment of
both Christian, and Civil Societies: Take That away, and the Parts drop from
the Body; One Piece falls from Another.

The Magistrate (for Orders sake) requires Uniformity; You, and your Associates
oppose it, upon a Plea of Conscience. The Question is; Whether He shall
Overruled your Opinions, or You Overrule His Authority? This Dispute begets a
War, for want of a Judge; and to prevent that Consequence, I offer that a Judge
is Necessary. Or put it Thus: You, and I differ; and possibly we are Both in
the Wrong; but most certainly we are not Both in the Right; and yet neither of
us but thinks well enough of his own Opinion. What Is to be done in This Case?
Shall we Wrangle Eternally?


N. C. No, We Will rather put the Matter to Arbitration.


C. Well; but the Arbiter himself is Fallible; and may mistake too: Or let him
have the Wisdom of an Angel, he cannot please us Both: For That which seems
Right to the One, will appear Wrong to the Other. Shall we stand to his Award
whatever it be? If not, take into your Thought these Consequences. You refuse
to submit, because it is Wrong; and I may refuse, by the same Reason, though it
be Right: (For, Every Man's Reason is of equal Force, where there is no Common,
and Representative Reason to Bind All.) So that by your Reckoning, Every Man is
in the Right to Himself, and in the Wrong to all the World besides: (for I
persuade my self, that Nature never produced Two Persons, in all Points, of the
same Judgment.)

Now, if you can neither deny Confusion to be the Natural Effect of this
Liberty of Judgment; nor the want of a Regulating, and Decretory Sentence, to
be the Cause of This Confusion, I hope you will grant me the Necessity of an
Unaccomptable Judge.


N. C. Is not the Word of God a sufficient Judge?


C. No: That Is no Judge, but [a Rule Chillingworths Safe Way. p. 57
for Christians to Judge BY] and the great Danger lies upon the Meaning of That
Rule. Witness those Swarms of Heresies, that have overspread this Land, since
the Bible has been delivered up to the Interpretation of Private Spirits.


N. C. You say well, if you could direct me to a Judge that we might all rely
upon.


C. And you say something too, if you could make appear, that None at all is
better then the Best we have: Or that Popular Errors, Numberless, and
Inevitable, (with the Dissolution of Societies to boot) are to be preferred to
the Few, and only Possible Failings of Authority, attended however with Peace,
and Agreement. The Question, Briefly, is This. Whether will you rather have;
One Fallible Judge, or a Million of Damnable Heresies?


N. C. Truly, as you have reduced it, to a Certainty of Peace the One way, and
to as great a Certainty of Discord, the Other; to a Certainty of Many Errors,
without a Judge, and to a bare Possibility of some few, with One: I think a
Final Judge may be Convenient, if not Necessary.


C. If you find it so in the Church, sure you will not Dispute it in the State;
especially against an Experience too, the most forcible of all Reasons. We were
never troubled with Constructive Necessities; with Cavils about the Receptacle
of Power, and the Limits of Obedience: With Distinctions betwixt the Political,
and the Natural Right of the People; The Legal, and the Personal Will of the
Prince; and betwixt the Equity, and the Letter of the Law: till Judgment was
forced from its proper Course, and the Decision of Political Controversies,
committed to the Frivolous, and Tumultuary Arbitrations of the People.


N. C. Nay, I am as much for a Judge, as You; but not for One Judge to All
Purposes: Nor indeed, for any Judge so Absolute as you would have him.


C. I tell ye again, A Judge, and no Absolute Judge, is No Judge: and you shall
as soon find the End of a Circle, as of a Controversy, by such a Judge. Nor is
it yet my Intention, that One Judge should serve for All Purposes.


N. C. Divide your Matter then, and assign to every Iudicable Point its Proper
Judge.


C. You have Reason; for truly I do not take the Magistrate to be any more a
Judge of My Conscience, then I am of His.


N. C. No doubt of it; And it were an Encroachment upon the Prerogative of God
Himself, for the Magistrate to Challenge it.


C. How comes it now, that we, that accord so well in the End, should differ so
much in the Way to it? But I hope the Clearing of the next Point will set all
Right: for after the Acknowledgment of the General Necessity of a Judge, we
have nothing further to do, but to agree upon the Judge, and so submit.


SECT. XXIII.
The Three Great Judges of Mankind, are GOD, MAGISTRATES, and CONSCIENCE.
SOme Things we do as Men; Other Things, as Men in Society; and Some again, as
Christians. In the first place, We are acted by the Law of Individuals; Which
Law, in the Second place, is Subjected to That of Government; And Both these
Laws are, in the Third place, Subordinate to That of Religion; i. e. The Law of
God's Revealed Will. So that the Three Great Judges of Mankind are, GOD,
MAGISTRATES, and CONSCIENCE.

Man as Consisting of Soul, and Body, may be again Subdivided within Himself.
Take Him in his Lower Capacity, and He is swayed by the General Law of Animal
Nature, But in his Divine part, you will find Him Governed by the Nobler Law of
Refined Reason; which Reason, in some Cases, we call Prudence, and in others,
Conscience, according as it is Variously Exercised.

The Things which we do purely as MEN, (Abstracted from any Ingredients of
Policy, or Regulated Religion) are either Natural Actions, Prudential, or
Moral. Of the first sort, are Those Actions to which we are prompted by a
Natural Impulse, in order to the Conservation of Life, and Being. Of the third
sort, are such Actions as we perform in Obedience to Moral Principles. (Which
are no other, then the Divine Will, as it is couched under the Dictate of
Humane Reason) And Betwixt These Two, lies the Region of Middle Actions: That
is, of Such Actions, as although not of simple, and strict Necessity, either to
Life, or Virtue, are notwithstanding Useful, and Commodious, for the Guidance,
and Comfort of the One, and for the Practice of the Other. The accurate
Disquisition of This Interest clears the Main Difficulty of the Question; for
Nothing has embroiled us more, then the Mistaken Rights, and Privileges of
Individuals: Which Mistakes being once made manifest, by laying open the
Subordination of several Claims, and Powers, every Man may take a distinct View
of his own Province.

N. C. If you will proceed Regularly, you are to State these Subordinations as
you go.


C. Agreed; and we are now upon the Right of Individuals: In which naked
Simplicity of Considering Man, without any Regard to the Ordinary Motions of
Providence, in the Order, and Regiment of the World, We shall yet find a
Natural Subordination within Himself, and the Law of Sense, under the Dominion
of the Law of Reason, in the same Subject. These are the Laws which the Apostle
calls the Law of his MEMBERS, Romans 7. 23.
and the Law of his WILL. The Former Law (and the less Excellent) is the Law
Sensitive; which is no other, then the Law of Self-Preservation. (The Supreme
Law of Animal Beings, as it is of Rationals the Lowest) This Law Sensitive, is
no other than the Manifestation of God in the Creature: for what Sense does,
Nature does; and what Nature does, God does.


N. C. But what is That Power all this while, which you call NATURE?


C. It is the Ordinary Working of God in all his Creatures; by Virtue of which
Divine Impression, and Influence, Every thing is moved to seek the Utmost
Perfection whereof it is Capable. As for the Purpose; The Perfection of MAN is
the Congruity of his Actions with his Reason; which is Nothing else, but That
which we call VIRTUE. The Perfection of BEASTS lies a degree lower: For they
are only moved by a Sensual Impulse, toward what is Convenient for them; and
when they have it, They Rest.


N. C. When People are gravelled, they fly to their Impulses, and Occu^t
Qualities. Where lies the Difference; I beseech you, between Their Impulse, and
Our Choice?


C. Their Impulse carries them on through a Sensitive Search, not any
D^liberative Discourse; And there is no E^ection neither at last: But only the
Simple Prosecution of a Determinate Appetite, without imagining any Proportion
betwixt the Means, and the End.


N. C. But still we find, that there is a Proportion: and the Motion appears to
us according to the Method of Reason: And a very Orderly Proceeding from a
Question, to a Resolution.


C. Is it Reason, think ye, that makes a Dog follow his Nose, and Hunt for
Meat, when he is Hungry? Or will you call it Choice, if he leaves a Turfe for a
Bone? Now if you ask how This comes about: He is guided by Instinct toward the
End; and Sense carries him thorough the Means.


N. C. But why should the same Process of Means, and the same Application of
Causes, be ascribed only to Instinct, in Brutes, and to Reason, in Man?


C. You are to take notice, that all Natur^l Operations are Regular, and
Ordinate, by what Means soever performed: But it does not follow, because the
Method is according to Reason, that therefore the Instrument must be
Reasonable. But to mind what we are upon.

The Law of Self-Preservation, is a Law common to Beasts with Men; but not of
Equal Force, and Obligation: for Their Sovereign Interest is Life; Ours is
Virtue: And therefore your late Argument for Defensive Arms, under Pretense of
that Extremity, was but a Brutish Plea: For if the Consideration of Virtue be
not above That of Life, Where lies the Advantage of Our Reason?


N. C. But when the Death is certain, and the Virtue doubtful, Who shall decide
the Point?


C. In a Case abstracted from the Ties, and Duties of Religion, and Government,
every Man's Reason sits as Judge upon his own Life. As for Instance; You are in
the Hands of Thieves, and only This Choice offered you, either to take a False
Oath, or to lose your Life. Your Conscience tells you, that you must rather
Perish, then Forswear your self: But if you can preserve your self, without
Violence to a Superior Duty, you are your own Murderer if you do not. Thus far
I think we are safe, and I suppose agreed, that every Individual is to Govern
himself by his Natural Conscience. But when the several Particulars come to be
bundled up in One Community, the Case is otherwise.


N. C. I am sorry to hear you say That. Why should not every Man be Governed by
his own Conscience, as well in Consort, as in Solitude, as well in Company, as
by Himself? Or will you have it, that our Duty to God ceases in the Act of
becoming Subjects to a Civil Power?


C. As to your Conscience, you are as free now, as you were before: But your
Body is no longer your Own, after you are once enrolled a Member of a Society.
And here is the Difference; You were your own Servant before, and now you are
the King's. (For what is Government, but the Wisdom, Resolve, and Force of
every Particular, gathered into One Under standing, Will, and Body?) And This
comes up to what I have already Deliverd, that, Whatsoever God has left
INDIFFERENT, is the Subject of HUMANE POWER.


N. C. But who shall be Judge of what is Indifferent?


C. Let That be Examined the very next Thing we do.

You are already satisfied, that an Auth^rized Judge is absolutely Necessary,
in Order to the Pe^ce of Church, and State, and to the Ending of all Public
Differences: But we are not yet resolved about Our Judges; Or if we were, yet
in Regard they are but Men, and so may Err, [Infallibility being departed with
Christ and Chillingworth's Safe way, etc. p. 104.
his Apostles; in lieu of which Living, and Infallible Guides, God has in
Providence given us a Plain, and Infallible Rule] We are now to make Enquiry,
how far a Private Judge may be allowed to Oppose, or Differ from a Public, in
Case of a Reluctant Conscience, and in some sort to Judge his Judge?


N. C. You say very well; For place the Ultimate Decision where you will, It is
(as you said before) an Infallible Determination as to the Strife; but Not so,
as to the Truth; and comes at last to This, that every Man (in some Degree)
re-judges his Judge. If I be fully convinced, either, that the Command is
Sinful in it self, or the Opinion Wicked; I am neither to Obey the One, nor to
Embrace the Other; as being tied up by a General Obligation of rather Obeying,
and Believing God, then Man. Nay more; If in Obedience to the Magistrate, I
commit a Sin against God, and do it ignorantly too, That very Act in Ignorance
is Crimin^l: (If I had the Means of being better informed:) For No Humane
Respect c^n justify an Offense against God. Now if I am bound to do Nothing
that is Ill; I am likewise bound, before I do any thing, to satisfy my self,
whether it be Ill, or No: For otherwise, I may follow a False Religion for a
True, and be Damned in the End, for not minding what I did. This do I take for
Proof sufficient, that No Man is so Implicitly Obliged to rely upon other Men's
Eyes, as totally to Abandon the Direction of his own; Or so unconditionally to
swear Obedience to other Men's Laws, and Persuasions, as to hold no Intelligence
at all with that Sacred Law, and Faithful Counsell^r which he carries in his
own B^som.


C. I am so far from advising you to reneunce your Reason, that, on the
contrary, I would have you absolutely guided, and concluded by it; and only to
Obey for Quiet sake, so far as you can possibly Obey in Conscience.


N. C. What if a Single Person hit that Truth, which a General Council misses?
Which will you have him follow; Truth, or Authority?


C. I would have him follow Truth with his Soul, and Authority with his Body.
But it is not for so remote a Possibility as This is, to bring the Fancies and
Imaginations of a Private Spirit into a Competition with Resolutions of Law,
And yet for the Possibility sake, We Will take the very Supposition likewise into
Consideration, and Word the whole Matter as plainly as we can.

The Church says, Ye may Do; And the Law says, You must Do, That which your
Conscience says, You ought not to Do. How will you reconcile your Duty, and
your Conscience, in This Case?


N. C. Uery well: For I think it my Duty to Obey my Conscience, upon This
Principle, That Conscience is God's Substitute over Individuals.


C. Keep to That, and Answer me once again; Is not the Civil Magistrate God's
Substitute too? If He be, How comes your Conscience to take place of his
Authority? They are Both Commissioned alike, and consequently, Both to be
Obeyed alike: Which is Impossible, where their Commands are Inconsistent.


N. C. The Magistrate is a Public Minister, and his Commission does not reach
to Particular Consciences.


C. And on the Other side, You are a Private Person, and there is as little
Reason for your Opinion to Operate upon a Public Law. So that if I mistake
you not, we are upon accord thus far; That every Particular is to look to One,
and the King to the Whole.

Now if you would deal as Heartily with me, about the Ecclesiastical Power, as
you have done in the Civil, we might make short work of This Question. I hope
you will not deny that the Church is as well Rut^erford's Due Right of Presbyt.
p. 356.
Authorized to TEACH, and INSTRUCT in all the External Acts of Worship, as
Ibid. p. 352.
the Magistrate is to COMPEL to Those External Acts.


N. C. There is no Doubt, Ibid. p. 407.
The Church (as the Church) has a Ministerial Power (Ex Officio) to Define
Controversies, according to the Word of God; And that Ibid. p. 415.
A Syn^d Lawfully Convened, is a Limited, Ministerial, and Bounded Visible
Judge, and to be believed in, so far as they fellow Christ, the Peremptory and
Supreme Judge, speaking in his own Word.


C. This will not do our Business yet; for to say, that a Synod is to be
believed in, SO FAR as it follows Christ, seems to make Those the Judges of
That Act, that are to be Concluded by it; and leaves the Credit of the
Authority, dependent upon the Conscience, Fancy, or Humor of the Believer. For
it is but any Man's saying, that the Synod does not follow Christ, and that he
trusts in it so far as it does follow Him. And this is enough to keep the
Controversy afoot, without any hope of Decision.


N. C. We are indeed to believe Truths Rutherf. Free Disp. p. 36.
determined by Synods, to be Infallible, and never again liable to Retraction,
or Discussion; Not because [so says the Synod,] but because [so says the Lord.]


C. Still you are short; for it is not in Our Power to dis^elieve what we
acknowledge to be a Truth: But That which is Truth at the Fountain, may be
Corrupted in the Passage; Or at least appear so to Me, and What then?


N. C. It must be looked upon as an Error of the Conscience; which is no
Discharge at all of your Obedience: From which Error you are to be reclaimed,
either by Instruction, or Censure. For the People are obliged to Obey Ibid. p.
27.
Those that are OVER THEM IN THE LORD, who Watch for their Souls, as those who
must give an Account;] And not obliged to stand to, and obey the Ministerial
and Official Judgment of THE PEOPLE. He that Hears YOU (MINISTERS of the
GOSPEL, not the PEOPLE) Hears ME; And He that Despises YOU, Despises ME.


C. Why should not We Two shake Hands now, and Join in the Act for Uniformity?
You cannot say, that it wants any thing of the full Complement of a Binding
Law; Either in regard of the Civil, or of the Ecclesiastical Authority. Here is
first, the Judgment of the Church duly convened, touching the Meetness, and
Convenience of the Rites, and Forms therein Contained. You have next, the Royal
Sanction, Approving, and Authorizing Those Rites, and Forms; and Requiring your
Exact Obedience to them. Now so it is, that you can neither Decline the
Authority of your Judges, nor the Acknowledgment of your Duties; What is it
then that hinders your Obedience?


N. C. That which to Me is more then all the World, It goes against my
Conscience.


C. Only That Point then, and we have done with This Subject.

We have already concluded, that God is the Judge of the World; That the Church
is the Judge of what properly concerns Religion; That the Civil Magistrate is
Judge of what belongs to Public Order, and Peace; and That every Man's
Conscience is the Judge of what concerns his own Soul. The Remaining Difficulty
is This; How I am to behave my self in a Case, where the Law bids me do One
Thing, and my Conscience, Another.

To take a True Estimate of This Matter, We are first to Balance the Two
Interests, that meet in Competition; The One, for the Law, and the Other,
against it.

There is, in Favor, and for the EXECUTION of the Law (meaning That of
Uniformity) 1. The Personal Conscience, and 2. The Political Conscience of the
King. There is moreover, for the EQUITY of it, the Solemn and Deliberate
Judgment of the Church; which is, effectually, the Public Conscience; and
lastly, for the OBSERVANCE of it, There is the Duty of the Subject, which, if
it be withdrawn, does not only Invalidate This Particular Act, but it loosens
the Sinews of Sovereign Authority; and which is more, it destroys even a Divine
Ordinance; For take away Obedience, and Government lapses into Confusion.

Now for the Counterpoise; AGAINST This Law, and Thus Supported, appears your
Naked Conscience. Nay, That Is the Fairest on it; It may be worse, and in Truth,
any thing that is Ill, under That Name.


N. C. But what is the World to Me, in the Scale against my Soul?


C. You have great Reason sure, and it is no more then every Man may challenge:
That is, to Stand, or Fall, to his own Conscience: Is that your Principle?


N. C. Yes, out of Doubt; it is Mine, and Yours, and any Man's that is Honest.


C. Well; Hold ye a little* Your Conscience will not down with This Law; and
This Law will as little down with your Conscience. Weigh now the Good against
the Bad; What if it stands? What if it yields? Make the Case worse then it is;
as Bad as Bad may be, in your own Favor. You cannot comply with the Law; And
the Law will not stoop to You. What follows upon it?


N. C. The Ruin of many Godly People, that desire to Worship God, according to
his Word.


C. That Plea wrought little upon You from Us; but let that pass. What sort of
Ruin do you mean? Ruin of Liberty, or Estate? (For this Law draws no Blood)
State your Misfortunes, I beseech ye.


N. C. No Man must Hold a Benefice, or Teach a School, but upon Terms of such
Subscription, or Acknowledgment, as many an honest Man would rather Die then
Consent to: So that We are Distressed, not only for Our Selves, as being deprived
of the Comfort of all Spiritual, and Heavenly Freedoms; But Our poor Infants
are exposed to be Undone, wanting the Means of a Religious Education.


C. If This be All, never Trouble your selves; for many an honest Man has
outlived more then this comes to. In short; There Is a huge Clamor; but (God
knows) with little Reason. Some Particulars will possibly suffer for want of a
Toleration: and who are They; but the Professed Opposers of the Law? And on the
Other side, All the Friends of the Government will suffer by it.

If you would see the Event of Granting what you ask, Turn but your Face toward
-- 41, and then Blush, and Repent. Besides; You're not aware, that in
Contesting with the Law, you Quarrel with your self: THERE IS YOUR OWN VOTE
AGAINST YOU; and all this Muttering, is no other then your Factious Will,
wrangling with your Political Consent. And yet I say, Stick to your Conscience:
Let us now put the Case of a Real Distance, betwixt This Act, and your
Conscience. How will you divide your Duty?


N. C. I Will follow your Advice, and stick to my Conscience.


C. Now change Hands, and make your self the Supreme Magistrate. He has a
Double Conscience; One that concerns Himself, the Other, his People.

What his Majesty's Personal Judgment is, has been Declared Abundantly; What
his Prudential Judgment may dispose Him to, lies in His Royal Breast. But be
That as Heaven shall Order it. Here Is the Partition of your Rights: The King's
Prerogative has nothing to do with your Conscience; and your Conscience has as
little to do with His Majesty's Prerogative. The King is Accomptable to God for
the Welfare of his People; and You are only Accomptable to God for the Good of
your little Particular. If You cannot Obey the Law, Do not: But abide the
Penalty. If the Sovereign cannot Relax the Law, He Is as Free to Execute it.
Your Conscience requires Liberty, and your Governor's Conscience requires
Order. Now why you should expect, that your Sovereign should bring down His
Conscience to Yours, when you find upon Experiment, that you cannot persuade
your Own to come up to His, is to me a Mystery. To Conclude, Keep your self,
within your Sphere; and where you cannot Consent, as a Christian, Submit, as a
Subject; that We may at last hope for some Respite from the Calamities of
Sedition, and Schism.


N. C. And why not Scandal, and Profaneness too? For the Edge of your Severity
might be directed to much better Purpose That way.


SECT. XXIV.
The Church of England charges the Non-Conformists with SCHISM, and the
Non-Conformists charge those of the Church with SCANDAL. The Matter is taken
into Debate.
N. C. YOur Position is, That no Toleration is to be admitted, to the hazard
of Religion, Good Life, and Government. Keep to That Standard, and you will
find that the Conformists have as little Pretense to a Toleration as their
Neighbors: and that the Notorious Scandal on the one side, outweighs the
Objected Schism on the other.


C. This will scarce hold, if you come to be Tried by your own Laws: which make
it a Matter of Scandal, by Writing, Preaching, or otherwise, to publish a
Disaffection Scobel's Acts, Part 1. p. 340.
to the Present Government. But Explain your self.


N. C. By Scandal, I mean Habitual Profaneness, Sensuality, Dissolution of
Manners, etc. As by Schism, I suppose you intend our Incompliances with your
Church Discipline. Weigh These Two now, One against the Other, and do you your
self hold the Balance. Set up your Tavern-Clubs against our Conventicles;
Oppose your Combinations against God Himself, to our Plots against the
Government. For you must not take it Ill, if I tell ye, that Atheism is become
the Sport, and Salt of your most Celebrated Enterteinments. And when you have
dashed the Bible out of Countenance, with the Story of the Three Grand
Impostors, or some such Lashing Piece of Drollery, The Questioning of God's
Overruling Wisdom, by Solemn Arguments, and the Placing of Fortune in the
Throne of Providence, is that which commonly Crowns your Conversations.


C. You should not charge Personal Crimes upon a Party, unless you can prove
them to be rationally Consequent to the Tenets, and Actings of That Party. Now
if you can show me any Affinity betwixt our Principles, and These Impieties,
you say something: But if you cannot, The Dust of your Argument puts out your
own Eyes. I do not wonder, I must confess, to see a Nation Overrun with
Atheism, that has been so many Years under your Tuition: or to find the Brat of
a Conventicle laid at the Church-Door.


N. C. May not We charge Personal Extravagancies upon your Party, as well as
You do upon Ours?


C. Yes: If you can prove the same Agreement against Us, betwixt the Faults of
the One, and the Principles of the Other, which we are able to justify against
You.

The Episcopal Party, you know, stood for the King; and it is undeniable, that
the King, and Church had the same Cause, and Fate. It is as unquestionable on
the other side, that the Non-Conformists destroyed both the One, and the Other:
Not by Accident neither, but by a Formed, and Excogitated Design, wrapped up,
and couched in the very Mystery, and Foundation of the Schism: Your Separation
from a Communion with the Church, resolving naturally into a Combination
against the Entire Frame of the Government; till in the End, by the help of a
Peinful, and Well-effected Ministry, the Generality of the People were Preached
into This Division, [i. e.] Those that could not reach the Cheat, were taught
to Scruple at Every Thing; and Those that went along with it, to make a
Conscience of Nothing. And this is it, that has brought us to be so Pestered
with Enthusiasts, and Atheists.


N. C. But let me tell ye again, the Atheists are of the Other Party.


C. And let me enform you too, that your Proceedings have made Atheists, more
ways then One.

First: The mere Quality of your Cause has made Atheism the Interest of a great
many of your Partakers; who, to put off the Thought of a Divine Vengeance
attending them, if there be a God, Endeavor (for their own Quiet) to persuade
themselves that there is no God at all.

Secondly: The Work has been carried on under the Masque of Holiness; and the
most Desperate Atheist is nothing else but a Crusted Hypocrite. I speak of your
Religious Atheist, who has This Odds of the Profane, and Scoffing Wretch, that
he abuses God to his Face, and in his own House. The Great Atheists, indeed,
are Hypocrites (says Sir Francis Bacon) which Essay of Atheism.
are ever bandling Holy Things, but without Feeling; so as they must needs be
Cauteriz'd in the End.

It is Remarquable (as I have elsewhere recommended to your Observation) that
in the Holy Scripture there are not so many Woes pronounced, nor so many
Cautions Inculcated, against any sort of People, as against Hypocrites. You
shall there find, that God has given the Grace of Repentance to Persecutors,
Idolaters, Murderers, Adulterers, etc. But I am mistaken if the whole Bible
yields any one Instance of a CONVERTED Hypocrite.

Thirdly: You have done more in your Practices, toward the Vindication of
Atheism, then all that ever went before ye: and he that overlooks our Story,
from 1640, to 1660, will find matter, not only to stagger a Weak Christian, but
to put a Wiseman to a Second Thought, and make him Exclaim with the Prophet;
[Lo, These are the Ungodly, These Prosper Psalm 73. v. 12.
in the World, and These have Riches in Possession. Then have I cleansed my
Heart in vain, and washed my Hands in Innocence,

To see the same Men, Swearing to day, with their Hands lifted up unto the
Lord, in a Holy Covenant, to Defend, and Preserve His Majesty's Person: And a
while after, with the same Consecrated Lips, blessing that Cursed Vote, that
manifestly led to his Destruction. (The Vote of Non-Addresses) To see
Ministers, like so many Pulpit-Weather-cocks, shifting from Party to Party,
till they have run through every Point of the Compass: Swearing, and
Counter-Swearing: And when the City was split into more Factions, then
Parishes, still to maintein, that the whole Schism was Acted by the Holy Ghost.
To find the Pulpit Trading only in dark, and Oraculous Delusions, instead of
plain, and saving Truths; and the Pretended Messengers of Peace, turned Agents
for Blood: To hear, and see all This, and More, and the Cause prosper too, What
could the Invention of Man add more to this Temptation to Apostasy?

Lastly; Your Necessitated Toleration, (Necessitated, I say; for you could
never have Crushed the Government without it) started so many lewd Opinions,
that it was some Degree of Modesty, for fear of a worse choice, even to be of
No Religion at all: And without Dispute, many People finding it left to
Indifferent, of what Religion they were, became Themselves as Indifferent,
whether they were of Any, or No. So that the Scandal which you would spitefully
fasten upon the Persons of some of our Party, is found to be Radical, and
Constitutional, in the very Elements of yours. Neither is it All, that your
Imputation is misplaced; but I am afraid you will find your self in Another
Mistake.

Which of the Two, do you account the more Tolerable; SCANDAL, or Schism?


N. C. If by SCHISM you mean A Refusal to join with That Church, where I cannot
Communicate without Sin; And if by SCANDAL, you intend such Actions as are of
evil Example, and minister Occasion to our Neighbor, of Falling: I think it is
easily Determined, that the One is not to be suffered, and the Other not to be
condemned.


C. I do not speak of This or That sort, or degree of Schism, and Scandal; but
in the just Latitude, both of the One, and the Other. That is to say, (without
more Circumstance) Which do you take for the more Tolerable Mischief of the Two?


N. C. Truly, betwixt a Perverse Separati^n, and a Notori^us Scandal, I think
the Choice is hard; but I rather incline against the Scandal.


C. Now, if ye will believe Sir Francis Bacon, Schism is Both; [Heresies, and
Schisms (says he) are of all others, the Essay of Unity of Religion.
greatest Scandals; yea more then Corruption of Manners.]

Consider it, as it stands in Opposition to Unity. (which is the Bond both of
Religion, and Society) What can be more Scandalous, then that which renders
Religion, Ridiculous? And That Is the Effect of Schism. To see so many Sects,
grinning one upon another, and yet All Pretending to the same One, and
Infallible Spirit. Beside, that Schism seldom or never goes alone; and in
Truth, it is but Sedition, in a Disguise: For we find, that our Scrupulous
Dissenters, can with much Ease, and Unity, Agree in a War, though not in a
Ceremony.


N. C. And may there not be Conspiracies in Scandal, as well as in Schism?
There, with an Evident Design to bring Contempt upon Religion: Whereas Here, we
find at least a Color, and Pretense to uphold it. Further; the Sins which I
account Scandalous, are many of them Lebell'd at the Prerogative of God
Himself; and in short, the Question is not, properly, and simply, betwixt
Schism, and Scandal; but betwixt Schism, and all other Sins whatsoever, that
may be Propagated by Conversation, (for That Is the Latitude of Scandal.)

Again, let me observe from your own Mouth, that Heresies are Scandals: and
several Heresies you know, both by the Laws of God, and Man, are Punished with
Death: He that Blasphemeth Numb. 24 16.
the Name of the Lord, shall be put to Death. From whence you may gather some
Difference sure, betwixt the Heinousness of the On; and of the Other.


C. You will proceed by a very Uncertain Rule, to measure the Sin by the
Punishment: for Political Laws regard rather Public Conveniences, then
Particular Cases of Conscience. A Man shall lose his Life for Picking a Pocket,
and but hazard his Ears for a False Oath.

But if you will refer the Matter to the Just, and Infallible Judge of all the
Wo^ld, to God Himself; look but into that Dreadful Judgment upon the Schism of
Korah. Korah, Dathan, etc. rose Numb. 16. 1.
against Moses, with Two hun^red and Fifty Captains of the Assembly, famous in
the Congregation, and said unto them, Ye take too much upon You, since Verse. 3.
all the Congregation is Holy, even every One of them, and the Lord is among
them. Wherefore then lift ye your selves above the Congregation of the Lord?
[And what followed?] The Earth opened Verse 32.
her Mouth, and swallowed them up with their Families, and all the Men that
were with Korah, etc. A Fire came out from Verse 35.
the Lord, and Consumed the Two Hundred and Fifty Men that Offered the Incense.
This set the Multitude a muttering against Moses, and Aaron; saying, Ye have
Verse 41.
killed the People of the Lord. See now, what came of This Muttering too:
Fourteen Thousand Seven Verse 49.
Hundred of them were consumed by a Plague.

You have here, not only a Dreadful Instance of God's Wrath against Schism; but
against a Schism also, carried on, in the Style of Our present Non-Conformists:
Two Hundred and Fifty Captains of the Assembly, Famous in the Congregation;
Which Our English Translation renders, An Intelligent, Sober sort of Men,
Numerous Disc. of Relig. p 25
among all Ranks, etc. These rose against Moses, and Aaron, and said unto Them,
Ye take too much upon You. The Congregation is Holy, and the Lord is among
Them. Wherefore do ye lift your selves above the Congregation of the Lord? What
is This, but the Language of Our Age, the common Objection against the Bishops,
for Lording it over God's Heritage. The Consequences I leave before you.


N. C. Give me leave now to pass an Observation upon your whole Discourse. You
seem to have been very Punctual, and Methodical in the Distribution of the
Parts of it. A Toleration, or No Toleration, was the Question. An Universal
Toleration you found too Wide; A Limited Toleration too Narrow; and yet after
all This, your Opinion was, that a Toleration under such and such
Modifications, and Restrictions might be admitted: Upon which Terms, I was
content to come to an Issue with You. Now, since This Lender of a Compliance,
You have not proceeded, Methinks, with that Candor which I expected from You.
But the Main Stress of your Argument lies against the Whole Party of the
Non-Conformists; And (in effect) against any Toleration at all: with little or
no Regard to those Accommodable Points, that might have brought the Matter in
Difference to some sort of Composure.


C. It is very True, That I am utterly against Tolerating the Whole Party, as a
Thing of Certain Inconvenience, to Religion, and Government; and to the Ruin,
no less of your selves, then of the Public. Will Presbytery ever satisfy,
the Independents Conscience? Or will Liberty any better suit with the
Presbyterians? And yet you could both of you join with the Directory, against
the Common Prayer; with the Authority of the Pretended Assembly, against That
of the Church; wherein you have given Proof to the World, that you were not
United upon any Consideration of Conscience, but with a Design upon a Common
Booty. Ye overturned the Government, Divided the Spoil, Enrich't your selves,
Embroiled every thing, and Settled Nothing. And yet in those Days there was no
Act of Uniformity to hinder you.

This is enough to make Evident, that the Non-Conformists are Intolerable, in
Conjunction: But if you think fit to make a Trial, how far any sort of them may
agree with our Standard of Toleration, Apart, Plead you the Cause of the
Presbyterians, and let your Brother Independent here, (that has been a Witness
to our whole Debate) take up the Cudgels for his own Party; Not forgetting, that

In the Question of TOLERATION, the Foundation of FAITH, GOOD LIFE, and
GOVERNMENT is to be Secured.


N. C. According to what Latitude are we to understand that which you call the
Foundation of FAITH?


C. According to the Latitude of the APOSTLES CREED; wherein Chillingworth's
Safe way, etc. p. 186.
are contained All the Articles of Simple Faith, which are Necessary to be
Explicitly Believed.] And whatsoever was found by Them, to be Necessary, and
Sufficient to Salvation, continues so still, and ought to be so Received, and
Acknowledged by Us: without insisting upon Deductions, and Consequences, as
Points of Prime, and Fundamental Necessity; though Occasionally, and Obliquely,
they become Necessary too. This is the Word of Faith which we Preach, that if
thou shall Confess with Romans 10. 8
thy Mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall believe in thy Heart, that God has raised
him from the Dead, thou shall be saved. Here Is the Foundation of FAITH: And in
That of GOOD LIFE, respect is to be had to Morality, that nothing be Tolerated
to the Encouragement of Looseness, Sensuality, and Dissolution of Manners.

As there is an Absolute Necessity of Providing against Doctrines and Opinions
of this Quality; so I think there will be no great Difficulty, either of
Discovering, or of Suppressing them: For they are of a Condition so Notorious,
that they ly open to all People: and then so Odious they are, by reason of the
Gross Impiety, and Scandal; that they have no Friends upon the Face of the
Earth, (for their own sakes, I mean) but the professed Enemies Christianity, and
Nature. (It is another Case, when they are made use of in Subserviency to a
Faction.) So that you may save your selves the Trouble of Catechizing your
Brethren upon These two Points, and rather spend your Time upon the remaining
Caution, for Securing the Government: which will be much more to Our Purpose;
For the Matter we are now upon, is a Question, rather of Policy, then of
Religion.


Toleration Discussed, BETWIXT A PRESBYTERIAN, AND AN INDEPENDENT.
SECT. XXV.
An Enquiry, upon a Short, and Impartial Survey of the Rise, Progress, and
Issue of the War, raised by the Two Houses in 1641. Whether were more Criminal,
The PRESBYTERIANS, or the INDEPENDENTS.
Presb. IN all our Arguments, and Pleas for Toleration, we are still hit in the
Teeth, (as in Bar to our Demands) with Dangerous Practices, and Opinions; The
Murder of the Late King; The Over-turning of the Government; and that we have
a mind to serve the Son, as we did the Father. Now forasmuch as the Fact is
undeniable; and truly the Exception but Reasonable, as to those that did it; We
are first to clear our selves of that Execrable Fact; wherein I am content to
become an Undertaker for the Presbyterians) And to speak afterward, to the
Justification of our Principles, and Opinions.


Indep. Give me leave then to Plead the Cause of the Independents; and to
observe to you, in the first place, that the Scotch Non-Conformists under King
James were Totally Presbyterian: and so were the English Puritans under Queen
Elizabeth.


Presb. Were the Anabaptists, Familists, and Brownists, that started up in
Those Days, Presbyterians?


Indep. Some Dutch Anabaptists came over indeed in 1560; but one Proclamation
scattered them Immediately. And then for the Familists, and Brownists, you
speak of; Alas! They gave the Executioner more Trouble then the Government, and
were Suppressed as soon as Detected. But the Formal, and United Confederacy was
still Presbyterian; and you must overthrow all the Memorials, and Records of
Those Times to gainsay it. Briesly; If you look forward, you will find the
Presbyterians again under King James, at Hampton Court; The Presbyterians
again, in the several Parliaments under King Charles the First; and so the same
Hand still, to the beginning of the Scottish Broils in 1637. which was but the
Midwifry of the Plot, they had been so long a Hammering.


Presb. You make nothing, it seems, of the Turbulent Independents, that went
away to New England, Holland, and other Parts beyond the Seas, with all the
Clamor, and ^ancour Imaginable against the Government.


Indep. Not to Justify them in their Clamor; I must yet recommend their
Departure, as a fair Testimony that they withdrew upon Conscience. For by this
Secession, they put themselves out of Condition to carry on a Faction: Whereas
The Presbyterians, that had a further Design in Prospect, stood their Ground,
watched their Advantages, and gained their End.


Presb. All this is but Talk, without Proof.


Indep. It will be granted, I suppose, that the Scottish Tumults in 1637. and
the R^bel ion upon the neck of them, in 1638 were advanced upon a Presbyterian
account: and consequently, that Those were of the same Leven, that Voted them
Good Subjects, and Money for their peins, and Adopted them their DEAR BRETHREN,
for so doing.

Were not the Principals of the Faction in the Long Parliament, every Man of
them Presbyterian? Were not the Army, and Ass^mbly, Presbyterian; And all their
Votes, Actions, and Conclusions Influenced accordingly? Who were they that
Invited the Scots into England the Second time; (Nov 7. 164^.) That Imposed the
Covenant; Ex. Coll. p. 737.
Prosecuted the War, under the Countenance of it; and made it the Test of
Discrimination, betwixt the Malignant, and Well affected Parties: That Settled
the Directory, Nay the Presbytery it self? Were not These, Presbyterians?

Who were they, but Presbyterians, that stripp't the King of his Regalities,
and Revenues; Commissioned an Army against him; Fought him, Pursued him; and in
fine, brought him to utter Ruin?


Presb. You will find the Late King of another Opinion, in his Grand
Declaration, of Aug. 12. 1642. where he complains of the Tumultuous Assemblies
of Brownists, Anabaptists, and other Sectaries. Ex Coll. p. 532.



Indep. But still you will find in the same Page, that These very People were
Animated, and Countenanced, by Presbyterians; and Acted, as the Creatures, and
Servants, of That Interest.


Presb. Can you say that the English, Interest of Engl. p. 44.
or Scottish Preshyters did ever go about to Dissolve Monarchy?


Indep. Yes: And I do aver, that the Nineteen Propositions of June 2. 1642. Ex.
Coll. p. 307.
were as much a Dissolution of Kingly Government, as the very Act it self (of
March 17. 1648.) for Abolishing it. And the Uxbridge Propositions were to the
Scobel's Acts, Part 2. pa. 7.
same purpose.


Presb. You know very well, that after the New-Modelling of the Army, the
Presbyterians were able to do nothing; and this was a good while before the
King went to the Scots.


Indep. Let us see then how the Presbyterians behaved themselves, after his
Majesty cast himself into the Protection of the Scotch Army before Newark, in
May, 1646.

Notice was Immediately given of it, to the Two Houses, by the Commissioners of
the Army; Importing their Adherence to the Covenant, and Treaty; and that they
had no foreknowledge of his Majesty's Coming. The English Army presently
Marched with 5000 Horse, and (...), toward Newark; and our Brethren fairly
retreated with the Prey in the Foot toward Newcastle. After This, Both Parties
stood at Gaze for several Months; but not without a World of Tedious Papers,
betwixt the Scotch Commissioners, and the Two Houses, touching their Joint
Right in Disposing of the Person of the King. But in the Conclusion, The
Presbyterians Compounded the Controversy for the Sum of 400000l In May they
took their Sovereign into their Protection; In the December following, they
Sold him; and in February they Delivered him up; And All This, According to
their COVENANT.


Presb. They must needs Deliver him up, when they could Keep him no longer.


Indep. They had at that time the City of London to Friend; a Balancing Vote in
the House of Commons; a Considerable Mixture in the Army; Scotland behind them;
(Entire, if ever the Kings Interest came in Play) And at least Ten Thousand Men
in a Body. (The Royal Party over and above.) So that here was no visible Force
to overawe them: And Lowdon himself acknowledged as much, at a Conference
(October. 6. 1646.) If any such Course shall be taken (says he) or any Demand
made for Rendering of his Person, which cannot stand with his Honor, and
Safety; or which cannot consist with our Duty, Allegiance, and COVENANT; nor
with the Honor of That Army, to whom (in time of his Extreme Danger) he had
his Recourse for Safety: It cannot be Expected that we can be Capable of SO
BASE AN ACT: And if (to shun this, and avoid occasion of Quarrelling between
the Kingdoms) He shall go to Scotland, and resent his Expulsion out of England;
and crave the Assistance of That Kingdom for Recovery of his Right to This
Crown: He may in a short time, raise such Forces in Scotland, and Ireland, as
with the Assistance of Foreign Princes, these Kingdoms may be made a Field of
Blood, etc.

By This, it appears Evidently, that They were under no Necessity of Delivering
the King: And you may now see their Opinion of the Action it self. [If Answer
to the Vote of Sept. 24. 1646.
it be Contrary (say the Scotch Commissioners) to the Law, and Common Practice
of Nations, to Deliv^r up the meanest Subject fled to them, though it be for
the Greatest Crimes; How much more would the World abroad condemn our Army, for
a BASE, DISHONORABLE Act, if they should Deliver up their Head, and SOVEREIGN,
(having cast himself into their Hands) to be Disposed of at the Arbitr^ment of
another Nation!


Presb. But yet you saw that they Conditioned for his Honor, Freedom, and
Safety.


Indep. That Is a Shuffle: For upon such Terms did they render him, that they
might have cast a Sheep into a Herd of Wolves, with as much Confidence, and
Likelihood of Safety. You are here to distinguish the F^ction of Scotland, from
the Nation: No Country affording greater Instances of Honor, and Loyalty. Nay,
I have heard (even on This Occasion) that upon the Kings Earnest Desire to go
for Scotland, It was carried in the Negative but by Two Voices.


Presb. Can you Imagine, that if they had apprehended any Danger to his R^yal
Person, they would not have ventured their Libes a thousand time^ over, to have
saved him?


Indep. No, no: But on the Contrary; They Foresaw the Danger, debated it; and
yet exposed him: Nay, which is still worse, they reserved him for it. Were not
his Majesty's Friends kept from him, by a strict Order, at Newcastle? Was he
not Spied, and Guarded, for fear of an Escape? And upon Information, that He
intended one, Was not a narrower Watch set over him?

That they foresaw the Danger, is confessed by the Chancellor Himself. Lest we
should walk in the Dark, (says he) upon Obscurity of Ambiguous Words, I shall
desire, that the Word of Disposing of the Kings Person, may be rightly
understood. For Dolus versatur in Universalibus. For to Dispose of the Person
of the King, as Both Houses, or Both Kingdoms shall think fit, may in some
sense be to DEPOSE, or WORSE. And in a Speech to his Majesty, he goes yet
further. If your Majesty (says he) shall refuse to assent to the Propositions;
(which God forbid) you will lose all your Friends, lose the City, and the
Country; and All England will join against you as one Man: And (when all hope
of Reconciliation is past) it is to be feared they will Process, and Depose
you, and set up another Government. Upon your Majesty's refusing the
Propositions, both Kingdoms will be Constreined (for their mutual Safety) to
Agree, and Settle Religion, and Peace without you: which (to our unspeakable
Grief) will ruin your Majesty, and your Posterity. And if your Majesty reject
our Faithful Advice, and lose England by your Wilfulness, your Majesty will not
be permitted to come and ruin Scotland.


Pres^. These Propositions, I suppose were of Absolute Necessity to the
Well-Being of the Public; they would never have been brought in Competition
else with the Kings Freedom, Life, and D^gnity).


Indep. The King was first, to Justify the Pr^ceedings of the Two Houses, and
to deliver up to Death, Beggary, and Infamy his Whole Party.

2. To Settle the Militia of England, and Ireland, in the Hands of the
Parliament, for Twenty Years; giving them Authority to raise Men, and Moneys.

3. To make v^id all Honors since 1642; and no Peers admitted for the future,
to Sit and Vote in Parliament, but by Consen^ of Both Houses: who were likewise
To dispose of all Great Places, and Offices of Honor, in England, and Ireland.

4. His Majesty was to Swear, and Sign the COVENANT, and Command the taking of
it throughout the Three Kingdoms; Abolishing Episcopacy, and Settling Religion
as Both Houses should Agree.

Upon his Majesty's Refusal to Sign These Propositions, the Scotch Declaration
of Ian. 16. 1646. tells us, That there would be a Joint Course taken by Both
Kingdoms concerning the Disposal of His Majesty's Person. -- With Respect had
to the Safety, and Preservation of his Royal Person, IN THE PRESERVATION,
AND DEFENSE OF THE TRUE RELIGION, AND LIBERTIES OF THE KINGDOMS -- According
to the COVENANT. And According to the COVENANT, His Majesty's Person was
Disposed of.


Presb. And do you believe that the Two Houses would have used the King any
better, if he had gone to Them?

They made it Treason Immediately, and Death without Mercy, for any Man to
Harbor, and Conceal the Kings Person; upon a Supposition, that his Majesty was
then in London. This was the fourth of May; and on the sixth, The Commons Uoted
him to Warwick Castle* which was Unvoted again upon the ninth. In ^une, the
Kings going to the Scots, was Uoted A Design to Prolong the War. And this was
as much the Action of the Independents, as the Other was of the Presbyterians.


Indep. Pardon me there, I beseech ye. You see by the Voting Back and Forward,
that the House of Commons was upon a hard Tug, but the Scottish Party was
totally Presbyterian.

But will you hear the Kirk speak for it self, after the putting of the King
into English Hands? They Exhort their COVENANTED BRETHREN, (the Assembly at
Westminster) to hold fast their Solemn League and Covenant: to entertein a
Brotherhood, and Unity between the Nations, (Feb. 12. 1646.) (but not a
Syllable of the King) Again, (June 18. 1647.) The General Assembly of the Kirk,
presses the Two Houses to a speedy Establishment of the Presbytery: (but not a
Word again of his Majesty.) And in truth, their Silence is a Favor,
considering how they order him, when they speak of him: As you may observe in a
Resolve of theirs, upon a Question Debated at Edinburgh.

If the King be Excluded from Government in England, for not Granting the
Propositions concerning Religion, and the Covenant; and for not giving a
Satisfactory Answer to the Remanent Propositions: Whether in That Case it be
Lawful for this Kingdom to assist him, for the Recovery of the Government, or
whether it be not Lawful?

Being put to it, We cannot but Answer, in regard of the Engagement of This
Kingdom, by Covenant, and Treaty, NEGATIVE.


Resolved upon the Question,

1. That the Kingdom of Scotland, shall be Governed as it has been these last
Five Years; All Means being used, that the King might take the Covenant, and
Pass the Propositions.

2. That the taking of the Scots Covenant, and Passing some of the
Propositions, does not give Warrant to assist him against England.

3. That upon bare taking the National Covenant, we may not receive him.

4. That the Clause in the Covenant, for Defense of the Kings Person, is to be
understood, in Defense, and Safety of the Kingdoms.

5. That the King shall not Execute any Power in the Kingdom of Scotland, until
such time that he has Granted the Propositions concerning Religion, and the
Covenant; and given a Satisfactory Answer to Both Kingdoms in the rest of the
Propositions, presented to him by both Kingdoms at Newcastle.

6. That if his Majesty refuse to Pass the Propositions, he shall be disposed
of according to the COVENANT, and Treaty.

7. That the Union be firmly kept between the Kingdoms, according to the
Covenant, and the Treaties.

Here Is PRESBYTERIAN LOYALTY: If the King would have consented to give up his
Crown; Blast his Conscience; Betray his Trust, and Sacrifice his Friends; he
might perchance have been allowed the Pageantry of a Court, and some
Mock-Properties of Royalty: but upon other Terms, the Kirk you see gives him no
Quarter.

The King is now under the Care of his new Governors; Holdenby is his Prison;
The Question is Matter of Church Government; and his Majesty is pressed to an
Alteration. Some Two Months are spent in the fruitless Desires, and
Expectations of his Chaplains, for his Advice, and Comfort: and any Two (of
Twelve in Nomination) would satisfy his Majesty. But That could not be; (they
said) No, not a Common Prayer Book for his own Private Use. These were the
Presbyterians still.

Upon the fourth of June 1647. Co^not Joyce, with a Party of Horse took the
King from Holdenby; under color of preventing other Secret Designs upon the
Person of his Majesty. The next day, at a Rendezvous near Newmarket, was Read,
and Signed The Armies ENGAGEMENT: compleining of the Two Houses, and in
particular, of a Vote they had Past for Disbanding the Army. (Where Note, that
the Houses were still Presbyterian) The Sum of their ENGAGEMENT was: That they
would Disband, upon full Satisfaction received, and not without it. This
Liberty was menag'd all this while, with much Formality of Duty, and Respect:
The Houses at every Turn advertised concerning the King's Motions: and (June
the 9th) consulted how further to Dispose of his Majesty. Some Three days
after, the Army drew toward London, and Alarmed the City: (contrary to an
Express Order of the Houses, the very day before) A Months Pay was their
Errand, and to save Carriage, they made a step from Royston to St. Albans to
receive it.

On June the 15, out comes a Terrible Representation, with Desires from the
Army, Against all Arbitrary Powers, and Interests whatsoever: Pleading the
Presbyterian Presidents, and the Principles of the Two Houses in their
Justification.

The Parliament (say they) has Declared it no Resisting of Magistracy, to side
with the Just Principles, and Law of Nature, and Nations, (being That Law upon
which we have assisted you) and that the Soldiery may Lawfully hold the Hands
of the General, who will turn his Cannon upon his Army, on purpose to destroy
them. They Demanded, The Purging of the Houses; and Retrenching the Power of
Committees; An Account for Public Moneys; A Period of the Present Session,
and Limits for the Future, etc.

It could not choose but Gall the Two Houses, to see their Throats cut with
their own Weapons: but still they kept up their Greatness of Pretense, and
Style; and by an Order as Imperative as ever, they commanded the Placing of his
Majesty at Richmond; in Order to a Treaty, forsooth, for a Safe, and
Wellgrounded Peace, But the Army had another Game to Play; However, what the
Presbyterians would have done upon that Occasion, may be seen in what they did
afterward, at the Isle of Wight, in his Majesty's last Distress, and Extremity.


Presb. You are willing, I find, to pass over the Barbarism of the Independents
toward his Majesty, while they had him at H^mpton-Court; but there is enough
yet behind, to make That Faction Odious to all Eternity.


Indep. Truly no: but I would not spin out a Debate to the length of a History.
As to the Barbarisms you speak of, let his Majesty Himself be heard.

Colonel Whaley, I have been so civilly used by You, and Major Huntington, that
I cannot but by this parting Farewell, acknowledge it under my Hand. Nov. 11.
1647. And again; from Carisbrook Castle to the General, Nov. 27. 1647.

The Free Liberty which you willingly afforded us to have of the use of our Own
Chaplains, makes us at this time not only to Acknowledge your Former
Civilities, but, etc. So that His Majesty's Condition appears to have been
somewhat more easy at Hampton Court, then before it was at Holdenby. Nay, most
certain it is, that the Presbyterians, even at That very Time, did the Deadly
Thing that brought the King to the Seaffold.


Presb. How could That be; when the Two Houses, by Purging, and Modelling, were
Subjected Absolutely to the Devotion of the Army?


Indep. Thus they did it. His Majesty was at That time, upon fair Terms with
Cromwell, and Ireton; and not without large hopes of a Final Accommodation. (The
Author of The History of Independency, (Pa. 35.) is positive, as to their
Treating with the King) While This was in Agitation, the Presbyterians were at
work on the other hand, to break the King's Confidence in the Army; by
Imputations of Treachery, and Levity: to divert his Majesty to the Seeking of
Relief elsewhere; with particular Undertakings of great Matters from Scotland,
and the City of London. This way of Tampering might very well put the King to a
stand: which Cromwell no sooner perceived, but he Immediately betook himself to
a Course of Extremity: Irritated (over and above, as is credibly affirmed) by
an Advise foom Argyle, in confirmation of his Jealousy.

His Majesty's next Remove was to the Isle of Wight: Where, for Ceremonies
sake, he was presented with Four Bills; and upon his Refusal to pass them,
followed the Vote of NON-ADDRESSES. In Passing these Bills, His Majesty had not
only divested Himself, and His Successors, of all Sovereignty; but Subjected
his People to the Basest, and most Absolute Tyranny that ever was Excrcis'd
upon Mortals.


Presb. You will not call This the Act of the Presbyterians, I hope.


Indep. No, I will not: But yet I must tell you, that the Presbyterians, upon
this Juncture, did every jote as much as this Amounts to.

So soon as the Parliament of Scotland was thoroughly Informed of the Distress,
and Danger of the King's Condition, the Matter was presently Debated; and a
Resolution taken to Raise an Army for his Majesty's Relief. In which
Proceeding, they were violently opposed by the Genral Assembly, without any
regard at all to the King's Life, at that time in Q^estion. See The Humble
Desires of the Commissioners of the General Assembly to the Parliament, Page
13. (We desire that his Majesty's late Concessions, and Offers concerning
Religion, as they have been by the Church, so may be by the Parliament declared
UNSATISFACTORY. (March 22. 1648.) And afterward: (Ian. 10. 1648.) That his
Majesty's late Ibid. p. 60.
Concessions, and Offers concerning Religion, may by your Lordships, DIRECTLY,
and POSITIVELY, be Declared UNSATISFACTORY to this present Parliament. And that
there shall be no Engagement for Restoring his Majesty to one of his Houses,
with Honor, Freedom, and Safety, before Security, and Assurance be had from
his Majesty, by his Solemn OATH, under his HAND, and SEAL, that ^e shall for
HIMSELF, and his SUCCESSORS, Consent, and Agree to Acts of Parliament,
enjoining the League and Covenant, and fully Establishing Presbyterian
Government, Directory of Worship, and Confession of Faith in all his Majesty's
Dominions: and that his Majesty shall never make Opposition to any of these, or
endeavor any Change thereof.

This is Rivetted with a Mischief. And pray'e show me now the Material
Difference, between Precluding His Majesty by a Vote of NO ADDRESS, or by a
Resolution of NO AGREEMENT: His Honor, and Conscience being equally at Stake
on either side.

To give you the Sum of all in short. The Presbyterians began the War; Pursued
it; made the King a Prisoner; Sold him; and in the Depth of his Calamity,
presented him with Templation, instead of Comfort. No Composition would be
heard of, but the Forfeiture of his SOUL, for the Saving of his LIFE.


Presb. But the Independents however, Crowned the Wickedness with his Blood.


Indep. Suppose it so: They did only Execute the Sentence, but the
Presbyterians Pronounced it. Neither did they Execute it, as Independents; or
under color of any Impulse of Religion, or Conscience, but upon Civil, and
Political Pretexts. He was adjudged to be put to Death as a Tyrant, Traitor,
Murderer, and Public Enemy: Not for Refusing to Enter into a
Church Covenant, or Establish Liberty of Conscience; but upon a Pestilent
Motive of Diabolical Policy, and State. Whereas, the Presbyterians persecuted
him as PRESBYTERIANS; and deprived him of his Royal Support, Dignity, Friends,
Freedom, (in Effect) Life and all, because he would not renounce his Reason,
and Conscience, in favor of their Government. And I am verily persuaded, that
you will have as little to say for your Principles, as for your Actions.


SECT. XXVI.
What Party soever DEMANDS a Toleration, and yet Mainteins, that It is
Destructive both of Church, and State, to GRANT one, Is an ENEMY to BOTH.
Indep. AS to the Point in Question; It lies Naturally before us to speak first
to the Thing, in it self; and we may afterward consider it in the Consequences.

In the Desire of a Toleration, the Independents ask no more then they would be
ready to Allow; I wish the Presbyterians could say the like.


Presb. In the large sense of Allowing all sorts of Libertines, and Heretics,
as the late Independent Government did, I do confess you have outdone the
Presbyterians.


Indep. And yet Those very Libertines, and Heretics, were Your White-Boys,
and Favorites, so long as they served Your Ends. They had none of this
Language from you, when they Tumulted against Bishops, and Common Prayer;
Ceremonies, and Popish Lords. While they were the Instruments of Your Ambition,
they were the Godly, Well-affected Party: So that Heretics, it seems, will
down well enough with your Politiques, though not with your Consciences:
Provided they will content themselves to be Damned, and let the Presbyterians
alone to Govern.


Presb. The Independents made sweet work in Holland, did they not? And where
was your Spirit of Toleration, and Forbearance, I beseech you, in New England?


Indep. You cannot say that we gave any Trouble in Holland to the State; or
that we fell foul there upon Different Judgments. In New England, it is true, we
excluded the Gortonists, Familists, Seekers, Antinomians, Anabaptists; and
Subjected them to the Censure of the Civil Power, as People of Dangerous
Principles, in Respect both of Good Life, and Government. Which Proceeding of
our^ methinks might serve to disabuse those that call Independency the Genus
Generalissimum of all Errors, Heresies, Blasphemies, and Schisms: and take the
Church way of New England, for that sort of Independency. They did also exclude
Papacy, and Prelacy; The Latter, perchance, more out of Regard to a Temporary
Convenience, then upon any rooted Principle of Implacable Severity. And I
persuade my self, the Episcopal Party will witness thus much on our Behalfs;
that as to the Freedom of their Meetings, and way of Worship, in the late
Revolutions, they had much better Quarter from the Independents, then ever they
had from the Presbyterians: There was no Persecuting of Men for Covenants, and
Directories: So that Thus far, the Independents have made their Professions of
Liberty good, by their Practice.


Presb. And are not the Classical Presbyterians as much for a Lawful Liberty,
as the Congregationals? [L^t there be a Old Non-Conf. p. 41.
Toleration in Religion, excepting to Blasphemy, Treason, or Gross Errors.]
Bear with the Weak; Tolerate the Tolerable, and for the Intolerable, we beg
Petit. for Peace, p. 20.
not your Toleration. ^ere's the Sense and Destre of the Presbyterian Divines
that were Commissioned about the Review of the Service Book.


Indep. This is only a New Song, to an Old Tune. The Presbyterians have just
the same need of the Independents at this day, that they had some nine and
twenty Years ago. The Author of The Discourse of Religion has many good
Remarques upon the Papists, that may be very well applied to the Presbyterians;
and This for One. [Things past (says he) may afford Par. 1. p. 6.
Prognostiques of things to come. So that we are to gather what you intend now,
from what you did, after saying the same things before. Or if you had rather
come to a Trial, upon the Evidence of your own Manifestos, and Declarations,
then upon the History of your Practices; I shall make use of no other Testimony
against you.

The Presbyterians press the Demand of a Toleration, as a very reasonable
Request; and yet they Themselves have pronounced Judgment against it, as a
thing against Conscience, Destructive of Public Order both in Church, and
State, and of the Peace of Common Society.

Toleration (says Mr. Edwards) cannot Gangraena Part 3. p. 282. Ibid. 303.
be Condescended to, without a Breach of Oath, and Covenant. [It is the Depth
of Satan, this Design of a Toleration. He does not move for a Toleration of
Heresies, and Gross Errors; but an Allowance of a LATITUDE in some LESSER
DIFFERENCES with Peaceableness. This is Candidus ille Diabolus, That White
Devil, etc. The London Ministers Letter to the Assembly, in 1645. declares it
Repugnant to the Solemn League and Covenant. The Commissioners of the Kirk of
Scotland, do Protest, and Declare Rutherf. Free Disp. p. 267.
against it, as Inconsistent with, and Repugnant to the Word of God.

As to the Influence of a Toleration upon Church, and State; Mr. Edwards tells
us, that The Party Tolerated will never rest Gangraena, p. 293.
Working, till they get the upper hand, and Suppress the Other. Rutherford is
positive, that such Opinions, and Practices as make Free Disp. p. 98.
an Evident Schism in a Church, and set up two Distinct Churches, of Different
Forms, and Government, are NOT to be Tolerated. For by their Principles they
labor, each the Destruction of the other; and this Toleration destroys Peace,
and Unity. Again, The London Ministers are of Opinion, that it will produce
causless, and unjust Revolts from the Ministry, and Congregations. The Peoples
Minds will be Troubled, and in Danger to be Subverted. Heart-burnings will be
Fomented, and Perpetuated to Posterity. The Godly, Peinful, and Orthodox
Ministers will be Discouraged, and Despised. The Life and Power of Godliness
will be eaten up by Frivolous Disputes, and Ianglings. And the whole Church of
England, in short time, will be swallowed up with Distraction, and Confusion.
The Kingdom will be woefully weakened also, by Scandals, and Divisions: The Power
of the Magistrate will not be only weakened, but utterly overthrown, by the
Anti-Magistratical Principles, and Practices of the Independents: And the whole
Course of Religion in Private Families, will be interrupted, and undermined.

Not to multiply Authorities more then necessary, This has been the strein of
all your Proceedings: Imperiously, and Inexorably Strict, and Rigorous in
Imposing upon Others; and as Shamelesly Importune, and Clamorous for Liberty to
Your selves. But what have I more to do, then to pass Sentence upon you, out of
your own Mouths? You cannot in Conscience desire a Toleration, if you
understand it to be Against Conscience to Grant it. And the very Asking of That
which you believe would draw a Destruction upon Church and State, is Ground
enough for a strong Presumption that you Intend it.


Presb. That which was a Reasonable Cause of Refusal, from the Presbyterians to
the Independents, will not hold good from the Church of England to the
Presbyterians: Either in respect of the Stability of our Government, or of the
Sobriety of our Principles.


SECT. XXVII.
In Case of a Toleration, or Indulgence to be Granted, Whether has the fairer
Pretense to it; The CLASSICAL Way of the PRESBYTERIANS, or the CONGREGATIONAL
Way of the INDEPENDENTS; in Respect of their Form of Government.
Indep. THe Presbyterians (you say) are rather to be Tolerated then the
Independents, in regard of the Stability of their Government, and the Sobriety
of their Principles, To speak in this Place to the Matter of their Government;
I think your Argument is very ill grounded. For in Deliberations of this
Nature, the Cautions that occur to all Magistrates are chiefly These Two.
First, in case of an Indulgence, that it may be placed upon a Party, which in
Probability, would not disturb the Public if they could; But Secondly, to
make sure however, (for fear of the worst) that they shall not be able to do
it, if they would. So that whether a Stable, and United, or a Loose, and
Distracted Interest may with more Security be Indulged, is the Question.


Presb. You may as well ask, Whether Order, or Confusion be more Tolerable in a
Government.


Indep. That Order which is Necessary in the Government it self, is Dangerous
in the Enemies of it. But deliver your Exceptions to the Toleration of those
which you call Independents, in Regard of their way of Government.


Presb. You have already, in a good part, saved me that Labor. But a Man shall
not need to go further for an Exception, then to the very Denomination of them;
which Imports an Exemption from all Jurisdiction, both Eclesiastical, and Civil.


Indep. But what will become of That Exception, when I shall tell you, that
those People are no more Independent, then the Presbyterians? [We depend upon
Cotton's Way, p. 11.
the Magistrate for Civil Government, and Protection; and upon Christ, and his
Word, for the Rule of our Administrations. Nay, we insist upon it, that the
Congregational Way, is the only true, Original Burton's Vind. p. 18
Presbytery, which is Peculiar to every Particular Church of Christ. But if you
call us Independent, as in distinction to Subordinate, we are not only ready,
as such Independents, to defend our selves; but by virtue of That very
Independency, we pretend to claim an Advantage over the Presbyterians.


Presb. I could tell ye of your Church-Covenants, and Defensive Leagues,
against the Commands of Authority.


Indep. But I could speak homer to you, of your National Leagues and Covenants;
which all the World knows, are the grand Engines to disjoynt Communities, and
remove the Foundations of Government. And I do not much wonder at it, where the
Act of a General Assembly, Influences the Consciences of a whole Nation. As to
any Covenants, and Leagues against the Magistrate; neither do the Independents
practice them, nor would they stand them in any stead, if they had a mind to
play the Villeins; for want of an Orderly Dependence, to unite, and to oblige
them.


Presb. And for That Reason, you Imagine, the Independents may be better
Tolerated, then the Presbyterians.


Indep. Truly for That Main Reason, with Twenty Great ones more in the Belly of
it.

It were a wild thing for a Man to apprehend any danger to a Government, from a
Faction that is Divided, and Distracted within it self; and without any Common
Tie of Agreement to Unite it. And This do I take to be the Condition of the
Independents, (which for Discourse sake, we will suppose to be a Faction.)
Their Congregations are generally small; The Members of them, gathered up here
and there, and so Scattered, and Intermixed with People of other Persuasions,
that they have neither Opportunity, nor Encouragement to join in a Conspiracy.
Besides that in Respect of their Church-Parity, they want that ordinary Medium
of Superiority, and Subjection, to link them together in a Combination, upon
the Point of Common Interest. Another Difficulty will arise from the Affections
of the Pastors themselves; who are not without their touches of Disgust, and
Emulation, to see themselves either Out-vied, or Deserted: the One, by Fuller
Congregations; and the Other, by the Removal of their Members from one Church
to another.


Presb. If I am not mistaken, you have provided against the Inconvenience of
Breaking in One upon Another; by an Obligation at your Entrance into any
Church, not to forsake it without Leave. But proceed.


Indep. There remains yet behind, another Obstacle, equal to all the rest:
Which is; that the Independents have no Men that are Eminent for Popularity,
Interest, Great Fortunes, and Abilities, to head them. Now how it is possible
for a Party under all these Disadvantages, to work any Mischief to the State, I
am not wise enough to imagine. If you object, that the late Independent
Government had many Persons at the Helm, that were qualified with these
Circumstances. I must Answer you, that whatever they were, they did not set up
Originally for Independency.


Presb. So that upon the Result, to save your Party from Appearing Dangerous,
you have made it Contemptible. And your Argument would have run very well in
These Words. The Independents may better be Tolerated then the Presbyterians:
for no Body that has either Brains, or Reputation, will own Independency.


Indep. As an Interest (you should have said) whereupon to work any Change of
Government. (And this would have been point blank to the Question, and your
Period never the worse for it.)

Now if my Reason be good on the behalf of the Independents, that They may be
Tolerated without any Risque to the Commonwealth, upon the Considerations
before mentioned: It will hold as good against the Presbyterians; because of
the very Contrary Circumstances in their Government, and Case. That is to say,
They are at great Agreement in the Orderly Reduction, and Connection of their
Polity; and they have commonly found Great Friends to uphold them in their
Pretenses.

My first Exception to Presbytery is, that it is a National Church Government.
And Methinks Two National Church-Governments in the same Kingdom, looks like a
Sharing of the Sovereignty, and the setting up of Christ's Vicar against Gods
Vice gerent. And what will the People say in the Matter, but either that the
Government thinks them in the Right, or else that it is afraid of them? The
former Supposition draws the Simple into the Party upon Conscience; and the
Latter engages the Crafty upon Interest.

To take it now in the Constitutive Parts of it; The Scale of the Presbytery
rises Thus: From Parochial Inspection, to Classical; from Classical to
Provincial; and from Provincial, to National: Which Extensive Latitude, and
Comprehension, does plainly discover, that there was a Design of Sole, and
Sovereign Dominion in the very Institution of the Discipline.

To say nothing in this Place of the Absolute, and Independent Authority
Claimed, and Exercised by the General Assembly; I shall only observe this to
you: That they have the best Security in the World, for their Subjects
Obedience to all their Acts, and Conclusions whatsoever. For Life, Fortune,
Soul, and all lies at Stake: They Fine, Punish, Degrade, Excommunicate at
Pleasure. And this is the True Reason, that from time to time, the Presbyterial
Discipline has had the Countenance of so many Popular Advocates, and Abetters.
For certainly, it is the best Foundation for an Alteration of State, that ever
was yet laid upon the Face of the Earth; and their Work is three quarters done
to their hand, in the very Disposition of the Model.

Only one Observation more, and I have done. And That is, The Provident
Commixture of Laity, and Clergy in all their Counsels; These to Attaque the
Church, the Other, the State; by which means, they may the more commodiously
carry on Schism, and Sedition in their proper Seasons: and leave a Door of
Preferment, and Advantage, open to all Comers.

I will not say yet, that it is absolutely Impossible for a Protestant
Monarchy, and this Double refined Presbytery to prosper in the same Soil: But
if I had Money in my Pocket, I would not give any Prince in Christendom above
Eighteen Months Purchase for his Crown, that should put it to the Venture. For
he has nothing in the World to trust to, but Miracles: The Gratitude, Faith,
Good Nature, and Pure Integrity of the Party.


SECT. XXVIII.
Whether may be better Tolerated in This Kingdom, The Presbyterians, or the
Independents; in Respect of their PRINCIPLES, and Ordinary PROCEEDINGS.
Debated, First, With Relation to his Majesty's PERSON, and AUTHORITY.
Indep. THe Government of England is Monarchique; but so attemper'd with Legal
Provisions* for the Comfort, and Benefit of the People, that every Englishman
has his Interest in the Preservation of the Law; as That which Intitles him to
the Free Enjoyment of his Life and Fortune: So that we are to frame our
Discourse with a Regard to His Majesty's PERSON, and Royal AUTHORITY; The
Foundation, and Execution of the LAW; The Rights, and Just Liberties of the
PEOPLE: Utterly excluding from the Limits of Our Toleration, all Power or
Pretense whatsoever, that shall presume to Usurp upon any of These Particulars.
Now to begin with the First.

What do you find in the Independent Way, that may endanger his Majesty, either
in his Person, or in his Prerogative?


Presb. The Princes of Germany would Answer you, that your Proceedings are
Sangu^nary, and Violent: not only against your Actual Opposers, but against the
very Ordinance of Magistracy it self.


Indep. What are the Furies of the Anabaptists to us, that have Declared
against them, as well as You? But if you can fasten upon those of the
Congregational Way, any Antimonarchical Opinions, or Practices, which are
either wrapped up in the Bowell of That Profession, or naturally Issuing from
thence: and make good your Assertion, by proving what you say, to have been the
Formal Act of any One of our Churches by it self, or More of them in
Combination, I will never open my Mouth after it, in a Plea for the
Independents.


Presb. It were a hard matter indeed to fasten any thing upon the Principles ^f
a Party, that professes to have no Principles, but still refers it self to the
Guidance of a Further Light.


Indep. And yet you can blame us for our Principles, though by your own
Confession, you know not What they are. Now for the Reserve of Acting according
to a Further Light; It is expressed, in the Ordinary Form of our Church Covenant,
that it is to be reached unto us out of the Word; which most assuredly will not
lead us into any Evil.

If this be all you have to say against the Independents, I would gladly hear
what Defense you are able to make for the Presbyterians: Either Simply, and in
Themselves; or else Comparatively with any other sort of People. Nay, I should
not much care if you took the Jesuits Themselves for your Foil.


Presb. How can you say This? Considering, [that Thundering of Excommunication,
Disc of Relig. Part 1. p 3.
which has sounded in all Ages, since the beginning of the Papal Reign, against
Kings, Emperors, etc. And These Practices Justified by their Decretals, Ibid.
p. 4.
and Canons; Divines of greatest Authority, and some of their Councils:
Ascribing to the Pope a Power of Deposing Princes that are Heretical^ or
Favorers of Heretics. The Jesuits Doctrine of KING-KILLING has made them
Odious, etc.


Indep. Do you tell us of PAPALEXCOMMUNICATIONS, justified by Canons, Divines,
Councils; DEPOSING of Kings for Heresy; and the Jesuits Doctrine of
KING-KILLING, etc? The Disciple should speak Reverently of his Master: for I
assure you, a Jesuits Cloak sits exceedingly well upon the Shoulders of a
Presbyterian.

To Discipline, must all the States Scotch Discipline, p. 59.
within the Realm be Subject, as well the Rulers, a^ the Ruled. (According to
the Discipline of the Kirk of Scotland, Printed in London, 1647.

The Person of the Magistrate ought Ibid. p. 78.
to be Subject to the Kirk, Spiritually, and in ECCLESIASTICAL GOVERNMENT:
Submitting himself P. 79.
to the Discipline of the Kirk, if he Transgress in Matters of Conscience, and
Religion. Beza, Buchanan, (and in truth, the whole Brotherhood) are for the
Excommunication of Princes. So that there is Presbyterial EXCOMMUNICATION you
see, as well as Papal.

And in Case of Superstition, and Idolatry, the Presbyter can DEPOSE too, as
well as the Pope, in Case of Heresy. Was not the Queen-Regent in Scotland
(1559.) Deposed, upon the Encouragement, and with the Approbation of Willock,
Knox, and their Fellows? As not Hist. of Reform. Printed 1644. p. 195. Spotsw.
Hist. p. 418
doing her Duty to the Subjects; and as a vehement Mainteiner of Superstition,
and Idolatry? Did not the Commissioners of the Kirk (in 1596.) threaten an Open
Protestation against King James, and his Council, in Case of either Pardoning,
or Restoring the Popish Lords that were at that time under Banishment?

As to the Jesuits Doctrine of KING-KILLING; We are able not only to Match, but
to Out-doe it, out of the School of the Consistory. There is no doubt but the
Jesuits are Guilty of Delivering Doctrine that naturally leads to King-Killing
Conclusions. But do ye find that ever they said in plain Terms; It is Lawful
for Subjects to take up Arms against their Sovereign, in Case of Religion; Or
that ever they Publicly Applauded the Murder of a Prince, after the Fact was
Committed? Certainly, in this Particular, the Consistorian Copy goes beyond the
Papal Original.

Upon a dangerous Uproar that was raised by the Ministers, in Edinburgh,
(1596.) The King by Proclamation, discharged Ibid. p. 431.
all Iudicatories from Sitting there. Whereupon the Ministers pressed a Bond of
Association, upon the Noblemen, and Barons; and sent a Letter (drawn by Robert
Bruce, and Walter Balcanquel) to the Lord Hamilton to Head them: For by the
Motion of God's Spirit, and animated by the Word, the People had
gone to Arms, in Defense of the Church, etc.

Not to trouble you with a Rabble of Unnecessary Instances: In the Ninth
Section, there has been said more than enough upon this Subject already. You
shall now see the Veneration they have for the PERSONS of Princes.

Gibson, in the Pulpit, denounced that Spotsw. Hist. pa. 343.
Curse against King James, that fell upon Jeroboam: that he should die
Childless, and be the last of the Race. (An. 1585.) which words, by the
Assembly, (with Ibid. 367.
much a do, and after declining the Question, were found to be Scandalous.

David Blake preached, that all Kings Ibid. 419:
were the Devils Barns, and His Majesty had detected the Treachery of his
Heart. For which he was cited before King and Council, and appealed to the
Presbytery, who by their Commissioners moved his Majesty for a Surcease of the
Process, with Ibid. 423
a charge, in case of refusal, to Protest against the Proceedings of the
Counsel. Quasi Pulpita (says Cambden) a Regum Authoritate essent Exempta. As
if Pulpits were privileged from the Authority of Princes.

John Welsh, at the High Church in Ibid. 430.
Edinburgh, preached, that the King was possessed with a Devil, and that the
People might Rise Lawfully, and take the Sword out of his hand.

But what is all this, in comparison with the License of the late times here at
Home, when the Two Houses, and Assembly were daily entertained with Sermons and
Pamphlets of this Quality, for which the Authors had their Thanks, and
Imprimanturs? But I shall rather confine my self now, to the Arbitrary excesses
of the Scottish Presbytery, as the Model of the Covenanted and blessed
Reformation.

To come now to their Usurpation upon the Civil Power.

King James was surpised at Ruthuen (1582.) under pretext of Religion, and
kept 5 months a Prisoner. This Act was publicly justified by the Assembly at
Ibid. 322.
Edinburgh, as done for the Preservation of the Kings Person and Religion.

In the Case of Andrew Melvil: It was Ibid. 330.
insisted upon, that Treason in the Pulpit, fell under the Cognition of the
Presbytery, and that neither King nor Counsel, Prima Instantia, ought to meddle
with it. But it is a much easier matter to find what a Prince may not do,
(under the Inspection of a Presbytery) then what he may.

He must not Ibid. 324.
receive an Embassader, nor 398.
pardon an Offender, without the Approbation of the Kirk. Nor so much as choose
his own Guards; 419.
Court-Officers, or Counselors, nor Issue out any Proclamations or Decrees.
They are to direct him 405.
what Forfeitures to take, and how to dispose of them: when to Arm, and whom
to Trust. If the King has a a mind to Feast an Embassader, they presenly indict
a Fast 334.
; and Curse the Magistrates almost to Excommunication, for not observing it.
Nay so little Power had King James with these people, that 354.
when his Mother was under a Sentence of Death, he could not get them so much
as to Pray for her, That God would Illuminate her with the Light of his Truth,
and save her from the Apparent danger she was in.

On the other side; they claim to themselves the Power of War, and Peace; of
Calling and Dissolving Assemblies; and whenever they shall think fit to say,
that the Good of the Church; the Glory of God; or any Spiritual end is
concerned, They King's large Declaration, p. 415.
make no Scruple in the World, of Levying Arms, Men, Moneys; Seizing of
Castles, and Forts; Issuing out of Warrants for Members of Parliament. Ibid. 87.
They impose Oaths and Covenants against the King Himself; 98.
Encounter Proclamations with Anti Protests; Page 416.
Rescind Acts of Counsels, etc. And what is the color for all this Haughtiness
and State? The Ministers (forsooth) are Christ's Deputies; and their Acts are
Christ's Ordinances; whereas Judges, Counselors, and Parliaments are but the
King's Substitutes, and their Laws only Humane.


Presb. You are not any more to conclude against the Presbyterial Government,
from the President of some Factious Assemblies, than against the Constitution
of Parliaments, from the President of some Seditious Compositions and Elections.


Indep. Neither do I charge these Imposing Usurpations upon the Confederacy of
a Cabal, or a Faction, but upon the Original Scope, and Mystery of the
Discipline; for I find them rooted in the very Foundation of their Policy.

Their Pragmatical Intermedling in Civil Affairs, and Matters of State, is
warranted Scotch Discipline p. 79.
by their Book of Government; where it is said, that The Minister handles
External things, only for Conscience cause: Now I would fa^n know That Notion
which may not some way or other, be made Relative to Conscience.

For Limiting the Magistrate in the Ibid. p. 79.
Exercise of his Power, they have this Plea; that though the Ministers do not
EXERCE the Civil Jurisdiction, they TEACH the Magistrate how it should be
Exercised, according to the Word. So that the Prince is put to School to the
Masterships of his Parish, to learn every point and circumstance of his Duty.

Now for the Absolute, and Boundless Jurisdiction of their General Assemblies:
They tell us, not only that The Kirk is Ibid. p 97.
to appoint Times and Places convenient for their Meeting; but that as well
Magistrates, as Inferiors, are to be SUBJECT to the JUDGMENT of the same; in
Ecclesiastical Causes, without any Reclamations or APPEAL, to any Judge Civil
or Ecclesiastical.

Is not this a Dethroning of Majesty, to set Princes, and Peasants upon the
same Level in point of Subjection to their Resolutions and Decrees?


Presb. Not at all; For the Magistrate is to assist, and maintein the
Discipline Ibid. p. 91.
of the Kirk; And punish them Civilly that will not obey the Censure of the
same.


Indep. In truth it is a Goodly Office, you have allotted the Chief Magistrate;
to set him Cheek by Iowle with the Beadle of the Parish: You are to direct the
Punishment, and He is to Execute it.

But what if he should prove Refractary, and dispute your Authority? In Case of
Contumacy, He is as Liable to Censure (you say) as another person. And then you
have no more to do, but to resort to your ordinary Method of Calling in the
Noblemen, Barons, Gentlemen, Burgesses, and Commons to your Assistance against
him.

Let me now marque to you, two Passages in your Discipline, that make two
shrewd discoveries. [A Minister (you say) must not frequent, and commonly Ibid.
61.
haunt the COURT, unless either sent by the Kirk, or called upon by Authority
for his Counsel, and Judgment in CIVIL AFFAIRS. And afterward, you say, that,
Ministers may and should assist their Ibid. 44.
Princes, when required, in all things agreeable to the Word; whether it be in
COUNSEL, or PARIAMENT, or otherwise. Provided, that through Flattery of
Princes, they hurt not the Public state of the Church.

Whence it appears; First, that simple Presbyters may do well enough in
Parliaments, or Councils; though Bishops are Excluded: were it not Secondly,
for the danger of creating a Kindness betwixt the King, and the Kirk; which in
consequence would frustrate the main Design. For the Prime end of this Church
Policy is the Overtopping and Subjecting of the Secular Power: and it was
wisely done to temper the very Foundation of it with Principles of Opposition
to the Order, and well Being of Civil Government.


SECT. XXIX.
The Question of Toleration, ^etwixt Presbytery, and Independency; Debated,
with regard to the Foundation, and Execution of the LAW.
Presb. WHat if you had put the Question betwixt a Peaceable, and Obedient sort
of people, and a Generation of men that cannot live out of Contention.


Indep. The m^n of Contention, I suppose you would have me understand to be the
Independents. What Is the Quarrel to them upon the matter now before us?


Presb. Only This: that they are Intolerable in any Government. How many Plots
have they had upon this Kingdom, since his Majesty's Return? There was Venner's
Rising; A Conspiracy in the North; Another in Ireland.


Indep, And all this while, y^u forget the Rebellion in Scotland, which was
professedly Presbyterian; beside that, These disorders which you speak of, were
nothing at all to the Independents: But (one way or other) these Instances are
to no purpose without some Authoritative Allowance; and Pray'e let us agree
upon it, that only the Conclusions of the Kirk, on the one hand, and of the
Church on the other, may be Insisted upon, as the Acts of either Party.


Presb. I do not find that the Independent Churches* come to any Resolutions at
all.


Indep. You have the less to say then against their Principles; and I wish the
Indep^ents could say the same thing for the Presbyterians.

How far, I beseech you, are Humane Laws Binding?


Presb. ^o far forth as they are agreeable to the Word of God.


Indep. And who shall Determine what Laws and Constitutions are agreeable to
God's Word?


Presb. The Church Lawfully Constitute; ad. Book of Disc. p. 92.
which all Godly Princes, and Magistrates ought to hear, and to obey their
voice, and reverence the Majesty of the Son of God speaking in them.


Indep. I need not ask what Church that is; For John M^rellius was
Excommunicate, for mainteyning in a certain Treatise, That TELL THE CHURCH, did
not belong to the Consist^ry, and the Book was burnt. But to the Point.

If the Word of God be the Rule for Humane Laws; and the Presbytery, the sole
Expounders of the Word of God; the Law of the Nation is at the Mercy of the
Kirk already: for it is but saying, that This or That Law is not Agreeable to
the Word of God, and there is an end on it.


Presb. The Kirk has Power to Abrogate 2d. Book of Disc. p. (...).
and Abolish all Statutes, a^ Ordinances concerning Ecclesiastical Matter^,
that are found n^ysome, and unpro^table, and agree not with the ^ime, or are
abused by the People.


Indep. If the Kirk has This Power, the Pope Himself pretends to nothing beyond
it. Are not your Determinations as pere^ptory; and your Orders as Imperious?
But I am speaking here, as to the Latitude of your Pretended Jurisdiction. You
may abrogate All Statutes (you say) CONCERNING Ecclesiastical Matters. And I
say, on the other side, that you may upon that Ground, abrogate all the
Statutes in the Christian World: for I defy the whole race of Mankind, to show
me any one Law extant, or the very supposition of a Law possible* which may not
some way or other* be said to CONCERN Ecclesiastical Matters.


Presb. You take no notice, how this Power is clogged with Limitations. If they
be found Unprofitable, Unseasonable, or to be abused by the People.


Indep. Very good: And if the Kirk shall think fit to find them so or so;
Pray'e What Remedy? B^t their own Avowed Actions, and Declarations, are the
Best Comments upon their own Principles.

Under King James in Scotland, nothing was more ordinary, then Overruling Acts
of Parliament by the Acts of the Assembly: Did they not erect a Counsel of the
Church in Edenborough, 1596. and S^tsw. Hist. p. 418.
take upon them to Convene, Examine, and Censure at pleasure such as they
suspected to hold any Correspondence with certain Excommunicate Lords? did they
not also appoint to meet in Arms, at the Trial of Ib. p. 398
them? Kings large Declaration, p. 416.


Nor did they think it enough, to Rescind* or supersede Acts of Parli^ment and
General Ass^mblies: but People must be Qu^stion'd too for yielding Obedience to
Acts of Parliament, and of General Counsels under Color of Unjust Laws. We Will
close this particular with the Judgment of the Commissioners of the General
Assembly of Scotland, of May 5. 1648.

The Authority of Parliament is one thing; an Act of Parliament another Declar.
of the Commission. p 55. and 56.
thing. We do still acknowledge their Authority, when we obey not This or That
Act. And whatsoever be the TREASON of Impugning the Authority of PARLIAMEN^, It
can be no Treason to obey GOD rather then MAN: Neither did the General Assembly
of Glasgow, 1638. and such as were active for the Covenant at That time, commit
any Treason, when they Impugned Episcopacy, and P^rch Articles, although
ratified, and strengthened by Acts of PARLIAMENT, and standing LAWS then
Unrepealed.


Presb. When we have once gotten Power into our hands, we are all too apt to
abuse it. But I cannot yet persuade my self that the Root of these Practices is
to be found in their Principles. Their Books of Discipline are Public; and no
Government would ever entertein it, if there were such danger in it.


Indep. How was the Covenant entertein'd? or who would have dreamed of any harm
in a League for the Preservation and Defense of the King's Majesty's Person
and Authority? And yet the Presbyterian Interpretation, and Salvo of
Subordinating his Majesty's SAFETY and PRESERVATION, to the Defense of the TRUE
RELIGION (immediately following) and the Kirks assuming to Themselves the
Judgment of that Religion, brought both King and Church to Destruction. Nor can
you choose but Observe the Holy Discipline, and Covenant, to be both of a
Style, and both of a Design: Their Claim concerning Ecclesiastical Matters,
hooks in all Laws; and In the Defense of the true Religion, They usurp an
Authority over all Magistrates. This Discipline (at the best) is but a Worm at
the Root of Civil Government: Wheresoever it comes, the Secular Power hangs the
head, and droops upon it, and never thrives after. But to Sovereign Princes, a
man might say of it, as God said to Adam, of the Apple: In the day you eat
thereof, you shall dye the death.

Now as it is manifestly destructive of Law in the very Foundations of it, to
carry an Appeal from all Temporal Governors and Constitutions, to the Scepter
and Sentence of Christ, sitting upon his TRIBUNAL in the PRESBYTERY (the
Language of Beza himself) so likewise have they their Preparatory Artifices for
Obstructing the Execution of Law, and for the Weakening, and Distracting of a
Government before they enter upon the Great Work of Dissolving it. And this is
effected by the Trojan Horse (as one calls it) of their Excommunication, that
carries all the Instruments and Engines of Public Ruin, and Confusion in the
belly of it.

By Virtue of this Device, they do not only impose upon all Ministers, and
Courts of Justice; but they may, when they please (as Hooker observes) send out
their Writs of Surcease; and fetch in the whole Business of Westminster Hall,
to the Bar of the Consistory. Or at the fairest, (according to Beza's
Distinction) if they allow the Civil Judge to try the Fact (as mere Civil) yet
de Iure Controverso, Ecclesiasticum Syn^drium constat Respondisse: The Church
was to determine in matter of Law, and the Civil Magistrate after That, to
pronounce Sentence, according to That Decision. Briefly, Beza gives the
Presbytery the same Power under the Gospel, which was Exercised by the
Synagogue under the Law. But now to the Point of your Excommunication; and to
show you in what manner it is applied, to hinder the Execution of Law; and to
obstruct Civil Justice.

By One Clause of your Discipline, You may Abrogate what Laws you please,
concerning Ecclesiastical Matters: And by Another; The Minister is Authorized
to handle External things, for Conscience Cause: So that your Authorit^ is
without Control in Ecclesiastical Matters; and so is your Liberty of handling
Civil Matters as Ecclesiastical. Upon which Bottom was founded an Assertion not
long since maintained at the Savoy, i. e. That the Command of a most Lawful Act
is sinful, if That Act commanded may prove to any One a Sin per Accidens, Now
if the Kirk shall think fit to Abrogate a Law (as nothing more frequent)
whoever shall presume to Execute That Law, is sure to be Excommunicate: And the
Supreme Magistrate himself is no less liable to Church Censure, for not
Executing That Sentence, then the Inferior Magistrate was for his Original
Disobedience.

The Bishop of St. Andrews (in 1586) Spotsw Hist. p. 345.
was Excommunicate for Advising King James to a Declaration against Certain
Fugitive Ministers that were denounced Rebels; and Contriving the Statutes of
(1584.) touching The Kings Authority in Ecclesiastical Causes. Knox is for
Excommunication in all Crimes, that are Capital by the Law of God; and in
effect, for the Churches Trial of the very Fact. It was not for nothing that
the Two Houses held the Assembly so long in Play, upon this Point; and in
Despite of all Importunities to the Contrary, kept the staff still in their
own Hands; and reserved to Themselves the Ultimate Appeal, in Cases of
Excommunication.


Presb, Was it not rather the Work of the Independents? Who (to say the Truth)
were as much against any Settlement at all as against That; And against the
very Convening of the Assembly it self.


Indep. And they had done the State a good Office, if they had totally hindered
it. But this is beside our Business. We have said enough as to the Dangerous
Influence of Presbytery, upon the Security of his Majesty and the Law. It
remains now to be considered, with a respect to the Rights, and Liberties of
the People.


SECT. XXX.
The Question of Toleration, betwixt Presbytery, and Independency, Debated,
with a Regard to the Rights, Liberties, and Advantages of the PEOPLE.
Indep. YOU see how it is with Kings, Parliaments, and Laws, under the Dominion
of Presbytery. We are now to look into the Condition of the Nobility, Gentry,
Commonalty, and of the Presbyterial Clergy it self, under that Discipline:
Which will best appear, by a view of the Powers which the Presbytery claims,
and Exercises. But let me Commend One Note to you as Previous to that
Examination. This Party has constantly screwed it self into the World, by an
Oath of Mutual Defense: Which Oath they apply as well to the Ruin and
Extirpation of their Opponents, as to their own Preservation; by making it a
Test of good Affection to That Interest; and Excluding all People whatsoever
from any Office, or Benefit Ecclesiastical, or Civil, without subscribing it.
You cannot deny but this Oath in the very Institution of it, is a Violence both
upon Law, and Conscience; and Consequently, that the Imposition falls heaviest
upon those that make an Honorable, and Religious Scruple of their Actions. So
that here is already exposed the most Considerable part of the Nation, for the
Subject of their Displeasure; with their Lives, Liberties, and Fortunes at
Mercy; as you will find upon a further Consideration of their Usurped
Authority, and Jurisdiction.


Presb. Leave this way of General Discourse, and come to Particular Instances.
Where is it, that you find This Exorbitant Power that you talk of?


Indep. In the very Declaration of the Commission of the General Assembly of
Scotland, 1648. page 53. [The Duties of the Second Table as well as of the
First: As namely, the Duties between King, and Subject; Parents, and Children;
Husbands, and Wives; Masters, and Servants, and the Like; being contained in,
and to be taught and cleared from the Word of God, are in That Respect, and so
far as concerns the Point of Conscience, a Subject of Ministerial Doctrine,
and in Difficult Cases, a Subject of Cognizance and Judgment to the Assembly of
the Kirk. The Dispute here was about the Assemblies Authority, in the Question
of War or Peace.

Is not This at one Blow to destroy the Order of all Relations, Political,
Natural, and Moral? Princes must not presume to make War or Peace; To Enact
Laws, or Abrogate; To Spare or Punish, without Ecclesiastical License. The
Subject must go to the Masters of the Parish, to know whether, he shall Obey
Authority, or Resist it. And after the same manner it fares with Parents, and
Children; Husbands, and Wives; Masters, and Servants; So that there is not any
Person, either Public, or Private; Or any Action, or Office, of Regard to
Community, Family, or Alliance, that scapes their Pragmatical Scrutiny, and
Inspection.


Presb. So far as these Duties are matter of Conscience, there is no Doubt, but
they are of Ecclesiastical Cognizance; and further then so, they make no
Pretension.


Indep. But you must give me leave to tell you then, that their Consciences are
larger then other Peoples. The Old Nonconformist (as au Expedient for the
settling Ecclesiastical Affairs (Page 43.) proposes the setting up of
Workhouses for the Poor; the Carrying on of the Fishing Trade; The taking off
of Protections; that none may be Imprisoned but according to Law: and the
Abatement of Taxes. The Assembly at Glasgow 1638. passed an Act concerning
Salmon Fishing, and another about Salt Pans. And all This I Warrant ye, so far
as they concerned Point of Conscience. But if you would see, what the
Consistory calls Conscience, in the full Extent, we must repair for
satisfaction, to their Direction, and Practices in the matter of Conscience,
and Excommunication.

The Kirk proceeds to Excommunication in all Capital Crimes, where the Offender
that deserved to dye, is suffered to live. And in Cases of Fornication,
Drunkenness, Swearing, Cursing, Sab^ath-Breaking, Wanton Words, Contempt of the
Orders of the Church; Oppression of the Poor; Deceit in Buying and Selling, by
wrong Mete and Measure.


Presb. Well; and what hurt's in all this?


Indep. None at all: But let me proceed. They Censure also Excess in Apparel,
Meat, or Drink, UNCOMELY GESTURES; Contentiousnes, without reasonable Cause;
Chiding, Brawling, VAINWORDS; Every fault that tends to the Hurt of a Man's
Neighbor, or to the Hindrance of the Glory of God: Whether by Force, or Fraud;
Word, or Deed; Manifestly, or Secretly; Purposely, or Ignorantly: And the
Judgment of the whole is left to the Discretion of the Church. So that your
very Thoughts are not free. [The Spiritual Ruler (says the Page. 79.
Book of Discipline) Judges Both Inward Affections, and External Actions in
respect of Conscience, by the Word of God. Upon which ground they take upon
them to Censure the very SUSPICION of Avarice, and Pride: Superfluity or
Riotousness, in Cheer or Raiment. But upon Dancers, Robin Hoods, and all Games
that brings Loss, they have no mercy. These particulars are extracted to a
syllable out of the most Authentical Records they have to show for the Warrant
of the Scottish Discipline- (Our Blessed Model.)

But many People perchance will make it a matter of nothing to be Excommunicate
upon a Supposition that the Anathema is the uttermost spite of the Censure.
They never dream of Car^ings, Iogges, Presbytery Displayed. p. 4.
Pillories, Shaving their Beards, and Cutting half the Hair of their Heads.
Banishments, Pecuniary Mu^cts, Close Imprisonments, and all sorts of Studied
Defamations.

Nay, If any man refuse to Subscribe their Confession of Faith, Rule of
Government, Ibid. p 39.
and Manner of Worship, He is forthwith Excommunicate; and upon Remonstrance of
a Commissioner from the Presbytery to the Civil Judge, a Warrant granted,
commanding him to Conform by a Day Certain, or to be OUTLAWED. If he Conform
not within that time, his ESTATE MOVE ABLE is FORFEITED; and if not within a
Year and a Day, he Loses his whole REVENUE for his Life. After This, at the
further Instance of the Churches Commissioner, Out go Letters of Caption, for
Apprehending of his Person, and Committing him as a Rebel. And if he be not to
be found; These are followed with Letters of Inter-Communing, forbidding all
men either Personally to Confer with him, or by Letter, or interposed Person to
Correspond with him, upon Pein of the Inter-Communers being Judged and Reputed
a Rebel of the same Guiltiness.

As to the General Rule of Excommunication; Book of Discipline. p. 56.
no Person (Wife and Family excepted) is to have any Communication with the
Excommunicate; be it in Eating or Drinking; Buying or Selling; Yea in Saluting
or Talking with Him: Unless at Commandment or License of the Ministry for his
Conversion. His Children Begotten Ibid. p 57.
and Born after That Sentence not to be admitted to Baptism, till of Age to
require it; Unless the Mother or some special Friends, Members of the Kirk,
Offer and Present the Child, Damning the Iniquity and Contempt of the
Impenitent. There are that Spotsw. Hist. p. 436.
do not allow Husbands to accompany with their Wives in the State of Excommuni
cation.

Now upon what has been delivered, Let any Man Consider the Unchristian Rigor
of This Disciplinary Inquisition; not only in the Actual Tyranny of it, but in
the more Miserable Consequences.

First as it Scandalizes the Gospel, and Unchristian Rigor.
makes the Death of Christ seem to be no Effect, by Imposing upon Us such
Conditions of Salvation, as if the Blessed Angels should descend, and Indue
Humane shapes, they were not able to perform. For it is not what Christ and his
Apostles say, that will do a Man's business here, without the Urim and Thummim
of the Parochial Session, and the Defects of the Written Word, are to be
supplied by Unwritten Traditions out of the Repository of the Presbyterial
Cabale. In this Case it is that we are to have recourse to the Apostles
Precept; of Standing fast in the Liberty wherewith Christ has made Us Free,
and not to be entangled again in the Yoke of Bondage. (A Yoke much more
intolerable then That of the Law;) For the Jews had their Lesson before their
Eyes, and knew what they were to do. But here, it matters not what either
Scripture or Conscience says, without the subsequent Concurrence of the
Presbytery: to whose Supreme, and Infallible Judgment (and not to our own) We
are to stand or fall either to Heaven, or Hell.

The Rigor of this Discipline is m^st Un-Christian also, as it Crucifies Weak
Consciences with Needless, Infinite, and Incurable Scruples; with Scruples that
Haunt, Dog, and Torment us in the most Necessary, and Ordinary Actions of
Humane Life. At the Church; at the Table; at the Market; at Home, and Abroad.
At all Times, in all Places, and upon all Occasions, in our Words, Thoughts,
and Deeds.

As to Excess in Eating. It is Censurable either in the Quantity, or in the
Quality. Excess in Eating censurable.
So that in the first place the Eldership is to provide One Common Gage for the
Stomachs of the whole Parish, for fear of a Mouthful too much. And in the
second P^ace, it is made a matter of Salvation, or Damnation, whether a Man
Eats Beef, or Venison.

And so, for Excess in APPAREL. One Inch more, then to Cover your shame,
Apparel.
is a Sup^rfluity; and One Penny more, in the Pound, then the Allowance of the
Presbytery, is made as much as a Man's Soul is worth.

It is the same thing for VAIN Vain words.
WORDS. A Nurse shall not dare to still her Child but with a Psalm; and you
must not presume so much as to ask What a Clock it is, without a Text; to prove
that the Question tends to Edification.

But the hardest Case of all is, That of Suspicion of Pride.
SUSPICION. The very Suspicion of Avarice, or Pride, You say, makes a Man
liable to Censure. This, methinks, is very severe, for a Man to be delivered
over to Satan, because the Brotherhood Suspects him to be Proud, or Covetous;
whether he be so, or no.


Presb. It Is to be presumed, that the Church will proceed according to a
Judgment of Charity, and Discretion.


Indep. Did not the Kirk Excommunicate the whole Multitude for a Robin-Hood?
Nay at St. Iohnstons, they cursed not only the Men, that should take part with
the King, but the very Horses, and Spears. (Here Is an Excommunication by way of
Advance) Upon the Action of Duke Hamilton in 1648. the whole Party were
Excommunicate (even after the Defeat: (as appears by the Scotch Act for
Renewing the Covenant.)

In some Cases again, They are as Tender and Cautelous. Andrew Hunter (a Prime
stickler for the Discipline) attended Bothwel as his Chaplain, in a Rebellion,
1593. But King James could not prevail with the Assembly to Excommunicate Him
Spotsw. History. p. 395.
for it; (though no Doubt was made of the Fact) Nay, on the Contrary, They
would not be quiet, till they had got Bothwell's Pardon. And upon Gowry's
attempt Ibid. 460.
(in the Year 1600.) His Majesty required the Ministers of Edinburgh to give
God thanks in their Churches for his Deliverance, and they refused it.

But to the Point we were upon. As nothing can be more Contrary to the Temper
and Dictate of the Holy Gospel then the Claim of this Arbitrary and Censorious
Jurisdiction: It seems to me to stand in an equal Degree of Opposition to the
Rules of Society, Humanity, and Reason.

The KING is upon his good Behavior Book of Discipline. p. 61
to the Elders, and Deacons (who are Judges of others manners) as well as the
Meanest man in the Parish. He is indeed (as is observed by the Author of
Presbytery Displayed) the Chief Member of the General Assembly; but they allow
him no Negative Voice; and if he has the Fortune to be Out-Voted, he must cause
the Sentence to be Executed, whatever it be, under Pein of Censure, and
Consequently of Deprivation.

Of Acts of Parliament, and Inferior Magistrates, enough is spoken already.

As to the State of the NOBILITY, and GENTRY, they are either Conformists to
the Government, or Dissenters; and must take their Lot in it, to be either
Sovereigns, or Slaves: (for that is the distribution of it.) Upon the Mayn These
Domini Dominantium Challenge by their Commission to be no Respecters of
Persons; and so lay upon all Sorts, and Conditions of Men in General at their
good Pleasure certain Common Impositions, Importing their Servility, and
Subjection, and whose Livery they wear.

I must not omit one Peculiar Obligation, the Nobility, and Gentry have to
these their Gracious Masters: Which is the Easing Bo^k of Discipl. p. 97.
them of their Patronages, and Presentations to Benefices, because These things
fl^wed from the Pope, and the Corruption of the Canon Law only, and are
Contrary to the Word of God, and the Peoples Liberty of Electing their own
Ministers. [For (say They) this is altogether to be avoided, that any man be
violently Intruded, or Thrust in Book of Discipl. p. 29.
upon any Congregation. But this Liberty, with all Care, must be reserved to
every several Church, to have their Votes, and Suffrages in Election of their
Ministers.

Observe now, I beseech you, the Peoples Liberty, in this Choice. Violent
Intrusion we call it not, when the Counsel of the Church, Ibid. p. 29.
in the fear of God, and for the salvation of the People, ^ffereth unto them a
sufficient Man, to Instruct them. If his Doctrine be found wholesome, and able
to Instruct the Simple, and if the Church justly can reprehend nothing in his
Life, Doctrine, nor Ut^erance, then we judge the Church Unreasonable, if they
refuse him, whom the Church did offer; and they should be compelled by the
Censure of the Counsel, and Church, to receive the Person appointed. Here Is
Liberty upon Compulsion; and it is most Palpable, that your whole Design is the
Interest of a Party.

Now to the men of Ordinary BUSINESS, and TRAFFIC. The Presbytery will put an
end to all their Disputes, about Free Trade, Privileges, and matter of
Commerce, with a wet Finger. Did they not Spotsw. Hist. p^. 393.
by an Act of Assembly at Dundy 1592. Prohibit the Scots Trading with any of
the King of Spains Dominions, under Pein of Excommunication? And his Majesty
refusing to comply with them, (at the Iustance of the Spanish Merchants) Did
they not proceed to Censure the Merchants? So that there shall be no Trading,
but where they please: And no Markets neither but upon their good liking too.
Did they not by their Proper Authority Discharge the Munday-Market in
Edinburgh? Ibid. 394.
But the Shoo-makers indeed were too hard for the Elders this bout, and told
them plainly, they would turn out all their Ministers by Head and Shoulders
first, before they parted with their Market. Upon which Menace they were quiet.

The Author of Presbytery Displayed, P. 10.
gives you some Instances of the Presbyteries Interposal, in Actions of Debt,
and menacing Landlords, and Creditors, with Excommunication, unless they laid
down the Precess: Upon Pretense Forsooth, that though it was in a Civil Cause,
it had yet a Spiritual Prospect: Withdrew People from their Callings, and
Hindered the Progress of the Gospel.

And this is no more, then any man will reasonably Expect, that looks but with
half an eye upon the very Frame, and Provision of the Discipline. Is not he a
mad man, that thinks to recover a Debt at Common Law, against any Member, or
Members Friend of the Presbytery, when '^is but flying to the Canon of the
Consistory, to silence the Dispute, and telling Him, that He is Contentious
without a Reasonable Cause? Cannot the Church put an End to Strife among
Brethren, as well as the Civil Magistrate? It is a matter of Evil Example, and
tends to the Hurt of our Neighbor. If the Creditor be Obstinate, and will not
take good Counsel, Out flies an Excommunication against Him, for refusing to
obey the Orders of the Church.

I would now fain understand, what it is that sets so many of the MINISTERS a
Gog upon this Platform; For certainly, They are of all Mortals the most
Contemptible: (the Iunto, and some few of the Select Ones Excepted.)

Their Discipline Divides the Church Book of Disc. p. 98.
Patrimony into four Parts One for the Pa stor; Another for the Elders,
Deacons, and other Kirk-Officers; their Doctors, and Schools. A Third for
Charitable Uses: and the Rest for Repairing of Churches, and other Incidental
Charges. So that the Clergy is stripped already of 3. Parts of 4 of their Legal
Maintenance,

And then for the poor Pittance that is Book of Discipl. p. 34.
left; so much as will keep Life and Soul together, they are allowed in Meal,
and Malt; and totally dependent upon the Mercy of the Church for the rest. And
yet for this pitiful stipend, They are to be Ibid. 61.
called to Account how they spend it; and Ibid. P. 35
their Wives, and Children, to be thrown at last upon the Charge of the Parish.
In their Preaching, they are Limited by the Direction, and Design of their
Leaders: Only Tenants at Will in their Cures; and liable to be Removed,
Suspended, or Deposed at Pleasure. This Arbitrary Dominion, together with the
Shameful Condition of their Bondage, has proved so great a Discouragement to
the Ministry, that they have found themselves forced to Press Ministers into
the Service, as they would do Soldiers. And where they find men of Abilities
for their Purpose, The Civil Magistrate is called upon, to compel them to the
Ministry. Ibid. p. 32. Ibid. p. 44.
Nay rather than fail, the Nobility and Gentry must bring up their Children, to
the Service, and good Liking of the Kirk, under Pein of Church-Censure.

A Jurisdiction exercised according to the Latitude of This Discipline, One
would think, might satisfy any Reasonable sort of People. But alas! If they do
not as much Exceed their own Bounds, in their Practice, as they exceed all
other Models in their Pretensions, they reckon it as good as nothing. They can
Cite People out of a Remote Jurisdiction. Deprive whole Presbyterys for
Dissent. (Kings Declaration, page 314) Call Nine Presbyters of Fifty, a General
Assembly. (Spotswood, p. 490.) Demolish Churches (304.) and Dispose of the
Patrimony (311.) and what not?

More needs not be said, as to the Empire They Exercise over King, Lords, and
Commons, severally, and in diverse Respects: We come now to their Usurpations
upon the Common Rights, and Privileges of Mankind.

CHIDING (as I told you) they have drawn within the Compass of Ecclesiastical
Censure. So that Masters shall not Reprove their Servants, nor Parents their
Children; without leave of the Eldership, (to the utter Dissolution of the
Order and Discipline of Private Families.) Nay, they have taken in BRAWLING
too, and made every Billingsgate Quarrel, every Brabble betwixt a Butter-Whore
and an Oysterwench, a Subject of Consistorial Cognizance.

Under the Censure of LEWD CUSTOMS are Comprised all sorts of Public Sports,
Exercises, and Recreations, that have been long in Use; upon the Worshipful
Pretense (forsooth) that they had their Original from the times of Paganism, or
Popery: As Comedies, Interludes, Wrastlings, Foot-Ball-Play, May-Games,
Whitson-ales, Morrice-Dances, Bear-baitings; Nay the Poor Rosemary, and Bays,
and Christmas-Pye, is made an Abomination.


Presb. And are not the Independents as much against these Fooleries as the
Presbyterians?


Indep. No, we take Our own Freedom, to forbear what we dislike our selves; and
allow other People their Liberty, to Practice what pleases them. But to proceed.

All GAMES that bring LOSS are Prohibited, Tennis, Bowls, Billiards; Not so
much as a Game at Stool-Ball for a Tansy, or a Cross and Pyle for the odd Penny
of a Reckoning, upon Pein of Damnation.

-- Shortly, Boys shall not Play At Span-Counter, or Blow-Point, but shall Pay
Tell to some Presbyter. --

What do you think now of UNCOMELY GESTURES? That a man shall be given to the
Devil, for Lolling upon his Elbow, or set^ing on his Backside, in the Presence
of the Deacon of the Parish.

And the Like for Excess in EATING, or APPAREL. Every Bit we put into our
Mouths, and every Rag we put upon our Backs, becomes a Snare to Us. It may be
either too much, or too costly: and What Reformation soever the Kirk shall
think fit to Order, either in our Clothes, or Diet, must be observed, with the
same Degree of Submission, and Obedience, as if the matter in Question were an
Article of our Creed.

Their Censure of VAIN WORDS is yet more Rigorous, and reaches for ought we
know, to the honestest Endearments, and Familiarities of Friendship, and
Conversation, even to the Exclusion of Common Decency, and Civility. But let
Our Words be what they will, We are still dependent upon the good Pleasure of
the Eldership, whether they will pronounce them Vain, or Edifying.

But why should a man expect to escape for WORDS, where THOUGHT it self is
Censurable? SUSPICION of Avarice, Pride, etc. (as you have heard) He that sues
to recover a Debt, shall be suspected of Avarice. He that refuses to Crouch
like the Ass under the Burden, shall be suspected of Pride. And for a Man and
a Woman to be only seen together, shall be ground enough for a suspicion of
Incontinency. Nay, they shall be Cited, Interrogated, Close-Committed, and put
to Bread and Water upon it; and compelled to Swear in Propriam Turpitudinem.
After all This, and that no Proof appears, and that they purge themselves upon
Oath: It shall be yet Enacted by the Assembly, that Presb. Displayed. p. 9.
if ever These two shall be seen again in Company together, unless at Church,
or Market, they shall be taken pro Confesso for Guilty.

A whole Volume (says the Author of Presbytery Displayed) might be written of
Young Women by these Courses, disgraced, and Defamed: Of many Families divided,
and scattered; whereas before there was never any jealousy betwixt the Man and
the Wife.


Presb. These are Objections rather of Passion, and Extravagance, then of
Argument.


Indep. They are no other then such Conclusions, as the Premises will very
well bear.


Presb. I have heard indeed of several Wild, and senseless Scruples charged upon
the Independents: As that they have made it a matter of Religion to Piss abed,
and ride Hobby-Horses, because it is said, Except ye become as little Children,
ye shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, Matthew. 18. 3.


Indep. Pray give me leave to requite You with three or four Presbyterian
Scruples: out of Bancrofts Survey of the Pretended Holy Discipline, page 368.

Move Mr. Cartwright, and some other Our Reverend Brethren to deliver their
Judgments, Whether all laying out of Hair be forbidden to all Women:
especicially Pig to Field, 1586.
at their Repair to the Public Meetings of the Church?

A Question rises in my Mind, Whether one that Professes Christ truly, may,
Ed. Brow. to Field.
according to the same Profession, delight in, and use Hawking, and Hun^ing; so
no Unchristian Behavior otherwise be joined therewith.

Let me know your Judgment particularly: Walker to Field.
Whether it be in any respect tolerable for Women, that profess Religion, and
the Reformation, to Wear Dublets, Little Hats with ^eathers: great Gowns after
the French, and Outlandish Fashion: Great Ruffes, and Hair, either Cu^led, or
Frisled, or set out upon Wires, and such like Devices.

I would be glad to have your Judgment in the Fourth Commandment: Whether the
Cholm to Field.
strict Prohibition of not kindling Fire on the Sabbath, be of the Substance of
the Moral Precept.

In the same Author you will find a Catalogue Dangerous Positions, p. 104.
of Pleasant Names too. The Lord is Near. More Trial. Reformation. Discipline.
Joy again. Sufficient. From above. Free Gifts. More Fruit. Dust. And in the
next Page, he tells you of one Snape that proceeded toward the Baptizing of a
Child, till they came to Name it, Richard, and then brake off, for fear it
would not have proved a Christian, if he had so Baptized it.

I cannot pass from these Fantastical Absurdities in your Practices, without
some Reflection upon those in your Constitution, To say nothing of your
Disagreements among your selves, about your Officers, and Discipline. What can
be more Ridiculous than to Authorize a Cobbler to Correct Majesty, Mechanics to
Determine in Points of Faith? Are not your Book of Discipl. p. 28.
Elders joined in Commission with your Ministers, for the Examination of the
Person that offers himself to the Ministry, in all the Chief Points in
Controvorsie betwixt us and the Papists, Anabaptists, Arrians, etc? Are not the
Elders, and Deacons fit Persons (think ye) to be made Judges of Theological
Ibid. 60.
Niceties; and to Admonish, and Reprove a Minister, that Propones not faithful
Doctrine? Has not your General Assembly, rather the Face of a Council of State,
then of a Counsel of the Church? (And in Truth the Business too.) Behold the
Composition (I beseech ye) of the Pretended Assembly at Glasgow, 1638. Seven
Earls, Kings large Declaration, p. 315.
Ten Lords, Forty Gentlemen, And One and Fifty Burgesses, to Determine of
Faith, and Church Censures.

Now to take a Brief View of the whole. What greater Slavery in the world, can
be imagined, then to live in Subjection to a Government; where you shall have,
neither Freedom of Conscience, Law, Person, or Fortune? Where you shall not
Speak, Look, Move, Eat, Drink, Dress your self; Nay, not so much as entertein a
Thought, but at your Peril? And to be in This Bondage too unto the Meanest, and
most Insolent of your Fellows? For none but such will ever engage themselves in
the Exercise of so Inhumane a Tyranny. And for a further Aggravation of the
Shame, and Guilt of the Faction: Let me desire you, but to cast an eye upon
their Proceedings, under King James in Scotland, and here under Queen
Elizabeth; where you shall find that they were never so Impetuous, and Bold, as
when they found
the King, and the State in Distress, upon the Apprehension of Foreign
Dangers. And so for the Queen, upon the business of Eighty Eight: Whereas the
Independents never so confined themselves to the Prosecution of their Private
Interests, as to Hazard the Betraying of their Country to Foreigners: And
particularly, in the Late Engagements at Sea, against the French, and Dutch,
many of them have given Signal Testimony, and Proof of their Fidelity, and
Valor.

I should not have Engrossed This whole Discourse to my self, but in Persuance
of a Point, wherein you have Confessed beforehand, that you had nothing further
to oppose: That is to say, Concerning the Principles of the Parties in Question.

Neither is any thing I have hitherto delivered, to be taken as a Challenge,
and Claim of a Toleration, of such a Quality, as to enter into a Competition
with the Peace and Security, of the Public: But This I pr^mise my self, that
if it shall appear reasonable to Authority, to allow of any Relaxation, The
Independents Plea, upon all Considerations of Common Equity, and Safety, will
stand good against That of the Presbyterians,

From whose Triple-Crown'd Consistory; that Lords it Over Souls, Bodies, and
Estates; Over Kings, Nobles, and Commons; Over Laws, Magistrates, and all
Sorts, and Ranks of Men, and Interests; That turns Gospel into Law; Communities
into Deserts; Men into Beasts; GOOD LORD DELIVER US.


THE END.

