THE Relapsed Apostate: OR NOTES UPON A PRESBYTERIAN PAMPHLET, ENTITLED, A
PETITION for PEACE, etc. WHEREIN The FACTION and DESIGN are laid as open as
Heart can wish.

Nullum perniciosius Odium eft, quam violati Beneficii pudere. Senec. Epist.

By ROGER L'ESTRANGE.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Brom at the Gun in Ivy-lane. M. D C. X L I.

TO THE PRESBYTERIAN DIVINES; The PUBLISHERS, and Abettours of A PAMPHLET,
Entitled, A PETITION for Peace, etc. --
Gentlemen,
THat you may not glory either in your Cause, or Fortune, you are here
Condemned to suffer Public Shame by a weak hand; yet so, as not to make Me
proud of the Conquest; for ye fight against your selves, and fall by your own
Weapons. This is the Certain Fate of all your Strivings against the Right of
Bishops. The Liberties you challenge, must be allowed again by You to the
People: and where is your Holy Discipline then? Thus are ye Broken upon your own
Wheel, and your Selves cast into the Pit ye Dug for Others.

The well-weighing of This Consequence twenty years ago, might have saved a
great deal of Sin, and Treasure: it may prevent the same again, (for ought I
know) even at This Instant, duly to consider it: for to deal freely, Gentlemen,
you are now Reentred upon that deadly path that leads from Heaven to Hell, from
Conscience to Disobedience: from the Reforming Pulpit to the Kings Scaffold.
How shall I reconcile that Reverence I bear your Character, with the just
Indignation due to your Actings?

You have of late Published a Book; Thus called; A PETITION for PEACE, with the
Reformation of the LITURGY, etc. Your Petition appears fortified with Twenty
Reasons, which I take a Freedom to reply upon, and I make a little bold too
with your Liturgy: submitting the Reason of All, to the Judgment of the
Indifferent World; and to your selves my Dedication.

Your Writings are like the Pestilence that walks by Night, and the Plague
that destroys at Noonday. They steal out, and disperse themselves in the
dark, but the Malice of their Operation is Public.

Many unseemly Circumstances there are in the menage of this your Pamphlet,
which I refer to their proper Notes: but since you plead the Kings Authority
for what ye did; It will behoove me in the first place to clear that point; and
no way better then from the very Words of his Majesty's Commission; directing,

To advise consult upon and about the Book of Common Prayer, and the several
objections and exceptions, which shall now be raised against the same, and (if
occasion be) to make such reasonable and necessary alterations, corrections,
and amendments therein, as by and between you, the said Archbishop, Bishops,
Doctors, and Persons hereby required and authorized to meet and advise as
aforesaid, shall be agreed upon to be needful and expedient, for the giving
Satisfaction to tender Consciences, and the restoring and continuance of peace
and unity in the Churches under our protection and Government.

How far Your Liberties agree with These Limitations, be you your selves the
Judges.

I am afraid you will think my Introduction somewhat below the Dignity of the
Subject; but though the Argument in it self be grave, methinks your menage of
it, is exceeding pleasant: In truth, so much, that all your sober Fashions will
hardly make me swallow it for Earnest.

You know we have had a Long and Bloody War, Gentlemen: and the same Actions
which on the Legal side, were Duty, Piety, and Justice, were in the Adverse
Party, no other then Rapine, Murder, and Rebellion. These Crimes call for
Repentance, and either Christianity is but a story, or it concerns those People
that have This Load upon their Consciences, frankly, and seasonably to
discharge themselves.

Would not a Searching Sermon now and then upon this Subject, do as much good
as a Discourse of humane Impositions? It Is not an Act of Pardon, and Oblivion,
will bring Them off, at the great day, that have these Horrors unaccompted
for. As Public Ministers, Kings may remit Public Offenses: and forgive
Those who cannot yet forgive Themselves. The Royal Power extends but to the Law
not to the Conscience. They shall not Dye for That which yet they may be Damned
for. A man that Robs a Church may escape the Wheel, and yet the Sacrilege
cleave to his Fingers.

In fine; Monarchs may dispense with their own Laws, and interpose betwixt the
Gibbet, and the Offender; but betwixt Sin and Vengeance; -- Guilt, and the
dreadful stroke of Divine Justice; there is but one Mediator: before whose
Majesty Kings are but animated Shadows, and all the dazzling Glories of this
World, a Black Obscurity. In short; he that has made his Peace with the Law and
not with his own Soul: -- on Earth, and not in Heaven, has done the least part
of his business.

You are now crying up Those People for the Godly Party, whose wretched Souls
were by the Magic of your Covenant-Holyness charmed into Disobedience. You're
Scrupulizing now again about the Lawfulness of Ceremonies: but not a word
touching the Unlawfulness of the War. For shame, for shame, Gentlemen; That
very point betrays you. It looks as if you would have the people still believe
the Cause was good, and that upon the same presumption of an Imaginary
Superstition, they may tread over the same Steps again.

Tell them how ill they did to fight against the King: (if you believe 'twas
ill done) press their Repentance and bewayl Publicly your own Engagements in
that sinful Quarrel: You betray otherwise the Souls ye plead for, into a final
hardness, -- into an Obstinate, and Impenitent Security.

This is so undeniably your Duty, (unless you still adhere to your first
Cause,) that there is no Shifting: so that the Trial of your Integrity depends
upon this Issue: If you be truly Loyal, and Repentant, wherever you have
Preached disobedience, you will Recant it: however your Confession must be as
Public as your Sin. Without This cleerness all your Talk of Conscience weighs
not a Nut-shell. Only betake your selves to your own Pastoral Discipline; And
there I leave ye.

Your humble Servant, Roger L' Estrange.

AN ADVERTISEMENT.
I Have been of late solicited by diverse Persons to hold my hand: but finding
no cause for it, either in my Thoughts, or Papers, I went on, finishing what I
here Publish.

This morning, and just upon the perfecting of my Book, I received notice of a
scandalous Report about the Court, and which (they say) has reached his
Majesty's ear, That I am printing of a General List, of all those Persons now
in Employment, which formerly bare Arms or Office against the King.

Who ever speaks this as upon knowledge, tells a thing false and foul.

I am not such an Ass, as not to understand the mischievous Imprudence of it:
nor such a Knave, as to engage in what I judge so gross, and so unlawful. But
since the malice of mine enemies wants matter, for the least color of an
Accusation, I must be crushed by Calumny, and once again condemned unheard; now
(in pretense) for dishonoring the King, as I was formerly for serving him. It Is
possible by some of the same persons too: for I Am sure, no man that is Loyal,
will pretend I Am a Rebel.

But there is no smoke (they say) without some fire. The ground of this Report I
may imagine; only a little amplifi'd it is by the benevolence of the courteous
Understander.

These are my words. Caveat, page 18.
We are with reverence to believe, that where he (the King) knows the Person he
Prefers, or Saves, he knows likewise the Reason of his Bounty or Mercy; and we
are not to pry into forbidden secrets.

As to the Rest, I think a private List presented to his Majesty, were a Good
and a Loyal piece of service: as ('it is, and ever was my judgment) it were the
contrary to make it public, for that were to invade an Act of Parliament, to
assault the Party. Whereas the other is (as I understand it) only a dutiful
and modest office toward his Majesty.

General Rules have their Exceptions; and beyond doubt, Particulars there are,
whom they that placed them there, would not his Majesty should take notice of.
Neither do I presume to blame even Those, but I propose to show them.

If Services of this Quality be rendered dangerous, it is only for those people
that are weary of their Lives, to be Honest; and I Will content my self still to
be one of them.

One Note, and I have done. My Crime is not the raking into pardoned Actions,
but for exposing Relapsers, and discovering new Combinations.

November. 14. 1661.
THE RELAPSED APOSTATE.
THE INTRODUCTION. THere is newly come forth a Godly Libell, to the TUNE of --
When JOCKY first the War began -- IT IS ENTITLED, A PETITION for PEACE with
the Reformation of the LITURGY, etc. --
SOme Thousands of these Fireballs, are already thrown among the Common People
by the Reformado Presbyters, and it is their way; First to Preach, the Rabble to
Gunpowder; and then scatter their Squibs among them. There is neither Author,
Stationer, nor Printer, that appears to the Pamphlet: but the Design is Peace
and Reformation; and That Is the Reason they are ashamed to own it.

If my Intelligence deceives me not; this same Schismatical piece of Holiness,
was delivered to the Press by one Mr. Baxter, or by his Order. Ibbitson in
Smithfield was the Printer. Birds of a Feather.
(The Levelling Ibbitson I suppose; he that Printed the Adjutators Proposals, I
mean, and The PETITION TO THE ARMY AGAINST THE MAYOR AND ALDERMEN in October
1647.) I am told too that R. W. has a Finger in the Pie; -- Brittanicus his old
Friend; -- he that hunts in Couples with Tyton. These good Folks have Printed
Treason so long, that they think now they do the King a Kindness, to stop at
Sedition. Indeed it is pity their old Imprimatur-man was so unluckily called
aside by a Good Office into Ireland; we should have had the Toy stamped else
with Privilege.

My Information tells me further; that the Bauble was Barrell'd up, for fear of
Venting, and so sent several ways; which being performed with much Secrecy and
Dispatch, does but bespeak a general Tumult, and prepossess the Nation against
better Reason.

Crine Ruber, Niger Ore, Brevis Pede, Lumine Luscus: Rem magnam praestas,
Zo^le, si bonus es.

The Marks of the Beast.
Go thy ways Prester John, never bad of the Marque; Four White Feet, a
Wall-Eye, and sound neither Wind nor Limb; you are right I Will warrant thee.

unauthoriz'd Form of Worship: composed, Printed, Published, and Dispersed by
private persons; which at first dash affronts the Prerogative Royal, and the
Established Government.

next; that it is done by Stealth: no Name to it: which gives a shrewd Suspicion
of Ill-meaning* when they that best knew what it meant, thought it not safe to
own it.

Third place to the Promoters of it; and I divine, you will scarce find any man a
Stickler in this Office, that has not been an Enemy to the King.

Fourthly, take notice, that though the Book addresses to the Bishops, from
Them of all the rest, it is with most care concealed; but on the Other side: The
Copies fly in Swarms about the Nation: that is, where they may do most
Mischief; however kept from them, to whom they seemingly apply for
Satisfaction. Is this fair Play my Masters?

See now the Timing of it: upon the just Nick, when the Bishops are consulting
a Christian, General, and Friendly Accommodation: and That Is the Event they
Dread; DOMINION or CONFUSION; -- being their Motto. Did ever Presbyters set
footing any where, and Blood or Slavery not go along with it? This Comfort yet
attends the Broyls they cause; The WARR'S a less Plague then the GOVERNMENT.

Once more; who knows but they have chose this Juncture, for some yet more
malicious ends?

They have not stickled to make Parties; -- held their Consults and
Conventicles: -- Printed and Preached Sedition all this while only for Exercise
or Pleasure. Do they not now expect to reap the fruits of their Disloyal
Labors?

The Parliaments adjourned, and in this Interval, it is beyond doubt they think
to do their Business: what can be else the drift of this their Challenging
Petition; and at this most unseasonable Instant; but to precipitate a Breach,
and disappoint the General hopes of their next Meeting? Nothing more common
with the Faction, then to discourse what wonders the next Parliament will do:
and hint the Approaching end of This.

Unthankful Creatures! have they so soon forgot, who saved them? Their
Mushrome-Honesty, Nemo repent.
has in a night forsooth shot it self up from Hell to Heaven. It Is a wide step,
from Sacrilege, to strict Holiness: -- from Robbing the Material Church, to
the advancing of the Mystical: -- from a Lawless, Merciless oppression of Gods
Ministers; -- to a true pity toward his Servants. In fine; it is a huge leap,
from the Dross of Humanity, to the Perfection of Angels; yet in the case before
us, there is but a Thought, a Moment; but an Imaginary Line that seems to part
them.

'Twas the Kings Fiat that struck Light out of Darkness, and made them pass for
what they should be; His Majesty's Command, that drew the Curtain betwixt the
World, and their Transgressions; and betwixt Life and Death.

They are not yet at Ease; they have their Heads again to make new Stakes with:
and we have another King to lose, if they can catch him as they did his Father.
Just Thus began the Late Rebellion; and if good order be not taken with these
Relapsed Apostates, just Here begins another.

Nor is it only the same Method and Design; but it will soon appear, that the
same persons are now in again, whining and Snivelling for Religion, (as they
did ever) only to Cheat the Multitude, and to engage a Faction. They have now
dispersed this Pamphlet all over England; as I am fairly assured.

But why to the People first? Unless they intend to make use of them? and what
use can they make, but Violence? This is to say, that if the Bishops will not
do them Reason, the People shall. Next; Why so many? but to beget a
thorough-disaffection to the Established Liturgy?

In short; What is all This, but to cry Fire, or Murder to the Nation; When
they themselves are the Aggressours; and it is a Flame of their own kindling?

Truly these are Symptoms (as the Country Fellow said) of an Apostasy; We'll
come a little nearer now, and feel their Pulse.

By your Leave, Gentlemen of the REFORMATION.
What, Sir John B -- too? Your most humble Servant Sir, Pray'e while I think
on it let me ask you a Modest Question or two; (with favor of your Friends
here.)

Can you tell me Whether old Olivers Physicians or his Intelligencers, had the
better Trade on it? Or do you know who it was that was so monstrous Earnest to
have had me to Bridewell for my CAVEAT?

Some say, he is a Physician (but I hear no Body say so that knows him) and that
'twas only a cast of his Profession, to advise Breathing of a Vein with a
Dog-whip. (for betwixt Friends some of the new-modell'd Gimcracks take Me for
Mad.)

Others again will have him to be a Justice, and that he would have had me
Lashed upon the STATVTE.

I am the rather inclined to believe This, because I Am told that He, and
Barkstead, (late of the Tower) were formerly Fellow Servants, and conferred
Notes. Now this same Barkstead laid that very Law to me: He told me that I was
a Fiddler, and that a Fiddler was a Rogue by the Statute.

Some will needs fasten it upon one, that would have made the PRESBYTERY of
Paul's Covent Garden, INDEPENDENT: and that he took an Edge they say, because of
a Jerk I gave to a certain Friend of his; who upon Richard's coming toward the
Crown; PRAYED devoutly that the Scepter might not depart from the Family.

In fine; the thing is done, and QVI WHIPP AT, WHIPP ABITVR. -- melius non
tangere clamo;
Flebit, and insignis tota cantabitur urbe.
Good Morrow Knight: and Now to my Divines.

Hark ye Gentlemen; betwixt Jest and Earnest, I have a way of Fooling, will
go near to put your Gravities out of Countenance: and yet I know, you are a
little Joco-serious too you selves; but in another way. --

Do not you Jest sometimes, when ye profess to love the King? now that is our
Earnest: -- but then you're monstrous Earnest, when you are discovered that you
do not; Cujus Contrarium.
and there is our sport. Your very way of Argument, and Reasoning, is but a kind
of Cross Purposes. -- 'Twas asked me -- Can any man be saved without
Repentance? and 'twas Answered -- Clap him up.

Are not (in good time be it spoken) your very Vows, and Covenants, arrant
Riddles?

The War was raised and prosecuted; the King and his Adherents, Ruined; by
Virtue of your Covenant; Ye swear to Act according to that Covenant; and yet ye
knew not what it meant. For, when the Holy War was finished, did not you fall
together by the Ears, among your selves, about the meaning of it? To save his
Majesty, (you will say) from Covenant-Breakers. Agreed: so that it seems,
According to the Covenant, the King might have been shot, but not beheaded; or
otherwise; 'twas lawful to shoot at him; but not so to Hit him.

But your poor Covenant's dead and gone; even let it Rest. Yet tell me (by the
Oath ye have taken) have ye not still a Kindness for it!

Methinks, (in a plain phrase) ye look as if ye loved the very Ground it went
upon. Your ways, your words, your Actions -- All Smells of the SOLEMN -- still:
yes, and (with Reverence) your New Liturgy it self, is downright Directorian.

'Twould make one smile, (if 'twere good manners to make merry with your
Grievances) to see how the poor harmless miserable Aequivoc -- is lugg'd by
head and ears into your Sermons, and Discourses; the very sound Delights you
still. But that is not all. The often mention of the word COVENANT, bespeaks a
Note; and by that double meaning, moves the People: so that the Good old Cause,
is still carried on, under protection of an Amphibology.

Now, if you please Gentlemen, we'll cloze upon the Question, and begin with
your Title.

A PETITION for PEACE with the REFORMATION of the LITURGY, As it was Presented
to the Right Reverend BISHOPS. By The DIVINES, appointed by His Majesty's
COMMISSION to treat with them about the ALTERATION of it.
NOTE. I.
WE have here (as Bishop Hall says of SMECTYMNUUS) a Plural adversary: and in
good Deed, 'twas more then one man's Business, to do a thing so excellently
amiss. No Name, no License; and yet the matter in Debate, no less then the two
Grand concerns of Humane Nature, PEACE, and SALVATION: Done by Divines too;
Dedicate to Bishops; the Kings Commission mentioned in it.

Methinks a work of this Pretense should not have crept into the World so like
a Libell; especially considering the Nature of the Proposition: (Change of
Church Government; for it is no less) and the distempered humor of the People.
This secret manner of under-feeling the Multitude, does not in any wise comport
with the Design and Dignity of a fair Reformation.

Truly, it is Ill, at best; but it may well be worse yet. Put case, that some of
the prime Sticklers against Episcopacy, in 1641. should prove now of the Quorum
in this Enterprise: Some that at first only pressed Moderation; Relief for
tender Consciences; -- a REFORMATION; (just as at present) and yet at Last,
proceeded to an unpresidented Extremity: Root and Branch: (nothing less would
satisfy them: -- King, Bishops; all went down.)

Say Gentlemen Commissioners, may not a Christian without breach of Charity,
suspect a Second Part to the same Tune, from such Reformers?

Answer me not, but with your Legs, unless it be otherwise.

Is This your Gospell-work to provoke Subjects against their Sovereign? Call
you This, Beating down of Popery and Prophannesse? to scatter your Schismatical
and Seditious Models among the People; and after all the Plagues you have
brought already upon this Kingdom, by your Scotch Combination, to invite the
multitude once more, to prostitute themselves; and Worship, before the Golden
Calfe of your Presbytery.

Come leave your Jocky-tricks, your Religious Wranglings, about the thing ye
least consider, Conscience. Leave your streyning at Gnats, and swallowing of
Camels: -- your Blew-cap Divinity of subjecting Public and venerable Laws, to
private and Factious Constitutions.

I speak this with great Reverence to all Sober Divines, in which Number my
Charity can hardly comprize the Publishers, and Dispersers of the Pamphlet in
Question.

A PETITION for PEACE. The Divine^ Petition for Peace. page 1.
To the Most Reverend ARCHBISHOP and Bishops, and the Reverend their
Assistants, Commissioned by His Majesty, to Treat about the Alteration of the
Book of COMMON PRAYER. The Humble, and Earnest Petition of Others in the same
Commission, etc.
NOTE. II.
HAd Zimri Peace that slew his Master? Had Zimri Peace?
What Peace can they expect from Others, that are at War within themselves;
whose very Thoughts are Whips; and their own Consciences their own Tormentors?
Is Treason, Blood, and Sacrilege, so Light, and yet the Common Prayer Book, or
a blameless Ceremony, a Burden so Intolerable? Those People that Engaged
against the King in the late War, should do exceeding well to look into
Themselves, ere they meddle with the Public, and take a strict Account of
their own sins, before they enter upon the Failings of Others.

As it is their duty, to begin at home, so it is our Part, not to trust any man
that does not: for beyond doubt, it is Vanity, or worse, that governs these
unequal Consciences, that are so Quick and tender for Trifles; so dead, and so
unfeeling in weightier matters.

But all this while, why a Petition for PEACE? where is the Danger? what is the
Quarrel? The Law stands still, my Masters; You come up to it, and then complain
of Violence.

Again: you Pray to them, for whom you utterly refuse to Pray; the Bishops. But
let that pass; Peace is the thing ye would be thought to aim at; which, as you
labor to persuade the World, depends upon complying with your Alterations of
the Common Prayer. That is we are to look for War or Peace, in measure as your
Propositions are denied, or granted. Is it not That you mean?

Johnson.
But with your Legs, Good Gentlemen, unless, it be otherwise.]

This (as I take it) is to Command, not Treat: and to deal freely, your
Petitions are commonly a little too Imperious. Here Is in a word the sum of All.

You have transformed the Common Prayer, and ye would have it ratified. You
make your Demands, ye give your Reasons: and when all fails, ye throw your
Papers up and down the Nation, to show the silly little People, what doubty
Champions they have; -- to irritate the Rif-raff against Bishops; and to
proclaim your selves the Advocates of Jesus Christ.

Now do I promise my self quite to undo all that you have done: to prove from
your own Form of Worship that the design of it is arrantly Factious; ('it is a
course word) and an Encrochment upon the Kings Authority: that your Demands
want Modesty, your Reasons, weight. This I shall likewise show; and that your
scattered Copies are a most disingenuous, and unseemly Practice. I shall go
near to unbait all your Hooks too; lay open all your Carnal Plots upon the
Gospel; and in fine; Place an Antidote, wherever you have cast your Poison.

I give my Thoughts their Native Liberty; which is no more then Modest, toward
those that are now lapsed into a Second Apostasy: and for the Rest, let me
declare here, once for all, A Convert is to me as my own Brother.

We'll see now what it is you plead for; and Then (in Order) to your Argument:
The Presbyt. Demands. Page 2.
the Right and Reason of your Asking.

Ye Demand, Reformation in Discipline; and Freedom from Subscription, Oaths,
and Ceremonies: -- The Restoring of able faithful Ministers without pressing
Reordination.

Ye have taken a large Field to Cavil in: See now what it is you call a
Reformation.

The REFORMATION of the LITURGY OR The Ordinary PUBLIC WORSHIP on the
LORD'S DAY. (Page. 25.)
NOTE. III.
OUr Liturgy was very much to blame sure: Seventy Six Quarto-Pages to reform
it? Pray'e Gentlemen, since you are so Liberal of your Labors, do but once
bless the World with a Presbyterian Dictionary, that we may be the better for
them. It would be an Excellent means I can assure ye, to beget a right
understanding betwixt the King and his People* Alas! how Ignorant were We, that
all this while took Reformation only for Amendment; a Pruning perhaps of some
Luxuriances, and setting things Right, that were out of Order. But now we stand
Corrected, and perceive that to reform is to destroy.

Was not Church Government REFORMED? yes, by an Act of ABOLITION. Was not the
Kings Power REFORMED too? yes, by a Seizure of his Regalities and of his Sacred
Person. At this rate, is our Liturgy REFORMED: that is, it is totally thrown
out; and a wild Rhapsody of Incoherences, supplies the place of it.

Presbyterian Reformation signifies Abolition.
Note here Good People of the Land, that Presbyterian REFORMATION signifies
ABOLITION. By the same Irony they made YOU FREE, and HAPPY; the King A GLORIOUS
PRINCE: advanced the GOSPEL. -- When of all Slaves you know ye were the
cheapest, and the most Ridiculous: Your Lives and Fortunes hanging upon the
Lips of Varlets; -- Your Consciences tenter'd up to the Covenant, and every
Pulpit was but a Religious Mous-trap.

In short, remember, that Presbytery, and Rebellion, had the same Authority,
and that those Prodigies of seeming Holiness, your Kirkify'd Reformers; those
Reverend Cannibals, that made such Conscience of a CEREMONY, made none of
BLOODSHED. This is not yet, to prejudge Tenderness; and to conclude all
Forwardness of Zeal to be Hypocrisy. Let it rest here; we have from Truth it
self, that Liberty may cloak Maliciousness; we have it likewise from
experience; for we our selves have been Betrayed by most malicious Libertines.
The Question is but now how to discern the Real, from the Counterfeit: and
That, so far as may concern the Platform here before us, shall be my business.

By the Reformers Leave, we'll shortly, plainly, and sincerely examine the
matter.

They pretend in the Front of this Pamphlet, to exhibit to the World, Fraud.
A REFORMATION of the Liturgy, but upon search, we find just nothing at all of
it: only a Pragmatical and Talking thing of their own; in stead of a most
pertinent and solemn service.

That Is Fraud; Score One, Good People.

Next, they confess themselves authorized to treat [only] about the ALTERATION
of it: Usurpation.
to propose This for That perhaps, one Clause or Passage for another: but
barely to discourse, or offer at the total ABROGATION of the old form, is to
assume a Power we do not find in their Commission.

This is another Presbyterianism. Reckon Two.

Thirdly; they were to Treat; They did so; and the debate proved Fruitless:
Where lies the Fault I pray'e? Do but observe a little.

His Majesty, out of a Gracious Inclination to gratify all persons whatsoever,
of truly-Conscientious, and tender Principles: appoints a Consult of Episcopal,
and Presbyterian Divines to advise jointly upon some general expedient; whereby
to satisfy all reasonable Parties, (saving the Glory of God; the Good of the
Church; his own Royal Dignity; the Peace, and welfare of his People.)

What they insisted on, ye see under their own hands; Design, not Conscience.
and that the Change of Government, was That they aimed at, not (as they would
persuade the World) relief of Conscience.

That day wherein this Proposition should be granted, would (I much fear) prove
but the Eve to the Destruction of this Nation.

I am no Prophet, but my kind Friends, the Presbyterians before they have done,
I think will make me pass for one. They make good every Syllable I promised for
them, in my Holy Cheat: and if the Duke of Ormond would forgive me, I should
presume to mind his Grace, of a Paper, which (now more then a Twelvemonth
since) was left at Kensinton for his Lordship; although not known from WHOM, to
this Instant.

We are to Marque here a Third Property of this Faction. They propose things
unreasonable, unnecessary, and dangerous: More then they ought to ask, as to
themselves: -- more then the People can be supposed to want; on whose behalf
they seem to Beg -- more then the King can Grant, with Safety to his Majesty.

When they are repulsed, how sad a Tale they tell, The Method of Sedition.
of the hard usage of Gods People! This is done in a Sermon, or Petition. --
Let them alone thus far, and once within a fortnight, you may expect a
Remonstrance, a state of the Case; -- or some such business. That Is dangerous;
for it is ten to one, That Presbyterian Legend will have some Cutting Truths
in it. (no Government being absolutely faultless) The Vulgar, thinking it as
easy to avoid Errors, as to discover them; and finding some Truths in the
mixture, swallow down all the Rest, for Company, (and for Gospel.)

The next News, possibly may be the Storming of White Hall, or the Two Houses
with a Petition against Bishops.

When once Authority comes to be Bayted by the Rabble, your Judgment is at
hand.

Bethink your selves in time, my Masters; reason the matter with your selves a
little, what can these ministers propose by this Appeal from the Supreme
Authority, to the People; but to extort by Mutiny, and Tumult, what they cannot
prevail for by Argument?

You are not (first) the Judges of the Case: so that in That Regard, it is an
Impertinence. Nor are you versed, (I speak to the Common sort) Instructed in
the Controversy. Your business lies not in the Revelation, nor among general
Counsels. Alas! your own souls know, you do not understand the very Terms of
the Dispute, much less the Springs, and Reasons of it. Yet see; you are the
men, these Gentlemen are pleased to make the Vmpires of the Difference: What
are these Applications then, but Trapps, bayted with Ends of Scripture, and
Fragments of Religion; set, to betray your Honest, and well-meaning Weakness?

Now ask your selves This Question.

Whether did you contract Those Scruples which they charge upon you; (if really
you have any) upon the account of your own judgment; or from their
Instigation* If upon Their account, observe what use this sort of people have
ever made of your Beleevings: how Step by Step, they have drawn you on, from a
mere Counterfeit of Conscience, to a direct Insensibility and Loss of it.

Thus far, we have met with very little, either fair dealing or Moderation from
them. But perhaps they will say, that less would have contented them. It Is very
right* if manifested to be unmeet. (Page 23.) but who shall make them see more,
then they have a mind to see? They Will say perchance too for the Printing of it;
that it was only done to show the World that they had discharged their Duties.

Their Duty was discharged in the bare Tender to the Bishops* (that is,
admitting such Incumbency upon them) The work it self, was Supere-rogatory, and
afterward, their telling of the People what they had done, was to accuse the
Bishops, not to acquit Themselves. Beside; the huge Impressions; the close
Carriage of it: -- In fine, it was not menaged either with an Honorable, or an
Evangelical Cleerness.

Further; the Title makes the matter worst yet. A Petitionary Menace.
A Petition for PEACE. That is. Take away BISHOPS or provide for another WAR.

This will be taken heynously. Who, They take away Bishops?

Why? it is no wonder: The Order stands Excommunicate already: they have
inserted no particular Prayer for them: and if they should do it now, it is no
new thing for them to do. But their grand Plea will be this.

They have no design, nor desire, to justl^ out the Common Prayer, but only
that Theirs, and That may be Inserted in several Columns, and the Minister
left to his Discretion which to read: [According to his Majesty's Declaration
concerning Ecclesiastical Affairs.]

Let the Kings Declaration judge betwixt us then.

SInce We find (says His Majesty speaking of the English Liturgy) some
Exceptions made against several things therein, Page 14.
We will appoint an equal number of Learned Divines of both Persuasions, to
review the same, and to make such alterations as shall be thought most
necessary; and some Additional Forms (in the Scripture Phrase, as near as may
be) suited unto the nature of the several parts of Worship, and that it be left
to the Ministers choice to use one or other at his Discretion.

In the mean time, and till this be done, although we do heartily wish and
desire, that the Ministers in their several Churches, because they dislike some
Clauses and Expressions, would not totally lay aside the use of the Book of
Common Prayer, but read the parts against which there can be no Exception;
which would be the best instance of declining those marks of Distinction, which
We so much labor and desire to remove;

Yet in Compassion to diverse of Our good Subjects; who scruple the use of it as
now it is, Our Will and Pleasure is, that none be punished or troubled for not
using it, until it be reviewed, and effectually Reformed, as aforesaid.

His Majesty, in persuance, of this Gracious Indulgence, makes an Appointment
to the Intents abovementioned. We'll see now the proportion, betwixt the
Liberty they take, and what the Kings Declaration allows them.

The Divines exceed their Commission.
They have first formed to Themselves a Complete Liturgy, after the Presbyterian
Mode; in stead of only altering some passages in the other. Let This be granted
them, and They left at Discretion which to follow, we may be sure they will read
their own.

Consider then how they have Nestled Themselves, in the most Populous, and
Wealthy places of the Kingdom, both for Convenience of Gain, and Proselytes.

Put these together, and what would this Allowance fall short of a Presbyterian
Government?

Take notice next, that the Alterations are to be such, as [by the Divines of
both Perswasions] shall be thought most NECESSARY. This puts a Bar to Slight
and Trivial Charges, of mere Humor, and Caprice.

But our good friends regard not that, they have changed All that is not of
Authority unalterable: disdaining in all cases, any Subjection to Episcopal
Dominion, and claiming to themselves a Right of Governing all others: Imposing
upon the Multitude for Holy Zeal, the troublesome Effects of Pride and Faction.
In short; This Form of Theirs is calculated to the Meridian of the Directory.

Hitherto the Kings Concessions, in favor of his Presbyterian People: See now
the Dutiful Return they make their Sovereign.

We do heartily Wish and Desire (says His Majesty) that the Ministers would
not totally lay aside the use of the Book of Common Prayer, The Kings Proposal
to the Presbyterian Ministers.
but Read those Parts against which there can be no Exception, etc.

A man would think, nothing but Heaven or Hell, could step betwixt these men,
and their Obedience.

They are now drawing the first Breath of a new Life; and their Preserver is
their Prince: who to endear the Bounty and the Kindness, Hazzards himself to
save them.

Here Is Duty, Honor, Justice, Gratitude, nay Interest too, and all that is not
Brutish in man's nature, concur to fix, and strengthen the Obligation. Sure it
must be some mighty matter, that Subjects under All these Ties, shall stick at
to their Sovereign. Subjects especially of a Religious Dye, (indeed, The Godly
Party.
not of the Common Clay with other men) whose words and actions, are all
weighed in the Balance of the Sanctuary.

Read (says the King) those parts against which there can be no Exception. It Is
a short easy Task, either to Read or to Except.

But this Will-worship's such a thing; they are so afraid of Adding or
Diminishing. --

Away, away, ye Hypocrites, with your double-refin'd-Consciences. We'll bate ye
the Cross in Baptism; -- Kneeling at the Communion: -- the Surplice; -- Bowing
toward the Holy Table; -- nay Praying for Bishops too; -- any thing in fine;
though never so Authorized, which Ignorance it self would not blush to scruple
at. We'll only instance in some Cases, wholly incapable of any Conscientious
Competition.

Tender Conscience^. Page. 61.
Why not WEDDED Wife -- and Husband, as well as MARRIED?] Page 69.

Why not DO thou Believe, as well as [DO YOU believe?] and All this I
STEADFASTLY believe, (according to the Common Prayer) is turned forsooth into [
All this I do UNFEIGNEDLY believe. Ibid.
]

I will not trouble the Reader with any more of these nauseous Alterations;
Their whole Service is of a Suit, and with much care Diversified from Ours,
both in the Style, and order of it. Now, let the Consistory answer for
Themselves.

I hope they will not say these Changes were matter of Conscience; unless
because the King Commanded the Contrary. What was the true ground then of this
their Beastly dealing with His Majesty? Truly no other then the pure nature of
the Animal: A Presbyterian does not love a King.

We have seen the Earnestness of his Majesty's Desires, a word now to the Drift
and reason of them: from whence, flows the clear evidence why they opposed them.

The King having first passed a large Indulgence, in all Cases of Scruple,
advises a compliance with the form of the Church in points Indifferent, and
without Exception: [as the best Instance of declining Marquis of Distinction]

They, for that very Reason, or a worse, decline it: either out of an
Inflexible stiffness, to the Faction; or a Contumacious desiance of the
Authority. Thrust out the Common Prayer they could not; Agree with it, they
would not: A Prescript Form they saw was necessary; and That they brought their
Stomachs to. But still the Public Liturgy of the Church had not the luck to
please them: Such and such Rites, and Clauses would not down with them. His
Majesty, in favor of their pretended Scruples, suspends the Law, gives them
their Freedom^: allows them to propose some Medium of Accommodation: demanding
only their Agreement in matters liable to no Exception.

The Reconciling Terms at last are These. Episcopacy they lay aside: -- they
totally reject the Common Prayer: His Majesty's Tenderness abused.
set up a Presbyterian Platform of their own: and This is it, which they have
now the Confidence in a blind way to recommend to the Practice of the Nation.
Yet so to recommend, as that the thing at last, is nothing less then it appears
to be. While they pretend to mend the Common Prayer, they take it quite away:
and that they seem to give us in Exchange, is in Effect just Nothing;
affronting equally the Wisdom of the Nation, with the Authority of it.

The Presbyterian Rubric. NOTE. IV.
SEE, An Arbitrary Set-Form.
now their Rubric -- [In these or the like Words] Page 25. -- Let one of the
Creeds be read, -- and sometimes Athanasius Creed.] Page 26.

Some of these Sentences may be Read] Page 27. -- some may be read] again -- a
Psalm may be sung; -- a Te Deum, Christian Liberty. Page 32.35.36. ibid.
the Benedictus, or Magnificat may be said:] and Then the Minister is taught
how to pray before his Sermon, dismissing at last the Congregation with [ a
Benediction in These or the like words] -- In case of a Communion, the Minister
may delay the Benediction.] -- A General Prayer in stead of the Letany, and
Collects -- when the Minister finds it Convenient.] -- and a Thanksgiving;
with Hymns, at the Discretion of the Minister.

Page 46.
This or the like Explication -- (at Discretion, before the Communion:
Christian Liberty at the Communion. Page 55.
-- This, or the Like Prayer] -- Page 51. Let him Bless the Bread and Wine in
These or the like Words] -- Page 52. Let the Minister be at Liberty to
consecrate the Bread and Wine, Together, or otherwise: and whether to use any
Words or not, at the Breaking of the Bread, and Pouring out the Wine: and if
the Minister choose to Pray but once, let him Pray as follows, or to this
Sense] --

ibid.
Let it be left to the Ministers Discretion, whether to deliver the Bread and
Wine (at the Table) only in several; each one taking it, and applying it to
Themselves; or in General, to so many as are in each particular Form, or to put
it into every Persons hand: Page 56.57.58.
] -- and let none be forced to sit, stand, or kneel.] -- Next; This, or some
such Exhortation] -- Conclude, with This, or the like Blessing.] -- ibid.

Let no Minister be forced to Baptize the Child, of open Atheists, Unchristian
Rigor.
Idolaters, or Infidells, nor yet the Child of Parents justly Excommunicate, or
living in any notorious, Scandalous Sin.] -- This, or the like Speech, to the
Parent or Parents that present the Child. Page 59.

Page 62.64.
After the Interrogatories; -- Let the Minister Pray Thus, or to this Sense.] --
After the Child is Baptized; -- This Exhortation or the like -- to the Parents]
-- and to the People, Thus, or to This Sense.]

Consistorian Tyranny.
I must not pass this office without a Marque how Tyrannous these people are
wherever they can hook in any thing, within the Reach of an Ecclesiastic Lash.
With what face can these uncharitable Zelotes, call themselves Gods Ministers,
and yet dare to Restreyn a benefit, and Dispensation granted by God himself in
favor of Mankind? But hear the Admirable and Divine Hooker upon the Point, and
then I Will forward.

Hookers Ecclesiastical Policy l. 5. S. 64.
Were not Proselytes, as well as Jews always taken for the Sons of Abraham?]
and again -- [ In case the Church do bring Children to the Holy Font -- whose
natural Parents are either unknown or known to be such as the Church accurseth,
but yet forgets not in that Severity to take compassion upon their offspring
(for it is the Church which does offer them to Baptism by the Ministry of
Presenters) were it not against both Equity and Duty to refuse the Mother of
Believers her self, and not to take her in this case for a faithful Parent? It
is not the virtue of our Fathers, nor the faith of any other that can give us
the true Holiness which we have by virtue of our new Birth. Yet even through
the common faith and Spirit of Gods Church (a thing which no quality of Parents
can prejudice) I say through the Faith of the Church of God undertaking the
motherly care of our Souls, so far forth we may be, and are in our Infancy
sanctified as to be thereby made sufficiently capable of Baptism, and to be
interessed in the Rites of our new Birth, for their Pieties Sake that offer us
thereunto.]

In Matrimony the Minister may talk his Pleasure concerning the Institution,
etc. -- of Marriage; Page 68.72.73.
-- and Bury the Dead as he pleases.

Upon the receipt of great, and Extraordinary mercies, the Church, having
opportunity, (that is, Concerning Festivalls.
if the King be at Oxford) is to assemble for Public Thanksgiving unto God,
and the Minister to] -- (do -- no matter what; nor for the Kings Authority in
the Case.) Further; Though it be not unlawful, or un-meet, to keep Anniversary
Commemmoration, Ibid.
by Festivals, of some great and notable mercies to the Church or State (as for
the Root and Branching of Episcopacy, some great Victory over the King; or the
like) Yet because the Church-Festivals are much abused, and many sober Godly
Ministers, and others unsatisfied in the Observation of them as Holy Days: Let
not the Religious observation of them by public Worship be forced upon any,
etc.] Oh, have a care; it is Lawful to Kill and Steal upon the Lords Day, but
not to serve God Publicly upon a Saints Day.

These Following Prayers, or the like] for the Sick.

In their Thanksgiving for Deliverance in Childbearing. Page 74.78:
Thus,

If the Woman be such as the Church has cause to Judge Ungodly, (and a small
matter will make the Kirk judge so) Then, the Thanksgiving must be in words
more agreeable to her Condition; if any be used] -- This is, in English; either
no Thanks at all; or else to Publish the Mother a Whore, and the Child a
Bastard. Methinks the Holy Sisters should not like this kind of Fooling; but in
some cases the Reverend will wink at small Faults.

Of Pastoral Discipline. NOTE. V.
Pastoral Discipline. p. 82.
THeir Forms of Pastoral Discipline follow; which may be varied, as the Variety
of Cases do require. Never such Engrossers of Liberty to Themselves, and such
Niggards of it to others; and yet they advise that Ministers may CONSENT to
give account when they are accused of Maladministration. Page 80.
] (But what if they will not consent to give Account?)

Page 81.
If any by notorious persidiousness, or frequent COVENANT BREAKING have
forfeited, etc. -- ] Marque how they hang upon the Haunt. This
Covenant Breaking, signifies one thing to the Law, and another thing to the
People.

In the Penitents confession, before the Congregation; The Sin must be named
and aggravated, Open Confession.
when by the Pastor it is judged Requisite.] Page 85.

As for Instance; if any man has been a Traitor, a Schismatique, an
Oppressor, a Murderer, a Hypocrite, or a Perjured Person. Let him say, --

For a Traitor.
I have fought against the King: or I have Preached against his Authority, and
Provoked Tumults against his Person: Behold, I am a Traitor.

A Schismatic.
I have renounced my Mother the Church, and Preached others into Schism and
Separation: -- I have destroyed the Apostolical order of Bishops, and
countenanced all my wild extravagancies with Forms of Religion: -- Lo, I am a
Schismatique.

I have Imposed upon men's Consciences, unlawful Oaths, An Oppressor
and Covenants: Enslaved my Fellow Subjects, Robbed, and Imprisoned my
Sovereign; Entered upon the Ministry without a Call, and thrust out Lawful
Ministers from their Livings; Scattered their miserable Families, and snatched
the Bread out of the Mouths of the Widow and Fatherless. Behold, I am an
Oppressor.

I have Embru'd my hands in the Blood of the King, and of his Friends: blessed
God the more, for the more mischief, A Murderer.
Fathered the Rebellion, and Bloodshed upon the Holy Ghost. See here a
Murderer.

I have led and encouraged men against his Majesty, under Pretense to save him:
-- Subverted the Law; An Hypocrite.
under pretext of defending it: -- made the People Slaves under Color of
Setting them at Liberty, erased the Order of Episcopacy, under the notion of
accusing the Persons that exercised it: and stripped his Majesty of his best
Friends, under color of removing Evil Counselors. I have called those
Ministers Scandalous, that had good Livings: -- Those men Delinquents, that had
good Estates; -- and those People Jesuits, that had either wit or Conscience. I
have belyed the Holy Spirit in pretending Revelations; and I have covered my
Ambitious, Bloody, Covetous, and Factious Purposes, under a Cloak of Holiness.
I have stumbled at a Ceremony, and leaped over the Seven deadly Sins. Lord I am
an Hypocrite.

I have renounced my Oath of Allegiance, A Perjured person.
and that of Canonical obedience: and taken other Oaths, and broken Them too,
and multiplied my Perjuries. I swore to defend the late King, and I have
destroyed him: and I have now sworn to the Son, with an Intent to serve him as
I did his Father. I am a Perjured Wretch.

In Truth, This Pastoral Discipline, This Discipline necessary for the
Presbyterians.
put duly in Practice by the Composers of it, would be of Singular benefit and
of great Satisfaction to the Nation.

This Discipline is followed with a Letany, and That with a Thansgiving, both
at Discretion.

Observe now what a Mockery is this Pretense to a Prescript Form: and do but
think how irreligious a Confusion would certainly ensue upon a Public
Sufferance of these peevish Liberties (for doubtless such they are.)

They have thrown out, what they undertook to mend, and the new Service they
have introduced, is left Arbitrary, and values norhing; or at the best, it is
but an Execution of the Directory.

As the Contrivance of it is a Jewd design upon the Public Government, so is
the Printing of it, a Practice no less foul upon the Public Peace. The
Instruments employed in it, were the Last Kings Base, and bitter Enemies; and
the prime Agents in This Enterprise were grand Confederates in the late
Rebellion. These are ill Signs my Masters.

Truly, among matters that arrive frequently, I wonder at nothing more, then
that ever a Presbyterian Faction deceived any man Twice, for of All Parties
that ever divided from Truth, and Honesty, I take them for a People, the most
easily distinguishable from other men, and Traced to their Ends.

The Method of the Presbyterian Faction.
Their first work is still to find out the Faults of Rulers, and the Grievances
of the People; which they proclaim, immediately; but with great Shows of
Respect toward the One, and of Innocent Tenderness for the Other. The
Offending Persons, ye may be sure are Bishops, where the Episcopal Order is in
Exercise: But where they have thrown it out, and introduced themselves; ye hear
no more news of Ecclesiastical Errors, but of Church Censures in abundance. The
Civil Magistrate is then to blame, -- and never will these People rest, till
they have grasped all. In Fine --

The Marquis of a Presbyterian.
Where you find a Private Minister inveighing against the Orders of the Church:
-- bewailing the Calamities of a Nation under Oppression: -- Preaching up
Conscience AGAINST Authority; and stating in the Pulpit, the Legal Bounds of
King and People: -- A Boaster of himself, and a Despiser of his Brethren: -- a
Long-winded Exhorter to the Advancement of Christ's Temporal Kingdom; and a
Perpetual Singer of the Lamentation: -- A Crier up of Schism, for Conscience,
Faction for Gospel, and Disobedience to Temporal Magistrates, for Christian
Liberty: -- where ye find such a man, -- Stop him; he is of the Tribe of
ADONIRAM.

To conclude; they have All, the same Design; Dominion; -- and the same course
they take to compass it; -- by stirring up a Godly Faction. And now in good
time; -- Omnibus in Christo Fidelibus -- Salutem, etc. -- Marque but the
Gravity of the Men; and truly but that they have fooled us formerly in the same
way, a man would think they were in Earnest.

Most Reverend Fathers, and Reverend Brethren.
THe special Providence of God, and his Majesty's tender regard of the Peace
and Consciences of his Subjects, and his desire of their Concord in the things
of God, has put into our hands this opportunity of speaking to you as humble
Petitioners, as well as Commissioners, on the behalf of these yet troubled and
unhealed Churches, and of many thousand Souls that are dear to Christ; on whose
behalf we are pressed in Spirit in the sense of our Duty, most earnestly to
beseech you, as you tender the Peace and Prosperity of these Churches, the
comfort of His Majesty in the union of His Subjects, and the Peace of your
Souls in the great Day of your Accounts, that laying by all former and present
exasperating and alienating differences, you will not now deny us your Consent
and Assistance to those means, that shall be proved honest and cheap, and
needful to those great Desirable ends, for which we all profess to have our
Offices, and our Lives.


NOTE. VI.
WE have here a Healing, and a Glorious Preface. Persons Commissioned by God,
and the King, to the great work of Peace and Union. Intent upon their Duties,
and only craving the Bishops Assent to matters of evident Reason and Necessity.

What now if all these big Pretenses fall to nothing: and they Themselves at
last prove the Obstructours of what they seem so eagerly to Promote?

They Petition the Bishops to move His Majesty on their behalf; Page. 2.
for the Confirmation of their Grants in his Royal Declaration: The Liberty of
the Reformed Liturgy. The Restoring of able and Faithful Ministers* and the
Ejection of the Scandalous -- ] -- and these Proposals are here backed with
Twenty Reasons; which we'll take one by one; and briefly as we can, make
evident; that what they call Religion is mere Faction; -- a Project by
subverting the established Government, to advance themselves: -- That if their
Model were allowable, The Persons yet that stickl^, have the least title of
all others to the advantage of it.

In fine; Their Appeal, is Tumultuary; and their present Design (should it
succeed) as certainly destructive to His Majesty now Living; as the Last was to
His Most CONSCIENCIOUSLY-MURTHER'D Father.

The Divines REASONS FOR Their REQUESTS.
[A] YOu (the Bishops) are Pastors of the Flock of Christ, who are bound to
feed them, and to Preach in season, Page 3. Reas. 1. The Duty of Bishops.
and out of Season: and to be Laborious in the Word, and Doctrine; but are not
bound to hinder all others from this blessed work, that dare not use a Cross,
or Surplice, or Worship God in a form, which they judge disorderly, defective,
or Corrupt, when they have better to offer him. (Mal. 1.13, 14.) Is it not for
matter and Phrase at least as agreeable to the holy Scriptures? If so, we
beseech you suffer us to use it, who seek nothing by it, but to Worship God as
nere as we can, according to his Will who is Jealous in the matters of his
Worship.

[B] -- He that thrice charged Peter as he loved him to feed his Lambs, and
Sheep, did never think of charging him to deny them food, or turn them out of
his Fold, or forbid all others to feed them; unless they could digest such
Forms, and Ceremonies, and Subscriptions as ours.]

NOTE. VII.
[A] THese Presbyters are so mindful of the Bishops Duties, that they forget
their own. Suppose them not bound to hinder all Non-Conformists, are they
therefore bound to admit all? Some dare not use a Surplice, others will not.
Who shall distinguish now betwixt a Case of Schism, and Conscience? Not the
Recusant surely: for that opinion were an inlet to all Heresies and Schisms,
without Control. Will any man confess himself an Heretic? Allow the Bishop
to be Judge; his Duty leads him questionless, to proceed with Lenity or Rigor,
according as he finds the Party, weak, or wilful.

It seems they do not like the Form of the Church: -- nor the Church Theirs;
where lies the Authority betwixt them? But theirs is more perhaps in
Scripture Phrase: -- and less in Scripture-meaning. It Is not the Crying Lord,
Lord: -- nor the Crowding of so many Texts hand over head into a Prayer, that
makes our Service acceptable: But the due, genuine, and fervent application,
and conformity of our Words, Thoughts, and Actions to Gods Revealed Will. I
speak with Reverence to those blessed Oracles; which in themselves however
accommodate to our Relief and Comfort, may yet by our abuse, be rendered
Mischievous: They are the Dictates of the God of Order, and hold no Fellowship
with Confusion.

[B] Touching our Saviors Charge to St. Peter: it was a Charge to Him; to Feed
his Sheep; no warrant to the Sheep to be their own Carvers. It was his Office
too, to reclaim Straglers, and keep within his Fold, such as he found inclined
to wander after strange Shepherds. He was the Judge too of the Food that best
befitted them; and if at any time he saw them hanckering after new Walks and
Pastures; It was his Part to overwatch their Appetites; they might perchance
take poisonous Plants for wholesome else; and reject better nourishment: Blaming
the Meat for the Disorders of the Stomach.

John. 10.27.
Again: Our Saviors Sheep know the True Shepherd, hear his Voice, and follow
him.] But here the Shepherd follows Them: They run their way, and neither own,
nor hear him. He offers them to eat; They Will none, and then they cry they are
starved; some few Starters leap the Pale (of their own accord) and then
forsooth the Flock, must follow, or they complain they are turned out of the
Fold.

They proceed now to a bold Challenge, touching the Quality of their ejected
Ministers.

THere are few Nations under the Heavens of God, Page 4. Reas. 2. A sad
Compleynt.
as far as we can learn, that have more able, holy, faithful, laborious and
truly peaceable Preachers of the Gospel (proportionably) than those are that
are now cast out in England, and are like in England, Scotland, and Ireland, to
be cast out, if the old Conformity be urged. This witness is true, which in
Judgment we bear, and must record against all the Reproaches of
uncharitableness, which the Justifier of the Righteous at his day will
effectually confute. We therefore beseech you that when thousands of Souls are
ready to famish for want of the Bread of Life, and thousands more are grieved
for the Ejection of their faithful Guides, the Laborers may not be kept out,
upon the account of such Forms or Ceremonies, or Reordination; at least till
you have enough as fit as they to supply their places, and then we shall never
petition you for them more.

NOTE. VIII.
I Would not Lash all Presbyterian Divines for the Faults of Some: but as to
Those now under Question, I doubt 'twould pose the Cynique with his Lanthorn,
to find a Saint among them.

Observe the Clamor, and the Alarm; -- Those that are now cast out; -- and
like to be.] (as who should say: the times are Ill God wot, already, and likely
to be worse) what a Buzze is here, with a Sting in the Tail of it? Nay, and
take this along with ye, that these outcast Divines, are persons Eminent for
Learning, Life, and Doctrine: If This be true; what can be more enflaming,
against the Government, then to Proclaim it; If False; what can be fouler
against the Authors of the Scandal.

Their Character is this. They are Able, Holy, Faithful, The Presbyt. Character.
Laborious, and truly- peaceable Preachers of the Word.] And they are ejected,
[upon the Account of Forms or Ceremonies, or Reordination.] Page 2.

Concerning their ABILITIES; they are of the Commune mixture of the World in
all unlawful Enterprises: Able.
a few Crafty People, to a great many Simple: -- Some to contrive and lead;
others to execute: and This we have upon Experimental Knowledge; that the
Church-faction was carried on by a Cabale in the Late Assembly, as well as the
State-faction, by another in the two Houses; and that they Both communicated
still, in order to the common undertaking; the greater part of them scarce
understanding why they were come together.

But let their Works bear witness of their great Abilities. Their Famous Letter
of Apology and Invitation to the Reformed Churches abroad; -- does it not look
as if they meant to satisfy the World, that they had renounced Latin as well
as Popery? Nay; take their Learned Directory it self: -- but it is too much to
add their weaknesses to my own.

Holy.
HOLY they are it seems too: I do not think it Honest to expose Particular
Persons to a Public Scorn, but in case of high Necessity; Wherefore, I shall
content my self to ask.

If it be Holiness; -- to Preach up treason; and Blaspheme in the Pulpit: --
to give God thanks for Murder; and make the Story of the Last Weeks News the
next Sundays exercise: to help out a hard Text with a false Comment; -- To
seize by Violence, and Fraud, another office, and Living; -- and to refuse the
Communion to a Person for refusing the Covenant. All these things have been
done, even by the Holy-men we are now speaking of.

What they intend by FAITHFUL is not altogether so clear. Faithful.


Not to their Vows I hope; for those have been back, and forward; fast and
loose; They have denounced their Anathema's upon both Friends and Enemies of
the King* Did they not destroy the Church, under pretense os Reforming it; and
having sworn Canonical obedience renounce Episcopacy?

Have they been faithful to their Friends? (I mean, to those of the Independent
Judgment.)

Yes certainly, so far as they had need of them. We have not yet forgotten, how
they besought God and the King, on the behalf of tender Consciences; -- how
they laid forth the sad Estate of many Thousands, ready to famish for want of
heavenly food: which delicate, and weak-stomach'd Christians, were forsooth,
those Religious Brutes that braved his Sacred Majesty in his own Palace: that
forced the Votes of the Two Houses: -- demolished Churches: -- yes, and had
Thanks too for their good Affections, and the SMECTYMNUANS to plead their Cause.

This was great Kindness, but not Lasting. For as the Presbyterian Power
increased, and the Kings Lessened: (effected, partly by false play in his
Majesty's Quarters: and partly by a Potent Combination betwixt the Kirk, and
Scotifi'd English) The Consistorian Party began now to bethink themselves, how
fairly to get quit of their old friends the Independents: plainly discovering,
that what was CONSCIENCE, while they needed their Assistance, was become
downright SCHISM, when they could live without it; and so That Liberty, which
was cried up at first for Christian, and necessary, was by Those very Ministers
Preached down again, as most Intolerable.

Yet to conclude; FAITHFUL they are; that is: to their first Principles, of
Pride: Ambition, and of Infidelity.

That they are LABORIOUS Preachers likewise, we shall not much deny, for truly,
I think, Laborious.
no men take more pains in a Pulpit then they do: or would more willingly
compass Sea and Land to gain a Proselyte.

But TRVLY-PEACEABLE; -- I must confess, Peaceable.
I take to be an Epithete does not belong to Them. This particular is handled
at large, in my Holy Cheat, where I have showed their Practices and Positions
to be Insociable, and Cruel.

Indeed, we need not much torment our Memories for Instances to prove the
unquiet humor of these People; since Hundreds (I think I might say Thousands)
of their Contentious Sermons, and Discourses, are yet in Being, and in
readiness to testify against them. Nay, which is worst of all; their Sourness
is Incorrigible: they are no sooner Pardoned, but they Revolt into a Second
Forfeiture.

These are the Able, Holy, Faithful, Laborious, and truly Peaceable Peachers of
the Gospel; -- that are cast out; (as they have worded it) or must be kept
out, because they cannot conform, etc. They Beg, that these may be admitted,
or restored, at least till others may be found, as fitting, to supply their
Places.]

These Holy men abuse the People: I say, they are not cast out as
Non-Conformists, but as Usurpers of those Benefits they had no Right to. By
Violence, they thrust Themselves into other men's Livings; or else by a
Rebellious Power, they were placed there. Now, put the case, they would
Conform: should That give them a Title to the Continuance of an Ill-got
Possession?

Their Petition (to end withal) is pleasant. They desire to be In. Themselves,
till others, as Fit, may be found; of whose Fitness, they Themselves intend to
be the Judges.

Page 4. Reas. 3. Sorrow in a day of Common Joy unseasonable.
AND we beseech you consider, when you should promote the joy and thankfulness
of his Majesty's Subjects for his happy Restoration, whether it be equal and
seasonable to bring upon so many of them, so great Calamities, as the change of
able, faithful Ministers, for such as they cannot comfortably commit the
conduct of their Souls to, and the depriving them of the Liberty of the public
Worship; Calamities far greater then the mere loss of all their worldly
Substance can amount to: in a day of common Joy, to bring this causlesly on so
many of his Majesty's Subjects, and to force them to lie down in heartbreaking
Sorrows, as being almost as far undone, as Man can do it; this is not a due
requital of the Lord for so great deliverances: Especially considering, that if
it were never so certain, that it is the Sin of the Ministers that dare not be
Re-ordained, or conform; it is hard that so many thousand innocent people should
suffer even in their Souls for the faults of others.

NOTE. IX.
THE Reformers should do very well, to consider, as well the Loss of the late
King, as the Restoration of This; and how much more they contributed to the
Former, then to the Latter. It Is I confess, an Indecorum, to mourn upon a day
of Jubilee: a deep, and foul Ingratitude, to entertain so General a Blessing, as
the Restoring of his Majesty, with a less General Joy. Yet since 'twere idle to
expect, All Parties should be pleased, and evident it is, Some are not; we'll
first see, Who they are that make these loud Compleynts, and Then, what it is
that troubles them.

The Presbyterian Ministers insooth are ill at ease: sick of their old Disease
of 41. (Bishops and Common Prayer) They suffer Causlelesly they say; and in a
day of Common Joy they are forced to lie down in Heartbreaking Sorrows. Alas
now for their Tender Hearts!

What Mirmidon, or hard Dolopian
What Savage-minded rude Cyclopian? etc. --
I want a Modest Term to express these Peoples want of Common Honesty. They Are
sad they say, The Presbyterians laugh when they should cry.
when were they other? but where they ought to have put on Sackcloth? What were
their Mock-fasts, but Religious Cursings of their most Sacred Sovereign? And
their Thanks-giving-feasts, and Sermons; -- were they not Entertainments, and
Discourses, of Joy, and Triumph for the Disasters of his Majesty?

No wonder then to see These People out of humor; at a time when all Loyal
Souls are filled with Comfort.

To suffer, is not yet so much: but Causelessly; That troubles them: They Are
sorry I perceive that they have given so little Reason for it.

Just in this manner did they Encroch upon his Late Majesty: whom they persu'd
and hunted, with their Barking Arguments, up to the very Scaffold; and There,
when they were sure that Words would do no good, they babbled a little, as if
they meant to have saved him.

The old Cause revived.
Once more; they have been laboring a Faction ever since his Majesty's Return;
They Preach, they Print the Old Cause over again; and manifestly drive the same
Design upon The Son, which formerly they executed upon the Father.

Page 3. Reas. 4. How great a part of the 3. Nations suffer.
IF we thought it would not be mis-interpreted, we would here remember you, how
great and considerable a part of the three Nations they are, that must either
incur these sufferings, or condole them that undergo them; and how great a
grief it will be to His Majesty to see his grieved Subjects; and how great a
joy it will be to him, to have their hearty thanks and Prayers, and see them
Live in Prosperity, Peace and Comfort under his most happy Government.

NOTE. X.
THis Mustering up of Multitudes, is an old Trick they learned from the
Committee of Safety; The Faction good at false Musters.
only a help at a dead Lift; and truly the Party is more then a little given to
This way of Amplification.

Inconsiderable.
Surely, he is much a Stranger to the Temper of This Nation, that does not know
the Presbyterians to be very Inconsiderable, both for Number and Interest of
Credit with the People. Where did they ever any thing without the Independents?
and Them, they made a Shift to Ensnare, by a pretended Engagement for Christian
Liberty: which, when they found to be a Cheat with how much Ease did the
Journymen turn off their Masters!

But what a care they take, now of a Sudden, for his Majesty's Satisfaction!
How great a Grief, etc. -- and how great a Joy, etc. --

Indeed his Majesty has reason to be troubled; to see his Royal Mercy and
Patience thus abused, by a forgetful Murmuring Faction, that will be satisfied
with nothing consistent with the Kings Dignity, and Safety; the Peace and
Welfare of the Public.

[A] WE may plead the nature of their Cause, Page 4. Reas. 5. The Nature of the
Cause.
to move you to compassionate your poor afflicted Brethren in their Sufferings.
It is in your own account but for refusing Conformity to things indifferent, or
at the most, of no necessity to Salvation. It is in their account for the Sake
of Christ, because they dare not consent to that which they judge to be an
usurpation of his Kingly Power, and an accusation of his Laws as insufficient,
and because they dare not be guilty of addition to, or diminution of his
Worship, or of Worshipping him after any other Law, than that by which they
must be judged, or such as is merely subordinate to that.

[B] Things dispensible and of themselves unnecessary, should not be rigorously
urged upon him, to whom they would be a sin, Page 5.
and cause of condemnation. It is in case of things indifferent in your own
judgment, that we now speak.

[C] If it be said, that it is humor, pride, or singularity, Ibid.
or peevishness, or faction, and not true tenderness of Conscience, that
causes the doubts, or Nonconformity of these men. We answer, such Crimes must
be fastened only on the Individuals, that are first proved guilty of them; and
not upon multitudes unnamed, and unknown, and without proof.

[D] If it were not for fear of sinning against [God] and wounding their
Consciences, and hazzarding, Page 6.
and hindering their Salvation, they would readily obey you in all these
things; it is their fear of Sin and Damnation that is their Impediment.

[E] One would think that a little Charity might suffice to enable you to
believe them, when their Noncompliance brings them under suffering, and their
compliance, is the visible way to favor; safety, and prosperity in the World.

NOTE. XI.
The ground of the Reformers Schism.
THere is one Gross, and Common Principle, which our Schismatical Reformers have
laid down as the Foundation whereupon they build, and Justify their
Disagreements. To wit; that Scripture is the only Rule of Humane Actions.] We
must not Eat, Sleep, Move; -- without a Text for it.

Upon this Ridiculous Assertion, they pick a Quarrel with such Orders of the
Church, as are not commanded in the Word of God; when yet the Practice of all
Christian Churches hitherto extant, appears against them.

The Curse lies against him that Preaches another Gospel.] -- He that abides
not in the Doctrine of Christ, has not God: -- Marque them which cause
Division and Offenses, Gal. 1.8. 2 John 1.9. Romans 16.17.
contrary to the Doctrine which you have Learned, and avoid them.

Now what is all this, to the Exterior mode of Worshipping? St. Paul's advice
was Decency; 1 Cor. 14.40.
in General Terms, not Worship Thus, or so; but Decently; and leaving to the
Church the Judgment of that Decency.

Some Posture or other we must worship in; as Kneeling, Sitting, The manner of
Worship left to the Church.
Standing, Leaning, Prostrate; -- or the like. It is not said; Pray in This
Posture or in That. But the Command is; PRAY. Must we not therefore Pray at
all: for want of a strict Scriptural Direction in what Posture?

It Is the same thing, the Case of all Those Ceremonies, which are only of meet,
and sensible relation to the Duty. They are in Themselves, Indifferent, but by
Command made Necess^ry.

Indeed Agreement even in Outward Forms were a thing very desirable, among all
Christians: would but the Disagreeing Modes, and Humors of several Places bear
it: Now since that cannot be, we are commanded to present our Souls to God, in
the same Faith; but for the manner of our Worship; the sensible Formalities of
it: we are to follow their Appointments, whom God has given Dominion over our
Bodies: our Lawful Rulers.

To offer up our Prayers, without any Significant Action, were to imply a
drowsy, flat, Regardlesseness of what we do. To make the same Ceremony,
Universal, were most improper; because in several Places, the same Posture, or
motion, carries several Meanings.

Well then; since some visible Action, is necessary; This, or That, (in it
self) Indifferent: -- The same, throughout, -- unfit; -- what more agreeable --
Rational expedient; then for the Supreme Magistrate, to say, Do This, or That,
for Order sake; wherein there is nothing of Repugnancy to Conscience?

But we'll now lay the General Question aside, and come to Particulars.

[ A] We take Conformity, though to matters Indifferent, Conformity necessary.
(if Commanded by a Lawful Authority) to be a necessary to Salvation: so that
no doubt remains in this case, but concerning the Authority.

Further, their Pretense of Conscience; is both Wide, and Weak.

Wide; for they dissent, A queynt Scruple.
in things of most u^leniable Freedom: and wherein, they only oppose the
Authority, not the Thing. Why not JOINED; -- in the Marriage office, as well as
CONJOINED? so they change wedded, into married; and a hundred such frisks they
have. Is This, Conscience? Their Pretense is weak too, as Thus.

They undertake to Prohibit; which requires the same Power as to Bind. To say I
cannot, is well; to say They must not, is Authoritative: and to say, They
cannot, borders upon Simple. How do they know? when the same thing may be
Lawful to one, and Unlawful to another?

They dare not usurp Christ's Kingly Power.] Does not our Savior tell us, his
Kingdom is not of this World? and bids us render unto Caesar the things that
are Caesar's? Give me thy Heart; -- Let the Body do what it can; without the
Agreement of the Mind all is Nothing. Kneeling before an Idol, is no Sin,
('bating the Scandal) without the adjunct of a misplaced Devotion: Or if it be,
a Stumble before an Image is Idolatry. Sin is an obliquity of the Will, not
This or That Flexure or Position of the Body. In fine; Where did our Savior
either command, or forbid any Particular Posture of the Body? At the
Institution of the blessed Eucharist, says the Text, Matthew. 26.20.
[ he sat down with the Twelve.] for which Critical reason, our punctual
Christians will sit too at the Holy Communion; (though in Effect that is not the
Posture) But we read further, Matthew. 26.39.
that our Blessed Savior [fell upon his Face, and Prayed.] Why do not our
Precise Scripturists, as well Pray, Prostrate too, as Communicate, Sitting?

As if his Laws were insufficient;] they cry. No, neither are they yet so
Actually explicit, as to set down at length all Constitutions helpful to our
Condition: Much is remitted to Political Discretion; and it is enough if Humane
Laws bear but a Non-repugnancy to the Divine.

Addition or Diminution to, or of Gods Worship, they dare not assent to.] Let
this be understood just to the Letter; they do it Themselves; but take it as it
properly relates to points unalterable, of Faith, and Doctrine, neither dare we.

[ B] But things dispensable, etc. -- ] The more dispensable the Command is; 2
Kings 4.13.
the less dispensable is the obedience. [If the Prophet had commanded thee a
great thing, would thou not have done it? How much more then when he says to
Thee, -- Wash and be clean?] A Rigorous Injunction, though of a small matter,
is made necessary by a Frivolous, and stiff opposal of it.

[ C] They deny this Inconformity to proceed from Humor, Pride, etc. -- and
bid us charge Particulars.] Every Presbyterian, that acted in the late War, and
proceeded from Pretext of Conscience, to Subversion of the Government, and is
not yet converted, is clearly -- illud quod dicere nolo. Those very people are
now at work again; upon the same Pretense, and (without Breach of Charity) I
think, we may conclude, upon the same Design.

[ D] Here they protest, that only fear of Sin and Damnation hinders their
obedience.] These first-Table Saints stop short of the Fifth Commandment. What
Gospel do these Precisians live by? What Law would their Conformity offend?
And yet they offer Oath, that a pure Scruple of Conscience is their Impediment.

They could impose, and swallow, a Damning, Treasonous Oath, against the Law,
without this Scruple: Their Scruple is Faction.
how come they now to be so delicate, when they have Duty, Conscience, and
Authority to warrant them? The naked Truth is this; They Would have the King
subscribe to the Supremacy of the Kirk.

[ E] Now for the credit of their Protestation; they argue that their
Noncompliance crosses their Interest.] No, (under favor) by no means. There
are more Presbyters, then Bishops, and every Presbyter within his little
Territory, is much more then Episcopal. Beside; it were against the Faith of
the Associated Combination, for Ten or Twenty of them, to turn honest, and
leave the Rest in the Lurch.

Again; Their Argument of Interest lies now, but where it did in Forty one.
Their Consciences went then against the Stream too; and yet (abating some odd
reckonings, with divine Justice) they made a shift to make a saving Game on it.
In short, they do but venture a little, in hopes to gain a great deal.

[A] DO you think, the Lord that died for Souls, Page 6. Reas. 6. The
Disproportion betwixt the things in Question and the Salration of Souls.
and has sent us to learn what that means [I will have mercy and not
Sacrifice.] is better pleased with Reordination, Subscription and Ceremonies,
than with the saving of Souls, by the means of his own appointment?

Page 7.
[ B] Concord in Ceremonies, or Reordination, or Oaths of obedience to
Diocesans, or in your questioned particular forms of Prayer, do neither in
their nature, or by virtue of any promise of God, so much conduce to Men's
Salvation: as the Preaching of the Gospel does, by able faithful and laborious
Ministers. And how comes it to pass that unity, concord and order must be
placed in those things, which are no way necessary thereto. Will there not be
order and concord in Holy obedience and acceptable Worshipping of God, on the
Terms which we now propose and crave, without the foresaid matter of offense?

[C] We here show you that we are no Enemies to order, and our long importunity
for the means of Concord, does show that we are not Enemies to concord.

[D] We humbly crave that reproach may not be added to affliction, and that none
may be called factious that are not proved such; and that Laws imposing things
indifferent in your Judgment, and sinful in theirs, may not be made the rule
to judge of Faction.

[E] It is easy to make any man an Offender, by making Laws which his
Conscience will not allow him to observe, and it is as easy to make that same
man cease to seem disobedient, obstinate, or factious, without any change at
all in him by taking down such needless Laws.

Page 8.
[F] Sad experience tells the World, that if the Ministers that we are pleading
for be laid aside, there are not competent men enough to supply their Rooms,
and equally to promote the Salvation of the Flocks: This is acknowledged by
them, who still give it as the reason why Ministers are not to be trusted with
the expressing of their desires in their own words, nor so much as to choose
which Chapter to read, as well as which Text to preach on, to their Auditors,
because we shall have Ministers so weak, as to be unfit for such a trust.

NOTE. XII.
[A] WE have the same things over again so often, I Am even Sick on it. But I
Reply; -- It Is Truth; God is better pleased with the Saving of Souls, by the
means of his own Appointment; then, etc. --

Government is Gods Ordinance, Obedience his Appointment; Obey then, and be
saved. Reordination is not pressed as necessary; nor, (that I know) Proposed
so; though to deal freely, (as the Case stands) I think it were no needless
Test of Discrimination,

Subscription, Ceremonies are necessary to Order.
and Ceremonies are of most necessary Relation to Unity, and Order: which it is
the Churches Care, and Duty to uphold; to prevent Schism, and Confusion. The
Church, in these Injunctions, does but comply with a Superior Command,
virtually inculcated in all those Precepts that concern Unity and Decency: and
These Refusers, strike at God himself in their Disobedience to his Ministers.

[B] But Concord in Ceremonies, etc.] Observe this Clause well.

Here Is first Implied a Competition betwixt the Efficacy of a Sermon, and of a
Ceremony, etc. Whereas we put This difference; The one, is Gods Ordinance; the
other, Man's. Yet is it in such sort Humane, as that the Authority is virtually
Divine.

See now their Complement upon the Episcopal Clergy: As if the Church of
England had no able Preachers, but Non-Conformists: The Fruit of whose
Laborious Ministry has been a Twenty-years Rebellion.

But the point most remarkable, is This. They oppose the Power not the Thing.
It Is CEREMONY they oppose; not This or that Injunction, as of ill choice or
tendency; but as an Imposition. Their Plea is a Rejection of the Power
Imposing, more then of the thing imposed: It Is the Command forsooth that they
dislike. [ as an Addition to Gods Worship.] Let Confidence it self blush for
These People.

Pray'e what is the difference betwixt Addition to Gods Worship, in Words, or in
Actions? Only the One works upon the Eye, the Other upon the Ear; Both tending
to the same Effect, and Marquis of our Conceit, alike; whether by a
Significancy of nature, or of Agreement, matters not much. They seem to allow
of a Set-form of Words, why not of Actions too? Since neither the One, nor the
other amounts to any thing, but as they are Qualified, and Tinctured with the
Intention. Says the Command; -- Say Thus; and why not -- DO Thus too; Grant
Both; or neither; for These Two, Stand or fall, by the same Argument. WE ask
no more liberty then THEY take. Their Prayers, and Forms are not Actually in
the Scripture; Our Rites and Ceremonies are Potentially there. For this Cause
(says St. Paul to Titus) I left thee in Crete, Tit. 1.5.
that thou should set in Order the things that are wanting, and ordain
Elders in every City, as I had appointed Thee.] Here Is a Commission at Large,
to set in Order, but What, or How, remitted to Discretion.

Touching Reordination we have spoken before. A word now concerning their
Oaths of obedience to Diocesans.

The Presbyterians swear freely.
That These persons do not much stick at an Oath, is evident from the many Oaths
they have already taken; diverse of which being of direct Contradiction, would
make a man suspect, they did not much heed what they swear. Only now when the
Oath they should take, comes in Question, a Qualme of Conscience seizes them.
They cannot swear obedience to Diocesans. That is, they will not submit to
Episcopal Government: or yet more close, They Will set up PRESBYTERY and Rule us
Themselves.

Why should these men be Trusted, without an Oath, according to the Law, that
have so freely sworn, against the Law? Nay, did not Modesty restreyn me, I
should discourse the Insecurity of crediting those people upon their Oath; that
have already broken so many. Again; They plead Exemption from Swearing, that of
all Mortals were the most Violent Enforcers of it.

Now to our Questioned Forms of Prayer.] Who Questions them, but they that
Questioned as well our Form of Government? Those miserable Hypocrites, whose
Breaths are yet scarce sweet, since they swore Last against the King, and voted
down the Bishops. Agreement in the manner of Worship ought to be the Churches
Care; The Peoples Duty is submission, and Obedience; to which, God in the very
Precept, has annexed a Promissory Blessing: and he that resists, shall receive
to himself Damnation.

[C] But They are no Enemies (they say) to Order, and Concord. Indeed, they are
Pleasant Folks: We are their Witnesses, what pains they took to bring all to a
Presbyterian Rule, and Order: and to unite the People in a foederal Concord,
against their Prince, by a Rebellious Covenant.

[D] Here they demand, that none may be called Factious, that are not proved
so.] Content; What is it to be Factious, but to promote, Who are Factious.
and stir up Disaffections against the stated Government? At This Rate, all the
Preachers, Writers, Printers, etc. against the Episcopal Order, or the
Constitutions of the Church are Factious. More narrowly; the Publishers, and
Contrivers of the Petition for Peace; the Presbyterian Lecturers; (Twenty for
One) and their Abettors may be reckoned among the Factious. But in fine, let
them prove our Ceremonies Unlawful, we'll soon show them who is Factious.

Their next Proposition, that the Law may not be made the Rule to judge of
Faction] is (I persuade my self) a Slip more then they meant us. The Law is
above the King, they say, and yet They Would be above the Law.

This is to draw an Appeal from the Bench to the Bar; to damn the Judgment of
the Law, and make a Presbyterian the Judge of Faction.

[E] They come now to press, the violence of the Laws upon their Consciences.]
Whereas it is evident, that Straight, and Gentle Laws, have met with Sour, and
crooked Humors. They say, the Law makes the Offender: may they not charge the
Decalogue, Romans 7.7, 8.
by the same rule? What shall we say then? (says St. Paul) Is the Law, Sin? God
forbid. Nay, I had not known Sin, but by the Law: for I had not known Lust,
except the Law had said, Thou shall not Covet; But Sin taking occasion by the
Commandment, wrought in me all manner of Concupiscence.] -- Sin is the
Transgression of the Law; -- the Disobedience not the Precept.

This Freedom of Challenging the Law, leads to an Arraignment of the Ten
Commandments. The Idolater excepts to the first, and Second; the Blasphemer,
to the Third; the Sabbath-breaker, to the Fourth; the Rebel to the Fifth; the
Murderer, to the Sixth; -- the Adulterer, to the Seventh; -- the Thief, to the
Eight; -- the Slanderer, to the Ninth; the Extortioner, to the Tenth.

The Consequence of Presbyterian Liberty.
Well, but their Consciences cannot submit to observe such and such Laws. Truly,
to give them their Due, nor any Other neither but of their own making. Though
every man may be allowed to be the Judge of his own Conscience; yet there are
many Cases wherein men ought to be severely punished, for Acting according to
their Consciences: For Conscience may be misinformed; and beyond doubt, there
never yet was any Heresy, but had some well meaning Believers of the opinion.
Grant but this Liberty to the Presbyterians (as upon Equity of Conscience) all
other Factions, have the same Title to it.

Where are we Then, but in an universal State of War? His Conscience will have
no King; Another, no Bishops; a Third, no Laws; a Fourth, no Religion; One
will have Women in Common; -- Another, Goods: -- In fine; Our Peace, Comfort,
and Reason; -- nay, and the Dignity of Humane Nature; -- All that is Noble, in
us, or belonging to us, is by This Presbyterian Argument of an Imaginary
Conscience, drowned in Brutality, and Confusion.

What Remedy then, when betwixt Law, and Conscience, there is a real
Disagreement? Where so it happens; rather let People Innocently suffer, though
they lose their Freedom, then by a foul Resistance endanger their Salvation to
recover it.

But They Would be quiet, they say, if some needless Laws were taken away, Yes; as
they were before, when under Color only of Regulating, some such needless
Laws, they destroyed all the Rest.

[F] Their next compleynt, is for want of Competent men to supply the place of
Their Ministers [Still they confine the [ Competent] to their own Party:
Reasoning the weakness of the Ministers, because they may not be Entrusted, to
Pray in their own words, or to choose their own Chapters, etc.]

These Gentlemen have some reason to know, that there are Knaves, as well as
Fools; and that the Factious, are less fit to be Trusted with That Liberty,
then the Simple.

[A] THE persons that we now speak for, Page 8. Reas. 7. The Nonconformists
submit to all things necessary to Salvation.
are ready to subscribe to all contained in the Holy Scriptures, and willing to
be obliged by the Laws of men to practice it.

[B] Seeing then you do profess that none of your Impositions, that cannot be
concluded from the Scripture, are necessary to Salvation: let them not
consequentially be made necessary to it, and more necessary than that which is
ordinarily necessary.

[C] That smaller things must not be imposed by unproportionable penalties.
Page 9.


[D] The Church may not make any thing necessary to preaching it self; that is
of it self unnecessary, and not antecedently necessary, at least by accident.

NOTE. XIII.
[ A] TRuly we have an Obligation to These Reformers, that if the Law requires
it, they will subscribe to the contents of the Holy Bible: But That must be
with their own Comment too. They puzzle the Vulgar with a blind notion of
Things necessary to Salvation; as if the sole belief of the Divine Authority of
Sacred Writ, and of the Mysteries, therein comprised, were enough to carry a
man to Heaven.

Things necessary to Salvation.
Some Things are necessary to Salvation, as we are Christians. That is; the
Sum of the Catholic Faith, (according to our Confession) which except a man
believe faithfully, he cannot be saved.] -- or in short; an un-doubting
Resignation and Submission to the explicit Doctrine of the Bible, teaching
Salvation: These are things, Primarily, evidently, and unchangeably necessary,
equally binding all Humane flesh, without distinction.

Some things again, are necessary to our Salvation, as we are Men in Society;
for Instance, Subjects. And these are matters commonly, in Themselves,
Indifferent; Changeable in their Qualities; Temporary in their Obligation; and
yet necessary by Collection. The short of all is This; Where the Law of the
Land does not Thwart the Law of God; or That of Nature; we are to obey the
Politic Magistrate, upon pain of Damnation.

[ B] That Impositions are not necessary to Salvation.] We answer, They are not
necessary to be imposed; but necessary to be obeyed.

[ C] Concerning the measure betwixt the Fault and the Punishment; Let the Law
estimate the one, and proportion the Other. Private Persons are not to Correct
the Public Laws.

[ D] The Church may not, etc.] Many a man may be duly qualified to Preach, in
point of Ordination, (for the purpose) or Ability, that yet in other regards is
not fit to come into a Pulpit. I hope, refusing to communicate with the Church,
may pass for as fair an Impediment; as refusing to Covenant against it. (I am
enforced to refresh these Gentlemen's memories ever and anon.)

IF our Religion be laid upon your particular Liturgy, Page 9. Reas. 8. As well
the Mass Book as the Common Prayer.
we shall teach the Papists further to insult, by asking us, where was our
Religion two hundred years ago? The Common Prayer Book as differing from the
Mass Book, being not so old, and that which might then be the matter of a
change, is not so much unchangeable it self, but that those alterations may be
accepted for ends so desirable as are now before us.

NOTE. XIV.
TO This, we answer, that our Religion is unalterable; our Liturgy not. If a
Papist asks a Presbyterian where his Religion was two hundred years ago? he
might as well ask him, where 'twill be two hundred years hence? But That Is a
harder Question to a Puritan, then to a Catholic.

Further; to press the Differings, or agreement of the Common Prayer Book,
from or with the Mass Book, is more a shift then an Argument. We Will keep to
our Adversary. It Is our Profession, that the Form is Alterable; but by the same
power only that Established it; Not by a Conventicle, or a Club of
Running-Lecturers; but by a grave consult of Reverend Divines; that is,
Prepared by them, and fitted for the stamp of the Supreme Authority.

IF we may not have the Liberty of the Primitive times, Page 9. Reas. 9. The
Liberty of the Ancient times.
when for ought can be proved, no Liturgical Forms were imposed upon any
Church, yet at least let us have the Liberty of the following Ages, when under
the same Prince there were diversity of Liturgies and particular Pastors, had
the power of making and altering them for their particular Churches.

NOTE. XV.
HOw these good people beat the Bush, and yet start nothing! The Liberty of the
Primitive Times, etc.] what Primitive Times? where will these men begin their
Reckoning? The late Primate of Ireland, tells us, that [ all the Churches in
the Christian world, in the first, and Best times, had their set forms of
Liturgy whereof most are extant in the writings of the Fathers, Luke. 1 1.2.
at this day] -- when you Pray, say -- Our Father, etc.] In the Apostles age,
the Holy Ghost abundantly supplied all humane needs, by supernatural Graces,
and Inspirations. But the Use of Liturgies is too clear, to suffer or admit a
contradiction.

A modest request.
Yet this they are not very earnest in; allow them only the Liberty of the
following Ages] and what was that I beseech ye? Only the Power of making and
Altering Liturgies themselves; as under the same Prince has been formerly
permitted to Particular Pastors.

Away away for shame, with These Horse-coursing Tricks; they dress a sound Leg
to amuse the People, when the Jade wants an Eye. Look ye be not Cheated with
Their Ambition, and never trouble your selves for their Consciences: They Will
shift in all weathers; -- for in case of necessity. --

Johnson.
Pigg may be Eaten -- Yea Exceedingly well Eaten.

I would the whole Nation might but once dream of such a Whipping, as when
these Reverences got the Law into their own hands, their bounty would bestow
upon them. They would use no other bug-word to their Children, then the
Presbyterians are coming.

Were not a blessed Reformation, to have an Almighty Inquisition, set up in
every Parish: to see a Pontifical Presbyter rule as King and Priest over the
Estates and Consciences of his subjected congregation? To have but One
Commandment to keep, in stead of Ten; Obey the Presbyter. -- In truth it is
such a Government of Clouts, I cannot choose but play the Fool with it: Briefly;
when They Are permitted to make Laws let us make Halters: We have tasted them
already, and if They proceed to mind us of their Old Discipline, let us mind
one another of our Old slavery; and Them too, that they now plead for a Bratt,
by their own rule not to be received into the Church; for it was conceived in
Schism and Brought forth in Rebellion; (God bless us) I mean Presbytery.

Whereas they urge that several Liturgies have been allowed under the same
Prince, etc. -- ] Confeis'd: It has been so, and may be so again, and with
good reason too; yet all this while, This proves no Title our Pretenders have
to the same Liberty.

Where People of differing Humors, and wonted to Differing Customs, are
united under the same Prince; Prudence advises a Diversity of Liturgyes. Again;
It Is one thing to persuade a Prince; another thing to force him (but the main
reason is yet to come.) These bold Petitioners press the King to give them
what they Got, and kept, (so long as they could hold it) by Rebellion: -- to
grant away, what his Royal Father held dearer then his Blood; and to complete
the shameless proposition, some of the now- Petitioners to the Son, were the
hot Persecutors of the Father.

In fine, they act, as if they would vie Provocation with the Kings Mercy: they
ask, That which his Majesty cannot grant, but with a Double hazard to himself;
-- both from the Government, and from the Persons.

[A] IF you should reject (which God forbid) the moderate Proposals which now
and formerly we have made we humbly crave leave to offer it to your
consideration, Page 9. R. 10. The hazard of Refusing.
what Judgment all the Protestant Churches are likely to pass on your
proceedings, and how your cause and ours will stand represented to them, and to
all succeeding Ages.

[B] If after our submission to his Majesty's Declaration, and after our own
Proposals of the Primitive Episcopacy, and of such a Liturgy as here we tender,
we may not be permited to exercise our Ministry, or enjoy the Public Worship
of God, the Pens of those Learned, moderate Bishops will bear witness against
you, that were once employed as the chief Defenders of that cause (we mean such
as Reverend Bishop Hall and Usher) who have published to the World that much
less than this might have served to our fraternal Unity and Peace.

[C] And we doubt not but you know how new and strange a thing it is that you
require in the Point of Reordination. When a Canon amongst those called the
Apostles deposes those that Re-ordain, and that are re-ordained.

[D] Not only the former Bishops of England, that were more moderate were
against it, but even the most fervent adversaries of the Presbyterian way; such
as Bishop Bancroft himself; how strange must it needs seem to the Reformed
Churches, to the whole Christian World, and to future Generations, that so many
able, faithful Ministers, should be laid by as broken Vessels, because they
dare not be re-ordained? and that so many have been put upon so new and so
Generally dis-rellished a thing.

NOTE. XVI.
Presbyterians no Protestants
[A] AS to the Protestant Churches; (if they have not changed their opinions)
they will give the same judgment of These people now, which they did formerly.
That is; they will disown Them, and their Actions, for being so singular and
Impious, as to oppose the Reason, Right, and Practice of all other Nations: who
Generally have their setforms of Prayer. Touching the Moderation of their
Proposals, it is already enough notorious.

[B] If after our Submission to his Majesty's Declaration, etc.] Prodigious
Boldness, and Ingratitude! Submission? as if the King had Pressed, when he
Relaxed them: an Indulgence beyond President, bestowed upon a people void of
Sense. Indeed a Meritorious Patience was their Submission. Content they were
not, for many of the Presbyterian Teachers here about the Town, Petitioned for
more, so soon as That was Granted.

But how have they submitted? They have not Struck, That Is all. Do they not
daily Preach, Write, Print against Episcopacy; in opposition to the Express
Intent, and Letter of the foresaid Declaration? Do they not prejudge the Synod,
to which that Declaration referrs them? Yes, and abuse the Freedom of
proposing some Alterations, by the Rejection of the Whole. Suitable to This
Submission, are Their Proposals, both of the Primitive Episcopacy, and of their
Liturgy. Their Liturgy, as we have spoken formerly, is a Contest for Dominion,
not for Conscience, and comes to This at Last; If they may not Rule, they will
not worship.

Their Primitive Episcopacy, sounds as much as Presbytery: for they confound
the Terms, as if Bishop and Presbyter were Originally the same; and Prelacy
(as the Queynt Smectymnuus has it) of Diabolical Occasion, Smectimnuus Page 23.
not of Apostolical Intention. At This Rate, what do they offer, in a Primitive
Episcopacy? Bishops in truth they allow, but so, that every Presbyter must be
as Bishop.

To give the matter Credit; they Appeal to the Reverend Hall, and Usher, those
Learned, Moderate Bishops (as they Term them) whose Pens are to bear witness
against These now in Being, and Authority, if they refuse their Askings. I am
told, (and I believe it) that at least One of the Smectymnuans had a hand in
this New Liturgy, and Petition for Peace. If so, I must needs put the Gentleman
a Froward Question.

Is Bishop Hall so much improved since he Died? (in truth a Prelate to whose
Memory the Church of England owes great Reverence) This was that Learned and
Moderate Bishop, that Smectymnuus so bespattered under the Name of the
Remonstrant. But will you see now how that Noble Prelate was bayted by five of
our newfangled Primitive Bishops? S.M. E.C. T.Y. M. N. W. S. (let Mr. Manton
uncipher this.)

Variae Lectiones upon Reverend, Moderate, and Learned.
Episcopal bravado. Page 3.] Treason Treason Page 4.] We know not what his
Arrogance might attempt. Page 14.] So many Falsities and Contradictions. Page
15.] A Face of confident Boldness, A Self confounded man. -- Notorious Falsity
-- ibid.] His Notorious -- ] not leave his -- ] Page 16.]

Os durum -- ] forgets not himself, but God also.] Words bordering upon
Blasphemy -- ] -- Indignation will not suffer us to prosecute these Falsities]
--.Page 18.]

A Stirrup for Antichrist] -- Page 30.] Antichristian Government] -- Page 65.]
-- We thank God we are none of you.] Page 74.] -- Borders upon Antichrist.]
Page 80.] -- Pride, Rebellion, Treason, Unthank-fulness, which have issued from
Episcopacy.] Page 85.]

These were Favors of the Bishops own laying up; and so much for the Reverend,
Moderate, and Learned.

It seems a Presbyter in the Chair, is not Infallible: why may they not
mistake themselves as well in the Bishops opinion as in his Character? Or may
they not forget their Proposalls they have offered, as well as the Injuries?
Will these Gentlemen subscribe to the Bishops Episcopacy by Divine Right? Or
will they show, wherever he passed a Contradiction upon himself?

Nay, come to his Modest offer, to the Assembly in 1644. Is That the Piece
shall rise in Judgment against us? (and That yet was pared as Close as close
could be, the better to comply with the Sullenness of a Prevailing Faction.)
Hear what the Bishop says in That Treatise then.

There never yet was any History of the Church, wherein there was not full
mention made of Bishops, Bishop Hall's Modest offer, Page 3.
as the only Governors thereof*

The Rules of Church Government laid forth in the Epistles to Timothy and
Titus, do suppose, Ibid. Page 4.
and Import that very proper Jurisdiction which is claimed by Episcopacy at
this day.] --

The Co-assession of a Lay-Presbytery he disapproves: Page 15.
and in his Epistle Dedicatory to his Episcopacy by Divine Right, This; [ If
any man Living can show any one Lay-Presbyter that ever was in the World till
Farell, and Viret first created him, let me forfeit my Reputation to Shame, and
my Life to Justice.

See now what the late Primate of Armagh says in his Direction, of 1642.

Episcopal Ordination, and Jurisdiction has express Warrant, in holy
Scriptures: as namely Titus 1.5. For this Cause left I Thee in Crete, that thou
should set in order, things that are wanting, and ordeyn Presbyters: that
is, Ministers in every City; as the first of Timothy 5.22. lay hands suddenly
on no man; and Verse 19. Against a Presbyter, or Minister, receive not an
Accusation but under Two or Three Witnesses.] Page 4.

No other Government heard of in the Churches for 1500. years and more, then by
Bishops.] Page 5.

This is enough to clear the Authority of the Institution; But That, they will
say is not the Question? These Reverend Bishops gave their Judgments, of, and
for a Primitive Episcopacy: and to a Government so Regulated, these Divines
offer to submit.

That is; they will allow a Bishop to Rule in Consociation with his Presbyters:
and This looks gayly to the Common People.

Rule with his Presbyters, (they cry) and will not that content him? what;
would the Bishops be as absolute as Popes? and Then, the Order's presently
proclaimed for Antichristian: and War denounced against all Constitutions of
Their framing, as Superstitious. Nay, the most Solemn Forms and Orders of the
Church; though venerable for their long Continuance, Use, Decency, and
Universal Practice, are thrown out, as Idolatrous, because the Bishops favor
them. Of so great moment are the Fallacies of pleasing words, where there wants
skill, or care to taste the bitter meaning.

But alas! Those simple Wretches that inveigh against the Tyranny and Claim of
Bishops; and with an undistinguishing rage, -- confound the persons with their
Calling: how do they draw upon themselves the thing they Fear, and furiously
oppose the sum of their own wishes?

-- Do they first know what it is, To RULE in CONSOCIATION?

Presbyterian Primitive Episcopacy.
It is, To Degrade a Bishop into a Prime Pastor: -- to disrobe him of his
Apostolical prelation of Degree, and allow him a Complemental priority of
Order. This Imminution of Bishops, will, doubtless, not displease their
Enemies; but let them have a care; for in that very Act and Instant, wherein
they fetch a Bishop down to a Presbyter, does every Presbyter become a Bishop:
so that for five and twenty they pluck down, they set up some ten thousand.

This was the Cheat that fooled the People into those Tumults, which the
Smectymnuans entered the Lists to justify. A Primitive Episcopacy was the
Pretense, which they boiled down at length into a rank Presbytery, and more
Imperious. Thus was the Government of the Church destroyed; and after the same
manner, That of the State.

[ The King was to govern with his Parliament.] This saying carried a Popular
sound; and the Multitude were not able to comprehend the Drift of it. In short,
they brought his Majesty, first, to be one of the Three Estates; thence, by
degrees, lower and lower, till they Dethroned him, and at last Murdered him.

This was the cursed Issue of a Pretense, to the Regulation of Monarchy and
Episcopacy.

But to end this point: The Reformers would persuade the world, That they have
made a Tender of more yielding, than the forementioned Reverend Bishops have
accounted necessary to Fraternal Unity and Peace.

We answer; That to make This good, they must prove, that These Bishops have
renounced their Episcopal, and Superintendent Authority: or Instance for
Themselves; wherein They acknowledge it. Not to insist upon their Usurpations,
of Framing a new Liturgy, without a Commission; and Imposing upon the
Established Government without either Modesty or Reason.

[ C] Touching Reordination: (with submission) I do not understand it either
Requisite, or Unlawful: nor can I learn that it is Pressed, as they pretend.

The Canon whereupon they ground, is This. [ Si quis Episcopus, aut Presbyter,
aut Diaconus, secundam ab aliquo Ordinationem susceperit, deponitor, tam ipse,
quam qui ipsum Ordinavit, nisi forte constet eum Ordinationem habere ab
haereticis Qui enim a talibus Baptizati, aut Ordinati sunt, hi neque Fideles,
neque Clerici esse possunt.] If any Bishop, Presbyter, or Deacon, shall receive
from any man (ab aliquo) a second Ordination, let the Person Ordaining (qui
ipsum ordinavit) and the Person Ordained, be both Deposed: unless it appear,
that his prior Ordination was by Heretics. For those that are either Baptized
or Ordained by such, cannot be reputed either Believers or Clergymen.

Observe first, that This Canon presupposes a Regular, and Episcopal
Ordination: ab aliquo: -- qui ordinavit: -- referring singly to the Bishop,
whose Assistance is deemed so Essential to the work, as that -- No Bishop; no
Ordination.

Next, there is an Error in the Canon: For, Hooker's Eccles. pol. lib. 5. sect.
62.
If Baptism seriously be administered in the same Element, and with the same
form of words which Christ's Institution Teaches, there is no other defect in
the world, that can make it Frustrate.] So that This Canon availes them little,
either in respect of the Scope of it, or the Authority.

But is Reordination (say they) so new and strange a thing? I am sorry to see
Smectymnuus quarrel with himself. Smectymnuus. Mr. Manton's Impression, page 51.
We had it in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth, urged, and received:] and with
less color Then, th^n Now: for there, a true necessity lay upon them: They
fled for Conscience, and received Orders in the Reformed Churches; not in
contempt of Bishops, but only for want of them. Whereas our cavilling
Pretenders, have cast them off; -- Rejected their Authority; -- Usurped their
Power; -- laid violent hands upon their sacred Order; -- and after all, they
have the confidence, to claim, from their Intrusions, and still adhere to the
equity of Their Revolt.

[ D] Bishop Bancroft (they say) was against it: (no Presbyterian Bishop.)
Could but these Gentlemen have seen beyond their Noses, they would have spared
this Instance: Mark now how Bancroft was against it.

In 1610. a Question was moved by Doctor Andrews, Bishop of Ely, Spotswood
Hist. of Scotl. lib. 7. page 514.
touching the Consecration of three Scottish Bishops; who, as he said, must
first be ordained Presbyters, as having received no Ordination from a Bishop.
Bancroft being by, maintained it not necessary, seeing where Bishops could not
be had, the Ordination given by the Presbyters must be esteemed lawful.] This
carried it.

Hence, it appears, that if Bishops could have been had, their Ordination by
Presbyters had not been lawful. Had not these Gentlemen now as good have let
the old Bishop alone, as have taken the Dorr? as Smectymnuus has it.

Let not the World believe yet, that these Complainers are out of play, barely
upon the account of Reordination.

None are Turned out (so far as I can hear) upon That Scruple; But sure, it is a
fair reason not to Admit them: For it denotes them Factious, and in Truth, the
common business of their Lectures is notorious Schism.

THe holy Ghost has commanded you to over-see the Flock, not by constraint,
Page 10. Reason 11.
but willingly; not as being Lords over God's heritage, but as Ensamples to the
Flock. And that it is not only more comfortable to your selves, to be loved as
the Fathers, than to be esteemed the Afflicters of the Church; but that it is
needful to the ends of your Ministry for the People. When you are loved, your
doctrine will more easily be received. But when men think that their Souls or
Liberties are endangered by you, it is easy no judge how much they are like to
profit by you.

NOTE. XVII.
BElieve me, and we are now upon a weighty Question. Who shall be Judge, the
People, or the Church; The Church the Judge.
Which is Christ's Flock? That is, Whether shall One be the Judge of all the
Rest; or all the Rest be the Judge of that One? (for that is the point) What
signifies the Multitude, but a number of single Persons, where each Individual
acts, and accounts for himself? whereas the Church, is both by Divine
Deputation, and by Political Paction, Authorized and Acknowledged to be the
Judge of All.

If there were nothing in it but common Expedience; -- Reason of Interest, and
of State: methinks, That might suffice, to make us rest in Their Decrees, to
whom, as by a general reference, we have subjected the Decision of all our
Differences. But the Benignity of Providence treats us more kindly yet;
annexing all the Blessings of both Worlds to our Obedience: which surely no man
will oppose, that is not wholly void of Religion, Moral Honesty, and of common
Prudence.

But it is better to obey God then Man, they will tell us, Has the Church any
jurisdiction over our souls? any right of Imposing upon our Consciences?

No, God forbid. But does not the Church know our consciences as well as we
know one another? and may not the Church as well suspect that we do not think
Thus or So, as we affirm that others do? When private persons plead for
Themselves, it may be conscience; but when they come once to stickle for
others, it is Faction. If it be said, that Preachers are not private persons. I
answer, That all subordinate persons are private, in respect of their
Superiors. In fine, it is our Duty every man to attend the good of his own
soul; and it belongs to the Church to over-watch us All: preserving still the
common Unity, though to the grief of some particulars.

Well, but there are so many Thousands (they say) that suffer upon tenderness
of Conscience. These People do but make So^es, that they may beg Plasters.
There may be Tender Consciences, and there are, doubtless, to whom great
Tenderness is due, and needful; but these Compleyners are not of That number.
They are too lavish in their undertakings for others, and too Peevish in their
Pleadings for Themselves. He that is Positive in what he does not know,
forfeits his Credit too in what he does.

But They are still Christ's Flock: and it is enough; They say it. (from Sheep
with Claws, deliver us.)

Take heed (says our Savior) that no man deceive you, for many shall come in
my name, Matthew. 24.4.
saying, I am Christ, and shall deceive many] and again; There shall arise
false Christ's, and false Prophets. Matthew. 24.24.
] We see the very Text bids us take heed, and foretells dangerous Hypocrites.

But what need we look further then our own Memories? Was not the whole Crew of
the late Conspirators, clad in the Livery of Gods People? Only His Majesty's
Friends had, and have still the Fortune to be reckoned among the Profane, and
not admitted into the Fold.

Would These Correctors of Magnificat would show us once, where ever Christ
called his Flock together with a Scotch Covenant: or where the Holy Ghost gives
Private Persons an Authority over their Superiors; or Commissions the Sheep to
Quarrel with their Pastor.

It is confessed, that Softness, and Humility becomes the Fathers of the
Church, and it is enjoined them; But then Obediance likewise befits the
Children: whose part it is meekly to obey, in all matters not directly sinful,
but to Resist in None.

Schism turns to Rebellion.
Let me add one thing further: Where These dividings about Forms are suffered,
the Mischief seldom stops at Schism: for the same Principle, that Rents the
Church, Threatens the State; beside the Hazard of an Ambitious Faction, ever
at hand to aid and to improve, that Peevish Holiness. In Truth, both Interests
are so enter-woven, that it is Impossible to Crush the one without bruising the
other; and to conclude; a Schismatique shifts as naturally into a Traitor, as a
Magot turns to a Fly.

The next step from Liberty of Conscience, is Freedom of Estate and Person;
and from Liberty of Thought, they proceed to That of Action, arguing and
concluding in great Earnest, with my Honest Friends Jest.

For at the Beginning was, nor Peasant, nor Prince;
And who (the Devil) made the Distinction since?
IF we are not in point of Ceremonies or Forms in every thing of your mind;
Page 10. Reason. 12.
it is no more strange to have Variety of Intellectual Apprehensions in the
same Kingdom and Church, then variety of temperatures and degrees of age and
strength.

NOTE. XVIII.
WE do not say it is strange, that there should be Variety of Intellectual
Apprehensions; but we contend that so it is; It ever was, and ever will be so:
and from the Truth, and Evidence of That Assertion, arises the clear reason,
and necessity of what we plead for.

We must consider Man, as a Reasonable Creature: composed of Soul and Body;
born, for the Public, and Himself; and finally Accomptable for the
Emprovement of his Talent toward the Ends of his Creation.

The great, the Indispensable, and universal end, The End of man's Creation.
is That which has regard to the Creator, from the Creature: and in That point
we are all agreed upon a Common Principle of Reason, that it is our Duty to
Adore, Love, and obey that Gracious Power that made us. That This is the Prime
end, we all Agree, and that our works are only Good, or Evil, according as
they correspond with, or recede from it.

In the next place, as we consist of Soul and Body; we seem to fall under a
mixed Concern; and There, the Skill is how to temper the Angel, and the Brute,
in such sort as may best comply with the behoof, and Comfort of the Individual:
subjected still to the great Law and Purpose of our Being. Our Reason, we
submit to the Divine Will; and our Affections to our Reason. Behold the Scale
of our obedience; and Universal Dictates of our Reasonable Nature.

In These Particulars: God, as the Sovereign Prince of the whole World, binds
all Mankind alike, with an unlimited, and undistinguishing Authority. Our
Souls, the Almighty Governs by his Immediate and blessed self; our Bodies he
referrs to his Deputies; whom in all sensible and common Actions we are to obey
as Gods Commissioners.

We come now to the point that moves the great dispute: -- our state of Liberty
in matters of themselves indifferent.

In This Question we are to consider, that every man is born first, for the
Public; Next, for Himself.

He that Rates any thing except his Soul, above the common Benefit of Social
Nature, is an ill Member of the Universe.

While every man consults his own Particular, how easily he is drawn to Think
That Fair, which he finds Pleasant! Employing much more cunning to persuade
himself, that what he Likes, is Lawful, then strictly to Examine it; (for fear
it should prove otherwise.)

Are we not All made of the same Lump; -- ( -- born to the same Ends: Objection.
-- Dignified with the same Reason? -- What is it Then, but an Injurious
Custom, and oppression, that puts the Difference betwixt Governors, and
Slaves? That prostitutes so many Millions of Freeborn Christians, to the
Command of any Single Person?

These are the Stirrings and Debates of Mutinous and unadvised Natures, Sol.
They scan but the one half; and that, the Grosser too; the vulgar part of the
Question. Can the whole Perish; and the Parts' escape? Can any thing be
beneficial to Particular Persons, that is Destructive to the Community? what by
one Violence they Get, they Lose by Another; and in exchange for the Soft,
Honest bonds of Order and Obedience, they leap into a Sinful, Shameful Slavery
Was not the late War undertaken, (in Show) for This Imaginary Freedom? and
yet, at last, what was the Event, but Tyranny, and Bondage? not by miscarriage
neither, but by a Regular Fatality, and Train of Causes.

Do we not find men's Minds, and Humors as various as their Complexions, or
their Faces? Every man likes his own way best; Pleads for his own opinion.
There Is no such thing as right or wrong in things Indifferent, but as they are
circumstanc'd by Application: and here is the very Case of our Reformers.

Some are for Kneeling at the Eucharist; peevish Liberty.
others for Standing, Sitting, or the like; They differ too about the manner of
Receiving. Capricious Holiness! Shall That confused, and Promisenous use of
several Forms, and Postures, pass for a Decency in the Lords house, and on so
solemn an occasion, which at a Private Table would be exploded for a gross and
ridiculous Immorality? The Church, for Order sake, and Uniformity, enjoins one
form, or Posture; This, or That, it is Indifferent; where lies the Conscience of
Refusing? Should but the Rubric say -- Let the Minister enter at the Church
Door: -- Would not our Teachers make it a piece of Conscience to creep in at
the Window? Marque it, it is That; -- That -- That Is the Business; -- It Is
POWER they Tug for, and to bring MONARCHY under the Yoke of PRESBYTERY.

They argue the Expedience of granting Liberty, because forsooth of the
differing humors of Applying it. The strongest Reason in the World against
them. For in this State of Disagreement, take but away that Limiting, and
Binding Rule that prescribes Uniformity; what other Consequence can be
expected, from letting loose so many wild, and Petulant Passions; so many
Raging, and dividing Factions, but Tumult, Heresy, and Rebellion?

Page 12. Reas. 13.
IF any shall make men disobedient, by imposing things unnecessary, which they
know are by learned, pious, peaceable men, esteemed sins against the Lord, and
then shall thus heavily afflict them for the disobedience, which they may
easily cure by the forbearance of those impositions; let not our souls come
into their secret, nor our honor be united to their Assembly: If they shall
smite or cast out a supposed Schismatic, and Christ shall find an able Helper,
peaceable Minister, or other Christian, wounded, or mourning, out of doors, let
us not be found among the Actors.

NOTE. XIX.
Why did not the Reformers rather say? If any shall make people Rebellious, by
preaching down Obedience to Authority, as a thing unnecessary: or abuse the
simple, by calling Good, Evil; and Evil, Good: -- Let not our souls -- ]
Whether is greater, the boldness of these Teachers, or the blindness of their
Disciples? Does not this way of Reasoning, root up all Government? And has not
the Practice of These men made good the worst that any man can say, or think of
their Design? Were they New Folks yet, a man might find some Charity, for the
soft-headed Gulls that believe them: but to be Twice caught in the same Trap;
Twice fooled by the same Persons, were an unpardonable sottishness.

Let the three Kingdoms cast up the Accounts of the late War, The Reformers
Method.
and see what they have gained clear, by the Reformation. These very Gentlemen
were one and twenty years ago upon this Argument; infinitely troubled about
Additions to God's Worship, in things unnecessary; Oaths of Subscription, etc.
-- To obviate these crying evils, they set to work a Preaching Ministry, and
Lectur'd up the people into a Gospel-frame, (for that is the Knack) of
Disobedience. The People heard their Prayers; (for 'twas to them they prayed)
Meroz was cursed, and cursed -- and the right Reverend Matrons sent forth their
Bodkins and their Thimbles to help the Lord against the Mighty.

In fine; The Cause prosper'd under their Ministry, and Things unnecessary
were taken away; that is, King, Bishops, the Law of the Land, the Liberty of
the Subject: -- the Heads and Fortunes of his Majesty's best Friends.

Some Oaths that were of exceeding scandal and burden to weak consciences
were taken away too, or rather exchanged, for others less offensive, to the
sense of the Learned, Pious, and Peaceable men, they speak of. As for instance;
in stead of that Abominable Oath of Canonical Obedience to the Bishop and his
Successors, (in omnibus Licitis, and honestis) in all things lawful and honest;
A Covenant was introduced of Combination against them. But no man was compelled
to take it neither; for 'twas but losing the capacities of Englishmen; a
Sequestration; -- Rotting in a Gaol, or some such trivial penalty, if they
refused it. Indeed, to serve the King after the taking of it, was a little
dangerous, because of an Article of Aug. 16.1644. declaring, that whosoever
shall voluntarily take up Arms against the Parliament, having taken the
National Covenant, shall die without mercy.

The truth is, the Covenant was somewhat more in Scripture Phrase, and suited
better to the gust of the godly. So for the Positive Oaths of Allegiance and
Supremacy; They gave us Negatives; still moved by tenderness of Conscience:
They made a scruple forsooth, of swearing with Us to serve the King; but they
made none of forcing Oaths against him. To make an end; The late Presbyterian
Rebellion has cost the three Kingdoms at least fourscore millions of Treasure,
besides Souls and Bodies; and now they are hammering of the Nation into another.

They talk of Conscience: so Peter's, their fellow laborer, was a man of
conscience; was he not? the foulest part of whose lewd life, was That wherein
they wrought in common fellowship. In short; the Presbyterians bound and
prostituted the Virgin, and the Independents were the Ravishers.

These drops are sharper, than in any other case would stand with Modesty: but
they are Truths, so timely, and so needful for the Public, that they shall
out, what ere they cost me.

What do these Creatures keep a coil with Sin for? that Act as if there were no
God; and yet they talk, as if they thought of nothing else. Are not their
Contradictions upon Record? has not the Nation, in all Quarters, the witnesses
of their very Tongues and Pens against them? Was ever any Tyranny so barbarous,
as what these people exercised over the consciences of their fellow subjects,
and against the Government which they had sworn to preserve? Yet now, when the
Authority requires Obedience; the learned pious men are taken of a sudden with
strange fits of conscience: -- FROM SUDDEN DEATH (in the Letany) must be,
forsooth, FROM DYING SVDDENLY; (a most important Scruple!)

Well, but forbearance (they say) cures, and eases them. We do not know, had
the Rebellion of the Angels been once pardoned, what such a mercy might have
wrought upon the Devils. But here we are upon Experiment. After so large an Act
of Grace; -- so flowing and magnificent a Bounty; -- so prone a goodness toward
their whole Party; now to Re-revolt: -- Misereatur Deus!

They are much careful not to take an able Minister for a Schismatic: they
take not half that care to distinguish a Schismatic from an able Minister. If
Christ (they say) should find that able Minister cast out for a Schismatic?
what then, good people? But what (say I) if Christ should find Schismatics
kept in for able Ministers? what then, good Brethren?

Page 12. Reason 14.
[A] MEn have not their understandings at their own command, much less can they
be commanded by others, if they were never so willing to believe all that is
imposed on them to be lawful; they cannot therefore believe it, because they
would, the Intellect being not free.

[B] Few men are obstinate against the opinions that tend to their ease and
advancement in the world, Page 13.
and to save them from being vilifi'd as Schismatics, and undone; and when men
profess before the Lord, that they do impartially study and pray for
knowledge, and would gladly know the will of God at the dearest rate; we must
again say, that those men must prove that they know the Dissenters hearts,
better then they are known to themselves, that expect to be believed by
charitable Christians, when they charge them with wilful ignorance, or
obstinate resisting of the truth.

NOTE. XX.
[A] EXceeding fine and Philosophical. Men cannot believe all that they would
believe; -- and no man is to profess or act against his belief. (that hits it.)

The Reformers cannot believe the Orders of the Church to be Lawful and
Binding: The Intellect not to be forced.
The Church cannot believe the Recusancy of the Reformers to be Reasonable or
Conscientious.

The Reformers cannot believe that they ought to be kept out for Inconformity;
the Church cannot believe that they are to be taken in, unless they conform.

The Reformers take Discipline to be essential to Salvation; the Church thinks
otherwise.

The Reformers cannot but believe the Separatists to be Saints; the Church on
the other side, cannot but belive them to be Schismatics.

So that in fine, if the Church cannot grant, what the Reformers cannot but
ask; Whether shall the Law yield to a Faction, or the Faction to the Law?

[B] Few men are obstinate, Page 13.
etc. -- ] This Objection is already Answered, but I shall add something.

All Popular Attempts upon change of Government, are hazzardous to the
Undertakers; are there therefore no Rebellions? But here is the state of their
Adventure. If the Design takes, and the People Tumult, then are they in at
pleasure, in the head of the Faction. If it miscarries, they have no more to do
but keep their countenance, retire, and grieve -- because of the Ungodly. That
disappointment they nickname, -- A suffering for the Gospel: -- a Persecution:
and in that shape, they get more by private Collections, then many an honester
man does by a good Benefice. Beside: They are bold upon a confidence in the
King's Lenity.

They pray to be informed, they say.] That was Scot's Plea, concerning the
Murder of the late King; and may be any man's by the same equity, that shall
be pleased to call it Conscience, to do as much again. Now for the knowledge of
their Hearts, (the last thing they insist upon) we will follow the Scripture-rule:
-- Know the Tree by its Fruits: -- measure their Faith by their Works: --

Judge of their Fidelity, by their breach of Vows; of their Honesty, by their
breach of Articles; of their Scruples, by their Sacrilege; of their Loyalty, by
their persecution of their Sovereign; of their Tenderness, by their deliberate
Murders; and, in fine, of all their pretended Virtues, by their contradicting
Impieties.

Page 13. Reas. 15.
WE crave leave to ask, whether you do not your selves in some things mistake,
or may not do so for ought you know? and whether your understandings are not
still imperfect, and all men differ not in some opinion or other? And if you
may mistake in any thing, may it not be in as great things as these? Can it be
expected, that we should all be past erring about the smallest Ceremonies and
Circumstances of Worship? And then, should not the consciousness of your own
infirmjty, provoke you rather to compassionate humane frailty, than to cast out
your Brethren, for as small failings as your own?

NOTE. XXI.
THis is but loosely argued: to Reason from an universal Fallibility, to an
universal Toleration. Because all men may commit errors, therefore all errors
must be suffered. The Law respects common equity, and politic convenience; not
the degrees of Wisdom or Folly in the Transgressors of it. If Fools were
priviledg'd, all Knaves would plead Ignorance. There may be subsequent
allowances in favor of misguided Understandings, but they are of Charity, and
Relaxation, not of strict Justice.

All stated Laws (better or worse, no matter) if they are not simply wicked,
are obliging: and to correct a public Sanction, by a private Hand, is but to
mend a Misadvice by a Rebellion.

This they concede, that All may err: Then they themselves are not Infallible:
so that the Competition rests betwixt the Law and the Reformers. But now, to
what we are sure of.

There are some cases wherein a Subject must not obey his Prince; but I defy
the world to show me any, wherein he may Resist him. That were to say, A
Subject is no Subject. To say, he may be Su'd, makes nothing; That Law which
warrants the Compleynant is virtually the King.

Again; That which betwixt Man and Man, were a fair Rule, holds no proportion
betwixt a Personal Weakness, and a Public Inconvenience. The giving way to
Clamours of this impetuous and froward nature, cost the late King his life. To
say more, were to prejudge my Betters; let this suffice.

PUt your selves in their case, Page 14. Reas. 16.
and suppose that you had studied, conferred and prayed, and done your best to
know, whether God would have you to be Re-ordained, to use these Forms or
Ceremonies, or Subscriptions or not? and having done all, you think that God
would be displeased if you should use them, would you then be used your selves,
as your dissenting Brethren are now used, or are like to be; love them as your
selves, and we will crave no further favor for them.

NOTE. XXII.
THis we call laying of the Matter home to a Man: -- Make it your own Case.
Good.

Do as ye would be done by.
Whose Case did these Reformers make it, when they stripped all men to their
Shirts, whose Consciences could not submit to their Rebellious Leagues of
Extirpation, and Directorian Fopperies? Would they have been Content,
Themselves, to have been turned out of their Livings, because they could not
play the Renegado's; to have been muzzled up in Dungeons; -- debarred the
Common Benefits of Humane Life: -- Not suffered to Officiate as Private
Chaplains; -- No, nor so much as teach a petty School; -- nor enter into any
honest Employment, which their Ingenious malice foresaw might give The
Persecuted Wretches Bread.

Is This according to the Rule? Do as you would be done by. There were no
Superstitious Impositions, at That Time; but matters went as they would have
them. They Ordered every thing Themselves; and the best Choice an honest man
had left him, was Job's upon the Dunghill.

It was the Pulpit too, that gave Fire to the Train; -- that warranted the
Treason, and covered Murder with a Gloss of Justice. Briefly; a Reformation
was the Cry of the Design, and see the Issue of it.

And yet Do as you would be done by, is Their Plea, that did all This. Far be
it from us however to imagine that their abuse of Justice should overthrow
their Title to it; or that the pravity of Man should frustrate the Eternal
Virtue of a Decree of God, and Nature. We'll make Their Case our own then; and
Reason with them, upon their own Principles.

Do as you would be done by; say they to us: Do as ye would be done by; say We
to Them. Would you be willing to be thus Imposed upon? says a Private Person:
Would you be willing to be thus contemned? says the Magistrate. Yes, if (I
commanded things unlawful, says the one: or if I were a Schismatic says the
other.

If upon Search and Prayer for better Light, Object.
we think that God would be displeased with us for doing This or That, we must
not do it. Now, why should others trouble us, only for doing That which in our
places they would do Themselves? This is the Fair state of the Question.

We are to Note here, that Words are not the certain Evidences of our Thoughts;
Sol.
and that our Charity is never so tied up, as to be barred advice with Reason.
Now others are to deal with Us, according to the Rules of what things
rationally seem to Them, not strictly (peradventure) what they are. As Thus; A
common Liar tells a Truth; it may be so; yet I Am not bound to venture any thing
upon his Story. The first Profession a man makes; -- in Charity, I Will Credit;
yet still in Prudence I Will secure my self, in case I prove mistaken. But People
that Break often, where they may keep their Words* that by prepense Contrivance
have formerly strewn their way with Oily Language, to deadly Ends: These, by
the general Dictate of Common Reason, I may suspect, and which is more, I ought
to do it, and to be wary of them.

Does not our Blessed Savior himself bid us, BEWARE of the Leven of the
Pharisees which is HYPOCRISY? -- Those that Tithe Mint and Cummin, and neglect
Judgment Mercy, and Fidelity: -- That streyn at a Gnat, and Swallow a Camel:
-- That are Fair outwardly, and Rotten within; -- and under color of long
Prayers, that devour Widows houses.

Do not Pharisee, and Puritan begin with a Letter? Is not this Character most
bitterly like the humor of the men we wot of?

Further; it is manifest from this Caution, that we are not bound to think all
People Godly, that call themselves so, nor to trust all appearances of
Holiness; but we are soberly to reduce our Judgments to the Standard of
Discourse and Reason. They must deny the Bible, that refuse us This; and now,
suppose the Table's turned.

The Presbyterians case put.
We told the World, that we were afraid of Popery; and that our Consciences
could not submit to Ceremonies; under which color we entered into a Covenant,
which in pretense was to Reform the Church, and to Establish the King. We
destroyed Both, by virtue of That Freedom, which we seemed only to desire in
order to our Souls. The Son of that Prince whom we ruined, is now by
Providence, and Hereditary Right, placed on his Fathers Throne. Our Consciences
are once again Sick of the Old Scruples; and cannot down with Forms, and
Ceremonies. Shall we be laid aside now for our Consciences?

Yes certainly, we must be laid aside, unless we show very good reason, first,
why they should believe us Conscientious, and next, (if truly Scrupulous they
can Imagine us) why they should trust us.

Did not we swear, than an Impulse of Conscience transported us into our first
Engagement? That, all the World knows was a design of Faction, and Sedition;
and that the Pulpit-Theme, was the Decrying of the Kings Negative Voice; and
the Exalting of the Power of Parliaments. (Blaspheming the Authority of the
Nation, by applying it to a Conspiracy in the Two Houses.)

This we have formerly done, and, as yet, given the World no Tokens of
Repentance: We ask the same things over again; and (in good deed) why may not
they suspect to the same Purpose?

May they not argue likewise from our Practices, against our own Demands? Do we
say People may not be compelled? Why did we compel Them then?

Well, but suppose it a pure Case of Conscience, that hinders our Compliance.
Men may think many things unlawsul to be done, that are still as unlawful to be
suffered. We ask that Freedom from the Law, which would in Consequence destroy
the Law: and This we beg, for Conscience. Were it not Breach of Trust in These
to whom the Care of the Public is committed, to gratify a Private Scruple,
by a General Inconvenience? So that their Conscience stands engaged against us.
But it is replied, that we are many Thousands. All are but One, in point of
Conscience; Take them together, they are a Faction.

At last; if we can yield no Reason why they should either Believe, or Trust
us; Where lies the Sadness of our Condition; save only in the Loss of what we
never had? Page 14. Reas. 17.
Unless Thus or so Qualified we must not be admitted.

[A] IT is easier to agree in few things, than upon many, upon great and
certain and necessary things, than upon small uncertain and unnecessary things,
and upon things that God himself has revealed or appointed, than upon things
that proceed from no surer an Original, than the Wit or Will of man. The strict
prohibition of adding to, or diminishing from the things commanded by the
Lawgiver of the Church. Page 16.
Deuteronomy. 12.32.

[B] It Is easy to forsee, how those expressions in men's Sermons, or Prayers,
or familiar Conference, which seem to any misunderstanding, or suspicious, or
malicious bearers, to intimate any sense of sufferings, will be carried to the
ears of Rulers, and represented as a crime. And nature having planted in all
men an unwillingness to suffer, and denied to all men a Love of Calamity, and
necessitated men to feel when they are hurt, and made the Tongue and
Countenance the Index of our sense, these Effects will be unvoydable, while
such Impositions are continued, and while a fear of Sinning will not suffer men
to swallow and digest them, and what wrongs such divisions about Religion will
be to the Kingdom; and to his Majesty, we shall not mention, because our
Governors themselves may better understand it.

Page. 16.
[C] What universal ease, and peace, and joy would be the fruits of that happy
unity and concord which the reasonable forbearances which we humbly petition
for, would certainly produce* how comfortable would our Ministerial labors be,
when we had no such temptations, burdens or disquietments.

[D] It must be the Primitive Simplicity of Faith, Worship, and Discipline,
that must restore the Primitive Charity, Unity, and Peace, and make the
multitude of Believers to be of one heart, and of one Soul, and to converse
with gladness and Singleness of heart, as having all things common, Act. 4.32.
and 2.46. No such things as our controverted Impositions; were then made
necessary to the unity and concord of the Members of the Church.

NOTE. XXIII.
[A] IT is not good to make Little matters seem Great, and Great small: -- to
make less difficulty of Doing what God h'as directly forbidden, then of
complying with what he has not expressly commanded. Observe here a Text most
miserably forced. What-thing-soever I command you, observe to do it: A Text
wrested.
thou shall not add thereto, nor diminish from it. Deuteronomy. 12.32.] which our new
Scholiasts render thus. Do nothing but what God commands, even where God
commands nothing at all. Does not [ what-thing-soever I command: Observe to do
it.] imply that some things there are which God does not comcommand; and that
in those Cases we are at Liberty? (the [ Observe] waiting upon the particular
thing Commanded.)

[B] It Is easy to foresee, etc. -- ] Our Reformers foresight is in this
place, an Almanac for the last year. The Poison of their Sermons, Prayers, and
Conferences has been already reported to the Ears of Rulers, -- by hearers, not
malicious neither; but grieved, to see the Pulpits filled with Faction,
Ignorance, and Scandal; and to hear only Hortatives to Tumult; Defiances, and
Alarums, instead of Evangelical and healing Comforts.

But these (effects they tell us) will be unavoidable, while such Impositions
are continued.

Nay rather, while such Freedom is allowed. Do these men Preach, and yet
complain of a Restraint? They cannot swallow and digest, etc. -- ] Yes,
Sequestered Livings they can, not Ceremonies. In truth the One is a little hard
to go down, and the Other is as hard to come up.

If these Divisions threaten wrong to the Kingdom, and his Majesty, (as they
say they do) a timely order would be taken with the Dividers.

[ C] To sweeten the last Menace, where they tell us the hazard of not
complying with the Faction; We are now blessed with a view of their Land of
Promise. What universal peace and ease, etc. -- the giving them all they ask
would certainly procure. [Indeed I suppose the Nation might be at Unity That
way; The Reformers Unity.
for betwixt Hanging and Transplanting all men of Differing opinions, there
must needs ensue a pleasant state of Concord.

Less rigor cannot reasonably be expected by any man, that either considers
the Faction; since it first got footing in the world; or the late practices of
these very people. Concerning their extraction and proceedings, I have given
some account in my Holy Cheat: Of their late practices enough is said too;
only a word touching the Quality and Temper of our Reformers. Which word [
Reformers] must not be understood singly of those that published this spurious
Liturgy, and bold Petition: but likewise of their aiding and consociate
Brethren.

The foulness of the late War is notorious: and the King's Mercy toward the
Conspirators surpasses all example: in which number, I reckon the revolting and
intruding Churchmen, as Criminals of the first Magnitude. Of these, some keep
their Benefices, others are laid aside, in right perhaps of the due Incumbent,
or for want of Orders. Those that continue, help the rest, -- set up their
Lectures, -- call in the ejected and the deep-mouthed Brethren to their
assistance: -- and now they are in, full cry against Church Government, and
Persecution.

In fine; out of the whole Crew of these Reformers, let any man produce one
single person that ever was a friend to the late King. I Will show him diverse of
his bitter enemies; nay, some of those (yet public Preachers) in the City,
that pressed the Murder of our late blessed Sovereign, rankly and openly in
the very Pulpit.

Now let the world judge, what these people mean by Reformation.

But we are told, that forbearances will quiet them. They are no Presbyterians
then: for ever since they have had a being, kindness has made them worse: and
the very Moment of his Majesty's Return, was watched by their impatient and
seditious Libels.

[ D] What an Amphibion is a designing Presbyterian! a Levelling Prelate: -- We
have here a Complement to New England from the Kirk of Scotland: -- All things
in common, according to the Primitive Discipline.

That the Primitive simplicity of Faith and Worship, (as Worship may be taken)
is necessary to Christian Unity; I think no man questions, that writes
Christian: but to bring Discipline up to an Essential, is (under favor) a
Religious Soloecism: or rather, an Audacious Imputation upon all Churches, that
ever yet embraced Christianity.

It Is in effect, a Feather plucked from the Sovereignty: -- a conscientious
encroachment upon the Supreme Power: -- for by this Knack, all civil Causes are
hooked in within Cognizance of the Consistory, and found within the Purlues of
their Discipline.

As their Ambition is remarkable in all Cases, so is their Purpose most
observable in this before us. What signifies the necessity of Their Discipline
to Our Peace? but that Bishops must down, and Presbytery up, or we shall have
no Quiet with them.

For a Come-off; All things must be done with singleness of heart (they tell
us) as having all things in common, Act. 2.46.4.32. (This is a morfel for the
Independents) No such Things as our controverted Inquisitions were then made
necessary, etc.]

Never had men worse luck with Texts. A subtle Inference.
Mark but these two Quotations now, and then admire the subtle Inference from
them. No Impositions, Then; and consequently, none must be Now. Would our
Reformers have had the Church ordered, before it was gathered? Rules for
Church Government established, before Christianity it self was acknowledged.

The Apostles had but newly received the holy Ghost; and to convince the Jews
of the Divinity of that JESUS whom they had crucified, was their first Business
and Commission: Faith and Repentance was their Theme: -- the Question, -- Men
and Brethren, What shall we do? (not how) Then Peter said unto them, Repent,
and be Baptized: -- Act 2.37, 38.] Then (says the Text) they that gladly
received his word were Baptized -- and they continued steadfastly in the
Apostles Doctrine, and Fellowship, and in breaking of bread, and in prayers,
verse. 42.]

If the Apostles had been Presbyterians, they would perhaps have begun with
their holy Discipline, and laid the Sacraments aside to be considered of at
leisure. Had it not been a most preposterous course, to have directed the
manner of our Worship, before they had laid the foundation of our Faith?

It Is said again, chap. 4. verse. 32. that the multitude of them that believed,
were of one heart, and of one soul.] And here is no mention of Impositions
neither; whence they infer the non-necessity of Impositions, as to Concord.
When these Gentlemen shall have proved Impositions unnecessary, they have a
long way yet to go, ere they shall be able to prove them unlawful. But, till
they have done the former, we shall persist in our opinion of their necessity;
at least conveniential, not to Salvation, but to Unity.

It must be noted, that this unanimity in the believing multititude, was a
miraculous grace. They were all filled with the holy Ghost: (says the verse
next antecedent) and the connection fairly implies this wonderful Agreement, to
be the imm^diate working of that blessed Inspiration. [We find a while after,
when the number of the Disciples was multiplied, there arose a murmuring of the
Grecians against the Hebrews, because their widows were neglected in the daily
ministration. Chap. 6. verse. 1.] (The bond of Universal Unity begins to slacken
already.) This Difference gave occasion to the institution of Deacons.

Church Officers being already appointed; -- Apostles and Presbyters by our
Savior himself, and Deacons by the Apostles: we come now to Church-Orders: or,
(in the holy Language) Impositions. Concerning which, one General serves for
All: Let every thing be done decently and in order. But the determination of
that Decency is left to the Church.

Page 18. Reas. 18.
THe common Adversaries of our Religion, and of the King and Kingdom, will
rejoice to see us weakened by our Divisions, and employed in afflicting or
censuring one another, and to see so many able Ministers laid aside, that might
do much displeasure to Satan, by the weakening of his Kingdom, and by promoting
the Gospel and Kingdom of the Lord.

NOTE. XXV.
SInce our Reformers have not over much Modesty, I wish they had a little more
Argument: that a man might either with Charity believe them in a mistake, or
with Honor show them the way out of it.

The common Enemy.
Who are the common Adversaries now? The King and his Party were wont to be the
common Enemies. But here they talk of Adversaries to our Religion, the King and
Kingdom. They may intend the King still, for ought I know. They charged his
Royal Father with Popery, and yet They themselves brought him to the Scaffold,
because he would not set it up under (forsooth) the disguise of Presbytery.
They declared him likewise an enemy to King and Kingdom, by making his Person
an enemy to his Authority, as they distinguished them. Briefly, who ever they
are that hate us, they may well rejoice to see us thus Divided, but woe be to
them from whom these Divisions come. It Is not for Subjects to expostulate with
Rulers: -- to start from the Laws, and bid Authority follow them.

Bishop Tailor says very well concerning Scandal, Great Exemplar. Page 447.
[Before the Law be made, the Superior must comply with the Subject: After it
is made, the Subject must comply with the Law.] The latter is our case, and the
Imposition lies on the other side; upon the Law, not upon the People.

But the great pity is, so many able Ministers are laid aside.] Truly, as to
the ability of good lungs, loud, and long talking, we will not contend with them.
But that they are such Champions for the Lord's Kingdom, against Satan's, is
more then, without better proof, we are bound to credit. However, they had
better have a tug with Satan here, than hereafter; but they must go another way
to work then; for, to destroy the Kingdoms of this world without commission, is
(without controversy) to advance the Kingdom of Darkness, and to do the Devil
a special piece of service.

IF what you study for, be indeed of God, Page 18. Reas. 19.
this course of unmercifull imposition, is the greatest wrong to it, that you
can easily he drawn to, unawares; while so many truly fearing God, are cast
out, or trodden down, and tempted to think ill of that which themselves and the
Church thus suffer by, and when so many of the worst befriend this way, because
it gratifieth them, it tends to make your cause judged of, according to the
quality of its friends and adversaries. And how great a hand this very thing
has had already in the dislike of that is befallen Diocesans, Ceremonies and
the Liturgy, is a thing too generally known to need proof.

NOTE. XXVI.
MEthinks the Sir John's grow a little pernicacious, (as our Author has it) [
unmerciful Impositions.] What? no more Covenants I hope. But it is at [
unawares] they say. That helps the matter. It seems, the Bishops do they know
not what, a Jolly Garb for a Petition, This.

But see; the Godly men are not only Oppressed, but Tempted to think ill of
what they suffer by. They are clearly for Ruling with the Ungodly, Psalm. 37.36.
and Flourishing like a Green Bay Tree;] but they do not love to think of being
cast down with them from Slippery places, Psalm. 73.17.
and destroyed; -- of Consuming, Perishing, and Coming to a Fearful End.] of
suffering their most certain Fate; Psalm. 37.39.
[ to be rooted out at last.]

As nothing can be clearer, then that their Cries are Causeless; so is it not
less Evident, that were they Truths, their Practices are yet Unchristian: and
that they are not the men [ truly fearing God] they would be thought to be.
Beware of False Prophets (says our Savior) that come to you in Sheeps
Clothing, Mat. 7.15, 16.
but Inwardly they are Ravening Wolves. Ye shall know them by their Fruits]
Here Is our Authority, How to judge of men's hearts
to judge the Hearts of men by their Notorious Actions.

Will they be tempted to think Ill, of what they suffer by? So may the
Traitor, of the Law that makes Rebellion Capital: -- The Plunderer, of the
Command that says thou shall not Steal: and in like manner, all Offenders may
Quarrel with that Constitution which Orders, and Directs their Punishment. Yet
we all know the Fault lies in the Malefactor, not in the Appointment. At this
rate, they may Cavil at Divine Justice, and disclaim Christianity it self, if
they come once to suffer by it.

Good manners they have shak'd hands with already; for they tell us, that so
many of the worst, befriend this [Ceremonial] way; -- That it tends to make the
Cause judged of, according to the Quality of its Friends, and Adversaries.]

It were a good Deed to tell this Faction, Exact Collect. Page 494. Note.
as they told the Late King; That the Suggestion is as false as the Father of
Lies can Invent:] Sure these Ill-Tutour'd Pedants know that his Sacred Majesty
is a Friend to this way: The Law, Antiquity, and Reason. But since they offer
to try the merits of the Cause by the Quality of its Friends, and Enemies: We
shall accept the Challenge; and let them thank Themselves, if they come off
with the worst on it: and first we'll take a brief view of the Opposers.

A Rabble of People, next door to Brutes, for Knowledge, The Bishops
adversaries.
and Morality, began the Action. These were Instructed and prepared by a Cabale
of Factious Lords and Commoners, (and by Their Instruments) to be afraid of
Popery, and Invasions; Bawle against Bishops, and Evil Counselors; and
finally, these Virtuous Sages were made the Judges, and Reformers of Laws, and
Manners.

In Time these Ostlers, Tinkers, Ragg-men, Cobblers, Draymen, Thimble-makers,
etc. -- Grew up to be our Governors. So much for the Rise, Fortune, and
Extraction of the first visible undertakers. Now for their Honesty.

They Plundered, Murdered, Rebelled, Forswore Themselves.

Mean while, the Mock-Priests, in their Pulpits proclaimed this Medly, for the
Godly Party; Wedded their Cause; took in all sorts of Heretics into the
Combination. Defamed the King: Enflamed the People against the Government; Cast
out the B'shops; -- Swore fast and Loose; and Preached three Kingdoms into
Blood and Ruin.

These were the Tender Consciences* The Holy Thousands.
-- The Holy Thousands; -- and the men truly fearing God, that were cast out,
and trodden down, etc. -- This is no General Charge, for I allow, that many
well-meaning but mis-guided Persons sided with the Party* I speak of Those
Members that stuck to the Work; and of those Ministers that fluck to Them: to
show the World what sort of Persons our Challenging Divines are now pleading
for, under the Notion of People grieved because of Universal Impositions.

Methinks Those that were In, Before, and have their Pardons, should be very
tender, how they engage the Nation in New Broils: Especially against That
Prince, whose Single, and Pure Grace it is, that puts a Difference betwixt the
Heads They wear, and Those upon the City-Gates; Whosoever is offended at This
plain Freedom, let him blame Those that have so spitefully, and so
unseasonably put this comparison of Parties to the Question.

The friends of Episcopacy.
We have in Gross, laid open the Opposers of our Church Government, Rites and
Ceremonies. Their Friends are briefly Those: The Warrant of Holy Writ: The
universal Practice of Ordering the Externals of Worship: -- The Establishment
of the Particulars, by the Consent of the People: -- The Regular Injunctions of
a Lawful Authority: -- and in fine, Every Person that loves the Religion, Law,
Honor, Peace, and Freedom of the English Nation.

Once more for All; what is the Kings Person to the Church-Ceremonies? Yet the
same Covenant, and the same Persons, destroyed Both. Which shows, (as I have
often said) that the Design is Power, not Conscience; and that the Friends and
Enemies to the Church; are the same Thing respectively to his Majesty.

Touching the Dislike, which (they say) is befallen Diocesans, etc. -- ] They
tell us here a Truth, which they Themselves have well-nigh totally procured:
for to infame the Hierarchy, and blast the Constitutions of the Church, has
been (ever since the Kings Return) the better half of their Business in the
Pulpit. (Not forgetting His Majesty neither.)

[A] A Weak Brother that makes an unnecessary difference of meats and days;
is not to be cast out, Page 18. Reas. 20.
but so to be received and not to be troubled with such doubtful disputation.

[B] Impositions are not indifferent, Page 19.
in the judgment of dissenters, though they be so in yours.

[C] We beseech you therefore plead not Law against us, when our request is
that you will join with us in Petitioning, to his Majesty and the Parliament,
that there may be no such Law.

[D] The cause of the Non-conformists has been long ago stated, at the
Troubles at Franckford, and having continued still the same, you have no reason
to suspect them of any considerable Change.

[E] We have now faithfully, and not unnecessarily, or unreasonably, spread
before you, the Case of thousands of the upright of the Land: We have proposed
honest and safe remedies for our present Distraction, and the preventing of the
feared increase.

NOTE. XXVII.
[A] Would our Divines persuade us that the Case of Meats, and Days, whereof
the Apostle speaks, is of the same nature with That of Ceremonies, which we are
now Debating, or that a weak Brother is not to be distinguished from a Peevish?
See how perverse and vast a difference lies betwixt them: but right or wrong,
if it be Colored for the Multitude, no matter for the Reason.

Under the Law, God himself put a Difference betwixt Meats; and betwixt Days:
which Difference ceased, upon the coming of our Blessed Savior. Some thought
it still, a point of Conscience to observe the Law; and These the Apostle calls
weak Brethren: Others again, that knew the Law was abrogate, quitted those
Scruples, and of These it is that St. Paul says; Romans 15.1.
we which are strong, ought to bear the Infirmities of the weak.

Now Marque; That which was formerly imposed, is now become a thing
Indifferent. That is; Indifferent to the strong and knowing: not so to Those
that were not yet convinced of the determination of the former Tie and Duty:
and This is the true ground of the Apostles Tenderness here concerning Scandal.
Romans 14.15.
Destroy not him with thy Meat, for whom Christ Dyed.] See how their Case now
matches ours.

They durst not Eat, because they knew that once they were bound; and they did
not know likewise that they were now discharged.

Let our Reformers show as much for Ceremonies: Either that Humane Impositions
were ever forbidden, or that Those, practiced in our Church, are in themselves
unlawful.

And yet These men are not so totally Indifferent, as they appear to be,
concerning Meats, and Days. Was ever any thing more sourly Superstitious, then
their Monthly-Fast? Those Days, wherein the Church enjoins Abstinence, they
choose, to Feast upon: and Sunday is the only Day for Humiliation.

[B] Laws are composed for the Public welfare, not for the Humors of
Particular Persons: and shortly; They that do not like the Law where they Live;
should do well to search the World, for a Law they like.

Plautus.
Si non ubi sedeas locus est, est ubi ambules. [C] We come now to a fine
Request; That is, they desire the Bishops to Petition the King to establish
Presbytery; (for That is directly the Effect of it) to destroy the Act of
Conformity. Do not people understand, that when Laws are formed to a Compliance
with Fancy and Humor, there is no other Law but Humor.

They tell us hitherto what they would not have, see now what it is they would
have.

[D] The cause of the Non-conformists (they say) is long since stated at
Frankford.]

Is that it then they would be at? Yes, that, or thereabouts. [We have no
reason to suspect them of any considerable change,] they tell us. Truly, nor
much to thank them for sticking there. But the late War is the best Measure of
their Aims; and yet they did no more there, than they attempt every where: for
I defy the world to show me one story, where ever That Faction was quiet,
unless they governed. But they have confessed enough; we are to look at
Frankford for their model: and by the spirit of the Reformers There, to judge
of These Here.

In the days of Edw. 6th. this Island first began to be leavened with
Presbytery: through the particular craft and instigation of Calvin, whose late
success and absolute dominion at Geneva, gave no small pretense and
encouragement to an allowance of his Discipline. While Discontents were
gathering, That Prince dies, leaving the Government to Queen Mary, in whose
Reign, diverse of the Reformed persuasion fled into Germany.

No sooner were they met at Frankford, but Calvin's model was there ready to
bid them welcome.

Some liked it but too well; and to make easier way for it, made it their first
work to disgrace the English Forms; just as our Consistorian Puritans do at
this day. Knox, Whitingham, and some others of the Geneva-humor, made a Cull of
the particulars they faulted, and sent them to Calvin for his opinion: whose
Answer was, That there were many tolerable Fopperies in the English Liturgy.
This Letter was made public, and a great furtherance to the ensuing Breach;
which ended yet in the establishment of the English way at Frankford, the
Calvinizers flying off to Geneva. So that Their Reformers and Ours agree; Both,
Enemies to the English Ceremonies, and Common Prayer. The cause the same too;
both are friends to the Geneva Platform. Nay, they agree in Practice likewise.

That Faction cast off their PRINCE and BISHOP there; ours did as much for KING
and BISHOPS here.

If those Nonconformists, and These are of a judgment; (as our Divines unwarily
imply) we shall best read what these men think and mean, srom what those said
and did, and rather proceed upon their own confession, than summon the three
Kingdoms to bear witness of their Actions.

We shall begin with Knox, (one of the intermedlers) whose Letters and
Discourses are sufficient to his condemnation, without that History of the
Church of Scotland; of which (though generally ascribed to him) Spotswood
acquits him. History of the Church of Scotl. page 267.


Spotswoods Hist. Scotl. page 136.
In 1559. Willock and Knox were advised with, concerning the discharging the
Queen of her Regency. Willock gave his opinion, That they might justly deprive
her from all Regiment and Authority over them.] Knox followed, and added, That
she ought now to be deprived. Ibid. 137.


Those of most note among the Frankford-sticklers, were Goodman, Whittingham,
and Gilby. See them at large in Bancroft's dangerous Positions: from whence
we will borrow some Collections out of them.

Dangerous Posit. page 35.
If the Magistrates (says Goodman) shall refuse to put Mass-mongers and false
Preachers to death, the people, in seeing it performed, do show that zeal of
God which was commended in Phineas, destroying the Adulterers; and in the
Israelites against the Benjamites.

Now see the men that these Reformers call Mass-mongers and false Preachers.

Ibid. page 61.
The most part of our Ministers (says Gilby) are either Popish Priests, or
Monks, or Friars -- Procters of Antichrist's Inventions: Popish Chapmen, etc.]

Ibid. page 9.
If Kings and Princes refuse to reform Religion, (says Whittingham) the
Inferior Magistrates, or People, by direction of the Ministry, may lawfully,
and ought, if need require, even by Force and Arms, to reform it themselves.

Ibid. page 36.
To the Multitude (says Goodman) a portion of the sword of Justice is
committed: from the which no person, King, Queen, or Emperor, (being an
Idolater) is exempt, he must die the death.

These are the opinions of those Persons whom our Reformers make their Pattern.
How they proceeded, the story of Queen Elizabeth sets forth abundantly; and our
own memories may enform us, how close our Covenanters have followed them.

[E] We have now faithfully, etc.] With what Faith, Reason, or Necessity --
soever the case was spread before the Bishops: we are sure 'twas foully done to
spread the case before the People. But where is the Faith, of taking an Ell for
an Inch: -- of abolishing what they pretend to alter: -- of perverting
Scripture: -- and of putting an Arbitrary Nothing upon the People, instead of a
Set-form?

Where lies the Reason of presenting the Opinions of the Simple, as Arguments
to the Wise: -- of opposing Number to Equity: -- Tumults to Authority: -- and
of pressing his Majesty, to put himself into the power of those very people
that dethroned his Father?

Lastly, where lies the necessity of insisting upon so many variations, as are
already proved to be utterly unnecessary?

Now see the Remedies they offer us* which come to this; They propose to cure
good Order by Confusion. Honest and safe they say they are; and honest and safe
we may believe them; but we must first believe, that there is no Knavery in
Nature: for set men's consciences at liberty once, to think what they please,
their hands will not be long restrained from executing those thinkings. Never
was a general Freedom demanded, but for a particular design: nor was it ever
granted, but the next proposition was Equality.

But they propose it here, it seems, as to prevent the feared enemies of our
distractions.]

Behold a drop fallen from the lips of Prudence it self. Are we in danger
already and shall we be in less, when those we fear are in more power* Either
the Reason's naught or the Design; let them say whether.

APPENDIX.
SO far as open and clear Dealing to their Arguments, or Justice to their
meaning may acquit me, I think I owe them nothing; and yet methinks I Am in
their Debt, unless I match their Twenty Reasons in favor of their
Propositions; with as many against them. And which is more; since it is the
Multitude they Court, I am content their friends shall be my Judges. When I
have done, it is at the Reformers Choice; either by a Reply to show the little
they have to say; or by a more ingenuous Silence, modestly to confess that
they can say Nothing.

TWENTY REASONS AGAINST Their PROPOSITIONS.
First, the Design is Dangerous, as Presbyterian. For I do not find where ever
yet that Government was Settled, but by Conspiracy, and to the Ruin of the
Supreme Magistrate. (With Reverence to the Reformed Churches; whose opinions in
matters of Faith may be Sound, and yet the Extraction of their Discipline,
vicious.)

2. The Proposers of This Peace ( as they call it) were the Promoters of the
Late War: and by those very means did they destroy the Last King, which they
here offer as Beneficial to This.

3. The very Matter of their Proposals, imports a Denial and Usurpation of the
Kings Authority. His Majesty may not prescribe a Set-form of Worship: They
Themselves may for [WEDDED, JOYN'D] etc. -- stamped with the Kings Authority
signify nothing: But change them into MARRIED, CONJOINED, etc.] and the
Reformers Seal to them, They pass for Current.

4. Their Propositions are an utter disclaim of the Episcopal Order: for they
oppose under pretense of Conscience, all Powers or Faculties derivative from
Bishops: as Canonical Obedience, Ordination, Subscription, etc.

5. They Press the King to act against his Declared Conscience: and to condemn
the Blessed Memory of his Father; who Died because he could not Grant, what
they demand now from his Royal Successor.

6. The Ground of their Pretense, is Scandal and Unfitness for the Ministry in
the One Party; Great Holiness, Ability, and Conscience in the Other, which to
allow, were to make Martyrdom, and Loyalty Scandalous; and to give Treason,
Faction, and Hypocrisy, the Credit and Reward of Holiness. ( for That Is the
Difference betwixt those that Ruined the Late King, and Those that Perished for
him, which Two are now the Question.)

7. The very Style, and Manner of the Address, is Menacing, Libellous, and
Mutinous: Menacing, in the Title; [A Petition for PEACE.] That is; no Peace
without a Grant. Libellous, in the way, and purpose of it. A Nameless, Close,
and Defamatory Invective against Bishops. Mutinous in the Scope, and
Consequence; it is an Appeal from the Supreme Power to the People.

8. The Liberty they ask, Extends to any thing they shall call Conscience: and
Then what Crimes, and Villainies shall not pass for Virtues, when every
Malefactor is his own Judge?

9. To give these People what they ask is to allow the Reason of their asking:
and at once to reward one Injury, and justify another.

10. They plead the Peoples Cause without Commission; and what the Church
styles Schism, They term Religion; That, Christian Liberty, which the Law
calls Treason.

11. It Is dangerous trusting of common Vow-breakers, and most unequal to
challenge absolute Liberty, and allow none.

12. The grant of one unreasonable Request, begets another, till at the last,
it becomes unsafe to deny, by having parted with too much.

13. The late War began with a pretense of Reformation: and with Reformation
are we now beginning again. It may very well be, that the same persons may
intend the same things, by the same terms, and that they still propose to act
by the same conscience: which if they do, in common equity and prudence, they
are not to be admitted. If otherwise, till their Confession is as public as
their Fault, they are not to be believed. (I speak of Churchmen more
especially.)

14. If really the common people be disaffected to the Orders of the Church;
surely these Ministers that preached them into these distempers, deserve rather
to be punished, than gratified for so doing. And that is the case. They
themselves first stir up a factious humor in the Multitude, and then they call
that Conscience, which is nothing else but a misguided Ignorance of their own
procuring.

15. While they pretend to reform bad Laws, they destroy good ones; noy, they
oppose the very scope and benefit of Law it self, common utility and concord:
making their fickle and unquiet fancies, the Rule of that Authority, which
better Reason meant expressly for a curb of our licentious wanderings.

16. Our Reformers place the last Appeal in the People; an excellent
contrivance, to make That Party Judge of every thing, which effectually
understands nothing.

17. Whereas they plead Religion in the case, such a Religion it is, as the
whole Christian world cannot show the fellow on it: rather to justify those
outrages, which even Humanity it self abhors; than to admit those universal
Rights of Government, which all men in society acknowledge, and submit to, but
themselves.

18. A furious Bustle they make with the silly people, for fear of Popery. Let
this be observed, The Church of Rome has gained more English Proselytes (ten
for one) during our Presbyterian Tyranny, than in proportion of time it ever
did under our Bishops. And still we lose; (I would I could not say) with Reason
too: for what is Presbytery, but a more shameful and Intolerable Popery? (But
all persuasions have their more moderate, and their violent Parties.) We talk
of Jesuits; What is a Jesuit, but a Presbyterian Papist? or what a
Presbyterian but a Reformed Jesuit?

19. Their Propositions are an affront to the King, and a snare to the People.
They ask leave to alter the Common Prayer, and they take leave to destroy it.
They offer a new form, and they desire it may be left to the Minister's
discretion which to use; which being granted, the Minister is left still at
liberty to use neither. Thus do they play Fast and Loose with his Majesty;
ensnaring likewise the People with a lamentable pretense, that they cannot
obtain, what in effect no mortal can understand.

20. Let them now get what they ask, and they shall soon take what they please:
for they only desire, that they may do what they list, and then judge of their
own doings. We all know what they have done, and called it Conscience too; so
that their present talk of Conscience, gives us no certainty of what they
intend to do. Wherefore it is safer to refuse than trust them.

Let me be taken still to speak with reverence to Authority: and truly I shall
further yet subject my Reason to my Charity; if any man will but do me the
kindness to show me only one public President, where ever a Presbyterian
Faction, in a contest for Power, and under no necessity, kept faith with any
party.

What were all Articles and Ties of Honor, more then Bulrushes, when they could
gain by breaking them?

How much I loathe these brawling Arguments, I might appeal to the whole
practice of my life, wherein I never yet put Pen to Paper, to any man's
dishonor, that was not a professed enemy to the King: nor have I ever printed
the least syllable, but on a public score.

It Is now high time to end this tedious wrangle, which I must not absolutely
quit, till I have given some Reasons for engaging in it.

First, I am tied by Oath to the discovery of all Conspiracies against his
Majesty, and by the Oath I have taken, I judge this here in question to be a
foul one.

Next, as a Subject, I am bound to do the King all lawful service.

Thirdly, I look upon this Office, as a small Offering to my Country; it is no
great vanity, if I believe some weak enough for me to teach: and it is a truth,
that I as much desire to learn from others.

Fourthly, We are charged with Ignorance and Scandal, (the Presbyterians
Livery) and I would have the world to know, that Those of the Censorious Cut
are not all Saints and Philosophers.

I might add for a Fifth Reason, that general good allowance which my
well-meaning weaknesses have found with the King's Friends: from whose
agreement of opinion, I receive great assurance and encouragement, in my poor
undertakings; and in their Charity much Honor.

But All are not so satisfied: for at This Instant I am informed of several
mean designs upon my Person, Freedom, and Credit.

The first amounts to nothing.

The Next I look upon but as the boiling of some old rancorous Humor against
the King: -- a Dream perchance of forty-four again. For sure no other Persons
will condemn me Now, but those that would have hanged me Then.

As to the Third, I Am least of all sollicitous; for perjured persons are no
proof in Law, and for the rest, I fear them not.

It will be urged perhaps, What has this scribbling Fellow to do with the
public?

I cry ye mercy, Gentlemen. You count it nothing then, after three Prentiships
spent in the Royal Cause, to be bespattered by those very persons that
overthrew it?

This is the course of your Implacable Distempers: The Cavaliers are abused,
and the Presbyterians complain.

Give me leave only to offer ye two or three Questions, and I have done. (The
first an old one, but not yet Resolved.)

First, Without Repentance can there be any Salvation? or, without Confession
and Restitution, any Repentance?

Secondly, Why will not you swear to obey Bishops, as well as ye Covenanted to
destroy them? and why may not you as well be forced to take a lawful Oath, as
you forced others to an Unlawful one?

Thirdly, Why is it not as lawful for Bishops to silence Presbyterians, as for
Presbyterians to extirpate Bishops?

One Fool may ask more Questions, than twenty Wise Men can answer.

FINIS.

