A SEASONABLE MEMORIAL IN SOME HISTORICAL NOTES UPON THE LIBERTIES OF THE
PRESS and PULPIT: WITH THE Effects of Popular Petitions, Tumults,
Associations, Impostures, and Disaffected Common* Councils.

To all Good Subjects and True Protestants.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Brom at the Gun in S. Paul's Churchyard, 1680,

A Seasonable MEMORIAL, etc.
THis Title may perhaps give the Reader an expectation, if not a Curiosity to
hear more then the Author is willing to tell him: For it is his intent, only
to expose the Mystery of the Contrivance, of our late Troubles, without the
names of the Persons; and to show that the great work of Destroying three
Kingdoms was only the Project, and Influence of a Private Cabal: and that the
Rebellion it self was excited and carried on by the Force, rather of an
Imposcure then of a Confederacy; The Generality of the people, being
powerfully, and artificially Possessed by the pretended Patrons of our
Religious, and Civil Liberties, that Popery and Arbitrary Power were breaking
in upon us, and the design promoted by the Interest of a Court-Faction; It
could not choose but create in them the tenderest affection imaginable for the
one Party, and as violent a Detestation for the other: Especially considering
that the Person and Authority of the King were as yet Sacred; and uot any man
opened his Mouth, but for his Honor, and safety; the Purity of the Gospel, and
the Peace of the Kingdom. For such was the Reverence the Nation had, at that
time, for the King, and the Law, that the least word against the Government had
spoiled all.

This Double-refining spirit came into the World, even with the Reformation it
self; when by flying from one Extreme to another, it left the Truth in the
middle; which Calvin himself rakes notice of in a Letter to the Protector (in
Ed. 6.) There are two sorts of Seditious men (says he, speaking of the Papists
and the Puritans) and against both these must the sword be drawn; For they
oppose the King, and God himself. It was the same Spirit that moved the
Distemper afterward at Frankfort; and the same still, that made such havoc in
Scotland; and flew in the face of Q. Eliz. her Parliaments and Council: till
she was forced to suppress it by Severity and Rigor. Her successor King James,
after a long Persecution in Scotland, and a fresh attempt upon him at Hampton
Court, by the same Faction: took them up roundly, once for all, and so past the
rest of his days in some measure of quiet. But the Plot succeeded better under
King Charles; when taking advantage of his Majesty's necessitys, with the
Infinite goodness of his Nature, that made him apt to believe the best of all
men, and a Popular mixture in the House of Commons, that was still ready for
their turn, they pursued him with Remonstra^ce upon Remonstrance, through four
Parliaments; and at last by the help of the Act for the continuance of the
Parliament, Tumult^, and that Execrable Libel of Dec. 15. 1641. Entitled, A
Remonstrance of the State of the Kingdom, they accomplished their ends, under
ehe Countenance of the Fifth. By what steps, and Methods they gained their
Point, comes now to be considered.

Their first advance toward a Sedition, The Schism led the way to the Sedition.
was the introducing of a Schism; by distinguishing themselves, under the Name
of the Godly Party, from the rest of the Nation: which they found to be the
safest way of approach, and the most plausible expedient. To this end they
brought in Lecturers over the Heads of Parochial Ministers; whose maintenance
being dependent upon the Faction, made them wholly at the devotion of their
Patrons.

They had their Emissaries also in all Corporations, Emissaries in Corporations
and Populous parts of the Kingdom, that were appointed as Feoffees, to deal
for Impropriations, under the charitable pretext of making a better Provision
for the Ministry. And these were men of public business in the World, as
Clergymen, Lawyers, etc. well known, and made famous for their Zeal, by the
Reputation of so pious an Undertaking. By this project they advanced
considerable Sums of Money; but the Incumbents little the better for it: For
either it stuck to the Feoffees fingers, or it was applied to other uses; and
with the Tithe of a Parsonage in one place, a Lecture was set up in another.

After the Choice of fit Instruments; their next work was to secure them from
any trouble of Church Censures: To which end, they bought some Headship or
other in an University, for some Eminent man of their own way, for the training
up of Novices in their Discipline. Seminaries of Novices.
And then they had a kind of a Practical Seminary at St. Antholines in London;
where their Disciples were in a manner, upon a Probation, for Abilities, and
Affections: and out of this Nursery they furnished most of their New-bought
Impropriations.

These young Emissaries of theirs had their Salary, and were subordinate to a
Classis or Clero-Laicall Consistory, to be transplanted Their Agents were upon
(...) their behavior.
at their pleasure. And yet this Consistory did not so strictly confine
themselves to their Own Members; but upon Letters Testimonial from the
Patriarchs of the Party, that such or such a man was fit for their turn; or had
given proof of his fidelity to the Cause, by undergoing some sentence for
contemning the Orders of the Church, and persisting Obstinately in that
disobedience: to such a man, (I say) in such a Case, they commonly allowed a
Preference. And the better to avoid the danger of the Spiritual Courts, they
made it their business to provide Commissaries of their Own Leaven, where they
had any special Plantation. And Lastly, to make sure of their Agents, that they
should not fall off when they had served their own turns, they kept them only
as Pentioners at pleasure, and liable to be turned out at any time, either if
they cooled in the Holy Cause, or failed of Preaching according to the
direction of the Conclave.

Let it be noted here by the by, that the design and mischief Their Lecturers
are supplied by our Conventicles.
of those Lecturers, when they could nor so well Congregate in Private
Meetings, is, in our days, supplied, if not outdone, by a greater number of
Conventicles; to the very same Intent; and God grant it prove not with the like
effect.

They were as yet but upon the Preparatory to the great work of their Thorough
Reformation; which in plain English was the The People were poisoned from the
Pulpit.
Dissolution of the Government. So that the Pulpits had nothing more to do at
present, then to dispose and accommodate the Humors and Affections of the
People. The Common Subject of the Pulpit (and they all sung the same Song) was
First to irritate the Multitude against Popery: which had been well enough, if
they had not, Secondly, by sly Insinuations, under the Notion of Arminianism,
intimated the Church of England to be leaning that way. By this Artifice the
People were quickly brought into a dislike of the English Communion; and by
degrees into as fierce an Aversion to the One Church, as to the Other. Now
whatsoever the Government Lost, the Faction Gained: And those Pedantique
Levites, that brought so many dreadful Judgments upon this Nation themselves;
were by the Credulous, Tumultuary Rabble cried up and Idolized, as the very
Moses's that stood in the Gap to avert them. Having by this means rendered the
Government Odious, and given some credit to the Schism; their next Instruction
was, to make Proclamation of the Numbers, the quality and the sobriety of the
Persons aggrieved; to possess the one side with a confidence, and the The
boast of their Number bers.
other with an apprehension of their strength! Thousands of Souls ready to
Famish, (they cry) for want of the Bread of Life. How many Insufficient
negligent and scandalous Pastors? How many Congregations destitute of able,
Faithful Teachers; Preaching in season and out of season, and laboring in the
Word? Alas! they dare not consent to any Addition to, or Diminution of Christ's
Worship, or to the Use of the Inventions of Men, in Gods Service. They desire
only the Freedom that Christ and his Apostles have left unto the Churches; and
to serve God according to the Example of the best Reformed Churches abroad.
This is the Case of Thousands of the upright of the Land. Let it be understood,
that the Press all this while kept pace with the Pulpit; only now and then
there started out a Party upon the Forelorn, to make Discoveries, and try the
Temper of the Government. Some escaped, and others were taken, and censured; as
Leighton, Burton, Prin, and Bastwick, who only showed themselves
inconsiderately before their Friends were ready to Second them.

We shall see now how they changed their style with their Condition; and how
their boldness increased with their Interest. They grow upon the Government.
Their grievances at first, were only a dark and a doubtful Prospect of
Popery, and Popish Innovations afar off; and an anxiety of thought for the
calamities that were coming upon Gods People through the corruptions of the
Times. But success opening their Eyes, they are coming now to discover more and
more Popery nearer hand: They find the Churchmen to be Popishly affected; the
Liturgy to be no other then an English Mass Book; the Hierarchy it self and all
the Courts, and Officers depending upon it, to be directly Antichristian: They
charge his Majesty to be Popishly affected, and all that will not renounce him,
to be either flat Papists or Worse, imposing Protestations, Covenants,
Engagements of Confederacy against both King and Church; and Oaths of
Abjuration: as the Tests of a Loyal Protestant: passing an Anathema upon any
man that interposes betwixt their malice, and their Sovereign: They prostitute
the Sacred Function for Money; they suck the blood of Widows and of Orphans; By
violence taking possession of Eighty five Livings at one clap, out of Ninety
seven, within the Walls of London; exposing so many Reverend, and Loyal
Divines with their Families, to the wide World to beg their Bread: They Preach
the People into Murder, Sacrilege, and Rebellion, they pursue a most gracious
Prince to the Scaffold; they animate the Regicides, calling that Execrable
Villainy an Act of Public Justice, and Entitling the Holy Ghost to the Treason.

If this General recital of the Rise and Progress of their Actings be true; the
Reader has here before him the Issue, and the drift of their pretended
Scruples, the Exposition of their Protestations, Covenants, and Designs:
wherein it cannot but be observed how their Consciences widen'd with their
Interests: And this may serve to satisfy any man, whither People are then a
going, They squar their Consciences to their Interests.
when they come to tread in the same steps. But however, for a further support
to the credit of this Memorial, we shall now subjoyn some undeniable Evidences
of the whole matter, out of their Own words and Writings: where we shall find
Mr. Hookers saying made good, in the Preface to his Ecclesiastieal Polity. What
other sequel (says he) can any wise man imagine but this; that having First
resolved that attempts for Discipline without Superi ours are Lawful, it will
fellow in the next place to be disputed what may be attempted against
Superiors. But now to our Proofs, which we shall give you from Point to Point,
and from the very ^abbies of the Schism.

First, As to the CHURCH. Gods people (says Burton) lie under Burton on Psalm.
53. 7. 8. Jun. 20. 1641
Bondage of Conscience in point of Liturgy. 2dly, In bondage of Conscience
under Ceremonies. 3dly. Of Conscience under Discipline. 4ly. Of Conscience
under Government.

How the Presence and Preaching of Christ did scorch and blast those Pa. 21.
Case on Ezra 10. 2, 3. pa. 33.
Cathedral Priests, that Unhallowed Generation of Scribes and Phariees!

Prelacy and Prelaticall Clergy; Priests and Jesuits; Ceremonys and Case on
Isa. 43. 4. pa. 19.
Service Book; Star Chamber and High Commission-Court, were mighty Impediments
in the way of Reformation.

The Scots were necessitated to take up Arms for their just Defense Ward on
Deuteronomy 33. 16. pa. 18.
against Antichrist, and the Popish Priests.

Now to the LITURGY. The Service of the Church of England is now so dressed,
that if a Pope should come and see it, he would Claim it as his own. And again,
what credit is this to our Church, to have such a Form of Public Worship, as
Papists may without offense Join with us in? This we have from the Sm^ymnuans
themselves, E. Call. and Stephen Marshall being part of the Club. Now (says
Bishop Hall) If the Devil confess Christ to be the Son of God, shall I disclaim
the Truth because it passes through a damned mouth? And what did they give us,
in exchange for this Form of Public worship, but a Directory without either
the Decalogue, or a Creed in it?

Let not the pretense of Peace and Unity cool your Fervor, or make Dispu.
against English Popish Ceremonies, pa. 11
you spare to oppose your selves unto those Idle and Idolized Ceremonies,
against which we dispute.

Their next fling is at the HIERARCHY it self. The ^lastring, or palliating of
these Rotten Members, [Bishops] will be a greater Smectymnu^ pa. 58.
dishonor to the Nation, and Church, then their cutting off; and the Personal
Acts of these Sons of Belial being connived at, become National sins.

The Roman Emperors wasted the Saints in Ten several Persecutions, Marshall
before the Commons, Jun. 15. 43. page 25.
but all these were nothing in Comparison of this destroyer. All their Loins
are not so heavy as the little finger of Antichrist.

The Prelacy of England which we swore to extirpate, was that very same Fabric
and mode of Ecclesiastical Regiment, that is in the Antichristian World. And
again; As thy Sword Prelacy has made Case of the Covenant, 1643. pa. 47,
many Women Childlesse, many a faithful Minister Peoplelesse, so thy Mother
Papacy, shall be made Childlesse among Harlots: your Diocesses, Bishoplesse,
and your Sees Lordlesse. Page 51.

Carry on the work still; leave not a Ragg that belongs to Popery: Lay Marsha^
Penegyrique 1643. pa 21
not a bit of the Lords building, with any thing that belongs to Antichrist,
but away with it Root and Branch, Head and Tail, till you can say, now is
Christ set upon his Throne.

Were they not English Prelates that conspired to sell their Brethren Woodcock
on Gen 4. 23. pa. 1^.
into Romish slavery?

It Is not partial Reformation, and Execution of Justice upon some Offenders
will afford us help, except those in Authority extirpate all Achans with
Babylonish Garments; and Orders, Ceremonies, Gestures, Fair^loth, on Josh. 7.
25. pa. 28
be rooted out from amongstus. Trouble they will bring upon us for the time to
come, if they be not now cut off, Page 36.

As to the KING and his PARTY, what a sad thing is it, my Brethren, to see our
King in the head of an Army of Babylonians, Case on (...) (...) 4. pa. 18.
refusing as it were to be called the King of England, Scotland, Ireland, and
choosing rather to be called the King of Babylon.

Those that made their Peace with the King at Oxford, were Judases of England;
and it were just with God to give them their Portion Cala^ Sermon, Dec. 25. 44.
pa. 8.
with Judas.

Here follows next, their Opinion of the COVENANT. The walls of Jerico have
fallen flat before it; the Dagon of the Case on the Covenant 1643. p. 65.
Bishops Service Book brake its neck before this Ark of the Covenant, Prelacy,
and Prerogative have bowed down, and given up the Ghost at its feet.

Take the Covenant, and you take Babylon: the Towers of Babylon, Caryl^ Sermon
at the taking the Covenant Oct. 6. 43.
and her Seven Hills shall move. -- It is the Shiboleth to distinguish
Ephramites from Gileadites. Page 27. Not only is that Covenant which God has
made wi^h Us, founded upon the Blood of Christ, but that also which we make
with God, Page 33.

See now the TENDERNESS of these men of tender Consciences. Whenever you
shall behold the hand of God in the fall of B^idges on Revelations 4 8.
Babylon; say, True here is a Babilonish Priest crying (...) alas! alas! my
Living; I have Wife and Children to maintain. Ay, but all this is to perform
the Judgment of the Lord. Page 13. Though as Little ones they call for pity,
yet as Babilonish they call for Justice, even to Blood. page 11.

We are now entering upon the State of the WAR; wherein you will find in the
first place who sounded the Trumpet to it. To you of the Honorable House, Up,
for the Matter belongs to you. Fair ^loth on I^sh 7. 25. Page 29.
We even all the GODLY MINISTERS of the Country will be with you.

The First Enginiers that battered this great Wall of Babylon, who Marshalls
Sermon; June, 15. 43. Page 15
were they but the poorer, and meaner sort of People, that at the First joined
with the Ministers to raise the Building of Reformation?

Here is an Extraordinary appearance of so many Ministers to encourage Cal' s
Speech at Guild Hall. Oct. 6. 43.
you in this Cause, that you may see how real the Godly Ministry in England is
unto this Cause. (This was upon calling in the Scots.) And again. If I had as
many Lives as I have hairs on my head, I would be willing to Sacrifice all
those Lives for this Cause. Ibid. -- You shall read Numb. 10. that there were
two Silver Trumpets; and as there were Priests appointed for the Convocation of
their Assemblies, so there were Priests to sound the Silver Trumpets to
proclaim the War. And Deuteronomy. 20. When the Children of Israel would go out to
War, the Sons of Levi, one of the Priests, was to make a Speech to encourage
them.

Nor were they less cruel and fierce in the Prosecution of the Herle Jan, 15.
on Psa. 95 1.
War, then they were forward in Promoting it. In vain shall you in your Fasts
with Joshua, lie on your faces, unless you lay your Achans ^n their Backs: In
vain are the High Praises of God in your Mo^hs, without a Two edged Sword in
your hand, Page 31.

The B^od that Ahab spared in Benhadad, stuck as deep and as Herle on Genesis 22.
5. pa. 23.
heavily on him, as that which he spilt in Naboth.

The Lord is pursuing you, if you execute not Vengeance on them betimes,
Faircloth on Josh. 7. 25.
Page 48. -- Why should life be farther granted to them, whose very lif^ brings
death to all about them? page 50.

Cursed be he that with-h ldoth his Sword from blood; that spares Case on D^.
11. 32, 44.
when God says strike, etc. page

And let it not be now pretended that this War was not Levied against the King;
for they both disclaim his Authority and even the opposing of him on express
terms. It is lawful (says Dr. Downing of Hackney, in a Sermon to the Artillery
Men) for defense of Religion, and Reformation of the Church, to take up Arms
against the King. It is commendable (says Calamy) to Cal's Theses pa. 29. Case
on the Covenant, 43. Herle before the Commons 44.
sight for peace, and Reformation against the Kings Command. And Case again.
Why come not in the Scottish Army against the King?

If the Devil can but once get a Prophet to leave Gods service for the Kings,
he has taken a Blew already, and is ready for as deep a Black as Hell can give
him. pa. 28.

But what do they say all this time to his AUTHORITY?

The Parliament, whom the People choose, are the Great and only Ca^'s Theses in
a Sermon Dec. 25. 44.
Conservators of the peoples Liberties. page 2. They are the chief Magistrates,
page 38. All those that fought under the Kings Banner against this Parliament,
fought themselves into slavery; and did endeavor by all bloody and Treacherous
ways to subvert Religion and Liberties, page 9. The Lords and Commons are as
Masters of the House. page 22.

The Parliament of the Commonwealth of England without the King 1651, were the
Supreme Authority of this Nation. Jenkins's Petition.


The Houses are not only requisite to the Acting of this Power of Herles Sermon
before the Commons, 1644.
making Laws, but Coordinate with his Majesty in the very Power of Acting. page,
42.

The Real Sovereignty here in England was (says Baxter) in King, Lords and
Commons, page 72. And those that conclude that the Paxters Holy Commonwealth.
Parliament being Subjects, may not take up Arms against the King, and that it
is Rebellion to resist him, their grounds are sandy, and their Superstructure
false, page 459. 460.

The next Point is their Animating the MURDER of the KING. Do Justice to the
Greatest; Saul's Sons are not spared; no Herle before the Commons Nov. 5. 44
nor may Agag, or Benhadad, though themselves Kings. Zimri, and Cozbi (tho
Princes of the people) must be pursued into their Tents: This is the way to
Consecrate your selves to God. page 16.

The Execution of Judgment is the Lords word; and they shall be Strickland's
Thanksgiving Sermon, Nov. 5. 44.
cursed that do it negligently. And cursed shall they be that keep back their
Sword in this Cause. You know the story of Gods Message unto Ahab, for letting
Benhadad go upon Composition, page 26.

But you shall now hear the MURDER of his Sacred Majesty pressed more
particularly in these Words. Cockayns Sermon before the Commons Nov. 29. 48.
Think not to save your selves by an unrighteous saving of them, who are the
Lords, and the Peoples known Enemies, you may not imagine to obtain the favor
of those against whom you will not do Justice: For certainly, if you act not
like Gods in this particular, against men truly obnoxious to Justice; they will
be like Devils against you. Observe that place, 1 Kings 22. 31. compared with
Cap. 20. It is said in Chap. 20. that the King of Syria came against Israel,
and by the mighty power of God, he and his Army were overthrown, and the King
was taken Prisoner. Now the mind of God was (which he then discovered only by
that present Providence) that Justice should have been executed upon him, but
it was not. Whereupon the Prophet comes with ashes upon his face, and waited
for the King of Israel, in the way where he should return; and as the King
passed by, he cried unto him, thus says the Lord, because thou have let go a
man whom I appointed for Destruction, therefore thy Life shall go for his Life.
Now see how the King of Syria, after this, answers Ahab's love: about three
years after, Israel and Syria engaged in a new War, and the King of Syria gives
command unto his Soldiers, that they should fight neither against small nor
great, but against the King of Israel. Benhadads Life was once in Ahabs hand,
and he ventured Gods displeasure, to let him go. But see how Benhadad rewards
him for it? Fight neither against Small nor Great, but against the King of
Israel, Honorable, and Worthy. If God do not lead you to do Justice upon those
that have been great Actors in shedding Innocent Blood, never think to gain
their Love by sparing of them; for they will, if Opportunity be ever offered,
return again upon you. And then they will not fight against the poor, The Kings
Murder Encouraged.
and mean ones, but against those that have been the Fountain of that Authority
and Power which have been ^mproved against them.

(...) you not sins ^now of your Own, (says another) but will ye wrap (...)
selves up in the Treachery, M^ther, Blood, C^uelty, and Tyranny (...) (...)
before the Commons D^c. 26. 48
(...) others? p. 17. Set some of those Grand. Malefactors a mourning (that h^e
caused the Kingdom to mourn so many years in Garments roll^d in blood) by the
Execution of Justice, etc. P. 19.

Tamum Religio potuit suadere Malorum. And we are not yet at the Top on it
neither; For to look back upon that hideous Impiety, not only without remorse,
but with satisfaction, is a piece of hardness, and Inhumanity, till this Age,
and this Case, perhaps unheard of.

Worthy Patriots, (says another of the same Order) you; that are our Rulers in
this Parliament, it is often said, we live in times Jenkins' Sermon before the
Commons Sept. 24 56. pa. 23.
wherein we may be as good as we please; wherein we enjoy in Purity and plenty
the Ordinances of Jesus Christ, praised be God for this^; Even that God who
has delivered us from the Imposition of ^relatical Innovations,
Altar-Genuflexious, and Cringings, with Crossings, and all that Popish trash
and Trumpery. And truly I speak no more then I have often thought, and said,
The Removal of those Insupportable Burdens, Countervails for the Blood and
Treasure shed and spent in The Kings Murder Justified.
these late Distractions: Nor did I as yet ever hear of any Godlymen, that
dest^ed, were it possible, to purchase their Friends, or Many again, at so dear
a rate, as with the return of these, to have those soulburthening,
Antichristian Yoaks re-imposed upon them. And if any such there be, I am sure
that desire is no part of their Godliness; and I PROFESS MY SELF, IN THAT TO BE
NONE OF THE NUMBER.

And M. Baxter likewise in effect says as much, viz. That having often searched
into his heart, whether he did lawfully engage in the War, Baxters Holy
Common-wea^th, 486.
or not, and whether he did lawfully encourage so many thousands to it, he
tells us, that the Issue of all his search was but this, that he cannot yet see
that he was mistaken in the main Cause, nor dares he repent of it, nor forbear
doing the same, if it were to do again, in the same State of things.

We might carry the aggravation yet a step farther, in a Remarque or two upon
his Political Theses, where he took as much pains in 1659. to keep out his
present Majesty, as he did in the late War to drive out his Royal Father;
casuistically resolving Mr. Baxters* Cases of Conscience Theses 1^7. ^81.
upon the point then in Hope and Prospect; that in that state of things, the
King himself could not justify the resuming of his Government, nor his People
the submitting to it. But this is enough to recommend the same persons over
again, to the care of another Reformation, that were so dutiful in the former;
and the Government needs not doubt but they will be just as kind to his Majesty
as they were to his Father. Good God! That any thing in Humane shape, that
Glories in the Murder of his Sovereign, should make a face at a Ceremony!

Here Is no amplyfying of the Matter, no forcing of constructions, Packing of
Presidents, or suborning of Proofs; But the Doctors of the Schism, Cited,
Produced, and Judged out of their (...).
own mouths: and in so clear a manner too, as to leave no place for a doubt,
either of the Fact, or of the Design. We could The (...) naticks did the
Faction many good Offices
give you an account of the many good Offices they did in the various
Revolutions of the War, and upon the Pinching Exigences of the State: As the
promoting of Petitions, Tumults, Protestations, Oaths and Covenants, of all
sizes and colors: the Consecrating of the Rebellion by Authorities of
Scripture; Dividing Wives from their Husbands, Sons from their Fathers,
Preaching away the Apprentices from their Masters, and setting Jesus Christ in
the Head of the Sedition: The artifices of their Fasts and Thanksgivings; their
Cajolling the City out of their Bags, and the simple multitude out of their
Lives and Duties; the Influence they had upon bringing in the Scots, their
faculty both of Creating Fears and Jealousies, and of Emproving them; their
miraculous Discoveries of Plots of their own making: Their Sermons were a kind
of Domestique Intelligence, and people went to Church as to a Coffee-house, to
hear News and Fables. We could show you likewise how they shifted their
Principles with their Interests, and from 1640. to 1660. how these Mercenaries
of the Pulpit complied with every turn of State: But we have raked far enough
already in this puddle, and it is high time to proceed.

If a man might with a fair Decorum call so direful a Tragedy a Puppet-play,
we should tell you that you have hitherto seen only The Pulpits only sp^ke as
the Caball dictated.
the Puppets of this Pretended Reformation; and that they signified nothing of
themselves, but as they were guided by the Masters of the Machine, from under
the Stage, or behind the Hanging. Now we cannot better lay open this Practice
and Confederacy, then by setting forth the admirable Harmony and Concert that
appeared betwixt the Lay-Caball, and the Ecclesiastic; agreeing in the same
method, in the same steps, in the same cause, and in the same Opinions: Only
that which was matter of Policy in Private, was made matter of Conscience and
Their agreement in Method and d^signe.
Religion in Public, First, they find out Corruptions in the Government; as
matter of Grievance, which they expose to the People. Secondly, they Petition
for Redress of those Grievances, still asking more and more, till something is
denied them. And then Thirdly, they take the Power into their own hands of
Relieving themselves, but with Oaths and Protestations, that they Act only as
Trustees for the Common Good of King and Kingdom. From the pretense of
Defending the Government they proceed to the Reforming of it; which Reformation
proves in the end to be a Final Dissolution of the Order both of Church and
State. This we shall deduce as briefly as we may.

After the Fatal Pacification at Berwick; June 17. 1639. (upon the Scotts
Insurrection, who kept not any one Article that was there agreed upon) the King
called a Parliament, that A deduction of our Late Troubles.
met Aug. 13. 1640, which at first was thought to be well enough disposed, till
Sir Hen. Vane (then Secretary of State) demanded Twelve Subsidies, in stead of
Six, which put the Commons into such a flame, that upon May 4. his Majesty, by
the Advice of his Council, thought fit to Dissolve them. In August following,
the Scotch Confederates (holding very good Intelligence with the English,
entered England with an Army, which the King opposed with what force he was at
that time able to Raise, upon his own Credit. His Majesty, upon this pinch,
summons his Great Council of Peers to assemble at York, Sept. 24. where they
met accordingly, and advised the King to a Treaty, which was held at Rippon,
and a Peace was there Concluded and Signed Oct. 26. His Majesty being plied in
the Interim with Petitions to call a Parliament, and his work cut out ready to
his hand, in the matter of Property and Religion. Those Petitions might have
been spared, the King having before hand resolved to call a Parliament, to meet
on the 3d of November next. They were no sooner met, but they fell upon
Grievances and Impeachments, beginning with the Earl of Strafford, and the
Bishop of Canterbury, and so proceeding, till all his Majestys Friends were
made Traitors, and the Law it self was found to be the Greatest Grievance.

There is a Malignant and Pernicious Design (says the Remonstrance Exact
Collection page 4.
of Dec. 15. 41.) of subverting the Fundamental Laws, and Principles of
Government, upon which the Religion and Justice of this Kingdom is firmly
established. And there are certain Counselors and Courtiers, who for private
Ends have engaged themselves to further the Interest of some Foreign Princes
and States, to the Prejudice of his Majesty, and the State at Home. Take notice
now, that the King had already (by their own confession) passed more Good Bills
Page 16.
to the advantage of the Subjects* then had been in many ages. Coat and
Conduct-money were all damned; The Earl of Strafford beheaded. The Archbishop
of Canterbury, Judge Bartlet, and several other Bishops and Judges Impeached;
two Bills passed, the One for a Triennial, the Other for Continuance of the
Present Parliament; the Star Chamber, High Commission, Courts of the President,
and Council in the North taken away, the Council Table Regulated, the Power of
Bishops and their Courts abated; Innovators and Scandalous Ministers terrifi^d
by accusations; the Forests and Stannary-Courts brought within compass; and
yet after all this, other things pa. 15. of main Importance for the Good of
this Kingdom are in Proposition. But their Intention page 19. is only to reduce
within Bounds that exorbitant Power which the Prelates have assumed; to
unburthen men's Consciences of needless and superstitious Ceremonies; Suppress
Innovations, and take away the Monuments of Idolatry: To support his Majesty's
Royal Estate with Honor and Plenty at home, with Power and Reputation abroad;
and by their Loyal Affections, Obedience and Service, to lay a sure and
lasting Foundation of the Greatness and Prosperity of his Majesty and his
Royal Posterity after him. page 2. Declaring and Protesting further to this
Kingdom and Nation, and to the whole world, page 663. in the presence of
Almighty God, for the satisfaction of their Consciences, and the discharge of
that Great Trust which lies upon them, that no Private Passion or Respect, no
evil Intention to his Majesty's Person, no design to the prejudice of his
JUST Honor and Authority engaged them to raise Forces, and take up Arms
against the Authors of that War, wherein the Kingdom was then Inflam^d.

Let us see now how well they acquitted themselves as to this Profession; Exact
Collections.
They put the Kingdom into a Posture of Defense by the Authority of Both Houses
Page 96. They require an^ Obedience to it, Page 112. They Vote it a Breach of
privilege, not to submit to any thing, as Legal which they declare to be Law.
Page 114. And declare Page 150. that upon Certain Appearance, or Grounded
Suspicion, the Letter of the Law shall be emproved against the Equity of it;
and that the Commander going against its Equity, discharges the Commanded from
Obedience to the Letter: to shorton the business, they make it Treason, upon
any presence whatsoever, Page 576. to assist his Majesty in the War, with
Horse, Arms, Plate, or Moneys; and his Majesty Sums up the Malice of that
Declaration in these Sixth Petitions.

First, That they have an Absolute Power of Declaring the Law; Six Treasonous
and Seditious Po^ions. Page 297, 298.
and that whatsoever they declare to be so, ought not to be questioned either
by King or people: So that all the Right, and safety of the Prince and Subject,
depends upon their pleasure.

Secondly, That no Presidents can be Limits to bound their Proceedings; which
is so, the Government of the Turk himself is not so Arbitrary.

Thirdly, That a Parliament may dispose of any thing wherein the King or
Subject has a Right for the Public Good: (speaking all this while of the
remnant of the two Houses.) That they without the King are this Parliament, and
Judge of this Public Good; and that the Kings Consent is not necessary. So
that the Life and Liberty of the Subject, and all the Good Laws made for their
security may be disposed of and Rep^al'd by the Major Part of both Houses, at
any time, present, and by any ways and means procured so to be, and his Majesty
has no Power to Protect them.

Fourthly, That a Member of either House ought not to be troubled or meddled
with, for Treason, ^lony, or any other crime, without the Cause first brought
before them, that they may Judge of the Fact, and their leave obtained to
proceed.

Fifthly, That the Sovereign Power resides in Both Houses of Parliament; the
King has no negative Voice, and becomes Subject to their Commands.

Lastly, That the Levying of Forces against the Personal Commands of the King
(though accompanied with his presence) is not Levying War against the King: But
to Levy War against his Laws and Authority (which they have power to declare
and signify) is Levying War against the King; and that Treason cannot be
committed against his Person, otherwise then as he is entrusted with the
Kingdom, and discharging that Trust; and that they have a power to judge
whether he discharges it or no. And all this still, for the maintenance of
the true Protestant Religion, the Kings JUST Prerogatives, the Laws and
Liberties of the Land, and the Privileges of Parliament, Page 281. Nay they
will not allow the King any great Officer or Public Minister; the Power of
Treating upon War or Peace, or any matter of State, conferring Honors; no not
so much as the Power of appointing any Officer Civil or Military, without leave
of the two Houses. The Scale of their wickedness, in One Word, (wherein their
hireling-Pulpitiers fail in as pat with them as two Tallies) was this. First,
they fell upon the Kings Reputation; they Invaded his Authority in the next
place; after that, they assaulted his Person, seized his Revenue; and in the
Conclusion, most impiously took away his Sacred Life: At which rate, in
proportion, they treated the Church, and the rest of his Friends, and laid the
Government in Confusion.

For the compassing of these accursed ends, they still accommodated Baits for
all Parties.
themselves to the matter they had to work upon. They had their Plots, and
false allarms for the simple, their Tumults for the fearful, their Covenants
was a Receptacle for all sorts of Libertines, and Malcontents. But the great
difficulty was the gaining of the City: which could not be effected, but by
embroyling the Legal, and ancient Constitution of that Government. For there
was no good to be done upon the Imperial Monarchy of England, without First
confounding the Subordinate Monarchy of the City of London, and creating a
perfect Understanding betwixt the Caball, and the Common Council: which was
very much facilitated, by casting out the Loyal, and Orthodox Clergy, and
teaching all the Pulpits in London to speak the same Language with Margarets
Westminster. But let us consider the Government of the City of London, First,
in the due, and Regular Administration of it; and then in its corruptions, and
by what means it come afterward to be debauched.

The City of London, was long before the Conquest, Governed The Legal
Government of the City of London.
by Port-Reeves: and so down to Richard the First, who granted them several
Privileges in acknowledgment of the Good Offices they had rendered him. But
the First Charter they had for the Choice of their Own Mayor, or Government,
was conferred upon them by King John, in these words. Know ye that we have
granted to our Barons (or Freemen) of our City of London, that they may choose
unto themselves a Mayor of themselves. And their following Charter of Henry the
Third runs thus. We grant also unto the said Citizens, that they may yearly
present to our Barons of the Exchequer (we or our Heirs not being at
Westminster) every Mayor which they shall first choose in the City of London, to
the end they may be by them admitted as Mayor. In a following Charter of Ed. 2.
That the Mayor and Sheriffs of the City aforesaid, may be chosen by the
Citizens of the said City; according to the Tenor of the Charter of our
Progenitors, (sometimes Kings of England) to that end made; and not otherwise.
The Charter of Hen. 8. runs to the Mayor, Commonalty and Citizens of London,
Conjunctim. The Charter of Ed. 3. is thus. We have granted further for Us and
our Heirs, and by this our present Charter confirmed to the Mayor, and Aldermen
of the City aforesaid; that if any customs in the said City hitherto obtained
and used, be in any part Difficult or Defective, or any thing in the same newly
happening, where before there was no remedy Ordained, and have need of
amending, the said Mayor and Aldermen, and their Successors with the assent of
the Commanalty of the same City, may add and ordain a remedy meet, faithful,
and consonant to reason, for the Common profit of the Citizens of the same
City, as often, and at such time as to them shall be thought expedient.

We have the rather cited these clauses in favor of the Lawful The Charter of
the Lord Mayor and Aldermen
Government of the City; in regard that they have been so often, and so
earnestly perverted another way. The Charter we see, is directed to the Lord
Mayor and Aldermen of the City; the Power is granted to them, to propose the
making or mending of Laws, as they see occasion; only by the affent, or dissent
of the Commons, they are ratifyed or hindered. And those Laws are only Acts of
Common Council, that is to say, not of the Commonalty alone, but of the Lord
Mayor, Aldermen, and Commons, in concurrence. Some there are that mistake the
word Conjunctim, and would have Jointly, to be Equally: as if one could not
have a greater interest or Authority, and another a less, though in a Joint
Commission. The Power, in short, of summoning, and Dissolving Common-Councils,
and of putting any thing to the question, does legally reside only in the Lord
Mayor. And the Active Power in the Making of a Law, and the Negative Voice in
the Hindering of a Law, have been by long Prescription and usage, in the Lord
Mayor and Aldermen. And these being customs of the City, every Freeman is to
support and maintain them by the Obligation of his Oath. And in farther proof
that the Lord Mayor and Aldermen are by their Charter invested with the Powers
aforesaid; We shall need only to enform our selves who they are that in case of
any public Disorder, are made answerable for the Misdemeanour. Richard the
Second granted a Commission to enquire of all and singular Errors, Defects,
and Misprisions in the City of London, for want of Good Government in the
Mayor, Sheriffs and Aldermen of the said City. And for the Errors, Defects,
and Misprisions, in their Government sound, they were fined 3000. Marks; the
Liberties of the City seized into the Kings Lands, and a Warden appointed to
govern the City: till in the end, the Duke of Gloucester prevailed upon the King
to reinstate them.

We have here given you a short view of the Orderly Government of this glorious
City; which is perchance one of the best qualified Establishments both for King
and People, under the cope of Heaven. We are now coming to lay open by what
Arts and Contrivances it came to be corrupted; and in a manner, to lay Violent
hands upon it self: Which is a story that may serve some for curiosity, and
others for Edification.

The People being extremely discomposed in their minds upon the Apprehension of
Popery and Arbitrary Power; and In what manner the People were wrought upon.
shaken also in their Allegiance, upon a strong Impression that it was a design
in their Governors themselves to introduce it. It was no hard matter to
inveigle them into Petitions for Relief, Protestations, Associations and
Covenants, for the Common defense of themselves, in the preservation of their
Liberties and Religion; and into a favorable Entertainment of any plausible
pretext even for the Justification of Violence it self: Especially the Sedition
coming once to be Baptized Gods cause, and supported by the Doctrine of
Necessity and the unsearchable Instinct and Equity of the Law of Nature: And
all this too, Recommended and Inculcated to them by the men of the whole World,
upon whose Conduct and Integrity, they would venture their very Souls, Bodies
and Estates. Being thus persuaded, and possessed; the coming in of the Scots
served them both for a Confirmation of the ground of their fears, and for an
Authority to follow that Pattern in their Proceedings; both causes being
founded upon the same Bottom, and both Parties united in the same Conspiracy.
So that this opportunity was likewise improved by all sorts of ayery
Fantastical Plots, frivolous and childish reports, to cherish the Delusion:
And now was the time for Tumults and Outrages upon public Ministers, and
Bishops, nay and upon the King himself; till by Arms and Injuries they forced
him away from his Palace, when yet they had the confidence to charge his Sacred
Majesty with making War upon his Parliament. But this would not yet do their
business, till they got Possession of the Militia; which at length they did:
the Presses and the Pulpits all this while giving life and credit to their
Proceedings.

Upon the tuning of men's minds for Innovations, by making them sick of the
present state of things; The Artifice of Petitions.
the People were easily prevailed upon to Petition for what they so much wished
for and desired: and this was the second step toward the Tyranny, and Slavery
that ensued upon it. The Rude people (says his Late Majesty) in his Reflections
upon (TUMULTS) are taught EIK. BA.
first to Petition, then to Protest, then to Dictate, and at last to Command.
The Faction made use of Petitions as common Housebreakers do of screws; they
got in by little and little, and without much noise, and so Risled the
Government: Or they did rather like the counterfeit Glasiers, that took down
the Glass at Noonday under color of mending the Windows, and then Robbed the
House.

To make a right Judgment upon a Popular Petition we should first consider the
matter of it* Secondly, the wording of it. Thirdly, the manner of Promoting it.
Fourthly, the Probable intent of it. And Lastly, we should do well to consult
History and Experience to see what effects such Petitions have commonly
produced.

As to the Subject Matter of Popular Petitions, it is either for public
concernment or private; General or particular: That is to say concerning the
whole Body of the People, or only some part of it. It is either within the
Petitioners Cognizance, and Understanding, or it is not; It varies according to
the Circumstances of Times, Occasions, and Parties: and it often falls out,
especially where it treats of Reformation, that the one half of it is a
Petition, and the other a Libell. The Case of that is purely Private, or
Particular, cannot properly be called Popular; and so not to our purpose. There
are likewise Mixed Cases of Public and Private; as in the Calamities of War,
Pestilence, Fires, Inudations and the like; where Numerous Subscriptions are
matter of Attestation, rather then Clamor; on the behalf of such and such
Known, and Particular Sufferers. Now there is a great heed to be given to the
Petitions of men both that Understand what it is they ask, and whom the Law has
made Competent Judges of it. But where the Question is, the Redress of
Grievances in matter of State, the Complaining part of the Petition makes it
only a more Artificial Scandal: Besides the dangerous boldness of
Intermeddling in points which they neither have any thing to do withal, nor
one jot Understand. Such as the Petition of the Rabble, in and about London, in
1640. against Episcopacy, Root and Branch; the Porters Petition in 1641. about
the Militia, being told that it was only a Petition to Prohibit Watermen from
carrying of Burdens, That of the Stanford Schoolboys, which their Masters
made them Subscribe against Bishops; Or the Scottish Petition in 1637. of Men
Women Children and Servants (in those very terms) against the Service Book.
These few instances may suffice to show the folly (and worse) of peoples
stickllng for they know not what.

Next to the Matter of the Petition we should consider the Many Petition for
they know not what*
wording of it: For he that asks he knows not what, may ask any thing in the
World, for ought he knows. And it is not the humility of the Style, that can
justify the publishing of a Reproach upon the Prince: Did not Jacob take Amasa
by the Beard with the Right hand to kiss him, and yet at the same time strike
him under the Fifth Rib that he died? It is no Breach of Charity, when a
Multitude are drawn into a Petition blindly to solicit the Interests of Other
men, to take all ambiguities and Equivocalls in the worst sense.

And then the Manner of promoting these Petitions goes a The manner of
Promoting Petitions.
great way. It was a common practice in the Late Times, for the confiding
Members of several Countries to draw up Petitions to themselves, and Lodge them
in the hands of several of their Factious Countrymen here in the City, to
gather Subscriptions, Where, and how they plea'd,, in the Name of their
respective* Countiee* Their Seditious Preachers (says the Late Ex. Coll. 536.
Fobb'd Petitions imposed upon the Nation by the Faction.
King) and Agents are by them, and their special and particular Directions
sent into the several Counties to infuse Fears and Jealousies into the minds of
our Good Subjects, with ^itions ready drawn by Them, for the People to Sign;
which were yet many times by them changed three or four times before the
delivery; upon accidents, or occurrences of either, or both Houses. And when
many of our poor deceived People of our several Counties have come to the City
of London, with a Petition so framed, altered, and Signed, as aforesaid; that
Petition has been Suppressed, and a New one ready drawn has been put into
their hands, after their coming to Town (insomuch as few of the Company have
known what they ^tition'd for) and has been by them presented to One or Both
our Houses of Parliamant, as that of Bedfordsh* and Buckinghamsh.; Witness
those Petitions; and amongst the rest that of Harfordshire; which took notice
of matter agreed on or dissented from, the night before the delivery. Which was
hardly time enough to get so many thousand hands, and to travel to London on
that Errand. These were not the Petitions of the Subscribers, but of those that
set them on; who did in effect, but Petition the People to Petition them again;
and that which was taken and imposed as the sense of the Nation, was only the
Project and Dictate of the Caball. Only with the Porters, they thought they had
signed a Petition against the Watermen, and it proved to be against the
Government (so innocent were the greater part of the Petitioners.)

Now as to the Intent of those Petitions, since we cannot enter into the hearts
of men, we are allowed to judge of the Tree The intent of Popular Petitions is
to be Considered.
by the Fruit. And we must distinguish too betwixt the Intention of the
Dictatours, and that of the Subscribers: the Former Contriving with an Ill
Intention that which the Latter Executed with a Good One. Let the Matter of the
Petition be never so fair, yet (as was said before) if it be a business out of
the Petitioners sphere, and capacity, either to Meddle in, or to understand; it
is a suspicious way of Proceeding. Such were the Confederate Petitions of
England and Scotland for a Parliament in 1641. which were Consederate Petitions
are but the Pro logue to Confederate Practices.
but a Prologue to the Opening of the Subsequent Confederacy against the
Government: When the Petitions that followed, sufficiently expounded the
meaning of the Former. They Petitioned against Ecclesiastical Courts,
Ceremonies, Scandalous Ministers, Bishops Votes in Parliament, and Episcopacy
it self, against evil Counselors, Monopolies, Corruptions of State, Courts of
Oppression and Innumerable Grievances; Were they not gratified in all this? and
did not those very Concessions make them still Bolder Never satisfied.
and Bolder? More and more Greedy still, and more Insatiable? They must have
the Militia too, the Command of the Kings Towns, and Forts, and put the Kingdom
into a posture of defense themselves. They cry for Justice upon Delinquents;
the very Rabble demanding the Names of those in the House of Peers that would
not consent to the Proposition made by the House of Commons Ex. Coll. (...).
548.
concerning the Forts, Castles, and the Militia, (when it was rejected by a
Major Part twice.) And declaring them for Enemies to the Commonwealth: Loyal
and Legal Petitions being still rejected, and the seditious countenanced: In a
Word; they grew higher and higher* till they brought the King to the Block;
which was no more then a Natural Conclusion from such premises. And the First
Petition (how plausible soever) was the Foundation of all our Ruins. These
Petitions you must know, do not ask to Obtain, but to be Denied; and only seek
an Occasion to pick a quarrel; and if they cannot find it, they will make it. If
this be not provided for, they tell us, It is the Case of many a Thousand in
England, and great troubles will come of it: The very Style of them is
Menacing; and certainly nothing can be more Evident then their evil Intention.
There Is Malice in the Publication of them too; beside that by the Number of the
Subscrip^ions; they take an Estimat of the strength of their Party; which is
their safest way of Muster.

The Last Section under the Head of Popular Petitions is the Effect of them:
which in our Case was no less then the destruction The Effect of Popular
Petitions.
of Three Kingdoms; and let the Matter be what it will, the Method is a most
necessary Link in the chain of a Rebellion. And it is the securest experiment
too, of attempting a Commotion, being the gentlest of Political Inventions, for
feeling the pulse of the People. If it takes, the work is half done; and if
Not, it is but so much Breath Lost, and the Design will be kept Cold. But may
not Men Petition (you will say) and Petition for a good thing? Upon what Terms
they may be allowed.
Yes, if the thing be Simply Good, the Petitioners, Competent Judges of it, and
every man keep himself to his Own Post, I see no hurt in it. But for the
Multitude to interpose in Matters of State; as in the Calling or Dissolving of
Parliaments; Regulation of Church Government; or in other like Cases, of
Doubtful and Let every man keep to his own post.
hazardous Event, wherein they have no Skill at all, nor any Right of
Intermedling; why may not 20000. Plow-Iobbers as well Subscribe a Petition to
the Lord Mayor of London for the Calling of a Common Council? Or as many
Porters and Carmen here in London put in for the better government of the
Herring-Trade in Yarmouth? every jot as reasonable would This be as the Other.
And that is not all neither, for the Thing they take to be a Cordial, proves
many times to be a Poison: and after Subscription they are yet to learn the
very meaning of the Petition: And then the Numerous Subscriptions prove it
manifestly to be a Combination: For the Number of Hands adds nothing to the
Weight of the Petition; and serves only for Terror and Clamor. It is a kind
of an odd way of putting the Question: as who should say, Sir, May we be so
bold? and the sufferance or Patience of the Prince seems to answer them, Yes,
you may: and so they go on.

The Transition is so natural, from a Popular Petition to a Tumult, that the
One is but the Hot Fit of the other; and little A Natural Transi^ion from a
Popu lar Petition to a Tumult. EIK. BA. upon tumults.
more in effect then a more earnest way of Petitioning. By these (says his Late
Majesty) must the House be purged, and all Rotten Members (as they please to
call them) cast out. By these the Obstinacy of men resolved to discharge their
Consciences must be subdued; by These, all Factious, seditious end
schis^natical Proposals of Government Ecclesiastical or Civil ^st be backed and
abetted, till they prevail. God forbid (says Mr. Pym) that the House of Commons
should proceed in any E^. C^ll. 532.
way to dishearten people to obtain their j^t desires in such a way. It would
fill a Volume to tell the Insolences of the Rabble upon L^mbeth-House upon the
Persons of the Archbishop of York and all The Insolences of the Rabb^e upon the
Parliament.
the Loyal Members of both Houses; their O^tcries for Justice upon La^d and
Strafford, under the Conduct of Ven and Ma^waring: Their Exclamations, No
Bishops, No Popish Lords; Proclaiming several of the Peers by their Names to be
evil and r^tton-hearted Page 533
Lords: Their besetting of Sheriff Garnets House, when the King Din^d there,
crying out, Privileges of Parliament; Upon ^e City.
their a^onting the Lord Mayor (Sir Richard Gourny) and tearing his Chain from
about his Neck and using Sir Thomas Gardener (the Recorder) little better;
following them with Reproaches, Remember the PROTESTATION. Nay the King himself
had his Coach stopped, and Walkers Seditious Libel, And upon the ^ing himse^f
To your Tents O Israel, thrown into it in the street. This was upon the
dispute about the Five Members, when at their Return from Westminster they made
a stand at White-hall-gate, bauling out, that they would have no more Porters
Lodge, but speak with the King when they pleased. About a hundred Lighters and
Long-Boats were set out by water, laden with Sacres, Murthering-Pieces, and
other Page 538.
Ammunition, dressed up with Mast-cloths and Streamers as ready for fight;
calling out as they past by Whitehall Windows, what is become of the King?
whither's he gone? The Tower of London and Hull being both besieged at the same
time. Now what was the End of These Tumults, but over and above the Guilt and
Calamities of a Civil War, a Vengeance in the Conclusion upon the Heads of all
the First Abetters of them? These very men that The first Tumu^s punished by
tumults.
first by Tumults forced away the King from Whitehall, and their Fellow Members
from attending their Duty at Westminster, were Themselves afterward cast out,
by succeeding Tumults, under the Character of Persons Disaffected, (the
Independents at that time being too hard for the Presbyterians) and the City
too was whipped with its own rod. No man is so blind (says the Late King) as not
to see herein the Hand of Divine Justice; They that by Tumults, first
occasioned the Raising of Armies, must now ^e chastened by their EIK. BA. Upon
the Distraction of the Parliament Army, and City.
own Army for new Tumults. In fine, a Tumult is a seditious action in Hot
Blood; and only accounted the less Criminal, for that there is not in it the
Malice Prepence of a Rebellion. If it succeeds, the Principals of the Faction
form it into a Conspiracy; but if it miscarries, it passes only as That did in
Scotland, 1637. for an Outrage of the Rabble.

Where many People agree in the Desiring of the same thing, Of ^aths,
Covenants, and Associations.
they seldom fail of Engaging afterward toward the Procuring of it; and so
the Project advances, from Petition to Protestation, or Covenant; the One
Leading so naturally to the Other, that the Late Popular Petition was no sooner
set on foot, but it was immediately followed upon the Heel with the Proposal
of an Association, pretending the Practice of 27. Eliz. for their Warrant. It
would be endless to run through all the Leagues, Covenants, Bonds,
Protestations, Engagements, Oaeths, etc. of the Late times; and as needless to
set forth the Histories of the Miseries they brought upon us, after so many
Narratives and Discourses already Published, upon that Subject: So that our
Business shall be rather to discover the Imposture of those Practices, then to
dilate upon the Story.

All Popular Leagues, without the Authority of the Supreme Magistrate The
Leagues of Subjects among themselves are Conspiracies.
are to be looked upon as Conspiracies; but when they come once to bear up in
Defiance of it, the Case is little better then a State of Actual Rebellion. The
Pretense of the Late Engagements was only to assert and Compass the Ends of the
foregoing Petitions: And it was the Masterpiece of the Faction to keep the
Vulgar in the dark, by disgui^ing the Drift, and the Scope, both of the One,
and the Other. It was by this following train of thoughts that the Multitude in
1641. were Egged on into the foulest crimes, and the Heaviest calamities
Imaginable. The Lord bless us (say they) we are all running into the French The
delusions of 1641.
Government, and Popery: the Courtiers and Prelates will be the Undoing of us
all; the King is a good man enough of himself, if he had but Good people about
him; but he is so damnably led away by Popish Counsels; I would to God he would
but call a Parliament and harken to their advice. But why should we not press
him to^t; and ferret out all these Caterpillars from about him? It Is true, the
King can do no wrong, but his Ministers may: and yet the King is bound by the
Law. as well as We. Had not we better get hands to a Petition* and join to
stand by one another as One Man, for the preservation of our Liberties, and
Religion, then stand gaping with our fingers in our Mouth till all is lost?
Little did these people Imagine all this while that Death was in the Pot, and
that instead of the way to Peace and happiness they were then in the High-Road
to Destruction. And This they might easily enough have discovered if they had
but diligently consider^d the Opinions and Professions of the Heads of these
Covenanters and Subscrib^rs; among which, there was not one man of a hundred
that was not a known and a vow^d Enemy both to Courch and State. But they
plunged themselves like Curtius, into the Gulf, as Devotes for the mistaken
preservation of their Country. But the delusion will better appear, by
applying only Common Reason to the Imposture it self: And first, let us
consider their Protestation of May, 1641.

I* A. B. do in the presence of Almighty God, promise, vow, and protest to
maintain and defend, as far as lawfully I may, with my Life, The Protestation.
Power, and Estate, the True Reformed Protestant Religion, expressed in the
Doctrine of the Church of England, against all Popery and Popish Innovations
within this Realm, contrary to the same Doctrine, and according to the Duty of
my Allegiance to his Majestyes Royal Person, Honor, and Estate; as also the
Power, and Privileges of Parliament, the lawful Rights and Liberties of the
Subjects, etc. Now as the whole Pretext was plansible, so the saving clause in
it [as far as lawfully I may] made it go down without much seruple.

The Solemn League and Covenant of 1643. (which was the Bond of the Confederacy
of the Two Nations) had the same salve The Juggle of the Covenant.
in it too, and the very same specious pretenses for the Protestant Religion,
the Honor of the King, the Privileges of Parliament, and the Liberty of the
Subject: only enlarged to the setting up of the Scottish Diseipline and
Government, the Ex^irpation of Prelacy and Popery; and the bringing of
Delinquents to punishment: So that from the maintaining of the Government, they
are now come to the Dissolving of it; and from the Defense of their own Rights
and Liberties, they are advanced to the Inva^ng of other peoples. We might
reflect upon a world of Soloecisms, Illegalities, Contradictions and Defects,
both in the Givers and Takers of this Protestation and Covenant: As the Nullity
of any Engagement entered into, Contrary to Law; the altering of the
Government, without the consent of his Majesty in Parliament; The perjurious
Fraud of Swearing in One sense, in opposition to the Known Intent of the
Imposer in another; beside the Inconsistence of these Vows with Themselves, and
the Contradictions they bear to One another. Wherefore we shall rather detect
the Cheat in the Thing it self, and the wonderful Rashness of the Undertakers,
then play the Casuist upon the Question.

Take the Protestation as it runs with that Qualifying Clause in The
Protestation an Oath of Policy not Conscience.
it [as far as lawfully I may] and there is hardly any thing more in it then
what a man is obliged to do without it: So that without some Mystery in the
bottom, the thing appears in it self to be wholly Idle and Impertinent, and not
answerable to the solemnity of making it a National Duty. And then the
Imposition was in it self an Usurpation of Sovereign Power. The Covenant (I
must confess) was Ranker, having an Auxiliary Army of about 20000 Scotts to
second it. But was ever any thing in appearance more harmless, Loyal or
Conscientious, then this Protestation? and if the fellow of it were now in
agitation, how would the Town Ring, of any Church of England-Man for a
disguised Papist, that should refuse to take it! And yet what ensued upon the
peoples joining in this officious piece of misguided Zeal and Duty? When they
were once In, there was no longer any regard had to the Grammar or Literal
Construction of it, but to the List of those that took it, as the
Discriminating Test of the Party; They that contrived it, did like wise Expound
it: and every man was bound implicitly to believe That only to be Lawful,
which they told him was so, without being allowed the liberty of Judging of his
own Actions. He that looks into the Records of that Revolution, will find the
Contributions, Subscriptions, Loans, Levies, and briefly the highest violences
of the War, the boldest attempts upon the Honor and Person of the King, the
Privileges of Parliament, and the Property of the Subject, to be charged at
the soot of the account, upon the Tie of the Solemn League and Protestation;
and every man bound, upon the forfeiture of his Life, Liberty, and Estate, to
observe it, in their sense. Over and above the Iniquity of these Oaths, how
Ridiculous is it for every Paltry Fellow to swear to the doing of he knows not
what, and the maintaining of the Privileges of Parliament, which no man living
understands? We shall conclude this Point, with the words of the Late King
[Cons^derations by way EIK. BA.
of Solemn Leagues and Covenants, are the Common Road used in all Factious and
Powerful Per^urbations of State or Church.] And our Covenanters did but write
after the Copy of the Holy League of France.

The people being now prepared for any mutinous Impressions, Imposture; upon
the People.
poisoned in their affections to the Government, besotted into the apprehension
of Remote and Invisible dangers, and United in the Resolution of Defending
their Rights against all Opposers; the Design would have been there at a
stand, for want of matter to work upon, if the Caball had not fed, and
entertain^d their fears* and Icalosies, with stories of Plots and Discoveries
nearer hand, where still the Parliament and the City were in the greatest
hazard. One while the Northern Army was coming up, and strong Guards appointed
upon all Passes within 20. miles of London, and then comes a Letter to the
Close Committee, of a Conspiracy to seize the Earl of Argile, and some other
Lords in Edinburgh: And upon This, an Order is presently issued out to the
Justices of Middlesex, Surry, and Southwark* to secure the City, by strong
Watches; because (says the Order) the mischievous Designs and Conspiracies
lately discovered in Scotland against some Principal and Great men there, by
some of the Popish Faction, gives just occasion to suspect that they may
maidtain Correspondency Here, and practice the like mischief. They had a Touch
now and then at the mighty preparations of France and Denmark, for the invading
of the Nation, and assisting the King to govern by an Arbitrary Power. And then
the Army under ground at Ragland Castle was a terrible thing, and miraculously
discovered by an Innkeepers Servant at Rosse, to Alderman Actons Coachman.
These whimses were but so many approaches toward the Militia; and they are so
extravagant, that the man that was upon the place, and can witness the effect
of them, has hardly the face yet to make the Report.

Upon Twelth Night 1641. the City was alarmed at Midnight (...) Alarm
with a Report of 1500 Horse that designed to surprise the City. Whereupon a
matter of 50000 men were presently in Arms, and the Women at work in the
streets, with Joynt-stools, Empty Cask, and other Lumber, to interrupt their
passage.

Upon the Kings making Sir Tho. L^ford Lieutenant of the The good women could
not s^p for fear of the T^ guns*
Tower, the good women of the City could not sleep for fear of the Guns But yet
without any Objection, his Majesty presently puts in Si^ John Byron. They could
make no exception against him, till at last (as my Author has it) Lieutenant
Hooer, the Aqua-Vita-man, and Nieholson the Chandler, enform the
Common Council, that since he came to (...) Lieutenant, there was nothing to do
at the Mint, though it was made appear that the Mint had more business since
this Gentleman was Lieutenant, then ever it had in so short a time before: But
their Trade being in the Retail of Brooms, Candles, and Mustard their Ignorance
in the other point might be the better excused.

In Aug. 1643. upon a Vote for sending Propositions of Peace to A Tumu^ f^r
fear of a Peace.
the King, the very next day there were Papers scattered, and posted up and
down the City; requiring all persons well-affected to rise as One man, and come
to the House of Commons next morning, for that 20000 Irish Rebels were landed.
And this was the News of the Pulpits next day; when; (though Sunday) a
Common Council was called late at Night, and a Petition there framed against
Peace. This Petition was next morning recommended to the Commons by Penington,
then Mayor, with a Rabble at his heels, declaring that the Lords Propositions
for Peace would be destructive to Religion, Laws, and Liberties, and that if
they had not a good answer they would be there again the next day, with double
the Number.

We must not forget the design upon the Life of Mr. Pim by a Plague Plaster,
that was wrapped up in a Letter and sent him, Mr. Pyms Plague plaster.
which Letter he put in his pocket for Evidence, though he threw away the
Plaster. And there was another discovery that came as wonderfully to light: a
Tailor in a Ditch in A Tailor discovers a Plot against my Lord S^y.
Finsbury-Fields overheard two men talking of a Plot upon the Life of my Lord
Say, and some other Eminent Members of both Houses; and so the Design never
took effect.

At this rate were the people gu^'d from day to day, with The people Imposed
upon by ridiculous Stories and Impostures.
fresh and palpable Impostures; never was any Nation certainly under such an
Absession of Credulity, and Blindness; but as the Cause was founded in
Hypocrisy, so it was by Forgery to be supported. And yet these Legendary Tales
stood the Faction in very good stead; by authorizing the People now and then to
betake themselves to their Arms, and to put themselves upon their Guard; which
did, by degrees, let them into the Command of the City Militia; out of which
Egg (as one says) came forth the Cockatrice of Rebellion. Thus was poor England
frighted out of a Dream of Dangers into cutting of Throats in Earnest: Out of a
fear of Popery, into a prostitution even of Christianity; and out of an
apprehension of Tyranny into a most despicable state of Slavery. The Change of
Government now in agitation, had been long in Project; and no foresight wanting
for the furtherance No foresight wanting in the Faction.
of the design. None so diligent at the Military-Yard, or Artillery-Garden, as
the zelots of the Faction; and upon the Vacancy of any considerable Employment
there, who but they to put in for the Command? Nor were they less industrious
to screw themselves into the Bench of Aldermen and Common Council, insomuch
that a Motion was made there (with an Eye to two beggarly, and Fanatical
Captains,) that Honest men, (for that is their Name when they are their own
Godfathers) might bear the Magistracy, and the City the expense. But what did
all this amount to, without a Fond of Mon, Money, Arms, and Ammunition, to carry
on the Work? So that their business was now to The Faction could do nothing
without the City.
make sure of the CITY, as the only means of their supply: But that, they found
could never be brought about, without a Lord Mayor for their Turns; Or else
reducing the Mayor and Aldermen to a Level with the Commons: and establishing a
firm correspondence betwixt Westminster, and Guild Hall, the One to Contrive,
and the Other to Execute. So that this was the thing they pitched upon, and the
manner of their proceeding was as follows.

Having Pharisaically, and Invidiously divided the people into The Practices of
the Faction upon the Common Council.
Two Partys; Themselves forsooth, the Godly Party, and the Friends of the
Government, the Papists: a little before St. Thomas's day 1641. (when the City
chooses their Common Council) they calumniated the Old Common Council men, as
men too much inclining to the Court; sticklers for Episcopacy, and the
Common Prayer; and not at all zealous for Religion, (just as we cry out against
Papists, and Pensioners now adays;) by this practice, they worm'd out Honest
men, and chose Schismatics into their places: and instead of Sir George
Benyon, Mr. Drake, Mr. Clark Mr. Gardener; Deputy Withers, Mr. Cartwright, and
other Loyal, and considerable Citizens; they took in Foulk the Traitor,
Perkins, (my Lord Says Tailor,) and Others of the same stamp and Value.

Now though the Election be on St. Thomas day, they are never The Common
Council imposed upon by the Faction beyond president.
Returned yet before the Monday after Twelfth; nor allowed to Act as
Common-Counsil men till the Indentures of their Election be Returned from the
War (...) Inquest to the Town Clerk; and a Warrant Issued from the Lord May^r
to the S^rjeant of the Chamber to Summon them. But the Faction however made
bold to dispense with these Puntillo's, (though the constant Rule and Custom of
the City) and a Common Council being held December 31. 1641. by the Kings
Express Order, all that Gang of the New Choice, thrust themselves in, and took
their places with the Old. This Intrusion was opposed by several, but out of
respect to a Message from his Majesty which was then brought them by the Lord
Newbourgh, complaining of Tumults about White Hall, and Westminster, and
recommending to the care of the City, the preventing of any further disorders:
the question was let fall for the present; and the Court applied themselves to
dispatch an answer to his Majesty; which was in effect, an acknowledgment of
his gracious Goodness expressed to the City; the Courts disavowing of the
Tumults; their promise of doing their best for the future to prevent, or
suppress them, and their humble desire that whosoever should be found guilty of
them, might be brought to condign punishment.

On the Last of December, the House of Commons under pretense of finding
themselves in danger, sent to the King for a Ex. Col. 44.
Guard, but it must be a Guard out of the City of London, and to be commanded
by the Earl of Essex. To which Message, his Ex. Col. 45.
Majesty offered them, Jan: 3. a Guard of his own appointment for their
security: But this Trick would not pass upon the King: so that they were forced
to do their business another way.

Upon the Fifth of Jan. another Common Council was called by The King goes to
the Common Council,
the Kings Order, when his Majesty was pleased, in person to acquaint the Court
with the Reasons of his demanding the five Members the day before: admonishing
them not to harbor or protect those men in the City. Fowke and his new
Brethren (contrary to all Right or President) were got in again, and there he
most audaciously affronted his Majesty with a Discourse of fears and Jelousies,
Privileges of Parliament, etc. the King only replying in effect, that they
were dangerous men, and that they should have a Legal Trial.

On the same day (being Wednesday) the House adjourned till the Tuesday
following, and Ordered a Committee to set next The Commons adjourn, and remove
into the City.
morning at Guildhall; taking upon themselves little less then Sovereign Power.
The Committee met at Grocers Hall, where the Five Members met, under the Guard
of the City-Train'd-stands, where they past such Votes of Privilege as never
any Age heard of before, extending it even to the Exempting and justifying
(...) Treason it self.

On Saturday, Jan. 8. upon a Debate for the safe meeting of The Committees Vote
at Grocers-Hall.
the Five Members at Westminster the Tuesday following; the Result was, That
the Sheriffs of London should and might raise a Guard of the Train'd-Bands, for
the Defense of the King and Parliament; and that they might warrantably march
out of their Liberties. A Rout of Seamen offering their service by water, as
the Other by Land. This Subject set all the Puritan Pulpits on work to inflame
the People against their Sovereign in favor of the Five Members.

Upon the fatal 10th of January, the King was forced to withdraw The King
withdraws from London.
from London, which was then left at the Mercy of the Faction, and that very
day, the Indentures of the Election were Returned: Upon all Questions about
These Elections, the Decision was formerly in the Lord Mayor and Court of
Aldermen; but by the Violence and Importunity of these New Intruders, it is
left to a Committee of the Common Council, (being the Committee a so for the
safety of the City (so called): This Committee was their first approach toward
the Militia; and then followed another: for putting the City into a Posture of
Defense, consisting of Six Aldermen and Twelve Commoners, most of them of the
New Cut; and 300l. per annum allowed to Skippon, as an assistant to the
Committee.

Having already modeled the Common Council to their liking They settle the
Militia.
they furnish themselves with all sorts of Military Provisions; augment the
Train'd-Bands, from 6000. to 8000. the Six Aldermen are made Colonels, and the
Committee for the Posture of Defense, are to choose their Officers; the
authority of Summoning Common Councils is taken away from the Lord Mayor, and
lodged And strip the Mayor of his privileges.
in people of the Faction; and whenever they will have One called, the Lord
Major must obey, without so much as asking a Reason for it.

They took away his Power also of Dissolving them, and kept him to his seat,
till they thought fit to discharge him.

And again, whereas all Proposals were formerly offered to the Court, and all
Questions put by the Recorder from the Lord Mayor; when the Faction had any
thing to propound, wherein the Lord Mayor would neither Command the Recorder,
nor the Recorder act without the Lord Mayor, Ven, Pennington and Vassel helped
them out at a dead lift, with an Order from the House of Commons.

And finally, they brought the Orderly Constitution of the City-Government to a
Level, confounding Mayor, Aldermen and Commons in the Blending of their Votes.

The Schismatiques have now got the Riches and the Strength The Fiction Masters
of the City.
of the City in a manner at their own Disposal, For if the major part of the
Common Council may Call, Continue and Dissolve the Court at pleasure, put what
Questions they list, and Determine all things by a Plurality of Votes, there
needed little more then a Pack't Common Council to do their business.

Let us consider now the Harmony betwixt the Two Junto's of The Commons Pe^on
about the Mi^tia. Ex Col. 61.
Westminster, and the City. The Commons Jan. 26. Petitioned his Majesty about
the Tower, Forts, and the Militia: to which his Majesty returns them a Refusal,
Jan. 28. in the most obliging Terms imaginable, telling them, that he did not
doubt, that his having granted more then ever King had granted, would ever
persuade his House of Commons to ask more then ever Subjects had asked.

About the beginning of Feb. there was held a Common-Coun^ll; A Trick put upon
the Lord Mayor and Aldermen.
which sat till One in the Morning. When the Count was quite weary, and tired
out, Ven took that Opportunity of presenting an Order of the Commons, desiring
a return of the Names of those Persons whom the City entrusted with the Militia
of London. The Court was a little surpised at it; but yet being desirous to be
gone, and considering whatsoever past at One Council was in course to be
debated at another, sent the Names of the Committee for the Posture of Defense,
in return to the Houses Order. By this fetch, the Lord Mayor, Sheriffs, and
Court of Aldermen, were understood to have voluntarily relinquished their Own
Interest, and lodged the Power of the Militia in the Committee for the Posture
of Defense, whereof the Major Part was wholly at the Devotion of Ven, and his
accomplices. At the next Common Council, upon reading the Orders of the last
meeting, some of the Aldermen Protested against them; as having no thought, of
either shuting out the Mayor, or making the Committee so absolute as they found
the two Houses had done. Whereupon it was moved that the Houses might be
Petitioned to reverse the Order. But that being carried in the Negative, Ven
produces another Order for the adding of Skippon to the Committee for the
Militia, which was carried without much Difficulty.

The Court of Aldermen reflecting upon the Indignities cast upon the Mayor and
Government of the City, The Government of the City aff^onted.
Petitioned the House apart from the Commons, that the Mayor and Sheriffs might
be nominated of the Committee, but to no purpose; For they knew Sir Richard
Gourny was a person of two much Honor and Loyalty, to comply with their
Designs. After this Repulse, several of the most Eminent Citizens, both for
Worth and Estates, Petitioned the Two Houses in their own Names for the
Removal of That Scandal, but there was no relief to be had; and they were
barbarously treated for their pains over and above. Sir George Benyon (to his
Honor) as the framer and chief Promoter of that most reasonable Petition, was
fined 3000l. Disfranchiz'd in the City, never to bear Office in the Kingdom, to
be Committed for two year to Colchester Goal, and at the end of the Term to
give security for his good Behavior. Methinks the bare Recital of This
Inhumane Insolence should turn the Blood of every honest Citizen.

This Committee was now become the masters of the Militia; The Tyranny of this
Committee.
they removed Sir Richard Gourny, and put Pennington into his place; they make
Ordinances to pass for Laws, and Rebellion, to be a point of Conscience, they
persecute the Orthodox Clergy, Oppress their Fellow Citizens, and the whole
Nation; and where they have not Credit to borrow. they make use of their Power
to Take away, living upon the Spoil, without any regard to the Laws either of
God or Man. And to show the world that as the Faction had subverted the
Government of the City, so they intended to perpetuate the slavery: See as
follows.

Vicesimo Octavo, Februarii 1648. An Act of the Commons of England in
Parliament Assembled, For Removing Obstructions in the Proceedings of the
Common Council of the City of London.
THe Commons of England, in Parliament assembled, do Enact, and Ordain, and be
it Enacted and Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, that in all times to come,
the Lord Mayor of the said City of London, so often and at such time as any 10.
or more of the Common-Council-men do by Writing under their hands, request or
desire him thereunto, shall summon, assemble, and hold a Common Council, and if
at any time being so required or desired he shall fail therein, then the ten
persons, or more making such request or desire, shall have Power, and are
hereby Authorized by Writing under their hand, to summon or cause to be
summoned, to the said Council, the Members belonging thereunto, in as ample
manner as the Lord Mayor himself usually has done, and that the Members
appearing upon the same Summons, being of the Number of 40. or more, shall
become a Common Council. And that each Officer whose duty it shall be to warn
in, and Summon the Members of the said Council, shall perform the same from
time to time upon the Warrant or Command of ten persons or more so authorized
as aforesaid: And it is further Enacted and Ordained, by the authority
aforesaid, that in every Common Council hereafter to be assembled, the Lord
Mayor of the said City for the time being, or in his absence, such Locum tenens
as he shall appoint, and in default thereof, the Eldest Alderman present if any
be, and for want of such Alderman or in case of his neglect, or refusal
therein, then any other person Member of the said Council whom the Commons
present in the said Council shall choose, shall be from time to time President
or Chairman of the said Council; and shall cause and suffer all things offered
to or proposed in the said Council to be fairly and orderly debated, Put to the
Question, Voted, and Determined, in and by the same Council, as the Major part
of the Members present in the said Council shall desire or think ^it; and in
every Vote which shall pass, and in the other Proceedings of the said Council,
neither the Lord Major nor Aldermen, joint, or Separate, shall have any
negative or distinct Voice, or Vote, otherwise then with, and among, and as
part of the rest of the Members of the said Council, and in the same manner as
the other Members have, and that the absence and withdrawing of the Lord Major,
or Aldermen from the said Council, shall not stop or prejudice the proceedings
of the said Council. And that every Common Council which shall be held in the
City of London, shall sit vnd continue so long as the Major part of the Council
shall think sit, and shall not be dissolved, or adjourned but by and according
to the Order or Consent of the Major part of the same Council: And that all the
Votes and Acts of the said Common Council which was held 13 January last, after
the departure of the Lord Mayor from the same Council, and also all Votes and
acts of every Common Council hereafter to be held, shall be from time to time
duly registered as the Votes and Acts of the said Council have used to be done,
in time past. And be it further E^cted and Ordained by the Authority aforesaid,
that every Officer which shall sit in the said Council, shall be from time to
time chosen by the said Council, and shall have such reasonable allowance, or
Salary, for his pains and service therein, as the Council shall think fit: And
that every such Officer shall attend the said Common Council, and that all Acts
and Records and Register Books belonging to the said City, shall be extant, to
be perused ^od* searched into by every Citizen of the said City, in the
presence of the Officer who shall have the Charge of keeping thereof, who is
hereby required to attend for the same purpose.

Hen. Scobel. Cler. Parliament.

Take notice, that the Vote of Common Council in the Act aboverecited, of Jan.
13. 1648. when the Lord Mayor went off, and dismissed the Court, was a
Treasonous Vote, for the speedy bringing of the King to Justice.

You have here the State of the New-Model'd Government of How we were
destroved, and
the City (and effectually of the whole Nation) together with the Methods of
Hypocrisy and State that brought us into that miserable Condition. And what
were they but Canting Sermons, Popular Petitions, Tumults, Associations,
Impostures, and Disaffected Common-Councils? We have likewise set forth how
these Advantages were gained, with their Natural Tendency to the Mischiefs they
produced. And who were they that promoted and brought all these Calamities upon
us, but men of desperate By whom.
Fortunes and Principles, Malcontents, broken Tradesmen, Cobblers,
Thimble-makers, Dray-men, Ostlers, and a world of this sort of People, whose
Names are every where up and down in the History of our late Consusions; Men of
Ambition and Interest, and agreeing in nothing else but an United Disaffection
both to Church and State. The contrivers of all these mischiefs (says his Late
Majesty) know what overtures have been made by them; and Ex. Col. 534.
with what Importunity for Offices and Preferments; what great Services should
have been done for us; and what other Undertakings were (even to have saved the
Life of the Earl of Strafford) if we would confer such Offices upon them. And
Henry Martin very Honestly blurted it out, Apox* o your snivling for Religion
(says he) we fight for Liberty: And all their bawling to put other people out
of Employment was only to get themselves In. Thus they went on till the
Government was made a Prey to the Faction; and the deluded Multitude too late
made sensible of their Errors.

Methinks the People of England, after all this Experience, We must be mad to
engage in New Troubles*
should be both Wiser and Honester, then by treading the same steps over again,
to re-engage themselves in the same Miseries and Crimes: Or if both Conscience
and Common* Prudence* should have quite forsaken us, the very shame, methinks
of being fooled over again the same way, should move us to bethink our selves.
Or if that very shame were lost too, it was so Base, so Scandalous a Servitude;
we were Slaves to the Meanest of the Rabble: And our Masters were a greater
Infamy to us then our Fetters; the very Ignominy cannot but work an Indignation
in any thing that wears the Soul of an Englishman.

This Paper and occasion will not bear the tracing of their Ingratitudes and
Tyrannies at length; but in short, how barbarously The Factions Ingratitude.
did they treat even their Idolized House of Commons; their Assembly; nay their
Covenanting Brethren the Scots; when they followed them from Newark even to
their Borders with a body of Horse at their Heels? their General, and the Army
that set them up: in a most Eminent manner the City of London, though (as the
Faction ordered it) the very Nurse and Supportesse of the Rebellion.

His Sacred Majesty can never forget by what means his Blessed The Methods of
our Late Troubles fresh in our Memories.
Father was Murdered; nor the Bishops forget the abuse and Profanation of the
Pulpits even to the Extirpating of the Holy Order; the Nobility and Gentry can
never forget the Illusions that were put upon them under the Appearancee of
Religion and Duty, by men that were void of both; neither certainly can the
Common people forget how they were conjured into a Circle by Sermons,
Petitions, and Covenants; whence there was no getting out again.

We Will see a little of their Ingratitude now to the City of London; and whether
They fared any better then other people. First Ungrateful to the City.
they stripped them of the Militia; then of their Charter and Priviliges; they
turned their Government Topsy Turvy: Taxed, Disarmed, Imprisoned, and Plundered
at pleasure; took down their Chains, and Posts, Quartered Soldiers upon them,
Garrisoned the Tower, and several other places of the City; the Army Marching
in Triumph through it, for the aggravation of their Slavery; they degraded the
Lord Mayor Reynoldson, Fined him 2000l. and Committed him to the Tower, April
21. 48. for refusing to publish the Proclamation for Abolishing the Kingly
Office: They threatened to set fire to the City, and lay it in the Dust, telling
the Mayor and Aldermen, in a Letter about the beginning of Aug. 1647. that they
were unable to defend either the Parliament or themselves; and demanding to
have the City delivered into their hands; which was submitted to, upon
Conditions, of relinquishing the Militia, and 11. Members, delivering up the
Forts, and Tower of London, and all Magazins, and Arms therein, to the Army,
disbanding their Forces, turning out all Reformades, and drawing off their
Guards from the Parliament. In Walkers Hist. of Independency, these Particulars
are to be seen at large. The Plot driven on Principally by Petitions.


It is remarkable, that what other means soever were occasionally made use of,
the Plot was still driven on, from First to Last, mainly by PETITIONS, but none
were admitted on the Other side: For so soon as ever any Petition appeared that
crossed the Factions ^nterest; (as in several Cases from the Agitators or the
City of London) there was presently a strict enquiry after the Authors and
Abettors of them, and the Design immediately crushed. They should have taken in
the SUBSCRIBERS too, and Issued out a Commission of Enquiry, whether all the
Marks, and Subscriptions, produced in the Names of so many A way to discover
Counterfeits.
thousand Petitioners, were really the Acts, and Attestations of the Persons so
Named, and what Arts and Menaces were made use of for their procurement. No
unnecessary caution, even in our present Case, to distinguish the Sober, and
well-meaning Subscribers, from the Fierce and Bloody Fifth-Monarchy men, and
other Sects that hold affinity with them; It being notoriously known, that a
Mark is set upon the Refusers by those Factions, who are the violent sticklers
in this proceeding, which carries the face rather of an Intended Massacre, then
a Petition. This will seem no uncharitable Construction, when I shall tell you
what a Noble Lord said in the House of Peers, Dec. 19. 42. Dutyful Children.
They cheerfully undertook (says he) to serve against that Army wherein they
knew their Own Fathers were; and on my Conscience (says he) I speak it to their
Honor had they met them* alone (...) would have sacrificed them to the
Commands of both Houses. And now you shall see their Piety expounded in another
part of the same Speech. They (says he) who think that Human Laws can bind the
A Dispensation for perjury
Conscience; and will examine the Oaths they have taken, according to the
Interpretations of Men, will in time fall from us: but such who Religiously
consider that such Moral Preceps are fi^ter for Heathens, then for Christians;
will not feint in their Duty.

To bring this Pamphlet to a Conclusion, we shall only say this further in
justification of it, that it was written with a very Honest Intention; that the
matter of Fact is partly upon Certain Knowledge, and partly upon the credit of
very Warrantable Papers. The principal Scope of it was, to lay open the Mystery
and Method of the Late Rebellion; and so to expose it, that the same Project,
and Model may not be made use of for Another.

The End.
The CONTENTS.
THe Liberties of Press and Pulpit. Page 5 A Deduction of the Late Troubles. P.
12 Of Popular Petitions. P. 18 Of Tumults. P. 22 Of Popular Oaths and
Associations. P. 23 Of Plots, and Impostures. P. 26 How the Faction gained the
Common Council. P. 28

Errata.
PAge 15. line 11. after Covenants, read, Associations for the Factious, and
in (...), the Party. Ibid. l. 29. for Government, r. Governor. p. 21. l. 16.
for be kept, r. keep. p. 22. l. 16. for Garnets, Garrets. p. 27. l. 31. for
Absession, r. Obsession.

Beside other Literal Faults Escaped in haste.


