THE PRESENT STATE OF GENEVA.

With a brief DESCRIPTION Of that CITY, And several changes and alterations it
has been subject to from the first foundation thereof until this present
year, 1681.

LONDON. Printed for William Cademan, at the Pope's Head, in the New-Exchange in
the Strand. 1681.

TO THE REDER.
Courteous Reader,
THis Book was at first a Manuscript composed in Italian for the use of the
present Great Duke of Florence by Signior Gregorio Leti the ingenious Author of
the Cardinalismo and Nepotismo, from whom the Translator had it at Geneva. Some
necessary occasions having called the Author lately into this Country, the
Translator communicated to him his design of turning that Treatise into
English, which he not only approved of, as knowing the value of the thing, but
has since added with his own hand some remarkable passages which conduce not a
little to the accomplishment of the work, and are of so fresh a date, as cannot
as yet have been published by any other. So that, Reader, you have here within
the narrow compass of so little a Treatise all that indeed can be said, or is
necessary to be known concerning that so famed City and Republic.

Farewell.

THE PESENT STATE OF GENEVA, etc.
GENEVA, Antiquity.
as appears by some Chronicles of the Country of Vaux, is one of the ancientest
Cities of Europe, being commonly supposed to have been built by Lemanus, Son of
Hercules, the great King of the Gauls, who gave the name likewise to the Lake
Lemane, by many called the Lake of Geneva.

The first foundation of it was laid in the year of the World 3994. upon a
little rising Hill covered with Juniper Trees, called by the French Geneuriers,
from whence it afterward took the name of Geneura; Lemanus having granted many
Privileges to the place, and erected the same into a City incorporated with
great immunities and freedoms, prescribed them a Form of Government suitable
to the Customs of those times.

In the time of Julius Caesar this City was of great renown, and by him called
the Bulwork of Helvetia, Julius Caesar.
and frontiere Town of the Allobrogi, which name at present it deserves more
than ever.

When the eruption was made upon the Swissers in the year of God 230. by the
Emperor Heliogabalus, Heliogabilus.
Geneva was almost utterly destroyed by Fire; but in the time of Aurelian the
Emperor, Destroyed.
about the year of Grace 270. it was by the command of the same Emperor
rebuilt, Rebuilt.
who having bestowed many privileges on those that came to repair it,
commanded it for the future to be called Aurelia, but the Inhabitants could not
easily banish from their minds the ancient name of Geneva, which to this day it
holds, tho during the Life of Aurelian, they called it Aurelia.

The Situation of this City is one of the pleasantest in Europe, being on the
North side, washed by the Lake, and on the South adorned with a spacious
Neighboring Plain, reaching to the very Walls, and encompassed by two large
Rivers, the Rone and the Arue.

This plain serves the Citizens for a place of diversion and Recreation: There
they walk to take the Air, and refresh themselves in the delightful Gardens,
which inviron it, of which there is a great number. There likewise they train
and exercise their Soldiers, and divert themselves at Play in a long Mall.

Plain Palace.
This Plain is commonly called the Plain Palace, and in a Corner thereof, where
the Arue falls into the Rone, there is a spacious burying place for the dead.
Burying-Place.


The Confines of Geneva are on the East, and South the Duchy of Savoy, on the
West the Country of Gex belonging to the King of France, and on the North side
the Lake. Lemane, and beyond that Switzerland: From the Steeple of St. Peter's
Church, which is a strong high Tower might have been seen formerly six (tho at
present but five Principalities, the Spanish Burgundy being united to France)
to wit, Savoy, France, the Spanish Burgundy, Switzerland, Sion, and Geneva, a
thing so singular, as cannot be paralleled in the World.

This City has of a long time been walled, Fortifications.
and indifferently well fortified; but since the year 1659. the Fortifications
both within and without have been augmented with Bastions, half-Moons, and
Bulwarks, at which they are still busily employed, the Engineer of the
Republic, an expert and skilful Artist, daily assisting and over-seeing their
work.

In the year 1662. The States and other private Persons of the United
Netherlands made a Present to the Republic of above thirty thousand Crowns,
Hollanders
which Sum was applied to the raising of a strong and regular Bulwork on the
side of the Rone, whereon by Order of the Senate this Inscription was put,

Oppugna oppugnantes me ex munificentia Celsiss. Ordinum Faederatorum Belgii,
1663. The City seems divided, Bridges.
because the Rone running through it makes two Islands, that sustain four
Bridges, two whereof which join to St. Gervase have houses and shops upon them,
but the other two that are united with the body of the City, since the fire in
the year 1670. have been left open without any houses to cover them.

Before the Reformation there were many casual fires, sometimes in one, Fires.
and sometimes in another part of the City; but since the year 1534 that the
Reformation began, until 1670. by the grace of God and provident care of the
Magistrates, the City remained free from any such accident, when on Monday the
17th. of January about twelve of the Clock at night a dreadful fire broke out
upon one of the largest and most inhabited of the four Bridges, and burnt with
so much force and rage, that in the space of three hours, tho the night was
calm, without a breath of Wind stirring, the whole buildings, to the number of
threescore and ten houses, were utterly consumed in the Conflagration, above an
hundred and thirty Families deprived of habitation and a hundred Persons, Men,
Women, and Children destroyed in the merciless flames; a dreadful argument,
that if the People could not escape with their Lives, they could not save their
Goods. The loss was reputed to amount to a French Million of Money, and was the
greater, because many substantial Merchants lived upon that Bridge. Many
Collections were presently made throughout the City, for the relief of those
poor People that were burnt out of all, and the Protestants of Switzerland,
Germany, and other places gave seasonable instances of their Charity to the
distressed upon that occasion.

The Bridge is now rebuilt with most excellent Workmanship, New-B^idge.
but by Decree of the Senate no houses nor Shops are for the future to be built
upon it, tho it be much stronger now than it was before, so that the City seems
at present divided.

The Fabric of their houses is not very considerable, Their Building.
the People having been always more addicted to convenience than magnificence,
so that we need say nothing but of their public Structures, which are, the
Town House, repaired and beautified since the Reformation, the Arsenal, five
public Granaries, the Mint and the Towers, two of which stand, one on each
side of the New-Bridge.

Ecclesiastic Buildings.
The Ecclesiastic Fabrics are the four Churches, to wit, St. Peter's the
Cathedral, St. Gervase, St. Magdalens, and St. Germans, besides two little
Chapels, where the Lectures of Theology, Greek Hebrew and Philosophy are held;
and in the biggest of the two, preaching in high Dutch.

There is besides a College built since the Reformation, containing Schools
for the Youth that learn humanity, and houses for the Ministers and Professors.

There were heretofore most magnificent Buildings, both for the Regular and
Secular Clergy, and especially the rich Abbey of St. Victor, the Abbot whereof
was a Temporal Prince invested with many Jurisdictions.

In the great Hall of the College is the Library, furnished with excellent Old
Books. The Library Keeper is a Minister, who is to take care of it, and show it
to such Strangers as desire to see it.

Every day in the week there is preaching in two places (to wit) in the
Preaching
Churches of St. Peter, and St. Gervase, and thrice a week in St. Magdalens,
but on Sunday, there are three Sermons at St. Peter's, and as many at St.
Gervase's, that is, two in the forenoon, and one in the afternoon; besides
Catechizing at Noon in each of the said Churches. There is preaching twice
every Sunday likewise at St. Magdalens in the Morning and Evening, with
Catechizing at Noon. Every Sunday Morning, and Wednesday in the afternoon,
there is a Sermon in High Dutch, and every Thursday in Italian.

St. Peter's Church was in ancient times dedicated to Apollo, as is to be seen
in some very old Inscriptions, several Cardinals and many Prelates of great
Renown were buried in this Church when the Romish Religion flourished here; and
since the Reformation in one of its Chapels, An^o 1628. was interred Emilia of
Nassau, and sometime after the Princess her Sister, both Sisters to the Prince
of Orange, Emilia being Wife to Don Antonio King of Portugal, who was banished
by the Spaniards. In another Chapel lies the Body of the Duke of Rohan buried
in the year 1638 in a most magnificent Monument built by his Duchess, who was
laid there also near her Husband, in the year 1660. as their Son Tancred was in
the Year 1661.

There are two Hospitals, Hospita^^.
the one within the City for releif of the Poor, not only of the Place, but
likewise of all sorts of Strangers; and the other without the City in the
Burying-place of the Plain-Palace, being a Pesthouse for receiving of the
infected in time of the Plague; when the Catholic Religion reigned here, there
were seven Hospitals.

Master of the Hospitals.
The Master of the Hospital continues in place three years, but he is usually
confirmed by the Counsel of two hundred, who have the power of Election for the
next three years, and this place, as being very profitable, is much sought
after. He has for his Assistants (who are the Governors of the Hospital) nine
Laymen with a Minister and a Syndick, who is President in all Courts kept for
the management of the Revenue of the Hospital.

Visiting of the dead.
When any one dies, the body is instantly veiwed by a Surgeon appointed by
the Senate for that purpose; and without this search it cannot be buried.

The Dead are buried without any ceremonious Pomp, Burying.
being accompanied to the Grave by few or many, according to the quality of the
person, but there is no obligation upon any to be present unless invited.

Burying of Strangers of Quality.
Persons of Quality, who are strangers, are interred in the Cloister of St.
Peter's, where Theodore Beza, who departed this life in the Year 1604. lies
buried.

Churchyard of St. Gervase.
In the Church yard of St. Gervase lie seventeen Citizens, who dy^d fighting
nobly in the defense of their Country, the night of the Scalado: to whose
memory the Senate caused this following Inscription to be cut in a Wall.

D. O. M. S.
Quorum infra nomina Scripta, Corpora sita, (Posteri nostri) dum ingressis ipsa
in pace urbem hostibus; and fortiter arma sua, and sedulo munia alia
pernecessario tempore opp^nunt; glorioso laudabilique exitu pro Repub.
ceciderunt. ad d. XII. December. 1602.

Many of the Inhabitants, who die in that quarter of the City are usually
buried in this Churchyard.

Marriages are here celebrated with the usual Ceremonies, Marriages.
that is with the consent of the Parties, who being agreed, and having mutually
past a Promise of Marriage and interchang'd a Ring (if they think it fit) they
make a note of the Banes, with the names of the Persons to be married, which
being signed by the chief Syndick, is given to the Minister, who publishes the
same from the Pulpit three Sundays successively, and afterward, no lawful
impediment being objected, they may marry when they please in the Parish Church
of the Husband, or in any other Church if they judge it more convenient.

The Burgesses and Citizens are not tied to give any security; but the
Inhabitants or Inmates (as they are called) if they intend to marry, are
obliged to pay to the Hospitals, or French Box, about three Pistols, or to give
in security for a greater Sum, that is, for thirty Crowns.

Public dancing and music are not allowed, Dancing.
however for the most part they connive at it, and suffer the Bridegroom and
Bride to pass away their time with some Dance, or Ball within doors.

When any impediment of Marriage is objected; the matter is brought before the
Consistory or Presbytery, who receive the necessary informations in the case:
And in matters of Importance the parties must be cited, and appear before the
Magistrates, and their cause legally tried.

Inhabitants Burgesses and Citizens.
Geneva is inhabited by three sorts of persons, Inhabitants or Inmates,
Burgesses and Citizens. The Inhabitants pay greater contributions than the
other, and yet they enjoy not the same privileges: Besides the Senate may send
them going when they please, and it is likewise permitted to them upon leave
asked to be gone, if they think it convenient.

The Burgesses are those who buy their Freedom, and enjoy all sorts of
privileges; but cannot be admitted to the highest Dignities, and at present
the price of ones Freedom is determined according to the pleasure of the
Council. The Sons of Burgesses born within the City are Citizens, and may
attain to the highest place and Dignity in the Republic.

A Colony of diverse Nations.
In former times Geneva was a Colony of the Allobrogi, but since the reformation
it is become a mixed Colony of all the Nations of Europe, especially of French,
Germans, Italians and Spaniards, who being persecuted for the truth of the
Gospel repair daily thither in whole Families: Hence it is that when before the
reformation, there were not above five thousand Souls in the City, it is at
present so populous by the great concourse of people who flock thither, that it
contains no fewer than thirty five thousand Souls of diverse Nations, and this
is the reason why the humor of that people is so mixed and various, that it is
not easy to find out the temper of any person there without long experience
and conversation; every one retaining still some Tincture of the Ancient
instinct of their Original Country.

A Prince of the Family of Hesse being in Incognito in Geneva in the Month of
July 1602, composed the following verses.

Mauritius Hassiae, Landgravius.
Quisquis amat vitam sobriam castamque tueri,
Perpetua esto illi casta Geneva domus.
Quisquis amat vitam hanc been vivere, viveret illam,
Illi iterum fuerit pulchra Geneva locus.
Hic vitae invenies quicquid conducit utrique,
Relligio hic sana est, aura, ager atque lacus.
Englished.

A strict and sober life if you would embrace,
Let chaste Geneva be your dwelling place.
Or would you lead a lawless life and fice,
The same Geneva your abode must be,
Convenience here for either life is found,
The Air, Land, Water and Religion sound.
The people of Geneva are very industrious, Indust^y.
and since they have not land enough to take up their time in agriculture and
Husbandy, as other states of larger Territories have, they apply themselves
sedulously to the improvement of handycraft Trades.

Clocks and Watches.
Clock and Watch making is a Trade of great esteem, and of Masters and servants
there are above three hundred that follow that occupation; of whom there are
some that drive a good Trade by it, not only in all the Countries of Europe but
also in Turkey, Persia, and other remote Kingdoms: It is necessary tho that such
as come hither to buy, have their eyes in their heads; if they would not be
cheated; because there are bad as well as good Artists among them.

Goldsmiths Gun-Smiths
There are many excellent and skillful Goldsmiths here also, but above all
things tire-Arms are here made in perfection, such as Harquebuses, Pistols,
Muskets and the like, and many Gentlemen provide themselves from hence.

The Genevians want neither Courage nor resolution, having given proofs of the
same on many occasions against the Savoyards, Liberty in great esteem.
but especially when their beloved liberty lies at stake, for which they are
ready (as they have always been) to Sacrafice a thousand lives. an instance of
it.
Pecolat a Citizen of Geneva being taken in Savoy, and made Prisoner by Charles
the Third a declared enemy of the liberty of Geneva, and put to the Rack
because he would confess nothing to the prejudice of his Country; the Savoyards
provoked by his constancy, and thinking him enchanted, called for a Barber to
shave him, and to wash off all suspicion of a Charm. Pecolat snatching the
Razor out of the Barbers hand, instantly cut out his tongue, that thereby he
might deprive himself of the means of discovering any thing to the hurt of his
Country.

Ancient Inscriptions.
In the time of Paganism Apollo was worshipped by the Genevians, as appears by
many ancient Inscriptions, that are to be seen in the City. In an old house, in
the great Street you will find, Apolloni Munfustius, and in a Wall of the College
there is still to be seen, Apolloni Muestius Mercator, without the Chain of the
Harbor, their is a Rock called Neptunes Stone, but formerly Neptunes Prayer,
Neptunes rock.
because in time of Paganism the Boat men offered there Sacrifices there, when
they were upon undertaking of any voyage.

The Christian Religion planted.
By some Manuscripts, and especially in a very ancient Bible kept in the
Library, it appears that the Church of Geneva was planted by the Disciples of
the Apostles, Consecration of St. Peter's Church.
and that the Church of St. Peter was consecrated by St. Denis and Paradocus
his Scholar, who remained Bishop of Geneva, when St. Denis was gone to preach
the Gospel at Paris.

The Successors of Paradocus became afterward not only Chief in Spirituals,
but also Supreme in Temporal Affairs, so that until the Year 1535. Geneva was
Governed by a Succession of 74 Bishops, of which Peter de la Baume was the
last, who being a Prelate odious for his lascivious life, and therefore very
timorous, upon information that the Citizens intended to embrace the reformed
Religion already received by their Neighbors, was so surpised with fear of
some unhappy accident in such a revolution, that he with his Chanons on a
sudden retired into Burgundy, giving way (as he said) to this first popular
commotion to spend it self, but he was greatly mistaken, for the people more
encouraged by the absence of their Bishop and Clergy gave a beginning to the
reformation, and the chief Minister that preached there was one William Farrell
a very Learned man. The Senate ordered that on the right hand of the Gate of
the public Palace this inscription should be put, as it is to be seen by
passengers at this day.

Profligata Romani Antichristi tyrannide, abrogatisque ejus superstitionibus,
Sacro sancta Christi Religio, Inscription of the Reformation.
hic in suam puritatem, Ecclesia in meliorem ordinem singulari Dei benesicio
reposita, and simul pulsis fugatisque hoslibus, Vrbs ipsa in suam libertatem
non sine insign miraculo restituto sucrit. S. P. Q. G. Monumentum hoc perpetuae
memoriae causa fieri, atque hoc loco erigi curavit, quo suam erga Deum
gratitudinem ad Posteros testatam faceret.

Money coined.
In the same year, 1535. And on the 24th. of October, the Senate began to coin
money. The first Inscription or Motto about the Arms, was Post Tenebras spero
Lucem, but it was ordered to be altered and instead thereof, only post tenebras
lux to be stamped on the one side, and on the other Deus noster pugna pro nobis.

Geneva was under the Jurisdiction of a Bishop, Bishop.
as their Spiritual and Temporal Head and Governor. He had under him thirty
two Chanons, one half of them being always to be Citizens, but all of them
together exercised their Jurisdiction: there were besides Eleven Chaplains,
Maccabees
of whom six were called Maccabees, and this Congregation was institued by John
Alermet, Bishop of Geneva in the year, 1378. To serve in the Cathedrral of
Saint Peter, which he subjected to the Canonical Jurisdiction, and endowed with
considerable revenues, ordering them to be called Maccabees; besides them were
six Clerks of the Quire, and seven Curates.

The regular Clergy had five Monasteries; three Frieries, to wit, Monasteries.
of St. Dominick, St. Francis, and St. Augustine: And two Nunneries, the (...)
of St. Clare, and the other of Dominicans, with their Chaplains.

Eection of the Bishop.
In the Primitive times the Bishop was elected by the general Council of the
people, which was the custom likewise in other Bishoprics of Suitzerland; but
he was always confirmed by the Pope, who afterward deprived them of that
Privilege, conferring the power of Election on the Chanons, who by plurality
of voices chose two, of whom the Pope according to his pleasure confirmed the
one.

There were moreover four Annual Syndicks (as there are at present) who
governed as Temporal Princes, Election of the Syndicks before the Reformation.
being Judges in Criminal causes, Lords of the City, Masters of the Gates, and
of all that belonged to the Militia, which the Bishop never challenged or
meddled with. The General Council consisted of Citizens and Burgesses, and to it
belonged the Election of the four Syndicks, which was on Saint Martins day.
Every Syndick afterward chose five Counselors, and all together Elected a
Treasurer: From sun setting until break of day, the fo^^ Syndicks alone had
absolute Jurisdiction within the City, and acted what they judged convenient
for the Public by their own Supreme Authority.

When the Bishops Lieutenant or Vidone, as they called him in that time,
aphrehended a Malefactor, he remitted him to the Syndicks; Administration of
Justice before the Reformation.
who were obliged within the space of twenty four hours to do Justice upon
him, from which Sentence there was no appeal; it is true the Bishop had the
power of pardoning and showing mercy if he pleased; the Sentence being given by
the Syndicks, it was intimated to the Prisoner, who was then again turned over
into the hands of the Bishops Lieutenant with orders from them to cause the
Sentence to be put in Execution, and if the Bishop gave no pardon, the
Lieutenant delivered up the same Prisoner to another Lieutenant belonging to
the Counts of Geneva, who were feudatories of the Bishop, and he it was that
put the Sentence in Execution: this was all the power and Authority that the
Counts of Geneva had; Counts of Geneva.
and it is also to be observed that Executions were always performed without
the City in a place called Champel, where one of the Gibbets is to be seen to
this day.

The Duke of Savoy as Successor to these Counts, Pretentions of the Duke of
Savoy.
pretends the Soveranity over Geneva, though there be nothing more certain than
that the said Counts never had any Jurisdiction of Command, nor right of
Dominion in that City.

His Highness indeed makes great pretentions, and is very well satisfied with
the reasonableness of the same, though they be backed with very weak and
frivolous evidences, seeing the proofs that are alleged to make good those
pretentions, come far short of what they are intended to assert: one argument
is, that though the Bishop of Geneva was chief in Spirituals and Temporals, and
was honored with the Title of Prince of the Empire; nevertheless (His Royal
Highness would have it) it behoved him to do homage to the Duke regent as to
his Superior, and to Swear fealty to him the day of his Inauguration; but
there is not one Authentic act to be found of this, and the only Oath the
Bishop took was to the Syndicks, to whom he swore, to maintain and preserve the
privileges and liberties of the City.

It is further alleged that Duke Charles of Savoy went frequently to Geneva
with his Duchess Beatrix, where all Imaginable honor and respect was showed
him: -- This I am apt to believe, but the consequence is not good; for the
Genevians are civil and obliging to all strangers, but especially to persons of
high merit and quality.

It is certain that Geneva was always a free City, and that long before the
House of Savoy was spoken of, or came in play, they were Governed by their own
Laws and Statutes Imperial and municipal edicts; the Bishops, indeed of Geneva,
who in the fall of the Roman Empire raised themselves to Supremacy in temporals
in that City, as well as other Bishops had done in other places, were commonly
in contest with the Counts of Geneva, for the dominion and Governmenr of the
City, a short account of which, I shall hear give you. After that one Humbert
Bishop of Geneva had exchanged this for another life, Andutius his Successor
applied himself to the Emperor Frederick the first, and obtained of him to be
declared absolute Prince of the City of Geneva, that in Temporals he should be
subject to none but the Emperor alone, and that he should be free, and Exempt
from all taxes and tribute, but the Bishop being returned with design to enjoy
the prerogative granted him by the Emperor; the Counts raised greater trouble
against him than before, not suffering him to exercise any such privileges;
though this storm was afterward calmed by the Golden-bull of the same
Emperor in favor of the Bishop, and published in the year, 1162. For some
time after, matters went on quietly to the satisfaction of the Bishop, until
that one William Count of the Geneveses, who took upon himself the Title of
Count of Geneva, being for Rebellion and other heinous Crimes outlawed by the
Emperor, and deprived of the fief which he held of the Bishop, betook himself
to his friends for help and Assistance.

This having occasioned a long war whereby the forces of this Bishop and the
City were much impaired the Genevians called to their Assistance a Count of
Maurianna who was afterward Count of Savoy, but this put no end to the War; on
the contrary it increased daily, in so much that the Count of Maurianna being
powerful, he seized several places and Castles which belonged to those of
Geneva, encroching daily more and more upon the City, and not contented with
what he he had Usurped under the Title of Homage, he demanded to be reinbursed
of the expenses he had been at in the Wars. Hence many new quarrels arose,
which lasted until the Counts of the Genevese were extinct, of whom the last
was the Antipope Clement the seventh: To them the Dukes of Savoy, with consent
of the Bishop, succeeded as Heirs, but Amadeus Prince of Savoy disdaining to
be under the Jurisdiction of a Bishop, procured of the Emporour the Vicarship
of the Empire within all his own Territories, thereby pretending that as Vicar
of the Empire, the Bishop in all his Jurisdictions ought to be subject to him,
but the Bishop protected by the Pope made vigorus resistance, and threatened to
Excommunicate the Duke, as often, as he should pretend to revive any such
pretentions, wherefore the Duke that he might not Embroil him self with the
Court of Rome, let fall his great pretentions, expecting a more favorable time
to raise them again, and so the Bishop remained in peaceable possession of his
Authority, and the people of their ancient liberty.

Afterward in the year, 1418. Pope Martin the fifth passing through Savoy was
in all places entertained by the Duke regnant at great expenses, and with the
highest Demonstrations of honor, the Pope to gratify him, of his own free
motion, conferred on him the Temporal Jurisdiction over the City of Geneva, but
neither the Bishop, or people for all that, even suffered the Duke to enjoy
that Pontifical privilege and concession.

In the year, 1536 about the beginning of September, John Calvin of Noion in
Picardy, The coming of Calvin to Geneva.
a learned man came to Geneva and joining with Farrel, who already preached up
the reformed Religion in that City, they together instituted many Ecclesiastic
ordinances, and settled a lecture in Theology.

Cardinal Sadoleto a person eminent for learning and integrity of life,
Cardinal Sadoleto.
hearing of the separation of Geneva from the Roman Church, wrote a most
courteous and hortatory Letter to the Senate, promising them in the Popes name
a pardon for what was past, offering himself to be their mediator, for
reconciling them again to the Church, but the minds of the people being
disposed to the contrary, that Letter had no effect.

The Banishment of Calvin and Farrel.
In the year, 1528. Calvin and Farrel were banished Geneva, by order of the
Council of the two hundred, because they had said openly that they could not
Administer the Sacrament of the Lords supper, to loose and dissolute people,
and indeed they actually refused upon an Easter day to give the Sacrament to
some Scandalous and lewd persons, whereupon the Council of the two hundred
being next day assembled, those two men were sentenced to be Banished, and
presently departed.

The Syndicks who were the contrivers of that Banishment were utterly ruined
two years after; one of them that told Calvin the gates were made wide enough
to march out at, burst in a narrow window, through which he attempted to escape
out of prison; another was beheaded, but the rest fled, and so saved their
lives.

The year, 1540. Charles V.
The Emperor Charles the fifth by express Letters commanded those of Geneva
not to Swear Allegiance to any whosoever, declaring that for the future, they
should continue under the obedience of the Emperor, and enjoy the privileges
which other Imperial Cities and they themselves had already in times past
enjoyed.

Calvin returns to Geneva.
The Edict of 1538, for Banishing of the Ministers was in the years, 1541 in a
general Council revoked, and by express Letters they were recalled, so that on
the third of September, 1541 Calvin returned to Geneva, about which time by his
advice the first Ecclesiastic Laws were established in that Church, the
Supremacy in Spirituals as well as Temporals, being by a General declaration
asserted to belong solely to the Senate.

Calvin dies.
Calvin lived the remaining part of his life in great esteem and tranquillity
in Geneva, and to the extraordinary grief of the people died the 24 of May
1564, aged fifty four years, ten Months and six days, his body was interred in
the burying place of the plain Palace, but since upon suspicion that the
Savoyards intended to dig up and insult over his bones, they were removed and
buried within the Cloister of St. Peter's Church.

The Government of Geneva was at first wholly democratical, Government of Geneva.
the people assembled in a general Council having the Supreme power to dispose
of Public places by Election as of the Syndicks Lieutenant, Auditors,
Treasurer, Procurator general: And besides of making peace and War,
nevertheless in the year 1607, The Council of two hundred alone concluded a
peace, and at present all the power the people has is of choosing by most
voices in their Councils, one of two that are presented to them by the Council
of two hundred, and none being ever presented by them but persons of chief note
in the City; the Government seems now to have a great affinity with
Aristocracy, none but the more Noble being admitted to the public
adminstration of affairs.

The public Officers are always first elected in the Council of twenty five,
and then confirmed by that of the two hundred, who have the Authority to
approve, or reject the Election: when the Council of two hundred rejects a
party proposed, then the Council of twenty five returns and makes a new
Election, which is to be reiterated, as long as the choice is not confirmed by
the Council of two hundred, who at the same time that they reject any person
proposed, have the power to nominate another; but this is seldom put in
practice; the manner of their Election is as follows.

When a Lieutenant (for instance) is to be made, Balloting.
two candidates are chosen by the Council of twenty five, and presented to the
Counsel of two hundred; in which all the kindred and relations, first of the
one, and then of the other Candidate successively to the utmost degree, are
ordered to withdraw, this being done, they carefully sift and examine the
actions of the persons proposed, and such as have any thing to object against
them, speak their minds freely, then every member of the Council puts into a
Box a B, or an O, B, signifying bon or good, and the O, omitted or rejected. If
their be more Bs found than Os, the party is approved but if more Os, the
Council of twenty five proposes an other, and many times the Council of two
hundred rejects ten in one Election: Both being afterward confirmed, they are
presented to the people, and he who in their general Council has most voices,
is legally elected.

In the opening of any Council or assembly for Election, there are always two
Oaths Adminstred to the Members, one that they choose a fit person, and the
other that they discover nothing of what shall be spoken concerning the parties
proposed.

All Burgesses and Citizens past eighteen years of age are admitted into the
General Council; The General Council.
which is sometimes more, sometimes less Numerous, according as the Members are
at home, or willing to come.

The City Companies of the Militia.
The City is divided into seventeen companies, each of which has for Captain a
Lord of the Council of twenty five, with a Lieutenant, Ensign and other
officers who are commonly chose from among the Burgesses and Citizens, yet a
Burgess tho he may be a Lieuetenent, can never be an Ensign.

The Companies of Trades.
Every Trade has a Company consisting of Members of the same profession, which
is Governed by a Lord of the Council of twenty five, and four assistants of the
same Trade.

The Election of Magistrates.
The Magistrates are always chosen by secret suffrages, some of whom continue
in place for life, and others for a certain time.

The Members of the Council of 25.
The Members of the Council of twenty five, who constitute the chief Court of
the City, and carry properly the names of Counselors, are chosen out of the
Council of two hundred, that is the Council of twenty five proposes two, and
that of the two hundred approves or rejects them, and if it happen that both
are approved by the greater numbers of Bs, than Os, then they come to an
Election by the Plurality of voices, in which Election the Kindred have a
voice; though when Scrutiny is made with Bs, and Os, all remove even to the
remotest degree of relation.

The members of the Council of two hundred are Elected solely by the Council of
twenty five, The Members of the Council of 200.
and must be twenty five years of Age complete, as it is ordered sometime
ago, they continue in place for life, unless by the Council of twenty five,
who in the beginning of every year try and censure their actions, they be
turned out or suspended for misdemeanor.

In the beginning of every year the Council of two hundred, censure also the
actions of the Council of twenty five; except of the four Syndicks, who with
the Treasurer are exempted from that censure.

The four Syndicks who are annual, Syndicks.
are chosen by the general Council of the people, by the general Council of the
people, and are commonly taken out of the Council of twenty five, one of them
carries the title of first Syndick, and he that has once been a Syndick, in
four years time returns most commonly to the same place again.

Lieutenant and Auditors.
The Lieutenant who administers justice has six Auditors for assistance, all
chosen by the general Council of the people, the Lieutenant for one year, and
the Auditors for three, of whom two are yearly chosen, and two go out, these
Auditors are not elected out of the number of twenty five, but of that of the
two hundred.

Procurator general.
The Procurator general is likewise taken out of the Council of the two hundred,
and chosen by the people for three years; but is commonly confirmed again for
three years more, his Office is to take care of the observation of the Laws,
and preservation of privilidges.

The Treasurer is always one of the Council of twenty five, Treasurer.
who is to give an account of the revenues and disbursments of the Republic;
he is elected by the general Council of the people, continues three years in
place, and most commonly goes not out before he be chosen Syndick.

Secretaries of State.
There are two Secretaries of State chosen by the Council of the two hundred out
of that of twenty five, they continue in place during pleasure, but commonly
until they be chosen Syndicks, they sit uncovered, and write all the acts of
the Council.

City Marshal.
The Office of City Marshal is very considerable, tho he be as in other places
but Captain of the Town Officers. This place is conferred upon one of the body
of the two hundred, but he is admitted into the Council of twenty five, and
hears all that passes there; he has no voice, but only expects their orders; he
sits uncovered on a bench by the door. Two are named to the place by the
Council of twenty five, but the election belongs to that of the two hundred; he
continues commonly in place for six years, and is not allowed to appear in
public without a staff in his hand with a Sylver ball which belongs to the
State. When the Senate makes a present of Wine or any thing else to Strangers
of Quality, it is his part to make the Compliment,

The House of the Secretaries and City Marshals public feasts.
In the Town House of the City none live but the two Secretaries of State and
the City Marshal, to whom it belongs to order the public feasts in the times
of Election, and to treat such, as the Senate thinks fit to appoint.

At the Election of the Magistrates, that is of the Syndicks, Lieutenant,
Auditors, members of the Council of twenty five and other greater Officers, the
Council of twenty five Dine in the Town Hall at the charge of him who is new
elected, but because the election of the Lieutenant and Auditors is all ways
on the same day, the two Auditors are at the charge of the diner, and the
Lieutenant eats Scot-free.

There are in the State of Geneva four Castellains who Administer Justice to
the people in the Country, Castellains.
and are Members of the Council of the two hundred and by them elected, after
that they are nominated by the Council of twenty five, as all other officers
are; every one of these Castellains continues in place three years, having
under him only a Clerk, and Officers, and once a week, or oftener if need be,
goes to Adminster Justice in the place of his Jurisdiction.

Public Gramnarie.
To the public Granarie, which is one of the first things that is to be seen in
Geneva, and of great advantage both to the State and people, belong eight
Governors with a Receiver, and Syndick, who are entrusted with the management
thereof. These Governors, (except the Syndick) are indifferently chosen from
among the Citizens, Burgesses and Inhabitants, or inmatess, and meet on
occasion upon notice given them by the Syndick, who is their President, they
are all elected by the Council of twenty five, and confirmed by that of the two
hundred; in several store houses of this Granary are commonly kept one hundred
thousand Sacks of Corn, each sack weighing an hundred and fifty pounds weight
at twelve ounces to the pound, and above twenty thousand sacks are yearly
bought and sold here. The Bakers are obliged to buy their Corn out of this
Granary at the rate of 24 Solz dearer then it is sold in the Market, and the
Inkeepers, Vintners, and other public House keepers are bound to buy their
bread from those Bakers, so that by this means the City raises a considerable
profit without burdenning their Subjects; such as put money into that Chamber
have formerly had seven, or eight per cent, but at present that the Chamber is
not necessitated to borrow money, they allow no more then three, or at most
four per cent.

The forces of the City.
There are nine Companies of foot appointed for the constant Guard of the City,
the Captains who are chosen by the Council of twenty five, and confirmed by
that of the two hundred, enjoy their places for life, some of them are of the
body of the two hundred, and some not, according as they have friends and
Interest. A Burgess may be a Captain, when other Offices require a Citizen. The
Companies consist of thirty Soldiers a peace not reckoning inferior Officers,
to wit, Serjants and Corporals, and are all punctually paid once a month. Every
Cap. has an hundred French Crowns and somewhat more a year, a Sergeant about
forty five, a Corporal somewhat less, and every private Soldier somewhat more
then two Crowns a month: There are three Gates in the City, and at each gate a
Captain with his Company keeps constant guard; moreover every evening four are
chosen out of those Companies that are not upon duty at the gates to go the
round without and within the City; one of which Companies mounts the guard
every night in the Town Hall.

The Muster of the Companies.
The penult and last day of every month the nine Companies three at a time are
mustered in presence of the Syndick of the Guards (who is for most part the
fourth Syndick) and of the two Majors, and at the same time receive their pay.

The Majors are members of the Council of twenty five, Majors.
and commonly the two youngest are chosen. It is really a place of great
fatigue; for they are obliged by turns once a week, to relieve the Guards every
evening, and to go the rounds twice a night about the City to visit the
Sentinels; they are allowed indeed to discharge their Office on horse back,
being attended by some Soldiers and a Lantern: And certainly since the Scalado
and surprise that the Duke of Savoy attempted to have made on this place, there
is no City in the world more vigilant, and that uses greater diligence to
prevent the like for the future; for four of the Council of the two hundred
every week go the rounds nightly, both before and after the Majors rounds, and
every hour of the night the Sentinels are visited, the Guards being always
doubled when there is any suspicion of danger.

Pomps and vain shows.
There is a Court established here a against Pomps and vain Shows consisting of a
Syndick as President, the Procurator General, and four Deputies, who meet
commonly on Monday after dinner.

The time when the Councils meet.
Twice a year the General Council of the People meets after morning Sermon in
St. Peter's Church, to wit, on the first Sunday of November, for the Election of
the Lieutenant, and two Auditors, and the first Sunday of January, for the
Election of the four Syndicks, Procurator General and Treasurer.

The Council of 25.
The Council of twenty five sits every morning, and on occasion in the
afternoon, excepting Sunday and Thursday, when they never meet, unless matters
of State, or other things of great importance require their attendance.

The Council of 200.
The Council of the two hundred meet the first Friday morning of every month
after that the Council of 25 is up, for treating of matters of State and
affairs of public benefit; but if other necessary matters do require,
ac^^^ding to exigency they meet oftener, and because many Civil matters are
transferred from the Council of twenty five to that of the two hundred, they
assemble sometimes three days a weak for the decision of such actions.

There is no appeal to be made to the Council of the two hundred in any action
under fifty Crowns, the parties being obliged to deposit twenty, and besides
allege that the sentence given by the twenty five is against the Edict which
is the Municipal Law of Geneva.

The Council of threescore.
There is moreover a Council of sixty, the Members whereof are chosen out of the
body of the two hundred, and are men of mature judgment, and such as have born
the charge of an Auditor, but this Council seldom meets and only upon matters
of State: You must observe that the Members of the Council of twenty five, sit
in all other Councils, whether of the General, that of the 200, or of the sixty.

The Lieutenant assisted by his six Auditors holds a Court daily, Lieutenant.
and tho all be not present, yet it is still a Court, the first Auditor in
absence of the Lieutenant being President thereof.

In the Court which is called the Court of Appeals a Syndick is President,
Appeals.
and it is composed of five Judges or Counselors, who are Members of the two
hundred and continue in place for three years. They are to meet once a week
according as causes happen; for from the sentence of the Lieutenant they remove
to this Court of Appeals, and from (...) the Council of twenty five.

When an action whether Civil or Criminal is to be decided in the Coun^^^
twenty five; all the Kindred and Relations of the Parties withdraw, so that to
fill up the Quorum of that Court, as of the other of Appeals, they take
Assessors out of the number of the two hundred, who sit not on the bench, but
on certain seats provided for them in the middle of the Hall: but if the number
of the Judges not excepted against, exceed the half, the Court is complete and
no Assessors are called.

The Congregation of the Ministers.
The Congregation of Ecclesiastics, that is, of the Ministers who Preach the
Gospel, consists of twenty four Churchmen, that is of twelve Ministers of the
City, and as many of the Country about, which belongs to the Soverainity of
Geneva.

Every Friday Morning this Assembly meets to treat of the affairs of their
Ministry, and the Purity of Religion, tho upon urgent occasions they meet at
other times: not only all the Ministers but likewise the Professors are
admitted into this Congregation, the truth is, the professors of Theology,
Greek, and Hebrew are commonly Ministers, and tho those of Philosophy be not,
yet they have place in the Congregation.

The Consistory.
The Consistory which is held every Thursday, is composed of all the Ministers,
and nine other persons of exemplary life and Mature age, whom they call Elders;
two of which are commonly members of the Council of twenty five. A Minister
with the title of Moderator is President of the Consistory, who is changed
weekly, but the twelve Country Ministers are never admitted to be Moderators.

The Italians and Germans have likewise their Consistories, composed of their
Ministers, and some Elders, who meet commonly after Sermon, and treat of the
affairs of their several Churches, but they depend on the greater Consistory.

There is a kind of Hospital commonly called the French-Box, The French Box.
which takes care to relieve all the poor Families of strangers, for none are
received into the great Hospital, but only Burgesses, Citizens, and poor
Travelers without any respect to their Religion or Country.

The Italian and German Boxes.
The Poor Families of the Italian Nation are releived out of the Box of the
Italian Consistory, and the Germans out of the German-Box.

Administration of the Holy Sacrament of the Lords Supper.
The Sacrament of the Lords Supper is Administered to the People four times a
year, to wit, at Easter, Whitsuntide, in the beginning of September, and at
Christmas, but always on a Sunday, and that twice in every Church with great
concourse of Communicants. The Italians likewise and Germans receive four times
a year in their seververal Churches; so that the Sacrament is administered
twelve times a year in Geneva, that is once a Month, a thing most convenient
for Travelers and the sick.

The Italian Church is much antiener than that of the Germans. Heretofore the
Spaniards had a Church, but for want of people of that Nation it is now lost.

The College.
The College for Letters is constituted of a Rector who is a Minister, seven
Professors, to wit, three of Theology, one of Hebrew, another of Greek, and
two of Philosophy: There is moreover a Principal, who is a Minister also set
over the Regents of the Schools, where the youths study humanity; a libruy
keeper, who has the charge of the public library, and three Senators of the
Council of twenty five, whom they call commonly the Governors of the Schools.

The election of Ministers.
When a Minister is to be chosen for the City or Country, the Congregation by
secret voices makes the Election, and then proposes the person elected to the
Council of twenty five, who have the absolute power of admitting or rejecting
him: If the party be rejected, the Ministers proceed to a new Election until
they please the humor of the Council: The same method is observed in choosing
of Professors; but for the Regents of the Schools, it is sufficient that they
be examined by the body of the College, and then with their recommendation
presented to the body of the twenty five.

There are in Geneva many Students called Proposants, as well Natives, as of
other Countries, as French, Germans, Switzers, Hollanders and others. These
Students are employed weekly to say Prayers every Evening in three Churches, to
wit, St. Peter's, St. Gervase's, and St. Magdalens, and besides to read in the
Pulpit some Chapter of the bible every Morning and Evening, between the first
and last ringing into Church.

When any of these Ministers are to be ordained, Ordination of Ministers.
that is when they are to receive Authority to Preach and Administer the
Sacraments, they are examined by the Ministers in the Congregation, and
afterward without any Ceremony they receive their Authority, the Council of
twenty five not meddling in that, but leaveing the whole care thereof to the
Ministers.

The Pres^.
There are many Presses in Geneva, which ought weekly to be visited by the
Rector; but to speak truth both that and Licensing of Books by the Rectors and
Governors of Schools without which they should not be Printed, for most part
are neglected.

The Salary of the Ministers and Professors. Adultery.
The Salary of the Ministers of the City exceeds not the sum of two hundred
Crowns a year.

About fifty or threescore years ago the Crime of Adultery was without any
respect of persons punished with death, but that rigor is at present remitted;
the punishment being now some months Imprisonment, and a pecuniary fine, but
the poor that have not money are punished Corporally.

Simple Fornication is also punished according to the quality of the offense,
the delinquent being confined to prison for nine days to eat nothing but
Bread and Water, none are exempted but must present themselves before the
Consistory.

The course that is taken in time of fire.
There can no where better courses be taken in time of fire than in Geneva, for
all the men upon the first alarm are obliged in their arms to betake
themselves to the several quarters appointed them, and the serving Maids with
their Buckets to carry water, every house keeper being bound to send his Maid;
Masons Carpenters and the like are obliged to go and carry their Instruments
and tools with them to the place where the fire is, and the Members of the
Council of twenty five repair to the Town Hall, there to give the necessary
orders.

The Lieutenant with his Staff of Justice, two Auditors, and the Syndick of the
Guards with his Staff, and another Syndick all accompanied with a considerable
number of Officers go to the place where the fire is, and there give all orders
necessary, every one being obliged exactly to obey them and to pull down what
Contiguous Houses they shall think most convenient for quenching the fire; the
two Auditors take into their Custody all the goods they can, which they
transport to prevent theft and robbery; and in a late fire a Burgess was hanged
for stealing some small trifle whilst the people were in confusion.

The Guards of the Gates are doubled with a Company of Soldiers more than
ordinary, and in the day time when the Gates are open, so soon as they cry
fire fire, they are shut and not opened again until the fire be quite out, the
two Majors on Horse back continually surrounding the City and visiting the
posts, and in a word no care and diligence is omitted.

Trials of prisoners dispatched.
The Trials of Prisoners are no where dispatched with greater expedition then in
Geneva, where they are not suffered, as in other places, to languish in a prison.

The Jailer is one of the Council of the two hundred, Jailer.
who discharges that office only for a year, but seeing it is a place of no
great profit, there are not many that seek after it.

Prisoners are commonly brought to Trial at the suit of the Lieutenant and
Procurator General before one of the Council of twenty five, Trials.
who meet always in a Room of the Prison appointed for that purpose, where
they examine the Prisoner, who every time that the Council go to examine him, is
obliged to pay them eighty Florins, which is about three Crowns, but such as
are condemned to death, and have not wherewithal, are exempted from payment, no
man being bound to do a thing impossible. Malefactors are not tortured here so
much, as in other places, and they never give the rack oftener then twice.

The Trial ended, Sentence.
the Members of the Council of twenty five having first prayed to God on their
knees, give Sentence, from which the Citizens and Burgesses, as soon as it is
intimated to them, appeal to the Council of the two hundred.

Execution of the Sentence.
After that Sentence of death has past, it is next day an hour before Sunrising
intimated to the prisoner by two Ministers, and from that time till ten of the
Clock before noon, he is constantly attended by two of them, who are relieved
every hour, and who make it their business to prepare him for Death, the
Prisoner, all that while being in the same Room where the Council of twenty
five sits, when they examine any Malefactor, and where he receives the
intimation of his Sentence, and continues till he be carried to the place of
Execution.

Time of Execution.
At ten of the Clock then in the forenoon the Council of twenty five assembles
before the Gate of the Town Hall where stands a seat of Justice, on which sit
the four Syndicks with their staves of Justice in hand, the Counselors sitting
on each side of the bench, but lower than the Syndicks, the Prisoner assisted
still by two Ministers, is brought before them by an Auditor (representing the
Lieutenant) and the City Marshal with his Officers, where kneeling alone before
the bench, a Clerk with an Audible Voice reads to him all the Crimes he is
guilty of, which being confessed by himself, the Sentence then read, the City
Marshal holding all this while an open Bible in his hand before the Court,
because before the Clarke begins to read the Sentence he pronounces these words
aloud, having before our eyes, God and his holy Scripture. The Sentence being
read, the Prisoner is instantly delivered over into the hands of the Officers
of the Lieutenant, to whom the execution of Justice belongs, but the Sentence
must be immediately executed, and therefore the Executioner appears, who taking
the Prisoner by the hand, leads him into a low room, where having put the
Halter about his neck and bound him, an Auditor and the City Marshal on
Horseback, with the Officers and Executioner on foot, bring him to the place of
Execution, and stir not from thence till the Malefactor be dead.

Place of Execution.
Ordinarily persons are put to death in the plain Palace without the City, and
in the place of Molard.

Geneva has at several times contracted alliances, Alliances.
both in the times of the Bishops and since, and that with several Princes, and
Republics, particulary with the Commonwealth of Venice, with which until this
day they entertain a very good corespondence, in so much that they willingly
suffer their Captains to levy men amongst them.

In the year 1518. 1518.1526.
The Genevians made a League with the Canton of Fribourg, which in the year,
1526. Was confirmed with closer obligations of Friendship and enlarged with new
Articles; The Canton of Berne with that of Fribourg, being therein
comprehended, and all three together obliged in a perpetual, and individual
League with one another.

The reformed Religion being afterward in the year, 1535. 1535.
Established in Geneva, the States of Fribourg moved by their Church men, sent
Ambassadors to Geneva, declaring that if they would not return into the bosom
of the Catholic Church they would be obliged to break the League, to these
propositions the Genevians would not condescend, but protested they would
faithfully observe the alliance.

The year following which was 1536. 1536.
The States of Berne understanding that the Fribourgers had made a League with
the Genevians, sent Ambassadors to Geneva, where a League for twenty five years
was concluded betwixt Geneva and Berne, this Legue expiring in the year, 1558.
On the first of January of the same year a perpetual League was concluded
betwixt these two States.

May the 8th. 1559 Henry the third, 1559.
King of France and Poland made Alliance with Berne, Solerne, and Geneva, in
which treaty Geneva was by that King called the key of Switzerland, and he
always esteemed it so, having recommended to the Switzers the preservation of
that City.

Lastly, on the eighteenth of October, 1584. 1584.
Zurich made a mutual League with Geneva, in memory whereof the Senate crected
a Marble Monument with this inscription, which is to be seen in the Hall of the
Town house, on the side as you go to the Arsenal.

Anno a vera religione divinitus cum vetere liberate Geneva restituta,
Inscription
quasi novo Jubileo inennte, plurimis vitatis domi and foris insidijs and
sup^ratis tempestatibus, quod Helvetiorum primari^ Tigurini Bernarum exemplo
aequo jure and in societatem perpetuam nobiscum venerint, and prius novo
vinculo adstrinxerint, S. P. Q. G. quod faelix esse velit. D. O. M. tanti
benesicii Monumentum consecrarunt.

Besides the above mentioned alliances, Geneva holds friendship and
correspondence upon account of the Prorestant Religion, with the English.
Hollanders, and Protestant Princes of Germany all which in time of need would
do them sen^e good Offices, but the truth is the Jealousy that reigns amongst
neighboring Princes, has a greater influence upon the preservation of the
Liberty of Geneva than any other consideration whatsoever.

Protestants of France.
This City is looked upon as the only City of refuge, for the Protestants of
France, seeing upon occasion of any persecution, they can retreat into this
place, and that makes them on their part so solicitous for its safety and
preservation, that on all occasions they would be ready to show the effects of
their good inclinations toward it, as they have already done during the War
with the Duke of Savoy, and it is certain that no sooner would any new War
begin in Geneva, but that the Protestants of the best quality in France would
come to its assistance, knowing very well, that if they be deprived of that
Sanctuary, they must remain exposed to the will of their enemies.

As to the forces of Geneva, without doubt they are but inconsiderable, Forces
Arsenal.
they have in the first place an Arsenal provided of all sorts of Arms for
arming of six thousand men at least; besides a great many old Arms and Colors
taken from their enemies in the time of the War.

There is no great store of Cannon in the Arsenal, because this City being a
Frontier place, has the Walls both day and night well furnished with great
Gunns, and certainly there is no frontiere place better provided with Cannon.

Private Arms.
The private Houses are sufficiently, furnished with Arms, and there is no
Citizen but has Arms for two or three men, there are several that can Arm
twenty five or thirty, and some are so well provided that they can conveniently
Arm three hundred Soldiers, so that every private House may be called an
Arsenal, hence according to computation it is commonly reckoned that in Geneva
there are Arms for forty thousand men.

The City is always well furnished with Provisions and Ammunition of all sorts
conveniently distributed into Magazines and Store houses in the several
quarters of the Town, Provisi^^^.
so that if an accident should happen in the place, the City could sustain no
great prejudice thereby, the other stores being sufficiently provided to supply
the loss; they keep constantly Ammunition, as Powder, Bullets, Match and the
like enough for a two years Siege, and a sufficient quantity of Corn for three
years, having Mills within the Town always in readiness to grind it.

Military exercises.
The Genevians are generally well trained in the exercises and discipline of
War; and though they can brag of no famous Commanders (their wars having been
more defensive than offensive) yet they have Soldiers of long experience in the
wars, and take care to exercise their youth to Warlik exercises by conferring
honor and reward on those especially who at some set times in the year obtain
the advantage of shooting.

Kings of the several kinds of Arms.
They preforme those exercises chiefly in the Spring, the fittest time for
recreation, and to raise in their youth a generous emulation for Honor, they
make him who has shot best in the Cannon, Musket, Bow, Cross-bow, or Pistol,
King of that kind of Arms wherein he has excelled, giving him a mark of Honor
and some privileges in reward of his dexterity: But the King of the
Harquebuses is in greatest esteem amongst them, and besides the Privileges
which are allowed him, he is after his Election attended home by the Chief of
the City with show and triumph. The public reaps no small benefit from those
delightful exercises, for the Citizens are thereby trained in the discipline of
War, and by the Honor and privileges conferred upon the Kings, encouraged to
noble undertakings.

But though brave men, and good Arms be the ordinary means of the defense and
preservation of the City, On what Geneva. builds its considence.
yet the Geneveans trust not altogether to their own strength; they are
sensible enough of their weakness and inability to withstand the designs of
their powerful enemies, who are very industrious in contriving their ruin.

Their chief trust therefore is in God, under whose protection they are to
sacrifice their lives and fortunes in maintaining of their dearly beloved
darling Liberty, as by experience they have already made appear. They can
muster of their own some thousands of well trained Soldiers, but in case of
War, or Siege, the four Protestant, Cantons of Switzerland are obliged by
mutual Articles to send them a supply of four thousand men, and it being the
common maxim of Statesmen and skilful Soldiers that the preservation of
Geneva depends on the Friendship of Switzerland, and the Liberty of Switzerland
on the safety of Geneva, the Catholic Cantons themselves for reasons of State,
and that they may not by losing that barrier expose their Liberty to the
descretion of a Conqueror, will in case of need, contribute both men and money
for the assistance of that place.

In the year, 1602. Experience confirmed this; for in the space of few hours
great supplies of men hastened in time of danger to Geneva: And the Scalado
happened about midnight in the bitterest time of Winter, yet next Evening about
two thousand men under several Commanders, came from the Neighboring parts of
Switzerland to the relief of the City, and about four thousand more were upon
the march thither, but the danger being over, they were with thanks dismissed.
The History of this enterprise deserves some mention.

On Saturday night the twelfth of December, An account of the Scalado.
1602. About midnight, the Forces of Charles Emannel Duke of Savoy attacqued
Geneva by Scalado in this manner.

The Signior D' Albigni the Dakes Licutenant (the Duke in person being come
post to Champey a Village near to Geneva) with twelve hundred men, advanced
toward the wall of the City without any noise of Drum or Trumpet, and an hour
before midnight began the Scalado, making use of three Ladders most
artificially made, as may be seen at present in the Arsenal, one Father
Alexander a Jesuit standing at the foot of the midle-most and encouraging all
the Soldiers with assurance of indulgence and pardon in name of the Pope,
though the enterprise was attempted without the Popes knowledge. Two hundred
and fifty were already got into the City before any perceived it; But God
Almighty infatuated their Council, seeing they might as easily have brought in
above a thousand; and cut all the Citizens to pieces; but by their own
oversight, or unskilfulness they were discovered three hours before day by a
Sentinel from the Tower of the Mint House, the City taking thereupon the
Allarm, the bravest and most active Citizens two hours before day put
themselves in Arms, and after some hot skirmishes and brisk fighting, about
break of day obtained the Victory and beat out the enemy who had the ill luck
that their Petarde, (notwithstanding all their diligence) did no execution,
seventeen of the Valientest Citizens were killed, and ten wounded in the
action, the enemies had fifty four killed, and thirteen taken Prisoners, some
of which were wounded by leaping over the walls, the City Canon having broken
their Ladders; early next Morning the Council sat to consult what must be done
with the thirteen Prisoners, and because the people cried for Justice, they
were all condemned to be hanged, though they were not persons of the least
quality in Savoy, amongst whom were the Barons of Sonaz, Attignac and
Chaffardon. The Baron of Attignac having a broken Leg was carried to the
Gallows in a chair, all of them pretended to be used as Prisoners of War, but
the City told them they were traitors, peace breakers, and assassins, and used
them accordingly, having on Sunday the thirteenth of December about noon
caused them all to be hanged; The bodies of those that were hanged, as well as
of those that were killed in the action, were publicly exposed until Tuesday
the fifteenth of the same month, and then their Heads to the number of sixty
seven cut off, and placed upon Poles, and their bodies cast into the Rone,
according to the Sentence pronounced by the Council of sixty, who because they
themselves had confessed that their orders were to kill men women and Children
without distinction, and to cast their bodies into the same River, thought it
just to do unto them, what they intended to have done to others.

After this, the Peace being broken the Geneveans made several incursions into
Savoy, but in the Month of July following, by the Mediation of the seven
neutral Cantons of Switzerland, and the Authority of the most Christian King,
which (next to Providence) had the chief influence on the negotiation, peace
was concluded betwixt the Duke of Savoy and the States of Geneva,
notwithstanding which peace, the Duke afterward left no means unassayed to
surprise the City, but all his industry and attempts have been successless.

Combourcier beheaded.
Wednesday April the 19th. 1609. Signior della Cambourcier Lord of Terrail was
beheaded in the place of Molard opposite to the Harbor, because he had
promised the Duke of Savoy (as he himself confessed) to assault Geneva on the
side of the Harbor, for which purpose he came to the City to view and mark out
the place.

Peter De la Batide.
Peter della Batide an ingeneer and complice with Combourcier was on the 21st.
of April hanged in the same place.

As to wealth, Riches
Geneva is none of the Richest, though it be Richer at present than it was
before the Reformation. It is true some private persons use their utmost
endeavors to raise themselves by trading in Germany, Italy, Holland,
Switzerland, and other Neighboring places, but the number of Merchants is
inconsiderable in respect of the artificers and tradesmen.

The Trade of Bookselling is in great esteem here, Booksellers.
and there are some Booksellers, who have great stores and variety of books,
especially of such as are prohibited of all sorts, and in all Languages, by
reason of the convenience of the Situation of the place, Geneva being as it
were the center to Germany, France and Italy.

There are about seven or eight in Geneva who trade for above a hundred
thousand Crowns a year, some of which are worth so much, but trade not so
openly as others do, and above a hundred Families who live handsomely and
commondiously by commerce, but most part of the Towns people are employed in
handicraft Trades.

Geneva has its Laws and institutions, by the Geneveans called Edicts, Laws.
taken for most part from the Civil law, and the particular customs of the
Country, that have been in practice for two, or three hundred years, but in
such cases as are not determined by edicts, they have always recourse to the
Civil Law; these edicts since they were first collected into a body and
published, have been reduced into a better form and contain two parts, the one
concerning the Elections of Magistrates, and their duty, and the other relating
to the decision of Civil causes.

Public Revenue.
The public Revenue of the State amounts to about one hundred thousand Crowns,
but the Subjects are not at all burdened, paying only for maintaining of the
Guards, and some small duty for Grinding of their Corn, Importation of Wine,
and at present a little voluntary Contribution for the fortifications, so that
a man for himself and Family of six persons may pay in all ten Crowns a year;
such as have real estates pay the accustomed tithes, and Merchants the usual
duties.

The public and ordinary expense is considerable, Expenses.
forty thousand Crowns a year not being sufficient to pay the Sallaries of the
Counselors, Ministers, Professors, Regents, Soldiers, and defray the charges
of the public Fabrics, Arsenal, Warlike provisions and the like; besides many
other casual and extraordinary charges that happen daily.

The Territory of Geneva is as healthful, Territory.
and as fruitful, as it is little and narrow: And therefore most part of the
Geneveans settle their estates in Savoy and France, and pay the same public
duties as the native subjects of those two Princes do: none of the Neighboring
Princes come near the Territory of Geneva for plenty, the Geneveans useing all
diligence to supply what it wants in extent, by pains and cultivation; so that
it produces Corn, Wine, Turnips, Barley, Hay, and all sorts of Grain, the
Fruits it commonly yields, are Nuts, Apples, Pears Cherries, Almonds, Chestnuts,
Apricoks, but very few Figs.

The Air.
The air is good and healthful, being purified by the North Wind that frequently
blows there, the winter is not so sharp as in Germany, and other Northen
Countries, nor the Summer so hot, as in Italy and some places of Dauphiny, the
weather indeed is sometimes excessively hot in the Summer and as cold in the
Winter, but that continues but for a few days.

In times past the Inhabitants of Geneva have been reckoned dull, The nature and
temper of the people.
not to say, of a silly and blockish Spirit, but at present by their commerce,
with Forrainers, they are pollished and refined, and not only skilful in their
works, but are become speculative and subtle, managing their affiairs so
cunningly that it is not easy to overreach them.

Their jealousy over strangers.
They are very observant and jealous of strangers, especially the inferior
people; nevertheless they are respected and made welcome, especially such as
come to traffic or Sojourne and live in pension among them; in a word they who
have money and afford them occasion of profit, are there as in other places,
well esteemed of.

Geneveans good Politicians.
They are very expert in affairs of State, and know well what measures to take
with their Neighbors, as they have on many occasions made appear, and
certainly if they were not so, they had very often been embroyled with the Duke
of Savoy, which they have hitherto prudently avoided*

Rigor against delinquents.
They were accustomed for a long time to receive and protect all that came and
embraced the Reformed Religion, but at present the City being well peopled,
they are not so ready to admit of such.

Those who have committed any crime, in any other place had not best fly to
Geneva, for that City is a cage for such as retreat thither, to avoid
punishment, and many who have expected safety, have been so far disappointed,
that though they had committed crimes in remote places, yet at the suite of the
plantiffs they have been made prisoners, where they promised themselves all
kind of liberty, and afterward brought to Trial and hanged.

Geneva has no Sovereign upon earth, Soverainry.
and depends upon none but God Almighty, the Senate having the same authority
in their state, that the greatest Monarch in the world has in his own dominions
and are as careful to preserve it.

Strangers who pass through or Sojourne at pensions in Geneva, are kindly
received by the Inhabitants, and to gratify them the Senate does
affectionately protect them, causing them to be treated with all imaginable
civility, insomuch that offenses that in other places would be severely
punished, are passed over, and connived at in Geneva, for the honor and
respects sake, which is showed there to Gentlemen Travelers.

It is a common but false report in Italy, that Monks, Friars, Religions.
Priests of the Church of Rome, are badly used when they pass through Geneva,
for they themselves find the contrary in their Travels, and if any man should
offer insolence to a Priest, or Friar in that City, he would certainly be
punished, nor do the people refuse Charity and lodging to the poor Religious
when they demand it.

The rate of pensions for diet, Pensions.
is commonly twelve Crowns a month for the Master, and six for the Servant, but
there are inferior pensions also, to wit, from seven to eight Crowns a man,
and the entertainment according to the price, nevertheless for Gentlemen who
expect to be well treated, the lowest is ten and the highest twelve Crowns a
month all the City over:

Fishing in the Lake of this City is very considerable both for profit and
pleasure, Fishing.
they commonly take trouts of four score pound weight at twelve ounces the
pound, and in the middle of the River opposite to the Town preserve their fish
alive for use, in two little deal board houses made for that purpose.

In the Summer time it is a very pleasant recreation to go a Fishing here, and
both strangers, and Citizens mightily delight in it.

All sorts of exercises are taught in this City, Exercises.
as well as in any other place; there is a good Master for riding the great
Horse, and for the first month four Pistols, and three for every month after,
he has a Stable very well furnished with Horses; For Fencing, Danceing,
Mathematics, Geography and the Languages, there is choice of Masters also, so
that Travelers may Sojourne in this City with as much ease to the purse, and
advantage for Education as in most parts of Europe.

Inns.
There are many Inns and public Houses here, in all of which as a Traveller is
of quality, and intends to order his expenses, he will find entertainment
answerable to the rate he pays.

The Arms of Geneva.
The Arms of Geneva are a half Eagle and Key, the Eagle signifying that the
City is Imperial, and the Key, that it has been an Episcopal See; but the
Ancient Arms of that City was a Sun, which they still use on a Seal, and has
been retained since the time that Geneva (as has been already observed)
worshipped Apollo.

The Posts.
The French Post comes hither twice a weak, to wit on Monday at ten of the Clock
in the morning, and parts on Tuesday at noon, and on Friday in the Morning
which parts again in the Evening, the price of a single Letter from Lions to
Geneva paying three Solzs.

Twice a week the Messenger or Carrier arrives also, his business is to convey
to and fro between Lions and Geneva all sorts of goods, and to conduct
Strangers that are pleased to Travel with him, a single person pays him for
passage, and entertainment upon the rode about a Pistol, and for every pound of
goods at sixteen ounces the pound tow Solzs.

The German Post comes in on Monday toward Evening, and goes out on Tuesday at
the same time. The Letters pay more, or less according to the distance of the
place from whence they come.

The Post of Turin which brings all the Letters of Italy, comes in on Wednesday
and sets out on Thursday, but all Letters that are sent by that Post, must be
paid for to Cambray.

Hackney Horses and Coaches.
There is no want of Hackney Horses nor of Messengers, or Vittorins (as they are
called) in Geneva, the usual hire of a Horse is twenty Solz a day, such as
Travel with the Vittorin pay for all charges, at most half a Pistol a day a
peace, and if the Company be greater the rates will be less; you may likewise
have Hackney Litters at the rate of a Pistol a day less or more, according to
the season of the year, or circumstances of the Master. Here are to be had no
Hackny Coaches, and there are not above seven or eight persons who keep Coaches
in this Town.

Three Faires a year are kept here, Faires.
to wit on the twenty ninth of June, the first of August, and the twenty second
of February; but they are but ordinary Faires, the Trade running chiefly in
beasts, especially Horses and Cattle; there is a Magistrate appointed over the
first to decide the controversies that may happen; each Fair lasts three days,
and on the second all the Inhabitants are obliged to wear Swords, the Guards of
the City and Gates being for Greater security reinforced that day.

They have two weekly Markets also, on Wednesday and Saturday Mornings, which
are frequented by vast numbers of Savoyards and French from the County of Gez,
who supply the City with all manner of provisions, and buy from thence what
they need in the Country.

This is all that can be said concerning the State and Government of Geneva,
but before we bring this little Treatise to a conclusion, It will not be amiss
to take some notice of the French Kings late resolution of settling a Resident
in that City: Whereby, as he had a probable opportunity of introducing the Mass
into that place, so had he a particular design, by making appear that the
protection of that Republic belonged to him, to put a stop to the pretention
of the Switzers, who, (especially those of the Canton of Bearn) endeavored in
effect under pretense of Friendship and alliance to skrew themselves into a
kind of Authority there; insomuch that upon the least occasion they wrote
Letters to the Magistrates of Geneva in so imperious a style, that they seemed
rather to command than entreat. But the French (who of late are seldom asleep
when their interest lies at stake, and who pretend to sway or give laws to all
Europe) having the matter in the wind, thought it convenient to send a Resident
to Geneva, to the end that by exercising there some litte Jurisdiction by which
the Law of Nations is allowed to public Ministers, they might baulk the
Switzers in their pretensions, and confirm their King sole Protector of that
City and Republic.

About the end therefore of the year 1679, Mounsieur Chanvigny was sent
Resident to Geneva, a man of a low Stature, but hotter temper than well suited
with his Age of threescore years. This man having a Son in orders, and in
expectation of Preferment, that he might curry favor with the Churchmen, and
especially the Court of Rome, began to exercise his charge with extreme
violence, insomuch that not satisfied with the allowance of a Chapel in his
own House for his private devotion, he wrote Letters all about, inviting the
Catholics in the Neighborhood at Geneva to come publicly to Mass at his
House.

Nor did he stop here, but solicited all the Curats and Monks in those parts
to come and say Mass in Geneva, and often employed several of the Jesuits of
Horn to Preach, inviting all the Neighboring Catholics to the exercise. This
was so ill relished by the People, that some of the rabble cast of all respect
due to a Person of his Character, so that two of them were committed to Prison,
being accused for having fired some Pistol-shot within the Court of the said
Resident. The noise of this reaching as far as Paris, moved the most Christian
King to take information of the matter of Fact, who, thereupon ordered the
releasing of the Poisoners, and recalled Chanvigny to Paris, sending in his
place Monsieur du Pre, a person of very great experience, as the offices which
he has discharged has sufficiently made appear: And the truth is, this
Gentleman lives in very good correspondence, both with the Senate and people;
and tho he have Mass said in his House, yet it is with such moderation, as in
appearance removes all ^^^nsie from the minds of the People, who now begin to
be acquainted with the freakishness and in constancy of Fortune.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of Books Printed for William Cademan Bookseller at the Pope's Head
in the New-Exchange in the Strand.
Folio.
AN Institution of General History, or the History of the World, by William
Howel, L. L. D. in two Vol: Historical Collections, or an exact account of the
proceeding of the four last Parliaments of Queen Elizabeth of famous Memory.
Pharamond Complete. English. Clelia a Romance. English. Parthenissa Complete.
English. An Historical Heroic Poem on the Right Honorable Thomas Earl of
Ossory, Written by Elkanah Settle.
Quarto.
An Historical relation of the first discovery of the Isle of Madera. The
Protestant Religion is a sure foundation, etc. by the Right Honorable Charles
Earl of Derby. The Jesuits Policy to suppress Monarchy, by a Person of Honor.
A warning Peace for the unready in two Visitation Sermons at Preston, by Seth
Bushel, D. D. The great Efficacy and necessity of good Examples, especially in
the Clergy; in a Visitation Sermon at Guilford, by Thomas Duncomb, D. D. A
Sermon Preached before the King, by Miles Barn, Chaplain in Ordinary to his
Majesty. A Sermon Preached at the Assizes at Lancaster, by Henery Pigot, B. D.
Gods Revenge against Murder, demonstrated in the Persecution of Henry Symbal
and William Jones, Executed for the Murdering Sir Richard Sandford.
Plays in Quarto.
The Rivalls, a Comedy. Catalines Conspiracy. Island Princess. Flora's
Vagaries. Town Shifts. Citizen turned Gentleman. Morning Ramble. Macbeth.
Cambyses Empress of Morocco. Conquest of China. Herod and Mariamne Notes on
Morocco. Ibrahim. Love and Revenge. Pastor Fido. Pope Joan. Fatal Love or
forced inconstancy. Careless Lovers. English Princess. Reformation. Spanish
Rogue. Marcelia. The Mall. Rehearsal. Mock Tempest, Dumb Lady. Gentleman
Dancing Master. Alcibiades. Dutch Lovers. Pysoes Conspiracy. Siege of Memphis.
Rival Kings. Constant Nymph. Wrangling Lover. Tom Essence. French Conjurer.
Wits Led by the Nose. Counterfeit Bridgroom Tunbridge Wells. Conspiracy or
Change of Government. Revenge or a Match in Newgate.
Octavo and Twelves.
The Spanish History, or the differences that happened in the Court of Spain
between Don John of Austria and Cardinal Nitard, with all the Letters and the
Politic Discourses relating to those Affairs. Reflections upon Ancient and
modern Philosophy. The English Princess or the Duchess Queen. A pleasant Novel.
Court-songs and Poems, being an exact Collection. The Temple of Death, with
other Poems, by a person of honor. Hogan Moganides, or the Dutch Hudibras.
Liquor Alcahest, or the Immotal Dissolvert of Paracelsus and Helmont.
Philosophical Essay, or the history of Putrefaction by Dr. Sherly.
FINIS.

