THE Present State OF GENOVA, WITH THE ARTICLES OF THE Treaty of Cession TO THE
FRENCH KING, AND An Account of the late ACTIONS of the French Fleet, before it,
and of the Damages there sustained by the Bombs and Carcasses.

To which is added, A LETTER from the Republic of Genoua to the City of
Argiers upon that Subject.

LONDON: Printed for Randall Tailor near Stationers' Hall. 1687.

THE Present State OF GENOA.
OF all Countries in the world, The situation of Genoa.
the Territory of GENOA seems to be the most abandoned of Nature, but instead
thereof, above all others, the most assisted by humane Industry: since among
the dry sands of a barren Sea, and the high cliffs of craggy and bare
Mountains, men have built one of the stateliest Cities in the Earth, filled it
with magnificent Palaces, adorned it with pompous public Structures, enriched
it with exquisite Pictures, inestimable Statues, precious Furniture; planted
about it the most delightful Gardens of Europe, and in a word, seeing all that
can contribute to Pleasure, and support Luxury, is there to be found in
abundance: The truth is, he that casts his eyes upon the sumptuous palaces that
make the New-street, and that of Balbi, must confess, that the meanest of them
is fit to receive the Greatest Prince in the World.

Its original.
The City of Genoa is so ancient, that it is impossible to trace it to its
original; some concluding from conjecture and some allusion of name, Janua.
attribute the foundation thereof to Janus, tho in all appearance that name
has been given it by the Latins, thereby to denote that it is the door of
Italy. But whatever its beginning was, it is certain that in the time of the
Commonwealth of Rome, it was the capital City of Liguria and under the
protection of that Republic, seeing as Titus Livius reports, Genoa as an Allie
of the Romans was destroyed by Mago Admiral of Carthage and Brother to
Hannibal, Destroyed by Mago.
during the second Punick War, and that the Government thereof was continued to
the Praetor Spurius Lucretius, that he might rebuild it, and repair the Haven;
which by his diligence he accomplished in the space of a year.

The same Livy relates that that fickle City with the rest of Liguria revolted
against Rome, at the time when that Republic having destroyed Carthage, and
subdued Africa, Greece, and Asia, was at the highest pitch of grandeur: Makes
war against Rome.
He says that in that defection the Genoese with Forty thousand men attacked
Pisa, that the Consul Minutius had much ado to defend it, that the War as
being of great danger and importance was managed against them by both the
Consuls, that many bloody Battles were fought, in which the Ligurians had so
great advantage, that Rome in extreme consternation, was forced to appoint
Prayers and Vows for the public safety; which shows in what power Genoa was at
that time.

It was at length absolutely reduced under the dominion of Rome, and continued
so under the Caesar's, then under the Kings of the Herules or Goths, who
Possessed Italy; and afterward under the Greek Emperors, and the Exarchs of
Ravenna; Possessed by the Lombards.
But the Lombards having utterly destroyed the Roman Empire in Italy,
Assaulted, took and Sacked Genoa in the year 670. and that City remained in
their hands, Conquered by Charlemagne
until Charlemagne having overcome Didier the last King of Lombardy, and made
him Prisoner, conquered all Italy, whereof he made Pepin his Eldest son King,
and gave the Government of Genoa to Count Ademar his Kinsman, who shortly after
in the year 806. commanding the Fleet of which Charlemagne had made him
Admiral, defeated the Saracens at Sea, and after a bloody Battle which he
gained upon them in the Island of Corsica, wherein nevertheless he died,
reconquered that Island, which by that means was annexed to the State of Genoa,
The union of the Island of Corsica to the state of Genoa.
from which it has never been separated since.

It is certain that after the Death of Charlemagne, Genoa and the Island of
Corsica remained under the dominion of the French, of which Count Boniface was
Governor for Louis the Debonnaire in the year 828. It is also certain that it
fell to the share of Lotharius, eldest son of Louis the Debonnaire, with the
rest of the States of Italy, and that his Successors peaceably enjoyed it; but
after the Death of Charles the Gross which happened in the year 888. the Empire
and Kingdom of Italy were all of a sudden dismembered by the weakness of Charles
the Simple, who was so far from reuniting all that belonged to his Crown, that
to the Age of Twenty five years he had several Regents substituted to him with
the Title of King.

These Usurpers that they might Peaceably enjoy what was within the Kingdom,
shamefully suffered the Empire and the fair flowers of the State without to be
invaded, and under their very Nose permitted Italy to be disputed and rent into
pieces by the Wars which Louis, the Son of Bozon King of Provence had against
Berenger, The French lose the State of Genoa.
Son of Everard Duke of Frioli, who had caused himself to be Proclaimed King of
Italy in Pavia, whilst Guy Duke of Spoleto his competitour attempted the same
thing in Padua, and so, many Princes having intruded into the States which
Charlemagne had Conquered beyond the Alps, and having successively killed or
dispossessed one another, Genoa, Genoa falls to the first Possessor.
as all the rest, fell to him that could first possess it; so that during the
revolution which Providence was preparing in France, in favor of Hugh Capet,
the last Kings of the second race having their hands full on it by the affairs
of Germany, and the maintaining their own Crown, divisions increased daily in
Italy, Destroyed by the Saracens.
and gave occasion to the Saracens to make a descent at Genoa, which they
unexpectedly surprised in the year 936. sacked and burnt it, carrying away all
that could be put on board their Ships; but they were met betwixt Corsica and
Sardinia by the Fleet of the Genoese upon their return from cruising, and were
engaged with so bad a success for the Infidels, that they were wholly defeated,
Reestablished.
the Slaves retaken, and the City reestablished upon its ashes.

After that dismal desolation it continued during the space of 450. years, The
uncertain state of Genoa.
sometimes in an Anarchy, sometimes in a kind of Republican Government, and
sometimes under the dominion of several Princes. At length the People weary of
the divisions which these changes of State caused amongst their chief Citizens,
Returns to the French.
resolved to return under the dominion of the Kings of France, who were become
lawful Lords of Genoa from the time that Charlemagne reckoned it amongst his
other Conquests.

The cause of that Revolution was, that in the year 1363. Simon Bocca negra
Duke of Genoa having been Poisoned, Gabriel Adorno a Merchant of the faction of
the Guelphs, was chosen to succeed him, and Governed seven years, until
Dominico de Campo Fregozo a Merchant of the Gibelline faction, displaced him
the 13. of August 1370. and was installed in his place. That was the beginning
of the long Quarrel betwixt the Adorno's and Fregozo's, The Adorno's and
Fregozo's divided.
which during the space of 180. years held the City of Genoa in continual
divisions and factions, which ended not but by the extinction of one of these
Families, the Montaldo's and Guarco's who were very powerful, maintained the
Fregozo's; and Antoniot Adorno, who having been Elected Duke, expelled, and
restored, in the years 1383. 1390. and 1392. was for the fourth time Master of
the Republic in the year 1396. not thinking himself strong enough to maintain
his Authority against his powerful Enemies, by the mediation of the Cardinal
Louis of Fieschi and of Anthony Count of Lavagna his brother, with the
universal consent of all the Genoese made over to Charles VI. The resignation
of Genoa to Charles VI.
King of France, and his Successors, the Sovereign Lordship of the Republic,
and of all the States that depend on it; the resignation was made by an
Authentic Treaty of the 25. of October, and the 27. of November; the Arms of
France were set up upon the Gates and the great Tower of the Palace; and in
presence of all the People, Antoniot Adorno delivered the Keys of the Gates and
the Battoon of Command into the hands of the Kings Ambassadors, which were
presently given back to him, as to the Governor for the King: That Treaty was
put in execution, Confirmed with Charles VII.
and afterward confirmed a second time, by all the Orders of the City of Genoa
with Charles VII. in the year 1458. so that the Kings of France enjoyed it
during an Age and a half, Its Rebellion by Andrew Doria.
until the revolt of Andrew Doria made it rebel against Francis the first.

This happened in the year 1528. two years after the imprisonment of that more
valiant than fortunate King; and after that revolt, Aristocracy settled in Genoa
in the year 1528.
they settled a kind of Arisstocratical Government, which continues to this
day, and which according to the model of that of Venice, admits of none but the
Nobles to the administration of public Affairs.

They chose twelve reformers for making new Laws, Laws concerning the Doge.
the first of which was, that the Duke or Doge should continue but two years in
office, that his Government should expire on the last of December. And that his
authority might be the more stinted, it was added, that he could not be
continued; that after that day he should have no Power; that none of his Name
and Family should be chosen immediately after him, and that he himself could not
again enter into that dignity till after the expiration of five years; that he
be full fifty years of age, and have an allowance of Six thousand Livres a
year, reduced since to Four thousand; that after his reign he should be
perpetual Procurator of the Republic, if he committed no Fault in his Office;
which should be examined by the Syndicks within 8. days after the conclusion of
his administration.

The Government of Genoa consists of two Councils, the one called the great
Council, Two Councils in Genoa.
and the other the little, in both which the Doge Head of the Republic
presides, who, as has been said, is changed every two years, and has always
for his assessors twelve Senators, eight Procurators, and those who have
carried the supreme Dignity of Doge.

The great Council The great Council.
is made up of all the Nobles of the State in general, provided they be
present, and two and twenty years of age complete. These Gentlemen are about
seven hundred in number, who constitute near an hundred and fifty Noble
Familes, some of which are but the branches of others, or adopted into them. In
this Council properly the Supreme power resides, and of that number of seven
hundred, the two hundred who constitute the little Council are yearly chosen:
and in this manner the Election is made.

A few days before the new year begins, the Doge with the Senators, How the
little Council is chosen.
Procurators and the old Doges, assemble the little Council, which by Plurality
of voices chooses thirty Nobles whom they look upon to be the best Citizens,
most zealous for the public Good, and in greatest Reputation for probity and
honor, which thirty choose out of the seven hundred Gentlemen of the great
Council, the two hundred who are to make up the little Council for the year
following, which begins the first of January, and it happens almost always that
those of the foregoing year are for most part continued, if there be no weighty
cause nor secret reasons of State for excluding them; so that it may be said
that the choice which at present they make, is only for supplying the Places
of those who are dead or absent, or who have been preferred to more
considerable employments.

I have told you that for presiding in those two Councils, the Doge had for
Assessors twelve Senators and eight Procurators: They continue in Office two
years, and every Six Months three Senators and two Procurators are substituted
in the Place of those that go out; the Election being performed in this manner.

The Election of Senators and Procurators.
There is a box called the Seminary, wherein are the names of sixscore
Gentlemen, of Forty years of Age at least, in billets; and seeing there are a
great many names yearly taken out either for filling the places of Senators,
Procurators and sometimes of the Doge; or of those who die, or are taken up
about other employments, the number of these sixscore billets must yearly be
made complete; The box called the Seminary.
and for that purpose in the beginning of June the little Council is called;
and upon the report made to them of the number that is necessary to fill up the
Seminary, every Gentleman of the little Council, proposes a Person forty years
old, whom he judges worthy to be put in, and amongst all those who are
proposed, this Council chooses double the number of what is necessary for
supplying the number that is wanting in the box; How it is filled.
and then that double number chosen by the little Council, is proposed to the
great Council of seven hundred, which rejects one half and retains the other,
whose names are put into the Lottery box. Out of this box every six months five
names are taken by hazard, three for Senators, and two for Procurators: so that
it may be said that the Government of that Republic depends wholly upon
fortune, and that unfortunate merit and the honestest man of the State many
times by the capriciousness of obstinate fate lies buried in obscurity at the
bottom of the box.

The Election of the Doge.
The same fortune has some share also in the election of the Doge, but in a
different manner, because for the Senators Choice begins and Chance concludes,
and for the Doge, Election compleats what Lot began. When the Doge has
finished his two years, the great Council meets, the number of those who
compose it is taken, and as many little balls of equal bigness are put into a
box, of which fifty are gilt, and the rest silvered over; Every one by a little
hole through which the hand alone can pass without seeing, takes out one of
these balls, and the fifty Gentlemen who have drawn the gilt balls, meet, and
by scrutiny choose twenty persons each Fifty years old at least; and then about
those twenty chosen by scrutiny they go to a Vote; and by the Plurality of
Voices five of them are rejected, and fifteen retained, who are proposed to the
little Council, which out of these fifteen choose six by the Plurality of
voices; And of these six at length proposed to the great Council, he that has
most Voices is Doge; And it is to be observed that as the Offices are equally
divided betwixt the Ancient and new Nobility, so the Doge is taken alternatly
out of both, so that if he be to day named from amongst the ancient Nobility,
two years after he will be taken out of the new, and so successively.

The Doge with the twelve Senators represents the Prince, and enjoys the
Supreme authority; He can do all that he is not expressly prohibited to do by
law; with them he judges Suits betwixt Parties, or empowers others to judge,
and can even rescind Testaments and Contracts.

With the Senators and Procurators, he administers the affairs of State, the
Exchequer, Public Revenues, and those things which by the Laws are referred to
the cognizance of the College of Procurators.

The Prerogatives of the Doge.
One of the great Prerogatives of the Doge, is the right that he has of making
the Propositions to the Council, which the Doge of Venice has not; that right
gives of him a powerful Authority, The right of Proposing.
because if he perceive that the dispositions of the Council are not favorable
to the matter in deliberation, he interrupts it, and brings another affair upon
the Stage. It is he that gives Audiences, and orders them according to the
presence or absence of the friends of those whom he intends to favor or cross,
choosing proper times and junctures to make them miscarry or succeed: and seeing
he can propose the same affair three times, when he perceives some votes
wanting, he so dexterously insinuates his intentions to the Council, that he
always brings about some voices for obtaining the thing he intends.

Heretofore the Senators made use of the right which they had of proposing
twice a month, and employed it for the service of their friends, Senators
heretofore had it.
who could not obtain a favorable Audience of the Doge: but whether it be that
the register of Privileges has been suppressed, or that the Power of the
Princes naturally advances in growth by the flattery or easy compliance of the
rest, for some years no Senator has made use of that Privilege; a dangerous
change and favorable to those who aspire to that chief dignity; but the People
and Nobles who are not in a condition of attaining to that, suffer it with
extreme discontent, yet dare not speak of it, for fear of an exclusion, and of
being reckoned turbulent Persons who are better pleased with novelty than
Justice; so that by a cowardly silence they are fain to purchase a share in the
Government.

Weighty affairs are not resolved upon by the Doge and by these two Colleges;
but for determining them the little Council is called; and when they are of
great importance, the whole great Council meets, and when either of the two
assemble, it must be in Presence of five Persons who have the Title of
Conservators of the Laws, Conservators of the Laws.
and whose office is to take heed that nothing be Acted contrary to the Laws of
the State.

There is another Magistracy consisting of seven Persons, called the
Inquisitors of the State, Inquisitors of the State.
which are as a Sentinel, to observe the dangers of the Republic, Factions,
Conspiracies, and every thing that may be committed against the repose and
tranquillity of the People: six others have the care of those things that
relate to War, Other Magistrates.
five have the oversight of the Corn, five of the Galleys, five of the
Shipping, five of the Walls, Harbors, Aqueducts and high Ways, and five more
of the Markets and Provisions.

The Inquisitors of the State, whom I just now mentioned, have not only the
care of the Public Peace; but they have an Eye also over the conduct of
Foreign Ministers, and keep correspondences in the Courts of other Princes,
where they entertain Spies who are not suspected, that give them intelligence
not only of Intrigues that may concern their State, but of the conduct also of
their own Ministers. The English, Venetians, Dutch, and Florentines have
Consuls at Genoa for their Traffic, who give advice of the Affairs that may
concern the States of their Masters, as Monsieur Compan was there for France;
but Spain kept an Ambassador there for encouraging their Party, who of late
has been changed into a Resident or Envoy; such was Villagarcia at present
Ambassador at Venice. His Conduct was very grateful to the Republic, and
Coloma who succeeded him has not found the same Civilities, not only by the
refusal of the Honors that were rendered to his Predecessor, but also by an
accident which deserves to be known, and which I may very well take notice of
by the by in this place.

The Governor of Milan upon the complaint of the Patron of a Bark of Final,
The misfortune of Coloma.
a Creditor to some Genoese, against whom he could not have Justice from the
Senate, caused all the effects belonging to the Subjects of the Republic to be
sequestrated; (for this is the way by which the Spaniards do themselves
Justice) Coloma wrote to Spain to justify the Sequestration; A trick of the
Genoese.
But the Genoese stopped the Courier without the Gates, and having opened his
Packet, suppressed his Letters, and counterfeited others in their place, which
the Courier carried to Spain as sent from Coloma. That is no difficult thing
for them to do, because they always entertain a Man skilful in counterfeiting
all sorts of Writing, whom they use upon occasion. He whom they have at
present, is called Montiardin, a Prisoner in the Tower of the Palace for many
forgeries he had done for private Persons; and he who rendered the same Office
to the Republic before him, was one named Caracciola who fled upon some
discontents that he received; so that when they have a mind to undo any Man,
they make use of such Forgeries, upon which they cause those who displease them
to be arrested and clapped up into Prison for several years, and that without
any form of Justice; but by a formality of Matchiavilian Policy, which they
call est informata conscientia. To return then again to Coloma, the forged
Packet being come into Spain, it was believed to be his, and Orders were
presently dispatched to discharge the Sequestration. The Governor of Milan
incensed against Coloma, whom he thought to be the real Author of that Release,
set so many Engines at work against him, that he has got him to be recalled;
and that unfortunate Minister could never discover the Cheat till he had lost
his place at Genoa and his Credit at Court, where the Genoese are still so
cunning as to render him suspected of discovering the secrets of his Residence
to Monsieur de Saint Olon Envoy of France.

The Protectors of the House or Bank of St. George, The bank of St. George.
make another Magistracy, or particular Court. It is a kind of Body independent
of the Republic, and as a State within a State. This Bank which is governed by
very laudable Constitutions, owes its Original to the public necessities. It
is a sacred depost of all the Wealth of the People, and in this manner it was
established. The Treasure of the State having been exhausted by long and
continual Wars; The establishment of the Bank of St. George.
it was resolved to borrow considerable sums of Money, and to engage for them
the Revenues of the public Impositions: so that in stead of assigning, as is
usual in France, payments upon the duties of the Town, Genoa made over the
duties themselves and other Rights to their Creditors, to the end they might
receive them and reimburse themselves with their own hands. To facilitate the
execution of this, they were allowed to form amongst themselves a Council of
four hundred Directors, to take out of this Council a Magistrate, Its Directors
and Protectors.
eight Protectors and other inferior Officers, who take care to bring into the
public stock of St. George the Impositions assigned, and to make the
distribution of them amongst the Creditors of the Republic according to their
several Debts, with power to judge Sovereignly according to the Laws of the
State, all Suits Civil and Criminal that arise upon that account, and the
mutual Credit betwixt the Republic and that Bank is so punctually observed,
that what necessity soever the State has been reduced to, it was never
proposed to meddle with these Sacred Revenues, and that the most Criminal
Rebels, and Strangers in War with the Republic have always been regularly
paid the interest of their principal. A wise and politic Maxim that cannot be
too much commended, and which has so well maintained that Bank, that the Money
not only of all the private Genoese, but also of an infinite number of
Strangers has been put into it, and that its Money and Credit are
inexhaustible. So true it is that public Purses as well as private, cannot
subsist but by a long experienced Integrity and Justice, and that when a Prince
can once persuade his people of this honesty, all men's Coffers will open freely
of themselves, when necessities do urge.

The Riches of the Genoese.
Vast is the Riches which the Genoese have heaped up during a long Peace, and
the continual good success of a well-setled Commerce. Their wealth is proud in
outward appearance, and their luxury prodigious; but that Republic is far more
wealthy than strong, far more haughty than valiant, and it is easier to subdue
it, than to make it a sincere Friend; because that people may become good and
useful Subjects, but they will always be jealous and unsincere Neighbors.
Poverty made them industrious, Labor rendered them powerful and victorious at
Sea; that Power settled their great Commerce, which brought them Wealth, and
this introduced Luxury, Licentiousness and the effeminacy of Peace, wherein
their dastardized Virtue has for a long time languished. Their care is to
swell their Revenues, their amusement and diversion to rear stately Palaces,
and their delight to plant sumptuous Gardens, more fit for the reception of
Kings, than of Merchants and Seafaring Men. Nevertheless whilst the Subjects
increase daily in Riches, the body Politic decays, its Dignity declines, and
all its Grandeur at present consists in the pompous Attire, wherewith that
people set off their Doge, and the imaginary pretensions that make them vie, if
they could, with Crowned Heads, in all the Courts of Europe.

The Revenue of the Republic.
Notwithstanding the prodigious wealth of the Citizens, yet the constant Revenue
of the Republic, exceeds not eight hundred thousand Crowns a year. The truth
is it might be improved to more, if the Governors were so faithful as not to
employ to their private uses part of that which is imposed for public
necessities.

Its Charge.
Upon that Revenue the Republic entertains three thousand Foot in constant pay,
who in time of Peace are sufficient to garrison the places not only of the
main Land, but also of the Island of Corsica.

The next Charge of the Republic, is the constant maintaining of six Galleys,
which amounts to ten thousand Crowns a year a piece. They have since armed four
new ones, but the fund for maintaining them is settled upon extraordinary
impositions. The two Residents which they entertain in France and Spain cost
them twelve thousand Crowns a year; but the greatest charge is employed in the
maintaining of two Rota's or Courts of Justice, the Civil and Criminal, their
Chancellours, Secretaries or Clarks, Judges of the Seacoasts and Isle of
Corsica, Officers and other inferior Ministers of Justice, who, as in other
States, are of a prodigious number, a grievance to the people, and an abuse
that cannot be too much reformed.

The remaining part of the Revenue is employed for the charges of foreign
Ministers, and paying the interest of borrowed Money put into their Chambers,
such as the Chamber of St. John Baptist, and the Chamber of St. Bernard, which
are much like to the Chamber of the City of London; And all these Charges being
defrayed, if any surplus remain, it is divided amongst the Doge and the more
powerful Senators and Nobles, who so order matters by their secret Intrigues
and close Combinations that they always govern the Republic successfully, and
impropriate to themselves the Places and Offices, to the exclusion of all the
rest.

Besides the vast Wealth that renders the Capital one of the richest Cities of
Europe; The people have been so industrious in cultivating their Lands, that
they enrich the Inhabitants by the plentiful crops of Corn, Fruit, Oil and
Wine, which both the Riviera's produce; for so they call the Coasts of Liguria
to the East and West of the City of Genoa.

Prodigious quantities of Oils.
The truth is, to the West Side the Territories alone of Dian, Porto Moriso and
Vintimiglia, in good years yield above four hundred thousand Tun of these sweet
and precious Oils, which are the delights of the North, and the provision of
Italy, so that one year with another the profit of them is valued at eight
hundred thousand Pistols a a year.

The prodigious plenty of Citrons, Abundance of Citrons and Oranges.
Limons and Oranges which are yearly gathered in the Territory of San-Remo, is
greater than can be believed: England and Holland load whole Fleets with them;
the Lombards buy them, they are transported into Germany, and an infinite
number of Families live and grow rich by the sale only of the Flowers. They
who coast along the shore by these delicious Forests of Citron and
Limon-trees, have not only their Eyes diverted by the surprising prospect of a
verdure always fresh, and agreeably mingled with the Or and Argent of the Fruit
and Flowers, but a breeze from the Land conveys to them also so fragrant a
smell, that it would seem Nature had there summoned together all her Perfumes
for the delight of Travelers.

Wines of Taggia.
The Muscat Wines which grow in the Territory of Taggia, are so esteemed all
over Italy, and especially at Rome, that they are the dainties of the most
delicate Tables, and that rich Village is filled with wealthy Contadini, who
show the vast Estates which their Forefathers have raised only from their
Grapes and Raisins.

Sestry and Veltry.
On the same Riviera to the West are Sestry di Ponente and Veltry Colonies of
rich Merchants, who by the Trade of Spain and America have got prodigious
Wealth; and at Veltry are those Paper-Mills which make the finest and whitest
Paper of Europe.

Aranza, Aranza.
a small inconsiderable Borough sometime ago had got into so vast a Trade, that
there were no less than threescore Merchant Ships that belonged to it, and
plied the Trade of Africa, the Levant and Spain. The truth is, the Corsaires of
Barbary having disturbed their Traffic, their Fleet has been diminished, and
reduced to a small number of Vessels; so that at present they have no more than
ten or twelve Ships from forty to sixty pieces of Cannon, wherewith they follow
their Traffic.

The rest of the Riviera to the Westward lying nearer the City, is destined
more for pleasure than profit; for there it is that the rich Genoeses have
built their Country Houses, where they spend the pleasant time of the Summer
and Autumn: And there are so many Palaces and delightful Gardens to be seen
there, that a great Cardinal speaking of St. Peter d' Arenes, of its situation,
and the magnificence of its buildings, said that a Prince ought either to live
in Heaven or in that place.

The Riviera to the East abounds in Wines, which are sufficient to supply the
State, and produces plenty of extraordinary good Oil: Oranges and Citrons
abound not there so much as at San Remo, but they are better: and the
Inhabitants of that Coast are not so rich, because they are of a more warlike
and less mercenary disposition.

The State of Genoa on that side reaches to La Magra, La Magra separates the
State of Genoa from Tuscany. Sarzana and Sarzanella.
which divides it from Tuscany. The first place of Strength is Sarzana,
situated in a fertile Plain. It is defended by a great Ditch, and a Wall, with
an ancient Castle flanked with four Towers. And Sarzanella is a Fort upon an
adjoining Hill, which wholly commands Sarzana. It was built by Castruccio, who
made himself Master of the City of Luca: but after his death, the Marshall of
Boucicaut Governor of Genoa received it in name of Charles VI. of France. The
Dukes of Milan possessed it afterward, and made it over to Thomas de Campo
Fregoso, who transacted with the Florentines for it: And Charles the Eighth
having made himself Master of Florence, became so also of Sarzana and
Sarzanella, and made the Bastard of Brienne Governor thereof; who perceiving
the Affairs of Italy going to wrack, resolved to make his private advantage of
them, and without Orders from the King his Master, sold them to the Genoese,
who by virtue of that illegal Contract, usurped them, and have held them in
possession till this present.

Next to Sarzana is Lerice Lerice.
built at the foot of the Rocks, upon a point of Land, from whence it has no
prospect but toward the Sea, and discovers the Gulf delle Spetie, Gulf delle
Spetie.
of which it defends one of the Entries. Opposite to that on the other point of
the Gulf is Porto-Venere, Porto-venere.
and a little farther in, on the same side stands the Fort St. Marie, Fort S.
Marie.
which defends the whole compass thereof. The mouth of that Gulf then, is
reckoned from Lerice to Porto-Venere, and betwixt the two are two little
Islands which take up a great part of that Mouth, and leaving only an entry to
the East on the side of Lerice, and another to the West on the side of
Porto-Venere, cover the Gulf, and defend it from the Southern Winds; which
renders it the most commodious, as it is the most spacious of all the Havens of
the Mediterranean; in so much that there is no Royal Fleet but may securely lie
there.

In those two Islands which are in the mouth of the Gulf, The Islands in the
mouth of the Gulf.
there is black Marble dug of extraordinary beauty and fineness; it is full of
Veins that look and shine like the purest Gold; and there is some found there
as variously colored as the Porphyrian Marble of the East. In the middle of
this Gulf, as by a miracle of Nature, A wonderful Fountain.
springs a Fountain of fresh water, which through the salt Waters rises to the
Surface, and spreads it self as it were into a large Basin, from which fresh
Water may be taken, without any necessity of going ashore to fetch it on board
of Ships.

La Spetia which is at the bottom of the Gulf, and which has given it the
name, belonged heretofore to the Counts of Fieschi. The Republic of Genoa that
seized it, about thirty years since or thereabouts caused a Cart-way to be
made, A way begun.
which crossing all the Lands of the Counts of Fieschi reaches to the bourg of
Valdetaro, heretofore a Principality of the same Counts, and at present
possessed by the Duke of Parma. The Republic made that Way in hopes, nay and
upon the Promise which the Duke of Parma made to them, of continuing it to
Fornova, or of permitting the Genoese to do it at their charges, which
afterward they might be reimbursed of by the Tolls that should be settled in
several places. Their design was to draw by that way to the Port della Spetia
all the Trade of Legorne: And the truth is that place is far more proper for a
Staple, than any other place whatsoever of the Mediterranean. The English and
Dutch Merchants desired it, not only because of the security and
commodiousness of the Port, but also because they could more conveniently
unload their Commodities there for Parma, Modena, Bologna, and all Lombardy,
and by the Po convey them into the State of Milan, Montferrat, Mantoua, and the
States of Venice, Ferrara and the patrimony of St. Peter, which without doubt
would have been very profitable to the Duke of Parma. But the late great Duke,
The great Duke hinders the completing of it.
one of the wisest Princes of Europe, prevented the Genoese. And seeing the
Duchess of Parma, his Sister governed the State during the minority of her Son,
he engaged her not to suffer that way to be continued in the Lands of the State
of Parma. The Genoese being netled at that politic Action of the Great Dukes,
to be revenged, and with design to vex him, resolved to buy the Principality of
Pontremoli, Pontremoli.
which the Spaniards possessed, having usurped it upon the Counts of Fieschi.
That Principality is contiguous to La Spetia; and by that means the Genoese
might have cut off from the Duke of Tuscany the way of sending his goods from
Legorn into Lombardy, by laying great Impositions upon all that passed that
way. But the Great Duke a Man of more ability and cunning than the Genoese, who
have much ado to agree in their resolutions, and are always slow in the
execution of them, Bought by the great Duke.
prevented them again: and though they were got into the possession of that
State, which they had morgaged from the Governor of Milan, for eight hundred
thousand Crowns in ready Money, with a clause of ratification on the part of
the King of Spain; yet the Great Duke caused the Affair to be negotiated
directly at Court, and purchased that Principality in Fee without Reversion,
for the sum of twelve hundred thousand Crowns in ready Money, whereof eight
hundred thousand were employed for the reimbursement of the Genoese, who had
only bought it in Morgage; And the other four hundred thousand Crowns went
into the Exchequer of Milan, and served to the regaining of Tortona from the
French, and the defending of Lombardy against them. The Genoese who discovered
the trick that the Governor had put upon them, and knew that he had kept by
him a whole year the ratification of their Treaty, that he might give the Great
Duke leisure during that time to supplant them, were upon the point of breaking
with the Spaniards: but the cunning of the Governor, and the private interest
of the chief members of the Republic, put a stop to the fermentation of their
bad humors; And though they were ill satisfied with Spain and the Great Duke,
yet they continued quiet, and gave no vent to their resentment.

Upon that Coast to the East are Rimaggio, The East Coast.
Manerola, Corniglia, Vernazza, Monterosso, Levanto, Bonasola, Framura, Deina,
Moneglia, and other Lands in the Mountains, all abounding in most excellent
Wines, Oil, Figs, Citrons, and Oranges.

Sestri.
Sestri di Levante is upon that Riviera: It is a Town built upon a Tongue of
Land, betwixt a Strand and a Port: it belonged to the Counts of Fieschi; and
might be rendered considerable for the passage into Lombardy. Adjoining to that
is Cucurno, which belonged to the Counts of the same name of Cucurno, who
having made it over to the Republic of Genoa, by a cruel revolution of Fortune
are become so miserable, that they are at present reduced to the gaining of a
living by Fishing, and Seafaring.

From Sestri forwards the Coast is surprisingly beautiful; and the lower
Mountains are more easily cultivated, producing with wonderful profusion what
ever the Inhabitants please to demand of the Earth.

There lies Lavagna, Lavagna belonged to the Counts of Fieschi.
the Ancient Inheritance of the Counts of Fieschi, who have always carried the
Title of it since the year nine hundred ninety four, though the Republic has
outed them. Chiavari, Rapallo, Santa Marguareta, and Porto fini come next,
after which we find Caniogli, Bogiasio, abounding in Oil, and Nervi, which is
rich in Roses that blow all the year long.

The King of Spain's Debts.
The public Riches of the People consist in many things; The Kings of Spain owe
them above thirty Millions of Gold, the first of which Debts were contracted by
Philip the Second upon a very politic account, that by that bit of Gold he
might curb a People naturally inconstant. These Debts or Actions were by the
Spaniards assigned upon diverse Librances or Rights, as they call them, but in
such a manner that it is difficult to exact the payment of them, or indeed the
profit, so that most part have been forced to abandon the Principal.

The Genoese being disappointed of the fair dealing which they expected from
Spain in relation to their Debts, have taken other measures, and put their
Money into the Banks of Rome, Venice, Florence, Milan, Naples and Sicily, and
have purchased considerable Lands within these States, where they have laid out
great sums for Inheritances or Morgages, from whence they draw several millions
of Rent; They have also many in the Town Hall of Paris and in the Bank of Lion.

It is to be observed that the Spaniards by a quaint piece of Policy giving the
Genoese the investiture of Fiefs and Lands which they have acquired in the
States subject to the Catholic King, Spanish Policy.
do it upon condition that they sell them not to any but to Genoese; that so
they may always have a hank over them as over Vassals, and hinder them from
transferring the price of these Fiefs any where else; And that is the thing
which unites them more closely both in interest and inclination to Spain,
according to the Maxim, That where a Man's Treasure is, there is his Heart also.

The Ports of the State.
The four most considerable Ports of this State upon the main Land, are that of
Genoa, wonderful through industry; Savona, which is at present filling up;
Vado, by the Provencals called Vaye; and the Gulf delle-Spetie, which is the
largest and securest Port of all the Mediterranean.

The Port of Genoa, one of the Wonders of the World, is the most considerable
and most frequented: Art has rendered it safe and commodious by two vast and
stately Moles of hard Stone, which encompass a large extent of Sea, and cover
it from the South Wind. These two prodigious Walls have cost incredible sums of
Money; and to defend them against the beating of the Sea; there is a strong
Rampart made before them of rocky stones of extraordinary bigness, which have
been rolled and cast in hab nab at random; so that sloping naturally of
themselves, they face the Mole at Water-mark and break the violence of the
Waves, which by that means cannot damnifie the Wall. On the contrary, the Sea
it self in its continual agitations, to second that Masterpiece of humane
industry, drives daily in great heaps of Sand against that pile of Rocks, and
mingles those with them in such a manner, that not only it makes a second
solid comport against its own fury, but also spreading its banks of Sand,
prepares insensibly a road without, which in time will prove one of the best of
the Mediterranean.

This Port within begins to dry toward the Land, by the filth and dirt that
the common Sewers bring to it. It would not be difficult to fill it up as far
as the mouth of the Darsena, and join that great space to the City which would
much enlarge it: And on the other hand by carrying further out on each side the
two Arms whith the old and new Moles stretch out into the Sea, the Harbor of
Genoa might by that means be rendered one of the largest, most stately and safe
Ports in the World; For the wide opening which is betwixt the two Moles, as
they are at present, leaves too much Sea exposed to the rage of the South,
South-east and South-west winds, so that Vessels cannot lie opposite to the
mouth of the Harbor when any of these Winds blow hard.

The Darsena I mentioned, is a little Harbor within, which can hold five and
twenty Galleys, as in a box. It might easily be made twice as big, by breaking
down a Wall which divides it from another bosom of the Sea, called the Darsena
of Wine, because the Barks that bring it put in there.

The Sea Arsenal has great shades and Coverts, The Arsenal.
where twenty Galleys may be built at a time. And the Arsenal of Arms, which is
in the Ducal Palace, is always furnished with Arms for forty thousand Foot. The
Magazines of Powder are well provided; but they entertain no more Soldiers
ordinarily than the three thousand Men I spoke of.

Having surveyed the main Land, we must now give a description of the Isle of
Corsica. The Isle of Corsica.
It lies in a very good Climate, betwixt the fortieth and two and fortieth
degree of North latitude. It is in circuit one hundred and fifty French
Leagues. That part which looks to Italy, and which they call Banda di dentro,
is less cultivated than the rest All that this Island produces is excellent;
exquisite Wines and delicate Oil: it yields also Silk, Wax, Honey and all sorts
of Fruits in abundance. It has Iron Mines, two salt Pits, and a good breed of
Horses might be kept there: but for all that this Country is so fertile;
Dispeopled by the Genoese.
the Genoese do what they can to render it almost desert and abandoned, for two
reasons: First, because they think that if the People grew numerous and
powerful, they would revolt against them: And secondly, that they may not
excite Strangers to invade an Island which they endeavor to render
contemptible, that they make it to be less envied. There are not reckoned to be
upon it at present above one hundred thousand Souls; but it might easily admit
and maintain six times as many. It is divided into six Bishoprics, Has six
Bishoprics.
reduced in to five, by the union of the Bishopric of Mariana to that of
Accia: Aleria, Aiazzo, Nebbio and Sagona are the other four.

The considerable parts of it are Calvi, Aiazzo, Boniface, St. Florent, and
Porto-vecchio, and the Genoese have made at Bastia the ordinary residence of
the Governor, a Mole capable to contain four Galleys under cover. St. Florent
was a work of the French fortified before the Peace of Chasteau Cambresis: The
Genoese have demolished it; but the foundations of Freestone are still
remaining, so that it might easily be raised again; and if a descent were to be
made upon the Island, there is no place more commodious, not only by reason of
its situation on the West side; but also because it is but three Leagues
distant from Bastia the Capital Town of the Island, opposite to it, and seated
on the Coast which looks to Italy on the East side.

The Territory of Aiazzo Aiazzo.
abounds in Wine, Corn and in all sorts of fruit.

Cape- Corfe.
Cap Corfe produces excellent Wine, and the people of this Country, are the
civilest and most peaceable of all the rest of the Island.

Balagna, which is called the Garden of of Corsica, yields the excellentest Oil
in the World, and exquisite fruits of all kinds.

Bastia.
Bastia, the residence of the Governor, has a good, rich and fertile Soil.
There are thirty thousand Souls reckoned to be in it, the Town has a good Trade
and is well governed. There is good Hunting and better Fishing about it, by
reason of the many Lakes and Ponds that are near the same.

On Alerie Alerie.
that is destroyed and Porto-vecchio depend large Lands, which are partly
uncultivated, though they be fit to bear all sorts of Corn. The great quantity
of standing dead Water that is there, incommodes the Air, and makes that
Country almost abandoned. There Colonies ought to be planted for draining the
Fens, and laboring a fat and fertile soil, which alone might feed all Liguria,
that has so little Corn, that it is forced to supply it self from Lombardy,
Sicily, and many times from Africa: That draining would be easy, and the
Genoese have seen a proof of it, since they brought thither a hundred Families
of Magnote Greeks, a people neighboring upon Morea, who have much advanced
Husbandry in the place where they have settled; but that number is not
sufficient for a corner of all these great Countries, which labor and industry
would render most fruitful, if men enough were employed to compass so good a
work: a thing that would be easy by dividing all these Lands into inheritances
of different Tenures and qualities, to be granted upon condition of settling a
certain number of Families therein, sowing of Corn, planting Vines and Olive
Trees, and especially quantities of Mulberry Trees for Silks. By that means of
a despicable Island, it might be made one of the richest Provinces in the World.

Woods of Aitona.
Aitona is famous for the vast Forests, and innumerable Trees that grow upon
the Mountains thereof, and which are of a bigness and quality, not only for
building of Houses, but also for building and masting all sorts of Vessels:
These Mountains make a chain of some Leagues in length; And the Forest would
never be consumed, provided it were orderly cut: the Timber even cut in the new
Moon alters not, and is of a particular grain. The Genoese who have found the
importance of this, have employed an hundred thousand Crowns, to plain a way
upon the ridg of the Mountains, which from the Forest reaches to the
Seashore, where they have built great Magazines, for preparing the Timber,
keeping it dry and preserving it. There is very good fishing for Tunnys there,
and abundance of Coral; which if well looked after, might turn to a
considerable account. There are two salt Pits also in the Island, but the
Republic slights them through a Politic condescension to the Spaniards.

Salt is a sacred Commodity, The Salt.
which People cannot be without, and whereof some Princes make their ordinary
Revenues: that Element of life, as necessary as Corn: that Manna, which seasons
all our food, to defend us from corruption; that source of all the delights of
the Taste, is one of the pillars that in many States upholds the public
Treasure: It costs but little at first, but people pay dear for it. And
generally Kings, and Republics have imposed severe punishments upon those, who
by a greedy rashness attempt in that particular to avoid and frustrate the
Laws. Genoa draws a considerable duty from Salt, because that City furnishes
not only all the State; but likewise Milan and all Lombardy with it. It is a
great branch of the Revenue, and the House or Bank of St. George to whom the
Gabel is engaged, The Gabell belongs to the Bank of St. George.
has the administration thereof, which is performed with much order and
Economy. But the Genoese might, without exacting, double the profit of it,
because they load their Salt at Yvyca, where the Spaniards sell it them dear,
and from whence they import it at great charges; whereas by re-establishing the
two salt Pits of the Island of Corsica which they slight, Salt Pits in Corsica.
that they may not displease the Spaniards, they might have it of their own,
and at home: nay, if instead of going to load at Yvyca, they would come and
take their Salt at the Hiere Isles, much nearer them, it would cost them far
less both in the purchase and transportation. This has been several times
proposed by some Genoese to the Great Council; but the Spanish Cabal has
always by a mystery of State hindered the resolution, though acknowledged to be
advantageous.

Since I have fallen upon the matter of Salt, it will not be impertinent to
speak of that which the French King would have conveyed from the Hiere Isles
to Montferrat for supplying of Cazal and the Forces which he maintains there,
who are not used to the Salt of the Country which is inferior to that of
France.

The demand of a Magazine of Salt at Savona.
This King demanded of the Genoese the settling of a Magazine of Salt at Savona.
They excused themselves to his Majesty, because all things are carrried in the
Council of Genoa by the influence of the Spaniards.

They have gone farther; for being persuaded that the commodiousness of the
Port of Savona put the King upon making that demand, The Port of Savona filled
up.
they have quite spoiled it: And as Andrew Doria began heretofore to render it
less useful, by sinking two great Vessels full of Earth in the mouth of it, so
they have set Masons at work to wall up the Entry, and wholly to fill it up.
And in the manner they spoil it, it will be almost impossible to restore it
again. But there is a shorter way to have a place upon the Sea Coast for
unloading of Salt, making a Magazine, and transporting it to Montferrat; There
needs no more but to back the just pretensions of the Counts of Fieschi, for
the restitution of his Estates. The Marquisat of Laon, Laon.
which borders upon the limits of the Marquisat of Montferrat, is one of the
chief Lands usurped from them: it is a little Town by the Seaside, with a
stately Castle, possessed by the House of Doria, since Andrew Doria took it
from those Counts. It is walled round, and seated upon an easy descent that
reaches the shore. It contains about three thousand Souls; and may be easily
fortified: It has no Harbor, but the Road is good; and by the help of a
little Mole there might be easily made a Haven sufficient for the unloading of
Salt, which might be carried as soon from Laon to Cazal, as if the Magazine
were at Savona; And for having it, the King needs only to require that Justice
and Restitution may be made to the Count of Fieschi, and that the restitution
begin by that Marquisat of Laon, which may be bought from him.

Upon that Coast two Leagues from Laon is Albegna, a strong place and well
situated, where by the help of a little Isle that is opposite to it, and a
Mole, which on the East Side might join the Island to the main Land; one of the
best Ports of Europe might be made, which would make Montferrat reach as far as
the Sea, supply it with the Salt of the Hieres without any need of Savona, and
facilitate the transportation of Forces by Sea, without being obliged to march
them through Savoy, which in the revolution of time may prove not so faithful
to France as it is at present. All that is to be done then, is only to make
the Republic restore to the Counts of Fieschi the Estates that lawfully belong
to them, and which could not be confiscated for the reasons that are solidly
alleged in their second Petition.

Genoa is an Archbishopric, Genoa an Archbishopric has eleven Suffragans.
which has eleven Suffragan Bishops; six in the Continent, Brugneto and
Sarzana to the East; Savona, Noli, Albegna and Vintimiglia to the West; and
five in the Island of Corsica as we have mentioned before. No Man is promoted
to Episcopal Dignity, unless he be a Genoese, or of the State of Genoa, and the
Archbishop must be of a noble Family, who is nominated by the Pope. The
Cathedral Church called St. Laurence has given to the Church, Popes, Cardinals
and Bishops. The Chapter of St. Laurence.
The Chapter heretofore decided all Controversies that happened betwixt the
Archbishop and the Senate: and it was in so great reputation, that Rome
esteemed its decisions no less than France does those of the Sorbone: but since
the Senate has arrogated to it self the honors of Royalty, and forced the
Archbishop to take his place on the side of the Epistle, transporting thither
his Episcopal Chair, to make room for the Doge on the side of the Gospel; the
Chapter has clashed with the Senate, who to depress the Canons have raised and
maintained against them certain Chaplains, founded in that Church by the Counts
of Fieschi who cross them in all things.

Besides that, the Senate has erected a new Tribunal consisting of six Monks
and three Senators, which they call the Ecclesiastic Juncto. Rome has
complained of it, as belonging to her alone to establish Ecclesiastical Courts
in Italy. But the Senate believed they might satisfy the Pope, by changing the
name of that Tribunal, and calling it the Juncto of Jurisdiction. The Juncto of
Jurisdiction.
The Republic is guided by it in the Affairs of Conscience. The Monks that
constitute it are of the Order of Mendicants, and enjoy great privileges,
being exempted from the Quire, and conventual Offices, well-lodged with a
Lay-Brother to attend them, and a double allowance; go out and in without their
Superiors leave, and have besides a Pension for their private occasions. The
way how they give their Opinions, is a mere Mummery: their Judgment is not set
down in writing; but when they have given it by word of mouth, the three
Senators are to make report thereof to the Chancellor; and they turn the
Report as they please, and very often quite contrary to the Sentiment of the
Monks.

The Inquisition.
The Court of Inquisition is another piece of Pageantry, in the way they manage
it. The Inquisitor is sent from Rome, who is a Dominican Monk, with a Secretary
and Companion. These three Fathers make up the Inquisition, and can judge
absolutely; but nothing is put in execution but by express orders from the
Senate, which never gives them. The Inquisitor exclaims and vexes himself; but
if his Complaints sound too loud, the Senate sends him packing, under pretext
of reason of State, and as turbulent.

There is no Religion but the Catholic, professed at Genoa. Since the time
that St. Nazaras and St. Celsus preached the Gospel there, no Heresy has
there taken footing: And for that constancy in the true faith, and the Wars
they have had against Infidels, the body of the State reckon it one of their
privileges, that they cannot incur an Interdict, nor general Excommunication,
no not from the Holy See, Genoa cannot be excommunicated.
if in the excommunication his Holiness mention not the privilege, and expressly
derogate from it.

That privilege was granted them by Pope Innocent IV. Innocent IV. of the
Family of Fresque.
of the House of Fieschi, who being besieged in Gajetta, with the whole College
of Cardinals by Frederick II. was delivered by James and Nicolas Fieschi's his
Nephews, to whom Genoa lent them Galleys for that important Expedition; So that
these two Nephews making a show of going against the Moors of Africa, put back
to shore again of a sudden; and coming to Gajetta, took on board the Pope and
Cardinals, and carried them to Genoa, and from thence to France, where the Pope
in presence of St. Louis celebrated the Council of Lion, The Council of Lion.
wherein Frederick the second was declared fallen from the Empire, and another
chosen in his place.

The religious Mendicants have stately Churches in Genoa, and every Order has
two or three. The Jesuits keep the public Schools, and have extraordinary
credit with the Nobility. The Senate are pious in appearance, but in reality
Machiavilians, with a fair outside of Religion, but little correspondence to it
within; being proud, revengeful, irreconcilable, cruel, and glorying in Usury;
saying that they have a Bull from the Pope, (which no man ever saw) which
allows them to take Interest at seven in the hundred, and a good pledge besides.

There are twenty four Fraternities Fraternities.
established in Genoa: and there is not one Genoese who is not enrolled in one
or other of these Fraternities: so that it may be said, that under pretext of
Devotion, there are twenty four factions in Genoa, who still feed that secret
rancour which heretofore divided the State into Guelphs and Gibellins, under
the names of the Adorno's, and Fregozo's, and which is still entertained
betwixt the Fieschi's and other Families; the Fregoso's being Guelphs, and the
Adorno's Gibellins: And as a mark of distinction betwixt those two parties, the
Fregozo's both Men and Women wear their Hair and Posies on the right side, and
a Turkey blew; and when they promise any thing, they hold up the Thumb, and
close the Fist: whereas the Adorno's wear their Hair on the left side; put
their Posies there, and delight in green; and when they assure any thing, they
point out the Forefinger, and close the rest of the Hand. The Adorno's are of
the Spanish faction, and the Fregozo's who are inferior in number, incline to
the French. Nevertheless, the Nobility of late have withdrawn from these
Fraternities, and leave the people only engaged in them, whom they are willing
to have divided into many little factions, that they may not unite against the
Nobility.

I forgot to tell, that there is a Court, which is called the Court of the
Arsenal, The Court of the Arsenal.
consisting of five Gentlemen and a Chancellor. Their care is to cause Galleys
to be built, and to have always a certain number ready to be put to Sea.
Excellent building of Galleys.
The structure of them is excellent, the Workmen very skilful, and the work
perfectly good. And to the end that the building of Galleys may not cost the
Republic much, they always build many more than they need; and the sale of
those that are superfluous supplies the charge of those which are necessary.
And hence it is that the Squadrons of Spain, Naples, Sicily and Sardinia, are
made up of Galleys built in the Arsenal of Genoa. And that the prohibition made
to them by M. de St. Olon, on the part of the French King, has strangely
stunned them, through the apprehension of being obliged to dismiss so many able
Artists that work in their Arsenal.

They have also established another Court, The Court of the borders.
which they call the Court of the Borders, to take heed that none of the
Subjects of the Republic, nor neighboring Princes, undertake any works upon
the Rivers, such as Milns, Dykes, or Canals, that may be prejudicial to the
Public.

Besides the Revenue that I have mentioned, there is a certain public stock,
which is called the Peculio, Peculio.
and is a Cash yearly reserved and put apart for urgent necessities. No man
whatsoever can know what it amounts to; that is a secret reserved for the
perpetual Procurators, the knowledge of it being kept even from the ordinary
Procurators; because they who manage the Peculio are accountable to no man,
which has made it to be believed that they appropriate it to themselves, as
they do the Rents of certain Farms.

The Government as to Provisions.
The Genoese have an admirable Government as to the regulation of Provisions and
Victuals; that the People may have plenty and at cheap Rates. Their conduct in
that particular deserves not only to be commended, but also imitated by all
Princes: and especially as to Corn and Wine, which are as the two Poles on
which the life of man turns. They take particular care to have always a
sufficient quantity of both to supply the whole City for two years complete.

As to the Corn, As to Bread.
they take this course: They have public Granaries, which are four great
square Houses, with several vaulted stories one over another in each, which are
so many different Granaries; and which for greater security are enclosed with a
Wall that has but one Gate well guarded. All these Granaries together can hold
a sufficient quantity of Corn to supply the Town for three years; and as one is
emptied, another is filled; with this prudent care, that if it be a plentiful
year and the Corn cheap, the Granaries are filled double: and if the year be
barren, and the Corn very dear, they spend the time with the former Provision,
and wait till the following year to fill them again: So that it is not to be
thought strange, if by so wise a conduct the Bread is no dearer at one time
than at another; the People being never sensible of the barrenness of the
Earth, which by divine Providence has never for two years together refused to
man his sustenance.

Out of these public Grananaries all the Bakers are obliged to buy their Corn,
with which they supply the people with bread: and they are prohibited under
severe Penalties to buy it elsewhere. Private Persons nevertheless are
permitted to bake their own bread at home; but since bread is at a very
reasonable rate, the Republic being content with a moderate profit, few give
themselves the trouble of making particular provisions, besides that the
Republic sets a price upon the Corn according to the plentifulness of the
Crop, and none can buy, till the public Granaries be first supplied: And when
there is a scarcity in Liguria, the Magistrate appointed for the regulation of
Provisions, causes Corn to be brought from Sicily, or Africa, to be put into
the public Granaries, that the crop of the Country may be for the use of the
Country People, the other Towns and private Families.

As to Wine, As to Wine.
every private Person is allowed to furnish himself, and freely to buy for his
provion; but no person whosoever in Genoa dares to sell or retail it out, no
not Vintners and they who keep Victualling Houses; The Republic reserves to
itself alone, the right of selling Wine by retail, and for the more convenient
distribution thereof, there is in every quarter a public Cellar always full of
Wine of two different prices, which never rise nor fall.

Fondaqui, public Cellars.
They call these public Cellars Fondaqui, over every one of which an Overseer
is put, to whom the Wine is delivered upon account, and who brings the Money
that it is sold for to the public Cash. He is strictly prohibited not to after
the Wine, either by mingling one sort with another, or adding Water; strict
inspection is taken into that; and they are not only punished by great Fines,
but are sent to the Galleys; so that there is seldom any complaint made of
them. The Cellars are filled as fast as they are emptied; and the provision is
always for two years.

Though this Policy as to Wine seems to be somewhat inconvenient, and that it
would seem that Princes who have considerable duties from the retail of Wines
in Taverns ought not to approve it, nevertheless it has certainly its
advantages, not only because it prevents Drunkenness, and the disorders which
attend it; but also because the profit which the Republic draws from the
retailing of Wine, comes clear into the public stock; whereas the duties that
in other places are raised from Vintners, pass through so many Hands, and to
the profit of so many Leeches, before they come to the public Treasury, that
the Prince receives but a very small share of the profit of that Imposition;
besides that thereby the adulterations and poisonings of Wine by the
Wine-Coopers and Vintners are prevented.

Money is reckoned at Genoa by Livres and Sols; The Money,
but the 20 s. of Genoa are worth but 12 s. of France: and so the sous of Genoa
is but worth seven Deniers of France, and a fifth Denier; by that reason a
French Crown and Patacoon are there worth five Livres; And a Louis-d'or, is
there valued at 18. 6. s. 8. den. That Is to say three Louis d'ors, are there
worth fifty five Livres Genoese Money.

They Coin certain pieces of Silver, which they call Genuines, Genuines.
that are worth seven Livres of their Money, which are four Live. 4 s. of
France: they are of a very fine allay, being of eleven Deniers and six grains
fine, and the neighboring States melt them down for Coining their Money which
is of a baser Standard.

They have four different Pistols, which pass at the same value, and which they
call the Quatrostampe: these are the Louis-d'ors, the Pistol of Spain, the
Pistol of Genoa, and that of Florence, which are of the same weight and Coined
of Gold of twenty two Carrats, with two grains of allay. All other Pistols are
current there, at somewhat less value. Their Genuines of Silver are in great
esteem in Savoy, and pass as far as Lion: but on this side of it, there are few
of them to be seen, though there be few pieces of coined Silver in Europe that
equal them in goodness.

There are three sorts of Persons Three sorts of Persons.
in Genoa: the least in number, but the most powerful are the Nobles, The
Nobles.
who govern the States and possess great Estates, and considerable Inheritances
in the Territories of the Catholic King; which links them close to the Crown
of Spain, by an indispensable necessity of Interests. And they who engage not
blindly in that stronger side, have little share in the Government, and cannot
but be much dissatisfied with the present State.

The second sort is that of the Merchants, The Merchants.
who mind nothing but their Trade: These have naturally a Republican Soul; but
they are only wedded to Spain by the consideration of the profitableness of
their Commerce, which if it succeeded under the protection of another
Sovereign, they would by degrees fall off from the Spaniards.

They have a pretty good inclination to France, upon account that they think
Justice there impartially distributed without distinction of Persons, whereas
at Genoa they feel a Tyranny, which is so much the more uneasy, that it
increases as fast as the Nobles who compose the State do multiply.

The last sort, the weakest, and yet the greatest, is made up of the Populace,
the Artificers and the Poor; who not only through the common inclination which
misery gives, desire a change, in hopes of bettering their condition: but
likewise, I may say, would be willing to be under the protection of France,
upon more honorable Motives.

All the Forces of Genoa consist in six Galleys which they constantly
entertain, and to which of late they have added four new ones, for reasons well
enough known to all Europe.

They have laid up the two great Men of War which conveyed their Merchant Ships
for the Trade of Spain: And this they have done upon the resentment of a secret
displeasure they conceived, and which they expressed to Captain Palavicini, who
going to Spain suffered his Ships to be visited. For there is no Nation in the
World more haughty and vain than the Genoese. The Pride of the Genoese.
They are nevertheless resolved to fit out three Men of War, in place of those
two which they have unrigged.

There are, Their Shipping.
as I have already said, ten or twelve great Ships well equipped belonging to
private Persons, wherewith they trade into the Levant, the West, and Africa;
and in the two Riviera's there are about three hundred Barks great and small,
and two hundred Coralines, which are only employed in fishing for Coral upon
the Coasts of Corsica and Sardinia.

The two Riviera's or Coasts of Liguria can furnish six or seven thousand good
Seamen: And if all the Militia of the main Land were raised, it is thought they
might amount to fifty or threescore thousand vigorous and hardy Men able to
carry Arms, and who want nothing but discipline and exercise. On the West side
the Men are Richer but not so Warlike, and those on the East side are poorer
but better Soldiers. Corsica also can furnish a Militia of fifteen thousand
good Men.

There are in Genoa an hundred and fifty Families of rich and powerful Nobles,
who for most part follow Merchandising; but these one hundred and fifty are
properly reduced to fourscore and ten, or thereabouts; for some of them are but
branches of other Families. As for Merchants, there are at least three hundred
very rich Families: They have all sumptuous Palaces, Country Houses, delightful
Gardens, costly Furniture, rich Tapistry, much Plate, exquisite Pictures,
excellent Statues, and their Wives are always clothed in cloth of Gold,
covered with Jewels and precious Stones.

The Nobility is divided into the Ancient and the new: Nobility heretofore
adopted.
the Offices of State are always filled by half of the one and half of the
other, and the Doge is chosen out of the two by turn. In the year 1528. when
Genoa having revolted from France, established a new form of Government, a
Register of the Nobility was made, in a Book which they called the Golden Book,
wherein all that were Ancient were recorded. There they inserted eight and
twenty Families which composed it. The new Nobility is far more numerous, and
was established by a permission given to the Ancient Nobility to adopt to these
twenty eight, other Plebeian Families. And according to that aggregation or
adoption, they were and are daily still inserted in the golden Book. It is also
to be observed that many who were of the Ancient Nobility, having neglected in
the year 1528. to cause themselves to be inserted, have only place amongst the
new, as the Justiniani: and that many of the new, for want of insertion, have
lost their Privileges, though their Children be without dispute received at
Malta.

Of the twenty eight Families of the Ancient Nobility, there are four which
without contradiction are the chief, to wit, the Families of the Fieschi,
Spinola, Grimaldi, Doria.


The House of the Fieschi's, whereof Don John-Louis Mario who fled into France
and lives there, is the Head, is at present the lowest of the four in Riches
and Power, tho the most Noble and Illustrious: they descend from the Ancient
Sovereign Counts of Lavagra, who issued from the Ancient Dukes of Burgundy,
whose Arms they still retain, having only changed the Colors, which was
heretofore often enough practiced by younger Brothers. They possessed several
considerable Estates in Italy, where they were perpetual Vicars of the Empire,
Admirals of Liguria, and coined Money. There have been two Popes of that
Family, and an incredible number of Cardinals. The Counts of Savoy at present
Dukes, the Counts of Montferrat, and the Dukes of Milan, from whom all
Christian Princes spring by the Mother side, have allied with the House of
Fieschi. Histories are full of the glorious Exploits of Generals of Armies
which it has produced: but there can be no better proof of the grandeur of
that illustrious Family, than the privileges which were preserved to it in a
Treaty of Peace made by advice of the Duke of Milan in the year 1453. betwixt
the Count Philip the chief of that House, and the Republic of Genoa; wherein
amongst other Articles it is agreed upon, that he shall always have place by
the side of the Doge, and the same honors; that most part of Offices shall be
granted, one half by the Doge, and the other half by the Count of Fieschi; that
he shall establish as well as the Doge, his Notaries, and Podestats; and that
he shall have his Forces and Garrisons.

These four chief Families have been always divided into two Parties: The
division of the four Families.
The Fieschi's and Grimaldi's have supported the faction of the Guelphs, and
espoused the Interests of France: but the Spinola's and Doria's have sided with
the Gibellin Party, and sticking close to Spain, have acquired two Grandeeships
in it, seeing the Prince of Melfi and the Duke of Tursis Grandees of Spain, are
of the House of Doria: and the Marquess de los Balbaces, and the Duke of
San-pietro are of the Family of Spinola. As for the Grimaldi, it is above six
hundred years since the Head of their Family was Sovereign of Monaco: but the
Fieschi's have been stripped of all since the enterprise of the year 1547. And
they have no more now remaining but the hopes of the French King's protection,
to restore them to their Estates unjustly usurped.

The other four and twenty Families of the Ancient Nobility are the Families of
the Cibo, Lomellini, Roeres, Negrons, Catanees, Palavicins, Imperiali,
Centurions, Mari, Serra, Piquenots, Leccari, Salvaggi, Pavezes, Cigales,
Rapasquieres, Pinelles, Marini, Grilli, Gentilli, Negri, Vsodimari, Malaspini,
Vivaldi.


And amongst the Families of the new Nobility, there are four Chief, which vie
in Quality with those of the Ancient; and these are

The Justiniani, Sauli, Franchi, Fornaci.


The others that came to my khowledg during my abode in Genoa, are the Adorni,
Inbrees, Saluzzi, Franzoni, Federici, Paggi, Viali, Doughi, Torilles, Cazelles,
Balbi, Raggi, Torre, Duraz, Bassadone, Carmagnoles, Zoagli, Brignoles, Balians,
Odons, Sophranes, Carpenius, Gropallo, Scaglia, Tiscornes, Moneilles,
Castagnoles, Morans, Fosses, Androvins, Biasses, Prato, Costaguts, Guani,
Garibaldi, Caze, Pietra-Raggia, Garbarins, Mercanti, Levanti, Calvi, Clavezani,
Ferrari, Ricci, Poveroto, Gritta, Tasso, Caregges, Restoro, Monzia, Maineri,
Oliva, Ansaldi, Nuovo Paffiiani, Gievardi, Airoldi. Passaggi, Chiavari.


Others there may be, of which I have not been informed.

The Custom-House is always provided of all sorts of Commodities, as Silk,
Sugars, Spice, cloth of Gold, silken and woollen Stuffs, and of every thing
that necessity or luxury requires.

The Port is much frequented by English and Dutch, who trade with the City of
Genoa, in Silks, Oil, Velvet, Damask, Honey, Wax, and Commodities of the Levant.

The most considerable Forts of the Terra firma or main Land are Savona, Gavi,
Sarzana, and the Fort St. Marie, in the Gulf delle Spetie; and in Corsica they
have Calvi, Boniface, and Aiazzo; but the whole State has not both by Sea and
Land six hundred Piece of brass Cannon.

The Garrison of Genoa exceeds not two thousand five hundred Men, This was
written before Genoa was Bombed by the French.
who have never seen the fire of an Enemy nor a Mortar-piece play; its Walls
toward the Land side and Mountains, are two French Leagues in extent, they
make a double enclosure, of which the outermost is almost wholly cut out of the
Rock, but the Ditch of it is narrow and shallow, and the Covert-way is so far
from being large, that two Men cannot pass it a breast, besides that the Works
which defend the Town, the Gates and Posts which of necessity must be
furnished, require as many to defend it, as are necessary to attack the same.

In bringing succors from the Milanese, there is a necessity of marching
through a great many narrow passes, in the Mountains that divide their States,
and two or three thousand Dragoons posted in the avenues of these Passes, would
be enough to hinder all relief: Men may land not only without Musket shot,
but it is easy for them also in landing to lodge under Covert, either on the
side of Bizagne, or on the side of S. Peter des Arenes. Batteries may be raised
betwixt the Fanal and the new Mole without the reach of any assault, which
would batter down the City on all sides; besides, there is nothing more easy,
than to cut the Aqueducts which make the Milns to go and furnish the City with
fresh water, so that the People without Bread and Water, starved with hunger
and thirst, would quickly cry for Peace, the whole City is also full of common
Sewers and subterranean Vaults which discharge themselves into the Sea, and
nothing hinders but Mines and other Engines may be made to play, which would
overthrow the Walls that cross those Sewers, and make in them as many breaches
as might be thought fit: from whence it may be concluded that that City is
supported more by its name, haughtiness, and outward appearance, than by any
solid strength.

That Republic then, though exceeding rich, is notwithstanding in it self very
weak for two reasons: First, Because the profound Peace it has for a long time
enjoyed, has inured the People to softness and luxury; and secondly, because
though the private Persons be extreme wealthy, yet the Revenues of the State
are but very moderate, and it is no easy matter in Commonwealths to impose
new Taxes for defraying the charges of War, which always displeases the People
who are naturally inclined to rest. But to remedy this weakness which the
Genoese themselves are sensible enough of, they are so straightly linked in
Interest with the Spaniards, that they will always be supported with all the
Forces of that Kingdom. That strict Alliance is founded not only, on what I
have already said, of the great Estates which the Genoese possess in the
Territories of the Catholic King; but also because the Milanese borders upon
the States of Genoa; and that Final, Final.
which belongs to the Spaniards, is a place apart, and situated betwixt
Albegnao and Savona, in the middle of the States of this Republic, which
inviron it on all hands: so that Milan can have no communication with that
important Maritime place, but by passing through the Lands of Genoa, which are
bordered on the West by the Mountains of Piemont; The limits of the State of
Genoa.
on the North by Montferrat and the Milanese; on the East by the States of the
Dukes of Florence and Parma; and on the South, by the Sea of Liguria.

Some time before the Pyrenean Peace, the Spaniards fearing that the French
might seize Final, proposed to sell it to the Genoese: the price was agreed
upon; Genoa bargains for Final.
but the Marquess de los Balbaces a Grandee of Spain of the House of Spinola,
as a faithful Subject, preferring the Interest of the King he served, before
that of his own Country, opposed it. He was Counselor of State for the
Affairs of Italy, and with much vigor and stedfastness he represented, that if
Final were abandoned, and the Genoese should afterward break with Spain, it
would be impossible to send relief in to the Milanese: but that if the Genoese
should abandon Spain, relief might always be sent by Final, and Montferrat,
without being obliged to them. His reasons were good, because at that time
Montferrat was not in the hands of the French: but if at present Genoa
abandoned Spain, Milan would be without relief; because to go from Final to
Milan, Montferrat being shut, there is a necessity of passing through the State
of Genoa. The advice of Los Balbaces was followed: And is disappointed.
the Treaty of Final was broken off; and the Genoese thereupon conceived so
great indignation against Balbaces their Countryman, that they deprived him of
all his privileges, which were to go with his Servants armed, to have the
Cushion at Church, and to be visited by the Nobility without the permission of
the Doge: which obliged him wholly to renounce Genoa, and to settle in Spain.

Final then, is one of the chief links that unites Genoa with the Catholic
King. Nevertheless, what Efforts soever Spain makes in favor of that
Republic, yet it can give them but very moderate assistances by Land; because
it can only help them with the Forces of the Milanese which it dares not
ungarison. But by Sea it can defend them with all the Galleys of the Squadrons
of Naples, Sicily, Sardinia and Spain. So that provided a powerful Prince who
intended to attack Genoa, had a Fleet strong enough to give a check to the
Naval forces of Spain, it would be easy for him by Piemont and Montferrat to
assault that Republic by Land, and in a short time to triumph over its pride,
with a smaller number of men than one may imagine; and so much the rather that
Commerce being the Soul of that Republic, a Fleet cruising before their
Harbors, would no sooner interrupt their Trade, but that the People and
Artificers would be reduced to extremity; besides that Genoa, the Country
furnishing but very little Corn, is obliged to supply it self from Sicily and
Africa by Sea; and that finding themselves besieged by Land, and blocked up by
Sea, with little relief from the Forces of the Milanese, and out of condition
of being revictualled from any where else, it would quickly be reduced to the
last pinch, having but very few standing Soldiers, and the Militia of the
Country altogether undisciplined.

But if the Nobility as well as People of Genoa, could be once cleared of the
false notions they have conceived of a Government contrary to that under which
they live; if once they could be persuaded that the Republican yoke gives
instead of one lawful Master, an hundred insatiable Tyrants, that it is a Hydra
of many Heads, which seldom agree in their resolutions; that a King governs
alone, in imitation of the Deity; whereas popular Assemblies are for the most
part but a confused Babylon; that by an inclination of Nature which tends
always to perfection, all Republics soon or late terminate in a Monarchy, as
heretofore Rome, and Florence in later days furnish the Genoese with almost a
domestic instance: if they would also call to mind that they freely gave
themselves over to Charles VI. and his Successors upon conditions religiously
observed on the part of our Kings, who by consequent are their true and lawful
Sovereigns: If to all these Reasons, they added serious reflections upon the
incomparable Virtues of the greatest King that ever France had; and that
touched with a remorse for a revolt that made them shake off his Dominion, they
would sincerely return under his Royal Protection, to what pitch of grandeur
might not that rich Republic advance? what Traffic might not the Genoese
aspire to, under the triumphant banner of France? and what Corsaires durst
appear in the Mediterranean, when our Squadrons joined to twenty Galleys that
Genoa might entertain, should cruise from Europe to Africa against these
infesters of the Seas?

I say that Genoa, which commonly sends out but six Galleys, might easily
maintain not only twenty, but also six men of War at least; to convey their
Merchant Ships, if that Republic were again under the protection of the Kings
of France: for seeing then they could have no cause to fear a War from their
Neighbors, all their Revenues might be wholly employed in Navigation, that
they might become Masters of all the Trade of the Mediterranean, and
successfully carry it on as far as the East and West Indies. And as the Nobles
of Genoa are extraordinarily rich, and have no less Wit and Courage than
Wealth, what employments might not they render themselves capable of under a
King, who with wonderful exactness knows how to discern the merit of his
Subjects, and who would furnish them with continual occasions of cultivating a
genius, that is dastardized by pleasures, and of employing a Courage, which by
an unactive Peace languishes in idleness? The principal Dignities of the State,
the highest Commands in the Army the considerable Offices of the Kingdom, would
be as much the recompenses of their merit, as of their sincere submissions; and
it would be a pleasant thing to see them share in the good fortune and glory of
a State, whose Interests would go hand in hand with their own. Genoa and
Marseilles united under the Standard of the Flower-de-luce, would give the Law
from Cadiz to the Dardanelles, keep all Barbary in awful respect, and make the
Sultan, tremble even in the Seraglio of Constantinople. The Treasures of the
Ligurians, would daily increase by the free Trade that they might have in their
own hands: and that great Commerce drawing into the Coffers of the King's
Subjects all the Money of Europe, would render his own the more inexhaustible
for the enlargement of that high Power to which his Virtues buoyed up by
extraordinary fortune have raised him. May Heavens grant that that invincible
Monarch may reunite to his Crown that precious Flower, which a revolt
heretofore struck out of it, and that Louis the Great and the Genoese may
contend who shall have the better on it; he by Clemency, and they by profound
Submissions.


