THE Reformation Reformed: OR A SHORT HISTORY OF New-fashion'd Christians;
OCCASIONED BY Franck Smith's Yesterdays Paper of Votes, September, 2. 1681.

LONDON: Printed for Joanna Brom, at the Gun in St. Paul's Churchyard.
MDCLXXXI.

THE PREFACE.
THE Author of Franck Smith's Paper, Entitled [ Votes of the Honorable the
Commons of England, Assembled in the late Parliament at Westminster, in favor
of Protestant Dissenters] is very little seen (I perceive) in the History of
the Commons of Westminster, and the said Protestant Dissenters: He would never
have stopped at a Broadside else; and almost the one half of that too, spent in
Remarque and Descant on the other.

Now with Honor to the Commons of 1680. and 1681. and with all Due Respect to
whatever they did; and to whatever they would have done; I shall take the
freedom to inform the People, that the Commons of 1640. and 1641. did a great
deal more for the Protestant Dissenters than ever these other Gentlemen, either
did, or intended to do. You Will say perhaps, That the Protestant Dissenters of
the Forty-One-Edition did what they did, for themselves, and only out of a
kindness to the Children of their own Mothers. As to That Point, let the matter
even go as the Courteous Reader pleases. We are not here upon the HOW IS and the
WHY'S; but in one word, upon the FACT; and you shall have it as plain, as the
best Authorities of those Times can tell the Story: That is to say, Husbands
his Two Volumes of Collections, and Scobel's Acts and Ordinances: unto which I
shall refer ye, and you shall there see the Blessed Fruits of an Union of
Dissenters, and a Thorough-Reformation: Monarchy Reduced within the Bounds of
Law: The King made a Glorious Prince in his Person; and his Dignity provided
for; His People settled in Peace, and his Royal Revenue in Plenty. You shall
there understand the meaning of Moderating the Exorbitant Power of the Bishops:
Clearing the Service of God, of Antichristian Ceremonies, and Human
Inventions, and setting up that which they call a Painful, Conscientious, and
Gospel Ministry in the Land. You shall there learn what it is for the Subjects
to be Secured in their Lives, Liberties, Consciences and Estates; For you will
find, in the Holy Idiome, That when a man is Imprisoned, Transplanted, put to
Death, Sequestered, Plundered; His Person, Life, and Estate, is said (for so
much) to be Secured. And so is his Conscience, when he comes to be put a
Shipboard, or Immured betwixt Four Walls, for not taking the Covenant. You
will see there, what is Intended by Securing the Person of the King, and his
Revenue, Church Lands, Delinquents Estates, etc. And according to the
Dissenters Lexicon, The True Sense of EASING the People. Were they not Eased of
their Liberties, their Fortunes, their Lives, their Governors, and their
Teachers? What a Blessing it was to have a Wanton, and a Plethorique Nation,
Eased of a matter of Sixty Millions of Money besides By-Blows? And in short,
What can be a Greater Ease to any man, than to have nothing left him either to
Lose, or to Care for? And then to have a Blessed Assembly of Divines at last
for his Confessors to Absolve* him, for the Contempt of God and his
Commandments? And who but the Protestant-Dissenters still; for the Heirs and
Executors, upon this wonderful Revolution to all Changes of Government. [It is
far from our Purpose or Desire say the Remonstrators, (Exact Collections, Page
19.) to let loose the Golden Reins of Discipline and Government in the Church,
etc. [Our Intention is only to Reduce within Bounds, that Exorbitant Power
which the Prelates have assumed unto themselves, so contrary both to the Word
of God, and to the Laws of the Land; to which End we past the Bill for the
Removing them from their Temporal Power and Employments, that so the better
they might with Meckness apply themselves to the Discharge of their Functions.
Exact Col. Page 19. Well! And what was the Business all this while? only [ The
Preserving the Peace and Safety of the Kingdom from the Malicious Designs of
the Popish Party. Ex. Col. P. 2.] And what were the Remonstrants next? Only [
His Majesty's most Humble and Faithful Subjects, the Commons in the present
Parliament then Assembled. Ex. Col. Page 1.] What might be the Drift of such a
Rabble of Calumnyes, Crowded up into that Remonstrance? The Government wanted
mending (it seems) and if his Majesty would but have minded his own Private
Business, and left them to manage Matters of State, [ We doubt not (say they)
but God will Crown this Parliament with such Success, as shall be the beginning
and Foundation of more Honor and Happiness to His Majesty than ever yet was
enjoyed by any of his Royal Predecessors, Ex. Col. Page 21.] I shall not need
to tell ye the kindness these People had for Protestant Dissenters; when only
Papists, and the Canonical Sons of the Church of England, (under the Notion of
Church-Papists) were excepted from Time to Time out of all their Dispensations:
And not only the Episcopal Clergy, but the Service Book it self; and all the
Friends, both of the Order and Discipline cast out of all Terms of Christian
Accommodation. The Pretext was Popery too: But so soon as ever they had gotten
the Prey in the Foot, they presently laid down their Religion, and took up the
Booty; and their Ostentation of Loyalty concluded in the Subversion o^ the
Monarchy; as under the Color of a Reforming Zeal they Overturned the Church.
And let not any pretend to Qualify the Crime by Acquitting themselves of an
Actual hand in the Horrid Regicide, or in giving Advice upon that single Point:
The Majesty of the King was Murdered in that very Remonstrance; and the
Doctrine and Design of it laid open the Way in a Direct Line from the Pen to
the Scaffold

But they themselves, in the Third of their own Actions, are the Best
Expositors of their Thoughts and Designs; so that without any further Comment,
I shall only Recommend ye to the Tract of their Proceedings, as it stands upon
Record in their own Writings: Wherein I have been so far from forcing any thing
beyond the Clear Import and meaning of it, That I have been Partial rather on
the other hand, in Representing it less than I have found it. When you shall
plainly see, and thoroughly consider the miserable Prospect of Wickedness and
Slavery That I have here set before ye, If Mr. Baxters Saints themselves should
Rise out of their Graves again, and tell ye what they suffer in another World,
for what they did in this, Neither would you believe them, though coming from
the Dead; if after all this, you remain Insensible of so Fair a Warning.

THE Reformation. etc.
AN Ordinance of both Houses of Parliament for the Ordering of the Militia of
the Kingdom of England, and Dominion of Wales. February 1641. Exact
Collections, Page 88.

Resolved, That this Answer of his Majesty is a Denial to both Houses of
Parliament concerning the Militia, and that those that Advised his Majesty to
give This Answer, are Enemies to the State, and Mischievous Projectors against
the Defense of the Kingdom. March 2. 1641. Exact Collections, Page 95.

Resolved, That the Kingdom be forthwith put into a Posture of Defense, by
Authority of both Houses, in such a way as is already agreed upon by both
Houses of Parliament, March 2. Ex. Col. Page 96.

Resolved, That the Ordinance of the Lords and Commons in Parliament for the
Safety and Defense of the Kingdom of England, and Dominion of Wales, is not any
way against the Oath of Allegiance. March 15. Exact Collections, Page 102.

Resolved, That the several Commissions Granted under the Great Seal to the
Lieutenants of the several Counties, are Illegal and Void. Ibid.

Resolved, That whosoever shall Execute any Power over the Militia of this
Kingdom, and Dominion of Wales, by Color of any Commission of Lieutenancy,
without Consent of both Houses of Parliament, shall be accounted a Disturber of
the Peace of the Kingdom. Ibid.

Resolved, etc. That in this Case of Extreme Danger, and of his Majesty's
Refusal, the Ordinance agreed on by both Houses, for the Militia, does oblige
the People, and ought to be obeyed by the Fundamental Laws of this Kingdom.
Ibid.

Resolved, That when the Lords and Commons in Parliament (which is the Supreme
Court of Judicature in the Kingdom) shall Declare what the Law of the Land is;
To have this not only Questioned, and Controverted and Contradicted, and a
Command that it should not be Obeyed, is a High Breach of the Privilege of
Parliament. March 1641. Page 114.

Resolved, That the Declaring of Sir John Hotham Traitor, being a Member of the
House of Commons* is a High Breach of the Privilege of Parliament. April. 18.
1642. Page 162.

Resolved, That the Command of his Majesty to call Capt. Philip Skippon,
Sergeant Major General of the Forces of London, to Attend his Majesty's Person
at York, is against the Law of the Land, and the Liberty of the Subject. March
17. 1642. Page 194.

Resolved, That it appears that the King (seduced by Wicked Counsel) intends to
make War against the Parliament who (in all their Consultations and Actions)
have proposed no other End unto themselves, but the Care of his Kingdoms, and
the Performance of all Duty and Loyalty to his Person. May 20. 1642. Page 259.

Resolved, That whenever the King makes War upon the Parliament, it is a
Breach of the Trust reposed in him by his People, contrary to his Oath, and
tending to the Dissolution of this Government.

Resolved, That whosoever shall Serve or Assist him in such Wars, are Traitors
by the Fundamental Laws of this Kingdom, and have been so Adjudged by Two Acts
of Parliament, and ought to suffer as Traitors. 11 Rich. II. 1 Hen. IV. Ibid.

Resolved, That those that are Actors in the putting of the Commission of Array
in Execution, shall be esteemed as disturbers of the Peace of the Kingdom; and
Betrayers of the Liberty of the Subject. June 20. 1642. P. 348.

Resolved, That an Army shall be forthwith raised for the Safety of the Kings
Person, Defense of both Houses of Parliament, and of those who have obeyed
their Orders and Commands; and Preserving of the True Religion, the Laws,
Liberty, and Peace of the Kingdom. July, 12. 1642. Page 457.

Resolved, That shall be Commissioners for raising of Monys, Horse and Plate
upon the Propositions, and shall have Power to Appoint Commissaries to Value
the Horse, and Treasurers to receive the Money and Plate. Oc. 4. 1642. P. 629.

Resolved, That shall have Power to Seize and Apprehend all Delinquents, That
are so Voted by the Parliament; and all such others as Delinquents, as have, or
do show themselves Opposite and Disobedient to the Orders and Proceedings of
Parliament. Ib. P. 630.

To Pass over Those ensuing Votes that were only Leading to the Execrable
Accomplishments of their Work in the Murder of the King and Change of
Government; We shall give ye now their Votes of no more Addresses.

Resolved, That they (the Lords and Commons) will make no further Addresses or
Applications to the King.

Resolved, That no Application or Address be made to the King by any Person
whatsoever, without the leave of both Houses.

Resolved, That the Person or Persons that shall make Breach of this Order,
shall incur the Penalty of High Treason.

Resolved, That the Lords and Commons do Declare, That they will receive no
more any Message from the King; and do Enjoin, That no Person whatsoever do
Presume to Receive or Bring any Message from the King to both, or either of the
Houses of Parliament, or any other Person. Baker's Chron. P. 577.

Resolved (further) That no Message be received from the King upon Pain of
Treason, and that the General take Care of his Person, and a Council of War
draw up a Charge of Treason against him. Baker, P. 585.

January, 6. 1648. The Ordinance of the Kings Trial turned into an Act of the
Commons alone; and a Faction in the City Suborned to PETITION for Justice
against the King. Thus was his Sacred Majesty Voted from one Calamity to
another, till they Consummated their Enterprise in the Diabo^ical Murder of
their Sovereign, and the Change of the Government.

Notes and Resolutions, Ut Supra, in further Favor of PROTESTANT DISSENTERS.
AN Order of the Commons for Tonnage and Poundage. Mar. 24. 1641. Ex. Col. P.
121. An Order of Commons concerning Four Subsidies, and other Money unpay'd.
Mar. 25. 1642. Ex. Col. P. 122. Subscriptions toward the Propositions for
Ireland. Ex. Col. P. 136. A special Order of the Commons concerning the Free
Order of the County of Buckingham. Ex. Col. page 137. An Order of both Houses
concerning Poll-Mony. May, 6. 1642. Exact Col. page 178. Propositions by the
Lords and Commons for bringing in of Money, Plate, Horse, Horsemen and Arms.
June 10. 1642. Ex. Col. 339. A Declaration of the Lords and Commons, That the
Estates of Delinquents and Malignants shall be toward the Public Charge of the
Kingdom. September. 8. 1642. Exact Collections. page 609. An Order of a Committee
concerning Horses to be brought in. Sept. 17. 1642. Ex. Col. page 613. An Order
for Raising Dragoons, and 16000 l. Sept. 29. Ex. Col. page 624. An Order for
Raising One Thousand Dragoons upon the Public Faith. Oc. 4. page 627. A
Declaration for more Money upon the Public Faith. No. 14. Ex. Col. 752. An
Order of the Lord Mayor for Borrowing 30000. l. No. 26. Ex. Col. page 769. An
Ordinance for the Twentieth Part of all such as have not Contributed toward the
Propositions for Money, Plate, etc. Ex. Col. page 764. An Ordinance for the
speedy Execution of the said Ordinance. Ex. Col. page 775. An Order to Break
open Locks and Doors. Exact Collection. page 777. An Order for Advance of Money,
Dec. 1. Ex. Collections. page 781. An Order concerning Purveyance. Ex. Col.
page 788. An Ordinance concerning Tonnage and Poundage. page 792. Several
Orders for the promoting Subscriptions. Jan. 14. page 849. An Ordinance for
Assessing Eight Counties that had not Contributed. page 890. An Ordinance for
Assessing Malignants. page 900. An Ordinance for New Contributions. page 964.
An Ordinance for Rating New Castle Coal. February, 21. page 922. An Ordinance
for a Weekly Assessment. Mar. 4. p. 932. Additions to an Ordinance for
Assessing All the Kingdom. page 932. An Ordinance for Raising Moneys for the
Defense of Exon. Husbands Collections, PART 2. page 8. Mar. 24. 1642. An Order
against paying Rents to Delinquents. Fol. 11. An Ordinance for Raising Money
upon Hereford. Fol. 21. An Ordinance for Sequestring Delinquents. Ap. 1. 1643.
Fol. 13. An Order for borrowing Ordnance of the East India Company. Fol. 25. An
Order for taking up 2600 l. Fol. 29. An Ordinance for raising Money for the Isle
of Wight* Fol. 30. An Ordinance for Sequestring Delinquents. Fol. 33. An
Ordinance of 200 l. weekly out of Bucks. Fol. 36. An Order for Sequestring
Committee Men that neglect their Duties. Fol. 36. An Order for Contribution for
Maimed Soldiers. Fol. 42. An Additional Ordinance for Seizing Horses and Goods
of Malignants. Fol. 44. An Ordinance for borrowing Horsemen and Money on the
Public Faith. Fol. 45. An Order for Contribution for Redemption of Captives
Fol. 46. An Order for Raising Moneys to Pay the Forces in the Eastern
Association. Fol. 48. An Ordinance for Seizing Horses, Goods and Chattels of
Malignants in the Eastern Association. May. 2. Fol. 155. An Ordinance for
maintaining Portsmouth, etc. Fol. 158. An Additional Ordinance for Sequestring
Delinquents Estates in Lancashire. Fol. 163. An Ordinance for Raising Moneys in
Southwark, etc. Fol. 164. An Ordinance for taking Horses for the Parliaments
Service. Fol. 164. An Order for the speedy Raising Moneys. 165. An Ordinance
for the Fifth and Twentieth part. 169. An Ordinance for raising Moneys for
Ireland. 178. An Additional Order for the Committee of Sequestrations in
Lancashire. 179. An Ordinance for raising Moneys out of the Eastern
Association. 181. An Ordinance for Coll. Long to take up Moneys in several
Hundreds in Essex. 182. An Ordinance for raising Horses for the Parliament.
184. An Order for Haberdashers-Hall to Assess within 20 Miles of London. Fol.
185. An Order for Assessing 100. l. a Week on the Borough of Southwark. June 5.
1643. Fol. 196. An Order for a Rate to be set on Coals. Fol. 206. An Order for
Sequestring the Archbishop of Canterbury. Fol. 207. An Ordinance to Advance
Money for Salop. 225. An Ordinance for New Subscriptions for Ireland. July 14.
1643. Fol. 233. A Declaration for Moneys on the Public Faith. 237. An
Ordinance for moneys for Northampton. 239. An Ordinance for a New Impost. 267.
An Ordinance for raising Horse for the Earl of Manchester. 278. An Ordinance
for Impressing of Men. Aug. 10. 1643. Fol. 282. An Order for Raising 1000 Foot
and Dragoons. 286. An Order for Raising Money and Horse in Essex. 286. An
Ordinance for Impressing 20000 Soldiers for the Eastern Association. 288. An
Ordinance for taking an Oath within the Lines of Communication. Fol. 289. An
Order for Impressing 2000 men in London and Westminster. 291. An Ordinance for
speedy Raising of money in London and the Liberties. 294. An Ordinance for
Sequestring such Member's Estates as Neglect their Service. 296. An Order for
Raising Money for Relief of Ireland. Fol. 306. An Ordinance for a Weekly Tax on
the Eastern Association. Sept. 6. 312. An Ordinance for Raising Moneys by way
of Excise. Fol. 313. An Order for Publishing the Ordinance of Sequestration of
the King, Queen, and Prince's Revenue. 333. An Order for Raising Money for
Advance of the Scots Army. Oct. 7. fol. 354. An Ordinance for the Excise upon
Wines. 355. An Ordinance for Raising Moneys for Northampton. Fol. 356. An
Ordinance for Assessing the Estates of absent Members. 357. A Penalty upon Beer
and Ale-Brewers for not paying of Excise. 365. An Ordinance for Raising 66666
l. etc. for our Brethren in Scotland. 371. An Ordinance for Raising Moneys for
Magazines, etc. No. 9. 1643. Fol. 384. An Ordinance Concerning Customs for
Plymouth, Fol. 386. An Order for Returning the Names of such as take not the
Covenant. Fol. 390. An Order to raise 500 l. for Guernsey and Jersey, Dec. 7.
1643. Fol. 395. An Order for diverse Persons to take the Covenant at Margarets
Westminster. 399. An Ordinance disabling any man within the City of London from
any Place of Trust that shall not take the Covenant, Fol. 404. An Ordinance of
Excise upon Flesh, Victual and Salt. Jan. 9. 1643. Fol. 410. An Ordinance for
Regulating the University of Cambridge, and removing scandalous Ministers. 415.
An Ordinance for taking the Covenant through England and Scotland. Feb. 2. 420.
An Ordinance for a New Assessment in Middlesex. Fol. 429. An Ordinance for a
Weekly Meal. Mar. 26. 1644. Fol. 467. An Ordinance for Continuing the Excise,
Ap. 8: Fol. 481. An Ordinance for felling of Timber in Waltham Forest, and out
of Delinquents Woods for the use of the Navy. Fol. 482. An Ordinance for
maintaining of Forces in the seven Associated Counties; May. 15. Fol. 492. An
Ordinance for Raising money for Forces in Salop. June 13. 1644. Fol. 504. An
Ordinance for continuing four Months Assessments upon Southampton, Surrey, etc.
507. An Ordinance for a New Excise upon Alum, Coperas, etc. July 8. 1644. 519.
An Ordinance for a New Excise upon Herring, Aug. 24. 1644. 542. An Order for
Raising Money for Ireland. 544. An Ordinance for Four Months Weekly Assessment
on the Seven Eastern Counties. Sept. 26. 1644. 551. An Ordinance for Continuing
the Ordinance for Excise, Twelve Months longer. 554. An Ordinance ^or a Weekly
Assessment on the County and City of Gloucester. Oct. 2. 1644. fol. 557. An
Ordinance for Raising 22000. l. fol. 560. An Ordinance for a Weekly Assessment
in the County of Northampton. fol. 562. A Weekly Assessment throughout the
Kingdom. f. 563. An Ordinance for Raising 66666 l. etc. by way of Loan for* our
Brethren of Scotland. December, 2. 1644. fol. 588. The Excise on Flesh Victual
and Salt continued. 952. An Assessment for the Isle of Wight continued. 593. An
Ordinance for Raising Moneys to Redeem Captives. Jan. 28. 1644. fol. 596. An
Ordinance for continuing several Ordinances of Excise. fol. 597. An Order for a
Monthly Tax of 21000 l. February, 20. 1644. fol. 607. An Ordinance for
Continuing the Subsidy of Tonnage and Poundage. fol. 618. An Ordinance Enabling
my Lord. Admiral to Impress Mariners. fol. 620. An Ordinance for a Tax of Three
Hundred Pound a Month upon Essex. March 3. 1644. fol. 625. An Ordinance for
Draught-Horses, and for Payment of Coat and Conduct-money. fol. 627. An
Ordinance for Con^inuing a W^ekly Assessment upon Gloucester. fol. 628. Ad
Ordinance for the Militia o^ London and Sub^Committees to Press men. March 29.
1645. fol. 632. A Tax of 2800 l. upon Lincoln. Ap. 3. 1645. fol. 633. An
Ordinante for Raising of Money out of Delinquents Estates for the Garrison of
Gloucester. May 6. 1645. fol. 647. An Ordinance for a Collection for Taunton.
Fol. 651. An Ordinance for raising Monys in the County of Derby. Fol. 652. An
Ordinance for a Council of War in Kent. June 10. 1645. fol. 957. An Ordinance
for the General to Press men in all places of his March. Fol. 656. An Ordinance
for Raising 21000 l. a Month for the Scots. 658. An Ordinance for Raising 31000
l. for the Scots. Fol. 665. An Ordinance for Raising Monys for the County of
Rutland. 673. An Ordinance for Raising 20000 l. to Reduce Oxford. July 1. 1645.
Fol. 68^. An Ordinance for Raising 500 Horse. 687. An Ordinance for Raising Ten
Thousand Pound, etc. 688. An Ordinance for the Continuing of Assessments in the
County of Northampton. Aug. 1. 1645. Fol. 693. A Monthly Assessment upon
Lincoln. Fol. 707. A Tax on several Counties for Reducing Newark. 709.
Assessment for Sir Thomas Fairfax his Army Continued Six Months longer. page
711. Assessments for the Scots Army Continued Four Months longer. 711.
Assessment for Ireland Continued Six Months longer. 712. An Order That no
Prisoner go abroad without leave of the Committee for Prisoners. 718. An
Ordinance for Maintenance of Garrisons. Sept. 3. 1645. Fol. 721. An Ord. for
Raising 500 Horse, and 500 Dragoons* 724. An Ord. for taking of the Fifth Part
from Delinquents Wives. 726. An Ord. for Supply of the British Army in
Ireland. 739. An Order for advance of 40000 l. Oct. 13. fol. 746. An Order for
Contribution for Leicester. 749. An Order for a Collection for the Protestants
in Ireland. N^. 1. 1645. 751. An Order for an Additional Excise. 760. An Order
for Raising Moneys in the Eastern Association. December. 1. 1645. fol. 764. An
Order for Raising 31000 l. for the Scots. 767. An Order for a Collection for
the Town of Manchester. 768. Several Orders for Payment of the Army. 770.771.
An Order for Pay of Waggoners. 772. An Order for Raising Horse for Defense of
the City of London. Jan. 17. 1645. 780. An Order for taking away the Court of
Wards. Feb. 24. 1645. fol: 810. An Order of the Committee of the West for a
Weekly Contribution. Mar. 30. 1646. 870. An Order for all such as have born
Arms against the Parliament, to depart the City before the Sixth of April next.
March 31. 1646. 873. An Ordinance for a Court Martial in London and
Westminster. Apr. 3. 1646. fol. 874. Assessments for the Army continued Four
Months longer. 876. The Commons Declaration for the Ancient Fundamental
Government of the Kingdom. 877. An Order for Continuing the Excise. Apr. 25.
1646. fol. 880. An Order for Cavaliers to depart 20 miles from the City of
London, by May 12. May 6. 1646. fol. 883. An Ordinance to raise Moneys for
Ireland. 885. An Order for taking the Negative Oath, and National Covenant.
June 2. 1646. 889. An Order for Execution of Legal Process against any in
Custody for Delinquency. 890. An Order forbidding any that come out of the
King's Quarters to go Armed while they remain in or near London. July 2. 899.
An Order for abolishing Archbishops and Bishops, and settling their Lands upon
Truststees, for the Use of the Commonwealth. Oct. 9. 1646. 922. An Order for
the Advance of 200000 l. fol. 925. An Order against Letting Sequestered Estates
to the Owners. No. 10. 1646. 931. An Order concerning the Lands and Estates of
Excepted Persons. 931. A Declaration for payment of our Brethren of Scotland
200000 l. and they to depart this Kingdom. 931. An Order for Sale of Bishops
Lands. 932.
Scobels Collection.
THE Subsidy of Tonnage and Poundage Continued. March 13. 1646. fol. 116. An
Ord. for raising 42000. June 3. 1647. fol. 124. For Raising Money for the Army,
etc. fol. 128. For Re-Establishing the Duty of Excise, etc. Aug. 28. 1647. fol.
132. An Order to disable Delinquents to Bear any Office or Place of Trust, or
have any Voice or Vote in Elections. Oct. 4. 1647. fol. 135. The Subsidy of
Tonnage and Poundage further Continued. Dec. 16. 1647. fol. 136. For raising
50000 l. for Ireland. Jan. 13. 1647. 137. For the Settling of the Presbytery.
fol. 139. For raising 20000 l. a Month for Six Months. Feb. 16. 1647. fol. 144.
The Form of Church Government agreed upon. Aug. 29. 1648. fol. 165. The
Assessment of Sixty Thousand Pound a Month, Continued for Six Months longer.
Oct. 6. 1648. Fol. 180. The Style of the Law Altered. Jan. 27. 1648. Part 2.
Fol. 3. An Act Prohibiting the Proclaiming any Person to be King of England and
Ireland. Ibid. The Kingly Office in England and Ireland Abolished. Mar. 17.
1648. Part, 2. Fol. 7. The House of Peers Abolished. Fol. 8. An Act for Raising
90000 l. a Month, etc. Ap. 7. 1649. Fol. 8. Deans and Chapters, etc. Abolished.
Ap. 30. fol. 16. A Penny per Gallon Excise upon all Foreign Salt. June 12 fol.
44. An Act for borrowing 150000 l. June 29. sol. 45. An Act for Sale of the
Goods and Personal Estate of the late King, Queen, and Prince. July 4. 1649.
fol. 46. An Act for Sale of their Honors, Manors, and Lands, etc. July 16.
fol. 51. For Continuing the Assessment of 90000 l. per Month. Aug. 1, 1649.
fol. 71. For the Speedy Raising and Levying of money by way of New Impost, or
Excise. Au. 14. fol. 72. For Removing all Papists, Officers, and Soldiers of
Fortune, and diverse other Delinquents, from London and Westminster, and
Confining them within five miles of their Dwellings. Feb. 26. 1649. fol. 104.
An Act for a High Court of Justice. Mar. 26. 1650. fol. 111. An Assessment for
six months of 90000 l. the first three months, and sixty thousand the other
three. May 21. 1650. fol, 122. Further Power given to the High Court of
Justice. Aug: 27. 1650. fol. 1330. For Sale of Manors, of Rectories and
Glebe-Lands, late belonging to Archbishops, etc. Oct. 16. 1650. fol. 134. For
Raising 120000 l. a Month for four Months, etc. No. 26. fol. 149. For
Establishing a High Court of Justice in Norfolk, Suffolk, etc. Dec. 10. fol.
149. For a Seal of the Commonwealth of England, Jun. 22. 1650. fol. 151. An
Act for the Sale of the Fee-Farm-Rents, etc. Feb. 6. fol. 151. For Continuance
of the Customs. March, 11. page 152. An Imposition upon Coal. Mar. 28. 1651.
fol. 153. For Continuing the Assessment of 120000 a Month. Ap. 15. Fol. 154. An
Act for Continuing the High Court of Justice. Jun. 20. Ibid. For the Sale of
several Estates Forfeited, etc. July 16. fol. 156. An Act for Sale of Goods
belonging to the Late King, Queen and Prince, July 17. 1651. fol. 173.
Correspondence Prohibited with Charles Stuart or his Party. Aug. 12. 1651. fol.
175. The Assessment of 120000 l. a month Continued. Sept. 1. 1651. fol. 175.
The Commissioners of the Militia Enabled to Raise Money for the present Service.
September, 2. 1651. fol. 175. The High Court of Justice Continued. Sept. 25.
fol. 176. A Tax of 90000 l. a month for six months. Dec. 19. 1651. fol. 177. An
Act making Void all Honors or Dignities given by the Late King since January
4. 1641. Feb. 4. 1651. fol. 178.
An Act for disabling Delinquents to Bear Office or to have any Voice or Vote in
Election of any Public Officer. Oct. 8. 1652. fol. 209. An Assessment of
120000 l. a month for six months. Dec. 10. 1652. fol. 226. For Exposing to Sale
diverse Castles, Houses, etc. belonging to the late King, Queen and Prince. Dec.
31. 1652. fol. 227. An Act for Continuance of the Customs, Mar. 22. 232. And
for Continuing an Imposition upon Coal. Ibid. For Continuing the Receipts of the
Excise. September. 6. 1653. fol. 238. The Tax of 120000 l. a Month Continued. No.
24. 1653. fol. 272. An Order for Continuing the Excise. December. 24. 1653. fol.
275. The Tax of 120000 l, a Month Continued. June 8. 1654. fol. 305. A High
Court of Justice Established. June 13. fol. 311. An Act for appointing the
Excise of Alum and Coperas. Aug. 29. 1654. fol. 347.
An Act for Renouncing and Disannulling the Pretended Title of Charles Stewart.
fol. 371. 1656. For taking away the Court of Wards. fol. 375. The Subsidy of
Tonnage and Poundage Continued. fol. 384. A Tax of 60000 l. a Month. fol. 400.
For Raising 15000 l. Sterling in Scotland. fol. 425. An Assessment of 35000 l,
a month on England. 6000 on Scotland, and 9000 on Ireland, for Three Years.
fol. 491.
By the Protector.

A Proclamation prohibiting Delinquents to bear Office, or to have any Voice or
Vote in the Election of any Public Officer.
HIS Highness the Lord Protector has by and with the Advice and Consent of his
Council ^hought fit to Publish and Declare* and does hereby signify his Will
and Pleasure to be, that no Person or Persons of what Quality or Condition
soever, whose Estates have at any time heretofore been duly Sequestered, or
their Persons Imprisoned for their Delinquency, or who did Subscribe or Abet
the said Treasonable Engagement (1647) or have been in any wise aiding,
assisting or abetting the late King or his Family, or Allies, or any other the
Enemies of this State and Commonwealth, shall be Elected, or give his or their
Uoice or Uote in the Election of any Person or Persons to any Office or
Offices, Place or Places of Trust, Power, or Government, within this
Commonwealth; or shall Hold, Exercise, or Execute by him, or themselves, or
his or their Deputies or Assigns, any such Office or Offices, Place or Places
within the same, until his Highness Command be further known, on pain of his
Highness displeasure, and such penalties and punishments as may and shall be
severely Inflicted on them as Disturbers of the Public Peace, and Contemners
of his Highness Just Commands herein, etc.

Sept. 21. 1655.
Here follows an Extract of some Clauses and Passages out of the Humble
Petition and Advice of the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses Assembled in the
Parliament of the Commonwealth, which was Presented to his Highness, May 25,
1657. And his Highness Answer thereunto, was Read by the Clerk of the
Parliament, in these words.

The Lord Protector does Consent.
We Will give you first a Taste of the Style; and then show you by what Measures
they proceeded for the Securing of their Government, which for the ^olicy and
Prudence of them may serve for a Rule and Precedent for other Princes and
S^ares to walk by.

We the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses in this present Parliament Assembled,
taking into our most serious Consideration, the present State of these Three
Nations, Joined and United under your Highness Protection, cannot but in the
first place, With all Thankfulness, Acknowledge the Wonderful Mercy of Almighty
God in Delivering us from that Tyranny and Bondage both in our Spiritual and
Civil Concernments, which the Late King and his Party designed to Bring us
under, and Pursued the Effecting thereof by a Long and Bloody War, etc. Scobels
Acts. Fol. 378. Part 2.

Persons disabled to be Elected or to Elect Members of Parliament.
That All and every Person and Persons who have Aided, Abetted, Advised or
Assisted in any War against the Parliament, since the First day of Jan. 1641.
(unless he or they have since born Arms for the Parliament, or your Highness;
or otherwise given signal Testimony of his or their good Affection to the
Commonwealth, and Continued Faithful to the same) and all such as have been
actually Engaged in any Plot, Conspiracy or Design against the Person of your
Highness, or in any Insurrection or Rebellion in England or Wales since the
Sixteenth day of December 1653. shall be for ever Disabled and made Incapable
to be Elected, or give any Uote in the Election of any Member to sit or serve
in Parliament. That for Scotland none be Capable to Elect or be Elected to sit
or serve in Parliament, who have been in Arms against the Parliament of
England, or against the Parliament in Scotland, before the First day of April
1648. (Except such as have since born Arms in the Service of the Parliament of
England, or your Highness, or given other signal Testimony of their good
Affection) nor any that since the said First day of April, 1648. have been in
Arms, or otherwise Aided, Abetted, Advised, or Assisted in any War against the
Parliament of England, or your Highness, except such as since the First day of
March, 1651. (old style) have lived Peaceably, and thereby given Testimony of
their good Affection to the Parliament and your Highness. Scobel. Fol. 379.
Part 2.

That all Uotes and Elections, Forfeiture for Electing contrary, or not
according to the Qualifications.
given or made contrary, or not according to the Qualifications aforesaid,
shall be Uoid, and of none Effect; and that if any person or persons so
incapable as a foresaid, shall give his or their Uote for Election of Members
to serve in Parliament; all and every such person and persons so Electing,
shall lose and forfeit one years value of his and their Respective,
Real Estates, and one full third part of his and their Respective personal
Estates. Ibid.

A Co^f^ssion of Faith shall be agreed wi^h in (...) Pr^^^cy.
A Confession of Faith to be Agreed by your Highness and the Parliament*
according to the Rule and Warrant of the Scriptures to be asserted, h^ld for^h
and recommended to the People of th^s^ Nations, so that this Liberty be not
Extended to (...) or (...). etc.

Pers^^s d^sabl^d to ^old Offices of Trust.
that all and every person and persons, who have Aided Ab^tted Advised* or
Assisted in any War against the Parliament, since the First day of January,
1^4^. (unl^ss he or they have since born-Arms for the Parliament, or your
Highness, or otherwise given s^gnal Testimony of his or their Good Affection to
the Common Wealth, and continued Faithf^l to the same) and all such as have
been Actually Engaged in any Plot, Conspiracy, or Design, against the Pers^n of
your Highness, or in any Insurrection or Rebellion in England, or Wales, since
the Sixteenth day of December, 1653. And for Scotland* That all and every
Person and Persons who have been in Arms against the Parliament of England, or
against the Parliament in Scotland, before the First day of April, 1648.
(except such as have since born Arms in the Service of the Parliament of
England, or your Highness, or given other signal Testimony of their good
Affection) and every person or persons that since the said First day of April,
1648. have been in Arms, or otherwise Aided, Abetted* Advised, or Assisted in
any War against the Parliament of England, or your Highness, except such
persons who having been in Arms or otherwise abetted advised or assisted in any
War against the Parliament of England, or your Highness since the Fir^^ day of
April, 1648. and were not in Arms against the Parliament of England, or against
the Parliament of Scotland, before the First day of April, 1648. and have since
the First day of March, 1651. (Old Style) lived peaceably, and thereby given
Testimony of their good Affection to the Parliament,
and your Highness be made incapable for ever, of holding or Enjoying of any
Office or Place of Public Trust, in these Three Nations, or any of them.
Scobel. Part 2. Fol. 382. May. 25. 1657.

We shall give you a Touch here of Oliver's Politiques though of a former Date.

We have (says he) in our own Judgment such Clear and Convincing Grounds to
justify our Proceedings with those men, (the Cavaliers) which could scarcely
be Expected in Cases of secret Treasons and Conspiracies; a bare Correspondency
wherein has been always accounted Capital; And if the Supreme Magistrate were
in these Cases tied up to the Ordinary Rules, and had not a Liberty to proceed,
upon Illustrations of Reason, against those who are Continually suspected,
there would be wanting in such a State, the means of Common Safety:
Conspiracies could never be Prevented, nor would the Precipitations of our
Enemies from one Mischievous Design to another, ever hurt them. [A Declaration
of his Highness by the Advice of his Council. Oct. 31. 1655. page 36.] And
again:

That Character of Difference between them and the Rest of the People, which is
now put upon them, is Occasioned by Themselves, not by Us; There is nothing
they have more Industriously Labored in than this, To keep themselves
separated, and distinguished from the Well-Affected of this Nation: To which
End, they have kept their Conversation apart, as if they would avoid the very
beginnings of Union; have Bred and Educated their Children by the Sequestered,
and Ejected Clergy, etc. Ibid. page 38.] And therefore we leave to all mankind
to Judge, Whether we ought not to be Timely Jealous of that Separation, and to
proceed so against them, as they may be at the Charge of those Remedies which
are required against the dangers they have bred. Ibid. page 39.

We Will show ye now the Kindness of our
Double-Refin'd-Protestant-Dissenting-Reformers to the Orthodox Clergy, as well
as Laity, and ye shall even take it at length as it comes to me.

A Declaration of his Highness, with the Advice of the Council in Order to the
Securing the Peace of this Commonwealth.
HIS Highness the Lord Protector, upon Advice with his Council, finding it
necessary for the Reasons, and upon the Grounds Expressed in his Late
Declaration, to use all* Good Means to Secure the Peace of the Nation, and
prevent future Troubles within the same, has thought fit to Publish and
Declare, and by and with the Consent and Advice of his Council does Publish,
Order and Declare, That no Person or Persons whatsoever in England or Wales,
whose Estates have been Sequestered for Delinquency: or who were actually in
Arms for the Late King against the then Parliament, or for Charles Stuart his
Son, or have Adhered to, Abetted, or Assisted the Forces Raised against the
said Parliament, do from and after the First day of December, 1655. buy, use or
keep in his or their House or Houses, or elsewhere, any Arms Offensive or
Defensive, upon pain that every person and persons so Offending shall forfeit
and lose such Arms, and be otherwise proceeded against according to the Orders
of his Highness and the Council, for Securing the Peace of the Commonwealth.
And his Highness by the Advice of his Council does also Publish, Declare and
Order, That no person or persons aforesaid, do, from and after the First day of
Jan. 1655. keep in their Houses or Families as Chaplains or Schoolmasters, for
the Education of their Children,
any Sequestered or Ejected Minister, Fellow of a College, or Schoolmaster,
nor permit any of their Children to be Taught by such, upon pain of being
proceeded against in such sort as the said Orders do direct in such Cases. And
that no person who has been Sequeste^d, or Ejected out of any Benefice,
College or School, for Delinquency or Scandal, shall, from and after the said
First day of January, keep any School either public or private, nor any person
who after that time shall be Ejected for the Causes aforesaid.

And that no person, who for Delinquency or Scandal has been Sequestered or
Ejected, shall from and after the First day of January aforesaid Preach in any
Public Place, or at any Private Meeting of any other persons than those of his
own Family, nor shall Administer Baptism or the Lords Supper, or Marry any
Persons, or use the Book of Common Prayer or the Forms of Prayer therein
Contained, upon pain that every person so offending in any the Premises, shall
be proceeded against as by the said Order is Provided and Directed.

November, 24. 1655,
You Will find in Mercurius Rusticus's General Bill of the Mortality of the Clergy
of London; what work the Protestant-Dissenters made among the London Ministers,
from 1641. to 1647.

In the 97 Parishes within the Walls (besides St. Paul's) Outed 85. page 257.

In the 16 Parishes without the Walls, Outed 14. page 258.

In the 10 Out-Parishes, Outed 9. page 259.

In the Adjacent Towns besides the Abbey and Islington. Outed 7. Ibid.

Querela Cantabrigiensis will tell ye what Havoc they made in the University
of Cambridge, where they ejected near Two Hundred, besides Nine Masters, and
Three more dead. To say nothing of their Breach of Faith, Sacrilege, Plunders,
Imprisonments, and Personal Outrages over and above.

Neither did Oxford, when it came to their turn to suffer, escape any better
than Cambridge had done before. For no sooner had his Majesty's Defeat ended
the late Rebellion in the Field, but a new War was raised in the House of
Commons, about dividing the Spoil; in which Contest the Independent Faction
out-witting the Presbyterian, there was no Triumph left for the Presbyterian
but to insult upon them they called the Common Enemy; and being hopeless of any
other Empire, contented themselves now to sit down with the Honor of being
Executioners, of destroying and doing mischief. To this End when the
Independents found it their Interest to gain upon the Nation by pretenses to
Moderation and Liberty of Conscience, the other Party pursued the
Covenant-Principle of Root and Branch, as vigorously as ever: And accordingly,
the Presbyterian Divines, by Importunity and unwearied Solicitations at the
House of Commons door, and in the Pulpit pressed hard, and at last procured an
Ordinance for the Visitation of the University of Oxford, (see Mr. Hen. Wilk.
Sermon) wherein Ten were named (who were formerly Members of the University,
but all of them either Expelled or Censured for their Demerits) to be Visitors:
And to Countenance their proceedings, about Fourteen more, Country-Gentlemen
and Lawyers: but the whole Transaction was carried on by those good men who
were to Visit themselves into the Preferments of this place. Any Five having
full power to hear and determine in all Cases by the Ordinance, which bore Date
May 1. 1647. Accordingly, on the Fourth of June, they Summon the University to
appear before them, between the Hours of Nine and Eleven, and that their
Usurpation might have all necessary formalities, A Sermon was to precede, where
Mr. Harris, (the man who was famous for Sanctifying the holding six Livings at
a time and rendering it no plurality) held forth so long, till the time prefixed
was elapst, this being observed by the Vice Chancellor, who Commanded all the
University-Men then in Expectation of their doom in the Convocation-House, to
depart home. The Visitors being in some disorder by this little disappointment,
and the Contest between the two Juntas growing still higher, the University-Men
so contrived delays, by putting in little stops with the Committee in London,
that these Reformers were forced for a time to desist. But in October
following, having procured an Order (dated the Eighth, 1647.) for sending the
Vice Chancellor, Dr. Fell, Prisoner to London, They began a closer Siege, and
April 6. 1648. returned in Earnest to revenge themselves not only of the
Malignity but the Resistance of this place.

And having with them a Noble Person, they make him first their Chancellor, and
he in Gratitude, Creates them Doctors, forcibly breaking open and rifling the
Lodgings of the Heads of Colleges, and rifling the Treasuries: particularly at
Christ-Church: The Dean Prisoner in London, (where he contracted the Sickness,
whereof soon after he died,) the Chancellor, attended by a File of Musketeers,
and his Clergy-Bailiffs, brake open^ his Lodging; and having for about a
Fortnight quartered Soldiers upon his Wi^e, who with her Family was there, she
and her Children were violently haled out by the rude Soldiers into the
Quadrangle. Dr. Sheldon, and Dr. Hammond, were made Prisoners in the Town. And
the Heads of Houses, Expelled at this time, were as follows.

Dr. Fell, Dr. Sheldon. Dr. Bailey. Dr. Oliver, Dr. Hammond, Dr. Gardener, Dr.
Pain, Dr. Sanderson, Dr. Morley. Dr. Newlin, Dr. Harvey, Dr. Ratcliff, Dr.
Potter, Dr. Pit. Dr. Stringar, Dr, Mansel, Dr. Walker, Dr. Prior. Mr.
Whitwick.
There were Expelled the University, on June, 29. and July 7. 1648. One Hundred
Thirty Seven Persons; who were Commanded also by the Governors Order to depart
the Town, upon pain of being used as Spies, their Expulsion being grounded upon
the Order underwritten.

WHereas by several Orders of the Right Honorable Committee of Lords,
Resolved, That all and every person and persons whose Names are underwritten,
be Deprived and Removed from their respective Places in their several
Colleges, and Expelled the University for their high Contempt of the Authority
of Parliament. And the Execution of the Order aforesaid has been referred to
us the Visitors of this University.

We therefore do Require all and every of the Persons, whose Names are here
underwritten, forthwith to remove accordingly. And in case any person* or
persons refuse to obey and remove, the Soldiers of this Garrison are by Order
of the Lords and Commons aforesaid, desired to cause the said Orders to be put
in Execution. By Order of the Visitors.

Ra. Austen.
Mr. Richard How.
Mr. Walter Dayrel, etc.


After this they went on, but by lesser numbers, and upon several pretenses, to
make a Thorough Reformation; Ejecting some for refusing the Engagement, others
for absence, and some few for Submitting too late. It may be Observed that of
the University-Men who were Visitors all but two were obnoxious to the Old
Established University. Cheinel had been denied his Degree. Wilkinson had been
questioned for a Sermon before the War, which he had Preached at St. Mary's.
Mills had been from his Infancy a Rebel to his Governors in Christ-Church, and
was Expelled by the King's Express Command. Corbet had been questioned by the
local Visitor. Sir N. B. Mr. Wilkinson and Rogers were for their Engaging
against his Majesty, by his Order removed from their Headships: So that only
Mr. Reinolds remains, and Mr. Harris, who were not visibly preingaged, upon
spite as well as Interest. So soon as they were come; Mr. Reinolds becomes
Dean of Christ-Church; Harris, President of Trinity; Cheinel, of St. John's; Old
Dr. Wilkinson, of Magdalens; Henry Wilkinson, Fellow of Magdalens, and Canon of
Christ-Church; Mr. Rogers, Canon of Christ-Church; Dr. Mills, Student and Canon
of Christ-Church, both together. As soon as Entered, they fell to dividing the
Spoil. In Magdalens they share the Stock of Money left from the Founder Time, as
Sacred. There and elsewhere they make havoc of Woods, nay Sell the Timber of
the very College from off the Walls: (So they did at Christ-Church,) Rack the
Tenants; insomuch that in Christ-Church, the Dean and Canons there, (in that
short time they were Possessed of it) Purchased more Lands, than all their
Predecessors had done from the Time of the Foundation to their coming.

As to their Reformation of Manners, they made most Colleges
Publick-Tipling-Houses: Strong Beer and Ale being Sold in the
College-Butteries, and sent for into the Town as frequently as from Common
Alehouses.

The Advance of Learning, was the laying aside all Scholastic Exercises, and
running after Extemporary Sermons, and then repeating them.

The Reformation of Religion, was the laying aside all the Devotions of the
Church, and particular Founders: Nay of the Lords Prayer, insomuch That there
were not left four Persons in the whole University, who durst repeat it before
their Sermon. The perfect abolition of the Communion; it being not so much as
once administered during the whole time of their reign. In Christ-Church, the
same Person, who before his Expulsion Administered the Sacrament; at his Return
after Twelve Years, delivered the next Sacrament there in that Cathedral, and
great College for Divines.

It is Remarkable that after the great Clamor against Vice in this University;
No Man during the whole fury of this Visitation, was Ejected for any thing but
his Loyalty, and for not daring to violate his Oaths of Allegiance to his
Prince, his Oaths to the University, and to his Local Statutes: nay every one
of these Gentlemen which punished this their consideration of their Duty, were
likewise obliged by the same Oaths.

POSTSCRIPT.
YOU have here a Naked and Historical Deduction of a Sublimated Reformation,
under the Reign of our late Protestant Dissenters of Execrable and Infamous
Memory; and as Time is the Mother of Truth, so Past-Ages are the Best Glass of
Those to come; for mutations in Governments as well as in Natural Bodies,
proceed by a Leading Connection of Causes and Effects. Here Is neither any Need,
or Possibility of Rendering things worse than they were by Partiality and
Descant; for as it is one of the Foulest Pieces of Story that ever yet came to
light; and of the most Audacious Affronts to the Laws of God and Man, the
Duties of Common Faith, Humanity, Order, and Religion, that ever yet perhaps
was offered in the Face of the Sun: so I have in this Summary of those
Oppressions, very Honestly left the Actors themselves to be their own
Historians; and without any Malevolent Construction, Exposed them to be Tried
and Judged by their own Records; And for the Truth of what is here set down, I
remit my self to the Credit of their own Journals. And so far have I been from
Enflaming the Reckoning, either with the Number of Particulars, or the Weight
of Aggravations, that I have left out several Notorious Instances of Tyranny
and Wickedn^ss, and barely made a Report of the Heads and Titles of many
Arbitrary Votes and Ordinances, without Reciting several Clauses in the Frame
and Body of them; sufficient to have struck the Reader with Indignation and
Horror. It is not yet that in the publishing of these Papers I would be
understood to pass a Complement upon the Party, in speaking Better of them than
they Deserve, or Less-Ill rather, than they have done of Themselves: But I have
consulted Brevity and Christianity in the Case; that I may keep my self within
Charity and Compass.

But What Is the End of this Pamphlet then You Will say? It is to lay before the
Reader the Scheme of a Popular Reformation; and to bid them beware of The
Leaven of the Pharisees. In short, I would not have People Poisoned over again,
by mistaking Hemlock for Parsley.

Now Pray what were the Pretenses of One and Forty? Fears of Popery, Absolute
Power, Evil Counselors, Corrupt Magistrates and Ministers, Prelatical Rigor;
Popish Ceremonies; Ecclesiastical Discipline, etc. And are not These the very
Complaints of this Day? And are not Franck Smith's Dissenting Protestants the
very Picture of that Godly Party? These Grievances must be removed they Cried;
and we say the same thing now too. But by what means? By a Parliament; and so
say we too. Well, And the Late King Called several Parliaments, and by his
Royal Prerogative Dissolved them too, when he saw Occasion: and so has his
Gracious Majesty now in Being. But at length betwixt the Credulity of his own
Goodness, and the Importunity of some of his Treacherous Subjects, he made one
False step that Ruined him past Recovery: And that was the Passing of a Bill,
for the Continuance of that Fatal Parliament, till it should be Dissolved by
the Consent of both Houses. This King, God be Praised, has held his hand as to
that Point. But the thing nevertheless has been fairly offered at, in several
Papers of News, and Expostulatory Libels; insisting upon it as the Right and
Claim of the People; And all to be Backed with an Association too after the
Model of the Covenant. Now who were the Sticklers I pray for That Reformation?
Were they not Brownists, Anabaptists, Separatists, Independents, Antinomians,
Presbyterians, Fifth-Monarchy-Men, Ranters? And in One Word, the whole Mass of
Men, of the most Sanguinary, and Heretical Principles, gathered together under
the Cloak of People of Tender-Consciences, and the Godly Party. And have not we
our Dissenters now to Match their Godly Party; and of as many sorts almost as
there went Beasts into the Ark; and of as Inconciliable Aversions? These are
the People, that make it their Business to find faults in the Government; and
for want of matter of Fact to work upon, they Invent and Create it. These are
the Men that set up for Reformers of the Church and of the State: And yet at
the same time, many of these Sects deny Magistracy and Ministry to be the
Ordinance of God; and make it their Profession to Labor the destroying of the
Kingdoms of this World in Order for the Clearing of their way to the Reign of
King Jesus. And these Sects (in good time) must be United for the Security of
our Religion and Government, that Declare themselves the Enemies of All
Government, and Implacable Adve^saries Each to the Other.

This will be called the Stif^ing of the Popish Plot; a Blowing of the Coal
betwixt King and People; and a Design to stir up Heart-Burnings among his
Majesty's Subjects. This was the very Method of the Scandal and Calumny too of
the Late Times, that was cast upon every man that Crossed the Humor of the
Faction. How many Rotten Lords, Popish Bishops, Straffordians, Malignants, and
Jesuited Papists, were People called; for Acting according to their
Consciences, and opposing the Torrent of that Hypocritical Sedition? And thus
far, the Parallel runs True; a Yorkist, a Pensioner, a Sham-Plotter, a
Masquerader, a Tory, or the like; But the Scene of things to Come is yet in the
Dark; and we have no better way then from what is Past to take a Caution against
the Future. And to that End it is, That I have now Committed these Sheets to
the Public. The Establish'd-Religion was to be Reformed; and they ran it so
far, till not only Christianity, but even the Moral Duties of Religion it self
were almost Extinguished. Did they not style themselves the Kings best Subjects
too; till ye see what came on it upon the upshot? The Liberty of the Subject was
a Great Point with 'em too; and what was the End on it; but the subjecting of
the Nobility, Gentry, and all the Honest and Industrious People of the Nation
to a Rapacious Committee of Blasphemous Heretics: a Major General, and a
Red-Coat; and our Estates, Liberties, and Lives, laid at the Mercy of those
Vermin to Seize, Sequester, Imprison, Hang and Draw at pleasure? The King
wanted but a matter of Thirty Thousand Pound for his Expedition against the
Scots: And the City (alas!) were so poor, they were not able to furnish it;
and yet how many Millions did they voluntarily Bleed afterward toward the
Raising and Supporting of a Rebellion? But this was a thing not to be done,
till they had first delivered up the Government of the City into the hands of a
Faction. Our Modern Whiggs are just of the same Temper in the Cas^ of the
French, as the Godly Party were then in the Case o^ the Scots. Not a Cross to
be gotten, unless his Majesty will Pawn his Crown for it. That is to say, If the
Clamorous party without Doors may have their Wills.

I have here presented ye a Draught of the Effects of One Reformation: and as
ye like That, ye may Consider of the Fellow of it.

THE END.

