State-Divinity; OR A SUPPLEMENT TO The Relapsed Apostate. WHEREIN Is
prosecuted the Discovery of the present Design against the King, the
Parliament, and the Public Peace: In NOTES upon some late Presbyterian
Pamphlets,

By ROGER L'ESTRANGE.

Mon eant vos utriusque fortunae documenta, ne contumaciam cum pernicie, quam
obsequium cum securitate malitis;

Tacit. Hist. lib. 4. LONDON, Printed for Henry Brom, at the Gun in Ivy-lane.
M. DC. LXI.

PREFACE.
HE that troubles himself, because he cannot please others, doubtless wants
either Brains, or Business: He shall Live Miserable, and Dye with an Apology
betwixt his Teeth. I think I am here upon my Duty; and till the King says Hold,
I Will follow it, (to whose Authority, I ow my Breath, as well as my Obedience.)

The Presbyterian Faction (under the Notion of the Commissioned Divines) have
of late scattered several Libels, reflecting dishonourably upon His Sacred
Majesty, -- the Church, -- Parliamentary Power, -- This Parliament in Being; --
and in fine, arguing from the Justice of the Late War, the Lawfulness of
Another.

To the First of Four, I returned an Answer, under the Title of the Relapsed
Apostate: This Supplement, was particularly occasioned by One of the other
Three, entitled Two Papers of Proposals to his Majesty, wherein their Designs
upon the Public Peace are more avowed, and open, then in the Rest. Should
These Seditious Papers pass un-controul'd, 'twould make either their Party; or
their Arguments seem more considerable then they are.

I will not foul my Paper, with the extravagancies of their Rage against me;
but in their Intervals, (that is, when they are as Sober, as other people are
when they are Mad.)

Thus they Object against my Pamphlet; There Is too much Fooling in it: and too
much Railing, (They do well to vilify what they cannot Answer.)

They are to know, that my Design was to expose their Practices, and Arguments
to the People; toward whom, whoever Sauces not his Earnest with a Tang of
Fooling, misses his Marque; fot it is not less necessary to make a Faction
Ridiculous, then Hateful; their Power is Then gone too; and Then they are lost;
whereas they would make a shift without the Peoples Love.

For Railing; I confess I was never taught in the Presbyterian-School; -- where
they call foul things by fine names. Sometimes perhaps I call their
Combination, (as the Law Christened it) Treason: -- Spilling of Innocent Blood;
-- Murder. Taking away an Honest man's Estate, Robbery. Rifling of Churches,
Sacrilege, etc. --

They have indeed a cleanlier Idiome for these Matters. A Treacherous
Confederacy they call a Holy Covenant. Murder forsooth, is Justice upon
Delinquents. Notorious Robbery, passes for Sequestration. Rifling of Churches,
is but demolishing of the High Places.

Was the Murder of the late King ever the less execrable, because the Scaffold
was hung with Black? The bloody Reformation ever the less Impious, because
'twas dressed up with Texts, and Covenants? Or Judas the less Treacherous for
doing his business with a Kiss?

Whether is the greater shame: for Them to Act these Crimes, or for Us, to Name
them?

Let no Converted, Honest Presbyterian take this to himself, which is Intended
only to the Guilty.

December. 4. 1661.
STATE-DIVINITY: OR A SUPPLEMENT TO The Relapsed Apostate.
HE that disputes the Presbyterian Claim, does the Question more Honor then he
does Himself: yet for their simple sakes that believe Justice goes always with
the Cry, and measure Reason by the Bulk; the Holy Discipline has received many
a Fair Confutation. Silenced it is not; for though the Brethren have nothing to
Say, they Talk on still, and truly to make John Calvin speak in his Grave, were
not much harder then to make any of his Disciples hold their Tongues while they
are alive.

A man Sleeps over their Arguments, they are so Flat, and Spiritlesse; And I Am
scarce well awake yet, since my last Answer to them, so that till I hear
something back again, I hold my self discharged even upon That account, from
any further search into the Controversy.

In truth, as the case stands, to Controvert their Government, were to begin at
the wrong end; we'll take a nearer Cut, and challenge them, First, as Criminals
against the State: when they have avoided That Charge, we'll deal with them
again upon the point of Conscience. Their Charge shall be Plain and Short.

They Invade the Kings Authority: -- The settled Law: -- And the Power of The
Reformers Charge.
Parliaments. They affront the Parliament Now Sitting: -- Threaten the Public
Peace: Justify the Rebellion of 1 6 4 1. and Provoke Another. -- Here it is, in
Brief, and we'll run it over in as good order as we can.

First, They Invade the Kings Authority.

They Indict Fasts; -- Disclaim the Sovereign Power in things Indifferent; They
invade the Kings Authority.
and without Warrant or Pretense, they vilify, and cast out the Established
Form of the Church, and make Another:

But This they will tell ye is the Language of the Sons of Scandal: we'll strike
it off the score then; and Try the Babes of Grace by a Jury of the Holy Tribe.
They can but ask to be both Parties and Judges, and That we'll Grant them. The
Able Teachers shall sit upon the Faithful Pastors: -- R. shall Try B. -- E. C.
-- T. M. -- W. I.

Hear now the words of the Reformed and Reforming Crew, to His Sacred Majesty.

[A] WHether the Covenant were lawfully imposed or not. Proposals page 12.
[B] We are assured from the nature of a Vow to God, and from the Case of Saul,
Zedekiah, and others, that it would be a terrible thing of us to violate it on
that pretense. [C] Though we are far from thinking that it obliges us to any
evil, or to go beyond our places and callings to do good, much less to resist
Authority (to which it does oblige us) yet does it undoubtedly bind us to
forbear our own consent to those luxuriances of Church Government which we
there renounced, and for which no Divine Institution can be pretended. [D] Not
presuming to meddle with the Consciences of those many of the Nobility and
Gentry, and others, that adhered to his late Majesty in the late Unhappy Wars,
who at their Composition took this Vow and Covenant. We only crave your
Majesty's clemency to our selves and others, who believe themselves to be under
its obligations. And God forbid that we that are the Ministers of the Word of
Truth should do any thing to encourage your Majesty's Subjects to cast off the
Conscience of an Oath. [E] Till the Covenant was decried as an Almanac out of
date, and its obligation taken to be null, that odious Fact could never have
been perpetrated against your Royal Father, nor your Majesty have been so long
expulsed from your Dominions. And the obligation of the Covenant upon the
Consciences of the Nation, was not the weakest Instrument of your Return. [F]
We therefore humbly beseech your Majesty (with greater importunity than we
think we should do for our Lives) That you would have mercy on the Souls and
Consciences of your People, and will not suffer us to be tempted to the
violation of such solemn Vows, and this for nothing, when an expedient is
before you that will avoid it, without any detriment to the Church; nay, to its
honor and advancement.

The very Ink, is but the soul of Presbytery, Distilled: and Tinctured with the
Spirit of Fraud, and Disobedience. We'll Taste it, Drop, by Drop.

[A] Whether the Covenant were lawfully imposed, or not, Page 12.
etc.

NOTE I.
A Doubtful point indeed: -- a very pretty, and a pleasant Question left
unresolved, when by an Act of this sitting Parliament the Institution's Damned,
and the final Decision of the Case committed to the Common Hangman. Well:
Forward.

[B] WE are assured from the Nature of a Vow to God; Page 12. A miserable
shift.
and from the Case of Saul, Zedekiah, and others, that it would be a terrible
thing to us to violate it on that pretense.]

NOTE II.
MArque now the miserable shift these people make; how Ignorant they are even
in their Own Trade: for, Art there is in dawbing. They must not Violate the
Covenant, upon protence of Unlawful Institution.]

The Question is not Here; the Lawfulness, or Unlawfulness of the Power
Imposing; The Covenant not binding.
but the Liberty of the Party Swearing, as to the Drift, and Subject of the
Oath. Suppose the Enforcers of the Covenant, had pressed a General Oath upon
the Nation obliging every Man only to wash his hands before he went to Dinner.
The Imposition had been Unlawful: -- as the Act of an Usurping Power. The
Taking of it had been unlawful likewise, as, in some measure, an Allowance of
that Usurpation: -- Yet having sworn to do a thing, at my own choice to Do, or
let alone, till I had bound my self to do it, That Oath's obliging; yet not so
Binding, but by a subsequent Command from the Supreme, and Legal Magistrate
That Obligation may be Cancelled. The Reason's This. I cannot dispose of
another Right; of my Own I may. My Oath cannot operate beyond my Power, and
Freedom; so far as I am Free, it binds me, but where my Superior thinks fit to
determine That Freedom, Amesius. de Consc. lib. 4. q. 11.
the Bond ceases. Parents (says Amesius) Mariti, Domini, Principes, irrita
pronunciare possunt, vel Iuramenta, vel Vota, a Filiis, Vxoribus, Servis,
Subditis facta, sine ipsorum Consensu, in iis Rebus, quae ipsorum Potestati
subiiciuntur.] Fathers, Husbands, Masters, and Princes, may disengage their
Children, Wives, Servants, and Subjects, from what Oaths or Vowes-soever
contracted without their consent, touching matters subjected to their Authority.

Now to their Cases of Saul, and Zedekiah: The former whereof is of so wild an
Application, I know not what they drive at in it; The Other I confess is a
little more perspicuously beside the purpose.

In our Case, the People enter into a Covenant, without, and against the King;
What passage in the story of Saul our Reformers intend for a Match to This, I
cannot Imagine.

Saul binds the People by an Oath to fast till Evening; Saul's Case examined.
(1 Samuel 14. 24.) Jonathan knowing nothing of the Oath tastes a little Honey (v.
27.) Saul for This resolves to put Jonathan to death; (v. 44.) and the People
rescue him. What Is this to us? We Will try again.

Jonathan and David made a Covenant: 1 Samuel 18. 3. (No Scotch Covenant I hope)
The business was This; David had newly killed the Philistim, and Jonathan
transported with the Bravery of the Person, and the Action, strikes a League of
Friendship with him.

David's Victory being celebrated in a Popular and Triumphal Song, that [Saul
had slain his Thousand, and David his Ten Thousand] from that day forward (says
the Text) Saul had an eye upon David. 1 Samuel 18. 9.] Jonathan acquaints David
with his Fathers evil purpose, David minds Jonathan of his Covenant of
Friendship. (1 Samuel 20. 8.) and in the 42. verse of the same chapter, the
Covenant is explayn'd. [Ionathan said to David, Go in peace: that which we have
sworn both of us in the name of the Lord, (saying, The Lord be between thee and
me, and between thy seed, and my seed;) lot it stand for ever.]

Thus far, there is no Proportion; the one is a Personal Covenant, extending
only to matter of Kindness; the other is a Public League, of Opposition, and
of Violence.

Since This is nothing to our business, it must be That which follows, or
nothing at all: Now see the Sequel; which, if any thing, makes the Case worse.

David flees (Chap. 22.) and a malecontented Party gathers to him. Saul Hunts
him; Jonathan finds him in the Wood, and comforts him, saying Fear not, for the
hand of Saul my Father shall not find thee. (here is no Resistance.) So they
twain made a Covenant before the Lord etc.]

During the League betwixt this Pair of Noble Friends, David asks Counsel of
the Lord in all his Public Actions; [Shall I go and smite the Philistines?]
(Chapt. 23. verse 2.) and the Lord answered David, Go and smite the
Philistines, and save Keilah.] David discomfits the Philistines, and saves
Keilah: Saul marches toward him, David again applies himself to God to know if
the men of Keilah would deliver him up or no? it was returned, they would. So
David fled, and afterward had Saul twice at his mercy, whom as the Lords
Anointed, he still feared to touch.

I have here traced the story at Length, and now let the Reformers choose what
use they will make of it. This part of Scripture has been often tortured in
favor of the late Rebellion, but for the Covenant, they might as well have
quoted an Indenture; so that either the Reformers business is to justify the
Quarrel, or to abuse the Bible.

Concerning the Case of Zedekiah, The Case of Zedekiah.
take it in short. Jerusalem was taken by the King of Babel, and Zedekiah
carried away Prisoner, his Eyes being first put out by Nebuchadnezzar. Zedekiah
Rebelled (says the Text) against the King of Babel, (2 Kings 24. 29.) who made
him King in the stead of Iehojakim, his Uncle, who was carried away in
Captivity from Jerusalem, to Babel. The Provocations to that Judgment are
found at large in the Prophet Jeremiah, to be These; Idolatry, Rebellion, and
Breach of Covenant: But Breach of Covenant is the Question, and Zedekiah's the
Case. Agreed.

13. Thus says the Lord, Jerem. 34. God made the Covenant.
the God of Israel, I made a Covenant with your Fathers in the day that I
brought them forth out of the Land of Egypt, out of the house of Bondmen,
saying;

14. At the end of seven years, The Covenant it self.
let ye go every man his Brother, an Hebrew, which has been sold unto thee;
and when he has served thee six years, thou shall let him go free from thee:
but your Fathers harkened not unto me, neither inclined their ear.

15. And ye were now turned, Zedekiahs Covenant.
and had done right in my sight, in proclaiming liberty every man to his
Neighbor, and ye had made a Covenant before me in the house which is called by
my Name.

16. But ye turned and polluted my Name, And Revolt.
and caused every man his Servant, and every man his Handmaid, whom ye had set
at liberty at their pleasure, to return, and brought them into subjection, to
be unto you for Servants, and for Handmaids.

17. Therefore thus says the Lord, For the Breach
Ye have not harkened unto me, in proclaiming liberty every one to his Brother,
etc. --

21. And Zedekiah King of Judah, he is Punished.
and his Princes will I give into the hand of their Enemies, and into the hand
of them that seek their life, and into the hand of the King of Babylons Army.

Now here is the Case: God having made a Covenant with the Israelites, King
Zedekiah makes a Covenant with the People, for the performance of That
Covenant. Breach of Faith was the Sin that drew on their grievous Punishment.

Can our Covenanters now show us a Text for the Scottish Discipline? The Case
does not hold.
or that the late King entered into Covenant with the People to Observe it? Can
our Iudaising Brethren show us but a Levitical Law yet for our money? or dare
they but pretend, that the Jurors understood what they swore to do? In short,
here is the Difference, They Covenanted to observe a Levitical Constitution, and
Ours Covenanted to destroy the Fifth Commandment.

There is another Covenant mentioned in the Prophet Ezekiel, The very Case.
which is much fitter for Their Case: the Covenant of the Rebellious House,
Ezekiel. 17.
that after Oath and Covenant of Allegiance to the King of Babel, Rebelled, and
sent Ambassadors into Egypt, (Scotland I had like to have said) that they
might give him (Zedekiah) Horses, Ezekiel. 17. 15.
and much People, etc.] That blessed Combination, and Our Covenant are of a
Family.

I have been large upon these Precedents; to show how grossly they abuse the
very Word of God: and truly it is no wonder, for Those People to discover
Antichrist in a Ceremony, that can draw arguments for Rebellion out of the
Bible. They Proceed.

[C] THough we are far from thinking that it obliges us to any evil, A
Presbyterian Oracle.
or to go beyond our places and callings to do good, much less to resist
Authority (to which it does oblige us) yet does it undoubtedly bind us to
forbear our own consent to those luxuriances of Church Government, which we
there renounced, and for which no divine Institution can be pretended.]

NOTE. III.
THese words would have looked better from a Pagan Oracle, then from a
Gospel Ministry. Let any man either say what they can mean, but Mischief; or
name That Mischief which (for ought we know) they may not intend.

What was that Covenant which These people so much reverence, The Covenant an
abjuring Oath.
even in the Infamous Ashes, but an Oath of Anti-canonical Obedience, and of
Anti-Monarchical Allegiance? A Religious Abjuration of the King and the Church.
-- A Perjury, consecrated in the Pulpit; -- A League asserted by Bloody Hands,
and Fire and Sword were their best Arguments.

In sum; What that Covenant produced. These men Intend: they own as much, and
'twere ill manners to contradict them. Nay they adore the very Relics of the
Martyred Idol.

They will not go beyond their Places, and Callings.] So said the Solemn Fopp
it self: and under that pretext, pray'ye how far went they? for they profess so
far they will Go again.

A thorough Reformation is their Business then. A thorough Reformation.
That is to say, could they but Pack a Presbyterian House of Commons (which the
Sovereign People should call a Parliament) to reform the State, they would
undertake the Ordering of the Church Themselves, and there is the
Thorough-Reformation.

If This be not a Justification of the last Rebellion, and a fair step toward
another, I understand not English.

They say the Covenant does not oblige them to any evil.] But in the
Covenant-sense that is Good, which in a Legal, and Common sense is evil. Make
them the Judges once again, and they shall think another war as Lawful, as they
did the Former.

They will not Resist Authority neither.] In their Places and Callings.
(they say) so they told us of Old, but they misplaced it shrewdly. It Is but
taking his Majesty's Authority into the Faction, and Throwing his Person into a
Prison again, and that Flaw is made up too.

Now if a man had Lilly's Devil; -- for none but a Presbyterian Familiar is
able to help us out. --

Much less to resist Authority, (to which it does oblige us, etc.)

The Question here, Quere.
is how to understand the Parenthesis: whether they mean that the Covenant
obliges them to Authority, or to Resist it, I am a Traitor if I comprehend them.

We come now, to the binding part of the Covenant. They must not consent (say
they) to those Luxuriances of Church Government which they there, Renounced,
etc.]

If they must not Consent, may they not let them Alone? No, no, they will tell
us, it is their Calling to reform them. I demand, will they consent to the Civil
Government, then? If they do That; the Law provides a Punishment for such
meddling Reformers, and it is in vain to think of settling Presbytery, before they
have (effectually) Destroyed Monarchy. But these Gentlemen know the way to
Confusion, without a Guide.

By their [Luxuriances] they understand, An Affront to the Parliament.
Prelates, and all appendents to the Hierarchy. These they have Renounced, they
say, and by their Covenant they are still obliged to make good their Disclaim.
This Boldness requires rather the Severity of the Law, then dint of Argument:
'To prefer a Schismatical League to an Act of Parliament: -- the skumm of the
People to the Supreme Authority of the Nation.

Let the gravest of their Galloping Lecturers answer me only to This one
Question, Where lies the Last appeal; according to the Constitution of England?

If in the King; (as what honest man doubts it) They are Judged already, let
them be quiet. If in the Parliament, they are Overruled There too; -- the
Covenant's gone. If in the People, why do they contradict themselves, and
Petition his Majesty? if in the Presbyterian Pastors; why do they Supplicate
the Bishops?

As to the point of Divine Institution, it is worn Thrid-Bare. But where is the
Divine Institution of a White-Cap under A Black! of A Cloak in A Pulpit? of
Reviling Bishops? and Speaking evil of Dignities: of the Heartbreaking Humm's
and Haws, and the doleful tunes they Teach in?

Their next Period is a Bobb to the Cavaliers: let the Brethren make their best
on it.

[D] NOt presuming to meddle with the Consciences of those many of the
Nobility, and Gentry, and Others, that adhered to his late Majesty in the late
unhappy Wars: who at their Camposition took the Vow and Covenant. We only crave
your Majesty's clemency to our selves and others, who believe themselves to be
under its obligations. And God forbid that we that are the Ministers of the
Word of Truth should do any thing to encourage your Majesty's Subjects to cast
off the Conscience of an Oath.]

NOTE. IV.
MArque the transcendent Confidence, and Weakness of these People.

They will not meddle with the Cavaliers Consciences, The Reformers tenderness
touching Oaths.
that took the Covenant.] Did they not meddle with them neither to make them
take it? They put them to this Choice, either to swear, or sterve; and in that
Desperate Extremity, diverse submited to their accursed Covenant. It Is true they
did, and they are bound to a Repentance for it. But what is the portion then of
those Impenitents that were the Barbarous Enforcers of it?

Were Lucifer himself Incarnate, and a Subject, would he not blush to treat his
Sovereign with their Arguments? Observe.

They mind the King how bloodily they used his Friends by the obligation of
that Covenant, The boldness of the Faction.
by which they likewise ruined his Royal Father: and in the same Breath, they
desire his Majesty to believe that all was Matter of Conscience: They plead,
the Covenant's not discharged; and in effect they Fairly tell their Gracious
Sovereign, that they are obliged to do now as they did before.

Now see the Weakness of these People; Their weakness.
while they Beg this, they stir the strongest Provocation, and most
unanswerable Reason to Deny it. They labor to involve All in an Equal Guilt,
and to Confound the lewdest Villenies in Nature, with Common Frailties.

But Here, a word to all sorts of People that ever took their Covenant.

Some knew not what they did, and were to Blame to swear they knew not what.
Let those of that From ask themselves, if ever they intended by that Vow, to
raise a War against the King, and overturn the Church. They are now Free, and
Pardoned, and if they are not Mad, they will say their Prayers, and be Quiet.

Such as Engaged through Faction, Malice, or Ambition; I have little to say to
their Consciences. Methinks, if the Kings Mercy cannot make them Honest,
Experience should make them Wise: But they are Dangerous People to deal with,
we'll to the next.

A Third sort there is, that to save their stakes, sat still, and looked on.
Those cannot but abhor the very thought of Repeating what they did, and
suffered: especially in agreement with these persons, that now declare the
Covenant against the Late King, to be Binding against this. (for that is the
Logique on it.)

There are a Fourth Sort, that having engaged their Lives and Estates in the
King's service, Sank by the Fortune of the War, and being left a naked Prey
to an insulting and merciless enemy, were forced to sad Conditions for their
Bread, and Families. Now in requital for the Plagues they have brought upon us
already; they are soliciting for leave to make us yet more miserable, and to
have us declared for villains by an Allowance of their Treasons: A thing
Impossible for so Generous a Prince, to Grant, but wondrous Easy for so
Imperious a Faction to Demand.

And who are the Petitioners all this while, but most of them the Old stagers?
A man would think 'twere time now, for their Reverences to give over their
juggling Divinity; -- their Quailpiping in a Pulpit to catch silly women; -- and
fall at last to their Prayers in Earnest.

But God forbid (they cry) that the Ministers of the Word of Truth, should do
any thing to encourage his Majesty's Subjects to cast off the Conscience of an
Oath.]


Let the Heads that are Gone Blush for those they have left behind them. The
Conscience of an Oath, do they say? Let the Three Nations rise against them;
and tell how many hundred Thousand persons these Hypocrites have forced to
swear against their Professed Consciences. But drive it Homer yet. This is to
say, that All that acted in the late war according to the Covenant, are bound
to do the same Things over again. There is a huge deal of Folly in this
Assertion, and as it seems to me, a Spice of Treason. Does it not encourage the
People to adhore to a Rebellious Princple?

There is (says the Lord St. Albans) a thing in an Indictment, called an
Inuvendo, you must take head how you Becken, or make signs upon the King in a
Dangerous sense.] This is a shrewd Beacken as I take it, to excite a Tumult to
justify a Rebellious vow, and oppose a Pedantique Libell to an Act of
Parliament.

[E] TIll the Covenant was decryed as an Almanac out of date, and its
obligation taken to be null, that odious Fact could never have been perpetrated
against your Royal Father, nor your Majesty have been so long expulsed from
your Dominions. And the obligation of the Covenant upon the consciences of the
Nation, was not the weakest Instrument of your Return.]

NOTE. V.
THat Odious Fact they speak of, was the Kings Murder; which they that shot at
him, were not less Guilty of, then that Monster, that severed his Sacred Head
from his Body. It Is the Consent that makes the Sin; Hitting or Missing does not
one jote after the Quality of the Action.

But has any man the Face to mention Loyalty, and the Covenant, in the same
Day? The Marquis of Montross was Murdered, expressly for his Loyalty to the
King as a Desertour of the Covenant, Loyalty made Death, accordi^^ to the
C^venant
and by a Public Ordinance 'twas made Death for any man to serve his Majesty
having first taken the Covenant. They that first Voted War against the King,
were every whit as Criminal, as that Mock-Court of Justice that Condemned him.
In Fine, the Independents murdered CHARLES STUART but the Presbyterians Killed
the KING.

What is a Prince without his Negative Voice? the Power of Life and Death, and
the Militia? That is, what is a King, without the Essentials of Royalty; but a
mere Name, and Property?

But till the Covenant was decry'd, as an old Almanac, and the Obligation
taken for Null, we are to take for Granted, all went well; and so far our
Reformers plead the Covenant Binding still.

Was not the Last King Persecuted, Dethroned, Robbed, etc. -- according to the
Covenant? so by the Consequence of the Reformers Doctrine, may This King be
Treated likewise.

Nor had His Majesty been so long expulsed, they say.]

Go to then; Let these Gentlemen produce (from First to Last of the Quarrel)
any Proposals from the Presbyterian Party (in Power) either to His Majesty, or
his late Blessed Father, that are not worse then Banishment.

And for the Covenants bringing in the King: -- they hung it up, and ^^ew'd his
Name in it, to gull the People with it, as they had done before.

Did they not after This, exclude both from the Next Convention, and the
Militia, all the Kings Actual Adherents, and their Sons, to get the Power once
more into the hands of their own Faction? But the next Choice proved other then
They expected, and when they saw they could not hinder His Majesty, they seemed
to help him.

These are Distastful stories, but it is the pleasure of the Reforming Faction
to move the Dispute; and by a needess Challenge, and Appeal, to affront the
Law, the King, and all that served him, in Opposition to their Covenant. If
They are in the Right, (as they proclaim they are) then consequently We are
Traitors, and our Gracious Master is no King.

I do but take up the Defensive, and I hope a Cavalier may say he is Honest
yet, though some will have it dangerous to say he is Poor: Reserving still a
true Respect, and Kindness for all such Presbyterians as love His Majesty, whom
I consider as Select Persons, and distinguished from the Notion of the Party.

It were a good deed now to give the world a taste of a Covenanting spirit: and
truly I Will venture at it. He is a Rabbi too I assure ye; One that gives
Bishops, Ceremonies, and Common Prayer no Quarter; no, nor his Majesty neither,
but that he has the grace (as Sir Francis Bacon says) to speak seditious matter
in Parables, or by Tropes, or Examples.] In fine, the Gentleman is a Reformer,
of the First Rank.

Upon Sept. 24. 1656. he preached before the Parliament, (as they called it)
upon this Text: [Kiss the Son, left he be Angry] Page 23. You may find these
Words, if you can find him, and if you cannot, I can.

Worthy Patriots, W. I.
you that are our Rulers in this Parliament, it is often said, we live in Times
wherein we may be as good as We please: wherein we enjoy in purity and plenty
the Ordinances of Jesus Christ. Praised be God for this, even that God who has
delivered us from the imposition of Prelatical Innovations, Altar-genuflections
and cringings, with crossings, and all that popish trash and trumpery. And
truly (I speak no more then what I have often thought and said) The removal of
those insupportable burdens countervails A taste of the Reforming Spirit.
for the Blood and Treasure shed and spent in these late distractions. (Nor did
I as yet ever hear of any godly men that desired, were it possible, to purchase
their friends or money again, at so dear a rate, The Kings Murder justified.
as with the return of these, to have those soul-burdning, Antichristian yokes
reimposed upon us: And if any such there be, I am sure that desire is no part
of their godliness, and I PROFESS MY SELF IN THAT TO BE NONE OF THE NUMBER.

The Odious Fact (they talk of) was already perpetrated, yet does this
Gentleman profess, that to redeem the Life of our Martyred Sovereign,
and gather up again all the Christian blood had been spilt, (if it were
possible) he would not do it, to have Prelates, and Ceremonies where they were
again.

Here Is Covenant-Divinity for you: the Gospel of our New Evangelists: and this
Divine is now one of the Eminent Sticklers against Bishops. If any man say
'twas Conscience, I could tell him a Tale of a certain Petition: but we will
scatter no words.

While my hand's in, take one more; a Public Preacher now in the Town too,
and a troubler of the Church Government. Upon November. 29. 1648. he preached
before the Commons, and pressed the Murder of his Sacred Majest in these Words.

Think not to save your selves by an unrighteous saving of them; G. C.
who are the Lords and the Peoples known Enemies. You may not imagine to obtain
the favor of those against whom you will not do Justice;
For certainly, if ye act not like Gods in this particular, against men truly
obnoxious to Justice, they will be like Devils against you. Observe that place,
1 Kings 22. 31. compared with chap. 20. It is said in chap. 20. that the King
of Syria came against Israel, and by the mighty power of God, he and his Army
were overthrown, and the King was taken Prisoner. Now the mind of God was
(which he then discovered only by that present providence) that Justice should
have been executed upon him, but it was not; whereupon, the Prophet comes with
ashes upon his face, and waited for the King of Israel in the way where he
should return; verse. 12. of Chap. 20.
and as the King passed by, he cried unto him, Thus says the Lord, Because
thou have let go a man whom I appointed for destruction, therefore thy life
shall go for his life. Now see how the King of Syria, after this, answers
Ahab's love: About three years after Israel and Syria engage in a new War, and
the King of Syria, gives command unto his Soldiers, Chap. 2. v. 31.
that they should fight neither against small nor great, but against the King
of Israel. Benhadads life was once in Ahabs hand, and he ventured Gods
displeasure to let him go: but see how Benhadad rewards him for it, Fight
neither against small nor great, The Application.
but against the King of Israel. Honorable and Worthy, if God do not lead you
to do Justice upon those that have been the great Actors in shedding innocent
Blood, never think to gain their love by sparing of them; For they will, if
opportunity be ever offered, return again upon you; and then they will not
fight against the poor and mean ones, but against those that have been the
Fountain of that Authority and Power whih have been improved against them.

It is no wonder to find Rebellion in a Nation where Murder and Treason are
the Dictates of the Pulpit: -- where Surplices are Scandals, and such
Discourses, none; and where the Kings Murderers pass for Gods Ministers.

I know how close this Freedom sticks to some that have a Power to do me
Mischief; and I forecast the worst that can befall me for it: Wherefore,
whatever it be, I Am not surpised, for I expect it. But to proceed.

[F] WE therefore humbly beseech your Majesty (with greater importunity then we
Page 12. The Covenant Revived.
think we should do for our lives) That you would have mercy on the Souls and
Consciences of your People, and will not suffer us to be tempted to the
violation of such solemn Vows, and this for nothing, when an expedient is
before you that will avoid it, without any detriment to the Church; nay, to its
honor and advancement.

NOTE. VI.
OBserve here 2. or 3. bold, and bloody Intimations.

First; that the Souls and Consciences of the People lie at Stake.

Next; that the King's Denial were great Cruelty: Especially considering the
smalness of the thing they Ask; the Honor and advantage of what they offer.

Thirdly; the Obligation of Their solemn Vow.

To the First; We have elsewhere difcussed the point of Conscience, but we are
Here to Note how this suggestion tends to Tumult and Sedition. The Sense it
bears to the People, Sedition.
is This: Stick to your Covenant, or, be Damned: but in the Sense of
Conscience, Law, and Reason; it sounds the contrary: -- Stick to your Covenant,
and be Damned.

By what Law were the People freed from their Allegiance, and made the Judges,
and Reformers of the Government? Well; but they have sworn to do it, and they
must keep their Oath.] Put case they had sworn to Fire the City. At This Rate
it is but Swearing First, and then pretend a Conscience of the Oath, to carry
any thing.

The second Intimation subjects the Piety, and Good nature of his Majesty to a
Question; as who should say; what? will the King destroy so many Thousand Souls
of his poor People for a matter of Nothing? Marque now their Matter of Nothing.

It cost the late Kings Life; A matter of nothing.
the best Blood in the Nation; the Ruin of Church and State: a long Rebellion;
-- and Treasure not to be Compted. (This they make nothing of) And for the
Honor they propose to the Church; it is but a Back-look, and we find it.

Now to the Obligation of their Covenant. That which the Law makes Treason,
They make Conscience; and in effect they urge, that they are bound to a
Rebellion: for it is no less to attempt what they have sworn to do: which is to
Repeat what they have already done.

But what they are bound to by the Covenant, will from the Letter of the
Covenant best appear. Where, in the second Branch, they Swear, Without Respect
of persons, to endeavor the Extirpation of Popery, Prelacy, Superstition, etc.
The sense of the Covenant.
So that the King himself is not excepted, if standing in the way betwixt Those
Matters which they call Luxuriances of Church Government, and their pretended
Reformation.

To make it yet more evident, that their design is Factious; They Ask --

THat the Youth of the Nation may have just Liberty as well as the Elder.
Proposals page 24.
If they be engaged in the Universities, and their Liberties there cut off in
their beginning, they cannot afterward be Free, etc.

NOTE VII.
TO see the Providence of these good men's Consciences! Their Care extends as
well to Those that never took the Covenant, and looks still forward, to the
Scruples of the yet unborn.

What work this Motly would soon make in the Universities, let any sober man
Imagine: when every Stubborn, and Vntutor'd Boy shall have the Freedom to
control, and overruled the Orders of his Mother. The Streams must needs be
Foul that flow from a Corrupted Fountain.

Just such another Project was That of the Long House of Commons; -- I mean
their offer of Freedom to all Prentices that would leave their Trades, and
serve the (pretended) Parliament. That Liberty may start a Faction, but hardly
settle a Religion. What Public Peace can be expected; when the Schools of
Unity and Order are become a Nurcery of Schism?

But These are men will take no Nay; for if his Majesty denies them, marque the
End on it.

SHould we lose the opportunity of our desired Reconciliation and Union,
Proposals page 12.
it astonisheth us to foresee what doleful effects our divisions would produce,
which we will not so much as mention in particular, lest our words should be
misunderstood.

And seeing all this may be safely and easily prevented, We humbly beseech the
Lord in mercy to vouchsafe to your Majesty, an heart to discern aright of Time
and Judgment.]

NOTE. VIII.
Bless us from a Gun! Should we lose the Opportunity? And then their Prayer at
last; that his Majesty may [discern aright of Time, etc.]

Certainly these Folks would have said to the King -- [ While it is called to
day harden not your heart] but that it is Common Prayer. Or do they dream
themselves at work again with the Poor Cavaliers? and mean, that if his Majesty
come not In by such a time, he is not to be admitted to his Composition? Are
these the men of Reverence that must Teach us Manners toward God Almighty, and
are yet to learn it Themselves toward his Vicegerent?

He that makes any thing form the Collation, of [ Opportunity,] and [ Time,]
but a Cautionary Menace; -- let him lend me his Spectacles. A Menace.
But the coherence cleers it, Should we lose (say they) the opportunity of our
desired Reconciliation, and Union.]

Must it be Now, or Never then? and their own way, or None? Is it not
Reconciliation, if They Return to the Church? and Unity if they Agree with it?
A Child runs from his Mother, and cries they are Fallen out. They cannot comply
with Ceremonies: -- nor the Church with Schism.

Well; The Reformers Foresight.
but put the Case they Lose this Opportunity, then forsooth [it astonishes us
(they say) to foresee what doleful effects our Divisions would produce.]

Just so did Peter's foresee the Death of the late King: -- Judas; the Betraying
of our Savior; and so did I my self foresee the Printing of this Paper, just
as these Gentlemen foresee confusion; or as men commonly foresee Eating when
they are Hungry.

If the Foresight ( indeed) astonishes Them; the Prospect cannot but be
Dreadful: for only Hell transcends those Horrors which these bold men have
beheld with Pleasure; And in good truth, That may be it: for he that has
Murder, and Rebellion at his Back, does commonly Phansy Fire and Brimstone
before him.

These Holy,
and Fastidious Scrupulists; -- these same spiritual Surgeons, that Live by
dressing wounds of their own making; -- must understand, we have some skill in
Probing of a Conscience, too. If they are Mortified throughout, that is not Our
fault; but if they have any Feeling Left, we will Quicken it.

Now leaving them to their Astonishments, we will to the foreseen Product of our
Divisions, [Doleful Effects,] they say. They Prophet Jonas his [Yes within
Forty days -- ] had scarce a sadder sound. It may be any thing: -- War, another
Covenant; Famine, Sequestration; Truce-breaking, Decimation: In fine, any
thing, and now at last we are left in the Dark to grope it out.

Doleful Effects; (they say) which we will not so much as mention in
Particular, lest our words should be misunderstood.

These good men are wonderfully put to it for want of Expression; the thing
would imply Mutiny, and They are afraid it should be taken for Treason. No
honest apprehension could in Their Case be Dangerous. What hazard of
mis-construction were it, to mention any Trouble of Mind Imaginable? But if it
tends to mischief of Action, That may prove perilous indeed. More Gunning,
beyond Controversy, and their Sagacities smell the Powder. The People will
Rebel they think; that is English, and the Truth they are loath to Speak.

To lay their Souls as Naked now as their Bodies came into the World, The
Faction laid open.
I shall here Prove, (or I deceive my self) that These People are the Betrayers
of the Public Peace: and of the Office of their Ministry.

If they foresee any Seditious Consequence likely to arise from his Majesty's
Refusal: why do they not rather in Private Supplicate the King to Grant, and in
Public, Charm the People to Submit; Seditious.
then so to Plead, and Justify the Disagreement to the King, that their
Arguments, and Importunities may be overheard by the People? They First and
openly avow the Popular Cause, and shake the head Then at the Danger of it:
giving a Double Encouragement to the Multitude, as well from the Equity of the
Matter, as from the Strength of the Party.

Upon the whole, Calumnious.
what are their Libellous, and Creeping Night-works, but Poisonous Calumnies
against the King; and mean, Incensing Flatteries toward the People? Or in a
word, sneaking Complaints, as if his Sacred Majesty would not grant, what with
Conseience, Honor, and Safety he cannot deny? Whereas the Sun's not clearer,
then the pure Contrary. For; the King denies them nothing, but what with
Conscience, Honor, and Safety, he cannot grant.

They Demand Presbytery, that is; the confused exercise of it, and Liberty to
the Minister of Praying at pleasure: which being admitted, makes Divine Service
but a Spiritual scuffle; the one half of the Congregation Praying for that
which the other Curses.

Against This Proposition, his Majesty stands engaged by Oath, Honor, and
Judgment: being Persuaded in his Reason, and Obliged by the Other Two.

They pretend next, the continuing virtue of their Covenant; (which never had
any) wherein his Majesty can hardly gratify them, without blasting the Glory of
his blessed Fathers Memory: the Justice of his Cause, and without shaking the
Foundation of his Imperial Title.

Their Reasons, I have un-Reason'd already, and when the Nameless Divines of
the Church Invisible, shall vouchsafe their Answer, I shall dispose my self to
receive it.

But nothing can be pleasanter then to hear them talk of their Cousins the
People. Presbytery will never down with the People.
(by Britannicus his Leave) Alas! their Sowrness of discipline, and the Peoples
freedom of Constitution are Fire and Water. The people may endure to hear them
Talk of Liberty, but the exercise of their Tyranny is intolerable. To have
every Parish haunted with a Phantome; -- every Church turned into a House of
Correction; -- and one man excommunicated for a walk upon the Lord's Day, while
Another is Canonized for a Murder. I do not plead for Impunity of Sinners, but
for a pious differencing of Matters disputable from crying sins: for
Impartiality in the Pulpit, and Charity to all men: -- for Preaching Damnation
to those that Resist, as well as Caution to those that are to Obey.

The Expedient to prevent these mischiefs, is a Synodical Government; wherein
they beseech the Lord in mercy to vouchsafe to his Majesty an heart to discern
aright of Time, and Judgment.]

This is, in plainer terms; to tell the King, that it is his best course to
make use of a Seasonable Offer.

Let This suffice for their Proposals.

Some three or four days after the Publishing of these abovementioned
Proposals, out comes a single sheet, in form of a Petition to his Majesty, from
the Commissioned Ministers.

It Is likely that this was drawn from them by a general rumor then current, of
a severe Declaration already in the Press against their other Pamphlets: for
having so notoriously overshot themselves in the Rest, they mend the matter in
This, by giving the same thing a fairer dress.

[A] IF we should sin against God (say they) because we are commanded, Page 4.
who shall answer for us, or save us from his Justice? And we humbly crave,
that it may be no just Gravamen of our dissent, that thereby we suppose
Superiors may err, seeing it is but supposing them to be men not yet in
Heaven.]

And again, [B] Page 5.
We know that Conscientious men will not consent to the Practice of things in
their Judgment Unlawful, etc.]

NOTE IX.
[A] SAint Augustine resolves this Point exceeding well; Reum Regem facit (says
he) Iniquitas Imperandi, Innocentem Subditum Ordo Serviendi] Let the Governor
account for an unjust Command, but the Order of Obedience saves the Subject
Harmless. This must be understood of Matters not simply Wicked.

Where we doubt, on the One hand, The safe way is best.
and are sure on the Other, beyond Question, the surest side is Best. We are
sure that we are to Obey, if the thing be not Unlawful, and we are not sure
that the Thing is Unlawful. I must but touch upon This; If the Government
offend some Particular Persons, it is hard they cannot agree, but let those
Particulars march off: for They offend the Government* and it is better, that
some suffer by an Imposition, then All by a Rebellion.

They offer to Dispute; and then they pass for mighty men with the people. But
what is the Question? Only forsooth, whether I Think This, or That Lawful: And
if I say, I do, it is so; and no matter what the Law says to the Contrary. What
I believe, binds me; and every Man being Free to pretend what Belief he
pleases, every man's Private Humor becomes a Law.

They Argue, thar Superiors may Err. They may so; but theit Errors are no
Forfeiture of their Superiority. Cannot Inferiors err too? So that their own
claim brings the Issue of this Strife but to a Drawn Battle. When Subjects
question the Proceedings of their Governors; they do not so much tax their
mistakes, as Vsurp their Authority; and for some Slip perhaps in the Exercise
of Government destroy the Order of it.

[B] We know that Conscientious men will not consent, etc.] They borrow here,
the Apostles Rhetorique. [King Agrippa believe thou the Prophets? I know that
thou believe.] They seem to take for Granted, what they are now endeavoring
to persuade them to. These are but hints to the Common People, to say their
Consciences cannot submit to the Law, and then there is a Party made against the
King.

Soon after the Publishing of their Petition for Peace, came forth a pretended
Account of all the Proceedings betwixt the Commissioned Divines concerning the
Liturgy. Not to insist upon the weakness of their Reasoning, I shall only
produce one Mistake of Memory, (I had like to have given it a worse name.)

The Bishops urge, that [while the Liturgy was duly observed, we lived in
Peace, since that was laid aside] -- the contrary. Now bless the Modesty of the
Replicants.

BUt Really has Liberty to forbear, The Divines Account p. ^.
produced such Divisions as you mention? The License, or Connivence that was
granted to Haeretiques, Apostates, and foul-mouthed Raylers against the
Scripture, Ministry, and all God's Ordinances indeed bred Confusions in the
Land.

NOTE X.
Would not this scandalous Recltal of their old Forgeries against the
Government: -- This Re-charge of our late Gracious Sovereign: and Imputation of
the late War to the King's Party, (for There Their Malice fixes it) make a man
lay the very Roots of the Rebellion Naked; and trace the Project up to the very
Door of the Reforming Conclave?

Nota magis nulli domus est sua, quam mihi, etc. Do not we know the Scotch
Cabale, and the Confederate English; the Pack that hunted the Earl of
Strafford? Yes, and the Beagles too, that Bayted the Archbishop.

[But Really, has Liberty to forbear produced such divisions? etc.] Goodly,
Goodly! your Reverences are Gamesome: Yes, Really it has.

Are not Knaves and Fools the greater part of the World? and in the State of
Freedom, they require, Those are the men we make our Governors. Without This
Liberty of Freedom, where had been their separate Assemblies? Their Seditious
Conventicles; Their Anti-Episcopal Lectures, and without These, their
Desolating Reformation? Were we not in the highway to Unity, when Churches
were turned into Stables, and houses of Infamy supplied the place of Churches?
when Peter's was fooling in One Pulpit, Marshall Denouncing in Another: and when
the Now-Pastor of Brainford threw the very Firebrand of the Rebellion into the
Kings Coach; that execrable Pamphlet, [To your Tents O Israe(...)

But the Reformers assign our Breaches to another Cause. [The License or
Connivence that was granted to Haeretiques, Apostates etc. -- ]

When will These men's Mouths be Sweet again, after so foul a Calumny? Nay more;
the very Crimes they charge upon the Government, in a high measure, they
Themselves were guilty of.

Liberty of Conscience was their First Clamor, a Notion which included all
Sects and Heresies imaginable, whereof, great Use was made against the King.
But notwithstanding the prodigious, and Blasphemous Opinions, then rise, and
crying, both in their Conventieles and Pulpits; All passed for Gospel in the
Godly Party: for Unity in the War was their business, not Unity in Religion:
and it was safer to Deny the Trinity, then to refuse the Covenant.

The bare Rehearsal of their Monstrous Tenants would make a man Tremble.

There were among them that denied the Authority of the Scriptures, -- Liberty
of Conscience.
the use of the Old Testament, -- the Immortality of the Soul, -- the Trinity in
Unity. That affirmed the Soul to be of the Essence of God, etc. -- and a world
of other Impious Positions they held, such as either the Devil, or Distemper
suggested to them. the Presbyterians were pleased to (...) these Phanatiques,
at first more needful to their Design, then Scandalous to their Profession;
preferring at any time an Ordinance of the Two Houses, to the Obligation of the
Two Tables. And so they escaped, not only with Impunity, but Encouragement;
till the Declining of the Royal party, and the Increase of these wild
Libertines, put the Kirk-faction upon other thoughts: which were, having now
Mastered the Kings forces, how to cast off the Independent Party, by whose
assistance they had done the work.

They began now to open their eyes, and to perceive, that what they called
Gospel-Profession while they needed them, was become gross Haeresie, when they
had done with them: and that Gods People in the Beginning, were Schismatiques
in the Conclusion.

What is become now of the Liberty of Conscience these Faithless Creatures
promised to all that sided with them? See the Ministers Letter from Sion-House
to the Assembly in 1645.

Toleration of Independents, as unseasonable so unreasonable. First, Not
established in any Christian State by the Civil Magistrate. Secondly, It
consists not with Presbytery. Thirdly, If That; then all Sectaries must be
Tolerated.] Again;

Such a Toleration is utterly Repugnant, and Inconsistent with the Solemn
League and Covenant for Reformation.]

See Bayly's disswasive from the Errors of the Times in his Dedicatory.
Printed in 1646.

Liberty of Conscience, and Toleration of all or any Religion, is so prodigious
an impiety, that this religious Parliament cannot but abhor the very naming of
it.

The whole Faction sing the same song, of Liberty, when they are Rising, and
Non-Toleration when they are Up: and they are now upon their first concern;
they Plead in pretense for all the Adversaries of our Church Order, but they
propose to set up only for Themselves.

This is a point worthy a strict Enquiry, and we will sift it Thoroughly, in that
which follows.

But it is to us matter of Admiration to observe (clean contrary to your
Intimation) how little Discord there was in Prayer, The Divines account p. 8.
and other parts of Worship, among all the Churches throughout the three
Nations, that agreed in Doctrine, and forbore the Liturgy. It is wonderful to
us in the Review to consider, with what Love, and Peace, and Concord, they all
spoke the same things, that were tied to no From of words, even those that
differed in some points of Discipline, even to a withdrawing from Local
Communion with us, yet strangely agreed with us in Worship.]

NOTE. XI.
ACutely, and unanswerably argued; Those Churches that Agreed, did agree,
wherein they Agreed.

The Bishops infer the Expedience of restoring the Common Prayer, from the
Divisions which have ensued upon forsaking it.

Nay rather; (reply the Presbyterians) the License given to Apostates,
Haeretiques, and the like, caused those Divisions, etc. Whereas those that
forbore the Liturgy, and agreed in Doctrine, were unamimous to a Miracle.

Where lies the Wonder, if those that agreed in Doctrine, differed not much in
other matters, when there was nothing else for them to differ upon? Or what
Answer is it to an Objection that there were great and many Divisions, to say
that there were some Agreements? And those Agreements were no other neither
then a Conspiracy.

The Question is, what was the Effect of that Popular Defection from the
Practice of the Church? Was it not Haeresie, and Rebellion? Nor is it possible
it should be other; for a General Freedom is but a Licentious Combination
against a Regulating and Limiting Order.

But the Wonderful Love, Peace, and Concord that was among those that were tied
to no form of words!]

-- Inter so Convenit Vrsis] They did in truth agree, to Catch the Prey, but
not to share it: -- they loved the Independency, but they hated the
Independent: or with Doctor Donn; The One was con^ent the Other should be
Damned, but loath he should Govern.

Since these Gentlemen are pleased to boast the Unity of that Party that
forbore the Liturgy; we will confer Notes with their great Friend Mr. Edwards
upon the Question; and first we will see what precious Instruments these
Tender-conscienc'd men made use of, as the conjunct Promoters of a Reformation.
We Will then enquire, upon their subdivision, how they agreed among themselves.

Certain Opinions frequent among the Godly Party (falsely so called.)
THat the Scriptures are Insufficient, Edward's Gangraena, P. 18.
and uncertain. That God is the Author of Sin: Page 19.
not of the Action only, but of the Sinfulness it self. That the Magistrate
ought not to Punish any man for Denying of a God: Page 20.
if his Conscience be so persuaded. That every Creature is God: Page 21.
an Efflux only from God, and shall Return to him. That there is but one Person
in the Divine Nature. Ibid.
That Christ came only to witness and declare the love of God, Page 22.
not to procure it. That the least Truth is of more worth then Jesus Christ
himself. Page 23.
That the Doctrine of Repentance is a soul destroying Doctrine. Page 25.
That it is as possible for Christ himself to sin, as for a child of God to sin.
Ibid.
That the Moral Law is of no use at all to Believers. Ibid.
That Peter's trouble after the denial of his Master, Page 26.
issued only from the weakness of his Faith. That Infants rise not again. Page
27.

The same Author tells us in the Second part of Gangraena, Page 18^*
of a Sectary pleading for a Toleration of Witches, which he follows, with a
recital of Instances in several kinds, the foulest, and the most impious,
imaginable.

Let these suffice out of that rabble of Infamous Collections, to show the
blessed Effects of the Presbyterian Reformation.

If it be objected, that these opinions no way concern the Presbyterian Party.
They are not Charged with the Belief of these Heresies, but with the
encouragement and protection of them, for they grew up and spread under Their
Government.

[All of them being vented and broached within these four years last pact,
Gangraena, page 1.
yea most of them within these two last years and less; Heresies the spawn of
Presbytery.
] ( This was in 1646. and more especally (says the same Author in the Page
following) in London, and the Counties adjacent, in the Parliaments Quarters,
in their Armies, and Garrison Towns, not maintained by Persons at Oxford, etc.
for Then it had not been so much to us;] -- but [in Thee London, in Thee
Associate Counties, in Thee Armies, and that after a Solemn Covenant to
extirpate Heresies, and Schisms, are found such and such errors, blasphemous
opinions, strange practices, etc. -- ]

Nor were the Sectaries only let alone, and suffered, Gangr. page 179.
but highly respected, preferred, etc. -- ] Nay, says our Author; The
Independents were but few; and other Sectaries a small Number, in the first and
second year of this Parliament, some half a score or dozen Ministers, three or
four hundred People, the Presbyterians gave them the Right hand of Fellowship,
admitted them to their Meetings, opened their Pulpit doors unto them, showed
all brotherly respect of Love and Kindness to them, even more then to must of
their own Way, condescending to such a Motion, as to forbear Praying, and
Printing against their Opinions and Way; making them (who were so small and
inconsiderable a Party) as it were an equal Party, putting them into the
Balance with themselves; they appeared not to hinder their being Chosen to be
general Lecturers for This City, in several great Churches; and as at first, so
all along, they have been tender and respectful of them, in Assembly, City, and
in all Cases suffering them to grow up to Thousands, etc.]

These are the words of a professed Champion of the Cause; a bitter Adversary he
was to Independents, and to say no worse; he was a Presbyterian to Bishops. As
he has stated the Case,
it was the Presbyterians, not the Bishops, that licensed Heretics,
Apostates, and Foul-mouthed Raylers against the Scripture, Ministry, and all
Gods Ordinances; -- ] and the forbearance of the Liturgy, was the first step
toward This horrible Confusion.

Qui non prohibet, cum potest, Iubet. He that permits, Commands; when he might
fairly hinder.

The Sectaries were but Few, he says, at the Beginning of the War, The
Presbyterians nourished the Sectaries at first.
till they were Nursed, and Cherished by the Presbyterians; so that it seems,
'twas Their Indulgence wrought our Mischief, and not Episcopal connivance. In
Truth that Thing they called the Cause, was but the Sink of the whole Nation:
-- the common Receptacle of Lewd, Factious, and foul Humors. The Government
was their grand Aversion; and next to King and Church, they hated one another.
The Divines, Preached, and Printed up the Quarrel; the Brutish Multitude
Maintained it: which kind of Combination is rarely Phansi'd by Sir Francis
Bacon, in These Words.

Libels against Bishops, and Ecclesiastical Dignities, calling in the People to
their Aid, are a kind of Intelligence betwixt Incendiaries, and Robbers; the
One to Fire the house, the Other to Rifle it.]

We come now to the wonderful Love, Peace, and Concord, of those People that
were tied to no Form of words, etc.] and first The Kindness of the
Presbyterians to their Colleagues the Independents.

The Sectaries agree with Julian the Apostate, The Presbyterians love to the
Independ.
Gangrene, p. 54.

The Sectaries are Libertines and Atheists, P. 185.] Unclean, Incestuous, P.
187.] Drunkards, P. 190.] Sabbath Breakers, Deceivers, P. 191.] Guilty of gross
Lying, Slandering, Iugling, Falsifying their Words and Promises: Guilty of
Excessive Pride and Boasting, page 192] -- Of insufferable Insolences,
horrible Affronts to Authority, and of strange Outrages, page 194.] There never
was a more Hypocritical, False Dissembling, Cunning Generation in England, then
many of the Grandees of our Sectaries. -- They Encourage, Protect, and Cry up
for Saints, Sons of Belial, and the Vilest of Men, p. 240.] Gangraena 2d Part,
1646.

These Imputations being attended with Public, and Notorious Proofs: and this
Subject being at that time the Common Theme of the Presbyterian party; enough
is said to show their Kindness to the Sectaries; We Will now to the Other side,
and Manifest that there was no Love lost betwixt them.

An Anabaptist said that he hoped to see Heaven and Earth on fire before
Presbytery should be settled.] The Sectaries love to the Presbyterians.


Another Sectary, that he hoped to see the Presbytery as much trodden under foot
as the Bishops are. Gangr. p. 73.]

The National Covenant is a double faced Covenant, the greatest makebate and
snare, that ever the Devil, and the Clergy his Agents, cast in among honest men
in England in our age. Gangraena, 2d. Part, page 220.

The Presbyterian Government is Antichristian, a limb of Antichrist,
Tyrannical, Lordly, Cruel, a worse bondage then under the Prelates, a bondage
under Taskmasters as the Israelites in Egypt, Ibid. 221.

The Assembly is Antichristian, Romish, Bloody, the Plagues and Pestes of the
Kingdom, Baals Priests, Diviners, Southsayers, Ibid. p. 230.

The Seed of God in this Nation, has had Two Capital Enemies, the
Romish-Papacy, and the Scotch-Presbytery. Sterry, Englands Deliverance, p. 7.

Behold the Harmony of the Non-Conformists: the wonderful Agreement of the
with-drawers from local Communion with us.]

But the Reformers argue Learnedly, Divines Account page 8.
that if we tell them of those that differ from them in Doctrine, and are not
of them, it is as impertinent to the point of their own agreement in Worship,
as to tell them of the Papists.]

Marque the Insipid flatness of This Evasion. If they Differ, they do not
Agree; and if they Agree, they do not Differ. Have not the Independent
Schismatiques the same Pretense, as well as the Presbyterian? We urge that all
the Factions were of a Party, not all of an Opinion; and that the Independent
Heresies were hatched under the Kirk-Schismatiques Wing.

This we have proved, and now, to a Conclusion.

Wheresoever the Two Factions close, Conveniant in Tertio.
there is a design upon the Civil Power; for their Principles are Inconciliable,
save by the stronger malice they bear to the Government, then to each other.

How great a madness is it then for those People to unite against the Public?
when they are sure either to fall in the Attempt, or at the most, not to stand
firm long after it! For whenever they Break, (and Break they must) it is but a
little Patience till they are i^, and the Third Party gives the Law to Both,
Turning the Scale at Pleasure.

But what a vayles it to offer Light to those that shut their Eyes, or Reason
to a man that dares not hearken to it? It Is with Notorious Sinners as with men
much in Debt, they had rather Break then come to an Account: -- rather run
headlong the direct Rote to Hell, then pass the Purgatory of a Repentance.

It is a remarkable saying of Sir Francis Bacon, that the great Atheists indeed
are Hypocrites, which are ever Handling Holy things, but without Feeling.] Such
are the people we have to deal with. Witness their Seditious Zeal; -- their
Wrested Allegations; -- their Neglected Vows, and D^ring Scruples. No wonder
then at their incorrigible Hardness and Impenitence.

David, (we find) Repented his Adultery and Murder; Hypocr. impenitent.
Manasseh, his Idolatry; Saint Peter, the Denial of his Master; Saint Paul, the
Persecution of the Church, etc. -- but not one precedent in the whole Bible of
a Repentant and Converted Hypocrite.

LORD, Luke 18. 11.
I am not as other men are, says the Pharisee: Number. 16. 3.
The Congregation is holy, every one of them, 2 Samuel 15. 4.
and the Lord is among them, (cry the Sons of Korah.) Oh that I were made Judge
it the land, (says Absalom) that I might do every man justice!] But what became
of these People? He in the Parable was not justified; -- The earth opened her
mouth upon the Korites; -- and the smooth Advocate for the Peoples Liberties
was Hanged upon an Oak.

Wherefore beware of the leaven of the Pharisees, which is Hypocrisy. Luke 12.
1.


Nor is this Crime more fatal to the Person than to the Public; Hypocr.
dangerous to the Public.
those that are tainted with it, being not one jot better Citizens or Subjects,
than they are Christians: two or three are enough to infect a Parish, and half
a dozen popular Hypocrites will make a shift to embroyle a Nation.

It is not credible, how greedily the heedless Vulgar swallow down any hook
baited with forms of godliness, especially when they themselves are taken in
for sharers in the work, and made the Judges of the Controversy. Then they
begin to talk of the Righteous Scepter, and of subjecting the Nations to the
rule of the holy Ordinance, abundantly supplying with revelation their want of
common Reason. They (forsooth) must be conferred with about Church Government,
and Delinquents, Baals Priests, and the High places, which way to carry on the
Cause of the Lamb; against the Kingdoms of this world, and the powers of
darkness.

When once the poison of this cankered zeal comes to diffuse it self, and seize
the mass and humor of the people; who can express in words, or without horror
think upon the Blasphemies, Treasons, Murders, Heart-burnings, and Consusions
that ensue upon it: We shall not need to ransack Foreign Stories, or past
Ages, for sad and dismal Instances; this little spot of England and our own
Memories will furnish us.

Those that are struck with this distemper, Phanaticisme.
take Fancy for Inspiration, their very dreams for divine Advertisements, and
the Impulse of a besotted Melancholy for the direction of the holy Spirit. They
fashion to themselves strange uncouth Notions of the Diety, entering into a
familiarity with Heaven; and in this elevation of spiritual pride and dotage,
having, as they imagine, the Almighty on their side, and the Eternal Wisdom
for their Counselor; they account* human reason a ridiculous thing, and laugh
at the authority and power of Princes.

So many of them as agree to oppose the Right, are called the Saints; the earth
is their inheritance, and that which we style Theft or Plunder, is but with
them taking possession of their Birthright. In order to their ends they reckon
no violence unlawful. Princes are murdered for the glory of God, and the most
barbarous mischiefs that fire and sword can bring upon a people, they term a
Reformation.

Their Combinations against Law and Order are (in the language of the
Consistory) a holy Covenanting with their God; and all their actings (though
never so irreverend and impetuous) only the gentle Motions of the Spirit.
These are the pious Arts that take and lead the Multitude -- the simple and the
factious, together with such malcontents as are by guilt, disgrace, or
poverty, prepared for lewdness. And this has been the constant method of our
devout Patriots, who with Gods glory and Christian liberty still in their
mouths, laid the foundation of our ruin in Hypocrisy.

The word belongs to the Stage, and in That sense, to some of our Reformers; a
great part of whose Pulpit-work it is, by Feigned, and forced Passions in
Themselves, to stir up True Affections in their Hearers; making the Auditory
Feel the Griefs the Speaker does but Counterfeit. Do we not see familiarly,
that a sad Tale upon the Stage, makes the People Cry in the Pit? And yet we
know, that he that Plays Caesar murdered in the Senate, is but some Droll-
Comoedian behind the Hanging.

I thought to have ended here, but one Note more shall do my Business, and
Theirs too, or I mightily mistake my self.

THe Church judges not of things undiscovered: The Divines Account p. 12.
non esse and non apparere, are all one as to our Judgment, we conclude not
peremptorily, because we pretend not here to infallibility. As we are not sure
that any man is truly penitent, that we give the Sacrament to, so we are not
sure that any man dies impenitently. But we must use Those as Penitent, that
seem so to Reason, judging by ordinary means, and so must we judge those as
Impenitent that have declared their sin, and never declared their Repentance.]

NOTE. XII.
THis Point will be the Death of the [Invaletudinary] Ministers, The Elegancies
of the learned.
(as our Ciceronians) and they might ten times better have endured (by reading
the Office of Burial, at the Grave) to expose their tender Bodies to the
Excessively Refrigerating Air: (another Elegance) which Imposition they do not
understand to be a sign of the Right and Ingenuine Spirit of Religion) Sure it
Rains Soloecismes: Three in the third part of a Page.

Now to the Churches Faculty, and Power of Judgment, according to the
strictness of their own Rule.

Not to Appear, and not to Be, are the same thing, as to the Judgment of the
Church -- and Those are to be judged Impenitents, that have declared their Sin,
and never declared their Repentance. Public Worship page 67.
And That, in words only, will not suffice neither; for (say our Reformers) It
must be Practice first, that must make Words Credible, when the Person by
Perfidiousness has forfeited his Credit.] They press further likewise, that
according to his Majesty's Declaration of October. 25. 1660. Exceptions, p. 8.
Scandalous Offenders are not to be admitted to the Holy Communion till they
have Openly declared themselves to have truly Repented, and amended their
former naughty Lives, etc.]

Now try the Self-Condemners by their own Law. Self-condemners.


Where Is their Repentance for putting Gods Name, to the Devil's Commission?
under the Form of a Religious Vow, Couching an Execrable League of violence,
against their Prince, the Law, their Country.

Where Is their Repentance, for the Souls they have Damned by their Seditious
Doctrine? the Blood they have made the People spill, by their Incentives to the
War? -- Those Schisms and Heresies, which they have given us in exchange for
an Apostolical Order, and Evangelical Truths; under the color of a
Gospel-Reformation.

Where is the Practice (they prescribe) of their Obedience? Their Open
Retractations and Amendments? Their Sins as Public as the Day; but where is
their Penitence? These Gentlemen must justify the War; or by the method of
their own Discipline, be excluded the Communion of the Church.

But they are so far from That, they Claim a Right of Government. Acts of
Parliament must submit to Their Authority: They put a Bar to the Kings Power in
Matters Indifferent; and just as the Last War began, are they now tampering to
procure another.

I had some thoughts of a Reply upon their Exceptions against the Liturgy: but
truly for the Common People Sake, rather then for their own; for I think them
much more capable of a Confutation then worthy of it. At present, I am given to
understand, that there is more Honor meant them, then they deserve; and I
shall wait the Issue of it from a better hand.

My Frequency of writing may persuade some, that I Am in love with Scribbling:
but what I now do, is no more then what I have ever done, when I believed my
Duty called me to it. And having done the same thing Formerly, and oftener, at
a time when Rationally I could not expect any other Reward then a Halter: I
think there are some People that believe I write for a Halter, still, and have
amind to save my Longing.

I know how I am misrepresented; which, if I had any thing to Lose, but what
I Am weary of, perhaps would trouble me. But Soberly, (since so it is) here I
declare, I do not ask the abatement of the strictest rigor of any Law, either
Humane, or Divine, in what concerns his Majesty. But betwixt some, perchance
from whom I have not deserved Ill, and others, from whom I have no great
Ambition, to receive much Kindness, my Doings I perceive are Commented upon,
and much mistaken. To These discourtisies, I shall only oppose This Word.

Let the World renounce me, when they find me either less Innocent, then I say
I am; or less Dutiful, then I have been.

Mala Opinio been parta delectat. Sen. Ep.

FINIS.

