A LETTER FOUND IN UTOPIA.

And from thence recommended by a very good hand to the perusal of the
Publisher.

Wherein (among other things) a candid Testimony to Mr. Sterryes learned and
accurate Discourse of the Freedom of the Will, lately Printed: As also some
reflections upon Contending or Disputing (as of late) about matters of RELIGION.

With a POSTSCRIPT to the READER.

Published to undeceive and quiet the minds of the People. By one that pities
the Inscription upon the Athenian Altar.

1. Cor. 1. 20. Where is the Disputer of this World?

Job 15. 31. Let not him that is deceived trust in vanity, for vanity shall be
his recompense.

Isa. 44 20. -- He feeds on ashes: A deceived heart has turned him aside
that he cannot deliver his soul, nor say, Is there not a Lie in my right hand.

All things Superable below him that is Insuperable: and All things Finite
below him that is Infinite.

Bonitas invicti non vincitur, and infinita misericordia non finitur.

Fulgent. ad Mon. Diffudisti per omnem mundum religiosi nominis membra
religionis vim non habentia.

Salvian. ad Eccles. Cathol. Ecchoing to 2 Timothy 3. 5. Qui Coelum dependenter
habet in Revolutionibus suis, vari ^^ sibi influenti^s impartialite^ exhibere
tanquam Principi in terris, aut Potentatui amplissim^: Is Terram similite^
queat expectare in Laboribus suis, fructum ipsius praematurum sibi producere;
idqu^ tempore tempestivo; absque omni solicitudine, vel timore, sive Hominis,
aut Bestiae^

^. G. Americanus Protomartyr. Printed in the Year* 1675.

The Publishers PREFACE OR APOLOGY.
THe following Letter might have waited sooner upon the World, had the
liveliness of the Exodus 1. 19.
Hebrew women been upon it, and nothing to hinder the celerity of its
Production; but it frequently so falls out among men, that useful things have
but slow beginnings, and a Progress proportionable in their going on to
maturity: Jonah's Jon. 4. 6.
gourd (under which he was willing to shade himself as long as he could) came
up in a night, and perished in a night; and it may well serve as an Emblem for
things of a lower value, or such as the darkness of the night produces, and
that cannot endure the light of the day: much Lucifugae.
might be said about matters of that nature, that come forth suddenly, and
vanish accordingly, the ordinary fate of such Col. 2. 8, 20, 22.
wordly Rudiments, as perish in the using, and that are seldom long lived.

But when the Prophet comes to speak of Sions peculiar and supernatural
Birthright, he says, Isa. 66. 7, 8.
That before she travailed, she brought forth; before her pain came, she was
delivered of a Man-child: well may this be attended with the succeeding
Queries: Who has heard such a thing? Shall the earth be made to bring forth in
one day? Shall a Nation be born at once? Surely this can never or no where else
be, but where Time and Eternity are coupled together in marriage: Rev. 22. 13.
the beginning and the end, the first and the last, the highest and the lowest,
the Esa. 46. 9, 10.
most ancient and honorable, with things not yet done, or of 1 Cor. 1. 28.
no account in the worlds estimation; when Isa. 60. 22.
a little one shall become a thousand, and a small one a strong Nation, and
Mic. 5. 7. comp. with Job. 38. 28.
the remnant of Jacob in the midst of many people: as a Dew from the Lord, that
waits not for man, nor tarrieth for the sons of men; and all this most amply,
as well as most compendiously, in Him, who makes the Heavens and the Earth to be
but one Globe, or God and Man, to be but one entire Being, or most complete
Subsistence, in CHRIST OUR (...)
LORD for ever.

If such a thing as this be creeping or stealing upon the World like Rev. 16^.
15.
a thief in the night, to Luke 1. 35.
umbrage all the dark shades of the Creature, and to Ephesians. 1. 10.
gather up, all that is but seemingly such, into the full Heb. 1. 3.
Brightness of the Fathers Glory, in Him, that Really is so. And if a savoury
Specimen or Trial hereof be heartily imparted to us, in and by the ensuing
Epistle, let no man run among the Plot-mongers of the World for some execrable
Stratagem or Hellbred Device, whereby to elude the Discovery: For the Thing (in
it self) is Spiritual and Heavenly, and of a Divine Nature. (falling sweetly
upon us, like the Deuteronomy. 32. 2.
Dew upon the grass, or small rain upon the tender herbs) and such must they
be, that can give it any more than a civil Entertainment: and yet surely such
there are, that can open their doors to such J^b 31. 32.
Strangers as these, and be mighty glad of their Company; Heb. 13. 2.
neither can there be in it matter of Disparagement, or Discouragement, or
Prejudice, or Disadvantage in the least to any, but such as either 1 Cor. 2. 14.
do not, or cannot, or Exodus 5. 2. Jer. 44. 16. 1 John 5. 20.
will not understand it; since of this kind of Isa. 50. 4. John 6. 45. 1 These.
4 9. (...).
Learning (above all the rest) it is most truly and properly said, that -- non
habet inimicum praeter ignorantem, i. e. it has no enemy besides the ignorant
man, and one whose ignorance is the mother of his Devotion.

The Letter.
Worthy Sir:
I Received your Love in the Lines and A Discourse of the Freedom of the Will,
by Mr. P. S
Book you sent me (for so I do with much thankfulness acknowledge and interpret
your accosting me with so free and large and noble a Present) the posthumous
Work of a Person that was indeed of an Prove. 17. 27.
excellent Spirit, whereby Heb. 11.
He being dead yet speaks; as a Man of rich and rare Endowment; a Star of the
first Magnitude, among those that were able to see him, and understand his
worth: I have not yet had time to read the Book throughout, but from what I
have sedulously, and with great delight perused, I should not stick to assert
(if that might signify any thing) that the same Divine Glory appears in the
Work, that was formerly wont to Eccles. 8.
shine upon the face of the Workman in all the true Lineaments of the most
perfect and well-accomplished Beauty: It needs not to be denied but that the
same Vail that was upon his Speakings may still abide upon his Writings, like
that upon the (d) face of Moses, which the Apostle 2 Cor. 3. 3, 14.
tells us, is to this day remaining untaken away, and that it cannot be removed
till Christ himself removes it; which vail, he says is done away in Christ. The
Prophet Isaiah likewise speaks of (e) a vail that is Isa. 25. 6, 7. ^en. 22. 14.
spread over all Nations, and a covering cast over all people, which is not to
be destroyed or swallowed ^K. 19. 8. ^a 63. 15. ^sal. 26. 8.
up, but in the Mount of God, the Mountain of his Holiness, or place where his
Honor dwells; where he makes us a Feast of fat things, of wines on the lees,
of fat things full of marrow, of wines on the lees well refined, etc. And the
truth is, let men dream and divine, or conjecture what they please to the
contrary, yet this is very certain, That all manner of vails and coverings
whatsoever, can never be destroyed swallowed up, or quite taken away, till (f)
the Sun of Righteousness arise with healing Mal. 4. 2.
in his wings, and freedom of good will upon us.

But (dear and loving Sir) there is a passage in yours that I do not so well
apprehend the meaning of, and you will not, I hope, be offended at my
paraphrasing upon it (as briefly as I may) in order to a right understanding:
Whereas you say in your Letter, That the present time is very dark: I suppose
you meant it to be so, only to those that are in the dark, 2 Cor. 4. 9.
whose minds the god of this world has blinded; otherwise to those that Ephesians.
5. 8.
were sometimes darkness, but are now made light in the Lord, the present time
is as lightsom to them, as any that ever was, or shall be; for if we rightly
profess and confess him, Revel. 1. 4.
that is, and was, and is to come, and yet Heb. 13. 8.
yesterday, and to day, and the same for evermore; then we cannot but
understand and see plainly, that neither Ministrations past, nor any that are
to come, can make any the least change or alteration upon that complete
subsistence, or being that we have in Him, Ephesians. 1. 22, 23.
who is Head over all things unto the Church, which is his Body, the fullness of
him that fills all in all; if we can witness, and bear forth this testimony
to the world, That 2 Cor. 4. 6
the same God who commanded the light to shine out of darkness (in that great
early day, or morning of the world) has shined into our hearts the light of
the knowledge of the Glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ, and if by virtue
of this Light we can clearly discern, and do know, that our GREAT Job 19. 25.
REDEEMER lives, who by Heb. 10. 14.
one Offering has perfected for ever, as many as come by faith unto him. So
that now we can sing triumphantly with Exodus 15. 1, 20. Job. 38 7.
Moses and Miriam, and all those bright morning Stars, and blessed ones of God,
unto the praise and glory of that one great and good work of his (wherein we
are Ephesians. 2. 10.
created in Christ Jesus) as having neither superfluity nor defect in it; and
Tim 3. 17.
that the man of God is thus made perfect, and so thoroughly furnished unto all
good works (in that one) that he must needs stand Col. 4. 12.
complete for ever in all the whole mind, and counsel, and will of our Heavenly
Father: If these things be known to us, and believed on by us, how then comes
it to pass, that we are so mightily troubled, molested, or disquieted about all
that darkness, and weakness, and want, and imperfection that we find to be in
our selves, and that the thoughts hereof do frequently make us so exceeding
wretched and miserable? since all these things (or Privations rather) are
familiarly known among Believers, to be so disposed and ordered by the wisdom
of the Almighty, as to become the sole Inlets, or Entrance into all that Light,
and Strength, and Beauty, and Glory, and fullness of Sufficiency, that is only
to be found in God alone (in that way of Col. 1. 19.
Christ eternally) and no where else besides.

And in that Day (that great day of the Lord) wherein these things are thus
made manifest, finished, or done for us, and in us, Zach. 12. 8.
He that is feeblest in Jerusalem shall be as David [ Psalm. 2. 6.
a King, 78. 72.
a Leader, 1 Samuel 18. 7.
a valiant man, 2 Samuel 23. 1.
a sweet singer in Israel] and the house of David as God, or as the Mighties
(for so the word is plural) and as the Angel of the Lord before [Them] and
since every one of these, is now as the Angel, or Messenger of the Lord before
the rest of the Congregation, or as the Angel of the Lord before [Him] so it
may also be read, that is, a Messenger, or Ambassador, like his Servant Luke 3.
2, 4 5. Mal. 3. 1. Mat. 11. 10.
John, to prepare, or made ready his way before him: it being the Angel, or
Messenger of the Lord (and he only) that rightly knows and understands how to
bring down every high Mountain, and how to lift up every low valley, and to
make this an highway for the Royalty of our King to pass upon in the
wilderness: And this is that real Glory now, that the world can neither give,
receive, or take away. And yet Psalm. 149. 9.
this Honor have all his Saints. Praise we the Lord.

Having thus settled the main, and that which (in the love and distinct
knowledge of it) is of infinite consequence and concernment to the Souls of
men: In the next place, Sir, yours mentions the name of one, that I have not
heard of a long time before, that is Mr. W. L. Who congratulates, you say, my
return from Diogenes his Tub, etc.
There are so many years elapsed since I had any report, either from, or
concerning him till now, that I began to think, and was ready to conclude, that
either some disease, or some sad casualty or other incident to mankind, might
have carried him quite away from us, and lodged him in the Grave; but now I
perceive by yours, he is alive still, and lately come forth upon me with A Tale
of a Tub; and because (it seems) he was not willing to give himself any more
trouble, he took (I suppose) what came next Diogenes his Tub rehearsed and
transposed.
hand, or what first fell upon his mind in order to the business, and so puts
me into Diogenes his Tub, as the fittest Receptacle, or hiding place for me, in
his own private judgment. Now, Sir, as to this, knowing him to be an Levit. 19.
32.
old man 1 Samuel 2. 32
(that I speak of) and Job. 42. 17
full of days, and that the infirmities of Age cannot choose but be either more
or less upon him, possibly at some times, or in some cases, he may not have his
Heb. 5. 14.
senses so well exercised as they should be; however having been an intimate
familiar friend, and one of ancient acquaintance with us, and a very honest
well-disposed Gentleman, let us try (if you please) whether we may not help him
a little at this dead, or dying lift.

To this purpose, I remember very well, that he who writes the life of that
Diogenes, that he speaks of, among other things, has this memorable passage
concerning him: He says, that on a certain time he came into the Marketplace
Aelian. Poly-hist. vit. Diog. Laert.
at Noonday, with a candle and lantern in his hand, and when they asked him
what he made there in that posture? He said, he did it, as seeking for a MAN;
and when they answered, that the number of such was great about him, being in
the midst of a crowd of people: His Reply was, Homines video, sed virum
desidero: there were men enough indeed, he said, but among them all, he saw not
the man that he looked for. Now, Sir, if you be free (for I must not impose)
the next time you write to Mr. L. desire him to send us word what the man's
name was that Diogenes sought for; and if he finds himself to be at a loss
about it (as I doubt he will) let him but enter into the despicable Tub, I
mean, the secret silence of Hermes, and there he may peradventure see either
him, or that which he never saw before, and be so far satisfied with the
Vision, as never to look any farther.

But though this may perhaps surprise, or come unexpectedly upon Mr. L. yet
there is another Friend that looks, and longs for something, and to him I am
hastening as fast as I can. His name Mr. R. B. (who sent me a Letter, and a
small Book, together with yours) heavily complaining, not so much to my self,
as to some other of our Friends in London, how negligent and careless I have
been in not writing to him according to his expectation. But pray, Sir, the
next time you see him, and have an opportunity, be pleased to let him know,
that his speaking and writing may possibly be as offensive, and liable to
exception, as my silence, and not writing: And i^ that I deal plainly, and
freely with him, I do not yet see what Ground or Reason he can have to show for
interesting himself in those carnal Controversies, or Combats, or conflicts, or
fightings after the manner of men, that are now so hotly pursued, High
Dissentions among Professors scandulous to Religion.
to the shame and scandal of Religion, and all the Professors of it, as if they
could live no where in the world without driving a mighty fierce violent trade
of inconsistencie among themselves: What needs he to concern himself, or meddle
in these matters? Having little or nothing else to do that I know of. Cannot he
See Is. 30. 7. Am. 5. 13. Heb. 2. 20.
sit still, and be quiet, waiting in See Is. 30. 7. Am. 5. 13. Heb. 2. 20.
silence upon God, as would best of all become him? Does he not know? Assuredly
yes; he does, and cannot but know, That 2 Cor. 10. 4. 5.
the weapons of the Christian warfare are not carnal, but mighty through God,
to the pulling down of strong holds; casting down imaginations, Reasonings,
Disputations, ((...)) and every high thing that exalts it self against the
knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of
Christ: And as for all other weapons managed by Job 21. 12.
vain man, that would be wise, though born like the wild Asses colt, they are
altogether useless and unprofitable about the matters we mention, or things
that we now speak of, and such as avail not in the least to 1 Cor. 1 32.
the Resurrection of the dead; rather darken and cloud, and eclipse, and keep
under that light and life of God, that might otherwise shine, and come forth
abundantly, to the Mat. 5 16.
glorifying of our Heavenly Father, and the mutual Ephesians. 4 16.
edifying of one another in love.

Thou O man of God, flee these things, says the Apostle: What things? 1 Timothy 6.
5. 11. comp.
Perverse Disputings of men of corrupt minds, and destitute of the Truth (as it
is in Jesus) supposing that the gain (of a little empty breath, in popular
applause or the like) is Godliness; from such withdraw thy self, he says in his
sacred and serious advice to Timothy his dearly beloved Son, 1. Tim. 6. To the
same effect others, though perhaps not so higlhy or divinely inspired: Sir H*
Wotton was a very worthy Person, a man of Written or engraven on the plain
Marble of Sir H. W. by his own appointment, Hic jacet hujus sententiae primus
Auctor, Disputandi pruritus fit Ecclesiarum Scabies. Nomen alilias quaere.
Lluyd. Mem. of the Statesmen of England since the Reformation, p. 806.
excellent parts for Learning, and other useful abilities among men in his day
and time, who never spoke more like himself, or to better purpose, than when he
said, and took it for his Motto, That, Disputandi pruritus fit Ecclesiarum
Scabies: The Itch of Disputing is made, or becomes the Scab of the Churches.
And when was it ever more lamentably upon them than now in this Conjuncture?
What itching and scratching there has been among the several Parties both at
home and abroad, I need not tell you, the Infamy of it is too notorious; yea,
what resisting one another, even* unto Blood (quatenus Parties at least) not in
their Heb. 12. 4.
striving against sin which would have been very commendable) but rather in
their striving, and contending to maintain and uphold sin, in all those fleshly
2 Timothy 3. 5.
formalities that are sufficiently known to have nothing of the Life, and
Power, or Spirit of God in them.

And yet on they go for all this, and are upon their march Jehu-like, and
furiously enough, and many sore Battles, and sad Rencounters they have had of
late, here and there, wherein man against man, and Book against Book, and --
tantene animis coelestibus irae?
Party against Party have been bitterly and spitefully engaged, all fighting in
the shadow (as old Hermes said) beating and buffeting one another (And abatarum
more) blindfold and in the dark so long, until they have made themselves
extremely ridiculous and contemptible in the sight and view of all that are 1
These. 5. 8.
sober, and Psalm. 112 5.
discreet, and Jam. 2. 1.
impartial, and Prove. 3. 35. Dan. 12. 3.
wise-hearted among us, who cannot but see the formal Spirit thus divided
against it self, to be in its root and fruit, the very same with that which is
most profane or common among men.

-- pudet haec opprobria nobis, etc.
A shame it is for us to hear and see,
How sadly the Parties disagree.
And all this for want of yielding that Sovereign Mat. 26. 18.
Power and Authority in Heaven and Earth, to that Psa. 62. 11
PRINCE OF PEACE, and blessed Son of God, to whom of right it u belongs, and
peculiarly appertains: Hence it is that there have been so many Aceldemaes, so
many fields of Blood, in all Times and Ages, in this and other Nations,
Provinces, and Countries, That the Joh. 6. 69
Christ of God, the Psalm. 45. 7.
Anointed of the Father, that Just and Holy One, has not only been Act. 3. 14.
denied, but cruelly Act. 2. 23.
slain, and murdered, by wicked lawless: hands, in the street of that Revel.
11. 8.
great City, which is spiritually called Sodom and Egypt; where also OUR LORD
IS CRVCIFIED. And the 2 These. 2. 3, 4.
Man of Sin advanced in the interim, and put into his Throne, or Seat, who can
never manage, or carry on his work, without abundance of blood and cruelty; and
yet not prevail in the issue neither, but prevailed against for ever, by Revel.
12. 7, 8.
Michael and his Angels, when they come forth conquering and to conquer, in the
name and strength of that Great and Mighty God, who is not only Potent, but
Revel. 19. 6.
Omnipotent; not only Mighty, but -- 15. 3.
Almighty.

Upon which undoubted certainty, How good is that of the Psalmist! Yea, how
exceeding worthy, even of all men's 1 Timothy 1. 15.
acceptance! Let not the Rulers, or Potentates, or Great Ones of the Earth (to
whom he there in a special manner directs his speech) think it any
disparagement to them, or any whit below them, to stoop and bow hefore it, lest
inevitable ruin attend them, for their neglecting or refusing so to do: Be
wise now therefore, Psalm. 2. 10. 11. 12.
O ye Kings, he says, be instructed ye Judges of the Earth. Serve the Lord with
fear, and rejoice with trembling; kiss the Son lest he be angry, and ye perish
from the Joh. 14. 6.
Way (the Truth, and the Life,) When his wrath is kindled but a little; what
then? A short elliptick phrase, implying, Contraria juxta se posita magis
elutescunt.
That as contraries do best illustrate, and set forth one another, so none so
accursed, or unspeakably miserable, as they who fall into a way of
contradiction, or course of absolute contrariety, to, Blessed are all they that
put their trust in him. If no Creatures under Heaven be in so low, and mean,
and base, and deformed, and dangerous, and ruinous a condition, as they who
draw back unto perdition, according to the Heb. 10. 39.
rate of the 2 These. 2. 3.
Son of Perdition, by an evil heart of unbelief: then it must needs follow by
the Rule we are upon, That none so exceedingly blessed and happy as they, who
are Is. 54. 13. Joh. 6. 45.
taught of God, and enabled thereby to Heb. 10. 39.
believe unto the saving of the Soul. And upon that account, be it seriously
considered of, by your self, Sir, and accordingly by us all, that being the
Apostle, after he had freely and fully debated all matters of outward Order,
concludes, That Gal. 5. 6.
neither circumcision avails anything, nor uncircumcision, but faith which
works by love; since there is not any thing under a Form, or elsewhere to be
met with (among the circumcised, or the uncircumcised) that can profit in the
least, avail, or signify, without Heb. 11. 6. Mark 9. 23. Ephesians. 5. 8. 1 Pet. 1.
5.
faith toward God, and Romans 13. 10. 1 Cor. 13. 13. Col. 3. 14.
love to one another.

Were I but worthy, or any way fit to be an Adviser to the several Partyships
among us: I would hereupon in a fair and friendly way suggest thus much unto
them, that as their crossing and contradicting, and disturbing (especially
their hating and being angry with one another) can never do any good (for the
Jam. 1. 20.
wrath of man works not the righteousness of God) so let them duly and timely
consider, how much in opposing and gainsaying one another, on this manner they
must needs oppose and gainsay the mind and will of God, whose Romans 14. 17.
Kingdom is Righteousness and Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost, and that has
nothing at all of that strife and contention in it, that now we speak of; more
especially let them take heed, that by their So called, Jam. 3. 14.
bitter zeal and animosities they engage not too far, or stand not out too
long, upon a stubborn disobedience to that great counsel and command of Romans
13. 8.
Love (upon which so much of a Christian course depends) lest they all perish,
and fall thereby into the same condemnation: See to this purpose Jam. 3. 1.
where the words are, Jam. 0. 1. Expl.
My Brethren, be not many Masters, that is, do not that which love forbids, who
1 Cor. 13. 4.
vaunteth not her self: Be not too Magisterial in obtruding, or imposing your
own sentiments in point of Opinion (and that some call Religion) lest ye
receive thereby the greater condemnation, as there it follows.

Before I remove or go quite off from hence, let me put you in mind, Sir, or be
your Remembrancer once for all, of that most excellent and seasonable
Advertisement which our Apostle (yea, our Great Heb 3 1.
Apostle) gives us by the mouth or handwriting of Paul in one of his Epistles,
which I take to be so pertinent and precious, in opposition to all the
monstrous deba^cheries and follies, and vanities of this Age, that the Dawnings
of it among us would be more than Aurora-like when ready to bring forth the
Sun, or the Sun to bring forth the Spring, or the Spring the varieties of all
the whole Creation. The Place that I mean is, Romans 13. from v 12. and so on,
where it is thus recorded, Romans 13. 12, 13, 14.
and written for our Admonition, The night is far spent, the day is at hand,
let us therefore cast off the works of darkness, and let us therefore cast off
the works of darkness, and let us put on the Armor of light, let us walk
honestly as in the day, not in rioting and drunkenness, not in chambering and
wantonness, not in strife and envying; but put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and
make not provision for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof. May the Great
Job 33 23
Interpreter, one of a thousand, the chief Genesis 49. 24. Psalm 23. 1. Heb. 13. 20
Shepherd and Is 40. 11. Ezekiel 34. 23. Joh. 10. 11.
Feeder of Israel be entreated, and prevailed with, to lead us into the life
and power, into the truth and substance of all this, or of this all, which will
otherwise be but vainly read, or talked of among the people.

But, Sir, one thing more I must add, and it shall be the Coronis or Conclusion
of the whole, for I may not pass, so much as a seemeng neglect, upon that truly
Act. 17. 11.
noble and Right 1 Samuel 2. 30.
Honorable 3 Epist. Joh. 1. 2.
Lady with The most excellent Lady Sophia with whom the most noble and learned
Aristobulus dwells.
whom you reside, who has made us both happy your self especially) in Is. 60.
15.
the enjoyment of her Acquaintance, as an eminent Pattern of that eternal
excellency that God communicated with his people in, when he makes them his 1
Cor. 6. 18.
Sons and Daughters: Let me therefore entreat you to favor me so far, as to
pay my due respects in full to her Honor; and so much the rather, because you
know, that I am not in a capacity of doing it Man of himself at the greatest
distance from the knowledge of God in Christ, and greatest enemy thereunto.
my self, at such a distance; withal, pray let the service be attended with an
humble intimation, that I do with much veneration, and submission to the Divine
Will congratulate that access of Dignity, lately put upon her even by the
Apostle himself, where he lays his Commands upon us, to 1 Timothy 5. 8.
Honor Widows that are Widows ind^ed, that is, such as have been lawfully
loosed, or rightfully disobliged from all manner of Compacts, Agreements, or
Combinations in the flesh, to be totally affianced or espoused, to Vidua non
Viduata. Take this in the largest sense, putting no confinement upon Lusts of
the flesh.
that 2 Cor. 11. 2.
one Husband, who always Jer. 31. 3. Mal. 1. 2.
loves, and never hates, and ever Heb 7. 25. Rom 6. 10.
lives to God in the Spirit, and never dies to any thing but the flesh: And
this is that Heb. 13. 4.
Marriage that I look upon as honorable indeed, and the bed that is undefiled;
and as for those Whoremongers and Adulterens, or Fornicators of this world (
Rev. 22. 11. Isa. 32. 6.
filthy vile persons) that can easily, and without remorse prostitute their
Souls, their Bodies, their Estates, their Reputations, any thing, every thing
(be it either Sacred or Civil* to their own prodigious and unbridled lusts, let
God alone to judge them, and to make it appear what they are, as he daily does,
and will do it, more and more, to the praise of his holy Name, and the great
and singular encouragement of all those that have a secret Antipathy, well and
truly fixed and established in them against all such lewd, and lowd-crying
Abominations: In the mean time, or while this is doing, according to the
counsel and care that God takes of his own Affairs, what shall we write upon
the Premises, but Hinc Lachrymae? or that doleful saying of the Prophet, Ezekiel.
19. 14.
This is a Lamentation, and shall be for a lamentation, so long as it does
continue.

And now, Sir, that you have occasionally drawn me forth to this length, that
is not ordinary with me in things of this nature. If what I have written, may
in the least refresh, delight, or do you good, as a furtherance of your Neh. 8.
10
Joy, your Mic. 5. 15.
Peace, your Psalm. 11. 6, 7.
Rest in God, it stands as a dish ready dressed upon the Table before you, and
having told you that you are kindly and heartily welcome to it; I do
accordingly bid you 2 Cor. 13. 11.
Farewell.

Yours, and every one's that loves and walks in the truth, as it is in our
blessed Lord Jesus: Erimastix Philalethes, R. C. P.
Dated from Bethel, near the Pool of Bethesda, in the Land of our Immanuel;
where the Angel gives it in upon Oath That time shall be no more, Apoc. 10. Or
where all things are measured according to the account of God, and not
according to the shallow Register of Man's Day and Time.
A Postscript TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader:
IF the Act. 9. 18.
scales of ignorance be fallen from thine eyes, and the care of thy Native
Country so dear to thee, as it should and ought to be, 17. 16.
thy Spirit must needs be stirred (as Paul's was at Athens) to see the poor
distressed Nation so mightily overrun with Formality on the one hand, and
Profaneness on the other, both combining in their Rise and Progress to ruin
and undo the people, whilst they openly proclaim to all the world, and testify
at length to our very faces, the vanity of our contending about our Religious
Interests, and that we have fought in the shadow, so long till we have lost the
Substance.

And yet although it be true, that of all Pilots, he had need to be the most
skilful that shall undertake to guide and carry the Ship securely, and let her
fall down into a safe and even course between Scylla and Charybdis, or these
two dangerous Rocks of Formality and Profaneness; considering likewise that of
all Passengers or Travelers under Heaven, either by Sea or Land, none have
more need of an able Convoy, or Isa. 4. 5.
mighty Defense upon them, than such as are obnoxious, or in danger to be set
upon by these two potent Armies of Formality and Profaneness (always in a
readiness on the Frontiers of Christianity) under whose Conduct, and in whose
Magazines lie enveloped all the Counsels, and Contrivances, and Instruments and
Executions of Cruelty and Confusion, of Mischief and Sorrow that ever the World
heard of.

Notwithstanding all this, and what else might be farther mentioned, look what
the Prophet mentions in that formidable instance of Isa. 7. 2. 4.
Syria's being confederate with Ephraim (when the hearts of the people were
moved as the trees of the wood are moved with the wind) that is still in use,
and chiefly to be regarded; Take heed, and be quiet, he says, and then fear
not, neither be saint-hearted, for the two tails of th^se smoking firebrands,
or portentous blazing Comets Formality and Profaneness.

For albeit like Jannes and Jambres, and the rest of that Society, they (both)
muster up all their might, and bring forth all their stock of Policy and Power
to withstand the true Moses, or hinder the Mal. 4. 2.
rising Sun, yet shall they 2 Timothy 3. 8. 9.
proceed no farther, when once their folly shall be made manifest to all men,
as theirs also was.

Whereunto if this small Epistle, or slender Intimation thereby suggested, may
but in the least be subservient, or any way advantageous, let God have the
Praise, and his People the benefit of it, which will fully and exactly answer
the End, or Design of this Publication: whereby nothing is more desired than
to see the Life of the LORD JESUS EXALTED, in the voiding of these things, and
his own way of WORSHIP and ADMINISTRATIONS exercised and put inpractise Joh. 4.
24.
IN SPIRIT AND TRVTH among us.

Even so, Revel. 22. 20.
Come Lord Jesus, Come quickly. Making the Isa. 66. 22. 2 Pet. 3. 13. Revel.
21, 1.-5.
Heavens and the Earth, and all things new; Jer. 33. 6.
Revealing to us the abundance of Truth and Peace; Act. 3. 21.
Restoring, Psalm. 104. 30.
renewing, and filling the Is. 27. 6.
face of the World with the knowledge, and love, and fear of the Lord, as 11. 9.
the waters cover the Sea; when our flesh, or tired-out condition shall Ps. 16
9.
rest in hope, and Act. 3. 19.
Times of refreshing come from that Job 42. 5.
Beatifical Vision, or most calm and serene Ps. 16. 11.
Presence, that has fullness of Joy in it, and everlasting Pleasure. Even so,
Amen.

Jer. 51. 7. Babylon has been a golden Cup in the Lords Babylon detected.
hand, that made all the Earth drunken: the Nations have drunken of her wine,
therefore the Nations are mad.

Psalm. 87. 5, 6. And of Sion it shall be said, This and that Sion exalted.
man was born in her; and the Highest himself shall establish her.

The Lord shall count, when he writes up the people: that this man was born
there Selah.

In thy light we see light,

Psalm. 35. 9. FINIS: OR, THE END of all things is at hand: Be ye therefore
sober 1 Pet. 4. -- 7. 8.
and watch unto Prayer: But above all things, have fervent love among your
selves; for love will cover the multitude of sins, and both timely correct, and
totally expunge, or wipe out all the ERRATA that may be found in the Author or
his Book, the Workman or the Work.

2 Cor. 5. 14. The love of Christ constrains us thus to judge: that if One
died for all, then were all dead:

15. And that he died for all, that they which live should not henceforth live
unto themselves, but unto Him which died for them and rose again.


AMEN. HALELVIAH. Which being Interpreted, is, PRAISE YE GOD.

