L'ESTRANGE HIS VINDICATION, From the Calumnies of a Malicious Party IN KENT:
(Relating to a Commotion there in May 1648.) which he addresses to the
Authors, and Promoters of them.

Magna est Veritas, and praevalebit.

Printed in the year 1649.

THis Discourse is a Sacrifice to Truth, and Honor; not Vanity or Distemper.
The Vindication of my Misfortunes from your Calumnies; and the Story of Both:
Plainly, and Faithfully delivered; without Art, or Passion: not studious of
Revenge, or Glory; but Conscient of mine own Integrity, I am resolved to
Justify it.

I have been 6 Months the Patient Subject of your Injurious Clamours; and 6
Eternities had been the same to me, would you but have Bounded your
Intemperance within your Proper Circle: (for, in your Ale, you have a
Praerogative to be Angry, or Politic, at Pleasure) but to find my Name
brought upon a Foreign Stage; my Infamy Transplanted; Paquetts stuffed with
your Invective Scandalls, and Letters dispatchd Express to that Ignoble
Purpose; Vn-guarded, Unsealed; with Design to be yet more Public: your
Malice Immortal too; never leave -- To these Indignities, let me be Pardoned;
if I render a Severe account.

Nor have I much to Thank you for at Home; where you have not left one Atome of
my Reputation without a Wound: nay, in that precise Instant, while I have been
Paying my Vows to Allegiance, and Friendship, you have Murdered me at the very
Altar, as an Apostate to Both: as a Traitor to the most Sacred, the most
Inviolable Bonds of Humane Nature. Oh the Inconsiderate, and Inverted Extremes
of Popular Affections! your Love? There Is Tyranny; there is Torture in it;
Drowning and Strangling, in your very Enterteynments, and Embraces: but let me
Prosper, as I find no hing more Civil then your Displeasure. You would never
else have pressed me to any thing so much to mine Advantage, and your
Dishonor; to a Defense, so much your Condemnation. (for I know, you Hate me,
as the Living Monument of your Ingratitude; as the Reproach of your
Inconstancy.) Would I Boast any Act of Mine, it should be This, and Thus. No
Spirit, but That which Ruined Kent, could have doubled so supinely. Yet, (in
earnest) it were a sad Chapter, did not the Inconsistence, and Contradictions
in it, carry so rank a Tincture of Impossible, and Ridiculous. I shall now
Approach to my Charge; and Proceed thence to my Answer: (Briefly as I can) but
with Caution, and-Praemise; lest I seem to Act the Temerity I Condemn; and in
stead of a Vindication, to deliver a Slander.

To Kent, first, and in General; with This Protest.

I do believe, there never was so Numerous a Concurrence of such Honest,
Resolute Souls, to so Brave a Purpose, within that narrow Compass of Ground,
and Time, in the World; ( All Circumstances considered) In a Straggling,
Disarmed County. within the Power, and Contribution of an Enemy. Not a single
Wall, for a Retrait: not Three Persons to Repair to for Protection: within Two
days March of an Experienced, Succesfull Army. Under the very Nose of the
Country-Militia: whose Immediate Business and Commission, at that Instant, was
with all their Force, and Cunning, to Crush, or Contermine them. I might Add;
that they had been formerly Baffled by Unworthy Spirits in the Head of them.
This notwithstanding, they made in 12 days 12000 Men Effective. Reduced the
Royal Navy. Gave an Amuse, and Diversion to their Adversaries: An Example,
Encouragement, and Occasion to their Friends. They gave themselves the glory of
Beginning an Action wherein the whole Nation (stood at Gaze, and) durst not
second them. They made war alone upon the Masters (in effect) of three
Kingdoms. They Rose, Naked, and Solitary: they stood so; and so they Fell.
Their Defeat was rather a Surprise, then a Conquest. They came short not 12
hours of their own wishes; in which Critical Opportunity, they were Engaged,
and Lost; for want of Discipline, not Courage: in the very Twilight of Order,
and Confusion. Nor could Obedience, or Execution be Reasonably expected from a
Multitude, where no Authority, of above 6 hours standing, was acknowledged,
that might Require it. In one word: They spoke fair for Monarchy, and Liberty;
let their Ashes find Peace for it, and their Memories Honor; and let those
that come after, mend it.

Descending now to Particulars; I must avowe, that our Age Produces not any
where, Persons of more Gallantry, Loyalty, and Reason: of a more Primitive
worthiness, then in Kent.

But for a Corrective; there is a mixture too, of the Tamest Slaves, and the
most Insolent Tyrants, that ever Sacrificed to Fear, or Cruelty. Wretches that
wait upon dangers, and Hover over Armies like Vultures, to Prey upon the
Unfortunate. Of which number, (Gentlemen) You are: ( Your Names I know not, but
I am told, there are such Things in Nature) You, I mean, that write your selves
spectatours of, and Actours in this Business; and upon that score Insinuate
for Truth your most unhandsome reports. To you it is my Vindication directs it
self; Wherein I undertake to prove the Contrary: and whereby, I oblige my self
to make it good. (take me in what Latitude you please)

As for those Credulous, and Passionate Natures whom your Infusions have
corrupted, I wish them a seasonable return to their Better Counsels; and not
to make Articles of Faith out of Canterbury Tales: and to Infer Consequences
of Infallibility from Traditions upon the Rode. Phy, Phy: -- But no more. I
have a Civility yet left for some of these, for whose mistaken sakes, I half
repent my Innocence.

I should add something now to those Spirits of Censure, and Contemplation,
that endure no other Measure, or Test of Reason, then their Particular
Judgments. Those Pragmaticall pieces of Ill-manner'd Impertinence, that appear
born to no other end, then unprofitably to Vex Affairs with their Importune
and serious Follies. Those that cry The Prince upon my Knowledge, etc. the
Counsel etc. the Design etc. 40000 Scotts: 20000 Irish. True by him that made
me. I had it by Express from the Commissioners etc. These; These are the
Kil-Cowes. These walking Gazetts: these Fripperyes of Intelligence. What
Person, or Action, (although never so Honorable, if Unfortunate) stands secure
from the Lash of their Pedantique Sauciness? and their Praerogative is; they
are Contemptible. But I hasten: And now let Heaven and Earth be Judges. Here Is
my Charge: To a scruple.

It Is Vox Populi, (says my Author) that l' Estrange began the business of
Kent, wherein he Engaged his Noble friend Mr. Hales: whom he urged, not to take
up, when he might have come off with his Honor; nor to Persist, when he might
have made it good with his Sword: but upon the loss of Maidstone, flew to his
house, (whither he had persuaded him before) and there surprised him, and his,
with such affrights, as made him Quitte his Estimation, and his Country at
once. All which, l' Estrange did ( some say) moved by his Interests, or (as
Others) by his Fears: whereas, had but they Rallyed their own Troops, (which
(as themselves affirm) lay then not far off) and joined with the undisturbed
Forces of East-Kent; They might have bidden Fairfax his Army in the Head.

Thus, at Random, when they had Vomited their Mutinous, and Infamous follies;
the Close was ever to the Tune of -- A Plague of God confound them, they have
undone us all. And this, I cannot much deny. I think we put you into a Capacity
of being All undone: of your selves, possibly, some twenty, or thirty might
have come to cast the dice for your lives, the rest look on, and there an end
of the Business. ( Gentlemen: such things as these have been done in the
Memory of Man.)

There are, that say, the temper of my Style was Bolder then became the Growth
of our Affairs; and Particularly, of those two letters: the First, to the
Committee at Derby-house. The Other in Return to the Lord Fairfax; (of which,
hereafter.) and that this liberty Exasperated the fury, and Revenge of the Army
upon the County. (I crave your Pardons. I thought it had been as dangerous to
Arm ten thousand men, as to give the Reason for it.) (was ever any man so
be-smeared with Ale, and Custard?) But this is all (I hear) you have against
me. And to this I shall vouchsafe a Refutation. I may live to give you a
Personal account, if Heaven, and the Parliament Please: till then, accept of
this, in black and white.

Truth it is, and Reason; or I am deceived: (Plain how ever) and meant for a
Conviction, not a Charm: not colored with either Phrase, or Argument, to
Engage your Fancy, or abuse your Judgment; nor yet LAMENTABLY COMPLAINING,
to provoke your Charity: but founded upon the Infallible testimony of
Demonstration it self: and upon that Bottom, your worst is below my Scorns. In
a word: if any soul remain yet unsatisfied, in point of opinion, as to this
Matter; I desire him either to reserve it, or Rejoyne: and Own it too, unless
he wears a Name he is ashamed to Acknowledge. Nay; if Malice, or Detraction it
self be not yet Pacified I offer further; and to all the world. Let them
dissect, and Rifle the whole Series of my life, and when they have done,
produce the worst; I shall no more Blush at that story, then at mine Humanity.
At the present, I am Obliged to speak to this, wherein I shall not break the
order of the Affair in complement to your Praeposterous passions. In
substance, I shall deliver what I did; what I Advised and would have done:
(whereof you are pleased to say nothing) and what I did not, (which you pretend
I did) in Relation to this distemper of Kent.

To begin with the Rise of the Whole: the foundation of this Babell was laid in
Canterbury: (for it proved but a Glorious confusion) A Petition was there
formed by the Grand Jury in behalf of the County, insisting upon the Kings
Rights, and the Peoples liberties according to the Laws of the land, and the
Declarations of the present Parliament, It was well taken, and better meant,
but (as it happened) not so luckily contrived or worded. That which
administered Spirit, and Occasion to this Resolve, was part Emulation, part
Revenge, cooperative with those Native Principles of Fidelity they carried still
about them. To be plainer yet. Essex gave the Example; and Fortune, this
Opportunity. The two Houses had sen down Commissioners of Oyer and Terminer to
take Cognizance of a Riote in Canterbury the Christ-masse before. The Jury gave
in Ignoramus, and so converted that intended Tragaedy into a Scaene of Mirth.
Hereupon, the people began to talk another language; to contemplate the
mortality even of a perpetual Parliament: and Fleshed thus upon a Committee,
they determined next to Fly at all, and Step in boldly to the Rescous of their
Invaded liberties: in which He at they drew up this Petition That done, the
news is presently at London that Essex and Kent are associated. For my private
Satisfaction I went down to see: where, I found little to that purpose. Much
talk of a Petition, and the people prone to promote it, but as to the conduct
of those Inclinations, (for ought I could discover) much to seek. No Person of
Quality to avow it. No Correspondences to Strengthen it. Nor (as yet) any
Commissioners agreed upon for the Menage of it: and this disorder the Deputy
Lievetenants understood more then enough; who fell in immediately with their
Troops to suppress it: and That, with bold and Public Me^aces of Violence,
and Severity against the Petitioners: nor were they far from seizing the most
Eminent among them. Opposition they met with none, but in discourse: an
universal aversation to be for ever Slaves: and a Resolve to redeem their
liberties, if they might be had for Asking. But another Medium was now to be
thought on, and who should strike the first blow, was the great Question, and
mutual expectation. This was the State of your Affairs, when you invited me
into an Engagement; and now follows the Story of my proceedings, so long, as I
was any way interessed in the Action. (A Truth, so free from Ostentation, I
would not have confessed it without a Torture.) First to give a Stand to the
Activity of the Committee then raging in the County, I drew up and Printed this
ensueing Letter, Thus Addressed.

A Letter Declaratorie, To the Disturbers of the Peace of the County OF KENT:
Occasioned by a Petition tending to an Accommodation. Subscribed by many
thousands of the said County.
OBserving with what Diligence and Expedition, Parties are Drawn Together,
Armed, and by Whom: we cannot but Demand; to what End? The Country is Quiet,
and desires so to continue: Our Interest is Peace, not Rapine and Bloodshed:
yet are we also resolved, not to Fall Tame Sacrifices to the Spirit of Slumber
and Delusion, and render up our Religions, Laws, Lives and Fortunes, upon such
Cold conditions.

We must crave leave to tell you, that a Petition, Concluded on, and Avowed by
the Universality of this County, representing their Honest desires, in a Modest
Way, to the two Houses of Parliament, according to the Practice, nay the
Approbation of this present Parliament; -- That this Petition is by the most
Active in this new Commotion, Discountenanced and Menaced, which makes us
Reasonably Suspect, whither those Designs may Tend, whereof they have the sole
conduct. Our Addresses are to the Parliament not You, and from them we shall
await a seasonable Return; our Desires being of a moment above your Cognizance.
That we labor for is Peace; and in a Peaceable Manner: Nor can we without
Horror think of a fresh Imbroylement.

The Petition we do all Own, Affirming the scope thereof so innocent, that we
dare deliver it up to Heaven with our Souls; and so Determine to do, if
thereunto reduced by any Troublesome Interposition, till the Great Council of
the Kingdom (to whom only and properly it referres) shall Advise upon it.
Wherefore, to avoid the effect of Iealousies, (the Fountain of this Late War)
we desire also the Causes may be Removed, lest Introductive to Another.

When you have satisfied this Scruple you have Obliged your Friends.

COpies hereof I delivered you; to Disperse, and Post up in all your
Mercate-Townes. My next application was to the Gentlemen of EAST-KENT, and
ROCHESTER; betwixt whom, I did (Personally) Accomplish, and Enterchange This
paction, and assurance: that Both should be ready for the First Opportunity;
and not fail to second, either the Other, whethersoever Acted, or suffered
first. (whereof, I advertised MAIDSTONE, and other parts:)

By this; the Deputy-Lievetenants had posted up an Antiprotest: but to matter
of Violence they durst not proceed, (as appeared by those Letters we
intercepted) without the Entire Conjunction of what power the Parliament was
Master of in the County: which, hereupon, they Incontinently labored to draw
together. Upon the Neck of this; I moved you to tender an ENGAGEMENT, to all
the Petitioners; which (accordingly) you did; and in these words.

We do Solemnly and Religiously Oblige our Selves ngage-
with Our Lives, and Fortunes, to oppose Effectually what Person, or Persons -
soever shall presume to Interrupt, and Molest us in the Just and Legal
Presentment, of our humble Desires, to the two Houses of Parliament, and to the
Utmost of our Endeavors to save Harmless and Protect Each the Other in a
Privilege so undoubtedly our Own. And so not only Adjudged, but Practiced
and Encouraged, by This Present Parliament. And Further; in case any Single
Person, shall be for this Engagement Prosecuted; All of us to Rise as One Man,
to the Rescue. This, so help us God, as we shall Respectively Perform, and
Resolutely.

In this very Article of Time, comes the Kentish Committee with a Troup of
Horse to SITTINGBORNE. I was then at TUNSTALL, two miles off: where, upon
Consultation; 4 or 5 of us concluded to make a Party, and fall into their
Quarters next night. In which Resolve; I was so far from Involving Master
Hales, (as these Sons of Fortune pretend) that when his House was Propounded
for our first Rendez-vous, and his Person for the first Attempt, I was the
only Soul Dissenting. And for the County: They drew me in, not I, Them. Next
morning, we heard that ROCHESTER bridge was drawn. afternoon, the Enemy
quitted the Town, and so put an end to that nights design. Master BIXE only
(one of the Committee) they left; and Him the people seized upon; with about
sixscore Arms, in the Church. Upon This; with a matter of 18 Horse, we marched
to SITTINGBORNE: where, having armed as many as we could, we fixed our
Quarters. In which condition, by a prone, and universal vote, you committed
your selves to my Conduct. Thus invested by your Election, (as Virtuated also
by Commission) soon as the Watch was set, I treated with BIXE; and upon his
Parole, gave Him a Condition all Liberty; as you the Reasons for it: which,
although Indisputable, occasioned 6 or 7 of the Company to withdraw, swearing
that L'ESTRANGE was a TRAITOR.

The morning following, I dispatched Invitations to FEVERSHAM, and CANTERBURY
to join with us. Their Answer was; They would look to Themselves. It should
seem there were others of that Opinion too: for by the next day, we wanted a
third part of our Men. In this Exigence, I proposed to draw up a REMONSTRANGE,
to which, you all consented, and this was it.

A Remonstrance, showing the Occasion of the present Arming the County of Kent.
Being reduced to this Choice, whither to deliver up our Lives, and Liberties
Remonce.
Together, or to DYE FREE: we are Resolved to Act the last Scaene of this
Tragedy with our swords in our hands. (which we shall sooner turn upon our own
Hearts, then upon the Public Peace) By what necessities we are Exasperated to
this Resolve, let the World determine; -- and understand: That a Petition,
Consonant to Religion, and Honor, (if the Parliament may be Judges) is by some
Persons, (neither warranted by any Authority from the Houses, nor praetending
to it) upon their own Score, Audaciously Affronted: the Petioners Menaced, and
prosecuted into this Extremity, by spirits so Implacably distempered; that Sir
ANTHONY WELDEN vowed he would not cross the street of Rochester to save one
soul that Subscribed the Petition. And it was a Proposition of BEALES; to Hang
up two of the Petitioners in every Parish. If this be not sufficient to
Admonish Others, let it suffice, that it Awakens us into a just sense, and
scorn of these Indignities.

We have Lost all, with Patience: and if it be Accounted a Crime to Beg, we
shall prefer to Perish.

Hence-forward, every hour brought us (thither) some fresh signification of
Good. To be Short: in 4 days, we Mustered 400 Horse and Foot, and found the
whole County Ripe to be formed into a Posture: CANTERBURY, and ROCHESTER, more
Particularly prepared, by the Prudence, and Example of the Gentry there Engaged.

Matters thus advanced; I understood that Master Hales was willing to wedd the
Quarrel: upon which Notice, I presented him a Troup of Horse for his Guard to
our Quarters; and there delivered up the whole Affair Entirely to his Menage:
under whose Command we made this further Progress.

From SITTINGBORNE, to MAIDSTONE; where we found a Prone, and most Effectual
Reception: both from the Town, and Country. A party was thence ordered to
AYLESFORD, (a Garrison of the Enemies, some 3 miles off) which, soon after, we
took in. It afforded us, 7 Brass Gunnes; 4000 Arms: Powder, Ball, and Match
proportionate. ( The Critical Particularities of Persons, Times, and Places, I
have lost with my Papers)

Dureing this Action; we received intelligence, that the Enemy was drawing into
a Body, and designed for MAIDSTONE. Their strength between 500, and 3000 (wide,
at the Rate of Common AEstimation) upon the matter: about a thousand we
supputed them, and upon that Praesumption, proceeded. Hinder their Conjunction
we could not: and to Engage them United, had been Madness: upon their Own
ground too; and that with a Party inferior, both in Number, and Order.
Further: We expected Relief, they Despaired on it. Every Hour made us Stronger,
and Weakened them. That Body of theirs was the Extent (to a Man) of what their
interests Personal, or Public could Raise in the Country: Ours but the
Infancy of a Brigade, made up of the Contributary Allegiance of a Few
Villages, without any Reference of Mixture to CANTERBURY, ROCHESTER; or those
more populous places. From these Deliberations we Concluded to make good our
Quarters, but not by a Praecipitate forwardness to hazard the Blasting so fair
an Expectation in the Budd.

In this interim, Two Gentlemen of the Lower House (by Name, OXINDEN, and
WESTROE) Signified that they had in Charge from the House, to the Gentry there
convened; which, upon a Conference, they delivered, and to this Effect. That
the Parliament had taken Notice of a Disorder in Kent, but not the Reasons:
which they desired likewise to understand. In Generals; they had heard of an
Odd kind of Petition; and some Peevish Differences betwixt the County, and the
Committee: against whom, if there lay any Exception, they should have Audience,
and Reparation: An Ordinance of Indemnity for what was Passed; if they would
Desist here: and a Seasonable Consideration of all their Regular Requests for
the Future. (Many superadditionall Flashes of Complement, and State they had,
for the better grace of the Business: But this was the sum of their
Embassage, to which, they pressed a Positive, and Immediate Answer.)

The Return we gave them, was to This sense: We could not Fight, and Treat at
Once. Let the Enemy Retire into a Distance, whence not to Incommode our
Quarters. We should have Liberty, to Discourse: Otherwise, we had another Game
to play. From any Violence during such a Treaty, they Offered to secure us, but
further, they would not Undertake: nor could we Rest Satisfied with that.

The next news, is a Hott, and Insignificant Alarm. Whence, Where, How, by
Whom, no man knows: but there wanted not, that Swear the Town was Entered.
Upon the Whole: some Flying Parties they had Abroad, for Diversion, and
Discovery: but their Body lay Entire, about two miles off. Thus Informed, we
drew out, With pretense to Fight them: and (once upon Motion) the People were
half madd to make it earnest. Yet, upon further Collection, ( which I willingly
Omit) they were persuaded to keep the Peace. The Enemy had drawn up two
Troops of Horse, in View, under the Protection of 800 Foot; which they had so
disposed of, it was no easy matter to Retrive them, but to Distodge them,
Impossible. Our Retrait was, in it self, fair, and undisturbed, but attended
with Circumstances Mischievous, and Unhandsome: for which, we found no Remedy,
but by Engageing, to Fix, and Charm that Spirit of Inconstancy, and Confusion.

With this Resolve, upon our March, we were Encontred by a Trumpet from the
Enemy with this Errand. That the Deputy Lievetenants, (upon the Mediation of
Two Members of the House, Commissioners of Interposition to that Praeventionall
purpose) desired a Parley. The Motion was Entertained; and they appointed Me
their Agent. ( An Office, of how Coy a Nature with a Slippery Multitude, I was
not now to Learn.) To Contract the story: we Treated.

Their first demands were high. I signified, that my Delegation was to make a
Peace, not a Bargain: and to that end, (if they so Pleased) I would propound;
at a word. I did so: and left them to Advise, while I stepped over to mine own
Party. (For I was studious to decline all Possibility of Exception.) To them,
I made Suppositions, Thus, or so: much below what we Agreed upon) with which,
they were so far satisfied, they would have been Glad of Less: Nay, they
wished but to Hold their Own, That night, and they Declared as much. Upon this
Account, I hastened back, and gave this Issue to the dispute. (In which
Intervall, the Enemy had taken Prisoners, near 200, that were coming up to us:
and we, Aylesford.)

Articles agreed upon between the Gentlemen at Penenden Heath, and some of the
Committee of Kent. May the twenty fourth. 1648.
First, a Restoration of the Prisoners, and whatsoever was taken from them, as
Arms, Clothes, Horses, etc. (as much as possible) and that they be permitted
Immediately to march to our Quarters at MAIDSTONE.

Secondly, that the Party of the Committee may repair to any Garrison, where we
are not now Enquartered, except Alesford; and from thence not to exercise any
Act of Hostility, during the Cessation.

Thirdly, that SITTINGBORN remain our Garrison; provided, it appear, that any
Party of ours, to the number of twenty, was there quartered at the hour of
Concluding these Articles; otherwise not to be Garrisoned at all.

Fourthly, that Musters be made of Both Parties, by two Gentlemen, of each
Party, One; Obliged, not to discover the strength of either: and that the
Cessation Expired, they may Reviewe, that there pass no Intervening Recruits.

Fifthly, that no forces be either Imported, Dispatched, Levied, or Ordered,
from London, or elsewhere, into this County: or if granted already, that they
be Remanded to the Place where they were at the Commencement of this Treaty,
there to Continue to the end thereof.

Sixthly, that the Cessation beginning at 5 of the Clock this present Wednesday,
determine upon Satterday at 5 Afternoon, being the twentieth seventh of May.
1648.

Signed in the Name, and by the warrant of the Deputy-Lievetenants now Present
at Penenden Heathe. Signed by the Deputation of the Kentish Gentlemen; and in
their Name. MICHAELL LIVESYE. ROGER L'ESTRANGE.

Immediately upon the Signing of these Articles, we discovered Horse and Foot
upon their march toward MAIDSTONE. They came from ROCHESTER; to our Relief: and
by us Importuned: but, as Then, unexpected. At their Approach, Our Men gave a
Shout, and Advanced. Whereupon; I Rode up: told them, We had Agreed: upon what
Terms: and that they were bound in Honor to make every Syllabe Good. They
cried; No: No Agreement: Plague o you, and your Agreements. March Boys. We
will not be Betrayed; by God etc. -- Briefly: when I had Long, and in Vayn,
besought them; Not to play a Fai^r Game Foul: Not to Blemish a Good Cause, and
Justify a Bad One, by Perfidiousnesse: Not to take a Rise to their Hopes, from
their Crimes. etc. -- I found another Course more Effectual to the Composure
of this Tumult: which, in some measure Appeased; I gave them the Sum of our
Transaction, and the Reasons: but all too Little: Right, or Wrong; L'ESTRANGE
must be a Traitor. Yet at Last; upon the Muster, (which Article I inserted to
prevent all Conjecturall, and Emergent disputes) when it appeared that the
Enemy was yet an Hundred more, notwithstanding that Additionall Party: (before
whose coming up, the Quarrel had been (Questionless) decided; without this
Intermise) They began to Hear, and Speak Reason; and acknowledged the Accord.
Whereof, this was the Sequel: Of the Enemies Infantry, within two days, there
were not 6 Persons left together.

The County, thus Cleared; Rose, and succeeded Incredibly* 1500 at a Clap,
about DEBTFORD: more at ROCHESTER: but in EAST-KENT most of all. The Rendry of
the Ships in the Downs, and 3 Castles; over, and above.

It rested now, only to Amasse and Form these divided Forces; which we had
seasonably done, had not that Superstitious Nicety of Keeping the Day, and
Place, Retarded us.

Nor was it more our Concern, then Care: however frustrated by Impertinence,
and Confusion. Of this Truth, I could Produce many Honorable, and Feeling
witnesses: as Sr. John Main: Colonel Thornhill, Colonel Colepepper, Colonel
Hanin^on etc. -- How often did we press you to Line your Country-Gentlemen
with Soldiers: and to Entreat Those Nobly that Offered themselves? To chase
an Head, without which, you Were a Tumult, not An Army: To Reduce your
Counsels to a number Capable of Secrecy, and Dispatch: Not by 40 or 50 at a
Time, and as many Opinions, as Faces, to Expose and Embroyle your Debates,
Consuming Entire Days sometime, Without any Result?

But Perdere quos vult Jupiter, hos dementat. All we could do, amounted to
nothing, beyond the Conscience of having discharged our duties.

The Plain truth is; you cherished Traitors in your very Bosoms: Not upon
design, but facility: and whose Infusions were eminently significant, in all
your Consults: still some trick or other, to spill more time, even then, when
every remaining Moment was worth a Kingdom. Their names I will not stoop to
Remember; I need not: they wear their Crimes now on their foreheads: Suffice
it; that you once had notice of them.

Again: Your souldjery was so Zealous, and your Gentry (many of them) so
Cautious, it was no hard matter for a cunning iustrument to corrupt such
Dispositions into either Extreme of Rashness, or Reservation: and from Hence
proceeded those frequent, and Praetenslesse Heats, and Colds, of Mutiny, and
Desertion.

But I Resume my propose: and come now to the Manifestation of what I said, as
well as what I did. (For there is scarce a Syllable, or Action of Mine, which
has not stood the Torture: which has not been either Violenced, to Confess
what it never Meant, or Praesumed to have Intended more then it Confessed.)

To this; let me mind you; that of above 200 Missives, upon your Errand, I
never sealed up any One but with the View, and Approbation of the Company: And
touching dispatches of a more Public Nature; (an Employment which I neither
Courted, nor Refused) not a Title passed, without a severe Examen: and Once
Voted; it became the Counsels Act; ceased to be Mine. Yet suppose it Mine,
Still: and make your best on it. Two Letters only are wanting, which I cannot
Recove^r; (viz: One, to the City: the Other, in Answer to the Lord Fairfax his
Demands) of the rest, I shall present you the true Copies, and Occasions.

The Earl of Thanet, (that Ambidextrous Lord) Qualified to all Honorable, and
fair Intents; (no doubt) with a Declaration in one hand, and Conditions in the
Other, (from Derby House) gave us (at Length) to understand his Embassy, and
Commission: in terms, much to this sense.

Stultorum Bethlem; Nebulonum, Regia Bridevvell:

That is; in English, the Parliament had left it to our choice whither we would
be Fools, or Knaves. We thanked his Lordship; and upon second thoughts gave
this Account to the Committee.

To the Right Honorable, the Commissioners at DERBY-HOUSE.
MY LORDS,
A Declaration for the Suppressing of Tumults we have all taken Notice of; But
your Instructions to the Earl of Thanet, and Proposalls to the Gentlemen here
Embodyed, Representing us under a Notion so Ignoble, we stand all Amazed at:
Nor can we possibly own any thing so Much below that Honor which we must
rather Dye then Relinquish. Tumults indeed there have been: But not on our
part. Horrid, unheard of violences Complotted, Menaced, Nay, in some measure,
Executed by Troops of furious Precipitate persons upon us, and a^ll this; For
but intending to desire not to be for ever Miserable. At last; the Country
makes Head, and as informed with one Soul; Rises unanimously to the Redemption
of their Expiring Liberties; which (with much ado) they have Imperfectlie
Recovered: for our Adversaries (at present) dis-appear; Being weakened into an
Incapacity of further persuing (publicly) the Ruin of the Common wealth,
But what they could not then act effectually upon our persons, they Attempt now
upon our Estimations, Transferring the Crime from themselves to us, and the
Quarrel to you: Laboring to Engage the Authority of the two Houses, to
Countenance their wild Exorbitances; By terming the just vindication of our
Eternal Liberties, from the Insolence of a private faction, (...) Confederacy
against the Parliament. The vanity whereof Needs no other Confutation, then to
produce our Practices in order there unto. We having made it Capital
throughout our Quarters to disturb the Interest of any man for his affection to
the Parliament.

MY LORDS; let this suffice, to the Rise, and Progress of this Action.
Something we shall modestly return to your Lordships Propositions, and we have
done our duties.

As to the Petition, It shall not be presented by above 20 persons; but to
deliver up our Strengths, and Disband our Forces, In this Iuncture of affairs,
we humbly Conceive neither secure nor Honorable; and to Conditions either
Unsafe, or Unhandsome, we stand utterly dis-inclin'd. Unsafe Questionless, to
Expose our selves to their Mercy, who publish their designs to be our
destructions, and whose Interest it is to suppress Petitions, as the story of
those Miscariages whereof they know themselves the Authors viz: the violent
part of the Committee and their Adherents: Persons which we can prove as
opposite to the proceedings of the Houses as they Pretend us, and against whom
only we avow this Engagement, and then Dishonorable Certainly; Standing
Necessitated thereupon to confess our selves either Temerarious, or
Faithless. Indeliberate in the Resolve; or Treacherous, and Cowardly in the
Execution. And to Accomplish that which renders them justly Odious; they
Endeavor to make you (My Lords) our Enemies, to whom we would ever protest our
selves servants.

In the next place, (to preserve a fair Intelligence with the City) we
dispatched This praeparatory: Addressed.

To the Right Honorable the Lord MAJOR, ALDERMEN, and COMMUNE COUNSEL of the
City of LONDON.
My Lord and Gentlemen?
IT is not to Brave the Authority of the Houses, (we Bow to it) or the
Magnificence of a Glorious City; that we appear in this Posture. Providence
has made us Neighbors, and Policy, Friends: nor is it more our Interest, then
Inclination so to be. (yet our Interest so much, that we must Stand, or Fall
Together.) With what unwillingnesse we Arm, let our long Patience testify:
with what Resolves, observe but our Unanimity: upon what Grounds, and with what
Designs, Consult but Commune Reason, and Necessity.

After the Tedious, Sad, and Fruitless Expectation of Better days, and this
^^^ely Comfort, that we feared not worse; having divided the best part of our
Hours, and Portunes, betwixt Obedience, and Despayres: we Concluded, to
Breathe out our Auxions Spirits in a Modest Petition to the two Houses of
Parliament: Propounding to our selves, therein, no other Scope, then what They
have Declared Honorable, and Religious. Little thought we to have encontred
any Contradiction to so fair a Purpose: yet some there were, ( and Those, of
the Commit too) who opposed us; with such Fury, and Insolence, that we had
no other Sanctuary left us for the Protection of our Invaded Liberties, but
That of Violence. ( We esteemed our selves very unhappy, that they, who had
reduced us to Rags, should Deny us the Liberty to Beg; yet so they did)
Hereupon, we betook our selves to our Arms; not to make good the Petition,
but the Right of Petitioning; in persuance whereof, the whole Country stands
entirely Engaged.

In this state, we Greet you Peaceably; and Assure you, that our Approches
toward you, mean nothing of Mischief to you: The Temper of our Expediences
requires it.

Of the Parliament's candid Construction, we are Confident: nor less Assured
of yours. We subsist not by Abusing the City, or Cheating the Country. We
have Meditations of Living, and Dying, with Honor, and Freedom, and shall
much rather Fall, a Noble Sacrifice to Peace, and Liberty, then stand the
Despised Supporters of Oppression, and Tyranny.

Maidstone 27 May, 1648.
TO this flourish, we superadded other Advertisements: but all in Vain. There
was too much of Loyallty in the Design. The Reprobated spirit of that Apostate
City gusts nothing but Murder, and Rebellion: had it been to Enslave their
Prince, as't was to Redeem him: what Herds we should have had! Oh, how often
might they have been Secure, if they would have been Honest! In their Persons:
but rather then preserve us, (too) they destroyed Themselves. In their
Liberties: But they forfeited their Own, to ruin Ours. Nay their very Treasure
was not so dear to them as their Damnation: their Avarice was subdued with such
a Praedominance of Malevolous Disobedience: they chose, rather to Lose their
Estates, then save their Souls.

From persons thus Elemented, much of good was not to be looked for: nor did
they deceive those that expected least. ( Let me be understood; of the
Politic Furrs: the Formalities of the City; not at a Venture: for that
Infamous Pile holds many thousands of Souls, which never bowed to Baall.

By this time; the Army had gained footing in the Country: upon whose Advance,
I was moved to frame a Letter to the General; and Instructions praecisely
given me. My Vote was Negative; but more being for it: In Conformity, not
Consent, I drew up this.

MY LORD,
THE Affections we bear to Honor, and Peace, incline us rather to Address
to your self; and Thus.

We the Gentlemen etc. -- of Kent, have (in consideration of that sad Election
left us: either of a Certain Slavery, or a Doubtful Destruction) determined
(at worst) not to survive our Liberties; and present our selves the living
Monuments of our own Dishonor. In persuance whereof we stand upon our Guard:
Conscious of no Design beyond our proper Security: and (as to That Particular)
soberly resolved to Hazard the utmost Extremities of the worst of Fortunes.

In this Posture; we are Importuned with Perpetual Intelligences of an
Approaching Army: under what Conduct, we hear nothing. If (My Lord) any
Misrepresentation has rendered us to you suspected, give us Leave to Solve
that Scruple, and we stand clear to God, and Men.

My Lord, we have been Long, and much Oppressed by some Arbitrary Spirits in
our Committee; which we have Endured with a Patience Equal to their
oppressions: but now of Late, they have even Exceeded Themselves; Acting such
Violences (and that merely in Contradiction to the Right of Petitioning) by
Menaces, Imprisonments, etc. -- that Incapable of the Burdens they Laid both
upon our Estates, and Consciences, we Concluded to Endeavor to Redeem our
selves.

This was the Ground of our taking Arms: and (we do most Religiously assure
you) without any Mixture Relative to your Authority.

This Protest is Truth: and We

MY LORD Your Excellencie's, etc.

WE received in Answer; that Fairfax was in a better condition to Fight, then
Treat: ( as (indeed) he is better at it) Nevertheless, we should hear further
speedily. We did so; and it was a Summons: Exclusive to strangers, and of
Indemnification to Kent: upon conditions, which we thought not fit to
Entertain, and so returned a Negative. To make which good; it was urged that an
Immediate course might be taken, to Em-body, and Model our distracted Forces.
But, still, the Impression of Black-Heathe, and the last of May, (the day, and
place, Originally Agreed upon for their first Rendezvous) would not out of
their Heads: It looked like Honor to stand to their Words: and that Fancy
gave a foul Interruption to our Greater concerns. To deal Liberally: The
dispute fell little short of a Downright Mutiny. In this disorder, comes an
Express from the Body, advising, that Lestrange was a Traitor, and to be
Excluded the Counsel. (No Remedy but Patience.)

Thus perplexed betwixt Impreparation, and Irresolution; It was Debated, and
Resolved upon the Question; Forthwith to choose a General. Upon the Vote; The
Earl of Norwich was He: (a Person of Honor, Fidelity, and Courage: and, by
his Highness the Prince of Wales, Commissioned to that End.) The Charge was by
Him Received, and his Authority, by us Acknowledged, with mutual, and aequall
satisfaction. The first Ceremony of Recognition over; His Excellency gave
Orders for a Rendezvous at Burham Heathe: intending Thence to make his Entry
upon that Great Work of Forming a Multitude. His reception was by the Soldier
also, Prone, and Cheerful: and doubtless, he wanted not 48 Hours of giving
the King his Crown again. We Mustered near 10000 Horse, and Foot; within view
of the Enemies Body; the River of Medway dividing us. Upon his distribution of
Offices, (in Order to the Introduction of a discipline) it pleased his
Excellency to Oblige me, by the Tender, (with much Earnestness) of a very
considerable Command. Next my acknowledgement, I desired Pardon, if I not only
quitted what I already had, but Declined any Other: (For I perceived, the
People had gotten a Tradition by the end; that I mixed, only to betray them:
and my Resolve was, not to Hazard the maine Issue, and my particular
AEstimation, upon the Performances of men so Praejudicate, and Dis-inclined)
but if my Person might be thought of any Use to the Action, I should be ready
upon all Commands, and Occasions to serve my Prince. At the same time, Master
Hales also delivered up his Command: and presented the General with his Own
Immediate Regiments.

I demand now; where those Troops of Ours were, which we are Condemned for
not Rallying, after the Loss of Maidstone?

It was in the Field Hinted to me by diverse, to write something of Invitation,
and Proposition to the Enemies Army, Which accordingly I did: and in these
Words.

GENTLEMEN,
COuld Prosperity make us Insolent, this overture should have been the story of
our present fortunes, how Numerous; how Unanimous; how Associated; how
Befriended; (or in a word) how Heaven and Earth make have to our Deliverance:
and that no Adversity can ever render us Spiritlesse; will appear, if you
Consider with what Assurance we. have managed our very Despaires, and advanced
our selves to This, out of nothing; Consider withal, that we Mo^e still by
those Resolves, as we are Favored, and Encouraged, by the same Providence
which Raised us. In this Posture (Gentlemen, and fellow Subjects) We salute
you; in a temper of Love and Christianity: disengaged (we assure you) from any
Interest, or Mixture of Revenge, or Fear: Peace is the End we aim at, and by
Peace (if it be possible) to accomplish that End: To which Purpose, upon a Sad
and Compassionate thought, how many Innocent Souls are seduced by the
Imposture of a pretended Liberty, and how many more corrupted by their own
importune Necessities, into an Erroneous and Unfortunate Engagement; all which
must in evitably Perish, unless by some seasonable application to their
releife: we have found out this, and this only expedient.

What Officer, or Soldier soever, now in Arms against us shall within --
days make his repair to the Headquarters of our Army, and there enter an
Engagement not to act any thing for the future against us, shall have his
Arriers Audited and Paid.

And we do further Oblige our Selves to interpose to his Majesty for their
Indemnity, as to whatsoever is Passed: the success whereof from our Lord the
King, we doubt not; and to the Performance on our parts, We tie our Honors
and the Faith of the County: Avowing withal, That we desire nothing either in
Church, or State, but what the Present Parliament has Declared to be the Duty
of good Christians, and Subjects.

IT was now about One o'th'clock: and by this time, Officers being Authorized,
and Orders delivered; we drew off the Heathe. Above the rest; a most particular
charge was given, by Breaking, and Guarding of Passes, to secure the River: and
Parties Commanded to watch the Enemy (who, as yet, lay Hovering Indifferently
betwixt ROCHESTER and MAIDSTONE)

Toward evening, we received Intelligence at ROCHESTER; first, that MAIDSTONE
was Alarmed: then, that the Enemy was drawn up before it: By and By, that they
had Assaulted it.

Thus advertised; his Excellency resolved for MAIDSTONE: upon him, waited Sir
Bernard Gascoigne; another Gentleman, my Self: etc. -- in all; 7 or 8 Persons.
By the way, we Encontred more Fugitives, then Messengers; All upon the Spur,
and the Word was: For Relief. At last; (within some two miles of the Town) we
found, that the Enemy had passed the River, (which we little expected) and
possessed all the Avenues. Hereupon, my Lord determined for ROCHESTER again,
and to send Immediate succor. There Arrived; it was consulted; what to do?
Colonel Colepepper Propounded, to draw out Horse and Foot, to a Man,
Incontinently, and Fight them. Some Cried; ' it was too Late: Others; that their
men were weary, and could not march: Some had not their Regiments within Call:
(Others, not their Resolutions) In a word: they rejected wholesome counsel. It
was then Demanded, What they would do, if they would not do This? Some were of
Opinion, ' it was best for them to do as well as they could. About midnight, we
received that the Town was Forced; with this brief account: that the Foot stood
very Gallantly; and Repelled them thrice: but the Horse played not their parts
so well. (The Persons most Eminent in this action for Conduct: were Sir William
Compton; Sir John Main, and Sir Gamaliell Dudlye: whom to Commend, were
Detraction)

Thus far assured, and missing Mr. Hales: upon enquiry, I heard that he was
gone to his House for money. ( Whither, I was so free from persuading him, I
knew not of his Going.) For Public Money, Gentlemen, and let me tell you, his
Bounty was the best string you had to your Bow) Hereupon, I Rode over to him:
told him, MAIDSTONE was lost, almost 3 hours since, from whence, (upon the
lest notice) it was but an hours work to take him in his House. Upon due
consideration, he concluded, for SANDWICH, with his Lady, and Family: and from
thence, to play the After Game as he should see Occasion. Sir Anthony Aucher
(then with him) Persuaded him to go before. I waited only for a stirrup, and
within 6 minutes followed: but could not overtake him. At length, I understood
he was abord the ANTILOPE, (as I Remember) and Bound for HOLLAND: Necessitated
so to do, or Hazard the Revolt of the Fleet: (In whom, the Phantastique Notion
of some disaster, had already wrought a deep impression) This I have heard
Averred, since: by persons of Quality, there present, and in Command. From
Himself; then and more particularly: Thus. That he would be instantly with us
Again: but in Case of any Intervening danger he desired his Lady to go for
France, and send him Word. Thus perplexed; I provided an House in SANDWICH for
his Family, (which was appointed thither to come:) Waited upon his Lady, and
her company, to a Neighboring friends; and thence, Returned my self toward the
Army. At CANTERBURY, I desired a pass from the Commissioners. They told me,
the Enemy was Interposed: and upon their march, in two divisions, for
CANTERBURY, and DOVER. something there passed of Bandye, and Retort betwixt us:
(how much I had abused them, and they, me) but in fine, they gave me: a
discharge; for my self, servants, and horses, to Pass free, either into Essex;
over the seas, or whither I pleased. (By this time, a man might read the Fate
of Kent without an Oracle) I repaired Hence, again to SANDWICH: Hired a Catch:
laid in Provision Embarked the Horses, and fignified to Mris. Hales, from Sr.
Anthony Aucher, that his Lady, and some other Gentlewomen desired her company,
much: and that they would be all ready by such an hour precise, and at such a
place. We came sooner then the hour, but (it seems) the Town was too Hot for
Them before: (for they were all gone, and no notice whither) we were now in a
new Straight: and there succeeded yet a worse. It was a low water: the Vessel
could not stir, that night. The Sea before us: the Enemy behind us: and the
People in a Mutiny round about us: nay more; at that very instant conspiring to
Apprehend us: and in such a fashion too; It was aequally dangerous, to flatter,
or Reprove their Disorders. Overhearing these discourses, I privily agreed with
a Shallop: Appointed the Master of the Catch to weigh, next flood: and Steer
such a Course; where we would that night expect him. Soon as the Boat was
ready, we Aborded: One servant, with my self. Scarce had we quitted the Peer,
But a matter of 20 Rogues with Cocked matches, were upon the Back of us:
damning themselves, if they did not fire, unless we came a Shore. The Master
(an Independent) would have landed us: but I stood rather inclined to Venture a
Bullet, then to be sure of a Halter, Clapped my sword to his Breast, and advised
him to keep the Channel. Some shot they made: followed us about a mile: but
(as it pleased God) without any Mischief. In this rotten Barque, with one Man,
and a Boy, we Fetched Calais: But the Catch was Arrested.

Hitherto, what I did or said: Now to my Intentions: what I would have done.
(For my very Thoughts escape you not: I wonder how you missed Originallsinne)
First, I desired you to Offer a Negative Engagement; and to Disarme all that
Refused to take it. Your Answer was: No: it would Disoblige the Country. (It
was a huge Complement; rather then disgust your Enemies, to Ruin your Friends:
nay your selves: for those very men I Hinted at, Joined afterward with Gibbons
against you) Secondly, I Pressed you (Hourly almost) to Dispatch Commissioners
to Negotiate an Association betwixt SVRRY, KENT, and ESSEX: and that Two,
Respectively, of Each, might, in Each County, Sit, Consent, and Act. in Order
to the Commune Interest of you all. You told me, That was done already, You
were sure of ESSEX, and SVRRY. Thirdly, I wished you to Attempt TILBVRY Fort;
to open a fairer way of Correspond betwixt ESSEX, and KENT: and to Protect the
County of ESSEX, till they should Embody. (There were too that proffered to
undertake it) That (you said) was designed a surer way: and the Time resolved
upon. Fourthly, I drew up an Order at MAIDSTONE, requireing every man upon a
severe Penalty to deliver up all his arms within so many hours into the
Public Magazine. (This was Voted, but not Executed: and upon the Storm, you
felt the mischief of that Neglect) Fifthly, To make sure of all the Passes,
[Near MAIDSTONE, Principally; and to fortify Turnbridge also] I did urge to
you, 500 times, Among other Objections, One was: It would charge the Country.
[I am of Opinion, that their Compositions, who were of this mind, would have
Reedified the Bridges.] Sixthly, I moved that it might be Published at the
head of every Troup and Company, upon our Rendezvous at BURRHAM-HEATH. That we
were no longer Petitioners, but Soldiers. The Quarrel, the Kings; which we
determined [as Obliged] to prosecute through all Extremities: and if any Person
apprehended greator Business at his Home; he had fair Liberty [Leaving his
Armes] to repair to his Interests. [This perhaps might have been seasonable,
for we hand many Soldiers that wanted Arms, and many Country People that
were weary of them]


Gentlemen, If this signifies Treason, I Will dye a Roundhead.

A word now of Deduction from what I have said, and to my whole Charge at Once.

It is OBJECTED: That I Engaged the County: Mr. Hales: Urged him not to come
off; and Hindered him from Persisting: Persuaded him, first, from Rochester to
his House; and thence, Out of the Kingdom: moved to this, by Interests; or
Fears: Whereas, had but We Rallyed our Troops etc. -- And again: My Letters
were too Sharp.

I ANSWER, The Grand Jury Engaged the County: Master Hales Acted upon his Own
Sense. (Not a Pinn matter, whether Thus, or so) As for coming off: It never
came to the Question. Nor did I Hinder him from persisting; (Nor could I, if I
would have done it) I told him that Maidstone was gone; and withal, that I was
yet confident of the Business) I knew nothing of his going from Rochester,
Home: (the Commissioners did: and his Errand was, Money for the Soldiers)
Neither did I advise, or know of his Quitting the Kingdom. (Sir Anthony Aucher
can testify the Resolve was for SANDWICH, and that I neither did nor could
counsel any other, After: for I savv him not) Moved by my Interests, I
Confess I was. (That is: by Considerations of Honor, and Friendship ( those
are a Gentleman's Interests) not by your Dirty, and Mechanique Principles of
profit, and Unthankfulness.) As for my Fears: I would have That Thing (whose
Robe neither Hides his Ears, nor Protects his Shoulders) Know; that I Came not
off upon Canterbury Articles. To the matter of Rallying Our Troops: We
commanded none, And For my Letters: Questionless the Wretch was huge good
Natured that thought them so Severe.

In Sum the whole Story is Canterbury News; not One Syllable, True. But
Right, or Wrong; so the Truth be lost, No matter How. In such Cases, Every man
spends his judgment; and he that has Least; spends most.

To Recollect a Little.

And now (in the Name of Wonder) why Mr. HALES, of all the rest? what was He
Guilty of? (beyond the Crime of Laboring to preserve such thanklesse Peasants)
His Example, Honesty, and Fortune contributed more of Advantage to this Action,
then All you Together, that ever Clamoured against him.

For my part: I was praepar'd for it. I foresaw it; and said as much* in case
the Business succeeded not. (Thanks to my dear Experience) How often have I
been Licked whole by the same Tongue that Wounded me! I shall again. If not:
there is neither Pain nor Danger in it. Nay; it were a Pleasure to me, did not
the Charity, and Pity I bear to Knaves, and Fools, Correct it. (That is: to
the Malicious Authors, and Credulous Promoters of such Groundless Calumnies)
Nothing in Nature tickles me, like the Fancy of Machiavell in a blew Apron:
Maxims of State, and the Interests of Princes: betwixt IMPRIMIS and the TOTAL
SUM. Or what think you of POLYPHEMUS the Grasier; with a Basket-Hilt, and a
Cup of NORTHDOWNE Ale, Cursing ULISSES? These are not Themes (My Masters) for
Melancholy, or Indignation. Vanity it self is not so Comicall. But lest I take
too much on it, I divert; and into a Relation (Perhaps) not Impertinent.

In Persuance of a Commission from his Majesty, to Attempt the Reduceing of
LINN, I was Betrayed, and delivered up, by One of mine Own Party. (Never were
Fame, and Malice more Active to Publish, and Asperse any man's Misfortune, then
Mine: No Imaginable Ill was left unsayd: and with such Confidence, it gave a
Suspension to the best Resolved Friendships I Enjoyed.

The Commission was Decried for Counterfeit, the design, Rash, and Foolish:
the Instrument, as much: the Manage, worse. There Were too, that Affirmed, I
Betrayed all; with the Formalities: How, and upon what Conditions. Thus
Engaged, both in Reputation, and Liberty, I was Guarded to London. First, to
the Earl of MANCHESTER. Next, to DERBY-HOUSE. Then, to the Lower House: and
Thence, (by Order) Transmitted to the CITY-COURT-MARTIALL for my Trial. ( Of
the Counsel, Two Leading Charts, were a Saleman, and an Ostler) Brought to the
Bar; my Charge was Read, and my Answer Demanded; not permitting me one moment
for Collection.

First, as a Spy: To this, I returned, their power Extended not; for they
Acted by a Commission Limited to Articles, whereof that was not One. Next, as a
Traitor. To That, with much Circumstance; as that I had ever served the King;
and that an Enemy and a Traitor were Inconsistent. etc. -- In conclusion; the
Major Part acquitted me, which notwithstanding: my Definitive sentence was
protracted 2 days longer: under pretense of giving me Leisure for
Consideration. In this Interim, they had packed a Committee; which Condemned me
as a Traitor, to be Hanged, without hearing a Syllable. I urged the
Barbarism of such a Treatment etc. but in vain. My sentence Passed: I Threw a
Breviate of my defense among them: adding, that since they would not hear it,
they might read it, That was it. Wiltshire BAYNTON (a young Red-Headed fellow)
burnt it. I was next Hurryed to Newgate, Thrown into a chamber with 2 Beds in
it: among persons Notoriously Criminal, and here was my Praeparatory for
Eternity. I dispatched then, an Express to the King: An Appeal to the Lords:
and Letters to the Principal of both Houses, Significant upon what score I
stood condemned, and Monitory, lest such a Praesident might afterward concern
themselves. In sum, The Lords Ordered my Reprieve, and commanded MILLS (the
judge Advocate) to bring in my Charge. He appeared, but without it: with an
Excuse, that he had not time to prepare it. Upon Friday, he proffered to have
it ready. (This being Wednesday, and the next day I was to Suffer) It was then
Suggested, and Praesumed, that they meant not to Execute me in the Interim. He
said, Yes. The Commons had passed an Order, that no Reprive should stand Good,
without the Consent of both Houses. Hereupon, they desired a Conference, but
the Commons had Voted also, that no Private Business should be moved within
10 days.

To wind up this Discourse, betwixt Shame, and Fear, I was Reprieved, and Lay
almost 4 Years a Member of that Honorable Society. Upon which Test, and
Expiation, they forgave me for being unhappie, and Innocent.

(and upon second Thoughts, I doubt not, (Gentlemen) so will you)

Thus far; Mine Own Vindication to Kent. In a word now; The Vindication of
Kent to the World: and from These Objections.

First, They Rose too soon. 7, 9 Other Counties would have joined, if they had
Stayed but a Fortnight Longer.

I Answer. There was no Complication to that End. Nay; ESSEX, and SURRY had
already Reproched KENT for sitting still so long. Again. KENT had been up a
Fortnight, when Yet they Appeared not. Further, what Impediment was this
Forwardness to their Designs. 16000 Men in Arms for their Rise; (in the
County, there were not Fewer) and no Enemy left free, to Interrupt them. They
that durst not Then Rise, will (I Fear) Lie still For ever.

But, to be Short. They could not wait Longer: The last of May was the day
Resolved upon at Canterbury for their Rendezvous For Praevention whereof, there
were Troops Ready to Seize upon the Leading men of the County: and had done
it, had they not, in that Instant Risen.

Secondly, They Rose upon their Own Score (say some.) To This. It Is true, but
They Fought upon the Kings. The Petition was not the Cause, but the Occasion:
and had they Quarrelled upon any other Account, They had been Crushed in three
days. Had they first, Cried up the King and, under that notion grown
Powerful, deserted him; this had (indeed) been Parliamentary and Jewish. But
to Arm for Liberty, and Fight for Monarchy, (as they did) was an Action Noble,
and Worthy of themselves. In the Pride of their Fortunes, they Chose the Prince
his General, and avowed his Fathers Quarrel.

To this Objection; I shall Conclude with a Maxim:

The First Thing in Intention, is ever the Last in Execution.

Thirdly, They would not Enterteyne Officers.

I Answer. There was a Delay, but no Refusal.

But to speak to every Capriccious Humor, were Endless. For a Close;
Discipline they wanted; because Time* Nothing else: to understand them Better,
Look upon COLCHESTER: (which was (in Effect,) but KENT Transported.) An Action
never to be aequalled, or Forgotten: The Bed, Fate, and Monument of Honor,
and Allegiance. (Let me Add this) and the VINDIGATION of KENT.

FINIS.
POSTSCRIPT.
Obliged to a Defen^e, and Perplexed with a Coincidence of Story: I Resolved
Both: but not receiving all my Expected Papers, This Discourse proves
Imperfectly Either; which Disorder, I wish may be Imputed to my Fortune, not
Design.


