THE Presbyterian Sham, OR, A COMMENTARY Upon the New Old Answer Of the
Assembly of DIVINES TO Dr. STILLINGFLEET'S SERMON.

Dolus an Virtus? -- LONDON, Printed in the Year, MDCLXXX.

THE Presbyterian SHAM, etc.
I Perceive Shamming the World in Print, is become not only a modish, but
venerable Accomplishment: For otherwise, in the name of wonder how comes it to
pass, that some Nonconformists should unequally yoke themselves with the Sham
Letter of the Black Box? Verily Sirs, this does not become the Heads of the
Sober Party to write as if they were drunk or mad. An Answer to a Sermon
Preached by Dr. Stillingfleet! Sure, said I, these are very nimble Gentlemen to
be so quick upon the Doctor, to knock him down to rights like Lightning! Well,
fair and softly may go far, quoth I; but a quick dispatch is the grace of the
business; it is well if it prove so: but this is not all, here is Miracle upon
Wonder; here is a Sermon killed five Years before it was born; an Answer by the
way of Prophecy, an Answer which will serve against all that ever was or will
be, or may be, or shall be, or can be said against Nonconformists.

Well, my Masters, you are great Thaumatergicks, but I hope a Scruple of
Conscience may be admitted to kiss the Toe of your Infallibilities, and to
offer a few Scraps and Shreads of Nonconformity to your consideration, petimus,
damusque vicissim; and therefore first for the Front of the Book, I must take
the liberty to tell you, that you do not say either solum verum, or totum
veritatis, and you know what that is in English. Are they Ministers of Christ,
so are we. Now say I, neither so, nor so; for they are Ministers of Christ
Episcopally ordained, so are not you; You are Ministers of that profligate
Wretch Hugh Peters's ordaining, who for any thing I know, was not a Presbyter,
so are not they. Now Ordination having gone through the hands of Bishops for
1500 Years and upwards nemine contradicente, they who can have it but will not,
but despise and hate Bishops Root and Branch, are not so the Ministers of
Christ, as they who submit to those whom God has set over them.

But that I may pull off the Vizard from those Bugbears which these Iack-straws
and Watt Tylers have made to fright people into Nonconformity, I will come yet
a little closer to them: We are, say they, to seek Unity, and preach the
Gospel; but the second being the greater Duty, must give place to the first.
See the acurate Nicety of this little Assembly of Divines, and how logically
they contra-distinguish these things, making two of what God has made but one:
for is not preaching one God, one Faith, one Baptism, one Christ over all, one
Fold, and one Shepherd preaching Unity, is not one Article of the Faith, I
believe the Communion of Saints, and is not all this preaching the Gospel? If
your Morals, Gentlemen, and your Divinity be no better than your Logic, even
go your vvays for Churchmen.

But the men have reason for what they say I vvarrant you; Is there not now a
Cause? Yes, I assure you, several, the Good Old Cause, and several Suckers. The
Eternal welfare of thousands of Souls depends upon their Preaching: Yes, though
it be Disunion, Nonconformity and Toleration. Suppose now all these painful
Laborers dead and gone; what, must all the World be damned for want of their
Preaching? Durus Sermo! But pray tell us, do not the Episcopal-men preach the
Gospel? And may not Salvation be had in Communion of our Church? If it may,
then there is no such danger, but in men's neglect of the means; if it cannot,
then do they Unchurch all our Parochial Churches, which is a Crime, they say,
they could not answer before God, nor ever intended: So that if these honest
Conventicles, as they call them, and the whole Tribe of Nonconformists were
laid aside, there would be no such danger to men's Bodies, Souls, or Estates;
but a great deal of safety: For under the shadow of the Elders, there grows a
sort of Factious People called Republicans, who are for fighting, plundring,
sequestring, and all that.

But this is further supported by a Second-ly, That it is not in contempt of
Authority that they preach, and the People hear. Sure they take us for Gudgeons
that will swallow a Hook without a Bait: The next turn will be, they do it in
obodience; it is a way of arguing peculiar to the Party: they never fought
against the King, they never did any hurt, alas, poor Souls, they are as
innocent as obedient; but pray, what difference between breaking Laws, and
contempt of them; you can split a hair I know, and for once show us your Skill;
and now for an Excuse for the People, for greater Edification -- Comparisons
are odious among all People but Non-Cons; who live by ill Neighbors, and have
a great Talent at praising themselves, though a wiser man tells them, Let
another man praise thee, and not thine own mouth. Well, but the good people
hear them, to witness they are not accessory to their Ejection! Sure it is ill
halting before Cripples: What, are there none that can remember beyond the sad
St. Bartholomew? Are the Thumbs and Toes; the Heads and Hands that Adonibezeck
cut off, quite forgotten? Ah! the poor innocent Nonconformists! they never
ejected the Bishops and Conformists, the Clergy and Laity out of their Estates;
they never sequestered, beheaded, hanged, starved, banished, or imprisoned any
body for Conscience, not they. Come, for shame, be as honest as this same
Canaanitish King, Judges 1. 7. As I have done, so God has requited me.

But there is another Lion in the way, unfeigned Assent and Consent to all and
every thing. Why, what is the matter my Masters, that you cannot do this? Oh
Sirs, it is first something they cannot tell what, an aliquid (...). But
Secondly, something they do know. First they cannot believe the Calendar. Do
you understand it, Gentlemen? Or how to mend it Astronomically? If you do not,
why do you make a Scruple of what you cannot mend? And if you do, let us see
your Skill; and till then, give leave to use this till a more correct Calendar
is compiled. Secondly, they cannot believe the Athanasian Creed; why, this does
no more condemn the Greek Church than the Nicene, which say, I believe in the
Holy Ghost, who proceeds from the Father and the Son, which in your account
of English Presbytery, page 12. you say, In all matters of Faith, Presbyterians
believe whatsoever is in the Apostles and Nicene Creed. However, I am glad you
have some Charity for Socrates, Plato and Seneca. I am sure it is more than is
expected from those, who page 15. dare not believe so well of their own
Children when Baptized. Thirdly, in the Service of Gunpowder-Treason, it is
said, There are three Estates besides the King, and this they do not, that is,
they will not know. Well, would you know the true reason? If the King be one of
the three Estates, then he is coordinate with the other two, then a War
against him, maintained by the other may be lavvful; then as the King may
dissolve the Parliament, so the Parliament may serve the King, as the late name
of a Parliament did; then is not the King Supreme, then is not the Government
Monarchical, but a Commonwealth, which yet one would think they should not be
so fond of, considering how their Brethren the Independents treated them under
that Government. But the Great matter, I find, is, that they cannot disgorge
the Covenant; alas good men! There has passed a solemn Oath over the Nation,
engaging the main Body of it to endeavor a Reformation, and must all Covenants
be kept? I have read of some, who had made a Covenant with Hell, and others who
made a Holy League in France: Let them keep their Covenant, which is no better
than these, if they like it so well; but God keep us and the whole Nation from
them and their Covenant; but what would you have them do? They dare not give
their unfeigned Assent and Consent to the Bible; then I perceive Atheists,
Papists and Nonconformists are Cousin-Germans, if for some Litteral Faults of
Fallible Transcribers or Translators, we may be gravel'd to give unfeigned
Assent and Consent to the Infallible Scriptures, actum est de fide, farewell
Christianity. Among all this stuff, yet there is a sprinkling of Ingenuity,
page 15. We say we dare not give our Assent to the Use of any thing we never
intend to perform, which is the daily Use of Common Prayer either in Public or
Private, they need not swear or subscribe this, and indeed they had better
never use it than as some of them have done, who to save their Bacon, do not
use, but abuse it, making such minc't-meat of it, that it is no wonder if they
make the People abhor the Sacrifices of the Lord.

Oh but the Oath! this abhorring Oath! this is the saddest thing in the World
to abhor taking up Arms by Subjects against the King, or those Commissionated
by him: that this should be Traiterous too! make the People believe this and
all is undone! what a company of Knots are here found in a Rush? The true intent
and meaning of this in short is, that all men ought to swear they detest and
abhor all unlawful Sedition, and Rebellious taking up Arms against the King, or
such as are legally Commissionated by him in lawful things, as did the late
Rebels in 41. Was that a Traiterous Rebellion, or was it not? Pray Gentlemen
answer Categorically, I or no: If it was, then why may we not call a Spade a
Spade? If it was not, I say they are Rebels and Traitors that deny it; but it
is plain, they do not like to condemn the former Actings, Outgoings for
Reformation, or any thing that may obviate it for the Future; and my Masters,
this palliating an Old one looks scurvily, like encouraging a New one; but why
not abhor? Does not David say, All false ways I utterly abhor, Ps. 119. 128.
well, but a Cooler, a softer word were better, for page 21. A man may swear,
that it is unlawful to company with another Woman as his Wife; but what Shoals
of Nonconformists should we have, if all the Sons of the Church were to swear
they abhor it? Where by the way observe, the Nonconformists would not swear
they abhor any Sin; now I have been taught, that what I believe I ought to do,
I may swear I ought to do. Well, I find Abhor and Traiterous are very harsh
words; but sure to none but those who do not hate and abhor all Treason, privy
Conspiracy and Rebellion. This you may know is a sore place in their
Consciences, a Gall they got, when rid by the Rump, and pray touch it gently,
or they will kick. I doubt they abhor this Oath, though for all that, and the
Subscriptions too, because they say, page 13. There has passed a Solemn Oath,
viz. a Covenant over the whole Nation, engaging the main Body of it to
endeavor a Reformation.

Well, you have heard their Arguments, and what is now to be done? Why, these
Colemanists tell you positively, there is nothing to be done without
Toleration, Comprehension and Indulgence; and all must have the Benefit of it
except Papists; very good, and they will have the Benefit of it in spite of
your Teeth; how will you help your selves? They can, we know, be Presbyterians,
Independents, Fifth-Monarchy-men, Quakers, Anabaptists, what you please; and if
once there comes to be a Free Trade established, we shall never want Merchants
from Rome. Well, but what shall we do for our little Sister the Independent? Oh
very well; she shall be under the Visitation of the King, and the Justices of
the Peace; so that I find, though Bishops and Clergymen may not be Justices,
yet Justices may have the Honor of being Bishops; but how our Congregational
Men will like this, is another Query: For this Yoke put upon their Necks, will
oblige them to a Dependency, destructive of their Liberty, Being, and Name of
Independents.

But there is no doubt the Houses of Parliament will be induced to comply with
these People for three notable Reasons. 1. Because they will make the House of
Commons equal to the Lords, and both equal to the King, as must be in
coordinate Estates. 2. Because, say they, We see the Iaws of Jesuits and
Sectaries opening upon us, and for fear they should not gape wide enough to
swallow us up quick and quickly, strain them wider by a Toleration. 3. Because
they kindly suppose, p. 35. that all those who will oppose them in either House
are Papists. Few, say they, there are in either House who are Protestants,
without jealousy, etc. which is a plain intimation that there are some in both
Houses who are Papists. A Reflection which by naming no particulars, is a
general Scandal upon all and every Member of those Honorable Houses.

I will not trouble my self or the Reader with their explanatory Bill* or
their marginal Annotations, only observe, First, that their very Explanations
needs a farther Explanation, and so you shall have these prolifick heads bring
Superfetation upon Annotation, till the Acts of Toleration would out-svvell
the Statute-Book. Secondly, That Nonconformists are come to as great perfection
in Politiques as Divinity, and that ere long, the Gentlemen of the Long Robe
will be laid aside, as Grievances of the Nation: For they are vviser than the
Government many years ago, and abler than the Council Learned in the Law, to
prepare Bills for Parliament, and fittest to explain them when they have done.
The great Comfort is, they tell us, page 40. That they propose these things, as
if they were in Republica Platonis, and it is hoped they will, if ever be
enacted either there, or in Sir Tho. Moor's Utopia: For,

From Presbyters Laws,
And the Good Old Cause,
From the Jesuit's Iaws,
And the Fanatics Paws,
Libera nos Domine. FINIS.

