A SERMON Prepared to be Preached at the Interment Of the Renowned Observator.

With some Remarques on his LIFE, By the Reverend Toryrorydammeeplotshammce
Younke^crape.

To which is Annexed An ELEGY and EPITAPH, By the ROSE-ALLY-POET, And other
Prime Wits of the Age.

LONDON, Printed, and are to be sold by Langley Curtiss, at the Sign of Sir
Edmund-Bury-Godfrey, near Fleet-Bridge. 1682.

Thrice merry, or thrice doleful READERS. Which you please,
ACcording to your various affections peruse these ensuing lines: and know that
Man is a Mortal that has strange fegaries and quirks, and orders his reason at
such an odd rate, that he many times makes sport of their greatest misfortune,
their forced departure, and constraint to take leave of the Suns bright Light.
There was a certain Prince, who perceiving himself not well beloved by his
Courtiers, yet not well able to discover who they were that bore him enmity, in
regard that his Enemies had impaled their thoughts with dissimulation, he
resolved to pretend to fall sick and dye; to be short, so he did, that is to
say, he fell sick and died, like Endymion upon Latmus Hill, and was laid forth:
The report of his death brought all Persons to see him, his Friends to bewail
him, his Enemies to rejoice. And the nit was that his ill willers opened the
wickets of their Breasts; and while others spoke well of him, others cursed him
as heartily, calling him Tyrant, and ungrateful, and lading his memory with a
hundred Scandals, and Reproaches, I Will hold five shillings our Observator had
read this story. For he, finding himself baited on all sides like a Whitsontide
Bull, resolved to be for a while like an Incognito Ambassador in the world,
that he might hear what People said of him. To this purpose he desires a
certain Crape Gown Gentleman to make him a Funeral Sermon while he was living,
that he might amend and correct his own commendations. The Gentleman (as who
could deny the Foreman of his Faith) answered his expectations, and our dear
Observator put it up in his Pocket, and goes to the Tavern. There that night it
happened to be a dreadful Huzza night, nothing but past Two of the Clock could
move the Company -- and then the Devil of a Coach was to be got, so that our
dear Observator was constrained to totter home before a Link boy -- In that
condition, by what unlucky accident we know not, he dropped the following Papers.
Heavens bless us quo we, is our dear Observator dead, and shall we stifle such
a Panegyric as this? Ventre diable by no means. But quo another suppose he
should not be dead -- why then he is alive. But quo we, suppose he should be
dead, what injury can it be to him? so long as the Stationers are in being. For
we know there is nothing impossible with God -- and it may be a metaphysical
puzzlement, whether there be any thing impossible with a Stationer: for a
Stationer can make a Man write after he is dead. I Will undertake that there are
some men that have been dead these 40 years that shall still write on upon
their account till the last Trumpet sounds; so then if by their means the
Observator do write after he is dead what injury is it for him to die or to be
dead, I would fain know, for his pay runs on still. For my part I am apt to
believe he is dead, for his writings are the mere Skeletons of Reason Well but
let him be dead or alive, you have it here as it dropped out of his own pocket --
And Men have not the same privilege that Women have. For if a Woman tell ye,
she is dead, you must not believe her; but if a Man tell you so, you are not to
give him the lie, for fear of farther mischief: Gentlemen I have no more to say
in the business, and so without farther Complements, Fare ye well.

A FUNERAL SERMON Preached at the Interment of the Renowned OBSERVATOR.
Pantagruel, L. 2. c. 30. Then Eusthenes cried out, Ah Cruel Death, thou have
taken from us the most perfect of Men, upon which Pantagruel arose, and betook
himself to the greatest Lamentation that ever was seen in the world.
THE occasion of these words my Beloved was nothing but death, the death of a
certain person; mortuus est, extinguitur, as it is in the Original. For
Pantagruel, the Son of Garagantua, the Son of Grandgousier, was a great Giant,
who laid about him upon all occasions, whether it were eating or drinking,
fight or sh^^^ and as his name was Pantagruel, so he represented Henry the
second of France, as the most venerable notes upon our excellent Author
declare, and his adherents were called Pantagruelists, or Popelings, and he
warred against he Andoullians, who were the true Evangelics. Now to bring the
business down to our times, the Pantagruelists were Tories or Popelings, and
the Andoullians were Whigs or Evangelics according to those wicked distinctions
that are now used among us. As for our venerable Author himself, he was a great
Doctor in his Time, and a great Evangelic or Whig, for he refused to kiss the
Pope's Toe, as you may read in his Life, for which he suffered much
Tribulation, according to his demerits. As for the Book it self, it is
therefore called Pantagruel, because therein our venerable Author recites the
Acts of the great Pantagruel, as the Books of the Maccabees, are so called,
because they relate the Attchievements of the Maccabean Brethren. As for the
Person that the great Eusthenes, and the famous Pantagruel here lament, he was
called Panurgus, that is to say (for I have not been so long a Disciple in the
College of the Inferior Clergy, where our deceased Brother sat Regent, but I
understand many pretty knicknacks, especially those of Etymologies) one that
would be a Dominus Factotum, a Polypragmon, as it is in the Greek, in English a
Busie-body. In another sense it signifies a crafty cunning Companion. And thus
Jupiter in Lucian's second Dialogue of the Gods, reproaches Cupid with the
Epithites of Geron and Panurgus, old and deceitfully cunning. So that upon good
authority you may take Panurgus for a Busie-body, or a great Deceiver, which
you please, it being at your choice.

To this same Panurgus our once Divine Observator, and dear Brother here
departed, and now going to his long home, may be very justly resembled.
Panurgus became famous by maintaining disputes; he confuted a man of all sorts
of Sciences, once by the motion of his fingers. And what has not our Observator
done by his Proing and Conning? Has he not wrought miracles? has he not
confuted all the Andoullians, that else would have overran the Kingdom like so
many Locusts, and caused all the Enemies of the Pantagruelians to piss Vinegar?
Yes marry has he -- yes, my beloved, I say he has done it, don't to purpose
too, or as I may say, with a vengeance. Nay such was the reverence which the
Pantagruelians and Papishes had for him, that had he lived a little longer (and
a thousand pities it was he did not) a certain day in the year was to have been
set apart, at what time all the Pantagruelians and Papishes were to have met
our dear Brother by the name of the most invincible Observator, and he was to
have met them; and then was he to have pulled down his Breeches in most solemn
manner, and they in like solemn manner were to have kneeled, and kiss't his
bare Buttocks, and then they were to have had a Sermon, and to have gone to
Dinner at the Half Moon in Cheapside -- and the day itself was to have been
called Baise-cul or Kiss-nock Day.

In the second place Panurgus was enamored of a great Lady in Paris; but when
she fell out with him, and slighted his kindnesses, woe worth the Lady, such ill
luck betided her. For by virtue of a certain Drug which Panurgus strewn upon
her Garment, and the Folds of her Sleeves, as he kneeled by her at Prayers, all
the Dogs in the Church, both great and small of all sorts, came and pissed upon
her clothes, and spoiled her a Crimson Satin Petticoat, and a rich white
Velvet Just-a-core. In the same manner our dear Brother, rather our Grand
Master of Rhodes, that beat down all before him with the Club of Observation,
was enamored of a Lady, and they loved one another, and caressed one another,
and culebuted together for several years, till at length, unhappy and
unfortunate as she was, she fell out with him according to the custom of female
Inconstancy. But what was the fatal event? Town-buzzing, and Town-talk, slur,
blur, pur -- whur -- finger -- pointing -- sneering, fleering -- Hum for that,
etc. and all because the Lady refused to settle the land upon him.

In the next place Panurgus came to be a Cardinal. For by that name, as our
Author of Blessed Memory would have it, is meant the Cardinal D' Amboyse. And
why was he made a Cardinal? Why, for inventing a way of arguing without sense
or reason, by which he not only gravel'd the English Philosopher, as you shall
find in the 19th chapter Book second, v. 22. but also gravel'd and confounded
several Devils themselves. chapter 18. v. 33. And this he did after he had been
drinking all night, and playing at Spurn point with the Pages. At another time
out of the profoundness of his Kitchen learning, he discovered the great
Mystery concerning salt Beef, which lay hid till then under a strange
Cabalistical Trifle, and publicly maintained, that the sooner the Monks rose,
the sooner the Pot was set on; the sooner the Pot was set on, the sooner the
Meat would be boiled; the longer it boiled, the better it would be; the better
it was boiled, the tenderer 'twould be, and the more acceptable to the Stomach;
the more acceptable, the more nourishing.

By such idle methods of Argumentizing as these did our deceased Brother
endeavor Tooth and Nail to acquire fame, and a Cardinals Ha^. He had read how
Poole, Bellay, and others, had the Honor to be damned in Scarlet, as
Antichrists Nobles, for their indefatigable Industry in die Popes Service, and
a Cardinals Cap he had had, my beloved, as sure as a Gun, had not that Hag of a
Spinster Atropos clipped, I will not say the plain Thread, but the silken twist
of his Immortality-deserving life, just in the very juncture of Time, or as I
may so say, in the very nick: just when the Roman Catholic Lords in the Tower
had concluded upon the business: and there is no Man can think they could have
failed of their intercessions at Rome. Nay I dare say my Beloved, the Lord
Stafford himself would have risen again, rather than he should have gone
without it. And did he not deserve a Princely Purple Diademd' ye think? Has he
not from the first beginning, or at least as soon as he durst for his Ears,
been always snarling at the Plot; has he not done all that lay in hispower to
ridicule and render the Kings Evidence contemptible, to the inexpressible joy,
rejoicing, gladness, comfort, jocundness, delight, and pleasure of the drooping
and every where detected Offenders, who had no friend to speak a good word in
their cause, till our deceased Brother here, God rest his Soul, first opened
for Madam Cellier, and her Presbyterian Plot? Has he not to this purpose filled
the Town and Country with his weekly, I may say almost daylyshreads of Wast
paper, stufft with Flim and Flam, Tales of roasted Horses, Antipendiums and
Screws? Has he not labored, like Sisyphus in Hell, to engage the Nation in a
universal quarrel about his pitiful personal peeks, and silly foppish, idle and
impertinent squabbles, and brabbles about Goats Wool? all about Papist or no
Papist? And yet you may well believe, my beloved, that of twenty parts of the
Nation, hardly eighteen ever cared a straw whether he were a Papist or a
Pipin-seller. Again, my beloved, was it not his weekly practice, that he might
render himself redoubted and formidable to his Antagonists, the Enemies of
Popery and Sham-Plots, like the Devil in Isaiah, to exalt himself upon the
Mountain of the Congregation, to blazon his Gentility and his Parts, and like
the Son of Vainglory and self-conceit, to cry with Oliver, Nemo me impune
lacessit, and make Instances upon it? On the other side, to degrade and debase
his Opposers, to render 'em ridiculously contemptible, and to reduce 'em to
Mites and Atoms, has he not all along outscolded Billingsgate, and outrail'd
all the Course Complements of Blooms-bury, and Luteners-lane? Ha^ he not taken
upon him to be the Phaenix of utterance? Has he not taught the world in a most
gentile and argumentative way to confound the Andoullians, or Whigs and
Dissenters, with the convincing Epithites of Rogues, saucy Rascals, Coxcombs,
Monkies, Fools, spawn of the Devil, Scribbling Varlets, and comparing their
expressions to the filth and nastiness of Piss-pots, Close-stools and
Common-shoars, the certain effects of foul mouthed Dotage, peevish Choler, and
want o^ better Reason? Has he not outdone Ramus and Burgersdicius, Smith and
Keckerman in his impregnable Syllogisms of Ye lie, it is false, may I be damned
if it be true, may my Soul be delivered up at the last day if it be so, with
severa^ other Ferio's and Darapti's of the same nature* the bold dashes of an
Arbitrary Pen? Has he not by this means stiffly defended the gasping cause of
Popery in this Nation, and furnished the Traitors themselves with words at
least, if no^ with Arguments, to defend and justify their Treasons? True it
is, there are thousands, who belive that Oats and Prance have done their King
and Country better service than ever our dea^ Brother, with all his Gentility
and Grandeur or all his huffing and puffing and snarling against Parliament
Privileges, could ever pretend to, and I am apt to believe it among the rest.
But the never aimed at Cardinals Caps. 'Twas the Cardinals Cap that our dear
Brother had in his Head. I have wished it upon his Head an hundred times.
However my beloved, since he missed this same Hat of Eminency in this world, I
make no question but he will have one in the other world, and that not an
ordinary Hat neither, but a Hat, a Princely Hat, of the best fashion, a Hat
with Tossels, a Hat with Tossels, my beloved -- Amen, so be it --

Hum -- Hum -- Hum -- Hum -- Hum -- Hum -- Hum -- Hum -- Hum --

I come now to open the words themselves -- Then Eusthenes cried out, Ah Cruel
Death, thou have taken from us the most perfect of Men; How! the most perfect
of Men That is my beloved the most perfect in his way; in his calling or
profession, and thus he was the most perfect Observator in Europe. For he
observed many things that no body could observe but himself. For he could
observe a mote in a Whigs Eye no bigger than a Pins point; he observed Schism
and Faction among thousands that never dreamed of it: He observed a
Presbyterian Plot among those that never thought of it; by which means he
attained to many great perfections, as Pasquilling, Libelling, inflaming,
Boutesewing, Scolding, etc. Railing, which so increased his fame, that by
general consent he was acknowledg^d, Yerker, Firker, Whipster, Scribler General
of Tory-Land.

And now I have mentioned the word Whipster, I must tell ye my beloved, he was
the best Whipster in England. For the time was, when he whipped Cats into
Civility. 'Twas when he was a Youth, my beloved, and then he kept Birds, and
then his Neighbors Cats came and killed his Birds; and then he killed his
Neighbors Cats. Then came his Neighbors and said, why do you kill our Cats?
and he answered and said, why do your Cats kill my Birds? This had like to have
made as great a Division between our dear Brother and his Neighbors, as
between Whig and Tory; till at length the Heavens found out a happy way of
reconciliation. For said one among the rest, reverend for his gray hairs, and
his grave utterance, if our Cats come any more to devour your Birds, there is a
milder way to be taken, so that neither we may lose our Cats nor you your
Birds: Sir, when any of our Cats came again to kill your Birds, do but catch
the Cats, whip 'em well, and rub their Noses against the Cages, and the Cats
will never come near your Birds any more. For Sir, as the burnt Child dreads
the fire, so our whipped Cats will dread your Catt-a-nine-tails -- observe this
ever while you live. This advice proceeding from one of the Nestor's of the
Parish, he took it: so that when any of his Neighbors Cats came to kill his
Birds, as I said before, he was still too cunning for 'em, and caught 'em; and
when he had 'em, 'twas not all their mewing, or spitting, or scratching would
serve their turn, he gave them School Correction, and taught 'em the sad
inconvenience of watching his Cages. However I must needs say this for him,
that in whipping those Cats he used that moderation, and did it with that
prudence and equal balance between Rigor and Compassion, that it was wonderful
to behold in a Youth of his years: and it got him that renown, that there was
hardly a Cat in the Parish that had stolen a piece of Cheese, or a bit of
Bacon, or had broken an Earthen Pipkin in her privy searches of the Buttery
Shelves, but was brought to our dear Brother to be whipped. Upon which the
Soothsayers being consulted, they all agreed, that as Midas's wealth, and
Plato's Eloquence were portended, the one by the Emets, the other by the Bees
that fed them with Wheat and Honey in their Cradles, so that Cat-whipping
prudence was looked on as a prognostication of our dear Brothers future
Grandeur, and that as the Cats had been reformed by the lashes of his Hand, so
the Whigs should be reformed by the lashes of his Pen.

This Man, this Person of these perfections has Death, Cruel Death taken from
us. Death himself is turned Whig, to deprive the Tories of their Darling and
their Idol. The Thamuz, the Adonis of Toryland is departed, Death, Cruel Death,
Factious, Schismatical, Presbyterian Death has taken him away from us: Let the
Virgins of Toryland bewail him annually among the Mountains.

Ailina moi stonacheite napai, Kai Dono Hydor
Kai potamoi Klaioite ton Himeroenta Biona.
Henceforth may Coffee lose its virtue, and Tea it is operation, since he is
gone, that was the Soul of all Coffee-Houses, and the delight of those that
love to dung and read at the same time.

Hum, hum, hum --

But now, we would fain know what Death has done with him? Death has got him in
his clutches, and therefore, I say, what has he done with him? Heaven forbid
that Death in a peevish humor should have taken our dear Brother at his word;
for he has promised, (that is the truth on it) to deliver up his Soul to the
Devil at the last day, and given it under his hand in writing: so that whether
the Devil will stay so long, or be so critical, as to take the last day, for
the last day of his life, is the Question. And then again whether the Papists
will admit him into Purgatory, since he has renounced their Religion with such
a testy, nonsensical imprecation is another question. For I must confess, it is
my opinion that all the world ought sooner to believe Prance upon the customary
way of assertion upon Oath, than our dear Brother upon a hotheaded piece of
Choleric, and extrajudicial fury, or rather extravagant Rodomontado of Tipsy
Infusion. But we hope that neither the Pope nor his Jesuits will be so
ungentile as to take notice of the failings of his Age, considering the good
Service he has done 'em. For he only renounced the Queens Chapple, and not
Popery nor Purgatory; He had a defference we hope for that White Friars of the
other World, where Heavens debtors can lie till they have compounded with
Heaven; or else find an opportunity to give Beelzebub the bag, by slipping out
at the back door into Abraham's Bosom. And there it is that we also hope our
dear Brother will call and stay by the way, rather than deliver up his Soul, so
rashly as he talks of, as if he were to do a kind Act in discharge of his Bail.
We may flatter our selves, that Pluto will entertain him like a Gentleman, let
him deliver himself up when he pleases; but when we consider how he uses our
dear Brothers Betters, Xerxes being in Hell, no more than a crier of Mustard,
Hannibal, a seller of Egg-shells, Priamus a shailler of Beans, Pope Alexander a
Rat-catcher, and Boniface the Eighth a Chimney-Sweeper, it would grieve us my
beloved to meet our dear Brother hereafter in the Stygian shades, walking with
a long stick upon his shoulders. But we hope that the Popish Lords have taken
care of his future happiness as well as they did of his content in this world.
However while we are in these Dilemma's in the midst of these fears, doubts and
jealousies concerning our dear Brothers uncertain condition, we may well cry
out with the great Eusthenes, Ah Cruel Death, that have taken from us the most
perfect of Men.

Hum -- Hum -- Hum --

It Is true, no Man can attain to perfection in this world; but our dear Brother
had excellencies peculiar to himself, and therefore we may account him in some
measure perfect as I have said already. Pray my beloved do not cavil with me
about a word or two, when used to so good an end as the praise of our deceased
Brother. He was the most excellent guide to the Inferior Clergy that ever our
Land produced. He walked before 'em like a sumptuous Fore-Horse in Peascod
time, and lead 'em along as he pleased himself with the Harmonious gingling of
his painted Collar. So that if any thing were wanting to this extraordinary
Train, it was only that Celestial Constellation called Auriga, or the Carter,
with his heavenly Geeho's and Haitho's for their Dri^er. Cambridge was not
ignorant of this; and therefore was he by one of their Members quoted at St.
Mary's for an Author. Oh the Learned, the Great, the blessed Observator; who
knows but that in time he may stand in competition with St. Ambrose, St.
Austin, and St. Chrysostom? I remember, my beloved, I have read of a certain
Bird called Onocrotalus, a Bird resembling a Swan in shape and bigness, but
most sonorously braying like an Ass. Ah -- my beloved was not our dear Brother
the Swan of our Age --

Rara Avis in Terris Nigroque simillima Cygno. And then again how sweetly has
he brayd against the Whigs once, twice, sometimes thrice a week? I say he brayd
sweetly, gentilely, not like a Beast, but like a Bird: And why did he choose to
bray my beloved? Oh my beloved he knew that the Whigs were a kind of Aegithi,
or Hawks, that is to say, Birds of prey, that built their Nests among Thorns
and Briars, that is among Factions and Fractions, and that there was nothing so
terrible to those Hawks as the braying of an Ass; in so much that if they do
but hear an Ass bray, they will spoil their own Nests, and break their own Eggs
out of mere fear and astonishment. Therefore my beloved, our dear Brother chose
to bray: to the end he might scare the Whigs from their Nests, their Clubs and
their Conventicles, and cause them to break their own Eggs, their Designs and
their Plots and Contrivances. Ah my beloved, was there ever such an Onocrotalus
as this? Heaven send us more such Onocrotalus's as thief --

Hum -- Hum -- Hum --

But it is our comfort my beloved, he deceased in a good old Age; and tho he did
not die a Martyr, yet he died as like one as five pence to a groat. He had many
Enemies my beloved. And indeed there is hardly any creature either in the Water
or the Air, or upon the Land, but has its peculiar Enemy. The Swan and the
Eagle are always at Daggers drawing, so are the Weasel and the Crow, the Lion
and the Wolf. In the same manner did our dear Brother live in perpetual
Antipathy with one or other to his dying, day. His Hand was against every body,
and every bodies Hand against him. On the one side the Cares and the Curtiss's;
on the other by the Baldwin's and Janeway's. Had he not been a right metled
Towzer indeed, they had worryed him to death. One tells him of his Coach and
six Horses, which he kept by virtue of Phil-Porters Motto. Another rubs him up
with the tale of the Printers Wife, to whom he had promised peculiar immunities
when it was in his power, would she have condescended to have been his
Elderships Susanna. Another twits him with the twenty pieces reconciliation
with the Bookseller near Mercers Chapel, upon which followed a Cessation of
his Masters suit that employed him. Another swears him a Papist, nay another
would have sworn him into a Plot to destroy the Plot itself. Lastly, when he
thought to have thrown off all these things by taking the Sacrament, up starts
another and takes the Sacrament with him in justification of what he had sworn,
and so spoiled all again. These and many other such snubs and rubs, and
whirrets of the Ear of his Reputation, were enough to have sunk a Person of a
softer and milder temper long e're this. But ne Hercules contra duos; had he
been Towner with as many heads as Cerberus, they would have worryed him at
length; for I find they were resolved upon it. I wish these Butters against
Antichrist may not have cause to repent it, and I hope to see the day when
these Greek Kalends shall come. Those Grecian Kalends I have heard much talk
of: O may the Sun and Moon bring 'em quickly about, that we may be at once
avenged for the loss of our dear Brother, for he is gone, the most perfect of
Men. He that, as it is said of the great Xenomanes had a memory that was like a
Colonels Scarf, that would carry away a whole voyder of Sweetmeats at a time.
An imagination like the jangling of a Country Steeple; whose thoughts were like
a flight of Telfares; an understanding, like a torn prayer book; conceits like
those of a Snail creeping out of a Strawbery Bed; the judgment of a shooing
Horn; the discretion of a pair of Childrens mittens, and the reason of a
Bartholomew fair Drum. And now my beloved let us weep a while over the Hearse
of this great Person. May his emmory last as long as the Skeletons in St. John's
Library. He that offers to wipe with an Observator, may the piles vex him to
his Grave. And may that Grocer break, and all his Plums rot, that uses those
holy sheets for wast paper. And may all Wash-balls moulder to dirt that shall
ever be wrapped up in Whig and Tory. May they have the same charms as the
Hankerchers dip't in Staffords blood, to cure the Meazles in Hogs, and the Pip
in Chickens.

Laftly, my beloved, carry these dear Relics of his fame always about ye,
like Zisca's Skin, as a terror to the Whigs. So may our dear Brother live in
his Eternized Lines, whom otherwise I fear me, this Ungrateful Age will soon
forget.

But my beloved after all this there are a sort of People, that though they
will not deny him to have been dead, yet obstinately affirm him to have been
come to life again. For say they, should not so great a Hero as our Observator
have as much privilege as Lucian allows to Hercules, Orpheus and Ulysses. Nay
we find how the barking snarling Menippus cheated that same Devil of a Sculler
Chavan himself, under the disguise of a Lions skin, and a Club in his hand. And
indeed my beloved the world is grown to that pass now, that men are become so
vastly spiritualized in craft and cunning, that it could be no disgrace for the
Devil to be cheated by such a one as the Observator, a Person that exceeded the
Tyrant of Orcus in cunning and Romancing as much as that Infernal Monarch
exceeded Jack Adams, or the Author of Valentine and Orson, So that why he might
not have the same Privilege as Hercules, as being so great a Champion as he
is; or as Orpheus being so great a Musician as he is; or as Ulysses, being so
eloquent and mellifluous, so vanquishing and persuasive an Orator as he is,
that is to say, to go to Hell, and come back again, is more then I understand.
For as for Charon, there is no Man had more reason to be civil, and caress our
dear Brother the Observator than he had, in regard that he was once an
Observator himself. The Story is this my Beloved; (for you never knew a right
Sermon without a Story) Charon having a mind to behold what busy Mortals did
in this world, and what these things were of which they complained and houl'd
so much to be deprived of in the other, he got Mercury to help him; who after
much entreaty did so, and so they two together set three or four high Mountains
one upon another, from whence, as from a high Beacon, Charon had a full
prospect of the whole Earth, and the vast Lake that encompasses it: then he
beheld the several swarms of Mortals in their little Nests, or rather Hives,
called Towns and Cities. There he had a full view also of the folly of Regal
Pomp and Riches; the vanity of worldly wisdom, the Errors and confusions among
Philosophers. There he beheld the busy multitudes of Hopes and Fears, Madness,
Pleasure, Avarice, Anger, Hatred, and Jealousy, that plague and vex the world:
and after he had observed as much as he could observe, Mercury and the
Ferry-Man set the Mountains again in their places, and so the Observator Charon
returned to his Employment, so then it is plain that many Persons of Fame and
renown did make a journey to Hell, and returned back again, and why our
Observator so renowned, and so famous, should not have the same privilege, as
I said before, is a thing hardly to be believed, especially having two such
good friends upon the Shore of the Stygian Ferry, as Mercury the vafrous, and
Charon his Brother Observator, who would not refuse him any kindness that lay
in their Power.

Others there are that say he was too hastily Interred; so that when he heard
the Stones and the Brick-bats rattle about his Ears upon uttering the words
Dust to Dust, he made a noise in the Coffin, and so was taken out again, like
the Woman in Sussex to lead a new life in the old World.

Another sort there are who affirm, that they heard him cough in his Grave, as
being one that used to drink in his Porridge; which occasioned his miraculous
deliverance. But these my Beloved I fear me are mere surmizes, flashes and
conceits of those that fain would have it so, as I among the rest could wish
they were; and not mere stories like those of his own writing. Alas for he is
certainly departed. He and his Friend Quevedo, now I think on it, went together
into the other world some years since, to make new discoveries: and some few
they made; but going to make more, were never heard of again.

But you will say we have several Observators come out every week. It Is very
true, a company of dull flat heavy Dialogues between Tory and Whig, without
life or soul, not worth the glance of a Man's Eye; which is the more to be
wondered at, considering how many several notions of other men, posted every
foot in the Coffee-House Leiger Book, go to the forming and shaping of one
nonsensical half sheet, wherein you are bound not to forget the Screws, and an
Ironical ^^i^t upon Dr. Oats, of no concernment to any body else, either
public or private, but those that are afraid of their Testimony.

But let the Observator be dead or alive, it is not a halfpenny matter, you
have heard the reason of this Memento Mori: Neither is it an unusual thing for
great Persons to have their Tombs and Monuments erected in their life Times.
However it is most certain he must die at one time or other, and he had as good
make use of this kind Encomium, as impose upon his Executors to pay two broad
pieces for another that may prove worse.

An ELEGY UPON THE Right Reverend THE OBSERVATOR, Guide to the Inferior Clergy.
WHen Indian Kings in bloody Battles fall,
Their, Wives, and Slaves attend the Funeral,
Mounted aloft they squeeze a grinning smile,
Then tumble headlong from the flaming Pile:
So when the Pagan- Observator dies,
And little Tories close their Grand-sirs Eyes,
The Orphan'd, poor, Inferior-Crape-gown'd Elves
In their own Sursingles should hang themselves.
While Mournful Sam's is daubed with Scutcheons round,
And dismal Coffee scattered on the Ground,
The Newgate-Priests come dribling dainty verse,
Blubbring Joanna gloats upon the Hearse;
Alas! (she sobs) there lies that brawny He
That has so many'a time Observed me.
The Inferior gaping Devils his fall attend,
And wrapped in Crape expect his happy end;
He Will find 'em kind; forgive the Devil his due,
And Lucifer's an honest Tory too,
Who can if necessary cause appears,
Go once, or twice to Church in 20 years;
Of every thing on Earth he is the Spectator,
And may be termed a very Observato^:
The Whiggish Angels he would fain pull down,
And on his sooty Highness set the Crown,
Roger even there does earn his Pension well,
And bawl's for the Succession, tho in Hell;
As Loyal Seamen when they needs must go
Gargling Huzza's complete the health below.
Good Devil take heed, for if thou careless be,
Hodge will out-lie, out-cheat, out-devil thee.
If to the Coffee-Houses he can run,
He Will call thee Whig, and then thou art undone.
Pluto beware! or he thy Imps will sham,
Corrupt thy Guards, and steal away thy Dam,
Towzer in spite of Cerberus will pass,
Who Will take the old Crone for Madam Baltinglass.
Another Epitaph, found in the Cardinal Van Hesse's Library, and Translated out
of French, supposed to be writ by Nostredamus.
HEre lie Antipendiums, and Fiddles good store,
Here lies the old Stallion of the Roman old Whore;
The Lap-dog of Ladies, and the Wonders delight,
Whom Death did like Topham to the Netherlands fright,
The' Inferiour-Clergy (poor Noddies!) will stray,
Now their Will-a-Wisp-Guide is gone out of the Way.
His Epitaph.
Here lies the Man, whom Fate among us Hurled,
With bombasts Dialogues to plague the world.
Who rather then not vainly keep a pother,
Set one side of his mouth against the other.
And bid the Pope believe what wonders He
Would work to save his falling Monarchy:
With that he told a thousand tales and more,
And when his empty reason failed he swore.
But falling short of all the brags he made,
Here he succumbs in Crape Gown Masquerade,
So let him rest until the second Change,
The blustering, but unfortunate L. S --
FINIS.

