Truth and Loyalty VINDICATED, From the Reproaches and Clamours OF Mr. EDWARD
BAGSHAW.

TOGETHER WITH A Further Discovery of the LIBELLER Himself, and his Seditious
Confederates.

By ROGER L'ESTRANGE.

Ex Ore Tuo.

LONDON; Printed for H. Brom, and A. Seile, and are to be sold at the Gun in
Ivy-lane, and over against St. Dunstans Church in Fleetstreet, June the 7th.
1662.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE LORDS OF HIS MAJESTY'S Most Honorable Privy-Counsel.
My LORDS,
IF in Duty to his Majesty, I become Troublesome to your Lordships, I hope you
will vouchsafe to Pardon so honest an Importunity: Especially considering the
high Necessity of the Office, as to the Public; and the little Benefit he
expects to reap by it, that Undertakes it. It is in Truth (My Lords) grown
hazzardous to Assert the Cause of the Late King; or the Authority of This,
against the open, and professed Adversaries of Both: And they Proceed, as if
the Act of Oblivion had only Bound the Hands of his Majesty's Friends, and left
his Enemies Free. Which would not be, were but your Lordships duly Enform'd in
the Matter; and That you may be so, is the Scope and Service I pretend to in
This most humble Dedication.

I Think (My Lords) it may be made appear, upon a Modest Calculation, that not
so few as Two-Hundred-Thousand Seditious Copies have been Printed, since the
blessed Return of his Sacred Majesty, (which being Exposed with Freedom, and
Impunity, cannot fail to be Bought up with Greediness) To These may be added
diverse Millions of the Old Stock, which are Contrived and Penned with Accurate
Care and Cunning, to Catch All Humors. What This Glut of Poisonous Libels may
Produce, is submitted with Just Reverence to your Lordships Wisdom; for I
presume not to make a Judgment, but barely to Offer an Information: Wherein,
(as the fairest Evidence of my Respect and Duty) I shall be as short and plain
as possibly the Case will bear.

The late War is (in Terms) Justified against the Late King; Page 57.
and His Majesty Charged as an Overthrower of Religion, Parliaments, Laws, and
Liberties.

Several Counterfeit Prodigies Applied, Page 58.
as Portents of Revolts; Persecutions; Casting off Kings; And in fine, the
Drift of the whole Book tends Chiefly to Predict the Dissolution of the English
Monarchy, and Episcopacy.

The Total Extirpation of Bishops (under the Title of Sons of Belial) is
Recommended, Page 59.
in Mr. Manton his Publication of Smectymnuus.

The King's Supreme Authority in Matters Ecclesiastical, is absolutely
disclaym'd, Page 60.
and the People are Encouraged to Oppose the Imposers of Ceremonies, as
Adversaries of the Truth.

The Power of the Two Houses is Asserted in Coordination with the King. Page 62.


Harrison, Carew, Ibid.
etc. are called the Servants of Christ: Their Cause, Christ's Cause; and the
Murder of the late King is reported as the most Noble, Page 63.
and High Act of Justice that our Story can Parallel.

I^id.
The King's Judges, and Counsel, together with the Jury that Sat upon John
James, are Charged with thirsting after His Blood.

I^id.
His Majesty is Reviled and Menaced for his Proclamation against Conventicles.

For Opposing These Insolences, and Defending the King's Rights, His Cause,
and Government (without ever receiving any Pretense to a Reply) I have been
Twice Libelled (by Mr. Edward Bagshaw) as Cromwels Spy, Page 34.
and a Person Infamous both for Condition, and Morality.

My Lords, I dare not Beg, but I do secretly Wish, that he may be called to
make it Good; which I the rather do, because the Latter of the Two was Tendered
to your Lordships as My Character; But Principally, for the Consequence: For if
it comes to That once, That (in a time of Peace) a Man cannot be Loyal, but at
the Hazard of his Life and Honor; and that it becomes more Safe, and
Beneficial to be Guilty, then to be Innocent, I do m^st Dutyfully remit the
Rest to your Lordships: Humbly Beseeching You (My Lords) to receive This
further Advertisement concerning Mr. Bagshaw.

He denies the King's Supremacy; Page 11.
and Animates the Subject against it. Affirming [ That God has not Committed
unto the Magistrate, but to his Son, the Government of His Church, even in the
Outward Polity:] That the Command renders a Thing, in it self Innocent, utterly
Unlawful.] He makes the King an Usurper.] An Idolater. Page 12.
] An Impious Pretender. Page 14.
] He calls the Praelation of Bishops, an undue, and Antichristian Dignity.] He
Inferrs His Majesty either no King, Page 15.
or no Christian.] He is Peremptory, Page 16.
That the King is Singulis Minor, and, that the People may Depose him.] Fixum
Ratumque habeatur, Page 17.
Populi Semper esse debere Supremam Majestatem.]

Having exposed These Particulars, with several of the Authors, and Publishers
of them, Referring to the Pages of the Ensuing Discourse; I shall leave before
your Lordships Feet This Humble Testimony of my Desires to serve the King.
Wherein, if I have done Amiss, I Submit; if Otherwise, I have done but my
Duty: Which obliges me to Live and Die, with an Unspotted, and Inviolable Faith
toward his Sacred Majesty; keeping my self also within Those Terms of Modesty,
and Veneration, which may become

My LORDS, Your Lordships Most Obedient Servant, Roger L'Estrange.

The Praeface.
I Have no Ambition to get my self a Name by a Dispute with Mr. Bagshaw, and
(in effect) This way of Wrangling, is but a putting of it to the Question,
Which is the finer Fool, the Plaintiff, or the Defendent? Yet in regard that in
This Case, the Public, and my Particular appear so Complicated, that as I
Suffer for That, so That likewise is Wounded through Me; (for it is the King is
Struck at, in his Loyal Subjects, and They are only Persecuted, as the Bar
betwixt Au^hority, and Rebellion) I hold it but a Modest and Discreet Justice
not to divide in the Defense, what Faction and Malice have united in the
Scandal.

This being Resolved upon; The Course I mean to take with Bagshaw's late
Rhetorical Libell, (obtruded upon the World in form of a Letter to my Lord
Chancellor) is to Report him Word for Word, and then to Examine, First his
Pretended Loyalty; and after That, his Bold and Scurrilous Defamations.

Page 10, 11, 12, 16, 17.
For want of Softer Words, I must make use of Schism, Sedition, Treason, etc.
All which are proved against him under his own Hand. Touching the Libellous
part, I leave it so clear, that I defy his greatest Adorers to be my Judges.

The Greatness of His mind (we must Imagine) would never have stooped to so low
an Ebb of Baseness, Page 46.
as to have brought a Fiddle under his Cloak for a Recommendation to Oliver.
(as he says L'Estrange did) See now This Miserable Snake licking the very Dust
at the Feet of Bradshaw. Page 53.


The Measure of his Conduct, and Veracity; may be taken from his Frequent and
Ill-Menag'd Contradictions.

For the Purity of his Style, I refer the Reader to Pages 34, 35, and 36. But
the Story of his Life, and Manners, I Will keep for a Reserve; for I am loath to
overlay him at once.

This is a quick and Homely Method, to Say, and Prove all in a Breath; and I
ask no further Credit to This Paper, then is due to the Evidence which goes
along with it: So that hereafter, no man that is not a Professed Enemy to the
King; the Church; Nay, Government it self; Truth; Modesty; and Discretion; must
ever own himself a Friend to Mr. Bagshaw. Yet after all, never were Cause and
Advocate better Suited.

When I have laid his Imposture as Naked as Truth it self, I do intend so far
to Oblige him, as to show the World, in a further Discovery of Seditious
Persons, and Papers, that Mr. Bagshaw is not the only Enemy the King has. I do
expect that he shall thank me too, for sparing him in his Character; which even
read at the Bar, would make a Judge Blush upon the Bench; and shake the Faith
of a Good Christian to see a Person of That Marque in the Pulpit. But this is
to Proclaim Daylight, and tell the World what every Body knows already. In
fine, Excesses and Revilings are Familiar with Him; and He that wonders to see
Mr. Bagshaw, for, or against Any thing, may as well take the Changes of the
Moon for Miracles.

To the Right Honorable Edward Earl of Clarendon, Lord High Chancellor of
England, etc.
Right Honorable,
I Am so much a Stranger to your Lordship, that I believe the subscribing my
Name, will but little benefit your Lordships knowledge of me; EDWARD BAGSHAW,
Page 1.
and the cause about which I write, being merely the cleari^g of my self, is of
so p^tty concernment, that I am afraid, in stead of procuring your Lordships
good opinion, it may expose me to your Censure; and though I purge my self from
all other my supposed Crimes, Which he neither does nor ca^.
yet the very undertaking to trouble your Lordship with a matter so much below
you, may render me guilty of a very transcendent presumption.

But, my Lord, since none who is made so considerable as to be repu^ed
dangerous, can be too mean to appear in his own just defense; and since your
Lordship has already suffered your Goodness so much to be wrought upon, as in
a manner to condem^ me unheard; and seem to conceive of me, as I have been
lately represented, for a direct enemy unto the Church, and but meanly affected
to the State; I thought it necessary, if for no other respect, yet for the sake
of truth (which always suffers in the Oppression of any one of her followers)
to remove your Lordships mistakes; and by making a kind of Public confession
of my Faith, to vindicate my self from those suspicions, which if well
grounded, would render me not only incapable of Preferment (the want of which
I shall never complain of) but likewise unworthy of any Protection.]

TRUTH and LOYALTY, etc.
BEhold the Prologue to Mr. Bagshaw's Pretended Vindication; who, it seems, R.
L'S.
has been lately Represented to my Lord Chancellor for an Enemy both of Church
and State. It Is a great Truth; and L'Estrange is the Person that has so
Represented him, and This Paper is to make good That Charge. I am not Ignorant,
that in laying him Open, I do but crush a Punaise, and raise a Stink, to avoid
an Importunity: yet since that beastly work is (for once) necessary in order to
my Quiet; I shall first, for my Credits sake, show the World by what unlucky
Chance we came acquainted.

In Jan. last, was Printed a Discourse, Entit'led, The Bishop of Worcester's
Letter to a Friend, for Vindication of himself from Mr. Baxter 's Calumny. The
Right Reverend Bishop, having by undeniable Proofs, and unanswerable Arguments,
put the Case past all possibility of a Rational Reply, was soon after assaulted
by a Libel: bearing for Title, Animadversions on the Bishop of Worcester's
Letter. It was Dated Jan. 21. and Subscribed D. E.

In This Pamphlet, finding not only the Person of the Bishop ill-Treated, but
the King's Authority tacitly Disclaimed, and That of the Church more directly
Vilify'd, I thought it my duty to endeavor something in their Defense; which I
did, and (while my Papers were yet in in the Press) D. E. casts out a Second
Libel (Animadversions still, but with This Addition -- [ With an Answer to all
that L'S intends to write.] It was as foul as Malice, and Forgery could make
it; and in fine, though it passed without contradiction abroad, that D. E. and
Edward Bagshaw were one and the same Person; yet would it not sink into My
Thought, that it was possible for a Minister of the Gospel, to be Guilty of so
great a Scandal to Christianity; or for one that calls himself a Chaplain to a
Privy-Counsellour, to become an Advocate for Sedition: Till at length, I
retrived the Printer, (one Hayes in Woodstreet) who ingenuously confessed upon
Examination, that they were done by the Order, and direction of Mr. Bagshaw,
and that he delivered five hundred Copies of each, into Mr. Bagshaw's own hand,
in the house of the Earl of Anglesy. This Discovery was it, that gave me the
first Knowledge of Mr. Bagshaw; and That too, but of his Humor; for to this
hour, I cannot say, I have ever seen his Person.

Having, in the first place, asserted the Public, I thought it some Right to
my own Particular, to make some search into the Character of my rude Adversary.
Some of his Soberest Excesses I took notice of in my Memento, but the
Gentleman, finding it Easier to Calumniate L'Estrange, then to Defend Bagshaw,
(without returning a Syllable to the Particulars there Charged upon him, and
under pretext merely of clearing himself) throws out his Vomit against Me; and
with a Sawciness, suited to his Rage, and Folly, he Dedicates the Unsavory
Pamphlet to my Lord Chancellor. His Preamble we have had already, and now
follows his Vindication.

TO begin therefore with that which makes the loudest noise in the World, and
that is, a supposal that I am no friend to Bishops; E. B. Page 2. and 3. De
Presbyte^i^ and Episcopis, Pref. to the Great Question, etc.
I need say no more in justification of my self than what I have already
asser^ed, not only in my Latin Dissertation upon that Subject, but likewise in
the Preface to that very Book which first begat the suspicion -- I then said,
that I was a strict obse^ver of the Doctrine of the Church of England, as it
was contained in the thirty nine Articles ( as my several Treatises against
Discourse about Jesus and the Resurrection.
Atheism, Dissertationes Anti-Socinianae.
Socinianism, Treatise of God's D^c^ees.
Arminianism, and Treatise against the Pope's infallibility.

The Reverend and Learned Bishop Brownrigge on Nov 3. An. 1659.


Popery do witness) and for that which is the prime branch of Discipline, viz.
Episcopacy, or the subordination between Bishops and Presbyters; I do own it to
be of Apostolical Institution, that is, as I understand it, Jure Divino; at
least I think I am able to say as much for the Order of Bishops in the Church,
as any can for the Baptizing of Infants, for the change of the Sabbath, for
Tithes, or for any thing else, which has no particular Divine Precept, but
only Primitive practice and example to warrant it. And therefore in conformity
to this Principle of mine, when the Bishops were sunk lowest not only for Pomp,
but likewise for Reputation; and when no temptation either of profit or
convenience, but rather the contrary, could work upon me, I then chose to be
Ordained by one of them; which is sufficient Argument of my reality and
stedfastness. This, my Lord, was my Judgment then, and bating the words Jure
Divino, (which unless they be taken in a limited and restrained sense, are more
than the Cause will hear, because there is no mention of Bishops as a distinct
order in Scripture) is my judgment still, for though I know that (...) or an
ambitious affectation of Primacy, and all manner of Lordliness is to be avoided
by Church Officers, yet I could never see any reason why there might not as
well be different places and degrees for the Rulers of the Church; as it is
e^ident there is difference of gifts, and great disparity of endowments: So
that for the Order of Bishops, as chosen by, and ^uling with their Presbyters,
and by consent acting in an eminent way of Power, I acknowledge it to be a
Primitive usage, and accordingly I have been, and am likely always to prove an
Ass^r^er of them.

Having thus cleared my self from that, which because of your Lordships great
Devotion to the Church of England in its present Constitution, was most likely
to prejudice me in your Lordships thoughts, etc.


ALl This is but Edward against Bags^aw; and Both against Episcopacy. R. L'S.
The man is a Friend (it seems) to Bis^ops, but an Enemy to Praelates. He is
against an Am^itious Affectation of Primacy; (he says) and so are We; but not
against the Modest Exercise of it. He is for a Bishop chosen by, and ruling
with his Presbyters: But We are for a Bishop ruling his very Presbyters. In
short, here is the whole Difference: Mr. Bagshaw is for a Titular; We are for
an Authoritative; He for a Presbyterian Bishop, and the Church of England for
an Apostolical. Yet has This Gentleman the Face to talk as if he had Cleared
himself to the Church of England, in its present Constitution, when yet, in the
same Page, he has Declared himself point blank against it.

Marque now his Preface to the Great Question, etc. and how he Shuffles in his
Appeal to Himself.

He writes himself a strict O^server of the Doctrine, etc. What Is This to
Discipline; or Things Indifferent? (which are the Subject Matter of his
Discourse); Nay, for the Prime Branch of Discipline, viz. Episcopacy; (which in
Truth, is rather the Root of it) he does own a Subordination between Bishops
and Presbyters to be Jure Divino, etc. -- But when he comes to Limit and
Restreyn his Ju^ Divinum; and bring down his Subordination to a Consocial
Power; What Is the Result of his Pretense, but either a Presbyterian Episcopacy,
or an Episcopal Presbytery?

He pleads further for Himself, that he was Ordeyn'd by a Bishop, even when
Bishops were at Lowest, both for Pomp, and Reputation; and when no Temptation,
either of Profit, or Convenience, could work upon him.

First, Mr. Bagshaw's Sayings are no Articles of Faith; and from a man so
exceedingly addicted to speak more then he can Prove, This blank Affirmation is
but a very slender Evidence that he was ever Ordeyn'd at all. But suppose he
was, and by Bishop Brownrigge, on Nov. 3. An. 1659. Were Bishops then at
Lowest, when the whole Nation was in a Flame, for the Restoring of the Ancient
Government? Oliver was now Dead, -- Richard, laid aside; The Honorable, my
Lord BRADSHAW (Mr. B's adored Patron) newly Departed: and the Duke of Albemarle
(then General Monck) was already advanced into England with his Army to oppose
the Faction. Why does he not urge his Dedication to Bradshaw, and his
Dissertation, De Monarchia A^soluta (Both in 1659. too) as Arguments also of
his good Inclination to the Civil Government? Upon the Matter; if he was
Ordeyn'd; it was Manifestly his Interest, and not any Affection to the Church
that Led him to it; as may appear from several Irreverent Expressions in the
same Preface, against both the Authority, and Constitutions of it.

A greater Argument (says he) of my Reality, Preface to the Great Question.
and Stedfastness in Judgment, then most of Those, who now signalize
themselves by distinctive Habits, can pretend to; since such may reasonably be
presumed to wear them, either because they are the Fas^ion, or else the way to
Preferment. And a little Lower [ Ceremonies are so very Trifles, Ibid.
that they would vanish of Themselves; but that some men's Pride, Others want
of Merit, make them so sollicitous to continue them.]

Mr. B. must be understood here, either of the Imposers of These Distinctive
Habits, and Ceremonies, or of the Conformers to Those Impositions: If of the
Former, he Derides the Authority; if of the Latter, he reproaches their
Obedience. Decl. Eccles. Aff. page 15.
The King Himself is pleased to own a high Esteem and Reverence for Ceremonies.
Nay, and Expressly to Enjoyne the use of the Surplice, in his Chappel-Royal,
Cathedral, or Collegiate Churches, and in the Colleges of either University. I
hope This is not Pride or want of Merit in his Majesty. But Mr. Bagshaw tells
us, [That none can Impose what our Savior in his Infinite Wisdom did not think
Necessary, Pref. to the Great Question.
and therefore left Free.] That is; the King in This Injunction, has done more
then he can Justify. Now see his Kindness to the Civil Government.

E. B. Page 3.
I Shall next give an Account of my inclination to the Civil Government; and
though I can make it appear, that during our late Confusions, I passed my Life
with so much innocence, and so little compliance to the then usurping Powers,
that not one Public Action I did but is capable of a fair and Equitable Plea;
yet since an Act of Indemnity and Oblivion is already passed, I think it my
Duty so far to comply with his Majesti^s intention in granting that Act, as not
to mention any thing, how defensible soever, which he has commanded should be
utterly forgotten.]
R. L'S.
SInce Mr. B. is so Frank as to proclaim the Equity of his Past Actions, we will
take a Freedom to Examine some of them; and this may be done, without any
Violence to the Act of Oblivion. So far as they are warrantable, there is no
danger in the Enquiry; and where they are Other, his Justifying Now what he did
Then, is a New Crime. So that I fear, this Gentleman will find he has overshot
himself, in affirming that not One Public Action he has done, during our Late
Confusions, but is Capable of a Fair, and Equitable Plea.

E. B. Page 3. and 4.
TO give therefore my pre^ent sense, I can sincerely profess, that I have not
only a Loyal, but a most Affectionate esteem for his Majesty's Person and
Government; for since, besides the general obligation of a Subject, I am bound
by my Religion to prize Gratitude above all things, I could not be just, should
I not most earnestly desire the happiness of that Prince,
unto whose single endeavors I owe both my Civil and Religious Liberty; for he
must needs be a very great stranger in this our Israel, who does not
ac^nowledge, that his Majesty's Personal and passionate interposing did confirm
our Indemnity, and his most pious and unequalled Declaration has sufficiently
evidenced, that he is not unwilling ^o indulge the utmost extent of sober and
Christian Liberty; which are expressions of so much goodness, in the midst of
so great Power, and after so many provocations, that he has not the heart of a
Man, much less of a Christian, who does not always preserve a thankful
remembrance of them; I am sure they are so deeply impressed upon me, that if in
any writing of mine there be so much as a word, which can be wrested to the
lessening of his Majesty's JUST Authority, I entreat your Lordship to take
notice that I do hereby utterly disown it,
as being directly contrary to my Professed Principles, which lead me to no one
point of outward practice more strictly, than an exact and punctual obedience
unto his Majesty's Commands.
MR. Bagshaw's Confession of his Majesty's Mercy, R. L'S.
does but aggravate the Sin of his Abusing it: which that he has done to the
height of Ingratitude, and Disloyalty, shall be made good against him by the
Testimony of his own hand. And yet, if in any Writing of His, there ^e so much
as a Word, which can be wrested to the Lessening of his Majesty's JUST
Authority, he utterly disowns it, as ^eing directly contrary to his Professed
Principles.

His Majesty's JUST Authority, is but a Covenant-Salv^; and in His account so
small, that it can scarce be Lessened. But if it shall appear, that he not only
Lessens, but totally Rejects it; will his Disowning serve his Turn? May not a
Thief make the same Plea at the Gallows? Have not I Professed my self to be an
Honest man? and Stealing is contrary to my Professed Principles. Did not the
Murderers of the Late King plead Duty, and Religion? In short; if Mr. Bagshaw
will disown every thing that i^ Contrary to his Profession, having Professed
for, and against every thing, he must own nothing.

I Must co^fess, that ever since I became a Christian, which style I do not
own, either to my Birth, or Education; E. B. Page 4 and 5.
(having then sensibly experimented the great difficulty of believing) I
always doubted whether the Magist^ates Power did properly extend to things of
a Religious Conc^rnment; and accordingly I handled that point, while it was Res
Int^gra, and before ever there was any ^ear of Imposing: But since the
Parliament (...) have decided that Controversy, and put the matter out of
Question, I think my self, not only discharged from meddling with it, but
likewise concluded by what I have already declared, which was in these very
words; That though for the present, I make use of that Indulgence, which His
Majesty has been pleased to allow unto Tender Consciences, Preface to the
Great Question, etc.
that is, to all Rational and Sober Christians (the continuance of which, I
dare not so much wrong His Majesty's Goodness, as once to question) yet should
his Majesty be prevailed upon, for some Reason of State, to enjoin outward
Conformity; I am resolved, by the help of God, either to submit with
cheerfulness, or else to suffer with silence. For as there is an Active
Disobedience, which is, to Resist; so there is a Passive Disobedience, and that
is, to Repine; neither of which I can by any means approve of; since whatever I
cannot conscienciously do, I think my self obliged to suffer for, with as much
joy, and with as little resistance, as if any other Act of Obedience were
called for from me. I may perhaps be too partial to my self, but certainly in
general I may pronounce, that whoever preserves this Temper, let his Judgment
be what it will, in reference to Ceremonies, yet he cannot be supposed
incompati^le with ways of Public safety: since he that quietly suffers the
Penalty of any Law, I mean, where it is a Law mee^ly of outward Order, does as
really fulfill the intent of it, as he that actually performs all its
Injunctions; for such kind of Obedience does argue a more than ordinary degree
of Love, and that, in the Apostles sense, is the fulfilling of the Law. And
without speaking any thing in my own Commendation, my silence under my Illegal
exclusion from my place in Christs-Church, and my late voluntary forsaking a
Living I was possessed of, that I might prevent any possibility of seeming to
disobey Public Authority, does sufficiently proclaim the peacea^leness of my
Temper.]
WHereas Mr. Bags^aw affirms, that there was no fear of Imposing when he wrote
against it: R. L'S.
I say, that at That time, Decl. Eccles. Aff. Page 14.
his Majesty had already declared an Uniformity Necessary; he had Proposed,
Promised, and Resolved upon it.

Whereas (in his Preface to the Great Question) he pretends only to make use of
his Majesty's Indulgence; I say, that in the same Discourse, he does
Notoriously, and Seditiously, a^use it: which shall be Cleared, when we come to
compare the Liberties he takes, with his Sacred Majesty's Concessions: where we
shall prove likewise, that Mr. Bagshaws Opinions are utterly Incompatible with
ways of Public Safety.

Touching his Illegal Exclusion from Christ-Church, which in the Preface to his
Necessity and Use of Heresies, he tells us was for no Reason at all, that he
knew of, unless for the Impartial, and unbyassed Discovery of his Judgment
about Indifferent or rather Doubtful things in Religious Worship; Observe his
Ingenuity. He writes Student of Christ-Church, and yet confesses himself thrown
out of the College: But he knows not Why, (he says), unless for his Judgment
about Indifferent things. Whereas he does know Why; and that he was Outed
according to the usual custom, Two Mistakes.
having a Benefice of a value too great to consist with his Student's place;
and the customary indulgence of a year of grace was granted him, and expired
long before his Ejectment. There were in Truth Other Ungratious, and sufficient
Provocations to his Exclusion, but the Inconsistence of his Student's place
with his Living, was the Main.

This Edward Bagshaw has a Brother indeed, who at This present is a Student of
Christ-Church; and by Report, an Ingenious, Loyal, and Deserving Person. I
speak This, to the End that the Reader may Distinguish the Sheep from the Goat.

My Adversary has now perfected his Defense, and proved himself (as he would
persuade the world) a Dutyful Son of the Church, and a Loyal Subject to his
Majesty. I Am still of opinion, that he is a great Enemy to Both; that his
Condemnation is written with his own hand, and that Mr. Bagshaw pronounces
Sentence upon Himself.

In his Second Part of Things Indifferent, etc. Page 20. he does acknowledge
that his Majesty's Pious, Memorandum.
and Unequalled Declaration, has already indulged as much Liberty, as any
Sober-minded Christian can pretend to: So that if He takes more Liberty then
That Declaration Indulges him, he is by his own Confession, no Sober-minded
Christian.

We are very glad to find, (says his Majesty) that all with whom we have
conferred, The Kings Decl. Eccl. Af^. Page 14.
do in their Judgment approve a Liturgy, or Set-form of Public Worship to be
Lawful; which in Our Judgment, for the preservation of Unity, and Uniformity,
we conceive to be very Necessary.] Now hear Mr. Bags^aw in opposition to This.

E. B. Great Question. Pa. 2.
Bowing at the Name of Jesus, the Cross in Baptism, Pictures in Churches,
Surplices in Preaching, Kneeling at the Sacrament, Set-forms of Prayer, and the
like, -- I hold it utterly unlawful for any Christian Magistrate to impose the
use of them.

Every National Church, with the Approbation and Consent of the Sovereign
Power, The King, Ibid. Page 15.
may, and has always, introduced such particular Ceremonies, as in that
conjuncture of time are thought most proper for edificatio^, and the necessary
improvement of Piety and Devotion in the People, though the necessary practice
thereof cannot be deduced from Scripture.

Ibid.
That which before was, and in it self is indifferent, ceases to be
Indifferent, after it is once established by Law.

Ibid. Page 17.
For the use of the Surplice, We are contented that all men be left to their
Liberty, etc. Provided, that This Liberty do not extend to Our own Chapel,
Cathedral, or Collegiate Churches, or to any College in either of Our
Universities, etc.

We see here his Majesty's Opinion of the Use and End of Ceremonies. The Power
of Imposing them: That Indifferent Things when Established by a Law, Cease to
be Indifferent. We find likewise the use of the Surplice positively Enjoined by
his Majesty in his own Chapel, etc. Observe now with what Reverence Mr.
Bagshaw treats the King, in point of Judgment, Authority, and Practice.

E. B. Great Question, Pa. 5.
When once Humane Inventions ^ecome Impositions, and lay a Necessity upon that,
which God has left Free; then may we lawfully reject them, as Plants of Man's
setting and not of Gods owning. Is not This a flat Contradiction upon his
Majesty; and a Seditious Doctrine to the People?

So long as a thing is left Indifferent, Ibid. Page 9.
though there be some suspicion of Superstition in it, we may lawfully practice
it, as Paul did Circumcision; but when any shall take upon them to make it
Necessary, then the thing so imposed presently loses not its Liberty only, bu^
likewise i^^ Lawfulness; and we may not, without Breach of the Apostles
Precept, su^mit unto it: because we thereby do own; that those whose
Injunctions we obey, had a Power to Impose; and so by assenting, we become
A^etters and promoters of their Usurpation.] Here he makes the King an Usurper,
and Preaches Damnation upon Obedience.

The smaller the thing imposed is, Ibid. Page 1^.
the more is our Christian Liberty invaded, and consequently the more injurious
and sinful is its Imposition.

The Ceremonies in question, E. B. Pref. to theSecond Part of the Great
Question.
are by many thought to be as contrary to the Law of God, as they had reason to
think the Covenant was to the Law of the Land.

The Magistrate has no power to impose things doubtful and disputable upon the
practice of any in the Service of God; Part. 2. Page 3.
and therefore it cannot be lawful for any, to obey him; when he so imposes.

God has not committed unto Christian Magistrates, Ibid. Page 8.
but unto his Son, the Government of his Church, and that in the Outward
Polity, as well as in the Inward Purity of it.

God is sole Lord of the Conscience, and his Honor is Then given to another,
Ibid.
when by submitting to them [Magistrates] we seem in Part at least, to
acknowledge that they have Power to Impose.

That the Magistrate either has power to prescribe Religious Rites, or, that
if he does prescribe, Ibid. Page 12.
we ought to submit to him, neither That, [Rom. 13.] nor any other Text of
Scripture does evince.

When a Ceremony comes to be urged and pressed, beyond the bounds of things
Indifferent, Ibid. Page 1^.
here though no Doctrine be mentioned; yet there is a Doctrine couched under
it, and that is this which I have been all this while speaking against, That
the Magistrate has power to impose in Religious Worship. So that when things
doubtful come upon that score to be obtruded, we must resolutely refuse to do
them, lest we should seem to own and assent unto the Doctrine.

The Cloggs of Pretended Decency, but indeed Antichristian Tyranny. Ibid. Page
20.


Satan ^rought in Superstition, Will Worship, and Idle-Ceremonies, E. B.
Necessity and Use of Heresies, Page 8.

E. B. Animad. upon the Bish. of Worst. Letter, Page 8.

E. B. Signs of the Times, Page 21.


under pretense of Christian Decency, and Order.

We may Lawfully refuse to submit unto such Impositions as God has no where
commanded.

This Precept against Idolatry is broken, not only when Images are erected, and
Divine Honor given to them, ^ut also when we have Inventions and devices of
our own to adorn, as we think, but indeed to adulterate the W^rs^ip of God.

I^id. Page 22.
God does so much disdeyn to have his Worship squared by men's Models, that he
will root up all such Impious Pretenders, who by giving way to their own
Imaginations, do secretly tax the Goodness of God, as if he were not Holy and
Wise enough in his own Appointments. For let men say and use what fine
distinctions they please, it will at last be found, that all such self-devised
Forms, though they are not so gross and palpable; yet have every whit as much
of the Nature and Spirit of Idolatry in them, as the open Adoration of Images.

What use Mr. Bags^aw has made here of the King's Mercy, let any flesh, that
has but Common Sense, determine. Consider now the Scope, the Limit, and express
Condition, of his Sacred Majesty's Indulgence.

Our Pre^ent Consideration and work, is to gratify the Private Consciences of
those who are grieved with the use of some Ceremonies, Decl. Eccl. Aff. Page
15. and 16.
by Indulging to, and Dispensing with, their Omitting those Ceremonies; not
utterly to abolish any which are Established ^y Law; which would be unjust, and
of ill example.]

In this Concession, his Majesty only suspends the Strictness of the Law, and
Mr. Bagshaw peremptorily concludes against the Equity, and Authority of it. The
King gives Mr. Bagshaw leave to forbear Ceremonies; and Mr. Bagshaw denies the
King leave to Impose them. The End of This Indulgence was for the Relief, and
Quiet of Tender Consciences; and Mr. Bagshaw Imployes it to the perplexing, and
ensnaring of them. In fine; his Majesty applies This Dispensation, but to the
Omitting of Ceremonies; and Mr. Bagshaw extends it to the Damning, and
Forbidding of them. See now the Condition of his Majesty's Grace and Mercy in
This Declaration exhibited.

We hope, and Expect, that all men will hence-forward forbear to bent any such
Doctrine in the Pulpit, Decl. Eccl. Asf. Page 19.
or to endeavor to work in such manner upon the Affections of the People, as
may dispose them to an ill opinion of Us, and the Government, and to disturb
the Peace of the Kingdom, etc. --

No man shall be Disquieted or called in question for Differences of Opinion in
matters of Religion, Ibid. Page 5.
which do not disturb the Peace of the Kingdom, etc.

Does it not dispose the People to think Ill of his Majesty, and Government,
for Mr. Bagshaw to deny his Authority Royal? (in denying the Magistrates Power
of Imposing) To reproach him as an Impious pretender, and to presage that ^e
s^all be rooted up: To charge him with Idolatry, and Usurpation? etc. -- Can
any Opinions be more hazzardous to the Public Peace, then Those that dissolve
the very Order and Relation of Government: teaching that the mere Command of a
thing in it self Lawful, renders the Magistrate Criminal, and the Obedience
Sinful? If the Publishing, and Inculcating of The^e Doctrines be not
Dangerous, I have no more to say: But if it be, I am to seek for Mr. Bagshaw's
Interest in the King 's Declaration; which yet, by his own Confession, h^^
Indulged as much Liberty as any Sober-minded Christian can pretended to.

A little of his Kindness now to the Order of Bishops.

Letter of Animadversions, Page 2. Ibid. Page 5.
Mr. B. calls the Praelation of Bishops, an Undue, and (as some think)
Antichristian Dignity.

A Bishop is but one Minister, and ought not to silence his Fellow-Minister: If
by Arguments he can, it is well, but not by Authority.] That is; the Bishop of
Wor'ster ought not to have Silenced the Bishop of Kidderminster. (Mr. Baxter)
Would it not hold thus? The King is but one Man, and ought not to Impose upon
his Fellow-man. This we shall show by and by to be his Position, as to the
Civil Government. I perceive Mr. B. has but mean thoughts of Prelates, and
Ceremonies; What Is his Opinion of Churches? [When the Public Duties are
ended, the Place is as Common (I mean as to any Special Holiness) as That Mount
was when the Trumpet ceased from sounding. E. B. Brief Treatise, etc. Page 23.
Exodus 19.13.
] He thinks to save himself now with his Parenthesis, but there is no Comment
upon his Oracles, like his own Explication of himself.

This Gentleman being Catechist-Reader in Oxford, reads his Lectures in the
Church with his Hat on: and being admonished of it as a thing very unusual, and
disallowed, he reads his next Lecture Uncovered, and gives This Reason for what
he had done before: That he did not Idolize Fabriques,
but thought himself free to use any Posture in the Church which he might in
his Chamber. That is, the Posture of a Tumbler, or a Jack-Pudding; for every
man is Free to choose his Posture. Were it not a Spectacle to move Devotion, to
see a full Congregation, and every man making a several Face, in a several
Posture? Methinks That Is a strange Religion, that can better digest an Antique
in the Church, then a Ceremony. But Mr. Bagshaw is of so singular a Caprice,
that by Fits he will talk a little odly even of God himself. [As we set Traps to
catch Vermin, E. B. Necessity and Use of Herefies, Page 8.
so God appoints Heresies to ensnare arrogant and s^lf-presuming, or Viticus
and Self-defiling men.]

I suppose it sufficiently Proved that the Church of England has a sure Friend
of Edward Bagshaw Student of Christ-church; We are now to see what he says to
the Civil Power.

No man more satisfied with the Present Government, Pref. to the Great Quest.
or that has a more Loyal and Affectionate esteem for his Majesty's Person and
Prudence.] And in his Animadversions, [ A Passionate Lover both of the Kings
Person and Government. Page 2.
] In his late Letter to my Lord Chancellor he professes to have [ not only a
Loyal, Page 3.
but a most Affectionate esteem for his Majesty's Person and Government.] Nay,
Ibid.
[ so Innocently has he behaved himself during our late Confusions, that he has
not done any one Public Action, which is not Capable of a fair and equitable
Plea.]

If Mr. Bagshaw can do as he says, Mr. Bagshawes Loyalty.
let him show a fair and equit^ble Plea for Affirming, that there is no
Monarchy but what is Unchristian: That the Universality of the People may
depose the Prince; and for stating the Supreme Authority of England to be in
the People. All which is done in his Dissertatio Politica De Monarchia
Absoluta; Printed in 1659. and Applied to the Republican Juncto, as a Hint for
a Commonwealth, when all Honest men were endeavoring the Recovery of the King.

Monarchia A^soluta est Christiano Illicita, (says he) An A^solute Monarchy is
not a Government for Christians; De Mon. Abs. Page 6.

Ibid. Page 16.


and for a Mixed Monarchy, he says, that there never either was, or can be any
such thing, [ nec fuisse unquam, aut esse p^sse] by which Dilemma, his Sacred
Majesty is rendered either no King, or no Christian. Now for a Pretty Position.

Ibid. P. 6. and 7.
Coercenda est omnis Impotens Dominatio, quod in Imagine Dei Infimus quisque
non minus ac ipse Princeps, sit Creatus, and easdem secum in Pectore gestet
Divinitatis Notas.] i. e. All Unruly,
and Domineering Power ought to be Curbed; for the Beggar bears the Image of
God, as well as the Prince. Mr. Bagshaw should be Instructed to distinguish
betwixt a Divine Impression, Common (without Distinction) to Reasonable Nature;
and the Part^cular Dispensations of Providence in the Order and Regiment of
Humane Societies. Mr. Bagshaw may pretend to be made after God's Image, but I
can hardly take him for God's Vicegerent; and here is the Difference betwixt
Infimus and Princeps. In another place.

Ibid. Page 9.
Qui Potestate summa praediti sunt, impios poenis coercere, and Bonos Praemiis
afficere debent: quod nisi praestent, non amplius Dei Ministri sunt sed sui;
nec digni retinere diutius istud Imperium, quod tam male administrant.
Detrahere autem Indigno Magistratum etsi Privati non debeant, U^iverfis Mi^or.
Populus tamen universus quin possit, nemo, opinor, dubitabit; cum Privati
quidem solius Publici causa lege teneantur, at populo universo nulla lex est
sua Salute and Commodo potior.] When Kings neglect Reward and Punishment, They
are no longer Gods Ministers, but serve themselves; and deserve to lofe that
Power which they Menage so ill, yet is it not for Private Persons to Depose a
Wicked Governor, But that the Universality of the People may lawfully do it, I
think no body questions. Private Men being only subjected to Laws for the
Publ^^ue Good, which Public Good is it self the Supreme Law. Again,

Monarchia Mixta nihil est aliud quam aut Aristocratia aut Democratia
Imperfecta; Ibid. Page 14.
Illa enim sive Senatus, sive Populi Authoritas, quae Monarchia^ ^iscet h. e.
ita Temperat, ut fines ei and Terminos praescribat, plane tollit Monarchiam,
quae nisi Absoluta sit, nulla est; and ea potestate prorsus inferior a qua
Limits and Metam accipit.] i. e. A Mixed Monarchy is nothing but an Imperfect
Aristocracy, or Democracy, for That Authority either of the Senate or the
People that compounds the Monarchy, (that is) which so tempers, it as to give
it bounds, and limit it) utterly destroys the Monarchy; which if it be not
Absolute is none at all, but Inferior to that Power which Terminates it. Once
more;

Fixum Ratumque habeatur, Populi semper esse debere* Ibid.
Supremam Majestatem]. Let this stand for a Sacred, and everlasting Truth, that
the Supreme Power resides in the People. If Mr. Bagshaw can now produce a fair
and equitable Plea, not only for Subjecting the Order of Government to the
insolences of the Rabble, But for the audacious Attempt of Advancing a Popular
Tyranny, upon the ruins of his native Sovereign; It concerns him to show his
Cunning. But it is much harder, to Prove a Traitor an Honest man, then to
report an Honest man for a Traitor.

Since the perusal of Mr. Bagshaw's Pamphlets concerning Monarchy, and Things
Indifferent, I begin to have a little Charity for his Libel against the Bishop
of Worcester: wherein he does but endeavor to mainteyn the Mainteyner of his
own Principles, and effectually to defend Himself; for there is so strict an
Agreement betwixt Mr. Baxter in his Political Theses, and Mr. Bagshaw in his
Political Dissertation, (betwixt Them in fine upon a General Account) that it
is a hard Matter to press the Pastor of Kidderminster and the Student of
Christ Church not to suffer under the Weight of the Argument. In One Particular
indeed, Mr. Bagshaw seems to dissent from Mr. Baxter, and allows the Bishop to
have the better of him. Animad. Pa. 1.
[ As to the Main Controversy, (says he) I think the Bishop has much the
better of Mr. Baxter: For if the Question between them, was as Dr. Gunning, and
Dr. Pearson do attest, such a Command is so evidently lawful, that I shall much
wonder if Mr. Baxter did ever dispute it.] Now see That which he calls the Main
Controversy, (though in truth it was not so.)

Dr. Gunning and Dr. Pearson brought this Proposition to Mr. Baxter:

Bishop of Worsters Letter, Page 36.
That Command which Commands an Act in it self lawful, and no Other Act
whereby any unjust penalty is enjoined, nor any Circumstance whence directly,
or per accidens, any sin is Con^equent, which the Commander ought to provide
against; has in it all things requisite to the Lawfulness of a Command, and
Particularly cannot be guilty of Commanding an Act, per accidens, unlawful, nor
of Commanding an Act under an unjust penalty.

This did Mr. Baxter deny, and for This Reason, given in with his own Hand in
Writing.

Ibid.
Because the first Act Commanded may be per accidens unlawful, and be commanded
by an unjust Penalty, though no other Act or Circumstance commanded be such.

In This Point it seems the Brethren differ; observe now wherein they Agree;
and let some better Casuist then my self determine, Who has the more to Answer
for, The Execrable Headsman of the Late King, or the Assertor of These
following Positions?

Mr. Richard Baxter's, and Mr. Edward Bagshaw's, Political Resolutions.
Destructive of all Kings.
I. IF a Prince want such Understanding, Goodness, or Power, as the People judge
Necessary to the Ends of Government; in the first Case, he is Capable of the
Name, bu not of the Government; in the Second, he Deposes himself: in the
Third, the want of Power deposes him. (Theses 135, 136, 137.)

II. If a Prince in a Military State against his People, The Case of the late
King when he was Bought and Sold in 1646.
be by them Conquered; they are not Obliged to Restore him, without some other
Obligation then their Allegiance. (These. 145.)

III. If a Prince be injuriously Expelled, The case of the King and the Commons
in 1650.
by what-Power-soever, that Resolves to Ruin the Commonwealth, rather then he
shall be Restored; and if the Commonwealth may prosper without his Restoring,
That Prince is bound to resign his Government; or if he Refuses, the People are
to judge him Incapable by Providence. (These. 147.)

IV. If a Prince be so long Out, Oliver Chosen by Providence.
that the Nation cannot well stand without another: Providence has dispossessed
the former, and we are to make a new Choice. (These. 149.)

V. If a Prince be thrown out by a Rebellion; Olivers taking the Government
upon him was a deed of Charity.
the strongest Rebel may (ex Charitate) undertake the Government. (These. 150.)

VI. Any thing that is a sufficient sign of the will of God, that this is the
Person, Oliver by the Will of God.
by whom we must be Governed; is enough (as joined to Gods Laws) to oblige us
to consent, and obey him as our Governor. (These. 153.)

VII. And yet All the People have not this right of Choosing their Governors,
The Cavaliers compelled to consent, and the Brethren to choose.
but commonly a part of every Nation must be compelled to consent. (These. 159.)

VIII. Those that are known Enemies to the Common good in the chiefest parts of
it, are unmeet to Govern, For fear of the King and his Friends.
or choose Governors: (else give us up to our Enemies, or to Satan:) But such
are multitudes of ungodly vicious men.]

Presbyterian Absolution.
IX. If a People bound by Oath shall dispossess their Prince, and Choose, and
Covenant with another; they may be Obliged by the Latter, notwithstanding their
former Covenant.

The King can do no wrong with a Salvo.
X. Though a Nation wrong their King, and so quoad Meritum Causae, they are on
the worser side, yet may he not Lawfully war against the Public good, on that
account; n^r any he^p him in such a war: because propter finem, he has the
worser Cause. (These. 352.)

Take now the Opinion of these Doctors, concerning the English Government.

The King of England no Monarch.
I. THe real Sovereignty here amongst us, was in King, Lords, and Commons. (
Page 72.)

The King has the Militia if the People please.
II. The Law that says the King shall have the Militia, supposes it to be
against Enemies, and not against the Commonwealth, nor them that have part of
the Sovereignty with him. To resist him here, is not to resist Power, but
Usurpation, and private will; in such a case, the Parliament is no more to be
resisted then He. (These. 363.)

III. If the King raise War against such a Parliament upon their Declaration
of the Dangers of the Commonwealth, The People judges of the King.
the People are to take it as raised against the Commonwealth. (These. 358.)

And may depose or resist him at pleasure.
IV. And in that Case (says he) the King may not only be resisted, but cease
to be a King, and enters into a State of War with the People. (These. 368.)

Of These Blasphemous, and Seditious Maxims, (though Charged upon Mr. Baxter by
the Bishop of Worcester) the Libeller takes no notice, otherwise then by a
Tacit Allowance of them; his Agreement with Mr. Baxter in These Particulars
being sufficiently intimated in his express Acknowledgment wherein he dissents.
Nor in Sum, are they any other then the pure result of his own Opinions, only
Digested into a more Popular, and Intelligible Method. What Judgments may not
That Nation expect from Divine vengeance, where This Spirit of Treachery and
Imp^sture reigns in the Pulpit? Or if This be L^yalty, what is it which the Law
calls Treason?

If Mr. Bags^aw had been very wise, he would have forborne the Justification of
so great a Guilt, as under his own Hand appears against him (and indeed his
fate is hard, that his Testimony which goes for nothing against any m^n else
should yet stand good against himse^f) He had been wiser yet, if he had totally
declined the Controversy, and spent Those Hours in Gratitude, and Repentance,
which he has rather chosen to Employ in O^stinacy, and further Disobedience.
But to cast himself at once, out of all Terms both of Christianity, and
Humanity; neither to Regard his Duty to God, his Neigh^our, or Himself: To lash
out beyond all bounds of Piety, Loyalty, Modesty, Truth, and Prudence: (even to
the forfeiture of his own safety) This is a Prodigious heap of Miscarriages,
and yet no more then the Just Measure of his Confidence, F^lly, and Wickedness.
To dip into the Immoralities of his Life, were to stir a Puddle; and in Truth,
rather to Gratify my Revenge, then my Duty: so that I shall rather adhaere to
my Purpose of Discovering a Public Enemy, then exercise the Sting of a
Private Passion.

Those Pamphlets of his which in this Discourse I have made use of against him
are Thus Dated [ De Mon. A^s. 1659.] [ The Great Question, 1660.] (After the
Act of Indemnity) [ Pars 2 a. of the Great Quest. Sept. 10. 1661.] [ Pars 3 a.
Of Heresies Jan. 10. 1661.] [ Brief Treatise, etc. Feb. 15. 1661.] [ Two Li^els
against the Bishop of Worcester, Jan. 21. and Feb. 26. 1661/2]. [ Signs of the
Times, Jan. 28. 1661/^] [ Letter to The Lord Chancellor, May, 10. 1662.]

Only the First of These can, in the very point of Time, pretend to any favor
from the Act of Pardon; but That will not much avail Mr. Bagshaw, who by
Justifying Now, what he Did Then, does it over again, and stands accomptable
for the same Fault upon another Score.

But methinks the Case is not here, whether This Pamph^et, but whether or no
the very Author of it be Pardoned? and This Question (if any there be) arises
from the very Letter both of his Majesty's Declaration from Breda; and of the
Act it self.

Decl. from Breda.
His Majesty, in his Declaration from Breda, Grants a Free and General Pardon to
all that shall lay hold upon that Grace and Favor, and by any Public Act
Declare their doing so, and Return to the Loyalty, and Obedience of Good
Subjects: (Exceptis Excipiendis). Which Loyalty is to be Manifested, by not
Persevering in Guilt for the Future, and by not Oppos^ng the quiet, and
happiness of their Country, in the Restoration both of King, Peers, and People,
to their Just, Ancient, and Fundamental Rights: Here Is the Promise and
Condition of the Pardon: Persuant to which Promise, and Correspondent to which
Condition, the following Pardon is said expressly to be Enacted, i. e. [ In
Performance of his Royal and Gracious Word signified by His Letters to the
several Houses of Parliament now Assembled, Act of Pardon.
and His Declarations in that behalf Published.]

Now the Q^estion is, first, Whether Those that Persevere in their Guilt, and
oppose the Restoration of the King to any of his Just, Ancient, and Fundamental
Rights are not by This Limiting Condition excepted from Pardon? And the next
Question is,

Whether His Majesty's Supreme Authority in Causes Ecclesiastical, be not One
of His Just, Ancient, and Fundamental Rights? If so: Whoever Persists to oppose
the Prerogative Royal in This Particular, has no Right or Title to the Intent
or Benefit of the Act of Indemnity.

The Extent of his Majesty's Power as to the matter in Question, may be seen in
King James his Ratification of The Canons and Constitutions Ecclesiastical, in
1603. Annexed to the Book of Canons.

We do not only by our Prerogative Royal, and Supreme Authority in causes
Ecclesiastical, ratify, confirm, and establish by These our Letters Patents,
the said Canons, Orders, Ordinances, and Constitutions, and all, and every
thing in Them contained, as aforesaid; but do likewise propound, Publish, and
straightly enjoin, and Command by our Authority, and by These our Letters
Patents, the same to be diligently observed, executed, and equally kept, by all
our loving Subjects of This our Kingdom, etc. -- Straightly Charging, and
Commanding all Archbishops, Bishops, and all other that exercise any
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction within This Realm, every man in his place to see
and procure (so much as in them lies) all and every of the said Canons,
Orders, Ordinances, and Constitutions to be in all Points duly observed, not
sparing to execute the Penalties in them severally mentioned, upon any that
shall wittingly or wilfully break, or neglect to observe the same, as they
Tender the Honor of God, the Peace of the Church, Tranquillity of the Kingdom,
and their Duties, and Services to Us their KING and Sovereign.

If the King's Authority in Church Matters reaches Thus far: And if His such
Authority be a Just, Ancient, and Fundamental Right. And finally, if a
perseverance in Guilt and the Opposal of the Restoration of His Majesty to His
Just, Ancient, and Fundamental Rights, be a Delinquency, which is in Terminis
Excepted. And that the express Condition be, [a Return to the Loyalty and
Obedience of Good Subjects.] In what a Case is Mr. Bagshaw, who has Constantly
and Openly defied the very Letter, Intent, and Equity of that Gracious, and
Incomparable Act of Mercy? As is already made appear from his own Writings.

Nor is it Mr. Bagshaw's Case alone, but every man's, who either by Word, or
Deed, Publicly and obstinately opposing the Ceremonies of the Church of
England, denies his Majesty's Just, Ancient, and Fundamental Right of Imposing.

I speak This with Reverence, and Submission to the better-Enform'd; and to
Correct Those Slanderous Tongues, that have the Confidence to Tax his Just, and
Gracious Majesty, for being less then his word, when They Themselves by a
Persevering, and Incorrigible Contumacy, and Disobedience, Rejecting the
Conditions of the Kings Pardon, can lay no Claim to the Benefit of it.

Having Thus far unmasqu'd my Adversary, I am now to Defend my self, and to
Prove, that I am not that wretched Thing which I have proved him to be: and so
I proceed from his Defense, to his Libel, That being the Division of his
Pamphlet.

BUt my Lord, should I ever have so far stepped out of the bounds of my ^all^n^,
E. B. Page 6. Memento Page 6.
as to write a Public Memento ( which in the very n^m^ of it co^^radicts the
Act of O^livion.) etc.
A Public Memento, though from a Private person, R. L.'S.
is both Lawful, Conscienti^us, and requisite, where the Honor, and Safety of
the King are the Q^estion: And That I take to be the Case, where his Majesty's
blessed Father is ill spoken of, his Regal Authority questioned, his Government
Reproached, and the Resolutions of this present Parliament, Despised, and
Trampled upon. This shall I prove to be the Common Subject of the Press, and by
the very Letter of the Oath of Allegiance, I am tied to Discover it: So that my
Crime is but the keeping of my Oath; and the Performance of my Duty, in the
Vindication of the King and his Government.

It was the Compleynt of King Charles the Martyr, [ That the minds of many of
our weak Subjects have been, Exact. Coll. Page 173.
and still are poisoned by scandalous seditious Pamphlets and Printed Papers,
and that so general a terror has possessed the minds and hearts of all men,
that whiles the Presses swarm (and every day produces new Tracts against the
Established Government of the Church and State) most men want the Courage or
the Conscience to write, or the opportunity and encouragement to publish such
composed sober Animadversions, as might either preserve the minds of Our Good
Subjects from such Infection, or restore and recover them when they are so
infected.] Here Is my Warrant, and my Justification.

Should I have so much aspersed the present Government, as to say, That
Defamers of the Government, if Presbyterians, E. B. Page 6.
escape be^ter than their Accusers, etc.
Observe here, upon what Occasion This was spoken. R. L'S.
Under the Head of The Tokens and Prognostiques of Seditions [Memento Cap. 2.]
I quote Sir Francis Bacon who (in his Essay of Seditions, Memento, page 5.
and Troubles) reckons Libels, and Licentious Discourses against the
Government, when they are Frequent, and Open, amongst the Signs of Troubles.
In agreement with That Judicious Person, and without any Particular Instance, I
take notice that Libels were not only the Forerunners, Ibid. page 6.
but (in a high degree) the Causes of our Late Confusions. And a little Lower;
that the Press is now as Busy, and as Bold; Sermons as Factious; Pamphlets as
Seditious; the Government Defamed, and the Defamers of it (if Presbyterians)
escape better then their Accusers.

Is it now become an Aspersion upon the Government, to lay open and complein of
Those that Asperse it? Or am I mistaken in believing him to be a Defamer of the
Government, that Charges This King with Usurpation; his Father with Tyranny:
and that reports the Rites, and Orders of the Church, for the Institutions of
the Devil? If I Prove what I say; and make appear that Defamers of the
Government (if Presbyterians) do escape better then their Accusers, I am clear
of Edward Bagshaw's second Exception; If I fail, let the Infamy lie at my Door.
He Charges me Next, for saying:

That Promoters and Justifiers of the murder of the late King, are still
continued public Preachers, E. B. Page 6.
and can come off for Printing and publishing downright Treason, when I have
much ado to escape for telling it.
Let the Reader take along with him the Connection of my Discourse, R. L'S.
whereupon he grounds This Cavil.

Memento, page 8.
Sir Francis Bacon says, that [ when Discords, and Quarrels, and Factions, are
carried openly and audaciously, it is a sign the Reverence of Government is
lost.

Ibid.
And are not Factions carried Openly and Audaciously now! (says L' Estrange)
when the Promoters, and Justifiers of the Murder of the late King, are still
continued public Preachers, without the least Pretense to a Retraction?
Dictating still, by Gestures, Shrugs, and Signs, That Treason to their Auditory
which they dare not utter? What are their Sermons, but Declamations against
Bis^ops: Their Covenant-keeping Exh^rtations, but the Contempt of an
established Law? How it comes to pass, Heaven knows; but these Honest F^llows
can come off for Printing, and Publishing downright Treason, when I have much
ado to escape for Telling of it.

If I am now able to make it out, that such Preachers ^here are, and such
Printers, and Publis^ers, as are here spoken of; I do no more in Discovering
them, then I have sworn to do.

For the Printers, and Publishers, I have allotted Them a place by Themselves;
and concerning the Preachers, I shall only Instance in Mr. George Cokayn, of
Pancras Soper Lane, and Mr. William Jenkin of Christ-Church, London. The former
whereof Promoted and pressed the Murder of the late King, in a Sermon before
the Commons, N^v^mb. 29. 1648. and the Other, Justified That Murder, and
applauded it in another Sermon before the Commons, Sept. 24. 1656. as follows.

Think not to save your selves by an unrighteous saving of them, who are the
Lords and the Peoples known Enemies. George Cokain Flesh expiring, and the
Spirit Inspiring, page 26. and 27. Printed for Giles Calvert.
You may not imagine to obtain the favor of those, against whom you will not
do Justice; for certainly, if ye act not like Gods in this particular, against
men truly obnoxious to Justice, they will be like Devils against you. O^serve
that place, 1 King. 22.31. compared with chap. 20. It is said in chap. 20. that
the King of Syria came against Israel, and by the mighty power of God, he and
his Army were overthrown, and the King was taken Prisoner. Now the mind of God
was (which he then discovered, only by that present providence) that Justice
should have been executed upon him, but it was not, whereupon the Prophet comes
with A^hes upon his face, and waited for the King of Israel in the way where he
should return; and as the King passed by, he cried unto him, Verse. 42. of Chap.
20.
Thus says the Lord, Because thou have let go a man whom I appointed for
destruction, therefore thy life shall go for his life. Now see how the King of
Syria, after this, answers Ahab' s love: About three years after, Chap. 22.31.
Israel and Syria engage in a new War, and the King of Syria gives command unto
his Soldiers, that they should fight neither against small nor great, but
against the King of Israel. Benhadad' s life was once in Ahab' s hand, and he
ventured Gods dispeasure to let him go: but see how Benhadad rewards him for
it, Fight neither against small nor great, but against the King of Israel.

Honorable and Worthy, The Application.
if God do not lead you to do Justice upon those that have been the great
Actors in shedding innocent Blood, never think to gain their love by sparing of
them; for they will, if opportunity be ever offered, return again upon you; and
then they will not fight against the poor and mean ones, but against those that
have been the Fountain of that Authority and Power which has been improved
against them.

Worthy Patriots, you that are our Rulers in this Parliament, it is often said,
William Jenkins The Policy of Princes, p. 33. Printed for Samuel Gellibrand.
we live in Times wherein we may be as good as we please: wherein we enjoy in
purity and plenty the Ordinances of Jesus Christ. Praised be God for this, even
That God who has delivered us from the imposition of Prelatical Innovations,
A^tar-genuflections and Cringings, with Crossings, and all that Popish trash
and trumpery. And truly (I speak no more then what I have often thought and
said) The removal of those insupportable burdens, A taste of the Reforming
Spirit.
coutervails for the Blood and Treasure shed and spent in these late
distractions. Nor did I as yet ever hear of any godly men that desired, The
Kings Murder justified by a Professor.
were it possible, to purchase their friends or money again, at so dear a rate,
as with the return of these, to have those soul-burdening, Antichristian-y^kes
re-imposed upon us: And if any such there be, I am sure that desire is no part
of their godliness, and I profess my self in that to be none of the number.

Mr. Bagshaw Taxes me, in the Fourth place, for saying that great Dangers are
still remaining, etc.

R. L'S.
Should I have said, That great dangers are still remaining, in not preferring
the Kings Friends, E. B. Page 6.
( as if his Majesty would pr^f^r any, ^ut those that were of unsuspected
Loyalty) should I have added further, tha^ the danger is great, and number
also, of ill-chosen Justices: All which passages directly tend not only to
d^fame the Government, but to render it ridiculous, as if it were not politic
enough to preserve it self, etc.
I do not pretend, to hint any Danger, because the Kings Friends are not
Preferred; but because diverse of his Persevering, and Irreclaimable Enemies
are: and This I conceive may be spoken without Offense either to Loyalty, or
Good-manners. Are none preferred, but by his Majesty's Special Nomination and
Appointment? Or are none but Persons of unsuspected Loyalty Preferred? How
comes Edward Bagshaw to be Preferred then? (a Libeller against Praelacy, and
Church-Rites; and a Denyer of the Kings Authority.)

Touching the Danger, and Number, of Ill-chosen Justices; I do not speak of
what People have been, but of what they Are; and if the Number of such be
Great, I think nobody do ubts of the Danger. Is it not well, when men may be
Bayl'd for Threatening another Change, and hinting that This King will not stand
long; when the Person that gives Notice of this is forced to fly his Country
for it? It is not long since a Compleint of This Quality was brought to his
Majesty's Chief Secretary; and, in Truth, there are but too many Instances of
This Nature.

But Mr. Bagshaw (I perceive) is of opinion, that the King had better be
Destroyed by not knowing These Indignities, then that the Government (in his
Learned sense) should be Defamed by Discovering them. Caesar was Murdered in
the Senate; and his Murderers were (in our Adversaries Phrase) of Unsuspected
Loyalty. Had any man made Caesar Ridiculous, that had adverted him of the
Conspiracy? In short: Reason of State belongs to Ministers of State; but
Enformation in matter of Fact, (where the Public is Concerned) is every
Private man's Duty, and every Honest man's Business.

Should I, after I had in some former Pamphlet expressly Libelled your L^rdship,
afterward by making some dull Aphorisms about a Favorite, E. B. Page 6.
labor to abuse you to your face; I should then think I had done enough to
deserve, not only the Name, but likewise the Punishment* that is due to one
that is facti^us and Turbulent.
To make short work, R. L'S,
I think the Libeller deserves the Pillory, and I Am Content to stand the Issue,
whether it shall be Bagshaws Eat, or Mine. Why does he not Name that same
Former Pamphlet; and show my Lord what it is he calls a Libell? I shall not make
half the Ceremony with Him, but immediately prove This same half-witted Levite
to be the very Thing he would have Me Thought to be.

In the Ninth Chapter of my Memento, Memento, p. 85.
concerning Seditions; and showing in what manner they arise from These Seven
Interests. The Church; the Ben^h; the Court; the Camp; the City; the Country;
and the Body-Representative: Treating of the Court, (...). Page 100.
I make use of a Judgment of Sir Francis Bacon's in his Essay of Couns^l, which
is, that a Prince may be endangered in his Counsel; either by an Over-greatness
in One Counselor; or an over-strict Combination in Diverse.

According to the Quality, and Requiry of the Subject, under the Head of
Over-greatness in One Counselor, is handled the Humor and Working of a
Vicious Favorite: Page 103, 104, and 10^.
If Scrupulous, he goes to work Thus; if Ambi^iciu, Popular, Fawning, Covetous,
etc. So or so: And This do; Mr. Bags^aw's Scurrilous R^verence, call an Abuse
of the Lo^d Chancellor: sawcily imposing upon my Naked, and Political
Discourses, his own Libellous, and Personal Application.

Why does he not charge me with Flattery too, for asking what can be more
Desirable, Page 188.
then for a Prince to have a Watchful, Wise, Faithful Counselor; and the
People a Firm, Prudent, Patriote, in the same Noble Person? Why did he not as
well make me mean the Bishops, the Judges, The General, the City-Magistrates,
the Gentry, and the Commonalty, in my Reflections upon the Other Six Interests?
Truly upon the whole, if Mr. Bagshaw will agree to it, let the Libeller be
Gibbetted. After diverse Rhetoricating Exclamations; If He should have said
Thus or so (in his little Pedantique way.)

YEt, my Lord, (says Mr. B.) all this, and something worse is said in Pri^t, by
one Mr. L'Estrange, E. B. Page 6. and 7.
a Gentlemen whom I never saw, but yet I have ^ea^d so much il of him, that I
think my self obliged to thank him for his defam^tio^s of me; since by
confessing himself, in the same Book, to be guilty of Drunkenness and
Profaneness; he has said much more than I can knowingly charge him with, and
I am sure more than enough to discredit his own Testimony. For he that is
neither Sober to himself, nor Religious to God, cannot possi^^y (...) Just and
Civil to (...)* and Impiety will easily lead him to Forge^y: I shall not
therefore seem to plead my own Concer^ment against him; since (...) Credit and
Esteem with Good men i^ either very little, and then my sollicitousness wi^^
but little promote it; or else it is so great, that it is already placed beyond
the Reach of such Rude Assaults and Battery, and needs not my own Pe^ for its
Defense and Vindication.
TRuly I should be loath that Mr. Bagshaw's Friends should speak Well of Me, R.
L'S.
for I must Do Ill to deserve it, and Purchase their Kindness by Betraying my
Country; so that Their Ill Will shall never break My Heart. But do they speak
so very Ill, as to make Mr. Bagshaw Thank me for Defaming him? In Truth, the
Man is somewhat a Preposterous Christian; and it may be, it is his Method, to be
Thankful to his Enemies, as well as Ungrateful to his Friends. Whoever doubts
of the Latter, may be satisfied from Dr. Pierce his Letter to Dr. Heylin, at
the end of his Discoverer Discovered. And I must Add, that in the point of
Reviling his Superiors, and A^using his Friends, his Life has been all of a
Piece.

Touching My Defamations of him; Alas; save in my Memento, I never Mentioned
him. Nor There Neither, but upon a fair and Prudential Account; for it
concerned me to procure, that the World might not take Him for an Honest Man,
that had Reported Me for a Knave. In fine, he talks, in General, of
Defamations; but let him, if he dares, put me to prove the Particulars. See now
in what follows, the Confidence, Lewdness, and Weakness of the Gentleman.

He says, that I confess my self Guilty of Drunkenness* and Prophanen^ss, which
Discredits my Testimony; Impiety leading easily to Forgeries. (The last it is
possible he speak^ upon Experience.) My Words are These:

I do here Publicly confess my self not Absolutely Free from Those
Distempers, Memento Page 41, 42.
which (not to cast either upon Good Nature, or Complexion) I am both Sorry
for, and ashamed of.

If I have but Once drank my self to a Distemper; or if I have taken Gods' Name
in vain but Once in my Whole Life, I may confess my self not Absolutely Free,
and yet not charge my self with Drunkenness, and Profaneness: for (under
favor of Mr. Bagshaw's Philosophy) One Act does not make a Habit; and I defy
the World to Tax me with it, So That in This Particular, my Adversary has
streyn'd a point of Modesty: His next slip is a Lewd one.

All Men have their Sins to answer for; and without Repentance, no flesh shall
be saved. I have here made a Pullique Confession, and as Publicly Declared a
Penitence, and Shame, so far as I am Guilty. Now what can be a greater Scandal
to Religion; or a greater Affront to Christianity? then for a Professed
Minister of the Gospel, to turn the Confession of a Penitent into Libells: The
most Necessary Duties of a Christian into Reproaches;
and to make Repentance it self, shameful, and Ridiculous. And This is the
Disingenuous Dealing of Mr. Bagshaw, which if it were not menaged with a large
Proportion of Simplicity, were indeed Unpardonable: he would not otherwise have
argued, as if the speaking of Truth were a Discredit to my Testimony. I suppose
it needless to desire the Readers Notice, that in his 7th Page, he resolves not
to Defend himself; and Page 9. he says he has done it; (without saying any
thing of Himself, Between).

E. B. Page 7. and 8.
But, My Lord, how careless soever I am of securing my own Fame, yet in zeal to
the Public Honor and Faith of our Nation, I must take leave to say this, that
for any to dedicate a Book to ^our Lordship (who are by your place the great
Conservator of our Laws) and in it presume to break that very Law, which His
Majesty has appeared to be most tender of, and that so openly, as to revive
the mention of our War, under the Title of Rebellion, to call the Lords and
Commons then assembled in Parliament, a Company of Schismatics and Rebels; and
with them, to asperse the whole City of London, who either never intentionally
forfeited, or else have Nobly redeemed the mistake of their Loyalty: This, my
Lord, is an insolence of so infectious a Nature, that, if your Lordship does
not suppress it, men who love their Honors above their Lives; will not think
themselves fairly dealt with. For I must leave it to your Lordship to judge,
how little security we may expect from any of our old Laws, and how little
Obedience can justly be exacted unto the New ones; if, in the fa^^of the wo^ld,
and with (...) Lordships Privity, ^ay under your Protection, our la^e Magna
Charta can be, in the very Terms and Design of it, so apparently violated.
If Mr. Bagshaw were as Zealous for the Honor of the Public, R. L'S.
as he is Careless of securing his own Fame, This Nation would not afford a
better Subject, or Pa^riote. ('Bare him but his Mistakes) He writes my Lord
Chancellor [The Great Conservatour of our Laws] (by his Place) That Is his
Error: For the Chancellor is the Conservatour of the King's Conscience; and
the great Moderatour of the Positive, and Li^eral Rigor of the Law, according
to the more Favorable Dictate of Pi^us Equity. This for his Instruction.

Betwixt Zeal and Ignorance, in a Saucy, Menacing fashion, he does as good as
tell my Lord, that He had best do Justice upon L'Estrange; for, if he does not,
there are men of Honor, -- and so forth. My Crime (it seems) is the Dedication
of a Bo^k, in Contempt of the Act of Oblivion. I Call the Late War a
Rebellion, he says. It Is right, I do so; and the Rebels Names are Excepted in
the Act it self. He will have it too, that I call the Lords and Commons
Assem^led in Parliament, a Company of Schismatics, and Rebels. Herein,
Memento. Page 65. and 250.
is Mr. Bagshaw (which is a Miracle) as good as his Profession; that is,
exceeding Careless of his Fame; for I say no such thing. Our LEGIONS of the
Reformation (say I) were raised by CERTAIN Rebellious Lords and Commons. That
SOME such there were, Mem. Page 65.
the very Act Allows. In Page 250. I cannot find what he means, unless my
calling of The Covenant a Rebellious League, and in That Expression, I suppose,
This Parliament will warrant me. The Gentleman brands me next, for Aspersing
the whole City of London. My Words are, that the Faction was [ Seconded by the
City of London] which Expression refers to a Powerful, and Leading Party in it,
which was Then Packed, and Tumul^uary. Where was That Freedom, Exact. Collect.
Page 557.
and Privilege (says the late King) when Alderman Pennington, and Captain Ven
brought down their Myrmidons, etc.] And where is the Crime now (say I) of Naming
the Kings Judges?

R. L.'S.
E. B. Page 8.
I Know very well, that the Person who does this, presumes much upon his former
Loyal^y; and would make his past Services compo^^d for his present Frenzy; and
truly, my Lord, I must confess, that had all this ill Language been vented by
one of whose honesty there never had been any suspicion; had one defied the
Presbyterians ( as this Author is pleased to call all that are not of his, that
is, that are of any Religion) whose Life, or at least whose Loyalty had been
untainted; then the worthiness of the Person would very much have mitigated the
infamy of his Slanders; but for Shimei to curse Absalom; for Cromwell 's Spy to
cry out Treason; for the Protector' s Earwigge, to rayl upon the Kings Enemies;
this is a thing so very indecent, and incongruous, that nothing but your
Lordships condemning Mr. L'Estrange to his own Whip, or, because that is not
smart enough, to the Beadles, will ever cure his Lask, or bring him within any
tolerable compass of sob^iety.
BLess me, how it works upward and downward with him! Phrensie] -- Cromwell's
Spy, the Protectours Ear-wigg] -- Condemn him to the Beadles to cure his Lask.]
These are the Flowers of Edward Bagshaw's Modesty; take him now in the shape of
D. E.

Second Letter of Animadv. Page 1. Ibid. Page 2.
A Person so lost to all Good Breeding, of so forfeited, of so undone a
Reputation, in point of mere Morality, etc.] A Hog playing upon the Organs] A
Sc^venger was^ing a Surplice] a Morrice-dancer] a Fiddler in all Governments,
and would have been a Fiddler in the worst of them, for which end he knows how
many pitiful Legs and Faces he made to Scrape acquaintance with the Tyrant
Oliver] a Common Barretter] a Mercinary Songster] that for two Crowns more
would change his Note, and Rail against his Patron] A whiffling Thin-soul'd
Adversary] Who has not let any Thing Sacred, Ibid. Page 3.
whether Person, or Doctrine, escape his venomous Pasquils.

Would not any man that did not know This Fellow for a Levite, take him for a
Buffon, or an Affidavit-man? Is This the Temper of an Evangelist, or the
Dialect of a Gospel-Minister? It makes Religion look like a Fable, to see a
Common Libeller in the place of a Preacher, a known Seducer in the place of a
Guide. What Agreement is there with Christ and Belial? The Spirit of Love, and
Truth, and That of Slander, and Imposture? or in fine, what proportion betwixt
the Duties of a Divine, and the Practices of Mr. Bagshaw?

Of all the Ill he says, I Challenge him to Prove One Syllable, it is not my
part to prove a Negative. Yet Thus far I Will adventure.

For my Moralities, I dare refer my self to any man that knows Me, and has not
been an Enemy to the King: For my Quality, and Application, which he represents
for Mean and Mercenary, I must enform Mr. Bagshaw, that L' Estrange has been in
the same Seat in Norfolk, Cambden's Description of Norfolk.
almost thrice as long as Presbytery has been in the World: And for my Loyalty,
he gives himself the Lie, in calling me Cromwell's Spy; for he Confesses in the
very next Page, that the Crafty Tyrant would not admit me. Now if Mr. Bagshaw
will stand the Hazard of Calling Me to a Particular Proof of what I have said
concerning Him (which in his railing Pamphlet he has yet so much wit in his
Anger, as not to make any words of) if I make it not good, let me abide the
blame of it.

But why should I think my self Ill-used, when he has scarce treated any man
better? In his forementioned Libel against the Bishop, he has These
Expressions; beside the Abominable Untruths which he Fathers upon the Right
Reverend Bishop.

The Fatal Example of That one Bishop's Usurpations [Pag. 3.] Impertinent and
False, [Pag. 5.] Most False, Letter of Animadver. Pa.
[Ibid.] If any are Choleric and Teasty enough to be of his mind, [ibid.] As
to Christian Charity the whole thing is but a Letter of Defiance against it,
[Pag. 6.] There can be nothing more false, [ibid.] This Malitio^s and
ill-grounded Fan^y, [ibid.] It is bold and Impious, [Pag. 7.] Were he either
Christian or Man enough, [Pag. 9.]

He that would know more of him, needs but enquire of any Honest man that knows
him; unless he had rather read him further in Himself, and Then his Narrative
against Dr. Busby does the Business: A Perfon, not only Eminent and Exemplary
for Piety, Justice, Learning, and Hospitality, but his most Indulgent, and
Bountiful Master; One that Comforted him in his Disgrace (he knows what I mean;
That, which made him quit the Proctorship to Carpinder) One that Relieved,
and Entertained him in his Distress: and yet This Venerable Person, does Mr.
Bagshaw endeavor to supplant by his Interest with Bradshaw, (and had well-nigh
Effected it) Reproaching him at last, with Perjury, Treachery; as a man
Covetous, Cruel, Void of Conscience, Violen^, Dissembling, Corrupt, Am^itious,
Tyrannical, etc. In his Preface to This Pamphlet, he falls foul upon Dr.
Pierce: And to conclude; after his Invectives against Majesty, Episcopacy, The
Right Reverend, and the R^ver^nd, his Learned Indignation Descends upon Me;
Recommending me to mine own Whip; which, if his Forehead were not Wainscot, he
would not Name without a Blush, it being only a Temperate Reply upon a
Scurrilous Li^el of his against the Bishop of Wor'ster.

Truly the Quality of my Adversary might very well dispense Me the Trouble of
a Vindication; and yet methinks it looks like something; to be charged with
Wickedness by so competent a Judge of it, as Mr. Bagshaw; and it is not without
Color, that Bradshaws Property should be able to give some Account of
Cromwell's Intelligencers. Wherefore to stop the mouth of Calumny it se^f; or
which is more, to Silence Mr. Bagshaw: I defy the whole world to Contradict
any One Syllable of This Ensuing Relation, which I make a little Tedious, to
save my self a further, and a double Labor.

FRom the first Expedit^on of the Scots, in 1639. to This Instant, I never
declined any Hazard, Travail, or Expense, within the Compass of my Nature or
Power, in reference to my Duty to the Royal Interest. In 1644. I was Condemned
to Die for his Majesty. Dr. Mills (then Judg-A^vocate of the Court, and now
Chancellor to the Bishop of Norwich) pronounced my Sentence; (None of my
Friend, either Then, or since) let him say, if at the B^rr I disowned the Cause
for which I was adjudg'd to Die. Being thrown into Newgate, I was Visited by Mr.
Thorowgood, and Mr. Arrowsmith, (Two of the Synod) who very kindly offered me
their utmost Interest, if I would but make some Petitionary Acknowledgment, and
submit to take the Covenant. These Gentlemen (if Living, as I suppose they are)
will acquit me, that I Refused it. In Order to my Reprieve, I wrote several
Letters, to The Earl of N^rthumb^rland, the Earl of Stanford, (and others of
the Nobility that are since Dead) From which Noble Persons I received all
Honorable Justice, and F^v^ur. In the House of C^mmons, I was Partic^larly
Obliged (among others) to Sir John C^r^et, and Sir H^nry Ch^^mond^y: who can
bear me witness that I used no Unworthy means to save my Life: But Reprieved I
was, and in Order to a Further Hearing, in appearance; though eff^ctu^lly,
during Pleasure.

After almost Thirty Months spent in vain Endeavors either to come to a
Hearing, or to put my self into an Exchangeable Condition; I Printed This
following State of my Case, and Dedicat^d my Charge and Defense, as an Appeal
from the Court Martial, to the Lords and Comm^ns. Entitled, L'Estrange his
Appeal from the Court Martial to the Parliament.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
HE that suffers without a President, is not bound to act by one; if I be the
only man, in whose behalf no man will m^ve, blame me not (I beseech you) if I
be the only man too, that moves for himself. My Application must be singular,
as my Fortune; which (I think) is peculiarly mine own.

After thirty months patience, at least a hundred Petitions; (but for ^reathing
room) not so few Letters of Thanks to your Members: (only for saying, it is
hard.) After all this, and m^re, (and to no p^Rpose) I am told, my Case is
different from other men's. I am condemned; and there is nothing to be done in my
business. Am I then becalmed in Newgate? Truth it is, I was condemned by a
Court of War, but by your Honors Reprieved, and with some check to the
tem^rity to the Court. For I was (in effect) tried by one Committee, and
sentenced by another. Since that, I have awaited my promised Hearing, and can
now expect no longer, (unless I make it a Business of the next World,) being
(at this instant) reduced almost to my first Principles, by a Consumptive,
Hectique Distemper: I shall therefore immediately bring my self to the Bar,
and Appeal to you as my Judges. My charge was taken in Characters from the
mouth of the Judg-Advocate, and this is exactly the same with that, whereupon I
stand condemned. My Answer to it, I present you with it; and with that, my
Desires; which are, that either upon security, or my Parole, I may enjoy a
seasonable Liberty; upon Conditions either of rendering my self a Prisoner
within what time you fix: or indefinitely, when you demand it. If any man shall
yet scruple my freedom upon the old score, I offer my self to any charge he
shall pretend against me: But if thus I must perish, as I have been civil to
you, I shall be just to my self, and find at last some way to vindicate my
Ashes from the reproach and infamy of a Gaol.

Be pleased now to take as fair a view of my Crime, as you have of my
punishment, and then to measure them.




The Judge Advocate having read the several Examinations and the Commission,
thus begins. Judg-Advocate. Sir John Corbet, I have now done with the Evidence,
I shall only crave leave now to make some few Observations.

First, That this Commission of the Prisoner, is not the Commission of a
Soldier, to raise, or conduct any strength, or men of War; but a Commission
of mere Bribery and corruption, to make a party with Money and Preferment.

Secondly, The Prisoner came with this Commission from the Enemy, into the
Quarters of the Parliament, without Drum, Trumpet, or Pass; which alone brings
him within the danger and penalty of a Spy.

Thirdly, He came attended with no manner of Forces as an Enemy, but alone, in
a secret manner, and made choice of a solitary place (near Lynne) to obscure
himself, the better to effect his Treacherous Design.

Fourthly, That he relied not on the strength of his own Party, to have
surprised Lynne, but used unwarrantable and treacherous means to accomplish the
some, promising Leman 1000 l. and Corporal Haggar 100 l. and a Canoniers place,
(both of the Garrison) if they would contribute their assistance therein.

Lastly, His Design was of that nature, and carried on in so clandestine a way,
as that himself thought not fit to Treat upon it, without a strict Obligation
of Secrecy.

By all which it appears, that as the Prisoner came not into our Quarterss as a
fair and open Enemy, but with Treacherous ends and practices; so being now
taken in the manner, he may not expect the privilege of a just Enemy, but
rather the condign punishment, which by the Law and Custom of Arms, belongs
to Spies and Treacherous Conspirators.


To These I Answer in Order, and for Satisfaction, refer you to the Commission
it self. The Commission. Charles R.

WE having received from our Trusty and Well-beloved Roger L'Estrange,
D^clarations of the Good Affections of diverse of our well-affected Subjects of
our Counties of Norfolk and Suffolk, and particularly of our Town of Lynne, as
also some overtures concerning the reducing of our said Town of Lynne,: We have
thought ^it forthwith to return our Royal Thanks unto our said well-affected
Subjects, and particularly to give our said Trusty and well-beloved Roger
L'Estrange these encouragements to proceed in our Service, and principally in
the work of Reducing the said Town of Lynne.

First, That in case, that attempt shall be gone through withal, he the said
Roger L'Estrange shall have the Government of the Place.

Secondly, That what Engagements shall be made unto the Inhabitants of the said
Place, or any other person capable of contributing effectually to that Service,
by way of Reward, either in employment in his Majesty's Navy, or Forts; or in
Moneys not exceeding the sum of 5000 l. the service being performed, shall be
punctually made good unto them.

Thirdly, That they shall in this Work receive what Assistance may be given
them from any our nearest Garrisons.

Fourthly, That when^our said Town shall be reduced unto Our Obedience, We
shall forthwith send thither such a considerable Power, as shall be sufficient
to Relieve and Preserve them, We being a^ present (even without this) fully
resolved to send a considerable Power, to encourage our faithful Subjects in
those parts, and to regain our Rights and Interests there.

By his Majesty's Command, GEORGE DIGBY.
Oxford, November. 28. 1644.

Now to my Charge. L'Estrange. FIrst, This Commission is the Commission of a
Soldier, enabling me to raise and conduct such a Party, as should attempt the
surprizall of the Town. The matter of Money and preferment is in the Commission
expressly propounded by way of reward; and to pay the Soldier, is neither
Bribery, nor Corruption.

Secondly, The Article runs, Within the Quarters of the Army, not Parliament.
But I was not apprehended within the Quarters of the Army, therefore no Spy.

Thirdly, I came attended as an Enemy; that is, enabled to any Act of Hostility
whatsoever.

Fourthly, I relied upon the strength of mine own Party, and used warrantable
means to accomplish the surprise. Leman was not of the Garrison; Haggar was,
but appeared not to me under that Notion. Admit them both, what you would have
them; I could have justified it. They voluntarily proffered to assist me, and I
had been a Traitor or a Fool, if I had either discouraged, or dissuaded them.

Lastly, The Design was of that nature, that if discovered it were lost, (the
quality and hazard of all surprises) I therefore thought fit not to Treat,
without a strict Obligation of Secrecy.

By all which it appears;

First, That I came not into your Quarters at all; that is, not the Quarters of
the Army.

Next, That I came as a fair and open Enemy (never pretending to be any other
than I was.)

Lastly, That I had no Treacherous ends.

Being thus apprehended, by the Laws and Customs of War, I am a just Enemy,
and Prisoner of War; no Spy, or Treacherous Conspiratour.


Upon my desire of a days respit to prepare and digest my Defense, the
Judg-Advocate enterposed in these words. Judg-Advocate. Sir John Corbet,
whereas the Prisoner desires time to make his Defense, alleging that he has
Witnesses to purge himself, that are necessary for his Defense; I conceive that
altogether unnecessary, because we proceed only upon his own confession, and
there being no Witnesses against him, we take the Case as he has set it
forth, and committed it to your judgment; you may perceive, and he might have
remem^red, that his Charge was founded not only upon the special Articles, and
Ordinances of Parliament, but upon the general Rules and Customs of War,
which every Soldier ought to be knowing of. And (Sir) so far as I understand
any thing of the Customs of War, It Is a known Rule, that for any to come into
the Enemies Quarters, without a Pass, Drum, or Trumpet, that makes him a Spy;
and then to Treat with them of the Garrison, or to draw them to Treat to betray
the Garririson, this makes him a Treacherous Conspiratour.


L'Estr. If my Charge be founded upon mine own Confession, produce those
clauses, thence, whereupon this Charge is to be made good. My whole Confession
is (in substance) This; that I had ever been of the Kings Party, and that I
intended to execute this Commission.

I urged then, the impossibility of Betraying a Trust I never received; and to
my self; and that I should be both Enemy, and Traitor: And again; how
inconsistent it was with the Equity, and Reason, of the Law of Arms, (which is
uniform, and universal) that the same Law which punishes the Deser^our of his
Trust with Death, should with Death also punish the Assertour of it.

To This


Judg-Advocate. Sir, the Prisoner mistakes the Point, he is not charged with
breach of Trust: It is not said, he had any Trust, or broke any, ^ut that he
did endeavor to procure them to betray, which had a Trust, and so he did plot,
and those were to be his Confederates.


L'Estr. By this Rule, he that Summons, Assaults, or Besieges a Place (because
in so doing, he endeavors the surrendering and yielding it up to the Enemy)
shall be arraigned as an Apostate, or a Traitor: The very Article involving
him in the same danger with him that endeavors the betraying of it. Again, the
Article says expressly, it must be contrary to the Rules of War: Rules
(certainly) preceding this, and which it self is not: Rules positive and known,
not Arbitrary. Now show that Positive, known Law, which I have Transgrest. In
one word: The Court Martial by its own Laws cannot Try an Enemy.


Judg-Advocate. Sir you see the Case, it is not what he says is Law, nor what
I say is Law; but what you judge to be Law. You see the Case is plain, he came
without Trumpet, Drum, or Pass, into our Quarters from the Enemy; There, he
dealt with the Garrison of Lynne, and in that case, he came not with the face
of an Enemy, but as a Spy.


L'Estr. To the Business of a Spy, Thus.

First, I was no Spy.

Next, I had not been Tryable in this Court, if I had been one.

I was none, being apprehended neither in your Garrison, nor Quarters; for by
the Quarters of the Army, is intended the place where the Army lies enquarter'd
at the time of the Apprehension of such a person; but where no Forces are,
there is neither use, nor possibility of a Spy.

Upon this Assertion, that this Court took no Cognizance of Spies. The
Judg-Advocate, thus:


Judg-Advocate. Sir John Corbet, the Gentleman might have saved a labor, and
not limited the Power of this Court: for they proceed upon a Law, common,
betwixt the enemy and us.


L'Estr. If this Court Martial proceed upon a Law common betwixt the two
Armies, what mean those restrictive Clauses, so frequent in those Ordinances,
by virtue whereof they sit and determine; where they are expressly The letter of
of the Ordinance.
limited and appointed, to proceed according to the Articles there specified?
Again, what needs the annexion of five particular Articles of the Earl of Essex
his, with Ordinances virtuating them to proceed according to those Articles?
what need these Ordinances, if the Court could proceed without them? And why
are but five Articles expressed, if their Power extends to all? Now if the Court
be limited to those Articles, there being no Article against Spies among them,
I have proved what I desire.


Judg-Advocate. Sir John Corbet, to take away all Dispute about the Power and
Authority of the Court, and the rules upon which they proceed, I shall read the
last Ordinance of Parliament that was made in this particular case of Mr.
L'Estrange.

The ORDER.
IT is this day Ordered by the Lords and Commons, That Roger L'Estrange be
referred to the Commissioners for Martial-Law, and to be speedily proceeded
against, according to the proceedings of Martial-Law, for being taken with a
Commission from the King, for the delivering of the Town of Lynne to the King,
and endeavoring accordingly to d^ it.

John Brown.




By this Ordinance you are not limited to any particular Article, but are left
to the latitude and scope of Martial-Law in general, and this Court has made
choice to proceed against the Prisoner upon a known and common Rule of Martial
proceedings, by which the other side proceed against ours; therefore he has no
cause of complaining against the equity of this Rule.


R. L'Estr. True, this Order refers me to the Commissioners for Martial-Law,
to be proceeded against according to the proceedings of Martial-Law; that is,
Such Martial-Law as they are Commissioners f^r; and what that is, those
Ordinances which enable them, will best determine; they are there, as well as
here, styled Commissioners for, and Executors of Martial Law, yet not in the
latitude; now if they be not Commissioners for Martial-Law in the latitude,
neither must their proceedings be in the latitude.


Something more, to the same purpose, was (a while) bandyed and retorted, but
(in substance) the Dispute closed here. The Commissioners withdrew to
Weavers-hall, whence (after some half-hours Debate) returning, the
Judg-Advocate admonis^ed me to acknowledge the fair respects of the Court, in
that they had afforded me till Saturday at three afternoon, to form and
strengthen my Defense (this being Thursday.) Upon Saturday late at night, I was
brought to the Bar, not suffered to speak, Condemned, For endeavoring the
Betraying of the Town and Garrison of Lynne, etc. Adjudged to be hanged; and
many persons contributed to this Vote, who had not heard one syllable of my
Trial. After I had received my sentence, I threw a paper among them, adding
with-all, that it was my Defense; which, since they would not hear, they might
read: A Wilts. Gentleman burnt it. I was thence conducted to Newgate; and here
the story falls into a Circle, Sir John Corbet was President of the Court, and
in that relation, I have often to do with his Name, I would leave it as fair as
I found it; I never believed the Gentleman my Enemy.

Newgate June 1647.

After almost Four years Imprisonment, (with ^y Keeper's Privity) I slipped
into Kent; and after the Dissolution of That Affair, with much difficulty I got
Beyond Sea. About the Latter end of August, 1653. The Long-Parliament being
Routed by Oliver, I returned into England. And now I come to Mr. Bagshaw's
Particular Charge.

E. B. Page 8. and 9.
I Would not willingly, while I plead for the keeping of ^ur Laws by others, be
found a Transgressor of them my self; yet since he does bear himself so much
upon his Innocence, as if he needed not the Laws pr^tection; I must crave leave
to repeat what I know your Lordship is fully acquainted with, that this very
Pamphleter did heretofore frequently solicit that he might be admitted to
private conference with Oliver, and humbled himself to so low an ebb of
baseness, that he often bro^ght his Fiddle under his Cloak to facilitate his
entry; and when he saw that craf^y Tyrant would not admit of one, whom he knew
unfit for the management of a serious Treason; he then by little Bribes,
bestowed upon his nearest Attendants, showed how willing he was to purchase
Access at any Rate; All which Attempts were n^thing else, but so much unfledged
Treason; which would not so long have fluttered in the dark, had but that
Tyrant thought him worthy of employment, and added wings un^o his waxen
disp^sition.
R. L'S.
It Is Truth, I bear my self so much upon my Innocence, that I disclaim the
Benefit of the Pardon; and (if I know my self) the Punishment would be less
Grievous to me then the Crime, if I were Guilty. B^t Mr. Bagshaw says, I am;
tells his Story; and has the Face to affirm, that it is no more then to his
knowledge, my Lord Chancellor is fully acquainted with. To which in Answer;

I must enform the world, that my Lord Chancellor has, not long since, upon
his Honor, professed himself a Stranger to the very Rumor of what is here
laid down in charge against me. (Yet (with my Libellers Leave) to be fully
acquainted with a Matter, goes further then the hearing of a Report; and
Implies, so to know a thing, a^ to know the Truth, and Bottom of it.) His
Lordship was pleased likewise at the same time, to Declare, that he never did,
or could believe me Capable of so great a Baseness: and that he thought me a
very Honest man. So that Mr. Bagshaw stands now upon his single Testimony, to
prove what he has said.

He will have it, that I frequently solicited a Private Conference with
Oliver. I would not care if I had done so; for I could make twenty fair
Pretenses to warrant it; But I do utterly, and to all purposes deny it. In
sooth his next is a choice Piece. He says, That I often brought my Fiddle under
my Cloak to facilitate my Entry.

Surely this same Edward Bagshaw has been Pastor to a Graves-end-Boat, he has
the vein so right. A Fiddle under my Cloak? Truly my Fiddle is a Base-Viol; and
that is somewhat a troublesome Instrument under a Cloak. 'Twas a Great
Oversight he did not tell my Lord to what Company I belonged too; but a man may
see what a Libeller is when the Devil leaves him to himself. In earnest, This
Device, is not worth a Serious Word. But we will to That that is.

Behold the Glorious Champion of the Pretended Holy Cause, and by what Crooked
Shifts The Miserable Wretch strives to Mainteyn it: Think Then what kind of
Cause it is that needs or owns the Aid of so Infamous a Method, or so
shameless a Patron. Take all that ever dropped from his Pen upon This Subject;
What is it but a Flux of Poison? and totally directed either to Propagate
Error, or Deprave Virtue; to make Some Really Wicked, and to make Others Appear
so. Is This the Office of God's Minister, or of Satan's? or, Whether is it
God's Cause, or Satan's, that supports it self by Forgery, and Scandal?

I am now to account for the little Bribes I bestowed upon Cromwell 's nearest
Attendants. I suppose, Those People had Names that received Them. Let him say,
Who, What, When, and let the Infamy stick upon me if he Proves what he says.
Let it Rest upon him, if he does not; and yet I am of Opinion, that I might
have requited a Common Civility with a Common Gratuity, and that with a very
good Conscience. In fine, the Tyrant would not vouchsafe to Employ me, and from
thence, Bagshaw infers, that I was Cromwell 's Spy. Now hear the Truth in a
plain Tale.

Upon the Dissolution of the Long Rump, in 1653. I returned from beyond-Seas
into England, and presently advertised the Council then sitting at White Hall,
that finding my self within the Protection of the Act of Indemnity, I thought
it Convenient to give them notice of my Return; This was about the Latter end
of August, soon after which time, I was served with This following Order, the
Copy whereof I have still by me.

Wednesday 7th of Septem^er, 1653. At the Council of State at White Hall.
Ordered,
THat Roger L'Estrange be sent unto, to attend the Committee of this Council
for Examinations.

Ex. Jo. Thurloe, Secr.




This Order brought me under a Necessity of Attending for my dispatch, but
perceiving my Business to advance very slowly, and my Father lying at that time
Ill of his Death-Sickness; I did my endeavor to hasten my Discharge what I
could, that I might pay my Duty to my Father, (whom I had not seen for many
years before) and receive his last Blessing. Mr. Strickland was one of the
Commissioners appointed for my Examination; and the Person from whom (in the
Judgment of my Friends) I was to expect the least of Courtesy. Wherefore the
better to dispose him to my Convenience, I gave him the Respect of a Visit,
telling him franckly, that I was returned upon the Invitation of the Act of
Indemnity; and laying before him how much it concerned me both in point of
Comfort, and Interest, to see my dying Father. Instead of Complying with my
Proposition, his Answer wa^, that I would find my self mistaken, and that My
Case was not Comprehended in That Act: My Reply to him was, that I might have
been safe among the Turks, upon the same Terms: and so I left him.

From That time, matters beginning to look worse and worse, I concluded upon it
as my best course to speak to Cromwell himself. After Several disappointments
(for want of Opportunity) I spoke to him at last in the Cockpit, and the Sum of
my Desire was either a Speedy Examination, or that it might be deferred till I
had seen my Father. He told me of the Restlesness of our Party; that Rigor
was not at all his Inclination; that he was but one Man, and could do little by
Himself; and that Our Party should do well to give some better Testimony of
their quiet and Peaceable Intentions. I told him, that every man was to Answer
for his own Actions, at his own Peril: and so he went his way. A while after,
I prevailed to be called, and Mr. Strickland, with another Gentleman (whose
name I have forgotten) were my Examiners; but the Latter pressed nothing
against me: Mr. Strickland indeed insisted upon my Condemnation, and would have
cast me out of the Compass of the Act; telling me at last, that I had given no
Evidence of the Change of my mind, without which I was not to be trusted. My
final Answer was to this Effect: That it was my Interest to Change my Opinion,
if I could; and that whenever I found Reason so to do, I would do it. Some few
days after This, I was discharged according to the Tenor of This Ensuing Order.

Monday the 31th of October, 1653. At the Council of State at White Hall.
Ordered,
THat Mr. Roger L'Estrange be dismissed from his further attendance upon the
Council, he giving in Two Thousand Pounds security to appear when shall be
summoned so to do, and to act Nothing Prejudicial to the Commonwealth.

Ex. Jo. Thurloe, Secr.


During the dependency of This Affair, I might well be seen at White Hall, but
that I spoke to Cromwell of any other Business then This; That I either sought,
or pretended to any Privacy with him, or that I ever spoke to him after This
Time, I do absolutely disown; and Mr. Bagshaw will find as much Difficulty to
prove the Contrary, as to Deny Those Treasonous and Schismatical Principles
which I have now raised in Judgment against him, out of his own Papers.

Concerning the Story of the Fiddle, This I suppose might be the Rise of it.

Being in St. James his Park, I heard an Organ Touched in a little Low Room of
one Mr. Hinckson's. I went in, and found a Private Company of some five or six
Persons. They desired me to take up a Viole, and bear a Part. I did so; and
That, a Part too not much to advance the Reputa- of my Cunning. By and By,
(without the least color of a Design, or Expectation) In comes Cromwell; He
found us Playing, and (as I remember) so he lef^ us. This is it which Mr.
Bagshaw Amplifies to the Report of Often bringing my Fiddle under my Cloak to
Facilitate my Entry.

[ Often] he says; which is False, for 'twas never but This Once. [Bringing of
my Fiddle] That Is Right again. I neither Brought it, nor was it My Fiddle. [
Under my Cloke] That Is Licentia Presbyteriana. [To Facilitate my Entry] Whereas
instead of my going to Oliver, He came to Me. After All; I do profess here,
that I would have made no Scruple on the Earth to have given Cromwell a Lesson
for my Liberty. But I affirm, that I did it not however.

As to the Bribing of his Attendants; I disclaim it. I never spoke to Mr.
Thurloe but Once, in my Life; and That was about my Discharge. Nor did I ever
give Bribe, Little or Great, in the Family.

In These Late Revolutions, I dare undertake to make it appear, that I have
Engaged my self as Frequently, and as Far, upon the King's Account as any
Subject his Majesty has of my Condition in his Three Kingdoms; and This I can
Prove by Several, and Eminent Persons in the City; and elsewhere: Only having
been Honest through the whole Course of his Sacred Majesty, and his blessed
Father's Adversities; It is held convenient, that I should pass for a Raskal in
the King's Prosperity. But I shall remit my Innocence to Justice, Time, and
Reason.

ANd thus, my Lord, though perhaps with more brevity, E. B. Page 9. and 10*
than the Cause, yet greater length than your Lordships Occasions will bear, I
have not only defended my self, but likewise uncased my Accuser; for whom while
I implore your Lordships Mercy; ( for as he stands thus naked in his colors.
Justice will never spare him) I beg nothing for my self, but so much Equity,
that ^ may have leave to plead my own cause at your Lordships Bar, bes^re you
conclu^e me guilty; and since, I doubt not, (...) your Lordship will allow,
that difference in Opinion about Religious Matters, may easily be reconciled to
a candid persuance of the same Civil Interests: since diversity in Habits, need
not alter the disposition in hearts; and since he that desires sincerely to
serve God, ought not to be counted a stranger, beca^se he serves him not in his
neighbors fashion: As long as there is an Eternal Truth in such kind of
Principles, and Moderation enough in your Lordship to close with them, I shall
not so much wrong your G^odness, as to despair of your Favor.
MR. Bagshaw makes his Boast here of his Defense, R. L'S.
and his Discovery; but so far is he from defending himself, that he does not
so much as mention his Charge: and so far likewise from uncasing Me, that he
only casts his own Cloak upon My Shoulders, P^tting L'Estrange his Name to
Bagshaw's Character.

His Moderation, of begging only leave to plead; I must confess, is laudable:
but he mistakes the Bar; for his Business lies at Common Law, not in the
Chancery.

He is pleased to Implore on my behalf, rather Mercy, then Justice; I Will do as
much for him. I have the Charity to look upon his Railing, but as a fit of
Vomitting: His Stomack's foul, and it must up. Nor would I understand his
Seditious, and Bold Imposings upon Law, and Government, to be any Other then
the Ebullitions of his Pride. And his Phantastiques in Religion, what are they,
but the mere Dotages and Resveries of a conceited Feavour? Most certainly, his
Crimes narrowly Scanned would Endanger his Head; but (without Malice to his
Life) when Preachers become Libellers, Some marque, in earnest, were not amiss
to the People, that they might distinguish betwixt a Churchman, and a Buffon:
And to comply with Mr. Bagshaw in his own way, methinks a Yellow Coat would
become him as well as a Black; and much more suitable, it were to his
Employment. I speak with Reverence to his Function.

We come now to his Masterpiece, where very slily he winds off, as if the
Reconcilement of Differing Opinions about Religious Matters, to a Candid
Persuance of the same Civil Interests, were the Thing in Question. But that is a
Juggle. He takes the power from the King, and gives it to the People: He
Charges his Majesty with Usurpation: Reckons Him among Impious Pretenders:
Contradicts and Opposes Him even against the Confessed Dictates of his Proper
Conscience. And what is all This now to difference of Opinion about Religious
Matters?

We have brought him now to his last Complement, where, (with Sir Philip
Sidney's Spaniel) he bemires with fawning. Yet see with what a face of Dignity,
and Virtue, the Servile Trifle Menages his Bold, and Vain Pretensions. It Is not
with Him you will find, as* with [ the greatest part of my Lords followers]. In
Truth, if it were so with Them, as it is with Him, my Lord would have great
Cause to be ashamed of his Retinue. But Mr. Bagshaw's Picture is best drawn by
his own hand, and His Humor best expressed in his own words.

E. B. Page 10.
ANd though the greatest part of your Lordship's Followers, may perhaps crowd to
you for the Eminen^e of your Place, and the Height of your Power; Yet I can
assure your Lordship, that your great Personal Worth, and the Excellence of
your Civil Accomplishments, together with That strict league of Friends^ip,
which such Resemblance of Virtuous Qualities must needs produce, between your
Lordship, and That Right Honorable, and truly Noble Person, to whom I am
Related, are solely reflected upon by Me, when I take leave thus publicly to
profess my self

My LORD, Your Lordships most humble and most obedient Servant, EDWARD BAGSHAW.
(...)* La^e, May* 10* 1662.

Here Is Mr. Bagshaw's Glosing Reverence to my Lord Chancellor; now let the
Reader only cast his eye upon the next Column, and he shall fee this very
Edward Bagshaw doing more Honor, and Professing D^^per to the most abominable
Monster in Nature.

Epist. Ded. to Gods Decrees, etc.
To the Honorable My Lord BRADSHAW, Lord Chief Justice of Chester.
I Have no one outward motive more* Prevailing with Me, then my, perhaps, too
great Ambition of presenting something to your Lordship, whereby I might
testify to the World, not only* That real esteem I have of your Lordships
Singular Worth, and Eminence in General, but likewise to manifest in
Particular, how mindful I am of those many Signal and Unparalleled Marquis of
Favor, which You have been pleased to confer upon my self; for which, though
the Service of my whole life will be too Poor, and mean a Sacrifice, and no
endeavor can amount to deserve the name of Requital; yet I could not but think
it my duty to study an acknowledgment: which Zeal of mine, if your Lordship
pleases either to accept, or pardon, I have attained my end; For I aim at
nothing more then the Honor of being owned for*

My Noble Lord, Your Lordships most obliged, most thankful, and most humble
devoted Servant, EDW. BAGSHAWE.
Chapter Chapter Dec. ^0. 16^9.

I shall now give Mr. Bagshaw leisure to Reconcile his Contradictions; and to
Prove that the Enemy of Hierarchy is a Friend to the Order of Bishops: That the
Disclaymer of the King's Authority has a most Affectionate Esteem for his
Majesty's Person and Government; and that his Adorations of the Late King's
Murderer, will admit a fair and equitable Plea, under the Government of his
Royal Successor.

I am still in Mr. Bagshaws Debt for an Answer to his Second, and Third
Exceptions, to my Memento; Concerning the Defamers of the Government, that
escape better then their Accusers; and Those that can come off for Printing, and
Publishing downright Treason, when I have much ado to escape for Telling it.]
That shall be Cleared in due Season: Only there lies a General Cavil in my way
to it, and I shall speak ^o That First; for since my Pen is in Course, I think
I had as good do all at a Heat.

I am suspected to Write, out of a Love of Scribbling; and Traduced, as if I
meddled further then belongs to me, with the Government of Church and State.
Those very Persons that Think so, I am content to make my Judges; and here is my
Case.

Upon his Majesty's Return, there were Printed, and Reprinted, New and Old,
diverse Seditious Pamphlets, of most Pestilent Reflection upon the Kings Honor
and Justice; and directly Libellous against the Government of the Church. Some
of the Fouleft of them I delivered into the Hands of certain Parliament Men,
(naming the Stationer for whom they were Printed) and, as I am enform'd,
Compleint was made of them in the House of Commons, which notwithstanding, they
were still publicly sold in Westminster Hall, and There the matter rested
without any further Prosecution. This Freedom of the Press, had so manifest an
Influence upon the minds of the People, that in a short time, That Unanimous
Proneness of Affection, which upon the Kings Restoration was most remarqueably
evident in the Generality of the Nation, was so far altered, and wrought upon,
by the means of these poisonous Discourses, that the Presbyterian Ca^se was
grown to be the Common Argument of Public Meetings, and the Power of the Two
Houses Coordinate with his Majesty not obscurely defended. Finding so many
Bitter and Infectious Writings to escape, not only unpunished, but unanswered,
to the daily Encouragement of the Faction, and the Scandal of the Government: I
reckoned it my Duty (since no body else would meddle) to supply the Place of a
Better Defendent.

My first Engagement was a Reply (by way of Observation) upon a Treatise;
Entitled, The Interest of England in the Matter of Religion: Written by I. C.
Wherein, without any Provocation, He Justifies the Presbyterian Cause of 1641.
[Pag. 10.] He excludes the Royal Party that served the late King from having
any hand in the Restoring of This, [Pag. 13.] He revives the Pretended
Misdemeanures of the Bishops, as Occasional to the last War, [Pag. 31. and 32.]
He mainteins the Actings of the Presbyterians according to the Covenant, [Pag.
44.] He makes the Two Houses Participant of the Sovereignty, [Pag. 49.] He
denies the Lawfulness of the English Ceremonies, [Pag. 88.]

These Positions, and Others like These, over and over urged, were the Occasion
of my Holy Cheat.

The next Pamphlet I wrote was called a Caveat, etc. and Drawn from me by a
desire to clear the Cavaliers from some Officious and well-meaning Imputations
cast upon Them by I. H. in His Cordial. Some Passages therein being otherwise
Rep^esented then I meant them; and to my Disadvantage, I was forced to follow
it with Another, by way of Explanation, and that I called A Modest Plea, etc.

My Relapsed Apostate, was an Answer to a Seditious and Schismatical Pamphlet,
Entitled A Petition for Peace; with the Reformation of the Liturgy. And the
following Supplement, was only a Discovery of the Malice of Some Other
Presbyterian Pamphlets.

My next Discourse was a Vindication of the Bishop of Worcester, from a Libell
of Mr. Bagshaw's. And This, now under my Hand, carries the Necessity of it
along with it: So that Thus far, my Pen has only been Defensive, either of the
King, the Church, or, in the last place, of My own Honor.

My Memento, it is Truth, is a Mixed D^scourse, and the Greater part of it,
Effectually, rather a Paraphrase upon Sir Francis Bacon, then my Proper Text.
It is written with more Honesty, then skill; and it has (the Common Fate of
other Things) Friends, and Enemies. He that understands it as I meant it, shall
do Me no hurt; and he that takes it otherwise, is the more likely of the Two
to miss my Meaning. Such Venomous Natures there may be, as to Blast All they
Touch; Draw Poison from the Holy Writ, and Turn the very Decalogue into a
Libel. If it Displeases Such, the matter is not great, for it was beside my
Purpose to Oblige Them.

I shall now be as good as my word concerning Defamers of the Government, etc.

Since the Burning of the Covenant; was Published a Book, Entitled, A PHAENIX;
or The Sole^n LEAGUE and COVENANT; Pretended to be Printed at Edinburgh; and
Dated [ In the year of COVENANT-BREAKING] The Drift of the Whole is to Justify
the last War; to disaffect the People to his Majesty now in Being; and to
Enforce the Obligation of the Covenant, out of an old Sermon of Mr. Edm.
Calamie's, called, The Great Danger of COVENANT-REFUSING, and
COVENANT BREAKING. This Book being brought to my Hand, I procured a Warrant to
search for it, and Retriv'd about 120 Copies, which I seized, together with the
Printer, Disperser, and One Stationer (of the Three that were Partners in the
Impression) I Brought These People to His Majesty's Principal Secretary, Sir
Edward Nichola^; by whose Order, the Printer, and Stationer were Committed; and
the Disperser, being Poor to Extremity, was upon certain Conditions left at
Liberty. Concerning the Printer, it appeared that he acted rather upon
Necessity, then Malice: but for Two of the Three Stationers, to wit, Giles
Calvert (who was Apprehended) and Livewell Chapman: (who was now fled) No men
whatever of their Profession have more Constantly, and Maliciously prosecuted
the Destruction of the Royal Family. The Third Stationer's Name is Thomas
Brewster, who absented himself for a while, and is since returned.
Francis-Tyton was one of the Pu^lis^ers (as Right as any of the Rest). At the
same Time, I Seized the first Two sheets of the Book of Prodigies, then newly
put to the Press, and for the same Booksellers.

Giles Calvert did not only come off for This, but during his Imprisonment,
(which cont^nued till the Adjournment of the Parliament) his Wife went on with
the Prodigies; upon Proof whereof, She was likewise Comm^tted, and is come off
too. See now the Temper and Design of These Pamphlets.

A King abusing his Power, to the overthrow of Religion, Phoenix Page 52.
Laws and Liberties, which are the very Fundamentals of this Contract and
Covenant, may ^e Controlled and Opposed: and if he set himself to overthrow all
These by Arms, then they who have power, as the Estates of a Land, may and
ought to resist by Arms; Because he does, ^y that opposition, break the very
^onds, and overthrow the essentials of this Contract and Covenant. This may
serve to justify the proceedings of this Kingdom against the late King,
who in an Hostile way set himself to overthrow Religion, Parliaments, Laws,
and Liberties.

Among the H^llish rout of Profane, and Ungodly men, Praeface to the Pr^digies.
let especi^lly the Oppressors and Persecutours of the True Church look to
themselves, when the hand of the Lord in the strange Signs and Wonders is
lifted among them; for then let them know assuredly that the day of their
Calamity is at hand, and the things that shall come upon them make haste. Deuteronomy.
32.35.
The retale and final overthrow of Pharaoh and the Egyptians ( those cruel
Taskmasters and Oppressors of the Israelites) did bear date not long after
the Wonderful and the Prodigious Signs which the Lord had shown in the midst of
them.


Prodigies Pa. 1.
Two Suns seen ne^r Hertford, etc.] The like in the Beginning of Queen Mary,
and about the Time of the Persecution in Germany. It portends a^s^ the Fall of
Great men from their Power.

Ibid. Page 11. and 12.
Armies were seen in Sussex, etc.] This happened a while before the King of
Swede routed the Imperial Army: -- and here in England in 1640.

A Terrible Tempest and Raging Tides] This in the Low Countries, Page 42.
a little before they threw off the Yoke of the King of Spain.

A River dried up, etc.] This portends a Revolt and Division of the People.
Ibid. Page 53.


Let what I have said, serve to satisfy Mr. Bags^a^, that Defamers of the
Governmen^, and the Publishers of Tre^son may come off; and better too then
their Accusers: for I am exposed to daily Menaces, Libels, Violences, only for
Asserting the Kings Interest, and Discovering his Enemies.

It Is time now to draw to a Conclusion, and I cannot end better then with
giving the World a Particular View of some few of Those Many Treasonous,
Seditious, and Schismatical Pieces, which have been Published Since his Sacred
Majesty's Return: and with That I shall wind up my Justification. Wherein, I
shall observe in Order, how they Treat the Church, and the King's Cause, and
his Authority.

Upon the Restoring of the King, Mr. Manton Publishes Smectymnuus, The
Smectym^^^ns.
and in his Preface to the Reader, [ I suppose (says he) the Reverend Authors
were willing to lie hid under this ONOMASTICK; partly that their work might not
be rec^ived with prejudice; the Faction, against which they dealt, arroga^ing
to themselves a Monopoly of Learning, and condemning all others as Ignorants
and Novices not worthy to be heard, etc.

Now see the Judgment of his Reverend Authors, and what Stuff Mr. Manton
Publishes for the Reception of His Majesty, he himself calling the Episcopal
Party a Faction.

Do we not know, the Drunkenness, Profaneness, Superstition, Popishness of the
English Clergy rings at Rome already? Smectym. Page 58.
Yes undoubtedly; and there is no way to vindicate the Honor of our Nation,
Ministry, Parliaments, Sovereign, Religion, God; but by Causing the Punishment
to ring as far as the sin has done; that our A^versaries that have triumph^d
in their sin, may be confounded at their Punishment. Note.
Do not your Honors know that the plastring or palliating of these rotten
Members, will be a greater dishonor to the Nation and Church, then their
cutting off; and that the personal acts of these Sons of Belial, being connived
at, become National sins?

Here Is Episcopacy, Root and Branch, with all Circumstances, Suitable to a
Presbyterian Modesty, Published by a Pardoned Nonconformist, for the Welcome
of H^s Sacred Majesty.

How com^s it to pass that in England there is such increase of Popery,
Superstition, Arminianism, Ibid. Page 66.
and Profaneness, more then in all other Reformed Churches? Does not the Root
of These Disorders proceed from the Bishops, and their adherents?

We have chosen rather to subjoyn by way of Appendix, Ibid. Page 68.
and Historical Narration of those bitter fruits, Pride, Rebellions, Treason,
Unthankefulness, etc. which have Issued from Episcopacy, while it has stood
under the continued influences of Sovereign Goodness.

Here Is Presbyterian Gratitude for his Majefties Declaration from Breda, See
now a seasonable, and Modest Quaere.

Covenanters Plea, Page 52.
Whether the Lords and Commons of England assembled in Parliament, have not a
power to make a new Oath, and impose it upon the People, unless the King first
consent.

Now see Gelaspies D^spute against the English Popish Ceremonies; a Book
formerly condemned by the Secret Counsel in Scotland to be burnt by the Hand of
the Common Hangman, and now lately Published by Philip Chetwynd. In his
Epistle to the R^form'd Churches, Thus.

Page 9.
1. Be not deceived, to think that they who so eagerly press this Course of
Conformity, have any such end as Gods Glory, or the Good of his Church, and
profit of Religion.

2. Let not the pretense of Peace, and Unity, cool your fervor, Page 11.
or make you spare to oppose your selves unto those Idle and Idolized
Ceremonies, against which we dispute.

3. If once you yield to these English Ceremonies, think not that thereafter
you can keep your selves back from any greater evils, Page 16.
or grosser corruptions, which they draw after them.

Ibid. Page 20.
4. Among the Laws of Solon, there was one which pronounced him defamed and
unhonest, who in a Civil uproar among the Citizens sits still, a Looker on,
and Neuter: much more deserve they to be so accounted of, who s^un to m^ddle
with any controversy which disquieteth the Church, wher^as they should labor
to win the Adv^rsaries of the Truth, and if they prove obstinate, to defend and
propugne the Truth against them.

Page 245.
5. Whenever you may omit that which Princes enjoin, without violating the Law
of Charity, you are not holden to obey them, for the Majesty of Princely
Authority.

Page 266.
6. The Lawfulness of our conforming unto the Ceremonies in question, can be no
way warranted by any Ordinance of the Supreme Magistrate, or any Power which he
has in things Spiritual, or Ecclesiastical.

Here Is first the very Intention of Authority uncharitably D^fam'd. Secondly,
the People Animated to Disobedience. In the Third place Here Is a Jelousie
injected of more Mischeives to follow. Fourthly, Not only Argument, but
Violen^e it self not obscurely Encouraged. Fifthly, Here Is the King's
Prerogative rendered dependent upon the Good Pleasure of his People. And
Lastly, here is an Absolute denial of his Majesty's Supreme Authority.

The same Things over again are Mainteyned in The Old Non-conf^rmist. The Trial
of the English Lyturgy. Mr. Crofton 's Pamphlets; The Interest of England; The
Presbyterian Account from the Savoy. Their Petition for Peace, and Their Two
Pap^rs of Proposals, Mr. Bagshaw 's Treatises; and final^y, Where not? See next
Mr. Watson's Word of Comfort, of but the other day.

Now (says he) because the Church of God appears in his Cause, and loses
Blood in his Quarrel, Page 8.
therefore God is in the midst of Her.] This was Calculated for Corbet, and
Berkstead, etc.

Take h^ed of Idolatry; yea, and of Superstition too, Page 28.
which is a Bridge leading ov^r to it. Superstition is an intermixing our
fancies and inv^ntions with Divine Institutions; it is an Affront offered to
God, as if he were not wise enough to appoint the manner of his own Worship.]

Is not God upon the Threshold of his Temple ready to fly? Page 30.
Are not the Shadows of the Evening Stretch^d ou^? And may we not fear the
Sunsetting of the Gospel? And again.

The Lord may let his Church be a while under Hatches, Page 39.
to Punish her security, and to awak^n her out of her slumbering fits; yet
surely the storm will not continue long.

What can This Gentleman mean here now by Superstition, but the Rites of the
Church? What by the Sunsetting of the Gospel? but the Approaching settlement
of Conformity? And what by the short continuance of the Storm? but the speedy
Subversion of The Present Authority? And in Truth, their Pulpits do Generally
speak the same Language. [ Christians: (says Mr. Jenkins, some five weeks
since) you do not know what God has Reserved to be done For you, and BY you;
only wait the Lord's Leisure. David had Saul's life in his Power, but far be it
from him (he would not say to lift up his hand against the Lord's Anointed,
but) to anticipate God's time. Who knows but the Lord may smite him, or he may
descend into the Battle, and fall by the Edge of the Sword. Look behind ye, and
ye must All confess that God has relieved ye in your distresses, when ye have
most desponded.] In short; he might as well have said to his Congregation,
Remember the last Turn, and Rely upon Another. Nor is This any Uncharitable
Gloss upon his Meaning, who may very well be suspected to be no great Friend
to the Son, having Publicly absolved the Nation of the Blood of the Father.

Observe now, in the Last Place, how Bold the Press is with the King's Cause,
and Authority.

When as a part of the Legislative Power resides in the Two Houses, Interest of
Eng. Page 49.
as also a Power to redress Grievances, and to call into Question all
Ministers of State and Justice, and all Subjects of whatsoever degree, in case
of Delinquency, it might be thought that a Part of the Supreme Power does
reside in them, though they have not the honorary Title.]

Here is Coordination asserted, which is Destructive of the King's Imperial
Title. Hear now the Publishers of the Speeches of some of the late King's
Judges, viz. Harrison, Carew, etc. -- In his Praeface to the Reader, He calls
them the Servants of Christ; and Publishes the Story, (as he says) that men
may see what it is to have an Interest in Christ,
in a dying hour, and to be faithful to his Cause.] If These People Suffered
for God's Cause, by what Authority did They Act that put them to Death?

Page 11.
Mr. Carew could have Escaped (he says) but would not; knowing how much the
Name and Glory of God was concerned in his Faithful Witness to the Cause of
Christ, for which he was in Bonds.] In another Place, a Letter is pretended to
be written to a Christian Friend by Mr. Justice Cook.

I look upon it as the most Noble and High Act of Justice, Page 41.
that our Story can Parallel, and so far as I had a hand in it, never any one
Action in all my life comes to my mind with less Regret, or Trouble of
Conscience, then that does: for the Blood must ly upon Him (meaning the King)
or upon the Parliament.] More of This Stuff there is, but it would be too
tedious. Proceed now to the Narrative of John James.

If there has been any undue Combination against this poor man, Praeface.
if for some Reason of State, rather then for any real Guilt on his part, he
was made an Example; if his Judgment and Conscience, rather then any Just
Crime, were the cause of his Condemnation, as he so often declared; if,
su^mitting to a Trial by the Word of God, he was judged contrary thereto; the
Lord in his due time will Manifest, and his Blood will most certainly be
required, etc.] And again,

He was Tried in so high a Court, Page 36.
there being sev^ral Judg^s before him, and four of the King's Counselors,
besides the Atturny, and Solicitour General, pleading against him to take away
his Life; and a Jewry of Knights and Gentlemen, all of the same spirit,
thirsting after his Blood, etc.]

Take now for a Close, the Miserable Madness of another Pamphlet, against the
King's Proclamation Prohibiting Conven^icles.

Oh it is sad to Consider, that the Proclamation of a poor Worm, should not
only Command men's persons, Loud Call, Page 16.
^ut their very Spirits also.

If any King or Powers dare off^r to entrench on men's Consciences, to their
utmost Peril be it; and if men give way to their Usurped Authorities, to their
uttermost Perils be it also; No Governors nor Rulers have any more Power as
from God, to give Laws in matters of Religion, or to Rule over men's
Consciences, then they have to sit in Gods Throne in Heaven, Ibid. Page 17.
or to pluck him from his Throne.

Stand up for your Meetings, and holy Services, let Men and Powers Decree never
so Contrary. Ibid.


I might Insist upon diverse other Seditious Pamphlets, but let This Suffice.
Here is the Sacred Government of the Church Vilify'd; the Rulers of it Reviled;
the People Animated and Enflamed against the Magistrate. Here is the
Prerogative of his Most Gracious Majesty, not only questioned, but Disclaimed;
his Indulgence Trampled upon; and the Execrable Murderers of his Royal Father
Sainted.

Let the World now Determine, Whether it be not highly N^c^ssary that These
Bold and Pestilent Defamations, should be either Punished, or Confuted.

FINIS.

